POEMS AND PLAYS.

VOL. V.

POEMS AND PLAYS, By WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQUIRE.

IN SIX VOLUMES.

VOL. V.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. M.DCC.LXXXV.

THE TRIUMPHS OF TEMPER; A POEM. IN SIX CANTOS.
O VOP CH' AVETE GL' INTELLETTI SANI
MIRATE LA DOTTRINA, CHE SI ASCONDE
SOTTO' IL VELAME DEGLI VERSI STRANT.
DANTE, Inferno, Canto 9.
PREFACE.
IT seems to be a kind of duty incumbent on those who devote themselves to
Poetry, to raise, if possible, the dignity of a declining Art, by making it as
beneficial to Life and Manners as the limits of Composition, and the character
of modern Times will allow: The ages, indeed, are past, in which the song of
the Poet was idolized for its miraculous effects; yet a Poem, intended to
promote the cultivation of good humor, may still perhaps be fortunate enough
to prove of some little service to society in general; or, if this idea may be
thought too chimerical and romantic by sober Reason, it is at least one of
those pleasing and innocent delusions, in which a poetical Enthusiast may be
safely indulged.

The following production owes its existence to an incident in real life, very
similar to the principal action of the last Canto; but in forming the general
plan of the work, it seemed to me absolutely necessary to introduce both the
agency and the abode of SPLEEN, notwithstanding the difficulty and the hazard
of attempting a subject so happily executed by the masterly pencil of Pope. I
considered his Cave of Spleen as a most exquisite cabinet picture; and, to
avoid the servility of imitation, I determined to sketch the mansion of this
gloomy Power on a much wider canvass: Happy, indeed, if the judgment of the
Public may enable me to exclaim, with the honest vanity of the Painter, who
compared his own works to the divine productions of Raphael, "E son Pittore
anch' Io!"

The celebrated Alessandro Tassoni, who is generally considered as the inventor
of the modern Heroi-comic Poetry, was so proud of having extended the limits of
his art by a new kind of composition, that he not only spoke of it with
infinite exultation in one of his private letters, but even gave a MS. copy of
his work to his native city of Modena, with an inscription, in which he styled
it a new species of Poetry, invented by himself.

A few partial friends have asserted, that the present performance has some
degree of similar merit; but as I apprehend all the novelty it possesses, may
rather require an apology, than entitle its Author to challenge commendation, I
shall explain how far the conduct of the Poem differs from the most approved
models in this mode of writing, and slightly mention the poetical effects,
which such a variation appeared likely to produce.

It is well known, that the favorite Poems, which blend the serious and the
comic, represent their principal characters in a satirical point of view: It
was the intention of Tassoni (though prudence made him attempt to conceal it)
to satirize a particular Italian Nobleman, who happened to be the object of his
resentment. Boileau openly ridicules the French Ecclesiastics in his Lutrin;
Garth, our English Physicians, in his Dispensary; and the Rape of the Lock
itself, that most excellent and enchanting Poem, which I never contemplate but
with new idolatry, is denominated the best Satire extant, by the learned Dr.
Warton, in his very clegant and ingenious, but severe Essay on Pope: A sentence
which seems to be confirmed by the Poet himself, in his letter to Mrs. Fermor,
where he says, "the character of Belinda, as it is now managed, resembles you
in nothing but in beauty." Though I think, that no composition can surpass, or
perhaps ever equal this most happy effort of Genius, as a sportive Satire, I
imagined it might be possible to give a new Character to this mixed species of
Poetry, and to render it by its Object, though not in its Execution, more noble
than the most beautiful and refined Satire can be. We have seen it carried to
inimitable perfection, in the most delicate raillery on Female Foibles: -- It
remained to be tried, if it might not also aspire to delineate the more
engaging features of Female Excellence. The idea appeared to me worth the
experiment; for, if it succeeded, it seemed to promise a double advantage;
first, it would give an air of novelty to the Poem; and, secondly, what I
thought of much greater importance, it would render it more interesting to the
heart. On these principles, I have endeavored to paint SERENA as a most
lovely, engaging, and accomplished character; yet I hope the coloring is so
faithfully copied from general Nature, that every man, who reads the Poem, may
be happy enough to know many Fair ones, who resemble my Heroine.

There is another point, in which I have also attempted to give this Poem an
air of novelty: I mean, the manner of connecting the real and the visionary
scenes, which compose it; by shifting these in alternate Cantos, I hoped to
make familiar Incident and allegorical Picture afford a strong relief to each
other, and keep the attention of the Reader alive, by an appearance
particularly diversified. I wished, indeed (but I fear most ineffectually) for
powers to unite some touches of the sportive wildness of Ariosto, and the more
serious sublime painting of Dante, with some portion of the enchanting
elegance, the refined imagination, and the moral graces of Pope; and to do
this, if possible, without violating those rules of propriety, which Mr.
Cambridge has illustrated, by example as well as precept, in The Scribleriad,
and in his sensible Preface to that elegant and learned Poem.

I have now very frankly informed my Reader of the extent, or rather of the
extravagance of my desire; for I will not give it the serious name of design:
They, whom an enlightened taste has rendered thoroughly sensible how very
difficult it must be to accomplish such an idea, will not only be the first to
discern, but the most ready to pardon those errors, into which so hazardous an
attempt may perhaps have betrayed me. I had thoughts of introducing this
performance to the Public, by a Dissertation of considerable length on this
species of Poetry; but I forbear to indulge myself any farther in such
preliminary remarks, as the anxiety of authors is so apt to produce, from the
reflection, that, however ingeniously written, they add little or nothing to
the success of a good Poem, and are utterly insufficient to prevent that
neglect, or oblivion, which is the inevitable fate of a bad one.

In dismissing a work to my Fair Readers, which is intended principally for
their perusal, I shall only recommend it to their attention; and bid them
farewell, in the words of the pleasant and courteous Tassoni -- "Vaglia il buon
voler, s' altro non lice,
"E chi la leggera, viva felice!"


EARTHAM, Jan. 31, 1781.
THE TRIUMPHS OF TEMPER.
CANTO I.
THE Mind's soft Guardian, who, though yet unsung,
Inspires with harmony the Female tongue,
And gives, improving every tender grace,
The smile of angels to a mortal face;
Her powers I sing; and scenes of mental strife,
Which form the maiden for the accomplished wife;
Where the sweet victor sees, with sparkling eyes,
Love her reward, and Happiness her prize.
Daughters of Beauty, who the song inspire,
To your enchanting notes attune my lyre!
And O! if happily your soft hearts may gain
Or use, or pleasure from the motley strain,
Though formal critics, with a surly frown,
Deny your artless Bard the laurel crown,
He still shall triumph, if ye deign to spread
Your sweeter myrtle round his honored head.
In your bright circle young SERENA grew;
A lovelier nymph the pencil never drew;
For the fond Graces formed her easy mien,
And Heaven's soft azure in her eye was seen.
She seemed a rose-bud, when it first receives
The genial sun in its expanding leaves:
For now she entered those important years,
When the full bosom swells with hopes and fears;
When conscious Nature prompts the secret sigh,
And sheds sweet languor over the melting eye;
When nobler toys the female heart trepan,
And Dolls rejected, yield their place to Man.
Beneath a Father's care SERENA grew;
The good SIR GILBERT, to his country true,
A faithful Whig, who, zealous for the state,
In Freedom's service led the loud debate;
Yet every day, by transmutation rare,
Turned to a Tory in his elbow-chair,
And made his daughter pay, however absurd,
Passive obedience to his sovereign word.
In his domestic sway he borrowed aid
From prim PENELOPE, an ancient maid,
His upright Sister, conscious of her worth,
Who valued still her beauty, and her birth;
Though from her birth no envied rank she gained,
And of her beauty but the ghost remained;
A restless ghost! that with remembrance keen
Proclaimed incessant what it once had been;
Delighted still the steps of youth to haunt,
To watch the tender nymph, and warm gallant;
And, with an eye that petrified pursuit,
Hang like the dragon over the Hesperian fruit.
Though strictly guarded by this jealous power,
The mild SERENA no restraint could sour:
Pure was her bosom, as the silver lake,
Ere rising winds the ruffled water shake,
When the bright pageants of the morning sky,
Across the expansive mirror lightly fly,
By vernal gales in quick succession driven,
While the clear glass reflects the smile of heaven.
In gay content a sportive life she led,
The child of Modesty, by Virtue bred:
Her light companions Innocence and Ease:
Her hope was Pleasure, and her wish to please:
For this to Fashion early rites she paid:
For this to Venus secret vows she made;
Nor held it sin to cast a private glance
Over the dear pages of a new romance,
Eager in Fiction's touching scenes to find
A field, to exercise her youthful mind:
The touching scenes new energy impressed
On all the virtues of her feeling breast.
Sweet Evelina's fascinating power
Had first beguiled of sleep her midnight hour:
Possessed by Sympathy's enchanting sway,
She read, unconscious of the dawning day.
The Modern Anecdote was next conveyed
Beneath her pillow by her faithful maid.
The nymph, attentive as the brooding dove,
Pored over the tender scenes of Franzel's love:
The sinking taper now grew weak and pale;
SERENA sighed, and dropped the unfinished tale;
But, as warm clouds in vernal ether roll,
The soft ideas floated in her soul:
Free from ambitious pride, and envious care,
To love, and to be loved, was all her prayer:
While these fond thoughts her gentle mind possessed,
Soft slumber settled on her snowy breast.
Scarce had her radiant eyes began to close,
When to her view a friendly vision rose:
A fairy Phantom struck her mental sight,
Light as the gossamer, as ether bright;
Arrayed like Pallas was the pigmy form,
When the sage Goddess stills the martial storm.
Her casque was amber, richly graced above
With down, collected from the callow dove:
Her burnished breast plate, of a deeper dye,
Was once the armor of a golden fly:
A lynx's eye her little aegis shone,
By fairy spells converted into stone,
And worn of old, as elfin poets sing,
By Aegypt's lovely queen, a favorite ring:
Mysterious power was in the magic toy,
To turn the frowns of care to smiles of joy.
Her tiny lance, whose radiance streamed afar,
Was one bright sparkle from the bridal star.
A filmy mantle round her figure played,
Fine as the texture, by Arachne laid
Over some young plant, when glittering to the view
With many an orient pearl of morning dew.
The Phantom hovered over the conscious Fair
With such a lively smile of tender care,
As on her elfin lord Titania cast,
When first she found his angry spell was past.
Round her rich locks SERENA chanced to tie
An ample ribband of caerulean dye:
High over her forehead rose the graceful bow,
Whose arch commanded the sweet scene below:
The hovering Spirit viewed the tempting spot,
And lightly perched on this unbending knot;
As the fair flutterer, of Psyche's race,
Is seen to terminate her airy chase,
When, pleased at length her quivering wings to close,
Fondly she settles on the fragrant rose.
Now in soft notes, more musically clear
Than ever Fairy breathed in mortal ear,
These words the visionary voice conveyed
To the charmed spirit of the sleeping maid:
"Thou darling of my care, whose ripened worth
Shall spread my empire over the smiling earth;
Whom Nature blessed, forbidding modish Art
To cramp thy spirit, or contract thy heart;
Screen'd from thy thought, nor in thy visions felt,
Long on thy opening mind I Have fondly dwelt;
In childhood's sorrows brought thee quick relief,
And dried thy April showers of infant grief;
Taught thee to laugh at the malicious boy,
Who broke thy playthings with a barbarous joy,
To bear what ills the little Female haunt,
The testy Nurse, the imperious Governante,
And that tyrannic pest, the prying maiden Aunt.
Now ripening years a nobler scene supply;
For life now opens on thy sparkling eye:
Thy rising bosom swells with just desire
Rapture to feel, and rapture to inspire:
Not the vain bliss, the transitory joys,
That childish Woman feels, in radiant toys;
The costly Diamond, or the lighter Pearl,
The massive Nabob, or the tinsel Earl.
Thy heart demands, each meaner aim above,
The imperishable wealth of sterling love;
Thy wish, to please by every softer grace
Of elegance and ease, of form and face!
By lively fancy and by sense refined,
The stronger magic of the cultured mind!
Thy pure ambition, and thy virtuous plan,
To fix the variable heart of Man!
Short is the worship paid at Beauty's shrine;
But lasting Love and Happiness are mine:
Mine, though the earth's mistaken, blinded race
Despise my influence, and my name debase;
Nor breathe one vow to that aetherial friend,
On whom the colors of their life depend.
But to thy innocence I Will now display
The mystic marvels of my secret sway;
And tell, in this thy fate-deciding hour,
My race, my name, my office, and my power.
First, hear what wonders human forms contain!
And learn the texture of the Female brain!
By Nature's care in curious order spread,
This living net is framed of tender thread;
Fine, as thy hand, some favored youth to grace,
Knits with nice art to form the mimic lace.
Within the center of this fretted dome,
Her secret tower, her heaven-constructed home,
Soft Sensibility, sweet Beauty's soul!
Keeps her coy state, and animates the whole,
Invisible as Harmony, who springs,
Waked by young Zephyr, from Aeolian strings:
Her subtle power, more delicately fine,
Dwells in each thread, and lives in every line,
Whose quick vibrations, without end, impart
Pleasure and pain to the responsive heart.
As Zephyr's breath the willing chord inspires,
Whispering soft music to the trembling wires,
So with fond care I regulate, unseen,
The softer movements of this nice machine;
TEMPER my earthly name, the nurse of Love!
But called SOPHROSYNE in realms above!
When lovely Woman, perfect at her birth,
Blessed with her early charms the wondering earth,
Her soul, in sweet simplicity arrayed,
Nor shared my guidance, nor required my aid.
Her tender frame, nor confident nor coy,
Had every fiber tuned to gentle joy:
No vain caprices swelled her pouting lip;
No gold produced a mercenary trip;
Soft innocence inspired her willing kiss,
Her love was nature, and her life was bliss.
Guide of his reason, not his passion's prey,
She tamed the savage, Man, who blessed her sway.
No jarring wishes filled the world with woes,
But youth was ecstacy, and age repose.
The Powers of Mischief met, in dark Divan,
To blast these mighty joys of envied Man:
The Fiends, at their infernal Leader's call,
Framed their base wiles in Demogorgon's hall.
In the deep center of that dreadful dome,
An hellish cauldron boiled with fiery foam:
In this wide urn the circling spirits threw
Ingredients harsh, and hideous to the view;
Page 22.

Stothard del. Sharp sculpt.

London. Published Sept. 1st. 1788. by T. Cadell. Strand.


While the terrific master of the spell
With adjurations shook the depths of hell,
And in dark words, unmeet for mortal ear,
Bade the dire offspring of his art appear.
Forth from the vase, with sullen murmurs, broke
A towering mass of pestilential smoke:
Emerging from this fog of thickest night,
A Phantom swells, by slow degrees, to sight;
But ere the view can seize the forming shape,
From the mocked eye its lineaments escape:
It seemed all passions melted into one,
Assumed the face of all, and yet was none:
Hell stood aghast at its portentous mien,
And shuddering Demons called the spectre Spleen.
Hie thee to earth! its mighty master cried,
Over the vexed globe in heavy vapors ride!
Within its center fix thy shadowy throne!
With shades thy subjects, and that hell thy own!
Reign there unseen! but let thy strong control
Be hourly felt in Woman's wayward soul!
With darkest poisons from our deep abyss,
Taint that pure fountain of terrestrial bliss!
The enormous Phantom, at this potent sound,
Rolled forth obedient from the vast profound:
The quaking Fiends recovered from their dread,
And Hell grew lighter, as the monster fled.
But now round earth the gliding vapors run,
Blot the rich ether, and eclipse the sun;
All Nature sickens; and her fairest flower,
Enchanting Woman, feels the baneful power:
As in her soul the clouds of Spleen arise,
The sprightly essence of her beauty flies:
In youth's gay prime, in hours with rapture warm,
Love looks astonished on her altering form:
To pleasing frolics, and enchanting wiles,
Life-darting looks, and soul-subduing smiles,
Dark whims succeed: thick-coming fancies fret;
The sullen passion, and the hasty pet;
The swelling lip, the tear-distended eye,
The peevish question, the perverse reply;
The moody humor, that, like rain and fire,
Blends cold disgust with unsubdu'd desire,
Flies what it loves, and, petulantly coy,
Feigns proud abhorrence of the proffered joy:
For Nature's artless aim, the wish to please
By genuine modesty and simple ease,
Fashion's pert tricks the crowded brain oppress
With all the poor parade of tawdry dress:
The sickly bosom pants for noise and show,
For every bauble, and for every beau;
The voice, that Health made harmony, disowns
That native charm for Languor's mimic tones;
And feigns disease, till, feeling what it feigns,
Its fancied maladies are real pains.
Such, and a thousand still superior woes,
From Spleen's new empire over the earth arose:
Each simple dictate of the soul forgot,
Then first was formed the mercenary plot;
And-Beauty practiced that pernicious art,
The art of angling for an old man's heart;
Though crawling to his bride with tottering knees,
His words were dotage, and his love disease.
From sex to sex this base contagion ran,
And Gold grew Beauty in the eyes of Man:
Courtship was traffic: and the married life
But one loud jangle of incessant strife.
The gentle Sprite, who, on his radiant car,
Shines the mild regent of the evening-star,
And joys from thence those genial rays to shed,
That lead the bridegroom to the nuptial bed,
While earth's new ills his friendly soul absorb,
From Cynthia called me to his kindred orb;
And, eager to redress the woes of Man,
The brilliant Son of Vesper thus began:
"Thou softest Being of the aetherial kind,
Be thy benignant cares no more confined
To smooth the ruffled plume of Zephyr's wing,
To guard from cruel frost the infant spring,
To drive gross atoms from the rays of noon,
Or chase the halo from the vapourish moon!
Thy friendly nature will not now deny
To quit for nobler toils thy native sky;
Thou see how Spleen's infernal vapors roll
Across the sweet serene of Woman's soul;
And earth, which darkens as her beauties fade,
Must grow a second hell without thy aid:
Take then thy station! fix thy nobler reign
Over those fine chords, that form the Female brain,
That used, ere injured by the rust of Spleen,
To fill with harmony the human scene!
Go! lest her touch their tender tones destroy,
Teach them to vibrate to thy notes of joy!
Go! and restore, by stilling mental strife,
Health to faint Love, and happiness to Life!"
So spoke that friend of Man, who lights above
His heavenly lamp of Hymenaeal love:
In his just aim my kindred spirit joined,
And flew obedient to the charge assigned.
Hence, as the biass sways the unconscious bowl,
I long unseen have swayed the careless soul;
Though often I feel my power by Spleen subdued,
In the shrill Vixen, and the sullen Prude,
In some fair forms my soft dominion grows,
Like fragance, rising from the opening rose:
Still I preserve, in many a lovely face,
That gay good humor, and that constant grace,
Which heavenly Powers united to infold
In perfect Woman's new-created mould;
When Nature, in her infant beauty blessed,
The last and loveliest of her works carest.
But of those Nymphs, who, delicately fair,
Draw their soft graces from my forming care,
My young SERENA shines her peers above,
Pride of my hopes, and darling of my love.
Hence I to thee such mysteries unfold,
As Man's pedantic eye shall never behold;
Whose narrow science, though it proudly boast
To pierce the sky, and count the starry host,
Sees not the lucid band of airy Powers,
Who flutter round him in his secret hours:
But if to me, thy guardian now displayed,
Thy duteous orisons are justly paid,
Thou to those realms shall pass, with me thy guide,
Where Spleen's pale victims, after death, reside;
Then to that orb, in vision shall thou rise,
Unseen by mortal astronomic eyes,
Where I -- but first let me thy soul prepare
To meet our secret foe's insidious snare!
It Is my fond purpose in thy form to show
The sweetest model of my skill below:
A Youth I destine to thy dear embrace,
Crowned with each mental charm, and manly grace,
With whom thy innocence, secure from strife,
Shall reap the beauteous joys of blameless life.
Pleased I observe thy little heart begin
To ask, what charms the mighty prize may win:
But know, though Elegance herself be seen
To guide thy motion, and to form thy mien;
Though Beauty over thy filial cheek diffuse
The soft enchantment of her roseate hues,
Not from their favor shall this glory rise!
TEMPER shall singly gain the splendid prize:
The sudden conquest shall be mine alone,
And Love with transport shall my triumph own.
Such are my hopes; but I with pain relate
What hard conditions are annexed by Fate:
As chemic fires, that patient labor blows,
Draw the rich perfume from the Persian rose,
So must thou form, by fiery toils refined,
The living essence of thy sweeter mind.
Dimly I see, on Destiny's dull glass,
Three dangerous trials it is thy doom to pass;
And oh! if once forgetful of my power,
Good Humor fail thee in the fatal hour,
Farewell those joys, that wait the happy wife!
Farewell the vision of unclouded life!
Fain would my love thy secret perils show,
Which Fate allows not even me to know:
In Spleen's dark court a thousand agents dwell,
Who bind her victims in the wayward spell;
Perchance three prime supporters of her sway,
The busiest of her Fiends, may cross thy way:
Stern Contradiction, her ill-favored child,
Of fierce demeanor, and of spirit wild,
Bane of delight! and horror of the sex!
His plan to puzzle, and his pride to vex! --
Or Scandal, filthy hag! who blindly limps
Round the wide earth, supported by her Imps,
Her inky Demons, who delight to print
Her base suggestion, and her envious hint: --
Or groundless Jealousy, pert changeling! born
Of amorous Vanity, and angry Scorn,
Whose bitter taunts with public insult dare
Basely to wound the unoffending Fair,
Proud the sweet joys of Innocence to crush,
And spread over Beauty's cheek the burning blush.
Whether these kindred Fiends, or one or all,
Shall aim thy airy spirit to enthrall,
Are points, my fondness tries in vain to reach;
But trust my caution! and beware of each!
Lest to thy lively mind my words may seem
The vain chimera of a common dream,
By one unquestionable sign be taught
To prize my presence in thy waking thought!
An azure ribband, on thy toilet thrown,
Shall make the magic of my empire known:
On this thy sportive needle tried its powers,
And silver spangles formed the mimic flowers;
On these my love shall breathe a secret charm;
With this, my Caestus, thy soft bosom arm;
Above it let the decent tucker rise,
To hide the mystic band from mortal eyes!
When Spleen's dark Powers would teach that breast to swell,
This guardian Cincture shall those Powers repel:
As the touched talisman, more swift than thought,
To save her charge, the Arabian Fairy brought;
So shall this Zone, if justly I Am obeyed,
Bring my soft spirit to thy certain aid.
In Love's great name observe this high behest!
Revere my power -- Be gentle, and be blessed!"
Here the kind Sprite her friendly counsel closed,
And lightly vanished -- Still SERENA doz'd;
Still in sweet trance she fondly seemed to hear
The soft persuasion vibrate in her ear.
But waking now far different notes she found;
Less pleasing echoes in her chamber sound:
For now the heralds of the London day
Sing their loud mattins in the uncrowded way;
The impatient Milkmaid now, with early din,
Screams to the rattle of her pail of tin;
With Sweep's faint cry, and, latest of the crew,
The deep-ton'd music of the murmuring Jew.
END OF THE FIRST CANTO.
CANTO II.
YE radiant Nymphs! whose opening eyes convey
Warmth to the world, and luster to the day!
Think what o'ershadowing clouds may cross your brain,
Before those lovely lids shall close again!
What funds of Patience twelve long hours may ask,
When cold Discretion claims her daily task!
Ah think betimes! and, while your morning care
Sheds foreign odors over your fragrant hair,
Tinge your soft spirit with that mental sweet,
Which may not be exhaled by Passion's heat;
But charm the sense, with undecaying power,
Through every chance of each diurnal hour!
O! might you all perceive your toilets crowned
With such cosmetics as SERENA found!
For, to the warning Vision fondly true,
Now the quick Fair-one to the toilet flew:
With keen delight her ravished eye surveyed
The mystic ribband on her mirror laid:
Bright shone the azure, as Aurora's car,
And every spangle seemed a living star.
With sportive grace the smiling damsel pressed
The guardian Cincture to her snowy breast,
More lovely far than Juno, when she strove
To look most lovely in the eyes of Jove;
And willing Venus lent her every power,
That sheds enchantment over the amorous hour:
For spells more potent on this band were thrown,
Than Venus boasted in her beauteous zone.
Her dazzling Caestus could alone inspire
The sudden impulse of short-lived desire:
These finer threads with lasting charms are fraught,
Here lies the tender, but unchanging thought,
Silence, that wins, where eloquence is vain,
And Tones, that harmonize the mad'ning brain,
Soft Sighs, that Anger cannot hear, and live,
And Smiles, that tell, how truly they forgive;
And lively Grace, whose gay diffusive light
Puts the black phantoms of the brain to flight,
Whose cheering powers through every period last,
And make the present happy as the past.
Such secret charms this richer Zone possessed,
Whose flowers, now sparkling on SERENA's breast,
Give, though unseen those swelling orbs they bind,
Smiles to her face, and beauty to her mind:
For now, observant of the Sprite's behest,
The Nymph conceals them by her upper vest:
Safe lies the spell, no mortal may descry,
Not keen PENELOPE's all-piercing eye;
Who constant, as the steps of morn advance,
Surveys the household with a searching glance,
And entering now, with all her usual care,
Reviews the chamber of the youthful Fair.
Beneath the pillow, not completely hid,
The Novel lay -- She saw -- she seized -- she chid:
With rage and glee her glaring eye balls flash,
Ah wicked age! she cries, ah filthy trash!
From the first page my just abhorrence springs;
For modern anecdotes are monstrous things:
Yet will I see what dangerous poisons lurk,
To taint thy youth, in this licentious work.
She said: and rudely from the chamber rushed,
Her pallid cheek with expectation flushed,
With ardent hope her eager spirit shook,
Vain hope! to banquet on a luscious book.
So if a Priest, of the Arabian sect,
In Turkish hands forbidden wine detect,
The sacred Mussulman, with pious din,
Arraigns the culprit, and proclaims the sin,
Curses with holy zeal the inflaming juice,
But cursing takes it for his secret use.
The gay SERENA, with unruffled mind,
The pleasing Novel, thus unread, resigned.
The Vision on her soul such virtue left,
She only smiled at the provoking theft;
The teazing incident she deemed a jest,
Nor felt the Zone grow tighter on her breast.
Now in full charms descends the finished Fair,
For now the morning banquet claims her care;
Already at the board, with viands pil'd,
Her Sire impatient sits, and chides his tardy child.
On his imperial lips rude Hunger reigns,
And keener Politics usurp his brains:
But when her love-inspiring voice he hears,
When the soft magic of her smile appears,
In that glad moment he at once forgets
His empty stomach, and the nation's debts:
He bends to Nature's more divine control,
And only feels the Father in his soul.
Quick to his hand behold her now present
The Indian liquor of celestial scent!
Not with more grace the nectar'd cup is given
By rose-lip'd Hebe to the Lord of Heaven.
While her fair hands a fresh libation pour,
Fashion's loud thunder wakes the sounding door.
The light SERENA to the window springs,
On Curiosity's amusive wings:
Her quick eyes sparkle with surprise, to see
The glories of a golden vis-a-vis:
Its glittering tablet gleam'd with mimic pearl,
And the rich coronet announc'd an Earl.
The good old Knight grew somewhat proud to hear
Of this new visit from the early Peer:
SERENA recollects the Vision's truth,
And fluttering, hopes it is the promised Youth:
PENELOPE from her high chamber peeps;
There her unfinished charms she coyly keeps;
With sage reserve her modesty abhorred
To show her morning face before a Lord.
The Peer alights: the well-rang'd vassals bawl
His sounding title through the spacious hall,
Till in the deep saloon's extremest bound
The ear-tickling words, "LORD FILLIGREE," resound!
As when great Hector, setting war apart,
Advanced to parley, with his spear athwart,
The Greeks beheld him with a still delight;
And silent reverence stopped the rising fight;
With such respect, but unchastis'd by fear,
Sir GILBERT and the Nymph first meet the Peer;
And, while his morning compliments commence,
The slighted breakfast stands in cold suspense.
But far unlike to Hector's ruder grace
His modern stature, and his modish face!
Nor less he differs from those Barons old,
Whose arms are blazoned on his car of gold;
Whose prostrate castle guarded once the lands,
Where, spruce in motley pride, his villa stands,
By Taste erected, in her trimmest mode,
Her mushroom structure, and her quaint abode.
As the neat Daisy to the Sun's broad flower,
As the French Boudoir to the Gothic Tower,
Such is the Peer, whom Fashion much admires,
Compared in person to his ancient sires:
For their broad shoulder, and their brawny calf,
Their coarse, loud language, and their coarser laugh,
His finer form, more elegantly slim,
Displays the fasionable length of limb:
With foreign shrugs his country he regards,
And her lean tongue with foreign words he lards;
While Gallic Graces, who correct his style,
Forbid his mirth to pass beyond a smile.
As the nice workman in the wooden trade,
Hides his coarse ground, with finest woods o'erlaid,
Thus our young Lord, with Fashion's phrase refined,
Fineer'd the mean interior of his mind:
And hence, in Courtesy's soft luster seen,
His spirit shone, as graceful as his mien.
The artless Fair, on Fashion's kind report,
Thought him the mirror of a matchless Court:
Much she his dress, his language much observes,
Whose finer accents prove his feeling nerves.
Her fancy now the destined Lover spies,
But her free heart abjures the quick surmise;
Yet as he spoke, at every flattering word
The Vision's promise to her thought recurr'd.
Far more parental pride contrives to blind
The good Sir GILBERT's more-experienc'd mind,
Who fondly saw, and at the prospect smiled,
A future Countess in his favorite child.
But what new flutterings shook SERENA's breast,
What hopes and fears the modest Nymph oppressed,
When with a simpering smile, and soft regard,
The Peer displayed a mirth-expressive card,
Where the gay Graces, in a sportive band,
Show the sweet art of Cipriani's hand;
Where, in their train, his airy Cupids throng,
And laughing drag a comic mask along!
"We," cries my Lord, with self-sufficient joy,
Twirling, with lordly airs, the graceful toy,
"We, who possess true science, we, who give
The world a lesson in the art to live,
We for the the Fair a splendid Fete design,
And pay our homage thus at Beauty's shrine."
He spoke; and speaking, to the blushing Maid,
With modish ease, the inviting card conveyed,
Where Mirth announc'd her masque-devoted hour
In characters intwin'd with many a flower:
The blushing Maid, with eyes of quick desire,
Viewed it, and felt her little soul on fire;
For of all scenes she had not yet surveyed,
Her heart most panted for a Masquerade:
But her gay hopes increasing terrors drown,
And dread forebodings of her Father's frown.
In mute suspense to read his thought she tries,
And strongly pleads with her prevailing eyes,
Her eyes, for doubt enchain'd her modest tongue,
While on his sovereign word her pleasure hung.
With such a tender, and persuasive air
Of soft endearment, and of anxious care,
Thetis attended from the almighty Sire
His fateful answer to her fond desire:
The good old Knight, like the Olympian God,
Blessed the fair Suppliant with his gracious nod;
Her lively spirit the kind signal took,
And her glad heart, in every fiber, shook.
The party settled, it imports not how,
The Peer politely made his parting bow:
The Nymph, with eyes that sparkled joyous fire,
Kissed the round cheek of her complying Sire,
Then swiftly flew, and summoned to her aid
The important counsel of her favorite maid,
To vent her joy, and, as the moments press,
To fix that first of points, a Fancy-dress.
Quick as the Poet's eyes over Nature fly,
Piercing the deep, or traversing the sky,
With such light speed her fond ideas glance
Over play and poem, story and romance,
While all the Characters, she ever has read,
Flash on her brain, and fill her busy head.
Now in Diana's form she hopes to meet
A fond Endymion sighing at her feet;
Now her proud thought terrestrial pomp assumes,
And Dian's crescent yields to Indian plumes;
Now, in the habit of the Grecian Isles,
She hears some Osman suing for her smiles,
And sees his soul that blaze of dress outshine,
Whose wealth impoverished a diamond-mine;
Now simpler charms her quick attention draw,
The rose-crown'd bonnet, and the hat of straw,
A Village-maid she seems, in neat attire,
A faithful Shepherd now her sole desire.
Thus, as new figures in her fancy throng,
"She Is every thing by starts, and nothing long;"
But, in the space of one revolving hour,
Flies through all states of Poverty and Power,
All forms, on whom her veering mind can pitch,
Sultana, Gipsy, Goddess, Nymph, and Witch.
At length, her soul with Shakespeare's magic fraught,
The wand of Ariel fixed her roving thought;
Ariel's light graces all her heart possess,
And Jenny's ordered to prepare the dress.
It seems already bought, with fond applause;
An azure tissue, and a silver gauze;
Too soon, alas! that garb of heavenly hue
The ready Mercer flashes to her view.
Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae,
Et servare modum, rebus sublata secundis.
Turno tempus erit, magno cum optaverit emptum
Intactum Pallanta, et cum spolia ista diemque
O lerit.
AENEID. x. v. 501. and seq.
Ah blind to Fate! how often the youthful belle
Feels her gay heart at sight of tissue swell!
And thinks the fashionable silk must prove
Her robe of triumph, and a spell to Love!
To thee, sweet Maid, whose pleasure-darting eyes
Joy in this favorite vest, an hour shall rise,
When thou shall hate the silk so fondly sought,
And wish thy silver-spotted gauze unbought:
For busy Spleen thy trial now prepares;
Darkly she forms her unsuspected snares,
And, keen to raise her pleasure-killing storm,
Assumes PENELOPE's congenial form.
In that prim shape, which all the Graces shun,
See the sour Fiend to good Sir GILBERT run!
Where, deeply pondering the Public Debt,
Silent he muses over a new Gazette!
Entering, she viewed, with eyes of envious spite,
The card, that spoke the masque-devoted night:
Eager she darted on the graceful toy,
And, fiercely pointing to each naked boy,
"Can thou," she cried, in a discordant scream,
That roused the Politician from his dream,
While with her voice the echoing chamber rings,
" (...), etc.
Say! can thou suffer these flagitious things?
"Are these devices to thy daughter brought,
"That wake such gross impurity of thought?
"In vain are all the prudent words I preach,
"The modest maxims that I strive to teach,
"By foolish fondness of your sense beguiled,
"You still indulge, and spoil the flippant child:
"For me, whatever I say is deemed absurd;
"She scorns my sage advice: -- but mark my word,
"If to this ball you let the Hoyden run,
"Your power is ended, and the Girl undone."
The patriot Knight, by interruption vexed,
In his political pursuits perplexed,
While he with wrath the intruding Mischief eyed,
Stern to the false PENELOPE replied:
"Go! teazing Prude, cease in my ears to vent
"Thy envious pride, and peevish discontent!
"To me of prudence can thou vainly boast?
"Of all my household, thou have plagued me most:
"The joys thou blamest are thy dear delight,
"By day the Visit, and the Ball by night:
"And, though too old a Lover to trepan,
"Thy midnight dream, thy morning thought, is Man.
"Were thou less closely to my blood allied,
"Thou should, to cure thee of thy canting pride,
"Be sent to sigh alone over purling brooks,
"Scold village maids, and croak to croaking rooks."
He spoke indignant: the sly Fiend withdrew,
Nor inly grieved; for well her force she knew.
As Indian females, in a jealous hour,
Of secret poison try the subtlest power,
Which sure, though slow, corrodes the unconscious prey,
And ends its triumph on a distant day:
Page 42.

Stothard del. Heath sculp.

Published July. 1st. 1788. by T. Cadell. Strand.


Thus the departing Fury left behind
Her venom, latent in Sir GILBERT's mind.
The hidden mischief though no eye observes,
He feels it fretting on his altered nerves;
But the kind habit of his healthy soul
Still struggled hard against its base control.
Now Spleen's dark vapors, in his bosom hid,
Prompt him the promised pleasure to forbid;
Now Love's soft pleadings that dire thought destroy,
And save the blossom of his daughter's joy;
Her envious Aunt now serves him for a jest,
And gay good humor reassumes his breast.
While Spleen's dark power now sinks and now revives,
At length the day, the important day, arrives,
Which in his breast must end the close debate,
And fix the color of SERENA's fate.
Now comes the hour, when the convivial Knight
Waits to begin the dinner's cheerful rite:
His fond heart ever, with a Father's pride,
Joys to behold his darling at his side;
But most the absence of her smile he feels
In the gay season of his social meals:
Hence, while for her the rich repast attends,
His hasty summons to the Nymph he sends:
The happy Nymph superior cares induce
To risk his anger by a rash excuse:
She craves his pardon; but, for time distressed,
She still is busy on her magic vest;
To range her diamonds in a sparkling zone,
She begs to snatch her scanty meal alone.
The Knight in sullen state begins to dine:
Spleen, like a Harpy, flutters over his wine:
Invisible she poisons every dish,
Tinging with gall his mutton, fowl, and fish.
The more he eats, the more perverse he grows;
For as his hunger sunk, his choler rose.
The cloth removed, he cries, with vapors sick,
The Pears are mellow, and the Port is thick;
Though nicer fruit Pomona never knew,
And his rich wine surpassed the ruby's hue!
A thousand times his dizzy brain revolves
A stern command: now doubts, and now resolves
To bid the Nymph descend, and, disarray'd,
Quit her dear project of the Masquerade:
As often kind Nature to his heart recurr'd,
And Love parental stopped the cruel word.
Mean time, unconscious of the brooding storm,
The Nymph exults in her improving form:
Gay is her smile, as those the Queen of Love
Darts on the Graces in her court above,
While they contrive, with love-inspiring cares,
New modes of beauty for the robe she wears.
At length, each duty of the toilet past,
The glance of triumph on the mirror cast,
Now the light wand our finished Ariel arms;
Glad Jenny glories in her Lady's charms;
And gives full utterance, as she smooths her vest,
To the sweet bodings of SERENA's breast.
O! lovely biass of the Female soul!
Which trembling points to Pleasure's distant pole;
Which with fond trust on flattering Hope relies,
O'erleaps each peril, that in prospect lies,
And springing to the goal, anticipates the prize!
Such was SERENA's fear-discarding state;
Her eye beheld not the dark frowns of Fate:
She only saw, the combat all forgot,
The triumph promised as her glorious lot.
Now, eager to display her light attire,
The sprightly Damsel seeks her sullen Sire;
His gloomy brow with sportive air she kissed:
Ah! how could Spleen that magic lip resist?
That voice, whose melting music might assuage
The scorpion Anger's self-tormenting rage?
For never did Nature to a Sire's embrace
Present a filial form of softer grace;
Or Fancy view a shape of lovelier kind
In the bright mirror of her Shakespeare's mind.
The sulky Fiend, in spite of all her art,
Had now been banished from the Father's heart,
But that, resolved her utmost force to try,
She summoned to her aid her old ally,
The fiery Demon, temper-troubling Gout,
Who sinks the lively, and appalls the stout;
Who now, assisting Spleen's malignant aim,
Shoots in quick throbbings through Sir GILBERT's frame.
Thus sorely pestered by a double foe,
Galling his giddy brain, and burning toe,
The testy Knight, with stern and sullen air,
Denounced his humor to the shudd'ring Fair:
"Go change your dress! give up this vain delight!
"I will not hear of Masquerades tonight:
"Your Chaperone's informed, she need not wait,
"So change your dress! and sit with me sedate."
As the proud dame, whose avaricious glee
Built golden castles in the rich South Sea,
Gazed on her Broker, when he told her first
Her wealth was vanished, and the bubble burst:
So gazed the Nymph, hearing her Sire destroy
Her airy palace of ideal joy.
First her fond thoughts to flattering doubt incline,
And deem the harsh command no fixed design,
But the quick sally of a peevish word,
That Love revokes, the moment it is heard:
Or happily mirth, in mimic wrath expressed,
A feigned forbiddance uttered but in jest:
To this short hope her sinking spirit clung,
To see his softening eyes refute his tongue.
Ah fruitless hope! for there she cannot find
The well-known signals of the friendly mind.
Stern Contradiction, with the frown of Fate,
On his dark visage reigned in sullen state;
Felt in each feature, in each accent shown,
Lowered in his look, and thundered in his tone.
Hence the warm bosom of the lively Fair
Now shivers with the chill of blank despair:
Now Disappointment's thick'ning shadows roll
A cloud of horror over the darkened soul;
And Fancy, in a sick delirium tossed,
Gives double value to each pleasure lost.
The blasted joys, she labors to forget,
Rush on her mind, and waken keen regret:
Her cheek turns pale -- the tear prepares to start,
And palpitation heaves her swelling heart.
But here, SOPHROSYNE! thy guardian aid
Saves from her potent foe the sinking Maid.
Her bosom, into strong emotions thrown,
Now feels the pressure of thy friendly Zone.
Swift thy kind cautions to her soul recur,
More quick to cancel faults, than prone to err.
As the rough swell of the insurgent tides
By the mild impulse of the Moon subsides:
So, by her mystic Monitor represt,
The flood of passion leaves her lightened breast,
From her clear brain each cloudy vapor flies,
And Joy's bright ray rekindles in her eyes.
Reviving Gaiety full luster spread
Over all her features, and with smiles she said:
"Let others drive to Pleasure's distant dome!
"Be mine the dearer joy to please at home!"
Scarce had she spoke, when she with sportive ease
Pressed her Piano-forte's favorite keys,
Over softest notes her rapid fingers ran,
Sweet prelude to the Air she thus began!
SOPHROSYNE! thou Guard unseen!
Whose delicate control
Can turn the discord of Chagrin
To Harmony of Soul!
Above the lyre, the lute above,
Be mine thy melting tone,
Which makes the peace of all we love
The basis of our own!
So sung the Nymph, not uninspir'd: the Sprite
Invoked so fondly in the mystic rite,
With richest music swelled her warbling throat,
And gave new sweetness to her sweetest note.
As when the seraph Uriel first begun
His carol to the new-created Sun,
The sacred echo shook the vast profound,
And Chaos perished at the potent sound:
So, at the magic of SERENA's strain,
Spleen vanished from her Sire's chaotic brain;
Whose fibers, lightened of that load, rejoice
In the dear accents of her dulcet voice.
Much he inclines his mandate to recall,
And send the Fair-one to the promised Ball;
But stubborn Pride forbids him to revoke
The solemn sentence, which Ill-humour spoke.
Still, conscious of her power, the Nymph prolongs
The soft enchantment of her soothing songs;
Which his fond mind in firm attention keep,
To his fixed hour of supper and of sleep:
This now arrived, the Knight retiring, shed
A double blessing on his Darling's head;
And with unusual exultation pressed
His lovely Child to his parental breast.
Thus while to rest the happy Sire withdrew,
The Nymph, more happy, to her chamber flew;
And, Jenny now dismissed, the grateful Fair
Breathes to her guardian Sprite this tender prayer:
"Thou kind Preserver! whose attentive zeal
"Gives me in this contented hour to feel
"That dearest pleasure of a soul refined,
"The triumph of the self-corrected mind;
"If happy in the strength thy smiles impart,
"I own thy favor in no thankless heart,
"Still let me view thy form, so justly dear!
"Still in kind Visions to these eyes appear!
"Thy friendly dictates teach me to fulfill!
"And let thy aid avert each future ill!"
While fond Devotion taught her thus to speak,
The soft Down sinks beneath her lovely cheek,
And settling on her lips, that sweetly close,
Silence, enamored, lulls her to repose.
END OF THE SECOND CANTO.
CANTO III.
YE kind Transporters of the excursive soul!
Ye Visions! that, when Night enwraps the Pole,
The lively wanderer to new worlds convey,
Escaping from her heavy house of clay,
How could the gentle spirit, foe to strife,
Bear without you this coil of waking life?
Its grief-embitter'd cares, its joyless mirth,
And all the flat realities of earth?
It Is you, sweet Phantoms, who new powers inspire,
Who give to Beauty charms, to Fancy fire,
When, soaring like the eagle's kindred frame,
The Poet dreams of everlasting Fame;
Or, tickled by the feather of the dove,
The softer Virgin dreams of endless Love.
There was a time, when Fortune's bright decrees
Were seen to realize such dreams as these:
Now dangerous visions the fond mind decoy
Vainly to hope for unexisting joy,
While Belles and Bards with mournful sighs exclaim,
Mortality has seized both Love and Fame.
Ah fair SERENA, might the boast be ours
To clear from such a charge these heavenly Powers!
Blessed! might thy Bard deserve in Fame to see
A guard as faithful, as Love proves to thee!
Blessed! if that airy Being gild his life,
Who saved thee trembling on the brink of strife,
And now, kind prompter of thy nightly dream,
Filled thy rapt spirit with her sacred beam!
For soon as Slumber set thy soul at large,
Thy Guardian Power revisited her charge;
And, lightly hovering over the illumined bed,
Thus with fond smiles of approbation said:
"Well have thou past, sweet Maid, one trying scene,
"One fiery ordeal of the tyrant Spleen:
"Thus, my SERENA, may thy force sustain
"Each harder trial, that may yet remain!
"Against the Fiend to fortify thy soul,
"By useful knowledge of her dark control,
"I come to show thee, what no mortal eye,
"Save thine, was ever permitted to descry;
"The realms, where Spleen's infernal agents goad
"The ghostly tenants of her drear abode.
"Now summon all thy strength! throw fear aside,
"And firmly trust in thy aetherial Guide!"
She spoke: and through the Night's surrounding shade
The obedient Nymph, not unappall'd, conveyed;
Through long, long tracts of darkness, on they past
With speed, that struck the trembling Maid aghast,
Till now, recovering by degrees, she found
Her soft foot press upon the solid ground.
Encouraged by her Guide, at length she tries
To search the gloomy scene, with anxious eyes.
Per me si va nella citta dolente,
Per me si va nell' eterno dolor,
Per me si va tra la perduta gente,
* * * * * * * * *
Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch' intrate.
Queste parole di color oscuro
Vid' io scritte al sommo d'una porta.
DANTE, Inferno. 3.
"Through me ye pass to Spleen's terrific dome,
Through me, to Discontent's eternal home:
Through me, to those, who sadden'd human life,
By sullen humor, or vexatious strife;
And here, through scenes of endless vapors hurled,
Are punished in the forms they plagued the world;
Justly they feel no joy, who none bestow,
All ye who enter, every hope forego!"
Over an arched cavern, rough with horrid stone,
On which a feeble light, by flashes, shone,
These characters, that chilled her soul with dread,
SERENA, fixed in silent wonder, read.
As she began to speak, her voice was drowned
By the shrill echo of far other sound:
Forth from the portal lamentable cries
Of wailing Infants, without number, rise.
Compassion to this poor and piteous flock
Led the soft Maid still nearer to the rock.
The pining band within she now espied,
And, touched with tender indignation, cried,
"How could these little forms, of life so brief,
"Deserve this dire abode of lasting grief?"
" -- Well may thy gentle heart be sore concerned
"At sight so moving," the mild Sprite returned:
"Thou see in those, whose wailings wound thy ears,
"The puny progeny of modern Peers:
"Their Sires, by Avarice or Ambition led,
"Aliens to Love, approached the nuptial bed;
"With proud indifference, and with cold distaste,
"Their homely brides reluctantly embraced,
"And by such union gave disastrous birth
"To these poor pale encumbrances of earth,
"Who, bred in Vanity, with Pride their dower,
"Were Spleen's sure victims from their natal hour,
"And in their splendid cradles pulled and pined,
"Till Fate their ill-spun thread of life untwin'd,
"And to this vestibule conveyed their ghosts,
"To form the vanguard of the infernal hosts.
"But let not Pity's ineffectual charm
"Impede thy progress, or thy strength disarm!
"Follow and fear not! guarded by my care,
"From all the phantoms, that around thee glare."
She spoke; and entered, ere the Nymph replied,
A pass, that opened in the cavern's side,
Low, dark, and rocky -- with her body bent,
SERENA followed down the dire descent.
A sudden light soon struck her dazzled view;
But 'twas a light of such infernal hue,
As double horror to the darkness gave,
With dread reflection from a dusky wave.
Round a black water tattered specter stand,
With each a tiny taper in its hand;
Fierce Mendicants! who strive some alms to win
From the fair Wanderer, with incessant din.
The Guardian Spirit saw SERENA grieve,
To hear of wants she knew not to relieve;
And to the generous Nymph in pity cries:
"The gulf of Indolence before us lies,
"Over whose dull flood, to which no bank is seen,
"A boat must waft thee to the dome of Spleen.
"These pallid figures, that around thee press,
"And haunt thee with importunate distress,
"On earth were Beggars of each different class,
"Though blended here in one promiscuous mass.
"The Poor, who spurned kind Industry's control,
"The Rich, who begged from penury of soul:
"Both, by their abject pride alike debased,
"Blasphemed that nature, which they both disgraced,
"And, hither by the sullen Fiend conveyed,
"Here still they ply their ineffectual trade;
"In chase of each new passenger they run,
"Condemned to beg from all, to gain by-none.
"But from these wretches turn thy fruitless care!
"Behold the gulf before thee, and beware!
"Nor touch the stream, which mortal sense o'ercomes,
"And by its baleful charm the soul benumbs!"
-- "Can mortal pass!" the shudd'ring Nymph replied,
"This sullen, slow, unnavigable tide,
"In whose black current this enormous mound
"Of shapeless stone appears, this horrid bound,
"That seems an everlasting guard to keep
"Over the dull waters, that beneath it creep?"
While yet she spoke, with a resounding shock,
Forth from the arch of the impending rock,
Which over the murmuring eddy hung so low,
The lazy river scarce had room to flow,
Of rude construction, and in roughest plight,
A boat now issued to SERENA 's sight;
An empty boat, that slowly to the shore
Advanced, without the aid of sail or oar;
Self-mov'd it seemed, but soon the Nymph beheld
A grifly figure, who the stern impelled.
Wading behind, the horrid Form appeared;
Above the water his strong arm he reared,
And cross the creeping flood the crazy vessel steered.
The heavenly Sprite observed her trembling Ward,
Whose growing fears the hideous pass abhorred,
And cheering thus she spoke: "This Spectre boasts
"The chief dominion of these dreary coasts:
"To him, thy Pilot, without dread consign,
"And place thy body in his bark supine!
"So through this arching rock thou wilt pass alone,
"Safe from the perils of the incumbent stone:
"Embark undaunted! -- on the farther side
"Thou Wilt surely find me thy unfailing Guide.
"Nor let this Pilot raise thy groundless dread,
"This sullen Charon of the froward dead,
"A Phantom, never blessed with human life,
"Though often on earth his noxious power is rife;
"And in that region, never from error free,
"The words he dictates are assigned to me.
"Observe this Fiend, that Nature scorned to frame,
"Offspring of Pride, and Apathy his name!
"Passions he never can feel, and never impart,
"A miscreated Imp, without a heart;
"In place of which, his subtle parent pinned
"A bladder, filled with circulating wind,
"Which seems with mimic life the mass to warm,
"And gives false vigor to his bloated form.
"But place thee in the boat, his arms direct,
"My love shall watch thee, and my power protect."
So spoke the friendly Sprite; the obedient Maid
Her form along the narrow vessel laid:
But oh! what terrors shake her tender soul,
As from the shore the bark begins to roll;
And, severed from her Friend, her eyes discern
The steering Spectre wading at the stern!
Far stronger fears her resolution melt,
Than those, which erst the Bard of Florence felt,
When, by the honored shade of Virgil led
Through all the dreary circles of the dead,
Hell's fiercest Demons threatened to divide
The living Poet from his shadowy Guide;
Page 57.

Stothard del. Heath sculpt.

London. Published Septr 1st. 1788. by T. Cadell. Strand.


And bade him, friendless, and alone, return
Through the dire horrors of the dark sojourn.
Not long the lovely Fair-one's terrors last;
For safely through the impending rock she past:
And slow advancing to the gloomy strand,
The sullen Pilot brings her safe to land.
There fondly hovering on her guardian plumes,
The heavenly Monitor her charge resumes;
And smiling, leads along the rocky road,
Whose windings open into Spleen's abode.
Thou Queen of Shades! whose spirit-damping spell
Too often is seen the Poet's pride to quell,
When the sharp workings of unrelish'd wit
Plunge thy pale victim in a bilious fit;
May I, unpunished by thy subtle power,
Dare to display thy subterranean bower,
And to this wondering upper world explain
The shadowy horrors of thy secret reign?
Entering beneath a wide fantastic arch,
Round the drear circuit of the dome they march;
Which a pale flash from many a fiery Sprite
Frequent illumes with intermitting light;
Such, as on earth, to Superstition's eye,
Denounces ruin from the northern sky,
While she discerns, amid the nightly glare,
Armies embattled in the blazing air.
Around the Nymph unnumber'd phantoms glide;
Here swell the bloated race of bulky Pride:
In close and horrid union, there appear
The wilder progeny of frantic Fear;
Misshapen monsters! whose stupendous frame
Abhorrent Nature has refused to name.
Here, in Cameleon colors, lightly flit
The motley offspring of disordered Wit.
All things prodigious the wide cave contained,
And forms, beyond what Fable ever feigned:
But, as the worm, that on the dewy green
Springs half to view, and half remains unseen,
Perceiving near its cell a human tread,
Slinks back to earth, and hides its timid head:
So, where the heavenly Spirit deigned to lead,
The startled specter from her step recede;
And, as abashed they from her eye retire,
Sink into mist, or melt in fluid fire.
High on an ebon throne, superbly wrought
With each fierce figure of fantastic thought,
In a deep cove, where no bright beam intrudes,
Over her black schemes the sullen Empress broods.
The Shriek-Owl's mingled with the Raven's plume
Shed over her furrowed brows an aweful gloom;
A garb, that glares with stripes of lurid flame,
Wraps in terrific pomp her haggard frame;
Round her a Serpent, as her zone, is rolled,
Which writhing, stings itself in every fold.
Near her pavilion, in barbaric state,
Four Mutes the mandates of their Queen await.
From sickly Fancy bred, by sullen Sloth,
Both parents' curse, yet pampered still by both,
First stands Disease; an hag of magic power,
Varying her frightful visage every hour,
Her horrors heightening, as those changes last,
And each new form more hideous than the past.
Detraction next, a shapeless Fiend, appears,
Whose shrivelled hand a misty mirror rears;
Framed by malignant Art, the infernal toy
Inverts the lovely mien of smiling Joy,
Robs roseate Beauty of attractive Grace,
And gives a stepdame's frown to Nature's face.
The third in place, but with a fiercer air,
See the true Gorgon Disappointment glare!
By whose petrific power Delight's overthrown;
And Hope's warm heart becomes an icy stone.
Last, in a gorgeous robe, that, ill bestowed,
Bows her mean body by its cumbrous load,
Stands fretful Discontent, of Fiends the worst,
By dignity debased, by blessings cursed,
Who poisons Pleasure with the sourest leaven,
And makes a Hell of Love's extatic Heaven.
The Guide celestial, near this ghastly group,
Perceived her tender Charge with terror droop:
"Fear not, sweet Maid," she cries, "my steps pursue!
"Nor gaze too long on this infernal crew!
"Turn from Detraction's fascinating glass!
"In silence cross the throne! observe, and pass!
"Beyond this dome, the palace of the Queen,
"Her empire winds through many a dreary scene,
"Where she torments, as their deserts require,
"Her various victims, that on earth expire;
"Each class apart: for in a different cell
"The Fierce, the Fretful, and the Sullen dwell:
"These shall thou slightly view, in vapqurs hurled,
"And swiftly then regain thy native world.
"But first remark, within that ample nich,
"With every quaint device of splendour rich,
"Yon Phantom, who, from vulgar eyes withdrawn,
"Appears to stretch in one eternal yawn:
"Of empire here he holds the tottering helm,
"Prime Minister in Spleen's discordant realm,
"The pillar of her spreading state, and more,
"Her darling offspring, whom on earth she bore;
"For, as on earth his wayward mother strayed,
"Grandeur, with eyes of fire, her form surveyed,
"And with strong passion starting from his throne,
"Unloos'd the sullen Queen's reluctant zone.
"From his embrace, conceived in moody joy,
"Rose the round image of a bloated boy:
"His nurse was Indolence; his tutor Pomp,
"Who kept the child from every childish romp;
"They reared their nursling to the bulk you see,
"And his proud parents called their imp ENNUI.
"This realm he rules, and in superb attire
"Visits each earthly palace of his Sire:
"A thousand shapes he wears, now pert, now prim,
"Pursues each grave conceit, or idle whim;
"In arms, in arts, in government engages,
"With Monarchs, Poets, Politicians, Sages;
"But drops each work, the moment it is begun,
"And, trying all things, can accomplish none:
"Yet over each rank, and age, and sex, his sway
"Spreads undiscerned, and makes the world his prey.
"The light Coquet, amid flirtation, sighs,
"To find him lurk in Pleasure's vain disguise;
"And the grave Nun discovers, in her cell,
"That holy water but augments his spell.
"As the strange monster of the serpent breed,
"That haunts, as travelers tell, the marshy mead,
"Devours each nobler beast, though firmly grown
"To size and strength superior to his own; --
"For on the grazing Horse, or larger Bull,
"Subtly he springs, of dark saliva full;
"With swiftly-darting tongue his prey anoints
"With venom, potent to dissolve its joints,
"And, while its bulk in liquid poison swims,
"Swallows its melting bone, and fluid limbs: --
"So this Ennui, this wonder-working Elf,
"Can vanquish powers far mightier than himself:
"Nor Wit nor Science soar his reach above,
"And often he seizes on successful Love.
"Of all the radiant host who lend their aid
"To light mankind through life's bewildering shade,
"Bright Charity alone, with cloudless ray,
"May boast exemption from his baleful sway:
"Haste then, sweet Nymph, nor let us longer roam
"Round the drear circle of this dangerous dome!
"Lest even thy Guide, entangled in his spell,
"Should fail to guard thee from a Fiend so fell!"
So speaking, the kind Spirit's anxious care
Led from the palace the attentive Fair,
And, winding through a passage dark and rude,
Thus the mild Monitor her speech renewed:
"'Against Fear and Pity now thy bosom steel,
"For sights more horrible I now reveal!
"Spleen's tortured victims view with dauntless eyes;
"For lo! her penal realms before thee rise!"
The Nymph advancing saw, with mute amaze,
A dismal, deep, enormous dungeon blaze.
Stones of red fire the hideous wall composed;
And massive gates the horrid confine closed.
The infernal Portress of this doleful dome,
With fiery lips, that swelled with poisonous foam,
Pale Discord, raged; with whose tormenting tongue,
Through all its caves the extensive region rung:
A living Vulture was the Fury's crest;
And in her hand a Rattlesnake she pressed,
Whose angry joints incessantly were heard
To found defiance to the screaming Bird.
"The boundless depth of this dire prison holds
"The untamed spirits of imperious Scolds:
"Nor think that Females only fill the cave!
"Male Termagants have lived, and here they rave.
"All of each sex are pent within this pale,
"Who knew no use of language, but to rail."
Thus to her Charge exclaimed the heavenly Guide,
And, as she spoke, the portals opened wide,
And to the observance of the shuddering Maid,
The immeasurable den was all displayed.
But oh! what various noises from within
Fill the vexed air with one stupendous din!
Mourning's deep groan, and Anger's furious call,
Terror's loud cry, and Affectation's squall,
The sob of Passion, the Hysteric scream,
And shrieks of Frenzy, in its fierce extreme!
In this wild uproar every sound's combined,
That stuns the senses, and distracts the mind.
"Mark," (to the Nymph SOPHROSYNE began)
"The fierce Xantippe flaming in the van,
"The vase, she emptied on the Sage's head,
"Hangs over her own, a different shower to shed;
"For, drop by drop, distilling liquid fire,
"It fills the Vixen with new tropes of ire.
"Beyond the Grecian dame extend your view,
"And mark the spectre of a modern Shrew!
"She, who whenever she dined, with furious look,
"Spurned her nice food, and bellowed at her cook,
"Here justly feels a culinary rack,
"Bound like lxion, to a whirling jack.
"But lo the Tityus of this realm! whose hulk
"Is stretched supine, and whose enormous bulk
"To such extent in this wide scene is spread,
"Nine acres seem too narrow for his bed!
"This form was once (but many years are past,
"Since in his Civic furs he breathed his last)
"Lord Mayor of London; his whole life one treat,
"And all his business but to rail and eat.
"The circling group of Fish, and Fowl, and Beasts,
"Once crowned his table, and composed his feasts;
"For all the creatures (mark this strange event!)
"Which he devoured with growling discontent,
"Over him their reunited limbs display,
"The grumbling Glutton's flesh they rend away,
"And find his swelling form a never-failing prey.
"See! where nine Bucks have gored his monstrous haunch,
"See! fifty Turkies gobble on his paunch!
"Over his broad side twelve creeping Turtles spread,
"And Fowls unnumber'd flutter round his head."
SERENA gazed, but soon she turned away,
Sick with disgust, and shuddering with dismay.
"To scenes less hideous let us now repair!"
(Said the kind Guard of the dejected Fair)
And, cheering her faint Charge, her step she led
To the near dwelling of the fretful dead.
Of dusky adamant the dungeon rose;
A dingy mirror its dark sides compose,
Reflecting, with a thousand quaint grimaces,
The pale inhabitants' distorted faces.
"Here, like a Dame of Quality arrayed,
"Sits Peevishness, presiding over the shade,
"And frowning at her own uncomely mien,
"Whose coarse reflection on the wall is seen.
"A snarling Lap-dog her right hand restrains,
"Her lap an infant Porcupine contains,
"Which, while her fondness tries its wrath to still,
"Wounds her each moment with a pointed quill.
"The froward Spirits here in durance fret,
"Whose testy life was one continued pet;
"Here they in trifles that vexation find,
"Which teased on earth their irritated mind.
"Observe the Phantom, who with eyes askance
"Still to the mirror turns her eager glance!
"See! to her cheek, incessant as she turns,
"Her vexed blood rushes, and her visage burns.
"Beauty for lasting bliss had formed the Maid;
"Love to her charms his faithful homage paid;
"But, all this swelling tide of joy to check,
"A fatal Freckle rises on her neck:
"Her soft cosmetics the grieved Nymph applies,
"Success attends her, and the Freckle dies:
"But ah! this victory avails her not;
"She finds an Hydra in the teazing spot:
"Fast as one flies, another still succeeds,
"And with eternal food her fretful humor feeds.
"Near to the Nymph, in a more moody fit,
"See the pale Phantom of a peevish Wit!
"Mark with what frowns his eager eyes peruse,
"Wet from the press, three Critical Reviews!
"With wounded Vanity's distracting rage
"How rapidly he runs through every page!
"He finds some honors lavished on his Verse,
"And Joy's faint gleams his gloomy spirit pierce.
"But oh! too soon these feeble sparks decay;
"And keen Vexation reassumes her prey.
"Hating reproof, in every fiber sore,
"One censured particle torments him more,
"More than a hundred happier lines delight,
"Which liberal favor condescends to cite.
"But time will fail us, if we pause to view
"The various torments of the testy crew;
"These wretched chemists, whose o'erheated brain
"Extracts from nothing a substantial pain.
"Yet, ere to different districts we advance,
"Take of one fretful tribe a transient glance!
"Their unsuspected punishments supply
"A lesson, useful to the Female eye.
"Spleen's liveliest agent here beguiles the gay,
"Fair to attract, and flattering to betray."
As thus the kind aetherial Guardian spoke,
Within a rock, whence plaintive murmurs broke,
She touched a secret spring, whose power was such
Two jarring doors unfolded at the touch,
And, with the charms of regal splendour bright,
A cheerful banquet sparkles to the sight.
Viands so light, so elegantly graced,
Might tempt even Temperance herself to taste;
For Fruits alone composed the enticing treat,
Fair to the eye, and to the palate sweet.
In such bright juice the Peach and Cherry swim,
As make the Topaz and the Ruby dim.
Here crowned with every flower, and gaily dressed
In all the glitter of a Gallic vest,
Whose ample folds her loathsome body screen'd,
A child of Luxury reigns, a subtle Fiend!
Who, with a grace that every heart allures,
Smiles on the luster of her rich liqueurs.
Her fatal smiles their utmost power exert
To poison Beauty at her dire dessert;
To blast the rose that Health's bright cheek adorns,
And fill each festive heart with latent thorns:
For the fly Fiend, of every art possessed,
Steals on the affection of her Female guest;
And, by her soft address seducing each,
Eager she plies them with a Brandy Peach:
They with keen lip the luscious fruit devour;
But swiftly feel its peace-destroying power.
Quick through each vein new tides of frenzy roll:
All evil passions kindle in the soul,
Drive from each feature every cheerful grace,
And glare ferocious in the sallow face;
The wounded nerves in furious conflict tear,
Then sink, in blank dejection and despair.
Effects more dire, thus tempting to deceive,
The Apple wrought not in the soul of Eve;
However disguised, in Jelly or in Jam,
Spleen has no poison surer than a Dram.
"But haste we now," (the heavenly Leader cries)
"To where this penal world's last wonder lies!"
She spoke; and led the Nymph through deeper dells,
Low-murmuring vaults, and horror-breathing cells.
And now they pass a perforated cage,
Where rancorous Specter without number rage.
"Avert thine eye!" (the heavenly Spirit said)
"Nor view these abject tribes of envious dead!
"Who pined to hear the voice of Truth proclaim
"A Sister's beauty, or a Brother's fame!
"Though crowned with all Prosperity imparts,
"High in their various ranks, and several arts;
"Yet, meanly sunk by Envy's base control,
"They died in that consumption of the soul;
"And here, through bars that twisted Adders make,
"And the long volumes of the envenomed Snake,
"Over this dark road they dart an anxious eye,
"Still envying every Fiend, that flutters by.
"Pass! and regard them not!" -- The attentive Maid
In silent tremor the behest obeyed.
This dungeon crossed, her weary feet she drags
Through winding caverns, and over icy crags:
Soul-chilling damps in the dark passage reign,
Which issues on a vast and dreary plain,
Fanned by no breezes, with no verdure crowned;
The black horizon is its only bound.
And now advancing, in a drizzly mist,
Through sullen Phantoms, hating to exist,
SERENA spies, high over his subjects placed,
The ghastly Tyrant of the gloomy waste.
Murmuring he sits upon a rocking stone,
The unstable base of his ill-founded throne:
Hideous his face, and horrible his frame,
Misanthropy the grisly Monster's name!
Him to fierce Pride, with raging passion sore,
The frowning Gorgon, Disappointment, bore;
On earth detested, and by heaven abhorred,
Of this drear wild he reigns the moody lord.
Few are the subjects of his waste domain,
And scarce a Female in his frightful train,
Except one changing corpse of ancient Prudes:
Reluctant here the prying band intrudes.
Each, who on earth, behind her artful fan,
Feigned coarse aversion to the creature Man,
Is doomed, in this dark region, to abide
Some transient pains for hypocritic pride.
Here ever-during chains those Scoffers bind,
Whose writings deaden and debase the mind;
Who mock Creation with injurious scorn,
And feel a fancied void in Plenty's horn.
In his right hand, an emblem of his cares,
A branch of Aconite the Monarch bears;
And those sour Phantoms, who this region haunt,
He feeds with berries from this deadly plant;
For, strange to tell! though severed from its root,
The bough still blackens with successive fruit.
The tribes, who taste it, burst into a fit
Of raving mockery and rancorous wit;
And, pleased their Tyrant's ghastly smile to court,
By vile distortions make him various sport.
The frantic rabble, who his sway confess;
Before his throne an hideous Puppet dress;
When in unseemly rags they have arrayed
The image, from their own dark semblance made,
In horrid gambols round their work they throng,
With antic dance and rude discordant song;
Satire's rank offals on the block they fling,
And call it Nature, to delight their King:
While in their features he exults to see
The frowns of Torture, mixed with grins of Glee.
For, as these abject toils engage the crew,
Their own grim idol darkens to their view;
Wide and more wide its horrid stature spreads,
And over the tribe new consternation sheds:
For each forgets, in his bewildered gaze,
It Is but a Monster, which he helped to raise.
As over its form their dizzy glances roll,
It strikes a chearless damp through all the soul.
Vainly to shun the baleful sight they try,
It draws for ever the reluctant eye:
At each review with deeper dread they start;
A colder chaos numbs each freezing heart.
No mutual confidence, no friendly care,
Relieves the panic they are doomed to bear;
For as they shrink absorbed in wild affright,
When each to each inclines his wounded sight,
They feel, for social comfort, sour disgust,
And all the sullen anguish of distrust.
"Now mark, SERENA! (the mild Guide began)
"The proudest Phantom of the gloomy clan,
"Appointed, by this surly Monarch's grace,
"High Priest of all his Misanthropic race!
"See over the crowd a throne of vapors lift
"That strange and motley form, the shade of SWIFT!
"Now shall thou view" (the guardian Sprite pursues)
"His horrid penance, that each day renews:
"Perchance its terrors may overwhelm thy sense,
"But trust my care to bear thee safely hence!"
As thus she spoke, above the gazing throng,
High in a sailing cloud the Spectre swept along.
Vain of his power, of elocution proud,
In mystic language he harangu'd the crowd;
The bounds he marked, with measure so precise,
Of Equine virtue, and of Human vice,
That, cursing Nature's gifts, without remorse,
Each sullen hearer wished himself a Horse.
Pleased with the pure effect his sermon wrought,
The ambitious Priest a rich Tiara caught,
Which, hovering over his high-aspiring head,
Sarcastic Humor dangled by a thread.
The rich Tiara, for his temples fit,
Blazed with each polished gem of brilliant wit;
And sharp-fac'd Irony, his darling Sprite,
Who raised her patron to this giddy height,
Fast on his brow the dangerous honor bound,
But, in the moment that her Priest was crowned,
His airy throne dissolved, and thunder rent the ground.
Forth from the yawning earth, with lightning's speed,
Sprang the fierce phantom of a fiery Steed,
Spurring his sides, whence bloody poison flowed,
The ghastly-grinning Fiend, Derision, rode.
In her right hand a horrid whip she shakes,
Whose sounding lash was formed of knotted snakes:
An uncouth bugle her left hand displayed,
From a gray monkey's skull by Malice made;
As her distorted lips this whistle blew,
Forth rushed the Spectre of a wild Yahoo.
See the poor Wit in hasty terror spring,
And fly for succor to his grisly King!
In vain his piercing cries that succor court:
The grisly King enjoys the cruel sport.
Behold the fierce Yahoo, her victim caught,
Drive her sharp talons through the seat of thought!
That copious fountain, which too well supplied
Perverted Ridicule's malignant tide.
Quick from her steed the grinning Fiend descends,
From the pierced skull the spleenful brain she rends,
To black Misanthropy, her ghastly King,
See the keen Hag this horrid present bring!
Her daily gift! for, as each day arrives,
Her destined victim for new death revives.
The Huntress now, this direst pageant past,
On her wild bugle blew so dread a blast,
The sharp sound pierced through all the depths of Hell;
The Fiends all answered in one hideous yell,
And in a fearful trance the soft SERENA fell.
Hence from the lovely Nymph her senses fled,
Till, through the parted curtains of her bed;
The amorous Sun, who now began to rise,
Kissed, with a sportive beam, her opening eyes The opinion of some respectable
Critics had almost led me to change the close of this Canto, as containing too
severe a censure on one of the great writers, who have done most honor to our
language. And, indeed, when I reflect on the inimitable talents, the public
spirit, and the charitable institutions of Swift, I am almost ready to address
his Spirit with this humiliating apostrophe: "I confess that I have done thee
wrong." -- But a superior attention to the interest of society inclines me to
persevere in a very different sentiment, and still to think, that no talents,
no virtues in a writer, can properly exempt even the most brilliant work from
severe reprehension, when, instead of improving, it has an evident tendency to
debase and vilify human nature -- a tendency, that I consider as most evident
in the composition to which I have alluded: -- if I am wrong in this idea, I
may yet shelter myself under the authority of two most honorable names -- a
moral Poet of a generous and exalted spirit, and a learned Critic of infinite
candor and discernment. -- In Young's Essay on Original Composition, and in
the posthumous work just bequeathed to the public by the lamented Mr. Harris,
the misanthropy of Swift is most warmly censured. The words of the latter are
so striking and apposite, that I cannot wish for a stronger justification.
"Misanthropy is so dangerous a thing, and goes so far in sapping the very
foundations of Morality and Religion, that I esteem the last part of Swift's
Gulliver (that I mean relative to his Houyhnhnms and Yahoos) to be a worse book
to peruse, than those which we forbid, as the most flagitious and obscene. One
absurdity in this Author (a wretched Philosopher though a great Wit) is well
worth remarking -- in order to render the nature of Man odious, and the nature
of Beasts amiable, he is compelled to give human characters to his Beasts, and
beastly characters to his Men; so that we are to admire the Beasts, not for
being Beasts, but amiable Men; and to detest the Men, not for being Men, but
detestable Beasts." HARRIS's Philological Enquiries, vol. ii. page 538.

END OF THE THIRD CANTO.
CANTO IV.
HAIL, thou enlightened Globe of human joy!
Where social cares the softened heart employ:
What cheering rays of vital comfort roll
In thy bright regions over the rescued soul,
Which, 'scaping from the dark domain of Spleen,
Springs with new warmth to thy attractive scene!
Once more I bless thy pleasure-breathing gale,
And gaze enchanted on thy flowery vale,
Where smiling Innocence, and ardent Youth,
Sport hand in hand with Beauty and with Truth.
Sport on, sweet revellers! in rosy bowers,
Safe from the intrusion of all evil Powers!
Ah fruitless wish of the benignant Muse,
Which to this checkered world the Fates refuse!
For round its precincts many an ugly Sprite
Speeds undiscerned to poison pure delight:
Amidst the foremost of this haggard band,
Unwearied poster of the sea and land,
Wrapped in dark mists, malignant Scandal flies,
While Envy's poisoned breath the buoyant gale supplies.
Though SHERIDAN, with shafts of comic wit,
Pierced, and exposed her to the laughing Pit,
The immortal Hag still wears her paper crown,
The dreaded Empress of the idle Town:
O'erleaping her prerogative of old,
To sink the noble, to defame the bold; --
In chase of Worth to slip the dogs of Strife,
Through all the ample range of public life; --
The Tyrant now, that sanctuary burst
Where Happiness by Privacy is nursed,
Her fury rising as her powers increase,
O'erturns the altars of domestic Peace.
Pleased in her dark and gall-distilling cloud
The sportive form of Innocence to shroud,
Beauty's young train her baleful eyes survey,
To mark the fairest, as her favorite prey.
Hence, sweet SERENA, while thy spirit strayed
Round the deep realms of subterranean shade,
This keenest agent of the infernal Powers
On earth was busied, in those tranquil hours,
To blast thy peace, and poisoned darts to aim
Against the honor of thy spotless name:
For Scandal, restless Fiend, who never knows
The balmy blessing of an hour's repose,
Worn, yet unsated with her daily toil,
In her base work consumes the midnight oil.
Over fiercer Fiends when heavy slumbers creep,
When wearied Avarice and Ambition sleep,
Scandal is vigilant, and keen to spread
The plagues that spring from her prolific head.
On Truth's fair basis she her falsehood builds,
With tinsel sentiment its surface gilds;
To nightly labor from their dark abodes
The Demons of the groaning Press she goads,
And smiles to see their rapid art supply
Ten thousand wings to every infant lie.
In triumph now behold the Hag applaud
He keen and favorite Imp, ingenious Fraud,
Her quick Compositor, whose flying hand
Has closed the paragraph she keenly planned.
No Nymph she named, yet marked her vile intent,
That Dullness could not miss the name she meant:
In Satire's tints the injured Fair she drew,
In form an Angel, but in soul a Jew.
It chanced her Sire among his friends enrolled
A wealthy Senator, infirm and old;
Who, dup'd too early by a generous heart,
Rashly assumed a Misanthropic part:
Though peevish fancies would his mind incrust,
Good-nature's image lurked beneath their rust;
And gay SERENA, with that sportive wit
Which heals the folly that it deigns to hit,
Would often the sickness of his soul beguile,
And teach the sullen humorist to smile;
Pleased by her virtuous frolics to assuage
The mental anguish of distempered age.
This ancient friend, in a sarcastic sketch,
Was marked by Scandal as a monied wretch,
For whom the young, yet mercenary Fair
Had subtly spread a matrimonial snare.
With such base matter, more diffusely wrought,
The spirit-piercing paragraph was fraught,
Over which with glee the eye of Scandal glar'd,
Which for the opening Press herself prepared;
She on the types her inky wad let fall,
And smeared each letter with her bitterest gall;
The Press, whose ready gripe the charge receives,
Stamps it successive on ten thousand leaves,
Which pil'd in heaps impatient seem to lie,
They only wait the dawn of day to fly.
Now, as the trembling child, which long has laid
Mute in the dark, and of itself afraid,
When, happily conscious of the pain it feels,
The watchful mother to its pillow steals,
Springs to her breast, and shakes off all alarms,
Feeling its safety in her fostering arms:
With such quick joy, in innocence as young,
The soft SERENA from her pillow sprung,
Pleased to awake from her ^ific dream,
And feel the cheerful Sun's returning beam.
Eager she rose, in busy thought, nor staid
The wonted summons of her punctual Maid,
And as her own fair hands adjust her vest,
The guardian Cincture flutters on her breast;
For fondly, when she waked, or when she slept,
Still round her heart the important Zone she kept.
Thou happy Girdle! to thy charge be just!
Firm be thy threads, and faithful to their trust;
For hours approach, when all the stores they hide
Of magic virtue, must be strongly tried! --
Now, while her kind domestic heart intends
To please her early Sire, the Nymph descends;
But Sleep, who left the Fair with sudden flight,
With late wings hovered over the good old Knight;
And the chill circle of the lone saloon
Informs the shivering Maid she rose too soon.
It Is true, attentive John's unfailing care
Began the rites of breakfast to prepare;
But yet no fires on the cold altar burn,
No smoke arises from the silver urn,
And the blank tea-board, where no viands lay,
Only supplied the Paper of the day.
Though mild SERENA's peace-devoted mind
The keen debate of politics declined,
And heard with cold contempt, or generous hate,
The frauds of Party and the lies of State;
Nor cared much more for Fashion's loose intrigues,
Than factious bickerings, or foreign leagues;
Yet, while she saunters idle and alone,
Her careless eyes are on the Paper thrown.
As some gay Youth, whom sportive friends engage
To view the furious Ourang in his cage,
If while amused he sees the monster grin,
And trusts too careless to the bolts within,
If the sly Beast, as near the grate he draws,
Tear him unguarded with projected paws,
Starts at the wound, and feels his bosom thrill
With pain and wonder at the sudden ill:
So did SERENA start, so wildly gaze,
In such mixed pangs of anguish and amaze,
Feeling the wound which Scandal had designed
To lacerate her mild and modest mind.
Startled, as one who from electric wire
Unheeding catches unsuspected fire,
She reads, then almost doubts that she has read,
And thinks some vision hovers round her head.
Now, her fixed eye some striking words confine,
And now she darts it thrice through every line;
Nor could Amazement more her senses shake,
Had every letter been a Gorgon's snake.
Now rising Indignation takes its turn,
And her flushed cheeks with tingling blushes burn,
With restless motion and with many a frown,
Through the wide room she paces up and down:
Now, musing, makes a momentary stand,
The fatal Paper fluttering in her hand.
So the shy Bird, by cruel sportsmen sprung,
And by their random fire severely stung,
Scared, not disabled, by the distant wound,
Now trembling flies, now skims along the ground,
Now vainly tries, in some sequestered spot,
From her gored breast to shake the galling shot.
Ye tender Nymphs! whose kindling souls would flame,
Touched, like SERENA's, by injurious blame,
O let your quick and kindred spirits form
A vivid picture of the mental storm
In which she labored, and whose force to paint
The Muse's strongest tints appear too faint;
In sympathetic thought her suffering see!
But O, for ever from such wrongs be free!
Her faithful Girdle tried its power to save,
And often a monitory impulse gave;
Still unregarded, still unfelt, it pressed
With useless energy her heaving breast;
Her mind, forgetful of the magic Zone,
Full of the burning shaft by Scandal thrown,
With blended notes of sorrow and disdain,
Thus in disordered language vents its pain: --
"Had Malice dared my honor to defame,
"The self-refuted lie had lost its aim:
"But here the world, deceived by sland'rous art,
"Must think SERENA has a venal heart."
A venal heart! at that detested sound,
In swelling anguish her sunk voice was drowned.
Now was a fearful crisis of her fate:
Distended now by Passion's growing weight,
And for its Mistress filled with conscious dread,
The magic Girdle cracked through every thread,
And snapp'd perchance by Scandal's force accursed,
From her full heart the guardian Zone had burst,
And, spite of all the virtues of the Fair,
The spell of Happiness had sunk in air,
But that SOPHROSYNE, whose friendly fear
Timely foresaw this trial too severe,
An early succor gained from secret Love,
From the fell Kite to snatch the falling Dove.
As Nature studies, in her wide domain,
To blend some antidote with every bane;
Thus her kind aid the friendly Power contrived,
That, from the quarter whence the wound arrived,
There flowed, the anguish of that wound to calm,
A soothing, soft, and medicinal balm.
As in her agitated hand the Fair
Waved the loose Paper with disordered air,
In capitals she saw SERENA flame:
She blushed, she shudder'd, as she viewed the name;
Her ready fears subside in new surprise,
And eager thus she reads with lightened eyes:
"Go, faithful Sonnet, to SERENA say
"What charmspeculiar in her features reign:
"A stranger, whom her glance may never survey,
"Pays her this tribute in no flattering strain.
"Tell her, the Bard, in Beauty's ample reign,
"Has seen a virgin cheek as richly glow,
"A bosom, where the blue meandring vein
"Sheds as soft luster through the lucid snow,
"Eyes, that as brightly flash with joy and youth,
"And locks, that like her own luxuriant flow:
"Then say, for then she cannot doubt thy truth,
"That the wide earth no Female form can show
"Where Nature's legend so distinctly tells,
"In this fair shrine a fairer spirit dwells."
With curious wonder the reviving Maid
Viewed this fond homage to her beauty paid;
A second glance over every line she cast,
And half pronounced and half suppressed the last,
While modest Pleasure, and ingenuous Pride,
Her burning cheek with deeper crimson died.
O Praise! thy language was by Heaven designed
As manna to the faint bewildered mind:
Beauty and Diffidence, whose hearts rejoice
In the kind comfort of thy cheering voice,
In this wild wood of life, were thou not nigh,
Must, like the wandering Babes, lie down and die:
Page 90.

Stothard del. Sharp sculpt.

London. Published Septr. 1st. 1788. by T. Cadell. Strand.


But thy sweet accents wake new vital powers,
And make this thorny path a path of flowers:
As oil on Ocean's troubled waters spread,
Smooths the rough billow to a level bed,
The soothing Rhyme thus softened into rest
The painful tumult of SERENA's breast.
Now, to herself restored, the conscious Maid
The lurking Fiend's insidious snare surveyed;
Her nerves, with grateful trepidation, own
A slighter pressure from the faithful Zone;
And in fond thought she breathes a thankful prayer
For her aetherial Guardian's constant care;
Yet with a keen desire her bosom glowed,
To hear from whom the gentle Sonnet flowed;
But kind SOPHROSYNE, who watched unseen,
To shield her votary from the wiles of Spleen,
As friendly Love had fixed a future time,
When to reveal the secret of the Rhyme,
Strove till that hour her fancy to restrain,
Nor let her anxious wishes rise to pain.
As Gaiety's fresh tide began to roll,
East in the swelling channel of her soul,
The good old Knight descends, though eager, slow,
The Gout still tingling in his tender toe;
And now, paternal salutations past,
His eyes he keenly on the Paper cast,
While his sweet Daughter, with attentive grace,
Before him flies his ready cup to place;
For Tea and Politics alternate share,
In friendly rivalship, his morning care.
Though smooth as oil the Knight's good humor flows,
When the mild breeze of pleasant fortune blows,
Yet, quick to catch the casual sparks of ire,
Like oil it kindles into mounting fire;
And fiercely now his flaming spirit blazed,
While on those galling words he wildly gazed,
Whose force had almost worked into a storm
The gentler elements in Beauty's form.
As the sarcastic sentence caught his view,
Back from the board his elbow-chair he drew,
And, by sharp stings of sudden fury pricked,
Far from his foot his gouty stool he kicked.
Fierce as Achilles, by Atrides stung,
He poured the stream of vengeance from his tongue.
But ah, those angry threats he deigned to speak,
Had sounds, alas! far differing from the Greek.
Rage from his lips in legal language broke;
Of Juries and of Damages he spoke,
And on the Printer's law-devoted head,
He threatened deep revenge in terms most dread;
Terms, that with pain the ear of Beauty pierce,
And oaths too rough to harmonize in verse.
While thus the good old Knight, with passion hot,
His Toast neglected, and his Tea forgot,
The discord of the drama to increase,
Now prim PENELOPE assails her Niece;
For, as Sir GILBERT now, with choler dumb,
Points her the period with his angry thumb,
"Ah! Brother," cries the stiff, malignant crone,
(Her sharp eye swiftly through the sentence thrown)
"Scandal could never rise to heights like this,
"But from the manners of each modern Miss;
"Had but my Niece, less giddy and more grave,
"Observed the prudent hints I often gave -- "
The honest Knight her vile conclusion saw,
And quick curtailed it with a testy "Pshaw!"
Mean while the gentle Maid, who heard the taunt,
Surveyed without a frown her prudish Aunt:
Far other thoughts employed her softer mind,
To one sweet purpose all her soul inclined;
How she might close the unpleasant scene, how best
Restore good humor to her Father's breast.
Her airy Guardian with delight surveyed
These tender wishes in the lovely Maid,
And, to accomplish what her heart desired,
Trains of new thought above her age inspired.
As Venus on her son's enlightened face
Shed richer charms, and more attractive grace,
When, issuing forth from the dissolving cloud,
His bright form burst on the admiring crowd:
So kind SOPHROSYNE, unseen, supplies
A livelier radiance to SERENA's eyes;
And, ere she speaks, to captivate her Sire,
Touches her lips with patriotic fire.
It chanced, that, tossed upon a vacant chair,
A volume of that Wit lay near the Fair,
Whose value, tried by Fashion's varying touch,
Once rose too high, and now is sunk too much;
The book, which Fortune placed within her reach,
Contained, O CHESTERFIELD, the liberal speech
In which thy spirit, like an Attic Sage,
Strove to defend the violated Stage
From fetters basely forged by Ministerial rage.
From this the Nymph her useful lesson took,
And thus began, reclining on the Book: --
"If on this noble Lord we may rely,
"Scandal is but a speck on Freedom's eye;
"And Public Spirit, then, will rather bear
"The casual pain it gives by growing there,
"Than, by a rash attempt to move it thence,
"Hazard the safety of a precious Sense,
"And, by the efforts of a vain desire,
"Rob this life-darting eye of all its fire.
"Though the soft breast of Innocence may smart,
"By cruel Calumny's corroding dart,
"Yet would she rather ache in every nerve,
"And bear those pangs she knows not to deserve,
"Much rather than be made a senseless tool,
"To aid the frenzy of tyrannic rule,
"Or forge one dangerous bolt for Power to aim
"At sacred Liberty's superior frame." --
As ancient Chiefs were wont of old to gaze,
With eyes of tender awe and fond amaze
On the fair Priestess of the Delphic fane,
When first she uttered her prophetic strain,
Entranced in wonder, thus Sir GILBERT viewed
His child, yet more inspired, who thus pursued:
"For me, I own, these lines, with gall replete,
"Shot through my simple heart a sudden heat;
"But happier thoughts my rising rage represt,
"And turned the pointless insult to a jest:
"And O! should Slander still new wrath awake,
"Still may my Father, for his Daughter's sake,
"Disdain the vengeance of litigious strife,
"And let SERENA's answer be -- her life!"
She ended with a smile, whose magic flame
Shot youthful vigor through her Father's frame:
His Age, his Anger, and his Gout, are fled;
"Enchanting Girl!" with tears of joy, he said,
"Enchanting Girl!" twice echoed from his tongue,
As, speaking, from his elbow-chair he sprung,
"Come to thy Father's arms! -- By Heaven, thou art
"His own true offspring, and a Whig in heart."
He spoke; and his fond arms around her curled
With proud grasp, seeming to infold the world.
Her conscious heart she feels with triumph beat,
And joys to find that triumph is complete;
For stiff PENELOPE, who near them stood,
"Albeit unused to the melting mood,"
Squeezed from her eyelid one reluctant tear,
And softened with a smile her brow severe;
But 'twas a smile of such a gloomy grace,
As lightened once upon Alecto's face,
When Orpheus past her, leading back to life,
From Pluto's regions, his recovered wife,
When Love connubial, joined to Music's spell,
Moistened with tender joy the eyes of Hell.
Far other smiles, with Pleasure's softest air,
Gild the gay features of the youthful Fair:
She looks like sportive Spring, when her young charms
Wind round her hoary Sire's reluctant arms,
And, by a frolic infantine embrace,
Banish the rugged frown from Winter's face.
Through the long day she felt the glowing tide
Of exultation through her bosom glide;
And often she wished for slow-approaching Night,
To hold sweet converse with her guardian Sprite.
At length the hour approached her heart desired,
And, in her lonely chamber now retired,
Her tender fancy gave the fondest scope
To ardent Gratitude and eager Hope.
"Dear airy Being!" (the soft Nymph exclaimed)
"Whose power can break the spell that Spleen has framed,
"Can, by the waving of thy viewless wing,
"Over darkest forms a golden radiance fling,
"And make, in minds by sorriest thoughts perplexed,
"This moment's grief the triumph of the next;
"I bless thy succor in each trial past;
"Be present still, and save me in the last!"
Thus, with her lovely eyes devoutly fixed,
Where rays of hope, and fear, and reverence mixed,
The tender Fair her faithful Guard addressed,
Then with her cheek her downy pillow pressed;
But long her wakeful lids refuse to close,
For Curiosity dispels repose.
Her busy mind the mystic veil would pierce,
That hides the Author of the pleasing Verse;
Her lips involuntary catch the chime,
And half articulate the soothing Rhyme,
Till weary Thought no longer watch can keep,
But sinks reluctant in the folds of Sleep.
END OF THE FOURTH CANTO.
CANTO V.
WHY art thou fled, O blessed poetic time,
When Fancy wrought the miracles of Rhyme;
When, darting from her star-encircled throne,
Her Poet's eye commanded worlds unknown;
When, by her fiat made a mimic God,
He saw Existence waiting on his nod,
And at his pleasure into being brought
New shadowy hosts, the vassals of his thought,
In Joy's gay garb, in Terror's dread array,
Darker than night, and brighter than the day;
Who, at his bidding, through the wilds of air,
Raised willing mortals far from earthly care,
And led them wondering through his wide domain,
Beyond the bounds of Nature's narrow reign;
While their rapt spirits, in the various flight,
Shook with successive thrills of new delight?
Return, sweet season, graced with Fiction's flowers,
Let not cold System cramp thy genial powers!
Shall mild Morality, in guard uncouth,
The housewife garb of plain and homely Truth,
Robbed by stern Method of her rosy crown,
Chill her faint votaries by a wintry frown?
No; thou sweet friend of Man, as suits thee best,
Shine forth in Fable's rich-embroider'd vest!
O make my Verse thy vehicle, thy arms,
To spread over social life thy potent charms!
And thou, SOPHROSYNE, mysterious Sprite!
If happily I may trace thy steps aright,
Roving through paths untrod by mortal feet,
To paint for human eyes thy heavenly seat,
Shed on my soul some portion of that power,
Which saved SERENA in the trying hour,
To bear those trials, which, however hard,
As Bards all tell us, may befall the Bard;
The Fop's pert jest, the Critic's frown severe,
Learning's proud cant, with Envy's artful sneer,
And, the vexed Poet's last and worst disgrace,
His cold blank Bookseller's rhyme-freezing face.
Hence! ye dark omens, that to Spleen belong,
Ye shall not check the current of my song,
While Beauty's lovely race, for whom I sing,
Fire my warm hand to strike the ready string.
As Quiet now her lightest mantle laid
Over the still senses of the sleeping Maid,
Her nightly Visitant, her faithful Guide,
Descends in all her Empyrean pride;
That Fairy shape no more she deigns to wear,
Whose light foot smooths the furrow plough'd by care
In mortal faces, while her tiny spear
Gives a kind tingle to the cautioned ear.
Now, in her nobler shape, of heavenly size,
She strikes her votary's soul with new surprise.
Jove's favorite daughter, armed in all his powers,
Appeared less brilliant to the attending Hours,
When, on the golden car of Juno raised,
In heavenly pomp the Queen of Battles blazed:
With all her luster, but without the dread
Which from her arm the frowning Gorgon shed,
SOPHROSYNE descends, with guardian Love,
To waft her gentle Ward to worlds above.
From her fair brow a radiant diadem
Rose in twelve stars, and every separate gem
Shot magic rays, of virtue to control
Some passion hostile to the human soul.
Round her sweet form a robe of ether flowed,
And in a wondrous car the smiling Spirit rode;
Firm as pure ivory, it charmed the sight
With finer polish and a softer white.
The hand of Beauty, with an easy swell,
Scoop'd the free concave like a bending shell;
And on its rich exterior, Art displayed
The triumphs of the Power the car conveyed.
Here, in celestial tints, surpassing life,
Sat lovely Gentleness, disarming Strife;
There, young Affection, born of tender Thought,
In rosy chains the fiercer Passions caught;
Ambition, with his scepter snapt in twain,
And Avarice, scorning what his chests contain.
Round the tame Vulture flies the fearless Dove;
Soft Innocence embraces playful Love;
And laughing Sport, the frolic Child of Air,
Buries in flowers the sinking form of Care.
These figures, pencil'd with a touch so light,
That every image seemed an heavenly Sprite,
Breathe on the car; whose sight-enchanting frame
Four wheels sustain, of pale and purple flame;
For no fleet animals, to earth unknown,
Bear through aetherial fields this flying throne.
As by the subtle electrician's skill,
Globes seem to fly, obedient to his will;
So these four circles of instinctive fire
Move by the impulse of their Queen's desire,
Mount or descend by her directing care,
Or rest, supported by the buoyant air.
Now, springing from her car, that hovering staid
High in the chamber of the sleeping Maid,
The Goddess, with a voice divinely clear,
Breathed these kind accents in her Votary's ear: --
"Come, my fair Champion, who so well have fought
"The useful battles of contentious Thought;
"To aid thy gentle spirit to sustain
"The final conflict of thy destined pain,
"View the rewards that, in my realms of bliss,
"Wait the sweet Victor in such war as this!
"So happily may thy mind, with strength renewed,
"The dark devices of the Fiend elude;
"By one blessed effort seal thy triumphs past,
"And gain thy promised guerdon in the last."
As thus she spoke, her heavenly arms embraced,
And in the car the conscious Maiden placed.
Quick at her wish the flaming wheels ascend,
No clouds impede them, wheresoe'er they bend.
As through the empire of the winds they rushed,
The winds were all in mute submission hushed:
And now SERENA, from the exalted car,
Looked down, astonished, on each sinking star;
Flying over lucid orbs, whose distant light
Yet has not reached the scope of human sight;
And now, not distant from the bounds of Space,
The guardian Sprite suspends their rapid race;
And, while in deep amaze the Nymph admires
The circling meteor's inoffensive fires,
Pleased at her wonder, the mild Power addressed,
With kind intelligence, her earthly guest: --
"Of those three Orbs, that in yon crystal sphere
"A separate system in themselves appear,
"The last, whose luminous and steady form
"Shines softly bright, and moderately warm,
"Contains my palace, and the gentle train
"Whom I have wafted to this pure domain.
"At equal distance my dominions lie
"From these two larger worlds, more near thine eye:
"Observe their difference as our wheels advance,
"And passing, take of each a transient glance."
So speaking, to the grosser globe she sprung,
Her car suspended over its surface hung,
In heavy air; for round this orb was rolled
A circling vapor, dull, and damp, and cold.
"Here," says SOPHROSYNE, "those Beings dwell,
"Who wanted soul to act or ill or well;
"Who saunter'd thoughtless through their mortal time,
"Without a Care, a Virtue, or a Crime:
"Here still they saunter, in this languid scene;
"But pass the dozing crowd, and mark their Queen."
And now, slow riding on a Tortoise' back,
Her features lifeless, and each fiber slack,
Full in their view the Nymph Indifference came;
The quick SERENA soon perceived her name;
For, as in solemn creeping state she rode,
In her lax hand she held fair GREVILLE's Ode.
Never did the Muse from her sweet treasure cull
Incense so precious for a Power so dull.
Still, as she moved along her even way,
The heavy Goddess tried to read the lay;
But at each pause her inattentive eye
Strayed from the paper, which she held awry;
Nor could her lips a single line repeat,
Though the soft Verse, most ravishingly sweet,
Through Time's dull ear will lasting pleasure spread,
And charm the poppy from Oblivion's head.
Thus like a City Mayor, whose heavy barge
Steers its dull progress at the public charge,
This Power, so cumber'd by her empire's weight,
Makes her slow circuit round her sluggish state.
Around her, tribes of rambling Skeptics crawl,
Though moving, dubious if they move at all.
Before her, languid Pomp, her Marshal, creeps,
Whose hand her banner half unfolded keeps:
Its quaint device her dull dominion spoke --
An Eagle, numbed by the Torpedo's stroke.
"Enough of scenes so foreign to thy soul,"
SOPHROSYNE exclaimed; "from this dark goal
"Pass we to regions opposite to this."
She spoke; and, darting over the wide abyss,
Her car, like lightning in soft flashes hurled,
Shot to the confines of a clearer world.
Now lovelier views the Virgin's mind absorb;
For now they hovered over a lucid orb.
Here the soft air, luxuriously warm,
Imparts new luster to SERENA's form:
Her eyes with more expressive radiance speak,
And richer roses open on her cheek.
Here, as she gazed, she felt in every vein
A blended thrill of pleasure and of pain;
Yet every object opening to her view,
Her quick regard with soft attraction drew.
SOPHROSYNE, who saw the gentle Fair
Lean over these confines with peculiar care,
Smiled at the tender interest she displayed,
And spoke regardful of the pensive Maid:
"Well may thou bend over this congenial sphere;
"For Sensibility is Sovereign here.
"Thou see her train of sprightly damsels sport,
"Where the soft Spirit holds her rural court;
"But fix thine eye attentive to the plain,
"And mark the varying wonders of her reign."
As thus she spoke, she poised her airy seat
High over a plain exhaling every sweet;
For round its precincts all the flowers that bloom
Filled the delicious air with rich perfume;
And in the midst a verdant throne appeared,
In simplest form by graceful Fancy reared,
And decked with flowers; not such whose flaunting dies
Strike with the strongest tint our dazzled eyes;
But those wild herbs that tenderest fibers bear,
And shun the approaches of a damper air.
Here stood the lovely Ruler of the scene,
And Beauty, more than Pomp, announc'd the Queen.
The bending Snow-drop, and the Briar-rose,
The simple circle of her crown compose;
Roses of every hue her robe adorn,
Except the insipid Rose without a thorn.
Through her thin vest her heightened beauties shine;
For earthly gauze was never half so fine.
Of that enchanting age her figure seems,
When smiling Nature with the vital beams
Of vivid Youth, and Pleasure's purple flame,
Gilds her accomplished work, the Female frame,
With rich luxuriance tender, sweetly wild,
And just between the Woman and the Child.
Her fair left arm around a vase she flings,
From which the tender plant Mimosa springs:
Toward its leaves, over which she fondly bends,
The youthful Fair her vacant hand extends
With gentle motion, anxious to survey
How far the feeling fibers own her sway:
The leaves, as conscious of their Queen's command,
Successive fall at her approaching hand;
While her soft breast with pity seems to pant,
And shrinks at every shrinking of the plant.
Around their Sovereign, on the verdant ground,
Sweet airy Forms in mystic measures bound.
The mighty master of the revel, Love,
In notes more soothing than his mother's Dove,
Prompts the soft strain that melting virgins sing,
Or sportive trips around the frolic ring,
Coupling, with radiant wreaths of lambent fire,
Fair fluttering Hope and rapturous Desire.
Page 112.

Stothard del. Neagle sculp.

Published at the Act directs by T. Cadell, Strand, Feby. 1st 1788.


Unnumber'd damsels different charms display,
Pensive with bliss, or in their pleasures gay;
And the wide prospect yields one touching sight
Of tender, yet diversified delight.
But, the bright triumphs of their joy to check,
In the clear air there hangs a dusky speck;
It swells -- it spreads -- and rapid, as it grows,
Over the gay scene a chilling shadow throws.
The soft SERENA, who beheld its flight,
Suspects no evil from a cloud so light;
For harmless round her the thin vapors wreath,
Not hiding from her view the scene beneath;
But ah! too soon, with Pity's tender pain,
She saw its dire effect over all the plain:
Sudden from thence the sounds of Anguish flow,
And Joy's sweet carols end in shrieks of woe:
The withered flowers are fallen, that bloomed so fair,
And poison all the pestilential air.
From the rent earth dark Demons force their way,
And make the sportive revellers their prey.
Here gloomy Terror, with a shadowy rope,
Seems, like a Turkish Mute, to strangle Hope;
There jealous Fury drowns in blood the fire
That sparkled in the eye of young Desire;
And lifeless Love lets merciless Despair
From his crushed frame his bleeding pinions tear.
But pangs more cruel, more intensely keen,
Wound and distract their sympathetic Queen:
With fruitless tears she over their misery bends;
From her sweet brow the thorny Rose she rends,
And, bowed by Grief's insufferable weight,
Frantic she curses her immortal state:
The soft SERENA, as this curse she hears,
Feels her bright eye suffus'd with kindred tears;
And her kind breast, where quick compassion swelled,
Shared in each bitter suffering she beheld.
The guardian Power surveyed her lovely grief,
And spoke in gentle terms of mild relief:
"For this soft tribe thy heaviest fear dismiss,
"And know their pains are transient as their bliss:
"Rapture and Agony, in Nature's loom,
"Have formed the changing tissue of their doom;
"Both interwoven with so nice an art,
"No power can tear the twisted threads apart:
"Yet happier these, to Nature's heart more dear,
"Than the dull offspring in the torpid sphere,
"Where her warm wishes, and affections kind,
"Lose their bright current in the stagnant mind.
"Here grief and joy so suddenly unite,
"That anguish serves to sublimate delight."
She spoke; and, ere SERENA could reply,
The vapor vanished from the lucid sky;
The Nymphs revive, the shadowy Fiends are fled,
The newborn flowers a richer fragrance shed;
The gentle Ruler of the changeful land,
Smiling, resumed her symbol of command;
Replac'd the roses of her regal wreath,
Still trembling at the thorns that lurk beneath:
But, to her wounded subjects quick to pay
The tender duties of imperial sway,
Their wants she succored, they her wish obeyed,
And all recovered, by alternate aid;
While, on the lovely Queen's enchanting face,
Departed Sorrow's faint and fainter trace,
Gave to each charm a more attractive grace.
Now, laughing Sport, from the enlightened plain,
Cleared with quick foot the vestiges of Pain;
The gay scene grows more beautifully bright,
Than when it first allured SERENA's sight,
Still her fond eyes over all the prospect range,
Flashing sweet pleasure at the blissful change:
Her curious thoughts with fond attachment burn,
Yet more of this engaging land to learn.
She finds the chief attendants of the Queen,
Sweet Females, wafted from our human scene;
But, as it chanced, while all the realm revived,
A Spirit masculine from earth arrived:
Two airy guides conduct the gentle Shade;
Genius, in robes of braided flames arrayed,
And a fantastic Nymph, in manners nice,
Profusely decked with many an odd device;
Sister of him, whose luminous attire
Flashes with unextinguishable fire;
Like him in features, in her look as wild,
And Singularity by mortals styled.
The eager Queen, and all her smiling Court,
Surround the welcome Shade in gentle sport;
For in their new associate all rejoice,
All pant to hear the accents of his voice.
Though over his frame the Armenian robe was flung,
The pleasing stranger spoke the Gallic tongue;
But in that language his enchanting art
Inspired new energy, that seized the heart;
In terms so eloquent, so sweetly bold,
A story of disastrous love he told,
Convulsed with sympathy, the listening train,
At every pause, with dear delicious pain,
Entreat him to renew the fascinating strain.
And now SERENA, with suspended breath,
Listened, and caught the tale of JULIA's death;
And quick she cries, ere tears had time to flow,
"Blessed be this hour! for now I see ROUSSEAU."
Fondly she gazed, till the enchanting sound
In such a potent spell her spirit bound,
That, lost in sweet illusion, she forgot
The promised scenes of the sublimer spot;
Till now, her mild Remembrancer, whose care
Strayed not a moment from the mortal Fair,
Roused her rapt mind, preparing her to meet
The brighter wonders of her blissful seat;
While her instinctive car's obedient frame
Now upward rose, like undulating flame.
As when some victor on the watery world,
Bright honor gilding all his sails unfurled,
Steers into port, while to the laughing sky
His streamers tell his triumph as they fly;
Expecting thousands line the crowded strand,
Swell the glad voice, or wave the joyous hand,
Pressing to view the sight their vows implored,
And hail their glory and their strength restored:
So the blessed Beings of this smiling scene
Flocked round the car of their returning Queen.
The radiant car, from which they now alight,
Careful she gives to a selected Sprite,
A Nymph of snowy vest and lovely frame,
Fidelity her fair and spotless name;
Then, happy to review her hallowed home
Leads her sweet Guest to her celestial dome.
Gentlest of Powers! for every purpose fit,
To strengthen Wisdom, and embellish Wit; --
Thou whose soft arts, possessed by thee alone,
Can give to Virtue's voice a sweeter tone;
Allay the frost of Age, or fire of Youth,
And lend attraction to severest Truth;
Improve even Beauty by thy graceful ease,
Or teach Deformity herself to please; --
Inspire the Bard, whose just ambition pants
To guide weak mortals to thy heavenly haunts!
Grant him, in notes that, like thy soft control,
Allure attention, and possess the soul;
Grant him to show, in luminous display,
The mystic wonders of thy secret sway!
Now, at the sight of the presiding Power,
Wide spread the gates of a stupendous tower,
On whose firm height, commanding Nature's bound,
The faithful warder of the fort they found,
Wakeful Intelligence, a trusty Sprite,
Whose eyes are piercing as the solar light,
And ever on the watch to sound alarm,
If aught of dusky hue, portending harm,
Should, in defiance of her mandate, dare
Approach the palace of the imperial Fair.
Within his ward, magnificently great,
Lies the rich armoury that guards her state.
Here stands Conviction's strong and lucid spear,
Whose touch annihilates Suspense and Fear;
Here, Truth's unsullied adamantine shield,
Which, save SOPHROSYNE, no Power can wield;
And Reason's trenchant blade of blazing steel,
Its edge and polish formed by friendly Zeal;
And, not less sure their destined mark to hit,
Pointed by Virtue's hand, the shafts of Wit;
And Ridicule's strong bolt, whose stunning blow
Lays towering Vice and fearless Folly low.
Here too the Goddess kept, in mystic state,
Those sweet rewards that on her champions wait,
Guerdons more precious than triumphant palms: --
The glance of Gratitude for mental alms,
Peace's soft kiss, and Reconcilement's tear,
And smiles of Sympathy, are treasured here.
These precincts past, now hand in hand they came
To the rich fabric of majestic frame;
Instinct with joy their Sovereign to behold,
The gates of massive adamant unfold;
And, as the gently-moving valves unclose,
Mysterious music from their motion flows;
The airy notes through all the palace roam,
And dulcet echoes fill the festive dome:
A gorgeous hall amazed SERENA's eyes,
Compared to which, in splendour, strength, and size,
The noblest works of which Tradition sings,
Judaic shrine, or seat of Memphian kings,
Would seem more humble than the waxen cell
In which the skilful Be is proud to dwell.
Here sits a Power, in whose angelic face
Beauty is sweetened by maternal grace;
Her radiant seat, surpassing mortal art,
Supports an emblem of her liberal heart,
A Pelican, who rears her callow brood,
And from her vitals seems to draw their food.
Around this Spirit flock a filial host,
Who bless her empire, and her guidance boast.
Here every Science, all the Arts attend,
In her they hail their parent and their friend;
Each to her presence brings the happy few,
Whose dearest glory from her favor grew.
Here, in her simple charms, with youthful fire,
Proud to display the magic of her lyre,
Soul-soothing Harmony presents her band:
Beside her Orpheus and Amphion stand.
Here, mild Philosophys, whose thoughtful frown
Is sweetly shaded by her olive crown,
(In all her attic elegance arrayed,
Strong to convince, and gentle to persuade)
To her, whose breath inspired his every rule,
Leads the blessed Sire of the Socratic school.
Each animating Bard and moral Sage,
The heaven-taught minds of every clime and age,
Who softened manners, and refined the soul,
Flock to this presence, as to Glory's goal;
And, as the mother's heart, that yearns to bless
The rival innocents that round her press,
Delights to see them, as her love they share,
Sport in her sight, and flourish by her care;
Fondly responsive to their every call,
Tender of each, and provident for all:
So this sweet Image of Celestial Grace,
Who sits encircled by her lovely race,
To every Science vital strength imparts,
And rears the circle of the Social Arts;
With such solicitude she gives to each,
Powers of sublimer aim and wider reach.
And now SOPHROSYNE, who near her pressed,
Thus spoke her title to her earthly guest: --
"Behold the honored Form, without whose aid
"My strength must vanish, and my glory fade!
"Source of my being, and my life's support!
"EUNOIA called in this celestial Court,
"BENEVOLENCE the name she bears on earth,
"The guard of Weakness, and the friend of Worth."
She ended: and the mild maternal Form
Embraced SERENA with a smile as warm
As the gay spirit Vegetation wears,
When she to crown her favorite Nymph prepares,
When, pleased her flowery treasures to display,
She pours them in the lap of youthful May.
But how, SERENA! how may human speech
Thy heavenly raptures in this moment reach?
If aught of earthly sentiment may vie
With the pure joy these happy scenes supply,
It Is when, unmixt with trouble and with pain,
Love glides in secret through the glowing vein;
When some fond Youth, unconscious of its fire,
Free from chill Fear and turbulent Desire,
With every thought absorbed in soft delight,
Sees all creation in his Fair one's sight,
And feels a blissful state without a name,
Repose of soul with harmony of frame.
So, plunged in pleasure of the purest kind,
SERENA gazed on the maternal Mind;
Gazed till SOPHROSYNE's directing aid
Thus summoned to new sights the obedient Maid: --
"Haste, my fair Charge, for of this ample state,
"Tracts yet unseen thy visitation wait.
"The pressing hours forbid me to unfold
"Each separate province which these confines hold;
"But I will lead thee to that blissful crew,
"Whose kindred spirits best deserve thy view."
So speaking, her attentive Guest she led
Through scenes, that still increasing wonder bred.
Wherever she trod, through all her gorgeous seat,
Soft music echoed from beneath her feet:
Passing a portal, on whose lucid stone
Emblems of Innocence and Beauty shone,
They reach a lawn with verdant luster bright,
And view the bowers of permanent delight.
No fiery Sun here forms a scorching noon,
No baleful Meteor gleams, no chilling Moon:
But, from a latent source, one soothing light,
Whose constant rays repel the mist of night,
Though tender, cheerful, and though warm, serene,
Gives lasting beauty to the lovely scene.
No sensual thought this paradise profanes;
For here tried Excellence in triumph reigns,
Benignant cares eternal joy supply,
And bliss angelic beams in every eye.
"In yonder groups," the leading Spirit cried,
"My favorite Females see, my fairest pride.
"The first in rank is that distinguished train,
"Whose strength of soul was tried by Hymen's chain:
"Though Beauty blessed their form, and Love their guide,
"Their nuptial band with happiest omens tied,
"Beauty and Love, they felt, may lose the art
"To fix inconstant Man's eccentric heart;
"Yet, conscious of their Lord's neglected vow,
"No Virtue frowned outrageous on their brow,
"To keep returning Tenderness aloof,
"By coarse upbraiding, and despised reproof:
"With Sorrow smothered in Attraction's smile,
"They strove the sense of misery to beguile;
"And, from wild Passion's perilous abyss,
"Lure the lost wanderer back to faithful bliss.
"See mild OCTAVIA over this band preside,
"Voluptuous ANTONY's neglected bride,
"Whose feeling heart, with all a Mother's care,
"Reared the young offspring of a rival Fair.
"Far other trials raised yon lovely crew,
"Though in connubial scenes their merit grew:
"It was their chance, ere judgment was mature,
"When glittering toys the infant mind allure,
"Following their parents' avaricious rule,
"To wed, with hopes of bliss, a wealthy fool.
"When Time removed Delusion's veil by stealth,
"And showed the drear vacuity of wealth;
"When sad Experience proved the bitter fate
"Of Beauty coupled to a senseless Mate,
"These gentle Wives still gloried to submit;
"These, though invited by alluring Wit,
"Refused in paths of lawless joy to range,
"Nor murmured at the lot they could not change:
"But, with a lively sweetness, unopprest
"By a dull Husband's lamentable jest,
"Their constant rays of gay good humor spread
"A guardian glory round their idiot's head.
"The next in order are those lovely Forms,
"Whose patience weathered all paternal storms;
"By filial cares, the mind's unfailing test,
"Well have they earned these seats of blissful rest:
"They, unrepining at severe restraint,
"Peevish commands, and undeserved complaint;
"Bent with unwearied kindness to appease
"Each fancied want of querulous Disease;
"Gave up those joys which youthful hearts engage,
"To watch the weakness of parental age.
"Turn to this cheerful band; and mark in this,
"Spirits who justly claim my realms of bliss!
"Most lovely these! when judged by generous Truth,
"Though Beauty is not their's, nor blooming Youth:
"For these are they, who, in Life's thorny shade,
"Repined not at the name of ancient Maid.
"No proud disdain, no narrowness of heart,
"Held them from Hymen's tempting rites apart;
"But fair Discretion led them to withdraw
"From the prized honor of his proffered law;
"To quit the object of no hasty choice,
"In mild submission to a Parent's voice;
"The valued Lover with a sigh resign,
"And sacrifice Delight at Duty's shrine.
"With smiles they bore, from angry spleen exempt,
"Injurious mockery, and coarse contempt:
"'It Was their's to clasp, each selfish care above,
"A sister's orphans with parental love,
"And all her tender offices supply,
"Though bound not by the strong maternal tie:
"'It Was their's to bid intestine quarrels cease,
"And form the cement of domestic peace.
"No throbbing joy their spotless bosom fired,
"Save what Benevolence herself inspired;
"No praise they sought, except that praise refined,
"Which the heart whispers to the worthy mind.
"Such are these gentle tribes, the happy few
"Who share the triumph to their victory due:
"Angelic aims their spotless minds employ,
"And fill their measure of unchequer'd joy.
"Behold! where some with generous ardor wait
"Around yon Seer, who holds the book of Fate;
"Those aweful leaves with eager glance they turn,
"Thence with celestial zeal they fondly learn
"What dangers threaten, through the vale of earth,
"Their kindred pilgrims, ere they rise to birth:
"To earth they still invisibly descend,
"In that dark scene congenial minds defend,
"From Pleasure's Bud drive Spleen's corroding worm,
"And in my votaries' heart my power confirm.
"Delights more calm yon listening band employ,
"Who deeply drink of intellectual joy.
"See them around that speaking Nymph rejoice,
"Their pleasures varying with her varied voice!
"What graces in the sweet enthusiast glow!
"Repeating here whatever she learns below.
"Memory her name, her charge over earth to flit,
"And cull the fairest flowers of human wit.
"Whatever Genius, in his happiest hour,
"Has penned, of moral grace and comic power,
"To warm the heart, the spells of Spleen unbind,
"And pour gay sunshine over the misty mind;
"Teach men to cherish their fraternal tie,
"And view kind Nature with a filial eye;
"This active Spirit catches in her flight,
"Skilled to retain, and happy to recite.
"Here she delivers each bright work, and each
"Derives new beauty from her graceful speech.
"Warpt by no envy, by no love misled,
"Equal she holds the living and the dead;
"Alike rehearsing, as they claim their turn,
"The song of ANSTEY, and the tale of STERN.
"But Morning calls thee hence. -- Yet one scene more,
"My fostering love shall lead thee to explore.
"This, thy last sight, with careful eyes survey,
"And mark the extensive nature of my sway."
Thus with fond zeal the guardian Spirit said,
And to new precincts of her palace led;
The scene she entered of her richest state,
Where on her voice the subject Passions wait:
Here rose a throne of living gems, so bright
No breath could sully their benignant light;
This, her immortal seat, the gracious Guide
Assumed: her Ward stood wondering at her side.
Swift as they felt their ruling Power enthroned,
Aetherial Beings, who her empire owned,
Crowded in glittering pomp the gorgeous scene,
To pay their homage to their heavenly Queen.
First came chaste Love, whose sweet harmonious form
Never felt Suspicion's soul-convulsing storm;
No baleful arrow in his quiver lies,
No blinding veil enwraps his sparkling eyes;
There all the rays of varied joy unite,
And jointly shed unspeakable delight.
With him was Friendship, like a virgin dressed,
The soft Asbestos formed her simple vest,
Whose wondrous folds, in fiercest flames entire,
Mock the vain ravage of consuming fire:
Around this robe, a mystic chain she wore,
Each golden link a star of diamonds bore;
Force could not tear the finished work apart,
Nor Interest loose it by his subtlest art:
But, strange to tell, if the presiding Power,
Who to her Favorite gave this precious dower,
If kind SOPHROSYNE could fail to breathe
Her vital virtue on this magic wreath,
The parts must sever, faithless to their trust,
The gold grow dross, and every diamond dust.
These Valor followed, decked with verdant palm,
Gracefully bold, majestically calm.
A mingled troop succeed, with festive sound,
Wisdom with olive, Wit with feathers crowned;
Here, hand in hand they move, no longer foes,
Their charms increasing as their union grows;
Pure Spirits all, who hating mental strife,
Exalt creation, and embellish life;
All here attend, and, in their Sovereign's praise,
Their circling forms the song of glory raise.
The blessed SERENA drinks, with ravished ear,
The melting music of the tuneful sphere.
Now in its close the soothing echoes roll
Over her rapt fancy, and intrance her soul;
Her senses sink in soft Oblivion's bands,
Till faithful Jenny at her pillow stands,
Recalls each mental and corporeal power,
While she proclaims aloud the passing hour;
And, in a voice expressive of surprise,
Too shrill to seem the music of the skies,
Informs the startled Fair it is time to rise.
END OF THE FIFTH CANTO.
CANTO VI.
BLESSED be the heart of sympathetic mould,
Whatever form that gentle heart infold,
Whose generous fibers with fond terror shake,
When keen Affliction threatens to overtake
Young artless Beauty, as alarmed she strays
Through the strange windings of this mortal maze!
To such, SERENA, be thy story known,
Whose bosom best can make thy lot their own,
And, kindly sharing in thy trials past,
Attend with sweet anxiety the last.
The hour approaches, the tremendous hour,
In whose dark moments deeper perils lower;
Still so enwrapt in Pleasure's gay disguise,
They lurk invisible to Caution's eyes;
And, unsuspected by the Fair one, wait
To cancel or confirm her blissful fate.
Her lively mind with bright ideas stored,
She takes her station at the Breakfast-board;
Still her soft soul the heavenly Vision fills,
And sweeter graces in her smile instills;
New hopes of triumph glide through every nerve,
And arm her glowing heart with firm reserve;
Conscious the final trying chance impends,
To bear its force her every power she bends;
In her quick thought ambitious to presage
How Spleen's dark agents may exert their rage,
She ponders on what perils may befall,
And fondly deems her mind a match for all.
Ah, lovely Nymph! this dangerous pride forego;
Pride may betray -- Security's thy foe.
While fancied Prudence thus, a foreign guest,
Sits doubly cherished in SERENA's breast,
Behold a billet her attention steal,
No common arms compose its ample seal;
The unfolding paper breathes a roseate scent,
Sweet harbinger of joy, its kind intent.
Of courteous FILLIGREE it bears the name,
Clear symptom of the Peer's increasing flame!
The gracious Earl, lamenting pleasure lost,
And fair SERENA in her wishes crossed,
Has planned, in honor of the lovely Maid,
A fancied Ball, a private Masquerade,
And supplicates her Sire, with warm esteem,
To smile indulgent on the festive scheme.
All arts he uses to insure the grant,
Nor leaves unasked the eager maiden Aunt.
Quick at the sound SERENA's glowing heart
Throbs with gay hopes; but soon those hopes depart:
Reflection, in her soul a faithful guard,
The opening avenues of pleasure barred:
She deemed the plan of this delightful show,
But the new ambush of her secret foe;
The bliss too bright to realize, she guessed,
And chased the idea from her guarded breast.
While these discreet resolves her thought employ,
Tranquil she triumphs over her smothered joy.
Not so the Knight -- to his parental eyes,
In dazzling pomp delusive visions rise:
That Coronet, the object of his vow,
He sees suspended over his daughter's brow;
Eager he burns to snap the pendent thread,
And fix the glory on his Darling's head.
Far wiser aims the ancient Maiden caught,
No empty gew-gaw flutters in her thought;
But, while more keenly she applauds the plan,
Her hope is solid and substantial Man;
Not for her infant Niece, whose baby frame
She holds unfit for Hymen's holy flame;
But for her riper self, whose strength may bear
The heaviest burden of connubial care.
Though different Phantoms dance before their sight,
Niece, Aunt, and Father, in one wish unite,
To join the banquet is their common choice,
The business past with no dissenting voice;
And the warm Sire, in whom ambition burned,
A note of grateful courtesy returned:
His billet sealed, the glad good-humored Knight
Launched forth, like Nestor, on his youthful might: --
"O could I now, in spite of age, retain
"That active vigor, and that sprightly vein,
"Which led me once the lively laugh to raise
"Among the merrier Wits of former days,
"When rival Beauties would around me throng,
"And gay Ridottos listen to my song!
"Such were I now, as on the festive night,
"When Ch -- h's charms amazed the public sight;
"When the kind Fair one, in a veil so thin
"That the clear gauze was but a lighter skin,
"Masked like a virgin just prepared to die,
"Gave her plump beauties to each greedy eye!
"On that famed night, (for then with frolic fire
"Youth filled my heart, and Humor strung my lyre)
"Pleased in the sunshine of her smile to bask,
"I danced around her in a Devil's mask;
"And idly chaunted an infernal ode,
"In praise of all this Female tempter showed.
"The jocund crowd, who thronged with me to gaze,
"Extolled my unpremeditated lays,
"And Sport, who still of this old revel brags,
" (...).See Nestor's Speech in the 11th Iliad.
Styled her the first of Maids, and me of Wags.
"Then a light Devil, now, reduced to limp,
"I am but fit to play the hag-born Imp;
"Still, not to cross the frolic of this Ball,
"Still as the Tortoise Caliban I Will crawl,
"And if with Gout my burning ankles flinch,
"I Will call it Prospero's tormenting pinch;
"Still in this shape I Will show them what I am,
"And PEN. shall go as Sycorax, my dam."
So spoke the Knight; and spoke with so much weight,
The listening Females saw his word was fate;
For never did Jove with so resolved a brow
To smiling Love his joyous scheme avow,
When he concerted, for his special mirth,
A masquerading on the stage of earth,
And of the Swan's soft plume, or Bull's rough hair,
Ordered the Fancy-dress he chose to wear.
From whence let sapient Antiquarians show
The ancient use of Masquerades below.
SERENA smiled to see this joyous fire
Infuse new youth in her determined Sire;
But mute PENELOPE, with half a sigh,
"With one auspicious and one dropping eye,"
Heard the firm Knight his fixed resolve impart,
Tickling at once and torturing her heart.
The Ball she relished, but abhorred the task
To hide her beauties in a Beldam's mask:
Miranda's name would better suit her plan,
A simple Maiden, not afraid of Man;
But used, alas! her Brother's law to feel,
She knows that law admits not of repeal.
Trusting her charms will any garb enrich,
She deigns to take the habit of a Witch.
Never did Sorceress in the shades of night
Try to illuminate a filthy Sprite
With fonder efforts, or with worse success,
Than PEN. now labored, in this wayward dress,
To give the sprightly show of living truth
To the poor ghost of her departed youth.
As Witches over their magic cauldron bend,
Anxious to see their menial Imps ascend;
So in her glass the ancient Maiden pries,
And dreams new graces in her person rise.
No such delights, whose dear delusions please,
The mild SERENA in her mirror sees;
She, at whose toilet Beauty's latent Queen
Attends, enchanted with her filial mien,
And over her Favourite's unconscious face
Breathes her own roseate glow and vivid grace.
She hastes her glittering garments to adjust,
With all the modest charms of sweet distrust;
Doubting that beauty, which she doubts alone,
Which dazzles every eye except her own.
The native diffidence which swayed her mind,
Now feels new terrors with its own combined;
The robes of Ariel to the Nymph recall
Those disappointments that may yet befall;
As her fair hands the gauze or tissue touch,
They fondly warn her not to hope too much.
She feels the friendly counsel they impart,
And Caution reigns protector of her heart.
The fateful evening comes -- the coach attends,
And first the gouty Caliban ascends;
Then, in Deformity's well-suited pride,
Sour Sycorax is station'd by his side;
And last, with sportive smiles, divinely sweet,
Light Ariel perches on the vacant seat.
Fancy now paints the scene of pleasure near,
Yet fluttering Gaiety is checked by Fear.
Her wish to view the festive sight runs high;
But the fond Nymph remembers, with a sigh,
From Hope's keen hand the cup of joy may slip,
And fall untasted, though it reach the lip.
As the fine Artist, whose nice toils aspire
To fame eternal by encaustic fire;
If he, with grief, has seen the faithless heat
Mar the rich labor it should make complete,
When next his hands, with trembling care, confide
To the fierce element his pencil's pride,
Watches unceasing the pernicious flame,
Terror and Hope contending in his frame,
While his fair work the dangerous fire sustains,
Feels it in all his sympathetic veins,
And at each trivial sound that Chance may cause,
Hears the Gem crack, and sees its cruel flaws:
With such solicitude the panting Maid
Past the long street, of every noise afraid.
Now, while around her rival flambeaus flare,
And the coach rattles through the crowded square,
She fears some dire mischance must yet befall,
Some Demon snatch her from the promised Ball;
And dreams no trial more severe than this,
So bright she figures the new scene of bliss:
Yet, horrid as it seems, her heart is bent
To bear even this, and bear it with content.
But, whirled at length within the Porter's gate,
She thinks what perils at the Ball may wait;
And, as she now alights, the fluttering Fair
Invokes her Guardian to protect her there,
Till thoughts of danger, thoughts of caution, fly
Before the magic blaze that meets her eye.
The advancing Nymph, at every step she takes,
Pants with amazement, doubtful if she wakes;
Far as her eyes the glittering scene command,
It Is all enchantment, all a Fairy land;
No vestiges of modern pomp appear,
No modern melody salutes her ear;
With Moorish notes the echoing mansion rings,
And its transmuted form to Fancy brings
The rich See the Views of this Palace in Swinburn's Travels.
Alhambra of the Moorish kings.
The Peer, who keenly thirsts for Fashion's praise,
To gild his revel with no common rays,
Summoned his modish Architect, whose skill
Can all the wishes of Caprice fulfill.
His genius, equal to the wildest task,
Gave to the house itself a Gothic mask.
The Chaplain, that no guest might feel neglect,
As a Magician of the Arab sect,
Waved a presiding wand throughout the Ball,
And well provided for the wants of all.
The Peer himself, his prowess to evince,
Shines in the semblance of a Moorish Prince;
And round the brilliant mimic Hero wait
All pomp and circumstance of Moorish state:
Through all his splendid dome no eye could find
Aught unembellish'd, save the Master's mind.
There, though represt by Courtesy's control,
Lurks the low mover of the little soul,
Mean Vanity; whose slave can never prove
The heart-refining flame of genuine love.
While her cold joys his abject mind amuse,
His thoughts are busied on connubial views.
His house complete, its decorations placed
By the sure hand of fashionable Taste,
He only wants, to crown his modish life,
That last and finest moveable -- a Wife.
She too must prove, to fix his coy desire,
Such as the eye of Fashion will admire.
His Ball is but a jury, to decide
Upon the merit of his fancied Bride.
If sweet SERENA, on this signal night,
Shines the first idol of the public sight;
If Gallantry's fixed eyes pronounce her fair,
By the sure sign of one unceasing stare;
And if, prophetic of her nobler doom,
Each rival Beauty shudders at her bloom;
The die is cast -- he weds -- the point is clear;
She cannot slight the vows of such a Peer.
Thus argued in his mind the festive Earl,
And, lest he lightly choose an awkward Girl,
Wisely convened, on this important case,
Each fashionable judge of Female grace.
Here Beaux Esprits in various figures lurk,
Of Jew and Gentile, Bramin, Tartar, Turk;
But of the manly Masks, a youthful Bard
Seemed most to challenge Beauty's soft regard:
Adorned with native elegance, he wore,
In simplest form, the minstrel dress of yore:
They call him EDWIN, who around him throng,
EDWIN, immortalized in BEATTIE's song;
And, sooth to say, within a comely frame,
He bore a heart that answered to the name;
For this neat habit decked a generous Youth,
Of gentlest manners, and sincerest truth.
Though on his birth propitious Fortune smiled,
No proud parental folly spoiled the Child;
And Genius, more beneficently kind,
Blessed with superior wealth his manly mind.
Of years he barely counted twenty-one;
But, like a brilliant morn, his opening life begun.
Fain would the Muse on this her votary dwell,
And fully paint the Youth she loves so well;
His figure's charms, the music of his tongue,
What Nymphs his lays allured, what lays he sung:
But higher cares her rambling song control;
SERENA's perils summon all her soul;
For Spleen, ambitious to exert her force,
Conscious this trial is her last resource,
Most keenly bent on her pernicious task,
Has shifted round the Ball from mask to mask,
Watching the moment, with infernal care,
To form with deepest art her final snare,
And manacle the mind of the unguarded Fair.
It comes, the moment that must fix her lot,
By her, ah thoughtless Maid! by her forgot;
Though the light Hours, even in their frolic ring,
Trembling perceive the fearful chance they bring,
And, shuddering at the Nymph's terrific state,
Seem anxious to suspend her doubtful fate.
Now social Ease the place of Sport supplied,
The hot oppressive mask was thrown aside,
And Beauty shone revealed in all her blushing pride.
Superior still in features as in form,
With admiration flushed, with pleasure warm,
The gay SERENA every eye allured;
The hearts her figure won her face secured:
A tender sweetness still the Nymph maintained,
And Modesty over all her graces reigned.
Well might her soul to brilliant hopes incline,
A thousand Youths had called her charms divine;
A thousand friends had whispered in her ear,
That Fate had marked her for the festive Peer.
Her youthful fancy, though by pomp amused,
Wished not those offers, which her heart refused:
That tender heart, by no vain pride possessed,
With indecisive trembling shook her breast,
Like a young bird, that, fluttering in the air,
Wishes to build her nest, yet knows not where.
The busy Earl, his puny love to raise,
Hunted the circling whisper of her praise;
Heard Envy own her lovely charms, though loath,
Heard Taste attest them with a modish oath;
And, nuptial projects thickening in his mind,
Now his fair partner in the dance rejoined.
As now the sprightly music paused, my Lord
Eager resolved to touch a softer chord;
Secure of all repulse, he vainly meant
Half to display, half hide his fond intent,
And, in dissembled Passion's flowery tropes,
To sport at leisure with the Virgin's hopes:
For this he framed a motley speech, replete
With amorous compliment and vain conceit.
The labored nothing with complacent pride
He spoke; but to his speech no Nymph replied:
Page 153.

Stothard del. Sharp sculp.

London, Published Septr. 1st. 1787, by T. Cadell, Strand.


For in the moment, the lost Fair devotes
Her willing ear to more attractive notes.
The Minstrel happened near the Nymph to walk,
Rapt with a bosom-friend in secret talk,
And, at the instant when the Earl began
Half to unfold his matrimonial plan,
EDWIN, in whispers, from the crowd retired,
Chanced to repeat the Sonnet she inspired:
The sounds, though faint, her recollection caught,
Drew her quick eye, and fixed her wondering thought.
Lost in this sweet surprise, she could not hear
A single accent of the amorous Peer.
Spleen saw the moment that she sought to gain,
And perched triumphant on the Noble's brain.
With jealous Envy stung, and baffled Pride,
"Contemptuous Girl!" with sudden rage he cried,
"If here to happier Youths thy views incline,
"I want not fairer Nymphs who challenge mine.
"Thy breast in vain with penitence may burn;
"But, once neglected, I no more return."
Thus loudly speaking, with distempered heat,
Rudely he turned, with rancorous scorn replete.
SERENA, startled at the injurious sound,
Surveyed the insulting Peer, who sternly frowned;
Shame and resentment through her bosom rush,
Swell every vein, and raise the burning blush.
Love, newborn Love, but in its birth concealed,
Nor to the Nymph herself as yet revealed,
And just Disdain, and Anger's honest flame,
With complicated power convulse her frame:
Contending Passions every thought confound,
And in tumultuous doubt her soul is drowned.
Now treacherous Pride, who tempts her tongue to trip,
Forms to a keen reply her quivering lip:
Insidious Spleen now hovers over the Fair,
Deems her half locked within her hateful snare;
In her new slave preparing to rejoice,
To taint her spirit, and untune her voice.
Hapless SERENA! what can save thee now?
The Fiend's dark signet stamps thy clouded brow,
In thy swollen eye I see the starting drop;
This fatal shower, aetherial Guardian! stop:
Haste to thy votary, haste, her soul sustain,
Nor let the trials she has past be vain.
Ah me! while yet I speak, with shuddering dread
I hear the magic Girdle's bursting thread.
This horrid omen, ye kind Powers! avert:
Nor thou, bright Zone! thy brighter Charge desert.
Ah, fruitless prayer! her panting breast behold!
See! the gauze shakes in many a ruffled fold!
Forced from their station by her heaving heart,
From the strained Girdle thrice three spangles start:
Through her disordered dress a pass they have found,
And fallen, see, they glitter on the ground!
O blessed chance! with life-recalling light
The glittering monitors attract her sight!
Like stars emerging from the darkened pole,
They sparkle safety to her harrass'd soul.
See! from her brow the clouds of trouble fly,
Vexation's tear is vanished from her eye!
Her rosy cheeks with Joy's soft radiance burn,
Like Nature smiling at the Sun's return;
The Nymph, no more with mental darkness blind,
Shines the sweet Ruler of her rescued mind.
Hence, hateful Spleen! thy fancied prize resign,
Renounce for ever what shall never be thine;
For, conscious of her airy Guardian's aid,
She feels new spirit through her heart conveyed,
And, inly blessing this victorious hour,
Her soul exults in its recovered power.
In such mild terms she hails the insulting Peer,
As Spleen, if mortal, must expire to hear;
But, driven for ever from the lovely Girl,
The foul Fiend riots in the captive Earl.
He answers not; but, with a sullen air,
On happier EDWIN, who approached the Fair,
Darts such a glance of rage and envious hate,
As Satan cast on Eden's blissful state,
When on our Parents first he fixed his sight,
And undelighted gazed on all delight:
So doomed to look, and doomed such pangs to feel,
Scornful he turned on his elastic heel.
"O lovely Mildness! oh angelic Maid!
"Deserving homage, though to scorn betrayed;
"Rise still, sweet Spirit, rise these wrongs above,
"Turn from injurious Pride to faithful Love;
"Though on my brow no Coronet may shine,
"Wealth I can offer at thy beauty's shrine,
"And, worthier thee, a heart that worships thine."
Thus, with new-kindled Love's aspiring flame,
Spoke the fond Youth concealed by EDWIN's name,
The gallant FALKLAND, rich in inborn worth,
By Fortune blessed, and not of abject birth.
Warmly he spoke, with that indignant heat
With which the generous heart never fails to beat,
When Worth insulted wakens virtuous ire,
And injured Beauty sets the soul on fire.
Quick to his voice the startled Virgin turned,
With wonder, hope, and joy, her bosom burned;
With sweet confusion, flurried and amazed,
On his attractive form she wildly gazed.
Full on her thought the friendly visions rushed;
Blushing she viewed him, viewed him still and blushed;
And, soft Affection quickening at the sight,
Perchance had swoon'd with fullness of delight,
But that her Father's voice, with quick control,
Recalled the functions of her fainting soul.
When on the distant seat, where, fondly fixed,
He viewed the Nymph as in the dance she mixed,
He indistinctly heard, with wounded ear,
The spleenful outrage of the angry Peer.
Swift at the imperfect sound, with choler wild,
He sprung to succor his insulted Child;
But ere his fury into language broke,
Love calmed the storm that Arrogance awoke.
The sudden burst of FALKLAND's tender flame,
His winning manners, his distinguished name,
His liberal soul, by Fortune's smile carest,
All joined to harmonize the Father's breast.
His fiery thoughts subside in glad surprise,
And to the generous Youth he warmly cries:
"Ingenuous FALKLAND! by thy frankness won,
"My willing heart would own thee as my Son;
"But on thy hopes SERENA must decide: --
"Haste we together from this house of Pride."
So spoke the Sire; for, to her Votary kind,
SOPHROSYNE inspired his softened mind.
Speaking, he smiled, to see that on his word
The Lover hung, and blessed the sounds he heard;
That his embarrass'd Child his sentence caught
With each tumultuous sign of tender thought;
Whose blushes, springing from the heart, declare
The dawn of fondness in the modest Fair.
The enchanted Youth with ecstasy conveyed
Forth from the troubled Feast the trembling Maid.
As the keen Sailor, whom his daring soul
Has drawn, too venurous, near the freezing pole;
Who, having slighted Caution's tame advice,
Seems wedged within impervious worlds of ice;
If, from each chilling form of peril free,
At length he reach the unincumber'd sea,
With joy superior to his transient pain,
Rushes, exulting, over the expansive main:
Such strong delight SERENA's bosom shared,
When sweet Reflection to her heart declared,
That all the trials of her Fate were past,
And Love's decisive plaudit sealed the last.
Her airy Guard prepares the softest down,
From Peace's wing, to line the nuptial crown:
Her smiles accelerate the bridal morn,
And clear her Votary's path from every thorn.
On the quick match the Prude's keen censures fall,
Blind to the heavenly Power who guided all:
But mild SERENA scorned the prudish play,
To wound warm Love with frivolous delay;
Nature's chaste child, not Affectation's slave,
The heart she meant to give, she frankly gave.
Through her glad Sire no gouty humors run,
Jocund he glories in his destined Son.
PENELOPE herself, no longer seen
In the sour semblance of tormenting Spleen,
Buys for her Niece the robes of nuptial state,
Nor scolds the Mercer once through all the long debate.
For quick dispatch, the honest Man of law
Toils half the night the legal ties to draw:
At length the enraptured Youth, all forms complete,
Bears his sweet Bride to his paternal seat;
On a fair lawn the cheerful mansion stood,
And high behind it rose a circling wood.
As the blessed Lord of this extensive reign
Led his dear partner through her new domain,
With fond surprise, SERENA soon descried
A temple raised to her aetheria! Guide.
Its ornaments she viewed with tender awe,
Their fashion such as she in vision saw;
For the kind Youth, her grateful smile to gain,
Had, from her clear description, decked the fane.
Joyful he cried, to his angelic Wife,
"Be this kind Power the worship of our life!"
He spoke; and led her to the inmost shrine;
Here, linked in rosy bands, two Votaries shine;
The pencil had imparted life to each,
With energy that seemed beyond its reach.
First stood Connubial Love, a manly Youth,
Whose bright eye spoke the ardent vows of truth;
Friendship, sweet smiling, filled the second place,
In all the softer charms of Virgin grace.
Their meeting arms a mystic tablet raise,
Decked with these lines, the Moral of my Lays: --
"VIRTUE's an ingot of Peruvian gold,
"SENSE the bright ore Potosi's mines unfold;
"But TEMPER's image must their use create,
"And give these precious metals sterling weight."
PLAYS OF THREE ACTS; WRITTEN FOR A PRIVATE THEATER.
TO HER GRACE THE DUCHESS OF DEVONSHIRE.
Non perch' io creda bisognar miei carmi
A chi se ne fa copia da se steffa;
Ma sol per satisfare a questo mio
Che ho d' onorarla e di lodar disio.
ARIOSTO, Canto xxxvii.
THE Great and Fair, in every age and clime,
Receive free homage from the Sons of Rhyme:
Bend, ye ambitious Bards, at Grandeur's shrine!
Be Power your patron! Wit and Beauty mine! --
To thee, whom elegance has taught to please
By serious dignity, or sportive ease;
Whom Virtue hails, at Pleasure's festive rites,
Chaste Arbiter of Art's refined delights:
To thee, fair DEVON! I breathe this votive strain;
Nor dread the averted ear of proud Disdain;
For O, if music has not blessed my lyre,
A lovelier spirit of the aetherial choir,
Joy-breathing Gratitude, that hallowed guest,
Who fires with heavenly zeal the human breast,
Bids my weak voice her swelling note prolong,
And consecrate to thee her tributary song.
When first my anxious Muse'sfav'rite child,
Her young SERENA, artless, simple, wild,
Presumed from privacy's safe scenes to fly,
And met in giddy haste the public eye;
Thy generous praise her trembling youth sustained,
The smile she dared not ask, from thee she gained;
And found a guardian in the gracious DEVON,
Kind as the regent of her fancied heaven. --
The flattered Muse, whose offspring thou have blessed,
In the fond pride that rules a parent's breast,
Presents thus boldly to thy kind embrace
This little group of her succeeding race.
Blessed! if by pathos true to Nature's law,
From thy soft bosom they may happily draw
Those tender sighs, that eloquently show
The virtues of the heart from whence they flow!
Blessed! if by foibles humorously hit,
In the light scenes that aim at comic wit,
They turn thy pensive charms to mirthful grace,
And wake the sprightly sweetness of thy face!
While thus the proud Enthusiast would aspire
To change thy beauties with her changing lyre;
Much as she wants the talent and the right,
To show thy various charms in varied light,
O might the Muse, intruding on thy bower,
From her fair Patron catch the magic power
Frequent to meet the public eye, and still
That fickle eye with fond amazement fill!
Let her, if this vain wish is lost in air,
Breathe from her grateful heart a happier prayer! --
However her different fables may give birth
To fancied woe, and visionary mirth;
May all thy griefs belong to Fiction's reign,
And wound thee only with a pleasing pain!
May thy light spirit, on the sea of life,
Elude the rocks of care, the gusts of strife,
And safely, as the never-sinking buoy,
Float on the unebbing flood of real joy!
EARTHAM, January 29th, 1784. W. HAYLEY.

PREFACE.
AS the following Plays were intended only for a private theater, I have been
tempted by that circumstance to introduce a kind of novelty into our language,
by writing three comedies in rhyme, though the Comic Muse of our country has
been long accustomed to express herself in prose, and her custom has the
sanction of settled precept, and successful example. The Antiquarian, indeed,
may remind me that Gammer Gurton's Needle, one of the earliest of our old
plays, with other comic productions of that rude period, was written in rhyme;
and possibly some fastidious enemies of that Gothic jingle, as they affect to
call it, may consider the present Publication as nothing more than a relapse
into the most barbarous mode of dramatic composition.

For the boldness of an attempt, which has no modern precedent to plead in its
behalf, some apology may be due to the Public.

In the first place, I beg it may not be supposed, that by writing a comedy in
rhyme, I mean to convey an indirect censure on the contrary practice. No one
can prize more highly than I do the many excellent comedies in prose, with
which our language is enriched. I am very far from entertaining a wish to
overturn the ceremonial which the Comic Muse of England has established; but I
hope to find our country as much a friend to toleration in the forms of
literature, as in those of religion. The custom of other enlightened nations,
both ancient and modern, may be pleaded on this occasion in behalf of verse.
Aristophanes, in his play of the Clouds, seems to pride himself on his poetry.
Ariosto having written two comedies in prose, converted them both into meter at
a maturer period of his life; and Moliere, the unrivalled master of the French
comie theater, who has written admirably both in prose and rhyme, is, I think,
most admirable, and most truly comic, when he adheres to the latter.

To the author who attempts a comedy in English rhyme, our language seems to
offer an advantage, which the French poet did not enjoy. The Comic Muse of
France has chiefly confined herself to that structure of verse, which belongs
equally to her Tragic Sister. In the poetry of our nation, this particular
measure is appropriated to sportive subjects, and though hitherto not used in
Comedy, it possesses to an English ear a very comic vivacity. That it is highly
calculated for poems of wit and humor, we have a striking proof in that most
exquisite production the Bath Guide. How far it may succeed through the varied
scenes of an English play, experiment only can determine. As some readers, on
the first sight of a comedy in rhyme, may hastily suppose that the fashion and
the materials of the work are borrowed from the Theater of France, I think it
proper to declare, in justice to the writers of that country, that they are by
no means answerable for any defects which may be found in these dramatic
performances. I am not conscious of having borrowed a single character or
situation from any comic writer whatever, either foreign or domestic. -- The
first of the three comedies, contained in the present Publication, was founded
on a real anecdote related to me by an intimate friend, who, concealing the
names of the parties, mentioned their ludicrous adventure as a new and tempting
subject for the Comic Muse. -- The plan of the second arose in the mind of its
author, from his remarking the various effects of Connoisseurship in different
characters. An attachment to the fine arts, which is allowed to refine and
strengthen the virtues of a manly and a generous spirit, has perhaps a peculiar
tendency not only to show, but to increase the narrowness of a vain and feeble
mind; and if such a tendency exists, it is the province of a comic writer to
counteract and correct it. -- The aim of the third comedy in this collection is
to laugh at two distinct species of affectation, very prevalent in our age and
country; the affectation of refined sentiment, and the affectation of pompous
and pedantic expression. I protest however against personal application: and,
to guard against it, let me declare, that this ridicule is levelled, not at the
great and respectable Veteran in the field of literature, whose phrases may
sometimes be borrowed by a character in the play; but at the nameless and
servile herd of his awkward imitators. -- Vigor and originality of thought give
a sanction to the pomp and peculiarity of his language. If singularities of
style are united with genius and moral excellence, they are properly regarded
with a partial respect; but when these singularities are preposterously copied,
and seem to prevail as a fashion, they become, I apprehend, very fair subjects
of sportive satire.

When I reflect what long and established prejudice a rhyming play must
encounter -- when I remember that even Dryden himself, the most able advocate,
and the greatest master of rhyme in our language, has expressly condemned the
use of it in comedy -- I am alarmed at the hardiness of my attempt; but when I
recollect that time, the most infallible test of literary opinion, has fully
shown the mistake of that immortal Poet, in recommending the use of rhyme in
English Tragedy, I am inclined to hope that he might be equally mistaken in
supposing it utterly unsuited to our Comic Muse. It may be urged indeed, with
great truth, that a comedy in rhyme cannot be so close a copy of Nature as a
comedy in prose, the latter adhering to the very language of common life. But
from a sister-art we may borrow, at least a plausible argument in favor of
Poetry, on the present occasion. The great master, who has descanted so happily
on the principles of Painting, observes with great propriety, in one of his
discourses, that "we are not always pleased with the most absolute possible
resemblance of an imitation to its original object: cases may exist, in which
such a resemblance may be even disagreeable. I shall only observe, that the
effect of figures in wax-work, though certainly a more exact representation
than can be given by painting or sculpture, is a sufficient proof that the
pleasure we receive from imitation is not increased merely in proportion as it
approaches to minute and detailed reality: we are pleased, on the contrary, by
seeing ends answered by seeming inadequate means Sir Joshua Reynolds' Discourse
of December 1782.
." -- On these principles, which perhaps are equally just in the two kindred
arts, a comedy in Rhyme may be still more entertaining than a comedy, of equal
merit in other points, which confines itself to prose; and a critic who
exclaims against the unnatural effect of a rhyming dialogue, may as justly
censure a portrait on canvass, because it is not so exact a copy of life, as an
image of colored wax. In both cases, the artist, whether painter or poet, may
be justly called a true and a pleasing copier of Nature, if he preserves as
high a degree of resemblance, as his mode of imitation will admit, and
embellishes his work with the attractive and almost indispensable graces of
ease, spirit, and freedom.

It is said by Voltaire of theatrical composition in general, "Tous les genres
sont bons horse le genre ennuyeux." If the present comedies fall not within the
class which that lively Writer has so justly proscribed, the Author may be
allowed to hope, that his liberal and enlightened readers will look with
indulgence on a Publication, which arose from his wish to introduce a striking,
and he trusts not a blamable, variety into the amusements of English literature.

THE HAPPY PRESCRIPTION; OR, THE LADY RELIEVED FROM HER LOVERS. A COMEDY, IN
RHYME.
Persons of the Drama.
SIR NICHOLAS ODDFISH, SAPPHIC, DECISIVE, MORLEY, COLONEL FELIX, JONATHAN,
Servant to MORLEY; SELINA, Niece to SIR NICHOLAS, MRS. FELIX, her Cousin, and
Wife to the COLONEL, JENNY, Servant to SELINA. Servants of SIR NICHOLAS, etc.
SCENE the Country Mansion of the ODDFISH Family. THE HAPPY PRESCRIPTION;
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Nicholas, in debate with Mrs. Felix and Selina. MRS. FELIX. WHAT a
strange declaration! -- it gives me the spleen;
But it is what good Sir Nicholas never can mean.

SIR NICHOLAS. Not mean it, fair Lady! -- by Jupiter, yes!
And my project, you will see, will be crowned with success;
I am joyous myself, and it is ever my plan
To give those I love all the joy that I can.

MRS. FELIX. We own it -- but joy is like diet, dear Cousin,
One palate may not relish what pleases a dozen;
Nor will I allow that my appetite's vicious,
If perchance I don't like, what you think most delicious.

SIR NICHOLAS. Rare dainty distinctions! -- But can I believe
That a woman ever lived, since the wedding of Eve,
Whose heart (though most coyly her head might be carried)
Did not fervently wish to be speedily married?
Not to wound your nice ears with the name of desires
Which youth renders lovely, and nature inspires,
Your sex, from its weakness, demands a defender,
Whom pride and affection make watchful and tender;
And if my fair Coz is no hypocrite grown,
The truth of my maxims you will honestly own;
While the wars from your arms the brave Colonel detain,
Is the want of a husband the source of no pain?

MRS. FELIX. There, indeed, you have touched me a little too near;
My Soldier, you know, to my soul is most dear;
I own -- and my frankness you never will blame,
I Would purchase his presence with aught but his same.

SIR NICHOLAS. Well said, thou dear, honest, and warm-hearted wife;
For thy truth may good angels still watch over his life,
And while others the rough field of slaughter are treading,
Send him home full of glory, to dance at our wedding!
For a wedding we'll have to enliven us all,
And Hymen's bright altar shall warm the old hall.
For my Niece ere I die it is my wish to provide,
And ere two months are past I will see her a bride.
I Am resolved -- and you know that my neighbors all say,
Sir Nicholas Oddfish will have his own way.

MRS. FELIX. Selina, dear Sir, wants no other protection,
While her life glides in peace by your gentle direction.
She-thinks, and, I own, I approve her remark,
In conjugal cares it is too soon to embark:
Her bosom untouched by Love's dangerous dart,
Fate has not yet shown her the man of her heart.

SIR NICHOLAS. The man of her heart! -- these nonsensical fancies
You lightheaded females pick out of romances.
That I am no tyrant you know very well,
So, Cousin, don't teach my good Niece to rebel!
I am no greedy guardian, who thinks it his duty
On the altar of Plutus to sacrifice beauty;
Whose venal barbarity, justly abhorred,
Ties a lovely young girl to an old crippled lord,
And basely, to gain either rank or estate,
Makesher swear she will love, what she cannot but hate.
From such a protector Heaven guard my dear Niece!
I wish her to wed that her joys may increase;
And the deuce must be in the strange girl who discovers
No man to her mind in such plenty of lovers.
To no very great length will my cruelty run,
If from twenty admirers I bid her choose one.

MRS. FELIX. But why, dear Sir Nicholas, why in such haste?

SIR NICHOLAS. It Is thus that my projects are ever disgraced
With the false names of hurry and precipitation,
Because I abhor silly procrastination;
That thief of delight, who deludes all our senses,
Who cheats us for ever with idle pretenses,
By whom, like the dog in the fable, betrayed,
We let go the substance to snap at the shade.
To seize present time is the true art of life;
It Is Time who now cries, make Selina a wife!
The season is come, I Have so long wished to see
From the moment I dandled her first on my knee:
She, you know, to my care was bequeathed by my Brother,
And having this child, I never wished for another:
Through life I have kept myself single for her;
Her interest, her joy, to my own I prefer.

SELINA. Your kindness, dear Sir, I can never repay.

SIR NICHOLAS. In truth, my dear damsel, you easily may;
I demand no return so enormously great;
I ask but a boy to possess my estate.

SELINA. Lord, Uncle, how come such odd thoughts in your head?

MRS. FELIX. From his heart, I assure you -- it is pleasantly said;
A fair stipulation -- both parties agreed,
The compact, I trust, in due time will succeed:
But patience, dear Knight, you will have your desire,
Nor wait very long for a young little 'squite.

SIR NICHOLAS. The cold stream of Patience never creeps in my veins,
But the wish my heart forms my quick spirit attains.
I Am none of your chill atmospherical wretches,
Whose affections are subject to starts and to catches;
Whose wish, like a weathercock, veering about,
Now turns toward hope, and now changes to doubt:
No, mine, like the needle without variation,
Only looks to one point, and that point's Consummation.
I want to behold this young urchin arise,
Before I have lost or my legs or my eyes,
That I may enjoy all his little vagaries,
As the changeable season of infancy varies.
I long to be moulding his heart and his spirit;
To show him the fields he is born to inherit;
Lead him round our rich woods, while my limbs are yet limber,
And tell the young rogue how I Have nursed up his timber;
That when the worn thread of my life is untwisted,
He long may remember that I have existed;
And when my old frame in our monument rests,
As he walks by my grave with a few worthy guests,
He thus to some warm-hearted friend may address him,
Here lies, my odd, honest, old Uncle -- God bless him!

MRS. FELIX. Thank Heaven, dear Cousin, your hale constitution
Shows not the least sign of a near dissolution.

SELINA. To make your life happy, whatever the condition,
Has been, my dear Uncle, my highest ambition;
To fulfill every wish that your fancy can frame,
Still is, as it ought to be, ever my aim:
But if by your voice I am doomed to the altar,
With terror and pain my weak accents must falter,
Unless my kind stars a new lover should send me,
Unlike all the swains who now deign to attend me.

SIR NICHOLAS. Nice wench! do you want the whole world to adore you?
Would you have all the men of the earth ranged before you?
For, thanks to your charms, and to fortune's kind bounty,
You may rank in your train all the youth of our county;
And, choose whom you will, if the man has but worth,
And is nearly your equal in wealth and in birth,
I give my consent -- you are free from restriction;
But I will not be plagued with perverse contradiction,
I will see you wed without any delay:
Your two fittest lovers are coming today;
Young Sapphic, whose verses delight all the fair,
And Dicky Decisive, Sir Jacob's next heir:
Both young and both wealthy, both comely and clever,
To gain you, no doubt, each will warmly endeavor;
For they come for a month, by my own invitation,
On purpose to sound my dear girl's inclination:
I have said to them both, and no man can speak fairer,
Let him, who can please her most, win her and wear her.

SELINA, aside to Mrs. Felix. Good angels defend me!

MRS. FELIX. I see nothing frightful:
Our month with such guests must be very delightful:
When Sapphic's soft verses incline us to dose,
Dick will keep us awake with satirical prose.

SIR NICHOLAS. Don't cross me, I say! nor mislead my good Niece!
By Jove, if she thwarts me with any caprice,
Like a certain old Justice, I Will ring up my maids,
And marry the first of the frank-hearted jades;
For perverse contradiction I never will bear,
But provide for myself a more dutiful heir.

MRS. FELIX. Dear Cousin, in spite of his Worship's decision,
You cannot be certain of such a provision:
Attempts of that nature are subject to fail.

SIR NICHOLAS. My designs, you shall see, Madam, always prevail:
For if this nice Gipsy, by your machination,
Declines every offer, to give me vexation,
Like my late jolly neighbor, Sir Timothy Trickum,
Who vindictively married the frail Molly Quickum,
I Will make sure of the matter, and choose me a wife,
With an heir ready placed on the threshold of life:
For, as I have said, though a foe to restriction,
I never will suffer perverse contradiction.
You now know my mind, which no mask ever covers,
So farewell, and prepare to receive your two lovers.
[Exit.
MRS. FELIX. Go thy way, thou strange mixture of sense and of blindness!
A model at once of oppression and kindness.
Thy will, thou odd compound of goodness and whim,
Is a stream, against which it is treason to swim;
Yet we must cross the current --

SELINA. Dear Cousin, say how!
Direct opposition he will not allow:
What can you devise as a plan of prevention?
How divert his keen spirit from this new intention?
I had much rather die than be ever united
To one of the lovers, that he has invited:
My heart has a thorough aversion to both:
Yet to make him unhappy I Am equally loath;
When I think what I owe to his tender protection,
The worst of all ills is to lose his affection.

MRS. FELIX. Dear Girl, your warm gratitude gives you new charms:
It Is an amiable fear which your bosom alarms,
And I from your Uncle's quick humor would screen you,
Not loosen the bands of affection between you.
He merits your love, and you know he has mine;
Yet we somehow must baffle his hasty design,
Nor suffer his whim thus to make you a wife,
To repent the rash business the rest of his life.
Take courage! kind chance may assist us --

SELINA. I doubt it,
Yet Heaven knows how we shall manage without it;
For when his heart's set on a favorite scheme,
His ardor and haste, as you know, are extreme;
Like a medicine ill-timed, opposition is vain,
And inflames the disorder 'twas meant to restrain.

MRS. FELIX. In his fevers indeed there is no intermission;
And thanks, gentle Coz! to your soft disposition!
So sweet and compliant your temper has been,
You have taught him to think contradiction a sin;
And here all around him confirm that belief,
His vassals all bow to the nod of their chief.
Here, shut from the world in this rural dominion,
No mortal opposes his will or opinion;
And thus he is spoiled -- Politicians all say,
Human nature's not fashioned for absolute sway.

SELINA. It Is true, though the world, as you say, think him odd,
In this sphere he is held a diminutive god:
And when I behold how his fortune is spent,
In suppressing vexation, and spreading content;
When I hear all the poor his kind bounty expressing,
And thoroughly know how he merits their blessing,
My feelings with theirs in his eulogy join,
And confess, that his nature is truly divine.

MRS. FELIX. Thou excellent Girl! if such fondness and zeal
For a warm-hearted, whimsical Uncle you feel,
With what fine sensations your bosom will glow,
What tender attachment your temper will show,
When your fortunate lord Love and Hymen invest
With higher dominion over that gentle breast!
But tell me, dear Cousin -- be honest -- declare,
Has no young secret swain formed an interest there?
I suspect -- but don't let my suspicion affright you,
Though the good Knight's rare virtues amuse and delight you,
From this gloomy old hall you would wish to get free,
Had not Cupid preserved you from feeling ennui:
Come tell me the name of the favorite youth;
I am sure I guess right.

SELINA. No, in sad sober truth,
I never have seen, in the course of my life,
A mortal to whom I should choose to be wife.

MRS. FELIX. Ye stars, what a pity! -- I wish I could learn
That my Colonel from India would shortly return,
Both for your sake and mine; for our present distress
He would speedily turn into joyous success;
As his regiment must some young hero afford,
Who might throw at your feet both himself and his sword.
What say you, my dear, to a soldier? --

Enter Jenny. JENNY. Oh! Madam,
Here Is young Mr. Sapphic -- I vow, if I had them,
I Would give fifty pounds had you seen how politely
He begged me to tie a sweet nosegay up tightly,
Which is jolted to pieces. -- Well, he is a sweet beau;
And now with his pencil he is writing below,
I believe it is a posy, he writes it so neatly,
And I Am sure it is fine verse, Ma'am, it sounded so sweetly.

MRS. FELIX. Oh charming! his vows will be very sublime,
And I trust we shall hear his proposals in rhyme.

SELINA. How can you, dear Cousin, so cruelly jest in
A business you know I am really distressed in?
I shall certainly forfeit my Uncle's protection,
For I never can wed where I feel no affection.
Do help me.

MRS. FELIX. Good Girl, this perplexity smother,
And think your two lovers will banish each other:
There Is much to be hoped from our present affairs.

JENNY. O, Ma'am, Mr. Sapphic is coming up stairs.
(Aside as she goes out.) I am mightily pleased with this marrying plan,
And I hope in my spirit that he will be the man.
[Exit.
Enter Sapphic. SAPPHIC. Fair Ladies, the moments have seemed to be hours,
While I stopped in your hall to adjust a few flowers:
For the season, I Am told, they are uncommonly fine;
But I still wish the tribute more worthy the shrine.
[ Bowing and presenting them to Selina.
SELINA. Mr. Sapphic is always extremely polite:
These roses, indeed, are a wonderful sight:
You are far better florists than we are.

MRS. FELIX. My dear,
Mr. Sapphic has magic to make them appear,
And Flora is bribed, by the songs he composes,
To produce for her poet extempore roses;
Into this early bloom all her plants are bewitched:
But you do not observe how the gift is enriched,
Here Is a border of verse, if my eyes don't deceive me.

SELINA, aside to Mrs. Felix. Dear Cousin, you will read it -- I pray you,
relieve me;
I shall blush like a fool at each civil expression.

MRS. FELIX, aside to Selina, taking the paper. Now, with emphasis just, and
with proper discretion.
(Mrs. Felix reads.) "Ye happy flowers, give and receive perfume
"As on Selina's fragrant breast ye bloom:
"From earth, though not arrang'd in order nice,
"Ye are transplanted into Paradise;
"If on that spot ye languish into death,
"'Twill be from envy of her sweeter breath."
It Is a delicate compliment, tender and pretty,
What original spirit! how graceful and witty!

SAPPHIC. Dear Ma'am, you're too good, to find any thing in it,
It Is a mere hasty trifle -- the work of a minute:
On the anvil I had not a moment to hammer,
And I fear, in my haste I have sinned against grammar.

MRS. FELIX. All slight imperfections I never regard
When I meet with such vigor of thought in a bard,
With a fancy so brilliant --

SAPPHIC. O! Ma'am, you're too kind;
But candor's the test of an amiable mind.
I wish that your taste all our Critics might guide,
To soften that rigor with which they decide.

MRS. FELIX. From Critics, dear Sir, you have little to fear.
If Mr. Decisive himself had been here,
He must have been charmed with this sweet jeu d'esprit,
Which, as he is coming today, he shall see.
I am eager to hear how his wit will applaud it:
To conceal it would be of due praise to defraud it.

SAPPHIC. In Mercy's name, Ladies, I beg your protection,
Preserve my poor rhymes from Decisive's inspection;
Consider how hasty --

MRS. FELIX. Say rather how springhtly --

SAPPHIC. Composed in a moment --

MRS. FELIX. Produced so politely!

SAPPHIC. He Will cut them to atoms!

MRS. FELIX. Dear Sir, he is your friend,
And I thought he had seen all the poems you penned:
I was told that to him your long works you rehearse --
Does Mr. Decisive himself write in verse?

SAPPHIC. I wish from my soul that he did, now and then;
But he uses the penknife much more than the pen,
And too freely has flashed all who write in the nation,
To give them an opening for retaliation.
My old friend Decisive has honor and wit;
To the latter, indeed, he makes most things submit;
And thinks it fair sport, as a friend or a foe,
To knock down a Bard by a flaming bon mot.
To your sex indeed his chief failings I trace;
For the fair-ones so flattered his figure and face,
That too early he ceased the chaste Muses to follow,
And being Adonis, would not be Apollo.

MRS. FELIX. Yet he has much fancy.

SAPPHIC. O, Madam, no doubt,
And genius, that study would soon have brought out.
Had his thoughts been less turned to his legs and his looks,
Ere this he would have written some excellent books:
It Is pity such parts should through indolence fall;
But he never composes, and reads not at all.

SELINA. Not read, Mr. Sapphic! you surely mistake;
Your friend cannot be an illiterate rake:
Our neighbors, who lately from London came down,
Declare, that his word forms the taste of the town.

SAPPHIC. Dear Madam, the business is easily done;
He judges all authors, but never reads one.

MRS. FELIX. I Am sure he must own this impromptu is sweet,
And I vow he shall read it --

SAPPHIC. Dear Ma'am, I entreat,
I conjure you to spare me; this earnest petition
I know you will grant me --

MRS. FELIX. On this one condition,
That for six lines suppressed you indulge me with twenty:
Come, show us your pocketbook -- there you have plenty
Of tender poetical squibs for the Fair.

SAPPHIC, taking out his pocketbook. Dear Ma'am, here is nothing.

MRS. FELIX. A volume, I swear,
O, charming! -- well, now you're an excellent man;
It Is stuffed like a pincushion --

SAPPHIC. Yes, Ma'am -- with bran.

MRS. FELIX. Fie, fie, you're too modest, and murder my meaning;
What a harvest is here! yet I ask but a gleaning:
It would not be fair to seize all the collection,
Though all is most certainly worthy inspection.
Indulge us, dear Sir: come, I Will take no refusal.

SAPPHIC. Indeed, Ma'am, here is nothing that is fit for perusal.

MRS. FELIX. There are fifty fine things, and one cannot choose amiss.

SAPPHIC, taking out a paper. Here Is one new little song --

MRS. FELIX. Well then, let me have this.

SAPPHIC, after giving a paper. They all are so jumbled, I fear I am wrong;
I meant to have shown you a new little song,
Which was written last week on the ball at our races,
Where I heard the Miss Trotters compared to the Graces;
I could not help saying, 'twas very profane,
It was taking the name of the Graces in vain.

MRS. FELIX reads. " On seeing Selina and Jenny near each other in the garden."


SAPPHIC. O mercy, dear Madam, you must not read those!
A stanza unfinished. --

MRS. FELIX. How sweetly it flows!
Selina, pray hear it.

SELINA, aside to MRS. FELIX. Dear Cousin, enough!
How can you delight in his horrible stuff!

MRS. FELIX reads. "Though each in the same garden blows,
"The poet must be crazy,
"Who, when invited by the rose,
"Can stoop to pick the daisy."

SELINA, aside to MRS. FELIX. If you love me, dear Cousin, assist me, I pray,
To end all this nonsense, and get him away. --
Pray, Sir, when you came, was my Uncle below?

SAPPHIC. He Is abroad, Ma'am, your servant informed me --

SELINA. O No!
You have heard he is building a temple to Pan,
And we hope that your taste may embellish the plan:
At the end of the walk, in his favorite grove,
Where there formerly stood an old ruined alcove,
You Will find him; and as it is an art you are skilled in,
'Twill please him to know what you think of the building.

MRS. FELIX. Aye do, Mr. Sapphic, inspect what is done,
For the workmen all blunder'd when first they begun:
Your opinion, I Am sure, will oblige the good Knight.

SELINA. An inscription, he once said, he wished you to write.

SAPPHIC. Dear Madam! -- the hint is delightful, I vow;
To the God of Arcadia I hasten to bow:
I shall find the good Knight in the midst of the dome;
I am heartily glad that he is not from home.
We shall surely contrive something clever between us,
And the Muse will compose by the order of Venus.
[ Bows tenderly to Selina, and Exit.
SELINA. How could you so praise that impertinent creature?
And praise him without discomposing a feature! --
I could not have thought, before this conversation,
That your frankness could turn into such adulation.

MRS. FELIX. The world, my dear Child, is to you quite unknown;
When you see it, you will find such discourse is the ton;
Fine folks in high life learn to praise with great glee
Such persons and things as they sicken to see.
To me your best thanks for my speeches are due --
By thus flattering the Poet, I surely serve you;
He will now play the Sky-lark instead of the Dove,
And stun me with songs, while you're saved from his love.

Enter Jenny. JENNY. Dear Ma'am, now I hope Mr. Sapphic's quite blessed,
For he flies through the walks like a bird to his nest. --
He Is a sweet pretty gentleman.

MRS. FELIX, aside to Selina. This, if I show it,
Will soon banish Jenny's regard for the poet: --
Jenny, see what your friend Mr. Sapphic has written.

JENNY. Dear Ma'am, with his verses I always am smitten.
( Having read the stanza.) A Daisy indeed! to be sure I am neat,
But though I Am a servant, I hope I am sweet.
When he makes my young Mistress a Rose or a Lily,
He might turn me at least to a Daffy-down-dilly.
But a Daisy, forsooth! with no fragrance at all! --
I Will cross him for this --

SELINA. What Is that noise in the hall?

JENNY. As sure as I live it is your other gay Spark,
For I saw a new chaise driving into the park. --
I Will see, Ma'am. (Aside going out.) I Will show this fine Poet a trick --
A Daisy! that no one but children will pick.
[Exit.
MRS. FELIX. This simile Jenny I see cannot swallow,
And her anger may ruin this son of Apollo;
For in courtship this maxim is often displayed,
He has half lost the Mistress who loses the Maid.

Enter Decisive. DECISIVE. Alone, my dear Ladies! -- they told me below,
Our friend Sapphic was here, your poetical Beau;
I was almost afraid that my sudden intrusion
Might check the rich stream of some lyric effusion.
(To Selina.) I am happy to see you so lovely today;
But I hope I Have not frighted your Poet away.

SELINA. O no -- Mr. Sapphic had bid us adieu --

MRS. FELIX. And not without saying some fine things of you:
He declares, that with those brilliant parts you possess,
It Is a sin you never send any work to the press.

DECISIVE. Good Sapphic! -- In truth it is his comfort to think
The whole duty of man lies in spilling of ink;
And at Paradise gate his large volumes of meter
Will, I hope, be allowed a fair pass by Saint Peter.

MRS. FELIX. Then the Saint must be free from your critical spirit,
For I know you have little esteem for their merit;
You're a rigorous judge, and to poets terrific.

DECISIVE. I wish my friend's Muse was not quite so prolific:
But in rhymes, when a child, I have heard he would squeak,
And so proved a poet before he could speak;
On his deathbed, I doubt not, he will still think of verse,
And groan out a rhyme to his doctor or nurse.

MRS. FELIX. I fancy your favorite reading is prose;
Here Is a new set of travels, pray have you read those?

DECISIVE, taking the book. This author is lucky to meet with a buyer:
A traveller's but a soft word for a liar.
Such works may please those who have never been abroad,
But men, who have traveled, perceive all the fraud.

MRS. FELIX. Is the work so deceitful! it seems you have read it?

DECISIVE. Not a syllable, Madam --

MRS. FELIX. Pray who then has said it?

DECISIVE. Not a soul that I know -- but such books are a trade,
And I perfectly know how those volumes are made.

MRS. FELIX. It Is a work, I am told, that has great reputation
Both for wit and for truth --

DECISIVE. We Are a credulous nation --

MRS. FELIX. Pray what kind of books are your favorite study?

DECISIVE. I find modern works only make the brain muddy,
As my friends grew by reading more awkward than wise,
And ruined their persons and clouded their eyes;
I have wisely resolved not to read any more,
Since each living author is turned to a bore.

MRS. FELIX. How can you so waste all your bright mental powers?
It Is pity you men have not such works as ours --
What do you say to my knotting? (Takes out her work.)

DECISIVE. Your box wants a hinge.
And I Will give you a much better pattern for fringe;
I brought it from France.

MRS. FELIX. Now I see, my good friend,
There is no kind of work which your skill cannot mend:
In all arts you possess a distinguishing head,
From building a temple to knotting a thread.

DECISIVE. A-propos of a temple -- pray has the good Knight
Raised his altar to Pan? -- he had fixed on the site.
Is the structure begun? -- I have not seen his plan --

MRS. FELIX. Then hasten, and pay your devotions to Pan.
Sir Nicholas now in his vestibule stands,
To guide all his workmen, and quicken their hands;
And Sapphic is gone to attend the good Knight,
And try what inscription his genius can write.

DECISIVE. Poor Pan! by the Graces you are left in the lurch;
Thy temple will look like a trim parish church,
With Sapphic's inscriptions, like scraps of the Bible,
Put up, as the Churchwardens say, in a libel.

MRS. FELIX. Indeed we much fear so -- pray haste to inspect it,
And exert all your exquisite taste to correct it.

DECISIVE. Ma'am I Will do what I can, for it puts me in wrath
To see a fine temple disgraced by a Goth.
[Exit.
MRS. FELIX. Well, my dear, your two Lovers, like true men of fashion,
Do not pester you much with the heat of their passion
You Will be quite at your ease -- thanks to Pan and the Muse!

Enter Jenny, hastily. JENNY. News! news! my dear Ladies, most excellent news!

SELINA. The girl is quite wild!

MRS. FELIX. What transports you so, Jenny?

JENNY. I Have news for you, Madam, that is well worth a guinea:
I have news from the Colonel --

MRS. FELIX. A letter! Where is it?

JENNY. No, Ma'am, here is a stranger arrived on a visit,
And he comes from the place where the Colonel is fighting.

MRS. FELIX. And with letters for me?

JENNY. Madam, that I Am not right in;
For I run from his man when I got half my story;
But the Colonel, he says, is all riches and glory.

MRS. FELIX. Dear girl! that is enough; through my life I shall feel
Due regard for thy warm and affectionate zeal.
But where is this Stranger?

JENNY. Just walked to my Master.
His poor man has met with a cruel disaster;
He was wounded in battle.

SELINA. Pray treat him with care. --
In your joy, my dear Cousin, I heartily share.

MRS. FELIX. This Stranger's a jewel for you from the East;
He Is a Captain, I hope, my dear Jenny, at least.

JENNY. Ah, Madam! my fancy supposed him so too;
But we are both in the wrong, and for Miss he will not do,
For I learnt from his man he is only a Doctor.

MRS. FELIX. Poor Jane! how the difference of title has shocked her!
For my part I cannot find, by my reason or feeling,
That the art of destroying excels that of healing:
We may equally love the professors of both.

JENNY. That Miss though should marry a Doctor, I Am loath.

MRS. FELIX. Come, my dear, let us meet 'em -- I cannot rest above --
How slowly fly letters from hands that we love!

End of ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Jenny and Jonathan. JENNY. COME, dear Mr. Jonathan, tell me the whole:
An account of a battle I love to my soul;
There is nothing on earth I so truly delight in,
As to hear a brave Soldier discourse about fighting. --
So the Colonel was wounded, you say, near the wall:
Whereabouts was the shot? Did he instantly fall?

JONATHAN. No; recoiling a little, he rushed on again,
And fought like a lion, made fiercer by pain;
Though a cursed keen arrow, an Indian let fly,
Pierced the bone of his cheek just below the right eye.
'Twas a horrible wound! but it could not appall him.

JENNY. O mercy! that such a hard fate should befall him.
Alas! I Am afraid that his fine manly face
Must have lost by the scar all its spirit and grace.
Does he look very hideous?

JONATHAN. No; thanks to my Master,
You can hardly perceive that he ever wore a plaster.
There never was known a more wonderful cure;
But kind Heaven assists my good Master, I Am sure;
Without it, the skill of no mortal could save
The many brave lads he has kept from the grave.
You would weep with delight to behold him surrounded
With a hundred fine fellows, once horribly wounded;
Who with thanks for their lives are still eager to greet him,
And hail him with blessings whenever they meet him.

JENNY. God reward him, say I, for the good he has done;
And of those he has saved I Am glad you are one.

JONATHAN. Aye, twice he preserved me when all thought me dead,
And once brought me off at the risque of his head.
It was not his business to mix in the strife,
And some thought him mad when he ventured his life
To bring off a poor mangled private like me;
But I Have still a heart left, in this trunk that you see,
Which loves the brave spirit who snatched me from death,
And will serve him, I hope, till my very last breath.

JENNY. Your scenes of hard service, I hope, are all over;
It is now fairly time you should both live in clover.
Your Master, I trust, has brought home as much treasure
As will make him a parliament man at his pleasure;
And, to recompense you for the wound in your arm,
Perhaps he will buy you a snug little farm.

JONATHAN. When a Gentleman comes from the East, my good girl,
You all think he is loaded with diamonds and pearl;
You fancy his treasure too great to be told,
And suppose he possesses a mountain of gold.
A few daring blades, by a bold kind of stealth,
Have indeed from the Indies brought home so much wealth,
That with all their keen senses they never could employ it,
And have died from the want of a heart to enjoy it:
But some hundred brave lads, whom gay youth led to enter
That promising region of hope and adventure,
Have toiled many years in those rich burning climes,
With small share of their wealth, and with none of their crimes.
Now my Master and I both belong to this tribe;
Not a single Nabob have we killed for a bribe;
And to tell you a truth, which I hope you will not doubt,
We Are as poor and as honest as when we set out.

JENNY. What! your Master still poor in so thriving a trade!
And, with patients so rich, has he never been paid
For the wounds he has healed?

JONATHAN. Yes, my dear, for his fees
I know he has touched many thousand rupees;
But the sight of distress he could never endure;
What he took from the rich he bestowed on the poor.

JENNY. Well, Heaven will pay him, no doubt, in due season.
But what brings him home? -- I would fain know the reason
Why he leaves that rich land in the bloom of his life:
I suppose, from the want of a cherry-cheek'd wife?
They say those black wenches are sad nasty creatures,
And though they have fine shapes they have horrible features.
Does he want a white sweetheart? or has he a Black?

JONATHAN. It Is indeed a white woman that brings us both back:
But, alas! it is an old one -- my Master, it seems,
Has a fond simple mother that is troubled with dreams,
And he, like a tender and soft-hearted youth,
Resigns his fine prospect, and comes home, forsooth,
Because the old dame has expressed her desires
To see him in England before she expires:
And egad, since he is come she will live long enough,
For she seems to be made of good durable stuff.

JENNY. Well, now I shall love him a hundred times more
Than I did for the stories you told me before.
God bless the kind soul! who behaves to his mother
As if he well knew he could never have another;
And were he my son, I could not live without him;
I could stay here all day while you're talking about him. --
But it is time to be gone; we must both disappear,
For the Colonel's sweet Wife and your Master are here.

JONATHAN. Stop, I must peep at her; -- she is as bright as the day!

JENNY. And her heart is as good as her spirit is gay --
Come, I Will show you our walks -- we may get out this way.
[Exeunt.
Enter Mrs. Felix and Morley. MRS. FELIX. Dear excellent Friend, since I owe to
your worth
The safety of what I most value on earth,
With those it loves best my heart yields you a place,
And I clasp your kind hand with a sister's embrace.
To judge of the man whom such service endears,
I want not the tardy acquaintance of years;
But in strong though quick ties, that no chances can sever,
In an instant he seizes my friendship for ever:
And had I much less obligation to you,
My regard and esteem I should still think your due,
From the picture my Felix has drawn of your mind.

MORLEY. His warm soul to his friends is most partially kind:
But such as I am I most truly am yours;
Your goodness my grateful attachment ensures,
And my heart with proud transport your friendship embraces.
Though I never gazed before on your personal graces,
I Have beguiled some long weeks of hard wearisome duty
With frequent discourse on your virtues and beauty;
And I own for the Colonel it raised my esteem,
To mark with what pleasure he dwelt on the theme.

MRS. FELIX. You're an excellent creature to sooth a fond Wife,
Who regards her Lord's love hardly less than his life;
But since you have replied with good humor so steady
To the ten thousand questions I Have asked you already,
I Will spare you today, and, if it is in my power,
Mention Felix's name only once in an hour.
That my thoughts to the Indies no longer may roam,
Let me talk to you now about matters at home;
Your counsel may make our perplexity less,
And finish our odd tragi-comic distress.
First tell me, and speak without any disguise,
(Though I fancy I read all your thoughts in your eyes)
What do you think of my Cousin?

MORLEY. Her graces indeed
The glowing description of Felix exceed;
Though in praising her, often he with pleasure has smiled,
Like a father describing his favorite child.
For my part, I think she is lavishly blessed
With those beauties by which the pure mind is expressed,
That her heart is with truth and with tenderness warm,
That sweet sensibility shines in her form;
A form, on which no man his eye ever turned
Without feeling his breast in her welfare concerned.
It Is the lot of such graces, wherever they dwell,
None can see their soft mistress and not wish her well.

MRS. FELIX. Very gallantly said, and the praise is her due --
But how came her Lovers so well known to you?

MORLEY. Her Lovers! -- dear Madam, I hope you're in jest --
Or if by their vows your sweet Friend is addressed,
Heaven grant, for the peace of her delicate mind,
That her hand may be never to either resigned!

MRS. FELIX. From my soul, I assure you, I join in your prayer;
But whence does it spring?

MORLEY. I will freely declare,
Though they are both men of fortune, fair birth, and good name,
With figures that set some young nymphs in a flame;
Though at each, many ladies are ready to catch
At what the world calls, a most excellent match;
Yet, if I have read your fair Cousin aright,
A bosom so tender, a spirit so bright,
Must be wretched with such a companion for life,
As each of these Lovers would prove to his Wife.

MRS. FELIX. You are right; but their characters where could you know?

MORLEY. I knew them at college a few years ago,
Before, by a whimsical odd sort of fate,
And some family losses, too long to relate,
In Europe my views of prosperity ceased,
And chance sent me forth to my friends in the East.

MRS. FELIX, Pray what sort of youths were these two modish men?

MORLEY. You now find them both what they seemed to me then;
Two characters formed like most young men of fashion,
Whose cold selfish pride is their sovereign passion:
In each, though they are men of an opposite turn,
The same heart-freezing vanity still you discern.
To indulge that dear vanity, each still displays
All the force of his mind, though in different ways.
Thence, in spinning weak verse Sapphic's toil never ends,
And Decisive never stops in deriding his friends;
Each equally fancies no nymph can resist
His lips, which he thinks all the Graces have kift.

MRS FELIX. Perfect knowledge of both your just picture has shown! --
The warmth of these Lovers diverts me, I own.
Of conquest each seems to himself very clear,
And feels from his rivals no diffident fear.
It Is easy to see, from their satisfied air,
Each loves his own person much more than the Fair.
But, my poor gentle Coz wishes both at a distance;
And I want to contrive, by your friendly assistance,
To relieve her, and quietly send them from hence
Without the Knight's knowledge.

MORLEY. As neither wants sense,
Cannot the Lady pronounce their dismission at once,
Which none can mistake but an impudent dunce?

MRS. FELIX. This measure seems easy indeed at first view;
But, alas! it is a measure we dare not pursue.
Our warm-hearted, whimsical, positive Knight,
Allows not to woman this natural right;
And hence my young Friend, in a pitiful case,
Knows not how to reject what she never can embrace;
For nothing her Uncle's resentment would smother,
Should she banish one suitor, and not take the other.

MORLEY. Then indeed I am grieved for the Lady's distress;
But how can I aid her?

MRS. FELIX. It Is hard, I confess,
To a sudden retreat this bold Pair to oblige,
And make two such Heroes abandon a siege;
Yet I wish we could do it -- and when they recede,
The departure of both must appear their own deed.

MORLEY, after a pause. Well -- my friendship for you has suggested a scheme.

MRS. FELIX. It Is a service our hearts will for ever esteem.
But what is your project?

MORLEY. Don't question me what,
Lest you think me a fool for too simple a plot:
It Is simple, and yet I would venture my life
It will drive from these Beaus all their thoughts of a Wife;
And if my scheme prospers, with joy I Will confess
What a whimsical trifle produced our success.

MRS. FELIX. Well, keep your own secret, if silence is best;
Though a woman, for once I Will in ignorance rest. --
Here comes our friend Sapphic -- he seems in a flurry.

MORLEY. His step shows indeed a poetical hurry,
And we shall be called in as Gossips, fair neighbor,
For by the Bard's bustle his Muse is in labor.

Enter Sapphic. SAPPHIC. Dear Ma'am! may I ask you for paper and ink,
Lest a fresh jeu d'esprit in oblivion should sink?
For when my free fancy has brought forth my verse,
My treacherous memory proves a bad nurse.

MRS. FELIX. O pray! for your Muse let us rear her young chit,
For the bantling, no doubt, must have spirit and wit;
As a cradle to hold it, I beg you will take that, (giving him a paper.)
And your Friend here will aid you in dressing the Brat;
At a rite so important I merit no place,
And I beg to withdraw while you're washing its face.
[Exit.
SAPPHIC. That Is charming gay creature -- luxuriant and young --
But I Have lost half a stanza -- the deuce take her tongue; --
Let me see -- let me see if I cannot recollect it. --
It Is done; -- and now, Morley, pray hear or inspect it.

MORLEY. The Poet himself his own verse should recite.

SAPPHIC. You're a sensible fellow -- your maxim is right.
(Reads.) "Thy old Arcadia, Pan, resign,
"For this more rich retreat:
"A fairer nymph here decks thy shrine;
"Be this thy favorite seat."
Well, my Friend, will not this bring the old God out of Greece?

MORLEY. Aye, and make good Sir Nicholas give you his Niece.

SAPPHIC. Yes, I fancy this stanza will make the Girl mine.

MORLEY. What Poet can wish for a prize more divine?
I give you much joy on your conquest, my Friend;
Yet the eyes of regret on your nuptials I bend,
And grieve in reflecting, that conjugal joy
Your poetical harvest of Fame must destroy.

SAPPHIC. What the deuce do you mean?

MORLEY. To those great works adieu
Which the world now expects with impatience from you.
The Poet when blessed can no more be sublime,
And a chill matrimonial must strike through his rhyme.

SAPPHIC. You're mistaken, dear Doctor -- connubial delight
Will give a new zest to each poem I write;
And you will see such productions! --

MORLEY. It Is true, now and then
Polemics by marriage have quickened their pen.
A Dutch Critic, I know, by the aid of his Wife,
Made a book and a child every year of his life.
But total seclusion from Venus and Bacchus,
Is, you know, to the Bard recommended by Flaccus.
A grand epic poem I hear you are writing;
It Is a work that your country will take great delight in:
But consider, my Friend, when you're deep in heroics,
As Poets have not all the patience of Stoics,
How you will grieve to be checked in the flow of your verse,
By a young squalling child and an old fcolding nurse;
Even the qualms of your Lady may drive from your brain
Fine thoughts that you never can recover again;
Reflect how you will feel, with such hopes of succeeding,
If your Muse should miscarry because your Wife's breeding.

SAPPHIC. Egad, in that case I should think my fate hard.

MORLEY. I myself have beheld an unfortunate Bard,
Who his nails for a rhyme unsuccessfully bit,
When family cares had extinguished his wit. --
With many who sing in the Muse's full choir,
It would do them no mischief to muffle their lyre;
But for you, whom the Nine, with a tender presage,
Are prepared to proclaim the first Bard of our age;
For you, who of Taste are the favorite theme --

SAPPHIC. Yes, I think I stand high in the publie esteem.

MORLEY. For you, I should grieve if domestic delight
On your fair rising laurels should fall as a blight.
It Is the pride of great minds, whom the Muses inflame,
To sacrifice joy on the altar of Fame:
Your passion's renown -- of this Girl are you fonder? --
On this delicate point I must leave you to ponder;
Consider it, while I attend the old Knight.
[Exit.
SAPPHIC alone (after a pause.) By Jove, I believe my friend Morley is right.
Thou, Fame, art my Mistress; to win thee I sing.
This Girl, though she is handsome, is but a dull thing.
It Is clear, whensoe'er I a poem rehearse,
That she has no relish for elegant verse. --
Her fortune indeed would be rather convenient,
But the glorious, to me, is before the expedient.
Egad, I Would quit Venus herself, if I knew
That the system of Morley was certainly true.
I don't think the Girl to Decisive inclined;
But here comes her Maid, who may tell me her mind.
Enter Jenny. My good little Jenny, you're trusty and true,
And your Mistress, I know, tells her secrets to you.
What you know, to a friend you may safely impart,
And give me a perfect account of her heart:
Pray how do I stand in your Lady's regard?

JENNY. Now Is my time to be even with this saucy Bard. ( aside.)
To be sure, Sir, the taste of my Lady is odd;
But poetry moves her no more than a clod.

SAPPHIC. What! no relish for rhyme! -- Does she never repeat
The soft little sonnets I Have laid at her feet?

JENNY. Ah, Sir! would my Mistress were once of my mind,
(For I read all the verses of yours that I find);
But my Lady's so cruel she thwarts my desire,
And to hide them from me throws them into the fire.

SAPPHIC. She Is a fool -- she is a fool (aside.) -- I should have a fine life,
With such a prosaic dull jade of a wife.

JENNY. But, my good Sir, I hope you will not be dejected,
I could tell you by whom all your wit is respected.
There Is a heart upon which you have made such impression --
But I must not betray her by my indiscretion.

SAPPHIC. Whom do you mean, my good Jenny? come, tell me, my dear.

JENNY. You would make a bad use of the secret, I fear. --
Now I hope I shall lead the Bard into a scrape, (aside.)
For he bites like a Gudgeon, and cannot escape.

SAPPHIC. Come, say who is in love with me -- if she is fair,
I Will not leave the dear creature, I vow, to despair.

JENNY. O lud! I protest she is coming this way;
But I did not intend her regard to betray.
I must fly -- but I beg that you will not be too free.
[Exit.
SAPPHIC. Madam Felix! -- I thought she was partial to me.

Enter Mrs. Felix. MRS. FELIX. May I enter without incommoding the Muse?

SAPPHIC. By a question like this your own charms you abuse.
Those eyes, my dear Madam, were formed, I profess,
To inspirit a Poet, and not to depress;
From your presence he surely must catch inspiration.

MRS. FELIX. A very poetical fine salutation!
But I seriously beg, if you're busy with rhyme,
That you will not allow me to take up your time.
As I Am not Selina, you're free from restriction,
And may tell me plain truths, unembellish'd with fiction.

SAPPHIC. Then I swear, my dear creature, I swear by this hand,
That I feel as I touch it my genius expand;
That your lips -- O by Jove! he is a madman or booby,
Who roves to the Indies for diamond or ruby;
And each vein in my heart his strange folly condemns,
Who leaves these more bright and more exquisite gems.
Sweet Fair! let me keep, while their richness I praise,
The cold damp of neglect from o'erclouding their rays.

(While Mr. Sapphic kisses Mrs. Felix with great vehemence, Jenny enters
unperceived.) JENNY. O ho! -- have I caught you? impertinent Poet!
This is more than I hoped for -- my Master shall know it.
[Exit.
MRS. FELIX. Good God! Mr. Sapphic, what frantic illusion
Has produced this ridiculous scene of confusion?
All Poets are Quixotes in love, I am told;
And the truth of the adage in you I behold.
As the Knight once mistook an old mill for a giant,
Your sense as disordered, your fancy as pliant,
Takes me for my Cousin -- your love's ebullition
I only can pardon on this supposition.
I fain would suppose that no insult was meant,
Nor believe you could think, what I ought to resent.

SAPPHIC. O! talk not of anger, with lips that inspire
The strongest sensation of rapturous fire,
That with love's sweet convulsions shake every nerve:
O! think not that I your resentment deserve;
Because my warm heart, thus engrossed by your charms,
Is ambitious of filling these dear empty arms.
No, let me, while basking beneath your bright eye,
The place of a thankless deserter supply;
And in this melting breast kindle ecstacy's flame,
Which Nature designed for so glowing a frame.

MRS. FELIX. Away, Sir! -- and since in your fondling insanity
You reject the excuse which I formed for your vanity,
My threats must inform you --

SAPPHIC. O! frown not, sweet creature;
Let not wrath spoil the charm of thy every feature.

MRS. FELIX. Regain you your sense -- from my wrath you are free,
Which should not be raised by a being like thee;
Begone then! -- my pardon in vain you will implore,
If you dare on this subject to breathe a word more.

SAPPHIC. Words, indeed, my warm fair one, by Nature's confession,
For the love that I feel are no proper expression;
The soul's fond intent in soft murmurs should swell,
And kisses explain what no language can tell.
Ye Gods, how luxuriant!

MRS. FELIX. Away! quit my arm!
Or my cries in an instant the house shall alarm.

SAPPHIC. Provoking sweet creature! -- indulge my fond passion;
Come, come, don't I know you're a woman of fashion?
Your coyness, I Have heard, you can sometimes give over;
And I Am sure you're too wise to be true to a rover.
Besides, I have learnt, that with partial regard
You have cast a kind eye on your ill-treated Bard.

MRS. FELIX. Away! thou vain coxcomb! nor, base as thou art,
Insult the bright Lord of so loyal a heart;
Begone! -- I abhor thee -- my person release! --

SIR NICHOLAS, entering. Is it thus, my young Sir, you pay court to my Niece?

SAPPHIC. Confusion! What devil has sent the old Knight?

SIR NICHOLAS. How dare you, pert stripling, almost in my sight
To insult a chaste female that is under my roof? --
But since of your baseness you give me such proof,
You shall feel it repaid by a proper correction.

SAPPHIC (aside.) Deuce take this perverse and unlucky detection:
I wish I had wisely, as Morley had taught me,
Renounced that jade Venus before he thus caught me.
What excuse can I make him? -- (To Sir Nicholas) My dear worthy Sir,
Though I now seem most justly your wrath to incur,
Yet as you grow cool, your opinion will vary,
You will not resent such an idle vagary,
A mere romping frolic --

SIR NICHOLAS. A frolic, do you say!
Then a frolic of mine shall your frolic repay. --
Call our servants to punish this frolicsome spark,
They shall drag him across the new pond in the park.

SAPPHIC (aside.) It Is what he cannot mean -- yet his countenance such is,
I wish from my soul I was out of his clutches. --
(To Sir Nicholas.) Dear Sir, I assure you, I Am grieved beyond measure
That I thus have awakened your furious displeasure;
When calmer --

SIR NICHOLAS. Young man, I am not in a fury,
A sentence more just never came from a jury;
Such frolics as yours have Old England disgraced:
In high life let them flourish as fashion and taste.
To those wanton young fellows I am not severe,
Who attack the loose Wife of a vain gambling Peer.
My Lady, whose Lord wastes at Hazard the night,
May plead to more generous pleasures some right;
I care not how each keeps their conjugal oath,
Since honor and peace must be strangers to both.
But when a brave Soldier, pure Glory's true son,
Ennobled with laurels laboriously won;
When risking in far distant climates his life,
To his Country he leaves a fair innocent Wife;
Accursed be the man, who, to friendship unjust,
Fails to guard as his soul this most delicate trust;
Or to punish those fops who insult her chaste beauty,
And invite her to swerve from her honor and duty.
Of the doom that I think to such libertines due,
I will give to the world an example in you.
Our old English discipline, Ducking, by name,
Shall atone for your outrage, by quenching your flame.
Here! William and John --

MRS. FELIX. For my sake, I entreat
That you will not, dear Sir, this rough vengeance complete.

SIR NICHOLAS. By Jupiter, Cousin, to make him less fond,
He shall croak out his love to the frogs of our pond. --
Here, William! tell Jack after Stephen to skip,
And tell the old Huntsman to come with his whip,
Then wait all together around the hall door.

SAPPHIC. O mercy, dear Sir! I your mercy implore.
You will not destroy me?

SIR NICHOLAS. No, only correct,
And teach you a brave Soldier's Wife to respect.

MRS. FELIX. Yet think, my dear Cousin, yet think, for my sake,
What a noise this ridiculous matter will make.
You know that my Felix's nature is such,
He don't wish his Wife to be talked of too much;
His honor and quiet let us make our care,
And bury in silence this foolish affair:
Perhaps, in my manners too easy and gay,
My levity led the young Poet astray.

SIR NICHOLAS. No, no I my good creature, you must not arraign
Your innocent self in a business so plain:
Besides, his offense by this plea cannot sink,
For they are the worst of all puppies that think
Each woman's a wanton who is not precise,
And that cheerfulness must be the herald of vice.

MRS. FELIX. However this may be -- as he is now all repentance,
I earnestly beg a repeal of your sentence.

SAPPHIC. Dear Ma'am I adore you for this intercession;
And I trust the good Knight will forgive my transgression.

SIR NICHOLAS. Well, Sir, as beyond your desert you're befriended
By that virtue which you have so grossly offended,
You are free to depart; but remember, young swain,
That you never touch the Wife of a Soldier again.

SAPPHIC. If I do, may I die by the wind of a ball!
Heaven bless you, good folks, and this sociable hall!
Since my amorous folly your friendship thus loses,
My amors shall henceforth be confined to the Muses.
[Exit.
MRS. FELIX. I thank you, dear Sir, and rejoice in my heart
That in safety you have suffered this youth to depart.

SIR NICHOLAS. By Jupiter, Coz, I had cooled your warm Poet,
Had I not been afraid all our neighbors might know it,
And make you the subject of such conversation
As I think your nice Colonel would hear with vexation.
Then, since for your sake I have let the Bard go,
Come and aid me to settle all matters below:
That my anxious cares in her comfort may cease,
I Am resolved young Decisive shall marry my Niece.

End of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. Felix and Selina. MRS. FELIX. WELL, my dear, what do you think of our
medical friend,
Whom the letters of Felix so highly commend?
If my gratitude does not my judgment mislead,
He Is the man in the world who with you might succeed:
Though gentle, yet manly, though bashful, polite.
Are you not half in love? --

SELINA. Yes, indeed, at first sight! --
His service to you on my heart is engraved,
And I love him, I own, for the life he has saved.
To win me perhaps he might not find it hard,
So esteemed as he is by the friends I regard;
But I fancy such thoughts will not enter his brain:
And for my part, instead of attracting a swain,
I only shall think, as they heartily vex me,
Of escaping from those who already perplex me.

MRS. FELIX. O make yourself easy, I pray, on that head;
In the deepest disgrace the poor Poet is fled,
And I trust that the Critic will soon share his fate.
Come with me -- I Have a most curious tale to relate.
Let us haste -- I perceive that Decisive is near,
In whose present discourse I would not interfere.
[Exeunt.
Enter Decisive and Morley. DECISIVE. So while in the grove I was cooly
projecting
New plans for the temple the Knight is erecting,
Our Poet, addicted to amorous sin,
Grew a little too fond of the Ladies within:
But discovery happened his passion to damp;
And this is the cause of his haste to decamp.

MORLEY. The old Knight, I believe, such resentment expressed
As quickened the speed of his fugitive guest;
On Terror's swift wing he is certainly flown,
And as he has retreated, the field is your own.

DECISIVE. As a rival I had not much fear of poor Sapphic;
Bad rhyme's current coin in most amorous traffic,
But would not pass here.

MORLEY. I think not in your view,
As it finds such a critical touchstone in you.
The Poet's dismission your triumph ensures,
And the prize, my good friend, is now certainly yours;
A prize, that we justly may call very great,
A lovely sweet girl with a noble estate.

DECISIVE. The girl's very well, but knows nothing of life;
It will cost me some pains to new model my Wife;
But I think she will gladly receive my correction,
And my wealthy old kinsman approves the connection. (Coughs.)

MORLEY. You Have a cough, my good friend.

DECISIVE. Yes, a trifling one: Hem!
Have you got any Indian prescription for phlegm?

MORLEY. Believe me, that cough is no trifling affair;
It calls, I assure you, for caution and care.
With regret I point out so unpleasant a truth,
But your constitution I Have known from your youth;
Your hectic appearance I see with concern,
As I know, with your frame, if health takes such a turn,
The least indiscretion your life may destroy.
The slightest excess in diversion and joy;
Even those tender cares, which on life's purest plan
Must belong to the state of a Family Man,
May lead to disease from which art cannot save,
And rapidly hurry you into the grave.
'Twere better this courtship of yours should miscarry,
For you will certainly die in six months if you marry.

DECISIVE. Are you serious, dear Doctor?

MORLEY. By such a sad end
I lately have lost a poor good-humored friend.
You remember Jack Dangle at College, no doubt;
He was just of your age, and a little more stout;
He, with other young sages, left Westminster Hall
To teach English law to the slaves of Bengal.
But Jack, in his new chamber-practice at least,
Too eagerly followed the rules of the East.
A bad cough ensued, much like yours in its sound -- (Decisive coughs.)
Good God! I could swear 'twas poor Jack under ground,
It Is his tone so exactly, sepulchral and hollow!
The system he slighted I hope you will follow.
With pains in his breast he was sharply tormented;
But as he at first to my guidance consented,
Some time my strict regimen kept him alive,
Poor Dangle once more was beginning to thrive;
And had he some months in my plan persever'd,
On the earth at this moment he might have appeared;
But chance threw a pretty white girl in his way,
And eager for marriage, fond Jack would not stay:
In vain I conjured him to wait half a year,
And showed him the danger he ran very clear.
He thought the remains of his cough but a trifle,
And, being unable his passion to stifle,
He took his fair wife; -- but, alas! the vile cough
Increased every day till it carried him off!

DECISIVE. I don't recollect any pain in my breast,
But I feel a strange tightness just now in my chest.

MORLEY. How Is your stomach?

DECISIVE. I Have nothing to fear on that score.

MORLEY. Do you eat as you did?

DECISIVE. Yes, I think rather more.

MORLEY. That ravenous hunger's the thing that I dread.
How do you sleep?

DECISIVE. All the time that I pass in my bed.

MORLEY. Indeed! -- I don't like so lethargic a slumber.

DECISIVE. Why! my friend! of good symptoms these rank in the number.

MORLEY. Alas! you may call them all good if you please,
By that title you only confirm your disease,
In which, though the patient declines very fast,
He for ever will flatter himself to the last.
Believe me, your symptoms are rather alarming,
Yet your present disorder there is not much harm in,
If you can but abstain, with a spirit resigned,
From all that may harrass your body or mind.
To a different climate I wish you would repair,
And for one winter breathe a less changeable air.
Spend a Christmas at Naples, and when you return
You may marry without any anxious concern.
But you're now at that critical period of life
When, in such frames as yours, nature feels an odd strife,
And, if quiet does not all her functions befriend,
The short earthly scene on a sudden will end.
On a point so important you will pardon my freedom.

DECISIVE. Your cautions oblige me, I feel that I need 'em,
For in truth I am growing as thin as a rabbit,
And there is something consumptive I know in my habit.
My father died soon after taking a wife,
And cough'd out his soul when I jumped into life:
I suppose I am going.

MORLEY. Take courage, my friend;
On your own prudent conduct your life will depend.
If you take but due care for two years, I Will engage
You will stand a fair chance for a healthy old age.
Nor would I advise you this girl to refuse,
A distant attachment your mind will amuse;
And, no doubt, for a man of your fortune and figure
She will wait till your health has recovered its vigor.

DECISIVE. I can part with the girl without feeling a chasm
In my heart; that will shake with no amorous spasm;
For, to tell you the truth, my old rich Uncle Cob
Is more eager than I for this marrying job.
By this scheme the old blade is supremely delighted,
Because two large manors may thus be united:
But when of his park I Have extended the bound,
It will do me small good if I sink under ground;
And I Am not such a fool, in these projects of pelf,
To humor my friends and endanger myself.

MORLEY. Indeed I Would not wed for an old Uncle's whim; --
But here comes our Knight, I shall leave you with him,
As I think you have some delicate points to adjust.
[Exit.
DECISIVE, alone. I Am in no haste to sleep with my Ancestors' dust.
It Is wiser my weak constitution to save,
Than to marry, and so travel post to the grave.

Enter Sir Nicholas. SIR NICHOLAS. Come, give me your hand, and rejoice, my
young neighbor,
You're the man that is to order the pipe and the tabor;
And by Jove we'll all dance on so joyous a day:
Your wedding, dear Dick, shall be speedy and gay;
For your rival is gone with our serious displeasure,
And I give to your wishes my young lovely treasure.
A treasure she is, though the girl is my niece;
Heaven grant ye long years of affection and peace!
And a fine chopping boy ere the end of the first --
Remember that I am to see the rogue nursed.
Go, you happy young dog, go and seal with a kiss,
And teach the old hall to re-echoe your bliss.
As I know on this match what Sir Jacob intends,
And we can so well trust each other as friends,
Short contracts will answer as well as the best,
Our lawyers at leisure may finish the rest.
I know all suspense in such cases is hard,
And you shall not, I swear, from your bliss be debarred,
While over acres of parchment they are crawling like snails.

DECISIVE. Dear Sir, upon weighing in Reason's just scales
Your very great favors, and my weak pretension,
I find I Am unworthy of such condescension,
And must, with regret, the high honor resign,
Which I once vainly thought might with justice be mine.

SIR NICHOLAS. Hey-day! what does all this formality mean?
Why, Dick! has the Devil possessed you with spleen?
Or has love made your mind thus with diffidence sore?
False modesty never was your foible before.
You think you're unworthy! -- the thought is so new,
That I hardly can tell what to say or to do.
If you love the good girl full as much as you said,
I think you have very just claims to her bed;
But if your mind's changed, and you feel your love lighter,
It Is better to say so, than marry and slight her:
And if this be the case, Sir, you have your release;
For although I am eager to marry my Niece,
Though I Am partial to you, yet I beg you to note,
That I don't want to cram her down any man's throat.

DECISIVE. I Am truly convinced of the Lady's perfection,
And 'twould please me, dear Sir, to preserve the connection,
Though now, by particular reasons, I Am led
To revisit the Continent once ere I wed.
In the time of my absence I cannot be exact;
But in what form you please I will freely contract,
In the course of two years to receive as my Wife --

SIR NICHOLAS. Do you mean to insult me, you puppy? Od's-life!
Ere I Would tie my dear girl to so silly a fop
For life, I Would condemn her to trundle a mop.
And let me advise you, young man, for the future,
To know your own mind ere you go as a suitor.

DECISIVE. I perceive, Sir, my presence grows irksome to you,
And you will therefore allow me to bid you adieu.

SIR NICHOLAS. Your departure, indeed, I don't wish to restrain,
And have little concern when I see you again.
[ Exit Decisive.
SIR NICHOLAS alone. What can make this pert puppy recede from his suit?
My fair Cousin and he have scarce had a dispute;
She would hardly affront him on purpose to vex me! --
Here she comes to explain all the points that perplex me.
Enter Mrs. Felix. Well, Cousin, my scheme for a wedding's suspended,
The Beaux are both gone, and their courtship is ended;
With an air so mysterious Decisive withdraws,
I a little suspect you're concerned as the cause:
Confess, have you had any words with this Youth?

MRS. FELIX. Not I, my dear Sir, on my honor and truth.
But I Am ready to own, that the news you impart
With surprise and with pleasure enlivens my heart.
I think your sweet Niece has a lucky escape:
I would almost as soon see her marry an ape
As her union with one of these coxcombs behold;
The Bard is too warm, and the Critic too cold.

SIR NICHOLAS. I find that they are not such lads as I thought 'em;
The world all the worst of its fashions has taught 'em:
And the world is indeed at a very fine pass,
When such puppies insult so attractive a lass.
Young fellows of fortune now think it hard duty
To pay a chaste homage to Virtue and Beauty.
But I Will leave these pert sops to their own vile caprice,
And soon find a much fitter match for my Niece.
Other orders of men for a husband I Will search,
And I think I can settle my girl in the Church.

MRS. FELIX. Lord, Cousin! I thought you detested the Cloth!

SIR NICHOLAS. Our Rector, I own, often kindles my wrath;
But all Parsons are not like my neighbor, old Squabble,
Who has learnt from his geese both to hiss and to gobble.
We have in our neighborhood three young Divines,
And each, I believe, to Selina inclines.
Our Bishop's smart nephew deserves a sweet wench,
He himself in due time may be raised to the Bench;
With him I should like very well to unite her;
And if he hereafter should rise to the Mitre,
Then perhaps we together may bring to perfection
A much-wanted plan for the Church's correction.

MRS. FELIX. A very fine scheme, which you will manage, no doubt!

SIR NICHOLAS. More wonderful things I have known brought about;
And though my first plan, as you see, has miscarried,
I Am resolved that my Niece shall be speedily married.
I Will unite the good girl to a Priest, if I Am able;
For the young Olive Branch never fails at his table.
There is one I prefer -- but to leave the girl free,
I allow her to make a fair choice of the three:
I shall therefore invite the whole group to the hall,
And I Will now go and make her write cards to them all.
[Exit.
MRS. FELIX alone. What a wonderful creature is this worthy Knight!
To make others happy is all his delight!
Yet, misled by some wild philanthropic illusion,
He Is for ever involved in odd scenes of confusion.
It Is well that our Critic has made his last bow,
I rejoice he is removed, and I long to know how.

Enter Morley. MORLEY. Thank my stars, my dear Ma'am, I Have dispatched your
commission;
Your sweet friend is, I hope, in a tranquil condition:
From her two irksome lovers she now is relieved.

MRS. FELIX. And I Am dying to know how all this was achieved.
Come tell me, good creature, how could you effect it?

MORLEY. By a project so simple you would never suspect it:
I have banished both swains, by declaring a wife
Would rob one of glory, and the other of life.
I persuaded the Bard his poetical fame
Could never exist with a conjugal flame:
Hence he grew with your charms so licentiously free,
But forgive me this ill, which I could not foresee.
Decisive, more wisely, abandons the Fair
To make his own lungs his particular care.

MRS. FELIX. What! on such points as these have they taken your word?

MORLEY. Dear Madam! mankind credit things most absurd,
When they come from the mouth of a medical man;
Hence Mountebanks never want skill to trepan.
The extent of our empire indeed there is no seeing,
When we act on the fears of a true selfish being.

MRS. FELIX. How simple soever the means you have employed,
You have remedied ills by which we were annoyed.
Having thus cleared the scene from each troublesome lover,
Can you not for the nymph a fit husband discover?
You see how she is pressed by her Uncle to wed,
Who never quits a scheme he once takes in his head. --
Suppose her kind fancy should lean toward you,
Is your heart quite as free as I Am sure 'twould be true?
Is it not pre-engag'd?

MORLEY. As in mirth's sportive sally
It pleases you thus a poor pilgrim to rally,
Your goodnature, I know, will forgive me if I
To your pleasantry make a too serious reply.
It Is my maxim to speak, whatsoever be the theme,
With a heart undisguis'd, to the friends I esteem:
Had I all India's wealth, 'twould be my inclination
To offer it all to your lovely relation.
But supposing it possible you could be willing
To unite her with one who is scarce worth a shilling;
Believe me, dear Madam, my pride is too great
To wish her to stoop to my humble estate.

MRS. FELIX. Such pride, though it rests upon no strong foundation,
Is noble, I own, and deserves admiration.
I call it ill-founded, because, in my mind,
If there is fortune enough for a couple when joined,
If talents and worth are by each duly shared,
If in all other points they are equally paired,
And mutual regard mutual merit enhances,
It signifies not which supplied their finances.

MORLEY. Your pardon -- how often, when fortune's unequal,
Gay weddings produce a most turbulent sequel?
But could I once hope your sweet Cousin to gain,
How many things are there such hopes to restrain?
Suppose your dear Colonel, my most noble friend,
Whom success to your arms may more speedily send!
Suppose, having closed the bright work he has plan'd,
His return from the East he should hasten by land;
Suppose him arrived, with what face could I meet
The man whom my heart should exultingly greet,
If he found me attempting, in spite of my station,
To wed, though a beggar, your wealthy relation?

MRS. FELIX. From these words, my dear friend, which I almost adore,
And a few slighter hints that escaped you before,
I have caught a quick hope, which is fraught with delight,
That I soon shall be blessed with my Felix's sight:
I begin to suspect he is in England already;
I perceive that you cannot keep your countenance steady.
With his usual attention his love has reflected
How my poor foolish nerves by surprise are affected;
And, lest they should fail me beyond all revival,
Has sent you to prepare for his wished for arrival.
Am I right in my guess? Is he not very near?
Could I trust my own heart, I should think Felix here.

COLONEL FELIX, entering. Sweet foreboder, behold him restored to your arms.

MRS. FELIX. O my Felix! this transport o'erpays all alarms,
Thus to see thee restored, and ennobled with fame!
In what words shall affection thy welcome proclaim?

COLONEL. My Love! my best Treasure! than glory more dear!
The bliss of this meeting, which shines in thy tear,
That we owe to this friend let us never forget.

MORLEY. My share in your transport o'erpays all the debt. --
But, Colonel, your fondness has traveled full speed,
And has not allowed me the time you agreed.

COLONEL. I meant not, indeed, to have joined you today,
But I found love forbade my intended delay.

MORLEY. Well, my duty is done, now you happily meet;
Heaven bless you together --

MRS. FELIX. Stay, stay, I entreat;
You must not go yet; and before you depart
I will open to Felix the scheme of my heart.

SELINA (behind the scene.) Indeed, Sir, I never can write such a card.

SIR NICHOLAS (behind the scene.) Then you will forfeit at once my paternal
regard!

COLONEL. Hey-day! in the house I much fear something's wrong,
As Sir Nicholas talks in a language so strong.

MRS. FELIX. Does he know you are here?

COLONEL. No, my dear, I think not,
Unless he the tidings from Jenny has got;
She alone saw me come, and without much ado
Most kindly directed me where to find you.

MRS. FELIX. They are coming this way -- let us withdraw all together,
And contrive how to turn this loud storm to fair weather.
[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Nicholas and Selina. SIR NICHOLAS. I insist on your writing such
cards to them all!

SELINA. Dear Uncle, I beg you will this order recall.
You know your commands I much wish to obey;
But reflect on this matter what people will say:
You're so eager to marry your Niece, they will swear
That you hawk her about just like goods at a fair.

SIR NICHOLAS. Well, my dear, let 'em say so, and I Will say so too,
For your simile proves what a guardian should do.
He who wants to dispose of a tender young maid,
May take a good hint from the gingerbread trade:
If he has any sense, 'twill be ever his plan
To part with soft pastry as soon as he can;
For egad an old maid is like old hardened paste,
You may cry it about, but nobody will taste.
Come, do as I bid you, and take up your pen.

SELINA. Lord, Sir! it will seem very odd to these men;
You will make me appear in a horrible light;
I vow my hand shakes so, I never can write.
Excuse me, dear Sir, from this business, pray do,
And let me live single for ever with you.

SIR NICHOLAS. All business where woman's concerned, I believe,
Must partake of the curse from our grandmother Eve.
All her daughters the steps of their parent have followed!
Contradiction, the core of the apple she swallowed,
In their veins still fermenting new ills can produce,
And all their blood seems coloquintida juice. --
You froward cross baggage! your word should I take,
And bid you live single five years for my sake,
Of the barbarous Uncle you would quickly complain,
Who from nature's just right a young girl would restrain!

SELINA. Indeed, Sir, I should not.

SIR NICHOLAS. I tell you you would.
From perverseness alone you oppose your own good.
It Is only to thwart me, because I desire
To see you well settled before I expire,
That you now, with your soft hypocritical carriage,
Affect to have no inclination to marriage.
But you will never contrive, though your tongue may be nimble,
To convince me your heart is as cold as your thimble.
I know of what stuff froward damsels are made;
The guardian must force you, who cannot persuade.
That you will like a good husband, I never can doubt;
And married you shall be before the month's out,
Or at least your kind Uncle no more you shall teaze,
But may even go to Rome and turn nun if you please.

SELINA (aside.) I have lost all the love he has shown me for years;
If I strive to reply I shall burst into tears.

SIR NICHOLAS. Come, answer me, Miss! will you scribble or not?

Enter the Colonel, Mrs. Felix, and Morley. COLONEL. My worthy old friend, what
can make you so hot?

SIR NICHOLAS. Ha, Colonel! -- you find me a little concerned --
But I Am heartily glad you are safely returned.
Your arrival indeed is a welcome surprise,
Though before you your fame a bright harbinger flies;
We have heard your success, and we all triumph in it.

COLONEL. I trust I am come in a fortunate minute
To make all your present embarrassment cease,
For I bring a young husband, my friend, for your Niece.

SIR NICHOLAS. Egad, that is well said; and I Am sure it is well meant;
And if he is like you he shall have my consent.

COLONEL. He has many more virtues, and just as much wealth,
And from India brings home both his morals and health.
Here, my friend, is the man. -- As I owe him my life,
I wish to present him so lovely a wife;
Half my fortune is his -- here I freely declare it,
And have only to hope that Selina my share it.
I Have regarded her long as a child of my own;
Nor can my affection more truly be shown,
Than by wishing to place the dear girl in the arms
Of the friend whose rare virtues are worthy her charms.

MORLEY. Dear generous Felix, I Am quite overcome,
Thy bounty is such, it strikes gratitude dumb!

COLONEl. This was ever, my friend, my most settled intention,
Though my very just purpose I chose not to mention,
From the hope I should find, what I gladly embrace,
A moment from which it may borrow some grace,
When my gift its plain value may rise far above,
By the aid it affords to the wishes of love;
And I own, as a prophet I Am proud of my art,
Now I see the effects of her charms on your heart.

MORLEY, O Felix! can I thus deprive thy free spirit
Of wealth, the reward of heroical merit?
Can I the victorious Commander despoil
Of what he has purchased with danger and toil?
Should love and delight on thy present attend,
I could never be happy in robbing a friend.
No, I still must decline --

SIR NICHOLAS. My dear boy, say no more;
You're the match that I never could meet with before.
I have long sought in vain for an heir to my mind,
But all my soul wished, in your spirit I find.
You shall not rob your friend of a single An Indian Coin.
Gold Moor,
He can raise heirs enough to inherit his store:
To such men as himself let him haste to give birth,
And with twenty young Felix's garnish the earth.
How trifling soever your fortune may be,
From the Colonel's esteem, and the virtues I see,
I think you as noble a match for my Niece,
As I could, had you brought home a new golden fleece:
I have money enough, if you're rich in affection. --
As I always have talked of an equal connection,
My neighbors, perhaps, may suppose my sight dim,
Or mock my wise choice as a generous whim:
Let them study with zeal, which I hope may succeed,
Of their horses and dogs to improve the best breed;
A study more noble engrosses my mind,
To preserve the first points in the breed of mankind:
On the heart and the soul, as the first points, I dwell,
In these, my dear Children, you match mighty well;
And I think human nature in debt to my care,
For uniting two mortals who happily pair.

COLONEL. Your hand, my dear Knight, it is gloriously said!

SIR NICHOLAS. By Juno, we'll put the young Couple to bed!
We'll have no dull delays. --

MRS. FELIX. Now what say you, my dear,
Are these orders for marriage too quick and severe?

MORLEY. My amazement and gratitude both are extreme,
But my voice seems oppressed in a heavenly dream;
Though your kindness is greater than language can paint,
I beg this fair hand may be free from constraint.

SIR NICHOLAS. From constraint! -- Gad, if now she affects to demur,
I can tell her my wrath she will so far incur,
She shall go to a convent for life, or at least
Be sent as a venture herself to the East.

SELINA. My Uncle I long have obeyed, and at present
I cannot complain his commands are unpleasant:
Nay more; could he place all mankind in my view,
And bid me choose from them, my choice would be you.

MORLEY. To this dear declaration my life must reply,
All words are too weak --

SIR NICHOLAS. The whole earth I defy,
To show me a scene more delightful than this;
Dear honest frank Girl, come and give me a kiss;
You Are the creature of Nature much more than of Art,
And I own thee again as the Child of my heart.

JONATHAN, entering and speaking to the Colonel. There are two chests for you,
Sir, just come to the hall.

COLONEL. A few Indian things for the Ladies -- that is all.
Pray, Jonathan, pay those who brought them with this. (giving money.)

MORLEY. My brave lad must share in our general bliss.
Here, Jonathan, if you're to marriage inclined,
And can luckily meet with a girl to your mind,
You may marry and settle, as soon as you please;
The Colonel has taken good care of your ease.

JONATHAN. God bless him, whatever he is pleased to bestow!
I think I have found a kind sweetheart below.

MRS. FELIX. He has made choice of Jenny; -- and I will provide
A fortune, my Friend, for your good-humored Bride.

SIR NICHOLAS. Egad, they shall have my new farm on the hill,
And raise young recruits there as fast as they will.

JONATHAN. Heaven prosper you all! I will pray for you ever,
And to serve my King still, as I can, I Will endeavor.
[Exit.
SIR NICHOLAS. Well said, honest Soldier; -- we'll have no delay,
Go and tell the old Parson to keep in the way.

COLONEL. Come with me, fair Cousin, examine my chests;
I long to present you a few bridal vests.

MRS. FELIX, to Morley. As we view with delight the events of today,
A fair lesson, my Friend, in your fate we survey;
While, from love to an aged fond parent, with speed
From wealth's open road you most kindly recede,
Heaven sends you that fortune you nobly have slighted,
And your warm filial piety here is requited;
This bright moral truth by your lot is expressed,
They who seek others' bliss, are by Providence blessed.

SIR NICHOLAS, to Morley. Here, my worthy young Friend, take and cherish this
Fair,
And, trust me, you will find her deserving your care;
For although of her sex she may have a small spice,
She Will please you ten times where she vexes you twice;
And happy the man, in this skirmishing life,
Who is able to say half as much of his Wife.

END OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.

