A REVIEW OF DOCTOR JOHNSON'S NEW EDITION OF SHAKESPEARE: IN WHICH THE
IGNORANCE, OR INATTENTION, OF THAT EDITOR IS EXPOSED, AND THE POET DEFENDED
FROM THE PERSECUTION OF HIS COMMENTATORS.

By W. KENRICK.

LONDON: Printed for J. PAIN, at the Feathers, in Paternoster Row.

M DCC LXV.

PREFACE.
EVERY act, says goodman Delver, has three branches: 'It is to act, to do, and
to perform Hamlet.
.' -- Contemptible as this piece of casuistry may be deemed; certain it is,
that our honest grave-digger was not mistaken in the number of those
distinctions, which are necessary to the investigation of moral merit. He was
not so happy, indeed, in his specification of the parts to be distinguished.
His logic, however, may pass, if we conceive the first part of his division to
comprehend the design or intent of the act; the second the manner of putting it
in execution; and the third, the effects or consequences produced by it.

Thus, in apologizing for the present Review, there are three things to be
considered. 1. The design or intent of writing it. 2. The manner in which it is
written; and lastly, the probable effects or consequences that will ensue.

In respect to the former; the Reviewer begs leave to express his motives for
writing in the words of an ingenious author, who stood exactly in the same
predicament. I thought it a piece of justice due to the memory of Shakespeare,
to the reputation of letters in general, and of our English language in
particular, to take some public notice of a performance, which, I am sorry to
say, has violated all these respects. Had this been done by a common hand, I
had held my peace; and left the work to that oblivion, which it deserves: but
when it came out under the sanction of a great name, that of a gentleman, who
had by other writings, how justly I shall not [ now] examine, obtained a great
reputation for learning; it became an affair of some consequence; as chimerical
conjectures and gross mistakes might by these means be propagated for truth
among the ignorant and unwary; and that be established for the genuine text,
nay, the genuine text amended too, which is neither Shakespeare's nor English
See Appendix to the Canons of Criticism.
.

Such being the motives of action, the intent and design of the act is plainly
what is set forth in the title, viz. to defend the text of Shakespeare from the
persecution of his commentators.

The Reviewer is well aware that Dr. Johnson's selfsufficiency may suggest a
more sinister view. For, he doubts not, that gentleman thinks of himself, what
he has said of Dr. Warburton, that he has a name sufficient to confer celebrity
on those who can exalt themselves into antagonists; and hence he may possibly
impute the present work to the motive which he insinuates to have actuated the
opponents of that writer. The allusion, also, of the eagle and owl, which he
quotes from Macbeth, may, with a very little latitude of construction, be
applied as well to himself and the Reviewer, as to Dr. Warburton and his
antagonist.

'An Eagle, towering in his pride of place,

'Was, by a mousing owl, hawk'd at and killed See Dr. Johnson's preface to his
edition of Shakespeare.
.' For though, Dr. Johnson having neither preferment in the church, nor post in
the state, the word place may seem to want that strict propriety the critics
require; yet, if we reflect how nearly places and pensions are allied, there is
not one of Shakespeare's commentators who would make any scruple of
substituting one word for the other, reciprocally, and alternately, as he
thought the case might require. There is no doubt also that, on this occasion,
the word pension would be preferred; as a pension must be universally allowed,
caeteris paribus, to be better than a place, to a man so fond of doing but
little; as it is apprehended the reader will think is the case with Dr. Johnson.

To invalidate, however, the force of such a suggestion, the Reviewer is
reduced to the necessity of apparently boasting, that, in this respect, he does
not lie under the disadvantage of being exactly in the same situation with the
author of the Canons of Criticism; who frankly confesses, that it was the
first, as it was the only book he wrote in his life. Dr. Johnson indeed may, in
all probability, have never before heard the name of the present writer. He
has nevertheless some little literary reputation to lose; which he would not
unadvisedly or wantonly put to the hazard.

This long-expected edition of Shakespeare is not the first work, by many, that
he has reviewed, nor is this Review the only book he has written: For, though
the name of Dr. Johnson is much better known than the merit of his writings,
his Reviewer, on the contrary, has hitherto chosen rather to have the merit of
his writings known than his name. The publication of the one is of consequence
to the world, that of the other of none but to the writer; with whose personal
importance or insignificance the public have nothing to do In confirmation of
what is here asserted, it may possibly be thought necessary to name some of
those publications, on which the public have conferred the honor of a
favorable reception. -- It is presumed needless, however, to particularize
performances that would certainly have been less faulty, had they been less
numerous. The author contents himself, therefore, with mentioning only his
Epistles to Lorenzo; and the Translations of Rousseau's Eloisa, and Emilius.


.

With regard to the second division of our prefatory sermon, respecting the
manner in which this Review is written; the author can readily foresee, that he
shall be thought to have treated both Dr. Johnson and Dr. Warburton with an
ill-becoming levity, if not with unmerited severity: at least, this he
conceives will be the opinion of those, whom an innate consciousness of their
own weakness inspires with a timidity, which they miscall, and flatter
themselves to be, CANDOR. The Reviewer confesses indeed he should have been
glad to have had, on this occasion, less to do with the commentary of the
reverend gentleman last mentioned. And this, he has reason to think, would
have been the case, had not Dr. Johnson been prevailed on by his printer
prudentially to cancel several annotations, in which he had strongly expressed
his dissent from that learned scholiast. But having, on second thoughts, judged
it expedient to shelter himself, as it were, under the wing of the bishop of
Gloucester; it is hoped the justice due to Shakespeare will excuse the
Reviewer, though he should be sometimes obliged, in correcting his present
editor, to ruffle and expose an irreverend feather or two of the Bishop's.

That he may not be suspected, however, of attempting to injure either, from a
principle of spleen or resentment, he can safely aver, with regard to both,
what another of Dr. Warburton's antagonists has declared in respect to him
alone; i. e. That he is personally a stranger to either of these gentlemen;
never conversed with them; never saw them [ but once]; never had the least
communication with them of any kind; never has received or solicited any
favor from either; nor, on the other hand, has been ever personally
disobliged by them; so that it is impossible this proceeding can have been
influenced either by disappointment or resentment. The truth is, that the
Reviewer has always understood it to be an established law in the republic of
letters, wisely calculated to restrain the excesses of insult, petulance and
ill nature, too apt to shoot up in the splenetic recesses of solitary
literature, that every writer should be treated on the same foot of civility,
on which, when unprovoked by prior ill usage, he has been accustomed to treat
others See the preface to the Revisal of Shakespeare's text.
. Now, whether he he has treated either of these gentlemen worse than they
have treated Shakespeare, he dares appeal to the impartiality of the public;
which, at whatever low estimation it may rate an obscure author, who has never
set his name to a book; it will hardly think there can be a greater difference
between him and this par nobile fratrum of commentators, than there is between
them and the inimitable writer on whose works they have so freely commented. If
the Reviewer has at any time, indeed, behaved toward these gentlemen with
little ceremony, it has been always when they deserved much less: for it is to
be observed, he had nothing to do with the political characters of either. He
did not think it necessary, therefore, to pay any deference to Dr. Johnson, as
his majesty's pensioner; nor to Dr. Warburton, as bishop of Gloucester. Their
literary character was all that concerned him; and even, viewing them in this
light, he had to respect them only as commentators on Shakespeare. --

Not that the Reviewer piques himself on being deficient in point of civility,
or would take upon himself to infringe the necessary forms of decency and
decorum. He admits, as Dr. Johnson observes, that respect is due to high place,
and tenderness for living reputation: but then he conceives that respect to be
limited both as to place and time; and cannot admit that any tenderness for the
Living gives us a right to trample inhumanly and sacrilegiously on the Dead.

Had the Bishop of Gloucester, when he entered on that right-reverend function,
made a public recantation of the errors of poetry, and formally renounced the
pomps and vanities of verbal criticism; not one of the heresies he maintained,
or the sins he committed in this kind, absurd and enormous as they were,
should, with the Reviewer's consent, have risen up in judgment against him; or
have been dragged from that oblivion, to which they seemed eternally consigned.
But if either Dr. Warburton, or his friends, presume on the influence of
lawnsleeves in the republic of letters, it is proper to inform them there are
neither Bishops, Priests nor Deacons in that community. The republic of letters
is a perfect democracy, where, all being equal, there is no respect of persons,
but every one has a right to speak the truth of another, to censure without
fear, and to commend without favor or affection. Nor is the literary community
of less dignity than the political. Popularity and influence, indeed, may be
obtained, for a while, by sinister means in both; but though birth and wealth
may confer eminence and power in the one, not the descent of an Alexander, nor
the riches of Croesus, confer prerogative or authority in the other.

In the primitive state of society, a superiority of intellectual abilities was
the foundation of all civil pre-eminence; and hence the scepter continued to be
swayed by superior wisdom through a succession of ages. The acquisitions of
science and learning were held among the ancients, in no less esteem than those
of conquest, and in as much greater than the possessions of royalty, as a
chaplet of laurel was preferred to a coronet of mere gems and gold. Xenophon
reaped more honor from his Cyropaedia, than from the famous retreat of the ten
thousand; and Caesar still more from his commentary, than from all the military
exploits recorded in it. As to the examples of modern times; to say nothing of
James and Christina, lest it be objected that one was a weak man, and the other
a foolish woman, we have seen the kings of Prussia and of Poland, the Alexander
and the Nestor of our age, ambitious to become authors, and be made denizons of
our little state. Frederick has been more than once heard to say, he would
give his crown, and Stanislaus, if he had not lost it, would have given
another, to possess the scientific fame of Leibnitz, or the literary reputation
of Voltaire.

Is it, by the way, then, to be wondered at, that a private individual, like
Samuel Johnson, should be even preposterously elated at finding that homage
paid to him, which has been in vain solicited by sovereigns, and is refused
even to the King on his throne? Graduated by universities, pensioned by his
prince, and surrounded by pedagogues and poetasters, he finds a grateful odor
in the incense of adulation; while admiring booksellers stand at a distance,
and look up to him with awful reverence, bowing the knee to Baal, and holding
in fearful remembrance the exemplary fate of Tom Osborne; presumptuous Tom
Osborne! who, braving the vengeance of this paper-crowned idol, was, for his
temerity, transfixed to his mother-earth by a thundering folio! It may be a
pity to disturb Dr. Johnson from so pleasing a reverie, and to dissipate so
agreeable a scene of delusion; he will exclaim doubtless, with the honest
citizen of Argos. Pol me occidistis --
-- cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
But, if the interests of our literary state require it, it cannot be doubted
that the mere gratification of an individual ought to be given up for the good
of the whole community.

But to proceed to the third and last head of our discourse: the object of
which is the effects or consequences of the following Review. These, like the
subject of our preface, may be divided also into three parts. In the first
place, it is presumed the injuries done to the name of Shakespeare will be in a
great measure repaired, and the luster of his tarnished honor restored. In the
second, it is feared Dr. Johnson will suffer not a little in his literary
reputation; and in the last, it may be suspected, that the proprietors will be
injured in the sale of the work.

In regard to the first; the pleasure, which it is presumed every true
Englishman will feel, at the attempt to do justice to his favorite poet, will
sufficiently exculpate the author, had it been necessary to practice a still
greater severity in effecting it.

With respect to the second, it may not be improper for the writer to offer
something in his justification. It is not easy to guess how far Dr. Johnson
would have the respect due to living reputation extend, when applied to
himself. He may possibly have adopted the opinion of Wolfius, and will plead
the authority of that great civilian, to prove that men of letters ought not to
detract from the unmerited reputation of others. Nemo eruditorum alterius famae
ac laudi, sive meritae, sive IMMERITAE detrahere debet. In reply to this,
however, Mr. de Vattel, a civilian of equal authority, though perhaps of
somewhat less note, takes a different side of the question; affirming, that no
person has a just complaint, because we may deprive him of a thing to which he
has no right, and which he unjustly assumes to himself. On the other hand, he
determines that the literary reputation which is gotten undeservedly, is
injurious to men of true merit; who thus become sufferers by the Vain and
Undeserving. When praise, continues this able civilian, is prostituted on
unworthy objects, it loses its value: the world grows distrustful, and in
consequence of being made the dupe of pretenders, frequently refuses to bestow
its applause on the truly Meritorious. Ought we to contribute to this
injustice, for fear of depriving an impostor of the reputation on which he
plumes himself, and to which he has no well-founded pretensions? Surely not!
Such is the reasoning of de Vattel on this interesting point; how far it is
applicable to any, or all the editors of Shakespeare, the public is to
determine. It is sufficient that the Reviewer has the civil law at least on
his side, in his endeavors to do justice to merit; though he should be found
to have detracted, more in effect than with design, from the reputation of the
Undeserving. His conscience is perfectly easy also, from the reflection that if
he had not undertaken to expose the defects of Dr. Johnson's work, somebody
else would. For, as Mr. Edwards justly observes, the world will not long be
imposed on by ungrounded pretenses to learning, or any other qualification; nor
does the knowledge of words alone, if it be really attained, make a man
learned. Every true judge, as he observes, will subscribe to Scaliger's
opinion; If, says that great Critic, a person's learning is to be judged of by
his reading, no body can deny Eusebius the character of a learned man; but if
he is to be esteemed learned, who has shown judgment together with his reading,
Eusebius is not such. To this it may be truly added, in the words of another
author, from whom this writer also borrowed them, as he used them on a similar
occasion; It is not the purpose of the following remarks, to cast a blemish on
his [Dr. Johnson's] envied fame; but to do a piece of justice to the real merit
of the comment and the commentator; by that best and gentlest method of
correction, which nature has ordained in such a case; of laughing them down to
their proper rank and character.

As to the last point, viz. the interest of the proprietors; the Reviewer
thinks it very problematical whether this will be affected either way. He has
indeed known books sometimes sell the better for being publicly censured: but,
be this as it may, he can truly aver that he meant them no harm; for, though it
is possible that one or other of them may have sometimes failed a little in
that respect to the writer, which he thinks an author has a right to expect of
his bookseller, and his bookseller, if he is wise, will be ready to pay him,
yet he does not harbor so much resentment against any of them, as to wish to
hurt their interest. If unluckily it should turn out, however, that the sale of
Dr. Johnson's edition of Shakespeare should be hence obstructed, and that it
should only hobble, instead of taking a run; the proprietors have nothing to
do, but to engage the Reviewer, if they can, or some body else, to furnish them
with a better edition. Nor will this be a difficult task, although it would be
an arduous and noble one, to give the public such a commentary as the writings
of this incomparable Bard deserve.

To detain the reader but a moment longer. -- Dr. Johnson, having acted, in the
outrage he has committed on Shakespeare, just like other sinners, not only by
doing those things he ought not to have done, but by leaving undone those
things he ought to have done; his sins of omission are not less important,
though much more numerous, than those of commission. Indeed, nothing is more
usual with commentators in general, than to display their own sagacity on
obvious passages, and to leave the difficult ones to be explained by the
sagacity of their readers Dr. Johnson, indeed, says, in his Preface: Not a
single passage in the whole work has appeared to me corrupt, which I have not
attempted to restore; or obscure, which I have not endeavored to illustrate.
How he has succeeded in these attempts, the reader is left to judge for
himself on perusal of the following sheets.


. The Reviewer, however, cannot be supposed here to have given a complete
commentary himself; indeed he has been able only to include in the following
sheets some few remarks on the most glaring blunders and defects that occur in
this new edition; of which such wonderful things were promised and expected;
and to which, having seen the prophecy fulfilled, we may apply, with as much
justice as ever it was applied to any thing, that wellknown quotation from
Horace.

Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
Parturiunt montes: nascetur ridiculus mus!
A REVIEW OF DOCTOR JOHNSON'S NEW EDITION OF SHAKESPEARE.
THE first specimen of critical sagacity, which merits attention, in this new
edition of Shakespeare, occurs in the play of

THE TEMPEST,
Vol. I. Page 8.
PROS. to MIR. I have with such provision in mine art
So safely ordered that there is no SOUL:
No, not so much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the vessel, etc.

This passage has raised much contention among the commentators; though it is
authorized, it seems, by the old editions. Dr. Johnson, however, says it is
apparently defective. Mr. Row (continues he) and Dr. Warburton, read that
there is no soul lost, without any notice of the variation. Mr. Theobald
substitutes no foil; and Mr. Pope follows him. To come so near the right, and
yet to miss it, is unlucky; the author probably wrote no soil, no stain, no
spot: for so Ariel tells, Not a hair perished;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before.
And Gonzalo -- The rarity of it is, that our garments being drenched in the
sea, keep notwithstanding their freshness and glosses. Of this emendation I
find that the author of Notes on the Tempest had a glimpse, but could not keep
it.

Mr. Theobald is treated with no little severity in the preface of the present
editor, for pluming himself on his critical penetration in making some
discoveries that have escaped others. Dr. Johnson, however, gives himself an
air of superiority in the above note, as exceptionable at least as any of
Theobald's; as will appear on the slightest attention to the construction of
the sentence; this pretended emendation, however plausibly supported, being in
fact entirely groundless. -- What can we understand by NO SOIL BETID to any
creature in the vessel? Or if we can with difficulty strain out a meaning, is
the style at all like that of Shakespeare; whose attention to colloquial idiom
is so close, that our language is more indebted, in this respect, to him than
to any other writer; I had almost said, all other writers put together? -- If
the passage is to be altered, let us at least make English of it: Shakespeare
very probably wrote ILL; a word easily corrupted by the transcriber into soul.
-- there is no ILL,
No, not so much perdition as an hair,
Betid to any creature, etc.
To betide is to befall, to happen to, to come to pass, to become of; and would
here be very improperly used with soil; for even supposing there were no
impropriety in saying a soil might betide a suit of clothes: no idiom will bear
a soil betiding to a creature, when its clothing only was meant.

But what shall we say to the speeches of Ariel and Gonzalo, that seem to
favor the emendation proposed? -- What, indeed, but that they are little or
nothing to the purpose! The poet was evidently judicious enough to apprehend
the spectator must be offended with the palpable impropriety of bringing on a
parcel of people, that had been just heartily soused in the sea, without any
apparent For that it was only the external appearance of their garments that
was preserved, is evident, from the speeches of Antonio and Sebastian
immediately succeeding that of Gonzalo. Our garments, says the latter, are
rather new died than stained with salt water. On which Antonio says to
Sebastian, If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not say, he lies? To
which remark Sebastian answers, "Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report."
Thus it does not appear that the creatures, the people themselves, sustained no
soil, stain, or spot. On the contrary, it seems by their discourse that they
were all in a very pretty pickle, notwithstanding their fair outside, which the
decency of theatrical representation rendered necessary for the poet to bestow
on them.


soil or spot on their clothes. To prevent him, therefore, from being thus
offended on their appearance on the stage, Ariel is previously made to mention
this circumstance to Prospero; and in order to reconcile the audience to it
when the persons actually appear, Gonzalo is artfully made to remind them of
what had been effected by the ministry of Ariel. -- There is not the least
necessity for telling this to the auditors three times over, or for Prospero to
mention this circumstance at all to Miranda. -- Prospero had before told her
there was no harm done: which she thinks very strange; and he proceeds
accordingly to explain from what cause there is no ill betid those, of whose
danger she was so very apprehensive, and for whose safety she was so very
solicitous. Has not every friend to the reputation of Shakespeare, a right to
exclaim here, -- ILL BETIDE such commentators!

Vol. I. Page 9.
PROS. to MIR. -- and thy father
Was duke of Milan, and his only heir
And princess, no worse issued.

Perhaps, says our editor, it should be ' and thou his only heir.' I say,
perhaps not: for, if thou be admitted, without rejecting the preceding and, the
measure is destroyed; and the sense is perfect without making any such
innovation, if we dele the superfluous and, which may well be spared, in the
third line, and read, with Theobald, A princess. -- and thy father
Was duke of Milan, and his heir
A princess, no worse issued.
Perhaps the reader will be of my opinion, that the passage loses neither
sense, spirit, nor propriety by this restoration. As Dr. Johnson tells us in
his preface, that he has generally adopted Theobald's notes, unless confuted by
subsequent annotators, it is to be wished he had always given his reasons for
deviating from him in the text.

Vol. I. Page 17.
The note contained in this page is so far a good one, as it is necessary and
proper to give the reader an idea of the system of enchantment, on which the
plot and machinery of the play is conducted. I should therefore have passed it
over as unexceptionable, had it come from any other pen than that of Dr.
Johnson. But as the world has been pleased very publicly to impute sentiments
to him, which seem incongruous with those he here professes, I cannot pass it
over without some little animadversion. The incongruity I mean lies here: the
Doctor, I have been frequently informed, very religiously believes in the
existence of ghosts and apparitions; although he here strongly insinuates that
there never was any such thing practiced as witchcraft. But if he believes the
story of the witch of Endor, and that the ghost of Samu^^ appeared to Saul, as
doubtless he does, he must believe in (...) exerci^e of witchcraft, and also in
its power over departed spirits. For, though some divines maintain that it was
the devil who appeared in the form of Samuel, and not the ghost of Samuel
himself; yet, as Dr. Johnson, in the note before us, adopts the distinction
made by king James in his demonology, viz. that an enchanter is one who
commands the devil, whereas the witch only serves him, he cannot be allowed to
shelter himself under the opinion of those learned theologues. Either Dr.
Johnson therefore must give up his faith in apparitions, or retract this part
of his note. -- But after all, perhaps, I may have been misinformed by the
wicked wits of the times; for though it be true they do avouch some
corroborating circumstances, and advance some plausible pretexts, I think I can
discover some fallacy at the bottom. Our editor's favorite, Hooker, it is
true, talks of spirits dispersed up and down in caves and dens under the earth;
and occasion may hence be taken to give out, that the visit Dr. Johnson once
made to a certain cemetery was to confer with some of these spirits. But in
this these superficial witlings must certainly be mistaken; the spirits
mentioned by Hooker were supposed, as is here observed, to be fallen angels.
Hence, though I should be brought to believe, that our editor did go from
Cock-lane to Clerkenwell, to fulfill an appointment with the ghost of Fanny, I
cannot possibly suspect him of ever going there purposely to meet the devil.

Vol. I. page 15.
ARIEL. Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad*, and played
Some tricks of desperation:

*In all the later editions this is changed to a fever of the mind, without
reason or authority, nor is any notice given of an alteration.

I wish our editor had given his reason for restoring the former reading,
against the authority of all the later editions. He will say perhaps they are
of no authority, as Theobald did of the editions of Row and Pope. But reason
and authority seem in this case to be so much at variance, that I am
apprehensive our editor will go near to be thought authority-mad, at least by
many, for making this restoration without assigning the motive for it. Madness
has been, with propriety, called a fever of the mind, by writers of all ages
and countries; and it is at best a pleonasm, or a piece of tautology, for Ariel
to say, they played tricks of desperation, after he had said they were seized
with madness. Perhaps our editor might think there was an impropriety, in
saying that a soul felt a fever of the mind. But, not to stand upon the
philosophical distinction that might justly be made between the mind and the
soul, he cannot be ignorant that the word soul is here used in the vulgar and
popular sense, as a man, a person. Will he persist in thinking it a sufficient
reason for abiding by the old copies, that the transcribers and compositors
could read? The same plea might be argued for perpetuating a number of blunders
committed in the present edition. Admitting also, after all, that the oldest
copies are likely to be most authentic, and that such reading, if erroneous,
could not thus pass through successive editions; yet I will undertake, in
behalf of Shakespeare, to affirm, that he did not write the above sentence, as
it now stands in the text. The commentators on Shakespeare are all very liberal
in their declarations against the ungrammaticalness of his style. Now I will
not here contend, whether he always wrote grammatically or not; but this I will
maintain, that he always wrote idiomatically; if he did not always write
grammar, he always wrote English. I wish I could say as much for the
newfangled accent-tuners of the present age; who, with their quaint and
affected pretensions to refinement and elegance, have so vilely corrupted the
idiom of our tongue. Whosoever would recover, and ground themselves in this,
must study Shakespeare, who, though he might possibly write Not a soul
But felt the fever of the mad,
that is, such a fever as the mad, or as madmen, feel, I will be bold to say,
could never in this place write Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad;
for if this means any thing, it must mean they caught a fever by feeling, or
being in contact with madmen. Dr. Johnson must, therefore, retouch this
restoration, if he means to do justice to the text of Shakespeare.

Vol. I. Page 19.
MIR. The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness in me.

The strangeness] Why should a wonderful story produce sleep? I believe
experience will prove, that any violent agitation of the mind easily subsides
in slumber, especially when, as in Prospero's relation, the last images are
pleasing.

In answer to the odd question proposed at the beginning of this note, I have
only to say, as the editor so frequently does, when he meets with difficulties,
I know nothing of the matter. I have for such a why no wherefore. Nay, I know
not that a wonderful story does produce sleep; unless it follows from a
profound observation, which possibly our editor may have made, that old women
and children generally amuse themselves with relating wonderful stories just as
they are going to bed. The editor believes, experience will prove that any
violent agitation of the mind easily subsides in slumber. Now, if he does not
mean simply by this, that when people are drowsy they cannot be violently
agitated, I do believe, on the contrary, experience will prove, that no violent
agitation of the mind easily subsides at all. I have indeed heard of somebody's
being so desperately in love, as to fall into a profound lethargy; but I
believe this too was only on the authority of some play-book, and much such
another philosopher as Miranda. But, supposing the fact to be true, what does
the editor mean by asking so strange a question? or what does he intend by his
reply to it? Does he mean, for the credit of the poet, to account for Miranda's
sleepiness from natural causes? Shakespeare is, doubtless, much obliged to him;
but in this our editor seems rather too officious, as the poet has taken care
to inform us, that Prospero had caused it by the power of enchantment: a
circumstance I wonder the editor should so soon forget, when he had
complimented Dr. Warburton, but two or three Page 14.
pages before, on his sagacity in discovering that Prospero's art-magic had, in
this case, operated on her like a dose of liquid laudanum, and that he had
wisely set it to work just as he was going to tell her the most interesting
story she ever heard in her life.

Vol. I. page 28.
MIR. Why speaks my father so urgently?

Urgently for ungently. This is probably an error of the press; as,
notwithstanding the instance above given of our editor's foisting in a thou,
against all propriety of measure, I think neither the emendation of sense, if
any is aimed at, nor even the authority of copies, can justify the breach of
measure here. And indeed, though it should be the mistake of the printer, an
editor, who is employed in literal and verbal criticism, is inexcusable for not
cancelling the page wherein such errors occur. Yet these mistakes seem very
frequently to happen in the present edition; thus, in page 6, Gonzalo is made
to say He Will be hanged yet,
Though every drop of water swear against it,
And gap at wid'st to glut him.
All the other editions that I have seen, read gape; but perhaps our editor had
some objection to a drop of water's gaping: but surely it might gape, and even
swallow, as well as swear. Or, perhaps, he thought every single drop could
never gape wide enough to take down a man-of-war's boatswain; and therefore
chose to read it quaintly gap; meaning that the drops separated from each
other, and thereby made a gap for him in the sea. By every drop, however,
Shakespeare meant all the drops, or the water collectively. After all, it is
not unlikely, as our editor has no note on this word, that he did not think at
all about it, but left the text to the mercy of the printer. -- Poor
Shakespeare!

Again in this very play, page 77. than is printed for that, and in many other
places, both in the text and in the notes, these errors occur, to the great
injury of the sense; so that one might be apt to think this edition (as Dr.
Johnson affirms of the old ones) was AT LAST printed without correction of the
press. It may be very true, as he also observes, that before the editor's art
was applied to modern languages, our ancestors were accustomed to so much
negligence of English printers I should refer my readers to the page of the
preface, from whence this passage is cited; but, behold, such is the accuracy
of modern British printers! the preface is not paged at all.
, that they could very patiently endure it. But is it not reasonably to be
expected, Dr. Johnson, that, since the editor's art has been so very
successfully applied to modern languages, our printers should be a little more
careful in correcting the press? or that the editor himself should a little
attend to this matter?

Vol. I. page 34.
SEB. -- Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business' making,
Then we bring men to comfort them:*

*It does not clearly appear whether the king and these lords thought the ship
lost. This passage seems to imply that they were themselves confident of
returning, but imagined part of the fleet destroyed. Why, indeed, should
Sebastian plot against his brother in the following scene, unless he knew how
to find the kingdom which he was to inherit?

This note serves to very little purpose in illustrating the author. It is a
matter of no consequence to the spectator, whether the king and his lords
thought the ship lost or not. They knew they must be somewhere in the
Mediterranean. They were neither in the Atlantic ocean, nor the South Sea, and
could not be cast ashore on Greenland, nor on Terra Australis incognita. And as
they found the island pleasant and temperate, and affording 'every thing
advantageous to life,' it was no wonder if they did not at all despair of
subsisting there, till they should find means to get back to Naples, even if
their own vessel and all the fleet were wrecked and gone to the bottom. But,
though this annotation does not serve to remove any difficulty, or display any
merit in the author, it sufficiently serves to expose the incapacity of the
annotator, for commenting on Shakespeare as a poet. He cannot see why Sebastian
should plot against his brother, unless he actually knew how to find the
kingdom he meant to inherit. But Sebastian's plot was natural, even supposing
there had been more reason for diffidence in this particular. This editor might
as well ask, why the chiefs of the rebellious party, in Henry the fourth, are
made to quarrel about the division of the kingdom, before they are masters of
it, and that of a kingdom of which they never are masters? Yet this is one of
the finest scenes in all Shakespeare, admirably representing that anticipation
of our wishes and expectations, which is daily observable in men of sanguine
constitutions, and is inseparable from the human mind. We are all too apt to
count our chickens before they are hatched, and even sometimes to sell them
too, and spend the money; which occasions the hen to fit so long brooding over
the eggs, and produce so many addled ones at last. -- 'My annotations are no
eggs.' -- I did not say they were, Dr. Johnson; but qui capit ille facit.

Vol. I. Page 38.
ANT. Although this lord of weak remembrance, --
-- -- -- --
-- -- has here almost persuaded,
For he is a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade, the king, his son's alive:

For he is a spirit of persuasion, etc.] Of this entangled sentence I can draw
no sense from the present reading, and therefore imagine that the author gave
it thus: For HE, a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade;
of which the meaning may be either that, He alone, who is a spirit of
persuasion, professes to persuade the king; or that, He only professes to
persuade, that is, without being so persuaded himself, he makes a show of
persuading the king.

Dr. Johnson seems here to have gotten a glimpse (as he before says of another
commentator) of the author's meaning, but cannot keep it. I wonder the word
almost, in the preceding line, did not lead him quite into it. There is no
necessity for altering the text any farther than to transpose the comma, placed
after the word persuasion, to the end of the line. The meaning would then be
this: He has ALMOST [not quite] persuaded the king; for he is the SPIRIT of
persuasion only, he professes to persuade: that is, He has only almost
persuaded the king; for he has no solid argument or weighty reason to enforce
what he says; he has only the mere volatile spirit of persuasion; that
superficial vapor of words which exhales and carries with it only the
appearance, the mere show or profession of persuading. -- Or perhaps the word
spirit is here used in a meaning nearly similar, for the mere form, apparition,
semblance; that is, not the body or substance of persuasion. But be it as it
will, it seems that a better sense than either of Dr. Johnson's, may be drawn
from this entangled sentence, without the least alteration of Shakespeare's
words. For it appears evident, from the opinion that both Antonio and Sebastian
entertain of the capacity of Gonzalo, that the one would never call him the
spirit of persuasion, as having the gift of elocution It is indeed observable
that, notwithstanding Gonzalo talks so much, and is, as Antonio says, such a
spendthrift of his tongue, yet Francisco gives the king more substantial
reasons, in one single speech, for thinking the prince alive, than Gonzalo,
with all his prattle. -- And yet Alonzo is made to turn a deaf ear to him, with
No, no, he is gone.


; nor the other be at all influenced by any thing of which he might, or might
not, be persuaded. So that we see neither of our editor's meanings are
supportable; but both as impertinent, as the alteration of the text is
unnecessary.

Vol. I. Page 43.
TRIN. Were I in England now, as I once was, and had but this fish painted, not
a holiday-fool there but would give a piece of silver. There would this monster
make* a man.


*That is, make a man's fortune. So in Midsummer Night's Dream. -- We are all
made men.

Our editor might also have added, in the Winter's Tale too, Act III. Scene 7.
where the clown tells the shepherd that he is a made old man. I have no fault
to find with this note, except that I think Dr. Johnson might have confessed
his obligation to the author of the Canons of Criticism; who gave this meaning,
after having exposed the absurdity of Dr. Warburton's very learned and
ridiculous note on this passage. -- This is not the only instance, however, by
many, as the reader will find in the perusal of these sheets, wherein Dr.
Johnson adopts the opinion of that ingenious critic, without mentioning either
his name, or his book. But perhaps, after treating this gentleman so scurvily
as he has done in his preface, he might be ashamed to have it known that his
sentiments so frequently coincided with so indifferent a critic. Or perhaps he
might think that, after having knocked him fairly on the head, the law of arms
gave him a right to plunder him at pleasure.

Vol. I. Page 76.
ARIEL. Where the be sucks, there suck I;
In a cowslip's bell I lie:
There I couch, when owls do cry.
On the bat's back I do fly
After summer, merrily.

The opinions of the commentators are strangely divided about this elegant
little song. Mr. Theobald reads, in the first line, there lurk I; observing
that Ariel was a spirit of a refined ethereal essence, and could not be
intended to want food. Besides, the sequent lines rather countenance lurk. For
my part, I am apt to be of Mr. Theobald's opinion, for another reason; and that
is, I think Ariel, though he should even be supposed to have occasion for more
substantial food than the cameleon; yet he cannot mean to compare himself to a
be, or a suckling of any kind. Mr. Theobald's reading is also more elegant;
and yet our editor has restored the old word suck, without giving any reason
for it. -- A more material alteration has been attempted on the last line;
which Mr. Theobald, in his Shakespeare Restored, conceived should be written,
After sunset merrily. This conjecture was countenanced by Mr. Pope, and
adopted by Sir Thomas Hanmer: but Dr. Warburton rejected it with infinite
disdain. Dr. Johnson also, having restored summer to the text, and quoted
Warburton's note without any animadversion of his own, must be supposed to
acquiesce in the force of what that learned commentator has advanced; or at
least, by his own confession, to have nothing better to offer. -- And yet
nothing, in my opinion, can be more inconclusive than the argument contained in
Dr. Warburton's annotation. -- It will be thought, no doubt, a little
presumptuous in so petty an Aristarchus as myself, to attack conjointly two
such gigantic and formidable critics. But I could not, with patience, see a
Goliath treat the muse of Shakespeare like a common drab, at his pleasure; my
weapon, therefore, is quickly out, you see, for I dare draw as soon as another
man, if I see occasion, in a good quarrel, and the law of my side.

Dr. Warburton's note, as it is quoted by our editor, runs thus:

After summer, merrily.] This is the reading of all the editions: yet Mr.
Theobald has substituted sunset, because Ariel talks of riding on the bat in
this expedition. An idle fancy. That circumstance is given only to design the
time of night in which fairies travel. One would think the consideration of the
circumstances should have set him right. Ariel was a spirit of great delicacy,
bound, by the charms of Prospero, to a constant attendance on his occasions. So
that he was confined to the island winter and summer. But the roughness of
winter is represented by Shakespeare as disagreeable to fairies, and such like
delicate spirits, who, on this account, constantly follow summer. Was not this
then the most agreeable circumstance of Ariel's new recovered liberty, that he
could now avoid winter, and follow summer quite round the globe? But, to put
the matter out of question, let us consider the meaning of this line, There I
couch when owls do cry.
Where? in the cowslip's bell and where the be sucks, he tells us: this must
needs be in summer. When? when owls cry, and this is in winter. When blood is
nipt, and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring owl.
LOVE's LABOR LOST. The consequence is, that Ariel flies after summer. Such is
Dr. Warburton's elaborate annotation: in answer to which it may be observed
that, whether Theobald's reasoning be right or not, his own arguments are
egregiously wrong. I will admit, with Dr. Warburton, that Ariel here speaks of
himself as a kind of fairy; but, supposing no objection to be made to the
difference of climates, I do not know that Shakespeare has any where
represented winter so excessively disagreeable to fairies, as to oblige them,
like swallows, to expatriate on the arrival of winter. The argument he makes
use of, and the quotation he brings to put the matter out of question, are
insufficient, and are invalidated by many other passages in Shakespeare. He
would infer from the two lines, quoted from the song in Love's Labor lost,
that owls never cry but in winter. But the queen of the fairies, in the
Mid-summer Night's Dream, says to her attendants, -- keep back
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots, and wonders
At our quaint Spirits.
And again, Puck, at the latter end of the same play, says, Now the wasted
brands do glow,
Whilst the scritch-owl, shrieking loud,
Puts the wretch that lies in woe,
In remembrance of a shroud.
Thus we see that the owls do cry, even in the presence of the fairies. It may
not be amiss also to remark, that in the song of Winter, the owl is represented
as singing a merry note; whereas, in the other passages, she is said to cry, to
be clamorous: which it might with great propriety be said to do in summer, when
her hooting is contrasted To the night-warbling bird, that now, awake,
Tunes sweetest his love-labour'd song --
A circumstance that does not operate to the owl's disadvantage in the cold and
dreary nights of winter, when the same hooting may even have something cheerful
in it; at least to those who are sitting by a good fire in the chimney-corner:
While greasy Joan does keel the pot. As to what Dr. Warburton says about
following summer quite round the globe, I never before heard that summer itself
went round the globe. That it vibrates from pole to pole is certain: but there
is some little difference between that motion of the earth which causes summer
and winter, and that which causes day and night.

In regard to Dr. Warburton's calling Theobald's reason, for altering the text,
an idle fancy, and his telling us, that the circumstance of the bat is only
introduced to design the time of night in which fairies travel; I must observe,
that Ariel does not seem to be one of those kind of fairies, that, as Puck
says, -- run
By the triple Hecat's team,
From the presence of the sun,
Following darkness like a dream.
On the contrary, he appears to execute the commands of Prospero by daylight.
Nor is this inconsistent with his character, as a fairy of a superior kind. For
thus, Oberon, the fairy king, on Puck's telling him of the approach of morning,
which hastens away those spirits that for aye consort with black-brow'd night,
replies; But we are spirits of another sort;
I with the morning light have often made sport;
And, like a forester, the groves may tread,
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.


THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.
This play is not numbered, as Dr. Johnson observes, among the most powerful of
Shakespeare's effusions. Our editor, indeed, conceives it was not very
successful on the stage; and that it has escaped corruption, only because,
being seldom played, it was less exposed to the hazards of transcription: Among
a few other remarks of equal importance, however, which he thinks proper to
make on this play, his critical acumen has discovered a corruption of the
text, in Launce's conversation with his dog. Scene VI. Act IV. LANCE. -- O,
it is a soul thing, when a cur cannot keep himself in all companies! I would
have, as one should say, one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be, as
it were, a dog at all things.




On this passage our learned editor thus sagaciously remarks. I believe we
should read I would have, etc. one that takes upon him to be a dog, to be a dog
indeed, to be, etc.

Is not this a curious and important emendation? It is, however, not quite
ingenious enough to be true, or even to deserve to be true. What can Dr.
Johnson mean by a dog's taking upon him to be a dog? This, every cur that is
whelp'd, is, of course; but he that would be a dog indeed, as Lance says (that
is, one who would be thought to be possessed of all the essential good
qualities of his species) should be as it were a dog at all things. -- What
cursed curs are crabbed critics, and carping commentators; who are ever
contentious for a bone to pick; yet, when they have got one, cannot help
snarling at those who afford it them!

MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM,
Vol. I. p. 112.
QUEEN. Full often she has gossipt by my side;
And sat with me, on Neptune's yellow sands,
Marking the embarked traders on the flood,
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive,
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind:
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gate,
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire)
Would imitate; and sail upon the land,
To fetch me trifles, and return again
As from a voyage rich with merchandise.

Dr. Warburton, and our editor, have both attempted to illustrate this passage,
without success. The difficulty lies in the sixth, seventh and eighth lines.
Dr. Warburton says, Following what? she did not follow the ship, whose motion
she imitated; for that sailed on the water, she on the land. If by following we
are to understand imitating, it will be a mere pleonasm -- imitating would
imitate. From the poet's description of the actions it plainly appears we
should read FOLLYING --
Would imitate.
i. e. wantoning in sport and gaiety. Thus the old English writers -- and they
beleeven FOLYLY and falsely -- says Sir J. Mandeville, from and in the sense of
folatrer, to play the wanton. This exactly agrees to the action described. --
full often has she gossipt by my side -- and -- when we have laughed to see.

This note, Dr. Johnson tells us, is very ingenious; but, continues he, since
follying is a word of which I know not any example; and the fairy's favorite
might, without much licentiousness of language, be said to follow a ship that
sailed in the direction of the coast, I think there is no sufficient reason for
adopting it. The coinage of new words is a violent remedy, not to be used but
in the last necessity.

I will not dispute with our editor the ingenuity of Dr. Warburton's note, or
that of his own; but it is certainly an ingenuity of a different kind to that
which is necessary to illustrate Shakespeare. The former of these gentlemen, I
remember, affected to ridicule the booksellers for believing a silly maxim,
that none but a poet should presume to meddle with a poet. The event, however,
has proved this maxim to have some truth in it. If either Dr. Warburton, or
Dr. Johnson, had, in criticizing this passage, exercised their ingenuity as
poets, instead of their ingenuity as philologers, I am persuaded they would
have soon discovered its meaning. But they were too intent upon words, to
attend to the images designed to be conveyed by them. The former talks of an
action described in two lines, wherein nothing is spoken of but gossipping and
laughing. Do these imitate a ship under sail? To have been merely playful and
wanton, is not the imitation here mentioned: nor does it consist in merely
following the object imitated, as Dr. Johnson conceives; for she did not only
sail upon land, in the same direction along the coast as the ships did in the
sea; but she returned again, which must have been in a different direction. So
that it appears neither of these ingenious critics had any idea of the poetical
beauty of this passage. -- I shall endeavor to explain it, therefore, by a
very different mode of investigation. -- If the reader has ever seen a ship
scudding before the wind, with its fore-sail grown big-bellied, as the poet
expresses it, with the swelling breeze; he must recollect that, in such a case,
the sail projects so far forward, that it seems, to a spectator on shore, to go
in a manner before the rest of the vessel; which, for the same reason, appears
to follow, though closely, after, with an easy, swimming motion. -- This was
the moving image, which the fairy's favorite, taking the hint from, and the
advantage of, her pregnancy, endeavored to imitate; and this she did, by
wantonly displaying before her the convexity of her swelling belly, and moving
after it, as the poet describes, -- with pretty and with swimming gate. Such
being the sense of the passage, the text is easily ascertained, by pointing and
reading thus; Which she, with pretty and with swimming gate
Following her womb, then rich with my young squire,
Would imitate.
This is the method a critic should take with the poets. Trace out their
images, and you will soon find how they expressed themselves, without
perplexing yourself either about the meaning of antiquated words, or the
coinage of new ones.

Vol. I. Page 162.
PHILIST. -- I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
Unless you can find sport in their intents,*
Extremely stretched and conn'd with cruel pain,
To do you service.

*Thus all the copies. But as I know not what it is to stretch and con and
intent, I suspect a line to be lost.

It is very common with Dr. Johnson, when his critical sagacity is at fault, to
suppose a chasm in the text, to excuse his having lost scent of the poet's
meaning. There is no need, however, for such a supposition here. By intents is
plainly meant the design or scheme of the piece intended for representation;
the conceit of which being far-fetched or improbable, it might be with
propriety enough called extremely stretched. As to this scheme or design being
conn'd (if any objection be made to the supposition of its having been written,
penned) it is no wonder such players as these are represented to be, such A
crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
Should con their several parts with cruel pain.


Vol. I. Page 163.
HIP. I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.

THE. Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.

HIP. He says, they can do nothing in this kind.

THE. The kinder we to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be, to take what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot do,
Noble respect takes it in might not merit.

*The sense of this passage [the apprehended difficulty of which lies in the
two last lines] as it now stands, if it has any sense, is this: What the
inability of duty cannot perform, regardful generosity receives as an act of
ability, though not of merit. The contrary is rather true. What dutifulness
tries to perform without ability, regardful generosity receives as having the
merit, though not the power, of complete performance. We should therefore read,
And what poor duty cannot do
Noble respect takes not in might but merit.


That is, says our editor, we should read directly contrary to what the poet
has written! Nothing, however, I think, can be more plain, or more consistent
with truth, than the passage as it now stands. Is it not a common thing for the
lords, and other owners of estates, in many countries where the peasants are
poor, and cannot pay their rent in cash, to take it in catile, or in corn? Does
not the parson, though he sometimes takes his tithes in a modus, frequently take
them also in kind? Is not every creditor, where a debt is desperate, willing to
take in meal or in malt, what he cannot get in money? And does not this mode of
expression justify the speaker in saying, agreeable to the idiom of our
language, that as to -- what poor duty cannot do,
Noble respect takes it in might, not merit --
That is, not as an act of ability, though not of merit, as Dr. Johnson says;
but as an act of merit, though not of ability: thus in consequence of its
inability, taking the will for the deed; viz. accepting the best in its might
to do, for the best that might be done; rating the merit of the deed itself at
nothing, agreeable to the first line of Theseus's speech, The kinder we to give
them thanks for nothing.


Vol. I. Page 167.
THE. Now is the mural down between the two neighbors.

THEM. No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to HEAR without warning.

On this passage our editor quotes the following note from Dr. Warburton,
without animadversion. Shakespeare could never write this nonsense: we should
read -- to REAR without warning; i. e. It is no wonder that walls should be
suddenly down, when they were as suddenly up; -- REARED without warning.

Had our editor nothing to offer better than this? And has he so little
veneration for Shakespeare, as so readily to countenance the charge against him
of writing nonsense? Did you, Dr. Johnson, ever read the scene, wherein this
passage occurs, quite through? I could almost venture to affirm, that neither
you nor Dr. Warburton ever could have read it through with any attention. It
seems to me morally impossible, if you had, that he could have made so
egregious a mistake, or you have admitted it among your notes. -- Shakespeare
most undoubtedly wrote it HEAR, as it stands in the text. For not to insist
upon the palpable defects of Dr. Warburton's explanation, the most undoubted
evidence in justification of this reading, may be deduced from the context. In
the preceding page the wall makes a speech, on which Theseus says, Would you
desire lime and hair to speak better? and Demetrius answers, It is the wittiest
partition that ever I heard discourse. On this Pyramus enters and closes his
speech with a curse against the wall. His speech ending with the words
deceiving me. Upon which Theseus again thus remarks, The wall, methinks, being
sensible, should curse again. No, says the actor who played Pyramus, in truth,
Sir, he should not. DECEIVING ME, is Thisbe 's cue; she is to enter, and I am
to spy her through the wall. You shall see, it will fall pat as I told you.
Yonder she comes.

Now, Pyramus and Thisbe having met and spied each other through the crevice,
for which purpose only the wall was introduced, their interview is no sooner
over than the actor who played the wall, apparently, without waiting for his
cue, as no body speaks to him, and he speaks to no person in the drama, says,
Thus have I, wall, my part discharged so;
And, being done, thus wall away does go.
On which Theseus observes again, as in the passage cited, Now is the mural
down between the two neighbors. To which Demetrius answers; No remedy It is to
be observed, that Demetrius does not say, It is no wonder, as Dr. Warburton
expresses it in his explanation; but There is no remedy. I cannot doubt,
therefore, that the above is the plain and obvious meaning of this passage.
That the expression, however, may bear a reference to some latent meaning, I do
not deny; and possibly it may refer to a custom practiced by the magistrates in
many places abroad, of sticking up a notice or warning on the walls of ruinated
and untenanted houses, for the owners either to repair or pull them quite down.


, my lord, when walls are so wilful, to HEAR without WARNING. That is, so
wilful as to take their cue before it be given them.

MEASURE FOR MEASURE.
Vol. I. Page 266.
DUKE. We have with special soul
Elected him, our absence to supply.

Dr. Warburton says, This nonsense must be corrected thus; with special roll:
i. e. by a special commission. The present editor, Dr. Johnson, thinks
Warburton right in supposing a corruption, but less happy in his emendation. He
reads, therefore, with special seal; which, he says, is a very natural metonymy
for a special commission. -- But why did not our editor obviate the objection
made against this supposition of a corruption, by the author of the Canons of
Criticism? Was his objection of too little weight, or was the writer of too
little consequence to need a refutation? This author remarks on this passage,
that with special soul, may fairly be interpreted to mean, with great thought,
upon mature deliberation; but that with special roll, for -- by special
commission, is harsh and awkward; and to elect a man by a commission, instead
of -- appoint him, is flat nonsense. Now, this objection lies equally against
Dr. Johnson's reading as against Dr. Warburton's, and must be removed before I
withdraw my caveat against any innovation being made in the text. Indeed I will
oppose, totis viribus, the admission of Dr. Johnson's seal, lest some future
commentator should start up, and affirm that, although to elect by or with a
commission may be nonsense; yet to ERECT by or with a commission is sense; to
erect here meaning nothing more than to set up, to promote, which is done by
commission. And how plausibly might not such an annotator maintain, that such
reading would be perfectly consistent with the context?

For you must know, we have with special seal
Erected him our absence to supply;
Lent him our terror, dressed him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power.
Might he not exclaim, Is it not plain, that the duke means to say he has
erected, that is, set up Angelo in the place of himself? Besides, who could
refuse, after having changed two letters at the instance of Dr. Johnson, to
make so small a variation as one for his successor? It Is only, he might plead,
changing an l for an r, merely one liquid for another; the transcribers and
printers might easily mistake it. -- Who does not see, (as Dr. Johnson says in
another place) that upon such principles there is no end of correction! --
Away, therefore, with all such trifling, and revere the TEXT of SHAKESPEARE.

Vol. I. Page 308.
ISAB. Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary, but only he,
Owe, and succeed by weakness.

This passage seems to have confounded all the commentators. Dr. Warburton
makes the following curious and learned note upon it. This is so obscure a
passage, but so fine in its application, that it deserves to be explained. A
feodary was one that, in the times of vassalage, held lands of the chief lord,
under the tenure of paying rent and service, which tenures were called feuda
amongst the Goths. Now, says Angelo, we are all frail; yes, replies Isabella,
if all mankind were not feodaries, who owe what they are to this tenure of
imbecility, and who succeed each other by the same tenure, as well as my
brother, I would give him up. The comparing mankind, lying under the weight of
original sin, to a feodary, who owes suit and service to his lord, is, I think,
not ill-imagined. -- This note, with little variation, is inserted in
Theobald's edition; who says it explains one of the most beautiful allusions
imaginable. -- The present editor inserts this note also, without any remark of
his own. He observes indeed, that to owe means in this place to own, to hold,
to have possession. -- For my part, I never could reconcile the words of this
passage, by any mode of construction, to the sense here put on it. Indeed, it
never appeared to me, from the tenor of the conversation, that Isabel could
possibly entertain such a constrained and far-fetched allusion, as the
ingenious Dr. Warburton has here fished out for her. I conceive her meaning to
be much more simple, and if the reader observes the connection of this speech
with those of Angelo that precede and follow, I doubt not but he will be of my
opinion. It is true, that to owe means here, as in other parts Particularly in
the Tempest; where Prospero says to Ferdinand, -- Thou do here usurp
The name thou ow'st not.

of Shakespeare's writings, to own, to have, to be possessed of or invested
with. The word feodary, however, is not derived from feuda, nor has its
meaning here any relation to the customs of the feudal times, but is derived
from foedus, a covenant, and is therefore mis-spelt, it having here the same
meaning as the word feodary in the following passage in Cymbeline, where it
means an accomplice, a confederate, a companion equally guilty. -- damned paper!
Black as the ink that is on thee: senseless bauble,
Art thou a feodarie for this act?
Taking the words in this, their true sense, let us see if we cannot, without
forcing their construction, discover a meaning more in character with the
speaker, and therefore more likely to be intended by Shakespeare: ANG. We are
all frail.

ISAB. Else let my brother die;
If not a feodary, but only he,
Owe, and succeed by, weakness.

That is, Let my brother die, if not one of his companions, if only he, of all
his sex, is frail, and has succeeded in his attempts on women, by taking
advantage of a like frailty in them. -- That this is the true sense, I think,
is put past dispute by the subsequent speech of Angelo; who takes occasion,
from the last suggestion of Isabel, to say Nay, women are frail TOO. Which is
as much as if he had said, Nay, the women, as you observe, are frail too. --
Ay, says Isabel, -- As the glasses where they view themselves.
--
Women! -- help heaven! men their creation mar
In profiting by them, etc.
That is, says Dr. Johnson, in imitating them, in taking them for examples. But
I cannot see how we can, with any propriety, be said to profit by what mars our
creation. I rather think Isabel means to say, that man disgraces himself by
profiting or taking advantage of female weakness. And this seems to agree with
the context.

Vol. I. Page 312.
DUKE. -- Reason thus with life;
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep:

Dr. Warburton, in order, I presume, to lay hold of an occasion for altering
the text, excepts against this passage, as being a direct persuasive to
suicide. The absurdity, however, of supposing that the speaker intended it as
such, is obvious, since he is endeavoring to instill into a condemned prisoner
a resignation to his sentence. Dr. Johnson observes, that the meaning seems
plainly this, that none but fools would wish to keep li^e; or, none but fools
would keep it, if choice were allowed. A sense which, whether true or not, he
remarks, is certainly innocent. But though our editor is graciously pleased to
exculpate Shakespeare in this particular, it appears to be only that he may
fall upon him with the greater violence in a page or two after; where Dr.
Warburton vouchsafes to pay the poet a compliment. This passage is in the same
speech as the foregoing; -- Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou often provok'st; yet grossly fear
Thy death, which is no more.
This passage, says Dr. Warburton, is evidently taken from the following, of
Cicero: Habes somnum imaginem mortis, eamque quotidie induis, and dubitas quin
sensus in morte nullus sit, cum in ejus simulachro videas esse nullum sensum.
But the Epicurean insinuation is with great judgment omitted in the imitation.
On this note Dr. Johnson has made the following remark: Here Dr. Warburton
might have found a sentiment worthy of his animadversion. I cannot, without
indignation, find Shakespeare saying, that death is only sleep, lengthening out
his exhortation by a sentence which in the friar is impious, in the reasoner is
foolish, and in the poet is trite and vulgar. -- Nor can I, Dr. Johnson,
without equal indignation, find you misrepresenting Shakespeare, and thence
taking occasion to condemn him for what he is not culpable; lengthening out
your censure with imputations that, being false in themselves, appear as
invidious in the man, as they are contemptible in the critic. Would not one
imagine, from the warmth with which Dr. Johnson speaks of this passage, that it
militates against the doctrine of the immortality of the soul; insinuating that
in death we close our eyes, and sleep for ever? -- Nothing, however, can be
more foreign from the plain intent of the speaker, and the obvious meaning of
the passage. The duke, in the assumed character of a friar, is endeavoring to
persuade Claudio to acquiesce in the sentence of death passed on him, and to
prepare himself for launching into eternity. To this end he advises him to
think altogether on death; and to excite him to do so, he enumerates the
several foibles of humanity, and the calamities incident to human life;
evidently intending by this means to wean his affections from the world, and
render him less averse to part with it, and less apprehensive of the pain of
dying. Thou often provokest sleep, says he, yet absurdly fear to die; which, with
regard to the painful and perplexing vigil of life, is only to go to sleep. For
that he only speaks of the mere sense of death, the parting of the soul from
the body, and that Claudio understood him so, is very evident, by the reply
which the latter makes to his harangue; notwithstanding the very last words of
it seem to be full as exceptionable as those objected to. DUKE. -- in this life
Lie hid a thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.

CLAU. I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find, I seek to die;
And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.

If any thing further be necessary to corroborate what is here advanced, we
might instance the duke's exhorting him, in scene III. of the same act, to go
to his knees and prepare for death. It is highly inconsistent to think such a
piece of advice should come from one who conceived death to be a perpetual
sleep. Prayers must seem as superfluous to him, as the advice must appear
impertinent to the prisoner. But that Claudio had the strongest notions of a
future state after death is not to be doubted, since, speaking of the sin of
debauching his sister, and Angelo's design to commit it, he says If it were
damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined?
Again, when his fears recurring, he tells his sister that Death is a fearful
thing, it is plain, he does not confine the meaning of the word, as the Duke
did, to the mere act or circumstance of dying. For when she retorts upon him,
And shamed life a hateful, he goes on, Ay, but to die, and go we know not
where. As if he had said, I do not mean the mere pain of dying; it is what is
to come after death that I fear, when we are to -- go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneeded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice:
To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendant world; or to be worse than worst
Of those, that lawless and uncertain thoughts
Imagine howling; it is too horrible!
Can we think that Shakespeare could so far forget himself, as to be here so
very explicit regarding the notion of a future state, if but two or three pages
before he had been inculcating a contrary doctrine! -- What then must we think
of his commentator, who affects to be moved with indignation, and in effect
presumes to charge him on this account with vulgarity, folly and impiety!
Shakespeare appears to have had such a regard, even for his mortal part At
least if he wrote the verses, said to be put on his gravestone: Good friend,
for Jesus' sake, forbear
To dig the dust enclosed here.
Blessed be the man that spares these stones,
And cursed be he who moves my bones.



, as to bestow a curse on the person who should disturb his ashes; what a
severe malediction, then, would he not have bestowed on that sacrilegious hand,
which has thus mangled his immortal reputation, could he have penetrated the
womb of time, or anticipated the temerity of a modern critic I had written the
above remarks and sent them to the press, without recollecting that a similar
reference to this imprecation of Shakespeare is to be met with in the appendix
to the Canons of Criticism, (last edition, page 260.) I leave the public to
judge, says that sensible critic, which has been engaged against Shakespeare,
Mr. Warburton or I, who have in part at least vindicated that best of poets
from the worst of critics; from one, who has been guilty of a greater violation
of him, than that of the authors on which he imprecated vengeance in his
epitaph. A violation which, were he not armed against the superstition of
believing in portents and prodigies, might make him dread the apparition of
that injured bard. -- Here we see the murder comes out: Dr. Warburton, it is
true, was not only armed against the superstition of believing in ghosts, by
his principles as a philosopher, but also against their doing him hurt, by the
awful power annexed to his sacred functions and character as a priest. But this
is not the case with Dr. Johnson, whose religion and philosophy put together,
it seems, cannot secure him against the terrors of such superstition: so that,
as I before observed, here the secret comes out; and we see the reason for his
sitting up all night, and lying a-bed all day, for fear of apparitions -- It is
not so much from his fear of ghosts in general, (for we know he did not appear
to be afraid of Fanny) but of the ghost of Shakespeare, whose fame he is
conscious of having inhumanly assassinated, and whose violated muse cries aloud
for vengeance against him.


!

Vol. I. Page 318.
ISAB. -- dare thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corp'ral sufferance finds a pang as great,
As when a giant dies.

The poor beetle, etc.] The reasoning is, that death is no more than every
being must suffer, though the dread of it is pepeculiar to man, or perhaps,
that, we are inconsistent with ourselves when we so much dread that which we
carelessly inflict on other creatures, that feel the pain as acutely as we.

The reasoning appears to be no more than is actually and obviously expressed
in the text. Isabel is persuading her brother that the sense of death is felt
more in apprehension than in reality; for that in reality it is next kin to
nothing, the poor beetle that we tread upon, and which, it is to be supposed,
can never be susceptible of much pain, feeling a pang as great as a giant;
ergo, more than Claudio will feel. -- This is the whole of this simple
argument; which serves to corroborate what has been said in the preceding
note; and, at the same time to show that, if any one in this play seems to
believe in the mortality of the soul, it is Isabel; which, I think, it is
preposterous to imagine, when we consider that she is just going into a
nunnery, with a design to take the veil.

Vol. I. Page 319.
CLAUD. The princely Angelo!

ISAB. Oh, it is the cunning livery of hell,
The damned'st body to invest and cover
In princely guards.

The stupid editors, says Dr. Warburton (whose note in this passage Dr. Johnson
has quoted) mistaking guards for satellites, whereas it here signifies lace,
altered PRIESTLY, in both places, to PRINCELY. Whereas Shakespeare wrote it
priestly, as appears from the words themselves, -- it is the cunning livery of
hell,
The damned'st body to invest and cover
With PRIESTLY guards.
In the first place we see, that guards here signify lace, as referring to
livery, and as having no sense in the signification of satellites. Now priestly
guards means sanctity, which is the sense required. But princely guards means
nothing but rich lace, which is a sense the passage will not bear. Angelo,
indeed, as deputy, might be called the princely Angelo; but not in this place,
where the immediately preceding words of, This outward-sainted deputy, demand
the reading I have restored.

To this very curious argument of Dr. Warburton's, the present editor only adds
the following note.

The first folio has, in both places, prenzie, from which the other folios made
princely, and every editor may make what he can.

It is really very kind of Dr. Johnson to give others leave to make SOMETHING
of what he can make NOTHING himself. -- Let us see, therefore, what others have
made of it. -- The author of the Canons of Criticism objects to Dr. Warburton's
emendation; observing that, if princely guards means nothing but rich lace, he
should be glad to know how priestly guards should come to signify any thing
more than black lace? -- The author of the Revisal of Shakespeare's Text, goes
still farther, and says, We should undoubtedly restore the ancient reading in
both places, the princely Angelo, and in princely guards. Nothing [says he] can
be weaker and more destitute of all foundation, than Mr. Warburton's criticism.
Angelo is represented as supporting the state of a prince, and the authority of
government, by excessive severity; but there is not the least hint [given] in
the whole play of his affecting a sanctified exterior, or setting up for a
devotee. Priestly guards, we are told, means sanctity; but how the body could
be invested or covered with sanctity, Mr. Warburton has not thought proper to
explain; for I presume he does not imagine that he wore the priestly habit, to
which he could be no way entitled, as appears by his marriage afterward, as
well as from many other circumstances needless to enumerate. In princely
guards, most certainly signifies in a habit adorned "as becomes a prince."

If it be thought necessary to add any thing to these remarks; it may be
observed, that the word guards is not strictly confined to mean lace, as Dr.
Warburton insinuates; but is used for ornaments of dress, or finery in general.
Thus Shakespeare, in some other of his plays, I think it is in Love's Labor
Lost, speaks of the guards of Cupid's hose; in all probability meaning the
clocks of his stockings I am well aware that our ancestors, wearing long hose,
sometimes included their breeches too under that denomination; but I cannot
suppose this part of the dress would be particularly specified, if lace merely
was intended, unless Cupid might be supposed to have worn laced breeches
without having a laced coat.


; which could not with propriety be called lace. Dr. Warburton, indeed, thinks
the word livery, in this sentence, fixes that of guards to mere lace, because,
it is true, most liveries are laced. It does not, however, follow that lace is
essential to a livery, or that a livery might not be given to servants without
any lace in the trimming of it: for the word livery comes either from the
French livree, of livrer, to deliver or give; or from the Italian livrea, or
the Spanish librea, all having the same meaning; so that a suit of clothes,
with trimmings of a different color, given to a servant, is as much a livery,
as if it were covered with lace. Again, to come nearer the point, can we
suppose that when Bassanio, in the Merchant of Venice, commands his followers
to give Lancelot -- a livery
More guarded than his fellows:
he means particularly that it should have more lace on it? No, surely, he only
means that it should, on the whole, be more fine and gaudy.

The meaning of the words thus settled, it is with great propriety Isabel calls
the princely badges and ducal finery of Angelo the cunning LIVERY of hell; as
being given him in order that he might the more effectually serve its abhorred
and damnable purposes.

Vol. I. Page 326.
ELBOW. Come your way. Sir. Bless you, good father friar.

Duke. And you good brother father*; what offense has this man made you? Sir.

* -- father] This word should be expunged.

Why, so? Dr. Johnson. -- What offense has this word done you, Sir? Why will
you not indulge the fictitious friar in the harmless jest he intends to make of
the ignorance of the poor constable? You will say, perhaps, you saw no jest
intended. I believe you; but certainly, such a one as it was, there was one
intended; and this it is. The word friar being a corruption of the French word
friar, meaning brother; the constable had, in fact, called the supposed friar
good father brother; to which the other jocosely replies, by calling him in
turn good brother father. -- The reader will now, therefore, expunge this word,
or let it stand, as he thinks proper.

Vol. I. Page 328.
LUCIO. What is there none of Pigmalion's images, newly made woman, to be had
now, for putting the hand in the pocket, and extracting it clutched?


Dr. Warburton says, the meaning of this passage is, Are there no women come
out cured from a salivation? And this explanation is implicitly adopted by Dr.
Johnson. The author of the Revisal, however, supposes the meaning of this very
affected cant to be, Are there no fresh women, no maidenheads to be had now?
For (continues the Reviser, very gravely) Pigmalion's statue newly made woman,
was certainly a pure virgin. -- Now, not to controvert the virginity of a
marble statue, or to query how long it remained so, when converted into flesh
and blood, in the hands of Pig (what do ye call him) malion
That longed to use her like a stallion.
Cotton's Virgil travestie.
I conceive these scholiasts to be all mistaken with regard to the sense of the
passage. It is perfectly agreeable to the character of Lucio, to call an
innocent uncome-at-able virgin a Pigmalion's statue; nor could he with any
propriety give that name to a prostitute, either under a salivation, or newly
come out of it. What he meant, therefore, by Pigmalion's images newly made
women, was young girls newly debauched. The deflowering a maid is frequently
called, by dramatic writers, the making a woman of her. Again, I think it
pretty evident that Lucio is too well acquainted with rogues and bawds, too
deep in "the trick of it," not to know that maidenheads were commodities they
seldom dealt in. On the other hand, I think it as plain that Lucio did not ask
after such battered brims as might be just come out of the powdering tub: for
when the clown tells him his mistress is herself in that situation, he says,
It Is good; it is the right of it; it must be so. Ever your FRESH whore, and
your powdered bawd: an unshunn'd consequence: it must be so. -- I fancy Lucio
would be apt to think such pickled devils as came out of the powdering tub,
sound as they possibly might be, too stale to be called fresh meat.

IBID. -- What reply? Ha! what say thou to this tune, matter and method?
is it not drowned in the last reign? Ha! what say thou, trot? This strange
nonsense (says Dr. Warburton) should be thus corrected, It Is not DOWN in the
last REIGN. i. e. these are severities unknown to the old duke's time. And this
is to the purpose.

Very much to the purpose truly! and so the ingenious author of the Canons of
Criticism has shown See Canons of Criticism, page 25.
; notwithstanding which, our editor, without taking the least notice of what
Mr. Edwards has advanced, proceeds thus. Dr. Warburton's emendation is
ingenious; but I know not whether the sense may not be restored with less
change. Let us consider it. Lucio, a prating fop, meets his old friend going to
prison, and pours out upon him his impertinent interrogatories: to which, when
the poor fellow makes no answer, he adds, What reply? Ha! what say thou to
this? tune, matter and method -- is it not! drowned in the last rain? ha? what
say thou, trot? etc. It is a common phrase used in low raillery of a man
crest-fallen and dejected, that he looks like a drowned puppy. Lucio, therefore
asks him whether he was drowned in the last rain, and therefore cannot speak?

Dr. Johnson's explanation of this passage is, in my opinion, less clear and
much less consistent with his own pointing than that given by Mr. Edwards.
Indeed the latter supposes Pompey's answer only to be drowned in the last rain
[a proverbial phrase, he says, to express a thing which is lost, or rather not
to be found]; whereas Dr. Johnson supposes that Pompey himself is taxed with
having been drowned in the last rain. Taking their own authority, however, for
the use of their proverbs, Mr. Edwards's explanation is not half so far-fetched
as Dr. Johnson's. It is, indeed, a strange round-about kind of salutation, to
ask a man whether or not he was drowned in the last rain; because, truly, he
looks dejected, and therefore may be phraseologically compared to a drowned
puppy?

Dr. Gray would make a farther emendation of the text, in this passage, of
which our editor has made mention in his appendix; but seems to disapprove it.
The Doctor proposes that, instead of reading what say thou, trot? we should
read, what say thou to it? the word trot being seldom, if ever, used to a
man. -- To this Dr. Johnson replies, Trot, or as it is now often pronounced
honest trout, is a familiar address to a man among the provincial vulgar. Now,
it appears to me, although I think Dr. Gray's emendation very admissible, that
Lucio might very probably here mean to give Pompey an appellation usually given
to women, by way of gibing him for following so scandalous an employment as
that of a bawd, usually practiced by wretches of that sex. But be this as it
may, I think nobody can hesitate about Dr. Johnson's being in the wrong, when
he supposes that Lucio might call Pompey Bum, the cock-bawd, HONEST trout. --
Trout! indeed! Dr. Johnson surely must imagine his readers to be very gudgeons,
to bait his hook with such grubs, as these grub-street annotations!

Vol. I. pages 329 and 330. are inserted two notes from Dr. Warburton, without
any remark of the editor's; notwithstanding they are both sufficiently refuted
and exploded in the Canons of Criticism, pages 25 and 26. I must beg leave,
however, for that reason to pass them over here.

Vol. I. Page 333.
ESCAL. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the same kind! this
would make Mercy swear, and play the tyrant.


I doubt not but my readers have already observed that, when Dr. Johnson's
sentiments coincide with Dr. Warburton's, he does not choose to hazard them for
his own; as he does when they agree with those of Edwards, and some others.
But, for fear they should be wrong, he takes advantage of the verbum
sacerdotis, and skulks behind the name of WARBURTON. This he does with regard
to the passage now before us; and yet if I should admit a single emendation of
all those Dr. Warburton proposes, I believe it would be this; and yet I don't
approve of it. But the case is, I as little approve of what is advanced by
others in favor of the present reading, and yet, as Dr. Johnson says, nothing
better suggests itself. Dr. Warburton says, We should read SWERVE, i. e.
deviate from her nature. The common reading gives us the idea of a ranting
whore. In opposition to this, the author of the Revisal says, the common
reading is agreeable to a very common form of expression, This would make a
saint swear, and supposes it means no more than that the excess of the
provocation would get the better of the mild disposition even of Mercy herself,
and put her in a passion. In answer again to this, however, it may be observed,
that we have no such very common form of speech as is here asserted. Nay, I
don't know that we can possibly have occasion for such a form. Make a saint
swear! Pray where are there any saints nowadays to be met with? For my part,
I never conversed with any but fictitious ones. I have heard, indeed, of things
being provoking enough to make a PARSON swear, and that even in the middle of
his sermon. But alas! alas! there is a great difference between saints and
parsons; though I hope the author of the Revisal is too honest a man wilfully
to impose a parson on his readers for a saint. -- The true state of the case
appears to me to be as follows: the poet did not intend, or at least did not
effect, a complete personification of Mercy. If he had, he would not have given
us the idea of a ranting whore, as Dr. Warburton justly expresses it; nor would
he have represented Mercy as stripped of her attributes, or put in a passion,
as the Reviser has it. -- It seems to me that Escalus speaks of that mercy, or
merciful disposition, existing in his own breast, agreeable, and in reply, to
what the bawd had said to him in the preceding speech. Your honor is accounted
a MERCIFUL man. To which he answers, Yes, but such provocation would make me,
merciful as I am, swear and play the tyrant. To this it may be objected, that
Escalus represents himself in this case as a ranting bully, just as Mercy, in
the other, gives the idea of a ranting whore. So that, perhaps, after all, we
had better abide by the literal construction of the text, and suppose the
prosopopeia complete; in which case to swear must mean to make a vow never to
be moved by pleas or intercession; to be unrelenting, being one of the
principal characteristics of a tyrant.

Vol. I. Page 348.
PROVE. A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully, but as a drunken sleep;
careless, reckless and fearless of what is past, present or to come; insensible
of mortality, and desperately mortal.


Desperately mortal.] This expression is obscure. Sir Thomas Hanmer reads
mortally desperate. Mortally is in low conversation used in this sense, but I
know not whether it was ever written. I am inclined to believe, that
desperately mortal means desperately mischievous.

I wish Dr. Johnson, every time he had dictated any of the articles of his
critical creed, had given us a reason for the faith that is in him. Why he
should believe Barnardine to be desperately mischievous, I cannot possibly
conceive. The Provost seems to give him a very different character: He has
evermore, says he, had the liberty of the prison: give him leave to escape
hence, he would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk.
We have very often awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him
a seeming warrant for it: it has not moved him at all. Is this the description
of a man desperately mischievous? I should rather think that, by desperately
mortal, means totally incurable of diseases, acquired by his beastly course of
life; or else that, despairing or careless of life, he looks upon himself as
dead to the world, and takes no thought of what becomes of him. That he is yet
desperate, or inflexibly obstinate, about even dying, is plain from his telling
the friar, that he will not die that day for any man's persuasion; but if they
will have it so, they shall beat out his brains with billets.

Vol. I. Page 364.
Oh! that it were as like as it is true.
Dr. Johnson has, on this passage, silently adopted the explanation of Mr.
Edwards, in opposition to that of Dr. Warburton. He does the same thing again
in page 369. -- See Canons of Criticism, page 144.

Vol. I. Page 366.
PETER. -- and what he with his oath
By all probation will make up full clear,
Whenever he is convented. First, for this woman.

Dr. Johnson has here inserted the word convented, instead of convened, which
was the common reading. Convented, indeed, was the reading of the first folio,
which Dr. Warburton insists upon to be right And yet Dr. Warburton, as the
author of the Revisal shrewdly remarks, calls that edition, on another
occasion, the old blundering folio.
, giving his reasons for it in the following arrogant and foolish note, which
is as impertinently and fillily adopted by our editor. The first folio reads
convented, and this is right; for to convene signifies to assemble; but
convent, to cite or summons. Yet, because convented hurts the measure, the
Oxford editor sticks to convened, though it be nonsense, and signifies,
whenever he is assembled together. But thus it will be, when the author is
thinking of one thing, and his critic of another. The poet was attentive to his
sense, and the editor, quite throughout his performance, to nothing but the
measure; which Shakespeare having entirely neglected, like all the dramatic
writers of that age, he has spruced him up with all the exactness of a modern
measurer of syllables.

I should be glad to know how either Dr. Warburton or Dr. Johnson came to know
that Shakespeare entirely neglected measure? Shakespeare had a poetical ear;
and though he might not stand to count his fingers, as probably these gentlemen
do when they write verses, he wrote in general much more melodiously than any
of the dramatic writers of his own age, or perhaps of the present. The Oxford
editor did very wisely, therefore, in abiding by the measure, as he could do it
without any injury to the sense. For to convene, as the author of the Revisal
justly observes, means not only to assemble together, but to cite or cause to
appear; and is rendered in Latin by cito, cieo. -- To this I may add also, that
cito does not mean simply to cite or summons in general, but also to summons or
produce as a witness, exactly agreeable to the case before us. Thus CICERO, in
hac re te testem citabo. But perhaps these learned gentlemen will object to all
this, because the verb convene is not derived from cito, cico, but from
convenio: they will profit little, however, by this evasion; for the verb
convenio itself is used in the sense of giving a citation or summons. Thus
PLAUTUS, illum in jus conveniam. But supposing these quotations to be, as
learned quotations generally are, nothing at all to the purpose, I may safely
borrow a phrase from Scripture on this occasion, and say to Dr. Johnson, Out of
thy own mouth will I judge thee, thou CARELESS COMMENTATOR! The author of the
Revisal seems a little unhappy that, having kept no common-place-book, he
cannot produce an example of the use of the word convene in the sense contended
for: but, if he had turned to Dr. Johnson's common-place-book, i. e. his folio
dictionary, he would have there found that this sense is properly authorized.
To convene, says the lexicographer, is to summon judicially; as a proof of
which he quotes the following passage from AYLIFFE; By the papal canon law,
clerks, in criminal and civil causes, cannot be CONVENED before any but an
ecclesiastical judge. -- What a pity it is there should be so little connection
between Samuel Johnson, M. A. the lexicographer, and Dr. Johnson the
commentator? But so it is; nor is it any thing new; people are apt to forget
themselves as they rise to preferment.

Vol. I. Page 372.
DUKE. -- laws, for all faults;
But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
As much in mock as mark.

Our editor appears to know very little of the provincial customs and manners
of his countrymen. He would else, I think, hardly have been under the necessity
of being obliged to Dr. Gray, and recurring back two or three centuries for the
beggar's clack-dish See Vol. I. page 331. also Dr. Johnson's appendix, vol.
VIII.
, which I myself remember to have seen carried about by those itinerants in
many towns and villages in different counties of England. Again, Dr. Johnson is
equally at a loss with respect to the passage before us. He has not omitted,
however, to display Dr. Warburton's erudition and sagacity on the occasion.

Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop.] Barbers shops were, at all times,
the resort of idle people. Tonstrina erat quaedam: hic solebamus fere
Plerumque eam opperiri --
Which Donatus calls apta seeds otiosis. Formerly, with us, the better sort of
people went to the barber's shop to be trimmed, who then practiced the
under-parts of surgery; so that he had occasion for numerous instruments, which
lay there ready for use; and the idle people, with whom his shop was generally
crowded, would be perpetually handling and misusing them. To remedy which, I
suppose, there was placed up against the wall a table of forfeitures, adapted
to every offense of this kind; which, it is not likely, would long preserve its
authority.

Such is Dr. Warburton's explanation of this passage; which, our editor says,
may serve till a better is discovered. He observes, nevertheless, that whoever
has seen the instruments of a surgeon, knows that they may be very easily
kept out of improper hands in a very small box, or in his pocket. -- The truth
is, that the tables of forfeits, hung up in barbers shops, are still extant in
some parts of England; at least I remember to have seen one about twelve or
thirteen years ago, in an excursion from Burlington to North-Allerton in
Yorkshire. I think it was either at Malton or at Thirsk, and very probably it
is there still. I do not, indeed, recollect the name of the operator, in whose
shop it was affixed; but its contents struck me so much on reading, that I
believe I can recite them from memory pretty exactly. They do not relate,
however, to the handling of chirurgical instruments, but to civility and good
behavior; and seem not injudiciously calculated for a place, where persons of
different stations and degrees were accustomed to meet, in order to be
successively shaved. These statutes were in Rhyme, and were entitled, RULES FOR
SEEMLY BEHAVIOR.
First come, first serve. -- Then come not late;
And, when arrived, keep your state That is, behave yourself agreeably to your
station.
;
For he, who from these rules shall swerve,
Must pay the forfeits. -- So, observe. --
I.
Who enters here with boots and spurs,
Must keep his nook; for, if he stirs,
And gives, with armed heel, a kick,
A pint he pays for every prick.
II.
Who rudely takes another's turn,
A forfeit mug may manners learn Learn for teach, a common perversion of
language; the meaning is, that, by being made to forfeit, he may thence learn
better manners, than to want another time to be shaved out of his turn.
.
III.
Who reverentless shall swear or curse,
Must lug seven Probably the price of a pint of beer.
farthings from his purse.
IV.
Who checks the barber in his tale,
Must pay for each It is not clear, whether for each means what the artizans
call pints-a-piece, i. e. a pint for every person in the shop. If so, the
interrupting the barber in his tale was held to be a grievous offense indeed.
-- But perhaps for each means only for each offense; in which case, however, it
is not accurately expressed.


a pot of ale.
V.
Who will, or can, not miss To miss, in that part of Yorkshire, means to spare
or to be without. Thus a man forfeited a pint for insisting upon being shaved
with his hat on.
his hat
While trimming, pays a pint for that.
VI.
And he who can, or will, not pay,
Shall hence be sent half-trimm'd There is some humor in the penalty of
sending the refractory away half-shaved; and it is not impossible that the
ingenious author of the Upholsterer took one of his best hints from these
rules. There is also no less morally in the two last lines; excellently
calculated to discourage the vice of ebriety.


away;
For, will-he, nill-he, if in fault,
He forfeit must, in meal or malt.
But, mark -- who is alreads in drink
The cannikin must never clink.


Vol. I. Page 373.
LUCIO. Do you so, Sir? and was the duke a flesh-monger, a fool, and a coward,
as you then reported him to be?


Dr. Johnson, who seems constantly on the watch to catch Shakespeare tripping,
observes here, that Lucio had not, in the former conversation, mentioned
cowardice among the faults of the duke. But, says he, very graciously, such
failures of memory are incident to writers more diligent than this poet. -- On
this occasion, I cannot help remarking, that it is somewhat singular to find
our editor so extremely remiss and negligent in illustrating the beauties of
Shakespeare, and so very diligent in discovering his faults. This carping
critic is in this particular, however, egregiously mistaken; there being no
grounds for charging the poet, in this place, with want of attention to his
plot. It is true, that Lucio does not expressly call the duke a coward, in that
part of their conversation which passed on the stage, in scene VI. act 3. Our
editor might have observed, however, that he has a farther conversation with
him in scene XI. act 4. where he begins again to talk of the old fantastical
duke of dark corners; and when the duke wants to shake him off, by bidding him
farewell, and telling him his company is fairer than honest, Lucio will not be
thus got rid of, but follows him, saying, By my troth, I Will go with thee to the
lane's end. If bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. Nay, friar,
I am a kind of bur, I shall stick. Is it not very natural to suppose, that
Lucio might afterward call the duke a coward, considering the many opprobrious
names he had already given him? and is the poet to be censured, because he has
made the Duke charge Lucio with a single word of detraction, which was not
actually spoken before the audience? If this be not hypercriticism, I know not
what is. But, to make the matter worse on the part of our unfortunate editor,
the Duke does not charge Lucio with calling him a coward, at the time when he
runs on enumerating his other vices. For this was in the open street, through
which the officers passed in carrying the bawds to prison: but the time is
particularly specified when he called him coward, which was when the duke met
him in the prison, and, as I above remarked, could not get rid of him. This is
plain from the context.

LUCIO. Come hither, goodman bald-pate; do you know me?


DUKE. I remember you, Sir, by the sound of your voice: I met you AT THE PRISON
in the absence of the duke.


LUCIO. Oh, did you so? and do you remember what you said of the duke?


DUKE. Most notedly, Sir.


LUCIO. Do you so, Sir? and was the duke a fleshmonger, a fool, a coward, as
you THEN reported him to be?


DUKE. You must, Sir, change persons with me, ere you make that my report: you
spoke so of him, and much more, much WORSE.


Surely Dr. Johnson must have invidiously sought occasion to depreciate the
merit of Shakespeare, or he could never have laid hold of so groundless a
pretext to cavil either at his inattention or want of memory.

Vol. I. Page 375.
DUKE. It was the swift celerity of his death
Which, I did think, with flower foot came on,
That brained my purpose.

Dr. Warburton would alter the text to BANED my purpose; the futility of this
emendation, however, is, if I mistake not, sufficiently exposed by the author
of the Canons of Criticism; whose opinion Dr. Johnson adopts, without making
any mention of him, as usual.

Vol. I. Page 377.
ISAB. Most bounteous, Sir,
Look, if it please you, on this man condemned,
As if my brother lived, I partly think,
A due sincerity governed his deeds
Till he did look on me; since it is so,
Let him not die.

Dr. Johnson has, in my opinion, a very exceptionable note on this passage. I
shall quote it therefore entire, and make my observations on it afterward. The
duke has justly observed, that Isabel is importuned, against all sense, to
solicit for Angelo; yet here, against all sense, she solicits for him. Her
argument is extraordinary. A due sincerity governed his deeds,
'Till he did look on me; since it is so,
Let him not die.
That Angelo had committed all the crimes charged against him, as far as he
could commit them, is evident. The only intent which his act did not overtake,
was the defilement of Isabel. Of this Angelo was only intentionally guilty. --
Angelo's crimes were such, as must sufficiently justify punishment, whether its
end be to secure the innocent from wrong, or to deter guilt by example; and I
believe every reader feels some indignation when he finds him spared. From what
extenuation of his crime can Isabel, who yet supposes her brother dead, form
any plea in his favor? Since he was good till he looked on me, let him not
die. I am afraid our varlet poet intended to inculcate, that women think ill of
nothing that raises the credit of their beauty, and are ready, however
virtuous, to pardon any act which they think incited by their own charms.

To expose the several fallacies suggested throughout the above note, I shall
observe first, that it was very natural for Mariana to solicit Isabel's
intercession for her husband, the man she so much loved. I cannot think also,
that it is, in any respect, out of character for Isabel, after repeated
solicitations, to be moved to oblige Mariana, who had already obliged her, so
far at least as to prevent the apparent necessity of prostituting herself to
Angelo: especially if we reflect on the tranquil state of mind she seems to be
in with regard to her brother; in whose supposed death she appears to have
acquiesced, either from principles of religion or philosophy: for when the
Duke, in the foregoing page, speaking of her brother, says, -- Peace be with
him!
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort.
So, happy is your brother.
Isabel answers, I do, my lord. From a principle of philosophy, she must be
very conscious that the death of Angelo could not bring her brother to life
again; and if to this reflection we suppose her religion might add the
suggestion of Christian charity and forgiveness, I do not see any impropriety
in Isabel's soliciting Angelo's pardon.

As to the argument she makes use of, and which Dr. Johnson thinks so very
extraordinary, it is to be observed, that she does not make use of it as a
positive plea, but introduces it with -- I PARTLY THINK
A due sincerity, etc.
Again, Dr. Johnson says, the only intent which his act did not overtake, was
the defilement of Isabel. Surely, Dr. Johnson forgets the intended execution of
Claudio! There is no doubt that Angelo's guilty intentions fully deserved
punishment; but as the principal of them failed of being carried into
execution, I do not see why the reader should feel so much indignation at his
being pardoned, especially as he must perceive the propriety of doing poetical
justice to the injured Mariana; which would not be the case, if her new-made
husband were to be immediately punished with the severity due to his wicked
designs.

As to the sinister meaning he imputes to the poet, of intending a covert
satire on the fair sex, I think enough is already said to exculpate him; I
wish, therefore, Dr. Johnson were equally excusable for giving Shakespeare the
appellation of varlet poet. Our editor can hardly intend here to confine that
term to its simple and ancient meaning: for where is the jest or propriety of
calling Shakespeare a yeoman, or servant, agreeably to the old meaning of the
word varlet; which like fur, in Latin, it is allowed, originally conveyed no
base or opprobrious idea? -- And yet, if Dr. Johnson did not use the word in
this limited and antiquated sense, what can he mean by calling Shakespeare a
mean, sorry, or rascally poet? For this is the modern sense of the word; and in
this sense the word varletry is inserted in a certain folio dictionary, on the
authority of Shakespeare himself. -- Perhaps, indeed, Dr. Johnson only meant
here to express himself in a strain of wit and pleasantry. If so, let him
beware how he attempts to be witty again: for surely never was such an awkward
attempt made before! It is not in his nature.

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE.
Vol. I. Page 389.
GRA. -- silence is only commendable
In a neat's tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.

ANTH. Is that any thing now?

All the old copies, it is said, read it is that any thing now? This being
palpably defective, the later ones, in general, read as above: but Dr. Johnson
supposes that we should read, is that any thing NEW? For my part, however, I
can see no propriety in this supposition of novelty; nor do I think the reader
will conceive there is any room for the proposed alteration, if he considers
the following answer of Bassanio. -- Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of
nothing more than any man in Venice: his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid
in two byshels of chaff; you shall seek all day ere you find them; and when you
have them, they are not worth the search.

Gratiano is indeed censured just before, for being an eternal talker; and when
he goes out, repeating the above couplet, Anthonio says, Is that ANY THING now?
intimating that, though he is so full of talk, there is nothing [i. e. no
meaning] in it: and thus, it is plain, Bassanio understood him, by his
answering -- true, he speaks an infinite deal of NOTHING.

Vol. I. Page 410.
LANCELOT. Looking on his palm. Well, if any man in Italy have a fairer table,
which does offer to swear upon a book. -- I shall have good fortune. Here Is a
small trifle of wives, etc.


This passage has given the commentators a world of trouble. It seems
generally agreed, that Mr. Theobald's explanation is still more inexplicable
than the text itself. Dr. Johnson inserts it, however; for what reason I cannot
divine, unless it be to swell his book, or to serve as a foil to the superior
sagacity of Dr. Warburton and himself, whose notes immediately follow. I shall
only quote those of the two latter.

Which does offer to swear upon a book.] This nonsense seems to have taken its
rise from the accident of a lost line in transcribing the play for the press;
so that the passage, for the future, should be printed thus: Well, if any man
in Italy have a fairer table, which does * * * * * offer to swear upon a book I
shall have good fortune. It is impossible to find, again, the lost line; but
the lost sense is easy enough -- if any man in Italy have a fairer table which
does [promise good luck, I am mistaken. I durst almost] offer to swear upon a
book, I shall have good fortune. Dr. Johnson, after condemning Theobald's note
in the severest terms, and informing us that by table is meant the palm
expanded, goes on very magisterially thus. -- Dr. Warburton understood the word
A mighty matter to understand truly! which is familiar to every strolling
gypsy, and as well known to every kitchen-wench who can make shift to spell the
Egyptian Fortune teller, Palmistry laid open, or the two-penny Chiromancer.
, but puzzles himself, with no great success, in pursuit of the meaning. -- No
wonder at that Dr. Johnson! people seldom puzzle themselves with any great
success in pursuit of any thing. -- But to proceed with our editor's note. The
whole matter is this: Lancelot congratulates himself upon his dexterity and
good fortune; and, in the height of his rapture, inspects his hand, and
congratulates himself upon the felicities in his table. The act of expounding
his hand, puts him in mind of the action in which the palm is shown, by raising
it to lay it on the book, in judicial attestations. Well, says he, if any man
in Italy have a fairer table, that does offer to swear upon a book -- here he
stops with an abruptness very common, and proceeds to particulars. -- No, Sir,
he does not stop here; but goes on, agreeable to Dr. Warburton's explanation,
to say what is to be sworn upon the book, i. e. that he shall have good
fortune. But this is not to be sworn either by Lancelot himself, or by any
other Italian. It is the hand itself that promises so strongly, and, as it
were, offers to swear upon a book, that he shall have good fortune. And in this
sense the author of the Revisal takes it; though I think he has not hit off the
meaning quite happily. His interpretation is, If any man in Italy have a fairer
table, which pronounces that I shall have good fortune, with as much assurance
as if it was ready to swear it upon a book. -- Here, says he, the sentence
breaks off, and we must supply, I am mistaken, or some other expression of like
import. -- None of these commentators, though very sensible of the break in
this passage, seem to know where it lies; but if I might be allowed to take the
most trifling liberty in the world with the text, I dare say the reader would
see the whole meaning and propriety of it, at one view. -- Well, if any man in
Italy have a fairer table! -- Why, it does offer to swear upon a book, I shall
have good fortune. -- Go to, etc. Taking the words, also, in this sense, there
is a beauty and propriety in saying the palm offers to swear upon a book;
because, in judicial attestations, the essential part of the form lies in
kissing the book, which the hand may not be improperly said to do, even in
laying hold of it. Dr. Johnson, apparently having a confused idea of a court of
justice in his head, confounds the action of a criminal holding up his hand at
the bar, with that of a witness, qualifying himself by oath, to give evidence
against him. The former, indeed, must of course display the palm; but I believe
the latter seldom or never does.

Vol. I. Page 422.
All that glisters is not gold,
Often have you heard that told, etc.
On these verses Dr. Johnson has two notes; in each of which he proposes an
emendation in the text; and I must do him the justice to own, that I think them
both judicious and unexceptionable. He would have saved me some little trouble,
si sic omnia dixisset.

Vol. I. Page 456.
DUKE. Upon my power I may dismiss the court,
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.

Bellario, a learned doctor,
Whom I have sent for. --
The doctor and court are here somewhat unskilfully brought together. That the
duke would, on such an occasion, consult a doctor of great reputation, is not
unlikely; but how should this be foreknown by Portia?

Why will you, Dr. Johnson, be thus constantly seeking occasion to find fault
with Shakespeare, for misconduct in his drama; the business of which you are
evidently much too unskilled in to have a right to take upon you the authority
of censuring the foremost man of all this world? -- You admit it to be right
that Dr. Bellario, whom we may very well suppose to be a civilian of the first
rank, should be sent for, to advise in this cause. You know too, I imagine (or
at least you might have known, if you had read the play) that this same Dr.
Bellario (for he was a doctor too; WE are all doctors, Dr. Johnson) was a
relation, a cousin, to Portia. This being premised, is it not very natural to
suppose that, after Bassanio was called away in such haste to Venice, on
account of the prosecution carried on against his friend Anthonio, his bride
Portia would send a messenger to her cousin Bellario, in order to ask his
opinion of so extraordinary a case, or to interest him in Anthonio's behalf?
And can any thing be more probable than that he should inform her, on receiving
such a message, that he was actually sent for to Venice on that very account?
For it is to be observed, that the duke speaks as if he had sent for him some
considerable time before: for he says, unless Bellario, etc. come here to DAY.
His power of dismissing the court also, on his not coming, seems founded on
some physical or moral impediment, that might very naturally occur, to prevent
his arrival within the time: so that he must be supposed either at such a
distance as made it necessary to give him a considerable timely warning, or
that the extraordinary nature of the cause might make him require so much the
more time to prepare himself equitably to determine it. -- This being the state
of the case, was not here a very apt foundation on which to build Portia's plot
of officiating for the doctor? which design she no doubt concerted with him by
letter, before she sent for the notes and clothes mentioned scene V. act III.
It may not be amiss to observe here, that I have known some spectators impute
the device, by which Anthonio evades the penalty of the bond, to the ingenuity
of Portia. -- Perhaps this is the case, indeed, with the audience in general.
-- But, as I think it a little out of character, in a young lady of her
education, to be so well versed in the quirks and quibbles of the law; so I
conceive there is sufficient reason given in the play to suppose that evasion
to have been suggested by Bellario. -- For she expressly mentions to the
messenger notes and ^^^aths. These notes were, doubtless, the brief or hints
for her pleading. And Bellario says in his letter to the duke, speaking of the
fictitious doctor, he is furnished with my opinion. So that I am so far from
thinking that Shakespeare, as Dr. Johnson supposes, represents Portia to be a
prophetess, or a witch, that I conceive his readers in general are apt to think
her much more shrewd than he describes her; at least, I dare say, Dr. Johnson's
readers will conclude, from this specimen of his sagacity, that whether Portia
was a witch or not, he is no conjurer.


-- And that this was really the case seems evident, from what Portia says to
Jessica, during the absence of Bassanio, and before she sends Balthazar to
Bellario for the notes and clothes. -- Jessica compliments her on -- a noble
and a true conceit
Of god-like amity; which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of her lord.
A sufficient intimation, I think, that Bassanio must have been gone some time.
Again, in Portia's reply to this compliment, she says -- this Anthonio,
Being the bosom-lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed,
In purchasing the semblance of my soul
From out the state of hellish cruelty?
Here we find Portia speaking very peremptorily and certainly of Anthonio's
deliverance; and of the cost already bestowed to effect it. Is it reasonable to
think she would express herself thus confidently on a mere suggestion of her
own? Besides, what cost could she have bestowed? Her having bid her husband pay
the bond three times over, was nothing; because she could not be sure the money
would be taken. Nay, she evidently does not intend to trust to that acceptance.
It is therefore, I think, very evident, that she had even at this time
concerted the scheme with her cousin Bellario. How far Belmont might be from
either Venice or Padua, I cannot exactly say: but it appears from
circumstances, that it could not be very far. From Belmont to Venice it seems
there was a common traject, or ferry; so that the distance of both from Padua
could not be too great for transacting the business in question. -- It is true,
that the formality with which Port a introduces her charge to Balthazar, when
she sends him for the notes and clothes, seems to favor the supposition, that
this was the first time she had sent to Bellario, in which case there would be
some grounds for Dr. Johnson's remark; but we must observe, that Balthazar is
now to be entrusted with a more important charge than he had before been, in
merely carrying and bringing back a letter; or, it is not unlikely, that Portia
entrusted that business with a servant of less importance. All these things
duly considered, it is plain, I think, that Dr. Johnson has very rashly and
unadvisedly presumed to call Shakespeare unskilful, because he wanted skill
himself. I shall dismiss this note, therefore, with advising our editor never
to wade so far out of his depth for the future. It is a trite adage, but it is
a very good one, and worthy to be observed; Ne suitor ultra crepidam. I do not
say that Dr. Johnson may not probably be well skilled in some things; not that
I know that he is well skilled in any I will except indeed the article of
literary composition; in which, so far as the merit of a speech, an essay, a
life, or a novel, goes, he is undoubtedly the best writer in Christendom. But
his merit even here is in a great measure mechanical, and may be justly
accounted for in a manner that will do little honor either to his boasted
genius or learning.
; for, though I have read all his works, I declare he does not appear to me (at
least so far as I myself am able to judge) to be master of any one science, or
any one language, so that he must not plume himself on my suffrage. Not that I
deny him to be master of the whole circle of sciences, and of all languages
ancient and modern. But, if it be so; if it be really true, as his friends
inform me, that he is possessed of such amazing stores of literary and
scientific knowledge, I cannot help thinking him extremely culpable, not to say
very ungrateful, to keep them all avariciously to himself, and fob off the
public with mere shreds and patches. How dare Dr. Johnson treat that public
with so much contempt, which has done him such extravagant honor? How dare he
behave to that public with such imparalell'd ingratitude, which has given him
such imparalell'd, such avowed, such unmerited encouragement? -- It is true,
that its having done all this is sufficient to give Dr. Johnson a very mean
opinion of its spirit, taste and judgment. But he should have been aware of
carrying the imposition too far; he should not have presumed to think that this
public, tasteless and ignorant as he may suppose it, could ever be prevailed on
to grace his waving noddle with a wreath, irreverently torn from the brows of
Shakespeare!

The self-sufficient, the arrogant, Dr. Johnson may possibly conceive, that the
zeal, with which the very name of Shakespeare inspires me, is counterfeited;
and that I express myself thus warmly, to provoke him to a reply. -- No, Dr.
Johnson, you cannot reply. I must join in that deference, which I think the
world has undeservedly paid you, so far as to own, that I should never have
presumed to publish any thing against Dr. Johnson, that I had not good reason
to think UNANSWERABLE. It is indeed prudential in you to make a virtue of
necessity, and previously to give out, that you will not do what you have so
much reason to think you can not do. -- Yet you have your satellites, your
light-troops; you may send them out to harrass the enemy whom you dare not
encounter. But, as I am no farther your enemy than as you are Shakespeare's,
send who you will, as many as you will; I will undertake, under so gallant a
leader, to rout an army of scribblers, to crush a myriad of cockle-shell
critics, in his cause.

Vol. I. Page 469.
MESS. -- I bring word.
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She does stray about
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

LOR. Who comes with her?

MESS. None but a holy hermit, and her maid.

None but a holy hermit.] I do not perceive the use of this hermit, of whom
nothing is seen or heard afterward. The poet had first planned his fable some
other way, and inadvertently, when he changed his scheme, retained something of
the original design.

How! the poet blundering again! -- Why, what a blockhead this Shakespeare must
be, Dr. Johnson? eh! -- Nay, if you object to giving the appellation to
Shakespeare, we must bestow it on somebody else; the word is blurted out, and
cannot be recalled. Let us see if it will apply, as the lawyers say, to the
author of the above comment. --

He does not perceive the use of the hermit, because nothing is seen or heard
of him afterward. -- Pray is any thing seen of him now? He is not brought on
the scene; and may, for ought that effects the business of the play, exist only
in nubibus. There is no doubt that the messenger tells a lie, respecting the
employment of his mistress; and why may he not do the same respecting her
attendants? -- But perhaps the commentator may not see the use of the fiction
neither, and will therefore condemn this part of the messenger's lie as
unnecessary. He would do well to recollect, however, that, although nothing is
heard about a hermit afterward, a sufficient reason was given before to speak
of one in this message; which is evidently a contrivance of Portia to support
the imposition she is carrying on. It is to be remembered that, when Portia
takes her leave of Lorenzo and Jessica, putting the management of her house and
family in their hands, act III. scene 5. she says -- For mine own part,
I have towered heaven breathed a secret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord's return.
There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide.
Now, having told them this fib at her departure, nothing could be more
pertinent, or indeed necessary, to keep up the probability of the story, than
for the messenger to say, she was attended by a hermit; as it would be both
unseemly and dangerous for two women to stray about, kneeling and praying by
holy crosses, without a male attendant; and who so proper on such an occasion
as an holy hermit, whose sacred character might protect them from insult? --
This is sufficient to show, that it was not unnecessary, but very pertinent to
the plot, to have a hermit here spoken of; which is all the poet has done. --
Add to this, that, after all, it is possible there might really be a hermit in
the case, though it was needless that he should appear. For the messenger
himself might not be in the plot, and Portia have employed a hermit to deliver
him the message from Portia, as he actually did deliver it to Lorenzo; unless
we are to suppose that holy hermits are too inflexibly attached to truth, to
assist even in so innocent an imposture: which I, who have had the honor of
knowing some of those gentry, conceive not to be the case.

AS YOU LIKE IT.
Vol. II. Page 45.
AMIENS sings. Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
Thou art not so unkind
As man's ingratitude;
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude.

There cannot, I think, be a more flagrant instance of that perversity of
apprehension, which seems to have distinguished almost all our poet's
commentators, than the difficulty they have raised about this passage. It is
true they have in general been much more successful in throwing obstructions in
the way of the reader, than in obviating those which common sense and simple
ingenuity might naturally suggest. For my part, I should never have dreamt that
these verses so greatly needed illustration, that they were corrupted, or that
a line was lost and badly restored, unless the learned Dr. Warburton had told
me of the first, the ingenious and sensible authors of the Canons of Criticism
and of the Revisal had insinuated the second, and lastly, the learned,
ingenious and sensible Dr. Johnson attempted to persuade me of the third.
Indeed, they have all successfully labored to throw some obscurity on the
text, Mr. Edwards not excepted; for, though he has facetiously and justly
exposed Dr. Warburton's ridiculous emendation of the fifth line, he has left
the reader to explain the passage himself, after assuring him that it certainly
is faulty.

It will, I presume, afford some entertainment to the reader to compare the
several notes of these annotators; by which they will see how they have all
blundered round-about the poet's meaning; perhaps for no other reason in the
world than that they imagined it lay much deeper than it really does. It is not
an uncommon thing for persons immoderately sagacious to look too far forward,
and stumble over what lies immediately under their nose. Dr. Johnson appears,
indeed, to have a very different opinion of this matter; and seems to think
that Shakespeare's meaning is always very profound. Thus he tells us, the
original and predominant error of Dr. Warburton's Commentary, is acquiescence
in his first thoughts; that precipitation which is produced by consciousness of
quick discernment; and that confidence which presumes to do, by surveying the
surface, what labor only can perform, by penetrating the bottom See Preface to
Dr. Johnson's Shakespeare.
.

For my part, I had always a very different opinion of Dr. Warburton's
Commentary. That he did too precipitately acquiesce in his own thoughts, may be
very true; and that he surveyed only the surface of Shakespeare's writing may
be no less so; but that he went very deep into the recesses of his own
imagination, as well as into his stores of book-learning, for all those
far-fetched allusions, quaint epithets and literary conundrums, which he
imputes to Shakespeare, is, I think, not to be doubted. For it is very true, as
our editor also observes, that his notes exhibit perverse interpretations and
improbable conjectures; he at one time gives the author more profundity of
meaning than the sentence admits, and at another discovers absurdities, where
the sense is plain to every other reader See Preface to Dr. Johnson's
Shakespeare.
.

It is very natural to conclude, from this reprehension, that Dr. Johnson means
to insinuate his having himself repaired the faults of Dr. Warburton, and
effected that by perseverance and labor, which the reverend scholiast, his
predecessor, failed to do by his vivacity and precipitation. It is certain,
that labor necessarily takes up time; and so far the frequent procrastination
of the present edition affords Dr. Johnson a plausible excuse for pretending to
have labored: but, on the other hand, it is as certain that time does not
necessarily include labor; for, it is notorious that an industrious
gerund-grinder may do as much or more in a month, than an idler will do in
seven years. It is also farther certain that, although youth and inexperience
may be too hasty and precipitate, yet experience and age cannot well execute
their work too expeditiously; in the former case delay may serve to correct
errors, and check the inordinance and exuberance of zeal; in the latter, it
produces only languor and perplexity. Thus if Dr. Johnson, instead of
spiritedly repairing the neglect of those who only surveyed the surface, had
boldly and immediately penetrated to the bottom, all had possibly been right:
but, instead of doing this, it appears he has been full as much too tardy as
they were precipitate; and thus, leaving the weight of his learning, and the
force of his reputation, to work their way without the least application of
genius, he has suffered them, by long and constant friction, to perforate or
to penetrate, as he says, the bottom itself. So that the superficial meanings,
which former editors skimmed from the top, are left hanging about the sides of
the vessel; while the profound discoveries, weighty arguments, and striking
illustrations, expected in the present edition, are all escaped through the
hole which Dr. Johnson's modest industry and vast erudition have worked through
the bottom.

But, to leave this digression, and return to the notes of the several
commentators. Dr. Warburton's, as it is inserted by way of preference, no
doubt, in the page before us, runs thus:

Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
This song is designed to suit the duke's exiled condition, who had been ruined
by ungrateful flatterers. Now the winter wind, the song says, is to be
preferred to man's ingratitude. But why? Because it is not SEEN. But this was
not only an aggravation of the injury, as it was done in secret, not seen, but
was the very circumstance that made the keenness of the ingratitude of his
faithless courtiers. Without doubt Shakespeare wrote the line thus, Because
thou art not SHEEN,
i. e. smiling, and shining, like an ungrateful court-servant, who flatters
while he wounds, which was a very good reason for giving the winter wind the
preference. So in the Midsummer Night's Dream, Spangled star light SHEEN;
and several other places. Chaucer uses it in this sense, Your blissful suster
Lucina the SHENE.
And Fairfax, The sacred angel took his target SHENE,
And by the Christian champion stood unseen.
The Oxford editor, who had this emendation communicated to him, takes occasion
from thence to alter the whole line thus, Thou causest not that teen.
But, in his rage of correction, he forgot to leave the reason, which is now
wanting. Why the winter wind was to be preferred to man's ingratitude.

On this curious comment, the author of the Canons of Criticism has made the
following remarks:

This passage [meaning the two lines quoted from the text] is certainly faulty;
and perhaps it cannot be restored, as Shakespeare gave it. Sir Thomas Hanmer at
last altered it into sense; Thou causest not that teen. But this, it seems,
will not do; because, in his rage of correction, he forgot to leave the reason,
why the winter wind was to be preferred to man's ingratitude. So now Mr.
Warburton comes with his emendation, which he charitably communicated to Sir
Thomas, though he was so graceless as not to make use of it. Because thou art
not SHEEN. Though this matter is so clear with Mr. Warburton, every body who
understands English will doubt of it; because SHEEN signifies bright, which
makes no better sense than seen; nor does he produce any authority for its
signifying SMILING, which is the sense he here puts upon it; and to make it
pass the better, he lugs in a parcel of "smiling, shining, court servants, who
flatter while they wound," of whom there is not the least hint in the song, or
in the whole scene.

Mr. Edwards then goes on to enumerate Dr. Warburton's examples, which having
quoted above, need not be repeated. -- He proceeds -- These are the examples he
produces; whether wisely or not, let the forest judge; but the conceit of a
smiling target is entirely his own; and, if be will allow me a pun invita
Minerva; for it seems in direct opposition to the famed Aegis of Pallas. But
this is hardly a laughing matter: for with what face can he say smiling,
shining -- so Shakespeare. -- Chaucer uses it in this sense, -- and Fairfax --
when, if he knows any thing of the language, he must know, that not one of
them, in these instances, uses sheen in the sense of SMILING; and that, in its
true sense of BRIGHT or shining, it would make the passage worse than he found
it?

If Sir Thomas Hanmer, as he says, took occasion, from having this emendation
communicated to him, to alter the whole line; he showed more judgment than if
he had inserted such a false and nonsensical note; but, "in his rage of
correction, he forgot to leave the reason, why the winter wind was to be
preferred to man's ingratitude." If SHEEN does not signify smiling, I doubt Mr.
Warburton will be in the same case. However Shakespeare has equally forgotten,
in the next stanza, to leave the reason why a freezing sky is to be preferred
to a forgetful friend; which, perhaps, may give a reasonable suspicion that the
word because This ingenious writer does not intimate what he thinks might be
the right word; but if he be right in his suspicion, I conceive that, instead
of the conjunction copulative because, Shakespeare must use the adverb or
preposition disjunctive beside.
, in the first stanza, may be corrupt.

The author of the REVISAL of Shakespeare's Text, says, What the meaning of the
common reading, Because thou art not SEEN, may be, it is extremely difficult to
discover, which gives great ground for suspicion that it may be corrupt.
Possibly it might be intended to be this: the impressions thou make on us are
not so cutting, because thou art an unseen agent, with whom we have not the
least acquaintance or converse, and therefore have the less reason to repine at
thy treatment of us.

To come now to Dr. Johnson; who, after quoting Dr. Warburton's note, without
mentioning a syllable of Mr. Edwards's remarks on it, proceeds thus: I am
afraid that no reader is satisfied with Dr. Warburton's emendation, however
vigorously enforced; and it is indeed enforced with more art than truth. Sheen,
i. e. smiling, shining. That sheen signifies shining, is easily proved; but
when or where did it signify smiling? Yet smiling gives the sense necessary in
this place. Sir Thomas Hanmer's change is less uncouth, but too remote from the
present text. For my part, I question whether the original is not lost, and
this substituted merely to fill up the measures and the rhyme. Yet even out of
this line, by strong agitation, may sense be elicited, and sense not unsuitable
to the occasion. Thou winter wind, says the duke No, Dr. Johnson, it is his
cousin Amiens sings it.
, thy rudeness gives the less pain, as thou art not seen, as thou art an enemy
that do not brave us with thy presence, and whose unkindness is therefore not
aggravated by insult.

After so many avowed assurances of the difficulty of the above passage, and
the unsuccessful, though elaborate, attempts to clear it up; it may seem
affectation in me to insist on its being very obvious. I must declare, however,
that before I had read any of the above criticisms, it always seemed so, though
I must own I did not take either the particular meaning of the words, or the
general design of the song, in the same manner as is done by any of the
abovementioned critics. Dr. Warburton seems, indeed, to have misled them all,
by confounding ingratitude with pretended friendship or private enmity. That
flatterers are often secret enemies, and generally ungrateful, is very true;
but it is by no means essential to acts of ingratitude that they should be
committed in secret; and, on the contrary, though it be disingenuous, mean, and
cowardly to do private injuries, it may not be ungrateful; for the doer may
happen not be obliged to the person offended. With regard also to the
particular case before us, there is no doubt but the banished duke had suffered
enough from public and visible acts of ingratitude: the wickedness of which
would therefore be aggravated, as Dr. Johnson rightly says, by insult; and
would not be, like acts of false friendship or private enmity, aggravated by
being done in secret. When Dr. Johnson, therefore, adopting Dr. Warburton's
reasoning, tells us that smiling gives the sense necessary in this place, he is
misled by the plausibility of that gentleman's argument; there being no manner
of occasion, as Mr. Edwards observes, for the introduction of his flattering
courtiers.

Having expatiated so much on the difficulty and misapprehension of the
passage, I come now to explain it that way in which I have ever understood it;
and according to which, I think, there is no manner of difficulty in
reconciling the sense to the words as they now stand. Nay, I flatter myself
many readers will discover more beauty in this admirable little song, than they
were before acquainted with. Before I enter, however, on the explanation of
particular words, I shall consider the design and tendency of the song in
general. To this end it may be necessary to repeat the whole. Blow, blow, thou
winter wind,
Thou art not so unkind
As man's ingratitude;
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude.
Heigh ho! sing heigh ho! etc.
Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
That do not bite so nigh
As benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy sting is not so sharp
As friends remembered not.
Heigh ho! sing heigh ho! etc.
The reader will observe that the first verse is addressed to the WIND, and the
second to the SKY; by which latter is evidently meant the air or atmosphere, as
appears by the attritributes or qualities he imputes to it. It is observable,
farther, that the poet has, with great judgment, kept the properties and
effects of both distinct, beginning with the least hurtful, and proceeding
regularly in the climax to the most cutting and severe.

This being premised, I come now to the disputed meaning of the particular
words: and here all the scholiasts seem to blunder, in mistaking the sense of
the word keen in the fourth line; which they take to signify sharp, cutting,
piercing; whereas it only means eager, vehement; a sense equally common with
the former. The poet speaks here only of a keenness of appetite; he does not
mention actual biting, till he comes to address a more proper and powerful
agent: for, though it be the property of the wind to bluster and make a noise, it
does not bite, unless it bring with it a nipping frosty air. It does not freeze
more in an high wind, than when its breath is neither felt nor heard; but often
less. Besides, if keen here means sharp, piercing, etc. this line has the same
meaning as the seventh line of the second verse, where the poet is at the last
stage of his climax. And I think he would hardly be guilty of such a piece of
tautology, in the space of so few lines, or address the less severe and
powerful agent exactly in the same manner as he does that which is more so.

Taking the word in this sense, let us see its effect on the context.

Thy tooth is not so keen. That is as much as to say, thou art not so eager to
bite; thy appetite is not so voracious -- thou art not so violent to distress
us.

Because thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude.
In other words, because thou do not come in a visible form to confront us,
notwithstanding thou insultest us with thy abusive blustering. -- Thou do not
show thy grim LOOKS, though we hear thy roaring VOICE Shakespeare uses breath
for voice also in the Twelfth-Night; SIR ANDREW AGUE-CHEEK. I had rather than
forty shillings, I had so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has.
. -- The sight of those who have behaved to us with ingratitude is known to be
particularly disgustful, even though we should despise any thing they should
say or do when out of our presence Thus Adam to his ungrateful Eve, in Milton's
Paradise Lost, Out of my SIGHT, thou serpent!
. It were indeed extremely offensive to see others show their teeth at us, even
though they could not bite. Perhaps Shakespeare had some distant allusion to
this proverbial phrase: it is also observable, that the invisibility of the
wind was a circumstance which this great poet had frequently in his mind. Thus,
in Measure for Measure, he speaks of the viewless winds; an epithet, I believe,
peculiar to himself.

I now trust this explanation to the reader's judgment, and should also take
leave of the subject itself, were there not an expression in the last stanza;
the beauty of which is, in a great measure, lost, for want of being rightly
understood. -- I have not undertaken, indeed, to supply the defects of the
commentators; but as this song is a favorite, I cannot proceed without making
a slight animadversion or two on this head. The expression I mean is, Though
thou the waters WARP. The word warp has been very differently used by different
writers: it is used by some to mean contract or shrivel, to turn aside, etc.
and a certain lexicographer, in his folio dictionary, quotes this very line to
show that it is used to express the effects of frost. But may we not
pertinently ask him, what these effects are? Does he mean to say, that
Shakespeare has used it here in a sense different from its most general and
obvious meaning? If he does, he does not understand the poet; if he does not,
he knows not how to write a dictionary. To warp, here means neither to
contract, nor to turn aside; for the body of water in freezing is dilated, not
contracted; and though the frost may arrest or stop water in its passage, I
don't know that it alters its course.

The word waters, indeed, does not mean here, as some have supposed, water in
the a^stract, as a fluid in general; it means also neither the waving,
multitudinous, sea, nor the rapid unfreezing rivers, but such inland pools,
lakes, and other stagnant or slowly-moving pieces of water that are subject to
be affected by frost Agreeable to this, when the rivers break down or run over
their banks, laying the country under water, we say the waters are out. When
the river is returned again to its channel also, the pools remaining behind in
the adjacent fields or meadows, are called the waters.


. Now, it is well known that the surface of such waters, as is here meant, so
long as they remain fluid, i. e. unfrozen, is apparently a perfect plane;
whereas when they are frozen, this surface deviates from its exact flatness, or
warps. This is peculiarly remarkable in small ponds, the surface of which, when
frozen, forms a regular concave; the ice on the sides rising higher than that
in the middle. Thus we see that Shakespeare need not to be obliged to any
lexicographer for admitting the latitude of his expression, as he here uses the
word warp in its primitive and most general signification; to make a thing cast
or bend, as boards do when they are cut before they are thoroughly dry, or when
they are put to the fire.

Vol. II. Page 54.
ROS. O most gentle Jupiter! -- What tedious homily of love have you wearied
your parishioners withal!


Dr. Warburton tells us we should read Juniper, as the following-words show,
alluding to the proverbial term of a juniper lecture: a sharp or unpleasing
one! Juniper being a rough prickly plant.

In answer to this, Dr. Johnson says, in his usual indolent and laconic manner,
'Surely Jupiter may stand.'

Ay, surely; why not? as well as Jupiter in the beginning of the 6th scene of
the preceding act, where the same Rosalind says, O Jupiter! how weary are my
spirits! Yet neither he, nor Dr. Warburton, boggle in the least at Jupiter
there. But who told you, Dr. Johnson, that Jupiter might stand here, and gave
you the same reason for it? -- Did not the author of the Canons of Criticism do
this? Why should you be so sparing of confessing your obligations to that
gentleman?

Vol. II. Page 81.
ROS. I will be more jealous of thee than a Barbary cockpigeon over his hen;
more clamorous than a parrot against rain; more newfangled than an ape; more
giddy in my desires than a monkey; I will weep for nothing, like Diana in the
fountain; and I will do that, when you are disposed to be merry; I will laugh
like a hyen, and that when you are inclined to sleep.


Dr. Warburton says, that instead of the last word sleep, we should read weep:
to this reading, however, Dr. Johnson objects. I know not, says he, why we
should read to weep. I believe must men would be more angry to have their sleep
hindered than their grief interrupted.

What our editor suggests is certainly very true, especially of persons
addicted to somnolency; but if the poet intended the antithesis Dr. Warburton
seems to suppose, I should rather read weep: but then the construction of the
sentence will not do. Instead of saying, I will laugh like a hyen, and that
when you are inclined to weep; the and should be transposed, and the word that
omitted. He should have said, AND I will LAUGH like a hyen, when you are
inclined to WEEP. Supposing the text uncorrupted in no other particular, I must
give my voice, with the editor, for sleep. But I cannot help suspecting that
this passage is corrupted in a part where none of the commentators seem to
think it. It is justly to be presumed, at least, that Dr. Johnson does not
think it so, as he passes it over, notwithstanding he assures us, in his
preface, that he has left not one passage, that he thought obscure, without
attempting to elucidate it.

But what shall we say to Rosalind's laughing like a HYEN? If by a hyen is
meant an hyaena, I do not know what authority we have for its laughing, nor can
discover the propriety of the allusion. It is reported, indeed, of that furious
animal, that it will counterfeit a man's voice; nay, call him by his name, to
entice him out of doors, in order to devour him; after which he may be said,
metaphorically, to laugh in his sleeve at the success of his contrivance. But
the laughing here alluded to, must be necessarily so loud as to prevent a
drowsy man's going to sleep; and I do not know that any animal in nature is
possessed of the streperous part of risibility, except man. Homo est animal
risibile, and I believe exclusively so. Shakespeare then can never mean to say,
like an hyaena.

"What then could he mean?" -- True, reader, that is the question. -- Have but
a little patience and I will endeavor to tell you. -- Shakespeare, with all
his diversity of action and character, is generally very uniform and constant
in his train of thinking. He does not chop his metaphors into fritters; nor
skip giddily and alternately from the allusions of art to those of nature, or
vice versa. The reader will please to observe, that, in the preceding line, and
in this very sentence, he mentions Diana. Now, it is not at all like
Shakespeare to fly off immediately from this classical allusion, to so distant
a one as any afforded by natural history; even supposing there were not that
impropriety in it as I have above noticed.

I would venture, after the modish way of deciding arguments, to lay a good
bet, if it could be determined, that Shakespeare wrote thus;

-- I will WEEP for nothing like DIANA in the fountain; and I will do that,
when you are disposed to be MERRY: I will LAUGH like a HYAD, and that when you
are inclined to SLEEP.

The word laugh in the last part of the sentence being used, by way of irony,
for CRY; thus we ironically say, to laugh like Heraclitus, the weeping
philosopher Or, according to the vulgar phrase, to laugh on the wrong side of
the mouth. But if any of my readers should make objections to the supposed use
of the figure abovementioned, and be willing to look over the defect of
construction in the text, in favor of Dr. Warburton's proposed alteration,
they may take the word in its natural sense; in which case, to laugh like a
HYAD, would mean, as another vulgar phrase has it, to laugh till she cries. In
either case, however, it must be hyad, and not hyen: this latter reading being
entirely excluded for the reasons above given. By substituting the former also
we make both the allusions classical, and preserve that conformity of thinking,
which is perfectly agreeable to the genius of Shakespeare; who, it is very
possible, came from reading Ovid, to compose many scenes in this play. It is
certain his head was so full of him, that he mentions his very name in one of
the scenes, where neither the occasion, nor the turn of the dialogue, gave the
least room for it. I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious
poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.


: so that to laugh like a hyad, is to sob and blubber like one of the hyads.
Now hyads, or hyades, is an appellation given to the constellation, otherwise
called the seven stars, and suposed to be a watery sign; whence their
denomination from (...), i. e. to rain. The poets feign these hyads to have
been the daughters of Atlas and Aethra; and pretend that Hyas, their brother,
having been torn to pieces by a lioness, they wept so vehemently for his death,
that the gods, in compassion to them, translated them to heaven, and placed
them in the forehead of the bull, where they still continue to weep: whence the
constellation is supposed by some to presage rain.

I am well aware, that some of my readers will think this comment written
rather too much in the Warburtonian strain It is not impossible also, that some
superficial critics may think, that a man could not be kept awake by a woman's
weeping. But certainly, if she blubbered and roared heartily, and out of spite,
as is here supposed, he might as well be kept awake by her crying as her
laughing. Besides, if we reflect on the shrewd veracity of the old proverb,
that says, Women laugh when they can, and weep when they will; I conceive that
Rosalind, in mentioning the several acts of her wilfulness, speaks only of her
weeping.


. But, if it be just and pertinent, I think this should be no objection to it;
for, though Dr. Warburton's comments on Shakespeare are seldom to the purpose,
and therefore do not always deserve our approbation, they are generally
learned, and never fail to excite our admiration, either on account of their
actual ingenuity or most palpable absurdity.

Vol. II. Page 107.
EPILOGUE. If it be true, that good wine needs no bush, it is true, that a good
play needs no epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes; and good
plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues. What a case am I in then,
that am neither a good epilogue, nor can insinuate with you in the behalf of a
good play? Here, says Dr. Johnson, seems to be a chasm or some other
depravation, which destroys the sentiment here intended. The reasoning probably
stood thus, Good wine needs no bush, good plays need no epilogue, but bad wine
requires a good bush, and a bad play a good epilogue. What case am I in then?
To restore the words is impossible; all that can be done without copies is, to
note the fault. -- Happy is it for the memory of Shakespeare, and as happy for
his discerning readers, that the veneration paid to his name sometimes prevents
the hand of the commentator from executing those designs which his temerity
conceives. What work would not a critic, of less modesty than our editor, make
of this passage, should he take it in his head to supply what is thus supposed
wanting? Yet how easily is the whole set right! It can hardly be called a
supposition that Shakespeare wrote though instead of then That a transcriber
might make such a mistake, is also as likely, as that he should write though for
then, as, Dr. Johnson supposes, is done in King John, page 410.
. It is obvious he must, as he plays on the word good all through the passage,
not once introducing the epithet bad, made use of by Dr. Johnson, nor hinting
at the antithesis, which the editor conceives so necessary to the sense. Though,
at the end of a sentence, is commonly used in discourse for however, and has
the same meaning as but at the beginning of it. Thus it is the same thing as if
the speaker had said, BUT what a case am I in, etc. Let the reader substitute
these words for what a case am I in THEN, and I dare say he will conceive with
me there is no chasm in the passage; but that it stands as Shakespeare wrote
it. Be this, however, as it may, what is substituted by Dr. Johnson is entirely
foreign to the purpose. It does by no means follow that, because good wine
needs no bush, bad wine requires a good one. Good wine will recommend itself,
and sell without a bush; but we do not thence infer, that the goodness of any
bush can recommend or sell bad wine. -- The Bermudans, I am told, when they go
fishing, never trouble themselves to carry any oil or butter for sauce; for if
they catch a fat fish it requires none, and if they catch a lean one it
deserves none. -- Shakespeare, I fancy, by saying nothing about either bad wine
or bad plays, reasoned about them both as the Bermudans do about their fish.

LOVE'S LABOR LOST.
Vol. II. Page 114.
BIRON TO THE KING. Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
That will not be searched with saucy looks;
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others' books.
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights
That give a name to every fixed star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights,
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know, is to know naught: but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.

KING. How well he is read to reason against reading!

Dr. Warburton and Dr. Johnson, having both exerted their critical abilities on
this passage, and, as I think, left it worse than they found it, I shall insert
the annotations of both, as I find them printed in the pages before me.

Too much to know is to know naught but FAME;
And every godfather can give a name.
The first line in this reading is absurd and impertinent. There are two ways
of setting it right. The first is to read thus, Too much to know is to know
naught but SHAME. This makes a fine sense, and alludes to Adam's fall, which
came from the inordinate passion of knowing too much. The other way is to read,
and point it thus, Too much to know, is to know naught: but FEIGN, i. e. to
feign. As much as to say, the affecting to know too much is the way to know
nothing. The sense in both these readings is equally good: but with this
difference; if we read the first way, the following line is impertinent, and,
to save the correction, we must judge it spurious. If we read it the second
way, then the following line compleats the sense. Consequently the correction
of feign is to be preferred. To know too much (says the speaker) is to know
nothing; it is only FEIGNING to know what we do not; giving NAMES for things
without knowing their NATURES; which is FALSE knowledge: and this was the
peculiar defect of the peripatetic philosophy then in vogue. These
philosophers, the poet, with the highest humor and good sense, calls the
godfathers of nature, who could only give things a name, but had no manner of
acquaintance with their essences.

On the above annotation, Dr. Johnson observes, that there being two ways of
setting a passage right, gives reason to suspect that there may be a third way
better than either. The first of these emendations makes a fine sense, but will
not unite with the next line; the other makes a sense less fine, and yet will
not rhyme to the correspondent word. I cannot see why the passage may not stand
without disturbance. The consequence, says Biron, of too much knowledge, is not
any real solution of doubts, but mere empty reputation In our editor's
appendix, speaking of this passage, he points, reads, and explains thus; Too
much to know is to know naught, but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
That is, too much knowledge gives only fame, a name which every godfather can
give likewise.


.

The author of the Revisal has a very long note on this passage; rejecting the
emendations proposed by Dr. Warburton, and seeming to coincide with the opinion
of Dr. Johnson. His explanation of the passage is this. Too eager a pursuit of
knowledge is rewarded, not with the real possession of its object, but only
with the reputation of having attained it.

It is really surprising to me, that these several critics should be so much at
a loss to comprehend, what I conceive the context renders very plain; without
making any alteration in the text, as it stood before Dr. Warburton meddled
with it, viz. Too much to know, is to know naught but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
I cannot imagine what put it into the head of Dr. Johnson, or of the author of
the Revisal, that fame here means reputation. And, supposing it does, what can
Dr. Johnson mean by saying, that too much knowledge gives only fame, a name
which every godfather can give likewise? What, because every godfather can
call a child N or M, is he able therefore to give him a literary reputation
This puts me in mind of a certain French bookseller; who, speaking of the
profession to which he intended to bring up an ignorant booby of a son; By-gar,
says he, Monsieur, I will make him one author; he shall be the first writer of
the age. Morbleu, he shall be une philosophe; une Voltaire!


? or is Dr. Johnson so careless of his pointing, as to mean to say that
reputation is a mere name? Or, farther, how can to know naught but fame mean to
acquire nothing but reputation? Be all this, however, as it may, fame means
here nothing more than report, rumor or relation. Biron is declaiming against
reading, or the mere study of books. Little, says he, -- have continual
plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others' books:
the authors of which books he calls -- earthly godfathers of heaven's lights,
That give a name to every fixed star.
Now, continues he, Too much to know, is to know naught but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
To all which the king replies, by observing to another nobleman, how well
Biron is read, -- to reason against READING. Hence, I think it is plain that
Biron means, through the whole passage, to inculcate a maxim, which is
undoubtedly a very true one, viz. that the greatest readers are not the most
scientific; the knowledge of things and of words being as different, as the
study of nature and the plodding over books. From the latter, people may
acquire a heap of indigested literature, without having any real knowledge at
all: indeed, their too great attention to philological pursuits, or to words,
often prevents their knowing any thing of philosophy or of things. Add to this,
that the knowledge acquired from books, is, for the most part, founded on the
authority of the writer, and what is thus known, is known only by report or
relation. So that those, whose whole stock of knowledge consists in what they
have read, merely in the learned lumber of their memory, may, with great
propriety, be said to know nothing but what is told them; that is, to be
entirely ignorant of facts, and to know nothing but FAME It would be absurd
also, to the last degree, to say, that to know TOO MUCH would be to know
NOTHING, if no difference in the kind of knowledge was intended. Again, the
last line of Biron's speech evidently refers to what he had just before said,
concerning the base authority of books. The authors can give names, says he, to
things; instancing those, That give a name to every fixed star, though they
profit no more by them, and know nothing farther about them, than those who are
ignorant of those names. And this being all they can do, he may well call their
writings base authority, and say that any body can do as much, for -- Every
godfather can give a name, which is as much at least as astronomers do by the
stars.

The author of the Revisal seems to think the word fame, in this place, has
some reference to the king's speech at the commencement of the play; when he
proposes reputation as the principal aim and motive of their studies. Let Fame,
that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registered upon our brazen tombs;
And then grace us in the disgrace of death:
When, spite of cormorant devouring time,
The endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honor which shall 'bate his scythe's keen edge;
And make us heirs of all eternity.
But admitting this, I cannot see any reason to think that fame, in the passage
disputed, has precisely the same meaning as in that just quoted, unless both
speeches had been spoken by the king. -- It is not unlikely that this passage
refers to the fame recommended by the king; but it is very unlikely that the
speaker should affect to set a greater value on knowledge than on that fame,
which was at first proposed as the ultimate end to be attained by it. -- It is,
in my opinion, more than probable that Biron the speaker, who is evidently a
wit, and rails at book-learning, takes the advantage here of the equivocal use
of the word fame; to sneer at the king's proposing celebrity as the end of his
studies: in which case the contested line might be paraphrased thus; To spend
all your time in getting to know only the names of things, and what others
report about them, is the way to get nothing else but fame sure enough! Indeed,
Biron seems to be a man of such a kidney, as to reason about literary fame as
Falstaff does about military honor, and could easily resolve it in like manner
by a trim reckoning, into a very word, air, a mere empty report.

Vol. II. Page 121.
COST. The manner of it is, I was taken in the manner.

BIRON. In what manner?

COST. In manner and form following.

Dr. Johnson tells us in his preface, that, when he inserts any of Dr.
Warburton's proposed emendations in the text, he means to give them his highest
approbation. Now, this he has done in the present instance; giving that
scholiast's note likewise at the bottom of the page. The note is as follows:

-- Taken WITH the manner.] The following question arising from these words,
shows we should read -- taken IN the manner. And this was the phrase in use to
signify taken in the fact. So Dr. Done, in his letters, But if I melt into
melancholy while I write, I shall be taken IN the manner; and I sit by one too
tender to these impressions.

The author of the Canons of Criticism, however, has invalidated what Dr.
Warburton advances in this place, by another of his own notes on a passage in
the first part of Henry the Fourth, where the same expression occurs; and on
which the same reverend commentator says: The quarto and folio read with the
manner, which is right. Taken with the manner is a law phrase, and then in use
to signify taken in the fact. -- Mr. Edwards observed, on remarking this
inconsistency, that "Great wits have short memories." But I am at some loss to
know to what I should impute Dr. Johnson's giving the highest approbation to
this blunder of Dr. Warburton's. That his memory is at least as bad, and his
attention full as little, is evident from his quoting both these contradictory
notes in their respective places, and his giving the highest approbation to
both the contradictory emendations, by inserting them in the text; one in the
play before us, and the other in that of Henry IV. Notwithstanding the
inconsistency had been pointed out in a book, that has run through at least
six editions. To what can we impute such servile transcription? Shall we set it
down among Dr. Johnson's other concessions to the respect due to high place,
and his veneration for genius and learning? Or shall we rather impute it to his
indolence in not consulting the Canons of Criticism? -- Or perhaps he would
neither choose to depend on the authority of that writer, nor even on Dr.
Warburton's himself, against the united suffrage of Dr. Warburton and Dr.
Done. He might have depended, however, on the farther authority of
Shakespeare; which he might have had by turning over a few pages more of the
volume before us; the Clown in the Winter's Tale using the same phrase, thus,
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not taken yourself WITH
the manner.

My readers will hardly doubt, on this representation of the case, that the
common phrase was taken WITH the manner. As to the certainty of its being
adopted here, however, it may possibly be still disputed. Dr. Warburton says,
Biron's question, immediately succeeding, shows that Costard should say IN the
manner. For my part I cannot see the force of this reason, though I can very
well see why Biron should not repeat WITH the manner, because of another law
phrase, with which Costard answers him, viz. IN manner and form following. Now
this could not be, with any propriety, WITH manner and form following. But I
think there is no impropriety in supposing that Biron, not attending to the
quaintness of Costard's expression, asks him simply and naturally IN what
manner? notwithstanding Costard had used the phrase WITH what manner. Be all
this, however, as it may, we have here a very flagrant instance, IN what manner
Dr. Johnson has commented on Shakespeare, and WITH what manners he has
treated the public, who encouraged him in this undertaking.

Vol. II. Page 142.
MOTH. A wonder, master, here is a costard broken in a shin.


ARM. Some enigma, some riddle; come, -- thy l'envoy -- begin


COST. No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the male, Sir.


Dr. Johnson boggles here at the word male, which he conjectures may stand for
mail, a packet or bag, and thence the mountebank's budget The author of the
Revisal also supposes, that we should read mail; but he says that means No
salve within the BANDAGE. He is equally silent, however, about the l'envoy; the
explanation of which though it be no great matter, the English reader has been
probably desirous of some little illustration or other.


. The matter, indeed, he owns is not great; but one would wish, he says, for
some meaning or other. I wonder, when he was in the humor to descend to such
trifles, he should pass over the word l'envoy, which is so often repeated in
this and the next page. I dare say not one reader of Shakespeare in a hundred,
and perhaps not all his commentators, know very well what to make of it.
Armado, indeed, is very explicit on the subject. It is, says he, -- an epilogue
or discourse, to make plain
Some obscure precedence that has to fore been sain.
I will example it. Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my
l'envoy. The fox, the ape, and the humble be,
Were still at odds, being but three.
There Is the moral now the l'envoy.




All this is plain and intelligible enough; every English reader also might
learn from Boyer, that envoy meant the conclusion of a ballad or sonnet; from
which he might be led to mistake it for the mere burden of a song. -- But why
should the couplets of a song, or the explanation of an enigma, be called the
envoy? The case was this -- during the institution of the Jeux Floraux, or
poetical contests, which formerly existed in France, the sonnets or verses of
the several candidates for the prize, always closed with an address to the
prince, or umpire, who determined their merit, and to whom each was accordingly
sent [envoie] whence the name; and hence this part of the composition was
usually the most studied and highly finished, in order to induce the arbiter to
bestow the prize on the author.

Vol. II. Page 149.
THE PRINCESS TO A FORESTER. Nay, never paint me more;
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here -- good MY GLASS -- take this for telling true.

Looking at her glass, and giving the Forester money. To understand, says our
editor, how the princess has her glass so ready at hand in a casual
conversation, it must be remembered, that in those days it was the fashion
among the French ladies to wear a looking-glass, as Mr. BAIL coarsely
represents it, ON THEIR BELLIES; that is, to have a small mirror, set in gold,
hanging at the girdle, by which they occasionally viewed their faces, or
adjusted their hair. -- As Mr. Johnson is almost always above referring
particularly to his authorities, I cannot readily turn to the passage in Bail
where he makes this coarse representation. I am greatly apt to suspect,
however, from the opinion I have of Mons. Bayle's usual propriety and elegance,
that our editor has mistaken his meaning. It appears to me that, if these
mirrors were hanging at the girdle, they would have been rather represented as
worn at the side, than on the belly, as the watch and etui are at present. Add
to this, that if the ribbon or chain, by which they were hung, was so long as
to permit the wearer to adjust her hair, without taking it quite off (as is
reasonable to suppose) it could hardly be suspended at the girdle; for in that
case such glasses would hang down to the knee, and could not, with any
propriety, be said to be worn on the belly. I imagine, therefore, these mirrors
were suspended from the neck, or somehow fastened to the drapery covering the
stomach and breast; in which case, Mr. Bail might say, without the least
inelegance, they were worn sur le ventre. For I will venture to say it is, from
his using the word ventre on this occasion, that Dr. Johnson charges him with
coarseness; but ventre does not always signify the belly.

The French distinguish between the stomach and belly, by calling the former
the petit-ventre, or VENTRE SUPERIEUR; and the latter the bas-ventre. The
general term is also frequently used instead of POITRINE, and as often means
the stomach and breast, as it does the belly. -- Vaugelas will tell him also,
that the word ventre is used with great elegance in metaphorical writing. Thus,
passer sur le ventre a son ennemi, is an approved phrase for giving an enemy a
total defeat. The French, in like manner, use the word entrailles, in such
phrases as, literally translated, would be very coarse and disgusting to an
English ear. To instance only one or two. Seigneur, votre loi est graveee dans
le fond de mes entrailles. -- Les entrailles de la misericorde de Dieu. One of
the most elegant French writers, now living, also calls the natural affection
of a parent for his child, l'amour des entrailles. But what should we think of
an English critic, who should translate such passages thus: Thy law, O Lord, is
engraven in our guts -- The entrails of the mercy of God -- The affection of
the bowels -- and thence take occasion to censure the writer for coarseness and
inelegance?

We are informed, by some letters lately published In the St. James's
Chronicle, and other newspapers; as also the monthly magazines.
, that when Dr. Johnson came to town, about the year 1730, he had a design of
engaging in some translation from the French. Whether he ever did or no, I
cannot say; but, from this and some other specimens of his acquaintance with
that language, I cannot help thinking the author would have been extremely
unlucky that had fallen into his hands.

Vol. II. Page 165.
KING. So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
The night of dew, that on my cheeks down flows.

On this passage Dr. Johnson has the following note.

The night of dew, that on my cheeks down flows.] I cannot think the night of
dew the true reading, but know not what to offer.

That is very strange! Dr. Johnson. -- Why, thou must have no more invention in
thee than there is in a leaden plummet: thy pegasus must be confined and
hoodwinked like a horse in a mill; or surely something would have suggested
itself to a writer who declares, that not a single passage, in this whole work,
has appeared to him corrupt, which he has not attempted to restore! See Dr.
Johnson's Preface.
-- I would be far from seeking to depreciate the success of our editor's
modest industry See Dr. Johnson's Preface.
: but I am afraid the purchasers of his book will be apt to think, from many
such slovenly notes as this, that both his industry and modesty are pretty well
matched. It is evident, from the context, that the king, being over head and
ears in love, employs himself, as people usually do in that situation, Wasting
the live-long hours away,
In tears by night, and sighs by day.
What objection then could our editor have to substituting nightly dew, instead
of night of dew. If we are not absolutely certain the poet wrote so, there is a
moral presumption, a great probability, of it: but whether he did or not, the
alteration is certainly an amendment, and a very harmless one. It would also
have served a little to save the credit of the editor; who, whatever might be
his intentions before he begun his work, sufficiently shows, by the work
itself, that he regarded not what he had promised when he did it; and, by his
Preface, that he knew as little what he had done when it was finished.

Vol. II. Page 170.
BIRON. O me, with what strict patience have I sat
To see a king transformed to a knot!

Here, indeed! we see our editor attempting to restore a passage, which appears
to him corrupt. -- Mark the success! --

To see a king transformed to a knot!] Knot has no sense that can suit this
place. We may read sot. The rhymes in this play are such as that sat and sot
may be well enough admitted.

What! have you lost your hearing and judgment too, Mr. Editor, as well as your
memory and invention? -- Do you not know that even sot and sot cannot be
admitted into any verse as English rhymes; and do you think the matter mended
with sot and sat?

Besides, do you see no impropriety in Biron's calling the King, to his face, a
blockhood or fool, because truly he was in love; especially when he is
conscious he is himself in the same situation? Add to this, that so gross an
expression is totally inconsistent with the fine strain of raillery that runs
through the whole of his speech. This attempt, therefore, of our editor at
restoration, is evidently a very unlucky one, and is excusable only as the
unsucessful endeavor of modest industry.

But why does Dr. Johnson conclude this passage to be corrupted? If he thinks
the rhymes sot and sat admissible, surely he can have no objection to our
pronouncing sat after the broad orthoepy of the vulgar; in which case it would
be a much less exceptionable rhyme to knot than what he is willing to admit. --
But he says, knot has no sense that can suit this place. He might have found,
however, by turning to almost any dictionary, excepting his own, that a knot is
a small bird, well known in many parts of England, and is called avis Canuti by
the naturalists; as it is said, because king Canutus was very fond of such
birds. It is, indeed, a delicious kind of waterfowl. Now, as Biron has said
but just before, speaking of the King, Shot, by heaven! proceed, sweet Cupid;
thou have thumpt him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap; I cannot, for my
part, see any objection to his comparing him in this passage to a wounded knot.
If my readers do, I have done. They will do me the justice, however, to own,
that, if I am not possessed of Dr. Johnson's ingenuity and modesty, I show at
least as much industry in defending the text of Shakespeare, as he does in
pulling it to pieces.

Vol. II. Page 222.
SONG. When daizies pied and violets blue,
And lady-smocks all silver white;
And cuckow-buds of yellow hue,
Do paint the meadows with delight.
Dr. Warburton says, we should read much-bedight, which is very proper and
elegant. -- The present editor quotes Dr. Warburton's note; to which he adds
the following short animadversion.

Much less elegant than the present reading. Undoubtedly it is: and I have here
only to ask Dr. Johnson, why he excludes the notes of Theobald, when they have
been sufficiently exploded by other writers; and yet pesters his readers with
those of Dr. Warburton, which stand exactly in the same predicament?

The ingenious author of the Canons of Criticism objected, long ago, to this
proposed emendation of Dr. Warburton's; judiciously observing, that if bedight
means bedecked or adorned, the meadows being bedight already, they little need
painting. -- But Dr. Johnson seems to be so much influenced by the respect due
to high place, that he seems determined to avoid the name of Edwards, as much
as possible, for fear of offending the bishop.

THE WINTER'S TALE.
Vol. II. Page 242.
LEONTES. You will! -- why, happy man be's dole! -- That is, says our editor,
may his dole or share in life be to be a happy man.


It is doubtless true, that dole means a share or part; but if this be all the
difficulty, how is the sense, elicited by Dr. Johnson, reconcilable to the
literal construction of the sentence? -- The editor should have told his
readers, that happy man be his dole was a common proverbial phrase, for wishing
good luck either to one's self or others. Thus Falstaff, in the first part of
Henry the Fourth. Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I; every man to
his business.

Vol. II. Page 295.
AUT. Oh, that ever I was born!

CLEON. In The name of me --

I believe me should be blotted out.

Here we have another article of Dr. Johnson's critical creed. It is certain
that, whether me be in or out, is, in this place, of very little consequence;
but I so much revere the text of Shakespeare, that, without I see an absolute
necessity for it, I will never defile it with a blot. It seems as if the very
name of Johnson was fated to cast invidious reflections on that of Shakespeare;
as if it was malignantly formed to absorb tho rays diffused by superior luster,
and enviously to fully, with a reflected gloom, the fountain of its own light.
-- This scheme of blotting-out was originally suggested by a Johnson; who, when
the players made their boast, in honor of Shakespeare, that he never blotted
out a line, replied, Would he had blotted out a thousand. This was BEN Johnson,
who only expressed his wish that Shakespeare had done, what SAM Johnson boldly
determined to do for him. For it is to be observed, that here was no tenderness
due to living reputation to stop his hand; and he might think to indulge
himself SAFELY in the innocent discussion of a dead poet's pretensions to
renown See Dr. Johnson's Preface.
.

If it be not owing to some such antipathy or inviduous influence subsisting
between the names of Johnson and Shakespeare, to what else can we impute Dr.
Johnson's objection to the harmless me in the above passage! He very possibly
cannot find any use for it. But if we consider that the whole line is a mere
exclamation; testifying the clown's surprise at hearing Autolicus cry out, and
seeing him lie grovelling on the earth. Had he said In the name of HEAVEN -- or,
In the name of MERCY -- the line, however bordering on profanity, would have
past: but nothing is more common than for conscientious people to check
themselves in the middle of such exclamations, or to substitute some innocent
word in the place of the exceptionable one. Again, if any objection be made to
the supposition of the Clown's stopping in the middle of the word mercy; let us
take another view of the exclamation, and admit the word me to stand as a
personal pronoun. It is notorious that persons, who, as Hotspur says, swear
like comfit-maker's wives, and give such sarcenet security for their oaths, as,
in good sooth -- as true as I live -- as God shall mend me -- and as sure as I
live. I say it is very common for these uncommon swearers, who cannot gulp down
or digest a good mouth-filling oath, to protest upon their WORD. Now I cannot
see why a person, who, to avoid a profane oath, should protest upon his WORD,
might not, with equal propriety, in order to avoid a profane exclamation, cry
out in his NAME. Admitting this, the Clown, instead of crying out in the name
of heaven, exclaimed in the name of himself; viz. l' the NAME of me. -- And
this expression may surely pass among expletives of this kind, as well as for
the SOUL of me -- for the LIFE of me -- for the HEART of me, etc. -- After all,
whether I have convinced the reader or not, of the propriety of letting me
stand in the text, I must have some better reason given ME for expunging it,
than the ipse-credidit of a JOHNSON.

Vol. II. Page 298.
PERDITA. -- even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way, as you did: Oh, the fates!
How would he look, to see his work, so noble,
Vilely bound up!

Here Dr. Johnson has found Shakespeare tripping again. -- Hear what he says.

His work so noble, etc.] It is impossible for any man to rid his mind of his
profession. The authorship of Shakespeare has supplied him with a metaphor,
which, rather than he would lose it, he has put, with no great propriety, into
the mouth of a country maid. Thinking of his own works, his mind passed
naturally to the binder. I am glad he has no hint at an editor.

We have here also, another awkward attempt of our editor at wit and
pleasantry. But, why will thou, Dr. Johnson, persist thus in playing at
bob-cherry, when the prize hangs so high above thine head, and such a weight
of lead is incumbent on thy heels? I have already advised thee, in the fullness
of my heart, and, as Cicero says, non otii abundantia, sed amoris erga te, not
to be so forward to display thy wit. I told thee before, and I tell thee again,
thou have it not in thee, being as unable to divert the reader with thy
pleasantry, as to convince him of Shakespeare's impropriety. -- Again, why, Dr.
Johnson, art thou glad that Shakespeare has no hint at an editor? Do thou
think he would have thrown out any censures that might reach thee? -- No --
that incomparable bard was, as thou say, the poet of nature, and drew his
characters from, the life: and nature had not produced in that age so arrogant,
and at the same time so dull an animal, as the present commentator on
Shakespeare. There were pedants and pedagogues, it is true, in his day; he has
depicted an Holofernes and a Sir Hugh Evans. But these were slight
excrescences, mushrooms, champignons, that perished as the smoke of the dunghill
evaporated, which reared them. A modern editor of Shakespeare is, on the
contrary, a fungus attached to an oak; a male agaric of the most astringent
kind, that, while it disfigures its form, may last for ages to disgrace the
parent of its being.

But, to lay aside metaphor; not Burgerdischius, Gronovius, nor any one of the
whole tribe of Dutch commentators, from the first of them to the last, has
proceeded through his author with more phlegm and frigidity, than Dr. Johnson
has gone through Shakespeare And here lies the difference between Dr.
Warburton and Dr. Johnson, whose commentaries I place both on a footing with
regard to their utility, as they are themselves pretty equal with respect to
that arrogance with which they have treated the public, the living patrons of
Shakespeare. In the commentary of Dr. Warburton, however, we have all the fire
and spirit of a restif imagination, bridled in by as perverse an understanding:
whereas, in that of Dr. Johnson, we see but too plainly the waywardness of
senescence struggling with the weakness of puerility.

It may be thought strange that I should treat Dr. Johnson's pretensions to wit
so contemptuously, when it is notorious that his bons-mots have been constantly
repeated for these ten years past in taverns and in coffeehouses, at dinners,
and over tea-tables, to the great gratification of his admirers, and the
edification of their hearers. Nay, it is well known, that a certain literary
projector, excited by the success of BEN Johnson's jests, had schemed the
publication of the Johnsoniana, under the name of our editor, intending to
insert on his title page, instead of O rare BEN! O brave SAM! -- But I know not
how, yet so it happened, that, upon enquiry, the projector could not muster up
above a dozen genuine jokes worth printing. It was found that most of the wise
sayings, smart repartees, pregnant puns, and cramp conundrums, imputed to him,
had been forged or invented for him by his friends and acquaintance. The few
following indeed were, if I remember right, admitted to be genuine:

JOHNSONIANA, or the witty sayings of Sam. Johnson, M. A.

Mr. Johnson, being sent for, by order of the king, to write the History of the
House of Brunswick; replied, with great humor and loyalty, to the gentleman
who proposed it, by saying, What! Sir, is there no scoundrel author in England
but myself?

Mr. Johnson, being offered a pension by his present majesty, in return for the
above instance of his loyalty, he, notwithstanding his former railing at
placemen and pensioners, very wittily and wisely said -- nothing; but growled
and TOOK IT.

Mr. Johnson having, on a necessary occasion, turned himself toward the wall,
in one of the streets of Oxford, was reminded by his companion, that he had
indecently placed himself just opposite a window where some young ladies were
drinking tea: on which Mr. Johnson, p -- f -- g on, wittily and delicately
replied, Sir, it is the OFFICE of Nature, and I shall DISCHARGE it.

At another time, Mr. Johnson, being in company where some persons were
disputing about the doctrine of the Trinity, he rose up from his chair, and
ingeniously decided the dispute at once, by clenching his fist, and threatening
to knock the first person down, who, in his presence, should cast infidel
reflections on his friend Athanasius.

In the same company, he was also heard most divertingly to affirm, that The
man must be an ATHEIST of the deepest dye, who did not believe in the COCK-LANE
GHOST.

At various times and places, he has been heard also to drop the following
exquisite strokes of wit and humor. -- Sir, Sir, the fellow is a fool. -- Sir,
the man is a blockhead. -- The rascal is an Atheist. -- There are but three
good lines in all CHURCHILL's satires, and two of them he stole from my LONDON.
-- Shakespeare a poet! Sir, he never wrote a line of poetry in his life. An
ostler! Sir, a VARLET, that used to hold gentlemen's horses at the playhouse!

These, and a few other strokes, equally pointed and humorous, being all the
undertaker of the above project could pick up; and as the humor even of these
depended greatly on a certain motion of the head peculiar to Dr. Johnson, which
cannot be committed to paper, it was judged advisable to drop the scheme: so
that I hope I stand excused, if I do not place Dr. Johnson's witticisms among
the anas, or think him upon a sooting even with Joe Miller, or his own
namesake Ben.


. It is hard to say, indeed, who is the dullest scholiast of the dullest writer
of antiquity. But Dr. Johnson has the singular honor of being the dullest
annotator on the brightest of all those who have succeeded the revival of
letters.

To return to Dr. Johnson's annotation, and the more particular defense of
Shakespeare's text.

The editor has here charged the poet with being guilty of an impropriety in
making a country maid talk like an author. But how does Dr. Johnson know that
this is really the case? How does it appear, from the words of the text, that
the allusion he charges on Shakespeare is at all intended? -- That Perdita
could know nothing about book-binding, is taken for granted; this being the
very circumstance, on which the charge of impropriety is founded. But it does
not appear, notwithstanding Dr. Johnson imputes this impropriety to
Shakespeare's profession, that the poet himself was much versed in the matter.
It is very little likely that a writer, who confessedly took so little care
about the printing of his works, and has no hint at an editor, should yet have
his head so full of a book-binder. Dr. Johnson is pleased, for the honor I
suppose of our profession, to rank Shakespeare among the livery-men of our
company. But, though I honor my profession as being the most liberal of all
others, though I honor the immortal memory of Shakespeare still more, yet I
respect the truth most of all. It does not appear that the term authorship can
be applied with any propriety to Shakespeare; for, though he wrote for the
stage, I find no good authority for supposing he sold his copies, or
transferred his right in them, to booksellers; and he only is an author by
profession who writes for the TRADE. -- No -- To the honor of the gentlemen of
the stage, Shakespeare was by profession a PLAYER; and I have no better reason,
than his knowing every thing, to suppose he knew that a book-binder existed.

To come now to verbal criticism. A piece of work vilely bound up, must,
according to Dr. Johnson, necessarily mean a book meanly bound. But why so?
Neither the words work nor bound up are idiomatical, when applied to
book-binding. In the first place, we do not call the writings of an author his
work, but his works. And, though sometimes, in speaking of the several sheets
of a book, or the different volumes of an author's works, we may talk of
binding them up; yet, speaking of a book in the singular number, we talk always
of its being bound merely; not of its being bound up.

On the other hand, the term bind up is applicable to various works of
husbandry, and such kinds of employment as a country maid might well be
supposed acquainted with. Add to this, that the term bound up has a peculiar
propriety in the passage before us, as it is opposed to prank'd up, a few lines
above. The reader will remember, that Perdita, the country maid, is dressed
like a princess; or, as she says, most goddesslike prank'd up; and Florizel,
the real prince, is disguised in the habit of a clown. Now it is observable
that, as the superb dresses of the rich and gay were fastened together by
ornamental brooches, ouches, knots of ribbons, etc. so the coarser garments of
the poor and simple were fastened together, and tied with strings or leathern
thongs. And hence Perdita might very properly say, that the prince, in his
swain's wearing, was vilely bound up; without having any more allusion to the
binding of a book than to the binding up of a wheatsheaf. But, because she has
called the son the father's work, without any impropriety in the line before,
she must in this truly allude to book-binding: though, were it so, she must be
guilty of as great an impropriety in the application of her allusion. For why
an author should be so terribly angry, as she supposes, at accidentally seeing
his works meanly bound, I cannot possibly devise; as I conceive neither his
interest nor his reputation can be at all affected by the difference between
calve's skin and sheep's leather.

Vol. II. Page 323.
AUT. Though I am not naturally honest, I am so sometimes by chance. -- Let me
pocket up my pedler's excrement *. -- How now, rusticks, whither are you bound?


On this passage our editor gives the following laconic note:

* What he means by his pedler's excrement I know not? No! -- Then, give me
leave to tell you, Dr. Johnson, you know too little, or are much too indolent
and inattentive to undertake a commentary on Shakespeare. -- Does not Armado,
in Love's Labor Lost, page 185, of this very volume, call his beard an
excrement? and do not you tell us in a note on that passage, that 'the author
has before called the beard valeur's excrement in the Merchant of Venice?' And
should not the recollection of these passages (not to mention others which an
able commentator might have recollected) have excited you to turn over this
play a little, in order to see whether some reason might not be found for
supposing the word excrement to have here the same meaning? -- You may think,
indeed, the futility of such a research evident on the face of the text; as a
man cannot easily put his beard in his pocket. -- Very true; but he does not
call it his own beard, but his pedler's beard, for that character was assumed,
as was also the false beard he wore on that occasion, in order the more to
disguise himself, lest he should be known again by the clown he had just before
robbed, act IV. scene 3. It would have required no very acute or profound
observation also, to have remarked that, though Florizel, in scene 10. stripped
him of his pedler's clothes, he had either no occasion for his beard, or did
not think it a false one: this, therefore, Autolycus had still on,
notwithstanding his change of habit, till he found it necessary to speak to the
clowns; when, prudently to appear in character, he whipped it off, and clapped it
in his pocket; saying, Let me pocket up my pedler's excrement. -- Do you know
now, Dr. Johnson? Or, will you prudentially choose to remain still in ignorance;
shake your wise head; and say, as usual, ' Sir, Sir, the man who tells me this,
is a blackhead Having written the above remarks on the pedler's excrement,
without turning to the editor's increment, the appendix to his eighth volume; I
was inclined to throw them aside, on finding that the editor had found out, or
that somebody had told him, the meaning of the word; for he there says, very
laconically too, page 323. Pedler's excrement is pedler's beard. But, as he has
not any where thought proper to let the reader into the secret of its being a
fictitious beard, or how otherwise Autolicus could put it in his pocket, I
conceived some of my readers might profit by the above illustration, and
therefore determined to insert it: and this the rather, when I reflected that
Dr. Johnson could by no means lay a just claim to the merit of such information
as he might acquire, by publicly advertising for, after his book was finished.
!'

Vol. II. Page 324.
SHEP. My business, Sir, is with the King.


AUT. What advocate have thou to him?


SHEP. I know not, an't like you.


CLO. Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say, you have none.


SHEP. None, Sir; I have no pheasant cock, nor hen.


Advocate's the court word for a pheasant.] This satire, on the bribery of
courts, not unpleasant. WARBURTON.

This satire, or this pleasantry, says Dr. Johnson, I confess myself not well
to understand! For my part I suspect, but I will not be positive, that the
Clown, who seems to be the shrewdest of the two countrymen, should say to the
other, Advocate's the court-word for a PRESENT, meaning a gift or fee of some
kind: to which interpretation of the word he might possibly be led by some
significant action of the pretended courtier, whose design it evidently was to
profit as much as possible by their ignorance. On this supposition we see the
shepherd is naturally led into the blunder of the pheasant, which is otherwise
not easily accounted for.

TWELFTH NIGHT.
Vol. II. Page 360.
SIR ANDREW. -- Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?


MARIAN. Sir, I have not you by the hand.


SIR AND. Marry, but you shall have, and here is my hand.


MAR. Now, Sir, thought is free: I pray you, bring your hand to the buttery
bar, and let it drink.


SIR AND. Wherefore, sweetheart? What Is your metaphor?


MAR. It Is dry, Sir.


SIR AND. Why, I think so: I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry.
But what is your jest?


It Is dry, Sir.] What is the jest of a dry hand, I know not any better than Sir
Andrew. It may possibly mean a hand with no money in it; or, according to the
rules of physiognomy, she may intend to insinuate, that it is not a lover's
hand, a moist hand being vulgarly accounted a sign of an amorous constitution.

It must be confessed, indeed, that our editor's sagacity is frequently at
fault when a jest is in the wind. The bringing the hand to the buttery-bar, and
letting it drink, is a proverbial phrase among forward Abigails, to ask at once
for a kiss and a present. Sir Andrew's slowness of comprehension in this
particular, gave her a just suspicion, at once, of his frigidity and avarice.
-- She therefore calls his hand dry: the moistness of the hand being a sign of
liberality, as well in matters of love as money. Thus Othello to Desdemona,
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.
--
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.
Hot, hot and moist --
--
-- It Is a good hand:
A frank one.
DES. You may, indeed, say so;
For 'twas hand that gave away my heart.

OATH. A liberal hand. --

Old Foresight, in Love for Love, describes his wife also as having a mole upon
her lip, with a moist palm, and an open liberality on the mount of Venus. --
Dr. Johnson need not, therefore, have expressed so much caution of suspecting
this to be the truth of the matter. There is one thing, however, he should have
attended to; and this is, that the whole of this insinuation is founded rather
on the rules of palmistry than physiognomy: for, though the etymology of the
latter word be known to the learned, who may admit of such latitude of
expression, I do not remember ever to have seen physiognomy made use of before
by an English writer to signify any information of this kind, but that which is
acquired from the features of the face. So that Marian's finding out any thing
from St. Andrew's palm, by the rules of physiognomy, must appear to an
unlearned reader, as absurd as if she had read his folly in his phyz by the
rules of palmistry.

To check the smile, however, of the unlearned reader, and to preserve the
veneration due to cramp words and crooked letters, he is to know that phyz does
not come from (...) but from a less ancient and honorable stock, the French
visage, or the Italian viso.

Vol. II. Page 362.
SIR TOBY. Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a curtain
before them? Are they like to take dust, like Mistress Mall's picture? Why do
thou not go to church in a galliard, and come home in a coranto? My very walk
should be a jigg! I would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. What
do thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think, by the excellent
constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.


I know not how many, or if all, the editions authorize this reading of
sink-a-pace. Our editor adopts it, and passes it over in silence, like the rest
of the commentators. I have ever looked upon it, however, as so vile a blot in
this admirable piece of raillery of Sir Toby's, that I cannot help imputing it
to the interpolation of some transcriber, who imagined there was an excellent
joke in making water into a SINK-A-PACE. The conceit, however, is so low and
vile, that I cannot give into the notion that Shakespeare, fond as he seems of
punning and playing upon words, was the author of it. I am confirmed in this
opinion also by reflecting, that the attention of the reader is diverted from
the real humor of the passage, by this horrid conundrum. Sir Toby, in carrying
his ridicule of poor Ague-cheek's dancing-accomplishments to the highest pitch,
proceeds so far as to tell him, he would not stand still on the most necessary
occasion, even to make water; but that he might not betray himself, even to
this fool, by talking of absolute impossibilities, he fixes on a grave, flow,
and even hobbling kind of dance, the cinquepace, for this suspicious occasion
The gravity and interruptions of this dance are, indeed, particularly pointed
out by Shakespeare on another occasion. Wooing, wedding, and repenting, is a
Scotch jigg, a measure, and a cinque-pace. The first suit is hot and hasty like
a Scotch jigg, and full as fantastical; the wedding mannerly and modest, as a
measure full of state and gravity; and then comes repentance, and, with his bad
legs, falls into the cinque-pace.


.

I could wish, therefore, the authority of the copies would bear me out in
discarding this miserable pun, and restoring the words to its genuine and
original spelling.

Vol. II. Page 368.
Enter Sir Toby. OLIVIA. By mine honor, half drunk. What is he at the gate,
uncle?


SIR TOBY. A gentleman.


OLIVIA. A gentleman! What gentleman?


SIR TOBY. It Is a gentleman here -- A plague o'these pickle herring! etc.


Dr. Warburton has a note on this passage, which our editor has inserted
without any animadversion, notwithstanding it has been sufficiently exposed
and confuted by Mr. Edwards, as Dr. Johnson appears to think by the pointing he
has adopted in the text, which is different both from that of Warburton and
Theobald. Theobald points and reads thus, SIR TOBY. It Is a gentleman. Here --
[belches] A plague o'these pickle herring!


Dr. Warburton's note runs thus.

It Is a gentleman. HERE -- ] He had before said it was a gentleman. He was
asked what gentleman? and he makes this reply; which, it is plain, is corrupt,
and should be read thus, It Is a gentleman-HEIR; i. e. some lady's eldest son
just come out of the nursery; for this was the appearance Viola made in men's
clothes.

On this note Mr. Edwards observes, that gentleman-heir is a new and
unnecessary phrase for a lady's eldest son: concluding that Shakespeare has no
need of it; as any body will own, who considers that Sir Toby was drunk, and
interrupted in his speech by his pickled herrings. That is, by the pickled
herrings he had been eating; and which, rising in his stomach, occasioned him
to belch, as Theobald has it.

Is it possible, after all this, to guess what induced our editor to trouble
his readers with Dr. Warburton's frivolous note, and to adopt Mr. Edwards's
pointing, against that of Theobald, without mentioning a word of either of the
two latter?

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.
Vol. II. Page 467.
NYM. For the revolt of mien is dangerous.


The revolt of mien, says Dr. Johnson, I suppose we may read the revolt of men.
Sir T. Hanmer reads this revolt of mine. Either may serve, for the present text
I can find no meaning.

Why then did you adopt it? The author of the Revisal affirms, that THIS revolt
of MINE is the common reading, as appears from Mr. Pope's edition, and is
plainly alluded to in Pistol's reply. Thou art the Mars of malcontents. The
Reviser charges both Dr. Warburton and Mr. Theobald also with having taken here
an unwarrantable liberty with the text, without giving the least hint to the
reader of what they had done.

Yet, notwithstanding all this, our editor has admitted a futile note on this
passage, by Mr. Steevens, into his appendix; in which that gentleman
unsuccessfully endeavors, as Dr. Johnson says on another occasion, to elicit
sense by strong agitation out of the text as it now stands.

Vol. II. Page 476.
MRS. PAGE. I warrant he has a thousand of these letters, writ with
blank-space for different names; nay, more, and the^e are of the second
edition: he will print them out of doubt, for he cares not what he puts into
the press, when he would put us two.


Having charged Dr. Johnson, among the other editors of Shakespeare, with
passing over difficult passages, and displaying their sagacity on those which
are obvious, I cannot pass over an instance of the latter kind, on the passage
before me. Our editor makes the following note, referred to from the word press.

Press is used ambiguously for a press to print, and a press to squeeze.

The reader would certainly stand in need of a ghost to to come from the dead
to tell him this. And yet Dr. Johnson, when it was necessary to apologize for
having done less than he ought, could plead that the reader is seldom pleased
to find his opinion anticipated; and that it is natural to delight more in what
we find or make, than in what we receive.

Vol. II. Page 478.
NYM. -- I have a sword, and it shall bite upon my necessity.


Dr. Warburton has a mighty whimsical note on this passage, which our editor
has printed, though he condemns it, and has silently adopted the reading of
Mr. Edwards, who had sufficiently exposed the absurdity of the Warburtonian
emendation. See Canons of Criticism, page 115.

Vol. II. Page 482.
HOST. -- Will you go an-heirs?


Dr. Warburton's note on this passage, printed without any animadversion of our
editor, runs thus;

Will you go AN HEIRS?] This nonsense is spoken to Shallow. We should read,
Will you go ON, HERIS? i. e. Will you go on, Master? Heris, an old Scotch word
for master.

What the present editor understands by this word, or whether he understands
any thing by it, is not easily determined, as he has thought proper to leave
it in this situation, doubtless for the reason given above; viz. its being
natural for the reader to delight more in what he may find out of himself, than
what the scholiast may tell him. For my part, however, I apprehend the mere
English reader would be glad of some little assistance here, especially as Dr.
Johnson does not seem to be satisfied with Dr. Warburton's note. -- The author
of the Revisal appears also to be of the same opinion, and therefore has given
his readers the following remarks on this controverted passage. Will you go on,
Heris? The nonsense of the former editions was, 'Will you go an heirs?' Mr.
Warburton assures us, ' heris is an old Scotch word for master.' It may be so
for ought I know. But as my experience has taught me some distrust of this
gentleman's positive assertions in matters of this nature, I must beg leave to
doubt of it. Besides, this word, according to this interpetation of it, is of
the singular number, and yet is addressed, not to Ford, but to Page and
Shallow, as is evident from what immediately follows. I see no reason neither
why either Shakespeare, or mine host of the Garter, should choose to talk old
Scotch, and therefore I should rather suppose our poet might have written,
'Will you go on, hearts?' An expression suited to the jovial character of mine
host, and not very different in appearance from the common reading, especially
when spelled as it anciently was, herts. Mr. Theobald's conjectures, 'Will you
go on here?' or Will you go, mynheirs?' carry with them, in my opinion, very
little probability.

It is very justly observed by the Reviser, that there is no obvious reason for
mine host of the Garter to speak old Scotch; but if we consider that he is a
German, I do not see why the scholiast should suppose Theobald's last
emendation improbable. Nothing is more likely, I think, than for him now and
then to drop a word of high or low Dutch. It is true that the word mynheirs is
properly neither one nor the other: for neither the Dutch nor the German make
the plural of here or herr end in s. Add to this, that they seldom use the
personal pronoun singular with the noun plural. When they accost a single
person with the title of my Lord or Sir, it is Mynheer or Mein herr; but when
they address more than one with the title of Lords or Gentlemen, the pronoun is
generally dropped, and they say Heeren or Herren.

But I see no manner of impropriety in supposing our host to be either above or
below such idiomatical and grammatical niceties: in which case he might not
only join the singular pronoun with the plural noun (as the English say my
Lords, as well as my Lord) but also give the plural noun their common ending in
English; so that if Theobald had substituted mynheers, it might have pasted.
But if it be insisted on, that our host of the Garter shall speak properly and
elegantly, the passage must stand thus. "Will you go on, heeren, or herren."
The reader may take which he likes best, both meaning simply, Will you go on,
gentlemen? --

I cannot help referring, on this occasion, to a passage in our editor's
preface; where, among other excuses for doing so little, after having promised
so much, he has the following curious passage:

If my readings are of little value, they have not been ostentatiously
displayed, or importunately obtruded. I could have written longer notes; for
the art of writing notes is not of difficult attainment. The work is performed,
first by railing at the stupidity, negligence, ignorance, and asinine
tastelessness of the former editors, and showing, from all that goes before,
and all that follows, the inelegance and absurdity of the old reading; then by
proposing something, which, to superficial readers, would seem specious, but
which the editor rejects with indignation; then by producing the true reading,
with a long paraphrase, and concluding with loud Dr. Johnson is here expressly
describing the method of writing annotations. Pray, Doctor, is your pen any
thing like a speaking trumpet, a stentorophontick instrument, as your
dictionary more explicitly calls it? If it be not, I cannot, for the soul of me
conceive how you do to write LOUD. As to my goose-quill, it runs over the paper
as still as a mouse; but then, it is true, I cannot boast that my writings have
made so much noise in the world as those of Dr. Johnson.


acclamations on the discovery, and a sober with for the advancement and
prosperity of genuine criticism.

We see here that Dr. Johnson knew very well what was to be done, if he had but
had abilities, industry, or goodwill will enough to do it. Indeed, he has
sometimes succeeded pretty well in doing all that he has here described,
except in one little particular, and that is producing the true reading; this
he has done so very seldom, that we could very readily have excused him, if he
had displayed even more ostentation, had he given us but a proportionate
quantity more of truth.

Vol. II. Page 482.
FORD. Though Page be a secure fool, and stand so firmly on his wife's fealty,
yet I cannot put off my opinion so easily.


All the copies, says Dr. Warburton, read stand so firmly on his wife's
FRAILTY: but to this reading, Mr. Theobald objected. No, surely; Page stood
tightly to the opinion of her honesty, and would not entertain a thought of her
being frail. I have therefore ventured to substitute a word correspondent to
the sense required, and one which our poet frequently uses to signify conjugal
fidelity. -- In reply to this note, Dr. Warburton says, Mr. Theobald has no
conception how any man could stand firmly on his wife's frailty. And why?
Because he had no conception how he could stand upon it, without knowing what
it was. But if I tell a stranger that the bridge he is about to cross is
rotten, and he believes it not, but will go on, may I not say, when I see him
upon it, that he stands firmly on a rotten plank? yet he has changed frailty
for fealty, and the Oxford editor has followed him. But they took the phrase,
to stand firmly on, to signify to insist upon; whereas it signifies to rest
upon; which the character of a secure fool, given to him, shows. So that the
common reading has an elegance that would be lost in the alteration.

Notwithstanding this fine reasoning, however, of Dr. Warburton, the present
editor has judiciously stuck by Theobald's emendation in the text, though he
is perfectly silent about it in his notes. It happens, nevertheless, very
unluckily for Dr. Johnson, that he has quoted this very passage in his
dictionary, under the word frailty, as an authority for the use and meaning of
that word. But of this I shall take proper notice in my Table of Errata A work
in great forwardness for the press, designed for the use of the purchasers of
that celebrated performance, and intended shortly to be published, under the
title of A RAMBLE through the IDLER's Dictionary.


to that admired and truly wonderful Lexicon; the blunders of which I hope, God
willing, to get through some time or other; although it is such an Augean
stable as requires, to cleanse it properly, the application and abilities of an
Hercules.

Vol. II. Page 540.
FALL. -- they would melt me out of my sat, drop by drop, and liquor fishermen's
boats with me.


For boats we should read boots. This may probably be an error in the printer;
but editors, as I have observed before, whose task professedly lies in
regulating points and adjusting true readings, are answerable for every slip of
this kind, whereby the meaning of their author is obscured or misrepresented.

Vol. II. Page 493.
FORD. Heaven be praised for my jealousy! -- Eleven o'clock the hour -- I will
prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I
will about it -- Better three hours too soon, than a minute too late. --


In a note on this passage, our editor has displayed his critical acumen most
egregiously; as indeed most of Shakespeare's editors do, when they venture an
inch beyond the servile bounds of verbal criticism. Our poet is universally
allowed to be one of the greatest masters in describing the effects, as well as
the greatest judge of the operation, of the passions, that ever existed. And
yet is he here arraigned for an error, which affects him as an accurate
observer of human nature, and a just delineator of the actions of mankind, his
most distinguishing characteristics. The note here follows:

Eleven o'clock.] Ford should rather have said ten o'clock; the time was
between ten and eleven; and his impatient suspicion was not likely to stay
beyond the time.

No; Dr. Johnson. -- Ford should neither be made to say ten nor eleven o'clock:
he is not speaking of the time, at which Falstaff is to meet his wife; but of
the time then present, which is seven o'clock, just three hours, as he expressly
observes, from the earliest time of the appointment. So that, so far is his
impatient suspicion from staying beyond the time of their intended meeting,
that it seems to urge him instantly to go about to defeat the supposed purposes
of it. -- I will about it -- better THREE HOURS too soon than a minute too
late. -- Why should he particularly mention three hours rather than any
indefinite time, unless for the reason given? I know not how far the copies may
authorize this reading; but the mistake might easily be made by the first
transcribers, and be successively transmitted through the press uncorrected, as
the sense was not very palpably affected by it. By reading seven for eleven,
however, we deliver Shakespeare from the persecution of his annotator, and give
a beauty and propriety to the passage, which at present is doubtless
exceptionable. I would advise the actor also, who may perform this part for the
future, to look at his watch, when he repeats this sentence; for that was
evidently the author's intention, as appears by the intimation of his having
still three hours good, in which to take proper measures to surprise the
parties. He did not mean, as is plain by the sequel, to prevent or hinder their
meeting, but to be beforehand The word prevent being here used, perhaps
nearly, though not altogether in the same sense ^s in our liturgy: when we say,
O Lord prevent us in all our doings. It may indeed be conceived to carry a
double meaning; viz. Ford's simply getting the start of the parties, in order
to detect and expose them; or, as is above hinted, to prevent or hinder his
being made a cuckold. But I think he seems to so be well assured of his having
been cuckolded by somebody or other, that a single prevention of this kind
could be of little consideration with him. It were indeed to little purpose, if
his opinion of his wife were justly founded, and his sarcasm on the sex in
general were true; i. e. that what they think in their hearts they may effect,
they will break their hearts but they will effect.


with them in the means of detection. Add to all this, that although, in his
rage, he says, just before, the hour is fixed, yet no one particular hour was
precisely named for the intended rendezvous; it was not at ten, nor at eleven,
but between ten and eleven; so that the reason Dr. Johnson gives, why he should
not say eleven, is in itself sufficient to prove he should say neither.

THE TAMING OF THE SHREW.
Vol. III. Page 20.
TRANIO. If love has touched you, naught remains but so,
Redime te captum quam queas minimo.

Dr. Warburton tells us, that the line, here quoted from Terence, shows that we
should read, in the preceding, If love has TOILED you, -- i. e. taken you in
his toils, his nets. Alluding to the capius est, habet, of the same author.

Dr. Johnson, however, without even deigning to adopt Not that Dr. Warburton's
emendation is defensible, but is sufficiently refuted by Mr. Edwards. See
Canons of Criticism, page 124.
any thing that might do the least honor to Shakespeare's learning, takes upon
him boldly to assure us, that our author had this line from Lilly, which I
mention, says he, 'that it may not be brought as an argument of his learning.'

But pray, Dr. Johnson, how can you take upon you to say that Shakespeare had
this line from Lilly, and not from Terence? Is it because the line is to be
found in Lilly? And is this your whole authority? -- You can have no other. It
appears by the application, however, that Shakespeare knew the meaning of this
line; and, if he knew it in Lilly, why might he not know it in the original
author from whom it was taken? Is it because you have so often quoted words and
passages, in languages you do not understand, that you suspect Shakespeare of a
similar practice? You should never measure others' corn by your own bushel. You
have been already reprehended in public, for misrepresenting in your preface
the testimony of your predecessor Ben Johnson; who tells us, that Shakespeare
had small LATIN and less GREEK. This you converted into small Latin and NO
Greek. The ingenious critic, who reminded you of this error, was candid enough
to impute it to your quoting from memory only In the St. James's Chronicle.
; but, supposing that, in this case, such a method of quotation was excusable,
it appears, I think, too plainly, from your constant and repeated endeavors to
depreciate both the natural and acquired abilities of Shakespeare, that this
was not the case. Your perseverance in these endeavors, at least, give great
reason to suspect the mistake was wilful; as the supposition of his having any
Greek at all, would not have suited with your darling project, or answered your
end, of invidiously representing him as a varlet, one of the illiterate vulgar.

Vol. III. Page 25.
PET. Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
Where small experience grows. But, in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me.

Dr. Warburton says, this nonsense should be read thus: Where small experience
grows but in a mew, i. e. a confinement at home. And the meaning is, that no
improvement is to be expected of those who never look out of doors.

To this note, quoted from Dr. Warburton, the present editor adds the following:

Why this should seem nonsense, I cannot perceive. In a few means the same as
in short, in few words.

This piece of information, however, and the method of pointing adopted by Dr.
Johnson, might have been had long ago from Mr. Edward's Canons of Criticism;
who, in exposing the absurdity of Dr. Warburton's emendation, quotes other
passages from Shakespeare, where the same expression is made use of.

In few; his death, whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp, etc.
SECOND PART OF HENRY IV. Again, in HENRY V. Thus then in few.


Vol. III. Page 45.
GREMIO. Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts but to so much in all.

All the copies, it seems, concurred in reading My land amounts not to so much
in all: But, because Dr. Warburton blunderingly conceived something must be
wrong in it, and wrote a plausible note in justification of BUT, Dr. Johnson
has not only inserted the said tedious note, but has given his highest
approbation to the proposed emendation, by adopting it in the text. -- The
sensible author of the Revisal, however, having exposed the futility of the
alteration, and sufficiently explained the text, agreeable to the old reading,
Dr. Johnson has thought proper, in his appendix, to recant his former opinion.
A glaring instance this, among many others, of the little pains our editor took
to examine into these matters himself!

MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.
Vol. III. Page 176.
MESS. I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.


-- The gentleman is not in your books.] This is a phrase used, I believe, by
more than understand it. -- Good lack! what a sad thing it is to want Dr.
Johnson's understanding! You understand it, no doubt, Doctor! -- Oh, yes, I see
you tell us what it is. -- To be in one's books is to be in one's codiciis or
will, to be among friends set down for legacies.

But, among friends, now, Doctor, how do you know this? I know that, in your
dictionary, by way of proving that to be in books, (as you vaguely term it)
means to be held in kind remembrance, you quote the following passage from
Addison. I was so much in his books, that, at his decease, he left me the lamp,
by which he used to write his lucubrations. -- But do you, merely because the
phrase is illustrated by this passage, insist upon the phrase being literally
applicable to the illustration. Or, have you a better reason? 'faith, I am apt
to suspect not; for surely, uncommunicative as you are, you would have told it
us either in your dictionary, or in your edition of Shakespeare. -- Shall I
tell you, then, what I conceive to be the origin of this phrase? not that I
pertinaciously insist upon being in the right, because I think Dr. Johnson is
in the wrong. I have a mind to indulge myself, however, in a conjecture, if it
so prove, on this occasion.

It was an ancient custom among the literati all over Europe, and is still kept
up abroad, particularly in Holland and Germany, for men of letters to keep a
book, which they call an album, so denominated from a similar application of
that word, among the ancient Romans, to a matricular register or muster-roll of
names. This book, or books, contained in like manner a list of the names of the
owner's friends, admirers or acquaintance; who, in subscribing their names in
his album, generally used to preface them with some compliment or device, in
prose or verse, each after his own manner. It was very natural, therefore, for
them to say, in speaking of their favorites or friends, that they were in
their books; and of their enemies, that they were not in their books, or out of
their books. Nay, I know not if it would be at all unnatural for resentful
persons to strike out the names of those who might afterward offend them, in
order to show their spleen, and at the same time that they would not be obliged
to such people for a compliment. I cannot help thinking also, that I discover a
propriety in the messenger's using this phrase to Beatrice, as he might intend
sarcastically to insinuate that, he imagined, by the severity of her raillery
against Benedict, that he was one who had paid no compliment to her beauty. But
whether this propriety be imaginary or not, there is not the least room for
supposing that he meant to say Beatrice had not, according to Dr. Johnson's
explication, remembered Benedict in the codicil of her will. It is, indeed, a
thousand to one if the last will and testament of the buxom Beatrice was
written; and a much greater chance if it had codicils annexed to it.

Vol. III. Page 199.
BEAT. Good lord, for alliance! -- Thus goes every one to the world but I, and
I am sun-burn'd; I may sit in a corner and cry heigh-ho for a husband.


Dr. Johnson's note. What is it to go to the world? perhaps to enter, by
marriage, into a settled state: but why is the unmarried lady sunburned? I
believe we should read, thus goes every one to the wood but I, and I am
sunburned. Thus does every one but I find a shelter, and I am left exposed to
wind and sun. The nearest way to the wood, is a phrase for the readiest means
to any end. It is said of a a woman, who accepts a worse match than those which
she had refused, that she has passed through the wood, and at last taken a
crooked stick. But conjectural criticism has always something to abate its
confidence. Shakespeare, in All Is well that ends well, uses the phrase, to go
to the world, for marriage. So that my emendation depends only on the
opposition of wood to sunburned.

A very slight dependence, indeed, and by no means worthy so prolix an
illustration! Our editor, surely, had lost himself in a wood, or his wits were
gone wool-gathering about the hedges while he penned it. -- To go to the world,
is to go into, to settle in, the world, which is usually supposed to be done in
marriage. Thus the clown, in All Is well that ends well, asks the Countess leave
to marry Isabel. -- If I have your ladyship's good will to go to the world,
Isabel the woman and I will do as we may. -- That a wood was necessary to give
meaning to the word sunburned, I cannot admit. It is evident that Beatrice here
speaks ironically, and, perhaps, a little sarcastically and peerishly, on the
occasion of Hero's getting a husband before her. For it seems that Hero was a
brunette, and, in all probability, not so fair nor so fine a woman as Beatrice.
At least so it is, if we may take Signior Benedict's word for it, who, speaking
of Hero, says, She is too low for an high praise, too brown for a fair praise,
and too little for a great praise: whereas of her cousin Beatrice he speaks in
a different manner, and this even before he is tricked into falling in love
with her, and while he boasts that he can see without spectacles. Of her he
says, after turning up his nose, as it were, at the commendations given to the
person of Hero, There Is her cousin, if she were not possessed with such a fury,
exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May does the last of December.
Now, though we should suppose Benedict to be a little partial, as having a
sneaking kindness, though he will not own it, for this amiable fury; yet it
seems clear that she was fairer than Hero. It was very natural for her,
therefore, to say ironically on this occasion, Thus every one gets married but
I. -- Poor I am sunburn'd; i. e. not fair enough to attract the notice of the
men, but must sit in a corner and cry heigh-ho for a husband.

Vol. III. Page 234.
BEEN. How now! Interjections? Why then, some be of laughing, as ha! ha! he!


This passage, says our editor, is a quotation from the Accidence; doubtless to
remind us that Shakespeare's learning did not reach higher than Lilly's
Grammar, of which he had before taken notice; or perhaps to sink the same of
his erudition, if possible, still lower, and to level it with that of Tailor,
the water-poet, who Having read from possum to posset,
There made a stop, and could not farther get.


Vol. III. Page 237.
CLAUDIO. O hero! what a Hero had thou been,
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About the thoughts and counsels of thy heart.

I am afraid, says our editor, here is intended a poor conceit upon the word
Hero.

Did thou really express thy fears or thy hopes, Dr. Johnson, on this
occasion? Did you not mean to express by this suggestion rather what you would
have the reader believe, than what you yourself actually believed to be true?
-- You will ask me, in your turn, probably, what right I have to catechize you?
-- It is very true, I am too young a catechiser to question, in general, such a
veteran of a catechumen. But I have undertaken the cause of Shakespeare, and
must tell you it carries with it a very invidious appearance, and is by no
means candid, to insinuate any charge against him, couched in whatever terms
you please, that you cannot prove to be true. For my part, I shall think
Shakespeare always innocent, till I can prove him guilty; and it had better
become you, as his editor, to have done so too; and not to have clothed thus
your injurious suspicions in the specious garb of tenderness and friendship. --
Out with such half-faced fellowship!

ALL IS WELL THAT ENDS WELL.
Vol III. Page 319.
PAR. -- Here comes the King.

LAF. Lustick, as the Dutchman says.

It is whimsical enough that our editor, who thinks it necessary, even in this
very volume, to inform his readers, that Ostentation means show, appearance,
etc. that port signifies look, demeanor, carriage, etc. that to broke with, is
to deal like brokers; with many other curious and learned pieces of
information, of equal difficulty and importance, should be as totally silent as
the rest of the commentators about the meaning of the word lustick. Supposing
he had not understood the meaning of it himself, could he have turned to none
of the old Nederduitschen Woorden-boeken that furnished him with etymologies
for his dictionary? Some of them, I warrant him, would have told him that
lustig signifies hearty, cheerful, etc. and is aptly spoken by Lafeu, at seeing
the King so well restored to his health, and able, as he expresses it, to lead
his female doctress a corranto.

Our commentators here put me in mind of the Scotch peddler, who, turning
pedagogue, was now and then puzzled at his pupil's boggling at a hard word: on
which occasion he would always peevishly cry out, the deel tak their laytin and
grik; skip it, bearn, skip it.

Vol. III. Page 323.
KING. Where great addition swells, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor; good alone
Is good, without a name vileness is so:
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title.

Dr. Warburton condemns the text here, and says it is corrupted into nonsense;
he then gives us, as usual, some worse nonsense of his own; and Dr. Johnson, as
usual, inserts his annotation, confessing that he has himself nothing, or very
little better than nothing, to offer. -- The former scholiast proceeds thus, --
good alone,
Is good without a name. Vileness is so.


The text is here corrupted into nonsense. We should read, -- good alone
Is good; and, with a name, vileness is so.
i. e. good is good, though there be no addition of title; and vileness is
vileness, though there be. The Oxford editor, understanding nothing of this,
strikes out vileness, and puts in its place in'tself.

Dr. Johnson says, The present reading is certainly wrong; and, to confess the
truth, I do not think Dr. Warburton's emendation right; yet I have nothing that
I can propose with much confidence. Of all the conjectures that I can make,
that which least displeases me is this: -- virtue alone,
Is good without a name; Helen is so;
the rest follows easily by this change.

The author of the Revisal seems to understand the passage better than either
of the doctorial critics just mentioned. He tells us the common reading is, --
good alone
Is good without a name; vileness is so:
the meaning of which, says he, one would imagine should be pretty plain. Good
singly by itself, without the addition of title, is good still; it is the same
thing with vileness. It takes its nature from itself, and not from external
circumstances, as title and the like. And this interpretation is given by the
poet himself, in the lines immediately following, The property by what it is
should go,
Not by the title.
Notwithstanding all this, Mr. Warburton mistook the meaning, and then murdered
the text.

As to Dr. Johnson's conjectural emendation, it serves to no other purpose than
to betray how barren he is at conjectures. I conceive, nevertheless, that our
editor has restored the true pointing, though it differs from that of his
rival scholiast. But whether this be due to cunning or good luck, I cannot
pretend to say, unless I knew to whom to attribute the honor of correcting the
press, the editor or the printer. The meaning I think is obvious, and the
passage may be paraphrased thus: good by itself is good, and even so, if
unadorned by titles, vileness were vileness.

I do not propose this improvement of the Reviser's explanation with any great
confidence, nor merely for the sake of differing from that very sensible
writer; but because I think there is some little tautology in saying good by
itself is good, and then to add without a name; for certainly if it was by
itself, alone, it was without any thing else.

Vol. III. Page 330.
BERTRAM. -- war is no strife,
To the dark house, and the detested wife.

To the dark house, -- ] The dark house is a house made gloomy by discontent.
Milton says of Death and the King of hell preparing to combat, So frowned the
mighty combatants, that hell
Grew darker at their frown.
JOHNSON.

I know not how this quotation from Milton illustrates the text, unless we are
to suppose that Bertram, or Shakespeare, had read Milton: or unless our editor
meant to justify the poetry of Shakespeare, by the authority of Milton. But not
to insist on Shakespeare's standing in no need of such suffrage, the allusion
of darkness to the gloom of discontent would be unexceptionable, even in the
meanest of our minor poets. The whole line, however, has, in my opinion, only
a general allusion to the common saying of a smoky house and a scolding wife;
which, with a little alteration, and still preserving an alliteration, Bertram
converted to use on the present occasion.

Vol. III. Page 339.
HELENA. Look on this letter, Madam; here is my passport.

When thou can get the ring upon my finger, which never shall come off; and
show me a child begotten of thy body that I am father to, then call me husband:
but in such a Then I write a Never.



The commentators seem to be sadly puzzled to explain this letter; the meaning
of which could not possibly be mistaken by any one who should read the play
quite through. Dr. Warburton's note runs thus:

When thou can get the ring upon my finger.] i. e. When thou can get the
ring, which is on my finger, into thy possession. The Oxford editor, who took
it the other way, to signify, when thou can get it on upon my finger, very
sagaciously alters it to, When thou can get the ring from my finger.

Dr. Warburton's explanation is undoubtedly as well founded as the Oxford
editor's is strange and inconsistent. Dr. Johnson, indeed, says, that he thinks
Dr. Warburton's explanation sufficient; but, continues he, I once read it thus,
When thou can get the ring upon THY finger, which never shall come off MINE.

Will the reader believe me, when I tell him, after this, that the meaning of
the passage in dispute is not only ascertained by the plot of the play, as
above hinted; but is also expressed in the last act by words that admit of no
equivocation? Yet so it is; Helena, in the last scene, producing the letter,
and addressing Bertram in these words, -- there is your ring,
And look you, here is your letter: this it says,
When from my finger you can get this ring,
And are by me with child, etc. This is done.
Will you be mine, now you are doubly won?


If scholiasts would but make themselves masters of the text, before they sit
down to write comments on it, they would be saved a world of trouble in puzzle
and conjecture. It is true, they would not have such frequent opportunities of
displaying their ingenuity; but then they would frequently avoid falling into
absurdity; so that, as our editor observes on another occasion, they would gain
on one side what they lose on the other; for, as Merry Andrew critically
remarks of his dancing pigs, what they now get by footing and casting off, they
lose by setting corners and turning round.

Vol. III. Page 341.
HELENA. -- O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-piercing air,
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.

Dr. Warburton, to whom Dr. Johnson sticks, like one of the conjuror's
familiars, to the skirts of Trappolin, says, the words are here oddly shuffled
into nonsense. We should read, says he, -- pierce the still-moving air,
That sings with piercing, --
i. e. pierce the air, which is in perpetual motion, and suffers no injury by
piercing.

To this Dr. Johnson adds nothing on the page before us; but tells us, in his
appendix, that for piercing air we should read piecing air.

This piecing air, it is true, is very much of a piece with the rest of our
editor's annotations; but what he means by it, I cannot conceive; any more than
I can find out what Dr. Warburton means by the perpetual motion of the air,
which prevents it from being injured by piercing. In my opinion, however, the
meaning of Shakespeare in this passage is obvious. It is notorious that the
epithet still-piercing, or silently-piercing, is applicable to the air on more
occasions than one. A cold air is a piercing air; and indeed, whether the air
be cold or hot, it silently pierces or penetrates into the inmost recesses of
place, and even the pores of many apparently solid bodies. It is likewise
notorious, that a cannon or musketball whizzes or whistles as it passes through
or pierces the air; which being converted, poetica licentia, from the patient
to the agent, and vice versa, may, with great propriety, be said to sing with
piercing, i. e. with being pierced, though it pierces silently itself. And thus
we see evidently the antithesis intended by the poet, which has escaped the
penetrating looks and piercing eyes of his commentators.

Vol. III. Page 358.
BER. I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.

DIA. Ay, so you serve us,
'Till we serve you: but when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
And mock us with our bareness.

BER. How have I sworn!

DIA. It Is not the many oaths, that make the truth;
But the plain single vow, that is vowed true;
What is not holy, that we swear not 'bides,
But take the Highest to witness: then pray tell me
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths,
When I did love you ill? this has no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love,
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words, and poor conditions but unsealed
At least in my opinion.

BER. Change it, change it:
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy, etc.

I judged it expedient to make so large a quotation from the text, in order
that the reader might form some judgment of his own, before he entered on the
perplexing annotations; to which two or three of the above lines have given
rise.

Dr. Warburton's note, as quoted by Dr. Johnson, is as follows:

What is not holy that we swear not BY.] Yes, nothing is more common than such
kind of oaths. But Diana is not here accusing Bertram for swearing by a being
not holy, but for swearing to an unholy purpose; as is evident from the
preceding lines. It Is not the many oaths, that make the truth;
But the plain single vow, that is vowed true.
The line in question, therefore, is evidently corrupt, and should be read
thus; What is not holy, that we swear, not 'BIDES: i. e. If we swear to an
unholy purpose, the oath abides not, but is dissolved in the making. This is an
answer to the purpose. She subjoins the reason two or three lines after; --
this has no holding,
To swear by him, whom I protest to love;
That I will work against him.
i. e. That oath can never hold, whose subject is to offend and displease that
being, whom I profess, in the act of swearing by him, to love and reverence. --
What may have misled the editors into the common reading was, perhaps,
mistaking Bertram's words above, By love's own sweet constraint, to be an oath;
whereas it only signifies, being constrained by love.

This note of Dr. Warburton's, the argument of which is as false as the
emendation proposed is constrained and uncouth, is highly commended by the
present editor. His annotation is as follows:

This is an acute and excellent conjecture, and I have done it the due honor
of exalting it to the text; yet, methinks, there is something yet wanting. The
following words, but take the Highest to witness, even though it be understood
as an anticipation or assumption in this sense, -- but now suppose that you
take the Highest to witness, -- has not sufficient relation to the antecedent
sentence, I will propose a reading nearer to the surface, and let it take its
chance. BER. How have I sworn!

DIA. It Is not the many oaths that make the truth:
But the plain single vow that is vowed true.

BER. What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the Highest to witness.

DIA. Then pray tell me
If I should swear, etc.

Bertram means to enfore his suit, by telling her, that he has bound himself to
her, not by the petty protestations usual among lovers, but by vows of greater
solemnity. She then makes a proper and rational reply.

Again, Dr. Johnson conceives another part of the above quotation to be
corrupt; which, as it may something affect the sense of the whole, I choose to
take notice of here, although the editor considers it in a distinct note.

To swear by him whom I protest to love,
That I will work against him:
This passage likewise appears to me corrupt. She swears not by him whom she
loves, but by Jupiter. I believe we may read to swear to him. There is, says
she, no holding, no consistency, in swearing to one that I love him, when I
swear it only to injure him.

But farther, Dr. Johnson, on reconsidering this passage, tells us, in his
appendix, that in the print of the old folio, it is doubtful whether it is
Jove's or Love's, the characters being not distinguishable. If it is read
Love's, perhaps it may be something less difficult. I am still at a loss. --
And so, by this time, I presume, is the reader. But, as the poet says, Who
shall decide when doctors disagree? Doubtless nobody less than he that has been
dubbed or capt twice; and he may authoritatively plead the same right of
pre-eminence over a single graduate, as two marrow-puddings have prerogatively
over one I hope none of the learned doctors of Oxford, Cambridge, or Dublin,
nor even those of Edinburgh, Glascow, or Lambeth, will be offended at the
vulgarity of this comparison. Had they been invested, however, with their
doctorial dignities at Rheims, Louvain, or Harderwyk, they would readily see
into the propriety of comparing a diploma to a marrow-pudding. It is, indeed, a
choice simile, but I cannot now tarry to illustrate it.


.

How far the author of the Revisal may be qualified to determine this matter, I
cannot pretend to say; being, to my regret, utterly unacquainted with the name
and quality of that writer. But, as I think he has explained this passage
better than either of the graduated gentlemen above quoted, I shall not follow
Dr. Johnson's example, by clothing his sentiments in different words, and
passing them off as my own.

The Reviser's remarks on the passage in question, are as follow: What is not
holy, that we swear, not 'bides, --
But take the Highest to witness.


Mr. Warburton has so strangely puzzled himself about this passage, that he
has at last quite lost sight of its drift and purpose, and given us one of the
most elaborate pieces of nonsense to be found in his whole performance. The
common reading, however, What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the Highest to witness,
is, if he could have been content with it, extremely plain and clear. The
sense is, We never swear by what is not holy, but swear by, or take to witness
the highest, the divinity. The tenor of the reasoning contained in the
following lines perfectly corresponds with this; if I should swear by Jove's
great attributes, that I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths, when you
found by experience that I loved you ill, and was endeavoring to gain credit
with you, in order to reduce you to your ruin! No, surely, but you would
conclude that I had no faith either in Jove or his attributes, and that my
oaths were mere words of course. For that oath can certainly have no tie upon
us, which we swear by him we profess to love and honor, when at the same time
we give the strongest proof of our disbelief in him, by pursuing a course,
which we know will offend and dishonor him. --

The Reviser is here very near the truth, but has neither fully confuted Dr.
Warburton, nor prevented the difficulties suggested by Dr. Johnson. He is also
mistaken in supposing the words this has no holding to mean such an oath is not
binding; since, be other matters as they may, nothing I think is plainer than
that she means, as Dr. Johnson says, There is no consistency. And this
explanation of those words, though it be our editor's own, is what militates
against the alteration of by into to, as he proposes; which alteration,
however, is otherwise very plausible, if the sense of the passage had
absolutely required it.

Let us see what we can make of it, without alteration.

Bertram tells Diana that he loves her, and he swears to it By love's own sweet
constraint. No, says Dr. Warburton, this is no oath; he only says he loves her
by love's own sweet constraint; having said in the preceding line, speaking of
Helena, I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By love's own constraint. --
But what is this but saying, I was compelled to love Helena by my father, but
I was compelled to love thee by Love himself. Thus we see, it is still as
Falstaff says, upon compulsion; and if readings were as plenty as
black-berries, I would adopt none of them upon compulsion. Besides, it does not
appear that Bertram loves Helena at all. It is very presumable that Bertram
swore, from Diana's taking him so roundly to task for the profanity of his
oath. He said thus; I was COMPELLED to her, but I LOVE thee --
By LOVE's OWN sweet constraint --
i. e. I was forced to wed Helena, but thou art the woman I love. -- She was my
father's choice, thou art mine. -- Yes, by all the powers of love, i. e. by
that power which influenced my choice, thou art. -- To which power, compared
with the tyrannical authority of his father, he was very aptly and naturally
induced to give the name of Love's own sweet constraint.

But, supposing he did not mean to swear by the powers or power of love at this
particular conjuncture, it appears, I think, pretty evident, that this was his
usual oath, or mode of vowing. Else, why should he answer, after being so
severely schooled about his not swearing by the Highest, as the only holy
object to swear by, -- Love is holy.
And my integrity never knew the crafts,
That you do charge men with.
What then becomes of Dr. Warburton's acute and excellent conjecture, to which
Dr. Johnson has done the due honor of exalting it to the text? Dr. Warburton
says, that Diana is not accusing Bertram for swearing by a Being not holy, but
for swearing to an unholy purpose. Indeed, she is accusing him of both, and
pleads the former as a proof of the latter. You cannot swear, says she, with
any good design, or to any good purpose, when you swear by such profane
objects. For, it is to be observed, that the words truth and true are not here
confined to the mere veracity of the terms of the oath But, as in Pandulph's
speech, in the play of King John, page 449, where truth, applied also, in like
manner, to an oath, relates, as our editor himself observes, to rectitude of
conduct. Thus, when Diana says It Is not the many oaths that make the truth;
But the plain single vow, that is vowed true;
she does not mean simply that a multiplicity of oaths will not make that true
which is otherwise false; for this is not to be done at any rate; yet, what she
means to say is confessely to be effected by -- the plain single vow that is
vowed true. What she means, therefore, is this; a multiplicity of vague and
profane oaths will not justify any immoral conduct or design; but that any
questionable design is to be justified only by the plain single vow, that is
vowed true; i. e. sworn in a regular and sacred manner. And hence she proceeds
to say, What is not holy that we swear not by, etc.


. Diana did not doubt that Bertram had a love or a passion for her, according
to the common acceptance of the term. It was to the other part of his vow that
she alludes; for he not only tells her he loves her; but -- will for ever
Do her all rights of service.
To which she answers, Ay, so you serve us,
'Till we serve you: but when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
And mock us with our bareness.
To this Bertram eagerly replies, How have I sworn! To which Diana as shrewdly
answers -- It Is not the many oaths, etc. As much as if she had said, Ay, how
indeed! -- by a multiplicity of vague and profane oaths: but what are these,
when there is neither a moral possibility of your performing your promise, nor
would there be any moral rectitude in it if you did? For you cannot, in such
case, take a single formal oath, and call the HIGHEST to witness the truth of
your promise, without making a mock of his great attributes; viz. goodness and
truth.

What then becomes of Dr. Johnson's first alteration; his supposed necessity of
dividing this speech between Bertram and Diana; an alteration that would
totally pervert the meaning of the passage?

As to his latter alteration, though it be less exceptionable, it is equally
unnecessary. For, taking the meaning of the words in the sense abovementioned,
the whole is perfectly intelligible and consistent. If we take the Highest to
witness, says Diana, (which, it is already observed, is done only when the
intent of the oath is morally good) THEN, i. e. in that ease, pray tell me, If
I should swear by Jove's great attributes, i. e. goodness and truth, I LOVED
YOU dearly, would YOU believe MY oaths
When I did love you ILL? --
i. e. wickedly, immorally. -- This has no holding,
To swear by HIM, whom I protest to LOVE,
That I will work against him.
i. e. This is inconsistent to swear by the God of truth and holiness, whom I
protest to love, that I will act dishonestly and wickedly. Nay, should we even
admit with Dr. Warburton and the Reviser, that -- This has no holding means
that the oath can never hold or is not binding; this will make no difference
with regard to the alteration proposed; the meaning of the lines, in that case,
being only similar to those of Pandulph to King John: It is religion that does
make vows kept,
But thou have sworn against religion:
By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st.
But it may be asked, why does Diana protest that she loves the supreme Being
by whom she supposes herself to swear? -- If we reflect, however, that this
protestation is nothing more than that of her love to virtue, it is by no means
improperly introduced to check Bertram's illicit passion, by depriving him of
all hopes of success. For it is to be remarked, that though she barely mention
the ill consequences to herself of being afterward abandoned by Bertram, the
point on which she dwells upon most, and seems to lay the greatest stress, is
the immorality of the act. It may be added also, that, as Bertram has not here
made use of that very expression, in his vows to Diana, it is not impossible
that she refers to some other conversation, in which he had not only sworn by
love's own sweet constraint, but also by her own sweet self, in which case it
is, with great propriety, she introduces, by way of antithesis, the
protestation of her love to the God of truth and goodness, being opposed to any
love she can possibly entertain for him. -- And this supposition is not
ill-founded, if we reflect on his calling her TITLED GODDESS, and his
confessedly making use only of the oaths common to lovers.

My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sat in's heart; she says all men
Have the like oaths. --
As to the alteration, suggested in our editor's appendix, and founded on the
bad print of the old folio, I am of a different opinion to Dr. Johnson, and
think that, instead of making the difficulty less, it would make it much
greater. I give my vote, therefore, for having the text stand as it did, before
either Dr. Warburton or Dr. Johnson meddled with it; -- except that the reader
may, if he pleases, add a comma after HIM; To swear by HIM, whom I protest to
love.

Vol. III. Page 372.
BERTRAM. A pox on him, he is a cat still.


That is, says Dr. Johnson, throw him how you will, he lights on his legs.

But why Parolles is like a cat, in respect to lighting upon his legs, I
cannot, for the life of me, discover. Bertram had said, on the discovery of
Parolles to be a scoundrel, I could endure any thing before but a cat, and now
he is a cat to me. On the exposition of his farther baseness, he says -- he is
more and more a cat; and at last, Pox on him, he is a cat still. But, as Bertram
gives no hint that he hates a cat for lighting upon her legs, I cannot conceive
where Dr. Johnson met with authority for his explanation.

It appears also, that one of our editor's friends was as much at a loss as I
am; I mean Mr. Steevens, whose objection to this illustration is inserted in
the appendix. Bertram, says Mr. Steevens, means no such thing. In a speech or
two before, he declares his aversion to a cat, and now only continues of the
same opinion, and says, he hates Parolles as much as a cat. The other meaning
will not do, as Parolles could not be meant by the cat, which lights always on
its legs, for he is now in a fair way to be totally disconcerted.

To this, however, Dr. Johnson thinks proper to give no other answer than this;
I am still of my former opinion.

Well said Doctor Johnsonius Obstinatus! Let not loose thy opinion. Thou have
formed it; it is truly thy own conceit, and not a college of wit-crackers
should flout me out of my humor. -- Thou have said it. -- It is enough. --
Thou art too exalted to condescend so low as to explain thyself. What are
paltry readers, and contemptible critics? -- I would give no man satisfaction!
I! --

Vol. III. Page 386.
KING. -- Well -- call him hither;
We Are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition: let him not ask our pardon.
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
The incensing relics of it.

Dr. Johnson is highly offended at the poet, for making the King so ready to
forgive his son Bertram. Shakespeare, says he, is now hastening to the end of
the play, finds his matter sufficient to fill up his remaining scenes, and
therefore, as on other such occasions, contracts his dialogue, and precipitates
his action. Decency required that Bertram's double crime of cruelty and
disobedience, joined likewise with some hypocrisy, should raise more
resentment; and that, though his mother might easily forgive him, his king
should more pertinaciously vindicate his own authority, and Helen's merit: of
all this Shakespeare could not be ignonorant; but Shakespeare wanted to
conclude his play.

I shall not here undertake the defense of Shakespeare, as to the propriety of
the King's readiness to forgive Bertram, though I think it might easily be
done, if we reflect that the match proposed to the young prince was, in itself,
very absurd and preposterous. The King laid the foundation for, and provoked,
the act of disobedience in his son, which was therefore the more excusable; for
it will hardly be admitted, by any person in his right senses, that the
paternal authority of the King ought to have carried him so far as to degrade
the heir apparent to his crown, by marrying him to the daughter of a quack,
merely because she had had the good luck, by one of her father's nostrums, to
cure his majesty of a fistula in ano.

This circumstance considered also, I think it should have obtained some little
favor for the character of Bertram in general, as well from our editor, as
from the very ingenious authoress of Shakespeare Illustrated; for though he be
on the whole a loose, unprincipled fellow, yet I think the absurdity and
cruelty of this forced marriage affords a great palliation of his crimes.

But my reason for stopping at this passage, is to remark another instance of
our editor's readiness to censure Shakespeare. Here, truly, Shakespeare has
done wrong in contracting his dialogue, because he was in a hurry to finish his
play: whereas, before the end of the play, Dr. Johnson finds fault with him
again for making his dialogue too long Page 397. He knows himself, etc. -- ]
This dialogue is too long, since the audience already knew the whole
transaction; nor is there any reason for puzzling the King, and playing with
his passions; but it was much easier than to make a pathetical interview
between Helen and her husband, her mother, and the King. JOHNSON. -- When was
Shakespeare ever accused before of wilfully avoiding a proper opportunity of
introducing pathetic scenes, on account of the difficulty of the task?


. Our editor's reasons for these inconsistent censures, however, are
sufficiently evident. In the one case he had an opportunity of displaying the
poet's precipitancy; and, in the other, of depreciating both his application
and abilities.

KING JOHN.
Vol. III. Page 415.
PHILIP. Knight, Knight, good mother -- Basilisco like.


On this passage Mr. Theobald has a long, and, I think, satisfactory note: he
supposes the word Basilisco, and the repetition of Knight, Knight, to refer to
an old stupid play called Soliman and Perseda. --

Dr. Warburton tells us the beauty of the passage consists in an allusion to a
fixed star of the first magnitude in the constellation Leo. Having inserted the
notes of both these commentators at length, the present editor makes very short
work with his part of the business, by adding the following sagacious
animadversion to the latter, Could one have thought it!

Could one have thought it, indeed! A mighty pretty way this, of writing
annotations on Shakespeare! To copy two long notes from Theobald and Warburton,
and then to exclaim, concerning some conundrum of the latter, Could one have
thought it! -- Neither your subscribers, nor your booksellers, I believe, Dr.
Johnson, thought you would have fobbed them off so shabbily. For, indeed, when
a man promised so fair, Could one have thought it? -- But, perhaps, this is
another stroke of our editor's WIT. -- It is. -- ha! -- like enough -- but,
could one have thought it?

We have in this play several other notes of similar importance. Thus page 421,
after a long note from Theobald, our editor adds, Mr. Theobald had the art of
making the most of his discoveries. But this remark, however true it man be in
one sense, is far from being so in another: for though Dr. Johnson has made
very few discoveries of his own, he has discovered the method of making more
of Theobald's at second hand, than ever the author could do, when they were
spick and span new.

Vol. III. Page 447.
CONSTANCE. Lewis, stand fast; the devil tempts thee here
In likeness of a new and trimmed bride.

In this passage our editor has two notes from Theobald and Warburton; after
which ne adopts the opinion of Mr. Edwards, who had exposed the absurdity of
the latter, but without mentioning him, as usual. -- But I must not pass over a
word or two, which Dr. Johnson has dropped on this occasion. A commentator, he
says, should be grave. But why, now, Doctor, should a commentator be grave? You
seem very angry, in your Preface, with Mr. Pope, for supposing that the task of
an editor must necessarily be dull. Now, though there is some distinction of
blood between dullness and gravity, they are near akin; and so nearly alike in
the face, that you might take them for sisters; ay, twins, with but
half-an-hour's difference in their age. I dare say now that many of your
mistaken readers have frequently thought even you dull, when I warrant you the
Doctor was only grave. I do not think, therefore, a commentator should wear so
much gravity. It is good to guard against mistakes, as they are frequently
better prevented than amended. Not that I hold it decent for a scholiast to be
always upon the broad grin; but if the author himself be cheerful, or the
absurdities of a brother commentator set him a laughing, where is the crime of
indulging himself in it? -- After this, let us hear no more of the gravity of a
commentator See Preface to Johnson's Shakespeare.
.

Vol. III. Page 455.
-- If the midnight bell
Did with his iron tongue and brazen mouth
Sound ONE unto the drowsy race of night.
The folio edition has it sound ON; but our editor has altered it either on
the authority of Dr. Warburton, or his own, without giving any reason for such
alteration. His friend Mr. Steevens, however, thinks the old reading right, and
conceives the meaning to be this; if the midnight bell, by repeated strokes,
was to hasten away the race of beings that are busy at that hour, or quicken
night in its progress, the morning bell (that is the bell that strikes one)
could never properly be made the agent, for the bell has ceased to be in the
service of night when it proclaims the arrival of day. Sound ON has a
particular propriety, because, by the repetition of the strokes at twelve, it
gives a much more forcible warning than when it only strikes one. -- This
criticism is admitted by Dr. Johnson into his appendix; but as he does not
there retract his former judgment, we may suppose he still coincides with Dr.
Warburton: or perhaps his own opinion is suspended between both. Mr. Steevens's
note is ingenious enough indeed (as our editor expresses himself on another
occasion) to deserve to be true; but if the single authority of the folio
edition may be set aside, I am afraid the double authority of two such learned
and tremendous critics as Dr. Johnson and the Bishop of Gloucester, will go
likely to involve Shakespeare in the absurdity of supposing the clock strikes
but one to acquaint us of midnight. For that the last right reverend critic
does not think midnight merely a point of time, dividing night from morning, is
evident from his comment on another passage of Shakespeare's, in the Mid-summer
Night's Dream, where, instead of the third part of a minute, he would have us
read the third part of the midnight. Now points of time, as well as points of
space, are unextended and indivisible; and yet the present editor makes no
other objection to this proposed amendment, than that of silently rejecting it:
but as this rejection is founded on other reasons than the impropriety here
mentioned, we may very reasonably suppose that Dr. Johnson, as well as Dr.
Warburton, has found out that midnight is a determinate quantity of duration,
comprehending at least all that space of time which elapses between twelve at
night and one in the morning! This admitted, it is no wonder that Mr.
Steevens's note should appear exceptionable; for if he, on the supposition that
when night is past it must be morning, can with propriety call the bell which
strikes twelve a midnight bell, they might with still more propriety, on their
supposition, call that a midnight bell which strikes one.

My readers will probably think I have here set the commentators together by
the ears, only to perplex and confound both them and the poet. -- Not at all.
-- The commentators were at odds before I meddled with them; and I have only
brought them together, to show my own critical dexterity in reconciling them to
each other, and extricating Shakespeare out of the hands of both. -- For
instance, now -- To you, Mr. Steevens, I attribute the honor or having
illustrated the poet's meaning, on the supposition that he wrote strike ON:
but, Sir, I shall prove to your teeth, in savor of your opponents, that their
reading of the text may be right; and this even from your own argument. You
suppose that the bell, which strikes one, is a morning bell -- granted -- it
has been so a full hour; ever since the hand came to the point, and the
clapper struck the first stroke of twelve. For you must not conceive that Time
stands stock-still till the clock has done striking the whole dozen: and if it
does not, the bell must, according to you, be called a morning bell after the
first stroke; so that we see there is even a physical impossibility of a
midnight bell's striking more than ONE. What then becomes of your repeated
strokes, and your midnight bell's striking ON? Silence that dreadful bell,
then, it disturbs the text from its propriety. -- EUGE, MAGNE. -- Here was I
going to congratulate myself on having topt all the commentators, even in their
own way, and on the wonderful acuteness displayed in adjusting this nice
dispute; but recollecting the fate of poor Theobald, and how severely he has
been handled for boasting and making the most of his discoveries, I will wrap
myself up in the buff doublet of my own sufficiency, and leave the world to do
justice to merit, or let it alone, as it thinks proper.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE impatience of the Author's acquaintance, to whom he had communicated the
design of this Review, having induced him to publish the foregoing sheets,
before he could have time to complete the whole; the remainder of this work,
containing similar remarks on the other five volumes of Dr. Johnson's
Commentary, together with a Review of his Preface, will be published with all
convenient speed.

The expedition with which these sheets have been written and hurried through
the press, having occasioned the following errors, the reader is desired to
correct them with his pen; as also such others of less consequence as may
possibly have escaped the eye of the corrector.

ERRORS.
PAGE LINE INSTEAD OF READ 4 4 and his heir and his only heir. 19 20 and intent
an intent. 27 31 fear fear. 35 2 reign rain. 56 15 effects affects. 59 26
spiritedly insipidly. 64 ult. he imputes imputed. 86 14 if we consider we are
to consider.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Some Time after Christmas will be published, In one Volume, Octavo, Printed in
the manner of the foregoing Sheets*

A RAMBLE THROUGH THE IDLER'S DICTIONARY: IN WHICH ARE PICKED UP SEVERAL
THOUSAND Etymological, Orthographical, and Lexicographical BLUNDERS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF THIS REVIEW.

His Work demands a Volume, and it shall ^^ve it.


