THE PERPLEXITIES: A COMEDY.

As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN.

Conamur tenues grandia. HORAT.

LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, in Catharine-Street in the Strand; and G.
KEARSLY, in Ludgate Street. 1767.

[Price 1^. 6d.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE editor of this Comedy thinks it his duty to declare that, in point of
fable, he is entirely indebted to an old play, wrote by Sir Samuel Tuke, called
the Adventures of Five Hours; of which piece Echard, in the preface to his
translation of Terence, after noticing some particular excellencies, gives this
general character; viz.

This is one of the pleasantest stories, that ever appeared upon our stage, and
has as much variety of plots and intrigues, without any thing being
precipitated, improper, or unnatural, as to the main action. This encomium, and
the request of a particular friend, induced an attempt to restore so excellent
a story to the stage. Finding, on examination of the original, the language to
consist entirely of measure and rhyme, a style by no means suited to the use of
comedy, it appeared indispensably necessary to new-write it. This arduous task
was not undertaken without much fear and diffidence. If the piece, as it now
stands, should be fortunate enough to meet the least favor, the editor will,
with the utmost readiness, charge such success to his having, in general,
adhered closely to the Original, pursued the same disposition of scenery, and
preserved as many of the sentiments as could be introduced, without clogging,
or interrupting the action. What particular alterations he has presumed to
make, are, with great deference, submitted to the Candor of the Public.

Since the copy was delivered to the press, some few passages have been
shortened in representation, which are easily distinguishable by the attentive
reader.

* This Comedy having been treated with very distinguished marks of candor and
encouragement, in the representation, the Editor thinks it his duty to return
his most grateful thanks to the Public.

PROLOGUE.
Mr. BEARD enters hastily. I Speak a Prologue! -- What strange whim, I wonder,
Could lead the author into such a blunder? --
I asked the man as much -- but he (poor devil!)
Fancied a Manager might make you civil.
"Garrick (says he) can with a Prologue tame
"The Critic's rage -- Why cannot you do the same?"
Because (quoth I) the case is different quite;
Garrick, you know, can Prologues speak, and write;
If like that Roscius I could write, and speech it,
I might command applause, and not beseech it.
But, sure, for one who, all his live-long days,
Has dealt in Crotchets, Minims, and Sol-fa's,
A Singer, to stand forth in Wit's defense,
And plead against Sound the solemn cause of Sense;
Persuade an audience that a play has merit,
Without a single Air to give it spirit;
It Is so much out of character -- so wrong --
No Prologue, sir, for me, -- unless in Song.
The fame (quoth I) you poets reap,
And all your gains, are owing,
To sounds that even measure keep,
And stanzas smoothly flowing:
But me the lyre would better suit
Than verses of Apollo;
The fiddle, hautboy, horn, or flute,
I Am always used to follow.
"Sir (says he) you will mar
"My verse and meaning too" --
Sir, must I turn fool,
To humor such as you?
I Will sing it if you please --
"Sing! cries he, in huff,
"Of you and your Sol-fa's
"The town has had enough" --
Oh! then I bounc'd and swore --
Was I much to blame?
Had you been in my place,
Why you would have done the same.
If for old-fashioned tunes he is not too nice,
I Would give him fifty of 'em in a trice,
With words more fitted to his purpose here,
Than all the rhimes he would jingle in a year.
He challenged me to show a single sample
Of what I bragged -- I did -- as for example!
The scene is prepared, the Critics are met,
The judges all ranged -- a terrible show!
E're trial begins the Prologue's a debt,
A debt on demand -- so take what we owe.
And this is the way, Mr. Author,
To trick a plain muse up with art,
In modish Fal-lal's you must cloathe her,
And warm a cold Critic's hard heart.
With a Fal-lal-lal, etc.
Wherefore I thus entreat, with due submission,
Between the bard and me you would make decision.
The whole now on your arbitration we rest,
And Prologues henceforward shall surely be dressed,
In what mode soever your taste shall like best,
Which none of us dare deny.
For, however cruel critics and witlings may sneer,
That at times I, alas! somewhat dunny appear,
If to you, my best friends, I ever turn my deaf ear,
May you your indulgence deny!
Then, for his sake and mine, (for we are both in a fright)
Till a treat of more gout shall your palates delight,
Let a poor humble Comedy please you tonight;
Which surely you will not deny.
CHARACTERS.
MEN.
Don Antonio, Mr. (...). Don Henriquez, Mr. Ross. Don Florio, Mr. Mattocks. Don
Juan, Mr. Hull. Guzman, Mr. Shuter. Corregidor, Mr. Gardner. Ernesto, Mr.
Cushing. Sancho, Mr. Rd. Smith. Jaques, Mr. Holtom. Sylvio, Mr. Weller.
Geraldo, Mr. Murden. Alguazils, Mr. Buck, etc.
WOMEN.
Honoria, Miss Macklin. Felicia, Miss Wilford. Rosa, Mrs. Green.
THE PERPLEXITIES.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, Don HENRIQUEZ, and Don JUAN. HENRIQUEZ. NO more, cousin, I beseech you;
all your rhetoric will not persuade me to leave so important a care, as the
honor of our family, to the caprice of a giddy girl. It was a charge committed
absolutely to me, by our parents, on their deathbed, and I alone must be
answerable for any blemish on that honor.


Juan. I have no doubt, Don Henriquez, but that this your extreme haste takes
it is rise from prudence; but may not even our virtues be sometimes
overstrain'd, and have their dangerous effects? It Is from this fear, that I
have often presumed to interpose, and must repeat it; would it not be better to
let your sister see, and make herself acquainted with the disposition of, the
man with whom she is to pass her life?


Hen. Which is, in other words, to give her more opportunity for devices, and
to try whether she cannot frustrate my designs -- no, no, -- an agreeable young
girl should never be left to her own direction; -- tricks, plots, and
contrivances are so innate in them, they will cousen themselves rather than
their imaginations should want employment; I have seen too many instances of
their vanity, giddiness, ingratitude; well -- well! -- I have, within this
hour, received intelligence from the Marquis d'Olivera, through whose generous
intervention my designs are, at last, come to maturity, that the person, to
whom she has been so long contracted, Don Antonio de Mendoza --


Juan. Is he the man? The very name removes half my objections. Why has it been
so long concealed?


Hen. Because I would not give my sister's enterprising genius either time, or
means, to counteract my purposes -- but now, the prospect of a speedy
conclusion of the whole affair renders that secrecy no longer necessary; this
evening he will arrive from Flanders; and so well convinced am I of the
propriety of my conduct, I will not sleep, till they are married.


Juan. Notwithstanding his undoubted merit, I cannot yet be reconciled to that
unreasonable custom of contracting persons, who never saw each other;
compelling them to be of the same opinion, in the most important concern of
life, before you know whether they could agree about the most insignificant.


Hen. I would only compel her to her good, and think I am the best judge what
measures to pursue. -- Opinions indeed! -- If you, Don Juan, delay the disposal
of your sister in marriage, till she is able to determine what her opinion is,
or (to express myself conformably to your easy temper) till she has fixed her
affections, she may give you a brother-in-law very ill suited to your choice,
and judgment.


Juan. Strange! that your understanding, education, and travels, should not
have allayed that severe opinion of women; by strangers imputed to us as a
national fault, and indeed with too much justice.


Hen. Persons, who cannot comprehend the motives, which actuate such as are
wiser than themselves, ever make strange interpretations of their conduct. I am
determined no longer to endure the daily, the hourly anxieties, and fears,
which a solicitude for Honoria's conduct has given me; this night they end.


Juan. I have had the like charge of a sister, you know, these thirteen years,
and cannot recollect a pain mine ever gave to me.


Hen. The comparison don't hold; their dispositions are different; yet, I wish,
Don Juan, you may not suffer for your easiness of temper; you give the reins
too much into your sister's hands; the thoughtlessness of youth, and passions
uncontrolled, may lead her far astray; it is too much to be feared; I have
strong reasons, have nicely weighed her conduct -- you may repent --


Juan. I know what you allude to; but the transactions of that fatal night are
far from alarming me about Felicia's conduct; it is true, Don Pedro was killed
under my balcony; you throw the deed on Florio, and his flight seems to justify
the accusation; yet, what reproach does this cast on her? For when I offered,
in consequence of your assertion, that he had dishonorable designs on her, to
interfere with you in his behalf, to stop the prosecution, and give her hand to
him, if her happiness consisted therein, she utterly declined it; assuring me
she had no one motive to wish for such an event, but many to avoid it.


Hen. You are too blind.


Juan. And you too suspicious; why should she deceive me? Have I not ever
assured her I would consult her inclination?


Hen. Ay, there is the curse, that ties my tongue.

[Aside.
Juan. I therefore cannot, will not doubt her. Her heart is generous and
honest; on such dispositions, indulgence weighs more than severity; and could
you be induced to alter your conduct toward Honoria -- but I ask pardon; your
own judgment must be your director; short as my absence has been, events may
have occurred, which may render me now an incompetent adviser. -- Your sister is
mistress of many virtues; and fame speaks loudly of Antonio, as a man, a
scholar, and a soldier.


Hen. On those considerations, let our argument die. I am determined. Will you
accompany me to our friend and kinsman the corregidor? I would require him to
be a witness, and partaker of our ceremonies tonight.


Juan. I will but conduct my sister to her cousin Honoria, to whom she has
devoted this evening, and attend you.


Hen. Shall I expect you in the Piazza?


Juan. You may.

[Exit.
Hen. A man, with a heart at ease like his, may well preach such doctrine; but
I carry a load of inquietude in mine. -- My sister married, one weighty care is
removed, but a far heavier remains. -- Ungrateful, blind Felicia! -- what
sufferings am I doomed to undergo, yet know not how to utter or relieve them!
to love, adore, doubt, fear, suspect, despair, yet still persist to love! I
blush at my own weakness -- to apply, and be refused, were a perpetual thorn to
me! and that, from her blind prepossession to another, and Juan's passive
acquiescence to her choice, is almost certain! rivall'd too in her affections
by a man, who, but a short time before, had asked my sister of me; my pride, my
honor is insulted; revenge is my only remedy; in that I will persist, and
experience its utmost efficacy.

[Exit.
SCENE, HONORIA 's Apartment. Enter HONORIA. Hon. Would Felicia were come! her
kind and cheerful temper might give me some relief -- Yet how can I expect it?
This tyrant brother! can I call him less! to compel me to marry a man I never
saw, while the chosen of my heart is forced to avoid me -- is rejected. My
brother's hatred could scarce entail on me a greater misery than his care --
Yet what can I do? His power over me is unlimited -- no alternative left, but
what is desperate; yet something must be done; I cannot thus tamely subscribe
to my own unhappiness.

Enter JUAN introducing FELICIA.
Juan. With pleasure I escort my sister to so dear and amiable a friend --
methinks it is pity even a wall should make the houses two, of neighbors so
entirely one.


Fell. Yes, and the houses are more entirely one, than you imagine, my dear
brother; thanks to our private door.

[Aside.
Hon. We have ever thought the slightest separation, inconsistent with our
friendship -- You oblige me with a most welcome favor in uniting us now; it is
a degree of charity, and I thank you. Am I to be honored with your company too?


Juan. I could with great pleasure stay, but an engagement with your brother
calls me; and the least trespass on his punctilious temper, you know --


Hon. Shall I call my cousin mine for the night?


Juan. Her own inclination is her ruler. Your most obedient.

[Exit.
Fell. There Is a brother for you -- upon my word if he were not so related, I
should be apt to mistake him for a lover.


Hon. And give him encouragement perhaps?


Fell. Undoubtedly, if my heart were free, and I could be convinced that same
politeness would not abate on marriage; a little of that, you know, goes a
great way in a husband -- But am I never to see my sweet friend smile again? --


Hon. I would willingly put off my grief, to avoid disturbing your gaiety, but
am not able.


Fell. Then let me put off my gaiety, that I may not interrupt your grief; there
is often ease in the indulgence of it, and I am too giddy for you. Tell me, my
dear Honoria, how can I metamorphose myself so as to suit your feelings? I
would be, or do, any thing that might give you pleasure.


Hon. You never fail to do that. -- Your every look, and word, has affection in
it; and that agreeable manner of setting them off, makes what would be styled
levity in others, a virtue in you, as it is only spring is from a desire to
entertain.


Fell Delivered with singular judgment, and politeress: yours to the very
ground.


Hon. Engaging playfulness! how can so tender, so susceptible a heart as yours
be so much at ease, in it is present doubtful, and anxious situation?


Fell. Why that is true -- and it is sometimes otherwise; but as I have not to
charge fortune, or friends, with any actual affliction, I bear accidental ills
as well as I am able, and endeavor to keep sorrow at arm's length. My hopes, I
think, grow faster than my fears, and I trust to the great midwife, Time, to
bring forth the fruits of 'em.


Hon. And may they answer your deserts! I have almost lost a part of my grief,
in my amazement at the adventures you were relating to me last night, when my
lordly brother interrupted us.


Fell. Yes, absence is a pretty whet to affection, now and then; he is ten times
worse than ever; there is no getting a moment now; his love, and jealousy,
together keep him in a perpetual fidget.


Hon. I could not sleep, for thinking of your story.


Fell. Ay, is it not a fine one? since the days of don Quixotte, to this present
seven o'clock in the evening, sure never was a better subject for romance --
Let me see, I Will enumerate the particulars: Travels -- Surprises -- Wars --
Drums -- Trumpets, -- taken prisoner -- attacked by a ruffian -- saved by a
heroic self-defence! -- Swooning! -- Recovery! -- and such a recovery! in the
arms of a handsome young fellow! O lud! cousin!


Hon. Who had killed the attempter of your honor too?


Fell. Oh! no -- you forget -- I had the credit of the victory over him -- As
soon as he began to use violence, I seized his dagger, and menaced his
destruction, (ay and meant it too) when a sudden alarm, and fear for his own
safety, relieved me from the monster.


Hon. But how came you deprived of your brother's assistance?


Fell. I was coming to that, when Don Henriquez interrupted us -- in defending
himself, and me, (which he did, a long time, with great galantry, ere we were
taken prisoners) he received some slight wounds, and was lodged in an upper
apartment of the house. -- I was taken to a pavilion in the garden, which, I
presume, the wretch, who assaulted me, thought most fit for his wicked purposes.


Hon. Your attachments to your relation, the Count D'Oniate, and the concern
your brother had in his embassy to the emperor, threatened surely a longer
absence. What occasioned your return?


Fell. My brother was suddenly recalled to his regiment, by royal command; and
the necessity for using dispatch in our return to Sevil, induced him to take
the nearest road -- too near the enemies quarters -- and thence we were made
prisoners.


Hon. I am sure, I have sensibly partaken every fear, and distress, during your
relation, and lament the necessity, that involved you in such perplexities,
though it restored so much of my happiness to me -- And you dearly love the noble
soldier, who offered to revenge your injuries, or die beside you?


Fell. Most entirely. -- I always speak truth, you know: if a sudden passion, a
first-sight love, is justifiable in any one, it is surely so in me; I suppose
gratitude may have some share; but then such a person, such looks, such words
-- however, I am mistaken, if I did not leave him as much cause to remember the
adventure, as he did me.


Hon. Why then did he leave you so abruptly?


Fell. What could the poor soul do? the trumpets summoned him, his men called
loudly for their commander; there was, to be sure, a notable combat between
love and honor, but honor got the better, and I honor him for it.


Hon. And what was this gallant hero's name?


Fell. I know not; I had neither means, nor time, to enquire: the moment my
brother had recovered some few hours strength, we were obliged to set off --
But enough of my affairs; how stand my sweet friend's?


Hon. Worse, and worse, Felicia, -- so near a crisis, that my brother is
determined on my marrying this night.


Fell. My brother hinted as much, as we came here; but I could scarce believe it.


Hon. It Is too true -- Henriquez has just received advice, that the person, to
whom I am contracted, will arrive this evening.


Fell. How absurd, and cruel! and poor Florio --


Hon. Now doubly banished; first from my brother's positive forbiddance of his
addresses, and visits, on account of this unhappy contract; and then, from the
ill-fated death of Don Pedro, whom, in self-defence, you know, he killed: if he
is found, my brother's evidence must condemn him to the law, and his resentment
seeks all occasions to compass the most severe gratifications.


Fell. Rash, inconsiderate, unfeeling man! Was not his savage love of me the
cause, which drives him hourly to some mad extreme? Then that unlucky
similitude of dress, which led him to believe Florio was entertaining me, that
fatal evening, in our balcony! nay, allowing his suspicions had been grounded
in truth, could nothing appease him, but assassinating Florio, and hazarding
his friend Don Pedro in so bafe a cause? Can he suppose such desperate, such
terrifying proofs of passion, (which while his pride will not suffer him to
own, he weakly fancies is unseen) would not disgust my heart?


Hon. However he has disdained to trust a woman, I wonder his friendship with
your brother has not induced him to ask your hand of him.


Fell. Oh my dear! two most weighty reasons are against it; first his pride,
lest he should be refused; secondly, my brother's strong dislike of forced
marriages, to which he is no stranger; though, between you and me, my dear, my
brother is as well convinced of his passion, as we are; and proceeded so far,
as to apply to me thereon; but finding my aversion, my horror at the very
mention of it, according to his accustomed tenderness, he has never since
re-assum'd the topic; but has Henriquez at last graciously been pleased to tell
you your intended husband's name?


Hon. He has, Felicia, this day at dinner; not a moment sooner.


Fell. May not I know it?


Hon. He is called Antonio de Mendoza.

Enter HENRIQUEZ.
Hen. I am pleased, Honoria, to hear you talking of your husband; it gives me
hope your conduct will deserve the happiness I am providing for you; -- have
you the letter ready, which I enjoined you to write to him? I Will send a servant
with it, to meet him on the way, and give him entire possession of that range
of apartments, designed for him; to show how absolutely, next to myself, he is
master here -- it is a respect, which persons of condition reciprocally
challenge.

Enter SYLVIO.
Syl. A servant from Don Antonio is just alighted at the gate, with letters to
your lordship.


Hen. I could not have received more welcome news; admit him. Sister, conduct
your lovely friend within. [Exeunt Honoria and Felicia. Exquisite, enchanting,
mis-judging woman!

Enter SYLVIO, with ERNESTO.
Ern. Sir, Don Antonio kisses your hands with this letter.

[Servants salute.
Hen. I Am glad to find he is in health; yet he seems to think the hour of his
arrival uncertain; else I would myself meet, and conduct him hither.


Ern. Though the hour is uncertain, signor, yet he will undoubtedly be here to
night; for he has appointed the very place, where I am to wait for him.


Hen. You are returning thither now?


Ern. As soon as I have received your commands, signor.


Hen. I Will answer this forthwith, then give you your whole commission. While I
write, make the me^^enger welcome: [Exit Sylvio with Ernesto] I hope nothing
will prevent his coming this evening. I grow more and more impatient -- there is
danger in delay -- however Honoria may put on a spe^^ous complaisance, I know
her; her head is quick to contrive, and her heart desperate to execute. Let but
Antonio come, and she shall not remain unmarried a single hour.

[Exit. Enter HONORIA, FELICIA, and ROSA.
Hon. You see how arrogant, and absolute he is.


Fell. Yet his proud heart felt a smart twinge from my keen eyes, just now, or
I Am mistaken.


Hon. Watched like a culprit, commanded like a slave, torn from the man I love,
forced to a man I have not an idea of!


Fell. Od's my life, girl, don't stand enumerating our distresses, but think how
we may remove 'em; we shall mend nothing by complaining; something must be
contrived.


Hon. But they come so quick upon us --


Fell. If they come too quick for a woman's invention, they are such as never
came before.


Hon. I have it.


Fell. I knew it.


Hon. Lend me your veil, cousin; Rosa, run and see whether my brother is
settled to dispatch Antonio's man.

[Exit Rosa.
Fell. What Is your scheme? quick.


Hon. If my brother is set down to write, I think I may say an hour is securely
mine; for his extravagant suspicion makes him distrust the sense of his own
words, and he will weigh a subscription to a scruple, lest he should degrade his
dignity by his style; therefore I Will to Florio, let him know the straits to
which I am driven, and that all hopes are over, unless he can devise some
prompt expedient to relieve us.


Fell. But where do you think to see him?


Hon. At the house where he is concealed, it is not far off, I Will venture.


Fell. Do You know the way?


Hon. No, but Rosa can conduct me; she has been often there.

Enter ROSA.
Rosa. Your brother, ma'am -- coming already!


Fell. Provoking!


Hon. Into my chamber -- quick.

[Exeunt Honoria and Felicia. Enter HENRIQUEZ, with ERNESTO.
Hen. Since you are so desirous, friend, you shall be indulged in seeing her.


Ern. I should be glad to have it in my power, signor, to tell my master I had
that honor.


Hen. Where Is your lady, Rosa?


Rosa. In her chamber, sir.


Hen. Acquaint her that Antonio's man requests to pay his duty to her, before
he goes. [Exit Rosa. Wait here, she will come to you; you will probably find a
kinswoman with her, but may distinguish your future mistress, by being in her
home-dress without her veil. I will go, and complete my letter.

[Exit Henriquez. Enter HONORIA, FELICIA, and ROSA. Ernesto addresses Felicia.
Ern. I have been bold to request the honor of seeing your ladyship, that I
may be more welcome to my lord, at my return.


Hon. An odd mistake! -- further it, my dear girl; it may lead to something, no
matter what; drowning people catch at straws.


Fell. Friend, in what state left you your lord, and mine?


Ern. As happy, madam, as the hopes of being yours could make him.


Fell. I pray present my service to him, and say, I shall be rejoiced to hear he
has completed his journey safely, and in health: my good wishes attend him.
Friend, farewell.

[Exeunt Honoria, Felicia, and Rosa.
Ern. Egad, she is a lovely creature; my master will be ravished, when he sees
her; I begin to hope this blind bargain, made by proxy, may prove as good, as
the old ones made by love; and that those pretty eyes of here is may coax his
wits back again, which, I think, he has lost; raving eternally about some
unknown damsel, whom he fancies, in his field-errantry, he recovered from a
trance, and he has dreamt of it ever since -- I Will go wake him with this good
news.

[Exit Ern. Enter HONORIA, FELICIA, and ROSA.
Fell. And yet for the soul of me, notwithstanding our vexations, I could hardly
forbear laughing at the formal fool's mistake -- Did not I prim myself up with
a pretty prudish reserve? Was it like you, cousin?


Hon. There Is no saying what may be the consequence of the mistake, but it was
a lucky thing for me, I Am sure; for I should not have known how to speak for
myself.


Rosa. Madam, do we go? What do you resolve?


Fell. That Is true; your brother cannot be much longer; and if, when he returns,
he should miss you from your apartment -- I don't think you can venture now.


Hon. What Is the hour, Rosa?


Rosa. Near eight madam; the clock struck seven, before Donna Felicia entered
the chamber.


Hon. I dare not venture now indeed; run Rosa, fetch your veil. [Exit Rosa.]
I Will appoint him in my tablets, time and place, where he shall meet me, and
Rosa shall carry 'em.


Fell. That Is well; but where do you design your interview?


Hon. In the remotest part of the garden, which fronts my apartment, you know;
where I have often met him, since your absence deprived us of the advantages of
your friendly assistance, and the private door to your portion of Don Juan's
house; Rosa has a key to the backdoor of our garden.


Fell. And how could she get that? Not by fair means, I Am sure. -- Henriquez
used to be as tenacious of his keys, as of his long-spun pedigree; and even
opened a door himself with as much cautious fear, as if he apprehended a piece
of his ancestry should make it is escape at it.


Hon. Rosa artfully procured me an impression of my brother's key one day, when
some sudden intelligence hurried him abroad in search of Florio; and by that we
got one made.


Fell. Well contrived, my notable girl!

Enter ROSA, veiled.
Hon. Shall I beg your patience, while I write?


Fell. This was a lucky accident for you, Rosa; you may chance to fee your fond
lover Guzman.


Rosa. He is a fond lover of himself, I believe, madam; and without a rival.


Fell. Are you sure your words and thoughts agree?


Rosa. I Am not so very old to be in my dotage, ma'am.


Fell. Nor so very young, but you may be in love. Dotage and love are
cousin-germans, Rosa.


Rosa. They may, when we encourage a passion, at first sight, madam, and
indulge it, without a chance of success; -- otherwise, not quite so nearly
related.


Fell. Pert, and witty enough that! I have provoked a wasp, and am stung by it.


Hon. My dear Rosa, make all the haste you are able.


Rosa. I Will fly ma'am; has Florio the other key of the tablets?


Hon. Yes, yes, -- pray dispatch.


Rosa. Never doubt me, madam, for all my own fortune is betted on your game.

[Exit Rosa.
Fell. There she goes; which is nimblest, her heels, or her tongue, I wonder?
Come, my dear girl, try to wear a more cheerful aspect; if we are reduced to
desperate measures, why let the person, who causes it, be blamed.


Hon. He justly would deserve it, though nothing but the last distress, I think,
should urge me to such measures, as the world might censure: yet, were not my
affections so strongly pre-engag'd, to a delicate feeling, surely it is no
trifling wound, to be obliged to give a worthy man a hand, without a heart.


Fell. Come, come, hope well -- and do not torment your mind any further; -- let
us retire to your chamber, and, while we wait Rosa's return, I Will try to raise
your spirits, with your favorite song.


Hon. My sweet friend, I fear the cold regard, I shall pay, will ill deserve
such a kind, and agreeable offer;

In vain we seek relief from outward things,

It Is from within alone sort quiet springs.

[Exeunt.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE, a Marketplace. Enter ANTONIO, and SANCHO, in Riding-Suits. SANCHO.
WHAT a confounded pace we have come! but you are always the same, sir. You
proceed in the attack of a mistress, with as much vigor, and activity, as you
storm a garrison.


Ant. Dispatch is the soul of every undertaking: I hate all that savours of
coldness, and delay. In a pursuit, so insipidly carried on, the spirits relax,
and, though you gain your ends, you scarce relish the success. -- What do you
smile at, Sancho?


San. You expect the truth, sir?


Ant. You know I do. I cannot brook falsehood, even in the veriest trifles; lest
the mind be insensibly led on to practice it in material affairs, and thereby
entail on itself such a reproach, as most disgraces manhood.


San. Why then, sir, I smiled at the oddity of your amors. First, to fall in
love with one you hardly ever saw; and then, make such haste to marry one, you
never saw. We poor mortals have another method.


Ant. Your reflections, like those of the world in general, are too hasty and
superficial; not knowing my motives, you wonder at my conduct. How many
faultless characters, through too severe, and premature conclusions, have had a
shade drawn over them, which time, and reason, have, at last, wholly removed!


San. Sir, I ask pardon, if I have offended,


Ant. You cannot easily offend. You have gained on my temper, and won an
indulgence, which your courage and fidelity well deserve.


San. But, sir, you are earlier, than you expected, by an hour almost.


Ant. It Is true.


San. Then suppose, sir, you return to the posthouse, and lay aside these
unnecessary implements for walking; then, if you please, you may relieve your
legs a little more; I can stay in the house, to be ready, when Ernesto comes,
according to your orders.


Ant. I like your counsel well -- follow me.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, a Street representing the House where FLORIO dwells. Enter, from his
House, FLORIO, with GUZMAN, both cloaked. Flo. Come, Guzman, now we may venture
to quit our dens, take a little fresh air, and begin chase.


Guz. Chase! now the sun is set. Of what, sir? Owls, or bats? Call you this
making love? -- It Is much more like making war -- marching all night in arms,
as if we were going to beat up the enemies quarters, on a forlorn hope.


Flo. Would not you venture as much for Rosa?


Guz. No, in good faith, sir, I shall venture enough, if I marry her; I Will run
no hazards before hand.


Flo. That Is from your fear, not your prudence.


Guz. Sir, you may call it what you please, but I dare boldly say, there lives
not a more valiant man in the world, than myself, while danger keeps at
distance; but when faucily it presses on me, then, I confess, I have a certain
tenderness for life, which checks my ardour, and inclines my prudence to make a
timely retreat.


Flo. How civil your style is to yourself! -- and how prettily you soften that
harsh word, cowardice! -- but, I think, I have seen your valor pleased to run
away, when danger has not been so very pressing.


Guz. It may not have appeared so, sir, to common eyes; but I have such a
piercing sight, that I can discover perils at a greater distance than any man
in Spain. -- Other people (poor souls!) not being blessed with such
perspicuity, do not descry dangers, time enough to shun 'em, and then their
struggling is by the injudicious world called courage.


Flo. A man truly valiant will always remain so.


Guz. A man wisely valiant will avoid all the danger he can.


Flo. You have more light, than heat, I Will allow, Guzman. But your humor, and
honesty, make amends for your want of courage.


Guz. I have courage enough for the profession my parents designed me for.


Flo. What was: that?


Guz. A lawyer. I could have put on rare anger in my client's sight, and, when
he was gone, have hugged the advocate of the opposite party; and, if I don't
mistake, sir, those gentry sell their breath, much dearer than you gentlemen
soldiers sell your blood; it is true, you get honor -- a fine light food, for
delicate appetites! -- yet I have known some captains of plain stomachs fast
upon it.


Flo. The knave's right -- but how I trifle time! What Is this to my
embarrassments in love? -- How shall I contrive to hear from my Honoria? --
Shall I venture to my old haunts? -- I dare not -- To what purpose should I,
unless she were pre-advised of it? This last unhappy accident! left to
solitude, and thought -- and that loaded with the disagreeable reflection of
having shed another's blood! -- which (though it chanced in self-defence) my
reason, and education, will not let me easily digest. -- Yet, Honoria! she must
be mine; and I will leave no peril unencounter'd, to obtain her. -- If, after
all, I fail -- if I must lose her, at least, I will deserve her.

Enter ANTONIO, and SANCHO.
Ant. I am tired with waiting.


San. He cannot be long now, sir, surely.


Ant. I Will take another minute's turn -- go you back to the inn, and wait me
there -- [Exit San.] I scarce can tell the name of any place, I see. It Is so
long, since I was in this city, I have lost all my measures of it.


Flo. Do my eyes cheat me, or is that my comrade, when I first bore arms? My
friend Antonio? If it be he, as sure it must, I cannot dread to know him.


Ant. Florio!


Flo. My honored friend! --


Ant. You were too long in recollecting me -- Your friendship cannot cool?


Flo. Never -- but your presence here, so unexpected, made me disbelieve my
sight. -- When came you to town?


Ant. I just now arrived.


Flo. I rejoice to see you; but should have thought it more likely to hear of
you at court, pursuing the recompense due to your deserts.


Ant. An employment I am neither fond, nor capable of. I cannot sue, even for
my right. It Is my-ambition to merit, but not solicit reward. The dignity of
honor suffers in it. If praise, and advancement, do not follow our services,
we must learn to pay ourselves, by a noble contempt of worldly favors.


Flo. A severe rule indeed, which virtue prescribes to herself! -- to be so
backward in claiming a reward, she is so eager to deserve.


Ant. By no means. She is more hurt in being reduced to beg reward, than she
can be in the want of it -- Besides, a true subject hazards his life in the
service of his king and country, for the advancement of their honor and
interest solely; he, who does it with a view to his own, deserves neither
praise, nor reward.


Flo. The same great, and generous spirit, as ever. I honor the day, which
introduced me to the knowledge of so much worth.


Ant. What merit I have, I can but faintly call my own -- I inherit it from a
father, whose example of courage, and integrity, it had been scandalous in a
son not to have imitated.


Flo. This is my house, at present, Antonio -- Will you honor it, by calling
it yours? Though you must excuse many deficiencies in your entertainment. I am
but in an ill condition, at present, to receive the honor of such a guest;
having, by an unhappy accident, been obliged, lately, to change my usual place
of residence, and keep myself concealed.


Ant. Concealed! -- but that is for a future hour, and more suitable place. --
I must however decline your kind offer a while, being forced to remain
hereabouts, lest I should miss the return of one, whom I sent to my
brother-in-law's.


Flo. You surprise me -- Have you a brother-in-law in Seville?


Ant. I have. I came hither a married man, as far as friends could make me.


Flo. Since then it so imports you not to miss your servant, I will keep you
company here, 'till his arrival; then lead you to some refreshment. -- You have
had a tedious and perilous campaign in Flanders. -- I long, methinks, Antonio,
to hear some account of your actions therein, of which fame speaks loudly, but
not distinctly. -- Could you not oblige me, while you are waiting for your
servant --


Ant. Excuse me -- I cannot -- if there be any merit in my behavior, my own
breath would fully it -- if not, the report is not fit for a friend's ear. --
But if you choose to fill up the time, I Will give you an adventure of mine,
which, I fancy, will repay your attention.


Flo. You will oblige me.


Ant. And, when it is finished, you will wonder how, with such a prepossession
in my heart, I should be induced to come here, to marry a stranger.


Flo. Your preface awakes my curiosity -- to the story, I beseech you.


Ant. On the evening, following that glorious day, whereon the Duke of Alva
gained such distinguished reputation, I was dispatched with some horse, to
cover the Limbourg frontiers, which were too much exposed to the enemy's
inroads. -- We were scarce arrived, when I received intelligence, that a party
of them (about 200 cavalry) were newly lodged in a village, three leagues off.
We instantly sounded to horse, and, not to trouble you with particulars, so
great was our expedition, that, by daybreak, their quarters were on fire.


Flo. You experienced the utility of your own maxim, that diligence in
execution is the mistress of success.


Ant. Our foes made but faint resistance -- some were slain, -- some fled to
give alarm to their reserves in quarters remote. -- The tumult nigh over. I
(...) to a lofty structure, supposing it was their leader's quarter -- with
intention to preserve him from the soldier's rage, and his building from the
fire -- but what was my surprise, when, entering a pavilion in the garden, I
beheld a woman of a matchless form stretched on the marble floor!


Flo. Your heart suffered then, I am sure -- Pity and bravery always dwell
together.


Ant. I felt, what I cannot describe -- though, at first, I believed her dead,
yet her appearance inspired me with such awe, and reverence, that I could not,
without trembling, venture to approach her. -- I knelt, and raised her in my
arms, when strait a sigh stole from her. I knew it not for a sound of grief,
while it was a sign of life. At last, she opened her lovely eyes, and beamed
such looks (spite of her sad situation) as I had never experienced. Awhile I
was held mute with wonder, and delight, when a poniard fell from her fair hand
-- as if she only wanted arms asleep, and waking trusted to her eyes. -- My
sensations increased each moment; -- when I recovered power to speak, I said --
I know not what -- It was all ecstasy, yet it had its rise in sincerity. -- She
endeavored to reply, but could not -- yet she looked such sweet surprise --
such gratitude -- though mixed with fear --


Flo. I am all impatience.


Ant. I renewed my ardent professions -- offered my life for the recovery of
here is -- I labored to know her story -- The crimson in her cheeks seemed
reviving, and her speech returning, when a sudden loud blast of trumpets, and
outcry of my men, alarmed me. They were charged with squadrons of fresh horse,
whom the fugitives had called from neigbouring villages. I longed to stay with
her -- I panted to be with them -- my powers, for a time, were suspended -- but
awaking to that sense of honor, from which no claim should alienate a soldier,
I tore myself away. The situation of my mind added to my usual heat -- I was
desperate in fight, and sustained so many wounds, that I swooned with loss of
blood, while my soldiers completed the victory, and brought me off.


Flo. I feel for you in all.


Ant. My outward wounds were slight, and quickly healed; but those within,
deep, and still so^^ly bleeding. My heart, and happiness seemed utterly to have
forsaken me. My enquiries after her were vain, and I returned to my post in the
army, loaded with the despair of ever seeing her again, from whom my affections
can never stray.


Flo. You have, indeed, given me cause for concern, as well as wonder. -- So
engaged, how comes this strange marriage? From what inducements? Your mind is
above the general temptations of the world.


Ant. From duty, gratitude, and justice -- Long before this event, I was
contracted to the lady, whom I now come to marry, by the Marquis D'Oliverc,
whose patronage and friendship, from my infancy, would render my disobedience
to a recommendation of his highly improper. -- Besides, when he first proposed
this match, my heart was wholly disengaged -- now there is no retracting.


Flo. A strange, and perplexing adventure truly! -- yet may I not ask who the
lady is in Seville, that is destined to call so much merit here is?


Ant. To you I have no reserve -- she is the sister of --

Enter ERNESTO hastily -- FLORIO, starting, retires, and muffies himself in his
clock. Only my servant.


Flo. Guzman -- Guzman! beg Antonio to dispatch him quick.

[Guzman whispers
Ant. Presently -- Well, Ernesto, what news?


Ern. I have delivered your letter, sir, into your brother-in-law's own hands
-- He seemed concerned at the uncertainty of your time of arriving; which I, in
some measure, removed, assuring him, you would undoubtedly see him this night.
He kisses your hands, and expects you with impatience. This letter contains his
full meaning -- As to your bride, sir -- the most accomplished creature! --


Ant. You have seen her then?


Ern. My being of your train gave me the privilege of a domestic, to see her
in her chamberdress, without a veil; which, of my conscience, I think, could
only be contrived to cover faults, or hide beauties.


Ant. Is she so handsome?


Ern. I never saw such another, sir -- such a shape! such eyes! -- your
Brussels-beauties, that you used to brag of so, are nothing to her. -- Fortune
shall choose me a wife -- I Will have no concern with love, or judgment. -- But
I Will say no more, sir. -- Only see her -- This master-key, sir, delivered by
your brother with great dignity, you are desired to receive, as an earnest of
that interest and authority, with which you are invested in the family, on the
intended alliance. It commands all the apartments prepared for your reception
-- a separate quarter, that opens on St. Vincent's street -- nobly furnished
indeed!


Ant. Enough -- You Will find Sancho here in the post house; send him off with my
things, and do you wait for me.

[Exit Ernesto.
Guz. There Is some ill near, when this bird appears -- she is ominous.

Enter ROSA hastily.
Rosa. Where Is your master, Guzman?


Guz. Don't you see him? -- You Have lived too long unmarried.


Rosa. Sir, something in private -- requires haste --


Flo. What now? more misfortunes?


Rosa. The tablets will instruct you, Sir.


Guz. You're not going, Rosa? -- stay for an answer --


Rosa. It Is a command, not a question, puppy.


Guz. Short and sweet, Rosa!


Flo. Distraction! -- Will you permit me to retire a moment?


Ant. By all means -- I Will wait upon you in, and stay your leisure.

[Florio, Antonio, and Rosa, go into Florio's house.
Guz. Ay, I was sure it was some disaster, it came so hastily and unsought for.
Some command from our heroine -- I Will be hanged, if it don't end in fighting.
My mind's prophetic in these matters -- People of their rank generally make
love by wrote, and it never fails to end in mischief. Those little black books
raise more devils, and destruction, than all the conjurer's circles in the
universe -- Curse of the inventer of that damned artifice of painting words, and
talking to our eyes! -- If I were to have a hundred daughters, not one of them
should ever learn to read or write. -- It Is a quick dispatch, for here she
comes again.

Enter ROSA, with a letter. What not a word, Rosa? -- a kind Glance, at least
-- grown cruel!


Rosa. This is no time for fooling.


Guz. Nay, if you're in your airs -- though now I think on it better, I will do
the honors of our street, and see you to the end of it. I hate being unpolite.


Rosa. Pry'thee, let go -- I shall be well helped up with such a squire as you.
If some wandering knight should offer to take your damsel, what would you do?


Guz. Use no weapon, but a torch -- throw aside your veil and show him your
face, and that would guard us both.


Rosa. Do You think it would frighten him then?


Guz. No, charm him, Rosa,


Rosa. Well, such as it is, I Will venture it, without endangering your
well-known valor.

[Exit Rosa -- Guzman returns to the house. Scene changes to the inside of
FLORIO's house. Enter FLORIO, followed by ANTONIO.
Ant. I must not be denied.


Flo. You must.


Ant. I will not. -- The disorder and confusion in your looks, the hurry of
your spirits, all convince me, some danger attends your undertaking --


Flo. None, that a friend like you, shall share.


Ant. Has Florio then forgot, or dares he violate the laws of holy friendship?
Have you not often shared my griefs, and perils, and must I be denied? -- Why
arrogate the glory to yourself?


Flo. At any time, but this -- Your business here in Seville was to seek
happiness, not misery. I cannot bear to be your obstacle -- Leave me, my
friend, I beg.


Ant. I cannot -- dare not leave you thus -- some desperate engagement calls
you -- my happiness can but be postpon'd, not destroyed. And think you I could
enjoy it, could relish any bliss, loaded with the reflection, that I had
abandoned my friend, when most he needed my assistance?


Flo. I could forego my own enjoyments, but cannot hazard yours.


Ant. You dare not trust me with the business.


Flo. Think you my refusal can arise from distrust of my Antonio's heart? --
Read there.

[Gives him the tablets. Antonio reads.
Ant. "Unless you can venture to be under the summer-house-window, at nine this
evening, expect no more to see, or hear from her, whose heart your constancy
has merited. Yet reflect on your situation, and come not unattended by a trusty
friend, as you value our mutual peace."


Ant. What opposes your union?


Flo. A tyrant-brother, whose enmity to me (sprung from ill grounded suspicion,
and revenge) is so increased by a late accident, which I Will tell you at a
fitter time, that he seeks all occasions to destroy our loves, and reach my
life.


Ant. Enough -- I see the exigence -- Obey your mistress's injunction -- You
cannot want that friend, while I am near. -- Wrong me not, Florio, by another
refusal. -- I will partake your difficulties, or here ends an intercourse,
which friendship has sanctified for years.


Flo. Your generous mind will be obeyed -- though it is with reluctance I accept
the aid I glory in.


Ant. No formal speeches -- to the business -- the lady waits -- time calls --
I cannot be happy, till you are so -- Our joys must be mutual, or they are
incomplete;

He basely injures friendship's sacred name,
Who reckons not himself and friend the same.

ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE the Garden, and Summer House, of HENRIQUEZ. HONORIA, FELICIA, and ROSA,
discovered up in the Summer House. HONORIA. THE appointed hour is near, cousin.


Fell. I should suppose it come, it is night already.


Rosa. And, thanks to kind stars, sufficiently dark.


Fell. Thanks to kind clouds you would say,


Rosa; for stars, on this occasion, would not much befriend us -- My dear
Honoria, rouse yourself; don't flinch, now you are come to the field of action:
such schemes as these are the only means a woman has to show her spirit; and,
on my conscience, I verily believe it is only the want of opportunity to show
ourselves, that makes the foolish world charge us with want of courage.


Hon. You will be careful then, my sweet girl; you, and Rosa, will watch very
narrowly above; for if my hot-brained brother should surprise us --


Flo. Let us alone to play the sentinels -- I Will warrant --


Rosa. I Am confident, madam, he is abroad, and will not return in a hurry: for I
heard him say he should pass part of the evening at the corregidor's, and you
know he never comes from thence very early.


Hon. But in the present state of his mind, determined as he is on the
immediate ruin of my peace, and expecting Antonio every hour, there is no
answering for him -- Would Florio were come!

Enter FLORIO, ANTONIO, and GUZMAN, in Cloaks, with drawn Swords.
Ant. Is it not rather too early in the evening for adventures of this nature?


Guz. I think it is always so.

[Aside.
Flo. It Is the exact hour she appointed.


Ant. How dark it is grown of the sudden! not a single star to be perceived!


Guz. So much the better; when I fight, I desire to have no spectators of my
courage.

[Aside.
Flo. This darkness is popitious -- may it but continue a little! -- Antonio,
I Will step before, and give the sign -- you stay here, till you hear the door
open, then come on, and follow me. --

Enter HENRIQUEZ and JUAN.
Hen. The corregidor's house is indeed noble, and the gardens elegantly laid
out.


Juan. The walks and fountains so entice me, I weary myself, before I am able
to leave 'em.


Hen. We have out-stay'd our time, we'll therefore take the shorter way home;
the back door of my garden is at hand. How dark it is!


Hon. Not yet! I fear the rising moon, and that would betray all. [Florio
strikes on the hilt of his sword.] I think I hear the usual signal. Who Is there?


Flo. It Is I.


Hon. You are not alone, I hope.


Flo. No, I am doubly guarded.


Guz. Not that you know of.

[Aside*
Hon. It Is well, -- I Will open the door immediately.


Hen. I think we should be near the garden gate now.


Flo. She must be ready, by this time; why do thou breathe so short, coward?


Guz. Either I spy more than ourselves, or else my fears do.


Flo. I think so too; I Will walk aside, till they are gone, to avoid suspicion.


Guz. So will I, to avoid danger; I have grop'd out a tree, they shall not say I
leave the field however.

[GUZMAN climbs the tree.] [the door is unlocked.
Juan. Sure, I heard a door open.


Hen. I thought so too -- At this late hour! what can it mean? it cannot sure
be mine!


Ant. The door opened; where are you, friend?


Hon. [At the door] What stay you for?


Hen. By hell it is, for that is Honoria's voice.


Juan. Patience, a moment; and you will make a clearer discovery; stand a little
aside.


Hon. My love! is it you?


Ant. Not he, whom you expect, lady, but a friend who --


Hon. Not he! who art thou then? and what shadow is that?


Hen. I can contain no longer; vile woman, I am thy destiny, and his mortal
enemy.


Ant. My mortal enemy!


Hen. Yes, villain, thy life shall answer this attempt upon my honor.


Ant. Vain man! the life, thou threat'nest, is guarded by a trusty sword.

[fight.
Flo. Clashing of swords! my friend's in danger.

[advances.
Hen. More of your crew! Ho, Sylvio -- Geraldo, Jaques -- thieves! -- assassins!


Juan. Bring torches -- ho! [Felicia and Rosa leave the summer house.


Guz. Their swords clatter bravely in the dark.


Hen. [Falls] I Have lost my sword --


Juan. What, are you hurt?


Hen. I know not.

[the moon rises
Flo. What, do you give back? you will not easily evade our just resentments, now
the rising moon assists us.


Hon. Now I see him; oh my love, what shall we do? my brother will sacrifice me
to his revenge.


Flo. Trust to my honor; I Will redeem you from his cruelty, or perish. Where Is
my brave friend?


Ant. By your side; away -- I Will secure your retreat.

[Exeunt Florio, Honoria, and Antonio.
Guz. Yonder Is my master victorious, and marching off with his fair prize --
Huzza! I Will down, and join the triumph.

[Exit.
Hen. No no, it is but a scratch!


Juan. But while I have been engaged to succor you, the villains have escaped;
they were afraid of the light -- lean on my arm.


Hen. I scorn assistance -- I am yet able to revenge my injuries; -- I will go
seek the wicked cause --


Juan. Be moderate, however, when you meet her.


Hen. Moderate! --


Juan. Or you will never make discovery who these people were, nor what their
intent. Hear what I have to offer; go in, and make a cool enquiry -- fie! how
unseemly is this fury! -- I will, mean while, endeavor to trace these villains
to their dens.

[Exit after them.
Hen. Well, well -- I Will try -- oh! this ungrateful girl!

[Exit at the garden-gate. Scene changes to the City. Enter FLORIO, and
ANTONIO, with HONORIA -- At a little Distance, GUZMAN, and, after him, JUAN.
Ant. Fear not, madam, we will defend you against all attempts.

[Exeunt.
Guz. Yes, yes, there they go -- and here is Antonio, bringing up the rear;
they are but just before, sir; my master is bearing her off most gallantly;
don't lose sight of me, and you're secure.

[Exit.
Juan. He takes me for one of his own party; his mistake will enable me to
harbor them.

[Exit.
SCENE, Apartments in HENRIQUEZ' s House. Enter FELICIA, and ROSA. Fell. I am
terrified out of my senses -- What can have been the issue?


Rosa. Heaven knows, ma'am; they may be all killed; when we returned to the
summer house, all was silent; not a soul there. She Is lost, at best.


Fell. It Is possible, that, in her fright, she ran to her own apartment, by the
other staircase. -- Let Us go see --


Rosa. Stop, stop, madam; there is a light, and Don Henriquez with his sword
drawn -- What shall we do?


Fell. Step aside, behind this door, and listen to his intentions.

Enter HENRIQUEZ, and JAQUES with Lights.
Jaques. Not to be found, indeed, sir; we have searched every room.


Hen. Infamous, abandoned woman! to cast so deep a stain upon our honor; if I
find her, I Will sacrifice her blood to the manes of her offended parents.


Rosa. Hear you, madam?

[Aside.
Fell. I do, and tremble.

[Aside.
Hen. Where Is her woman, villain? Why don't you call her?


Jaques. Rosa! Rosa!


Rosa. Defend me! What am I to say? Here, sir.


Hen. Where Is your mistress?


Rosa. Sir, she told me, about half an hour since, she would go --


Hen. Quick --


Rosa. Into the garden, sir.


Hen. Ay, then my disgrace is certain, it is public, and perpetual infamy is my
portion. -- This the reward for all my cares! -- my incessant torments! --
daily cautions! -- hourly admonitions! A man had better have to rule beasts of
prey, than women -- they have not half their designs -- their cruelty --
ingratitude! She has buried my heart in sorrow, and engraven dishonor on the
tomb of her ancestors. -- She stole away! -- her accomplices escaped! -- and no
means of revenge to be found! Oh! that creatures, which are but feathers in the
scale of our enjoyments, should add such weight to our anxieties and torments!

Enter JUAN.
Juan. Don Henriquez -- I have done wonders in your behalf, for so short a time
--


Hen. Tell me -- tell me -- I burn with impatience --


Juan. I have harbored the whole gang.


Hen. You revive me. --


Juan. Have marked the very house. --


Hen. How -- Where? -- gratify me, quick -- --


Juan. I soon discovered some, whom I suspected to be the villains; but unable
singly to attack 'em, I kept a little distance, to observe which way they took,
when one of their party, who was behind the rest, confirmed me in my
suspicions; mistaking me for one of his own crew, he bade me come on, saying
his master was but just before --


Hen. Good! good!


Juan. We had not passed above two streets, before he stopped; and at the
second house beyond the church in St. Jago's street, he entered, and bid me
follow --


Rosa. The house, where Don Florio is concealed, madam.

[Behind.
Juan. I stopping to observe it well, he grew aware of having spoke to a
stranger, ran into the house, and locked the door. I notic'd it particularly,
and cannot miss it.


Hen. Then, ere this possibly they have escaped.


Juan. That is not likely; Where else can they take refuge, at this time of
night, in Seville? No -- no -- we have them safe, I Will engage. --


Hen. You have given me new life; let me but enjoy my revenge, and, though the
next moment were my last, I could die contented. Call all my servants -- I will
besiege that impious dwelling; I Will reduce that theater of my disgrace to ashes.


Juan. Again in these mad fits! for shame, consult your reason; how wild and
impracticable were the attempt, to assail a house at this time of night in a
well governed city! it would only expose your person and fortune to the rigor
of the law, publish your dishonor, and frustrate your revenge for ever.


Hen. And would you have me tamely stay, till these ruffians, who have invaded
my house, affronted my person, and stole my sister, may escape my vengeance?


Juan. Be but ruled by me, I Will show you the surest and nearest way to gain it;
I Will instantly to the corregidor's, for the aid of his authority, to secure
them for the present, and tomorrow give 'em up to the law.


Hen. Away -- away -- Conceive you I will wait such slow decisions? Submit a
personal injury to the tame formal law? Oh! no; my honor challenges redress
from my own arm.


Juan. Honor consists in reason, and in justice, not in frantic violence --
that only is your idol. I pray be calm -- reflect -- all my design is but to
conceal the shame, till we have the villains in our power; which cannot be
brought about, by any means, so sure, as by demanding justice against the
assaulters of your house and person; trust to my conduct; I Will be speedier than
you can think, and bring you satisfaction instantly.

[Exit.
Hen. Could you fly, you would move too slow for my desires -- Oh! how tedious
are the moments measured by revenge!


Rosa. [Behind.] I Will venture, though I perish, ma'am, and give her warning of
their designs; I Am sure, she is there, -- this house is in such confusion, I can
run, without being missed.


Fell. Fly, brave girl! and I Will retire to Honoria's chamber, till your return.

[Exit Fell. and Rosa.
Hen. Yet why? Why am I to be controlled by other's wills? Why ruled by other's
counsels? Are not my own discretion, and wisdom, sufficient arbitors? I Will
after, and, at all events, sacrifice the destroyers of my glory; I Will hunt them
out, though they were buried in the center; or failing, I will withdraw me from
the world. Insulted and exposed, I cannot submit myself an object of public
ridicule, and contempt; much less, can I bear the sight of him, who will expect
a spotless sister at my hands.

Enter GERALDO.
Ger. Sir, Don Antonio is just arrived --


Hen. Who, villain, who?


Ger. Don Antonio, sir, your brother-in-law; Sylvio has conducted him to my
lady's antechamber, and bade me give you notice of it.


Hen. There my shames begin -- there they strike deep -- this circumstance
alone was wanting to complete my infamy -- What shall I say? What do? He Will ask
me for his wife -- can I tell him, she is -- Oh! cursed woman! where shall I
find a heart, a tongue, a voice, a face --


Ger. Your commands, sir -- it is possible, Don Antonio may think it long. --


Hen. Plague, and the devil! -- why tell him -- tell him -- say you cannot find
me. [Exit Ger.] I will avoid him; I Will hide myself, 'till he is gone -- I cannot
bear to see him -- when he finds no one here to entertain him, he may leave the
house offended: let him, with my whole heart; I will undergo any censure,
rather than be the reporter of my own disgrace.

[Exit.
SCENE, the Antechamber to HONORIA 's Apartments. Enter ANTONIO and ERNESTO.
Ant. My friend, and his mistress, safely lodged, I may now attend to my own
engagements. Yet this strange usage perplexes me; suffering me to wait thus
long, on my first arrival!


Ern. I swear, I am amazed, sir. It Is not above two hours, since I saw a
numerous family here, and, to all appearance, well ordered; now the pages bolt
out of their doors, then start back into their holes, like rabbits in a warren;
the maids too, as we entered, were all peeping out of the garret windows, like
the upper tier of ordnance in a ship -- all disorder! but here comes the
servant, you sent in. --

Enter GERALDO.
Ant. Friend, where is your master?


Ger. I cannot tell, indeed, sir, he is not to be found.


Ant. Where Is his sister?


Ger. Truly, I don't know, sir; we menservants have little concern with the
lady's quarters.

[Exit.
Ant. Humph! -- are you sure, Ernesto, you have not brought me to a wrong house?


Ern. If you are sure we are awake, sir, then am I certain this is the very
house wherein, this afternoon, I saw and spoke both with Don Henriquez and your
bride; by the same token, there was a lady with her in a veil; and this
identical room is the antechamber to your bride's apartment.


Ant. Then, what can all this mean? I dare not suppose the Marquis would be so
importunate to have me sacrificed to such a creature, as her own brother is
ashamed to show me.


Ern. Don't fear, sir, -- you may soon be set right, in that point; for yonder
I see her in the inner room, lying on her couch, and reading: though her face is
turned the other way, I Will swear to her shape, and clothes.


Ant. Are you quite certain it is she?


Ern. There are not many like her, sir.


Ant. Since you are sure, I Will venture in, without her brother's introduction.


Ern. Soft, sir, she saves you the trouble, and is coming this way.

Enter FELICIA, with a Book.
Fell. In short it is to no purpose, my concern for Honoria robs me of all
attention.

[Throws the Book away.
Ant. Heavens! that lovely form, which, fearing my revolt, appears to prove my
constancy and truth.


Fell. Defend me! who is this? Does my mind bear false witness, or am I
enchanted?


Ant. If it be but a vision --


Ern. Dear! dear! what fit of frenzy is this? Why, sir, it is Honoria -- no
vision -- but a lovely living woman, and your destined bride.


Fell. It Is he indeed! I Am all amazement --


Ant. The blessing is too mighty for my faith.


Ern. Oh! never consult faith about it, sir; approach, and trust your sense.


Fell. And does he come to wed Honoria? This her intended husband? What mystery
is this, and how to be unravelled?


Ant. If yet Antonio be not quite forgot --


Fell. The servant's error has misled him; he takes me for Honoria; how shall I
act? Had I not better, for her sake, still favor the deceit? So gain some
time, till she returns, or hear how she is disposed of! It shall be so -- I Will
trespass a few moments on the hazard of Henriquez's coming to undeceive him,
sound Antonio's sentiments, then get off as well as my heart will let me.

[Aside.
Ant. Thou dear resemblance of her, whom my soul doats on, in pity, speak --
Say, art thou that lovely maid, to whom I once presumed to pay the truest vows
of love?


Fell. I am, Antonio, that very she, whose safety, and whose honor, you made
your generous care; and to whom you paid some hasty vows of love.


Ant. And is it possible, that fortune has completed, what affection began?


Fell. I cannot but acknowledge she has been peculiarly propitious to you; and I
should make an ill return to those vows, did I not congratulate you on the
blind Goddess's amazing bounty, that has given you, in the wife to whom you
have engaged yourself, the only woman you can love.


Ant. No doubt my conduct may seem strange, yet hear me speak --


Fell. And swear again eternal love -- and breath again those ardent
protestations, which were intended for me alone, and not to be transferred to
an unknown fair? --


Ant. By my hopes of future happiness, I vow, that, long ere I beheld those
eyes --


Fell. We have not time for explanations now; a further conference would be
improper, till my brother's sanction has allowed our interview.


Ant. Leave me not, dearest lady, in this uncertainty -- give me the smallest
hope, that you have ever thought your servant worthy a remembrance; then, if I
cannot justify myself, discard, despise me utterly.


Fell. Esteem, that springs from gratitude, cannot easily decay -- let that
suffice; and, if you are the same Antonio, generous, and noble, as you first
showed to me, when in my distressed situation -- But how am I transgressing?
Honoria must act, as becomes Don Henriquez's sister; in his absence, longer
discourse would be improper; our next meeting may be less restrained. [So, my
mind is something easier, and his penetrating Donship has not interrupted us.

[Aside. [Exit.
Ant. To that next meeting then will I look forward, and hope shall be my
comforter, for that she did not deny me. -- Perfection of prudence, as of
loveliness! conscious that I can justify myself in honor, and integrity, I
have no doubt of happiness.

Enter HENRIQUEZ.
Hen. Sure he has learned the whole, ever this, and is gone to meditate revenge.

[Aside.
Ant. Noble Don Henriquez --


Hen. O curse! he is here still; I cannot fly him now.

[Aside.
Ant. Amazement! avoid a friend that is come so long a journey to cast himself
at your fair sister's feet!


Hen. Ay, now the storm breaks -- What shall I say to him? [Aside.] You may
easily suppose, sir, I am somewhat disconcerted -- that you should find my
house in such disorder -- so unprepared for the honor of so brave a guest --


Ant. I am indeed surpised -- beyond what I can express -- I scarce imagined,
Don Henriquez, your sister could have been --


Hen. Torture! plagues! [Aside.] -- it is not in a brother's power, Antonio, to
make a sister better, than --


Ant. In yours it cannot be -- I never saw a more accomplished creature.


Hen. Ha! what means he?

[Aside.
Ant. Notwithstanding your absence, I have just enjoyed the happiness of an
interview; she so far exceeds the rest of her sex I ever saw, her beauty, wit,
and discretion, are so excellent, all favorable circumstances join to make me
bless this meeting.


Hen. How am I to understand this? Can he be in earnest? I will, if possible,
contain myself, and try to fathom this. [Aside.] You have then seen, and
entertained my sister, sir?


Ant. I have, and with such full delight, that I think all the pains and toils
of my past life exquisitely rewarded in those few moments of her conversation;
I wished them to be prolonged, but her discretion would not suffer too long a
visit, in your absence: and I could not but adore the prudence, that robbed me
of such transcendant pleasure.


Hen. I am more and more confounded. [Aside.] She might have spared that
caution, sir, since with you -- she knew my sentiments -- would I could get him
away! [Aside.] Shall I have the pleasure to conduct you to your chamber? I fear
it is late, and you want rest.


Ant. I could not think of troubling you, nor indeed any one, at present, being
obliged, late as it is, to see a friend, before I go to rest.


Hen. Shall I attend you?


Ant. By no means -- I must not suffer it; I Will return in an hour, at farthest.


Hen. Take your own time; you're wholly master here.


Ant. I thank you sir -- adieu! [I never saw a man so discomposed, whatever the
matter is -- Ernesto, bid Sancho attend me out, and stay you in my apartment
till I return.]

[Aside.] [Exit.
Hen. How am I to interpret all this? One mystery breeds another; so delighted
with her conversation, so enamored of her form! he seemed in earnest; -- and
then to make such a sudden sally abroad, after a long journey too, in a place
where I should suppose him an utter stranger, and not suffer me to accompany
him -- but I Will bear no more suspense; I Will to my sister's chamber, and
unriddle the whole.

Enter JUAN.
Juan. Come away, Don Henriquez; dispatch, all is prepared; our kinsman, the
corregidor, waits you with a strong band of Alguazils.


Hen. Hush! Don Antonio and his people are arrived -- some one may overhear us
--


Juan. Has he discovered your sister's absence?


Hen. I don't know -- I think not. --


Juan. Away then, to recover her; we have not a moment to lose.


Hen. Pray, stay a little: I labor with a doubt, will burst me, if not cleared.


Juan. Are you mad? Will you permit such villains to escape, and laugh at us
for ever? Now Is your only time -- they will depend on our lying quiet till
morning -- away -- you must not stay an instant.


Hen. Well, well -- I go -- I will --

Of all the ills, wherewith our lives are cursed,
Suspense, and jealous fears, are far the worst.
[Exeunt.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
SCENE, FLORIO 's House. Enter HONORIA, FLORIO, and GUZMAN. HONORIA. WAS ever
such a distressful mistake!


Flo. Villain, thou have ruined us; where was thy soul? Had fear utterly
banished it? Left thee not a grain of common sense? And why did you not let me
know it, as soon as we were come into the house?


Guz. Lack-a-day, sir, what could you have done, if you had known it then?


Flo. Have sallied out, rascal, and killed the rogue, in whose power thou have
put it to ruin us; ever this, perhaps, he has acquainted Don Henriquez -- and
we may, every moment, expect the severest effects of rage, and malice, seconded
by the appearance of justice -- Curse on all cowards! better far be served by
fools, and knaves.


Guz. Why, sir, is it my fault, that I am not a cat? How could I tell, in the
dark, whether that rascal was a knight errant, or a knight recreant? I took him
for a friend. Were it not for such accidents as these that mock man's forecast,
the destinies would never have had a place among the deities.


Flo. Peace, cowardly, sententious slave! but that I would not disgrace my
sword with such base blood, thou should not have a moment to live.


Guz. A thousand thanks then to my base blood, for saving my noble flesh.

[Aside.
Hon. For heaven's sake, Florio, be pacified, and let us consider of some means
to extricate ourselves; we must not stay here; my brother will be upon us
instantly.


Flo. To convey you safely hence is my only care; my own danger I regard not. I
will myself conduct you to some shelter from his barbarous temper.


Hon. You should not, for the world. Think what would be the consequence,
should you be found by the officers of justice; that would complete our
calamities.


Flo. Run, rascal, and fetch a chair immediately.


Guz. A pretty errand at this time of night! those rogues of chairmen are
mighty good-natured; they are likely to obey a servant's orders, after eleven
o'clock.

[Exit.
Flo. But then, to hazard you alone!


Hon. The danger in that is not half so terrifying, as being found here; --
admit there were no cause to fear the sad effects of cruelty, and revenge, yet
being seen in your house would be interpreted into all that calumny could
invent.


Flo. Though the complexion of your brother's malice were as black as hell, it
could not cast a stain on innocence like yours.


Hon. Alas! my Florio, the unhappy are always in the wrong, and slander, once
propagated, never dies. Why did I leave my brother's house? Why engage your
love and tenderness in an adventure, that may prove your ruin?


Flo. Deprived of you, I live but to be miserable.

Enter GUZMAN.
Guz. The chair is come, sir, just as I expected.


Flo. Where is it?


Guz. Even where it was. The chairmen are so deeply engaged at cards, they
swear they will not stir for all the Dons in Seville.


Flo. Rascals! -- I Will have 'em, if I drag 'em hither.

[Exit.
Hon. My Florio, stay; what mean you? O heavens! he will meet my enraged brother,
and the officers; then I shall be utterly miserable --


Guz. As much aversion as I have, madam, to throwing myself in harm's way, yet
I am really so concerned at the mistake I have made, that I almost wish I had
endured a few blows, rather than have brought such a distress upon you --


Hon. Prithee peace!

Enter ANTONIO, and SANCHO.
Ant. Where is my worthy friend?


Guz. Did not you meet him at the door, sir?


Ant. No.


Guz. He went out but just before you came in, sir.


Ant. Madam, I could not think of seeking rest, till I had returned to inform
myself of yours, and my noble friend's state of mind; and to offer my future
services, whenever you require them.

Enter ROSA, running.
Ros. Oh! madam!


Hon. Heavens, Rosa, you here!


Ros. It Is a mercy, I am here, madam -- for, through fear of being traced, and my
intelligence prevented, I have taken so many strange, round-about turnings and
windings, I almost lost myself.


Hon. But what disaster brings you?


Ros. A terrible one, madam, -- you're found out, and pursued -- Don Juan, by
the help of the moon, and a mistake of some of your party, traced you to this
house, and, in my hearing, informed your brother of the whole; who is coming
with the corregidor and officers, to seize all that shall be found within these
walls.


Hon. O unfortunate!


Ros. Away madam, or you're caught.


Hon. What a torrent of woes am I plunged in! my brother's cruel fury has, I
doubt not, asperfed my name with infamy, never to be wiped out. --


Ant. Let the consciousness of your innocence make you bold, and defy worldly
censures. -- While your own heart approves, you're safe. --


Ros. They Will be upon you, before you are aware, madam --


Hon. That Florio should be absent! -- and yet to wait his return --


Ros. Would be madness, madam --


Ant. Dare you venture yourself with me, madam? Upon my honor, I Will protect
you, or perish.


Hon. My sad situation, sir, obliges me to trouble you, and your late conduct
gives me confidence. With gratitude, I accept your offer.


Ant. I am the obliged, madam. Guzman, go seek your master, and tell him the
danger not allowing us to wait, I will convey his mistress to a nunnery. [Exit
Guz.] Within religious walls she must be secure.


Hon. And stay you, Rosa, to bring me word of his resolves.


Ant. Hold! On recollection, they will not open the monastery gates, at this
hour, without a strict enquiry, and that would equally betray us. -- I have it
-- the happiest thought! I will convey you, madam, to my brother-in-law's. His
quality and honor will be a sanction to you, and my wife will with pleasure
pay the offices due to your virtue, and distress. The liberty, I take herein, I
am confident they will approve and thank me for. Sancho, stay here, represent
all this to Florio, and conduct him with the utmost caution and secresy to my
apartment; happily I have the key -- Ernesto sits up for me, so I shall not want
it; and, for Florio's better security, tell him, it is my counsel that he comes
in a chair.


Hon. Continue here, dear Rosa, till you are assured what steps Florio takes;
then return home, where I will find some means to send for intelligence. To
what arts am I reduced by my distresses!


Ant. Let the reflection that you deserve them not, support you to endure them.

[Exeunt Antonio, and Honoria.
San. Upon my soul, a very gallant compliment my master makes to your lady and
her lover, to quit his brother-in-law's, and leave so sweet a bride as Honoria,
alone! --


Rosa. What, is his mistress's name Honoria, too?


San. Yes, and if she had but as fair a handmaid as yourself, I should soon
forget our damsels in the Low Countries.

Enter GUZMAN.
Guz. Is not my master returned?


Rosa. No.


Guz. Nor I cannot find him -- A pretty pickle we are in! -- Oons, methinks a
man, who has but one grain of wit, would never serve a lover; he had better
serve a mountebank, and be run through the body twice a week, to recommend his
balsam. -- Our masters and mistresses have very prudently sneaked off, and left
us to pay the reckoning -- Ay, it is the same in all times and all places -- so
spoke the English poet --

Thus little villains must submit to fate,
That great ones may enjoy the world in state.
Enter FLORIO, and Chairmen with a Chair.
Flo. Stay in the entry, till I call you. How now! where is Honoria?


Guz. Fled away in the dark, sir, with a young man of your acquaintance.


Flo. Villain, leave fooling.


Guz. There Is none in the case, sir -- She never did wiser -- had she staid
your return, she had fallen into those clutches which will immediately gripe
you, if you don't make off; Rosa has ran, till she had little breath left, to
tell you the corregidor and alguazils are coming to apprehend all in this house
-- so save yourself, sir -- she is safe enough -- Antonio has taken her to a
nunnery.


Flo. A nunnery, slave! -- there she is lost to me for ever -- When once they
are informed of these transactions --


Rosa. Be pacified, sir, it was so designed, at first.


San. But mym aster has conveyed her, sir, to his brother-in-law's, whose
credit and quality are so eminent, that the engaging him in your mutual
protection, he doubts not, will much avail you -- My master's bride, too, will
assist to comfort her -- I was ordered to wait o'purpose to inform you this;
and if you will venture to follow them, to assure you, you may depend on a
protection there also. I have the key of my master's apartments to conduct you
privately; and he entreats you will go in a chair, to avoid being questioned,
in case of any encounter by the way.


Flo. My noble friend! with gratitude I embrace his counsel.


Guz. Hollo! up with your burden, beasts, and fall into your half trot [the
chair brought, Florio gets into it]

[noise within.
Rosa. Heavens! we are all taken! sit still, sir, for your life.

Enter CORREGIDOR, JUAN, and ALGUAZILS.
Cor. We have them safe.


Juan. You find, sir, I was right.


Cor. Some of you search the house throughout: see what servants there are
beside those in the hall. Be quick -- we wait you here

[Exeunt two Alguazils.
Guz. This is one of Don Cupid's pretty jests: we are struck upon a rock before
we put out to sea. --


Cor. What are you, sirrah?


Guz. A creature very like a man, sir, only I want a heart.


Cor. You're pleasant, sir -- Pray Heaven your mirth continue! -- Who is that
woman veiled?


Guz. Let her answer for herself, if your worship pleases -- She has a tongue;
set it once a going, and she will tell more than she knows.


Cor. Uncover her face.

[an Alguazil goes to Rosa.
Juan. [to the Alguazil] Hold, friend! -- Cousin, consider, should it be
Honoria, 'twould be terrible to expose her here.


Cor. It Is just -- go, then, and speak in private to her.


Rosa. [to Juan, addressing her] It Is I, sir, Rosa, attending on my lady; I was
commanded by her --


Juan. Enough; I understand the rest, and pity her: bid her sit still; I Will do
my best to save her from disgrace.


Rosa. A lucky mistake: it may save Florio from the officers. [Goes to the
chair] They take you, for my mistress, sir, sit close; I Will follow, and watch
all occasions for your escape.


Juan. We have found our wandering nymph, sir.


Cor. Was that Honoria?


Juan. No, sir; her waiting woman Rosa, following the chair wherein they were
conveying Honoria to some other place.


Cor. We arrived luckily -- had we staid a moment longer, they had all been
fled.


1st. Alg. Should we see who is in the chair, sir?


Cor. No, forbear; the folly is punishment enough to a woman of her rank,
without adding that of public disgrace --


Juan. How singularly happy it was, that you persuaded Don Henriquez to expect
us at your house! -- Had he been a witness to this discovery, his fury had
transgressed all bounds.


Cor. It Is true; and matters of this fort had better be reconciled by the
mediation of friends, than either private resentments, or public trials -- Who
do you belong to, friend?


Guz. To nobody.


Cor. Do not you serve?


Guz. I did; but my master has lost himself --


Cor. Take his sword.


Guz. Pardon me, sir -- I will surrender it. -- I could not bear to be disarmed
by any hand but my own; -- This is a weapon, I Would have you to know, of such
dreadful execution, that I dare not draw it, but at the call of justice. --
Sir, as soon as you reach home, please to hang it up in your hall, and write
under it,

This is bold Guzman's sword; O may it be
Ever from rust, as it is from slaughter free!

Cor. You Are a pleasant fellow.


Guz. Faith, sir, I never make myself uneasy for love, riches, or reputation --
nor do I pretend to that great sublety of sense, to feel before I am hurt; and,
for the most part, I keep out of harm's way --


Cor. This fellow's an original.


Guz. But of so ill a hand, sir, I am not worth hanging up among the worst of
your worship's collection.

Enter Alguazils, with two Men and two Women Servants.
2d Alg. An't please your worship, we searched the horse from the cellar to the
garrets, and these are all of the family to be found.


Juan. These are most material --


Cor. Take special care of this varlet, and the waiting woman; we'll have the
truth from them I Will warrant.


Rosa. Must we be prisoners together, Guzman?


Guz. It Is not so bad as the bands of wedlock, Rosa.


Juan. Hold! On reflection, we had better not carry Honoria home, till her
brother's fury is abated; therefore, if you approve it, cousin, I Will take her
to my house; as it is our desire to compose this business quietly, she will be
in a kinsman's house with more decency and satisfaction, and will have, beside,
my sister to accompany her; and further --

[They whisper.
Guz. A lovely damsel they are bearing off! -- some what hairy, it is true,
about the chin, but that is a sign of strength. It tickles me to think how like
an ass his worship will look, when he opens the shell, to find so rough a
kernel.

[Aside.
Cor. And the lights too?


Juan. Yes, and your officers -- take them all off. I have two of Don
Henriquez's servants; we shall be enough to guard our prisoners, and darkness
will suit us best. The more privacy, the safer will Honoria's reputation be.
Cousin, good night.


Cor. You propose well, sir -- this business could not be in better hands than
yours -- There I Will leave it, and wish you a good night. -- Officers, follow
me.

[Exit, with Alguazils.
Juan. You may go about your business, friends; I require none but these. Take
up the chair, and follow these your guides.

[Exeunt. Scene changes to Honoria 's Antichamber, in Henriquez 's House.
Enter ANTONIO, and HONORIA.
Ant. Now that we are safely arrived within these walls, madam, dismiss your
fears; please to remain here till I bring lights, and acquaint Honoria with the
happiness she will receive in entertaining so fair a guest.


Hon. Acquaint whom, sir?


Ant. My wife Honoria -- a little patience -- she will attend you.

[Exit.
Hon. Is her name Honoria, too? Heaven preserve her from such distresses as
attend her namesake! -- But where am I? so far from guessing the house, that,
what with my fears, and darkness of the night, I cannot conceive what quarter of
the town it is: then we have taken so many turnings to avoid meeting my cruel
brother, and his train; -- but I trust in providence, I am now in a place out
of his reach.

Enter ANTONIO with Lights; sets them on the Table.
Ant. I now go, madam, to fetch my wife; your pardon a moment.

[Exit.
Hon. And if, as this friendly man flatters me, I can but conciliate a
friendship here -- Save me! my brother's house! -- this is the quarter joining
to my own apartment -- I cannot be mistaken -- This the patronage and sarety I
was promised! -- false, false man -- Yet to what end? -- Why should he betray
me? My Florio could not mean -- Oh, no, let me not think it -- but that this
man, who looked like truth itself! to whom my Florio thought he could entrust
his happiness and life -- that he should be so base, to throw me into that
danger it was my only care to shun! -- All Is over now -- Struggling and hope
alike are vain, and all my future life is misery.

[Weeps. Enter ANTONIO, and FELICIA.
Fell. Who can this lady be?


Ant. It is, I confess, madam, a liberty, which I perhaps ought not to take so
early, but the distress of her situation will best apologize to your generous
heart -- The lady -- but she can best relate her story; I will go seek Don
Henriquez, and engage his power and interest in her behalf.

[Exit.
Fell. Madam, I -- Heaven's -- Honoria! Stay, stay Antonio -- it is not fit
Henriquez should be told -- he is gone, and we are undone.


Hon. Antonio, said you cousin? what mean you?


Fell. Unlucky girl! you are fallen into your husband's hands -- I have made
such discoveries --


Hon. O Heaven's!


Fell. This is the man, to whom you are contracted; and, to aggravate our
perplexities, the very hero, who preserved my life, and honor; though, I begin
to fear, at the expense of my happiness.


Hon. His behavior, and motives, then are well explained -- The man, to whom I
was engaged, has been a witness to my concealment, my shame -- my passion for
another -- and he has used this means to bring me to my abandoned home, that he
and my unnatural brother, may wreak their cruel vengeance on me.


Fell. I am all amazement -- How came you into his hands?


Hon. My Florio, to whom he proves an intimate friend, entrusted me to his
care; though till this moment, I never heard his name; -- that might have alarmed
me -- but every slightest circumstance concurs to ruin me. --


Fell. But were you distracted, to let him bring you here, or blind, not to know
your own house?


Hon. How could I in such darkness, such fear, such confusion? beside, he
brought me in the back way, through his own quarter, and had the lights put out,
before he introduced me -- Well, I am prepared to suffer.


Fell. Not in such haste, my dear girl -- while there is life there is hope --
I Will struggle to the last moment -- Don't you remember the mistake Antonio's
servant made this afternoon?


Hon. Yes.


Fell. Antonio' has done the same, in your absence; and, on your account, I did
not disabuse him. He has renewed his vows of love with equal ardour, as when he
first saw me, and seemed transported to discover his destined wife in the woman
whom he rescued. There hangs your hope, and mine.


Hon. Vain suggestion! What hope can we have, while this cruel contract remains
such a bar to our general happiness? -- Besides, he has seen my brother by this
time -- the whole is out -- and ruin certain.


Fell. Not so very certain, as you apprehend. Antonio's friendship to Florio,
which induced him to-protect you, may yet --


Hon. Friendship! dear Felicia, will that remain unshaken? -- will that stand
up against these strange events? -- against the affront done to his honor? Oh!
no -- He is not what he was, -- his mind, his principles are changed, and I am
made the victim to his wrath --


Fell. Antonio change! It is impossible. Though all felicity this world affords
should bribe him, it could not tempt him to recede from his pledged faith, and
honor. --


Hon. I forgot her interest in him. -- Pardon me, my dear Felicia. I scarce
know what I say. My mind is wounded by the variety of my afflictions.


Fell. My lovely girl! -- excuse my warmth -- but I must repeat my assertions --
If we have yet a chance for happiness, it is founded in his steadiness and truth
-- The more I contemplate it, the more do my spirits and hopes revive. If you
could secure yourself from your brother, this night only, what between my hero
and brother --


Hon. But where secure myself?


Fell. Steal home with me.


Hon. How?


Fell. By the secret door, through which you have so often passed, to meet your
Florio -- when last we used it, it was fatal; now it may be fortunate. Once
escaped, get my brother's assent for this night's concealment, and ask his
further advice, and assistance. I Will answer for him; he is generous, and kind
-- My lover brave and wise -- dry your eyes; Of My credit, you shall not weep,
till you have more occasion.


Hon. He Is here again, cousin.


Fell. Suppose we undeceive him --


Hon. Undeceive him! --


Fell. Yes -- such a confidence, I am sure, must rivet him to our interests.


Hon. For heaven's sake, be cautious. I yet have doubts of his conduct.


Fell. I have none. Our hopes in him will be made certainties hereby.


Hon. You Will infallibly repent it --

Enter ANTONIO.
Ant. Not yet returned! -- A guest in his house too, that is come so far on such
a business! something I cannot comprehend -- I have not yet been able, madam, to
find your brother; but think it cannot be long ever he returns; then I Will inform
him of the accident, which has made his house this lady's sanctuary.


Hon. He persists in his mistake, I see.

[Aside.
Fell. It Is now time, Don Antonio, to inform you --

Enter HENRIQUEZ.
Hen. I could not wait at the corregidor's, though I promised; my impatience to
unfold this riddle burns me up -- that Don Antonio should entertain my sister
when I was positive -- By heaven she is there, and Felicia with her! -- were all
my rascals mad, or was it a plot to insult me? and Don Juan! was he mad too? to
swear he had traced her to another house? either I, or they, or all, must be
possessed -- Some enchantment reigns here.


Ant. Here is Don Henriquez -- now I Will inform him, madam, of your sad story.


Fell. Undone utterly!

[Aside.
Ant. Don Henriquez --


Hon. I shall sink.

[Aside.
Ant. This lady, with your sister Honoria --


Hen. I know her well, sir.


Ant. Then you will the easier excuse my boldness.


Hen. In what, sir?


Hon. Now it comes.

[Aside.
Ant. That I have been the occasion of your finding her here, at this late hour.


Hen. I understand you, sir; she is desirous to pass this night, with Honoria,
and assist her in ordering her nuptial ceremonies. -- Ay, in heaven's name, let
her stay.


Fell. Better than I expected. Courage cuz!


Ant. But, sir, the necessity, that induces me to --


Hen. Dear sir, can you suppose an apology necessary for Honoria, and her
kinswoman, passing a night together?


Ant. Is she so near a relation of his? it is well I told no more of her story.


Hen. She knows, I owe her for many favors, and hope to be able to repay them
amply.


Hon. There -- can he speak his design much plainer?

[Aside to Fell.
Fell. For that matter, the cap would fit me, as well as you.

[Aside.
Hen. Since it is so late, sir, will you give the ladies leave to retire, for
the present, to their own chamber? withdraw, Honoria. --


Hon. Now Felicia! --

[Aside.
Fell. I don't like this sudden calm -- it is but the forerunner of another
storm; let us fly to shelter.


Hon. But how, while they remain in the Aside. room, through which we must pass?


Fell. We must watch their departure -- it is probable, he will wait on Antonio to
his apartment, and we may take that opportunity to escape.

[Exeunt.
Ant. I will now go see whether Sancho has yet brought Florio to my apartment.
Aside. your pardon, sir, I will but step to my own chamber, and return
immediately.


Hen. Shall I conduct you, sir?


Ant. I know the way, I thank you, sir. -- [There's something strange in his
words, and behavior, which indicates disguise and artifice. I must see it
expounded.

[Aside] [Exit.
Hen. All the feinds in hell, sure, could not conjure up such another mystery.
Juan affirms the people, we fought with, had conveyed Honoria away -- when I
come to seek her, at home, she is missing, and her waiting wench tells me she
went into the garden, whence no one knows of her return. Antonio, just after,
protests he saw, and entertained her in her own apartment, where I certainly
now find her, and that ungrateful woman with her. -- These are riddles to pose
an Oedipus, and madden a stoic -- They must be explained, and shall -- Yet
hold! Antonio said he would return forthwith -- here will I wait, 'till he
arrives; see him safe at rest, and then extort the whole truth from Honoria. --
Could I but be convinced my honor were yet unstained, I should, I think, be
somewhat easier. The load might be a little lighter, that is all I Am to expect;

No hope of perfect, or of lasting rest,

While unrequited love corrodes the breast.

[Exit.
ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE, JUAN 's House. Enter JAQUES, with GUZMAN, ROSA, and FLORIO in the
Chair. JAQUES. DAME Rosa, and brother servitor, in there; and now, my friends,
open the chair, and let the lady out.


Guz. By the darkness, this is the condemned dungeon, and when we are led out,
it will be to execution.


Jaques. Away, friends; you shall be paid below.

[Exit with the Chair, and locks the Door.
He. What miserable den am I thrust into? -- Rosa -- Guzman --


Guz. I Am here, sir -- and Rosa close to me, or I have lost my sense of feeling
-- one drop just to keep up my spirits --


Rosa. Booby!


Flor. I cannot conjecture where we are; I did not (...) look out; but
wheresoe'er, it is better than in the corregidor's hands.


Rosa. I am as much at a loss as you, sir -- the moon clouding, and our quick
pace prevented my observing the turnings.


Guz. I wish they would give us a little light, that we might see whether there
was any means of running away, or no. I spy a glimmering under the door; the
key turns -- I Will venture to secure the candle however.

[He gets on one side of the door -- Jaques entering with a candle, he seizes
it.
Jaques. Don Florio!

[Jaques seeing Florio, starts, runs off quick, and double-locks the door.
Rosa. We Are fast again; we have got a light however, and may see what kind of
place we are in!


Guz. Thanks to Don Guzman! I always held stratagem in war, preferable to force.


Rosa. As I live, sir, we are in Don Juan's house.


Flo. Heaven forbid!


Rosa. I Am sure, sir; I have frequented it too often, on Cupid's errands, when
you and my mistress used to meet in Donna Felicia's apartment, to be mistaken
in any part of it.


Flor. It Is too truly so; our enemies will soon know whom they have entangled
in their snares, and then their malicious designs will be completed.


Rosa. Stay, I think we have some room to hope -- beyond that inner chamber,
there is a backstair-case, if the door be but open; it always used -- let us
try, sir.


Flor. Lead on, guide.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, HENRIQUEZ 's House. HONORIA' Antichamber. HENRIQUEZ discovered. Hen.
Not yet retunr'd! what an irksome situation to a man of my anxious disposition!
in momentary expectation of Antonio, therefore not daring to enquire into what
so intimately concerns my peace and honor; no, I must not attempt an
explanation with my sister, 'till the house be quiet, and Antonio retired to
rest. Should he overhear any part of it, he would reject her hand with scorn.
-- What strange circumstances have joined together to prevent that single and
only event, which might give me ease! -- their marriage -- it is one comfort
however, that I have her safe now; I have not quitted these apartments; she
cannot have made a second garden-excursion -- Therefore, till I can settle the
whole affair to my wishes, I will endeavor to subdue my temper, control my
feelings, and be no more under the dominion of such passions, as rend my heart.

Enter Don JUAN.
Juan. Why would Don Henriquez leave the corregidor's, before I -- Oh! he is
here, -- yet how shall I tell it him? Don Henriquez -- I -- I --


Hen. What, Don Juan? Why this hesitation?


Juan. I dread to tell the issue of our search.


Hen. You need not, my friend; some favorable circumstances, and a little cool
reflection, I trust, have rendered me more temperate.


Juan. I should rejoice to prove it: but when you have heard my story, I fear
you will relapse.


Hen. Cousin, I Have said it -- I will not --


Juan. The corregidor and myself just reached the appointed place, time enough
for his officers to seize the servants, who were accomplices, when they were
just going to convey away in a chair -- I cannot speak it --


Hen. Out with it, man -- conveying away whom?


Juan. Honoria.


Hen. Honoria!


Juan. Even so.


Hen. Oh! ho! ho! ho!


Juan. Do you laugh, cousin? You are indeed changed in temper when the honor
of our family is a subject for your mirth.


Hen. Honoria! ha! ha!


Juan. This is a worse extreme, methinks, than the other; your senses are
unsettled.


Hen. You're not in earnest?


Juan. I am -- I found her there, as sure as you have life.


Hen. Why it is not possible -- Antonio entertained Honoria here, even now,
accompanied by your sister; and even now I left them within, sent her to her
chamber myself.


Juan. Cousin, cousin, what motive can you have for endeavoring to impose on
me? I tell you positively I found her there, and her waiting woman Rosa with
her.


Hen. Cousin, cousin, do not persist thus to affirm impossibilities.


Juan. Sure you are making some experiment on my temper; are endeavoring to
provoke me to one of your own frantic fits, that I may never dare to counsel
you again; I swear to you, upon my honor, it is not half an hour since I left
Honoria bearing away in a chair from the house, to which I dogged her, and your
man Jaques leading the way, and guarding Rosa.


Hen. And I swear to you, upon my honor, and the honor of our whole ancestry,
it is not a quarter of an hour, since I spoke with Honoria, and your sister, in
this very apartment.


Juan. Indeed, Don Henriquez --


Hen. It may be decided this moment; follow me to her.

As they are going off, Enter, JAQUES.
Jaq. O! sir, I have such admirable news, yet am so full of astonishment, I
scarce have power to tell you.


Hen. Villain, dispatch.


Jaq. When I had conveyed madam Honoria --


Juan. See! I told you so --


Jaq. Rosa, and the manservant who was with them, to your house, I locked 'em
all three into your antichamber, and went down for a light.


Hen. This madness is infectious, and my varlet is in one of Juan's fits.


Jaq. With which when I returned, who should I see, but Don Florio in the
middle of the room, and madam Honoria vanished.


Hen. Florio!


Juan. How is that possible, if you are sure you locked the door, when you went
to fetch candles?


Jaq. Ay, that is the very point, sir; that I cannot tell -- but --


Hen. No matter, you are sure you have Florio there?


Jaq. I Will forfeit my life on that, sir.


Hen. My injuries rekindle at his name; this moment will I sacrifice the author
of my shame, and inquietude.


Juan. Is then your promised coolness --


Hen. Away; I will not be advised, nor controlled: the beast is in the toil,
and he shall die.

Enter ANTONIO.
Ant. Who is the unhappy man, brother, you so severely doom? And what the great
offense to honor, which life alone can answer?


Hen. Sir -- I -- I -- I am a villain if I know what to say to him; -- how
spiteful is his coming at this moment!

[Aside.
Juan. His appearance just now is critically happy; I may, by his aid, assuage,
at least, if not o'er-rule this madness.

[Aside.
Ant. Consider me already as a friend, and brother, and as such treat me; give
me a knowledge of your wrongs -- I have a sword ready to serve in all occasions
worthy yourself and me.


Hen. This affair, sir, is so unfit -- so unluckily timed, and your arrival
here -- it makes -- how shall I shake him off?

[Aside
Juan. Noble Don Antonio, if you value your brother's honor, persist in
accompanying him; I have most weighty reasons, which when you know, you cannot
but approve.

[Aside to Ant.
Ant. Wrong me not, Don Henriquez, by suspicion: prove, by this early trial of
my truth, how heartily I mean, through life, to espouse the happiness, and
interests of your family.


Hen. I cannot doubt your honor, bravery, or attachment to our house; but, to
engage so dear a guest in any cause of danger were inhospitable.


Ant. Be what it may, let me partake it; you are too noble to employ your sword
in an unworthy cause; therefore I must, I will attend you, or you, by your
distrust, prevent our promised union.


Hen. Not knowing, sir, the nature of those injuries, whereon my resentments
are grounded, you may perhaps wonder at my desperate measures.


Ant. You are too good a judge of honor's dues, to pursue such measures, as
will not bear a friend's inspection. -- We go, sir -- --


Hen. To witness my revenge -- Lights there.

[Exit Hen. and Jaques.
Juan. [To Ant.] Sir, suffer him not to quit your sight, I beg: and use all
means to calm his rage; I Will follow instantly. [Exit Ant.] Let me reflect a
moment; -- if Honoria be there (as sure she must) heaven knows to what extremes
Henriquez may be driven! -- Florio, at least, is there, and I have ignorantly
been the means of throwing him into his enemy's power; it is therefore incumbent
on me, while he has the sanction of my house, to endeavor to preserve his
life, though at the hazard of my own.

[Exit.
SCENE, the Chamber in Don JUAN 's House. FLORIO, ROSA, and GUZMAN discovered:
Chairs, Table, and the Candle. Flo. How thwart and provoking?


Rosa. That unlucky door! -- I never knew it shut before.


Flo. We have now no means, Rosa; my dangers and distresses are complete! I
must welcome and endure them. Yet shall not my desperate state make me neglect
the only duty I can pay; -- the amiable, the generous Felicia's reputation must
not be left in doubt, even with the base Henriquez, whose cruel temper has
formed suspicions unworthy of her blameless conduct; it is fit I set him right.

[Sits down to write in his Tablets.
Guz. A curse on all love! and a double curse on all constant love! it is always
attended with fatal disasters! or ends in the worst of all, marriage.


Rosa. I suppose you wish every body to have such a quicksilver heart, as
yours: that can settle no where.


Guz. Why, that would not be amiss for you, my dear Rosa; you might then hope
to have your turn, as well as pretty faced damsels.


Rosa. And you would be one of the last, I should hear of; yet it is possible
you might come, before you were welcome.


Guz. [Aside.] She has wit, and good humor; excellent ingredients to pass away
time; I have a liking to her person too, but that will end with marriage, and
possibly her good humor too; -- well, honest Guzman, I would advise you to be
wary; if you should couple yourself to a yoke, instead of a yokefellow, you will
wear it to your grave. Yet, on recollection, your dancing days are now over;
your pleasures are come up to your mouth, you are now for the comfortable joys
of life, ease, and eating. And there is no cook or dry-nurse like a wife.


Flo. Rosa, should aught but well befall me, give these with care to Don
Henriquez' hands -- either on his desperate arm, or his black testimony at the
bar, my life depends; no matter which way it is decided.

Enter HONORIA, and FELICIA, through a private Door.
Fell. I think no creature saw us pass through the apartments.


Hon. What a tedious while have we been kept, before they left the chamber! My
Florio too! what is become of him? The rage, we perceived even now my brother
to be in, makes me tremble, lest, by some strange means, he, as well as myself,
may be thrown into his power.


Rosa. My dearest mistress!


Flo. Oh! heavens!


Hon. Florio! then my fears were true.


Flo. Can I trust my senses?


Guz. I think not, we are asleep, and dreaming, or haunted by fairies.


Flo. How is it possible I find you here? Did not my noble friend undertake
your protection?


Hon. So did he yours, yet you are here, and equally exposed to ruin. -- Oh!
how I grieve to say, it is he that has betrayed us both!


Flo. Antonio betray us!


Fell. Oh! no. --


Hon. It is, too surely -- he is the man, to whom my brother has contracted me.


Rosa. Bless my stars! no wonder we have blunder'd so, when we contrived to
take a husband into our party; nothing can succeed, they are concerned in.


Flo. Contracted to Honoria! he come to marry my Honoria.


Hon. The very same, and he has taken these ungenerous means, to sacrifice us
both.


Fell. I will not, cannot think it; I would as soon believe impossibilities, as
his apostasy from honor.


Flo. What Is her concern in him Honoria?


Hon. That adds to our distresses -- she, and Antonio --


Fell. This is no time to relate adventures -- Florio and you must not be found
here; therefore, Rosa, take this key, and set open the garden door, that leads
to St. Jerome's street, through that you may easily escape, on the least alarm.


Hon. Make haste, dear girl.

[Exit Rosa.
Flo. Generous Felicia!


Hon. My lovely girl, under what obligations -- how now Rosa! What Is the
matter? --

[Rosa returns.
Rosa. Undone past hope! your brother, Antonio, Juan, and servants, with swords
drawn, are, at this instant, in the hall: what will you do?


Flo. Into this inner room; retire, my love, and let me meet their rage.


Hon. I cannot leave you -- let me but stay, and share your fate --


Flo. I have no fears, but for you; nay haste; I must compel you to the only
means of safety, and concealment.

[Exit with Hon. and Fell.
Guz. Oh! if that is your scheme, the devil take the hindmost! it is for your
sake, Rosa, I shun these honorable engagements; -- having lost my weapon, the
best, I can do, is to walk off with the baggage.

[Exit Guz. with Rosa. Enter HENRIQUEZ, JUAN, ANTONIO, JAQUES, and GERALDO,
with Lights.
Hen. I will not be persuaded.


Juan. Cousin, you must: I have an honor too to guard, dear to me as yours is
to you; in all, that justice sanctifies, will I tread step for step; but will
not permit my house to be the scene of premeditated mischief, and revenge; --
already they have stained these walls too deeply.


Ant. Such admonitions are too sacred, surely, to pass unregarded; Henriquez
cannot be so lost --


Hen. I cannot be so lost to my own honor's calls, or nature's feeling, to
listen to a cynic's cold advice. Where is the man whose insolence and folly has
so far misled him --

Enter FLORIO.
Flo. Here is the man you seek.


Hen. What do I see:


Flo. Whom thou so basely have betrayed.


Ant. My friend! my Florio!


Flo. No more thy friend, Antonio, but Florio, by thy perfidy betrayed, and
thrown upon his fate --


Hen. Let me pass.


Ant. Hold a moment!


Hen. What mean you? Is all your fervor in a brother's interest reduced to a
mean parley with the foe? I Will right myself.


Juan. Cousin forbear; you shall not have your way; there lies some mystery
concealed in this, which once unfolded, might perhaps reconcile the difference.


Hen. It cannot be but by the sword; Antonio, hear me; if that the faith and
friendship pledged to me want power to rouse you, let your own interest and
honor; that man, whom you protect from my resentment, has seconded his
insolence to me, by foul attempts upon Honoria's honor.


Flo. I seek to wrong her honor! the parent of your black designs, and bitter
enmity, never yet invented a more hellish salshood; it is true, I have loved the
virtuous Honoria --


Ant. How, sir?


Flo. But with such spotless affection, such pure devotion, that she has
recompensed my passion with esteem; has chained me to her service, and I will
either live to call her mine, or perish in her cause. --


Ant. Distraction -- daggers to my heart! --


Hen. Oh! has it roused you, sir?


Ant. Henriquez pause! -- mitigate your fury for a moment. --


Hen. I will not -- His life or mine must pay the insolence.


Ant. Hold, or through me you pass; I must be heard. That impious man from
infancy have I called friend; -- allow me but a minute's space, alone to
question him about our mutual wrongs --


Hen. Antonio, do not trifle with me; mean you to let him escape?


Ant. No, by name and honor; if I deal not in this business to your heart's
wish, and honor's credit, my own life shall pay the forfeit.


Juan. Consent, Henriquez, I beseech you.


Ant. My heart is bleeding, while I speak -- I am not used to sue; let me
conjure you by your hopes of bliss, by all your dearest wishes, by our proposed
union, grant me this, or here our friendship ceases, and we meet no more.


Hen. Delay is agony.


Ant. I will not keep you long.


Flo. What means Antonio?


Ant. Dare thou answer my demands?


Flo. I can, and justify myself, thou traitor to thy friend!


Ant. Lead to some other spot.

[Exit Flo. and Ant.
Juan. This way, good cousin.


Hen. I will not long be dallied with; these keen sensations will not leave my
heart, nor can my fury die.

[Exeunt. Enter HONORIA, FELICIA, and ROSA -- GUZMAN following.
Hon. I am frighted to death.


Fell. At all events, let us follow, and see the result.


Rosa. Let me go first, ladies, and watch their motions, I Will keep an excellent
look-out, and alarm you, in case of extremity.


Fell. Be it so then; away!

[Exeunt. GUZMAN alone.
Guz. There will be mischief soon. -- Therefore, as my master has rudely left
the ladies, the least I can do is to keep with 'em, and take care of 'em.

[Exit. Scene changes to the Hall of Don JUAN 's House. Enter FLORIO, and
ANTONIO.
Flo. Give up my title! I never will renounce Honoria.


Ant. You must -- she is so much mine, that none must boast pretensions to her,
while I live -- in saving you from mad Henriquez' sword, I have discharged the
engagement friendship made; the injured husband now requires his dues.


Flo. Spite of my wrongs, I know not how to lift my sword against the breast of
him, who has given me such just, such strong, and such repeated reasons, to
admire, and love him.


Ant. It was Florio, my comrade in arms, my bosom-friend, whom I designed to
serve; not that disloyal man, who has invaded my honor, and my love.


Flo. Mean, treacherous artifice! to do so gross an injury yourself, then
charge me as the wronger! I swear, by all those powers, who both discern, and
punish, I never knew that you pretended to Henriquez' sister, till since I came
within these fatal walls.


Ant. How am I to believe you can speak truth in this, who have myself been
witness of your falsehood to her?


Flor. I false to Honoria! take heed, Antonio, so foul an injury I cannot brook.


Ant. Rare confidence! have I not myself assisted your feigned passion, and
been witness of your faithless vows pledged to another?


Flo. Another! what mean device has bred so strange a charge? but dars't thou
talk of violated truth? where are those ardent, sacred, and eternal vows,
pledged to an unknown fair, with which, at our first interview this night, thou
did abuse my credulous ear, and taught my sympathising heart, torn as it was
with it is own griefs, to throb with pangs for thee?


Ant. Still written here; -- base man, I cannot longer bear thy mean evasions;
either renounce all claim to Honoria, or this must speak the rest.


Flo. I Will be reduced to atoms, ere I yield her.

[sight. Enter HENRIQUEZ, JUAN, and the rest.
Hen. Ay this is well -- he shall not 'scape, without some marks of my revenge.

[He attacks Florio, Antonio turns in his Defense.
Ant. Hold sir; he shall not be o'erpower'd with numbers neither; my honor you
invade anew, and wake my pre-engagement to protect him.


Hen. Flames and the devil! why were not you yourself doing your best to kill
him?


Ant. It Is true; but if he must fall, he shall not be massacred by odds, but
conquered fairly like a man.


Juan. For heaven's sake, cease this violence; I Will dye for it, but some cursed
error lies concealed, that thus misleads us all. --


Hen. With my sword alone I Will search it out, though multitudes opposed me.

[He attacks again, Rosa peeping at the door, cries out Ladies! Ladies! Enter
HONORIA, FELICIA, and ROSA running.
Both. Hear us! hear us!


Hen. By heavens, Honoria!


Juan. Why did not I tell you she was brought here by my direction?


Hen. Oh! thou vile woman! that I could destroy thy memory with thy life!

[He advances furiously toward Honoria; Antonio, Juan, and Florio interpose.
Ant. Hold, sir; -- although I do not know this lady, I have, this night, engaged
my faith both to protect, and serve her.


Juan. See there! he does not know Honoria. --


Hen. Not know her! why it is not an hour, since I saw him entertaining her at
my house; death! all we see is illusion, and all we do enchantment!


Fell. Suffer me, Don Henriquez, to unspel these charms -- Antonio, which of us
is it, you pretend to?


Ant. Which? how can you ask? you know too well the conquest, which you made of
my poor heart, in Flanders. --


Juan. Conquest! heart! and Flanders? what means that now?


Hen. More riddles every moment!


Fell. Your contract with Honoria then --


Ant. Here I confirm it -- when I forego so dear a tie, or wed another fair --


Fell. Take heed, for I am not Honoria.


Ant. Not Honoria!


Fell. No.


Ant. Is It possible? have I been only mocked with visionary bliss, and are my
hopes thus blasted?


Fell. All now depends on whatsoever turn Henriquez' temper takes -- Observe his
conduct, nor doubt of mine.


Hon. Astonishment, and disappointed fury seem to possess my brother's thoughts.


Fell. I Will try to calm them. -- Know, Don Henriquez, that Don Florio has ever
been your sister's constant lover, his private visits, at our house, which have
disturbed your peace, were by me calculated for their interview, after you had
refused her to his addresses; -- my heart was then entirely free; it is now
engaged: -- if I trespass too far on that reserve, which is our sex's ornament,
and guard, let the present exigence, and my gratitude for signal services,
plead my excuse, while I declare, it is to that brave officer. --


Hen. Humph!


Fell. This, brother, is that generous commander, whose valiant arm restored our
liberties, and who engaged himself the guardian of my honor.


Juan. This that gallant leader, to whom we are so much indebted?


Fell. The same.


Juan. Why did you not inform me sooner of so laudable a prepossession?


Fell. My dear brother, gratitude, esteem, and a thousand nameless passions, so
soon possessed me, I was ashamed of what you might have called a visionary
love, and durst not trust my own tongue with my thoughts.


Flo. Your sister, and this lady, Don Henriquez, both can witness I never had a
thought to injure your happiness, or honor. Don Pedro's death was occasioned
by your mistaken jealousy; and you well know, (but that your self, and your
domestics, were the only witnesses of that transaction) I had the fairest
claim to the protection of the law, having been surprised at dis-advantage and
oppressed by numbers.


All. How!


Flo. Pedro deserved his death, and I am blameless.


Hen. My shame! my eternal shame! what shall I say? you see me overwhelmed with
confusion; if I have acted in a manner unbecoming my name, and honor,
attribute it to love -- (I seek not longer to conceal it,) a hurt, a desperate,
jealous love for that ungrateful creature.


Juan. Cousin, I will now own, I have perceived it long; and in justice to our
friendship, and alliance, have even addressed my sister on the subject; but
found such insurmountable objections to your but violence of temper, that, in
consideration of what your pride might suffer, I concealed my knowledge of your
passion, even from yourself.


Fell. How could a man of Don Henriquez' sense, and penetration, suppose his
tyrannic treatment of so amiable a sister, such everlasting doubts, suspicions,
jealousies, restrictions, and severities, must not disgust rather than win a
woman's heart? Could you but have subdued those passions, perhaps, ere I had
seen that gentleman, I might have been induced to think of you in such a light,
as your person, and natural endowments deserved; if a disappointment herein be
painful, to your self alone you are indebted for it.


Hen. Forbear, I pray you; show not the happiness I might have reached, nor add
the weight of your reproaches, to my self-condemnation; my punishment is
sufficient without it; -- I have justly railed; when such a heart as mine
concedes, the pangs it suffers are not trivial.


Fell. I am sorry, and ask pardon.


Hen. Yet to convince you that my sorrow is not selfish; as I have been the
source of general uneasiness, I will endeavor to make a general amends, let my
own heart suffer what it may: first madam, may you enjoy more happiness, if
possible, than I have wished to partake with you; and, sir, to you, unasked I
thus resign this contract, which love and justice both forbid me now to claim,


Ant. Noble Henriquez; I thank and honor you.


Juan. Sir, take from me her hand, whose heart your worth, and bravery has
merited.


Ant. Thus I receive the sum of happiness, this world can give; and, sir, since
you have generously resigned the name of brother, allow me that of friend,
which while I live I will deserve; and suffer me to entreat your concurrence
for your sister's happiness, where destiny seems to lead; -- I will answer,
with my life, my friend will merit her.


Hen. Sir, she is yours; -- and here dies all my animosity.


Flo. We are now all your debtors; I am peculiarly so.


Hon. My brother, now you are indeed my brother; noble, generous, and kind, you
have set my heart at ease, and I am myself again.


Fell. That Is more than I am, I Am sure; I have seen so many wonders, I shall not be
myself again this twelvemonth.


Rosa. They have had a rare come-off; sure, 'twou'd make a good plot for a play.


Guz. That would be bad for me; for, by the laws of comedy, I should be obliged
to marry you.


Flo. Well thought of, Guzman, though spoke in jest; you seem well fitted for
each other, and your faithful services deserve our general encouragement; what
say you Rosa?


Rosa. Sir, I say I have had so many frights to night, I am even afraid to lie
alone.


Guz. Thy hand, sweet Rosa; it is a bargain; if I don't repent first, I don't
care.


Juan. This union being in my house, let me entreat your stay, to unite in
woad'ring at these events, and enjoying general congratulations; cousin you
will not refuse me?


Hen. I will not be a means to thwart your mirth, but endeavor, as well as I
am able, to partake it, -- my heart has now a new, a difficult, and painful
lesson set it, but it must be learned; for our adventures prove that women's
mild and gentle hearts must be soothed by indulgence, not frighted by severity;
and that easy, frank, and confiding tempers bid fairest for a generous return,

Since such, and such alone, deserve to share
The confidence, and favor of the fair.

EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. MATTOCKS.
AY! -- ay! -- they are at it -- in a dainty tew;
"Have you the Epilogue?" -- "Not I -- " have you?
(Miss Macklin and Miss Wilford there I mean)
"I! -- I don't know that any has been seen".
"Lud! where is the author? -- I Am in such a fright!
"The author, child? -- not ventured here tonight."
"What shall we do, my dear?" -- "I cannot guess" --
To palliate this ridiculous distress,
Will you permit me to apologize
For this hard tax on new formed comedies? --
In short these Epilogues are grown so trite,
So few the subjects left, whereon to write,
So few the authors with this knack endued,
Perhaps my nonsense may be quite as good.
I Have been in front -- and, if with leave I may,
I Will give my inferences from this play.
See Mr. Garrick's Epilogue to the Earl of Warwick.
The beauteous Marg'ret of the Rival-House,
To lower the grandeur of despotic spouse,
Has taught the ladies, in true comic vein,
Rules to maintain, and use, their power over men.
My hints (although in homelier style than those)
To you, ye Lords of Nature, I Will disclose.
Would you, high Potentates, throughout your lives,
Preserve obedient sisters, daughters, wives,
Avoid Henriquez' faults -- be never proud,
Distrustful, jealous, arrogant, or loud;
Where ever we go, what ever we do, or say,
Make it your rule -- to give us our own way;
Neither attempt to lead us, nor restrain,
But let us have the length of all the rein;
In shoppings, auctions, jauntings, or Quadrille,
Leave us to spend, and lose what ever we will;
Let all our favorite foibles take their course,
(For every breather has some hobbyhorse)
With whatsoever whims or freaks you meet,
Still let your words and looks alike be sweet --
Lord! when thus left to our own tempers free,
The sweetest creatures in the world are we! --
Hence this important Maxim is defined,
Ye wise ones, keep it ever in your mind --
We women never frown, if never teased,
And, always humored, -- we are always pleased.
THE END.

