THE PRODIGAL. A DRAMATIC PIECE. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN THE
HAY-MARKET, DECEMBER* ^^ ^^^^

"To wake the soul by tender strokes of art,
"To raise the genius, and to mend the heart,
"To make mankind in conscious virtue bold,
"Live over each scene, and be what they behold:
"For this the Tragic Muse first trod the stage,
"Commanding tears to stream through every age."
Pope's Prologue to Addison's CATO. LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. ARROWSMITH,
MIDDLE-ROW, HOLBORN; AND SOLD BY B. CROSBY, STATIONERS COURT.

1794.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE dinner-hour of persons of fashion having almost jostled the supper-hour of
our ancestors out of its place, the first act of a play is either very thinly
attended, or considerably interrupted by the clattering of box-doors and seats,
while the house is filling; for which reason it has been thought necessary, of
late years, at the Hay-Market Theater, to perform a short piece previous to
that which is meant as the principal attraction: those already upon the acting
list having been some time in use, Mr. Colman (then junior) desired me to point
out such as might occur, suitable to the purpose. I mentioned The Fatal
Extravagance, written by Joseph Mitchell; ( Vide BIOGRAPHIA DRAMATICA, 1782, V.
II. P. 119.) which, on looking over it, he was pleased to approve of; excepting
that he thought the catastrophe too tragic for a petite-piece. I, therefore,
made such alterations in it as he conceived to be wanting; in doing which, I
availed myself of his very judicious advice, and adopted several energetick
expressions, dropped, during the rehearsals, from his mouth (...) pen.

The concluding lines, "Hence may the Gamester learn, ere yet too late," etc.
are entirely Mr. Colman's.

I wish I could particularize every word suggested by him; for though I have not,
as Ben. Jonson, to our loss, too-scrupulously did (as it is supposed) by
Shakspeare, "rather chosen to put weaker (and no doubt less pleasing) of mine
own," yet would I not "defraud so happy a Genius of his right, by my lothed
usurpation." See Jonson's Address "To the Readers." prefixed to the 4to edit.
of his "Sejanus." 1605.

The piece, as altered and called The Prodigal, has been excellently performed
twelve times at Mr. Colman's Theater, with distinguished approbation; some of
the passages, now printed, were omitted in the reprefentation: but, what would
have been thought tedious and heavy on the stage, it is hoped will not be found
so in the closet.

October, 1. 1794. F. G. WALDRON.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
BELLMOUR, Mr. Barrymore. COURTNEY, Mr. Aickin. BARGRAVE, Mr. Benson. LOUISA,
Mrs. Powell.
SCENE, Bellmour's House.

TIME, that of the Representation.

THE PRODIGAL. A DRAMATIC PIECE.
ACT I. SCENE. A Saloon.
Enter LOUISA and COURTNEY. LOUISA. 'TWAS kind! this speed of your return. --
But, tell me,
What success had you? was my father moved?
Methinks I read your news in your sad visage,
And my heart trembles with prophetic fears.

COURTNEY. 'Twas as I judged 't would be -- His own wants press him;
He sinks beneath your husband's wasteful life;
Those boundless dicings, and voluptuous riots,
Which have at once dissolved a wealth so vast,
That Pity scarce vouchsafes to heed his sufferings.

LOUISA. But his late conduct proves my Bellmour changed;
Misfortunes have instructed him to think,
And thought has captived every madding passion.

COURTNEY. Yet early vice, by custom long indulged,
Leaves such impression of habitual ill,
As finds no cure, but from severe remorse,
And Time's slow working.

LOUISA. Nay, name not Bellmour's vice; --
He has no vice; -- his every power is lost,
Even had he taste for follies: -- poor and despised,
The slaves, for whose cursed sakes he stands reproached,
Now shun his converse. Villains, who betrayed,
Start when they meet him. Poverty, like his,
Spreads a contagion round it, and mankind
Fly frighted from him. What will become of us!
Did you lay open our incumbent ruin?
Urged you my father strongly? Want's cold hand
Creeps over us, and it is now no time for counsel.

COURTNEY. I told him all, and moved his utmost pity.
Still, as he set to view your husband's failings,
I urged his virtues, and bore down the balance;
I praised his wit, his courage, his humanity,
His fine frank spirit, and his generous nature:
He answered, and I firmly think with truth,
What he has done, already, weighs him down;
His struggling will to save you has undone him,
And Bellmour's self would there beg aid in vain.

LOUISA. O! he was never born to be a beggar!
Heaven is too kind to goodness, to forsake him!
He, whom soft Pity melts at others' misery,
Deserves, himself, to live exempt from woe.
Bellmour could never behold a stranger wretched,
But he partook his pain, 'till he could ease it.
How, then, will he support the weeping anguish
Of three poor children, all undone by him!

COURTNEY. His good, and ill, so chequer out his nature,
That, which excels is doubtful. Nobly willed,
His pitying heart flows out in generous purposes;
But, wanting power to stem the tide of pleasure,
Irresolute he drives, and floats to ruin.
Men must be rigid, and severe, in virtue!
Serious and noble aims distinguish reason!
To live for luxury is not to live.
The man of pleasure dreams away his days,
And dies, to be forgotten. Bellmour's soul,
Had contemplation bent it to a bias,
Had given a point to Fame's proud pinnacle,
And purpled over his name with deathless glory!
Now, it lies lost in dust! -- contemned, despised!

LOUISA. Oh! I shall tremble to behold his face! --
His ruined family hangs on his heart;
His helpless children's future fate distracts him;
For, the once-lively Bellmour smiles no more!
Silent he walks, or stands, with folded arms;
And still looks down, as if his soul were earth.
If ever, by chance, his lifted eyes meet mine,
The starting tears glare dreadfully upon me,
And, quivering, struggle to flow loose in sorrow.
Then sighs, suppressed by force, strive hard for vent.
And heave, and swell, like earthquakes in his bosom.
Groaning, at length, he breaks in whirlwind from me;
Torn by ten thousand pangs, raves, reddens, starts,
And frights me with a dreadful burst of passions!

COURTNEY. Poor, suffering innocent! I would 'twere mine
To screen you from the storm that is gathering round;
But I, unblessed with power, can only wish,
And hope some chance will save you from destruction.

LOUISA. O, uncle! what remains for Hope to snatch at?
Of all the wide estate, that late was ours,
But this poor house is left us; -- this, too, totters.
Soon, Ruin, with his palsied hand, will seize
This ancient pile, and shake it into dust!
Not thrice the worth of all that now is ours
Will save poor Woodly from that fatal bond,
He signed to save my Bellmour. -- All our hope
Was in your friendly journey to my father;
Woodly must sink, and Bellmour cannot bear it.
Bellmour will never live to sink a friend! --
Look yonder, where, in pensive grief, he walks
Unhoping, and disconsolate!

COURTNEY. Poor Bellmour!
How changed, from that wild, gay, joyful reveller,
Which all his friends have known him! still extreme.

Enter BELLMOUR, melancholy. LOUISA. My life! -- my Bellmour! -- wound not thus
my soul;
I have more woes to bear, that are my own,
Than my strength matches; add not, thou, thy sorrow:
That would overwhelm me quite.

BELLMOUR. I pray, forgive me!
Imprisoned in thought, I could not look about me;
And my soul missed thy comfort: -- I was confidering --

LOUISA. What sad reflection held you?

BELLMOUR. Which of my boys,
Some few years hence, when I Am dissolved in death,
Will act the beggar best! -- run, barefoot, fastest!
And, with most dexterous shrug, play tricks for charity!

LOUISA. O! for heaven's sake, forbear, by starts like this,
To image horrors, Nature shrinks at thought of.

BELLMOUR. Why, my Louisa! it is a wretch's duty
To learn to bear his misery; -- to know it,
To use ourselves to scorn it, is the way
To make it easy to us. -- Yet, I Am to blame!
Thou had no share in any guilt of mine;
I ought alone to suffer. -- 'Twas too cruel,
'Twas even unmanly, to afflict thy innocence!

COURTNEY. Oh, Sir! you sooth the grief you should resist!
Mean spirits, only, buckle under woe;
It is the great man's pride to combat fortune,
And rise against oppression.

BELLMOUR. Sir, it is true; --
And I remember you have often advised it,
While I had power to try my virtue's proof.
A man may die unhelp'd, but must not hope
To conquer without arms. -- Talking of help,
Will your good Brother aid me? -- Speaking silence!
How could I hope it from him?

COURTNEY. Yet, despair not.
A time may come when even your woes shall prove,
To suffer well's the noblest way to conquest.
On a smooth Sea the Sailor shows no skill,
But he displays it all in Hurricanes.

BELLMOUR. He would not, sure, neglect to save his daughter,
Had he the power still left him! yet, friends, sometimes,
Are more than fathers! -- I had a friend in Woodly!
Once he was happy; -- what he shall be hereafter,
He owes to thriftless Bellmour. Perish the name!
To what a stinging death is he reserved,
Who leaves a good man wretched, whom he made so!
Sir, it would ease me of a galling pain,
Would you dispel this unavailing hope
I cherished late, relying on my father,
From Woodly's breast; -- 'Twere sin to nourish it,
Since it is unstable: -- he must know it soon.
Let it be told by any tongue but Bellmour's.

COURTNEY. I Will visit him this instant. -- Do you, meanwhile,
To Louisa. Calmly seek comfort from a firm belief
That heaven befriends your virtues, and will save you.
Exit.
BELLMOUR. Louisa!
With violent emotion.
LOUISA. Alas! what mean you to distract me thus,
With your wild startings?

BELLMOUR. Nay, but mark me well, --
Want's the damnation of a living sinner!
What have I lived for, if I die a beggar?
How excellent art thou not to have scorned me!
Good heaven! that reason should give madness way,
'Till man finds music in a rattling dice-box!
And has contracted thrice three thousand Acres,
To the cursed compass of a narrow table!
With what a thoughtless rapture have I shook 'em!
Hung over the throw! and hurled out my posterity
Slaves, thieves, or beggars! -- Tear me limb from limb,
Some pitying torturer! To die at once
Were comfort, even in agony! -- but I shall be
Whole ages, after death, in dying! -- Villains,
Dull, pityless, insulting, purse-proud villains,
Will point at some poor, ragged child of mine,
And say, " There Is pride and name, there is Bellmour's honor! "
" There Is the blessed remnant of a boasted family! "
Curse the keen thought! it pours all hell upon me!

LOUISA. Still will thou, thus, snatch at Despair's wild shadows?
I Have heard the manly soul can smile at anguish:
Woman's weak mind may bend beneath adversity;
But, Bellmour's brow, methinks, should wear a Majesty,
And make affliction awful.

BELLMOUR. Away with Counsel.
I cannot hear thee! thy moving air, thy wisdom,
That lovely softness, which bewitches round thee!
Each charm, which has a thousand times appeased me,
Now makes me mad! like oil, poured out on flame,
I tower in blaze, and burn with tenfold fierceness!
Thy every word is death! each look thou giv'st me
Shoots poisoned arrows through my bleeding conscience!
Think thou I am so mean, so lost a wretch,
That my own misery stings me? cruel woman!
What earthly ill can Bellmour stoop to fear,
Which hurts but Bellmour? it is true, indeed, thy fate
I have not learned to bear! -- there, Grief unmans me;
Thine, and thy helpless Infants' woes, rise to me; --
Oh! I have wronged thee!

LOUISA. It Is wronging me to say it.

Re-enter COURTNEY. BELLMOUR. Returned so soon!

LOUISA. Why look you pale, good Uncle?

COURTNEY. To bring unwelcome tidings to the wretched,
Gives the sad teller half the hearer's woe.

BELLMOUR. Friendly preparative! what follows next
Can be but Woodly's ruin!

COURTNEY. He Is undone! --

LOUISA. Unhappy Bellmour!

COURTNEY. Near your house I met him,
Hemmed by a swarthy guard of licensed villains;
The Law's grim bloodhounds, with rapacious talons:
Who dragged him on, in merciless serenity,
To shut him from his hopes, in joyless prison!

BELLMOUR. Oh!

COURTNEY. At short distance, near the Sycamore,
That marks the turning to that now-fall'n house
Of this poor Gentleman, I saw his Wife,
Wild, with a storm of grief! her Babes amazed!
Struggling, with weeping Servants, to break free.
Fain would she follow him, to share his prison;
With straining eyes, she kept him long in view;
And, when a gushing flood obscured her sight,
Still more to lengthen out a last, sad look,
She wiped away the tears, and gazed again!

LOUISA. Dreadful description! -- close it here, good Uncle!
It cuts too deep, and wounds my Bellmour's soul.

COURTNEY. Yet more remains to tell; his spacious house
Is filled with Ruffians, his rich goods torn down,
His frantic Wife, and Children, roam unshelter'd,
Without a home to succor them!

LOUISA. O, guide them hither!
Let me, with open arms, fly to receive them; --
And strive, if possible, to give them comfort.

BELLMOUR. Louisa! -- as thou would preserve my life,
Bring not their grief too near me; --
To see it would distract me! -- said he nothing?

COURTNEY. Marking me, as I turned my face aside,
He called, and counseled you to save yourself
By sudden flight; since other Russians, brought
By Bargrave, your malicious creditor,
Will presently be here, on the same purpose.
As for my fate, said he, bid him not mourn it:
To fall for Bellmour, would have given me joy,
Had Bellmour's self not fallen.

BELLMOUR. He falls indeed!

COURTNEY. Now, as I entered, Bargrave, just arrived
With his infernal crew, besets your gates.

LOUISA. Now, Bellmour, thou art lost! -- immediate ruin
Will swallow thee, and me, and our dear children!
All! all must sink together! -- teach us, good Uncle!
Which way to fly; what measures to pursue.

COURTNEY. The doors, fast barred, are guarded by your Servants;
And you may through the grove escape unseen.

BELLMOUR. No! let him enter! This Bargrave taught me vice,
And counseled each excess that has undone me!
He wrongs the Devil, who makes himself the punisher
Of ills which he excited! Justice acts wisely!
Oh, she is not blind! -- she chooses a fit moment,
And throws him on my vengeance! Let him enter;
Perdition seize me, if he 'scape my hand!

LOUISA. As thou love me, Bellmour! be not rash.
Should thou add murder --

COURTNEY. Persuade him rather;
Sooth him to pity. Would he free your friend,
And grant some weeks of liberty, for trial
What succor may be found; you have many friends --

BELLMOUR. No, Courtney! friendship rises but with fortune;
And sets when men go downward. Yet, I thank you;
Rage had obscured my reason. Say to Bargrave,
I have an offer for his private ear.
I will instruct my swelling indignation,
To cool and settle, like a Courtier's passions.
What cannot interest teach us!

COURTNEY. Though I loath,
As the dark adder, this detested wretch,
I Will try to speak him fair.
Exit.
BELLMOUR. Leave me, Louisa!
I would not have thee wound thy innocent eyes
With fight of such a Monster. -- Nor brook I well
That thou, who have been taught to love sincerity,
Should hear me flatter infamy!

LOUISA. Do but think
It Is for their sakes, whom most you wish to succor,
And you will find it easy. Farewell! he comes.
My Bellmour! as thou love me, oh, be careful!
Exit.
Enter BARGRAVE. BARGRAVE. So, Sir! I find you make your house your Garrison!
Bold, sour-faced sentinels admit, with caution,
Whom you vouchsafe your pass to. -- It Is great indeed!
Girt, Sovereign-like, within your Palace walls,
The Laws must beg admission! But, the pride,
With which your state o'erlook'd me, will instruct me,
'Till I find means to reach you. --

BELLMOUR. I sent not for you
Thus to revive old hatred. 'Twas my meaning,
To set before your eyes the spreading misery,
From which a week's short respite may, perhaps,
Free Woodly, and myself, nor do you wrong.

BARGRAVE. Oh, Sir! -- no doubt; it is likely that seven days
Will pay a Bond, which twice seven months, and more,
Have drawn no interest for! -- Woodly may claim
Some little pity. -- He Is a suffering tool,
Who fasts to feed your riots. But, for you,
No plea bears influence. What a mass of wealth
Loaded your youth! the toil of careful Ancestors!
And how it is consumed, let thousands tell,
Whose lifted eyes and hands proclaim their wonder:
I dare not whisper it. -- Men would think me mad;
And laugh to hear, that the once-liberal Bellmour
Is grown a niggard, now; and like a Miser,
Whines for a day of Grace, -- and cries, 'twill ruin him
To pay his Creditors.

BELLMOUR. Insulting wretch!
It grates my inmost soul to suffer this,
But my friend's fate depends on it. [Aside.] You seemed to speak
As if you pitied Woodly. -- Give him liberty;
And let me fill the place to which you have sent him:
I ask no more. -- For my own miseries,
Perhaps, they merit not, -- I Am sure they scorn
What pity thou can give them.

BARGRAVE. Pity to thee!
Who, not content to ruin thus thyself,
Have beggared all, whom blood, or foolish friendship,
Attracted to thy vortex of destruction!
So ends our talk; -- I Will hear no more, Sir!

BELLMOUR. Nay, then,
Off, mean Hypocrisy! I Will make thee hear me,
In words which match thy malice. -- Think, low Traitor!
From whom I learned that guilt, with which, but now,
Thy tongue reproached me! who, but the villain, Bargrave?

BARGRAVE. Ha! villain! said you? --

Offering to draw. BELLMOUR. Yes, the villain, Bargrave. --
Touch not thy sword! -- Should thou unsheath it here,
Thy guardian Devil, too weak to save his Minister,
Should rise in vain between us!

BARGRAVE, I Will hear thee out. --

BELLMOUR. Who, but thyself, spread all those snares about me,
Which first entangled, then o'erthrew my virtue?
Who stained the native whiteness of my soul,
And spotted it with follies? -- Think how the Bond,
Most fraudulently, and by shameful arts,
Was from my clouded reason won! when fumes
Of maddening wine had warmed my yielding fancy,
Fit for a knave's impression! -- Have thou humanity?
And do not feel a ruin thou have caused?
Have thou reflection? -- and can thou sleep unstung?
Or, have the siends, that haunt thy gloomy bosom,
Encased thy heart with steel? seared up thy conscience?
And left all Devil within thee? --

BARGRAVE. Now, take breath;
And hear me tell the effect of this fine preaching.
I find myself, with all these black endowments,
Your master, and your scourge! -- but that I scorn thee,
I could be angry. -- Mark this silent witness.
Look on this Bond, and curse the woeful hour
That gave thy friend and thee to my disposal;
While I seek vengeance, not from words but action.

Attempts to go out. BELLMOUR. By action did thou say? I thank thee,
Bargrave!
Thou have instructed me. -- That fatal Bond
Shall never rise in Judgment against Woodly.
[Drawing his sword, and putting himself before the door; -- Bargrave hastily
putting up the bond to defend himself, drops it unperceived.] Just Heaven, that
hates oppression, points a way
To ease my wretchedness of half it is load,
By cutting through that chain that binds my friend.
Now, if thou dare defend thy villainies,
Unsheathe thy sword, and to this guarded door
Force thy wished passage through the breast of Bellmour.

They fight and Bargrave falls. Enter COURTNEY and LOUISA. COURTNEY. What have
you done? I feared this rash effect
Of rage but half suppressed.

LOUISA. Was this my Bellmour? speak! was this the way
To ease our wretchedness? -- Oh! this black chance
Sinks us still deeper, cuts us off from comfort,
And we can never, now, be happy more!

BELLMOUR. Courtney! -- 'twere vain to wish this act undone.
Takes up the bond. Secret and sudden, like his guardian angel,
Let me entreat thee to convey this parchment
Into my Woodly's hand. -- Say how it happened:
Tell him, whatever Fate may do with me,
I Am blessed to give him freedom.

COURTN^Y. Collect yourself! --
Guard the doors well. -- There Is danger near:
I will not leave you long. --

Exit. LOUISA. Hence, Bellmour, fly!
One hour's delay prevents escape for ever.

B^LLMOUR. What would thou have me do?

LOUISA. Let me disguise thee. --
Then, through the Grove haste; and, in some poor Cottage,
Entreat a short concealment. There I Will find thee,
And we'll consult relief from all our woes.

B^LLMOUR. Fixed as my fate I stand, unmoved, to expect it.
Seek thy own safety; I Will not stir, by Heaven!

LOUISA. Think how my peace of mind, my hope, my misery,
Depend on thine. -- Thus, on my knees, I urge it.
Thou, being free, may find a thousand ways
To succor us; but, if thou fall'st, a Family, --
A lost! a friendless Family! falls with thee.
Oh! if I ever were beloved by Bellmour,
If all my prayers, my vows, my tears, can move him,
Let him but grant me this; -- let him but leave me:
Rain then a world of woes upon my head!
Let want, reproach, contempt, and all Life's agonies,
In ceaseless bitterness of soul, afflict me;
While thou art safe, if I but heave one sigh,
One breath of discontent escape my lips,
Curse me thyself, and make me lost indeed!

BELLMOUR. Excellent woman! -- rise. -- To see thee thus
Is torture beyond bearing!

LOUISA. I Will not leave thee! --
Here, at thy feet thus, humbled as that dust,
Which I shall shortly be when I have lost thee,
Here will I grow for ever, 'till thou grant'st
This only prayer I make thee.

BELLMOUR. Thou bid'st me fly:
What would thou I should fly from?

LOUISA. Danger and misery.

BELLMOUR. With whom then must I leave that misery?
Must not thyself, and those three friendless wretches,
Whose being I was cause of, and who expect
Aid and protection from a Parent's hand;
While I escape, must you not all be left?
Hell glows in that hot thought! be left, exposed
To all the miseries, which thou would have me
Fly, like a Coward from, and leave for innocents,
Who owe 'em to my baseness! no, Louisa!

LOUISA. [Rising.] Lost, lost, for ever!

BELLMOUR. No, there is a Judge on high,
Who sees thy goodness, and will sure preserve thee;
Come what Fate lists to me! -- But, loved Louisa!
Give now my sorrows way; a solitary thought
Will teach me to resolve for life, or wished for death!

Exit. LOUISA. Angels assist! inspire thy silent reasonings!
And from this labyrinth of woes conduct thee!
Dreadful our prospect! -- yet, all may be well!
Heaven cannot err! -- often guides us in the dark; --
And, when we least expect, affords relief!

Exit. End of Act the First.
ACT II. SCENE.
A Gallery. Enter BELLMOUR (pensive.) BELLMOUR. WHY should I pause? nothing can
be a crime
Which puts a stop to evil. A thousand men
May have been poor as I, -- and yet lived happy!
Miseries we make ourselves, are borne with ease;
But he who beggars his posterity,
Begets a race to curse him! -- every scorn,
Which wrings the soul of any future Bellmour,
Whom want shall pinch the bones of, ages hence,
Will mark, with shame, my unforgotten grave,
And reach my guilty soul, where ever it wanders!
If to give misery to those, to whom
We once gave life, is an inhuman crime,
How can it be a sin to take life back,
And put an end to undeserved woe?
Oh! -- did I feel no misery but my own,
How easy were it for this Sword to free me
From all that anguish, which embitters life?
But, when the Grave has given my sorrows rest,
Where shall my Wife and tender Babes find comfort?
Not all the virtues of Louisa's mind,
Nor even my pretty Prattlers' innocence,
Will shield them from unpitying Want's bleak storm!
Better, a thousand times, to lead them with me
Unto the peaceful mansion of cold dea!
It shall be done! -- but how? that asks some thought. --
From those dear, destined breasts, the pointed steel
Must draw no blood, to stain my blushing hand;
Lest my soul start, and that seem cruelty,
Which I would fain think pity. * Loud knocking without. -- Hark! Time presses.
What if I use the unwounding aid of Poison?
I have at hand a sovereign remedy
For all diseases, want, and woe, can plague with;
'Twill blunt the edge of death, and, in sweet slumber,
Swim, soft and shadowy, over the misty eye-ball.

Enter LOUISA. LOUISA. Will you forgive me, if officious love,
That anxious pain I feel till you are safe,
Obtrude my zeal, perhaps a few short moments,
Before you would have wished to be disturbed?
Yon Villains grow impatient for admission,
And scarce your Servants guard the gates against them;
Storms of bold oaths, and horrid imprecations,
Mixed with loud thunderings, and the threats of Law,
Make my heart tremble, and have forced me hither:
Forced me to urge you, by all ties of love,
Of interest, honor, hope, and future bliss,
To fly this dangerous roof, and save us all.

BELLMOUR. I thank thy gentle care. -- It is resolved.
Aside. I have bethought me of the means to evade
The malice of my fortune. -- 'Twill be a journey,
A little longer than thy love could wish it;
Yet, not so far but we shall meet again.

LOUISA. Oh! be the distance wide as Pole from Pole,
Let me but follow thee, and I am blessed.

BELLMOUR. It shall be so, Louisa.

LOUISA. A thousand Angels
Spread their wings over thee, and protect thy steps.
Now thou art kind! -- But, the dear little ones,
Shall they go too?

BELLMOUR. All! all shall go!

LOUSIA. Haste, then;
Let us begone: my bounding heart leaps joyful,
And I shall smile again. -- But, ah me, Bellmour!
They are so young! so tender! is it possible
That they should travel with us?

BELLMOUR. Moving innocence!
My strong heart bleeds within me at her accents.
Aside. A few short steps will lodge us in a place
To her. Of rest and safety. -- We shall have leisure there
To weigh our future hopes, and seek fit means
To our wished end. -- Courtney will soon return;
Said he not so?

LOUISA. He did, and we'll inform him
Of our new purpose, and begin our flight.
I Will make provision, such as best befits
Our haste, and our distresses. --

Going. BELLMOUR. Stay, Louisa!
Those precious cordials, I so lately purchased,
Gave I to thee, or no?

LOUISA. You spoke of such,
But still forgot to give them to me; now
They Are not worth memory.

BELLMOUR. Nay, now most useful!
Their virtue is reported sovereign,
Against the body's toil, or mind's disturbance.

LOUISA. I would my Uncle were returned to counsel us!
What can so long detain him? sure he is safe!

BELLMOUR. Seek him, my love! whilst I the cordials find.
Now, King of Terrors! to prepare thy banquet! (aside.)

Exit. LOUISA. Oh, what a world of ruin has one vice,
Detested gaming! brought upon us all!
Bellmour, so honest, tender, mild, by nature;
Has that propensity made almost wicked!
Stripped of the means to satisfy just claims,
His harrow'd heart starts not at homicide;
And may destroy himself, his babes, and me!
All-gracious Heaven! how will these mis'ries end?
I dare not hope! but thou art all-sufficient!
If more of evil yet o'er-hang this roof,
O, for my children's sake, just God! avert it!

Exit. Re-enter BELLMOUR. BELLMOUR. My baleful hand has mixed the deadly
draught!
To give it as a cordial -- Give it! whom?
Start from thy burning orb, thou conscious Sun,
And chill thyself to ice at my black purpose.
Am I a Parent? a Protector! Lover!
Or has this Devil, that heaves about my heart,
Transformed me to a fiend? -- he has! he has!
Chain him, some angel, millions of fathoms, down;
Heap him with mountains, lest he rise again,
And in a husband's, and a father's breast,
Brew horrid murders! -- I am myself once more. --
Now let cool Reason's undistracted search
Answer my bleeding soul, which dreadful ill
May best be borne by Nature? To leave our friends
To grinding sorrow, poverty, and scorn,
With sense of his not feeling any pain,
Who gave them all; -- or, to quit life together,
And, wanting power to bless, make it some merit,
Not to leave curses to surviving innocence!
I Am mad again! Reason herself betrays me,
And whispers, that this last is tenderest,
And murder grows a mercy. --

Re-enter LOUISA. LOUISA. Found you the cordial?
Your little wanderers are ready dressed
To act the pilgrim with us; perhaps 'twill aid
Their fainting spirits, yet untried in hardships:
Haste, love! and let us be gone.

BELLMOUR. Oh! if one moment,
One short thought longer, she oppress me thus,
With melting, innocent talk, I shall grow soft,
Yield her to want, and live to be a beggar.

LOUISA. Still you are doubtful --

BELLMOUR. No, I Am fixed -- Oh! Nature!
Aside. I left my closet open; -- on a table,
In that gold cup, which was thy father's present,
On the last birthday of our eldest boy,
Thou Wilt find the cordial. -- I have tried 'em all,
And what seemed fittest for the boys and thee,
Waits, in that cup, thy tasting.

LOUISA. Courtney stays long. --
All things are ready, and I wish him here.
Now for this boasted cordial. --

Exit. BELLMOUR. Be firm, my heart!
Stop thy big beat! thaw! thaw this curdling blood,
That through my icy veins creeps cold as death,
And freezes in its passage! -- Where is Louisa?
But a few moments, and she is no more!
Now! now the unsuspecting innocent
Lifts that last cup; -- Now! now she tastes a draught,
That snatches her for ever from my sight,
And robs me of all comfort! Never more
Shall her sweet voice enchant me! Never more
Shall her soft eyes look fondly into mine,
And shine with swimming languor!
Open, engulph me, and conceal my shame,
Befriending Earth! -- or, from thy yawning depth
Stream up a petrifying blast, to blot out memory,
Congeal my blood, and fix me here a statue!

LOUISA (without.) My life! my Bellmour!

BELLMOUR. Ha! it is her voice that calls me.
It sounded not reproachful.

LOUISA (without.) Look, my Bellmour!
These little strugglers will not quit the cordial,
But sip it to the bottom.

BELLMOUR. Torturing horror!

Enter LOUISA, with an empty cup. LOUISA. Why did not come, my Bellmour! and
partake,
When twice I called you? 'Twould have been a scene
Of pleasure, to observe with how much eagerness
The little wranglers quarreled for the cup;
Which, having drunk of first, I brought to them,
I bid them taste it only; and told the prattlers
It was their father's present: but that word
Transported them to lift their pretty hands,
In love and duty; and to drain each drop.

BELLMOUR. Furies tear me! --

LOUISA. Have I done aught amiss?
Did you not give permission they should taste it,
Ere they began the journey?

BELLMOUR. Alas! Louisa!
A long, long journey is, indeed, begun;
But endless as eternity! -- Thyself,
And those dear infants, are -- poisoned by that cordial!

LOUISA. Poisoned, by thee! Thou say it but to try me!
If 'twere thy wish that I should die, thy love,
At least thy pity, would have given some warning.
Death is a dreadful journey, and requires
Much length of preparation.

BELLMOUR. By those charms,
Which I no more must gaze on, and be blessed,
Thou can not live an hour! -- a last, long sleep
Will steal, in cold advances, over thy beauties;
And those two beamy suns, whose rays dart through me,
Shall set in endless night! -- Even while we talk,
The eternal shade will rise at once between us,
And sever us for ever!

LOUISA. Dreadful contraction
Of that short span, which, at its longest stretch,
Was much too narrow to allow me scope,
To speak, or look, or think my love for thee!
What shall I say? a thousand tender thoughts
Struggle, at once, for vent. -- I cannot speak --
Death is too hasty! -- I have yet undone,
Unspoke, unthought, a thousand weighty things!
O, heaven! my little ones! -- let me fly to them!
Have I so short a time to gaze upon them,
Yet never must see them more! I cannot leave thee!
What shall I do? -- O, bring my children hither;
Fly with them to my arms! -- Dear, dying innocents!
O, Bellmour! Bellmour! why has this been done?

BLLMOUR. That we might baffle woe, here die together,
And leave no beggars of our race behind us!
See! my Louisa! I have a saithful guide,
Draws a dagger. That will not let me lose thee.
Attempts to stab himself.
Enter COURTNEY. COURTNEY. Hold thy rash hand!
Wresting the dagger from him. Nor to thy other crimes add Suicide!
He, thou thought slain by thy revengeful arm,
Accursed Bargrave! is borne hence alive,
But slightly wounded; though awhile he seemed,
Through craft or cowardice, bereft of life.

BELLMOUR. Has that dire villain 'scap'd! and shall my wife,
And tender innocents, O, God! be made
A sacrifice for all my load of guilt!

COURTNEY. Nor are your wife and childen sacrificed.
The hand of Heaven (however, from mortal eyes
Obscured in clouds, it seems severe) is merciful!
Not thy three children, and thy wife, are fallen;
Nor shall even thou, whose meditated crimes
Deserve a signal vengeance, now be punished!

LOUISA. What mean you, Sir?

BELLMOUR. Thou little know, alas! the certain means
I used for their destruction!

COURTNEY. Then, trembling, mark the mazy paths of Providence!
Fearing, from late events, some dire mishap,
I traced your footsteps, as you sadly ranged
The lonely Gallery; spied a late-fill'd Cup
Of deadly poison, (known by the vessel left,
Which had contained it) mingled with a rich draught,
For present use: I took it, secret, thence;
Refill'd the Cup with Cordials that remained,
Without the baneful mixture; stood concealed
To view what then might hap: Louisa came,
And snatched it thence; I followed her, unmarked,
O'erjoy'd to have been the means to intercept
Her and her children's death.

LOUISA. Merciful Heaven!

[Louisa and Bellmour kneel, in adoration of, and gratitude to Heaven; then
embrace their Uncle, and each other.] BELLMOUR. Angels surround thee, with
unceasing vigilance;
To Courtney. And, for this friendship, ward off every evil!
Oh! I have erred! but, henceforth, I am changed!

COURTNEY. Now hear the rest; and Heaven pronounce thee worthy often!
By a young Kinsman, landed from a Ship,
That left her Consort scarce a day behind,
Woodly has heard, though mournful, happy news.
Your absent Brother, many years thought dead,
Returning, rich, from the remotest East,
Died but in sight of land; and has bequeathed
His whole heaped wealth to thee.

BELLMOUR. All-gracious Providence!
Most humbly I adore thee; and will trust,
Implicitly, to thy unerring wisdom!
Thou best can clear thy mystic dispensations,
And make confusion end in beauteous order!
Hence may the Gamester learn, ere yet too late,
To shun that Vice which endless Ills await;
Wild as the Sea his maddening passions flow --
Himself, Wife, Children, beggared at a throw!
Oh, should a Father, or a Husband come,
Whom Dice have lured from happiness and home,
To listen to our Tale; our hope is, here,
To check one Gamester in his mad Career.

THE END.

