PRIESTCRAFT Distinguished from CHRISTIANITY.

SHOWING,

I. That Wicked Priests are the real Antichrists mentioned in Scripture. II.
That the Corruptions of the Laity in all Christian States, proceeds from the
Corruptions of the Clergy. III. That there was a more General Virtue in the
grossest Times of Paganism, than there has been since our SAVIOR came into the
World. IV. That there is a more General Virtue in other Parts of the Globe,
than in the Christian World. V. That there was a more General Virtue in our own
Nation in the Times of our Ancestors, than there is in our own Times; and that
Priestcraft, and Corruption of Manners, have increased together.
By their Fruits ye shall know them. LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1715.

PREFACE.
THAT the Doctrines which the Clergy preach to the People, and the Examples
they give them, have an extraordinary Influence upon their Thoughts and
Actions, is evident from Experience, and from the very Reason of the
Institution of the Order. That the Examples which too many of the Clergy have
lately given them, and the Doctrines which they have preached to them, have
been neither Christian nor Moral, is too evident from the dismal Consequences
of them; from the Divisions which they have caused in their Hearers; from their
groundless Fears and Jealousies; from their Malice and their implacable Fury;
from their Hatred and their Enmity, not only to each other, but to their Native
Country, to their very Rights and Liberties; from the unfortunate Event of the
late War, in spite of Success, and an unparalleled Series of Victories; from
a Peace more calamitous than the most fatal War, and more destructive of
Commerce; from the dreadful and horrible Dangers which we have so narrowly
escaped by the immediate Hand of God, without any Thanks to our own Prudence
and Virtue; and lastly, from the Dangers and the Calamities which still
threaten us, and still hang over us, and over all the rest of the Christian
World.

To remove the Causes of all these Mischiefs, that the Effects may cease, it is
necessary to lay down a plain and certain Rule, by which the very meanest of
the People may be able to distinguish a Zealot from an Incendiary, a Priest of
God from a Priest of Baal, and the Precepts of the Gospel from Human Traditions
and the Doctrines of Devils.

That I have discovered and reproved the Vices of some of the Clergy by the
very same Method by which They have caused our Miseries; that I have done this
by a Sermon, by a chosen Text, and by severe, but too just Reproaches, is, I
hope, excusable in me, or They are altogether inexcusable: For whereas They
have made use of Calumny and Defamation; I have kept strictly within the Bounds
of a modest Satyr, which spares the Persons and attacks the Vices, and never
censures the Deserving, nor condemns the Innocent; and whereas They have had
recourse to Calumny and ungenerous Slanders, only in order to cause Divisions,
and to inflame Animosities, I have endeavored by just Reproaches to revive and
restore Charity.

The Author of the following Discourse was born and bred in the Communion of
the Church of England; and nothing in the following Sheets is in the least
designed by him to reflect on that Pious, Learned, and Numerous Body, who are
truly Christian Priests of the Church of England. But then he declares, that he
cannot apprehend how any one can be a truly Christian Priest, who makes it the
entire Business of his Life to root Charity out from the Souls of Men, and by
that Means to drive from the Face of the Earth the very Life and Soul of
Christianity. And as he cannot conceive that any thing can be a Part or a
Member of a Body, which has not a Communication with, and a Subordination to,
the Head of that Body; as he cannot conceive that any one can be a Priest of
the Church of Rome, who disowns the Papal Supremacy, so he cannot believe that
any one can be truly a Priest of the Church of England, but he, who being
united to the Faithful and Obedient Part of the Clergy, does with them
acknowledge King GEORGE alone, for his Rightful Head, and his Supreme
Ecclesiastical Governor.

THE CONTENTS.
THAT Antichrist, according to the genuine Meaning of the Word, signifies one
who is thoroughly and entirely opposed to Christ. Page 2 That one who is
thoroughly and entirely opposed to Christ, is opposed to him as a King, a
Priest, and a Prophet. ibid. That if Christ is a good King, Antichrist must be
a wicked Tyrant. ibid. That if Christ is the holiest of Priests, Antichrist
must be the vilest. ibid. That if Christ is a true Prophet, Antichrist must be
a false one. ibid. Of the Designs, Doctrines, Examples and Influences of Christ
and Antichrist in their different opposite Capacities of King, Priest, and
Prophet. p. 3 What the Kingdom of Christ is. ibid. What the Tyranny of
Antichrist is. ibid. That the Kingdom of God in Heaven, is an Empire of
Charity. p. 4 How that Empire was impaired by the Devil at the Fall of the
Angels. p. 6 That God established the same Empire of Charity upon Earth at the
Creation of Man. p. 7 How that Empire of Charity was impaired by the Devil upon
Earth at the Fall of Man. p. 8 That Christ Jesus came into the World to restore
the Empire of Charity; in order to which he assumed the Priesthood; and why. p.
10 His Doctrine as a Priest. p. 14 His Life and Example. ibid. His Miracles of
a piece with his Doctrine, and the rest of his Life, contrary in this to the
Miracles which were wrought by Moses. p. 15 His Delivery of his Doctrine with
Authority and Power. p. 16 As Religion like Government is to be carried on by
the same Methods by which it at first began, the Apostles preached the same
Doctrines after our Savior's Ascension, did the same Miracles, followed his
divine Example, as far as mere Humanity could follow it, and in proportion used
a like powerful Delivery p. 17 The Influence that all this had upon the Minds
of Men. p. 18 That the Devil, alarmed at this, contrived by means of some
Christian Priests, to make Christianity the Occasion of introducing a more
desperate Division among Men, than ever had been known before; in order to
which, he obliged them to preach his Doctrine for the Doctrine of Christ. p. 19
That these Priests thus acting by the Saggestion of the Devil, are the
Antichrists mentioned in the Text. p. 20 Their Doctrines. p. 21 Their Lives. p.
23 Their Delivery of their Doctrines. p. 24 The Influence that all this has had
upon the Minds of Men. p. 31 That there was a more General Virtue in the
grossest times of Paganism, than there has been since our Savior came into the
World. p. 32 That there is a more General Virtue in other Parts of the Globe,
than in the Christian World. p. 35 That there was a more General Virtue in our
own Nation in the times of our Ancestors, than there is in our own times; and
that Priestcraft and Corruption of Manners have increased together. p. 38 That
the Corruptions of the Laity in all Christian States, proceed from the
Corruptions of the Clergy, proved from two Arguments. p. 39 Antichrist opposed
to Christ as a Prophet. p. 42 The Predictions of our Savior concerning the
Jewish Temple. ibid. The Prediction of Antichrist concerning the Christian
Church, and the Mischiefs that are like to befall it. ibid. How false and
frivolous these Predictions are. p. 43 All the Marks of Antichrist reduced to
one grand Characteristical Mark, which is, the wresting the Words of the Gospel
to mean something contrary to the great Designs of Christianity. p. 49 Those
Designs are Two, viz. 1. To restore the Law of Nature. ibid. 2. To promote and
advance Charity. p. 51

A DISCOURSE UPON THE First EPISTLE General OF St. JOHN, Chap. 2. and part of
the 18th Verse. Even now there are many Antichrists.
THERE have been several wild and extravagant Explications, or rather
Applications of Antichrist, by those who have had a mind to fix it upon some
particular Person, as upon the Pope, or Mahomet, or some other spiritual or
secular Tyrants, according as they who applied it were corrupted or misguided
by Interest, or Malice, or Passion, or Fanatic Enthusiasm; but by Antichrist,
in the genuine Signification of the Word, may be meant every one who is
thoroughly and entirely opposed to the Lord's Anointed, i. e. to Christ: But
because there are no Creatures so opposed, and so contrary to him, as the Devil
and his Angels, they are most properly the Antichrists of whom the Apostle
speaks, who appear in sundry Shapes upon this Earthly Globe, and make use of
humane Instruments and humane Organs to accomplish their infernal Designs. And
as we may find, by the Words of our Text, that many of them appeared in the
World, even in the most pure and primitive Times, who is so easy as to believe
that they are not more numerous in our Days? In order then to the describing
and distinguishing them, so that they may be clearly known and discovered, we
intend in the ensuing Discourse to handle these three Points.

First, We shall give the general Marks of this thorough and entire Opposition
of Antichrist to Christ. Secondly, We shall consider the Designs, the
Doctrines, the Examples, and the Influences of one and the other, according to
those general Marks of Opposition. Thirdly, We shall reduce all these Marks to
one grand Characteristical Mark; and when we have done this, it will be easy
for you (Brethren) to make the Application your selves, and to point out these
to one another; of whom it may be said, in the Words of the Text, viz. Even now
there are many Antichrists.
First then, As our Savior was a Priest, and the best and holiest of Priests;
Antichrist must be likewise a Priest, acting by the Suggestion of the Devil;
for no one can be thoroughly and entirely opposed to the best and the holiest,
but the most profligate and the vilest of Priests.

Secondly, As Christ is a King who is perfectly good and gracious; Antichrist
must be the worst and most insupportable of Tyrants.

Thirdly, As our Savior was a Prophet, and an infallible Prophet, because he
could not but foretell the Events which he himself had decreed; Antichrist, in
Opposition to him, must be a Prophet, and for this reason a false and deluding
Prophet, because he has neither himself any Power over the Future, nor is
influenced and enlightened by him who has. But now we come,

Secondly, To consider the Designs, the Doctrines, the Examples, and the
Influences of Christ and Antichrist in their Priesthood, their Prophecies, and
their Empire.

First, We shall begin with their Empire, because Christ was a Prophet, and a
Priest, only to advance his Kingdom; and Antichrist too is a Prophet, and a
Priest, only to promote his Tyranny. Let us now see what sort of Kingdom the
one, and what sort of Tyranny the other, came into the World to establish.

Since then the Kingdom of Christ, or of the Messiah, is a Spiritual Kingdom,
or the Kingdom of Heaven, the Tyranny of Antichrist must be a Spiritual
Tyranny, or the Tyranny of the Prince of Darkness.

Let us now enquire what this Kingdom of Heaven is, and in what it consists;
how it began and flourished; how it came to be impaired, and how far our
Savior came to restore it; and we shall see, by making this Enquiry, what sort
of Tyranny the Tyranny of the Devil is; how it began, how it increased, how it
came to be impaired; and how far Antichrist has a design to restore it.

The Kingdom of Heaven then, is a Kingdom whose King proposes the Happiness of
his Subjects, as the ultimate End of his Reigning over them; for God is
perfectly happy in himself, and wants not our Obedience, nor our Service. A
Kingdom whose King proposes to make his Subjects easy and happy here, to
prepare them for eternal Happiness hereafter. Matt. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. His Empire then must
be an Empire of Reason and Law, and, by Consequence, an Empire of Liberty. St.
James 1. 5. But whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, that man shall
be blessed in his deed. It Is this Law of Liberty which establishes the Rule of
Reason, to restore the Kingdom of God, his Empire over the Soul and Conscience,
and frees Man from the Slavery into which he was brought by his Passions, which
is the Empire and Tyranny of the Devil, and of Antichrist his Son.

For this Tyranny of Antichrist, being in every thing opposite to the Kingdom
of Christ, must design both the Temporal and Eternal Misery of his Subjects;
must design to make them unhappy here, in order to the making them eternally
miserable hereafter, and must not be a Rule of Reason and Law, but an Empire of
Passion and Will; and must tend in every thing to subvert the Empire which
Christ has established upon Earth, and to restore the Tyranny of the Devil,
whose Kingdom, as it began at first, so it has ever since continued, in
Opposition to, the Kingdom of Heaven. And as our Savior teaches his Disciples
to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, in order to advance his
Kingdom upon Earth, Antichrist obliges his to make use of all three, to promote
his spiritual Tyranny.

The Kingdom of Heaven began with the Creation of Angels. God reigned over
those blessed Spirits, who are entirely happy in their Obedience; and their
great and comprehensible Law was Love, the Love of God and their Fellow
Creatures. They loved God, because they saw him as he is, all Beauty and all
Attraction; and they loved their Fellow Creatures, because they saw them the
Objects of their Creator's Love. Gosp. of St. John, Chapter 15. Ver. 12. This is my
commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. 1 Epist. of St.
John, Chapter 4. Ver. 11. If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.
And this Love was at once their Duty and their Happiness; a Love attended with
perfect Pleasure, and with Joy unspeakable

But when afterward the impious Aspirer, Lucifer, drew off his Love from his
Creator and his Fellow Creatures, and placed it upon himself, that Self-love
was immediately attended with Pride, and Rage, and Envy, and Hatred, and
Malice; Passions till then unknown in Heaven, as being inconsistent with
perfect Happiness.

Thus fell Lucifer; but alone he fell not; Millions of immortal Spirits he drew
after him into Perdition. By his Lies he seduced their Souls, defaced in their
Minds the Love of their Creator, and of their Fellow Creatures for their
Creator's sake, and planted the Love of themselves there. With Divine Love away
went all their Happiness. Self-love was immediately followed in them, as in
their Seducer before, by Pride, and Rage, and Envy, and Hatred and Malice; and
they who while they were united to God by Love, were Angels, divided from him
by Pride and Hate, became immediately Devils; and from the most glorious, most
happy, most beautiful part of the Creation, became all on a sudden the most
execrable and the most horrible: And as before they fell, that Divine Love by
which they were united to God, was at one and the same time their sovereign
Law, and their supreme Felicity; so when by Pride and Hatred, and the rest of
their Diabolical Passions, they broke that Divine Union, their Pride, their
Hatred, and the rest of their tormenting Passions, became at once their
Transgression and their Hell.

'Twas after this that God created Man, to supply the Room of the fallen
Angels, and to plant the same Kingdom upon Earth which remained among the
blessed Spirits in Heaven. He created them little lower than the Angels;
enlightened, innocent, happy, immortal. The Empire of his Maker was the same in
him, that it was in those blessed Spirits, an Empire of Reason and Law; and the
same Law was given to him which made the Angels happy. That great and
comprehensive Law was Love; the Love of his Maker and of his Fellow Creatures,
for his Creator's sake; which (as the Apostle of the Gentiles tells us) is the
fulfilling of all Law; and which our Savior had told us before, Gosp. of St.
John, Chap 14. Ver. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And as
long as this charming Law remained in the Heart of Man inviolated, it was
always attended with Peace, and Joy, and inexpressible Happiness.

But Satan, who in every thing by Divine Permission opposes the Designs of God,
attempted to destroy that Kingdom upon Earth, which he had before impaired in
Heaven. And what Wonder if the Seducer of Angels succeeded in his Attempts upon
Man; if he extinguished Divine Love in his Heart, and inflamed it with
Selflove; if he dissolved that Union which Man had with God, and overturned his
Dependence on him; destroyed the Empire which Heaven had set up in his Soul,
which was an Empire of Reason and Law, and established his own Tyranny there;
an Empire of Will and Passion, of Pride, and Rage, and Hatred, and Malice, and
all those accursed and damnable Passions, by which the Tormentor is himself
tormented, to which the Tyrant is himself a Slave?

Thus Satan brought Sin, and Misery, and Death upon Mankind; who was created
innocent, happy, immortal: And the Kingdom which he established here upon
Earth, in opposition to the Kingdom of Heaven, increased so fast, and extended
so wide, that Charity, which is the Love of God and our Neighbor, was almost
extinguished upon Earth; that Men were miserably divided from God, and from one
another; and that all Mankind, to the reserve of a small Remnant, were become
abandoned Slaves to the Devil, and to Devilish Passions, when Jesus Christ
came into the World to restore the Kingdom of his Father, and to destroy the
Tyranny of the Devil.

For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, That he might destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 Epist. of St. John, Chap. 3. Ver. 8.

When the Son of God came into the World to destroy the Tyranny of the Devil;
and to restore his own and his Father's Kingdom; that Kingdom of Love, and
Peace, and Joy, which was by the Divine Permission impaired upon Earth by the
Devil, at the Fall of Man, and under which the blessed Spirits are for ever
happy in Heaven; in order to restore that Kingdom, he assumed the Priesthood.
Not only because there was a Necessity for a Priest, who could make a
propitiatory and satisfactory Sacrifice for the Sins of the World; but because
also there was a Necessity for a Doctrine, which might incline and rectify the
Wills of Men, by enlight'ning and convincing their Understandings; that as Man
fell from Perfection freely and of his own choice, he might likewise be
restored freely and of his own choice; since if the Change in him should be
wrought wholly by Grace, his Conversion would proceed from a Force as it were
upon his Mind, and would not be the Action of a free Agent.

The Kingdom then that our Savior came to restore, was the Empire of Charity,
the Love of God, and of our Neighbor for the sake of God. For wherever that
Divine Love reigns, there is the Kingdom of Heaven; and wherever that Love is
wanting, is Hell and outer Darkness* Beloved, (says St. John) Let us love one
another. Every one that loves is born of God' and knows God. He that loves
not, knows not God: for God is love, St. John's first Epist. Chap. 4. Ver. 7,
8. But here, by the way, we are to take notice, that this Love of our Neighbor
is to be extended to all Mankind, even to our most cruel Enemies: But it ought
to be more intense or remiss, according to the different Relations in which Men
stand to each other. We ought to love Christians more than Infidels; our
Parents and Kindred more than our Acquaintance; our Acquaintance more than
Strangers, and our Country Men more than Foreigners.

As the Law of Divine Love, in the Observation of which lay the Happiness of
the first Man, and the Perfection of his Nature, was subverted by Self-love,
upon the Suggestion of the Devil; our Savior, that he might re-establish that
Divine Love, endeavored to root out the Love of one's Self, by a Doctrine that
was best adapted to the reasonable Nature of corrupted Man. He attacked it
therefore in all the several Branches of it, Pride, Avarice and Luxury; or in
the Words of St. John, The last of the flesh, the last of the eye, and the
pride of life: to which he opposed a profound Humility, a rigid Mortification,
and a sincere Disinterestedness. Not that fantastic Scorn of the World, which
proceeds from a Stoical Pride; but that which is founded upon the most solid
Foundation, the Interest that one has in God: For he to himself being
self-sufficient, he who has him, has all Things.

But as Pride is the most dangerous of the three forementioned Sins, (for that
is the continual Fever of the Mind; whereas the other attack it but by
irregular Accesses, Pride insolently intruding at the very Altar, where the
others never dare to approach,) there is no Virtue that our Savior recommends
more throughout the whole Gospel, than Humility: nay, almost every Virtue which
he recommends to his Disciples, appears to be founded on that; as Poorness of
Spirit, Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, Forbearance, Peacemaking,
Longsuffering, Mercy, Forgiveness: for nothing is more usual than for the Proud
to be swollen and drunk with Vanity; to be provoking, disdainful, insolent,
fiery, impatient, intractable, cruel, revengeful, implacable. That Sorrow and
Remorse which is necessary to Repentance, implies a severe Mortification, upon
a View of the Turpitude of Sin, and the Vileness of our own Natures. Even the
three Cardinal Virtues of the Christian Religion are founded upon Humility. Not
only Charity, to which the other two are subordinate; for as Pride is the
Effect of Selflove, Self-love is augmented by Pride: but Faith, which is an
Assent to Truths above our Understanding, because they are revealed by God to
us, is an owning of the Weakness and Blindness of our Reason, as the Hope of
Salvation by the Merits of Christ is a manifest Confession of the Depravity,
and Corruption, and Impotence of our Wills.

As true Humility is the solid Foundation of every Christian Virtue; a
Foundation which extending as low as Hell, is the Basis of a Fabric which
reaches to the very Heaven of Heavens; our Savior's Doctrine attacked Pride in
all its numerous Offsprings, Anger, Envy, Hatred, Malice, and in all their
unrighteous Effects, viz. bitter and barbarous Invectives, presumptuous and
damnable Judgments, Debate, Contention, Strife, Revenge, and Murder; and
opposed to them the contrary Virtues, Gentleness, Meekness, Patience,
Forbearance, Peacemaking, Mercy, Longsuffering, and Forgiveness; nay more,
real and unfeigned Love to our most cruel Enemies. Those who had the
forementioned Graces, our Savior pronounced Blessed, and left it to be
demonstrated by Experience, how much accursed they were, who were tormented by
the Passions and the Sins.

Thus our Savior taught the Will of his Father, which descended from Heaven to
Earth with him; and being for ever an High Priest after the Order of
Melchizedec, the Prince of Peace, an Order which is infinitely superior to the
Aaronical Order, infused into the Hearts of his Disciples, not a windy,
contentious Zeal, for the Observation of Forms and Ceremonies, and the
Political Government of an Established Church; but Virtues and Graces which no
Philosophy, and no Religion had ever taught before; to wit, a profound
Humility, and a Love Divine.

But though this Doctrine was never so conformable to the reasonable Nature of
corrupted Man, and though it was confirmed by Signs and Wonders, that manifested
a Power which commanded Nature, and which made the very Devils obey; it would
never have prevailed over the Minds of Men, which are influenced so forcibly
and constantly by their Senses, if it had not been enforced by the Example of
him who taught it. His Life and his Doctrine were all of a Piece: And as the
Design of his coming down from Heaven was, by the means of Humility, to restore
Charity, to reunite Mankind to God, and to one another; his Life and his
Death, his Incarnation, his Birth, his Baptism, his Choice of the most abject
of Men for his Disciples, and his Submission to the Death of the Cross, were
each of them so many eternal Lessons of Humility, are all of them so many
amazing Miracles of unparalleled Condescension, and of Love Divine.

His very Miracles were of a Piece with the rest of his Life, and were so many
Examples to that Doctrine of Charity which they confirmed by their Power; as
different in this from those which were wrought by Moses, as their Designs were
different. For as the Design of Moses was to separate and distinguish one
Nation from another, and to establish one by the Extirpation of many; the
Wonders which he wrought were answerable to that Design, attended by Terror,
and followed by Destruction, wrought in favor of a few, comparatively
speaking, to the Plague, and Misery, and Destruction of many.

But as the Design of our Savior's descending from Heaven was to remove all
Separation, and all Distinction, and to heal all Divisions amongst Men; as his
Doctrine was adapted to all Nations, and to all Men, contrary in that to the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Judaick Law; as it was framed to comprehend all, to
unite all, and to make all its Followers easy here, and eternally happy
hereafter: So likewise his Miracles, without Partiality and without
Distinction, brought Help and Comfort to all. The Roman and the Samaritan, as
well as the Jew, had nothing of Terror, had nothing of Destruction in them;
but were peaceful and gentle all of them, as the Dove that descended from
Heaven upon him who wrought them.

If Men were hungry in desert Places, he was at the Expense of a New Creation
to feed them; if they were languishing under Diseases, by a supernatural Power
he healed them: he healed them by that gentle and peaceful Power which calmed
the Winds and Seas that were about to destroy them; that Power that controlled
and rebuked the Devils that were busied in tormenting them.

As our Savior's Miracles were all of a Piece with his Doctrine, his Delivery
of that Doctrine was worthy of them both. It was with Power that penetrated to
the inmost Souls, and astonished and confounded his most obdurate Hearers. St.
Luke Chap. 4. Ver. 32. And they were astonished at his doctrine; for his word
was with power. And St. Matthew. Chap. 7. Ver. 29. For he taught them as one
having authority, and not as the Scribes. His Delivery of his divine Doctrine,
was not like that of the cold, unconcerned and phlegmatic Teachers of the Law:
No, there was no less than God in his Voice, in his Mien, and in his every
Action.

As Religion so far resembles Civil Government, that it must be carried on by
the same Methods by which it first began; the Apostles, after our Savior's
Ascension, continued to preach the very same Doctrine that he had taught
before, confirmed it by Miracles of the same Kind, enforced it by an Imitation
of their Master's Life, and by their own wonderful Delivery of it. When the
Apostle of the Gentiles preached to the Grecians, his manner of speaking
appeared as new to them as the Doctrine he taught: And as he spoke of Things to
them, which neither Eye had seen, nor Ear had heard, nor had it entered into
their Hearts to conceive; so he spoke to them in such a manner, as never Man
had spoke to them. And there was something in his Delivery, as far above the
Thunder of their Pericles and their Demosthenes, as the Things which he had
said to them, were of infinitely more Importance, and more Concern to his
Hearers. And he, who when he spoke of the Things of this World, was so very
cold, and so unconcerned, that his Bodily Presence was weak, and his Speech
contemptible; even this cold and unconcerned Apostle, when he discoursed of
Righteousness, of Temperance, and of Judgment to come, was so strangely
animated, so wonderfully penetrated with the Heavenly Truths which he uttered,
that the very Tyrant who came to Judge him and to Condemn him, trembled at what
his Prisoner spoke. Acts 24. 25.

Which naturally brings me to the Effect and Influence, which so Divine a
Doctrine, thus enforced, and thus delivered, had upon the Minds of its Hearers.
Which is as much greater than the Impressions which the Discourses of the
Grecian Orators had upon their Assemblies, as Heaven is greater and higher than
Earth. And whereas those Orators thought they effected a mighty matter, if they
changed the Opinions of their Assemblies, in relation to their own, their
Friends, or their Countries Reputation and Interests; our Savior and his
Apostles prevailed upon those who heard them, to contemn all earthly Reputation
and Interests; to despise Riches, and Power, and Glory, and even Life it self.
And the working this Change in the Heart of corrupted Man, was a greater
Miracle, than the changing the Elements, the healing Diseases, or the driving
out Devils. Behold Thousands of Souls flaming with Charity, and loving their
Creator with all their Might, and their Neighbors as themselves. Behold them
parting with all they have, and willing and contented to suffer Want, to
relieve the Necessities of others. Acts, Chap. 4. Ver. 31. to the end. Behold
Thousands of Souls gladly choosing, and joyfully embracing Poverty, and Infamy,
and Sorrow, and Pain, and Death, to render themselves acceptable to him whom
they love. So much was the Kingdom of God restored, and the Tyranny of the
Devil impaired, in the Hearts of Men.

Such were the Effects of our Savior's Doctrine, such was the Influence which
it had on the Minds of Men; at which Satan, alarmed, contrived by a
Masterpiece of infernal Malice, to make this very Religion, by which Christ
designed to unite Men to God and to one another, the Occasion of introducing a
more dangerous and desperate Division between them, than ever had appeared upon
any worldly Account; of making Self-love to take a deeper Root, and spread with
more luxuriant Branches; of kindling in Men's Hearts a spiritual Pride, more
fierce and more fiery than had ever appeared before; a Pride attended with a
more implacable Anger, a more inveterate Malice, and a more irreconcilable
Hatred. And in order to succeed in this Devilish Design, he who knows by
himself, who ruins Man by soothing and by pleasing him, that there is no Enemy
like the Traytor-Friend, and that so Divine a Doctrine could not be resisted
effectually, if it were opposed openly; attempts to destroy it, by a Pretense
to propagate it; delegates his spiritual Tyranny to some Christian Priests, and
prevails upon them, in order to extend it and establish it, to divide, and
weaken, and ruin the Church, by a pretended, impudent, obstreperous Zeal for
its Unity; to teach his Will for the Will of the Most High, and by a Height of
Wickedness, which would be incredible if we had not so often seen it, to prove
the Doctrine of the Devil by the Word of God, miserably wrested to the
Perdition of the perfidious Teachers, and the credulous Hearers. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and to doctrines of Devils.

These are the Antichrists mentioned in the Text; who to promote their own and
the Devil's spiritual Tyranny, preach not the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, but the
Devil's and their own. It Is not their Business to preach up Charity, or to
teach Humility, or any of the Virtues that produce or maintain Charity, as
Gentleness, Meekness, Patience, Forbearance, Peace making, Mercy, Long
suffering, and Forgiveness. If at any time they take Notice of the Doctrine of
Christ, in order to mingle it with their own, and make the latter pass
unsuspected, they do it after such a manner, as shows very plainly, that it is
not that they espouse; as shall be further observed in its proper Place. Their
Business is to preach Division and Dissension, a Spirit of Party and of
Faction, and to incite and inflame those Passions that create or nourish
Division; as Anger, Envy, Hatred, Malice, evil Speaking, evil Surmizings,
impudent and opprobrious Invectives, presumptuous and damnable Judgments,
pretended Distrusts and ungrounded Jealousies, audacious and provoking
Threatenings, Debate, Contention, Strife, Revenge, Confusion, Riot, Murder. It Is
their Business to incense and exasperate their Disciples against all who
contradict their Opinions; not what they pretend to believe as to the Credenda
of Christianity, but the Faith they profess as to their own Traditions, and the
Doctrines of Devils. And therefore it is their Business to inflame their
Disciples, not against Infidels (whether Jews or Turks,) or against Pagans, but
against those of the Christian Faith; nor against those, who while they have
only the Name of Christians, are either Deists or downright Atheists by an open
avowed Profession, or are thought to be such at least in their Hearts, by the
horrible Sins in which they live impenitent; but against true and sincere
Believers; against those who are under the Fear of God, and the sacred Power of
Conscience. These they account their mortal Enemies, against whom they
exasperate and inflame their Disciples, exhorting them both by Voice and
Example, sometimes to laugh, sometimes to rail with unmanner'd frontless
Invectives, at all the most venerable Christian Virtues which shine so bright
in the others, as Humility, Meekness, Moderation, Union, Charity; to hate them
with an irreconcilable Hatred, to keep no Faith with them, to hold no Trust
inviolable, to be bound by neither Vows nor Oaths, but as often as they find
Opportunity, to pursue them to the Destruction of their Reputation, Liberty,
Goods, and Life it self; and to break through all Bonds, both Divine and Humane,
to oppress them and destroy them.

And as the Power of this World is necessary for the supporting their spiritual
Tyranny, they never fail to insinuate into their Disciples, that it is their
Duty to throw as much of into their Hands, as they are able to grasp; to
persuade them, that they are bound to espouse the Cause of those temporal
Tyrants, with whom They their Pastors have made an implicit Contract for the
mutual enslaving of Mankind. And the more these temporal Tyrants are the
Devil's Vicegerents, the more they trample upon Law, and Reason, and Equity,
which are Bonds of Peace and Union to Mankind; that it is still more their Duty
to extol them, to obey them, to serve them, and to adore them. And if these
Tyrants are the Rulers of the native Countries of these Antichrists and their
Disciples, these Teachers industriously inform their Hearers, that they are
absolutely and indispensably bound to obey them, whatever exorbitant Things
they enjoin, or to suffer whatever they are graciously pleased to inflict; and
this, contrary to Nature's original Law, (the first and strongest Precept of
which is Self-preservation, and in order to it Self-defence,) that Law which
our Savior came to restore and to fulfill, and which none but the Devil and his
Disciples can ever come to destroy. And to induce them to this blind and
impious Obedience, they endeavor to prove, that these Tyrants are their Lords
by Virtue of Fatherhood, and their Sovereign by Right Divine; though as good, as
wise, and as forcible Arguments may be brought to prove, that the Devil is a
Lord by Virtue of Fatherhood, and a Monarch by Right Divine, and consequently,
that he ought always to be obeyed, and never to be resisted.

And as these Antichrists teach their Disciples to hate and persecute those
Christians most, who are under the Fear of God, and the Power of Conscience; of
all their Country Men and Fellow Subjects, they instruct them to hate and
malign them most, who are the most Zealous for the Maintenance of their native
Rights, and the Validity and Power of Law.

But if the forementioned secular Tyrants are the Rulers of foreign Nations,
and are mortal Enemies to the native Countries of these Antichristian Teachers,
and of their Disciples; they are so far from being discouraged by this, that
they are animated and encouraged the more to prevail upon their Hearers to
espouse them and to assist them, to rejoice at their Successes, and to mourn at
their Calamities, and to declare themselves Enemies to their native Country,
and their native Rights, and Traitors to their lawful Prince, and to their very
God, in spite of the most sacred and binding Oaths which they have taken to
the contrary. Nay, they exhort and prevail upon those Disciples, to take the
most solemn and binding Oaths to be true to their Prince, their Country, their
Religion, and their Liberty, only that they may oppress them with the greater
Security, and betray them more effectually.

Nor is the Doctrine of Antichrist more removed from Charity, than his Life,
which is the most contrary to it that possibly can be imagined. He divides from
his Brethren of the Priesthood, as soon as he finds that they are obliged to
profess peaceful and Christian Virtues, and that he cannot with them compass
his spiritual Tyranny. And St. John, in the Words of the Context, makes this
very Division one distinguishing Mark of Antichrist. 1 Epist. of St. John,
Chap. 2. Ver. 18, 19. Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists; whereby
ye may know that it is the last time. Ver. 19. They went out from us, but ^hey
were not of us: for if they had been of us, ^hey would no doubt have continued
with us: ^ut they went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not
at all of us. He lives, ^onverses with none, preaches to none, but such as
profess Divisions; divides from all who are under the Power of the Gospel,
(...) the Power of Law; is a Foe, not only to good Subjects, but to good
Princes, and a Friend to Tyrants alone: A Traitor not only to his Prince, but
to his Country, whose Constitution he attacks by his enslaving Doctrines, and
his more wretched abject Politics of absolute Non-resistance, unconditional
Obedience, the most insufferable kind of High Treason. For if he so justly
suffers Death, who only attempts the Executive Power, what may he not deserve,
who audaciously attacks, not only all the Legislative (which includes the
Executive,) but the very Law? He not only hates both Princes and Subjects, who
govern by, and declare for Law, but hates them with a more envenomed Hatred, a
more felonious Rancour, than ever has been known, upon a mere secular Account:
Reviles, reproaches, misrepresents, calumniates them, and, as far as lies in
his Power, oppresses, ruins, curses, kills, and damns them.

Instead of a profound and a Christian Humility, he manifests a more than
Humane Pride; exalts himself above all that the World calls Great, with his
independent Power, his uninterrupted Succession, his indelible Character, and
his Right Divine. And that Pride is attended, against all who oppose it, with a
Rage, an Envy, a Hatred, a Malice Inhuman and Diabolical. But above all, a
disdainful, ridiculous Fury, and an unheard of Cruelty; a Cruelty that spares
no Age, no Sex, and no Degree; that has destroyed entire Nations, the People
and their Kings together.

Instead of the abject contemptible Condition of our Savior and his Disciples,
behold his Opposite with pompous Titles, and pompous Equipages, and an Ambition
still unsatiable. Instead of their Poverty, and their Disinterestedness, behold
him loaded with Benefices, Sinecures, Pluralities, Dignities; flowing with
Wealth, yet pining still with Avarice. Instead of their rigid Mortifications,
behold him indulging himself in Fasts, more luxurious than the Feasts of
others; behold him meditating a lazy, a refined, and a temperate Luxury, that
pampers and indulges Nature instead of oppressing her; that keeps all her
Appetites sharp and keen, and raises all her Lusts and Passions high.

As his Doctrine is confirmed by his Example, it is extremely enforced by his
manner of Delivering it. But because he is obliged to mix the Doctrine of the
Gospel with his own, in order to make the latter pass by virtue of the former,
let us distinguish what he preaches into. First, The Doctrine of Christ;
Secondly, Humane Traditions, and Humane Inventions; and, Thirdly, The Doctrines
of Devils.

First then, He is obliged to preach the Doctrine of our Savior in order to
make his own pass. And that Doctrine comprehends, First, the Duties, and,
Secondly, the Mysteries of Christianity. These Duties likewise are either,
First, purely Moral, or, Secondly, Christian. For those that are purely Moral,
he preaches them coldly, enforces them feebly, dehorts from the contrary Vices
faintly; scarce ever mentions those which are most raging and most epidemical;
or if at any time he does mention them, he has nothing in his Air, in his Tone,
in his Action, that shows an ardent Concern for the Glory of God, for the
Prosperity of the State that he lives in, or for the Salvation of the Souls of
Men.

For the Christian Virtues, and especially those of Charity and Humility, his
Hearers can never have any Notion of 'em from him. Charity, in his Mouth,
dwindles to mere giving of Alms, which is but a poor and inconsiderable Branch
of that Divine Virtue. He seems to be afraid to let his Disciples so much as
hear of the Love of God, and of all Mankind for the sake of God; or if he does
at at any time mention it, even that ardent Virtue grows cold in his Mouth, and
expires upon his Antichristian Tongue, scarce ever reaching the Ears of his
Hearers, much less piercing their Hearts. His Soul is an utter Stranger to
these Heavenly Emotions, those Divine Raptures that inflame the Hearts of the
ravished Hearers with Seraphick Love. He never so much as preaches one Sermon,
never so much as writes one Treatise of that attractive Virtue Humility, the
soft and tender Nurse of Charity. He either says nothing of Patience,
Submission, Forbearance, Long-suffering, or he preaches them after such a
manner, that in his Mouth they produce Tumult, Fury, Faction, Riot, and
Rebellion, and all those Diabolical Passions and Diabolical Vices, which are so
destructive to the Temporal and Eternal Happiness of Men.

And all these Duties, both Moral and Chrstian, are but feebly and faintly
enforced by the Mysteries, even those stupendous Mysteries, that are capable of
supplying him with the most moving and sublimest Eloquence, with a more than
humane Force and Fire, and with a Vehemence irresistible; those Mysteries so
wonderfully important to himself and to his Hearers, which no Man can believe
and speak of as he ought to do, but he must alarm and alter Nature in the
Hearts of all who listen to him; raise the most transporting Joy on the one
side, or the most dreadful Astonishment, the most amazing Horror on the other;
those very Mysteries are spoke of by him after so cold and languishing a
Manner, as causes Unbelievers to turn Scorners, and Believers to become
Apostates. How does the Deist smile, and the Atheist laugh, to see this
Preacher discourse of Death and Judgment, of Heaven and Hell, calmly and
without Emotion, who the Moment afterward, falls into a Flame upon an empty
Dispute, of turning to the East, or bowing to an insensate Altar!

But he who is so unconcerned for the Salvation of the Souls of Men, for the
Honor of God, and the Interest of Religion, comes immediately to be warm and
eager, when his own Reputation and his own Interest are never so little
concerned. And he who daily with Phlegm and Temper hears the Name of his Maker
profaned, his Mysteries reviled, his Threatenings defied, his Protection
renounced, nay, and his very Being denied, contends warmly and eagerly for
Humane Traditions and Humane Inventions; for Forms, and Rites, and Habits, and
Ceremonies, and whatever serves to nourish his spiritual Pride, and indulge his
Lust of Power.

But when in order to extinguish Charity, to divide Mankind, and to increase
his own and his Father's spiritual Tyranny, he preaches the Doctrine of Devils,
preaches Rage, and Hatred, and Envy, and Malice, then is his Delivery becoming
of his Doctrine; then you may behold him burning with Fury, and distorted with
Convulsions, and both Body and Soul entirely possessed with the same infernal
Passions, which he would excite in his Hearers.

Let us now consider the Influence which such Doctrines, such Examples, and
such a Delivery has upon the Minds of Men. We have already hinted, that the
Design of the Devil by Antichrist, is, to take Occasion from the Christian
Religion, by which our Savior designed to unite Men's Affections to himself and
to one another, to introduce a more dangerous and desperate Division among
them, than ever had been known before: And now we shall show, that he so far
obtained his Design, that there was a more general Virtue among Men in the
grossest Times of Paganism, than there has been since our Savior came into the
World, excepting the first and most primitive Times of Christianity; that is,
those Times when the Supreme Magistrate was not as yet Christian, and Christian
Priests were yet undebauch'd by worldly Power and Greatness; and Secondly, that
there is at this time a more general Virtue in other Places, than there is in
the Christian World; and Thirdly, that this Deficiency, and these Corruptions
among Christians, have proceeded, and do proceed, from the Antichristian Lives
and Doctrines of several among their Clergy.

First, There was a more general Virtue in the Times of Paganism, than ever
there has been since our Savior came into the World. In those Times of
Idolatry, there were more free Nations in the World, than ever there have been
since the Establishment of the Christian Religion. And since there was more
Liberty then, there was more Union, more Justice, more Fortitude, more Public
Spirit. For Antichrist, in order to extinguish Charity, and to raise Divisions
among Men, makes it his Business, with all his Might, every where to establish
Tyranny. For as Civil Liberty is founded upon Virtue, and Reason, and Law;
Tyranny is established upon Will, and Passion, and Vice: And as Mankind is
united by Reason, and Virtue, and Law, they are divided by Humor, and Passion,
and Vice. Among those free States that flourished in the Times of Paganism,
there were two more illustrious than the rest, who before Corruption crept in
amongst them, had the Moral Virtues in so high a Degree, as no Christian Nation
has ever been able to boast of. There was a successive Race of Heroes among
them, who had not only a Temperance and Justice, a Valor, but even a
Disinterestedness, and Magnanimity, and an Height of Heroic Fortitude, which
made them as much superior to other Men, as other Men are to Beasts. Nay,
without being taught Charity by Divine Revelation, or sustained in it by the
Greatness of the Christian Hope, they practiced a very good Degree of it,
either by the Force of Reason and Nature, or by some secret Inspiration. For
they had a Public Virtue and Public Spirit, which the Christian World has
thought more proper for its Wonder, than Imitation. They loved Liberty and
their Country more than Life, hated Slavery more than Death, looked upon all
who favored Tyrants, as so many Monsters and Parricides, and pursued Tyranny
with extreme Vengeance, even in their nearest Friends and their dearest
Relations. They laid down their Lives with the greatest Alacrity, for their
Country and the Public Liberty, and never used their Valor against either.
They never had any Faction or Division upon a Religious Account, had but few
Civil Wars among them, and not one Religious, except the Egyptians, who had
degenerated into so Bestial a Fanaticism, as made them contemptible to the rest
of the World, which easily understood by the Force of Reason, that Religion was
designed to unite and compose, and not to divide and embroil the World.

If from ancient Rome or Athens we turn our Eyes upon our own Nation, and upon
our own Times, where shall we find the least Footsteps of their general
public, or private Virtue? That we have not so much as the Shadow of their
general public Virtues, is plain, even to Sense; for we see Thousands among us
disclaiming all Pretense to it. We see Thousands that speak and act with
Impunity against their Sovereign, their Country, their Liberty, and their Laws;
Persons against whom those Laws have made no Provision, because that our
Ancestors never believed that there could be such Monsters and Parricides in
Nature. We see Thousands openly threatening Destruction to their Country, their
Friends, their Relations, and to every thing that ought to be most dear to
them; and contriving Success to the Mortal Enemy, of all that ought to be
valuable, of all that ought to be sacred to to them. Since then we have not the
general public Virtue, nor public Spirit, whieh rendered those ancient States
so illustrious; it follows, that we have not their general private Virtues. For
public Spirit is founded upon private Virtue, and is the necessary Result of
that; so that through whatever Nation public Spirit is spread, through that
Nation private Virtue must be generally diffused. And therefore, if we daily
see so many attempting the Ruin of their Country, it is because their Pride,
their Avarice, their Necessity, and their Luxury, have made their present
Condition insupportable, and any Change desirable. But if any one thinks those
ancient States owed their general Virtue to the Forms of their Government,
which were both Republics, to him we answer, that no modern Republic either
has, or has had, the Virtue which those ancient States had: Besides, that Rome
was virtuous under its Kings, and so was Sparta and Macedon among the Grecians,
as likewise Persia in the Times of its first Monarchs.

But Secondly, If we consider only our own Times we shall find a more general
Virtue, both public and private, in any Civilized Nation upon the Globe, than
in those of the Christian World. Cast your Eyes, for Example, among the
Mahometans, you shall find among them less Ambition, less Avarice, less Luxury,
less Fraud, less Injustice, less Perjury, less Perfidiousness, than you shall
meet with among Christians. You shall find, that while every Christian State is
at present engaged against some other Christian Nation, in a desperate bloody
Contention, that these Infidels at the same time have no Wars with those of
their own Religion; but that Mahometans with Mahometans, the Ottoman with the
Persian, the Persian with the Mogul, living in Friendship and a profound Peace,
listen with astonished Ears to the numberless, endless Quarrels of the Sons of
Charity. What Opinion must they conceive of our Religion, when they find, that
the only Persons who profess the Practice of Charity, are they who live in
endless Wars with those of their own Faith? That they are not only eternally
engaged in Civil Wars, which are so rare among themselves, but even in Wars
unheard of among the Infidels, and which they cannot think of without Horror,
I mean in Wars of Religion? What Opinion must they conceive of the Christian
Religion, and of the Faith of those who pretend to teach others Charity, when
they find that our very Priests, those Dove-like Messengers of the Prince of
Peace, have been the Causes, the Abettors, and the Incendiaries of all those
Eoreign, and Domestic, and Religious Wars among Christians? When they hear
that it was a Priest who first laid the Plan of the French Universal Monarchy,
which has been the Cause of shedding so much Blood, and of such horrible
Devastations in these Western Parts of Europe? That it was a Priest who first
began the Design of the French Succession to the Spanish Monarchy, and that it
was another Priest who finished it, which has let out another Deluge of Blood
to overflow the Christian World? That it was a Priest who put our first King
Charles upon those violent Measures, that occasioned the Civil Wars of England?
That it was a Priest that involved Poland in all that Misery and Devastation in
which it now lies waste? That they were Priests who gave up the Liberties of
France, and afterward that of Denmark? That they are Priests who are at
present doing their utmost Endeavor to deliver up our own? What must they
think of the Christian Faith, when the very vilest Priests, even of all the
vile ones which we have mentioned above, those Priests who put a late
unfortunate Prince upon breaking through those Bonds Divine and Human, Bonds
which united him to his Subjects; those Incendiaries of Souls, those persidious
Pests of Societies, and common Disturbers of the Christian World, are called by
the Name of the blessed Founder of our Religion, as the most profligate Lay Man
that ever was upon the Earth is entitled the most Christian.

But Thirdly, if we consider only our own Nation, and our own Times, compared
with those of our Ancestors, we shall find that there was among them a more
general public and private Virtue, than we our selves can boast of; and that
Priestcraft and Atheism, Ecclesiastical Hypocrisy and Laical Deism, Right
Divine and Socinianism, Non-Resistance and Public Treason, Passive Obedience
and unnatural prodigious Luxury, have grown up and increased together.

Since then there neither is, nor has been, among Christians, the general
public and private Virtue, that there was in the grossest Times of Paganism;
nor is there now in the Christian World the same degree of Virtue that is to be
found in some other Parts of the Globe; nor have we, in our own Nation, as much
general public and private Virtue as our Ancestors formerly had; and we yet
profess a Religion more pure than our Ancestors formerly knew; a Religion that
teaches a more perfect and exalted Virtue, than the Religion, or the Philosophy
of the Graecians and Romans taught, or than is taught by any Religion that is
at present established out of the Christian World: It follows, that the want of
general Virtue among Modern Christians, must proceed from the Hearers, or the
Teachers, of Christianity. But from the Hearers it cannot proceed; for Men are
by Nature the same that they were formerly; have the same Force of
Understanding; the same passionate and ardent Desire to be rightly instructed,
and to be truly happy; and are the more adapted and prepared for Instruction
and for Happiness by a greater Light of Knowledge, and a greater Experience of
Things.

The Fault being neither in the Doctrine, nor in the Hearers, it follows, that
the want of general Virtue must proceed from some of the Teachers, who
contaminate the Doctrine of Christ by their own Inventions, and the Doctrines
of Devils. But that the want of general Virtue among us, and our deplorable
Corruption of Manners, does principally proceed from the foresaid Cause, is
evident from that which follows.

A general Virtue depends upon Religion; for all Virtue proceeds from good
Sense, or is the Result of Religion: But not one Man in fifty having good
Sense, a general Virtue must be the Result of Religion; which is likewise
proved by Experience: For all States through which a general Virtue has been
spread, have been at the same time Religious.

But here we ought to observe, that the Religion upon which a general Virtue
depends, must be a revealed Religion: For natural Religion speaks to cultivate
Reason, which is so rarely found among us; but Revelation speaks to Sense,
which is common to all Men.

But of all Revelations, the Christian Religion is most proper, even without
the help of supernatural Assistance, to establish a general (both public and
private) Virtue: The public, because it is the only Religion that teaches
Charity; which Divine Virtue is the very Height and Perfection of public
Spirit: The private, because every Virtue is comprehended in Charity, and
because the Christian Religion has provided the most effectual Remedies for the
three chief Causes of the Corruption of Manners; which are, in the Words of the
Apostle, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life.

Now every Religion, like every Government, is, humanly speaking, maintained by
the very same Methods by which that particular Religion was at first
established; as that of Mahomet, which began by the Sword, was maintained and
carried on by the Sword; and the Modern Roman Religion is maintained by the
same Force and the same Fraud to which it owed its Origin. And every Religion
loses its Force by the contrary Methods to these which at first established it.

As then the Christian Religion was at first established by the Doctrine of
Charity, and by the great Examples of Charity, which our Savior and his
Apostles gave through the whole course of their Lives, as it was maintained by
the same Metho^s; So Christian Piety cannot only decay, by the Antichristian
Lives, and Antichristian Doctrines, of those who pretend to teach it.

Since then a general Virtue in every Nation depends upon the Revelation
established there, whether true or pretended; and the Revelation established in
every Nation is maintained by the same Methods to which it owed its Origin, and
loses its Force by the contrary Methods as far as it can humanly lose it: And
since the Christian Revelation owes its Establishment to the Doctrine and
Examples of Charity, which shone in its first Teachers; it follows, that the
want of a general Virtue, and that deplorable Corruption of Manners that reigns
among us, are owing to the uncharitable Doctrines and Examples of some of the
Modern Teachers of Christianity.

Thus we have done our Endeavor to show how Antichrist stands opposed to
Christ in his Priesthood, and in his Tyranny. We shall only say one Word of his
Opposition to him as a Prophet. And because we have reason to fear that we have
been already tedious, we shall pass by the other Prophetical Functions, which
are so nearly allied to those of the Priesthood, and only just say something of
his Predictions. Our Savior foretold the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the
Second Temple, to confirm the Faith of Christians, and to augment their
Charity, by showing how little Dependence is to be had upon the Pomp and
Glories of this World, and upon outward and appearing Sanctity. Antichrist
foretells the Fall of the Third Temple, which our Savior has assured us shall
never fall, only that he may divide and embroil the World, and extinguish
Charity. For the Danger of the Church has now for some time been the general
Outcry. But may we not have Leave to ask those many Antichrists, when they say
the Church is in Danger, What they mean by the Church, and of whom it is
composed? What the Danger is with which it is threatened? Or, from whom or
whence it must come? May we not have Leave to ask them one plain Question? Are
the Souls of Men to whom they preach in danger? If they are not, why do they
preach to them? But if they are, is that the Danger they speak of when they say
the Church is in Danger? Or, is it another Danger? If they say it is another
Danger, can any thing be more ridiculous? Can any thing be more absurd, when
the grand Concern, nay, the only Concern, the very All of those to whom they
speak lies at Stake, to allarm them with Trifles? For what compared to that is
not a Trifle? There is not one of them that preaches to a very numerous
Congregation, but every Sermon which he preaches is the last to some of them,
to one of them at least. And who knows when they are assembled, who that one
may be? Who knows how near he himself is to Death and final Judgment? How near
to a Danger horrible even to conceive? And can this foolish, this trifling,
this impudent Preacher pretend to allarm them with another Danger, a Peril of
something more remote, a Peril perhaps in Fancy or in Fiction only; a Danger,
be it what it will, that is not worth a Moment's Thought, compared to this
stupendous Danger? Is not this like putting a Man in mind, who is about to
perish in a Storm, a thousand Leagues off from Shore, just in the Moment that
the Ocean opens her dreadful Abyss to swallow him, of putting him in mind of
some trifling Loss that he is like to sustain on Shore? Would not this be a
barbarous, would not this be a monstrous mocking of him, just in the terrible
Moment that he is about to perish? Would it not be, by so much the more
barbarous, by so much the more monstrous, in that it should come from one who
must be about to perish with him?

But if by this Danger, he means the Danger of Damnation, which the Souls are
in to whom he preaches; from what or whence is this Danger feared? Is it from
the actual and habitual Sins of his Hearers? Or, have they so few of both, that
they are at leisure to apprehend Damnation from something more foreign and more
remote? If it is from their actual and habitual Sins, and that extreme
Corruption which reigns in the Congregation to which he preaches; for in what
Congregations at present does not extreme Corruption reign? Is not this a
foolish, is not this an impudent insulting of them? Have some certain Preachers
brought them into this Danger? And is it in their Power to help them out of it?
And are they contented with barely threatening it? Has it not been made clear
and most perspicuous, that the extreme Corruption of the Laity, proceeds from
the Antichristian Doctrines, proceeds from the Antichristian Practices of some
certain Preachers? Let but those Preachers reform their Doctrines, and reform
their Practices, and I Will engage that the wretched Laity shall reform
immediately.

But alas! the Danger that those Preachers threaten, is not from the Sins of
the People to whom they preach; is not from the extreme Corruption of Manners
that reigns in their Congregations. For when have these Prophets ever inveighed
against their most predominant Vices? By what Sermons have they ever signalized
themselves against their Ambition, against their Avarice, against their
Oppressions, their public and private Rapines, against their new, their
unheard of, their unnatural Luxuries? Did they ever threaten them with Danger
from these? Are they really in no Danger from these? Are they not in a thousand
times more Danger from these, than they can be from any thing else in the
World? if they are, why are they not told so? if they are not, from what
wonderful, what unconceivable thing is it from which they are more in Danger?

From what has been said, it is plain that by the Danger of the Church, these
Preachers mean not the Danger of Damnation which their Hearers are in from
their numerous and crying Sins. It follows then, that they mean something that
is of no Concern to their Hearers: for if they would speak of things that are
of any Concern to them, why not their main, their whole, their tremendous
Concern? Why do they omit that, and threaten them with Trifles? Why do they
either not mention it, or while they mention, speak of it so very coldly; they
who while they speak of the Danger of the Church, declaim so very warmly? Is it
not shrewdly to be suspected, that by the Church they mean themselves, mean
their own Interests and their own Power? O foolish and miserable Laity! to be
so much alarmed, and deluded, and divided by these, who are so cool, so
unconcerned for you; so very warm, and so very much concerned for themselves!
who not only neglect your real Dangers, but by falsely allarming you with
imaginary ones, bring you into the only real, the only dreadful Danger. For let
me ask you once more, What is this pretended Danger of the Church? Is it the
Danger of the Catholic Church, against the which our Savior has told us, that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail? Is not this Assurance enough, that it
shall not fall? Or are some Priests more dangerous than the Devil? Or, by the
Danger of the Church, do they mean the Discipline and the Government of some
particular Church? As for Example, the Discipline and the Government of the
National Church of England? Are these in Danger to be altered? Supposing they
were: These are Things, by the Confession of all, of no Necessity to Salvation;
and Things, by the Confession of all but themselves, at liberty to be altered
in every Nation, at the Will of their Legislators. And consequently, if this
Danger were real, it would be of no Significancy to their Hearers. But this
Danger is not real; and no Shadow of Proof has been brought to show, that the
Discipline and Government of the Church are in any manner of Perils; nay,
unanswerable Arguments have been brought to prove, that they are not in Danger.
O foolish and wretched People! to be thus incensed and exasperated against each
other, by the vain fear of a fictitious Danger; which, were in true, would be
Ten thousand times less than the Danger into which it brings you; a Danger,
which, by the Confession of all, is the most real, and most horrible of all
Dangers; the Danger of Eternal Damnation from your want of Charity.

The exactest Discipline of the most Perfect Church is only in order to the
saving of Souls. The Design of our Savior's coming into the World, was to save
Souls, and not to establish Discipline: For where is the Discipline which our
Savior established? Can any thinking Man believe, that our Savior Jesus
Christ, who came to pull down the Partition Wall that was between the Jews and
the Gentiles, by abolishing the Ceremonial Law, and the Ecclesiastic
Discipline of the Jewish Nation, could ever design another certain Discipline,
and other certain Ceremonies, which he could not but foresee would create a
Division among his future Disciples? But Antichrist designs, by destroying
Charity, to damn Souls, that he may preserve Discipline. It Is the Danger that
Ecclesiastical Discipline is in, at which he is constantly alarmed. O vain and
impudent Pretense! For suppose the Danger true, as it is certainly most false,
how very foolish must that Preacher be, who pretends to be alarmed at any
thing more, than the Danger of those Souls which alone he preaches to save,
than the Danger of those Souls for which alone our Savior died? How many of
those miserable Souls have been for ever lost, while they have been harkening
to the Danger of the Church, and dying impenitent in Hatred and in devilish
Malice, by the Instigation of these their Pastors against their innocent
Brethren; have, to their Everlasting Confusion, found in Hell that the Church
is not in Danger!

Thirdly, Thus I have given you the Marks by which Antichrist stands opposed to
Jesus Christ, as a King, a Priest, and a Prophet. I shall now sum up all those
Marks in one grand Characteristical Mark, that as we have shown above that
Antichrist is a Priest, so it may be plain to the meanest Capacity who these
Priests are of whom it may be said, in the Words of the Text, Even now there
are many Antichrists.

Every Priest then, who, when he preaches, does apparently and maliciously
wrest the Gospel, or the Epistles which explain the Gospel, to say something
that is quite contrary to the great Design of our Saviviour, that Priest is
Antichrist. Now the great Design of our Savior in preaching the Gospel of his
Kingdom, was to do principally two Things; First, to restore the Law of Nature;
and Secondly, to revive and restore Charity.

First, The great Design of our Savior's coming into the World, was to restore
and fulfill the Law of Nature. Matt. 5. v. 17. Think not that I came to destroy
the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. And Ver. 18.
For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Now, what was the
Law that our Savior came to fulfill? Not the Ceremonial Law; for that he came
to disannul. Epist. to the Hebrews, Chap. 6. Ver. 18. For there is verily a
disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof. Ver. 19. For the law made nothing perfect. And what
Law is it which our Savior says must remain to the End of the World? Not the
Ceremonial Law, for that is already abolished. Heb. 10. Ver. 8, 9. Above, when
he said, sacrifice and offering, and burnt-offering, thou would not, neither
had pleasure therein, which are offered by the law. Then he said, Lo, I come
to do thy will, O God. He takes away the first, that he may establish the
second. Now, what is this Second Law which our Savior came to establish? What
but the Law of Nature, or the Moral Law; as appears by the forementioned
Chapter, Ver. 16. This is the covenant that I will make with them, after those
days, faith the Lord, I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds
will I write them. Since then the great Design of our Savior's Doctrine was to
restore the Law of Nature, every Priest who wrests the Gospel, or the Epistles
which explain the Gospel, to say any thing which offends against the Law of
Nature, that Priest is Antichrist. Now the eldest of Nature's Laws, and that
which Man is the hardest brought to violate, by the unanimous Confession of all
who have treated of it, is Self-Preservation. But this is most evident, that
without Self-Defence the Law of Self-Preservation cannot be kept inviolated;
and that without Resistance there can be no Self-Defence. Whatever Priest then
pretends to make the Scripture say any thing against any manner of Resistance
of unjust Violence, that is necessary to Self-Preservation, the eldest Law of
Nature, this Law which God has put in our Hearts, and has writ in our Minds,
and which only the Devil and his Disciples can ever design to deface; that
Priest is as much opposed to our Savior, as any thing possibly can be opposed;
and is therefore one of the many of whom we may say in the Words of the Text,
Even now there are many Antichrists.

But Secondly, The other great Design of our Savior's Doctrine was to restore
Charity. Gosp. of St John, Chap. 15. Ver. 12. This is my commandment, that ye
love one another. And this great Design comprehends the other, viz. the
restoring of the Law of Nature, Gal. 4. Ver. 15. For all the law is fulfilled
in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And Romans
13. Ver. 8, 9, 10. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that
loves another has fulfilled the law. v. 9. For this, thou shall not commit
adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false
witness, thou shall not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
v. 10. Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling
of the law. Thus Charity includes the Law of Nature. But it likewise includes a
great deal more. For by the Law of Nature, as it stands now, is meant only that
which can be gathered by the Light of Reason: but the Law of Charity includes
more than what can be gathered from the Light of corrupted Reason, and is the
first Law of Nature which was given to Adam in his State of Perfection, 1
Epist. of St. John, Chap. 3. verse. 11. For this is the message that ye have
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. Charity is the
greatest of all the Christian Virtues; by which alone our Savior tells us,
Matt. 25. that men will be saved at the last day; and for want of which alone
he tells us, they will be damned; than which nothing can be more reasonable and
more just: For all other Virtues are but in order to, and as it were the
scaffolding of that; and are included in that. When that is perfect, the rest
shall cease to be; and all shall at last be swallowed up in Charity: which
shall make the Felicity of the Blessed Ten thousand Ages, after Temperance,
Prudence, and Fortitude, nay, after Faith and Hope themselves shall have been
no more. Now Charity being the only Virtue that reigns in Heaven, he who has
not been habituated to it on Earth, would go thither like a Stranger to a
remote Country, whose Language and Customs are both unknown to him, and
entirely different from his own; and where, by Consequence, he could neither
keep any Company, nor find any Pleasure. The Advancement of Charity then was
the great Design of our Savior's coming into the World; for the Advancement of
Charity is the Salvation of Souls: And therefore, that Priest who wrests the
Scripture to say any thing destructive of that, is emphatically Antichrist.

St. Paul, by what he has said of Charity in the 13th Chapter of the 1st
Epistle to the Corinthians, has set before us several Marks to know when the
Scripture is wrested to the Destruction of that Divine Virtue.

Charity, says he, Ver. 4. suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not;
Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, v. 5. Does not behave it self
unseemly; seeks not her own; is not easily provoked; thinks no evil; v. 6.
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; v. 7. Bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. From
which it is plain, that whatever Priest makes use of the Scripture to stir up
Division amongst Men, to nourish their Malice, their Envy, their Pride; to
raise groundless Fears and Jealousies among them, and to destroy the Confidence
which Members of Societies mutually have in each other, and to compass all this
by impudent ill manner'd Invectives, and a sort of Ecclesiastical Billingsgate;
that Priest wrests the Scripture to say something that is very destructive of
Charity, and is emphatically Antichrist.

Nothing can be more seasonable, than here to consider, what the Apostle St.
James says of the Tongues of such Men, and themselves, Jam. 3. ver. 6. The
tongue is a fire; a world of iniquity: So is the tongue among the members, that
it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is
set on fire of hell. v. 7. For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of
serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of mankind.
v. 8. But the tongue can no man tame: it is abundantly evil: full of deadly
poison. v. 9. Therewith bless we God, even the Father, and therewith curse we
men, which are made after the similitude of God. v. 10. Out of the same mouth
proceeds blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be.
v. 11. Does a fountain send forth at the same time sweet water and bitter. v.
12. Can the Fig Tree, my brethren, bear Olive-berries? either a Vine Figs? So
can no fountain yield both salt water and fresh. And the Apostle declares in
the following Verses, that these Church-Incendiaries who make it their Business
to curse, when it is their Duty to bless, who are agitated with Rage, and Envy,
and Malice, have a Spirit in them that is directly contrary to the Spirit of
the Gospel; ver. 13. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you?
Let him show, out of a good conversation, his works, with meekness of wisdom.
v. 14. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and
lie not against the truth. v. 15. This wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish. v. 16. For where envying and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil work. After that the Apostle has, in several of the
foresaid Verses, shown you the Spirit of Antichrist; in the following Verses he
describes the Spirit of the Gospel, ver. 17. But the wisdom that is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. And in the next
Verse he tells us the Effects of it; v. 18. And the fruit of Righteousness is
sown in peace of them that make peace. But alas! how little is there of this
Wisdom, this Spirit, and this Fruit among some Modern Preachers!

Thus St. James declares Railing to be contrary to the Spirit of Charity, and
consequently of Christianity. And this is the unanimous Sense both of the
Apostles, and of the Evangelists: and that it is never to be allowed of against
any Person or Persons, upon any Pretense or Occasion whatever, let the Crime be
never so great, or so horrible. The greatest Crime that ever was committed, was
the first; the Apostasy of Lucifer from his Creator; the greatest of Sins,
excepting the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and equal even to that: like that so
great, that it was never to be attoned for by any Repentance, and never to be
forgiven. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he
disputed about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
Accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee. The greatest Crime next to these,
was the murdering of the Lord of Life: And yet we find not in any of the
Apostles, or in any one of the Evangelists, the least Invective, or the least
Bitterness, against Judas who betrayed him, or the High Priest who condemned
him, or Pilate who deliver d him to the Soldiers, or the Soldiers who mocked
and scourged and crucified him. And will our Modern Antichrists after this
pretend to take Occasion from the Gospel of Peace to rail? Will they yet
further defend their Railing, by wresting the Scriptures still more to their
own Destruction, and the Destruction of their credulous Hearers? Shall the 4th
Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to Titus be brought to justify this Spirit of
Antichrist: I charge thee therefore before God (says St. Paul to Titus, Chap.
4. Ver. 1.) and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead,
at his appearing, and his kingdom, ver. 2. Preach the word, be instant in
season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and
doctrine. To what is it that the Apostle in this Chapter exhorts Titus? Why to
preach the Word in Season and out of Season, that is, to preach the Son of God,
and the Doctrine of Charity. And shall this be made use of to justify
preaching up Division, Dissension, Sedition, and the Doctrines of Devils? Shall
the Apostle's Exhortation to reprove, and to rebuke, be made use of to
vindicate want of Manners, and such Rudeness as better becomes a drunken Bully
than a sober Divine, and a midnight Tavern than a Pulpit? especially when St.
Jude in the 9th Verse of his Epistle mentioned above, has as it were opposed
Rebuking to Railing, telling us, that the Archangel Michael durst not bring a
railing Accusation against the Devil, but only said, The Lord rebuke thee. And
St. Paul tells Titus in this very Verse, that his rebuking, and reproving, and
exhorting, must be with all long-suffering, and with doctrine, that is, with
Charity. The true Christian is certainly the best well-manner'd Man in the
World, if that be the truest good Breeding, which makes a Man most easy, both
to himself and others: and no Man who calls himself a Christian ever wanted
Manners, but that Man at the same time wanted both Faith and Charity. But if no
manner of Railing, in order to excite Envy and Hatred, and Rage, and Malice, is
allowed of by the Christian Religion, then certainly the most Criminal of all
Railings must be that which is pretended to be drawn from this very Religion,
which by its principal Commands, a Command comprehensive of all its Commands,
obliges us to hare no Man, and to rail at no Man. But as the Railing of our
Modern Preachers can by no means be justified by St. Paul's exhorting, rebuking
and reproving; can the grievous Sufferings of that Apostle for the sake of
Righteousness, and the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, be compared to a just
and a moderate Punishment inflicted by an offended Legislature, for the
preaching Division and Sedition, and the Doctrine of Devils? especially when
this very Apostle has told us, 1 Cor. 13. ver. 3. Though I give my body to be
burned, and have not Charity, it profitteth me nothing. From which we may
conclude, that many a Martyr has gone to Hell, and passed from one Flame to
another. Is there no difference between a light Suffering and a heavy one, a
nominal one and a real one, a just one and an unjust one? Is there no
difference between doing the Work of Christ, and the Work of the Devil and his
Angels? With whom I will not say, according to their own charitable Christian
way of dealing, that I will leave these wellnatur'd Preachers, though it is with
the Company they have always kept, as, I believe, has been made pretty plain;
but I humbly pray to Almighty God to deliver them out of the Hands of their old
Acquaintance, who first seduced them and debauched them, and whom, as is
manifest by their Works, they still frequent continually; and of whose House
and Family they may most properly be said to be; 1 John 3. ver. 10. In this the
children of God are manifested, and the children of the devil: whosoever does
not righteousness is not of God, nor be who loves not his brother. We pray to
God to deliver them from these wicked Spirits by a sincere Repentance, for all
the Mischief which they have done themselves, and for all which they have been
the Occasion of in others* for all the Antichristian Hatred, that is, for all
the Murder of which they have been guilty them(...) and of which so many
Thousands have (...) guilty by the Suggestion of them and the Devil. For St.
John tells us in the 15th Verse of the forementioned Chapter, Whosoever hates his
brother is a murderer. The Reason is plain, because whoever hates another would
kill him, if he were not restrained by the fear of Corporal Punishment. For
this is evident, that he is not restrained by the Law of Nature, nor by the
positive Law of God; not by the Law of Nature, because that obliges him not to
hate him, by its great and comprehensive Rule of doing as one would be done by;
for no Man is willing to be hated by another: nor is he restrained by the
positive Law of God, because that obliges him not to hate him. It follows then,
that he is only awed by the fear of Corporal Punishment. And how often has this
Religious Hatred, this Hatred excited by Antichrist and the Devil, broke out in
Wars, in Murders, in Burnings, and in Massacres? How near did it come to these
Confusions and these Horrors lately! How soon would it yet come to them, if it
were not restrained by the Wisdom of our Legislators. We humbly beseech
Almighty God, to cleanse the Hearts of all these Antichrists by a severe
Repentance, for the numberless Murders of which they have certainly contracted
the malicious Guilt, and for perfidiously sapping, at the same time, the
Foundations of our Constitution, and the Fundamentals of Christianity. We
humbly beseech thee, O God, to pour into their Hearts thy Spirit of Peace, of
Meekness, and of Charity, that they may be delivered from every evil Work, and
preserv^d unto thine own Kingdom. To whom be Glory for Ever and Ever. Amen.

The END.

