THE PASQUINADE. WITH NOTES VARIORUM.

BOOK the FIRST.

Ay, it is a Crust, a lasting Crust for the rogues, I would be glad to see the
proudest of them all but dare to nibble at this, -- if they do, it will rub
their Gums for them I promise you. BAYS. LONDON: Printed and Sold by C.
MOUNTFORT, near the Royal Exchange. M,DCC,LIII. [Price One Shilling.]

THE PASQUINADE. BOOK the FIRST.
Pasquinade.] As it is highly necessary that every writer, who publishes his
works for the instruction and emolument of the public, should write in such a
manner as to be understood by those of a common capacity, as well as by those,
who, as the poet says, -- Peruse a work of wit
With the same spirit that its author writ;
Or, if he does not, as it is highly becoming the scholiast to make them
familiar to such readers, I should think myself very unworthy to illustrate the
following poem, did I pass over the name itself; which, though some Critics may
understand, I am persuaded many do not. -- Know then, that Pasquin was Cobbler,
who worked in his stall at Rome, about the beginning of the fifteenth Century;
and, being a fellow of ready wit and a satirical disposition, the people
flocked about him to hear him rally and talk politics, at which he was very
expert. After his decease, the statue of a Gladiator being dug up near his
stall, it was set up and called Pasquin; the wits, his pupils, taking it in
their heads, in honor to their dead master, to stick their lampoons, satires
and libels thereon; all which were termed Pasquinades. If thou doubtest,
reader, whether this poem was ever hung on the said statue, if thou take a walk
to a certain corner of the palace of Ursines in Rome, thou may enquire
further concerning it.
O Chief in verse! O every Muses' care! Line 1. O chief in verse.] The great
personage here addressed, from what we may gather from the following lines, can
be no other than Dr. John Hill, Acad. Rege Scient. Burd. etc. Soc. and
Inspector General of Great Britain.

Pride of each mortal and immortal Fair!
Whether enraptured with Urania's charms, Lines 3, 4. Whether enraptured, etc.]
These lines seem to hint at the amors of Mr. Inspector, who has so often
celebrated, in his works, his Chloes, Daphnes, and Amandas, all Ladies of
quality, whose favors, some have been bold enough to say, have been of the
same nature with those he received from the Muses; purely imaginary; but we
presume not to assert this opinion, 'till we have some authority to suppose
those Ladies as chaste as the Sisters of Parnassus.

Or sunk in Chloe, or Amanda's arms;
Whether eternal Bays thy temples grace,
Or thy laced nightcap well supplies their place; Line 6. Or thy laced
nightcap.] A nightcap, ornamented with Brussels lace, which this Enamorato
used to wear on particular occasions, when honored in the embraces of Quality.
ANON:

Whether with Goddess, or with earthly Qual,
You saunter down Parnassus, or the Mal; Line 8. You saunter down.] Alluding to
a Je ne scais quoi in the carriage of this Gentleman, by some virulent writers,
called an indolent waddle, by others, a janty Air. -- Vide Libitina fine
conflictu, Woodward's Letter, etc.

Or, in Philosophy profoundly wise,
You pore intent with microscopic eyes, Line 10. You pore intent with
microscopic eyes.] From the contradiction this passage seems to imply to that
of another great author and philosopher, who says, Why has not Man a
microscopic Eye?

It might possibly be concluded that some mistake had happened, either in
transcribing or printing this line; and that our author intended it, through
microscopic eyes, meaning the eyes, or the glasses of his Microscope: But, if
any credit may be given to this Gentleman's discoveries in natural philosophy,
we must conclude he himself is possessed of eyes infinitely more discerning
than the rest of the Virtuosi; having found out such animalculae, and their
method of existence, as no other Philosopher ever did, or ever will, though
assisted by all the helps of the most improved Microscope, unless possessed of
the same kind of eyes: The visual rays to which are so ductile, that they not
only are directed from real objects, but from no objects at all, -- which
accomplishment alone should sufficiently establish this great man as the prince
of Philosophers, and empower him to correct and censure the researches of
others: As we must own the eye that can see what is invisible, is certainly
more able to explore the secrets of nature than that which can see only what is
to be seen. -- I find no reason therefore to vary the reading in the text.



New worlds discover in a Catharine pear, Line 11. New worlds discover in a
Catharine pear.] Among the philosophic researches hinted in the preceding
annotation, take the following, made by this Gentleman on a rotten pear. --

It was but a very small portion of the covered furface of the pear that could
be brought within the area of the Microscope, but this appeared, under its
influence, a wide extent of territory; varied with hills and lawns, with
winding hollows, open plains, and shadowy thickets. INSPECTOR. A very material
objection indeed arises against our author, in respect that he calls it a
Catharine Pear; as this philosopher in his preamble to the experiment,
expressly says, it was a French Pear, in which we cannot think him mistaken, as
he took such particular notice of the said pear; for, says he, it was cut by a
person very fond of Pears, who out of that excessive fondness eat a thin slice,
and reserved the rest to another opportunity: That he cried Pah! at seeing it
again when rotten, and that it was cut at the largest end. -- Vide Inspector
332. So that from these circumstances we must remark this as an error in our
author.



Or monsters animate in sour small beer,
Serenely trace their fundamental breath, Line 13. Fundamental breath.]
Alluding to an animal, which this profound enquirer into nature discovered,
whose organs of respiration are situated in its fundament; and which
continually swims with its head under water, and its tail above, for fear of
being drowned. A very singular kind of creature it must be owned; and it is
presumed a very clean one: As to no other part of its body are assigned the
offices which we should readily suppose were those of the part mentioned. Vide
Inspector, 393.

In this passage our author, like other great writers, it must be confessed,
does not pay the strictest regard to historical truth: As the monster, here
spoken of, is not said to be engendered in small beer; but was the polite
inhabitant of Kensington.



Whilst thy grim Lion grinds thy foes to death: Line 14. Whilst thy grim Lion
grinds thy foes to death.] Our author seems here to have an eye to a very
curious piece of history, in the London Daily Advertiser, of January 8, 1752,
which runs thus:

We hear from the Bedford Coffee-House in Covent Garden, that an unhappy
Gentleman of that neighborhood, having yesterday morning in wantonness, thrust
his head into the mouth of the Lion that resides there, felt the jaws
unexpectedly close upon him: On this, enquiring with a hollow voice, whether he
shook his tail, and being answered in the affirmative, he begged the
bystanders to pray for him. A terrible crash was immediately after heard, and
notwithstanding the uncommon resisstance of the skull, it is credibly reported,
that the teeth met through it. He was immediately after conveyed home, but his
Surgeons are afraid the wounds will prove mortal. Dr. HILL. It is not material
to consider how much wit or truth is in this paragraph, if it serves to give
the public a great idea of the said Lion.



O let my humble verse attention claim;
Nor deem the friend beneath the Poet's name.
Blessed in thy own inspectatorial style, Line 17. Inspectatorial style.] A
manner of writing peculiar to this great man, which has so often been imitated
by the superficial writers of the present age; and which our author seems to
speak of as inimitable. The reader, if any such there be, who is unacquainted
with this style, will conceive some idea of it from the following specimens. --
Speaking of a little rivulet or ditch, he says;

The translucent waves coursed one another down the light declivity, with an
inexpressibly pleasing variety of form, and a confused but very soft noise of
bubbling, lashing, and murmuring, among, against, and along the inequalities
and meanders of its rough sides, and various hollows. Of a pond, he says, --
The surface of the basin was a polished plane, unfurrowed by the least motion,
unruffled by the gentlest breeze; the setting sun threw a glow of pale splendour
over one half of it, the rest was silent shade.

On weeds, etc. gathered to one corner of a ditch. -- The fresh breeze had
blown together into this part of the watery expanse, whatever floated on or
near its surface. -- How philosophically exact among, against, and along. -- on
or near. At the same time how poetical and florid! Translucent waves, Meanders,
gentlest breeze, the glow of splendour and expanse. Hence reader, if thou have
perchance seen only the faint imitations of this beautiful style, thou may
conceive a more correct idea of what our author here so pathetically laments
the want of. Vide Inspectors 311, 393, 429.



You nobly scorn to hear the numbers toil,
To see them fettered down to mood and tense,
And groan beneath the infirmity of Sense,
Void of Politeness, Elegance and Ease.
Ah! what is Meaning when compared with these!
How then shall I for thee presume to sing,
For thee, borne high on Fame's tenacious wing, Line 24. Fame's tenacious
wing.] In this line appears our author's commendable spirit of modesty in
imitating great men. This expression being evidently taken from the motto on
the Lord Mayor's Coach. Penna metuente solvi. Vide State Coach of Sir Crisp
Gascoine: Also Horace's Ode to Crisp. Sallust.

Lost to thy soft, harmonious, flowing lay,
And cursed to mean whenever I sing or say. Line 26. And cursed to mean
whenever I sing or say.] Our author here seems, whether ironically or no, I
leave to abler critics, to complain of a misfortune which he fears will prevent
his success in poetry, for no less a critic and poet than the great Mr. Dryden,
says; He who servilely creeps after sense
Is safe, but never can reach to excellence.


Hear then, ye daughters of immortal Jove!
By the soft vows of your Inspector's love,
If not, too jealous of each other's flame,
You slight the lover for a rival's claim;
Or, if his gallantry superior charms,
And all the nine, in concert, fill his arms,
Like his familiar Daphnes here below,
Blessing at once the Poet and the Beau;
Hear and support me in your fav'rite's cause,
Inspire my song, and crown me with applause.
I sing dire faction and the cruel strife
Of Bards that live, and Bards that write for life; Line 38. Of Bards that live
and Bards that write for life.] I am appriz'd that this line may be taken in a
varied sense. -- Some may imagine, that by a man's writing for life is intended
his writing for a livelihood; and that by Bards that live are meant those who
live independent of writing; as it is expressed by this line.

These live to write, and those must write to live. A kind of distinction which
seems to have been handed down from that immortal Philosopher, Lord Chancellor
Bacon; who is said to have complained to King James the First, lest he should
be reduced to study to live, rather than live to study. I cannot however think
this our author's drift; but that by writing for life, he meant, writing as
hard as one can drive, and that he had in his eye, that part of the old ballad
of the Wife of Bath, When Adam heard her say these words,
He ran away for Life.
In which case, as Adam, according to the tradition, is in Paradise, or Heaven,
he could not be supposed to run to preserve his life; so that it is clear our
author intended only to convey the eagerness of the pursuit of those Bards,
who, had the measure allowed, he might have said, Write AWAY for Life.



Of Fiddlers, Coxcombs, Harlequins and Play'rs,
Physicians, Parsons, Fools, and dancing Bears. Line 40. Dancing Bears.] The
reader is not to take this expression literally, or think the poet celebrates
real, four legged Bears; or that he had any view to the famous Ursi domestici
mirabili, that yielded the Inspector an opportunity of being so very witty last
summer, or to those gentle Bruins that now expose themselves by dancing
hornpipes in the streets. It is plain he intends no more by the word Bear, than
as Sir ALEXANDER DRAWCANSIR has defined that appellation, in his complete
Modern Glossary.

Bear, -- a Country Gentleman, or any creature on TWO legs that does not make a
good bow. COVENT GARDEN JOURNAL, No. 4. Neither does our author proceed only on
precedent, having also philosophical authority. For Carolus Linnaeus Suecus,
whom I must own I have never read,

The first of natural philosophers, as the world with justice styles him, and
as he calls himself Dioscorides Secundus in his Systema Naturae, declares, that
the Man and Bear differ only as two species of the same genus. He establishes
in that work one of his Genera, under the name of Anthropomorphae, that is,
creatures having the human form, and comprehends under it the Bear, the Man,
and the Monkey. HILL.

Immortal Dullness, honored on her throne,
Beheld her Empire spreading over the town;
Despised the Vacuum of her ancient home,
Where whistling winds pierced through the hollow dome;
Forsook the tattered Ensigns of Rag-fair, Line 45. Tattered Ensigns of
Rag-fair.] See Pope's Dunciad; on which the Mythology and Machinery of this
poem is, in a good degree, founded.

And seized the unfinished Mansion of the Mayor. Line 46. Unfinished Mansion of
the May'r.] The Mansion House. -- It is not very clear, whether our author
intended here a satire on the imperfection and ill-design of that building, or
the slow progress made in its erection; but very prebably both.

Here flocked her sons, the sleepy, blind, and dull,
Each vacant brain and every solid skull:
Repeated Io's their full joy expressed,
And on the tables smoked a city-feast.
Shrieves, Wardens, Aldermen, their Brothers greet,
And each broad-bottom shook its trembling seat:
Even thicker Custards did the Cooks afford:
More solid Puddings reek'd upon the board.
The loving mother then addressed her sons;
O children! dear as birthday Odes or Puns!
Happy! thrice happy! am I thus to see
Your fond attachment to yourselves and me:
Nor shall I ever ungratefully forget,
You scorned to make your Chamberlain a Wit. Line 60. Chamberlain, a Wit.] On
the resignation of Sir John Bosworth, late Chamberlain of the city of London.
Mr. Glover, whose distinguished merit as a Gentleman, a Merchant, and a
Scholar, might have justly entitled him to a much higher post of honor and
trust, could not obtain the succession of that important office. -- I have
heard some critics condemn this line as a forced transposition. -- I have,
however, no authority to alter it.

No Genius here degrades your solemn meeting.
Right! what has Wit or Sense to do with eating!
O! still be zealous to support my laws,
And share my blessings in the good old cause. Line 64. Good old Cause.] A term
made use of in almost all cases, and by all parties; -- thus a rebellion, and a
restoration, and the opposite to both, have been honored with the same happy
and significant phrase. SCHOLIAST.

The Goddess spoke, and strait her opiate shed,
And eke her potent Quintessence of lead:
All felt its power, from Marshal to the Mayor: Line 67. Marshal to the Mayor.]
The City Marshal, an inferior office so called* and not the name of a worthy
personage, as may be suspected.

A double portion fell to As -- l's share. Line 68. A double portion fell to A
-- l Share.] Sir C. A. Km. and A -- n. A^ present remarkable for a very prudent
resentment subsisting between him and Cri^^ Gascoine, a Gentleman, who honors
every other ti^le he possesse^; before the time (...) whose Mayoralty commences
the Era of this poem.

Then, in the chair of state, she took her throne,
And all unanimous the Goddess crown.
Long live Queen Dullness, hoot her darling Owls,
Long live Queen Dullness, shout her favorite Fools.
When now behold, in glittering pomp, ascend
A sister Queen, a Goddess, and a Friend.
Immortal Pertness, sprung from Chaos old, Line 75, 76.] See Pope's Dunciad.

Inconstant, active, giddy, light, and bold,
Restless and fickle as her rumbling Sire,
Blind as her Mother, Night, could well desire.
Wrought by some power divine, in equal pride,
Her throne ascended by her sister's side.
Where hunted Ducks traverse the muddy stream,
And dogs initiate their whelps to swim,
Monsters and Fools assemble once a year,
And juggling Hymen celebrates May-fair,
This Goddess dwelt. Just raised above the ground,
Her Palace varnished silver decked around. Line 86. Her palace varnished
silver decked around.] May-fair Wells, beautified in the manner of most
theaters with lacker'd silver, to represent gold; -- a place resorted to by
clerks and 'prentices to perform what they call private plays to as many of
their acquaintance as they can crowd in, who come to laugh, and in their turns
to be laughed at. It was here Doctor Hill, in his younger days, amused himself
in the science of Spouting. A science ridiculed by one of their own Bards, in
an Epilogue spoken at the Haymarket. Nor is our Art to House or Home confined,
We rave in the Streets, and bellow to the wind.
Stentor roared out one day, down Drury Lane,
I Will call thee, Father, HAMLET, Royal Dane.
A Porter, blessed with impudence and ease,
Cried, you be damned, Sir, call me what you please.


Here stood her Merc'ry, here she nursed her Apes; Line 87. Here stood her
Merc'ry, here she nursed her Apes,
HERE STOOD HER OPIUM, HERE SHE NURSED HER OWLS.
DUNCIAD.

Here Magpies chatter'd in a hundred shapes;
Jackdaws and Parrots joined the unmeaning noise
Of Templars, Coxcombs, Prigs, and 'Prentice boys.
Far, hence, the Goddess spread her kingdom wide,
To Dullness, as in birth, in power allied,
She, from her native Grub-street to Rag-fair,
South to the Mint and west to Temple Bar,
Included every garrisoned retreat;
Bedlam, Crane-court, the Counters and the Fleet.
Her Sister boasted as extensive sway,
Fierce Broughton's bruising sons her power obey,
St. Giles's, George's, and the famous train Line 99. St. Giles's, George's,
etc.] I am somewhat at a loss to conceive why our Poet should join the Sons of
St. Giles's; with the decent, well-dressed Critics of George's, and the
Bedford. It is true they may be supposed equally pert, but I imagine our author
has a much deeper meaning. I therefore recommend this passage to the Critics,
hoping they will give some hints to the Printer, against another Edition of
this work.

Of Bedford, Bow-street, and of Drury Lane;
Even to the licensed park her chiefs resort,
And seize the priv'ledge of great George's Court.
Lo, Dullness now, half-rising from her throne,
Behold, my sons, the partner of my crown;
Let my loved sister equal honors share,
Pertness, immortal Regent of May-fair!
She said. The kindred Goddess all confessed,
And equal honors crowned each royal guest.
Their guardian Virtues in due order stood, Lines 109, 110.] See Pope's Dunciad.

Calm Prudence, Temperance, and stern Fortitude;
Poetic Justice held her scale between,
And leaned, by turns, the beam to either Queen.
Now living Merc'ry Opium out-weighs;
Now solid Pudding kicks up empty praise.
The crowd, below, each varied impulse felt.
Part roar and sing, and part in slumbers melt;
Grave Dons and skipping Coxcombs till the Hall,
These snore aloud, and those strike up the Ball.
At length the Tumult of the night is over.
The Dozers sleep, the fiddles squeak no more!
The morning-dawn o'ertakes the quick and dead;
And home the mighty Drunk are borne or led;
To business these, to pleasure those betake.
These born to hoard a Plumb, and those to rake. Line 124. These born to hoard
a Plumb.] A Plumb means here, the full sum of twenty thousand pounds.

Thus bear the sister Queens united sway;
And pert, and dull, their several powers obey;
Alternate Honors nod on either Plume.
And both by turns pre eminence assume.
Hence as one Blockhead sunk at Gresham College,
Another rose, of different taste and knowledge.
As loved of Pertness was her dear Rom -- ne, Line 131. Dear R -- ne.] A
reverend Gentleman, who, being honored with the professorship of Astronomy at
Gresham College, attempted in his public lectures to ridicule the Newtonian
Philosophy, and bring that contempt on the science which very j^^^ly fell on
himself.

As loved of Dullness is her own Cock -- ne. Line 132. Own Coc -- ne.] Successor
to the aforementioned Gentleman, who will leave the science and his hearers
exactly where he found 'em.

So when one Tutor Caesar's Heir forsook,
Another tutor read another Book.
Now from their throne they viewed their empire round,
Where skim the shallow, plunge the vast profound,
In dancing Lyrics skip the scribbling train,
Or plod in the lame, blank, laborious, heavy strain:
Saw journalists leave journals in the lurch;
Others revive the science of the Birch,
True scribbling Pedagogues usurp the lash,
And give, like Bayes's thunder, dash for dash;
They saw Guildhall and Westminster agree;
At both brow-beating C -- l earn his Fee; Line 144. Brow-beating C -- l.] I
cannot think the mention of this Gentleman here, shows any great disapprobation;
as our author confesses he earns his fee, which is an encomium our pleaders at
the Bar, in general, don't deserve.

Smooth-spoken L -- d with every witness trudge, Line 145. Smooth-spoken L --
d, with every witness trudge.] Sir R. L -- d, alluding to the manner of this
Gentleman's pleading, which is, in general, with great mildness intermixed with
sarcastical smiles. His trudging after witnesses alludes to his summing up the
evidence, and his frequent repetition of I am instructed to say.

And the sleek Council spoilt into a Judge: Line 146. And the sleek Council
spoiled into a Judge.] Justice D -- n esteemed an able, advising Counselor,
which station it seems our author thought better become him than his later
dignity.

Saw the slow Bishop, with expounding drawl, Line 147. Saw the slow Bishop with
expounding drawl, etc.] Dr. S -- r, L. B. of O -- d, of a slow delivery in the
pulpit. -- He left the rectory of St. J -- s, where he used to expound during
the winter, for the deanery of St. P -- l's. -- He took great offense at a
certain Alderman in his Mayoralty, before whom he preached, because his
Lordship did not invite him to dinner.

Leave poor St. James to grasp a richer Paul,
Right Orthodox, maintains those equal sinners,
Who slight his sermons, or refuse him dinners:
Saw Newgate's Ordinary chatter on as fast, Line 151. Newgate's Ordinary
chatter on.] The contrast between these two divines is very high; -- the
prelate addressing the most polite audiences in terms so homely, that he who
runs may read, and so slowly, that he who crawls may keep up with him; -- the
Ordinary telling the most ignorant of all wretches, that Death is an opake
Body, that eclipses the brightness of Eternity, with all the volubility of a
Schoolboy.

As if each sermon was to be his last;
Degreeless Doctors, regular-bred Quacks,
In Merc'ry and in Opium all go snacks:
Saw the choice Spirits noisy Vigils keep, Line 155. Saw the choice Spirits
noisy vigils keep.] A kind of modern Bacchanalians, who distinguish themselves
by frequent, nocturnal meetings; called by several names, such as Comus's
Court, British Carnival, High Borlace, etc. -- The scene is a mixture of
singing, drinking, blasphemy, and noise, as at the ancient feasts of Bacchus,
among the heathens, and very deserving the satire of a Christian Poet. -- Their
priests are dignified with the title of Stars, and their high priests by Stars
of the first Magnitude; so that it is plain in what esteem this Pagan worship
is held. O tempora! O mores! And yet the bishops, and the parliament take no
notice of these things, as if they were not. J. WESTLEY. viva voce.

What Mr. Westley remarks is undoubtedly very just, that the Clergy and the
parliament should look into these outrageous proceedings. But what will that
reverend divine say when I assure him, that not only members of that high
Court, but even Brothers of his own sacred function are themselves
Bacchanalians?



And sing their drunken Brethren fast asleep:
Blockheads and Bloods in Pit and Boxes roar,
Support a Pantomime and damn a Moore; Line 158. Damn a Moore.] Mr. Moore, a
Poet of great modesty, and merit, both ^s a Gentleman, and a writer. His last
Comedy, called GIL BLAS, met with very ^njust treatment on the stage, for,
notwithstanding it had many faults, as he himself allows, the best Critic would
not have condemned the Taste of the Town, for giving (...) more applause than
they have bestowed on many less-deserving pieces. -- His Female Fables are
masterpieces of good sense and elegance.

Arraign the traitor Garrick's insolence,
Who dared to satirize the want of Sense,
To join with Popery and France, at once,
In Powder Plot, to blow up every Dunce:
And leagued, to rob each freeborn English skull,
Of right and privilege of being dull.
Saw Students, Play'rs and Tailors, Casuists nice,
Discuss vague Metaphysics in a trice;
Part Woolfton, Bolingbroke and Annet foil, Line 167. Annet foil.] A writer,
who has published many pieces, after the manner of Woolfton, particularly about
the Trial of the Witnesses, -- a virulent opposer of the Christian System. --
He is now concerned in a periodical pamphlet, called the Free Correspondent.

And hold, unread, Le Clerc, Van Dale and Moyle,
In lukewarm Middleton find out a flaw,
Staunch to the Text and Kennedy and Law, Line 170. Kennedy and Law.] Two of
the most singular and incomprehensible written the world ever produced. Mr.
Kennedy has wrote an astronimcal treatise deduced from the Pentateuch, in which
he prefers the Ptolomaic System as next to that of Moses, and gives Sir Isaac
Newton, Copernicus, Tyho Brahe, and all the rest to the devil, -- He says, The
Newtonian Astronomer truckles to the suggestions of the Delphean Tripod, (...)
suffers himself to be juggled into an artificial computation, by the
Ambiguities of a Da^^^ -- A rare fellow! Mr. Law is his equal for he confesses
he has not his light from reason, nor writes to reason; he is indeed a seraphic
writer, and may possibly write for celestial Beings, for no mortal man can
understand him.

Plain as a pike-staff make the difference clear,
Between a Knight of the Post and Knight of the Shire:
Others with Lock and Newton truths dispute,
Still blunder on, and still themselves confute, Line 174. Mistake Ontologos.]
The name prefixed to a Pamphlet, which made some noise last winter, and was
called, An Essay to prove the Soul of Man is not, neither (...) it be,
immortal. This piece, though intended as a satire on the skeptical reasoning
(...) vogue, and purposely stuffed with threadbare arguments, and worn out
propositions, (...) swallowed by the Deists, who lavished encomiums on its
author, 'till he vouchsafed (...) undeceive them by publishing as weak a reply
in the same name, merely to convinc^ them how little he was in earnest. It was
attacked, however, from the pulpit on a^^ sides, except from Mr. Orator Henley,
who delivered an Elogium on its author, rema^^ing at the same time, that he had
not advanced his strongest arguments, for which however, his sagacity being at
fault, he could not account.

Estranged as much from Reason as from God,
Mistake Ontologos, and kiss the rod;
Aim at the mark of science, blindly wise,
So fire plump* buff-coats when they shut their eyes,
Root up Religion, cancel Good and Evil,
At Butcher-row, the Queen's-Arms, or the Devil. Line 180. At Butcher-row, the
Queen's Arms, or the Devil.] Places where a company of People meet together to
dispute on the several topics of religion, government, trade, etc. Every
person, in his turn, having the liberty of speaking a stated time, as much, or
as little to the purpose as he pleases. -- Sir Alexander Drawcansir has fallen
under a gross mistake, in supposing the former of these societies to have
subsisted some ages ago; which considering his account is so just, in other
respects, is a little surprising. It is true he might be led into this error
from the many absurd opinions and obsolete expressions they make use of, but
certain it is, it has not existed many years, and does still exist, -- the
fragments he has got verbatim are, however, really curious, one of which I
cannot help inserting here.

The Debate, whether Religion was of use to Society. -- A worthy member on this
occasion got up, and spoke thus.

I ham of Upinion, that relidgin can be of no youse to any mortal Sole; because
as why, relidgin is no youse to trayd, and if relidgin be of no youse to trayd,
how is it it yousefool to Sosyaty. Now no body can deny, but that a man may kary
on his trayd very well without relidgin; nay, and beter two, for then he may
wurk won day in a wik mor than at present; whereof no body can say but the
seven is mor than six: Besides, if we haf no relidgin we shall have no
Pairsuns, and that will be a grate savin to the sosyaty; and it is a Maksum in
trayd, that a penny saved is a penny got. COVENT GARDEN JOURNAL, NO. 8.

They saw their Bards and Critics all appear:
Dull Rolt, long-steep'd in Sedgeley's nut-brown beer: Line 182. Dull Rolt,
long steeped in Sedgely 's nut-brown beer.] Mr. Rolt, author of the Westminster
Journal, in which our author, in the same sentence with Mr. Fielding, had been
treated with abuse: Likewise of several poems and pamphlets now forgotten, such
as the Rosciad, Cambria, the Theatrical Contest, A Reply to Mr. Fielding 's
Discourse on Robberies, A Monody on the Death of the Prince, and the Gossip's
Chronicle in the Old Woman's Magazine. Our author, with much justice, has
joined in the same Line Ben Sedgely, of Temple Bar, sometimes the father of Mr.
Rolt's pieces, and who is very proud of being esteemed an author, placing
himself much higher than his predecessor Word, a publican celebrated in the
Dunciad, though not possessed of even half his talents. Ben being really a very
dull fellow, and remarkable for nothing but emptying a tankard. ANON.

Kenrick, whose sing-song verse the Ladies choose, Line 183. Kenrick.] A very
young poet, and a pretender to almost all kinds of writing. -- It is the
misfortune of this youth, that, unless he finishes what he goes about in a day
or two, the world never see it afterward. He published a Monody on the death
of the late Prince, dedicated to the Countess of Middlesex. -- His anonymous
pieces are numerous, and on various subjects. He wrote the two essays on the
immortality of the Soul, concerning which, see note on Line 174. Also many
other disquisitions for the exercise of his pen, and to amuse the dabblers in
argument. -- His Old Woman's Dunciad is an extraordinary instance of that
impetuosity of Genius, which though redounding little to his honor is very
offensive to his adversaries. -- Mr. Smart having advertised an Old Woman's
Dunciad, and given out, that this writer would share the benefit of his satire,
he immediately wrote that piece, and published it under the same title. After
which Mr. Smart never prosecuted his design of publishing his poem. -- He is
also the author of innumerable poetical, philosophical and political pieces,
dispersed up and down in the Newspapers and Magazines. It is no wonder,
however, he should be so indefatigable a writer, as he is perhaps the only one
that never takes any pains.

More honored by his wenches than his muse:
Derrick made fine with Gentleman's laced coat, 185. DERRICK made fine with
GENTLEMAN's laced Coat.] Mr. Derrick and Mr. Gentleman, both Players and Poets.
The former, Author of the Dramatic Censor, a very modest work, in which the
errors and inaccuracies of all our best Poets were to be pointed out. The
latter, Author of Sejanus, a tragedy, never acted; Fortune, a Rhapsody, and
some other pieces; particularly Osman, a Tragedy, in Manuscript.

Ah! wherefore soiled by Murphy's cruel foot! 186. By Murphy 's cruel Foot.] An
Irishman that has kicked me, says Mr. Derrick. It seems this Gentleman, who
sometimes amuses himself with the pen, thinking Mr. D. unworthy his resentment,
as an Author, disciplined him in a manner a little too rough for his
constitution.

J^nes who intends to live at Colley's death, Line 187. Jones, who designs,
etc.] A poet, who addressed the Earl of C -- d, when Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, in a copy of verses, which obtained him the favor of that Nobleman,
who brought him over to England. He published here a poem on seeing the late
prince of Wales's picture, of which the public took little notice. A tragedy
also of this Gentleman's, called, The Earl of Essex, has been long expected on
the stage.

So waits the good old Laureat's parting breath;
Has made his Threnody, against Fate shall end him;
'Cause Cibber to the Bays did recommend him: Line 190. To the Bays did
recommend him.] Mr. Cibber, in a late illness, wrote a letter warmly
recommending him to the Laurel, expecting hourly his own dissolution, which
Epistle the honorable personage, to whom it was addressed, esteemed, as it
really was, a remarkable instance of the Laureat's greatness of mind and
extraordinary merit.

Though here the Laureat's policy is known;
Worse odes the better will set off his own:
Macklin religious, Henderson polite, Line 193. Macklin religious, etc.] Mr.
Macklin, a famous player, and author, particularly celebrated for his harangues
on religious subjects, at the oratory of the Robin-hood.
Line 193. Henderson polite.] Author of an history of the late rebellion in
Scotland, and a tragedy never acted.

Woodward, The. Cibber, and the Mimes that write:
With these, droll Howard, and laborious Shiells Line 195. Laborious Shiells.]
Author of the Daily Gazetteer, sometime ago Amanuensis to Mr. Johnson. He is
also author of Marriage, a poetical essay, and many other anonymous pieces,
also a great Orator at the Butcher-row.
Line 195. Droll Howard.] Harry Howard, an author and humourist, well known at
the routs and assemblies of Old-Street and Broad St. Giles's.

With Mobs of Boys and Parsons at their Heels:
Saw O -- y, without excuse for Bread, Line 197. Lord O -- r -- y's Life of
Swift.

Rake up the sacred ashes of the dead,
Traduce the memory of his once-lov'd friend,
And brand the honored name he should defend:
Saw scribbling Stationers, and linked with those,
The Sons of Novel and poetic prose;
Long-winded Richardson, with Sm-llet joined, Line 203. Sm -- llet joined.]
Author of Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, the Regicide, a tragedy, and
several translations.

D -- y and Crockat, puffing in the Wind; Line 204. D -- y and Crockat.] Mr. D
-- y, Author of several dramatic pieces. A man of some ingenuity, but more
lucky in his designs, than able to execute them. W -- r -- r -- n, viva voce.

Mr. Crockat, a great designer in the literary way.



With slattern females traipsing up and down,
Searching adventures, to amuse the Town:
Saw puerile Harvey on a Cock-horse ride; Line 207. Saw puerile Harvey on a
Cock-horse ride.] Mr. Harvey, author of meditations and contemplations, a very
florid piece.

With Gibbons, Boyce, and fifty more beside Line 208. Gibbons and Boyce.] Mr.
Gibbons, by some called a second Dr. Watts. See his Juvenilia.

BOYCE, a second DUCK, according to the Inspector. He has wrote a Comedy, a
strange piece.



The bawdy-scribbling Knight, the preaching Lord,
And what the stews, the shops, and stalls afford.
All these the Sister Queens, with joy confessed,
For lo! their essence glowed in every breast!
But Pertness saw her form distinctly shine
In none, Immortal Hill, so full as thine.
Drinking thy Morning Chocolate in Bed,
She saw thy Daphne's neck support thy head,
Saw thee slip on thy nightgown and retire
To muse profoundly by thy parlour fire:
By turns thy slippers dangling on thy toes;
Slippers that never were disgraced from Shoes!
Saw where thy learning, in huge volumes stood,
Part lettered sheep, part gilt and painted wood;
Where thy loved Ancients in disorder lay,
Daily perused, for Mottos for the Day;
Thy Ovid, Horace,, and thy favorite Tully, Line 225. Thy Ainsworth, Bailey,
and thy well-thumb'd Lilly.] It will seem something strange, that our author
should join these moderns so unluckily with the Ancients; as it is impossible
he should himself be so ignorant; and very unlikely the learned personage he
addresses should know no better; since he himself remarks on illiterate
scribblers. We shall see the modern Essayist, who has hardly Grammar enough to
arrive at Concord, larding every other sentence with some transcript, from an
author it is impossible he should have read, not because it is necessary, but
because it is Greek, for what he has been saying in English.

It is true, a certain writer, who pretended to take off, or copy the Doctor's
writings exactly, did quote Lilly, and paum'd the passage upon Virgil; but it
is impossible to suppose an author, who could censure others in the manner
above-quoted, should be guilty of such forgery. SCHOLIAST.

Thy Ainsworth, Bailey, and thy well-thumb'd Lilly.
Saw where thy Maggots, in whole myriads, rise, Line 227. Dear Dirt-pies.]
Dirt-pies, the preparations for engendering animalculae.

Or in thy brain, or in thy dear dirt-pies.
When thus the Goddess of May-fair bespoke
Her royal sister. Gentle sister, look.
See where my son, who gratefully repays
Whatever I lavished on his younger days.
Whom still my arm protects to brave the Town,
Secure from Fielding, Machiavel, or Brown; Line 234. Machiavel, or Brown.] Our
author seems here to hint at the plot carried on last summer at Ranelagh, in
which Mr. Brown was the principal person concerned. -- Hear the account of the
diligence used in detecting the Contrivers.

Warrants were issued out on Wednesday night from Mr. Justice Lediard, and
early on Thursday morning from the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, for
apprehending all the persons concerned with Mr. Brown in the assault upon Dr.
Hill, on Wednesday night in the passage at Ranelagh. The officers have been
ever since in search after them, but none of them are yet taken. Yesterday at
noon the Marshals of the Lord Mayor entered the Chambers which some Gentleman
had lent to Brown in the Temple: But he escaped the search by concealing
himself in a Coal-hole. About ten last night he was seen to go out mussled up
in a great coat, and with a handkerchief tied over his face. Notice was
immediately sent to the city, and the proper officers are posted to wait his
return. The servants of the chambers, while he lay in the Coal-hole, pretended
he had early made his escape, and was by that time far enough out of reach.
Such measures are now taken that it will not be easy either for him or any of
the rest to get off, unless they have already anticipated the sentence of the
law by a voluntary banishment. It would be well if the Police of Paris were
imitated here, and accounts were taken of those who make the appearance, or
something which they intend shall be like the Appearance of Gentlemen, with no
visible way of living. H -- ll. There were some people, however, who, knowing
the consequence of this illustrious personage, imagined the scheme for
depriving this kingdom of his pen and services, much deeper laid than was
generally thought, and that, notwithstanding the trivial pretense of a private
quarrel, the politicians of the F^^nch King's cabinet were no strangers to the
process of this plot. This will appear very plausible, if we reflect how, on a
particular occasion, the great Mr. Dennis was disturbed by a French p^^^^teer,
hovering about the coast of Sussex, in order to take him for writing a pamphlet
against the interest of that Court. How the Doctor was offended at his
Christian Majesty, or whether it be not out of envy to this kingdom itself,
that this plot was laid against its Inspector-General, I cannot determine.
SCHOLIAST.

Whom Rage nor Sword ever mortally shall hurt.
Chief of an hundred Chiefs over all the Pert!
Rescued an Orphan Babe from Common-Sense,
I gave his mother's milk to Confidence;
She, with her own Ambrosia, bronz'd his face,
And changed his skin to monumental Brass:
This shame or wit^ successless, shall oppose,
Unless, so will the fates, they seize his nose.
This luckless part the young Achilles licked,
And though he cannot blush, he may be kicked:
Yet still his pen provokes the fates' decree,
In scandal dipped, and elemental Tea;
Still he rails on, and, when attacked, replies,
Recants his own, and blabs his neighbor's lies; Line 248. Recants his own,
and blabs his neighbor's lies.] It is most surprising the incredulity of
mankind, that the word of anonymous authors should be taken before a man's own
handwriting. Dr. H -- is accused of being a great liar, nay, this opinion has
so far prevailed, that his own acknowledgment of finding himself in an error
has been thus censured in an Epigram.

What H -- ll one day says, he the next does deny,
And heartily tells you, -- it is all a damned lie:
Dear Doctor, -- this candor from you is not wanted;
For why should you own it? -- it is taken for granted.
Now the Doctor himself says, There is no Vice so universally detested as
falsehood, and takes for the Motto of his paper, Juvenal's confession. I know
not how to tell a Lie. -- Surely, surely, those who thus accuse the Doctor must
be mistaken, or the Doctor must strangely mistake his own talents and
abilities. SCHOLIAST.

Or, guiltless of design, as Madmen fight,
Falls foul on friends or foes, or wrong or right;
Humane to spare when forced himself to run, Line 251. Humane to spare, etc.]
It is certainly the most convenient thing in life to make a virtue of
necessity, and conclude, when it is out of our power to revenge, there is not
any thing so virtuous, as to forgive an injury. INSPECTOR, No. 553.

As C-pe once saved the grateful mother's son. Line 252. As C -- pe preserved
the grateful mother's son.] A grave Lady of the Order of Mend^^ants, craving
charity of General C -- pe, to excite his liberality, pleaded her gratitude for
favors received, and poured blessings on him for being the preserver of her
Son's life. On which the General had curiosity enough to enquire who her Son
was, and how he could be instrumental in saving his life. -- Ah! God bless your
honor, returned she, when you ran away at Preston Pans, my Boy run after you,
or he would certainly have been killed. EDINBURGH TOWN-TALK.

Such is his pen, and such this son of mine,
Then shed thy Opium, and adopt him thine;
Let him exalted over our Empire reign,
From Shepherd's-market even to Rosemary-lane:
Tibbald dethroned, thy Dunciad reign is over,
Thy Gildon, and thy Toland, are no more.
Thus spoke the Queen, and pausing for reply,
Her sister rolled her broad, lack-lustre eye,
And thus returned* O Pertness! Goddess! Queen!
With whose my reign has ever consistent been,
O had thy thought anticipated mine!
So witness Jove I honor thy design!
My Opium then had filled his shallow skull,
And all the pert had bowed with all the dull.
But see my darling son, whom I have chosen,
Chief of my Chiefs among an hundred dozen,
With Cider muddled, or inspired with Bub,
In Newb'ry's Garret, or in Henly's Tub,
With Coachmen, Cobblers, and such dainty folks,
For Mugs of Porter, pun and crack his jokes;
In sacred verse, at my own Cambridge rise,
Write by himself and bear from all the prize;
As often poor Jack his brother wit has done,
Ran for a wager with himself, and won:
For him the regal Scepter I design,
As worthy thy distinguished love as mine.
Me, he confessed, though nursed by Common Sense,
Though Wit and Genius held him in suspense.
Thy Hill, from Gratitude, obeys thy laws,
My Smart, from love and rev'renee to our cause: Line 282. My Smart, etc.] Mr.
Smart, a person of real and great Genius. INSPECTOR 350. It is true, Mr.
Inspector gives another account in some succeeding papers of this real and
great Genius, concerning which, see notes on our second Book.



Yet, that due merit meet its due renown,
That he who best deserves may wear the crown,
Nor these our darling Chiefs, from partial care,
The highest honors of our Empire share,
Let all our Sons, in Emulation, rise;
And he who most atchieves shall claim the victor's prize.
The End of the First BOOK.

