THE PROSPECT: Being the FIFTH PART of LIBERTY. A POEM.

By Mr. THOMSON.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, over against St. Clement's Church in the
Strand. M.DCC.XXXVI. (Price One Shilling.)

The CONTENTS of PART V.
AUthor addresses the GODDESS of LIBERTY, marking the Happiness and Grandeur of
GREAT BRITAIN, as arising from HER Influence; to Ver. 88. SHE resumes HER
Discourse, and points out the chief VIRTUES which are necessary to maintain HER
ESTABLISHMENT there; to Ver. 374. Recommends, as IT IS last Ornament and
Finishing, SCIENCES, FINE ARTS, and PUBLIC WORKS. The Encouragement of These
urged from the Example of France, though under a Despotic Government; to Ver.
549. The Whole concludes with a PROSPECT of future Times, given by the GODDESS
of LIBERTY: this described by the Author, as it passes in VISION before him.

LIBERTY.
PART V.
HERE interposing, as the GODDESS paused, --
"Oh blessed BRITANNIA! in THY Presence blessed,
"THOU Guardian of Mankind! whence spring, alone,
"All human Grandeur, Happiness and Fame:
"For Toil, by THEE protected, feels no Pain;
"The poor Man's Lot with Milk and Honey flows;
"And, gilded with Thy Rays, even Death looks gay.
"Let other Lands the potent Blessings boast
"Of more exalting Suns. Let Asia's Woods,
"Untended, yield the vegetable Fleece:
"And let the little Insect-Artist form,
"On higher Life intent, it is silken Tomb.
"Let wondering Rocks, in radiant Birth, disclose,
"The various-tinctur'd Children of the Sun.
"From the prone Beam let more delicious Fruits
"A Flavor drink, that in one piercing Taste
"Bids each combine. Let Gallic Vineyards burst
"With Floods of Joy, with mild balsamic Juice
"The Tuscan Olive. Let Arabia breathe
"Her spicy Gales, her vital Gums distill.
"Turbid with Gold, let southern Rivers flow;
"And orient Floods draw soft, over Pearls, their Maze.
"Let Afric vaunt her Treasures; let Peru,
"Deep in her Bowels her own Ruin breed,
"The yellow Traitor that her Bliss betrayed, --
"Unequalled Bliss! -- and to unequalled Rage!
"Yet nor the gorgeous East, nor golden South,
"Nor, in full Prime, that new-discover'd World,
"Where flames the falling Day, in Wealth and Praise,
"Shall with BRITANNIA vie, while, GODDESS, she
"Derives her Praise from THEE, her matchless Charms.
"Her hearty Fruits the Hand of Freedom own;
"And, warm with Culture, her thick-clustering Fields
"Prolific teem. Eternal Verdure crowns
"Her Meads; her Gardens smile eternal Spring.
"She gives the Hunter-Horse, unquell'd by Toil,
"Ardent, to rush into the rapid Chase:
"She, whitening over her Downs, diffusive, pours
"Unnumber'd Flocks: She weaves the fleecy Robe,
"That wraps the Nations: She, to lusty Droves,
"The richest Pasture spreads; and Here Is deep-wave
"Autumnal Seas of pleasing Plenty round.
"These her Delights: And by no baneful Herb,
"No darting Tiger, no grim Lion's Glare,
"No fierce-descending Wolf, no Serpent rolled
"In Spires immense progressive over the Land,
"Disturbed. Enlivening These, add Cities, full
"Of Wealth, of Trade, of cheerful toiling Crowds:
"Add thriving Towns: add Villages and Farms,
"Innumerous fow'd along the lively Vale,
"Where bold unrivaled Peasants happy dwell:
"Add ancient Seats, with venerable Oaks
"Embosom'd high, while kindred Floods below
"Wind through the Mead; and Those of modern Hand,
"More pompous, add, that splendid shine afar:
"Need I her limpid Lakes, her Rivers name,
"Where swarm the finny Race? Thee, chief, O Thames!
"On whose each Tide, glad with returning Sails,
"Flows in the mingled Harvest of Mankind?
"And thee, thou Severn, whose prodigious Swell,
"And Waves, resounding, imitate the Main?
"Why need I name her deep capacious Ports,
"That point around the World? And why her Seas?
"All Ocean is her own, and every Land
"To whom her ruling Thunder Ocean bears.
"She too the Mineral feeds: the obedient Lead,
"The Warrior-Iron, nor the Peaceful less,
"Forming of Life art-civiliz'd the Bond;
"And Tin.
That the Tyrian Merchant sought of old,
"Not dreaming then of BRITAIN's brighter Fame.
"She rears to Freedom an undaunted Race:
"Compatriot zealous, hospitable, kind,
"Here Is the warm CAMBRIAN: Here Is the lofty SCOT,
"To Hardship tamed, active in Arts and Arms,
"Fired with a restless an impatient Flame,
"That leads him raptured where Ambition calls:
"And ENGLISH MERIT Here Is; where meet, combined,
"Whatever high Fancy, sound judicious Thought,
"An ample generous Heart, undrooping Soul,
"And firm tenacious Valor can bestow.
"Great Nurse of Fruits, of Flocks, of Commerce, SHE!
"Great Nurse of Men! by THEE, O GODDESS, taught,
"Her old Renown I trace, disclose her Source
"Of Wealth, of Grandeur, and to BRITONS sing
"A Strain the Muses never touched before."
" But how shall this THY mighty KINGDOM stand?
" On what unyielding Base? how finished shine?"
At this HER Eye, collecting all it is Fire,
Beamed more than human; and HER awful Voice,
Majestic, thus SHE raised -- "To BRITONS bear
"This closing Strain, and with intenser Note
"Loud let it sound in their awakened Ear."
On VIRTUE can alone MY KINGDOM stand,
On PUBLIC VIRTUE, EVERY VIRTUE JOINED.
For, lost this social Cement of Mankind,
The greatest Empires, by scarce-felt Degrees,
Will moulder soft away; 'till, tottering loose,
They prone at last to total Ruin rush.
Unblest by VIRTUE, Government a League
Becomes, a circling Junto of the Great,
To rob by Law; Religion mild a Yoke
To tame the stooping Soul, a Trick of State
To mask their Rapine, and to share the Prey.
What are without IT Senates, save a Face
Of Consultation deep and Reason free,
While the determined Voice and Heart are sold?
What boasted Freedom, save a sounding Name?
And what Election, but a Market vile
Of Slaves self-barter'd? VIRTUE! without THEE,
There is no ruling Eye, no Nerve, in States;
War has no Vigor, and no Safety Peace:
Even Justice warps to Party, Laws oppress,
Wide through the Land their weak Protection fails,
First broke the Balance, and then scorned the Sword.
Thus Nations sink, Society dissolves;
Rapine and Guile and Violence break loose,
Everting Life, and turning Love to Gall;
Man hates the Face of Man, and Indian Woods
And Lybia's hissing Sands to him are tame.
By those THREE VIRTUES be the Frame sustained,
Of BRITISH FREEDOM: INDEPENDENT LIFE;
INTEGRITY IN OFFICE; and, over all
Supreme, A PASSION FOR THE COMMONWEAL.
Hail! INDEPENDANCE, hail! HEAVEN's next best Gift,
To that of Life and an immortal Soul!
The Life of Life! that to the Banquet high
And sober Meal gives taste; to the bowed Roof
Fair-dream'd Repose, and to the Cottage Charms.
Of public Freedom, hail, thou secret Source!
Whose Streams, from every Quarter confluent, form
MY better Nile, that nurses human Life.
By Rills from Thee deduced, irriguous, fed,
The private Field looks gay, with Nature's Wealth
Abundant flows, and blooms with each Delight
That Nature craves. It Is happy Master there,
The ONLY FREEMAN, walks his pleasing Round:
Sweet-featur'd Peace attending; fearless Truth;
Firm Resolution; Goodness, blessing all
That can rejoice; Contentment, surest Friend;
And, still fresh Stores from Nature's Book derived,
Philosophy, Companion ever-new.
These cheer his rural, and sustain or fire,
When into Action called, his busy Hours.
Mean time true-judging moderate Desires,
Economy and Taste, combined, direct
His clear Affairs, and from debauching Fiends
Secure his little Kingdom. Nor can Those
Whom Fortune heaps, without these Virtues, reach
That Truce with Pain, that animated Ease,
That Self-Enjoyment springing from within,
That INDEPENDANCE, active, or retired,
Which make the soundest Bliss of Man below:
But, lost beneath the Rubbish of their Means,
And drained by Wants to Nature all unknown,
A wandering, tasteless, gaily-wretched Train,
Though rich, are Beggars, and, though noble, Slaves.
Lo! damned to Wealth, at what a gross Expense,
They purchase Disappointment, Pain and Shame.
Instead of hearty hospitable Cheer,
See! how the Hall with brutal Riot flows;
While in the foaming Flood, fermenting, steeped,
The Country maddens into Party-Rage.
Mark! those disgraceful Piles of Wood and Stone;
Those Parks and Gardens, where, his Haunts be-trimm'd,
And Nature by presumptuous Art oppressed,
The woodland Genius mourns. See! the full Board
That steams Disgust, and Bowls that give no Joy:
No Truth invited there, to feed the Mind;
Nor Wit, the Wine rejoicing Reason quaffs.
Hark! how the Dome with Insolence resounds,
With those retained by Vanity to scare
Repose and Friends. To tyrant Fashion mark!
The costly-Worship paid, to the broad Gaze
Of Fools. From still delusive Day to Day,
Led an eternal Round of lying Hope,
See! self-abandon'd, how they roam adrift,
Dashed over the Town, a miserable Wreck!
Then to adore some warbling Eunuch turned,
With Midas' Ears they crowd; or to the Buzz
Of Masquerade unblushing: or, to show
Their Scorn of Nature, at the Tragic Scene
They mirthful sit, or prove the Comic true.
But, chief, behold! around the rattling Board,
The civil Robbers ranged; and even the Fair,
The tender Fair, each Sweetness laid aside,
As fierce for Plunder as all-licens'd' Troops
At some sacked City. Thus dissolved their Wealth,
Without one generous Luxury dissolved,
Or quartered on it many a needless Want,
At the thronged Leve bends the venal Tribe:
With fair but faithless Smiles each varnished over,
Each smooth as Those that mutually deceive,
And for their Falsehood each despising each;
'Till shook their Patron by the wintry Winds,
Wide flies the withered Shower, and leaves him bare.
O far superior Afric's sable Sons,
By Merchant pilfer'd, to these willing Slaves!
And, rich, as unsqueez'd Favorite, to them,
Is he who can his Virtue boast alone!
BRITONS! be firm! -- nor let Corruption sly
Twine round your Heart indissoluble Chains!
The Steel of BRUTUS burst the grosser Bonds
By Caesar cast over ROME; but still remained
The soft enchanting Fetters of the Mind,
And other Cesars rose. Determined, hold
Your INDEPENDANCE; for, That once destroyed.
Unfounded, FREEDOM is a Morning Dream,
That flits aerial from the spreading Eye.
Forbid it HEAVEN! that ever I need urge
INTEGRITY IN OFFICE on MY Sons;
Inculcate common Honor -- not to rob. --
And whom? -- the gracious the confiding Hand,
That lavishly rewards; the toiling Poor,
Whose Cup with many a bitter Drop is mixed;
The Guardian Public; every Face they see,
And every Friend; nay, in Effect, themselves.
As, in familiar Life, the Villain's Fate
Admits no Cure; so, when a desperate Age
At This arrives, I the devoted Race
Indignant spurn, and hopeless soar away.
But, ah too little known to modern Times!
Be not the noblest Passion past unsung;
That Ray peculiar, from UNBOUNDED LOVE
Effus'd, which kindles the heroic Soul;
DEVOTION TO THE PUBLIC. Glorious Flame!
Celestial Ardor! in what unknown Worlds,
Profusely scattered through the blue Immense,
Have Thou been blessing Myriads, since in ROME,
Old virtuous ROME, so many deathless Names
From Thee their Luster drew? since, taught by Thee,
Their Poverty put Splendour to the Blush,
Pain grew luxurious, and even Death Delight?
O will Thou never, in thy long Period, look,
With Blaze direct, on this MY last Retreat?
It Is not enough, from Self right understood
Reflected, that thy Rays inflame the Heart:
Though VIRTUE not disdains Appeals to Self,
Dreads not the Trial; all her Joys are true,
Nor is there any real Joy save Here Is.
Far less the tepid the declaiming Race,
Foes to Corruption, to it is Wages Friends,
Or those whom private Passions, for a while,
Beneath MY Standard list, can they suffice
To raise and fix the Glory of MY REIGN?
An active Flood of universal Love
Must swell the Breast. First, in Effusion wide,
The restless Spirit roves Creation round,
And seizes every Being: Stronger then
It tends to Life, whatever the kindred Search
Of Bliss allys: then, more collected still,
It urges Human-kind: a Passion grown,,
At last, the central Parent-Public calls
It Is utmost Effort forth, awakes each Sense,
The Comely, Grand and Tender. Without This,
This awful Pant, shook from sublimer Powers
Than those of Self, this HEAVEN-infus'd Delight,
This moral Gravitation, rushing prone
To press the public Good, MY System soon,
Traverse, to several selfish Centers drawn,
Will reel to Ruin: while for ever shut
Stand the bright Portals of desponding Fame.
From sordid Self shoot up no shining Deeds,
None of those ancient Lights, that gladden Earth,
Give Grace to Being, and arrouse the Brave
To just Ambition, VIRTUE's quickening Fire!
Life tedious grows, an idly-bustling Round,
Filled up with Actions animal and mean,
A dull Gazette! The impatient Reader scorns
The poor historic Page; 'till kindly comes
Oblivion, and redeems a People's Shame.
Not so the Times when, Emulation-stung,
GREECE shone in Genius, Science, and in Arts,
And ROME in Virtues dreadful to be told!
To live was Glory then! and charmed Mankind,
Through the deep Periods of devolving Time,
Those, raptured, copy; These, astonished, read.
True, a corrupted State, with every Vice
And every Meanness foul, this Passion damps.
Who can, unshock'd, behold the cruel Eye?
The pale inveigling Smile? The ruffian Front?
The Wretch abandoned to relentless Self,
Equally vile if Miser or Profuse?
Powers not of GOD, assiduous to corrupt?
The fell deputed Tyrant, who devours
The Poor and Weak, Lord MOLESWORTH in his Account of Denmark says, -- It is
observed, that in limited Monarchies and Commonwealths, a Neighborhood to the
Seat of the Government is advantageous to the Subjects; whilst the distant
Provinces are less thriving, and more liable to Oppression.
at Distance from Redress?
Delirious Faction bellowing loud MY Name?
The false fair-seeming Patriot's hollow Boast?
A Race resolved on Bondage, fierce for Chains,
MY sacred Rights a Merchandise alone
Esteeming, and to work their Feeder's Will
By Deeds, a Horror to Mankind, prepared,
As were the Dregs of Romulus of old?
Who These indeed can undetesting see? --
But who unpitying? To the generous Eye
Distress is Virtue; and, though Self-betray'd,
A People struggling with their Fate must rouse
The Hero's Throb. Nor can a Land, at once,
Be lost to Virtue quite. How glorious then!
Fit Luxury for Gods! to save the Good,
Protect the Feeble, dash bold Vice aside,
Depress the Wicked, and restore the Frail.
Posterity, besides, the Young are pure,
And Sons may tinge their Father's Cheek with Shame.
Should then the Times arrive (which HEAVEN avert!)
That BRITONS bend unnerv'd, not by the Force
Of Arms, more generous, and more manly, quelled,
But by Corruption's Soul-dejecting Arts,
Arts impudent! and gross! by their own Gold,
In Part bestowed, to bribe them to give All.
With Party raging, or immersed in Sloth,
Should they BRITANNIA's well-fought Laurels yield
To slily-conquering Gaul; even from her Brow
Let her own Naval Oak be basely torn,
By such as tremble at the stiffening Gale,
And nerveless sink while others sing rejoiced.
Or (darker Prospect! scarce one Gleam behind
Disclosing) should the broad corruptive Plague
Breathe from the City to the farthest Hut,
That sits serene within the Forest-Shade;
The severed People fire, inflame their Wants,
And their luxurious Thirst, so gathering Rage,
That, were a Buyer found, they stand prepared
To sell their Birthright for a cooling Draught.
Should shameless Pens for plain Corruption plead;
The hired Assassins of the Commonweal!
Deemed the declaiming Rant of GREECE and ROME,
Should Public Virtue grow the Public Scoff,
'Till Private, failing, staggers through the Land:
'Till round the City loose mechanic Want,
Dire-prowling nightly, makes the cheerful Haunts
Of Men more hideous than Numidian Wilds,
Nor from it is Fury sleeps the Vale in Peace;
And Murders, Horrors, Perjuries abound:
Nay, 'till to lowest Deeds the Highest stoop;
The Rich, like starving Wretches, thirst for Gold;
And those, on whom the vernal Showers of HEAVEN
All-bounteous fall, and that prime Lot bestow,
A Power to live to Nature and Themselves,
In sick Attendance wear their anxious Days,
With Fortune, joyless, and, with Honors, mean.
Meantime, perhaps, Profusion flows around,
The Waste of War, without the Works of Peace;
No Mark of Millions in the Gulf absorpt
Of uncreating Vice, none but the Rage
Of roused Corruption still demanding more.
That very Portion, which (by faithful Skill
Employed) might make the smiling Public rear
Her ornamented Head, drilled through the Hands
Of mercenary Tools, serves but to nurse
A Locust-Band within, and in the Bud
Leaves starved each Work of Dignity and Use.
I paint the worst. But should these Times arrive,
If any nobler Passion yet remain,
Let all MY Sons all Parties fling aside,
Despise their Nonsense, and together join;
Let Worth and Virtue, scorning low Despair,
Exerted full, from every Quarter shine,
Commix'd in heightened Blaze. Light flashed to Light,
Moral, or Intellectual, more intense
By giving glows. As on pure Winter's Eve,
Gradual, the Stars effulge; fainter, at first,
They, straggling, rise; but when the radiant Host,
In thick Profusion poured, shine out immense,
Each casting vivid Influence on each,
From Pole to Pole a glittering Deluge plays,
And Worlds above rejoice, and Men below.
But why to BRITONS this superfluous Strain? --
Goodnature, honest Truth even somewhat blunt,
Of crooked Baseness an indignant Scorn,
A Zeal unyielding in their Country's Cause,
And ready Bounty, wont to dwell with them. --
Nor only wont -- Wide over the Land diffused,
In many a blessed Retirement still they dwell.
To softer Prospect turn we now the View,
To laureled SCIENCE, ARTS, and PUBLIC WORKS,
That lend MY FINISHED FABRIC comely Pride,
Grandeur and Grace. Of sullen Genius he!
Cursed by the Muses! by the Graces loathed!
Who deems beneath the Public's high Regard
These last enlivening Touches of MY Reign.
However puffed with Power, and gorged with Wealth,
A Nation be; let Trade enormous rise,
Let East and South their mingled Treasure pour,
'Till, swelled impetuous, the corrupting Flood
Burst over the City and devour the Land:
Yet These neglected, These recording Arts,
Wealth rots, a Nuisance; and, oblivious, sunk,
That Nation must another Carthage lie.
If not by Them, on monumental Brass,
On sculptured Marble, or the deathless Page
Impressed, Renown had left no Trace behind:
In vain, to future Times, the Sage had thought,
The Legislator planned, the Hero found
A beauteous Death, the Patriot toiled in vain.
The Awarders They of Fame's immortal Wreathe,
They rouse Ambition, they the Mind exalt,
Give great Ideas, lovely Forms infuse,
Delight the general Eye, and, dressed by Them,
The moral Venus glows with double Charms.
SCIENCE, MY close Associate, still attends
Wherever I go. Sometimes, in simple Guise,
She walks the Furrow with the Consul-Swain,
Whispering unlettered Wisdom to the Heart,
Direct; or, sometimes, in the pompous Robe
Of Fancy dressed, She charms Athenian Wits,
And a whole sapient City round Her burns.
Then over her Brow MINERVA'S Terrors nod:
With XENOPHON, sometimes, in dire Extremes,
She breathes deliberate Soul, and makes The famous Retreat of the Ten Thousand
was chiefly conducted by XENOPHON.
Retreat
Unequaled Glory: with the Theban Sage,
EPAMINONDAS, First and Best of Men!
Sometimes She bids the deep-embattled Host,
Above the vulgar Reach, resistless formed,
March to sure Conquest, -- never gained before! Epaminondas, after having beat
the Lacedaemonians and their Allies, in the Battle of Leuctra, made an Incursion
at the head of a powerful Army, into Laconia, It was now six hundred Years
since the Dorians had possessed this Country, and in all that time the Face of
an Enemy had not been seen within their Territories. Plutarch in Agesilaus.

Nor on the treacherous Seas of giddy State
Unskilful She: when the triumphant Tide
Of high-swoln Empire wears one boundless Smile,
And the Gale tempts to new Pursuits of Fame,
Sometimes, with SCIPIO, She collects her Sail,
And seeks the blissful Shore of rural Ease,
Where, but the Aonian Maids, no Sirens sing.
Or should the deep-brew'd Tempest muttering rise,
While Rocks and Shoals perfidious lurk around,
With TULLY She her wide-reviving Light
To Senates holds, a Catiline confounds,
And saves awhile from Caesar sinking ROME.
Such the kind POWER, whose piercing Eye dissolves
Each mental Fetter, and sets Reason free;
For ME inspiring an enlightened Zeal,
The more tenacious as the more convinced
How happy Freemen, and how wretched Slaves.
To BRITONS not unknown, to BRITONS full
The GODDESS spreads her Stores, the secret Soul
That quickens Trade, the Breath unseen that wafts
To them the Treasures of a balanced World.
But FINER ARTS (save what the MUSE has sung,
In daring Flight, above all modern Wing)
Neglected droop the Head; and PUBLIC WORKS,
Broke by Corruption into private Gain,
Not ornament, disgrace, not serve, destroy.
Shall BRITONS, by their own JOINT WISDOM ruled
Beneath one ROYAL HEAD, whose vital Power
Connects, enlivens and exerts the WHOLE;
In FINER ARTS, and PUBLIC WORKS, shall They
To Gallia yield? -- yield to a Land that bends,
Deprest, and broke, beneath the Will of One?
Of One -- who, should the unkingly Thirst of Gold,
Or tyrant Passions, or Ambition, prompt,
Calls Locust-Armies over the blasted Land:
Drains from it is thirsty Bounds the Springs of Wealth,
His own insatiate Reservoir to fill:
To the lone Desert Patriot-Merit frowns,
Or into Dungeons Arts, when They, their Chains,
Indignant, bursting, for their nobler Works
All other License scorn but TRUTH's and MINE.
Oh shame to think! shall BRITONS, in the Field
Unconquered still, the better Laurel lose?
Even in that Lewis XIV.
Monarch's Reign, who vainly dreamt,
By giddy Power, betrayed, and flattered Pride,
To grasp unbounded Sway; while, swarming round,
His Armies dared all Europe to the Field;
To hostile Hands while Treasure flowed profuse,
And, that great Source of Treasure, Subjects' Blood,
Inhuman squandered, sicken'd every Land;
From BRITAIN, chief, while MY superior Sons,
In Vengeance rushing, dashed his idle Hopes,
And bad his agonizing Heart be low:
Even then, as in the golden Calm of Peace,
What PUBLIC WORKS, at home, what ARTS arose!
What various SCIENCE shone! what GENIUS glowed!
It Is not for ME to paint, diffusive shot
Over fair Extents of Land, the shining Road;
The Flood-compelling Arch; the long The Canal of Languedoc.
Canal,
Through Mountains piercing, and uniting Seas;
The The Hospital for Foundlings
Dome resounding sweet with Infant Joy,
From Famine saved, or cruel-handed Shame,
And The Hospital for Invalids.
That where Valor counts his noble Scars;
The Land where social Pleasure loves to dwell,
Of the fierce Demon, Gothic Duel, freed;
The Robber from his farthest Forest chased;
The turbid City cleared, and, by Degrees,
Into sure Peace the best Police refined,
Magnificence, and Grace, and decent Joy.
Let Gallic Bards record, how honored ARTS,
And SCIENCE, by despotic Bounty blessed,
At Distance flourished from MY PARENT-EYE.
Restoring ancient Taste, how BOILEAU rose.
How the big ROMAN Soul shook, in CORNEILLE,
The trembling Stage. In elegant RACINE,
How the more powerful though more humble Voice
Of Nature-painting GREECE, resistless, breathed
The whole awakened Heart. How MOLIERE's Scene,
Chastis'd and regular, with well-judg'd Wit,
Not scattered wild, and native Humor, graced,
Was Life itself. To public Honors raised,
How Learning in warm The Academies of Sciences, of the Belles Lettres and of
Painting.
Seminaries spread;
And, more for Glory than the small Reward,
How Emulation strove. How their pure Tongue
Almost obtained what was denied their Arms.
From Rome, awhile, how PAINTING, courted long,
With POUSSIN came; Ancient Design, that lifts
A fairer Front, and looks another Soul.
How the kind Engraving.
Art, that, of unvalu'd Price,
The famed and only Picture, easy, gives,
Refined her Touch, and, through the shadowed Piece,
All the live Spirit of the Painter poured.
Coyest of Arts, how Sculpture northward deigned
A Look, and bad her GIRARDON arise.
How lavish Grandeur blazed; the barren Waste,
Astonished, saw the sudden Palace swell,
And Fountains spout amid it is arid Shades.
For Leagues, bright Vistas opening to the View,
How Forests in majestic Gardens smiled.
How menial Arts, by their gay Sisters taught,
Wove the deep Flower, the blooming Foliage trained
In joyous Figures over the silky Lawn,
The Palace cheered, illum'd the Story'd Wall,
And with the Pencil vy'd the glowing Loom The Tapestry of the Gobelins.
.
These Laurels, LOUIS, by the Droppings raised
Of thy Profusion, it is Dishonor shade,
And, green through future Times, shall bind thy Brow;
While the vain Honors of perfidious War
Wither abhorred, or in Oblivion lost.
With what prevailing Vigor had they shot,
And stole a deeper Root, by the full Tide
Of War-sunk Millions fed? Superior still,
How had they branched luxuriant to the Skies,
In BRITAIN planted, by the potent Juice
Of Freedom swelled? Forced is the Bloom of ARTS,
A false uncertain Spring, when Bounty gives,
Weak without ME, a transitory Gleam.
Fair shine the slippery Days, enticing Skies
Of Favor smile, and courtly Breezes blow;
'Till ARTS, betrayed, trust to the flattering Air
Their tender Blossom: -- then malignant rise
The Blights of Envy, of those Insect-Clouds,
That, blasting Merit, often cover Courts:
Nay, should, perchance, some kind MOECENAS aid
The doubtful Beamings of his PRINCE's Soul,
His wavering Ardor fix, and unconfined
Diffuse his warm Beneficence around;
Yet Death, at last, and wintry Tyrants come,
Each Sprig of Genius killing at the Root.
But when with ME IMPERIAL BOUNTY joins,
Wide over the Public blows eternal Spring;
While mingled Autumn every Harvest pours
Of every Land; whatever Invention, Art,
Creating Toil and Nature can produce.
Here ceased the GODDESS; and HER ardent Wings,
Dipped in the Colors of the heavenly Bow,
Stood waving Radiance round, for sudden Flight
Prepared, when thus, impatient, burst my Prayer.
"Oh forming Light of Life! Oh better Sun!
"Sun of Mankind! by whom the cloudy North,
"Sublimed, not envies Languedocian Skies,
"That, unstained Either all, diffusive smile:
" When shall we call these ancient Laurels Ours?
" And when THY WORK complete?" Strait with HER Hand,
Celestial red, SHE touched my darkened Eyes.
As at the Touch of Day the Shades dissolve,
So quick, methought, the misty Circle cleared,
That dims the Dawn of Being here below:
The Future shone disclosed, and, in long View,
Bright rising Aeras instant rushed to Light.
"THEY come! GREAT GODDESS! I the TIMES behold!
"The TIMES our Fathers, in the bloody Field,
"Have earned so dear, and, not with less Renown,
"In the warm Struggles of the Senate-Fight.
"The TIMES I see! whose Glory to supply,
"For toiling Ages, Commerce round the World
"Has winged unnumber'd Sails, and from each Land
"Materials heaped, that, well-employ'd, with ROME
"Might vie our Grandeur, and with GREECE our Art.
"Lo! PRINCES I behold! contriving still,
"And still conducting firm some brave Design;
"KINGS! that the narrow joyless Circle scorn,
"Burst the Blockade of false designing Men,
"Of treacherous Smiles, of Adulation fell,
"And of the blinding Clouds around them thrown:
"Their Court rejoicing Millions; Worth, alone,
"And Virtue dear to them; their best Delight,
"In just Proportion, to give general Joy;
"Their jealous Care THY KINGDOM to maintain;
"The public Glory Theirs; unsparing Love
"Their endless Treasure; and their Deeds their Praise.
"With THEE They work. Naught can resist YOUR Force:
" Life feels it quickening in her dark Retreats:
"Strong spread the Blooms of Genius, Science, Art;
"His bashful Bounds disclosing Merit breaks;
"And, big with Fruits of Glory, Virtue blows
"Expansive over the Land. Another Race
"Of GENEROUS YOUTH, of PATRIOT-SIRES, I see!
"Not those vain Insects fluttering in the Blaze
"Of Court and Ball and Play; those venal Souls,
" Corruption's veteran unrelenting Bands,
"That, to their Vices Slaves, can never be free.
"I see the FOUNTAIN's purged! whence Life derives
"A clear or turbid Flow; see the young Mind.
"Not fed impure by Chance, by Flattery fooled,
"Or by scholastic Jargon bloated proud,
"But filled and nourished by the Light of Truth.
"Then beamed through Fancy the refining Ray,
"And pouring on the Heart, the Passions feel
"At once informing Light and moving Flame;
'"Till moral, public, graceful Action crowns
"The Whole. Behold! the fair Contention glows,
"In all that Mind or Body can adorn,
"And form to Life. Instead of barren Heads,
"Barbarian Pedants, wrangling Sons of Pride,
"And Truth-perplexing metaphysic Wits,
"Men, Patriots, Chiefs and Citizens are formed.
"Lo! JUSTICE, like the liberal Light of Heaven,
" Unpurchas'd shines on All, and from her Beam,
"Appalling Guilt, retire the savage Crew,
"That prowl amid the Darkness they themselves
"Have thrown around the Laws. Oppression grieves,
"See! how her Legal Furies bite the Lip,
"While YORKS and TALBOTS their deep Snares detect,
"And seize swift Justice through the Clouds they raise.
"See! social LABOR lifts his guarded Head,
"And Men not yield to Government in vain.
"From the sure Land is rooted ruffian Force,
"And, the lewd Nurse of Villains, idle Waste;
"Lo! razed their Haunts, down dashed their maddening Bowl,
"A Nation's Poison! Beauteous Order reigns!
"Manly Submission, unimposing Toil,
"Trade without Guile, Civility that marks
"From the foul Herd of brutal Slaves THY Sons,
"And fearless Peace. Or should affronting War
"To slow but dreadful Vengeance rouse the Just,
"Unfailing Fields of Freemen I behold!
"That know, with their own proper Arm, to guard
"Their own blessed Isle against a leaguing World.
"Despairing Gaul her boiling Youth restrains,
"Dissolved her Dream of Universal Sway:
"The Winds and Seas are BRITAIN's wide Domain;
"And not a Sail, but by Permission, spreads.
"Lo! swarming southward on rejoicing Suns,
"Gay COLONIES extend; the calm Retreat
"Of undeserved Distress, the better Home
"Of Those whom Bigots chase from foreign Lands.
"Not built on Rapine, Servitude and Woe,
"And, in their turn, some petty Tyrant's Prey;
"But, bound by social Freedom, firm they rise;
"Such as, of late, an OGLETHORPE has formed,
"And, crowding round, the charmed Savannah fees.
"Horrid with Want and Misery, no more
"Our Streets the tender Passenger afflict.
"Nor shivering Age, nor Sickness without Friend,
"Or Home, or Bed to bear his burning Load,
"Nor agonizing Infant, that never earned
"It Is guiltless Pangs, I see! The Stores, profuse,
"Which British Bounty has to These assigned,
"No more the sacrilegious Riot swell
"Of Cannibal Devourers! Right applied,
"No starving Wretch the Land of Freedom stains:
"If poor, Employment finds; if old demands,
"If sick, if maimed, his miserable Due;
"And will, if young, repay the fondest Care.
"Sweet sets the Sun of stormy Life, and sweet
"The Morning shines, in Mercy's Dews arrayed.
"Lo! how they rise! THESE FAMILIES OF HEAVEN!
" An Hospital for Foundlings.
That! chief, (but why -- ye Bigots! -- why so late?)
"Where blooms and warbles glad a rising Age:
"What Smiles of Praise! And, while their Song ascends,
"The listening Seraph lays his Lute aside.
"Hark! the gay MUSES raise a nobler Strain,
"With active Nature, warm impassioned Truth,
"Engaging Fable, lucid Order, Notes
"Of various String, and heartfelt Image filled.
"Behold! I see the dread delightful School
"Of tempered Passions, and of polished Life,
"Restored: behold! the well-dissembled Scene
"Calls from embellished Eyes the lovely Tear,
"Or lights up Mirth in modest Cheeks again.
"Lo! vanished Monster-land. Lo! driven away
"Those that Apollo's sacred Walks profane:
"Their wild Creation scattered, where a World
"Unknown to Nature, Chaos more confused,
"Over the brute Scene it is A Creature which, of all Brutes, most resembles
Man. -- See Dr. Tyson's Treatise on this Animal.
Ouran-Outangs pours;
"Detested Forms! that, on the Mind impressed,
"Corrupt, confound and barbarize an Age.
"Behold! all thine again the SISTER-ARTS,
"Thy Graces They, knit in harmonious Dance.
"Nursed by the Treasure, from a Nation drained
"Their Works to purchase, They to Nobler rouse
"Their untamed Genius, their unfettered Thought;
"Of pompous Tyrants, and of dreaming Monks,
"The gaudy Tools, and Prisoners, no more.
"Lo! Numerous DOMES a BURLINGTON confess:
"For Kings and Senates fit, the Palace see!
"The Temple breathing a religious Awe;
"Even framed with Elegance the plain Retreat,
"The private Dwelling. Certain in his Aim,
" Taste, never idly working, saves Expense.
"See! SYLVAN SCENES, where Art, alone, pretends
"To dress her Mistress, and disclose her Charms:
"Such as a POPE in Miniature has shown;
"A BATHURST over the widening Okely-Woods, near Cirencester.
Forest spreads;
"And such as form a RICHMOND, CHISWICK, STOWE.
"August, around, what PUBLIC WORKS I see!
"Lo! stately Streets, lo! Squares that court the Breeze.
"In spite of Those to whom pertains the Care,
"Ingulphing more than founded Roman Ways,
"Lo! ray'd from Cities over the brightened Land,
"Connecting Sea to Sea, the Solid Road.
"Lo! the Proud Arch (no vile Exactor's Stand)
"With easy Sweep bestrides the chafing Flood.
"See! long Canals, and deepen'd Rivers join
"Each Part with each, and with the circling Main
"The whole enlivened Isle. Lo! Ports expand,
"Free as the Winds and Waves, their sheltering Arms.
"Lo! streaming Comfort over the troubled Deep,
"On every pointed Coast the Light-house towers;
"And, by the broad imperious Mole repelled,
"Hark! how the baffled Storm indignant roars."
As thick to View THESE VARIED WONDERS rose,
Shook all my Soul with Transport, unassur'd,
The VISION broke; And, on my waking Eye,
Rushed the still RUINS of dejected ROME.
THE END.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by A. Millar.
1. COllections relating to the History of Mary Queen of Scotland. Containing a
great Number of Original Papers, never before printed: Also a few scarce Pieces
reprinted, taken from the best Copies, by the learned and judicious JAMES
ANDERSON, Esquire late Postmaster-General, and Antiquary of Scotland. With an
Explanatory Index of the Obsolete Words; and Prefaces showing the Importance of
these Collections. In 4 Vols. on a fine Paper, and a most beautiful Letter,
4to. 2. Georgii Buchanani Scoti, Poetarum sui seculi facile Principis, Opera
Omnia, ad optimorum Codicum fidem summo Studio recognita, and castigata. Nunc
primum in Unum collecta ab innumeris fere Mendis, quibus pleraeque omnes
Editiones antea scatebant, repurgata; ac variis insuper Notis aliisque
utilissimis accessionibus illustrata and aucta, Curante Thoma Ruddimanno, A. M.
2 Tom. Folio. 3. The Peerage of Scotland: Containing an Historical and
Genealogical Account of the Nobility of that Kingdom. Collected from the
Public Records of the Nation, the Charters, and other Writings of the
Nobility, and from the most approved Histories, Folio. 4. The Lives and
Characters of the Officers of the Crown, and of the State in Scotland, from the
Beginning of the Reign of King David I. to the Union of the two Kingdoms.
Collected from Original Charters, Chartularies, Authentic Records, and the
most approved Histories. With an Appendix containing several Original Papers
relating to the Lives, and referring to them. Both by GEO. CRAWFORD Esquire Folio.
5. A System of Heraldry, Speculative and Practical. With the true Art of
Blazon, according to the most approved Heralds in Europe. Illustrated with
suitable Examples of Armorial Figures and Achievements of the most
considerable Sirnames and Families in Scotland, etc. Together with Historical
and Genealogical Memorials relative thereto. By ALEXANDER NISBETT, Esquire Folio.
6. The History of the Church under the Old Testament, from the Creation of the
World; with a particular Account of the State of the JEWS before and after the
Babylonish Captivity, and down to the present Time. Wherein the Affairs and
Learning before the Birth of Christ, are also illustrated. To which is
subjoined a Discourse to promote the Conversion of the JEWS to Christianity,
Folio. 7. The History of the Propagation of Christianity, and Overthrow of
Paganism. Wherein the Christian Religion is confirmed, the Rise and Progress of
Heathen Idolatry is considered; the Overthrow of Paganism, and the spreading of
Christianity in the several Ages of the New Testament Church is explained; the
present State of Heathens is enquired into, and Methods for their Conversion
offered. The Third Edition, with Additions, Alterations, and a complete
Alphabetical Index. Two Vols. 8vo. These Two by ROBERT MILLAR, A. M. "This Book
is recommended by the Bishop of London in his second Pastoral Letter, p. 31. as
written by a faithful and judicious Hand. 8. The History of the Union of
Great-Britian. By DANIEL DEFOE. Done from the public Records. 9. Pharmacopoeia
Collegii Regii Medicorum Edinburgensis. 10. De Re Medica Dissertationes Quatuor
Thomae Symsoni, Medicinae and Anatomices, in Academia Scotorum ad Fanum
Andreae, Professoris Candossensis, 8vo. 11. A Vindication of the true Art of
Self-Defence, with a Proposal to the Honorable Members of Parliament for
erecting a Court of Honor in Great Britain. Recommended to all Gentlemen, but
particularly to the Soldiery. To which is annexed, A Short but very Useful
Memorial for Swordmen. By Sir WILLIAM HOPE, Bart. late Deputy Governor of
Edinburgh Castle. 12. A Treatise of Music, Speculative, Practical, and
Historical. By ALEXANDER MALCOLM. 13. Grammaticae Latinae Institutiones, facili
and ad Puerorum captum accommodata, Methodo perscriptae, Thomae Ruddimanno, A.
M. Autore. Editio Secunda, 8vo. 14. Ditto, in 2 Vols. Additae sunt, in
provectiorum gratiam, Notae perpetuae: quibus non solum Latini sermonis
praecepta before explicantur, sed and ea pleraque omnia, quae a summis
grammaticis aliisque ad hanc artem illustrandam sunt observata, succincte simul
perspicueque traduntur. Perfecit and suis animadversionibus auxit. 15. The
Rudiments of the Latin Tongue: or, a plain and easy Introduction to the Latin
Grammar. Wherein the Principles of the Language are methodically digested both
in English and Latin. With useful Notes and Observations, explaining the Terms
of Grammar, and further improving its Rules. By the above Author. The Sixth
Edition corrected. 16. Poems in 2 Vols. 12mo. 17. The Ever-Green. Being a
Collection of Scots Poems, wrote by the Ingenious, before the Year 1600, 2
Vols. 12mo. 18. The Tea-Table Miscellany: or, a Collection of Scots Sangs, in 2
Vols. The Ninth Edition. Being the compleatest and most correct of any yet
published, 12 mo. These three by ALLAN RAMSAY. The Sangs adorned with the
Author's Head curiously engraven from a new Drawing by his Son. 19. Music for
the Sangs, in six Parts, by several of the best Masters, in a neat Pocket
Volume.
In the Press, and speedily will be published,

Essai Politic sur la Commerce, translated into English. This Treatise is
divided into 18 Chapters; I. Some general Principles. II. Of Corn. III. Of the
Increase of Inhabitants. IV. Of Colonies. V. Of Slavery. VI. Of exclusive
trading Companies. VII. Of military Government. VIII. Of Industry. IX. Of
Luxury. X. Of numerary Values. XI. Of Proportion in the Species of Money. XII.
Of the Sedition in the Time of Philip the Fair. XIII. Of the Money in the Reign
of St. Lewis and Charles VII. XIV. Of the Fall of Money. XV. Of the Dearness of
Provisions. XVI. Objections answered. XVII. Of Exchange. XVIII. Of Public
Credit. To which is added, by an able Hand, considerable Improvements,
Additions, Notes, Observations, etc.
In the Press, and speedily will be published.

The Tragedy of SOPHONISBA, acted at the Theater in Drury Lane by his Majesty's
Servants, by Mr. THOMSON. A few to be printed for the Curious on a Royal Paper,
in 4to, to complete the Second Volume of Mr. Thomson's Works.

