THE REHEARSAL: OR, BAYS in PETTICOATS. A COMEDY In Two ACTS.

THE REHEARSAL: OR, BAYS in PETTICOATS.

A COMEDY In Two ACTS.

As it is performed at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Written by Mrs. CLIVE.

The MUSIC composed by Dr. BOYCE.

DUBLIN: Printed for J. EXSHAW, and M. WILLIAMSON, M, DCC, LIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS little Piece was written above three Years since, and acted for my
Benefit. -- The last Scene was an Addition the Year after. Whatever Faults are
in it, I hope, will be pardoned, when I inform the Public, I had at first no
Design of printing it; and do it now at the Request of my Friends, who (as it
met with so much Indulgence from the Audience) thought it might give some
Pleasure in the reading. -- The Songs were written by a Gentleman.

I take this Opportunity to assure the Public, I am, with great Gratitude and
Respect,

Their most Obliged, Humble Servant, C. CLIVE.

PERSONS.
MEN.
WITLING, Mr. WOODWARD. Sir ALBANY ODELOVE, Mr. SHUTER. TOM, Mr. MOZEEN.
PROMPTER, Mr. CROSS.
WOMEN.
Mrs. HAZARD, Mrs. CLIVE. Miss GIGGLE, Miss MINORS. Miss CROTCHET, Miss
HIPPISLEY. Miss SIDLE, Mrs. SIMSON. Miss DAWDLE, Mrs. TOOGOOD. GATTY, Mrs.
BENNET.
PASTORAL CHARACTERS.
CORYDON, Mr. BEARD. MIRANDA, Miss THOMAS. MARCELLA, Mrs. CLIVE.
THE REHEARSAL: OR, BAYS in PETTICOATS.
SCENE I.
A Dressing Room in Mrs. HAZARD'S House. (GATTY preparing the Toylet.) Enter
TOM with Tea Things. GATTY. WELL, I believe we are at present the most
melancholy Family in Town, that used to be the merriest. Since these Devils,
the Muses, (as my Lady calls 'em) have got into the House, they have turned her
Head, and she distracts every body about her. She really was once a
sweettemper'd Woman; but now I cannot speak, or stir, but she flies at me, and
says I have flurried her out of one of the finest Thoughts! -- Hang her! I wish
her Farce may be hissed off the Stage.


TOM. That Is but a foolish kind of Wish; for if she is so sweet-temper'd now,
what do you think she will be then?


GATTY. I don't care what she will be; for I Am determined not to stay with her. I
am sure she uses me like her Dog.


TOM. Does she? -- Then you are an ungrateful Hussy to complain: for she is
fonder of that than ever she was of her Husband. -- I fancy this Farce of here is
is horrid Stuff: for I observe, all her Visitors she reads it to (which is
indeed every body that comes to the House) whisper as they come down Stairs,
and laugh ready to kill themselves.


GATTY. Yes, but that is at her Assurance. Why, do you know it is none of her
own? a Gentleman only lent it her to read; he has been ill a great while at
Bath; so she has taken the Advantage of that, made some little Alterations, had
it set to Music, and has introduced it to the Stage as a Performance of her own.


TOM. I hear Mr. Surly, that every body thought she was going to be married to,
is so enraged at her, that he will never speak to her, or see her again. One of
his Footmen told me of it yesterday, as a great Secret, so I promised him never
to mention it. -- Don't you hear her Bell ring?

(Rings.
GATTY. Hear her! yes, yes, I hear her; but I should have a fine Time on it, if
I was to go to her, as often as she takes it in her Head to ring. (Rings
again.) Ay, ay, ring away.


TOM. Ay, ay, ring away. -- I'gad here she comes. I with you well off. (Exit.


Enter Mrs. HAZARD. Mrs. HAZARD. Why, what is the Meaning I must ring for an
Hour, and none of ye will come near me, ye Animals? --


GATTY. I was coming as fast as I could.


Mrs. HAZARD. As fast as you could! why, you move like a Snail that has been
trod upon, you creeping Creature. -- Let me die, but she has provoked me into a
fine Simile. Come, get the Things to dress me instantaneously. (Tom with Tea
and Coffee. She repeats Recitative, Oh, Corydon, etc.) You, Tom, I Am at Home to
no human Being this Morning but Mr. Witling. I Have promised to carry him to the
Rehearsal with me. (Repeats Recitative, Gatty waiting with her Cap.)


GATTY. Madam, will you please to have your Cap on?


Mrs. HAZARD. No! you Idiot; how durst you interrupt me, when you saw me so
engaged? As I am a Critic, this Creature will distract me! -- Give me my Bottle
of Salts. -- She has ruined one of the finest Conclusions. -- O Cor. -- Lord! I
cannot sing a Note. -- What are you doing?


GATTY. Lord, Madam, I cannot find them!


Mrs. HAZARD. Here Is a provoking Devil! sees 'em in my Hand, and would not tell
me of it! Get out of my Sight. (Repeats Recitative) Why, where are you going?
am I to dress myself?


GATTY. Madam, Mr. Witling.


Enter WITLING. WITLING. My dear Widow! you're hard at it I see. Come, give me
some Tea. What is it, your Prologue, or Epilogue, pray?


Mrs. HAZARD. O Lord! dear Witling! -- Don't be ridiculous; for I Am in a horrid
Humor.


WITLING. Yes; and a horrid Dress too, I think. Why, it is almost ten. -- What,
is this your Rehearsal Habiliment?


Mrs. HAZARD. Why, that Creature that you see standing there, will not give me any
thing to put on.


WITLING. Well, do you know I have had such a Quarrel with Frank Surly upon
your Account? We met last Night at Lady Betty Brag's Rout; -- there was a vast
deal of Company, -- and they were all talking of your new Piece.


Mrs. HAZARD. So, I suppose I was finely worried.


WITLING. You shall hear: as soon as ever it was mentioned, we all burst out a
laughing.


Mrs. HAZARD. You did! -- and pray what did you laugh at?


WITLING. Hey! -- why -- oh, at Frank Surly; he looked so like a -- ha, ha, ha,
i'gad I cannot find a Simile that can give you an Idea of such a Face. Oh,
thinks I, my dear, you're in a fine Humor to make us some Diversion. So, says
I, Frank, I hear the Match is quite concluded between Mrs. Hazard and you; and
that she has fixed the first Night of her Comedy for your Wedding-Night. --
Sir, says he, (with a very grave Face) you may say what you please of Mrs.
Hazard; for as she is going to expose herself, she must expect that every Fool
will be as impertinent as she is ridiculous: -- but I would advise you not to
mention my Name any more in that Manner, for, if you do, I shall take it
extremely ill. Lord! says Miss Giggle, Mr. Surly, how can you be so cross?
expose herself! -- I Will swear, I believe Mrs. Hazard can write a very pretty
Play, for she has a great deal of Wit and Humor. -- Wit and Humor! says he,
why there are not ten Women in the Creation that have Sense enough to write a
consistent N. B. -- Marry her! I would sooner marry a Woman that had been
detected in ten Amors, than one, who, in Defiance to all Advice, and without
the Pretense that most People write for, (for every body knows she is a Woman of
Fortune) will convince the whole World she is an Idiot.


Mrs. HAZARD. A Bear! a Brute! let me hear no more of him.


WITLING. Yes, but I must tell you a very good thing that I said to him.


Mrs. HAZARD. No, that you cannot I Am sure, Witling; for you never said a good
thing in your Life.


WITLING. Nay, why should you be so ill-natured to me? I Am sure I took your
Part. Why, says I, Frank, how can you be such a Fool to quarrel with her? I
wish she liked me half so well, as I Am sure she does you; she should write, and
be hanged if she would, for any thing I cared; for let them do what they will
with her Performance, they cannot damn her eight hundred a Year.


Mrs. HAZARD. You said so, did you?


WITLING. I said so! -- No; Lord, Child! -- How could you think I could say
such a Thing. No, no, to be sure it was said by somebody in the Company. But
upon Honor I don't know who.


Mrs. HAZARD. What a Wretch is this? -- But he is to carry a Party for me the
first Night; so I must not quarrel with him. (Aside.


WITLING. Well, but my dear Hazard, when does your Farce come out?


Hrs. HAZARD. Why some time next Week; this is to be the last Rehearsal: and
the Managers have promised they shall all be dressed, that we may see exactly
what Effect it will have.


WITLING. Well, but don't your Head ach, when you think of the first Night?
hey. --


Mrs. HAZARD. Not in the least; the Town never hiss any Thing that is
introduced to them, by a Person of Consequence and Breeding. Because they are
sure they will have nothing low.


WITLING Ay, but they may not be so sure they will have nothing foolish.


Mrs. HAZARD. Ha! -- Why perhaps they may not find out one so soon as the other.
Ha, ha, ha, well, let me die if that is not a very good Thing. -- But it is well
for me, Witling, the Town don't hear me; not that I mean quite what I say
neither, for to do them Justice, they are generally in the right in their
Censure; though sometimes indeed they will out of Humanity forgive an Author
Stupidity, and overlook his being a Fool; provided he will do them the Favor
not to be a Beast; for which Reason, Witling, I have taken great Care to be
delicate; I may be dull, but I am delicate; so that I am not at all afraid of
the Town: I wish I could say the same of the Performers: Lord, what pity it is
the great Tragedy Actors cannot sing! I Am about a new Thing, which I shall call
a Burletto, which I take from some Incidents in Don Quixote, that I believe
will be as high Humor, as was ever brought upon the Stage. But then I shall
want Actors; oh! if that dear Garrick could but sing, what a Don Quixote he would
make!


WITLING. Don't you think Barry would be a better! he is so tall you know, and
so finely made for it. If I was to advise, I would carry that to Covent Garden.


Mrs. HAZARD. Covent Garden! Lord, I would not not think of it, it stands in
such a bad Air.


WITLING. Bad Air!


Mrs. HAZARD. Ay; the Actors cannot play there above three Days a Week. They
have more need of a Physician, than a Poet, at that House.


WITLING. But pray, Madam, you say you are to call your new Thing, a Burletto;
what is a Burletto?


Mrs. HAZARD. What is a Burletto? why havn't you seen one at the Hay-market.


WITLING. Yes; but I don't know what it is for all that.


Mrs. HAZARD. Don't you! why then, let me die if I can tell you, but I believe
it is a kind of poor Relation to an Opera.


WITLING. Pray how many Characters have you in this Thing?


Mrs. HAZARD. Why I have but three; for as I was observing, there is so few of
them that can sing: nay I have but two indeed that are rational, for I have
made one of them mad.


WITLING. And who is to act that, pray?


Mrs. HAZARD. Why Mrs. Clive to be sure; though I wish she don't spoil it; for
she is so conceited, and insolent, that she will not let me teach it her. You must
know when I told her I had a Part for her in a Performance of mine, in the
prettiest manner I was able, (for one must be civil to these sort of People
when one wants them) says she, Indeed, Madam, I must see the whole Piece, for I
shall take no Part in a new Thing, without choosing that which I think I can act
best. I have been a great Sufferer already, by the Manager's not doing Justice
to my Genius; but I hope I shall next Year convince the Town, what fine
Judgment they have: for I intend to play a capital Tragedy Part for my own
Benefit.


WITLING. And what did you say to her, pray?


Mrs. HAZARD. Say to her! why do you think I would venture to expostulate with
her? -- No, I desired Mr. Garrick would take her in Hand; so he ordered her the
Part of the Mad-woman directly.


WITLING. Well, I think the Town will be vastly obliged to you, for giving them
such an Entertainment, as I am told it is from every body that has heard it;
though the ill -- natured Part of your Acquaintance say it is none of your own.


Mrs. HAZARD. Why whose do they say it is, pray? -- Not yours, Witling; not
quite so bad as that I hope. No, my Motive for writing, was really Compassion;
the Town has been so overwhelmed with Tragedies lately, that they are in one
entire Fit of the Vapors. -- They think they love 'em, but it is no such Thing.
I was there one Night this Season at a Tragedy, and there was such an universal
Yawn in the House, that, if it had not been for a great Quantity of Drums and
Trumpets, that most judiciously every now and then came in to their Relief, the
whole Audience would have fallen asleep.


Enter TOM. TOM. Madam, there is a young Miss desires to speak to you upon
particular Business.


WITLING. Heark'e Tom, are you sure it is a young Miss? -- If it is an old one,
don't let her come up; for they are a Sort of Creatures I have a great Aversion
to.


Mrs. HAZARD. Why, thou impertinent, stupid Wretch! did not I bid you deny me
to every body? don't you know I am going out this Instant;


TOM. Madam, it is not my Fault; I was not below, and they let her in.


Mrs. HAZARD. I don't believe there is a Woman in the World has such a
Collection of Devils in her House as I have.


Enter MISS. MISS. Mame, -- your Servant. -- Not to interrupt you.


Mrs. HAZARD. Yes, Miss; but you have done that -- What is your Business pray?


MISS. Why, Mame -- I was informed as how that there was a new Play of yours,
Mame, a-coming out upon the Stage, with some Singing in it.


Mrs. HAZARD. Coming out upon the Stage! (Lord! where could this Creature come
from!) Well, Miss.


MISS. So, Mame, I have a Desire, (not that I have any Occasion) but it is my
Fancy, Mame, to come and sing upon the Stage.


Mrs. HAZARD. And a very odd Fancy I believe it is. -- Well, Miss, you say, it
is your Fancy to sing upon the Stage; but, pray are you qualified?


MISS. O yes, Mame; I have very good Friends.


Mrs. HAZARD. This Girl's a Natural! -- Why, Miss, that is a very great
Happiness; but I believe a good Voice would be more material to your Fancy; --
I suppose you have a good Voice.


MISS. No, Mame; I cannot say I have much Voice.


Mrs. HAZARD. Ha, ha, she is delightful! I am glad they let her in. Well, Miss,
to be sure then you are a Mistress!


MISS. Mame -- what do you mean?


Mrs. HAZARD. Ha, ha; I say, I imagine you understand Music perfectly well.


MISS. No, Mame, I never learnt in my Life; but it is my Fancy.


WITLING. Miss is a very pretty Girl, I wish she would take a Fancy to me, I
believe it would answer my Purpose better than singing will here is. (Aside.


Mrs. HAZARD. Well; but, my Dear, as you confess you have neither Voice nor
Judgment, to be sure you have a particular fine Ear!


MISS* Yes, Mame, I Have a very good Ear -- that is when I sing by myself; but
the Music always puts me out.


Mrs. HAZARD. Ha, ha. Well, Child, you have given an exceeding good Account of
yourself, and I believe will make a very extraordinary Performer.


MISS. Thank you, Mame, Yes, I believe I shall do very well in Time.


WITLING. Pray, Miss, will not you favor us with a Song?


MISS. Yes, Sir; If you please, I Will sing Powerful Guardians of all Nature:
I Have brought it with me.


Mrs. HAZARD. Pray let us hear it. (Miss sings.) Oh fie! Miss! that will never
do; you speak your Words as plain as a Parish-Girl; the Audience will never
endure you in this kind of Singing, if they understand what you say: you must
give your Words the Italian Accent, Child. -- Come, you shall hear me. (Mrs.
Hazard sings in the Italian manner.) There, Miss, that is the Taste of singing
now. -- But I must beg you would excuse me at present; I Am going to the
Playhouse, and will certainly speak to the Managers about you; for I dare
believe you will make a prodigious Figure upon the Stage.


WITLING. That you will indeed, Miss. -- The strangest that ever was seen
there. (Aside.


MISS. Sir, I thank you, Mame, I thank you. Mame, I Will wait on you another Time.


Mrs. HAZARD. Miss, your Servant. -- No; that you shall not do, I promise you.
(Exit Miss.


Enter TOM. TOM. Madam, your Chair has been waiting a great while; It Is after
Ten, above half an Hour.


Mrs. HAZARD. My Stars! this driveling Girl has ruined me. Here, Gatty, get me
my Shade; I Will go as I am.


WITLING. Shall Not I set you down?


Mrs. HAZARD. Oh! not for the World! an Authoress to be seen in the Chariot of
a Fool, would be the greatest Absurdity in Nature; we shall meet at the House.


WITLING. Very well, Mame, and I shall be in the Pit the first Night; remember
that. -- Come, give me your Hand, however. (Exeunt.


ACT II.
SCENE, The Playhouse.
Enter Mrs. HAZARD, Mr. WITLING, and Mr. CROSS. Mrs. HAZARD. MR. Cross, your
Servant. Has any body been to ask for me this Morning?


Mr. CROSS. Not any body, Madam.


Mrs. HAZARD. Well, that is very surprising! I expected Half the Town would have
been trying to get in: but it is better as it is; for they would only have
interrupted the Rehearsal. So, Mr. Cross, I Will be denied to every body. Well,
Witling, how do you like the Playhouse in a Morning?


WITLING. Why, I think it is like a fine Lady; it looks best by Candlelight.


Mrs. HAZARD. But pray, Mr. Cross, get every body ready; is the Music come?


Mr. CROSS. Yes, Madam, the Music has been here this half Hour, and every body
but Mrs. Clive; and, I dare say, she will not be long, for she is very punctual;
Mr. Beard and Miss Thomas are gone to dress.


Mrs. HAZARD. Mr. Cross, you have had a great deal of Trouble with this Thing;
I don't know how I must make you amends; but pray, when your Benefit is, -- you
have a Benefit, I suppose? -- set me down all your Side-Boxes, and every first
Row in the Front; I may want more; but I shall certainly fill those.


Mr. CROSS. Thank'ye, Madam.


Enter a SERVANT. SERVANT. Mr. Cross, there is a Person wants to speak to you.
(Exit Mr. Cross.


Mrs. HAZARD. Well, I Will swear these poor Players have a very slavish Life; I
wonder how they are able to go through it!


Enter Mr. CROSS. Mr. CROSS. Madam, Mrs. Clive has sent Word, that she cannot
possibly wait on you this Morning, as she is obliged to go to some Ladies about
her Benefit. But you may depend on her being very perfect, and ready to perform
it whenever you please.


Mrs. HAZARD. Mr. Cross, what did you say? I cannot believe what I have heard!
Mrs. Clive send me Word she cannot come to my Rehearsal, and is gone to Ladies
about her Benefit! Sir, she shall have no Benefit. Mr. Witling, did you ever
hear of a Parallel to this Insolence? Give me my Copy, Sir; give me my Copy.
I Will make Mrs. Clive repent treating me in this manner. Very fine indeed! to
have the Assurance to prefer her Benefit to my Rehearsal! Mr. Cross, you need
not give yourself the Trouble to set down any Places for me at your Benefit,
for I Will never come into the Playhouse any more.


WITLING. Nay; but, my dear Hazard, don't put yourself into such a Passion,
cannot you rehearse her Part yourself? I dare say you will do it better than she
can?


Mr. CROSS. Why, Madam, if you would be so good, as the Music are here, and the
other Characters dressed, it would be very obliging: And if you please to put
on Mrs. Clive's, her Dresser is here to attend, as she expected her, and I
believe it will fit you exactly, as you're much of her Size.


Mrs. HAZARD. O yes; to be sure it will fit me exactly, because I happen to be
a Head taller, and, I hope, something better made.


WITLING. Oh, my dear Hazard! put it on; put it on. Oh Lord! let me see you in
a Playhouse Dress.


Mrs. HAZARD. Well, let me die, but I have a great Mind; -- for I had set my
Heart upon seeing the poor Thing rehearsed in its proper Dresses. -- Well,
Witling, shall I? -- I think I will. Do you go into the Green Room and drink
some Chocolate, I Will slip on the Things in a Minute. No; hang it, I will not take
the Trouble; I Will rehearse as I am.

Enter PERFORMERS dressed. Miss Thomas, your Servant. Upon my Word, I am
extremely happy to have you in my Performance; you will do amazing well. Only I
must beg you*d throw in as much Spirit as you can, without overdoing it; for
that same Thing the Players call Spirit, they sometimes turn into Rant and
Noise. Oh, Mr. Beard! your most Obedient. Sir, I shall be vastly obliged to
you, I am sure; do you know that you sing better than any of 'em? But I hope
you would consider the Part you are to act with Marcella, is to be done with great
Scorn: Therefore, as you have such a smiling, good-humored Face, I beg you will
endeavor to smother as many of your Dimples as you can in that Scene with her.
Come, come, let us begin We may omit the Overture.


MIRANDA, Sola. RECITATIVE.
It must be so -- my Shepherd never shall prove
A Renegado from the Faith of Love.
Nor shall Marcella tear him from my Arms,
Even though her Wealth be boundless as her Charms.

Mrs. HAZARD. That Is pretty well, Madam, but I think you sing it too much; you
should consider Recitative should be spoken as plain as possible; or else
you will lose the Expression -- I Will show you what I mean. -- No, no, go on now
with the Symphony for the Song.


AIR.
If Cupid once the Mind possess,
All low Affections cease;
No Troubles then can give Distress,
No Tumult break the Peace.
Oh had I thousand Gifts in Store,
Were I of Worlds the Queen,
For him I Would covet thousands more,
And call Profusion mean.
2.
Then let my Swain my Love return,
And equal Raptures feel;
Nor let his Passions cool, or burn,
As Fortune winds her Wheel.
If his fond Heart I may believe
Immutably secure,
No Sorrow then can make me grieve,
No Loss can make me poor.
RECITATIVE.
But see he comes -- I Will wear a short Disguise;
Be false my Tongue! -- be Hypocrites my Eyes!
Nor to the Youth too wantonly impart
The secret History of a faithful Heart.
Enter CORYDON. What! from Marcella come! -- Insulting Swain,
Come ye to wake, and triumph in my Pain,
Warm from those Lips whose cruel Sentence gave
Thy Friend Philander an untimely Grave?
RECITATIVE.
CORYDON. Marcella! name not the capricious Fair,
One Smile from thee is worth Possession there.
MIRANDA. Did not I hear her, in yon Hawthorn Bower,
With Transport boast over Corydon her Power?
AIR.
CORYDON. In vain, my Fair One, you complain,
And charge the guiltless Boy in vain,
Who never was found untrue;
The sweetest Image Thought can find,
Thou best Idea of my Mind,
My Soul is filled with you.
2.
Let but those Eyes, benignly bright,
That look the Language of Delight,
This spacious Globe review;
If they can find an equal Fair,
Be jealous then -- and I Will take Care
You shall have Reason too.
MIRANDA. Well -- would you ease my Breast, and Peace restore,
Oh never see the vain Marcella more.
DUET.
MIRANDA. AIR.
At length return, luxuriant Thought,
Return and settle where you ought,
Fiz'd by Experience dearly bought
For sweet and useful Ends.
Often did I dread her subtle Care,
And often was jealous, though secure,
What Agonies did I endure?
But Love has made amends.
CORYDON. Joy were no Joy, and Pleasure vain,
Were there not Intervals of Pain;
The Captive who has felt a Chain
Is doubly blessed when free.
I view with Transports the Abyss,
Which Powers propitious made me miss,
And rush with aching Thoughts of Bliss
To Safety, and to thee.
BOTH. Joy were no Joy, and Pleasure vain,
Were there not Intervals of Pain;
The Captive who has felt a Chain
Is doubly blessed when free.
It Is Clouds that make the Sun more bright,
It Is Darkness that sets off the Light,
It Is Sorrow gives to Joy its Height,
By Heaven's most kind Decree.
CORYDON. (Witling falls asleep. Soft! she approaches -- seek you poplar Glade,
And wait beneath the thick embowering Shade.
Yourself shall be a Witness to my Truth.
(Miranda retires. Enter MARCELLA. Oh Corydon, ah cruel charming Youth,
Look not so stern, I have no Hopes to blast;
My Love is come in Sighs to breathe its last.
AIR.
The silver Rain, the pearly Dew,
The Gales that sweep along the Mead,
The softened Rocks have Sorrow knew,
And Marbles have found Tears to shed;
The sighing Trees, in every Grove,
Have Pity, if they have not Love.
2.
Shall Things inanimate be kind,
And every soft Sensation know;
The weeping Rain, and sighing Wind,
All, all, but thee, some Mercy show.
Ah pity -- if you scorn t'approve;
Have Pity, if thou have not Love.
(A Noise without. Enter Miss GIGGLE, Sir ALBANY ODELOVE, Miss SIDLE, and Miss
DAWDLE. Miss GIGGLE. My dear Creature, I immensely rejoice to find you; do you
know we have been at your House, and could not meet with a Creature that could
give the least Account of you? Your Servants are all abroad, ha, ha, ha; they
are certainly the worst Servants in the World, ha, ha, ha. Well, but my Dear,
have you done? for we must have you with us. We are going to one of the
breakfasting Places, but we don't know which yet, for they are all so immensely
superb, that I cannot touch my Breakfast at Home, ha, ha, ha! Lord, dear
Creature, what makes you look so miserable? your new Thing is'nt a Tragedy, is
it?


Mrs. HAZARD. Giggle, I Am astonished at you: Pray who are all these People you
have brought upon me? --


Miss GIGGLE. Who are they, my Dear? I Will introduce you to them; they are
immensely agreeable, all of them, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. HAZARD. Lookee, Miss Giggle, if they are ever so immense, they must not
stay here, for I Am going to be immensely busy, and will not be interrupted.


Miss GIGGLE. My dear Creature, as to leaving you, it is not in the Nature of
Things; I would not go without you for the World; Sir Albany Odelove, Mrs.
Hazard, desires to be introduced to you. Madam, this Gentleman is immensely
fond of the Muses, and therefore must be agreeable to you. Miss Sidle, Miss
Dawdle. (introduces 'em.


Mrs. HAZARD. Mr. Cross, -- I want to speak to you; I shall run mad. -- (Aside.


Miss GIGGLE. Lord Witling, what is the matter with Mrs. Hazard? She looks as if
she could kill me.


WITLING. The matter with her? ha, ha, ha! why, you have interrupted her
Rehearsal. Ah, I could indulge such a Laugh! if you will join with me, we shall
have the finest Scene in the World. -- She has made me sick to Death with her
Stuff, and I will be revenged. You must know one of the Actresses has
disappointed her, and she is going to sing her Part herself; so the Moment she
begins, do you burst into a violent Laugh; we shall all join with you, you may
be sure; and then you will see the Consequence. --


Miss GIGGLE. See! nay, I believe I shall feel the Consequence, for she will
certainly beat us immensely. Oh, I Will tell you what; let us set Odelove upon
her, to enquire into the Plot of her Play -- He Will plague her to Death, for
he is immensely foolish.


WITLING. Well -- that is an admirable Thought. -- Mum. --


Miss GIGGLE. Well, but my dear Mrs. Hazard, don't let us interrupt you, for we
are all immensely fond of a Rehearsal.


Miss DAWDLE. Yes, so we are indeed, Madam, immensely.


WITLING. So we are, immensely. (Catches her Hand.


Miss DAWDLE. Lord! don't paw one so, Mr. Witling. --


Miss GIGGLE. And so this is the Playhouse; I Will swear it is immensely pretty,
and all the Music; well, if there was but a Scene of green Trees, we might
fancy ourselves at Ranelagh, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. HAZARD. Why really by the Noise you make, and the Nonsense you talk, I
think you might. Lookee, Miss Giggle, I shall be very plain with you; if you
think it is possible for you to be quiet for Half an Hour, I shall be glad of
your Company; if not, I must beg you would depart.


Sir ALBANY. Why really what the Lady says, is very pathetic and consequental
to the foregoing Part of Miss Giggle's Behavior; for when a Person of Parts,
(as we are to suppose this Lady to be) is assassinated with Incoherences, it is
such an Aggravation to our Intellects, as does in Fact require supernatural
Patience to acquiesce thereto.


ALL. Ha! ha! ha!


Miss GIGGLE. Very well, Sir Albany, I Will remember you for this -- No, upon
Honor, now I will be very good, I will not interrupt you indeed, will not speak
another Word. -- O la, Witling, do you know Miss Lucy Loveshuffle had such an
immense ill Run last Night, she bragged every thing that came into her Hand,
and lost every thing she bragged -- 'till she really looked as ugly as a Fiend.


WITLING. I fancy you won then, Giggle: For I never saw you look so well.


Mrs. HAZARD. Nay, as to that Matter, let Giggle win or lose, it will be pretty
much the same thing with her Beauty; but come, Mr. Cross, pray let us go on.
Let me see, I begin my Recit.


ALBANY. Corydon. --


WITLING. Giggle, I can tell you who is going to be married.


Miss SIDLE and Miss DAWDLE. Oh Lord! who? -- pray tell us?

WITLING. The celebrated Miss Shrimp to Lord Lovelittle, a Man of very great
Fortune.


Miss DAWDLE. Really! well then, I think we none of us need to despair.


WITLING. Come, don't you be envious now; for she is a charming Girl, and
deserves her good Fortune.


Miss GIGGLE. Charming! -- nay then I shall never have done, I Am sure she is
immensely little.


Sir ALBANY. Oh fie Miss, that is Nonsense; horrid Nonsense! immensely little! Oh
Lord!


WITLING. Why, to be sure she is rather small, that must be allowed; she is
certainly the least Woman that ever was seen for nothing.


Sir ALBANY. Madam, as I was not so auspicious as to be here at the Beginning
of this Affair, will you give me leave to ask you a few Questions? --


Mrs. CROSS. Madam, if you will not go on, the Music and Performers cannot possibly
stay any longer.


Mrs. HAZARD. Why what can I do, Mr. Cross? you see how I Am terrified with 'em.


WITLING. She begins to be in a Fury. -- Look at her, Giggle.


Sir ALBANY. I say, Madam, will you give me Leave, as you're going to entertain
the Town, (that is, I mean, to endeavor, or to attempt to entertain them) for
let me tell you, fair Lady, it is not an easy thing to bring about. If Men, who
are properly graduated in Learning, who have swallowed the Tincture of a polite
Education, who, as I may say, are Hand and Glove with the Classics, if such
Genius's as I Am describing, fail of Success in Dramatical Occurrences, or
Performances, ('it is the same Sense in the Latin) what must a poor Lady expect,
who is ignorant as the Dirt?


Mrs. HAZARD. Pray, Sir, how long have they let you out?


Sir ALBANY. Therefore, I hope you have had the Advice of your Male
Acquaintance, who will take some Care of your Diction, and see that you have
observed that great Beauty, neglected by most Dramatic Authors, of Time and
Place.


WITLING. Oh Sir Albany, I Will answer she has taken Care of Time and Place; for
it will begin about half an Hour after eight; and be acted at Drury Lane
Theater. -- Ha, ha, ha, there is Time and Place for you.


Mrs. HAZARD. And so, you're Hand and Glove with the Classics, are you? Why
thou elaborate Idiot, how durst you venture to talk to any thing that is
Rational? -- Consult my Male Acquaintance! I thank my Stars, thou art not one
of 'em. Where did you pick up this Creature? -- what is his Name? -- Can you
spell your own Name, you ugly Brute?


Miss GIGGLE. Oh Lord! it will never come to her Singing.


Miss SIDLE. Pray, Madam, will there be any Dancing this Morning?


Mrs. HAZARD. No -- Mr. Cross, who let these People in? I do assure you I shall
complain to the Managers; -- I have been so plagued there is no bearing it -- I
could tear these -- I Am unfit for any thing now. -- So the Rehearsal must be
put off, 'till another Morning.


WITLING. Ay do; -- and let us go --


Mrs. HAZARD. Go to --


WITLING. To Ranelagh -- I knew you would not name an ungenteel Place.


Sir ALBANY. The Lady has been somewhat underbred in her Behavior to me; but
as I have a Regard to the Fair Sex, I would have some of you advise her to cry;
it will give Relief to her Passion.


Mrs. HAZARD. Sir, will you go out of this Place?


Sir ALBANY. I protest, Madam, I will, directly. (Exit.


ALL. Ha, ha, ha!


WITLING. Well, but my dear Creature, you are not angry with me? --


Mrs. HAZARD. Indeed I am, Witling, and very angry too; I don't believe I shall
ever speak to you again. As for those Things, that run about littering the
Town, and force themselves into all public Places only to show their
Insignificance, they are beneath my Resentment. -- Mr. Cross, I Will settle with
you, when I would have another Rehearsal; though I am not sure I ever will have
another. -- I believe I shall tear it to Pieces. -- Pray let somebody see if my
Chairmen are there.


WITLING. Shall I wait on you?


Mrs. HAZARD. No. (Exit.


WITLING. Well, as Sir Paul says Odsbud, she is a passionate Woman; but her
tearing it will only save the Audience the Trouble of doing it for her. Come,
Ladies, will you go? I Will see you to your Coach.


Mr. CROSS. As the Ladies have been disappointed of Mrs. Hazard's Rehearsal, if
they please to stay, we are going to practice a new Dance.


ALL. Oh, by all Means.


A DANCE. FINIS.

