TO DAVID GARRICK, Esquire
SIR,
AMIDST the regrets I feel for your quitting the Stage, it is peculiarly
gratifying, that a Play of mine closes your dramatic life -- It is the highest
pleasure to me, that that Play, from its success, reflects no dishonor on your
judgment as a Manager.

Posterity will know, through a thousand Channels, that Mr. GARRICK was the
ornament of the eighteenth Century, that he possessed the friendship of those
whose Names will be the glory of English History, that the first ranks in the
kingdom courted his society -- may my small voice be heard amongst those who
will inform it, that Mr. GARRICK's Heart was no less an honor to him, than his
Talents!

Unpatronized by any name, I presented myself to you, obscure and unknown. You
perceived dawnings in my Comedy, which you nourished and improved. With
attention, and solicitude, you embellished, and presented it to the world --
that World, which has emulated your generosity, and received it with an
applause, which fills my heart with most lively gratitude. I perceive how much
of this applause I owe to my Sex. -- The RUNAWAY has a thousand faults, which,
if written by a Man, would have incurred the severest lash of Criticism -- but
the Gallantry of the English Nation is equal to its Wisdom -- they beheld a
Woman tracing with feeble steps the borders of the Parnaffian Mount -- pitying
her difficulties (for it is a thorny path) they gave their hands for her
support, and placed her high above her level.

All this, Sir, and whatever may be its consequences, I owe to you. Had you
rejected me, when I presented my little RUNAWAY, depressed by the refusal, and
all confidence in myself destroyed, I should never have presumed to dip my pen
again. It is now my task to convince You and the World, that a generous
allowance for a young Writer's faults, is the best encouragement to Genius --
it is a kindly Soil, in which weak Groundlings are nourished, and from which the
loftiest Trees draw their strength, and their beauty.

I take my leave of you, Sir, with the warmest wishes for your felicity, and
Mrs. GARRICK's -- to whose taste, and sollicitede for me, I am highly indebted.
May your recess from the Stage be attended with all the blessings of retirement
and ease -- and may the world remember, in its most distant periods, that it is
to Mr. GARRICK the English Theater owes its emancipation from grossness, and
buffoonery -- that to Mr. GARRICK's Judgment it is indebted for being the
first Stage in Europe, and to his Talents for being the delight of the most
enlightened and polished age.

I am, Sir, your most devoted, and obedient humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE.
Written by the AUTHOR.
Spoken by MR. BRERETON. O The sweet prospect! what a fine Parterre!
Soft buds, sweet flowers, bright tints, and scented air! [Boxes.
A Vale, where critic wit spontaneous grows! [Pit.
A Hill, which noise and folly never knows! [Gallery.
Let Cits point out green paddocks to their spouses;
To me, no prospect like your crowded houses --
If, as just now, you wear those smiles enchanting;
But, when you frown, my heart you set a panting.
Pray then, for pity, do not frown tonight;
I Will bribe -- but how -- Oh, now I Have hit it -- right.
Secrets are pleasant to each child of Eve;
I Have one in store, which for your smiles I Will give.
O list! a tale it is, not very common;
Our Poet of tonight, in faith's a -- Woman,
A woman, too, untutored in the School,
Nor Aristotle knows, nor scarce a rule
By which fine writers fabricate their plays,
From sage Menander's, to these modern days:
How she could venture here I am astonished;
But 'twas in vain the Mad-cap I admonished;
Told her of squeaking cat-calls, hisses, groans,
Off, offs, and ruthless Critics' damning moans.
I Am undismayed, she cried, critics are Men,
And smile on folly from a Woman's pen:
Then it is the Ladies' cause, there I Am secure;
Let him who hisses, no soft Nymph endure;
May he who frowns, be frowned on by his Goddess,
From Pearls, and Brussels Point, to Maids in Boddice.
Now for a hint of her intended feast:
It Is rural, playful, -- harmless it is at least;
Not over-stock'd with repartee or wit,
Though here and there perchance there is a hit;
For she never played with bright Apollo's fire,
No Muse invoked, or heard the Aonian lyre;
Her Comic Muse -- a little blue-ey'd maid,
With cheeks where innocence and health's displayed;
Her 'Pol -- in petticoats -- a romping Boy,
Whose taste is trap-ball, and a kite his joy:
Her Nursery the study, where she thought,
Framed fable, incident, surprise and plot.
From the surrounding hints she caught her plan,
Lengthening the chain from infancy to man:
Tom plagues poor Fan; she sobs, but loves him still;
Kate aims her wit at both, with roguish skill:
Our Painter marked those lines -- which Nature drew,
Her fancy glowed, and colored them -- for you;
A Mother's pencil gave the light and shades,
A Mother's eye through each soft scene pervades;
Her Children rose before her flattered view,
Hope stretched the canvas, whilst her wishes drew.
We'll now present you drapery and features,
And warmly hope, you will like the pretty creatures;
Then Tom shall have his kite, and Fan new dollies,
Till time matures them for important follies."
The dotted lines in the Play are omitted at the Theater.

EPILOGUE.
Written by D. GARRICK, ESQUIRE.
Spoken by MISS YOUNG. POST haste from Italy arrives my Lover!
Shall I to you, good Friends, my fears discover?
Should Foreign modes his Virtues mar, and mangle,
And Caro Sposo prove -- Sir Dingle Dangle;
No sooner joined than separate we go,
Abroad -- we never shall each other know,
At home -- I mope above -- he will pick his teeth below.
In sweet domestic chat we never shall mingle,
And, wedded though I am, shall still live single.
However modish, I detest this plan:
For me, no maukish creature, weak, and wan;
He must be English, and an English -- Man.
To Nature, and his Country, false and blind,
Should Belville dare to twist his form and mind,
I will discard him -- and to Britain true,
A Briton choose -- and, may be, one of you!
Nay, don't be frightened -- I am but in jest;
Free Men in Love, or War, should never be pressed.
If you would know my utmost expectation,
It Is one unspoil'd by traveled Education;
With knowledge, taste, much kindness, and some whim,
Good sense to govern me -- and let me govern him:
Great love of me, must keep his heart from roving;
Then I Will forgive him, if he proves too loving:
If in these times, I should be blessed by Fate
With such a Phoenix, such a matchless Mate,
I will by kindness, and some small discerning,
Take care that Hymen's torch continues burning:
At weddings, nowadays, the torch thrown down,
Just makes a smoke, then stinks throughout the town!
No married Puritan -- I Will follow pleasure,
And even the Fashion -- but in moderate measure;
I will of Op'ra ecstasies partake,
Though I take snuff to keep myself awake;
No rampant Plumes shall over my temples play,
Foretelling that my brains will fly away;
Nor from my head shall strange vagaries spring,
To show the soil can teem with every thing!
No fruits, roots, greens, shall fill the ample space,
A kitchen-garden, to adorn my face!
No Rocks shall there be seen, no Windmill, Fountain,
Nor curls like Guns set round, to guard the Mountain!
O learn, ye Fair, if this same madness spreads,
Not to hold up, but to keep down your heads:
Be not misled by strange fantastic art,
But in your dress let Nature take some part;
Her skill alone a lasting power insures,
And best can ornament such charms as yours.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
MEN.
Mr. HARGRAVE Mr. Yates. GEORGE HARGRAVE Mr. Smith. Mr. DRUMMOND Mr. Bensley.
Sir CHA. SEYMOUR Mr. Brereton. Mr. MORLEY Mr. Aickin. JUSTICE Mr. Parsons.
JARVIS Mr. Palmer. First Hunter Mr. Bannister.
WOMEN.
Lady DINAH Mrs. Hopkins. BELLA Miss Young. EMILY Mrs. Siddons. HARRIET Miss
Hopkins. SUSAN Mrs. Wrighten.


Gentlemen, Hunters, Servants, etc.

SCENE, Mr. Hargrave's House in the Country.

THE RUNAWAY.
ACT I.
SCENE, a Garden. BELLA and HARRIET. Enter GEORGE. George. OH, for the luxury
of nightgown and slippers! No jaded hack of Parnassus can be more tired than I
am -- the roads so dusty, and the sun so hot -- 'twould be less intolerable
riding post in Africa.


Bella. What a wild imagination! -- But in the name of Fortune, why are you
alone? What have you done with all the College youths? -- This is the first
vacation you ever came home unaccompanied, and I assure you we are quite
disappointed.


Geo. Oh, most unconscionable Woman! Never to be satisfied with conquest --
There Is poor Lumley shot through by your wicked eyes.


Bella. A notable victory indeed! -- however, his name serves to make a figure
in the lists of one's conquests, and so you may give him just hope enough to
feed his sighs, -- but not to encourage his presumption.


Geo. Paragon of generosity! -- And what portion of comfort will your Ladyship
bestow on Egerton and Filmer, who still hug the chains of the resistless
Arabella?


Bella. Upon my word, your catalogue grows interesting -- it is worth while now
to enquire for your vouchers -- Proofs, George, proofs.


Geo. Why, the first writes sonnets in your praise, and the last toasts you
till he cannot see.


Bella. Oh, excellent! -- The Dulcinea of one -- and Circe of the other -- ha!
ha! -- to transform him into a beast -- I hope you have better love tokens for
the blushing Harriet -- How does --


Harriet. Fie, Bella -- you use me ill.


Geo. Why, Sister, you plead guilty, before the charge is exhibited -- But tell
me, my sweet Harriet, who is this favored mortal, of whom you mean to enquire?


Har. Indeed, Brother, I have no enquiries to make; but I imagine my Cousin can
inform you whom she meant.


Bella. Oh, doubtless -- but you look so offended, Harriet, that I dare not
venture the enquiry: ask for Sir Charles Seymour yourself.


Geo. Seymour! Ho, ho! Very fine truly! [aside.] If Seymour be the man, my
Sister, set your heart at rest -- he is on the point of marriage, if I am not
mistaken, with a fine blooming Girl, not more than eighteen. -- Soft, dove-like
eyes -- pouting lips -- teeth that were, doubtless, made of oriental pearl -- a
neck -- I want a simile now -- ivory, wax, alabaster! -- no; they will not do.


Har. [with an air of pique.] One would imagine, Brother, you were drawing the
picture of your own Mistress, instead of Sir Charles's, your colors are so
warm.


Geo. A fine Woman, Harriet, gives warmth to all around her -- She is that
universal spirit, about which Philosophers talk; the true point of attraction
that governs Nature, and controuls the universe of Man.


Bella. Heiday, George! Did the charms of Lady Dinah inspire this rhapsody?


Geo. Charms! What, of that antiquated, sententious, delicate Lady, who blessed
us with her long speeches at dinner?


Bell. You must learn to be more respectful in your epithets, Sir; for that
sententious, delicate Lady designs you the honor of becoming your Mother.


Geo. My Mother! Heaven sorefend -- you jest, surely.


Bell. You shall judge. -- We met her in our late visit to Bath -- She renewed
her acquaintance with your Father, with whom, in Mrs. Hargrave's lifetime, she
had been intimate -- He invited her to return with us, and she has been here
this month -- They are frequently closeted together -- She has forty thousand
pounds, and is Sister to an Irish Peer.


Geo. She might have been Grandmother to the Peer, by the days she has numbered
-- But her excessive propriety and decorum overcome me -- How can they agree
with my father's vociferation, October, and hounds?


Bell. Oh, I assure you, wondrously well -- she kisses Jowler, takes Ringwood on
her lap, and has, more than once, sipp'd out of your Father's tankard. --
Delicacies, Cousin, are easily made to give way, when we have certain ends to
answer.


Geo. Very true; and beware of that period, when delicacies must give way --
tremble at the hour, Bella, when you will rise from the labors of your toilette
with no end in view, but the conquest of some Quixote Galant in his grand
climacteric -- on whom you will squander more encouraging glances, than all the
sighs and ardor of two and twenty can extort from you now.


Bell. Memento mori! Quite a College compliment: you ought rather to have
supposed that my power will increase; and that, like Ninon, I might give myself
the airs of eighteen at eighty -- But here is John coming to summon us to
coffee. -- Harriet!


Geo. Come, Harriet -- why that pensive air? Give me your hand.


Har. Excuse me -- I Will only step and look at my birds, and follow you
instantly -- [Exeunt George and Bella playfully.] -- "Set your heart at rest,
my Sister." -- Oh, Brother! -- you have robbed that heart of rest for ever. --
Cruel intelligence! -- Something has long sat heavy in my bosom -- and now the
weight is irremoveable -- Perfidious Seymour! -- yet, of what can I accuse him?
He never professed to love me -- Oh yes, his ardent looks -- his sighs -- his
consusion -- his respectful attentions, have a thousand times professed the
strongest passion -- Surely, a man cannot in honor, be exculpated, who by such
methods defrauds a Woman of her heart; even though the word Love should never
pass his lips. Yet I ought not to have trusted these seeming proofs -- no; I
must only blame my own credulity -- O partial Nature! -- why have you given us
hearts so replete with tenderness, and minds so weak, so yielding?


SCENE, a Garden Parlour. Enter GEORGE and BELLA at the Garden Door. BELLA
seating herself at a Tea-table. Bell. Hang this Lady Dinah -- one's forced to be
so dressed, and so formal! -- In the country we should be all shepherds and
snepherdesies -- Meadows, ditches, rooks, and court-manners, are the strangest
combination!


Geo. Hist -- she is in the hall, I see -- I Will go and 'squire her in.


[Exit George, and returns with Lady Dinah. Lady D. To you, Sir, who have been
so long conversant with the fine manners o^ ^^e Ancients, the frivolous custom
of tea-drinking must appear ridiculous.


Geo. No custom can be ridiculous, Madam, that gives us the society of the
Ladies -- The young men of those days deserve your L^dyship^s pity, for having
never tasted these elegant hours.


Lady D. [aside.] He is just what his Father described.


Enter Mr. HARGRAVE. Mr. H. No; -- Barbary Bess is spavin'd; let her be taken
care of: I Will have Longshanks, and see that he is saddled by five -- So we
sha'n't have you in the hunt tomorrow, George, -- you must have more time to
shake off the lazy rust of Cambridge, I suppose. -- What sort of hours do you
keep at College?


Geo. Oh, Sir, we are frequently up before the Sun, there.


Mr. H. Hah! -- then it is when you have not been in bed all night, I believe. --
And how do you stand in other matters? -- Have the musty old Dons tired you
with their Greek, and their Geometry, and their learned Experiments to show
what air, and fire, and water, are made of? Ha! ha! ha!


Bella. Oh, no, Sir -- he never studied them closely enough to be tired -- his
Philosophy and mine keep pretty equal pace, I believe.


Geo. As usual, my lively Cousin -- If you had said my Philosophy and your
Coquetry, I should have thought you had meant to compliment me -- However, Sir,
I am not tired of my studies -- though Bella has not exactly hit the reason.


Lady D. to Mr. H. The Muses, Sir, sufficiently recompense the most painful
assiduities by which we obtain their favor -- Their true lovers are never
satiated with the pleasures they bestow -- those, indeed, who court them, like
the Toasts of the season, because it is the fashion, are neither warmed by
their beauties, nor penetrated with their charms -- but these are faithless
Knights; -- your Son, I dare say, has enlisted himself among their sincerest
Votaries.


Geo. You do me great honor, Madam, -- I have no doubt but you are perfectly
acquainted with the Muses. They shed their favors on a few only -- but those
who share them must, like you, be irresistible. I Will catch her Ladyship's style.

[aside.
Mr. H. [aside.] Humph -- I am glad he likes her.


Lady Dinah. You men are so full of flattery! In Athens, in Lacedemon, that
vice was for ages unknown -- it was then the Athenians were the happiest, and
the Lacedaemonians the --


Bella. Oh mercy! -- I have burnt my fingers in the most terrible manner.
[Enter Harriet from the Garden.] I wish the misfortune had happened to her
Ladyship's tongue.

[aside.
Har. Dear Bella, I am quite concerned.


Bella. Pho! -- I only meant to break in upon her harangue, there is no bearing
so much Wisdom.


[Enter Servant. Serve. Mr. Drummond.


Enter Mr. DRUMMOND. Mr. D. Benedicite! -- ah! -- my dear Godson! -- why, this
is an unexpected pleasure -- I did not know you were arrived.


Geo. I have had that happiness only a few hours, Sir, and I was on the point
of paying my devoirs to you at the Park.


Mr. D. Ungracious Rogue! a few hours, and not been with me yet! -- however --
stay where you are, stay where you are, George -- you cannot come under my roof
with safety now, I assure you; such a pair of eyes, such a bloom, such a shape!
-- Ah Girls, Girls!


Har. Dear Mr. Drummond, of what, or whom, are you talking? You make me quite
jealous.


Mr. D. Oh! you are all outdone, eclipsed -- you have no chance with my
Incognita -- Then she has the prettiest foot -- and moves a Grace!


Bell. Teasing creature!


Mr. D. Pretty Bella! -- well, it shall be satisfied. Mr. Hargrave, I wait on
you, Sir, to request an apartment for a young Lady of beauty, and honor, who
has put herself under my protecti^n. -- But as I really think my house a
dangerous situation for her, considering that I am single, young and handsome,
[stroking his face] I cannot in conscience expose her to it. -- You, being a
grave, orderly man, and having a couple of decent, wellbehaved young women for
a Daughter and Niece; I think she will be more agreeably protected here -- and
this is my business.


Mr. H. A young Lady who has put herself under your protection! Who is she?


Mr. D. Her name she wishes to conceal.


Mr. H. That Is very odd -- Where did you meet with her?


Mr. D. At the house of a Widow Tenant of mine, a few miles from hence, where
she had taken refuge from a marriage to which an Uncle would have forced her.
-- She had no companion but the good old Lady, whom I found employed in
assisting her to weep, instead of consoling her. -- In short, there were
reasons to think her situation highly dangerous, and I prevailed on her to
leave it.


Har. And so your credulity is again taken in, and the air of a weeping Beauty
is the trap that caught you? -- Ha, ha! ha! -- Will you never be sick of
impositions?


Mr. D. I don't remember that I was ever imposed on.


Mr. H. No! don't I know how many people you have plagued yourself about, who
had not a grain of merit to deserve it?


Mr. D. I want merit Mr. Hargrave; yet all the blessings of health and fortune
have not been withheld from me.


Mr. H. Aye, aye -- there is no getting you to hear reason on this subject.


Mr. D. It Is too late to reason now. The young Lady is at my house -- I have
promised to bring her here, and we must endeavor to raise the poor Girl's
spirits. She would have spoiled the prettiest face in England -- beg pardon,
Ladies -- one of the prettiest faces, with weeping at the old Widows.


Bell. An old Widow, a pretty Girl, a Lover, a tyrannical Uncle -- it is a
charming group for the amusement of a village circle. -- I long to see this
Beauty.


Lady D. Her beauty, according to Mr. Drummond, may be conspicuous enough --
but her pretensions to birth and honor seem to be a more doubtful matter.


Geo. Pardon me, Madam, why should we doubt of either? A Lady in such a
situation has a right to protection; [to his Father] and I hope, Sir, you will
not withhold yours.


Mr. H. Oh, no, to be sure, George. -- 'Sbud! refuse protection to a fine Girl!
-- 'twould be, with you, a crying Sin, I warrant -- but Mr. Drummond, I should
suppose --


Mr. D. Come, be satisfied, the weaknesses with which you reproach me, might
have induced me to have snatched her from an alarming situation without much
examination. -- But, in compliment to your delicacy, I have made proper
enquiries. -- She was placed under the care of Mrs. Carlton by a person of
credit. -- She has dispatched a messenger to her Uncle, who, I presume, will be
here tomorrow.


Har. Pray, Sir, permit us to wait on the Lady, and conduct her here; I am
strongly interested for her.


Mr. H. It Is an odd affair -- what say you to it, my Lady?


Lady D. As your Family seem desirous to receive her, Sir, I am sorry to
perceive an impropriety in the request -- but I should apprehend that any
appearance of encouragement to young Ladies in disobedience -- particularly
when accompanied with the glaring indecorum of an elopement --


Mr. H. Aye, very true -- 'Sbud, Mr. Drummond, how can you encourage such --


Mr. D. Madam, I do not mean to encourage, but to restore the young Lady to her
family. She seems terrified at the peculiar severity of her Uncle's temper; so
we'll put ourselves in form, receive him in full assembly, and divide his anger
amongst us. -- Your Ladyship, I Am sure, must be happy to render the recovery of
the first false step as easy as possible.


Mr. H. Why aye, my Lady -- there can be no harm in that, you know.


Lady D. Very well, Sir -- if you think so, I can have no farther objection.


Mr. H. Well then, Harriet, you may go -- I think


Bella. And I with you, Cousin.


Mr. D. Come then, my pretty doves -- I Will escort you. -- George, steel your
heart, steel your heart, you Rogue.


[Exeunt. Geo. It is steeled, Sir.


Mr. H. You need not go, George -- I want to speak to you.


Lady D. Bless me! -- what does he intend to say now? -- he is going to open the
affair to his Son -- well -- these are the most awkward moments in a Woman's
life -- but one must go through it. [aside.] I have letters to write, which
I Will take this leisure to do, if you will pardon my absence, Gentlemen.


Mr. H. To be sure, Madam [both bowing. Exit Lady D.] -- Well, George, how do
you like that Lady?


Geo. Extravagantly, Sir, -- I never saw a Lady so learned.


Mr. H. Oh, she is clever -- she is an Earl's Sister too, and a forty thousand
pounder, boy.


Geo. That Is a fine fortune.


Mr. H. Aye, very fine, very fine -- and then her interest! -- suppose I could
prevail with her -- eh, George -- if one could keep her in the family, I say --
would not that be a stroke?


Geo. An alliance with so noble a family, Sir, is certainly a desirable
circumstance.


Enter Servant. Ser. The Gentlemen are in the smoking parlour, Sir.


Mr. H. Very well -- are the pipes and October in readiness?


Ser. Yes, Sir.


[Exit. Mr. H. Well then, we'll talk over the affair tomorrow -- what -- I
suppose your stoma^h is too squeamish for tobacco and strong beer? -- you will
find the Justice, and some more of your old friends there.


Geo. Pardon me, Sir, I made too free with the bottle at dinner, and have felt
the effects in my head ever since -- I believe a turn in the garden is a better
recipe than the fumes of tobacco.


Mr. H. Well, well, we will not dispute the matter with you now, boy -- but you
know I don't like milksops.


Geo. [smiling] Nor I, Sir.


[Bows and exit. Mr. H. Aye, aye, George is a brave Boy -- Old England is
disgraced by a set of whipsters who affect to despise the jolly manners of
their Ancestors, while they only serve to show us, how greatly manners may be
altered without being mended --

Enter JUSTICE. 'Sbud, I don't know that we are a bit wiser, happier, or
greater, than we were in good old Bess's days -- when our Men of Rank were
robust, and our Women of Fashion buxom.


Justice. Aye, aye, a plague on all the innovations that tend to produce a race
of pretty follows instead of Englishmen -- and puny girls, for the Mothers of
Heroes -- Give me a rosy buxom lass, with eyes that sparkle like the glasses we
toast her in -- adad, I Would drink her health till the world danced round like a
top -- But, what a plague, 'Squire, do you stay here for? come into the other room,
and if you have a mind to make wise speeches there, we can drink in the mean
time, and then what you say will have a proper effect.


Mr. H. Well, well, I Will go, but I want to consult you -- I have been thinking
whether this Greenwood estate --


Jus. Tush -- you know very well, I can neither consider or advise, till I have
had my brace -- I am as dark, till the liquor sends its spirits into my brains,
as a lantern without its candle -- so, if you have any knotty point to propose,
keep it till I Am enlightened.


Mr. H. Well, come along.


[Going. Enter Clerk.] Cl. The people from the Crown, Sir, and the Rose, and
the Antelope, are here again about their licenses.


Jus. [To Mr. H.] There -- this is what I got by coming for you -- I charged
the Butler not to let this dog in. -- [to the clerk] Why, how can I help it? --
bid 'em come again tomorrow -- it is of no consequence.


Cl. And here is a Pauper to be passed -- a lame Man with four Children.


Har. Well, turn him over to the Cook, and let him wait till we are at leisure.


Cl. And a Constable has brought up a man, for breaking into farmer Thompson's
barn last night.


Jus. Has he? [seeming irresolute] well, tell him to wait too -- we are going
to be busv now, and cannot be disturbed. But bid him take care he does not let
the prisoner escape, as he did that dog Farlow, do you hear?


Cl. Yes, Sir -- but -- Justice Manly is now in the smoaking-room -- I Have spoke
to him about the licenses, and we may not have another bench this --


Jus. Will you please to march, Sir?


[Exit Clerk. Mr. H Well done, old Boy -- Burn himself could not have
dispatched business with more expedition.


[Going. Enter Servant. Ser. The Miller is here, Sir, with a man that he
cotch'd with a hate that he had taken in the spring -- but the poor fellow,
please your Honor, has a large family.


[Hargr. and the Justice return. Mr. H. What! a Hare -- Come along, Justice.


[Exit another way. A burst of laughter from the smoking room. -- the Justice
looks wistfully back, and then follows Mr. Hargrave. SCENE, the Garden. Enter
GEORGE reading. Geo. Here Is a special Fellow of a Philosopher now -- would
persuade that Pleasure has no existence, when bounteous Nature teems with her
-- she courts my senses in a thousand varied modes -- She possesses herself of
my understanding in the shape of Reason -- and she seizes my heart in the form
of Woman, dear, beauteous, all-subduing Woman. And there is one -- Memory, be
faithful to her charms! Show me the beauteous form, the animated face, the mind
that beamed in her eyes -- the blushing smile that repaid my admiration, and
raised an altar in my heart, on which every other passion is sacrificed -- on
which every hope, desire, and wish, is sanctified by her.


Enter BELLA. Bella. Oh, monstrous -- George Hargrave moralizing in the garden,
whilst the finest girl in England is in the parlour! -- what is become of your
gallantry?


Geo. Gone, sweet Cousin, gone.


Bell. Indeed! who has robbed you of it?


Geo. A Woman.


Bell. Come then, and regain it from a Woman, and such a Woman --


Geo. Is she so beautiful?


Bell. Beautiful! look at me, -- I myself am not so handsome.


Geo. Ha! ha! ha! -- that, I confess, is an infallible criterion. -- But I Will
bet this whole volume of Wisdom, against one of your Billet-doux, that she is
not within fifty degrees of her who witch'd away my heart.


Bell. Witch'd it indeed, if in six weeks it has not made one excursion -- I
never knew you so constant before. However, I prophesy her charm is broke; the
Divinity who will reign -- perhaps for another six weeks -- is coming down the
steps with Harriet -- but, that her rays may not dazzle your mortal sight,
shelter yourself behind the clump, and examine her.

[George goes and returns. Well, how do you like her?


Geo. Like her! -- the air is all Ambrosia -- every happy constellation is in
conjunction -- each bounteous star has lent its influence, and Venus guided the
event.


Bell. Heyday -- what event? Sure this cannot be your Masquerade Lady!


Geo. It is, it is -- she is the sweet Thief -- she is my Wood Nymph -- Oh, I
am transported!


Bell. And I -- amazed! -- how can it --


Geo. No matter how -- whether by chance or witchcraft -- Now could I
apostrophize -- Pshaw -- away, and at her feet -- these transports --


[Going. Enter Mr. DRUMMOND. Mr. Drum. So, so, so, -- and pray, what is the
cause of these transports?


Geo. You are the cause -- it is to you, my dear Mr. Drummond, I am indebted for
the happiness which dawns on me.


Mr. Drum. Then, God grant, my dear Boy, the dawn may not deceive thee -- I
wish it to brighten into the fairest day -- But how have I been instrumental to
all this?


Geo. That Lady I have seen before at a Masquerade -- She possessed herself of
my heart at once, but I despaired of ever beholding her again -- Pray present
me --


[Going.] Mr. Drum. Hold, George, hold -- perhaps you would better never be
presented; for, though you may have put her in possession of your heart, it is by
no means an evidence, that she has had the same complaisance for you --
Suppose, for instance, such a trifle as hers being engaged.


Bella. Oh unconscionable! to fancy the galloping imagination of a man in love,
capable of so reosonable a supposition! -- But, pray have so much decency,
George, to postpone your entree till you are more composed, I Will go, and
prepare her for the reception of a strange creature, that you may appear to
advantage.


[Exit. Geo. Advantage! oh, I will hope every advantage, from so fortunate a
chance -- her heart cannot -- shall not be engaged -- and she shall be mine --
Pardon, my dear Sir, these effusions of my joy.


Mr. D. I do pardon them -- it is an odd circumstance, -- Are you acquainted
with the Lady's name?


Geo. No one knew her -- She seemed like an Angel descended to astonish her
beholders, and vanish the moment she had fixed their hearts -- Unluckily Mrs.
Fitzherbert stopped me, and a jealous coxcomb in her train seized that moment, to
hurry her out of the room.


Mr. D. That misfortune, perhaps, I can repair -- but you seem so extravagantly
disposed to raptures, that I hardly dare tell you I know something of her
family.


Geo. I am rejoiced -- for I am convinced you know nothing that will not
justify my passion.


Mr. D. This eagerness to helieve might have been so fatal, that I tremble fer
you -- But you are fortunate -- she is the Daughter of a deceased Major Morley
-- a man, to whose friendship, and elegance of manners, I was indebted for
happy and rational hours, amidst the bustle of a Camp.


Geo. Fortunate indeed! for then my passion must have your sanction -- but I
thought you had not known --


Mr. D. I knew her Father's picture on her arm -- but her delicacy is so
alarmed at the idea of exposing the name of her Family in such a situation,
that she would not consent to be introduced here, but on condition of its being
concealed.


Geo. Charming delicacy! I will keep her secret. My only consolation was, that
such a Woman could not be long concealed, and it would have been the business
of my life, till I had diseover'd her --

but your goodness has brought about the event -- your goodness, to which I owe
more than --


Mr. D. Nay, stop your acknowledgements, and don't arrogate to your own merits
the affection I have for you; for, transcendent as without doubt they are, you
owe great part of it to circumstances, in which they have very little concern.


Geo. I am contented to hold your est^em by any tie -- But, dear Sir, the Lady
--


Mr. D. Impatient Rogue! -- Well, come, I Will introduce you, and may the moment
be auspicious!


[Exit. Geo. May it! Oh Love, sweet Tyrant! I yield my heart to thee a willing
slave -- to Love I devote my future life -- never more shall I experience the
aching void of indifference, or know one moment unoccupied by thee.


[Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, a Court before the House. Enter a HUNT. A Flourish of Horns. Hollo!
hollo! ye hoicks, Hargrave, ille, ille, hoa. First Hanter. ZOUNDS, it is almost
seven; -- [looking at his watch] the scent will be cold -- let us rouse the lazy
rogue with a long.


Second Hunt. Aye, a good thought -- come, begin.


SONG.
Arouse, and break the bands of sleep;
Blush, Idler, blush, such hours to keep.
Somnus! what bliss can thou bestow,
Equal to that which Hunters know,
Whether the mountains they attain,
Or swiftly dart across the plain?
Somnus! what joys can thou bestow,
Equal to those which Hunters know?
Hark through the wood, how our music resounds!
The horns re-ecchoed, more sweet by the hounds.
Deep-throated and clear,
Our spirits they cheer;
They give us such glec,
No danger we see,
But follow with pleasure:
It Is joy beyond measure
To be the first in at the death -- at the death,
To be, etc.

Enter GEORGE from the House. First Gent. Hah, my young Hercules! -- But how
now, in this dress! don't you hunt with us?


Geo. Oh, I have only changed liveries, -- I used to wear that of Adonis -- but
now I serve his mistress -- Venus.


Second Gent. And a most hazardous service you have chosen -- I would rather
subject myself to the fate of Acteon, than to the caprice and insolence of the
handsomest Coquette in England.


Geo. Acteon's fate would be less than you would deserve, if, knowing my Goddess,
you should dare profane her with such epithets.


Second Gent. May I never start Puss, if I believe your Goddess to be more than
a very Woman -- that is, a being whose soul is vanity -- taste, voluptuousness
-- form, deceitful -- and manners, unnatural.


Geo. Heyday! -- turned Satyrist on the sex at eight and twenty! -- What
jilting Blowsalind has worked this miracle?


Second Gent. Faith, I take my copies from higher schools -- Amongst the
Blowsalinds there is still Nature and Honesty -- but examine our Drawing-rooms,
Operas, and Water-drinking places -- you will find the first turned fairly out of
doors, and the last exchanged for Affectation and Hypocrisy -- so henceforward
[smacking his whip] I abandon all Ladies, but those of the woods, and chase
only the harmless game, to which my sagacious hounds conduct me.


[Exit. Geo. Ha! ha! -- and in a short time be fit society for your hounds
only. Good morning, Sir.


Enter Mr. HARGRAVE and the Justice. Mr. H. So, George -- Come, you would better
mount -- I Will give you a Lecture upon Air, and the advantages of a good
Constitution, on our Downs, worth all you could hear in a musty College these
fifty years.


Geo. I beg, Sir, to be excused this morning -- tomorrow I Will resume my usual
post, and lead where you only will venture to follow me.


Mr. H. Well -- we shall put you to the test.


[Exit. Justice to Geo. Yes, yes, you're a keen Sportsman -- I saw the Game you
are in pursuit of, scudding away to the garden -- beat the bushes, and I Will
warrant you will start her, and run her down too.


Third Gent. Egad! I started a fine young Puss a few days ago -- She seemed
shy, and made her doublings; but I stuck to the scent, and should infallibly
have got her, if that sly poaching togue, Drummond, had not laid a spring in
her way.


Justice. Why, she is the very Puss I mean; he housed her here.


[Exit. Third Gent. Oh, ho! then I suppose he only pointed the game for you --
Sweet Sir, your humble -- After College commons, a coarser dish than Pheasant,
I think, might have gone down.


Geo. Your whip, Sir -- your bit wants lashing. To talk thus of Mr. Drummond,
whom you do know, is not more insolent than your profanation of a Lady whom you
do not know.


Third Gent. O! cry you mercy -- Plague take me if I quarrel for any wench in
England -- You are heartily welcome to her, Sir, only I hope another time
you will be honest, and hunt without a stalking-horse.


[Exit. Geo. Barbarian! How critically did Mr. Drummond relieve the lovely Girl
-- This brute had discovered her, and she would have suffered every indignity
that Ignorance, supported by the pride of Fortune, could have inflicted. In the
garden -- that is fortunate beyond my expectations -- 'midst groves and
fountains -- the very scene where a lover should tell his tale -- and the sweet
consciousness which beamed in her eyes last night, flatters me that she will
not hate me for my tale -- I Will go in all the confidence of hope.


[Exit. SCENE, the Garden. Enter EMILY. Em. What an heavenly morning! --
surely'tis in England that Summer keeps her court -- for she is no where else so
lovely. -- And what a sweet garden this is! -- But tell me, my heart -- is it
the brightness of the morning, the verdure of the garden, the melody of the
birds, that gives thee these enchanting sensations? -- Ah, no! -- it is that
thou have found thy Lord -- it is, that I have again seen the Man, who, since I
first beheld him, has been the only image in my mind. -- How different from the
empty, the presuming Baldwin! -- yet, I owe him this obligation -- if his
hateful perseverance had not forced me from London, I might never have seen,
but once, the Man who, that once, possessed himself of my tenderest wishes. --
Ha!

[starting.]
Enter GEORGE. Geo. Abroad so early, Madam! -- the fine Ladies in London are
yet in their first sleep.


Em. It would have been impossible to have resisted the cheerful call of the
Hunters, if the morning had been less enticing.


Geo. Oh, do not imagine yourself obliged to the Hunters, Madam, it was my good
Genius -- I thank her -- that inspired them, and did me the favor to lead me
here.


Em. If she usually influences you to no better purpose, her claims to your
gratitude are but weak.


Geo. 'Till lately I thought so, and supposed myself influenced by the worst
Genius that ever fell to the lot of a poor mortal -- but she has entirely
retrieved herself in my opinion, and by two or three capital strokes has made
me forget her unlucky pranks, and believe her one of the best disposed Sylphs
in all the regions of Fancy.


Em. [smiling.] You recommend this aerial attendant very strongly -- Have you
any intention to part from her?


Geo. I would willingly exchange her -- if your Genius would be so obliging to
take a fancy to me -- I Will accept her with all my heart -- and give you mine.


Em. You would lose by the exchange.


Geo. Impossible! -- for my quondam friend would say a thousand things for me,
that I could not for myself -- so I should gain your good opinion -- and that
would be well gained, whatever I might lose to attain it.


Em. Your Genius is, at least, a gallant one, I perceive -- but

I was on the point of leaving the garden, Sir. -- The Ladies, I imagine, are
risen by this time.


Geo. Indeed they are not, but if they should -- these are precious moments,
which I must not lose -- may I presume to use them in telling you how happy I
am, in the event which placed you in my Father's house? -- but you have,
perhaps, forgot the presumptuous Tancred, who gave such disturbance to the
Gentleman honored by protecting you, at the Masquerade?


Em. No, Sir, I remember -- and, if I don't mistake, you were nearly engaged in
a fracas with that Gentleman -- I was happy, when I observed you stopped by a
mask, and seized that moment to leave the room.


Geo. A moment, Madam, that I have never ceased to regret 'till now -- but that
which I at present possess, is a felicity so unexpected, and unhop'd for --


Em. You forget, Sir, these gallantries are out of place here -- under a mask,
a Shepherd may sigh, or an Eastern Prince amuse himself in saying the most
extravagant things -- but they know there are delicacies to be observed in real
life, quite incompatible with the freedoms of a Masquerade.


Geo. Whilst you are thus severe on mere gallantries, I will venture to hope
that a most tender and respectful passion will be treated more favorably.


Em. Sir!


Geo. I comprehend, Madam, what your delicacy must feel, and will therefore
only add, that from the first moment I beheld you, my heart has known no other
object. You have been the Mistress of its Wishes -- and you are the Mistress of
its Fate.


Em. (hesitatingly) Indeed, Sir, this declaration, at a time when I must appear
in so strange a light to your family, hurts me greatly -- I can scarcely
believe you mean it a compliment -- but, surely, my situation here ought --


Geo. I acknowledge, Madam, the confession I have dared to make, is premature
-- it is ill timed -- nothing can excuse it, but the peculiarity of our
situation. -- When I reflect, that in a few moments your Uncle may arrive, that
he may snatch you from us, and that such an opportunity never may be mine again
--


[Enter Mr. Drummond. Mr. D. So, so, my young ones, have I found you? it is a
most delicious morning -- but is it usual with you, Madam, to taste the air so
early?


Em. Yes, Sir -- in the Country, at least -- I seldom murder such hours in
sleep.


Mr. D. Aye, it is to that practice you are indebted for the roses in your
cheeks -- What, I suppose, you brought the Lady into the garden, George, to
read her a iecture on Vegetation -- to explain the nature and cause of Heat --
or, perhaps, more abstracted subjects have engaged --


Geo. Stop, dear Sir -- I assure you I am not abstracted enough to enter on
these subjects with such an object before me -- I found the Lady here, and had
scarcely paid her my morning compliments when you appeared.


Mr. D. For which you do not thank me, I presume -- but come, Madam, you are my
ward, 'till I have the pleasure of presenting you to your Uncle; and I come to
conduct you to breakfast. George, you may follow; but take care you keep your
distance.


[Exeunt Mr. D. and Emily. Geo. Distance! -- as well might you persuade the
shadow to forsake its Sun, or erring mortals give up hopes of mercy. -- With
what sweet confidence she gives her hand to Mr Drummond! -- if these are the
privileges of Age, I Will be young no longer.


[Exit. SCENE, Lady DINAH's Dressing Room. Lady Dinah dressing, Susan
attending. Lady Dinah. Both in the garden -- and in deep conversation!


Susan. It appeared so, my Lady, as I saw them from the window -- he looked
eagerly in her face; and she blushed, and seemed confused.


Lady D. Confused indeed! -- yes, so the Impertinent affected to appear last
night -- though it was evident she had neither eyes nor thoughts but for Mr.
Hargrave's Son -- who paid her those attentions which, from the present habits
of life, are paid to every Woman -- though, I think, Mr. George Hargrave should
be superior to these modern gallantries.


Sus. I dares to say she is some impostor -- Husbands in good truth are not so
plenty, that a woman need run away to escape one.


Lady D. I have no doubt of her being a low person -- and as to her prettiness,
it is of the kind one sees in wooden Dolls -- cherry-colour cheeks, and eyes,
that from the total absence of expression might be taken for glass.


Sus. I wonder Mr. Hargrave did not stand by his own opinion, and let her stay
where she was; but whatever Mr. Drummond says is law here.


Lady D. Because Mr. Hargrave imagines he will make his Son his heir -- but if he
does, he will only share with the paupers of the neighboring villages; for these
Mr. Drummond seems to consider his family; and I am mistaken, if he does n't
find it a pretty expensive one.


Sus. Oh, Ma'am, he believes every melancholy tale that is told him as a proof
of his piety -- Here Is the Bow, my Lady -- but as he fancies her prettyness was
in danger, he had better have kept her in his own house, and stood guard
himself.


Lady D. Aye -- that employment, or any other that would keep him at home,
might be useful -- Want of rest [looking in the glass] absolutely transforms me
-- the detestable Horns, and their noisy accompanyment, waked me from the most
delightful dream -- How do I look today, Susan?


Sus. Oh, charmingly, my Lady.


Lady D. It Is a most provoking circumstance, the color of my hair should be so
soon changed -- but Mrs. Gibson's Liquid entirely hides that accident, I
believe.


Sus. Entirely, my Lady -- and then, her Bloom, it is impossible to distinguish
from nature.


Lady D. You need not speak so loud. In compliance with the custom of modern
times, a woman is forced to keep the use of these sort of things as secretly as
she would an Illegitimate Birth. It was not so among the Ancients -- The Roman
Ladies made a point of excelling in Arts of this kind; and the Empress Poppea
was not ashamed to carry in her train five hundred Asses, in whose milk she
bathed every morning for the benefit of her complexion.


Sus. Five hundred Asses in one Lady's train! -- thank Heaven, we have no such
engrossing nowadays -- our Toasts have all their full share.


Lady D. Indeed! Mrs. Susan, [half smiling] this wench has ideas. Pray, what do
you think of the young Collegian?


Sus. Oh, my Lady, he is the sweetest, smartest Man -- I think he is exactly
like the picture of your Ladyship's Brother, that died when he was eighteen.


Lady D. People used to say that Brother, and myself, bore a strong resemblance.


Sus. I dare to say you did, my Lady; for there is something in the turn of
young Mr. Hargrave's face, vastly like your Ladyship's.

[laughing behind her.]
Lady D. Well, Susan -- I believe I may trust you -- I think you can be
faithful.


Sus. Most surely, my Lady -- I would rather die than betray your Ladyship.


Lady D. Well, then -- I protest I hardly know how to acknowledge it -- But --


Susan. But what, my Lady? -- your Ladyship alarms me.


Lady D. I too am alarmed -- but I know your faith -- [sighs.] There will soon
be a most intimate and never to be dissolved connection between me -- and --
young Mr. Hargrave.


Sus. Young Mr. Hargrave, Madam!


Lady D. Yes, Young Mr. Hargrave, Madam -- What do stretch thy eyes so widely
at, wench? -- Mr. George Hargrave, I say, is to be my Husband -- I am to be his
Wife -- Is it past thy comprehension?


Sus. I most humbly beg your Ladyship's pardon -- it was my surprise -- the
whole house concludes your Ladyship is to marry Old Mr. Hargrave -- but, to be
sure, the Son is a much more suitable match for your Ladyship.


Lady D. Old Mr. Hargrave, indeed! -- the whole house is very impertinent in
its conclusions -- Go, and bring the Bergamot hither. [Exit Sus.] I marry Old
Mr. Hargrave! monstrous absurdity! and by so preposterous an union to become
the mother of that fine fellow, his Son! -- 'twould be insupportable -- no,
Mistress Susan, it is Young Mr. Hargrave I am to marry. [Enter Susan with the
Bergamot.] -- Here, scent that handkerchief, while I write to my agent to
prepare matters for the writings.


[Exit. Susan alone, scenting the handkerchief. Sus. To prepare matters for the
writings! a very fine business indeed; and what you will sorely repent of, my
good Lady, take my word for it -- All those scented waters, nor any other
waters, will be able to keep up your spirits this time twelvemonth -- A "never
to be dissolved connection," between fifty and twenty-one, ha! ha! ha! -- I
shall burst with the ridiculous secret -- I must find Jarvis, and give it vent
-- "never to be dissolved connection!" -- ha, ha, ha!


[Exit. SCENE, an Apartment. Enter GEORGE, HARRIET, and BELLA. Bell. What
transformations this Love can make! You look as grave, George, and speak as
sententiously, as an Old-Bailey Fortune Tellers.


Geo. And is it only to preserve your spirits, Bella, that you keep your heart
so cold?


Bell. The recipe is certainly not a bad one, if we may judge from the effects
of the opposite element on your spirits -- but I advise you, whatever you do,
not to assume an appearance of gravity -- it is the most dangerous character in
the world.


Geo. How so?


Bell. Oh, the advantages you would lose by it are incon-conceivable. While you
can sustain that of a giddy, thoughtless, undesigning, great Boy, all the
impertinent and foolish things you commit will be excused -- laughed at -- nay,
if accompanied by a certain manner, they will be applauded -- but do the same
things with a grave reflecting face, and ^n ^^por^^nt air -- and you will be
condemned, n^m. con.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Charles Seymour is driving up the avenue, Sir.


[Exit. Geo. Is he? -- I am rejoiced --


Har. Sir Charles Seymour, Brother? -- I thought you told us yesterday he was
on the point of marriage.


Geo. Well, my dear Harriet, and what then? Is his being on the point of
marriage any reason why he should not be here? -- he is even now hastening to
pay his devoirs to the Lady -- I left him yesterday at a friend's house on the
road, and he promised to call on us in his way today -- but I hear him --


[Exit. Bell. Harriet, you look quite pale -- I had no conception that Sir
Charles was of serious consequence to you.


Har. My dear Bella -- I am ashamed of myself -- I Will go with you to your
dressing room -- I must not see him while I look so ridiculously -- I dread my
Brother's raillery.


Bell. Come then, hold by me. Deuce take it, what business have women with
hearts? -- If I could influence the House, handsome men should be shut out of
society, 'till they grew harmless, by becoming Husbands.


[Exeunt. [Enter GEORGE and Sir CHARLES. Geo. Ha! the birds are flown.


Sir Cha. Let us pursue 'em then.


Geo. Pho -- they are not worth pursuing -- Bella's a Coquette, and Harriet's
in love.


Sir Chapter Harriet in love!


Geo. Aye, she is in for it, depend on it -- but that is nothing, I have
intelligence for the man -- my Incognita's found, she is now in the house -- my
beauteous Wood Nymph!


Sir Chapter Miss Hargrave's heart another's!


Geo. Miss Hargrave's heart another's -- why, my Sister's heart is certainly
engaged -- but how is all this?


Sir Chapter O George! I love -- I love your Sister -- to distraction, dote on her.


Geo. A pretty time, for the mountain to give up its burden truly! Why did you
not tell me this before? If your heart had been as open to me, as mine has ever
been to you -- I might have served you; but now --


Sir Chapter Oh, reproach me not, but pity me -- I love your Sister -- long have
loved her.


Geo. And not entrust your love to me! -- You distrusted me, Charles, and
you will be properly punished.


Sir Chapter Severely am I punished -- fool, fool, that I was, thus to have built a
superstructure of happiness for all my life to come, that in one moment
dissolves into air! I cannot see your Sister -- I must leave you.


Geo. Indeed, you shall not leave me, Seymour -- On what grounds did you build
your hopes, that you seem so greatly disappointed? -- Had my Sister accepted
your addresses?


Sir Chapter No -- I never presumed to make her any -- my fortune was so small,
that I had no hopes of obtaining your Father's consent -- and therefore made it
a point of honor not to endeavor to gain her affection.


Geo. Yes, yes, you took great care.

[aside.
Sir Chapter But my Uncle's death having removed every cause of fear on that head,
I flattered myself I had nothing else to apprehend.


Geo. Courage, my friend, and your difficulties may vanish. It Is your humble
distant lovers who have sung through every age of their scornful Phillis's -- You
never knew a bold fellow, who could love Women without mistaking 'em for
Angels, whine about their cruelty.


Sir Chapter Do you not tell me your Sister's heart is engaged? -- Then what have I
to struggle for? it was her heart I wished to possess. Could Miss Hargrave be
indelicate enough, which I am sure she could not, to bestow her hand on me
without it, I would reject it.


Geo. Bravo! -- nobly resolved! keep it up by all means. -- Come how, I Will
introduce you to one of the finest Girls you ever saw in your life -- but
remember you are not to suffer your heart to be interested there, for that is my
quarry -- and death to the man who attempts to rob me of my prize!


Sir Chapter Oh, you are very secure, I assure you -- my heart is adamant from this
moment.


[Exeunt. The Garden. Enter HARGRAVE and a Servant. Mr. Har. Run and tell my
Son I want to speak to him here di^ectly [exit Serve.] Her forty thousand pounds
will just enable me to buy the Greenwood Estate, -- and to my certa^n
knowledge, that young Rakehelly will not be able to keep it to his back much
longer. We shall then have more land than any family in the country, and a
Borough of our own into the bargain. Humph -- But suppose George should not
have a mind to marry her now? Why then, -- why then -- as to his mind, when two
parties differ, the weaker must give way -- the match is for the advancement of
your fortune, says I; and if it cannot satisfy your mind, you must teach it what
I have always taught you -- obedience. -- [Enter GEO.] Oh, George, I sent for
you into the garden, that we might have no interruptions; for, as I was saying,
there is an affair of consequence I want to talk to you about.


Geo. I am all attention, Sir.


Mr. H. I don't design that you shall return to College any more -- I have
other views, which I hope will not be disagreeable to you -- You -- you like
Lady Dinah, you say?


Geo. [hesitatingly] She is a Lady of great erudition, without doubt.


Mr. H. I don't know what your notions may be of her age; I could wish her a
few years younger, but --


Geo. Pardon me, Sir, I think there can be no objection to her age; and the
preference her Ladyship gives to our family, is certainly a high compliment.


Mr. H. Ho, ho, then you are acquainted already with what I was going to
communicate to you -- I am surprised at that.


Geo. Matrimonial negotiations, Sir, are seldom long concealed; it is a subject
on which every body is fond of talking -- the young, in hopes that their turn
will come; -- and those who are older --


Mr. H. By way of giving a fillip to their memories, I suppose you mean,
George, ch? -- well, I am glad you are so merry; I was a little uneasy about
what you might think of this affair -- though I never mentioned it in my life --
but perhaps, Lady Dinah may have hinted it to her woman, and then I should not
wonder if the whole parish knew it. However, you have no objection, and that is
enough -- though if you had, I must have had my way, George.


Geo. Without doubt, Sir.


Mr. H. Have you spoken to Lady Dinah on the subject?


Geo. Spoke -- n -- o, Sir, I could not think of addressing Lady Dinah on so
delicate an affair without your permission.


Mr. H. Well then, my dear Boy -- I would have you speak to her now, and, I
think, the sooner the better.


Geo. To be sure, Sir -- I shall obey you --


Mr. H. Well, you have set my heart at rest -- I am as happy as a Prince -- I
never fixed my mind on any thing in my life, so much as I have done on this
marriage -- and it would have galled me sorely if you had been against it --
but you are a good Boy, George, a very good Boy, and I Will go in, and prepare
Lady Dinah for your visit.


[Exit. Geo. Why, my dear Father, you are quite elated on the prospect of your
nuptials -- but why must I make speeches to Lady Dinah? I am totally ignorant
of the mode that elderly Gentlemen adopt on such occasions.


Enter BELLA. Bell. What, have you been opening your heart to your Father,
George?


Geo. No, faith -- he has been opening his to me -- He has been making me the
confident of his passion for Lady Dinah.


Bell. No! ha, ha, ha -- is it possible? -- what style does he talk in? is it
flames and darts, or esteem and sentiment?


Geo. I don't imagine my good Father thinks of either -- her fortune, I
presume, is his object; and I shall not venture to hint an objection; for
contradiction, you know, only lends him fresh ardor. Where is Seymour and
Harriet?


Bell. Your Sister is in the drawing room, and Sir Charles I just now saw in the
Orange-walk, with his arms folded thus -- and his eyes fixed on a shrub, in the
most penseroso style you can conceive -- Why -- he has no appearance of a happy
youth on the verge of Bridegroomism.


Geo. Ha, ha, ha, ha!


Bell. Why do you laugh?


Geo. At the embarrasment I have thrown the simpletons into -- ha, ha, ha!


Bell. What simpletons? -- what embarrasment?


Geo. That you cannot guess, my sweet Cousin, with all your penetration.


Bell. I shall expire, if you will not let me know it -- now do -- pray, George --
come -- be pleased to tell it me.

[curtseying.
Geo. No, no, you look so pretty while you are coaxing, that I must -- must see
you in that humor a little longer.


Bell. That Is unkind -- come -- tell me this secret -- though I Will be hanged if I
don't guess it.


Geo. Nay, then I must tell you; for if you should find it out, I shall lose
the pleasure of obliging you. -- Seymour and my Sister dote on one another --
and I have made each believe, that the other has different engagements.


Bell. Oh, I am rejoiced to hear it.


Geo. Rejoiced! I assure you, I am highly offended.


Bell. At what? Sir Charles is your friend, and every way an eligible match for
your Sister.


Geo. Very true -- I am happy in their attachment, and therefore offended. --
Sir Charles has been as chary of his secret, as if I had not deserved his
confidence.


Bell. I believe he never addressed your Sister.


Geo. Aye, so he pretends, he never made love to her -- ridiculous subterfuge!
-- he stole into her heart by the help of those silent tender observances,
which are the surest battery when there is time to play 'em off -- If any man
had thus obtained my Sister's heart -- left her a prey to disappointment, and
then said -- he meant nothing -- my sword should have faught him, that his
conduct was not less dishonorable, than if he had knelt at her feet, and sworn
a million oaths.


Bell. Why, this might be useful -- but, mercy upon us! if every girl had such a
snap-dragon of a Brother, -- no Beaus -- and very few pretty fellows would
venture to come near her -- pray, when did you form this mischievous design?


Geo. Oh, Sir Charles has been heaping up the measure of his offenses some time
-- 'twould have diverted you to have seen the tricks he played to get Harriet's
picture -- At last he begged it, to get the drapery copied for his Sister's;
and I know it is at this moment in his bosom, though he has sworn an hundred times
it is still at the Painter's.


Bell. Ha! -- I Will fly and tell her the news -- If I don't mistake, she would rather
have her picture there than in the Gallery of Beauties at Hampton.

[going.]
Geo. Sdeath! -- stop -- Why, are not you angry? -- shut out by parchment
provisoes from all the flutters of Courtship yourself -- you had a right to
participate in Harriet's.


Bell. Very true; this might be sufficient for me -- But what pleasure can you
have in tormenting two hearts so attached to each other?


Geo. I do mean to plague 'em a little; and it will be the greatest favor we
can do them -- for they are such sentimental people -- you know -- that they will
blush, and hesitate, and torment each other, six months before they can come to
an explanation -- But, by alarming their jealousy, they will betray themselves in
as many hours.


Bell. Oh, cry your mercy! -- So there is not one grain of mischief in all this;
and you carry on the plan in downright charity -- well, really in that light
there is some reason --


Geo. Aye, more reason than is necessary to induce you to join in it -- even
though there were mischief -- so promise me your assistance with a good grace.


Bell. Well, I do promise; for I really think --


Geo. Oh, I Will accept of very slight assurances.


Bell. A-propos! Here Is Harriet -- I Am just as angry as you wish me: leave us,
and you shall have a good account of her.


Enter HARRIET. Har. Brother! Mr. Drummond, I fancy, wonders at your absence:
he is alone with the Lady --


Geo. Then he possesses a privilege that half mankind would grudge him.


[Exit. Bell. Have you seen Sir Charles yet?


Har. Indeed I have not -- I confess I was so weak, as to retire twice from the
drawing room, because I heard his voice -- though I was conscious my absence must
appear odd, and fearful the cause might be suspected.


Bell. Ah! -- pray be careful that you give him in particular no reason to guess
at that -- I advise you to treat him with the greatest coldness.


Har. Most certainly I shall, whatever it costs me -- It would be the most
cruel mortification, if I thought he would ever suspect my weakness -- I
wonder, Bella, if the Lady whom he is to marry, is so handsome as George
describes her.


Bell. Of what consequence is that to you, child? -- never think about it; if
you suffer your mind to be softened with reflections of that sort, you will never
behave with a proper degree of scorn to him.


Har. Oh, do not fear it; I assure you, I possess a vast deal of scorn for him.


Bell. I am sure you fib, [aside.] -- Well now, by way of example, he is coming
this way, I see.


Har. Is he? -- come then, let us go.


Bell. Yes, yes, you are quite a Heroine, I perceive -- Surely you will not fly
to prove your indifference? -- Stay and mortify him with an appearance of
carelessness and good humor -- For instance: when he appears, look at him with
such an unmeaning eye, as one glances over an acquaintance shabbily dressed at
Ranelagh -- and when he speaks to you, look another way; and then, suddenly
recollecting yourself, -- What is that you were saying, Sir Charles? I beg
pardon, I really did not attend -- then, without minding his answer -- Bella, I
was thinking of that sweet fellow who opened the ball with Lady Harriet -- Did
you ever see such eyes? and then the air with which he danced! -- O Lord! I
never shall forget him.


Har. You Will find me a bad scholar, I believe -- however, I Will go through the
interview, if you will assist me.


Bell. Fear me not.


Enter Sir CHARLES. Sir Cha. Ladies -- this is rather unexpected -- I hope I
don't intrude.


Bell. Sir Charles Seymour can never be an unwelcome intruder.


Sir Cha. Miss Hargrave -- I have not had the happiness of paying my respects
to you since I arrived -- I hope you have enjoyed a perfect share of health and
spirits, since I left Hargrave-Place.

[confused'y.]
Har. I never have been better, Sir; and my spirits are seldom so good as they
are now.

[affecting gaiety.]
Sir Cha. Your looks indeed, Madam, speak you in possession of that happiness I
wish you [sighing] -- You, Miss Sydney, are always in spirits.


Bell. In general, Sir -- I have not wisdom enough to be troubled with
reflections to destroy my repose.


Sir Cha. Do you imagine it then a proof of wisdom to be unhappy?


Bell. One might think so; for wise folks are always grave.


Har. Then I Will never attempt to be wise -- henceforward I Will be gaiety itself
-- I am de^ermined to devote myself to pleasure, and only live to laugh.


Bell. Perhaps you may not always find subjects, Cousin, unless you do as I do
-- laugh at your own absurdities.


Har. Oh, fear not -- we need not always look at home; the world abounds with
subjects for mirth, and the men will be so obliging as to furnish a sufficient
number, when every other resource fails.


Sir Cha. Miss Hargrave was not always so severe.


Har. Fie, Sir Charles -- do not mistake pleasanty for severity -- but
exuberant spirits frequently overflow in impertinence; therefore I pardon your
thinking that mine do.


Sir Cha. Impertinence! Surely, Madam, you cannot suppose I meant to --


Har. Nay, Bella, I appeal to you; did not Sir Charles intimate some such thing?


Bell. Why -- a -- I don't know -- To be sure there was a kind of a distant
intimation -- though perhaps Sir Charles only means that you are awkward -- ha!
ha! -- But consider, Sir, this character of Harriet's is but lately assumed --
and new characters, like new stays, never sit till they have been worn.


Sir Cha. Very well, Ladies; I will not dispute your right to understand my
expressions in what manner you please -- but I hope you will allow me the same
-- and that, when a Lady's eyes speak disdain, I may, without offense,
translate it into Love.


Har. It Is an error that men are apt to fall into; but the eyes talk in an
idiom, warm from the heart; and so skilful an observer as Sir Charles will not
mistake their language.


Sir Cha. Are they alike intelligible to all?


Har. So plain, that nine times out of ten, at least, mistakes must be wilful.


Sir Chapter Then pray examine mine, Madam, and by the ^^port you make I shall
judge of your proficiency in their dialect.


Bella. Oh -- I Will examine yours, Sir Charles -- I am a better judge than
Harriet -- let me see -- aye -- it is so, in one I perceive love and jealousy --
in the other, hope and a wedding. Now am I not a Prophetess?


Sir Chapter Prove but one in the last article, and I ask no more of Fate -- now --
will you read? Madam!


Har. You are so entirely satisfied with Bella's translation, Sir, that I will
not run the risk of mortifying you with a different construction -- come,
Cousin -- let us return to our company.


Bell. [apart] Fie! that air of pique is enough to ruin all.


Sir Chapter Do you not find the garden agreeable, Miss Hargrave? I begin to think
it charming.


Har. Perfectly agreeable, Sir -- but the happy never fly society -- I wonder
to see you alone. Come, Bella.


Bell. Bravo!


[Exeunt Bella and Harriet. Sir Chapter Astonishing! What is become of that
sweetness -- that dove-like softness, which stole into my heart, and deceived
me into dreams of bliss? She flies from me, and talks of her company, and
returning to her society -- Oh Harriet! oh my Harriet! thy society is prized by
me beyond that of the whole world; and still to possess it, with the hope that
once glowed in my bosom, would be a blessing for which I would sacrifice every
other, that Nature or Fortune has bestowed.


[Exit. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, Lady DINAH 's Dressing Room. Lady DINAH and Mr. HARGRAVE sitting. Mr.
Hargrave. I AM surprised, Madam, at your thinking in this manner -- when I
spoke to my Son this morning -- I assure you, he expressed a great deal of
satisfaction about the affair -- I wonder indeed he has not been here.


Lady D. Now, I could almost blame you, Mr. Hargrave -- pardon me -- but you
have certainly been too precipitate -- your Son has scarcely been at home four
and twenty hours, and cannot possibly have received any impression, or formed
an idea of my character. -- He has been so much engaged, indeed, with other
persons, that I have had no opportunity of conversing with him; and how, so
circumstanced, can he have formed a judgment of his own heart?


Mr. H. Good God! Madam, he has given the best proof in the world that he has
formed a judgment; for he told me this morning, that the prospect of the
marriage made him very happy. -- I don't know what other proof a man can give
that he knows his own heart -- and let me tell you, Madam, I have accustomed my
children to pay a proper regard to my inclination.


Lady D. I am apprehensive, Sir, that Mr. George Hargrave's obedience may
influence him more than I could wish -- and I assure you, I cannot think of
uniting myself to any man, who does not prefer me for my own sake, without
adverting to any other consideration.


Mr. H. His obedience to me, influence him more than you could wish! -- why
really I don't understand you, my Lady -- Zounds! I thought she had been a
sensible Woman.

[aside.
Lady D. Not understand me, Mr. Hargrave! I have too high an opinion of your
good sense, to suppose that I am unintelligible to you.


Mr. H. My opinion, Madam, is, that an obedient Son is likely to make a kind
Husband -- George is a fine young fellow as any in England, though I his father
say it, -- and there is not a woman in the kingdom, who might not be proud to
call him her husband -- too obedient --


Lady D. Bless me! this man has no ideas [aside.] -- You mistake me, Mr.
Hargrave; I do not mean to lessen the merit of obedience in your Son -- but, I
confess, I wish him to have a more delicate, a more tender motive, for offering
his hand to me.


Mr. H. Look ye, Madam -- you have a great understanding, to be sure -- and I
confess you talk above my reach -- but I must nevertheless take the liberty to
blame your Ladyship; -- a person of your Ladyship's experience -- and, allow me
to say, your date in the world, must know that there are occasions in which we
should not be too nice.


Lady D. Too nice! Mr. Hargrave --

[rising.
Mr. H. Aye -- too nice, my Lady, -- a Boy and Girl of sixteen, have time
before 'em -- they may be whimsical, and be off and on, and play at
shilly-shally as long as they have a mind. -- But, my Lady, at a certain season
we must leave off these tricks, or be content to go to the grave old Batchelors
and --

[shrugging his shoulders.
Lady D. I am utterly astonished, Mr. Hargrave -- you surely mean to offend me
-- you insult me.


Mr. H. No -- by no means -- I would not offend your Ladyship for the world --
I have the highest respect for you, and shall rejoice to call you my Daughter
-- if you are not so, it will be your own fault -- for George, I am sure, is
ready the moment you will give your consent -- The writings shall be drawn when
you think proper, and the marriage consummated without delay.


Lady D. Well, Sir -- I really do not know what to say -- when Mr. George
Hargrave shall imagine it a proper period to talk to me on the subject -- I --
I --


Mr. H. Well, well, Madam -- I allow this is a topic on which a Lady does not
choose to explain herself but to the principal -- I waited on your Ladyship only
to inform you that I had talked to my Son concerning the affair, and to incline
you, when he waits on you, to give him a favorable hearing.


Lady D. Mr. Hargrave -- a person of your Son's merit is entitled to a proper
attention from any Woman he addresses.


Mr. H. There -- now we are right again -- I was fearful that you had not liked
my Boy -- and that your difficulties arose from that quarter -- but since you
like George, it is all very well, very well.


Lady D. Mr. Hargrave! -- I am surprised at your conceiving so unjust an idea
-- Mr. George Hargrave is, as you have said, a match for any woman, whatever be
her rank.


Mr. H. My dear Lady Dinah -- I am quite happy to hear you say so -- I am sure
George loves you -- odds bobs, I hear him on the stairs -- I Will go and send him
to you this moment, and he shall tell you so himself -- you will surely believe
him.


[Exit. Lady D. Mr. Hargrave, Mr. Hargrave -- bless me, what an impetuous
obstinate old Man -- what can I do? -- I am in an exceedingly indelicate
situation -- he will tell his Son that I am waiting here in expectation of a
declaration of love from him -- Sure never woman was in so awkward an embarras
-- I wish the Son possessed a little of the Father's impetuosity -- this would
not then have happened.


Enter GEORGE. Geo. Your Ladyship's most obedient servant.


Lady D. S -- i -- r

[curtseying confusedly]
Geo. My Father permits me, Madam, to make my acknowledgments to your Ladyship,
for the honor you design our Family.


Lady D. I must confess, Sir, this interview is somewhat unexpected -- it is
indeed quite premature -- I was not prepared for it, and I am really in great
confusion.


Geo. I am sensible, Madam, a visit of this kind to a Lady of your delicacy
must be a little distressing -- but I entreat you to be composed -- I hope you
will have no reason to regret a resolution which myself, and the rest of the
family, have so much cause to rejoice in -- and I assure your Ladyship, every
thing on my part, that can contribute to your felicity, you shall always
command.


Lady D. You are very polite, Sir -- We have had so little opportunity of
conversing, Mr. Hargrave, that I am afraid you express rather your Father's
sentiments than your own. It is impossible, indeed, from so short a knowledge,
that you can have formed any sentiments of me yourself.


Geo. Pardon me, Madam, my sentiments for you are full of respect -- and I am
convinced your qualities will excite the veneration of all who have the honor
of being connected with you. My Father could hardly have done it better.

[aside.]
Lady D. Why, this young Man has certainly been taught to make love by his
Tutor at College.

[aside.]
Geo. I am concerned this visit seems so embarrassing to your Ladyship -- I
certainly should have deferred it, from an apprehension of its being
disagreeable, but, in obedience to my Father, I --


Lady D. Then it is to your Father, Sir, that I am indebted for the favor of
seeing you.


Geo. By no means, Madam -- it would certainly have been my inclination to have
waited on your Ladyship, but my Father's wishes induced me to hasten it.


Lady D. Really! a pretty extraordinary confession!

[aside.] -- I think it necessary to assure you, Sir, that -- that this affair
has been brought thus forward by Mr. Hargrave -- and the proposals he made, in
which it was evident, his whole heart was concerned, were quite unexpected.


Geo. I have not the least doubt of it, Madam, nor am I at all surprised at my
Father's earnestness, on a subject so interesting -- What can she mean by
apologizing to me? [aside.]


Lady D. It would certainly have been proper, Sir, to have allowed you time to
have formed a judgment yourself, on a point which coucerns you so highly.


Geo. The time has been quite sufficient, Madam -- I highly approve the steps
my Father has taken -- but if I did not, the respect I bear to his
determination would certainly have prevented my opposing them. I must end this
extraordinary visit [aside.] -- Shall I have the honor of conducting your
Ladyship to the Company?


Lady D. N -- o, Sir -- I have some orders to give my Woman, I Will rejoin the
Ladies in a few minutes.


Geo. Then I Will wish your Ladyship a good morning.


[Ex. Lady D. Amazement! why, what a visit from a Lover! -- Is this the
language in which men usually talk to women, with whom they are on the point of
marriage? -- Respect! Veneration! Obedience to my Father! -- And shall I have
the honor of conducting your Ladyship to the Company? -- A pretty Lover-like
request truly! -- But this coldness to me proceeds from a cause I now
understand -- This morning, what fire was there in his eyes! what animation in
his countenance! whenever he addressed himself to that creature Mr. Drummond
brought here? -- Would his request to her have been to conduct her to Company?
-- No, no; -- But I must be cautious -- I must be patient now -- but you will
find, Sir, when I possess the privileges of a Wife, I shall not so easily give
them up -- your fiery glances, if not directed to me, shall at least, in my
presence, be addressed to no other.


[Exit. SCENE changes to an Apartment. BELLA at her Harpsichord. SONG.
Haste, ^aste, ye fiery Steeds of Day,
In Ocean's bosom hide your beams!
Mild Evening, in her pensive gray
More s^ft, and more alluring seems.
Yet why invoke the pensive Eve,
Or, sighing, chide refulg^nt Morn?
Their shifting moments cannot relieve
The heart by pangs of abs^nce torn.
Hang Music -- it only makes me melancholy -- Heigh-ho ' -- these Lovers insect
me too, I believe -- Seducive Italy! what are your attractions? Oh, for
Fortunatus's cap -- I Would convince myself in a moment if my doubts are justly
founded -- And suppose they should -- what then? -- Ah! they think I am made of
ice, whilst the gaiety of my disposition only serves to conceal a heart as
tenderly susceptible as the most serious of my sex can possess --

Enter EMILY. Ah, my dear Ma'am, I am rejoiced to see you; I have been just
long enough alone to be tired of myself, and to be charmed at so agreeable a
relief.


Em. Can that ever be the case with Miss Sidney? I thought you had possessed
the happiest flow of spirits in the world.


Bell. Pho! -- your great spirits are mere Jack-a-lanterns in the brain -- they
dance about, shine, and make vagaries -- while those who possess happiness,
soberly and quietly enjoy their treasure.


Em. Indeed! I hope dullness is not your criterion of happiness -- if it is,
there are few assemblies where you will not find a great number to envy.


Bell. Oh, no -- Dullness is the character of those who are too wise, not too
happy.


Enter GEORGE. Geo. Two Ladies in council -- on fashion, or news?


Bell. On a better subject -- laughing at the slaves we have made, and forging
chains for more.


Geo. That Is not the business of fine Women -- Nature meant to save them the
trouble of plotting -- for traps and chains, she bestowed sparkling eyes, and
timid blushes, with a whole multitude of graces, that hang about the form, and
wanton in the air.

[Looking at Emily.]
Bell. Well, after all, Men are delightful creatures -- flattery, cards, and
scandal, help one through the day tolerably well -- I don't know how we should
exist without 'em in the country.


Geo. And which of 'em would you relinquish in town?


Bell. Not flattery, because it keeps one in spirits, and gives a glow to the
complexion -- Scandal, you may take away -- but pray leave us cards, to keep us
awake, with the fashionable world, on Sunday evenings.


Geo. And, in lieu of scandal, you will be content with conquest.


Bell. Ridiculous! Conquest is not such an object with Women, as the Men imagine
-- for my part, I should conceive a net that would catch the hearts of the
whole sex, a property of very little value.


Geo. But, you would think it a very pleasant one, my gentle Cuz. or, at least
[archly] you would pick out one happy favorite before you gave the rest to despair.


Bell. Positively no -- I don't know one that I should not let fly away with the
rest.


Geo. Now, how can you fib, with such an unblushing face? This debate, Madam,
[to Emily] will let you into Bella's secret -- she has, at this moment, an
image in her heart, that gives a flat contradiction to her tongue.


Bell. Indeed! -- you make your assertion with great effrontery -- but now, to
compliment your discernment, whose image do you think of?


Geo. Ha, Bella -- listen with your greediest ears to catch the transporting
sound -- breathe not, ye softest Zephyrs! be silent, ye harmonious Spheres!
while I articulate the name of --


Bell. [stopping her ears] Oh, I will not hear it.


Geo. Belville!


Bell. Oh, frightful! -- don't attend to him -- George's belief is always under
the influence of his fancy.


Emily. In this instance, if I may judge from your looks, he has not hinted at
a fiction.


Bell. Indeed you are mistaken; his guess might have been as good, if you had
named Prester John.


Geo. Hum -- I wish it may be so, for I have heard a story about a certain Lady
on the Continent, whom a certain Gentleman --


Bell. Thinks handsomer than Bella Sydney -- mortifying -- ha, ha, ha!


Geo. Nay more, to whom be devotes his hours.


Bell. His heart

[petulantly.]
Geo. On whom he doats.


Bell. Psha!


Geo. Grows melancholy.


Bell. Nonsense!


Geo. Nay, fights for her.


Bell. Ridiculous!


Geo. Lives only at her feet.


Bell. You are really very insupportable, Sir -- do find some other subject to
amuse yourself.


Geo. Ha, ha, ha! the Gudgeon has bit -- See, Madam, a Coquette struggling with
the consciousness of love, -- are not those pouts, and angry blushes, proofs of
Belville's happiness?


Emily. I cannot perceive these proofs -- Mr. Belville, perhaps, is not in so
enviable a state.


Bell. Oh, you are a good Girl, and, I assure you, perfectly right -- Lovers,
thank our stars! are too plenty, for an absent one to give us much pain. --
What, turn your arms on your associate, George! -- I Will break the league, and
discover all.

[apart to George.
Geo. You dare not, you love mischief too well -- it is as dear to you as the
sighs of your Lover.


Bell. A-propos! where is Sir Charles?


Geo. In the garden probably -- sighing to the winds -- and I wish you would find
him -- and leave us.

[apart.
Bell. Ha! Perhaps they will waft his sighs to Harriet -- and she must not hear
'em yet -- and so, Sir Charles --


[Exit. Emily. Oh, pray make me one of your party.

[going.
Geo. Stay, Madam, I entreat you -- believe me, they will not thank you -- I Will
tell you the story.


Emily. I Will hear it from Miss Sydney.


Geo. Nay, if you are determined --


[Exeunt. SCENE, the Garden. Enter HARRIET. In vain do I endeavor to conceal
it from myself -- This spot has charms for me, that I can find in no other --
here have I seen -- perhaps for the last time, Sir Charles Seymour. My Cousin's
presence was unlucky -- I should have heard him -- but it would have been a
crime in him to have talked to me of love -- an insult that I must have
resented -- and yet it is the only subject on which I could wish to have heard
him. Bless me! he is here again -- he haunts this place -- but he does not
observe me, and I Will conceal myself; for I feel I could not now behave with
proper reserve.

[Goes behind an arbor. Enter Sir CHARLES, looking round. Ha, not here then! --
Sweet resemblance of her I love! come from thy hiding place. [takes a picture
from his bosom, and kisses it.] In her absence thou art the dearest object to
my eyes. What a face is this!

"'It Is beauty truly blessed, whose red and white
"Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on."

Enter GEORGE. Catches his hand with the picture. Geo. Ho ho! -- so the
Picture's come home from the Painter's, is it, Sir -- and the drapery quite to
your mind?


Sir Chapter [confused and recovering.] The artifice I used to obtain it, those who
love can pardon.


Geo. And how many times a day do thou break the decalogue in worshipping
that Image?


Sir Chapter Every hour that I live. I gaze on it till I think it looks, and speaks
to me; it lies all night on my heart, and is the first object I address in the
morning.


Geo. Oh, complete your character, and turn Monk -- it is plain you're half a
Papist.


Sir Chapter Why condemn me to cells and penitence?


Geo. That you may not violate the laws of Nature, by pretending to a character
for which she never designed you. Your bonds, instead of silken fetters, appear
to be hempen cords. Come, confess, have not you been examining on which of
these trees you would be most gracefully pendent?


Sir Chapter That gaiete de coeur, George, bears no mark of the tender passion;
and, to be plain, I believe you know very little about it.


Geo. You are confoundedly mistaken -- we are both Lovers, but the difference
between us lies thus: Cupid to me is a little familiar rogue, with an arch leer
-- and cheeks dimpled with continual smiles -- To you -- an aweful Deity,
decked out in his whole regalia of darts, flames, and quivers, and so forth --
I play with him -- you --


Sir Chapter Spare yourself the trouble of so long an explanation -- All you would
say is, that you love with hope -- I with despair.


Geo. Very concise, and most pathetically expressed -- melancholy suits your
features, Charles -- 'twere pity your Mistress should encourage you; it would
deprive you of that something in your air which is so touching -- Ha! ha! ha!
-- poor Seymour! Come, let us go in search of the girls, they are gone to the
wood; who knows but you may find a nymph there, who will have the kindness to put
hanging and drowning out of your head?


Sir Chapter Oh, would sweet Celia meet me there,
With softened looks, and gentler air,
Transported, to the Wood I Would fly,
The happiest Swain beneath the sky;
Sighs and complaints I Would give the wind,
And IO's sing, were Celia kind.

[As he repeats the verses, George, laughing, scans them on his fingers. [Exit
Sir Charles. Geo. Cupid is deaf, as well as blind.


[Exit George. Enter HARRIET. Har. Her picture in his bosom, and kiss it with
such rapture too! Well -- I am glad I am convinced -- I am perfectly at ease.
He loves them without hope, and George was mistaken in supposing him so near
marriage -- but he loves notwithstanding -- her picture lies all night on his
heart, and her idea is never absent from his mind -- Well, be it so -- I am
perfectly at ease, and shall no longer find a difficulty in assuming an
indifference that is become real -- Oh, Seymour!


[Exit. SCENE, the Wood. Enter Lady DINAH. Insolent wretch! -- Nothing less
than the conviction of my own senses could have induced me to believe so
shocking an indecorum -- I saw her myself look at him with eyes that were
downright gloting -- I saw him snatch her hand, and press it to his lips, with
an ardour that is inconceivable -- and when the creature pretended to blush,
and made a reluctant effort to withdraw it -- my Youth, so full of veneration
and respect for me, refused to resign it -- till the creature had given him a
gracious smile of reconciliation -- Heavens! they are coming this way -- sure
they do not perceive me -- See there! -- Nay, if you will come here.


[Goes behind a shrub.] Enter EMILY, followed by GEORGE. Em. I entreat you,
Sir, not to persist in following me -- You Will force me to appeal to Mr.
Drummond for protection.


Geo. You need no protection, Madam, that you will not find in my respect --
But you are barbarous to deprive me of conversing with you -- it is a felicity,
I have so lately tasted, that it is no wonder I am greedy of it.


Em. If you believe your attentions would not displease me in my proper
character -- I ought to be offended that you address them to a person, of whose
name and family you are ignorant.


Geo. Can a name deprive you of that face, that air -- or rob you of your mind
-- of what then am I ignorant? -- it is those I address with the most passionate
vows of --


Em. I positively will not listen to you -- However, if the acquaintance should
place us on a footing, I Will then converse with you -- if on my own terms. [Lady
D. listening -- Aye, or on any terms.] I have no dislike to the charming
freedom of the English manners -- you shall be as gallant as you please; but I
give you notice, the instant you become dangerous, I shall be grave.


Geo. How dangerous --


Em. Oh, the moment you grow of consequence enough to endanger my heart, I
shall shut myself from you -- but as long as you continue harmless, you may
play.


Geo. This is not to be borne -- I will not be harmless -- I declare open war
against your heart, not in play, but downright earnest.


Em. Nay, then, I must collect my forces to oppose you -- my heart will stand a
long siege, depend on it.


Geo. If you will promise it shall yield at last, a ten years siege will be
richly rewarded.


Em. Oh, no; I make no promises -- try your forces; if you should possess
yourself of it in spite of me -- I can only bewail its captivity.


Geo. Your permission to take the field is all I can at present hope; and thus
on my knees, dear charming Creature --


Lady D. [listening] There Is veneration and respect!


Em. Hold, Sir -- I will be so generous to tell you, that whenever you kneel I
shall fly.

[runs out.]
Geo. And I Will pursue -- till my Atalanta confesses I have won the prize.


[As Geo. is following Emily, Lady D. comes out against him with an angry
reproachful air, and passes him.] Geo. [aside] So, -- there is a look! what a
blessed Motherin-law I shall have!


[Exit. Lady D. What! -- not stay even to explain -- to apologize -- follow her
before my face -- oh, Monsters, Furies! yes, yes, she will yield without the
trouble of a ten years siege -- she can scarcely hold out ten minutes -- oh, ye
shall both suffer for this -- I will go this instant -- I will do something.


[Exit. Enter SUSAN. S^s^n. Hah, my good Lady, is it so? ha, ha, ha! I must see
if I cannot make myself useful here. A Lady, who like my mistress gives way to
her most unbridled passions, is the only one worth being served by a girl of
spirit and intrigue. I Will follow, and aid your Ladyship with my counsel before
you have time to cool -- [going, returns.] -- So -- it is needless, here she
ebbs, like a stormy sea.


Enter Lady DINAH, not seeing SUSAN. Lady D. A moment's reflection has
convinced me I should be wrong -- he must not suspect that I influence his
Father against the minion -- nor will I allow her the satisfaction of thinking
she gives to me the pangs of jealousy -- but I will not lose him -- something
must be done.


Susan. Oh, my Lady, I was witness to the whole affair -- Oh, a base man! I
could have trampled him under my feet.


Lady D. Base, indeed! but it is on her my resentment chiefly falls -- oh, Susan
-- revenge!


Susan. I am sure my heart achs for you, my Lady -- there is nothing I would not
do -- Oh, she is an artful slut.


Lady D. She Is as dangerous as artful -- I must be rid of her, yet I know not
how. -- Oh France! for thy Bastile, for thy Lettres de Cachet!


Susan. There are ways and means here, my Lady -- Miss told a fine tale to get
into the house, and I fancy I can tell as fine a tale to get her out of it, and
I should think it neither sin nor shame in the service of so good a Lady.


Lady D. If thou can contrive any method -- I care not what -- any plan to
rid me of her; command my fortune.


Susan. Oh, dear my Lady, as to that -- as to your fortune, my Lady, that is out
of the question -- but I know your Ladyship's generosity -- I think I could
send her packing, -- perhaps before night.


Lady D. Can you! -- The instant she goes, I Will give you two hundred pounds.


Susan. [courtesying] She shall go, my Lady, if I have invention, or Jarvis a
tongue.


Lady D. Jarvis! Are you mad? -- I would not have him suspect that I am
concerned in the affair, for the universe.


Susan. Oh, dear my Lady -- I vow I would not mention your name to him -- no,
not for another two hundred pounds; -- no, no, Miss shall be got rid of,
without giving Jarvis, or any one, the least reason to suspect that your
Ladyship is privy to the matter.


Lady D. I am convinced she is an impostor, and I wonder Mr. Hargrave does not
see it -- but there will be more labor in rousing his stupid apprehension,
than in explaining to an enthusiast the conceptions of a Bolingbroke.


Susan. I am more afraid of Mr. Drummond than him.


Lady D. Aye -- he will support that Girl's interest, in order to mortify me --


Susan. That does not signify, my Lady -- I have a card as good as any he holds
to play against him -- your Ladyship must have seen that the old Justice has
full as much weight with the 'Squire, as Mr. Drummond.


Lady D. I observe that Mr. Hargrave is continually wavering between them --
they influence his actions like two principal senses -- Mr. Drummond is the
friend of his understanding, the other of his humor. -- But what is the card
you mean to play?


Susan. I mean to play one of his senses against the other, my Lady, that is all
-- for I am mistaken if I cannot govern the Justice, as much as his whole five
put together.


Lady. D. That is indeed a card -- my hopes catch life at it -- Susan, say to
him what you will, promise what you will -- I suppose you have the way to the
old fool's heart, and know by what road to reach it -- at all events the Girl
must be got rid of; the method I leave to you. -- There Is the dinner bell -- I
must walk a little to recover my composure, and then, I suppose, I may have the
honor of sitting for the young Lady's foil.


[Exit. Susan. I am sure she cannot have a better -- ha, ha, ha! -- Two hundred
pounds! Oh the charms of jealousy and revenge -- I might have served one of
your good sort of orderly old women, 'till I had been gray -- these two
hundreds will quicken Mr. Jarvis a little -- we shall see him more attentive, I
fancy, than he has been, and then farewell to servitude -- Hah, Jarvis!


Enter Jarvis bowing affectedly. Jar. "So looked the Goddess of the Paphian
Isle,
"When Mars she saw, and conquered with that smile."
My dear Goddess, I kiss your fingers -- I have been hunting for you in every
walk in the garden.


Susan. [tenderly] Why -- what did you want with me, Jarvis?


Jar. Why, faith, I have the same kind of necessity for you, that a Beau has
for a looking-glass -- you admire me, and keep me in good humor with myself.


Susan. Oh, if you want to be put in temper, I Have got an excellent cordial. Now
for your parts -- now to prove yourself the clever fellow that you think you
are.


Jar. That you think, my dear, you mean -- but what ex-


Susan. Listen! -- We have discovered that the young 'Squire thinks eighteen a
prettier age than fifty -- that he prefers natural roses to Warren's, and that
gravity and wisdom are no match for the fire of two hazel eyes, assisted by the
reasoning of smiles and dimples.


Jar. And he is in the right on it -- didn't I tell you this morning they
reckoned without their host?


Susan. Here has he been on his knees at the feet of the Damsel, and her
Ladyship behind that bush, amusing herself with his transports -- ha, ha, ha!


Jar. Ha, ha, ha! -- I warrant her, it is the only transports she will ever see
him in. George Hargrave marry our old Lady! no, no -- I have a very good
opinion of that young fellow; he is exactly what I should be, if I was heir to
his Father's acres -- just such a spirited, careless deportment -- a certain
prevailing assurance -- upon my soul, Susan, you and I ought to have moved in a
higher sphere.


Susan. Come, come, you must consider this affair in another light; 'twou'd be
a shame, that because this Girl has a pretty face, and was found weeping by a
compassionate old Gentleman -- it would be a shame, I say, that for these
reasons, she should marry into a great Family, and cheat the Sister of a Peer,
of a Husband -- Read the story this way, act with spirit, and our Lady will, on
the day of our marriage, give us two hundred pounds.


Jar. Humph! -- on the day of our marriage -- cannot you, Child, prevail on
your Lady to give me the two hundred, without tacking that condition to it?


Susan. Pho, Sauce-box! -- Well, but these two hundreds now -- what will you do
for 'em?


Jar. Do for 'em -- Oh, any thing -- the most extravagant thing in the world --
run off with the girl -- blow up the house -- turn Turk -- or marry you.


Susan. Upon my word, Sir.


Jar. Well, but the business, Child, the business.


Susan. The business is, that we must contrive to open some door for this Girl
to walk out of the house.


Jar. But how -- upon what ground -- when, and where?


Susan. Why, if we could contrive the business, I have no doubt of the spirit
and fire of your execution. -- Do you remember the occupation which once gave
employment to these talents of yours -- I mean that of an itinerant Player?


Jar. Oh, yes -- I remember the barns that I have made echo with the ravings of
Orestes, and the stables in which I have sighed forth the woes of Romeo.


Susan. Well, but have you any recollection of a pretty Juliet -- a tall
elegant Girl -- in short, do you not remember one of the strolling party
exceedingly like the strange guest now in the house?


Jar. Hum! -- Why, what devil sent thee to tempt me this morning? -- so I am to
sell my honor -- my honesty --


Susan. Pho, pho -- honesty and honor are sentiments for people whose fortunes
are made -- let us once be independent, and we'll be as honorable and as
honest as the best of 'em -- so let us go in, and settle our plan.


Jar. Well -- it is the fate of great men to be in the hands of Women; and
therefore, my sweet Abigail -- I am yours.

[Leads her off.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, an Apartment. Enter HARRIET, followed by BELLA. BELLA. NAY, but hear
him -- hear him, Harriet.


Har. Can this be you, Bella, who this morning seemed fearful that I should not
treat him with sufficient scorn -- now persuading me to allow a private
interview to a Man who is professedly the lover of another?


Bell. How apprehensive you very delicate Ladies are! Why must you suppose he
wants to talk to you about love -- or on any topic, that his approaching
marriage would make improper?


Har. Why -- what can he have to say to me?


Bell. Admit him, and he will tell you -- perhaps he wants to consult your taste
about the trimmings of his wedding clothes -- or to beg your choice in his
ruffles -- or --


Har. Pho! -- this is downright ridicule.


Bell. Well then -- you will not admit him? [seeming to go] I shall tell him you
don't choose to see him, though he is going to leave us directly -- but I approve
your caution, Harriet, you are perfectly right.


Har. Going to leave us directly, Bella!


Bell. Immediately, my dear -- I heard him order his chaise, and mutter
something about insupportable -- but I think you will be exceedingly imprudent in
receiving his visit, and advise you by all means to refuse it.


Har. Dear Bella!


Bell. Well then you will see him -- I shall acquaint him with the success of my
embassy -- but remember scorn, Harriet, scorn.


[Exit Bella. Har. Now, what am I to expect? my heart beats strangely -- but
remember, foolish Girl, the picture of his Mistress is in his bosom.


Enter Sir CHARLES. Sir Chapter The request I ventured to make by Miss Sidney,
Madam, must appear strange to you -- the engagements which I --


Har. Renders it an extraordinary request indeed, Sir.


Sir Cha. I feared you would think so, and conscious of those engagements, I
should not have presumed to have made it -- but as it is probably the last time
I may ever see you -- I seize it, to tell you that -- I adore you.


Har. Sir Charles! I am astonished, -- in my Father's house at least, I should
have been secure from such an insult.


Sir Chapter Forgive me, I entreat you. Nothing could have forced this declaration
from me, but my despair.


Har. The engagement you talk of, Sir, ought to have prevented these effects of
your despair.


Sir Cha. I acknowledge it -- and they have kept me silent ever since I arrived
-- but when I thought of leaving you in a few moments, I sound the idea
insupportable.


Har. The picture you wear, Sir Charles -- might console you surely.


Sir Cha. Hah -- I thought you were ignorant, Madam, of my possessing it.


Har. Without doubt you did, Sir Charles -- but no, Sir -- I am acquainted with
your wearing that Picture -- and wonder how you could presume -- but I deserve
the insult, for listening to you a moment.

[Going.
Sir Chapter Oh, stay, Miss Hargrave, I entreat you, -- I will give up the picture,
since it so offends you -- yet how can I part from it?


Har. Oh, keep it, Sir -- keep it by all means -- you mistake me entirely, Sir;
I have no right to claim such a sacrifice.

[Going.
Sir Chapter You have a right, Madam -- here it is -- [kissing and offering it] but
do not rob me of it.


Har. Rob you of it! -- in short, Sir Charles, you redouble your rudeness every
moment --


Sir Chapter I did not think you would have so resented it -- but I resign it to
you, Madam -- nay, you must take it.


Har. I take it, Sir! [Glances her eye on it, then takes it with an air of
doubt] -- My Picture! -- astonishing!


Enter GEORGE and BELLA, both laughing. Sir Chapter Your picture, Madam!!


Geo. Look at the simpletons -- na, ha, ha!


Bell. What a fine attitude! -- do it again, Sir Charles -- ha, ha, ha! -- Well,
Harriet -- how do you like Sir Charles's Mistress? Is she as handsome as George
represented her?


Geo. Hold, hold! it is time now to have mercy. My dear Harriet, allow me to
present to you my most valued friend, as the Man whom I should rejoice to see
your Husband. To you, my Seymour, I present a Sister, whose heart has no
engagements that I am acquainted with, to supersede your claim.


Sir Chapter I am speechless with joy, and with amazement.


Geo. Forgive the embarrasment I have occasioned you -- you have suffered
something; but your felicity will be heightened from the comparison. My dear
Harriet, Seymour has always loved you -- the picture which so offended you is a
proof, you cannot doubt.


Sir Chapter And that you were so offended, is supreme felicity -- stupid wretch --
not to perceive my bliss!


Har. [to Geo. and Bell.] You have taken a liberty with me that I cannot pardon.


Geo. Nay, but you shall pardon it -- and as a proof, give him back your
picture this minute.


Sir Chapter Return it to me, Madam, I entreat you [kneeling] I will receive it as
the most precious gift.


Bell. Come, give the poor thing its bauble.


Har. Well, take it, Sir -- since you had no share in this brilliant
contrivance.


Sir Chapter [taking the picture] Eternal blessings on that hand!


Har. You, George, are never so happy, as in exercising your wit, at my expense.


Geo. And you, Harriet, never so heartily forgave me in your Life, and
therefore --


Sir Chapter Hold, George -- I cannot bear Miss Hargrave's suffering in this
manner; I will take on myself the transporting office of defending her -- this
hour, Madam, I shall for ever remember with gratitude, and will endeavor to
deserve it, by a life devoted to your happiness.


Bell. Come, Harriet -- I must take you away, that Sir Charles may bring down
his raptures to the standard of common mortals -- at present, I see his in the
clouds.


Har. It Is merciful to relieve me.


[Exeunt Harriet and Bella. Sir Chapter Charming Miss Sydney -- I Will never quarrel
with your vivacity again. -- But why have I been made to suffer thus?


Geo. Because you did not tell me why you wanted my Sister's picture -- but I
have taken a friendly vengeance; my plot has told you more of my Sister's heart
in a few hours, than all your sighs and humility, would have obtained in as
many months.


Sir Chapter For which I thank you -- and my present happiness receives a brighter
glow from this illusion of misery -- I Will fly and pour out my joy and
gratitude, at the feet of my charming Harriet.


[going. Enter Bella. Bell. Oh, stay, stay -- we may want your assistance.
Here Is your Father coming, George. Your repartee to Lady Dinah at dinner,
spoilt her digestion -- and she is been representing you -- that is all.


Geo. I hope she represented her sneer too, which suffused with tears the
loveliest eyes in the world. Could I do less than support her against the
ill-humour of that antiquated pedant? -- By Jupiter, I Will draw her in colors
to my Father, that shall make him shrink from the fate he is preparing for
himself.


Enter HARGRAVE. Mr. H. Why, George, how is this? -- Dy'e know what you have done?
-- you have affronted Lady Dinah.


Geo. I did not design to affront her, Sir -- I only meant to convince her that
she should not insult the amiable young Lady, whom Mr. Drummond placed under
your protection.


Mr. H. Don't tell me -- amiable young Lady! How do you know what she is? -- on
the footing you are with Lady Dinah, let me tell you, if she had insulted an
hundred young Ladies, you ought not to have seen it -- at least, not resented
it.


Geo. Pardon me, Sir -- I did not conceive that Lady Dinah should have assumed
in your house -- at least till she becomes your Wife -- a right to --


Mr. H. What Is that you say, Sir?


Geo. Indeed, Sir, to confess the truth, I am astonished at your partiality for
that Lady -- she is the last woman in the world, whom I could wish to see in
the place of my amiable Mother.


Mr. H. Your Mother!


Geo. I should think it a breach of my duty, to see you plunge yourself into so
irretrievable a fate, without acquainting you with my sentiments -- if you saw
her in the light I do, Sir -- you would think on your wedding day with horror.


Mr. H. Why -- why -- are you mad?


Geo. If you wished to keep your engagements a secret, Sir -- I am sorry I
mentioned the affair, but --


Bell. Oh -- it is no secret, Sir, I assure you -- every body talks of it -- for
my part, I shall be quite happy in paying my respects to my new Aunt -- I have
put a coral string in my tambour already, that I may finish it time enough for
her first Boy to wear at its christening.


Mr. H. Look ye, Sir -- I perceive that you have all that backwardness in
obeying me that I expected, and, in order to conceal it, are attempting to
throw the affair into ridicule -- but I tell you it will not do -- I know what
I am about, and my commands shall not be disputed.


Geo. Commands, Sir! -- I am quite at a loss --


Mr. H. Well then, to prevent further mistakes, I acquaint you, that I design
Lady Dinah for your Wife, and not your Mother -- and moreover, that the
marriage shall take place in a very few days. [going.] -- And, do you hear? --
acquaint your pert Cousin, that the coral string will do for your first Boy.


Exit Hargrave. [A long pause, staring at each other. Bell. So, so, so! and is
this the end of all the closetings?


Sir Chapter What the devil! -- it must be all a dream.


Geo. Wife!! -- Lady Dinah my Wife!


Bell. Ha, ha, ha! dear George, forgive me, but I must laugh, or I cannot exist
-- ha, ha, ha! oh, my Cousin Dinah!


Geo. Pray, Bella, spare your mirth, and tell me what I am to do -- for I am
incapable of thinking.


Bell. Do! why run to Lady Dinah -- fling yourself at her seet, tell her you had
no idea of the bliss that was designed you -- and that you will make her the
tenderest, fondest Husband in the world -- ha, ha, ha!


Geo. Oh, Cousin, for once forget your sprightliness -- I cannot bear it --
Seymour, what am I to do?


Sir Chapter My dear George, I pity you from my soul -- but I know not what advice
to give you.


Bell. Well, then seriously I think -- ha, ha, ha! but it is impossible to be
serious -- I am astonished you are not more struck with your Father's tender
cares for you.


Geo. Have you no mercy, Bella?


Bell. You have none upon yourself, or instead of standing here with that
countenance si triste, you would be with Mr. Drummond.


Geo. He is, indeed, my only resource -- I Will fly to him this instant, and if
it fails me -- I am the most miserable man on earth.


[Exit. Sir Cha. What can induce Mr. Hargrave to sacrifice such a fellow as
George, to a Lady Dinah? -- Preposterous!


Bell. Her rank and fortune -- and I dread the lengths to which his obstinacy
may carry him; he has no more respect for the divinity of Love, than for that
of the Egyptian Apis -- Let us find Harriet, and tell her the strange story;
she is not the only person, I fear, to whom it will be painful.


Sir Chapter Is it possible that Lady Dinah, in the depth of her wisdom, can
imagine such an union proper?


Bell. Be merciful -- Love has forced Heroes to forget their valor, and
Philosophers their systems -- no wonder he should make a Woman forget her
wrinkles.


[Exeunt. SCENE, the Garden. Enter JARVIS and SUSAN. Jar. Egad, *it is a service
of danger.


Sus. Danger! sure you have no qualms?


Jar. No, no, child -- no qualms -- the resolution with which I could go through
an affair of this sort, would in another hemisphere make my fortune -- but hang
it, in these cold northern regions there is no room for a man of genius to
strike a bold stroke -- the fostering plains of Asia, sor such talents as mine!


Sus. Now I think England's a very pretty soil.


Jar. Why, aye, if one could be sure of keeping clear of a dozen ill-bred
fellows, who decide on the conduct of a man of spirit at the Old Bailey, then
indeed we need not care; for an air of Ton, and a carriage, on whatever springs
it moves, introduces one to the best circles -- But let us consider our bottom
-- this girl was placed under the care of the old gentlewoman, by a person of
credit.


Sus. Pho, pho, what! she brought a recommendation -- don't we know how easily
a character is to be had -- spotless as silver, or as bright as gold! it is a
wonder she did not afford a name too; I warrant she had sufficient reasons to
conceal her own.


Jar. It does look like it, and there is a mystery in the affair -- Now,
mysteries, as my Lady says, we have a right to explain as we please.


Sus. Aye, to be sure -- and this is the explanation. She is an unprotected,
artful girl, who having caught a taste for the life of a fine Lady, thinks the
shortest way to gratify her longing, is by gaining the heart of some credulous
fool, who will make her his wife for the sake of her -- Beauty.


Jar. True -- That with this view she told her story to Mr. Drummond, who --
innocent soul -- not seeing her drift, introduced her here, where she attempts
to succeed, by playing off her artillery on the gunpowder constitution of
George Hargrave, Esquire; the younger.


Sus. Oh, delightful! -- why, if I continue with my Lady, I shall be her
mistress as long as she lives -- and now I think on it, I believe that must be
our plan -- You and I can be married just the same, you know.


Jar. Oh, just the same, my dear, just the same; nothing shall prevent that --
[aside] but my being able to coax you out of the Two Hundred.


Sus. Hark! here comes the Justice -- slip away, and leave me to manage him --
I know I can make him useful -- You need not be jealous now.


Jar. Jealous! no, no; I have lived among the great too long, to be tormented
with so vulgar a passion.


[Ex. Jar. Enter JUSTICE. Jus. Hah, hah! have I caught you, my little Picksey?
Come, no struggling -- I will have a kiss, by Jingo.


Sus. Lud! you are the strangest Gentleman --

[resisting.]
Jus. You are wondrous coy, methinks.


Sus. Coy -- so I should -- What have Gentlewomen without fortune, to recommend
'em else?


Jus. Aye -- but that rosy, pouting mouth tells different tales, I warrant, to
the fine Gentlemen in London. I have been thinking you would make a pretty little
Housekeeper -- yes you would, Hussy -- yes you would -- will you come and live
with me?


Sus. Oh, dear Sir -- I should like it vastly; but I think you had better go to
London with me -- I assure you, my Lady speaks very highly of your talents in
the law -- and she has great interest -- so, as soon as she is Lady Dinah
Hargrave -- Your Worship is acquainted with that affair, I suppose.


Jus. Yes, yes; my friend has told me of it -- but under strict injunctions of
secrecy.


Sus. Secrecy! aye, to be sure -- but I dare say Mr. Drummond has been informed
of it.


Jus. Oh, I know nothing of him -- he is queer and close; one can never get him
in at a bout -- he is not staunch.


Sus. I believe he is not staunch to our match; and if that is prevented, we
shall leave the country directly.


Jus. Why, what can prevent it, Sweety?


Sus. Perhaps Mr. Drummond's advice; for he can manage Mr. Hargrave.


Jus. Ah -- but my advice will go as far as his, I believe; and do you think
I Will part with you -- you little wicked rogue you?

[chucking her chin.]
Sus. Then if you find the match is likely to go off, you must use all your
interest to bring it to bear; and then we sha'n't part, you little wicked rogue
you.

[chucking his chin.]
Jus. That I will -- I Will plead for the wedding as vigorously, as if I had an
hundred guineas with a brief.


Sus. Well -- but do you mind me? I don't like the stranger this same 'Squire
ushered here.


Jus. Not like her! why, she is a devilish fine girl; -- adad, the warm
sparkling of her eyes catches one's heart, as if it was made of tinder.


Sus. Upon my word -- a devilish fine Girl -- the sparkling of her eyes! --


Jus. Oh -- I don't mean -- that is -- Oh, I would rather have one kind look of
thine, sweet Mrs. Sukey -- for the other I dare not squint at.


Sus. Hah! -- I believe you are a Coquet -- but however, I have certain reasons
to wish this beautiful Angel out of the house. I have observed looks that I
don't like, between her and young Hargrave -- and -- you comprehend me --
whatever interrupts the marriage, we are gone.


Jus. I understand you -- you may depend upon me -- let me see -- how shall we
manage to get her out of Drummond's clutches?


Sus. That Is your business -- I say, that must be done, and you must do it.


Jus. To be sure, Mrs. Susan -- let me consider --


Sus. We must have no qualms, Mr. Justice.


Jus. We will have none -- but what your smiles, sweet Sukey, can disperse -- I
must venture a little -- the tender passions make one do any thing. Omnia
vincit amor, say no more.


Sus. She shall be sent packing.


Jus. Have I not given you the word of a Magistrate? -- But come now, give me
one kiss, you little dear, cruel, soft, sweet, charming, baggage.


Sus. Oh, fie -- you will not ask for wages, before you have done your work.

[runs off.
Jus. Stop -- don't run so fast -- don't run so fast, Hussy --

[following]
[Exit. SCENE, an Apartment. Enter Mr. DRUMMOND and GEORGE. Mr. D. I wish I had
known it before matters had been carried so far -- on a subject of this nature
no woman can be affronted with impunity.


Geo. I* am careless of her resentment -- I will never be her husband -- nor
husband to any woman, but her to whom I have given my vows.


Mr. D. Hah! -- have you carried your affair so forward?


Geo. Yes, Sir, I have made that enchanting Girl the offer of my heart and
hand, and though her delicacy forbids her, while our families remain unknown to
each other, to give the assent my heart aspires to -- yet she allows me to
^atch hopes, that I would not forfeit to become master of the universe.


Mr. D. There Is a little of the ardor of youth in this -- the ardor of youth,
George -- however, I will not blame you* for twenty years ago, I might have
been tempted to enter the lists with you, myself.


Geo. I should fear less to meet a Hector in the field -- in such a cause the
fury of Achilles would inspire me -- and I would bear off my lovely prize from
amidst the embattled phalanx.


Mr. D. Bravo -- I like to see a man romantic in his love, and in his
friendships -- the virtues of him who is not an enthusiast in those noble
passions, will never have strength to rise into fortitude, patriotism, and
philanthropy -- but here comes your Father, leave us.


Geo. May the subject inspire you with resistless cloquence!


[Exit. Enter Mr. HARGRAVE. Mr. D. So, Mr. Hargrave.


Mr. H. So, Mr. Drummond -- what, I guess your business.


Mr. D. I suppose you do, and I hope you are prepared to hear me with temper.


Mr. H. You Will talk to no purpose, for I am fixed, and therefore the temper
will signify nothing.


Mr. D. Strange infatuation! why must George be sacrificed to your ambition? --
surely, it may be gratified without tying him to your Lady Dinah.


Mr. H. How?


Mr. D. By marrying her yourself -- which, till now, I supposed to have been
your design -- and that would have been sufficiently preposterous.


Mr. H. What! -- make me a second time the slave of hysterics, longings, and
vapors! -- no, no, I Have got my neck out of the noose -- catch it there again
if you can -- what, her Ladyship is not youthful enough for George, I suppose?


Mr. D. True -- but a more forcible objection is the disproportion in their
minds -- it would not be less reasonable to expect a new element to be produced
between earth and fire, than that felicity should be the result of such a
marriage.


Mr. H. Psha, psha -- what, do you suppose the whole world has the same idle
notions about love and constancy, and stuff, that you have? Do You think, if
George was to become a widower at five and twenty, he would whine all his life for
the loss of his deary?


Mr. D. Not if his deary, as you call her, should be a Lady Dinah; and if you
marry him with no other view than to procure him a happy widowhood, I admire
the election you have made -- but, if she should be like my lost love -- my
sainted Harriet -- my -- oh! Hargrave --


Mr. H. Come, come, I am very sorry I have moved you so -- I did not mean to
affect you -- come, give me your hand -- 'sbud, if a man has any thing to do
with one of you fellows with your fine feelings, he must be as cautious as if
he was carrying a candle in a gunpowder barrel.


Mr. D. It Is over, my friend -- but when I can hear my Harriet named, without
giving my heart a fond regret for what I have lost -- reproach me -- for then,
I shall deserve it.


Mr. H. Well, well -- it shall be your own way -- but come, let me convince you
that you are wrong in this business

-- 'sbud! I tell you it has been the study of my life to make George a great
man -- I brought Lady Dinah here with no other design -- and now, when I
thought the matter was brought to bear -- when Lady Dinah had consented -- and
my Son, as I supposed, eager for the wedding -- why! -- it is all a flam!


Mr. D. My good friend -- the motives, from which you would sacrifice your
Son's happiness, appear to me so weak.


Mr. H. Weak! -- why, I tell you, I have provided a wife for George, who will
make him, perhaps, one of the first men in the kingdom.


Mr. D. That is, she would make him a Court Dangler, an attendant on Ministers
levees -- one whose ambition is to be fostered with the cameleon food of smiles
and nods, and who would receive a familiar squeeze with as much rapture as the
plaudits of a nation -- oh -- shame -- to transform an independent English
Gentleman into such a being!


Mr. H. Well, to cut the argument short -- the bargain is struck, and George
shall marry Lady Dinah, or never have an acre of my land, that is all.


Mr. D. And he shall never possess a rood of mine, if he does.

[walking about]
Mr. H. [aside] There, I thought it would come to this: what a shame it is for a
man to be so obstinate! -- but hold -- faith, if so, I may lose more than I get
by the bargain -- he will stick to his word.


Enter JUSTICE. Jus. I am very much surprised, Mr. Drummond -- Sir -- that I
cannot be left alone in the discharge of my magisterial duties, but must be
continually thwarted by you.


Mr. D. This interruption, Mr. Justice, is ill-timed, and rather out of rule --
I could wish you had chosen another opportunity.


Jus. No opportunity like the present -- no time like the present, Sir --
you have cause, indeed, to be displeased with my not observing rules, when you
are continually breaking the laws.


Mr. D. Ha, ha, ha! let us hear -- what hen-roost robbery have you to lay to my
charge now?


Jus. Aye, Sir, you may think to turn it off with a joke, if you please -- but
for all that, I can prove you to be a bad member of society, for you counteract
the wise designs of our legislators, and obstruct the operations of justice --
yes, Sir, you do.


Mr. H. Don't be so warm -- what is this affair?


Jus. Why, the poacher, whom we committed last night, Mr. Drummond has
released, and given money to his family -- How can we expect a due observance
of our laws, when rascals find encouragement for breaking them? -- Shall Lords
and Commons in their wisdom assemble in Parment, to make laws about hares and
partridges, only to be laughed at? Oh, it is abominable!


Mr. H. Very true; and let me tell you, Mr. Drummond, it is very extraordinary
that you will be continually --


Mr. D. Peace, ye men of justice -- I have all the regard to the laws of my
country, which it is the duty and interest of every member of society to
possess -- If the man had been a poacher, he should not have been protected by
me -- the poor fellow found the hare in his garden, which she had considerably
injured.


Mr. H. Ho, ho -- what, the rascal justifies himself! an unqualified man gives
reasons for destroying a hare! -- Zounds, if a gang of ruffians should burn my
house, would you expect me to hear their reasons?


Jus. Ah, there it works -- Susan's my own [aside.] -- there can be no reasons
-- if he had found her in his house, in his bedchamber -- in his bed, and
offered to touch her -- I Would prosecute him for poaching.


Mr. D. Oh, blush to avow such principles!


Mr. H. Look'ee, Mr. Drummond, though you govern George with your whimsical
notions, you sha'n't me. -- I foresee how it will be as soon as I Am gone -- my
fences will be cut down -- my meadows turned into common -- my cornfieldsd laid
open -- my woods at the mercy of every man who carries an axe -- and, oh --
this is noble, this is great!


Mr. D. Indeed, it is ridiculous.


Mr. H. I Will take care that my property sha'n't fall a sacrifice to such
whimsies -- I Will tie it up, I warrant me -- and so, Justice, come along.

[going.]
Mr. D. We were talking on a subject, Mr. Hargrave, of more importance, at
present, than this; and, I beg you will hear me farther.


Mr. H. Enough has been said already, Mr. Drummond, -- or if not, I Will give you
one answer for all -- I shall never think myself obliged to study the humor of
a man, who thinks in such opposition to me; I have a humor of my own, which I
am determined to gratify, in seeing George a great man -- He shall marry Lady
Dinah in two days; and all the fine reasoning in the world, you will see, has
less strength than my resolution -- 'Sbud, if I cannot have the willing
obedience of a Son, I Will enjoy the prerogatives of a Father -- Come along,
Justice.

[Exit.
Jus. Do You hear with what a fine firm tone he speaks? -- This was only a
political stroke, to restore the balance of power.


Mr. D. Why don't you follow, Sir? [Exit Justice.] My son shall be a great Man!
-- To such a vanity as this, how many have been sacrificed! -- He shall be
great -- The happiness of love, the felicities that flow from a suitable union,
his heart shall be a stranger to -- but he shall convey my name, decked with
titles, to posterity, though, to purchase these distinctions, he lives a wretch
-- This is the silent language of the heart, which we hold up to ourselves as
the voice of Reason and Prudence.

Enter EMILY. Miss Morley! -- Why this pensive air?


Em. I am a little distressed, Sir -- the delicacy of the motive which induced
you to place me here, I am perfectly sensible of -- yet --


Mr. D. Yet -- what, my dear Child?


Em. Do not think me capricious, if I entreat you to take me back to your own
house, till my uncle arrives -- I cannot think of remaining here.


Mr. D. Then it is as I hoped [aside] -- What can have disgusted you? -- Come,
be frank; consider me as a friend, to whom you may safely open your heart.


Em. Your goodness, Sir, is excessive -- Shall I confess -- the Lady who will
soon have most right here, treats me unkindly.


Mr. D. That you cannot wonder at -- Be assured, I will effectually defend you
from her insults -- But do you not pity poor George, for the fate his father
designs him?


Em. Yes -- I do pity him.


Mr. D. If I dared, I would go still further -- I would hope, that, as his
happiness depends on you --


Em. Sir!


Mr. D. Let me not alarm you -- I am acquainted with his passion, and wish to
know that it is not displeasing to you.


Em. So circumstanced, Sir -- what can I say? -- He is destined to be the
husband of another.


Mr. D. It is enough -- I bind myself to you from this moment, and promise to
effect your happiness, if within the compass of my abilities or fortune. But,
that I may know my task -- favor me with the key to your Uncle's character.


Em. My Uncle possesses a heart, Sir, that would do him honor, if he would be
guided by it -- but unhappily he has conceived an opinion that his temper is
too flexible -- that he is too easily persuaded -- and the consequence is --
he will never be persuaded at all.


Mr. D. I am sorry to hear that -- a man who is obstinate from such a mistake,
must be in the most incurable stage of the disorder. However, we'll attack this
man of might -- his flexibility shall be besieged, and if it will not capitulate,
we'll undermine it.


Em. Ah, Sir! my Uncle is in a state of mind ill prepared for yielding -- He
returned from Spain with eager pleasure to his native country; but the disgust
he has conceived for the alteration of manners during his absence, has given
him an impatience that you will hardly be able to combat.


Mr. D. Take courage -- let me now lead you back to your young companions -- I
am obliged to be absent a short time -- but I Will watch over you, and, if
possible, lead you to happiness.


[Exit Drummond leading Emily. Enter JUSTICE. [tipsy] Jus. Where the devil does
my clerk stay with Burn! But I know I Am right -- yes, yes, it is a clear case.
By the statute Anno Primo Caroli Secundum -- obtaining goods on false
pretenses, felony, with benefit -- hum -- with benefit. -- Now obtaining
entrance into houses, upon false pretenses, must be worse -- I have no doubt
but it amounts to a burglary, and that I shall be authorized to commit -- Ho!
here they are! where is my clerk and Burn?


[Exit. Enter Mr. HARGRAVE and Lady DINAH. Mr. H. Aye, aye, here is a pretty
business -- bringing this Girl into my house now is the consequence of Mr.
Drummond's fine seelings -- he will never take my advice -- but I Will show him
who is best qualified to sist into an affair of this sort -- and yet I am a
little puzzled -- a stroller --


Lady. D. It is, doubtless, a strange story, Mr. Hargrave -- and I beg that you
will yourself question my servant concerning it.


Mr. H. Why, what can she mean -- what can her design be?


Lady D. To you I should imagine her design must be very obvious, 'though Mr.
Drummond's penetration was so easily eluded -- By assuming the airs and manners
of a person of rank, she doubtless expects to impose on the credulity of some
young heir, and to procure -- a jaunt to Scotland -- that, Mr. Hargrave, I take
to be her design.


Mr. H. Hoh, ho, is it so -- now I understand your Ladyship -- if your man can
prove what he asserts, be assured, Madam, she shall not stay in my house
another moment -- I Will young heir the baggage.


Lady D. But consider, dear Mr. Hargrave, before you take any steps in this
affair -- that it is possible, we may have been deceived, for though my servant
avows having been on the most intimate terms with her, he may be mistaken in
her person, you know.


Har. Oh, Madam, I shall inquire into that -- she shall pick up no young heirs
here, I warrant her -- I shall see into that immediately.

[Going.
Enter Justice, leading in JARVIS by the button. Just. Here Is the young man --
the witness -- I have brought him up in order to his examination. -- Here, --
do you stand there. -- In the first place, -- [settling his wig] in the first
place, how old are you?


Har. Fiddle de de -- What signifies how old he is?


Just. Why, yes it does -- for -- if he is not of age --


Har. Psha, psha -- I Will examine him myself. How long is it since you left the
strollers you were engaged with?


Jar. It is about two years since I had the honor of being taken into my
Lady's service, -- and at that time I left the company.


Har. And did you leave the young woman in the company at that time?


Jar. I did, Sir, and I have never seen her since till now.


Har. I am strangely puzzled -- I don't know what to think --


Just. It is indeed a difficult case -- a very difficult case -- I remember
Burn in the chapter on Vagrants --


Har. Prithee, be silent -- at this time you are not likely to clear up matters
at all.


Just. A Justice be silent! -- a silent Justice! -- a pretty thing indeed --
are we not the very mouth of the law?


Har. What does your Ladyship advise?


Lady D. I advise! -- I don't advise, Mr. Hargrave.


Just. Why then, let the parties be confronted --


Har. Aye -- let the parties be confronted.


Jar. Ay, ay, let us be confronted: if I once speak to her, she will be too much
dashed to be able to deny the charge.


Enter Servant. Ser. Did your honor call?


Har. Go and tell my daughter, that I desire she will bring her visitant here --
the young Lady.


Jar. [Aside] Two glasses of brandy, and tremble yet! -- I wish I had swallowed
the third bumper.


Lady D. Now, Mr. Hargrave, it will be exceedingly improper, that I should be
present at this interview, so I shall retire till the affair is settled.

[Going.
Mr. H. 'Sbud, my Lady, if you go, I Will go too -- and the Justice may settle it
as well as he can.


Jus. Nay, if you are for that -- I shall be gone in a crack -- I will not be left
in the lurch -- not I.


Lady D. Bless me! I am surprised -- only consider what an imputation may be
thrown on my character.

Enter HARRIET and EMILY. So -- now it is determined.


Har. Robert informed us, Sir, that you requested our attendance.


Mr. H. Yes, Harriet -- I did send Robert -- it is about an odd affair -- I had
rather -- but I don't know -- pray, Madam -- [to Emily] be so kind to tell us
if you know any thing of that person --

[pointing to Jarvis.]
Em. No, Sir, I believe not -- I do not recollect -- I may have seen him before.


Jar. Oh, Miss Jenny -- you don't recollect -- what, you have forgot your old
companion William Jarvis?


Em. I do not remember indeed, that I was ever honored with such a companion
-- and the mistake you have made of my name, convinces me that I never was.


Jar. Psha, psha -- this will not do now -- you was always a good actress, but
behind the scenes, you know, we used to come down from our stilts, and talk in
our own proper persons -- Why sure, you will not pretend to forget our
adventures at Colchester -- the affair of the Blue Domino at Warwick -- nor the
plot which you and Mrs. Varnish laid against the Manager at Beconsfield.


Har. Dear Sir, nothing is so evident, as that the man has mistaken this Lady
for another person -- I -- hope you will permit us to go without hearing any more
of his impertinence.


Mr. H. If he is mistaken, no excuses will be sufficient -- I don't know what
to say -- it is a perplexing business -- but I wish you would be so kind to
answer the man, Madam.


Em. Astonishment has kept me silent till now, Sir -- and I must still be
silent -- for I have not yet been taught to make defenses.


Enter GEORGE behind JARVIS. Jar. Dear Madam -- why surely you have not forgot
how often you have been my Juliet, and I your Alexander.


Geo. Hark you, Sir, -- if you dare utter another word to that Lady, I Will break
every bone in your body -- leave the room, rascal, this instant.


Mr. H. You are too hot, George -- he shall stay -- and since things have gone
so far, I Will sift the story to the bottom -- If the young Gentlewoman is not
what he represents her, she has nothing to fear -- Speak boldly -- where did
you last see that Lady?


Jus. Aye, speak boldly -- give her a few more circumstances, perhaps some of
them may hit -- People on occasions of this sort have generally short memories.


Geo. Surely, Sir, you cannot allow these horrid --


Mr. H. I do allow, Sir -- and if you cannot be silent, leave the room.


Jus. Yes, Sir, or else you will be committed for contempt of Court. Now, for
your name, child, your name, and that of your family.


Em. The name of my family, demanded on such an occasion, I think myself bound
to conceal -- my silence on that subject, hitherto arose from a point of
delicacy -- that motive is now greatly strengthened, and I refuse to discover a
name -- which my imprudent conduct has disgraced.


Jus. Ho, ho -- pray let the Lady be treated with respect -- a person of
Consequence -- stands upon Constitutional ground -- a Patriot, I Will assure you
-- she refuses to answer Interrogatories.


Geo. Sir, I cannot be any longer a silent witness of these insults -- Your
presence, Madam, supports that rascal, or he should feel the immediate effect
of my resentment.


Lady D. Your resentment will be unnecessary Sir, if he is not supported by
truth -- I shall take care that he is properly punished.


[Enter Servant. Sir. A Gentleman in a coach-and-six enquires for your honor
-- his name is Morley.


Em. Hah -- it is my Uncle -- I no longer dread his presence -- now, Sir, you
will be satisfied concerning my family.


[Exeunt Emily and Harriet. Mr. H. [to Lady D.] Her Uncle -- Heavens! Madam,
what have we done!


[Exit Hargrave. Lady D. Done! -- nothing -- madness!

[aside.
Jus. So, so -- the niece of a man who keeps a coach and six! -- we are got
into a wrong box here --

she can be no Patriot, our Patriots don't ride in coaches and six.


Geo. Stay, Sir -- we have not done with you yet -- you must now exhibit
another part in this scene -- what says your oracle Burn to such a fellow as
this, Justice?


Jus. Ay, you rascal -- it is now your turn -- thou art a vilifier, a cheat, an
impostor -- it is a downright conspiracy -- The niece of a man who keeps a coach
and six! -- why, how do think to escape? thou wilt cut a noble figure in the
pillory, Mr. "Alexander the Great."


Jar. Sir, -- your honors -- I humbly crave pardon for my mistake -- I could
have sworn the Lady had been my old acquaintance, the likeness is so strong. --
But I humbly ask pardon -- my Lady! --


Lady D. Expect no protection from me, I discharge you from my service from
this moment. -- The dilemma into which you have deceived me excites my warmest
resentment.


Geo. Since Your Ladyship gives him up, he has no other protection -- Who Is
there? [Enter Servants] Secure this fellow till I have leisure to inquire into
the bottom of the affair -- he is only the Agent, I am convinced.


Jar. [Aside.] Aye, Sir, but I am dumb -- or we shall lose the reward.] I
beseech your honor -- 'twas all a mistake.


Geo. Take him away.


[Exeunt servants with Jarvis. Lady D. [Aside.] Hah -- are you suspicious, Sir!
-- I hope Susan has not put me in this fellow's power -- I must be sure of that.


[Exit. Jus. It Is a conspiracy, that is certain -- and will, I believe, come
under Scan. Mag.

for it is a most scandalous Libel -- but hold -- 'gad-so -- let me see -- it
can be no libel; it is a false story -- if it had been true -- aye, then indeed
-- if it had been true

-- but I Will go home and consult Burn, and you shall know what he says. Egad,
it will not be amiss to get out of this Morley's way.

[Aside.
[Exit Justice. Geo. Surely she must have been privy to this scandalous plot --
but it is no matter -- my fate is at its crisis. -- Mr. Morley's arrival fixes
it. -- At this moment my fortitude forsakes me, and I tremble to meet the Man,
on whose caprice depends, the value of my existence.


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, an Apartment. Enter Mr. MORLEY and EMILY. MORLEY. A Pretty freak
indeed! -- a pretty freak, in return for the care and solicitude with which I
have watched over you -- I have broke with the Doctor for his share in this
romantic affair.


Em. I am much concerned, Sir, that compassion to my situation should have led
that worthy Man to take any step that you can think unpardonable -- but when he
found he could not move my resolution, he thought it his duty to accommodate me
with a retreat amongst persons of reputation.


Mar. Retreat! -- so, whilst I was condemning my sweet inno^ent Niece for
stubbornness, wilfulness, and ingratitude -- she was only gone to a retreat to
sit under elms, listen to the cawing of rooks, and carve her melancholy story
on the young bark -- Oh, Emily, Emily! you ought to be made repent of this
retreat, as you call it, as long as you live.


Em. Indeed, Sir, I do repent.


Mor. What Is that? -- repent! -- my dear Emily, I am rejoiced to hear you say
so -- I knew you was always a good Girl on the, whole -- come, it sha'n't be a
misfortune to you -- I Will make Baldwin swear, before the ceremony, that he will
never reproach --


Em. Sir, I must not deceive you -- my repentance does not concern Mr. Baldwin
-- he is -- pardon me, Sir -- my sentiments with regard to him, are, if
possible, strengthened.


Mor. Are they so, Mistress? then farewell to humourings -- since your
sentiments are so strong, your resolution cannot be weak -- 'twill enable you
to bear this dreaded fate with heroism.


Em. I am glad you can be so sportive with my unhappiness, Sir -- where you
jest with misery, you always design to lesson it.


Mor. Aye, that will not do -- the easiness of my temper. Girl, has been my great
misfortune. I never made a mistake in trade in my life, never, but have been
persuaded, and listened to advice, till I have been half ruined

-- but I Will be resolute now for your sake.


Em. Surely, Sir --


Mor. Aye, aye -- I understand that speaking face -- there is not a line in it,
but calls me Monster -- however, Madam, after your retreat, you can never
expect to be the wife of another -- so snap Baldwin while you can.


Em. Oh, Sir, allow me to live single, I have no wish for the married state --
since he to whom my heart is devoted must be the husband of another.


Mor. No wish for the married state! ha, ha, ha! -- why, it is the ultimate wish
of every woman's heart -- you all want Husbands, from your doll to your
spectacles.


Em. The person with whom one enters into so important an union should be at
least agreeable, or --


Mor. What an age this is! -- Why, hussy, in the days of your great
Grandmother, a Girl on the point of marriage had never dared to look above her
lover's beard -- and would have been a wife a week before she could have told
the color of her husband's eyes -- But, now, a Girl of eighteen will stare her
suitor confidently in the face, and, after five minutes conversation, give an
account of every feature and peculiarity, from his brow to his buckle

-- But pray, Madam, what is itin Baldwin now, that so particularly hits your
fancy?


Em. His person is ungraceful, his manner assuming, and his mind effeminate.


Mor. Very true -- and is not this the description of all the young men of the
age? -- but he has five thousand a year, that is not quite so common a
circumstance. Come, take the pencil again, lay on coarser colors, or you will not
convince me the picture's a bad one -- considering the times.


Em. Hah! -- how different is Mr. Hargrave! -- if I could urge his merit
[aside] -- You have heard my objections so often, Sir, that the repetition can
have no weight -- but, surely, I may urge my happiness.


Mor. By all means, it shall be considered, therefore -- John, order my
carriage up, we are going directly -- though you don't deserve it -- the very
moment we reach Grosvenor-street, you shall be tied fast to Baldwin, who is now
waiting there with the parson at his elbow -- and we'll this moment step into
the carriage, and away as briskly, as if Cupid was our coachman -- come now,
don't put on that melancholy air -- it is only to turn the tables -- fancy that
I hate Baldwin -- that you are driving to Scotland, and I pursuing you -- why
the horses will move so slowly, you will be ready to swear they don't gallop
above three rood an hour.


Em. I entreat you, dear Sir, stay, at least, till tomorrow. -- Oh, where is
Mr. Drummond?

[aside.
Mor. Not a moment.


Em. You have not yet seen Mr. Drummond, to whom I am so much obliged.


Mor. I have made enquiries, and have heard a very extraordinary character of
Mr. Drummond; we can make him acknowledgments by letter -- and you may send him
gloves. -- I know your design, you hope he will be able to talk me out of my
resolution -- and, perhaps, I may be a little afraid of it myself, -- and so,
to avoid that danger, we'll go directly.


Em. It Is so late, Sir, -- and the night is dark. -- [Aside] Yet why should I
wish to stay here?


Mor. No more trifling -- conduct me to the family, that we may take leave. If
you complain of this as an act of tyranny -- be comforted, Child, it is the last
you will experience from me -- my authority will expire with the night, and
tomorrow morning, I shall be my dear Niece Baldwin's most humble servant.


Exeunt. Enter GEORGE and Sir CHARLES. Geo. What, refuse me your assistance in
such an hour -- talk to me of prudence in a moment when I must be mad, if I am
human! yes, be prudent, Sir, be prudent, -- the man who can be discreet when
his friend's happiness is at stake, may gain the approbation of his own heart,
but mine renounces him -- Where can Mr. Drummond be?


Sir Chapter I am at your command in every thing -- I ask you only to reflect.


Geo. Yes, I do reflect, that in a few hours she will be irrecoverably
another's -- lost to me for ever -- unfeeling brute! to sacrifice such a Woman
to a man whom she despises!


Sir Chapter What then is your resolution?


Geo. There is but one way -- she hangs on the point of a precipice, from
which, if I do not snatch her in an instant, nothing can retrieve her. -- We
will follow the carriage on horseback; let your chaise attend us with our
servants -- I Will force her from this tyrant Uncle, carry her instantly to
Dover, and in a few hours, breathe out my soul at her feet -- in sweet security
in France.


Sir Chapter Considering your plan is an impromptu, I admire its consistency --
but, my dear George, have you weighed all its consequences? -- your Father --


Geo. Will perhaps disinherit me -- be it so -- I have six hundred a year
independent of his will -- and six hundred a year in France with Emily Morly --
kingdoms! empires! paradise!


Sir Chapter But are you certain she will partake it with you?


Geo. No -- but supposing the worst -- I shall, at least, have had the
happiness to preserve her from a fate she dreads -- for the rest I will trust
to time and my ardent passion.


Sir Chapter Pity the days of chivalry are over, or what applause might thou not
expect -- adventurous Knight!


Geo. Come, we have not a moment to lose -- let us get our people ready to
follow, the instant the carriage sets out.


Sir Chapter But, George -- George -- I Will not accompany you a step, after the
Lady's in your protection -- for if your Father should surmise that I have any
hand in the enlevement, I can hope for no success, when I ask him for my
charming Harriet.


Geo. Agreed -- let me have your chaise, and leave me to my fortune -- I will
not endanger your happiness -- this key will let you in at the garden-door --
you may give fifty reasons for your short absence. -- Now, Cupid, Venus, Jove
and Juno, leap into your chariots, and descend to our assistance.


[Exeunt Sir Charles and George. Enter Lady DINAH. Lady D. She Is gone, and my
alarms are at an end -- it is plain I had never the least foundation for my
fears -- what passed in the garden was mere gallantry, and the effects of her
art; he suffered her Uncle to carry her off with an indifference that
transports me. How weak have I been, to allow my credulity to be imposed on by
their suggestions, and my temper ruffled at a time when 'twas of so much
importance to me to have been serene!


Enter SUSAN. Susan. Oh, my Lady, she is gone -- the delightful obstinacy of the
old Uncle -- It is well Mr. Drummond was not here -- I was afraid --


Lady D. Your joy wears a very familiar aspect -- I know she is gone.


Susan. I beg pardon, my Lady -- I thought I might congratulate your Ladyship
on her being carried off -- I was terribly afraid --


Lady D. Yes, you have had most extraordinary fears on the occasion. You ought
to have known, that the man whom I had received as my Lover, could never have
felt any thing like a serious passion for such a girl as that.


Sus. So, so, so! how soon our spirits are got up! [aside.] I am sure, my Lady,
'twas not I who occasioned the interview in the garden today, that so enraged
you, and confirmed your fears -- you was ready enough then to believe all that
was said against her.


Lady D. How dare you reproach me with the errors which you led me into? --
'twas your fears I was governed by, and not my own; and your ridiculous plot
was as absurd as your fears.


Sus. As to the plot, my Lady, I am sure 'twas a good one, and would have sent
her packing, if the Uncle had not come -- 'twasn't our fault he came -- We have
had the same trouble, and -- service is no inheritance, and I hope your
Ladyship will consider --


Lady D. How dare you think of a reward for such conduct? -- If you obtain my
pardon, you ought to be highly gratified -- leave me, Insolent, this moment.


Sus. [muttering.] Ha! -- and dare you use me in this manner? -- I am glad you
have betrayed yourself in time, when I can take a severe revenge?

[aside.]
[Ex. Sus. Lady D. I have gone too far -- Now must I court my servant, to
forget the resentment which her impertinence occasioned -- Well, it is but for a
short time -- the marriage over, and I have done with her --

I must retire to my apartment, to recover my composure: perhaps he will visit me
there -- but not to talk of veneration and respect again -- Oh! I Will torment
him for that. Nothing gives a Woman so fine an opportunity of plaguing her
Lover, as an affectation off jealousy: if she feels it, she is his Slave; but,
whilst she affects it -- his Tyrant.


[Exit. Enter BELLA and HARRIET. Har. How very unfortunate, that Mr. Drummond
is absent! -- he would have opposed the reasoning of Lady Dinah; and prevented
their departure -- Sure, never any thing was so cruel.


Bell. Oh, there is no bearing it -- Your Father is quite a manageable being,
compared to this odd, provoking mortal, whose imagined flexibility baffles art,
reason, and every thing.


Har. Never shall I forget the look, wild, yet composed -- agonized though calm,
which she gave me, as her Uncle led her out. Her Lover must possess strange
sentiments, to resolve to marry her, in spite of her aversion.


Bell. Sentiments! my dear -- why he is a modern fine Gentleman; there is nothing
he is so much afraid of as a fond Wife -- If I was Miss Morley, I Would affect a
most formidable fondness, and ten to one but she would get rid of him.


Har. I wonder where Sir Charles is -- he passed me in the hall, and said in a
hasty manner, he must tear himself front me for half an hour.


Bell. I wonder rather where your Brother is -- but the heart of a woman in
love, is as unnatural as the ostrich's; it is no longer alive to any sentiment
but one, and the tenderest connexions are absorbed in its passion.


Har. I hope it is not in your own heart, you find this picture of love.


Enter Sir CHARLES. Bell. Oh -- here is one of our truants, but where is the
other? -- poor George, I suppose, is binding his brow with willows.


Sir Chapter That Is not George's style in love -- he has too much spirit to cross
his arms, and talk to his shadow, when he may employ his hours to more
advantage at the feet of a fair Lady.


Bell. What do you mean?


Har. Where is my Brother?


Sir Chapter On the road to France.


Both. France!


Sir Chapter Unless Mr. Morley has as much valor as obstinacy -- for George has
pursued him, and, by this time, I dare swear has gained possession of his Niece.


Bell. Oh! how I dote on his Knight-errantry! -- commend me to a lover, who,
instead of patiently submitting to the circumstances that separate him from the
object of his passion, -- boldly takes the reins of Fortune in his own hands,
and governs the accidents which he cannot avoid.


Har. How can you praise such a daring conduct? I tremble for the consequences!


Sir Chapter What consequences, Madam, can he dread, who snatches the woman he
loves from the arms of the man she hates?


Enter Servant. Ser. My Master, Sir, is returned -- the Lady fainted in the
chaise, and he has carried her to Mr. Drummond's.


Chapter The devil! -- is he at home?


Ser. No, Sir -- and Mr. Morley is come back too -- he drove through the gates
this minute.


Bell. Nay, then George will lose her at last -- he was a fool for not pursuing
his route.


Sir Chapter He has no chance now, but through Mr. Drummond; and what can he hope?
Mr. Drummond has only reason on his side, and the passions of three to combat.


Bell. Ay, here he comes -- and Mr. Hargrave, as loud as his huntsman.


Har. Let us fly to the parlour, and then we can send intelligence of what
passes to George.


[Exeunt. Enter Mr. MORLEY and Mr. HARGRAVE. Mr. M. Yes, yes, it is fact --
matter of fact, upon my honor -- Your Son was the person who took her out of
the coach.


Mr. H. Sir, it is impossible! -- ha, ha, ha! -- my Son! -- why, he is under
engagements that would make it madness.


Mr. M. Then, Sir, you may depend upon it, tho fit is on him now, for he clapped
Emily into a chaise, whilst an impudent puppy fastened on me -- egad! twenty
years ago I Would have given him sauce to his Cornish hug -- I could not discern
his face -- but the other I Will swear to.


Mr. H. George! look for George there! I Will convince you, Sir, instantly -- ha,
ha!


Enter HARRIET. Mr. H. Where Is George?


Har. Sir, my Brother is at Mr. Drummond's.


Mr. H. There! I knew it could not be him, though you would not be persuaded.


Mr. M. What a plague! you cannot persuade me out of my senses -- Your Son, I
aver, took her out of the coach -- with her own consent, no doubt, and on an
honorable design, without doubt -- Sir, I give you joy of your daughter.


Mr. H. If it is on an honorable design, they may live on their honor, or
starve with it -- not a single sous shall they have of me -- but I will not yet
believe my George could be such a fool.


Mr. M. Fool! Sir -- The man who loves Emily gives no such proof of folly
neither -- but she shall be punished for hers -- 'twas a concerted affair, I
see it plainly, all agreed upon -- but she shall repent.


Mr. H. Your resentment, Sir, is extraordinary -- I must tell you that my Son's
ancestry, or the estate to which he is heir -- if he has not forfeited by his
disobedience, are not objects for the contempt of any man.


Mr. M. Very likely, Sir, -- but they are objects to which I shall never be
reconciled -- What! have I been toiling these thirty years in Spain, to make my
Niece a match for any man in England -- to have her fortune settled by an
adventure in a post-chaise, an evening's frolic for a young spark, who had
nothing to do but push the old fellow into a corner, and whisk off with the
girl? Sir, if there was not another man in the kingdom, your Son should not
have my consent to marry Emily.


Mr. H. And if there was not another woman in England, I Would suffer the name of
Hargrave to be annihilated, rather than he should be husband to your Niece.


[Hargrave and M^rl^y walk about the Stage disordered.] Enter Mr. DRUMMOND. Mr.
D. Gone! -- her Uncle arrived, and the amiable girl gone -- What infatuation,
Mr. Hargrave, could render you so blind to the happiness that awaited your
family? -- I Will follow this obdurate man -- where is George? -- look for George
there -- he shall hear reason.


Mr. H. There, Sir -- that is the person to whom you must address your
complaints.


Mr. D. Unfortunate! -- I have made discoveries, that must have shaken even
your prejudices -- [to Mr. Hargrave] -- but this Uncle! -- surely, my dear
Harriet, you might have prevailed.


Har. Sir, this gentleman is Mr. Morley -- Mr. Drummond, Sir.


Mr. D. Hah! I beg pardon, Sir, I am rejoiced to see you; I understood you were
gone.


Mr. M. I was gone, Sir; but I was robbed of my Niece on the road -- she was
taken out of my coach, and carried off -- which forced me to return.


Mr. D. Carried off!


Mr. H. Aye, Sir, carried off by George, whom you have trained to such a
knowledge of his duty.


Mr. M. Stopped on the King's highway, Sir, by the fiery youth, and my Niece
dragged from my side.


Mr. D. Admirable!


Mr. H. What Is this right too? -- By heaven, it is not to be borne.


Mr. D. Where are they?


Har. At your house, Sir --


Mr. M. What a country am I fallen into! can a person of your age and character
approve of so rash and daring --


Mr. H. Let George do what he will -- he is sure of his approbation.


Mr. D. Gentlemen -- if you are sure Miss Morley is at my house, I am patience
itself -- she is too rich a prize to be gained without some warfare.


Mr. M. Sir, I am resolved to --


Enter Lady DINAH. [Exit HARRIET frighten'd] Lady D. So, Mr. Hargrave! so, Sir!
-- what, your Son -- this new insult deprives me of utterance -- but your Son
-- what is the reason of this complicated outrage?


Mr. H. My dear Lady Dinah, I am as much enraged as you can be -- but he shall
fulfill his engagements -- depend on it, he shall.


Mr. M. Engagements! -- what the young Gentleman was engaged too! -- a very
fine youth! upon my word.


Lady D. [to Mr. Hargrave] Your honor is concerned, Sir -- and if I was sure
he was drawn in by the girl's art, and that he was convinced of the impropriety
--


Mr. M. Drawn in by the girl's art! -- whatever cause I may have to be offended
with my Niece's conduct, Madam, no person shall speak of her with contempt in
my presence -- I presume, this gentleman's son was engaged to your daughter,
but that is not a sufficient reason for --


Lady D. Daughter! impertinent! -- No, Sir, 'twas to me that he was engaged --
and, but for the arts of your Niece --


Mr. M. To you! -- A matrimonial negotiation between that young Fellow and you!
-- Nay then, before George, I don't wonder at your ill temper -- A
disappointment in love at your time of life must be the devil.


Lady D. Mr. Hargrave, do you suffer me to be thus insulted?


Mr. H. Why, my Lady, we must bear something from this Gentleman -- the mistake
we made about his Niece, was a very ugly business.


Mr. D. I entreat you, Madam, to retire from a Family, to whom, if you suffer
me to explain myself --


Lady D. What new insolence is this?


Mr. D. I would spare you, my Lady, but you will not spare yourself -- Blush
then, whilst I accuse you of entering into a base league with your Servants, to
blast the reputation of an amiable young Lady, and drive her from the
protection of Mr. Hargrave's family.


Mr. H. What! a league with her Servants?

[aside.]
Lady D. And how dare you accuse me of this -- Am I to answer for the conduct
of my servants?


Mr. D. The villainy of your servants is the consequence of those principles
with which you have poisoned their minds. Robbed of their religion, they were
left without support -- against temptations to which you, Madam, have felt,
Philosophy opposes its shield in vain.


Lady D. I feel his superiority to my inmost soul -- but he shall not see his
triumph [aside] -- Is it your virtue which prompts you to load me with
injuries, to induce Mr. Hargrave to break through every tie of honor --
through the most sacred engagements!


Mr. D. I have just heard these terms, nearly as much prostituted by your
servants, who reproach you with not keeping your engagements to them.


Lady D. Ha! Am I then betrayed?

[aside.]
Enter GEORGE, leading EMILY. Geo. Miss Morley, Sir, commanded me to lead her
to you -- I cannot ask you to pardon a rashness, of which I do not repent.


Mr. H. Then I shall make you, I fancy.


Mr. M. Hah -- did you really wish to return to me?


Em. I left Mr. Drummond's, Sir, the moment I knew you were here.


Mr. M. That Is a good girl -- I Will remember it. Come, child, the coach is at
the door, and we must make speed to retrieve our lost time. But have a care,
young Gentleman, -- though I have pardoned your extravagance once, a second
attempt shall find me prepared for your reception.


Geo. If Miss Morley consents to go with you, Sir, you have no second attempt
to fear. But since this moment is the crisis of our fate, thus I entreat you
[kneeling] -- you, to whom I have sworn eternal love, to become my wife.
Consent, my charming Emily, and every moment of my future life shall thank you.


Mr. M. So, so, so!


Mr. H. What, without my leave?


Lady D. Amazing!

[All together.
Em. At such a moment as this, meanly to disguise my sentiments would be
unworthy of the woman, to whom you offer such a sacrifice -- obtain the consent
of those who have a right to dispose of us, and I Will give you my hand at the
altar.


Mr. M. That you will not, my frank Madam -- so no more ceremony, but away.

[seizing her arm, and going off.]
Mr. D. And will you go, impenetrable man -- I have discovered, Sir, that your
Niece is the daughter of Major Morley, who was one of the earliest friends of
my youth -- He would not have borne the distress she now endures -- I will be a
father to his orphan Emily, and ensure the felicity of two children, on the
point of being sacrificed to the ambition and avarice of those, on whose hearts
Nature has graven duties, which they wilfully mispel.


Lady D. What, Sir, are you not content with the insults you have offered to me
and Mr. Hargrave, but you must interfere with this Gentleman in the disposal of
his Niece!


Mr. M. What right have you, Sir, to dispose of our Children?


Mr. H. Aye, very true, you don't know how to value the authority of a parent.


Drum. Mistaken Men! into what an abyss of misery -- perhaps of guilt, would
you plunge them! -- they claim from you happiness; and you withold it -- they
shall receive it from me. I will settle the jointur'd land of my Harriet on
Miss Morley, and George shall now partake that fortune to which I have already
made him heir.


Mr. H. Ay, there is no stopping him -- what can these servants have told him,
that makes him so warm? -- Egad, I Will hear their tale.


[Exit, unperceived by Lady Dinah. Mr. M. Why, Sir, this is extraordinary
friendship indeed! fettle jointur'd lands -- I am glad Brother Tom had prudence
enough to form such a connection, 'twas seldom he minded the main chance --
Honor and a greasy knapsack, running about after ragged colors, instead --


Mr. D. Sir, I have served, and I love the profession. -- The army is not more
the school of honor than of philosophy -- A true soldier is a citizen of the
world; he considers every man of honor as his brother, and the urbanity of his
heart gains his Country subjects, whilst his sword only vanquishes her foes.


Mr. M. Nay, if you have all this Romance, I don't wonder at your proposal --
however, though your jointure lands might have been necessary for Major Morly's
Daughter -- My Niece, Sir, if she marries with my consent, shall be obliged to
no man for a fortune.


Lady D. The insolence of making me witness to this is insupportable -- Is this
you, Sir, who this very morning paid your vows to me?


Geo. Pardon, Madam, the error of this morning; I imagined myself paying my
devoirs to a Lady who was to become my Mother.


Lady D. Your Mother! Sir -- Your Mother! -- Mr. Hargrave -- ha, where is Mr.
Hargrave?


Enter Mr. HARGRAVE. Mr. H. I am here, my Lady -- and have just heard a tale of
so atrocious a nature from your servants -- that I would not, for half my
estate, such an affair should have happened in my family.


Lady D. And can you believe the malicious tale?


Mr. H. Indeed I do.


Lady D. Mr. Drummond's arts have then succeeded.


Mr. H. Your arts have not succeeded, my Lady, and you have no chance for a
husband now, I believe, unless you prevail on George to run off with you.


Lady D. Insolent wretches! -- order my chaise, I will not stay another moment
beneath this roof -- when persons of my rank, thus condescend to mix with
Plebeians -- like the Phoenix, which sometimes appears within the ken of common
birds, they are stared at, jeered and hooted, till they are forced to ascend
again to their proper region, to escape the flouts of -- ignorance and envy.


[Exit. Mr. M. Well said, a rare spirit, faith, I see Ladies of quality have
their privileges too. --


[As Lady D. goes off, Geo. fixes his eye on his Father, and points after her.]
Mr. H. [catching George 's hand.] My dear Boy, I believe we were wrong here --
and I am heartily glad we have escaped -- but I suppose you will forget it when I
tell you I have no objection to your endeavoring to prevail on this gentleman
--


Geo. Nothing, dear Sir, can prevent my feeling the most unbounded gratitude
for the permission -- now may I hope, Sir --


Mr. M. Hope, Sir! -- Upon my word I don't know what to say, you have somehow
contriyed to carry matters to such a length -- that asking my consent is become
a matter of form.


Mr. H. Upon my soul, I begin to find out, that in some cases one's children
should lead. -- Come, Sir, -- do keep me in countenance, that I may not think I
yielded too soon.


Mr. D. Your consent, Sir, is all we want, to become a very joyous circle --
let us prevail on you to permit your beloved Emily to receive the addresses of
my Godson, and you will many happy years hence recollect his boldness on the
road, as the most fortunate reneounter of your life: you shall come and live
amongst us, and we'll reconcile you to your native country: notwithstanding our
ideas of the degeneracy of the times, we shall find room enough to act
virtuously, and to enjoy in England, more securely than in any other country in
the world, -- the rewards of virtue.


Mr. M. Sir, I like you -- promise me your friendship -- and you shall dispose
of my Niece.


Mr. D. I accept the condition with pleasure.


Mr. M. There it is now, this is always the way -- persuaded out of every
resolution -- a perfect proverb for flexibility.


Geo. Oh, Sir, permit me --


Mr. M. Nay, no extacies -- Emily dislikes you now you have got me on your side.
What say you? [to Em.] don't you begin to feel your usual reluctance?


Em. The proof I have given of my sentiments, Sir, admits of no disguise -- or,
if disguise were necessary, I could not assume it.


Geo. Enchanting frankness! my heart, my life must thank you for this goodness.
But what shall I say to you -- [to Drummond] to you, Sir, to whom I already owe
more than --


Mr. D. To me you owe nothing -- the heart, George, must have some attachments
-- Mine has for many years been centered in you -- If I have struggled for your
happiness -- 'twas to gratify myself.


Geo. Oh, Sir! why will you continually give me such feelings, and yet refuse
them utterance? -- Seymour, behold the happiest of men!


Sir Cha. May your bliss, my dear George, be as permanent as it is great. -- [To
Hargrave] Allow me, Sir, to seize this propitious moment to ask your consent to
a second union -- Permit me to entreat Miss Hargrave for her hand, and I Will
prove George a vain boaster, when he calls himself the happiest of men.


Har. Why, Sir Charles, you have chosen a very lucky moment -- but there is no
moment in which I should not have heard this request with pleasure. Why,
Harriet -- if we may believe your eyes, you are not very angry with Sir Charles
for this request.


Har. A request, Sir, which gives you so much pleasure ought not to give your
Harriet pain.


Bell. Lord! you look so insulting with your happiness, and seem to think I make
such an awkward figure amongst you -- but here [taking a letter from her
pocket] -- this informs me -- that a certain person --


Geo. Of the name of -- Belville --


Bell. Be quiet -- is landed at Dover, and posting here -- with all the fancy
confidence our engagements inspire him with.


Mr. D. Say you so? -- Then we'll have the three weddings celebrated on the
same day.


Bell. Oh mercy! -- I will not hear of it -- Love, one might manage that perhaps --
but honor, obey, -- it is strange the Ladies had never interest enough to get
this ungallant sorm mended.


Mr. D. The marriage vow, my dear Bella, was wisely framed for common
apprehensions -- Love teaches a train of duties that no vow can reach -- that
refined minds only can perceive -- but which they pay with the most delighted
attention. You are now entering on this state -- may You -- and You [to Bella,
significantly] and You [to the audience] possess the bli^sful envied lot of --
Married Lovers!


FINIS.

