A School for Fathers. A COMIC OPERA. As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL
IN DRURY LANE. A NEW EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, at GARRICK'S Head, in Catharine-street,
Strand. MDCCLXXIII. [Price 1s. 6d.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP EARL OF CHESTERFIELD, THIS OPERA IS INSCRIBED,
BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT, MOST OBLIGED, AND MOST GRATEFUL HUMBLE SERVANT, THE
AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HAVING, for some years, met with very great success in my productions of the
musical kind; when I wrote the following Opera, it was with unusual care and
attention; and it was the general opinion of my friends, some of whom rank
among the best judges, that of all my trifles, Lionel and Clarissa was the most
pardonable; a decision in its favor which I was the prouder of, because, to
the best of my knowledge, through the whole, I had not borrowed an expression,
a sentiment, or a character, from any dramatic writer extant.

When Mr. GARRICK thought of performing this piece at Drury Lane Theater, he
had a new singer to bring out, and every thing possible for her advantage was
to be done; this necessarily occasioned some new songs and airs to be
introduced; and other singers, with voices of a different compass from those
who originally acted the parts, occasioned still more; by which means the
greatest part of the music unavoidably became new. This is the chief, and
indeed the only alteration made in the Opera; and even to that, I should in
many places have been forced, much against my will, had it not given a fresh
opportunity to Mr. Dibdin to display his admirable talents as a musical
composer. And I will be bold to say, that his airs, serious and comic, in this
Opera, will appear to no disadvantage by being heard with those of some of the
greatest masters.

A TABLE of the SONGS, with the NAMES of the several COMPOSERS.
N. B. Those marked thus **, are new, both words and music: but those marked
thus *, are only new set.

A New Overture by Mr. DIBDIN.

ACT I.
1 Ah, how delightful the morning Duet *2 To rob them of strength Mr. Dibdin *3
To tell you the truth Dibdin 4 Zounds, Sir! then I Will tell you Dibdin 5 When a
man of fashion condescends Dibdin *6 I Am but a poor servant Dibdin 7 You ask me
in vain Dibdin 8 Ah! pr'ythee, spare me Galluppi **9 Ye gloomy thoughts Dibdin
Quintetto Dibdin
ACT II.
1 O talk not to me Vento 2 Indeed, forsooth, a pretty youth Scolari 3 How
cursedly vexed Dr. Arne 4 Come then, pining, peevish lover Ciampi *5 To fear a
stranger Dibdin **6 Ladies, pray admire a figure Dibdin **7 Poor panting heart
Dibdin 8 In Italy, Germany, France have I been Dibdin **9 We all say the man
Dibdin 10 Go, and, on my truth relying Vento Quintetto Dibdin
ACT III.
**1 How can you, inhuman! Dibdin *2 I wonder, I Am sure, Dibdin **3 Hist, soft;
let us hear how matters go Dibdin **4 A rascal, a hussy Dibdin 5 Why, with
sighs my heart is swelling Ciampi *6 O bliss unexpected Dibdin Chorus Dibdin


PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Sir John Flowerdale, Mr. Aickin. Colonel Oldboy, Mr. Parsons. Clarissa, Mrs.
Baddeley. Lionel, Mr. Vernon. Mr. Jessamy, Mr. Dodd. Lady Mary Oldboy, Mrs.
Bradshaw. Diana, Mrs. Wrighten. Harman, Mr. Fawcet. Jenny, Miss Radley.
Jenkins, Mr. Bannister.


SCENE, The Country.

A SCHOOL for FATHERS.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Chamber in Colonel OLDBOY's House: Colonel OLDBOY is discovered at
Breakfast, reading a Newspaper: At a little Distance from the Tea-table sits
JENKINS; and on the opposite Side, DIANA, who appears playing upon a
Harpsichord. A Girl attending. A. 2. AH, how delightful the morning!
How sweet are the prospects it yields?
Summer luxuriant adorning
The gardens, the groves, and the fields?

A. 4. Be grateful to the season,
Its pleasures let us employ;
Kind Nature gives, and Reason
Permits us to enjoy.

Col. Well said, Die; thank you, Die. This, Mr. Jenkins, is the way I make my
daughter entertain me every morning at breakfast. Come here, and kiss me, you
slut! come here, and kiss me, you baggage!


Dian. Lord, papa, you call one such names --


Col. A fine girl, Mr. Jenkins, a devilish fine girl! she has got my eye to a
twinkle. There Is fire for you -- spirit! -- I design to marry her to a duke.
How much money do you think a duke would expect with such a wench?


Jen. Why, Colonel, with submission, I think there is no occasion to go out of
our own county here; we have never a Duke in it, I believe, but we have many an
honest gentleman, who, in my opinion, might deserve the young lady.


Col. So you would have me marry Die to a country 'squire, eh! How say you to
this, Die? would not you rather be married to a Duke?


Dian. So my husband's a rake, papa, I don't care what he is.


Col. A rake! you damned confounded little baggage: why, you would not wish to
marry a rake, would you? -- So her husband is a rake, she does not care what he
is! ha, ha, ha, ha!


Dian. Well, but listen to me, papa -- When you go out with your gun, do you
take any pleasure in shooting the poor tame ducks, and chickens in your yard?
No; the partridge, the pheasant, the woodcock are the game! there is some sport
in bringing them down, because they are wild; and it is just the same with an
husband or a lover. I would not waste powder and shot to wound one of your
sober pretty behaved gentlemen; but to hit a libertine, extravagant, madcap
fellow, to take him upon the wing --


Col. Do you hear her, Mr. Jenkins? ha, ha, ha!


Jen. Well, but, good colonel, what do you say to my worthy and honorable
patron here, Sir John Flowerdale? He has an estate of eight thousand pounds
a year as well paid rents as any in the kingdom, and but one only daughter to
enjoy it; and yet he is willing, you see, to give this daughter to your son.


Dian. Pray, Mr. Jenkins, how does Miss Clarissa and our university friend Mr.
Lionel? That is the only grave young man I ever liked, and the only handsome
one I ever was acquainted with, that did not make love to me.


Col. Ay, Mr. Jenkins, who is this Lionel? They say he is a damned witty
knowing fellow; and egad, I think him well enough for one brought up in a
college.


Jen. His father was a general officer, a particular friend of Sir John's, who,
like many more brave men, that live and die in defending their country, left
little else than honor behind him. Sir John sent this young man, at his own
expense, to Oxford; where, while, his son lived, they were upon the same
footing: And since our young gentleman's death, which you know unfortunately
happened about two years ago, he has continued him there. During the vacation,
he is come to pay us a visit; and Sir John intends that he shall shortly take
orders, for a very considerable benefice in the gift of the family, the present
incumbent of which is an aged man.


Dian. The last time I was at your house, he was teaching Miss Clarissa
mathematics and philosophy. Lord, what a strange brain I have! If I was to sit
down to distract myself with such studies --


Col. Go, hussy, let some of your brother's rascals inform their master that
he has been long enough at his toilet; here is a message from Sir John
Flowerdale -- You a brain for mathematics indeed! We shall have women wanting
to head our regiments tomorrow or next day.


Dian. Well, papa, and suppose we did, I believe, in a battle of the sexes, you
men would hardly get the better of us.

To rob them of strength, when wise Nature thought fit
By women to still do her duty;
Instead of a sword, she endu'd them with wit,
And gave them a shield in their beauty.
Sound, sound then the trumpet, both sexes to arms!
Our tyrants at once and protectors!
We quickly shall see, whether courage or charms,
Decide for the Helens or Hectors.

SCENE II.
Colonel OLDBOY, JENKINS. Col. Well, Mr. Jenkins! don't you think now that a
Nobleman, a Duke, an Earl, or a Marquis, might be content to share his title --
I say, you understand me -- with a sweetener of thirty or forty thousand
pounds, to pay off mortgages? Besides, there is a prospect of my whole estate;
for, I dare swear, her brother will never have any children.


Jen. I should be concerned at that, Colonel, when there are two such fortunes
to descend to his heirs, as yours and Sir John Flowerdale's.


Col. Why, look you, Mr. Jenkins, Sir John Flowerdale is an honest gentleman;
our families are nearly related; we have been neighbors time out of mind; and
if he and I have an odd dispute now and then, it is not for want of a cordial
esteem at bottom. He is going to marry his daughter to my son; she is a
beautiful girl, an elegant girl, a sensible girl, a worthy girl, and -- a word
in your ear -- damn me, if I an't very sorry for her.


Jen. Sorry! Colonel?


Col. Ay -- between ourselves, Mr. Jenkins, my son will not do.


Jen. How do you mean?


Col. I tell you, Mr. Jenkins, he will not do -- he is not the thing, a prig -- At
sixteen years old, or thereabouts, he was a bold, sprightly boy, as you should
see in a thousand; could drink his pint of port, or his bottle of claret -- now
he mixes all his wine with water.


Jen. Oh; if that be his only fault, Colonel, he will never make the worse
husband, I Will answer for it.


Col. You know my wife is a woman of quality -- I was prevailed upon to send
him to be brought up by her brother Lord Jessamy, who had no children of his
own, and promised to leave him an estate -- he has got the estate indeed; but
the fellow has taken his Lordship's name for it. Now, Mr. Jenkins, I would be
glad to know, how the name of Jessamy is better than that of Oldboy?


Jen. Well! but Colonel, it is allowed on all hands that his Lordship has given
your son an excellent education.


Col. Pshaw! he sent him to the university, and to travel forsooth; but what of
that? I was abroad, and at the university myself, and never a rush the better
for either. I quarrelled with his Lordship about six years before his death,
and so had not an opportunity of seeing how the youth went on; if I had, Mr.
Jenkins, I would no more have suffered him to be made such a monkey of -- He
has been in my house but three days, and it is all turned topsy-turvy by him
and his rascally servants -- then his chamber is like a perfumer's shop with
wash-balls, pastes, and pomatum -- and do you know he had the impudence to tell
me yesterday at my own table, that I did not know how to behave myself?


Jen. Pray, Colonel, how does my Lady Mary?


Col. What, my wife? In the old way, Mr. Jenkins; always complaining; ever
something the matter with her head, or her back, or her legs -- but we have had
the devil to pay lately -- she and I did not speak to one another for three
weeks.


Jen. How so, Sir?


Col. A little affair of jealousy -- you must know my gamekeeper's daughter has
had a child, and the plaguey baggage takes it into her head to lay it to me --
Upon my soul, it is a fine fat chubby infant as ever I set my eyes on; I have
sent it to nurse; and, between you and me, I believe I shall leave it a fortune.


Jen. Ah, Colonel, you will never give over.


Col. You know my Lady has a pretty vein of poetry; she writ me an heroic
epistle upon it, where she calls me her dear false Damon; so I let her cry a
little, promised to do so no more, and now we are as good friends as ever.


Jen. Well, Colonel, I must take my leave; I have delivered my message, and Sir
John may expect the pleasure of your company to dinner.


Col. Ay, ay, we'll come -- pox of ceremony among friends. But will not you stay
to see my son? I have sent to him, and suppose he will be here as soon as his
valet-de-chambre will give him leave.


Jen. There is no occasion, good Sir: present my humble respects, that is all.


Col. Well, but, zounds, Jenkins, you must not go till you drink something --
let you and I have a bottle of hock --


Jen. Not for the world, Colonel; I never touch any thing strong in the morning.


Col. Never touch anything strong! Why, one bottle will not hurt you, man! this is
old, and as mild as milk.


Jen. Well, but, Colonel, pray excuse me.

To tell you the truth,
In the days of my youth,
As mirth and nature bid,
I liked a glass,
And I loved a lass,
And I did as younkers did.
But now I am old,
With grief be it told,
I must these freaks forbear:
At sixty-three,
'Twixt you and me,
A man grows worse for wear.

SCENE III.
Mr. JESSAMY, Lady MARY OLDBOY, and then Colonel OLDBOY. Lady M. Shut the door;
why don't you shut the door there? Have you a mind I should catch my death?
This house is absolutely the cave of Aeolus; one had as good live on the eddy
stone, or in a windmill.


Mr. Jess. I thought they told your Ladyship that there was a messenger here
from Sir John Flowerdale.


Col. Well, Sir, and so there was; but he had not patience to wait upon your
curling-irons. Mr. Jenkins was here, Sir John Flowerdale's steward, who has
lived in the family these forty years.


Mr. Jess. And pray, Sir, might not Sir John Flowerdale have come himself? If
he had been acquainted with the rules of good breeding; he would have known
that I ought to have been visited.


Lady M. Upon my word, Colonel, this is a solecism.


Col. 'Sblood, my Lady, it is none. Sir John Flowetdale came but last night from
his sister's seat in the west, and is a little out of order. But I suppose he
thinks he ought to appear before him with his daughter in one hand, and his
rent-roll in the other, and cry, Sir, pray do me the favor to accept them.


Lady M. Nay, but, Mr. Oldboy, permit me to say --


Col. He need not give himself so many affected airs; I think it is very well if
he gets such a girl for going for; she is one of the handsomest and richest in
this country, and more than he deserves.


Mr. Jess. That Is an exceeding fine China jar your Ladyship has got in the next
room; I saw the fellow of it the other day at William's, and will send to my
agent to purchase it: it is the true matchless old blue and white. Lady Betty
Barebones has a couple that she gave an hundred guineas for, on board an
Indiaman; but she reckons them at a hundred and twenty-five, on account of half
a dozen of plates, four nankeen beakers, and a couple of shaking Mandarins,
that the custom-house officers took from under her petticoats.


Col. Did you ever hear the like of this! He Is chattering about old china,
while I am talking to him of a fine girl. I tell you what, Mr. Jessamy, since
that is the name you choose to be called by, I have a good mind to knock you
down.


Mr. Jess. Knock me down! Colonel? What do you mean? I must tell you, Sir, this
is a language to which I have not been accustomed; and, if you think proper to
continue or repeat it, I shall be under a necessity of quitting your house.


Col. Quitting my house?


Mr. Jess. Yes, Sir, incontinently.


Col. Why, Sir, am not I your father, Sir? and have not I a right to talk to
you as I like? I will, sirrah. But perhaps, I may not be your father, and I hope
not.


Lady M. Heavens and earth, Mr. Oldboy!


Col. What Is the matter, Madam! I mean, Madam, that he might have been changed
at nurse, Madam; and I believe he was.


Mr. Jess. Huh! huh! huh!


Col. Do you laugh at me, you saucy jackanapes!


Lady M. Who Is there, somebody bring me a chair. Really, Mr. Oldboy, you throw
my weakly frame into such repeated convulsions -- but I see your aim; you want
to lay me in my grave, and you will very soon have that satisfaction.


Col. I cannot bear the sight of him.


Lady M. Open that window, give me air, or I shall faint.


Mr. Jess. Hold, hold, let me tie a handkerchief about my neck first. This
cursed sharp north wind -- Antoine, bring down my muff.


Col. Ay, do, and his great-coat.


Lady M. Marg'ret, some hartshorn. My dear Mr. Oldboy, why will you fly out in
this way, when you know how it shocks my tender nerves?


Col. 'Sblood, Madam, its enough to make a man mad.


Lady M. Hartshorn! hartshorn!


Mr. Jess. Colonel!


Col. Do you hear the puppy?


Mr. Jess. Will you give me leave to ask you one question?


Col. I don't know whether I will or not.


Mr. Jess. I should be glad to know, that is all, what single circumstance in my
conduct, carriage, or figure you can possibly find fault with -- Perhaps I may
be brought to reform -- Pr'ythee, let me hear from your own mouth, then,
seriously, what it is you do like, and what it is you do not like.


Col. Hum!


Mr. Jess. Be ingenuous, speak, and spare not.


Col. You would know?

Zounds Sir! then I Will tell you, without any jest,
The thing of all things, which I hate and detest;
A coxcomb, a fop,
A dainty milk-sap;
Who, essenc'd and dizen'd from bottom to top,
Looks just like a doll for a milliner's shop.
A thing full of prate,
And pride and conceit:
All fashion, no weight;
Who shrugs and takes snuff,
And carries a muff;
A minikin,
Finikin,
French powder-puff:
And now Sir, I fancy, I Have told you enough.

SCENE IV.
Lady MARY OLDBGY, Mr. JESSAMY. Mr. Jess. What Is the matter with the Colonel,
Ma'am? Does your Ladyship know?


Lady M. Heigho! don't be surprised, child; it was the same thing with my late
dear brother, Lord Jessamy; they never could agree: that good natured, friendly
soul, knowing the delicacy of my constitution, has often said, Sister Mary, I
pity you. Not but your papa has good qualities, and I assure you I remember him
a very fine gentleman himself. In the year of the hard frost, one thousand
seven hundred and thirty-nine, when he first paid his addresses to me, he was
called agreeable Jack Oldboy, though I married him without the consent of your
noble grandfather.


Mr. Jess. I think he ought to be proud of me: I believe there is many a Duke,
nay Prince, who would esteem themselves happy in having such a son --


Lady M. Yes, my dear; but your sister was always your papa's favorite: he
intends to give her a prodigious fortune, and sets his heart upon seeing her a
woman of quality.


Mr. Jess. He should wish to see her look a little like a gentlewoman first.
When she was in London, last winter, I am told she was taken notice of by a few
men. But she wants air, manner --


Lady M. And has not a bit of the genius of our family, and I never knew a
woman of it but herself without. I have tried her: about three years ago, I set
her to translate a little French song: I found she had not even an idea of
versification: and she put down love and joy for rhyme -- so I gave her over.


Mr. Jess. Why, indeed, she appears to have more of the Thalestris than the
Sappho about her.


Lady M. Well, my dear, I must go and dress myself; though I protest I am
fitter for my bed than my coach. And condescend to the Colonel a little -- do,
my dear, if it be only to oblige your mamma.


SCENE V.
Mr. JESSAMY. Hold a little: I am going to see a provincial Baronet here; who
would fain prevail upon me to marry his daughter: the old gentleman has heard
of my parts and understanding, Miss of my figure and address. But, suppose I
should not like her on an interview? Why, positively, then I will not have her;
the treaty's at an end, and, sans compliment, we break up the congress.

Antoine, appretez la toilet. I am going to spend a cursed day; that I perceive
already; I heartily wish my visit was over.

When a man of fashion condescends
To herd among his country friends,
They watch his looks, his motions:
One boeby gapes, another stares,
And all be says, does, ates, drinks, wears,
Must suit their rustic notions.
But as for this brutish old clown here;
God's Death, why did I ever come down here!
The savage will now never quit me:
Then a consort to take,
For my family's sake,
I Am in a fine jeopardy, split me!

SCENE VI.
Changes to a Study in Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE'S House; two Chairs and a Table,
with Globes and mathematical Instruments. CLARISSA enters, followed by JENNY.
Jen. My dear Lady, what ails you?


Clar. Nothing, Jenny, nothing.


Jen. Pardon me, Madam, there is something ails you indeed. Lord! what
signifies all the grandeur and riches in this world! if they cannot procure one
content. I am sure it vexes me to the heart, so it does, to see such a dear,
sweet, worthy young Lady as you are, pining yourself to death.


Clar. Jenny, you are a good girl, and I am very much obliged to you for
feeling so much on my account; but, in a little time, I hope I shall be easier.


Jen. Why, now, here to day, Madam, for sartain you ought to be merry today,
when there is a fine gentleman coming to court you! but, if you like any one
else better, I am sure, I wish you had him, with all my soul.


Clar. Suppose, Jenny, I was so unfortunate, as to like a man without my
father's approbation; would you wish me married to him?


Jen. I wish you married to any one, Madam, that could make you happy.


Clar. Heigho!


Jen. Madam! Madam! yonder is Sir John and Mr. Lionel on the terras: I believe
they are coming up here. Poor, dear Mr. Lionel, he does not seem to be in over
great spirits either. To be sure, Madam, it is no business of mind; but, I
believe, if the truth was known, there are those in the house, who would give
more than ever I shall be worth, or any the likes of me, to prevent the
marriage of a sartain person that shall be nameless.


Clar. What do you mean? I don't understand you.


Jen. I hope you are not angry, Madam?


Clar. Ah! Jenny --


Jen. Lauk, Madam! do you think, when Mr. Lionel's a clergyman, he will be
obliged to cut off his hair? I Am sure it will be a thousand pities, for it is
the sweetest color, and looks the nicest put up in a cue.


Clar. I Am going into my dressing room -- It seems then, Mr. Lionel is a great
favorite of yours; but, pray Jenny, have a care how you talk in this manner
to any one else.


Jen. Me talk, Madam! I thought you knew me better; and, my dear Lady, keep up
your spirits, I Am sure I have dressed you today as nice as hands and pins can
make you.

I Am but a poor servant it is true, Ma'am;
But was I a Lady like you, Ma'am,
In grief would I sit!
The dickens a bit;
No faith, I would search the world through, Ma'am,
To find what my liking could hit.
Set in case a young man,
In my fancy there ran;
It might anger my friends and relations;
But, if I had regard,
It should go very hard,
Or I Would follow my own inclinations.

SCENE VII.
Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE, LIONEL. Sir John. Indeed, Lionel, I will not hear of it.
What! to run from us all of a sudden, this way; and at such a time too; the eve
of my daughter's wedding, as I may call it; when your company must be doubly
agreeable, as well as necessary to us? I am sure you have no studies at
present, that require your attendance at Oxford: I must, therefore, insist on
your putting such thoughts out of your head.


Lion. Upon my word, Sir, I have been so long from the university, that it is
time for me to think of returning. It is true, I have no absolute studies; but,
really, Sir, I shall be obliged to you, if you will give me leave to go.


Sir John. Come, come, my dear Lionel, I have for some time observed a more
than ordinary gravity growing upon you, and I am not to learn the reason of it:
I know, to minds serious, and well inclined, like yours, the sacred function
you are about to embrace --


Lion. Dear Sir, your goodness to me of every kind is so great, so unmerited!
Your condescension, your friendly attentions -- in short, Sir, I want words to
express my sense of obligations --


Sir John. Fie, fie! no more of them. By my last letters, I find that my old
friend the Rector, still continues in good health, considering his advanced
years. You may imagine I am far from desiring the death of so worthy and pious
a man; yet I must own, at this time, I could wish you were in orders, as you
might then perform the ceremony of my daughter's marriage; which would give me
a secret satisfaction.


Lion. No doubt, Sir, any office in my power that could be instrumental to the
happiness of any of your family, I should perform with pleasure.


Sir John. Why, really, Lionel, from the character of her intended husband, I
have no room to doubt, but this match will make Clarissa perfectly happy: to be
sure, the alliance is the most eligible for both families.


Lion. If the gentleman is sensible of his happiness in the alliance, Sir. --


Sir John. The fondness of a father is always suspected of partiality; yet, I
believe, I may venture to say, that few young women will be found more
unexceptionable than my daughter: her person is agreeable, her temper sweet,
her understanding good; and, with the obligations she has to your instruction
--


Lion. You do my endeavors too much honor, Sir; I have been able to add
nothing to Miss Flowerdale's accomplishments, but a little knowledge in matters
of small importance to a mind already so well improved.


Sir John. I don't think so; a little knowledge, even in those matters, is
necessary for a woman, in whom I am far from considering ignorance as a
desirable characteristic: when intelligence is not attended with impertinent
affectation, it teaches them to judge with precision, and gives them a degree
of solidity necessary for the companion of a sensible man.


Lion. Yonder Is Mr. Jenkins; I fancy he is looking for you, Sir.


Sir John. I see him; he is come back from colonel Oldboy's; here is my daughter
coming to you too; I have a few words to say to Jenkins, and will return to you
again in a minute.


SCENE VIII.
LIONEL, CLARISSA. Lion. Perhaps, Madam, you are not at leisure now: otherwise,
if you thought proper, we would resume the subject we were upon yesterday.


Clar. I am sure, Sir, I give you a great deal of trouble.


Lion. Madam, you give me no trouble; I should think every hour of my life
happily employed in your service; and, as this is probably the last time I
shall have the satisfaction of attending you upon the same occasion --


Clar. Upon my word, Mr. Lionel, I think myself extremely obliged to you; and
shall ever consider the enjoyment of your friendship --


Lion. My friendship, Madam, can be of little moment to you; but if the most
perfect adoration, if the warmest wishes for your felicity, though I should
never be witness of it; if these, Madam, can have any merit to continue in your
remembrance a man once honored with a share of your esteem --


Clar. Hold Sir -- I think I hear somebody.


Lion. If you please, Madam, we will turn over this celestial globe once more
-- Have you looked at the book I left you yesterday?


Clar. Really, Sir, I have been so much disturbed in my thoughts for these two
or three days past, that I have not been able to look at any thing.


Lion. I am sorry to hear that, Madam: I hope there was nothing particular to
disturb you. The care Sir John takes to dispose of your hand in a manner
suitable to your birth and fortune --


Clar. I don't know, Sir; -- I own I am disturbed, I own I am uneasy; there is
something weighs upon my heart, which I would fain disclose.


Lion. Upon your heart, Madam! did you say your heart?


Clar. I did, Sir, -- I --

Enter JENNY.
Jen. Madam! Madam! Here Is a coach and six driving up the avenue: It Is Colonel
Oldboy's family; and I believe the gentleman is in it, that is coming to court
you. -- Lord, I must run, and have a peep at him out of the window.


Lion. Madam, I Will take my leave.


Clar. Why so, Sir? -- Bless me, Mr. Lionel, what is the matter! -- You turn
pale.


Lion. Madam!


Clar. Pray speak to me, Sir. -- You tremble. -- Tell me the cause of this
sudden change. -- How are you? -- Where Is your disorder?


Lion. Oh fortune! fortune!

You ask me in vain,
Of what ills I complain,
Where barbours the torment I find:
In my head, in my heart,
It invades every part,
And subdues both my body and mind.
Each effort I try,
Every medicine apply,
The pangs of my soul to appease;
But doomed to endure,
What I mean for a cure,
Turns poison, and feeds the disease.

SCENE IX.
CLARISSA, DIANA. Dian. My dear Clarissa -- I Am glad I have found you alone. --
For Heaven's sake, don't let any one break in upon us; -- and give me leave to
sit down with you a little: -- I am in such a tremor --


Clar. Mercy on us! what has happened?


Dian. You may remember I told you, that when we were last winter in London, I
was followed by an odious fellow, one Harman; I cannot say but the wretch
pleased me, though he is but a younger brother, and not worth sixpence: And --
in short, when I was leaving town, I promised to correspond with him.


Clar. Do you think that was prudent?


Dian. Madness! But this is not the worst; for what do you think? the creature
had the assurance to write to me about three weeks ago, desiring permission to
come down, and spend the summer at my father's.


Clar. At your father's!


Dian. Ay, who never saw him, knows nothing of him, and would as soon consent
to my marrying a horse-jockey. He told me a long story of some tale he intended
to invent, to make my father receive him as an indifferent person; and some
gentleman in London, he said, would procure him a letter that should give it a
face; and he longed to see me so, he said he could not live without it; and if
he could be permitted but to spend a week with me --


Clar. Well, and what answer did you make?


Dian. Oh! abused him, and refused to listen to any such thing -- But -- I vow
I tremble while I tell it you -- just before we left our house, the impudent
monster arrived there, attended by a couple of servants, and is now actually
coming here with my father.


Clar. Upon my word, this is a dreadful thing.


Dian. Dreadful, my dear! -- I happened to be at the window as he came into the
court, and I declare I had like to have fainted away.


Clar. Is Not my Lady below?


Dian. Yes, and I must run down to her. You Will have my brother here presently
too; he would fain have come in the coach with my mother and me, but my father
insisted on his walking with him over the fields.


Clar. Well, Diana, with regard to your affair -- I think you must find some
method of immediately informing this gentleman that you consider the outrage he
has committed against you in the most heinous light, and insist upon his going
away directly.


Dian. Why, I believe that will be the best way -- but then he will be begging my
pardon, and asking to stay.


Clar. Why then you must tell him positively, you will not consent to it; and if
he persists in so extravagant a design, tell him you will never see him again as
long as you live.


Dian. Must I tell him so?

Ah! pr'ythee, spare me, dearest creature!
How can you prompt me to so much ill nature?
Kneeling before me,
Should I hear him*implore me;
Could I accuse him,
Could I refuse him
The boon he should ask?
Set not a lover the cruel task.
No, believe me, my dear,
Was he now standing here,
In spite of my frights, and alarms,
I might rate him, might scold him --
But should still strive to hold him --
And sink at last into his arms.

SCENE X.
CLARISSA. How easy to direct the conduct of others! how hard to regulate our
own! I can give my friend advice, while I am conscious of the same
indiscretions in myself. Yet is it criminal to know the most worthy, most
amiable man in the world, and not to be insensible to his merit? But my father,
the kindest, best of fathers, will he approve the choice I have made? Nay, has
he not made another choice for me? And, after all, how can I be sure that the
man I love, loves me again? He never told me so; but his looks, his actions,
his present anxiety sufficiently declare what his dclicacy, his generofity,
will not suffer him to utter --

Ye gloomy thoughts, ye fears perverse,
Like sullen vapors all disperse,
And scatter in toe wind;
Delusive phantoms, brood of night,
No more my sickly fancy fright,
No more my reason blind:
It Is done; I feel my soul released:
The visions fly, the mists are chased,
Nor leave a cloud behind.

SCENE XI.
Changes to a View of Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE's House, with Gates, and a Prospect
of the Garden. HARMAN enters with Colonel OLDBOY. Col. Well, and how does my
old friend Dick Rantum? I have not seen him these twelve years: he was an
honest worthy fellow as ever breathed; I remember he kept a girl in London, and
was cursedly plagued by his wife's relations.


Har. Sir Richard was always a man of spirit, Colonel.


Col. But as to this business of yours, which he tells me of in his letter -- I
don't see much in it. -- An affair with a citizen's daughter -- pinked her
brother in a duel -- Is the fellow likely to die?


Har. Why, Sir, we hope not; but as the matter is dubious, and will probably
make some noise, I thought it was better to be for a little time out of the
way; when hearing my case, Sir Richard Rantum mentioned you; he said, he was
sure you would permit me to remain at your house for a few days, and offered me
a recommendation.


Col. And there is likely to be a brat in the case -- And the girl's friends are
in business -- I Will tell you what will be the consequence then -- They will be
for going to law with you for a maintenance -- but no matter, I Will take the
affair in hand for you -- make me your solicitor; and if you are obliged to pay
for a single spoonful of pap, I Will be content to father all the children in the
Foundling Hospital.


Har. I Am sure, Sir, you are very kind.


Col. But hold -- hark you -- you say there is money to be had -- suppose you
were to marry the wench?


Har. Do you think, Sir, that would be so right, after what has happened?
Besides, there is a stronger objection -- To tell you the truth, I am honorably
in love in another place.


Col. Oh! you are.


Har. Yes, Sir, but there are obstacles -- A father -- In short, Sir, the
mistress of my heart lives in this very county, which makes even my present
situation a little irksome.


Col. In this county! Zounds! then I am sure I am acquainted with her, and the
first letter of her name is --


Har. Excuse me, Sir, I have some particular reasons --


Col. But look who comes yonder -- Ha! ha! ha! My son picking his steps like a
dancing master. Pr'ythee, Harman, go into the house, and let my wife and
daughter know we are come, while I go and have some sport with him: they will
introduce you to Sir John Flowerdale.


Har. Then, Sir, I Will take the liberty --


Col. But do you hear, I must have a little more discourse with you about this
girl; perhaps she is a neighbor of mine, and I may be of service to you.


Har. Do You think you could?


Col. I dare to say.


Har. But perhaps you might not choose.


Col. Try me, try me.


Har. Well, remember, Colonel, if I find your friendship can be of use to me,
depend upon it, I shall put it to the test.


SCENE XII.
Colonel OLDBOY, Mr. JESSAMY, and several Servants. Col. Why, zounds! one would
think you had never put your feet to the ground before; you make as much work
about walking a quarter of a mile, as if you had gone a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.


Mr. Jess. Colonel, you have used me extremely ill, to drag me through the
dirty roads in this manner; you told me the way was all over a bowling-green:
only see what a condition I am in!


Col. Why, how did I know the roads were dirty? is that my fault? Besides, we
mistook the way. Zounds, man! your legs will be never the worse when they are
brushed a little.


Mr. Jess. Antoine! have you sent La Roque for the shoes and stockings? Give me
the glass out of your pocket -- not a dust of powder left in my hair, and the
frissure as flat as the fore-top of an attorney's clerk -- get your comb and
pomatum; you must borrow some powder; I suppose there is such a thing as a
dressing room in the house?


SCENE XIII.
Colonel OLDBOY, Mr. JESSAMY, LIONEL, DIANA, CLARISSA. Col. Ay, and a cellar,
too, I hope; for I want a glass of wine cursedly -- but hold! hold! Frank,
where are you going? Stay, and pay your devoirs here, if you please; I see
there is somebody coming out to welcome us.


Lion. Colonel, your most obedient; Sir John is walking with my Lady in the
garden, and has commissioned me to receive you.


Col. Mr. Lionel, I am heartily glad to see you -- come here, Frank -- this is
my son, Sir.


Lion. Sir, I am extremely proud to --


Mr. Jess. Cannot you get the powder then?


Col. Miss Clary, my little Miss Clary -- give me a kiss, my dear -- as
handsome as an angel, by Heavens -- Frank, why don't you come here? This is
Miss Flowerdale.


Dian. Oh Heavens, Clarissa! just as I said, that impudent devil is come here
with my father.


Mr. Jess. Had'nt we better go into the house?

To be made in such a pickle!
Will you please to lead the way, Sir?

Col. No, but if you please, you may, Sir;
For precedence none will stickle.

Dian. Brother, no politeness? Bless me!
Will you not your hand bestow?
Lead the Lady.

Clar. -- Don't distress me!
Dear Diana, let him go.

Mr. Jess. Ma'am, permit me.

Col. -- Smoke the beau.

A. 2. Cruel! must I, can I bear?
Oh adverse stars!
Oh fate severe!
Beset, tormented,
Each hope prevented.

Col. None but the brave deserve the fair.
Come, Ma'am, let me lead you:
Now, Sir, I precede you:

A. 5. Lovers must ill usuage bear.
Oh adverse stars! oh fate severe!
None but the brave deserve the fair.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Hall in Sir John FLOWERDALE'S House, with the View of a grand Staircase,
through an Arch. On either Side of the Staircase, below, two Doors leading
from different Apartments: LIONEL enters followed by JENNY. Jen. Well, but Mr.
Lionel, consider, pray consider now; how can you be so purdigious undiscreet as
you are, walking about the hall here, while the gentlefolks are within in the
parlour? Don't you think they will wonder at your getting up so soon after
dinner, and before any of the rest of the company?


Lion. For Heaven's sake, Jenny, don't speak to me: I neither know where I am,
nor what I am doing; I am the most wretched and miserable of all mankind.


Jen. Poor dear soul, I pity you. Yes, yes, I believe you are miserable enough
indeed; and I assure you, I have pitied you a great while, and spoke many a
word in your favor; when you little thought you had such a friend in a corner.


Lion. But, good Jenny, since by some accident or other, you have been able to
discover what I would willingly hide from all the world; I conjure you, as you
regard my interest, as you value your Lady's peace and honor, never let the
most distant hint of it escape you; for it is a secret of that importance --


Jen. And, perhaps, you think I cannot keep a secret. Ah! Mr. Lionel, it must be
hear, see, and say nothing in this world, or one has no business to live in it:
besides who would not be in love with my Lady? There Is never a man this day
alive but might be proud of it; for she is the handsomest, sweetest temperdest!
And I am sure one of the best mistresses ever poor girl had.


Lion. Oh Jenny! she is an angel.


Jen. And so she is indeed -- Do you know that she gave me her blue and silver
sack today, and it is every crum as good as new; and, go things as they will,
don't you be fretting and vexing yourself, for I am mortally sartain she would
liverer see a toad than this Jessamy. Though I must say, to my thinking, he is a
very likely man; and a finer pair of eyebrows, and a more delicater nose I
never saw on a face.


Lion. By Heavens, I shall run mad.


Jen. And why so? It is not beauty that always takes the fancy: Moreover, to
let you know, if it was, I don't think him any more to compare to you, than a
thistle is to a carnation: and so's a sign; for, mark my words, my Lady loves
you as much as she hates him.


Lion. What you tell me, Jenny, is a thing I neither merit or expect: No, I am
unhappy; and let me continue so: my most presumptuous thoughts shall never
carry me to a wish that may affect her quiet, or give her cause to repent.


Jen. That Is very honorable of you, I must needs say; but for all that,
liking's liking, and one cannot help it; and if it should be my Lady's case, it
is no fault of yours. I am sure, when she called me into her dressing room,
before she went down to dinner, there she stood with her eyes brim full of
tears; and so I fell a-crying for company -- and then she said, she could not
abide the chap in the parlour; and at the same time, she bid me take an
opportunity to speak to you, and desire you would meet her in the garden this
evening after tea; for she has something to say to you.


Lion. Jenny, I see you are my friend: for which I thank you, though I know it
is impossible to do me any service; take this ring, and wear it for my sake.


Jen. I am very much obliged to your honor; I am your friend indeed -- but, I
say, you will not forget to be in the garden now; and in the mean time keep as
little in the house as you can, for walls have eyes and ears; and I can tell
you, the servants take notice of your uneasiness, though I am always desiring
them to mind their business.


Lion. Pray have a care, Jenny, have a care my dear girl; a word may breed
suspicion.


Jen. Psha! have a care yourself; it is you that breeds suspicion, sighing and
pining about; you look for all the world like a ghost; and if you don't pluck
up your spirits, you will be a ghost soon; letting things get the better of
you. Though to be sure, when I thinks with myself, being crossed in love is a
terrible thing -- There was a young man in the town where I was born made away
with himself upon account of it.


Lion. Things shall not get the better of me, Jenny.


Jen. No more they don't ought. And once again say, fortune is thrown in your
dish, and you are not to fling it out; my Lady's estate will be better than
three bishoprics, if Sir John could give them to you. Think of that, Mr.
Lionel, think of that.


Lion. Think of what.

O talk not to me of the wealth she possesses,
My hopes and my views to herself I confine;
The splendor of riches but slightly impresses
A heart that is fraught with a passion like mine.
By love, only love, should our souls be cemented;
No interest, no motive, but that would I own;
With her in a cottage be blessed and contented,
And wretched without her, though placed on a throne.

SCENE II.
JENNY, Colonel OLDBOY. Col. Very well, my Lady, I Will come again to you
presently; I am only going into the garden for a mouthful of air. Aha! my
little Abigail! Here Molly, Jenny, Betty! What Is your name? Why don't you
answer me, hussy, when I call you?


Jen. If you want any thing, Sir, I Will call one of the footmen.


Col. The footmen! the footmen! Damn me, I never knew one of them, in my life,
that would'nt prefer a rascal to a gentleman -- Come here, you slut, put your
hands about my neck, and kiss me.


Jen. Who I, Sir!


Col. Ay, here is money for you; what the devil are you afraid of? I Will take you
into keeping; you shall go and live at one of my tenant's houses.


Jen. I wonder you aren't ashamed, Sir, to make an honest girl any such
proposal; you that have a worthy gentlewoman, nay, a Lady of your own -- To be
sure, she is a little stricken in years; but why should'nt she grow elderly as
well as yourself?


Col. Burn a Lady, I love a pretty girl --


Jen. Well then, you may go look for one, Sir; I have no pretensions to the
title.


Col. Why, you pert baggage, you don't know me.


Jen. What do you pinch my fingers for? Yes, yes, I know you well enough, and
your charekter's well known all over the country, running after poor young
creatures as you do, to ruinate them.


Col. What! then people say --


Jen. Indeed, they talk very bad of you; and whatever you may think, Sir, though
I Am in a menial station, I Am come of people that wou^d'nt see me put upon;
there are those that would take my part against the proudest he in the land,
that should offer any thing uncivil.


Col. Well, come, let me know now; how does your young Lady like my son?


Jen. You want to pump me, do you? I suppose you would know whether I can keep
my tongue within my teeth.


Col. She does'nt like him then?


Jen. I don't day so, Sir -- Is Not this a shame now -- I suppose tomorrow or
next day it will be reported that Jenny has been talking, Jenny said that, and
the other -- But here, Sir, I ax you, Did I tell you any such thing?


Col. Why, yes, you did.


Jen. I! -- Lord bless me, how can you --


Col. Ad, I Will mouzle you.


Jen. Ah! ah!


Col. What do you bawl for?


Jen. Ah! ah! ah!

Indeed, forsooth, a pretty youth,
To play the amorous fool;
At such an age, methinks your rage
Might be a little cool.
Fie, let me go, Si^.
Kiss me! -- No, no, Sir.
You pull me and shake me,
For what do you take me,
This figure to make me?
Pd have you to know
Pm not for your game, Sir;
Nor will I be tame, Sir.
Lord, have you no shame, Sir,
To tumble one so?

SCENE III.
Colonel OLDBOY, Lady MARY, DIANA, HARMAN. Lady M. Mr. Oldboy, will not you give
me your hand to lead me up stairs, my dear? -- Sir, I am prodigiously obliged
to you; I protest I have not been so well, I don't know when: I have had no
return of my bilious complaint after dinner today; and ate so voraciously! Did
you observe, Miss? the whole wing of a partridge! Dr. Arsnic will be quite
astonished when he hears it; surely his new invented medicine has done me a
prodigious deal of service.


Col. Ah! you will always be taking one slop or other, till you poison yourself.


Lady M. It brought Sir Barnaby Drugg from death's door, after having tried the
Spaw and Bristol waters without effect: it is good for several things; in many,
sovereign, as in colds and consumptions, and lowness of spirits; it corrects
the humors, rectifies the juices, regulates the nervous system; creates an
appetite, prevents flushings and sickness after meals; as also vain fears and
head-achs; it is the finest thing in the world for an asthma: and no body that
takes it, is ever troubled with hysterics.


Col. Give me a pinch of your Lordship's snuff.


Lady M. This is a mighty pretty sort of man, Colonel; who is he?


Col. A young fellow, my Lady, recommended to me.


Lady M. I protest he has the sweetest taste for poetry! -- He has repeated to
me two or three of his own things; and I have been telling him of the poem my
late brother Lord Jessamy made on the mouse that was drowned --


Col. Ay, a fine subject for a poem; a mouse that was drowned in a --


Lady M. Hush, my dear Colonel! don't mention it; to be sure, the circumstance
was vastly indelicate; but for the number of lines, the poem was as charming a
morsel -- I heard the Earl of Punley say, who understood Latin, that it was
equal to any thing in Catullus.


Col. Well, how did you like your son's behavior at dinner, Madam? I thought
the girl looked a little askew at him -- Why, he found fault with every thing,
and contradicted every body!


Lady M. Softly! -- Miss Flowerdale I understand has desired a private
conference with him.


Col. What! Harman, have you got entertaining my daughter there? Come hither,
Die; has he been giving you a history of the accident that brought him down here?


Dian. No, Papa, the gentleman has been telling me --


Lady M. No matter what, Miss -- it is not polite to repeat what has been said.


Col. Well, well, my Lady; you know the compact we made; the boy is yours, the
girl mine -- Give me your hand, Die.


Lady M. Colonel, I have done. -- Pray, Sir, was there any news when you left
London; any thing about the East Indies, the ministry, or politics of any kind?
I am strangely fond of politics: but I hear nothing since my Lord Jessamy's
death; he used to write me all the affairs of the nation, for he was a very
great politician himself. I have a manuscript speech of his in my cabinet -- He
never spoke it, but it is as fine a thing as ever came from man.


Col. What is that crawling on your Ladyship's petticoat?


Lady M. Where! where!


Col. Zounds! a spider with legs as long as my arm.


Lady M. Oh Heavens! Ah, don't let me look at it; I shall faint, I shall faint!
A spider! a spider! a spider!


SCENE IV.
COLONEL OLDBOY, DIANA, HARMAN. Col. Hold! zounds, let her go; I knew the
spider would set her a galloping, with her damned fuss about her brother my
Lord Jessamy -- Harman, come here -- How do you like my daughter? Is the girl
you are in love with as handsome as this?


Har. In my opinion, Sir.


Col. What, as handsome as Die! -- I Will lay you twenty pounds she has not such a
pair of eyes. -- He tells me he is in love, Die; raging mad for love; and, by his
talk, I begin to believe him.


Dian. Now, for my part, papa, I doubt it very much; though, by what I heard
the gentleman say just now within, I find he imagines the Lady has a violent
partiality for him; and yet he may be mistaken there too.


Col. For shame, Die! what the mischief do you mean? How can you talk so tartly
to a poor young fellow under misfortunes? Give him your hand, and ask his
pardon. Don't mind her, Harman. -- For all this, she is as good-natured a
little devil, as ever was born.


Har. You may remember, Sir, I told you before dinner, that I had for some time
carried on a private correspondence with my lovely girl; and that her father,
whose consent we despair of obtaining, is the great obstacle to our happiness.


Col. Why don't you carry her off in spite of him, then? -- I ran away with my
wife -- ask my Lady Mary, she will tell you the thing herself. -- Her old
conceited Lord of a father thought I was not good enough; but I mounted a
garden-wall, notwithstanding their cheveux-de-frize of broken glass bottles,
took her out of a three pair of stairs window, and brought her down a ladder in
my arms. -- By the way, she would have squeezed through a cat-hole to get at
me. -- And I would have taken her out of the Tower of London, damme, if it had
been surrounded with the three regiments of guards.


Dian. But surely, papa, you would not persuade the gentleman to such a
proceeding as this is; consider the noise it will make in the country; and, if
you are known to be the adviser and abettor --


Col. Why, what do I care? I say, if he takes my advice, he will run away with
her; and I Will give him all the assistance I can.


Har. I am sure, Sir, you are very kind; and, to tell you the truth, I have
more than once had the very scheme in my head, if I thought it was feasible,
and knew how to go about it.


Col. Feasible, and knew how to go about it! The thing's feasible enough, if
the girl's willing to go off with you, and you have spirit sufficient to
undertake it.


Har. O, as for that, Sir, I can answer.


Dian. What, Sir, that the lady will be willing to go off with you?


Har. No, Ma'am; that I have spirit enough to take her, if she is willing to
go; and thus far I dare venture to promise, that between this and tomorrow
morning, I will find out whether she is or not.


Col. So he may; she lives but in this county; and tell her, Harman, you have
met with a friend, who is inclined to serve you. You shall have my post-chaise
at a minute's warning; and if a hundred pieces will be of any use to you, you
may command 'em.


Har. And you are really serious, Sir?


Col. Serious! damme, if I an't. I have put twenty young fellows in a way of
getting girls that they never would have thought of: and bring her to my house;
whenever you come, you shall have a supper and a bed; but you must marry her
first, because my Lady will be squeamish.


Dian. Well, but, my dear papa; upon my word, you have a great deal to answer
for: suppose it was your own case to have a daughter in such circumstances,
would you be obliged to any one --


Col. Hold your tongue, hussy! who bid you put in your oar? However, Harman, I
don't want to set you upon any thing; it is no affair of mine, to be sure; I
only give you advice, and tell you how I would act if I was in your place.


Har. I assure you, Sir, I am quite charmed with the advice; and, since you are
ready to stand my friend, I am determined to follow it.


Col. You are --


Har. Positively --


Col. Say no more then; here is my hand: -- You understand me -- No occasion to
talk any further of it at present -- When we are alone -- Die, take Mr. Harman
into the drawing room, and give him some tea. -- I say, Harman, Mum --


Har. O, Sir.


Col. What the Devil's the matter with you?

How cursedly vexed the old fellow will be,
When he finds you have snapt up his daughter?
But shift as he will, leave the matter to me,
And I warrant you soon shall have caught her.
What! a plague and a pox,
Shall an ill-natured fox,
Prevent youth and beauty,
From doing their duty?
He ought to be set in the stocks.
He merits the law:
And if we cannot bite him.
By gad we'll indite him!
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!

SCENE V.
DIANA, HARMAN. Dian. Sir, I desire to know what gross acts of imprudence you
have ever discovered in me, to authorize you in this license, or make you
imagine I should not show such marks of my resentment as your monstrous
treatment of me deserves?


Har. Nay, my dear Diana, I confess I have been rather too bold; -- but
consider, I languish'd to see you; and, when an opportunity offered to give me
that pleasure without running any risque, either of your quiet or reputation,
how hard was it to be resisted? It Is true, I little thought my visit would be
attended with such happy consequences as it now seems to promise.


Dian. What do you mean?


Har. Why, don't you see your father has an inclination I should run away with
you, and is contriving the means himself?


Dian. And do you think me capable of concurring? Do you think I have no more
duty?


Har. I don't know that, Madam; I am sure your refusing to seize such an
opportunity to make me happy, gives evident proofs that you have very little
love.


Dian. If there is no way to convince you of my love but by my indiscretion,
you are welcome to consider it in what light you please.


Har. Was ever so unfortunate a dog?


Dian. Very pretty this, upon my word! But is it possible you can be in earnest?


Har. It is a matter of too much consequence to jest about.


Dian. And you seriously think I ought --


Har. I shall say no more, Ma'am.


Dian. Nay, but, for Heaven's sake --


Har. No, Madam, no; I have done.


Dian. And are you positively in this violent fuss about the matter, or only
giving yourself airs?


Har. You may suppose what you think proper, Madam.


Dian. Well, come; let us go into the drawingroom and drink tea, and afterward
we'll talk of matters.


Har. I will not drink any tea.


Dian. Why so?


Har. Because I Am not dry.


Dian. Not dry! Ridiculous.


Har. I wish you would let me alone.


Dian. Nay, pr'ythee --


Har. I will not.


Dian. Well, will you if I consent to -- please?


Har. I don't know whether I will or not.


Dian. Ha, ha, ha, poor Harman!

Come then, pining, peevish lover,
Tell me what to do and say;
From your doleful dumps recover,
Smile, and it shall have its way.
With their humors, thus to teaze us,
Men are sure the strangest elves!
Silly creatures, would you please us,
You should still seem pleased yourselves.

SCENE VI.
HARMAN. Say thou so, my girl! Then Love renounce me, if I drive not old
Truepenny's humor to the uttermost. -- Let me consider -- What ill consequence
can possibly attend it? -- The design is his own, as in part will be the
execution -- He may perhaps be angry when he finds out the deceit. -- Well; --
he deceives himself; and faults we commit ourselves, we seldom find much
difficulty in pardoning.

To fear a stranger,
Behold the soldier arm;
He knows no danger,
When honor sounds the 'larm;
But dauntless goes,
Among his foes.
In Cupid's militia,
So fearless I issue;
And, as you see,
Armed cap-a-pee,
Resolve on death or victory.

SCENE VII.
Changes to a handsome Dressing Room, supposed to be CLARISSA's. On one Side,
between the Wings, is a Table with a Glass, Boxes, and two Chairs. DIANA enters
before JESSAMY. Dian. Come, brother, I Will undertake to be mistress of the
ceremony upon this occasion, and introduce you to your first audience. -- Miss
Flowerdale is not here, I perceive; but no matter --


Mr. Jess. Upon my word, a pretty elegant dressingroom this; but confound our
builders, or architects, as they call themselves, they are all errant
stone-masons; not one of them know the situation of doors, windows, or chimnies.


Dian. My dear brother, you are not come here as a virtuoso to admire the
temple; but as a votary to address the deity to whom it belongs. Show, I
beseech you, a little more devotion; and tell me, how do you like Miss
Flowerdale? Don't you think her very handsome?


Mr. Jess. Pale; -- but that I am determined she shall remedy? for, as soon as
we are married, I will make her put on rouge: -- Let me see: -- has she got any
in her boxes here? Veritable toilet a la Angloise. Nothing but a bottle of
Hungary-water, two or three rows of pins, a paper of patches, and a little
bole-armoniac by way of tooth-powder.


Dian. Brother, I would fain give you some advice upon this occasion, which may
be of service to you: You are now going to entertain a young Lady -- Let me
prevail upon you to lay aside those airs, on account of which some people are
impertinent enough to call you a coxcomb; for I am asraid, she may be apt to
think you a coxcomb too, as I assure you she is very capable of distinguishing.


Mr. Jess. So much the worse for me. -- If she is capable of distinguishing, I
shall meet with a terrible repulse. I don't believe she will have me.


Dian. I don't believe she will, indeed.


Mr. Jess. Go on, sister, -- ha, ha, ha!


Dian. I protest I am serious -- Though, I perceive, you have more faith in the
counselor before you there, the looking-glass. But give me leave to tell you,
it is not a powdered head, a laced coat, a grimace, a shrug, a bow, or a few
pert phrases, learnt by rote, that constitute the power of pleasing all women.


Mr. Jess. You had better return to the gentleman, and give him his tea, my
dear.


Dian. These qualifications we find in our parrots and monkies. I would
undertake to teach Poll, in three weeks, the fashionable jargon of half the
fine men about town; and I am sure it must be allowed, that pug, in a scarlet
coat, is a gentleman as degage and alluring as most of them.

Ladies, pray admire a figure,
Fait selon le derniere gout.
First, his hat, in size no bigger
Than a Chinese woman's shoe:
Six yards of ribbon bind
His hair en baton behind:
While his fore-top's so high,
That in crown he may vie
With the tufted cockatoo.
Then his waist so long and taper,
It Is an absolute thread-paper:
Maids resist him, you that can:
Odds life, if this is all the affair,
I Will clap a hat on, club my hair,
And call myself a Man.

SCENE VIII.
CLARISSA, Mr. JESSAMY. Clar. Sir, I took the liberty to desire a few moments
private conversation with you -- I hope you will excuse it -- I am, really,
greatly embarrass'd. But, in an affair of such immediate consequence to us both
--


Mr. Jess. My dear creature, don't be embarrass'd before me; I should be
extremely sorry to strike you with any awe; but, this is a species of mauvaise
honte, which the company I shall introduce you to, will soon cure you of.


Clar. Upon my word, I don't understand you.


Mr. Jess. Perhaps, you may be under some uneasiness, lest I should not be
quite so warm in the prosecution of this affair, as you could wish: it is true,
with regard to quality, I might do better; and, with regard to fortune, full as
well -- But you please me -- Upon my soul, I have not met with any thing more
agreeable to me a great while.


Clar. Pray, Sir, keep your seat.


Mr. Jess. Mauvaise honte again. My dear, there is nothing in these little
familiarities between you and me -- When we are married, I shall do every thing
to render your life happy --


Clar. Ah! Sir, pardon me. The happiness of my life depends upon a circumstance
--


Mr. Jess. Oh! -- I understand you -- You have been told, I suppose, of the
Italian opera girl -- Rat people's tongues -- However, it is true, I had an
affair with her at Naples, and she is now here. But, be satisfied, I Will give
her a thousand pounds, and send her about her business.


Clar. Me, Sir! I protest nobody told me -- Lord! I never heard any such thing,
or enquired about it.


Mr. Jess. Nor have they not been chattering to you of my affair at Pisa, with
the Principessa del --


Clar. No, indeed, Sir.


Mr. Jess. Well! I was afraid they might, because, in this rude country -- But,
why silent, on a sudden? -- don't be afraid to speak.


Clar. No, Sir; I will come to the subject on which I took to liberty to
trouble you -- Indeed, I have great reliance on your generosity.


Mr. Jess. You Will find me generous as a prince, depend on it.


Clar. I am blessed, Sir, with one of the best of fathers: I never yet
disobeyed him; in which I have had little merit; for his commands hitherto have
only been to secure my own felicity.


Mr. Jess. Apres ma chere.


Clar. But now, Sir, I am under the shocking necessity of disobeying him, or
being wretched for ever.


Mr. Jess. Hem!


Clar. Our union is impossible -- my present situation -- the gloomy prospect
before me -- the inquietude of my mind --

Poor panting heart, ah! will thou ever
Throb within my troubled breast;
Shall I see the moment never
That is doomed to give thee rest?
Cruel stars! that thus torment me,
Still I seek for ease in vain;
All my efforts but present me
With variety of pain.

SCENE IX.
JESSAMY, JENKINS. Mr. Jess. Who Is there?


Jenk. Do you call, Sir?


Mr. Jess. Hark you, old gentleman; who are you?


Jenk. Sir, my name is Jenkins.


Mr. Jess. Oh! you are Sir John Flowerdale's steward; a servant he puts
confidence in.


Jenk. Sir, I have served Sir John Flowerdale many years: he is the best of
masters; and, I believe, he has some dependence on my attachment and fidelity.


Mr. Jess. Then, Mr. Jenkins, I shall condescend to speak to you. Does your
master know who I am? Does he know, Sir, that I am likely to be a Peer of
Great Britain? That I have ten thousand pounds a year; that I have passed
through all Europe with distinguished eclat; that I refused the daughter of
Mynheer Van Slokenfolk, the great Dutch Burgomaster; and, that, if I had not
had the misfortune of being bred a protestant, I might have married the niece
of his present holiness the Pope; with a fortune of two hundred thousand
piastres?


Jenk. I am sure, Sir, my master has all the respect imaginable --


Mr. Jess. Then, Sir, how comes he, after my showing an inclination to be
allied to his family; how comes he, I say, to bring me to his house to be
affronted? I have let his daughter go; but, I think, I was in the wong; for a
woman that insults me, is no more safe than a man. I have brought a Lady to
reason before now, for giving me saucy language; and left her male friends to
revenge it.


Jenk. Pray, good Sir, what is the matter?


Mr. Jess. Why, Sir, this is the matter, Sir -- Your master's daughter, Sir,
has behaved to me with damned insolence, and impertinence; and, you may tell
Sir John Flowerdale, first, with regard to her, that I think, she is a silly,
ignorant, awkward, ill-bred country puss.


Jenk. Oh! Sir, for Heavens sake --


Mr. Jess. And, that, with regard to himself, he is, in my opinion, an old,
doting, ridiculous, country 'Squire: without the knowledge of either men or
things, and, that he is below my notice, if it were not to despise him.


Jenk. Good Lord! Good Lord!


Mr. Jess. And, advise him and his daughter to keep out of my way; for, by gad,
I will affront them in the first place I meet them -- And, if your master is
for carrying things further; tell him, I fence better than any man in Europe.

In Italy, Germany, France have I been;
Where Princes I Have lived with, where Monarchs I Have seen;
The great have caressed me,
The fair have addressed me;
Nay, smiles I have had from a queen.
And, now, shall a pert,
Insignificant flirt,
With insolence use me,
Presume to refuse me?
She fancies my pride will be hurt.
But tout au contraire,
I Am pleased, I declare,
Quite happy, to think; I escape from the snare;
Serviteur, Mam'selle; my claim I withdraw.
Hey! where are my people? Fall, lal, lal, lal, la.

SCENE X.
JENKINS. I must go and inform Sir John of what has happened; but, I will not
tell him of the outrageous behavior of this young spark; for he is a man of
spirit, and would resent it. Egad, my own fingers itched to be at him once or
twice; and, as stout as he is, I fancy these old fists would give him a
bellyful. He complains of Miss Clarissa; but, she is incapable of treating him
in the manner he says. Perhaps, she may have behaved with some coldness toward
him; and, yet, that is a mystery to me too --

We all say, the man was exceedingly knowing,
And knowing most surely was he,
Who found out the cause of the ebbing and flowing,
The flux and reflux of the sea.
Nor was he in knowledge far from it,
Who first marked the course of a comet;
To what it was owing,
Its coming and going,
Its wanderings hither and thither;
But the man that divines
A Lady's designs,
Their cause, or effect,
In any respect,
Is wiser than both put together.

SCENE XI.
Changes to Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE'S Garden; with the View of a Canal, by
Moonlight. LIONEL enters leading CLARISSA. Lion. Hist -- methought I heard a
noise -- should we be surprised together, at a juncture so critical, what might
be the consequence! -- I know not how it is; but, at this, the happiest moment
of my life, I feel a damp, a tremor, at my heart --


Clar. Then, what should I do? If you tremble, I ought to be terrified indeed,
who have discovered sentiments, which, perhaps, I should have hid, with a
frankness, that, by a man less generous, less noble-minded than yourself, might
be construed to my disadvantage.


Lion. Oh! wound me not with so cruel an expression -- You love me, and have
condescended to confess it -- You have seen my torments, and been kind enough
to pity them -- If this is to have erred --


Clar. Be calm, and listen to me: what I have done has not been lightly
imagined, nor rashly undertaken: it is the work of reflection, of conviction;
my love is not a sacrifice to my own fancy, but a tribute to your worth; did I
think there was a more deserving man in the world --


Lion. If, to dote on you more than life, be to deserve you, so far I have
merit; if, to have no wish, no hope, no thought, but you, can entitle me to the
envied distinction of a moment's regard, so far I dare pretend.


Clar. That I have this day refused a man, with whom I could not be happy, is
nothing singular; born for quiet and simplicity, the crowds of the world, the
noise attending pomp and distinction, have no charms for me: I wish to pass my
life in rational tranquillity, with a friend whose virtues I can respect, whose
talents I can admire; who will make my esteem the basis of my affection.


Lion. O charming creature! Yes, let me indulge the flattering idea; formed
with the same sentiments, the same feelings, the same tender passion for each
other, Nature designed us to compose that sacred union, which nothing but death
can annul.


Clar. One only thing remember. Secure in each others affections, here we must
rest; I would not give my father a moment's pain, to purchase the empire of the
world.


Lion. Command, dispose of me as you please; angels take cognizance of the vows
of innocence and virtue; and, I will believe that ours are already registered
in Heaven.


Clar. I will believe so too.

Go, and, on my truth relying,
Comfort to your cares applying,
Bid each doubt and sorrow flying,
Leave to peace and love your breast.
Go, and may the Powers that hear us,
Still, as kind protectors near us,
Through our troubles safely steer us
To a port of joy and rest.

SCENE XII.
LIONEL, Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE. Sir John. Who Is there? Lionel!


Lion. Heavens! it is Sir John Flowerdale.


Sir John. Who Is there?


Lion. It Is I, Sir; I am here; Lionel.


Sir John. My dear lad, I have been searching for you this half hour, and was
at last told you had come into the garden: I have a piece of news, which I dare
swear will shock and surprise you; my daughter has refused Colonel Oldboy's
son, who is this minute departed the house in violent resentment of her ill
treatment.


Lion. Is he gone, Sir?


Sir John. Yes, and the family are preparing to follow him. Oh! Lionel,
Clarissa has deceived me: in this affair she has suffered me to deceive myself.
The measures which I have been so long preparing, are broken in a moment -- my
hopes frustrated; and both parties, in the eye of the world, rendered light and
ridiculous.


Lion. I am sorry to see you so much moved; pray Sir, recover yourself.


Sir John. I am sorry, Lionel, she has profited no better by your lessons of
philosophy, than to impose upon and distress so kind a father.


Lion. Have juster thoughts of her, Sir; she has not imposed on you; she is
incapable -- have but a little patience, and things may yet be brought about.


Sir John. No, Lionel, no; the matter is past, and there is an end of it; yet I
would conjecture to what such an unexpected turn in her conduct can be owing; I
would fain be satisfied of the motive that could urge her to so extraordinary a
proceeding, without the least intimation, the least warning to me, or any of
her friends.


Lion. Perhaps, Sir, the gentleman may have been too impetuous, and offended
Miss Flowerdale's delicacy -- certainly nothing else could occasion --


Sir John. Heaven only knows -- I think, indeed, there can be no settled
aversion; and surely her affections are not engaged elsewhere.


Lion. Engaged, Sir! -- No, Sir.


Sir John. I think not, Lionel.


Lion. You may be positive, Sir -- I Am sure --


Sir John. O worthy young man, whose integrity, openness, and every good
quality have rendered dear to me as my own child; I see this affair troubles
you as much as it does me.


Lion. It troubles me indeed, Sir.


Sir John. However, my particular disappointment ought not to be detrimental to
you, nor shall it: I well know how irksome it is to a generous mind to live in
a state of dependence, and have long had it in my thoughts to make you easy for
life.


Lion. Sir John, the situation of my mind at present is a little disturbed --
spare me -- I beseech you, spare me; why will you persist in a goodness that
makes me ashamed of myself?


Sir John. There is an estate in this county which I purchased some years ago;
by me it will never be missed; and whoever marries my daughter, will have
little reason to complain of my disposing of such a trifle for my own
gratification. On the present marriage I intended to perfect a deed of gift in
your favor, which has been for some time prepared; my lawyer has this day
completed it; and it is yours, my dear Lionel --


Lion. Sir, If you presented a pistol with design to shoot me, I would submit
to it; but you must excuse me; I cannot lay myself under more obligations.


Sir John. Your delicacy carries you too far; in this I confer a favor on
myself: however, we'll talk no more on the subject at present; let us walk
toward the house, our friends will depart else without my bidding them adieu.


SCENE XIII.
DIANA, CLARISSA, and afterward LIONEL. Dian. So then, my dear Clarissa, you
really give credit to the ravings of that French wreteh; with regard to a
plurality of worlds?


Clar. I don't make it an absolute article of belief; but I think it an
ingenious conjecture, with great probability on its side.


Dian. And we are a moon to the moon! Nay, child, I know something of
astronomy, but can I believe that little shining thing there, which seems not
much larger than a silver plate, contains great cities like London? and who can
tell but they may have kings there and parliaments, and plays and operas, and
people of fashion! Lord! the people of fashion in the moon must be strange
creatures.


Clar. Methinks Venus shines very bright in yonder corner.


Dian. Venus! O pray let me look at Venus; I suppose, if there are any
inhabitants there, they must be all lovers.


Lion. Was ever such a wretch! -- I cannot stay a moment in a place; where is my
repose? -- fled with my virtue. Was I then born for falsehood and
dissimulation? I was, I was, and live to be conscious of it! To impose upon my
friend! to betray my benefactor, and lie to hide my ingratitude* -- a monster
in a moment -- No; I may be the most unfortunate of men, but I will not be the
most odious; while my heart is yet capable of dictating what is honest, I will
obey its voice.


SCENE XIV.
DIANA, CLARISSA, LIONEL, Colonel OLDBOY, HARMAN. Col. Die, where are you? What
the mischief! is this a time to be walking in the garden! The coach has been
ready this half hour.


Dian. I am learning astronomy, Sir; do you know papa, that the moon is
inhabited?


Col. Hussy, you are half a lunatic yourself; come here, things have gone just
as I imagined they would; the girl has refused your brother; I knew he must
disgust her.


Dian. Women will want taste now and then, Sir.


Har. Well, I have had a long conference with your father about the elopement,
and he continues firm in his opinion that I ought to attempt it: in short, all
the necessary operations are settled between us, and I am to leave his house
tomorrow morning, if I can but persuade the young Lady --


Dian. Ay, but I hope the young Lady will have more sense.


Col. Friend Lionel, good night to you; Miss Clarissa, my dear, though I am
father of the puppy who has displeased you, give me a kiss; you served him
right, and I thank you for it.


Col. O what a night is here for love!
Cinthia brightly shining above;
Among the trees,
To the sighing breeze,
Fountains tinkling;
Stars a twinkling

Dian. O what a night is here for love!
So^ may the morn propitious prove!

Har. And so it will, if right I guess:
For sometimes light,
As well as night,
A lover's hopes may bless.

A. 2. Farewell, my friend,
May gentle rest
Calm each tumult in your breast,
Every pain and fear remove.

Lion. What have I done?
Where shall I run,
With grief and shame at once oppressed;
How my own upbraiding shun,
Or meet my friend distressed?

A. 3. Hark to Philomel, how sweet,
From yonder elm!

Col. Tweet, tweet, tweet, tweet.

A. 5. O what a night is here for love!
But vainly nature strives to move.
Nor nightingales among the trees,
Nor twinkling stars, nor sighing breeze,
Nor murmuring streams,
Nor Phoebus' beams,
Can charm, unless the heart's at ease.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Room in Colonel OLDBOY'S House. HARMAN enters with his Hat, Boots, and Whip,
followed by DIANA. Dian. PRy'thee, hear me.


Har. My dear, what would you say?


Dian. I am afraid of the step we are going to take; indeed, I am: it is true,
my father is the contriver of it; but, really, on consideration, I think I
should appear less culpable, if he was not so; I am at once criminal myself,
and rendering him ridiculous.


Har. Do you love me?


Dian. Suppose I do, you give me a very ill proof of your love for me, when you
would take advantage of my tenderness to blind my reason: how can you have so
little regard for my honor, as to sacrifice it to a vain triumph? For, it is
in that light I see the rash action you are forcing me to commit; nay, methinks
my consenting to it should injure me in your own esteem.


Har. Come, get yourself ready: where is your bandbox, hat, and cloak? Slip
into the garden; be there, at the iron-gate which you showed me just now; and
as the post-chaise comes round, I will step and take you in.


Dian. Dear Harman, let me beg of you to desist.


Har. Dear Diana, let me beg of you to go on.


Dian. I shall never have resolution to carry me through it.


Har. We shall have four horses, my dear, and they will assist us.


Dian. In short -- I -- cannot go with you.


Har. But before me -- into the garden -- will not you?


Dian. How can you, inhuman! persist to distress me:
My danger, my fears, it is in vain to disguise:
You know them, yet still to destruction you press me,
And force that from passion which prudence denies.
I fain would oppose a perverse inclination,
The visions of fancy, from reason divide;
With fortitude baffle the wiles of temptation,
And let love no longer make folly its guide.

SCENE II.
Colonel OLDBOY, HARMAN. Col. Hey-dey! what is the meaning of this? Who is it
went out of the room there? Have you and my daughter been in conference, Mr.
Harman?


Har. Yes, faith, Sir; she has been taking me to task here, very severely, with
regard to this affair; and she has said so much against it, and put it into
such a strange light --


Col. A busy, impertinent baggage; egad, I wish I had catched her meddling, and
after I ordered her not! but you have sent to the girl, and you say she is
ready to go with you; you must not disappoint her now.


Har. No, no, Colonel; I always have politeness enough to hear a lady's
reasons; but constancy enough to keep a will of my own.


Col. Very well; now let me ask you, -- don't you think it would be proper,
upon this occasion, to have a letter ready writ for the father, to let him know
who has got his daughter, and so forth?


Har. Certainly, Sir; and I Will write it directly.


Col. You write it! you be damned! I will not trust you with it; I tell you,
Harman, you will commit some cursed blunder, if you don't leave the management of
this whole affair to me: I have writ the letter for you myself.


Har. Have you, Sir?


Col. Ay -- here, read it; I think its the thing: however, you are welcome to
make any alteration.


Har. "Sir, I have loved your daughter a great while, secretly; she assures me
there is no hopes of your consenting to our marriage; I therefore take her
without it. I am a gentleman who will use her well; and, when you consider the
matter, I dare swear you will be willing to give her a fortune. If not, you
shall find I dare behave myself like a man: a word to the wise. You must expect
to hear from me in another style."


Col. Well, will it do?


Har. Bravo, Colonel.


Col. As soon as you have got off with the girl, then send your servant back to
leave it at the house, with orders to have it delivered to the old gentleman.


Har. Upon my honor, I will.


Col. And now, Sir, look into the court yonder; there is a chaise, Sir, and four
of the prettiest bay geldings in England for you, Sir, with two boys in scarlet
and silver jackets that will whisk you along --


Har. Boys! Colonel? little Cupids, to transport me to the summit of my desires.


Col. Ay, but for all that, it may not be amiss for me to talk to them a little
for you -- Dick, come hither -- you are to go with this gentleman, and do
whatever he bids you; and take into the chaise whoever he pleases; and drive
like devils, do you hear; but, be kind to the dumb beasts.


Har. Leave that to me, Sir -- And so, my dear Colonel, bon voyage!


SCENE III.
Colonel OLDBOY, Lady MARY, and then JENNY. Lady M. Mr. Oldboy, here is a note
from Sir John Flowerdale; it is addressed to me, entreating my son to come over
there again this morning. A maid brought it: she is in the antichamber -- We
had better speak to her -- Child, child, why don't you come in?


Jen. I choose to stay where I am, if your Ladyship pleases.


Lady M. Stay where you are! why so?


Jen. I am afraid of the old gentleman there.


Col. Afraid of me, hussy?


Lady M. Pray, Colonel, have patience -- Afraid! Here is something at the
bottom of this. -- What did you mean by that expression, child?


Jen. Why the Colonel knows very well, Madam, he wanted to be rude with me
yesterday.


Lady M. Oh Mr. Oldboy!


Col. Lady Mary, don't provoke me, but let me talk to the girl about her
business. -- How come you to bring this note here?


Jen. Why, Sir John gave it to me, to deliver to my uncle Jenkins, and I took
it down to his house; but while we were talking together, he remembered that he
had some business with Sir John, so he desired me to bring it; because he said
it was not proper to be sent by any of the common servants.


Lady M. Colonel, look in my face, and help blushing, if you can.


Col. What the plague's the matter, my Lady? I have not been wronging you now,
as you call it.


Jen. Indeed, my Lady, he offered to make me his kept madam: I am sure his
usage of me put me into such a twitter, that I did not know what I was doing
all the day after.


Lady M. I don't doubt it, though I so lately forgave him; but as the poet
says, His sex is all deceit. Read Pamela, child, and resist temptation.


Jen. Yes, Madam, I will.


Col. Why I tell you, my Lady, it was all a joke.


Jen. No, Sir, it was no joke, you made me a proffer of money, so you did;
whereby I told you, you had a Lady of your own, and that though she was old,
you had no right to despise her.


Lady M. And how dare you, mistress, make use of my name? Is it for such
trollops as you to talk of persons of distinction behind their backs?


Jen. Why, Madam, I only said you was in years.


Lady M. Sir John Flowerdale shall be informed of your impertinence, and you
shall be turned out of the family; I see you are a confident creature, and I
believe no better than you should be.


Jen. I scorn your words, Madam.


Lady M. Get out of the room; how dare you stay in this room to talk impudently
to me?


Jen. Very well, Madam, I shall let my Lady know how you have used me; but I
shall not be turned out os my place, Madam; nor at a loss, if I am; and if you are
angry with every one that will not fay you are young, I believe there is very few
you will keep friends with.

I wonder, I Am sure, why this fuss should be made;
F^r my part I Am neither ashamed nor afraid
Of what I have done, nor of what I have said.
A servant, I hope, is no slave;
And though, to their shames,
Some Ladies call names,
I know better how to behave.
Times are not so bad,
If occasion I had,
Nor my character such I need starve on it:
And for going away,
I don't want to stay,
And so I Am your Ladyship's servant.

SCENE IV.
Colonel OLDBOY, Lady MARY, Mr. JESSAMY. Mr. Jess. What is the matter here?


Lady M. I will have a separate maintenance, I will indeed. Only a new instance
of your father's infidelity, my dear. Then with such low wretches, farmer's
daughters and servant wenches: but any thing with a cap on, it is all the same
to him.


Mr. Jess. Upon my word, Sir, I am sorry to tell you, that those practices very
ill suit the character which you ought to endeavor to support in the world.


Lady M. Is this a recompense for my love and regard; I, who have been tender
and faithful as a turtle dove?


Mr. Jess. A man of your birth and distinction should, methinks, have views of
a higher nature, than such low, such vulgar libertinism.


Lady M. Consider my birth and family too -- Lady Mary Jessamy might have had
the best matches in England.


Mr. Jess. Then, Sir, your gray hairs.


Lady M. I, that have brought you so many lovely sweet babes.


Mr. Jess. Nay, Sir, it is a reflection on me.


Lady M. The heinous sin too!


Mr. Jess. Indeed, Sir, I blush for you.


Col. 'Sdeath and fire, you little effeminate puppy, do you know who you talk
to? -- And you, Madam, do you know who I am? -- Get up to your chamber, or
zounds I Will make such a --


Lady M. Ah! my dear, come away from him.


SCENE V.
Colonel OLDBOY, Mr. JESSAMY, a Servant. Col. Am I to be tutored, and called to
an account! -- How now, you scoundrel, what do you want?


Serve. A letter, Sir.


Col. A letter! from whom, sirrah?


Serve. The gentleman's servant, an't please your honor, that left this just
now in the post-chaise -- the gentleman my young lady went away with.


Col. Your young lady, sirrah -- Your young lady went away with no gentleman,
you dog -- What gentleman! What young lady, sirrah!


Mr. Jess. There is some mystery in this -- With your leave, Sir, I Will open the
letter: I believe it contains no secrets.


Col. What are you going to do, you jackanapes? you shall not open a letter of
mine -- Die -- Diana! -- Somebody call my daughter to me there -- "To John
Oldboy, Esquire. -- Sir, I have loved your daughter a great while secretly --
Consenting to our marriage"


Mr. Jess. So, so.


Col. You villain -- you dog, what is it you have brought me here?


Serve. Please your honor, if you will have patience, I Will tell your honor -- As
I told your honor before, the gentleman's servant that went off just now in
the post-chaise, come to the gate, and left it after his master was gone. I saw
my young lady go into the chaise with the gentleman.


Mr. Jess. A very fine joke indeed! pray, Colonel, do you generally write
letters to yourself? Why this is your own hand.


Col. Call all the servants in the house, let horses be saddled directly --
every one take a different road.


Serve. Why, your honor, Dick said it was by your own orders.


Col. My orders! you rascal? I thought he was going to run away with another
gentleman's daughter -- Die -- Diana Oldboy!


Mr. Jess. Don't waste your lungs to no purpose, Sir; your daughter is half a
dozen miles off by this time.


Col. Sirrah, you have been bribed to further the scheme of a pick-pocket here.


Mr. Jess. Besides, the matter is entirely of your own contriving, as well as
the letter and spirit of this elegant epistle.


Col. You are a coxcomb, and I Will disinherit you; the letter is none of my
writing; it was writ by the devil, and the devil contrived it. Diana, Margaret,
my Lady Mary, William, John! --


Mr. Jess. I am very glad of this, prodigiously glad of it, upon my honor --
he! he! he! -- it will be a jest this hundred years. (bells ringing violently
on both sides.) What Is the matter now? O! her Ladyship has heard of it, and is
at her bell; and the Colonel answers her. A pretty duet; but a little too much
upon the forte methinks: it would be a diverting thing now, to stand unseen at
the old gentleman's elbow.

Hist, soft; let us hear how matters go;
I Will creep and listen; -- so, so, so,
They Are all together by the ears; --
Oh, horrid! how the savage swears.
There too again; ay, you may ring:
Sound out the alarm-bell -- ding, ding, ding --
Dispatch your scouts, it is all in vain,
Stray maids are seldom found again.
But hark, the uprcar hither sounds;
The Colonel comes with all his hounds;
I Will wisely leave them open way,
To hunt with what success they may.

SCENE VI.
Calonel OLDBOY reenters, with one Boot, a Great-coat, on his Arm, etc.
followed by several Servants. She Is gone, by the Lord! fairly slole away, with
that poaching, concy-catching rascal!. However, I will not follow her; no, damme;
take my whip, and my cap, and my coat, and order the groom to unsaddle the
horses; I will not follow her the length of a spur-leather. Come here, you Sir,
and pull off my boot; (whistles) she has made a fool of me once, she shall not do
it a second time; not but I Will be revenged too, for I Will never give her
sixpence; the disappointment will put the scoundrel out of temper, and he will
thrash her a dozen times a day; the thought pleases me; I hope be'll do it.

What do you stand gaping and staring at, you impudent dogs? are you laughing
at me? I Will teach you to be merry at my expense. --

A rascal, a hassey; zounds! she that I counted
In temper so mild, so unpracticed in evil;
I set her a horseback, and no sooner mounted,
Than, crack, whip and spur, she rides post to the devil.
But there let her run,
Be ruined, undone;
If I go to catch her,
Or back again fetch her.
I Am worse than the son of a gun.
A mischief possessed me to marry:
And further my folly to carry.
To be still more a sot,
Sons and daughters I got,
And pretty ones, by the L^^d Harry:
SCENE VII.
Changes to CLARISSA's Dressing Room; CLARISSA enters melancholy, with a Book
in her Hand, followed by JENNY. Clar. Where have you been, Jenny? I was
enquiring for you -- why will you go out without letting me know?


Jen. Dear Ma'am, never any thing happened so unlucky; I am sorry you wanted me
-- But I was sent to Colonel Oldboy's with a letter; where I have been so used
-- Lord have mercy upon me -- quality indeed -- I say quality -- pray, Madam,
do you think that I looks any ways like an immodest parson -- to be sure I have
a gay air, and I cannot help it, and I loves to appear a little genteelish,
that is what I do.


Clar. Jenny, take away this book.


Jen. Heaven preserve me, Madam! you are crying;


Clar. O my dear Jenny!


Jen. My dear mistress, what is the matter?


Clar. I am undone.


Jen. No, Madam; no, Lord forbid!


Clar. I am indeed -- I have been rash enough to discover my weakness for a
man, who treats me with contempt.


Jen. Is Mr. Lionel ungrateful, then?


Clar. I have lost his esteem for ever, Jenny. Since last night, that I fatally
confessed what I should have kept a secret from all the world, he has scarce
condescended to cast a look at me, nor given me an answer, when I spoke to him,
but with coldness and reserve.


Jen. Then he is a nasty, barbarous, unhuman brute.


Clar. Hold, Jenny, hold; it is all my fault.


Jen. Your fault, Madam! I wish I was to hear such a word come out of his
mouth: if he was a minister tomorrow, and to say such a thing from his pulpit,
and I by, I Would tell him it was false upon the spot.


Clar. Somebody's at the door; see who it is.


Jen. You in fault indeed! -- that I know to be the most virtuousest, nicest,
most delicatest --


Clar. How now?


Jen. Madam, it is a message from Mr. Lionel. If you are alone, and at leisure,
he would be glad to wait upon you: I Will tell him, Madam, that you're busy.


Clar. Where is he, Jenny!


Jen. In the study, the man says.


Clar. Then go to him, and tell him I should be glad to see him: but do not
bring him up immediately, because I will stand in the balcony a few minutes for
a little air.


Jen. Do so, dear Madam, for your eyes are as red as ferret's; you are ready to
faint too; mercy on us, for what do you grieve and vex yourself? -- if I was as
you --


Clar. Oh!

Why with sighs my heart is swelling,
Why with tears my eyes overflow,
Ask me not; it is past the telling,
Mute, involuntary woe.
Who to winds and waves a stranger,
Venurous tempts the inconstant seas,
In each billow fancies danger,
Shrinks at every rising breeze.

SCENE VIII.
Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE, JENKINS. Sir Jo. So then, the mystery is discovered: --
but is it possible that my daughter's refusal of Colonel Oldboy's son should
procced from a clandestine engagement, and that engagement with Lionel?


Jenk. My niece, Sir, is in her young Lady's secrets, and Lord knows she had
little design to betray them; but having remarked some odd expressions of here is
yesterday, when she came down to me this morning with the letter, I questioned
her; and, in short, drew the whole affair out; upon which I feigned a
recollection of some business with you, and desired her to carry the letter to
Colonel Oldboy's herself, while I came up hither.


Sir Jo. And they are mutually promised to each other, and that promise was
exchanged yesterday?


Jenk. Yes, Sir, and it is my duty to tell you; else I would rather die than be
the means of wounding the heart of my dear young lady: for if there is one upon
earth of truly noble and delicate sentiments --


Sir Jo. I thought so once, Jenkins.


Jenk. And think so still: O good Sir John, now is the time for you to exert
that character of worth and gentleness which the world so deservedly has given
you. You have indeed cause to be offended; but consider, Sir, your daughter is
young, beautiful, and amiable; the poor youth unexperienced, sensible, and at a
time of life when such temptations are hard to be resisted; their opportunities
were many, their cast of thinking the same.


Sir Jo. Jenkins, I can allow for all these things; but the young hypocrites --
There Is the thing, Jenkins; their hypocrisy, their hypocrisy wounds me.


Jenk. Call it by a gentler name, Sir; modesty on her part, apprehension on his.


Sir Jo. Then what opportunity have they had? They never were together but when
my sister or myself made one of the company; besides, I had so firm a reliance
on Lionel's honor and gratitude --


Jenk. Sir, I can never think that Nature stamped that gracious countenance of
his, to mask a corrupt heart.


Sir Jo. How! at the very time that he was conscious of being himself the cause
of it, did he not show more concern at this affair than I did? Nay, don't I
tell you that last night, of his own accord, he offered to be a mediator in the
affair, and desired my leave to speak to my daughter? I thought myself obliged
to him, consented; and in consequence of his assurance of success, wrote that
letter to Colonel Oldboy, to desire the family would come here again today.


Jenk. Sir, as we were standing in the next room, I heard a message delivered
from Mr. Lionel, desiring leave to wait upon your daughter; I dare swear they
will be here presently; suppose we were to step into that closet, and overhear
their conversation?


Sir Jo. What, Jenkins, after having lived so many years in confidence with my
child, shall I become an eves-dropper to detect her?


Jenk. It is necessary at present. -- Come in, my dear master, let us only
consider that we were once young like them; subject to the same passions, the
same indiscretions; and it is the duty of every man to pardon errors incident
to his kind.


SCENE IX.
CLARISSA, LIONEL. Clar. Sir, you desired to speak to me; I need not tell you
the present situation of my heart; it is full. Whatever you have to say, I beg
you will explain yourself; and, if possible, rid me of the anxiety under which
I have labored for some hours.


Lion. Madam, your anxiety cannot be greater than mine; I come, indeed, to
speak to you; and yet, I know not how; I come to advise you, shall I say as a
friend? yes, as a friend to your glory, your felicity; dearer to me than my
life.


Clar. Go on, Sir.


Lion. Sir John Flowerdale, Madam, is such a father as few are blessed with;
his care, his prudence has provided for you a match. -- Your refusal renders
him inconsolable. Listen to no suggestions that would pervert you from your
duty, but make the worthiest of men happy by submitting to his will.


Clar. How, Sir, after what passed between us yesterday evening, can you advise
me to marry Mr. Jessamy?


Lion. I would advise you to marry any one, Madam, rather than a villain.


Clar. A villain, Sir!


Lion. I should be the worst of villains, Madam, was I to talk to you in any
other strain: Nay, am I not a villain, at once treacherous and ungrateful?
Received into this house as an asylum; what have I done! Betrayed the
confidence of a friend that trusted me; endeavored to sacrifice his peace, and
the honor of his family, to my own unwarrantable desires.


Clar. Say no more, Sir; say no more; I see my error too late; I have parted
from the rules prescribed to my sex; I have mistaken indecorum for a laudable
sincerity; and it is just I should meet with the treatment my imprudence
deserves.


Lion. It Is I, only I, am to blame; while I took advantage of the father's
security, I practiced upon the tenderness and ingenuity of the daughter; my own
imagination gone astray, I artfully labored to lead yours after it: but here,
Madam, I give you back those vows which I insidiously extorted from you; keep
them for some happier man, who may receive them without wounding his honor, or
his peace.


Clar. For Heaven's sake!


Lion. Why do you weep?


Clar. Don't speak to me.


Lion. Oh! my Clarissa, my heart is broke; I am hateful to myself for loving
you; yet, before I leave you for ever, I will once more touch that lovely hand
-- indulge my fondness with a last look -- pray for your health and prosperity.


Clar. Can you forsake me? Have I then given my affections to a man who rejects
and disregards them? -- Let me throw myself at my father's feet; he is generous
and compassionate: -- He knows your worth --


Lion. Farewell, farewell!


SCENE X.
CLARISSA, JENNY, then Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE and JENKINS; and afterward LIONEL.
Jen. O Madam! I have betrayed you. I have gone and said something I should not
have said to my uncle Jenkins; and, as sure as day, he has gone and told it all
to Sir John.


Clar. My father!


Sir John. Go, Jenkins, and desire that young gentleman to come back -- stay
where you are -- But what have I done to you, my child? How have I deserved
that you should treat me like an enemy? Has there been any undesigned rigor in
my conduct, or terror in my looks?


Clar. Oh Sir!


Jenk. Here is Mr. Lionel.


Sir Jo. Come in -- When I tell you that I am instructed in all your
proceedings, and that I have been ear-witness to your conversation in this
place; you will, perhaps, imagine what my thoughts are of you, and the measures
which justice prescribes me to follow.


Lion. Sir, I have nothing to say in my own defense; I stand before you,
self-convicted, self-condemned, and shall submit without murmuring to the
sentence of my judge.


Sir Jo. As for you, Clarissa, since your earliest infancy, you have known no
parent but me; I have been to you, at once, both father and mother; and, that I
might the better fulfill those united duties, though left a widower in the prime
of my days, I would never enter into a second marriage. -- I loved you for your
likeness to your dear mother: but that mother never deceived me -- and there
the likeness fails -- you have repaid my affection with dissimulation --
Clarissa, you should have trusted me.


Jen. O my dear, sweet Lady.


Sir Jo. As for you, Mr. Lionel, what terms can I find strong enough to paint
the excess of my friendship? -- I loved, I esteemed, I honored your father: he
was a brave, a generous, and a sincere man; I thought you inherited his good
qualities -- you were left an orphan, I adopted you, put you upon the footing
of my own son; educated you like a gentleman; and designed you for a
profession, to which, I thought, your virtues would have been an ornament.


Jen. Dear me, dear me.


Jenk. Hold your tongue.


Sir Jo. What return you have made me, you seem to be acquainted with yourself;
and, therefore, I shall not repeat it -- Yet, remember as an aggravation of
your guilt, that the last mark of my bounty was conferred upon you in the very
instant, when you were undermining my designs. Now, Sir, I have but one thing
more to say to you -- Take my daughter; was she worth millions, she is at your
service.


Lion. To me, Sir! -- your daughter! -- do you give her to me? Without fortune
-- without friends -- without --


Sir Jo. You have them all in your heart; him whom virtue raises, fortune
cannot abase.


Clar. O, Sir, let me on my knees kiss that dear hand -- acknowledge my error,
and entreat forgiveness and blessing.


Sir Jo. You have not erred, my dear daughter; you have distinguished. It is I
should ask pardon, for this little trial of you; for I am happier in the
son-in-law you have given me, than if you had married a prince.


Lion. My patron -- my friend -- my father -- I would fain say something; but,
as your goodness exceeds all bounds --


Sir Jo. I think I hear a coach drive into the court; it is Colonel Oldboy's
family; I will go and receive them. Don't make yourselves uneasy at this; we
must endeavor to pacify them as well as we can. My dear Lionel, if I have made
you happy, you have made me so; Heaven bless you, my children, and make you
deserving of one another.


SCENE XI.
CLARISSA, LIONEL, JENNY. Jen. O dear, Madam, upon my knees, I humbly beg your
pardon: dear Mr. Lionel, forgive me: I did not design to discover it, indeed:
and you will not turn me off, Madam, will you? I Will serve you for nothing.


Clar. Getup, my good Jenny; I freely forgive you, if there is any thing to be
forgiven. I know you love me; and, I am sure here is one who will join with me
in rewarding your sevices.


Jen. Well, if I did not know, as sure as could be, that some good would
happen, by my left eye itching this morning.


Lion. O bliss unexpected! my joys overpower me!
My love, my Clarissa, what words shall I find!
Remorse, desperation, no longer devour me --
He blessed us, and peace is restored to my mind*

Clar. He blessed us! O rapture! Like one I recover,
Whom death had appal'd without hope, without aid;
A moment deprived me of father and l^ver;
A moment restores, and my pangs are repaid.

Lion. Forsaken, abandoned,

Clar. What folly! what blindness!

Lion. We fortune accused;

Clar. And the fates that decreed:

A. 2. But pain was inflicted by Heaven, out of kindness,
To heighten the joys that were doomed to succeed.
Our day was overcast:
But brighter the scene is,
The sky more serene is,
And softer the calm for the hurricane past.

SCENE XII.
Changes to the Hall. Lady MARY OLDBOY leaning on a Servant, Mr. JESSAMY
leading her; JENNY; and afterward, Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE with Colonel OLDBOY.
Lady M. It Is all in vain, my dear; -- set me down any where; I cannot go a step
further -- I knew, when Mr. Oldboy insisted upon my coming, that I should be
seized with a meagrim by the way; and it is well I did not die in the coach.


Mr. Jess. But, pr'ythee, why will you let yourself be affected with such
trifles? -- Nothing more common than for young women of fashion to go off with
low fellows!


Lady M. Only feel, my dear, how I tremble! Not a nerve but what is in
agitation; and my blood runs cold, cold!


Mr. Jess. Well, but, Lady Mary, don't let us expose ourselves to those people;
I see there is not one of the rascals about us, that has not a grin upon his
countenance.


Lady M. Expose ourselves! my dear? Your father will be as ridiculous as
Hudibras, or Don Quixote.


Sir Jo. I give you my word, my good friend, and neighbor, the joy I feel upon
this occasion, is greatly allayed by the disappointment of an aliance with your
family; but I have explained to you how things have happened -- You see my
situation; and, as you are kind enough to consider it yourself, I hope you will
excuse it to your son.


Lady M. Sir John Flowerdale, how do you do? You see we have obeyed your
summons; and I have the pleasure to assure you, that my son yielded to my
entreaties with very little disagreement: in short, if I may speak
metaphorically, he is content to stand candidate again, notwithstanding his
late repulse, when he hopes for an unanimous election.


Col. Well, but, my Lady, you may save your rhetoric: *for the borough is
disposed of to a worthier member.


SCENE XIII.
Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE, Lady MARY, Mr. JESSAMY, Celonel OLDBOY, LIONEL, CLARISSA,
JENNY. Sir Jo. Here are my son and daughter.


Lady M. Is this pretty, Sir John?


Sir Jo. Believe me, Madam, it is not for want of a just sense of Mr. Jessamy's
merit, that this affair has gone off on any side: but the heart is a delicate
thing; and after it has once felt, if the object is meritorious, the impression
is not easily effaced; it would therefore have been an injury to him, to have
given him in appearance what another in reality possessed.


Mr. Jess. Upon my honor, upon my soul, Sir John, I am not the least offended
at this contre temps -- Pray, Lady Mary, say no more about it.


Col. Tol, lol, lol, lol.


Sir Jo. But my dear Colonel, I am afraid, after all, this affair is taken
amiss by you: yes, I see you are angry on your son's account; but let me repeat
it, I have a very high opinion of his merit.


Col. Ay! that is more than I have. Taken amiss! I don't take any thing amiss; I
never was in better spirits, or more pleased in my life.


Sir Jo. Come, you are uneasy at something, Colonel.


Col. Me! Gad I am not uneasy -- Are you a justice of peace! Then you could
give me a warrant, could not you? You must know, Sir John, a little accident has
happened in my family since I saw you last; you and I may shake hands --
Daughters, Sir, daughters! Yours has snapt at a young fellow without your
approbation; and how do you think mine has served me this morning? -- Only run
away with the scoundrel I brought to dinner here yesterday.


Sir Jo. I am excessively concerned.


Col. Now I Am not a bit concerned -- No, dam'me, I am glad it has happened!
yet, thus far, I Will confess, I should be sorry that either of them would come
in my way, because a man's temper may sometimes get the better of him: and I
believe I should be tempted to break her neck, and blow his brains out.


Clar. But pray, Sir, explain this affair.


Col. I can explain it no farther -- Die, my daughter Die, has run away from us.


SCENE XIV.
Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE, Colonel OLDBOY, Lady MARY OLDBOY, Mr. JESSAMY, CLARISSA,
LIONEL, DIANA, HARMAN. Dian. No, my dear papa, I am not run away; and upon my
knees, I entreat your pardon for the folly I have committed; but, let it be
some alleviation, that duty, affection, were too strong to suffer me to carry
it to extremity: and, if you knew the agony I have been in since I saw you last
--


Lady M. How Is this?


Har. Sir, I restore your daughter to you; whose fault, as far as it goes, I
must also take upon myself; we have been known to each other some time; as Lady
Richly, your sister, in London, can acquaint you --


Col. Die, come here -- Now, you rascal, where is ^our sword; if you are a
gentleman, you shall fight me; if you are a scrub, I Will horse-whip you -- Draw,
Sirrah -- Shut the door there, don't let him escape.


Har. Sir, don't imagine I want to escape; I am extremely sorry for what has
happened, but am ready to give you any satisfaction you think proper.


Col. Follow me into the garden then -- Zounds! I have no sword about me -- Sir
John Flowerdale -- lend us a case of pistols, or a couple of guns; and come and
see fair play.


Clar. My dear papa!


Dian. Sir John Flowerdale -- O my indiscretion -- we came here, Sir, to beg
your mediation in our favor.


Lady M. Mr. Oldboy, if you attempt to fight, I hall expire.


Sir Jo. Pray, Colonel, let me speak a word to you in private.


Col. Slugs and a saw-pit --


Mr. Jess. Why, Miss Die, you are a perfect heroine for a romance -- And, pray
who is this courteous knight?


Lady M. O Sir, you that I thought such a pretty behaved gentleman!


Mr. Jess. What business are you of, friend?


Har. My chief trade, Sir, is plain dealing; and, as that is a commodity you
have no reason to be very fond of, I would not advise you to purchase any of it
by impertinence.


Col. And is this what you would advise me to?


Sir Jo. It is, indeed, my dear old friend; as things are situated, there is,
in my opinion, no other prudent method of proceeding; and it is the method I
would adopt myself, was I in your case.


Col. Why, I believe you are in the right of it -- Say what you will for me
then.


Sir Jo. Well! young people, I have been able to use a few arguments, which
have softened my neighbor here; and in some measure pacified his resentment. I
find, Sir, you are a gentleman by your connections?


Har. Sir, till it is found that my character and family will bear the
strictest scrutiny, I desire no favor -- And for fortune --


Col. Oh! rot your fortune, I don't mind that -- I know you are a gentleman, or
Dick Rantum would not have recommended you. And so, Die, kiss and friends.


Mr. Jess. What, Sir, have you no more to say to the man who has used you so
ill?


Col. Used me ill! -- That Is as I take it -- he has done a mettled thing; and,
perhaps, I like him the better for it; it is long before you would have spirit
enough to run away with a wench -- Harman, give me your hand; let us hear no
more of this now.


Har. I am so bound by your generosity, Sir --


SCENE XV.
Sir JOHN FLOWERDALE, Colonel OLDBOY, Lady MARY OLDBOY, Mr. JESSAMY, CLARISSA,
LIONEL, JENNY, DIANA, HARMAN, JENKINS. Col. Call more people in here -- Sir
John Flowerdale, what say you? shall we spend the day together, and dedicate it
to love and harmony?


Sir Jo. With all my heart.


Col. Then take off my great-coat.


Lion. Come then, all ye social powers,
Shed your infiuence over us,
Crown with bliss the present hours,
And lighten those before us.
May the just, the generous kind,
Still see that you regard 'em;
And Lionels for ever find,
Clarissas to reward'em!

Clar. Love, thy godhead I adore,
Source of sacred passion;
But will never bow before
Those idols, Wealth, or Fashion.
May, like me, each maiden wise,
From the fop defend her;
Learning, sense, and virtue prize,
And scorn the vain pretender!

Jess. Why the deuce should men be sad,
While in time we moulder?
Grave, or gay, or vexed, or glad,
We every day grow older.
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy will quickly find us;
Drink, and laugh, and dance, and sing,
And cast our cares behind us.

Dian. How shall I escape -- so naught,
On filial laws to trample?
I Will even curtsey, own my fault,
And plead papa's example.
Parents, it is a hint to you,
Children often are shameless;
Often transgress -- the thing's* too true --
But are you always blameless?

Col. One word more before we go;
Girls and boys have patience;
You to friends must something owe,
As well as to relations.
These kind gentlemen address --
What though we forgave 'em,
Still they must be lost, unless
You lend a hand to save 'em.

THE END.

