SEDUCTION: A COMEDY.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

BY THOMAS HOLCROFT.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON* PATERNOSTER-ROW.

M. DCC. LXXXVII.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. BARRYMORE.
AMONG the tawny sons of Indian lands,
The Hero, who aspires to lead their bands,
Must proof afford, ere he his cause can gain,
Of resolution, and contempt of pain:
Ere they will confess him fit for them to die,
Whips, stings, and fire, his fortitude must try!
Assembled Chiefs the desperate contest view,
Inflict the torture, and the pang renew!
And, should he, while the flames his reins embrace,
Heave one poor sigh, or even breathe apace,
With scorn and ignominy, he is expelled;
By boys and women in derision held!
But if, to pain superior, he comes forth
Equal to heroes of acknowledged worth,
Applauding shouts re-echo to the skies,
And all hearts claim him as his country's prize!
Severe the task! -- Who would to fame aspire
In lands like these, where Virtue's tried by fire?
Scarce less severe his task who pants for fame,
Scorched by the ardour of Poetic flame;
While fable, diction, pathos, wit and taste,
Like scorpion whips, and racks, are round him placed:
For, while to conquer each defect he tries,
"On the strong torture of the mind he lies!"
Rashly resolved to dare impending fate,
Tonight comes forth a hardy candidate.
The Critic lash, the more than mortal stings,
When Obloquy the Poet's bosom wrings,
When Disappointment gnaws his bleeding heart,
And mad Resentment hurls her venomed dart,
When angry Noise, Disgust, and Uproar rude,
Damnation urge, and every hope exclude,
These, dreadful though they are, cannot quite repel
The aspiring mind, that bids the man excel.
Though rules, alone, would yield a barren fame,
Such praise as rules can merit he may claim.
Each unity's preserved, nor knows the play
A lapse of time beyond the close of day;
No change of scene denotes a changed abode,
Nor has he dared indulge one episode.
But rules of art no native tints bestow;
Art never taught the beauteous rose to blow:
If nurtured not by dews, and heaven-born fire,
The half-blown bud must droop, the plant expire.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Frederic Fashion, Mr. PALMER. Lord Morden, Mr. KEMBLE. General Burland,
Mr. AICKIN. Lapelle, Mr. BATES. Bailiff, Mr. CHAPLIN. Mr. Wilmot, Mr. KING.
Lady Morden, Miss FARREN. Harriet, Mrs. WILSON, Emily, Mrs. BRERETON. Mrs.
Pinup, Miss TIDSWELL. Mrs. Modely, Miss POPE.
The time within twelve hours. The scene is the house of Lord Morden, and does
not change; and the stage is never vacant, but at the end of an act. The action
is single.

PREFACE.
THE immortal Author of Hudibras affirms, the hardest task in the world is to
write a play; it is, therefore, no wonder that writers of plays are prone to
regard their labors with fondness, even to partiality; or that they should
perceive with regret the light esteem in which a part of the literary world
have lately affected to hold them. Works of rudiment, of disquisition, nay,
even, of mere compilation, are often treated by criticism with a respect which
a comedy, or tragedy, where wit, invention, genius, and all the highest
faculties of the mind have, or ought to have, been employed, seldom meets. The
theater, however it may be debased by the nightly intrusion of unhappy and
improper persons, has a most powerful and good influence on morals, which
increases with industry, and as the means of gaining admission among the lower
class increase. Much time is there spent to the best, the noblest, of purposes;
the body's fatigues are forgotten, the mind is beguiled of its cares, the sad
heart is made merry, fictitious sorrow obliterates real, and the soul, imbibing
virtuous and heroic principles, is roused and impelled to actions that honor
not only individuals but nations, and give a dignity to human nature. Those who
can doubt this are to be pitied. And it is piteous, most piteous, that, not
only the learned, but, the political world should treat the stage with neglect;
nay, with contempt: that they do not combine, and employ the high powers they
possess to the encouragement and perfection of an art which, being, in its own
nature, so delightful, so fascinating, is capable of contributing, so
infinitely, to the happiness, as well as to the pleasure, of mankind.

These ideas have long, and often, occurred to my mind, where they have acted
with increasing force. If I have written a comedy which, perfectly moral in its
tendency, and counteracting a fashionable vice that is in danger of becoming a
vulgar one, has charms sufficient to attract spectators, I am of opinion I have
done my country an essential service. That some who read this may call me vain
or presumptuous is, to me, totally indifferent. The theater is a subject of
such consequence to virtue, happiness, and man, that I cannot forbear speaking
of it with a sense of feeling which, I fear, I cannot impart.

I must now undertake a task of a very different and painful nature; the cause
of my undertaking it shall be given, when I have told my story.

In the summer of 1785, I wrote the Opera of the Choleric Fathers, and the
Comedy of Seduction. They were both put into the hands of Mr. Harris, on
certain conditions; the substance of which was that, if, after reading, he
should approve the pieces, they were both to be played, during the ensuing
season, the first in November, and the latter in January, or the beginning of
February, 1786. They were read by Mr. Harris, and both accepted, on these
conditions; and so precise, so perfectly explained, were they that they were
reduced to writing. However, certain objections arising, on the part of Mr.
Harris, concerning benefit nights (not the time of performing the pieces, for
that remained determined) I, myself, tore the written agreement; saying, I
thought it improbable men, who meant honestly and honorably, should differ in
trifles; and that each other's word was sufficient.

When Mr. Harris had read Seduction, though he objected to parts, he was, yet,
so well pleased with the whole, that he said, with evident, and peculiar,
satisfaction, I had given the theater a comedy which, he thought, would do it
no harm.

Having made his objections, alterations were agreed on, and the comedy taken
back. Further to prove how fully the word of Mr. Harris was engaged, how
perfectly he understood himself pledged to abide by his agreement, while the
Opera of the Choleric Fathers was preparing for representation, Mr. Harris sent
to me, to make a new proposal, which, according to him, would highly benefit
the theater. This was that, instead of January, I should suffer the comedy to
be brought out before Christmas, because he had a new pantomime (Omai) that
would, in all probability, be greatly beneficial to the theater, after
Christmas, and that his season would then be filled up, and, probably,
exceedingly productive. That my interest might not suffer by this arrangement,
he promised, in compensation, to suffer the new pantomime to be played for my
third benefit, and, if the comedy ran a certain number of nights, for my
fourth. When he made this proposition I desired time to consider, and consult
my friends; and, at last, from a sincere wish to oblige Mr. Harris, and serve
the theater, acquiesced. This project, however, was deranged; not by me, or Mr.
Harris; but by an event highly vexatious to both, and which I shall not relate
now; perhaps never.

In the mean time, the play had received some alterations, and the insertion of
a character so atrocious, yet so frequent, in this town, as to make, in the
opinion of Mr. Harris, the representation of it dangerous. Accordingly, this
was to be expunged, still further alterations were undertaken, and the comedy,
a third time, delivered, as it is at present played, about the beginning of
December, 1785. It will be necessary to remark that, before this, the Choleric
Fathers had been performed, and did not take that run which Mr. Harris
expected, and I had hoped; and that, knowing the changeable disposition of Mr.
Harris, I cautioned him against suffering this mediocrity of success to
influence, and prejudice, his mind against the comedy. He assured me it should
not.

I must likewise state that, so self-denying was I, and desirous of promoting
the welfare of the theater, when Mr. Harris informed me, by Mr. Lewis, he had
no further hopes from the Opera, which had then been played seven nights, and
that he would allow me the eighth instead of the ninth night, but adding he
doubted whether I should clear expenses; I, though there was no probability of
loss, and, certainly, some of gain, gave up my third night to the theater;
telling Mr. Lewis I would not deprive Mr. Harris of a night, under such
circumstances.

The Comedy remained with Mr. Harris, who, I was told, was gone out of town,
till the beginning of January, without my receiving any information of its
being preparing for rehearsal. I began to be alarmed; and, unable to obtain an
interview, or even discover where Mr. Harris was, I wrote a letter to him,
expressive of these alarms. I need not describe what my feelings were, a few
days after, on receiving the comedy back, with a letter from Mr. Harris, in
which these feelings were indeed little respected, informing me it could not
succeed. The manner of sending it back was, almost, as extraordinary as the
act. It was brought, loosely tied up with packthread, in a bit of dirty brown
paper, unsealed, by the servant of Mr. O'Keefe. I mean not to insinuate any
possible disadvantage to the character of Mr. O'Keefe: far to the contrary. I
have often heard him honorably mentioned. Neither can I say how it came into
his hands, or that he knew what it was; but this is no palliation of Mr.
Harris's conduct. I returned no answer; it would have been exceedingly wrong to
have trusted the irritated mind at such a moment.

I will now give my reasons for relating this transaction to the world. To
pretend I did not feel all the indignation which conduct like this must kindle,
would be to assume an apathy contrary to nature; and, even, to virtue. This,
however, has worn off: I act coolly, at present, and from a sense of duty, not
revenge. As far as relates to myself, I would wish the affair might never more
be remembered; but, if men in similar situations might act thus always with
impunity, as they too often do, what means could the weak and unprotected find
of obtaining redress; what security in their dealings with a man, who,
regardless of probity, and yielding to the caprice of opinion, the dictates of
pride, or the narrow motives of self-interest, does not scruple to break his
word, so pledged, and engagements thus formal?

This narrative will scarcely be more disagreeable to Mr. Harris to read than
it has been to me to write: it is not my own cause I plead, for that was gained
in the success of my Comedy; but the cause of the weak against the strong; the
cause of hereafter genius against hereafter injustice; the cause of the man,
who, endowed with gifts of which Nature herself is proud, but deprived of every
benefit of Fortune, shall devote his days and nights to study, and suffer every
abstinence with resignation, and, even with delight, cheered by the sweet hope
of being some time known for what he is. There is a momentary intoxication, a
delirium of soul, in this hope, which not the daily privation of pleasures, the
disappointments of years, the labors of a life, nor injustice itself can
counterbalance. It is this godlike sensation which has given the mind an
impetus, and made it produce works so various, and so vast, that, glancing at
their amplitude and sublimity, it stands confounded at its own powers!

That I may avoid all appearance of mingling flattery with an appeal to
justice, I shall forbear describing the conduct of the Proprietors of
Drury Lane; except saying, they have behaved to me like Gentlemen, and men of
honor.

My heart will not, however, suffer me to be equally reserved, and silent,
concerning Mr. King. The moment he was convinced the producing of this Comedy
would probably serve, not injure, the Theater, his zeal and activity, in my
cause, were indefatigable: how very essentially his powers, as an actor, have
contributed to its success is too public for me (had I a wish so selfish) to
conceal. But this is not the first debt of gratitude from me to Mr. King; his
friendship, or his philanthropy, while I was struggling into notice, and
combating with adverse fortune, did me a generous kindness which never can, nor
ever ought to be forgotten.

The Town have beheld, with delight and surprise, the increasing excellence of
Miss Farren; and, thinking she had attained perfection, have been astonished,
when they saw her next, at their own mistake. In the present instance, her
exertions, and even the very manner of them, have been as pleasing to me, as
they were beneficial to the Comedy. I can only add, she has excelled herself;
and, though that thought be old, it never was more properly applied.

Having mentioned these, it were injustice to the rest of the performers not to
thank them; both for the display of talents, the merits of which are well
known, and the ardour, I may say the anxiety, they testified for my success.
Yes, I most sincerely thank them all; and only forbear to name them,
individually, because I cannot find expressions, various and warm enough, to
convey my thoughts, without making true and well deserved praise assume the
form of labored panegyric.

Upper Mary-le-bone Street, March, 1787.
SEDUCTION: A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
[A superb Drawing Room in the House of Lord MORDEN, with several Doors-leading
to other Apartments.] LAPELLE, from Lord Morden's dressing room, looking at his
watch. TWENTY minutes past ten! -- a shameful time of the morning for a
gentleman's gentleman to be disturbed. -- My Lord has lost his money, cannot
sleep himself, and will not suffer others to take their natural rest.

SCENE II. LAPELLE, Mrs. PINUP, from Lady Morden's dressing room.
Mrs. Pinup. I declare, upon my honor, this is a most monstrous time of night
for a lady's gentlewoman to be kept up; dozing over a dull novel, or nodding in
an antichamber and an arm chair, while others are taking their pleasure, and
losing their estates, among their friends.


Lapelle. Good morrow, Mrs. Pinup.


Mrs. Pinup. Good morrow, Mr. Lapelle! Good night, you mean. -- I have not been
in bed yet!


Lapelle. No!


Mrs. Pinup. That vile bedside bell! -- They Will wear me haggard before I am
old! Knew I should not rest long, so threw myself down in my clothes; and, just
as I was got into a sound sleep, tingle, tingle, tingle; up I must get, to
dress my lady, who, for my part, I believe, never sleeps at all.


Lapelle. Why, yes; your fashionable folks are a kind of ghosts, that walk of
nights, and greatly trouble the repose of valets and lady's maids -- and late
hours, like white paint, are excellent promoters of cracked complexions.


Mrs. Pinup. I declare, upon my honor, I am as tired as -- as --


Lapelle. A hackney coach horse, on a rainy Sunday.


Mrs. Pinup. Yes -- and as drowsy as --


Lapelle. An alderman at an oratorio -- Your Lady had a deal of company at her
rout -- Was Sir Frederick Fashion there?


Mrs. Pinup. To be sure.


Lapelle. He is a prodigious favorite with your Lady, I think.


Mrs. Pinup. Favorite! -- There are strange doings in this world! -- Staid I
know not how long, after every body else was gone!


Lapelle. What, alone, with your Lady?


Mrs. Pinup. Alone, with my Lady!


Lapelle. Indeed! -- Was Mrs. Modely at the rout?


Mrs. Pinup. Yes -- but don't ask me any questions; it is impossible I should
say ten words more: I am talking in my sleep now. -- When I get up, in the
morning, that is, about three o'clock in the afternoon, I Will tell you all; so
good night.


SCENE III.
Lapelle. A wonderful change in a short time! -- Lady Morden, young, handsome,
and full of spirits, was, not a month ago, reserved in her conduct, fond of her
husband, contented with home, and, indeed, a miraculous kind of exception among
wives of quality. Whereas, now, she has suddenly turned fantastical in dress,
capricious in temper, free of speech, and, what we half-bred folks should call,
light of carriage. She games with the women, coquettes with the men, and seems,
in every respect, ambitious to become -- a woman of fashion. As for my Lord --
why -- he is a man of fashion.


SCENE IV. GENERAL BURLAND, LAPELLE.
Genesis Burland. Is your Lady up, Mr. Lapelle?


Lapelle. Yes, Sir -- I believe she has never been in bed.


Genesis Burland. Who -- what do you mean?


Lapelle. My Lady had a rout last night.


Genesis Burland. A rout -- and never in bed? Impossible!


Lapelle. Yes! but it is very true, Sir.


Genesis Burland. Lady Morden! She whom, but a few weeks since, I left so
singular, so eminent an example of simplicity, and purity of manners!


Lapelle. Sir Frederick Fashion was here.


Genesis Burland. Sir Frederick Fashion!


Lapelle. He staid after every body else had retired.


Genesis Burland. What! alone, with Lady Morden?


Lapelle. So her Ladyship's woman, who is scarcely yet undressed, informed me.


Genesis Burland. [after a pause of astonishment] Why, then, all hopes of
goodness, in this world, are vanished! -- Go -- bid my daughter, my Emily, come
to me.


Lapelle. She is not stirring, I fancy, Sir.


Genesis Burland. But I fancy she is, Sir; I am sure she is. -- What, Sir, she had
not a rout, to keep her up all night!


Lapelle. She was of my Lady's party, I believe, Sir.


Genesis Burland. [after a pause of great anxiety] Go -- go -- pray, go, and do as
I bid you.


SCENE V.
Genesis Burland. What will this town, this world, come to! The only perfectly
amiable, the only enchantingly virtuous woman I knew, fascinated at last, and
sinking into the gulf of depravity! -- She will drag down my Emily too! -- No!
I Will hide her in a forest, seclude her in a cave, rather than suffer her to be
infected by the pestiferous breath of this contagious town. -- But is she not
already tainted? -- Of my Lady's party! -- She that I left her with as a
pattern, commanded her to observe, to study, to imitate, in all things!


SCENE VI. GENERAL BURLAND, LAPELLE.
Genesis Burland. Well, where is my daughter?


Lapelle. I have called her woman, and she will call Miss Emily.


Genesis Burland. I Will call her myself -- and it shall be the most ungentle call
she has long heard from me.


SCENE VII. LAPELLE, HARRIET, in the dress of a Croat.
Lapelle. Who comes here? Some foreign sharper, I dare say -- One of my Lord's
morning duns for last night's debts.


Harriet. [with the brogue] Hark you, young man; may I be asking you where I
will find my Lord Morden?


Lapelle. He is not come down, Sir.


Harriet. Oh, that, I suppose, is becase he is not up.


Lapelle. My Lord told me he expected a gentleman, or two, would call -- but he
has had so many calls lately --


Harriet. That he is a little slow in answering?


Lapelle. Rather -- Riches, regularity, and roast beef, will soon, I fear, take
their leave of our house.


Harriet. Faidth, and that may viry will be; for they are all three become
great vagabonds. Riches is turned Amirican pedlar, Regularity a Prussian
grenadier, and as for Roast Beef, why, the Frinch are now so fond of good old
English fashions, that poor Roast Beef is transported alive to Paris.


Lapelle. My Lord, I believe, is a little out of cash, at present.


Harriet. Will, now, that is viry prudent of him to put it out: for, whin a man
finds he cannot keep his cash himself, he is viry right to lit odther people
keep it for him.


Lapelle. Nay, then, I don't know a more careful gentleman.


Harriet. Careful? Why, sure, always whin a a man of spirit begins to take care
of his money, it is becase he has none.


Lapelle. Well, Sir, if you will please to leave your card, his Lordship, I
suppose, will know who has called.


Harriet. Indeed and he will not.


Lapelle. How so, pray, Sir?


Harriet. Faidth, for a viry good raison -- He niver saw me in his life.


Lapelle. Who then shall I say? --


Harriet. And is it my name you would know?


Lapelle. If you please.


Harriet. Let me see -- What the white divle is my name now? -- Oh! -- Char-les
Phelim O'Fireaway; an Irishman by accident, a gintleman by policy, and a
captain of Croats, in the Austrian sarvis, by design. -- Do you understand that
riddle now?


Lapelle. Not clearly.


Harriet. I did not intind you should -- What time can I see my Lord?


Lapelle. Most likely, about one.


Harriet. Will, then, give him this litter, and inform his Lordship I will take
the liberty of calling, this afternoon, to bid him a good morrow.


SCENE VIII. LAPELLE, LORD MORDEN.
Lord Morden. [in his morning gown and slippers, and calling as he enters]
Lapelle!


Lapelle. So! here he comes, already. [answering] My Lord.


Lord Morden. What time is it?


Lapelle. Eleven o'clock, my Lord.


Lord Morden. What a damned night have I passed! -- Is my coffee ready?


Lapelle. I Will go and see, my Lord.


SCENE IX. LORD MORDEN.
[Throws himself on the sofa] This head ache! -- No rest! -- Oh for half an
hour's sleep! -- A cursed silly course of life, mine! -- But there is no
accounting in the morning for the conduct of overnight.

SCENE X. LORD MORDEN, LAPELLE with coffee.
Lord Morden. This is not half strong enough -- get me some as strong as
possible. -- Any message? [rises].


Lapelle. This letter, my Lord.


SCENE XI. LORD MORDEN.
From Lady Westbrook, I see. [reads] -- Um -- A young lady in disguise! -- um
-- Will relate her own story! -- um -- um -- Rely on your honor to keep her
secret, and serve her cause! -- Would have addressed myself to Lady Morden, but
for reasons which you shall know hereafter! --

SCENE XII. LORD MORDEN, LAPELLE, with more coffee.
Lord Morden. Who brought this letter?


Lapelle. An Irish gentleman, in a foreign dress.


Lord Morden. A gentleman!


Lapelle. Said he would call about one, my Lord.


Lord Morden. Show him into my room, and inform me the instant he comes.


Lapelle. General Burland is here.


Lord Morden. [aside] General Burland! Zounds!


Lapelle. Came to town late last night, my Lord.


Lord Morden. Tell him I am come down.


SCENE XIII. LORD MORDEN.
Must not let him see the present temper of my mind -- My guardian once, he is
determined never to think me of age -- I need not his reproof to increase my
present chagrin; my own follies, and Lady Morden's unexpected, unaccountable
reverse of conduct, are sufficient -- He will lay it all to me; and, perhaps,
with reason! -- Heigho! -- Here he comes -- Really, one of these very prudent,
plain-spoken friends is a very disagreeable person, in these our moments of
folly. -- Well, I must assume a cheerfulness I don't feel, and ward off his
wisdom with raillery.

SCENE XIV. LORD MORDEN, GENERAL BURLAND.
Genesis Burland. Good morrow, my Lord.


Lord Morden. General, good morrow.


Genesis Burland. You seem scarcely awake.


Lord Morden. [stretching] Slept ill -- troubled with the nightmare.


Genesis Burland. Your troubles, I am afraid, are rapidly increasing.


Lord Morden. How so, General?


Genesis Burland. Lady Morden had a rout, last night!


Lord Morden. Oh! and forgot to send you a card, I suppose. -- Is that my fault?


Genesis Burland. You are merry, my Lord; but he who drinks poison, out of a
frolic, will soon be glad to send for a physician, out of fear; and the chances
are the doctor will come too late.


Lord Morden. Trope and figure!


Genesis Burland. My Lord! my Lord! this levity is unseasonable: blushes, and
shame, would better become you.


Lord Morden. Pff! They are out of fashion.


Genesis Burland. Yes, you leave your friends to blush for your faults.


Lord Morden. My friends are very good; nay, indeed, generous; for, were they
but to spare a single blush for each of their own faults, they would have none
to bestow on mine.


Genesis Burland. Fie! The mirth of a madman is sport only to boys -- I was your
guardian, I wished to prove myself your friend. 'Twas I first discovered that,
then, angelic woman who is, now, Lady Morden; I was the cause of her union with
you; and I am, therefore, accountable to myself, to her, and to society, for
her conduct.


Lord Morden. That is, you are a kind of second-hand sponsor --
Godfather-in-law, as it were.


Genesis Burland. Very well, Sir! proceed! despise reproof! ridicule advice!


Lord Morden. Nay, good doctor, you really wrong me; it is not the advice, but
the physic, I hate -- At least, I hate the form under which it is administered
-- But, pray, tell me; when last you saw Lady Morden, did you perceive any
symptoms of that degeneracy, in her Ladyship, you, now, complain so loudly of?


Genesis Burland. None! I thought it impossible!


Lord Morden. And is it not rather extraordinary, then, that my example should,
so suddenly, subdue what, within this month, seemed so invulnerable?


Genesis Burland. [Great surprise and energy] It is extraordinary, my Lord! most
extraordinary! but not less true; and, had you any sense of your duty to
yourself, your family, or society, the truth of it would make you tremble!


Lord Morden. See how differently different people understand things! My
acquaintance are, every day, wishing me joy of her Ladyship's reformation; and
telling me how surprisingly she has retrieved her character, in the world.


Genesis Burland. [sarcastically] And Sir Frederic Fashion, no doubt, among the
rest!


Lord Morden. [endeavouring to conceal his feelings] Hem! -- yes -- yes. He is
one of our very first men, you know; and he is quite in raptures with her --
swears she was born to lead and outshine us all.


Genesis Burland. [with continued irony] The approbation of so great an adept must
give you vast pleasure!


Lord Morden. Hem! -- a -- infinite! -- Not but this sudden change has, rather,
surprised me.


Genesis Burland. How so?


Lord Morden. Just as you left town, her Ladyship's melancholy seemed
increasing -- wandering over the house, like a perturbed spirit, as the play
says, mournfully clanking her chains, and frightening the gentle smiles and
pleasures from her, she seemed to way-lay me, and, with moving look, and
melting eye, entreat compassion; till, egad, I, really, at last, began to pity
her.


Genesis Burland. You did!


Lord Morden. Yes -- But, suddenly forsaking the -- penseroso, she broke in
upon me, one morning, and, with an air of levity and good humor, and a small
tincture of reproach, then, and there, read me a very pretty, wifelike,
remonstrance.


Genesis Burland. To which you listened with a truly picktooth insensibility.


Lord Morden. Yes -- You know my way.


Genesis Burland. And what was the subject of her discourse?


Lord Morden. Why, chapter the first was a recapitulation of my agreeable
follies, and her own perverse virtues. -- She was no partaker in my pleasures
-- I had forgot every endearment -- She was left to dine, sup, and sleep, by
herself -- I dined, supped, and slept, nobody knew where. -- She more recluse
than the abbess of a convent: I more uncertain than the price of stocks, or the
place of prime minister.


Genesis Burland. [with earnest concern] And what did you say to this?


Lord Morden. [aside] I must face it out. [aloud] Say? What could I say to such
a simple woman?


Genesis Burland. You did not attempt to deny the charge, then?


Lord Morden. What should I deny? 'Twas every syllable true; and every syllable
in my praise.


Genesis Burland. [sighs] Humph! -- Then you do not think, the sweets of affection
ought, sometimes, to alleviate the bitterness of neglect.


Lord Morden. Sweets! pshaw! they are too cloying to the stomach, and ought to
be taken sparingly. -- I am fond of sweet music, but too much of it sets me to
sleep. -- Besides, a wife, like a barrel organ, can only play one set of tunes.


Genesis Burland. [sighs] Well, Sir, but the conclusion?


Lord Morden. A very unexpected one, I assure you -- I misunderstood this for a
declaration of war; and, with a smile, was very obligingly about to entreat her
Ladyship would hatch her melancholy into mischief her own way: when, turning
short upon me, she curtsied, seemed abashed, began to apologize, applaud my
conduct, ridicule the silliness of her own, and promised to become as
fashionable a Lady as I, or any Lord in Christendom, could wish.


Genesis Burland. Your increase of happiness is, then, prodigious?


Lord Morden. Hem! -- a -- unspeakable. -- Lady Morden, I own, was, certainly,
a kind of -- Demi-Angel, though my wife -- but, then, her -- her goodness seemed
to throw one at such a distance -- so much in the back ground that there was
only one figure noticed in the picture!


Genesis Burland. It Is well, Sir, you are so perfectly satisfied.


Lord Morden. Nay, General, I will own, I have often felt a kind of
inclination, a sort of wish, as it were, to become very prudent, and wise, and
-- and all that -- but, really, one has so much to do that one does not know
where to begin. -- Besides, you very good kind of people, you -- upon my
honor, you are, in many respects, the most queer, precise, particular, species
of beings, and have such strange notions! -- Instead of taking one's pleasure,
and doing just what one likes best, which, you know, is so natural, one must
live for the good of one's country, love one's wife and children, pay
tradesmen, look over accounts, reward merit, and a thousand other of the -- the
most ridiculous whims -- and what nobody, absolutely, nobody does.


Genesis Burland. Intolerable profligacy! -- I have listened to you, my Lord, with
grief, vexation, astonishment, and pity! -- Your mind is degraded; and the more
dangerously so because you believe your worst vices to be your greatest merits!
You have had honor, happiness, and pleasure, of the most perfect kind, within
your power; and you have rejected them, to clasp their shadows! To merit pity
by misconduct is humiliating; but, by misconduct to incur contempt is, to a
manly spirit, insupportable; and the latter will, I fear, be suddenly your
Lordship's fate. Did not the remembrance of your noble father affect me, I
should look upon your approaching punishment with apathy; because you wilfully
have plunged to perdition: but, for your Lady, if I cannot retrieve, if I
cannot save her, I shall mourn indeed!


SCENE XV.
Lord Morden. Faith, this good general is, like a cuckoo, always in a tune.
[sighs] He has reason! -- I have labored to laugh at my own follies; but the
farce is over, the forced jest forgotten, and the sorceress Recollection
conjures up the ugly phantom Disgust! -- Why, what a child am I! -- Oh! Lady
Morden -- pshaw! -- absurd! -- I will not make myself the butt, and byword, of
my acquaintance -- I -- I -- I will laugh -- ha, ha, ha! -- laugh at my Lady's
gallantries. -- I jealous! -- I! -- that have daily made jealousy a standing
jest; the criterion of an ill-bred, vulgar, mind! -- No, no, no. [Sees Lady
Morden, and Sir Frederic Fashion, coming; and is seized with a suspicious
anxiety, which he endeavors to conceal.]


SCENE XVI. LORD MORDEN, LADY MORDEN, in an undress, SIR FREDERIC FASHION.
Lady Morden. [entering] No, no, Sir Frederic; you are partial.


Sir Frederic. Not in the least, Madam.


Lady Morden. Yes, you are -- good morrow to your Lordship -- yes, you are. --
I feel, I still retain a leaven of former silly prejudices; but a little
collision, among you people of superior fashion, will soon wear these
asperities smooth, and bring them to bear a proper polish.


Sir Frederic. Ah! Madam, you have a leaven of something celestial; which we
inferior people wonder at, but cannot imitate!


Lord Morden. [aside] So!


Lady Morden. [taps Sir Frederic with her fan] Fie! flatterer! -- but you are
always saying civil things; and that, I fancy, makes you so agreeable.


Sir Frederic. [serious and ardent] No, Lady Morden; you wrong me -- my tongue
is forced to give utterance to the effusions of my heart -- By heaven, you are
an angel! and I am, involuntarily, obliged to repeat, and repeat, and repeat,
that you are an angel! -- You must not be angry with me, for I cannot help it.


Lady Morden. No, no -- angry! no -- Though, I really believe, I do improve --
don't I, my Lord?


Lord Morden. Certainly, Madam, certainly!


Lady Morden. Yes -- I have discovered that one of my most capital errors,
formerly, was being too sensible of my own defects. -- I find that to wear, on
one's countenance, an open, and avowed, consciousness that one possesses every
grace and perfection, is the grand secret of really possessing them: or, at
least, of persuading the world one really does, which is the same thing.


Sir Frederic. Your Ladyship is very right; nothing can put a face of real
fashion out of countenance: the placid features are all fixed.


Lady Morden. Oh, immovable! -- Like the owner's names, cut in brass and
nailed to their doors.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! Charming!


Lady Morden. Do but observe one of our well-bred beaus, at a public assembly,
and you will see him enter, plant himself in a spot, elevate his eyebrows, fix
his eyes, half open his mouth, and stand like an automaton, with its head
turning on a pivot. [mimicks the manner.]


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! Charming! Charming!


Lord Morden. [smiling] But, don't you think this a little tending to the
ridiculous, Madam?


Lady Morden. Oh dear, no! -- Nothing can be ridiculous that is fashionable.


Sir Frederic. Oh, no, impossible!


Lady Morden. Formerly, I should have blushed if stared at; but, now, I find,
the only way is to stare again -- without looking -- that is, without betraying
the least indication of knowing whether one is looking toward the man, or the
wall -- thus.


Lord Morden. [with forced pleasantry] Ha, ha, ha! your Ladyship is very right:
modesty -- modesty is an obsolete bugbear.


Lady Morden. Yes, and, like the -- the ghost in the tragedy, has been stared
out of doors.


Sir Frederic. Oh, the very quakers despise it, at present.


Lady Morden. Yes -- it is a shabby fellow, whose acquaintance every body wishes
to drop. -- To be sure, I was a most absurd creature: was not I, my Lord?


Lord Morden. I -- upon my honor, Madam -- I -- you -- no -- no -- not absurd
-- no.


Lady Morden. Oh fie -- not absurd -- why, do you know, Sir Frederic -- ha! ha!
ha! -- I -- ha! ha! ha! I was, downright, in love with his Lordship.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! in love with his Lordship?


Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! upon my honor, it is true! -- is it not, my Lord?


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! -- ye -- ye -- yes -- Madam, yes.


Lady Morden. Thought him the most charming man in -- in -- in the whole world!


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! Is that possible?


Lady Morden. Why, it -- it is scarcely credible! -- But -- but such is the
fact -- Nay! I doated on him -- and continually reproached myself, for wanting
power, and attractions, to obtain my Lord's affection! -- For I never blamed
him -- Ha, ha, ha! -- I -- ha, ha, ha! -- I used to sit whole nights, while my
Lord was out, watching and weeping; and whole days studying which way I could
regain his love!


Sir Frederic. Regain, Lady Morden! -- Why, was his Lordship ever so
unfashionable as -- as --?


Lady Morden. As to love his wife -- Why, yes, really -- I -- I do believe he
was so singular, for -- for a whole fortnight.


Sir Frederic. Why! ha, ha, ha! Why, were you, Lord Morden?


Lord Morden. [forcing a laugh] Ha, ha, ha! -- I -- I -- [with a little spleen]
I don't know, Sir, what I was.


Lady Morden. Nay, don't be out of countenance, my Lord! You hear, I have the
justice to relate my own foibles, as well as your Lordship's -- and mine --
mine were infinitely the greatest. -- It is exceedingly strange, but, so --
fascinated -- was I that, ha, ha, ha! -- I -- ha, ha, ha! [suddenly becoming
very serious] -- I am verily persuaded, I could have died, with pleasure, to
have insured his affection.


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! -- [aside, and turning away] I cannot bear it.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! These things are unaccountable.


Lady Morden. [resuming her levity] Ay, one wonders how one could be so weak!
-- Oh, Sir Frederic! I am going to Christie's. There is a painting I have a
mind to purchase. They tell me it is very fine.


Sir Frederic. What is the story, Madam?


Lady Morden. The Metamorphosis of Actaeon.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! A fashionable subject.


Lady Morden. Yes -- that -- tha -- that is the very reason I wish to have it.
-- Poor Actaeon is taken at the precise moment when the -- the change is taking
place.


Sir Frederic. In his forehead?


Lady Morden. Yes. I am going down there, now; will you go with me, Sir
Frederic?


Sir Frederic. With pleasure, Madam -- Ha, ha, ha! poor Actaeon!


Lady Morden. Ay, poor Actaeon! -- Adieu, my Lord.


SCENE XVII.
Lord Morden. Madam! [following, stops short] 'Sdeath! what am I about? Shall
I, at last, sink into one of the vulgar; and become jealous? -- Wretched about
a -- oh, no! Actaeon! [striking his forehead] Sure all men are idiots, and
never know the value of that most inestimable jewel, a lovely and a loyal wife,
till in danger of having it purloined. [Lord Morden retires into his
dressing-room].


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. LAPELLE (coming from the door of the antichamber, as if he had been
listening).
SO, Mr. Irishman, by accident! A lady, in disguise! That Is the riddle, is it?
-- But, hush!

SCENE II. LORD MORDEN, dressed, HARRIET, (from the antichamber.)
Lord Morden [to Lapelle.] Leave the room -- I am sorry we were disturbed; your
story, Madam, has interested me deeply: though too reprehensible for the
irregularities of my own conduct, I cannot but condemn the licentious
libertinism of this Sir Frederic -- Indeed, I -- I have reason, perhaps, to
dread it.


Harriet. A man of honor, among men, the ruin of woman he thinks as necessary
to his fame as to his pleasure; and, like too many others of your cruel sex,
holds it no crime to make war upon those who cannot defend themselves.


Lord Morden. But what do you propose, by this disguise, Madam?


Harriet. There is a contract, which I, indeed, refused, but which he forced
upon me, to demonstrate, as he said, the purity of his intentions, wherein he
bound himself, in a penalty of ten thousand pounds, to marry me within a month:
for, in his fictitious raptures, he protested no sum, no proofs, could
sufficiently express the ardour, and sanctity, of his affection.


Lord Morden. And have you this contract?


Harriet. Oh, no! The day preceding that on which it was my good fortune to
discover his real designs, he asked to see, and artfully exchanged it, for a
counterfeit copy.


Lord Morden. This contract you wish to regain?


Harriet. If possible; or some other unequivocal means of detection.


Lord Morden. And force him to marry you?


Harriet. Oh, no -- To own the truth, I have a generous and a constant lover,
who, perhaps, has been a little ill used.


Lord Morden. As most generous and constant lovers are.


Harriet. It Is too true. -- To avenge him, and humble the pride of one who
thinks himself too cunning for our whole sex, is my determination.


Lord Morden. Well, Madam, ours is a common cause -- But, as we have both been
imprudent, and invited misfortune, we must both endeavor to conceal our true
feelings, mask our suspicions, and -- Hush! Here he comes; and with him a lady,
whose principles are as free as his own; but who has had the art so well to
conceal her intrigues, and preserve appearances, that she is every where
received in society. -- I will introduce you, in your assumed character.


Harriet. Not now; let us withdraw -- when he is alone. The fewer eyes are on
me, the less liable I shall be to a discovery.


(Lord Morden and Harriet return to the antichamber just as Mrs. Modely and Sir
Frederic appear.) SCENE III. MRS. MODELY and SIR FREDERIC.
Mrs. Modely. Really, Sir Frederic, there is no accounting for the strangeness
of your present taste! -- I pity you! -- I foresee the downfall of your
reputation! -- What, you! who have vanquished so many elegant coquettes, and
driven so many happy lovers mad; you! who were the very soul of our first
societies, and whose presence made palpitate the hearts of belles and beaux;
the first with hope and delight, the latter with fear and envy; you! sighing at
the feet of a prude, and become the rival of a husband!


Sir Frederic. [laughing] Deplorable!


Mrs. Modely. Have not you, for this month past, buried yourself in Lady
Morden's sober society, and dozed over crown whist with her, night after night?
-- Nay, have not you attended her even to church; and, there, with a twang,
joined the amen chorus of charity-children, paupers, and parish-clerks; sitting
with your face drawn as long as its shadow at sunset; and a look as demure and
dismal --


Sir Frederic. As poor Doctor Faustus, waiting for the Devil to come and fetch
him -- Ha, ha, ha! -- Granted.


Mrs. Modely. And what do you think has been said of you, mean while, in the
polite circles you have abandoned? -- Your very best friends have been the very
first to condemn you.


Sir Frederic. That Is natural -- When we are guilty of any folly, our very best
friends are always the very first to condemn us; to show they neither advise
nor countenance us.


Mrs. Modely. I thought the gay, young, beauty, besieged by pleasures,
surrounded by flatteries, who believes herself the goddess she is painted, to
fix her wandering fancy, to humble and bring her to a sense of frailty; or, to
supplant the happy, the adored, lover, while yet the breath is warm that vows
eternal constancy; these, I imagined, were the only achievements worthy Sir
Frederic Fashion!


Sir Frederic. These have their eclat. But, to initiate a youthful, beauteous,
wife, who, from her childhood, has been accustomed to say her prayers, believe
in virtue, and rank conjugal infidelity among the most heinous of the seven
deadly sins; to teach her to doubt, fear, wish, tremble, and venture; to be a
witness, afterward, of her repentance; her tears involuntarily falling, her
eyes motionless, her form fixed, and the severe saint transformed to a statue
of weeping sin; to read her fall in the public papers; be praised, reproached,
admired, and cursed, in every family in England; in short, to be for ever
immortalized, in the annals of gallantry, and the hero of the tea-table for a
whole month, for this will be no common vulgar wonder, this were glory equal to
my ambition! And this glory I am determined to acquire: nay, it is, already,
within my grasp. -- This day, or, rather, this night, this very, blessed,
ecstatic, night, shall I gain the greatest of all my victories!


Mrs. Modely. Insulting!


Sir Frederic. Nay, my dear Mrs. Modely, you know my enthusiasin, and must not
take exceptions -- Nor can I, surely, be blamed. Lady Morden is a concealed
hoard of native sweets, that delights the senses: while the made-up beauties we
commonly meet, like artificial flowers, are all show, and no fragrance.


Mrs. Modely, Raptures!


Sir Frederic. Inferior to her, in form and perfection, as the Venus of a Dutch
image-hawker to the genuine Grecian Antique!


Mrs. Modely. It matters not wasting your rhetoric on this topic; for I will
not give my consent to your pursuing this affair any further, Sir Frederic.


Sir Frederic. You will not?


Mrs. Modely. I will not.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! Don't provoke me, my dear Mrs. Modely; don't provoke
me.


Mrs. Modely. Nay, no threatening.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! -- Well -- To arms then -- War is the word.


Mrs. Modely. The choice remains with you.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha!


Mrs. Modely. Lady Morden is my relation; and, though I despise prudery, and
know the world --


Sir Frederic [aside.] That you do, indeed!


Mrs. Modely. Yet -- you can hardly suppose I will silently acquiesce in her
ruin!


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! You -- you forget yourself, dear Madam -- These
qualms would do vastly well, in some places; but, to me! --


Mrs. Modely. And why not to you, Sir! -- Though I do allow myself a little
liberty of conscience --


Sir Frederic. Not a little. [aside.]


Mrs. Modely. And though you -- you -- know I do, must I -- In short, I have
another favorite project, which I am determined not to give up.


Sir Frederic [aside.] Oh ho! But it will be best to avoid a rupture. --
[aloud] May I ask what this favorite project may be?


Mrs. Modely. You know the public affront General Burland gave me, last winter;
and you cannot suppose I have forgotten it.


Sir Frederic [aside.] No; I know you better. -- [aloud] Oh! the General is an
eccentric mortal; licensed to say any thing; and, instead of being listened to,
is laughed at.


Mrs. Modely. Yes; but I am determined he shall be punished.


Sir Frederic. Which way?


Mrs. Modely. His daughter, Emily, is a pretty, simple, girl -- I mean,
untutored, in the world.


Sir Frederic. [conceiving her design] True!


Mrs. Modely. To see her married to a man of fashion would, at least, break his
heart.


Sir Frederic. [laughs] Infallibly!


Mrs. Modely. Your fortune, I believe, Sir Frederic, like your family seat,
begins to want repairs; and she is a rich heiress, with twenty thousand pounds
at her own disposal, beside the General's estate, which must be hers -- Why do
you laugh so?


Sir Frederic. Oh! the delights of anticipation!


Mrs. Modely. An -- an -- anticipation!


Sir Frederic. [still laughing] It is a part of my plan to carry her off, I
mean, to let her carry me off, this very night.


Mrs. Modely. Who? Emily?


Sir Frederic. Emily.


Mrs. Modely. To night!


Sir Frederic. This active, this important, this blissful, night!


Mrs. Modely. Lend me your eau de luce, you divle!


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! -- This surprise from you, Mrs. Modely, is the
supreme of panegyric.


Mrs. Modely. And have you made any advances to Emily?


Sir Frederic. Yes, yes -- Ha, ha, ha! -- I made advances to her, and she made
advances to me -- The conquest was too easy -- Were it not for the circumstance
of the elopement, which will give the sauce a flavor the food wants, it would
scarcely invite my appetite.


Mrs. Modely. But Lady Morden --


Sir Frederic. Is mine, whenever I please to make my final attack. I am no bad
orator, in general; but, in company with her, I seem inspired -- am,
absolutely, astonished at my own eloquence! -- Nay, I have several times spoken
with such energy, enthusiasm, and momentary conviction, in praise of virtue,
that I have, actually, been in imminent danger of making a convert of myself!


Mrs. Modely. In praise of virtue?


Sir Frederic. In praise of virtue. There is no making one of these virtuous
visionaries rational, but by flattering their bigotry, and pretending to adore
their idol; by pursuing which method, I have inured her to, and made her as
familiar with, what is prudishly called vice, and vicious sentiments, as she is
with her own thoughts.


Mrs. Modely. Yes, yes, vile rake: but, remember, I Will have no concern in this
affair! -- I --


Sir Frederic. Oh, poh! Ay, ay, that is understood -- You wink -- and know
nothing of the matter.


Mrs. Modely. Nay, but I, here, publicly protest against your proceedings!


Sir Frederic. [aside] And will privately do your utmost to promote them.


Mrs. Modely. I exclaim against such licentiousness!


Sir Frederic. I know you do -- But, if you are thus tender of her Ladyship's
reputation, you will feel no repugnance at assisting me to irritate hi^
Lordship's sensibility.


Mrs. Modely. What do you mean?


Sir Frederic. To confess the truth, I am a little piqued at Lord Morden's want
of feeling -- I wish I could make him jealous.


Mrs. Modely. Jealous! Fie! He is too well bred.


Sir Frederic. That Is unfortunate. -- The antics of a jealous husband add
highly to the enjoyment, as well as the reputation, of an amor. -- The poor
man is so injured, so enraged, so distressed, so industrious to publish his
calamity, and is so sincerely pitied, and laughed at -- must, positively, rouse
my Lord to a sense of his misfortune; or it will want poignancy -- A turtle
feast without French wines!


Mrs. Modely. Well, should I find any opportunity of aiding you --


Sir Frederic. Ay, ay; I have no doubt of your zeal in the cause.


Mrs. Modely. Nay, but, don't mistake me -- I only mean as far as teazing his
Lordship is concerned.


Sir Frederic. Oh! Certainly -- certainly.


Mrs. Modely. If his Lordship had any real cause for jealousy, I should, for
Lady Morden's ache, be the -- the -- the -- the -- the most miserable creature
upon earth.


Sir Frederic. To be sure.


Mrs. Modely. But you seem mighty secure of your conquest.


Sir Frederic. I am no novice; I can tell when a woman's time is come. --
Besides, her Ladyship has granted me a rendezvous.


Mrs. Modely. When?


Sir Frederic. Why, this very evening, to be sure.


Mrs. Modely. Where?


Sir Frederic. Here, in this very house.


Mrs. Modely. Since you are so very certain, how came you not to take advantage
of being alone with her, after the rout?


Sir Frederic. I did: that is, should have done, had we not been interrupted.


Mrs. Modely. By whom?


Sir Frederic. A new footman -- an odd kind of -- Oh! here the very fellow
comes.


SCENE IV. MRS. MODELY, SIR FREDERIC, GABRIEL, loitering and leering.
Mrs. Modely. What does the rude lout peer at?


Sir Frederic. Country curiosity.


Gabriel. [attempting to go once or twice, then pausing and turning back] Did
-- did -- did your Ladyship's honor call?


Mrs. Modely. No.


Gabriel. [again going and turning] I -- I thought, mayhap, you wanted my Lord.


Mrs. Modely. What should I want your Lord for, think you, friend?


Gabriel. Nay, marry, that is more nur I can tell.


Sir Frederic. What is your name?


Gabriel. Gabriel, an't please you. -- In my last place, they used to call me
the Sly Simpleton.


Mrs. Modely. And who did you live with last?


Gabriel. Why, you an heard of my Lady's brother, the rich nabob, that be just
come over fro' the Eastern Indies?


Sir Frederic. Mr. Wilmot?


Gabriel. Ees. -- I do come fro' his estate, out of Staffordshire.


Sir Frederic. You are part of the live stock?


Gabriel. Anon!


Mrs. Modely. Were you in his service?


Gabriel. [hesitates] N -- E -- Ees.


Mrs. Modely. How long?


Gabriel. Better nur a week.


Sir Frederic. What sort of a man is he?


Gabriel. Humph! -- A be well enough, when a's pleased -- though I canno' say as
I do like him much, for a measter.


Mrs. Modely. Why so?


Gabriel. Because a'l neither let a servant tell lies nur take money.


Sir Frederic. Indeed!


Gabriel. No -- A'wonnot -- whereof, here, I find, I canno' please my Lady, if
I donna tell lies; and, I am sure, I canno' please myself, if I donna take
money.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha!


Mrs. Modely. Ha, ha, ha! So, he did not suit you?


Gabriel. No. -- A's too high flown, as 'twere, in's notions --


Sir Frederic. Which way?


Gabriel. A makes a great case of what a calls friendship, and honor, and
honesty, and such like; and, you know, if a poor sarvant gis heed to that there
sort o'stuff -- a's not likely to get rich.


Mrs. Modely. Upon my word!


Sir Frederic. So Mr. Wilmot's head is full of such nonsense, is it?


Gabriel. Oh! a's brimful of such nonsense -- and so were I, while I lived wi'
he; which wur the reason, as I do suppose, that they called me a Simpleton --
but I am not so simple as folk think me.


Sir Frederic. [aside to Mrs. Modely] My dear Mrs. Modely, leave me, for a
moment, with this fellow. -- You Will be upon the watch, to throw in any hints,
or aids, you happen to see necessary, and apropos?


Mrs. Modely. Yes, yes -- that is, for Emily, and the elopement -- but, be
cautious; a defeat would turn the tables upon us, and make us the jest of the
whole town, friends and enemies.


Sir Frederic. How can you fear it?


Mrs. Modely. Nay, I do not; I know my sex, and I know you.


SCENE V. SIR FREDERIC, GABRIEL.
Sir Frederic. Gabriel is your name, you say?


Gabriel. Ees.


Sir Frederic. You seem a sharp kind of fellow, and one that understands his
own interest.


Gabriel. Ees -- I understand my own interest.


Sir Frederic. Are you, if occasion should offer, willing to do me a piece of
service?


Gabriel. Humph! -- What will you gi' me?


Sir Frederic. I see you are a sensible fellow* and come to the point, at once.


Gabriel. Ees. -- I love to come to the point.


Sir Frederic. And you would not betray me, to any body?


Gabriel. Why -- not unless somebody were to pay me better.


Sir Frederic. Upon my honor, thou art the honestest rogue I ever met with.


Gabriel. Ees -- that I be.


Sir Frederic. Here -- here is money for thee -- and, observe, as thou seem
perfectly to understand a bargain, thou shall have more, in proportion to thy
fidelity and capacity; and, moreover -- Can thou read and write?


Gabriel. Ees.


Sir Frederic. Well, then, be faithful, and I will get thee a place in the
excise -- And, now, observe -- I -- I have a -- very great respect -- and
friendship for your Lady.


Gabriel. Ees, ees -- As we sen in the country, you have more nur a month's mind
to her.


Sir Frederic. How, sirrah! -- Dare you suppose I have? --


Gabriel. Nay, now, belike, you think me a simpleton too! -- Your great folk
supposen a sarvant has neither ears nor eyes -- But, lord, they are mistaken!
-- Ecod, their ears are often plaguey long. -- What, mun, I wur no' so fast
asleep as you thought me, in the passage, this morning.


Sir Frederic. [aside] The rascal!


Gabriel. Belike, becase I be a country lad, you reckon I should think it
strange, like, that one gentleman should teak a liking to another gentleman's
wife; but, lord, I know, well enough, that is naught, here -- I have learned a
little of what is what --


Sir Frederic. Nay, friend Gabriel, I am more and more convinced, thou art a
clever, acute, fellow.


Gabriel. Lord, mun, your worship need no' be so shy, like -- You do know, you
have promised me a place -- an places that are no' bought one way -- mun be
bought another.


Sir Frederic. Well said, friend Gabriel.


Gabriel. An, as for keeping of family secrets, donno' you fear me; becase why,
I do find they be a sarvant's best parkizites -- For, an it wur na for family
secrets, how should so many poor country John's so very soon become gentlemen?


Sir Frederic. [aside] This fellow's thoughts run all in one channel; his
ruling passion is money; the love of that sharpens his intellects, and opens
his eyes and ears. -- Well, Gabriel, you shall find me generous as a Prince,
provided -- Here Is somebody coming -- go into the next room; I Will speak with
you presently.


Gabriel. Ees. -- But I do hope your honor's worship wunna forget the place,
like?


Sir Frederic. Never fear.


[Gabriel goes into Lady Morden's dressing Room.] SCENE VI. SIR FREDERIC, EMILY.
Sir Frederic. My angel! My life! --


Emily. Hush! -- My papa is coming, and wants to take me away with him, home.


Sir Frederic. Away!


Emily. Yes -- hush -- take no notice.


SCENE VII. GENERAL BURLAND, SIR FREDERIC, EMILY.
Genesis Burland. Come, Emily; are you ready?


Emily. I am always ready, and happy, to obey my dear papa; but, surely, Sir,
you will not let me leave Lady Morden, without so much as bidding her adieu?


Genesis Burland. I Will write a card of thanks to her Ladyship, with your respects,
and as many compliments as you please.


Emily. Nay, but, dear Sir, consider -- it will seem too abrupt. Lady Morden is
so good, so kind -- I would not give her a moment's pain for the world. --
Besides, I have so many obligations to her Ladyship.


Genesis Burland. I begin to be afraid, child, left you should have too many
obligations to her Ladyship.


Emily. Let me only stay tonight, and tomorrow morning I will go, with all my
heart, and as early as you please, if you desire me.


Sir Frederic. [aside] I protest she is bantering him! -- Oh! the charming
malicious little angel! [aloud] -- Ay, General, let Emily stay tonight; I will
answer for her, she will go tomorrow morning, as soon as you please, if you
desire her.


Genesis Burland. You will answer for her! --


Sir Frederic. Yes -- Will Not you permit me, Emily?


Emily. [curtsies] My dear papa knows I never attempt to break my word.


Genesis Burland. Yes, my child; I do know, you have, hitherto, been unspotted,
and pure, as the morn blown lily; and my anxiety that you should remain so
makes me thus desirous of your quitting this house. -- When I brought you here,
these doors did not, so easily, fly open, at the approach of such fine, such
accomplished, gentlemen as Sir Frederic Fashion.


Sir Frederic. [with vast pleasure] By heavens, he anticipates his misfortunes!
[aside]


Emily. [takes the General's hand] Do, my dear papa, consent only for today; I
don't ask any longer.


Sir Frederic. [aside] I could hug the charming hypocrite!


Genesis Burland. Well, well, Emmy; you know, I never deny you any thing: for,
indeed, you never yet asked any thing that could give the most anxious and
affectionate father a moment's pain.


Emily. [kisses his hand] I thank you, dear, dear Sir; you have made me happy.


Sir Frederic. By my life, I shall find this a much more agreeable affair than
I hoped! -- Yes, General -- you -- you are a very good papa.


Genesis Burland. You think so?


Sir Frederic. Yes -- I do, upon my soul.


Genesis Burland. Then I am what you, I am afraid, will never be.


SCENE VIII. SIR FREDERIC.
Ha, ha, ha! He does not suspect we are so soon to be so nearly related -- Ha,
ha, ha! I should like to be present when he first hears the news -- He -- he
will foam and bounce like a cork from a bottle of champaigne.

SCENE IX. SIR FREDERIC, LORD MORDEN, from the Antichamber.
Lord Morden. Well, Sir Frederic, is her Ladyship returned?


Sir Frederic. Yes; she is dressing for dinner. -- She bought the Actaeon.


Lord Morden. She did?


Sir Frederic. Oh, yes. -- She is a charming woman! -- the eyes of the whole
room were upon her. There were some smart things said -- One observed a
likeness between me and Actaeon; another thought it bore a far greater
resemblance to your Lordship.


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! About the head, no doubt?


Sir Frederic. For my part, I said, I thought the likeness was very capable of
being improved.


Lord Morden. You were very kind.


Sir Frederic. Oh, pray, have you heard that Sir Peter Pry is going to sue for
a bill of divorce?


Lord Morden. No.


Sir Frederic. It Is very true. I should not have suspected Sir Peter of such
vulgar revenge; but, I find, our married men of fashion are far less liberal in
their sentiments than the Ladies.


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Yes; they often want a woman's philosophy in these
matters.


Sir Frederic. Yes -- they are wasps, that fly and feed wherever they can find
honey, but retain a sting for any marauder that shall approach their nests.


Lord Morden. Somewhat selfish, I own.


Sir Frederic. Much more liable to be jealous than the women -- and jealousy,
your Lordship knows, is the most ridiculous, ill-bred, contemptible thing in
nature!


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Yes, yes -- ha, ha, ha! Perfectly despicable.


Sir Frederic. Oh, nothing so laughable as the vagaries of a jealous husband:
no creature suffers so much, or is pitied so little.


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Ay -- the thefts of love are applauded, not punished.


Sir Frederic. Yes, and the poor robbed husband, watchman like, twirls his
rattle, alarms the neighborhood, and collects assistants, who never fail to
aid the thief, and laugh at him and his loss.


Lord Morden. Ye -- ye -- yes. Ha, ha, ha! -- A husband is a very strange,
ignominious animal.


Sir Frederic. A jealous husband!


Lord Morden. A paltry, mechanical --


Sir Frederic. Without an idea of life, or manners!


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Very true -- But, come with me; there is a young
gentleman, in the antichamber, of a good family, who wishes to be introduced
to you -- A very pretty fellow -- Has an ambition to do something which shall
give him eclat, and is, therefore, desirous of being known to us men of the
world.


Sir Frederic. Well! I am yours for a few minutes; but I must attend Lady
Morden at her toilette, presently.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. GENERAL BURLAND, LORD MORDEN, meeting: GABRIEL introduces GENERAL
BURLAND.
Genesis Burl. WELL, my Lord, is Lady Morden to be seen?


Gabriel. Oh! Ees, your worship, hur will be, anon; for yonder is Sir Frederic,
helping the maid to dress her ladyship.


Genesis Burland. Helping to dress her Ladyship?


Gabriel. Ees -- They sent me for some milk of roses, here -- [shewing the
phial] and, would you believe it, I wur sich an oaf, I had never heard, before,
that roses gave milk.


Genesis Burland. Ah! -- You are some half-taught country booby.


Gabriel. Why, so I do find; for, in the country, the folk do only clear-starch
their aprons and ruffles; but, here, ecod, they clear-starch their faces.


Genesis Burland. Well, go, carry in your milk; and inform her Ladyship I am
waiting her leisure -- [laughing within]


Gabriel. Ecod, here they all come, your honor; and rare and merry they be.
But you^ Londoneers do lead a rare, ranting, life!


SCENE II. GENERAL BURLAND, LORD MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC, LADY MORDEN, MRS.
MODELY. The three last from Lady Morden's Dressing Room, laughing.
Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! -- Oh! You whimsical toad! You -- Ha, ha, ha! -- You
have half-killed me! -- I am glad to see you in town, General -- We have been
drawing the characters of our acquaintance, and Mrs. Modely, and Sir Frederic
Fashion, have been so droll, and so satirical!


Genesis Burland. Ah! No doubt.


Lady Morden. I could not have thought there was so much satisfaction in
remembering the failings of one's friends.


Mrs. Modely. Oh! It makes one so cheerful!


Sir Frederic. And keeps one so charmingly in countenance!


Genesis Burland. [aside.] Which you stand in very great need of.


Sir Frederic. I assure your Ladyship, you have an exquisite turn for satire;
you cut with excessive keenness; and, yet, with a dexterity that makes the very
patient tingle with pleasure.


Lady Morden. You are partial, A little more experience will make these things
quite familiar; but habit only can give one perfect ease.


Sir Frederic. Oh! Habit -- Habit is a wonderful thing! -- Have you heard the
anecdote of the Newmarket-Jockey?


Lady Morden. No; what is it?


Sir Frederic. Why, a Jockey, having had a bad run at the last October meeting,
was willing to correct the errors of Fortune by turning his lead to gold;
accordingly, on Epping Forest, he stopped Major Warboys, and bade him deliver;
to which the Major, being one of those singular officers who think it some
disgrace to be robbed, replied by firing his pistol -- The ball happened to be
fatal -- the horse set off -- and, to show the effect of habit, the body of the
Jockey kept its seat as far as the stable door, and there deliberately tumbled
off; nay, some go so far as to assert it was seen to rise in the stirrups; but
that, I believe, wants confirmation.


Lord Morden. Ha, ha, ha!


Mrs. Modely. Ha, ha, ha!


Lady Morden. Pshaw! You tragi-comic wretch!


Lord Morden. I think you had not much company last night.


Lady Morden. Your Lordship was so well bred, and made your visit so short,
else you would have found a great deal.


Mrs. Modely. Oh, yes, they poured in, from all quarters.


Sir Frederic. Sir Nathan Neaptide, the yellow admiral, came.


Lord Morden. An agreeable guest!


Mrs. Modely. Oh! rude as his own boatswain.


Sir Frederic. Would teach a starling blasphemy, rather than want good
conversation. --


Lady Morden. He attempts satire.


Lord Morden. But utters abuse.


Mrs. Modely. That makes him so much respected.


Lady Morden. Yes; like a chimney-sweeper in a crowd, he makes his way by being
dirty.


Sir Frederic. I protest, your Ladyship is prodigiously brilliant today!


Lady Morden. No, no -- Though I am a vast admirer of wit. A person of wit has
one very peculiar, and enviable, advantage.


Lord Morden. What is that, madam?


Lady Morden. Long life.


Lord Morden. Long life!


Lady Morden. Yes. A wit has more ideas, consequently lives longer, in one hour
than a fool in seven years.


Sir Frederic. For which reason, your Ladyship is, already, three times the age
of old Par.


Lady Morden. Dear, Sir Frederic, that is so gallant.


Mrs. Modely. And so new.


Genesis Burland. Why, yes -- This is the first time I ever heard a Lady told she
was old, and receive it as a compliment!


Lord Morden. But, your visitors -- Who had you next?


Mrs. Modely. There was Sir Jeremy Still-life.


Lady Morden. [mimics] And his bouquet. He primmed himself up in one corner,
and seemed to think that, like the image of a Saint on a holyday, he was
powdered and painted on purpose to be adored.


Mrs. Modely. He was not singular in that.


Lady Morden. Oh, no; there was a whole row of them that, like jars and
mandarins on a mantle-piece, looked vastly ornamental, and served charmingly to
fill up vacancies.


Genesis Burland. Every trifle has its use.


Mrs. Modely. Lord Index came, and stalked round the rooms, as if he had been
loaded with the wisdom of his whole library.


Lady Morden. Yes, he looked as solemn as a monkey after mischief.


Sir Frederic. [mimicking his solemnity] And drew up his face in form, like a
writ of inquiry into damages, with a Take-notice engrossed in front.


Lord Morden. He would not stay late, for his Lordship is as careful of his
health as he is vain of his understanding.


Lady Morden. And, yet, he is but a kind of rush-candle; he may glimmer a long
while, but will never give much light.


Lord Morden. It seems strange that your people, who have acquired a little
knowledge, always think they possess an infinite deal; while those, who are the
best informed, appear continually conscious of wanting more.


Genesis Burland. Not strange at all, my Lord. Amassing knowledge is like viewing
the sun through a telescope; you enlarge the object, but you destroy the glare.


Mrs. Modely. Did not you observe that, notwithstanding the pearl-powder, my
Lady Bloom's neck looked remarkably sallow?


Lord Morden. Oh! As a Jew's face under a green umbrella.


Sir Frederic. The widow Twinkle, as usual, talked a vast deal about reputation.


Lady Morden. One is apt to admire a thing one wants.


Lord Morden. She always takes infinite pains to place her reputation, like
broken china in a buffet, with the best side outward.


Lady Morden. She may plaster, and cement, but will never bring it to bear
handling.


Mrs. Modely. Mr. Pensive, the poet, came in, too.


Sir Frederic. Yes, but as nobody took any notice of him, he presently went out
again.


Genesis Burland. A great proof of his good sense.


Sir Frederic. Your poets, and sheriff's-officers, are a kind of people every
body has heard of, but that nobody chooses to know.


Lady Morden. Or, if you are under the necessity of receiving a private call
from them, now and then, it would be quite disgraceful to be seen with them in
public.


Lord Morden. Your Ladyship used to be very partial to Mr. Pensive.


Genesis Burland. Yes, her Ladyship used to have many singular partialities. She
was once partial to merit and virtue, wherever she found them: she had a
partiality for order, economy, and domestic duties, likewise: nay, she even
went so far as to cherish a partiality for your Lordship!


Lady Morden. Ha! ha! ha! Odious partialities!


Sir Frederic. Ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Modely.


Lord Morden. Ma -- Ma -- Madam! -- Odious?


Lady Morden. Ha! ha! ha! To -- to be sure, Sir! -- Is it not odious to be
unfashionable?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly -- Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! -- I protest, General, you -- Ha, ha, ha! You are
too severe.


Genesis Burland. Am I?


(all together) Sir Frederic. Ha! ha! ha! You are, really.


Mrs. Modely. Ha! ha! ha! Yes, you are, indeed, General.


Lady Morden. Ha! ha! ha! Yes, yes, you absolutely are.


Genesis Burland. Humph -- Why don't you laugh, my Lord?


Lord Morden. I do. Ha! ha! ha! -- I -- I -- I do, General -- Though, as to
severity, I own I -- I don't see it in that light.


Genesis Burland. No!


Lord Morden. No -- I cannot accuse myself of any fault; unless the love of
pleasure be one.


Genesis Burland. Hah! [sighs] And your catalogue of pleasures, I fancy, is pretty
extensive.


Lord Morden. Not half so extensive as one could wish.


Genesis Burland. A dice-box, for instance, is one.


Lord Morden. A very principal one.


Lady Morden. My short experience hardly entitles me to venture an opinion, but
I find a wonderful similarity between gaming and a cold bath -- You have a -- a
tremor -- a -- a hesitation, at first; but, having once plunged in, you are
thrown into the most delightful glow!


Lord Morden. Oh, an ardent tingling --


Genesis Burland. Beware, Sir, that a shivering fit does not succeed.


Mrs. Modely. Ha! ha! ha!


Lady Morden.


Sir Frederic. Ha! ha! ha! -- You really have no mercy, General -- You hit so
often, and so hard, egad!


Lord Morden. I Am vastly -- happy -- to see you all so merry -- Though -- upon my
honor -- I cannot find out the jest.


Genesis Burland. That is strange, when you yourself make it.


Lady Morden. Not in the least -- There is many a professed joker who does not
understand his own wit.


Genesis Burland. [half aside] I am tired, disgusted, with this mixture of folly
and wickedness -- [aloud] May I intrude so far upon your Ladyship as to obtain
half an hour's private conversation?


Lady Morden. Why -- Upon my word -- General -- I -- I have so many affairs on
hand, to day, that I must beg you -- to excuse me: -- Tomorrow, you may command
me, for as long as you please.


Sir Frederic. Ay, do, General, have the complaisance to wait till tomorrow,
when my Lady will be more at leisure.


Genesis Burland. [deeply affected] Well, madam* I did not use to be thought an
intruder, by your Ladyship, and will not begin now -- But, since I cannot have
the honor to tell you privately, I still think myself bound to do my duty, and
inform you, publicly, you are in the hands of sharpers, "who will filch from
you your good name" -- [with great anxiety] Nay, perhaps, you are on the very
eve of destruction! -- Oh guile! -- Can it be! -- My heart is full! -- I --
[goes up to her, and most affectionately takes and presses her hand] Lady
Morden -- I have no utterance -- But, if there be such a thing as sympathy,
some small portion of the horror I now feel will communicate itself to you.


SCENE III. LORD MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC, LADY MORDEN, MRS. MODELY.
(Lady Morden seems affected, Lord Morden deeply so, Sir Frederic and Mrs.
Modely disconcerted.) A PAUSE. Lady Morden. [endeavouring to recover herself]
The -- the General -- has the -- strangest way of -- affecting -- and --
harrowing -- Has not he, my Lord?


Lord Morden. Ye -- yes -- Upon my honor, he -- he -- I don't know how --
[putting his hand to his heart].


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! -- The General -- The General is a true Don Quixote.
He first creates giants, and then kills them.


Lady Morden. Yes. Ha! ha! ha! -- His head is full of -- of windmills to grind
moral sentiments -- But, come, Mrs. Modely, you have not seen my new purchase.


Mrs. Modely. Oh, what the Actaeon?


Sir Frederic. Is it come home?


Lady Morden. Oh, yes -- I could not rest till I had it. [talking as they are
going off.]


Mrs. Modely. Come, my Lord -- I long to see it!


Lady Morden. The tints are charming!


Mrs. Modely. So I hear -- The grouping excellent!


Lady Morden. Oh, delightful!


SCENE IV. HARRIET, from the Antichamber, SIR FREDERIC.
Harriet. Hist! -- Sir Frederic!


Sir Frederic. [turning back] Oh! -- Well, Sir, how proceeds your amor? I
thought you had been busied in schemes about that affair.


Harriet. Faidth, and I am so -- But I don't believe I can succeed, without
your assistance.


Sir Frederic. Perhaps, you are a little scrupulous about the means.


Harriet. Me! -- Indeed and you have mistaken your man -- Why, you don't think,
Sir Frederic, I regard the complaints or tears of women! -- You and I, sure,
seek our own gratification, not their happiness -- For, if the love of man
sought only the happiness of woman, faidth, there would be nothing but dull
marriages, fond husbands, and legitimate children; and we should lose all the
satisfaction of seducing wives, ruining daughters, and of bringing so many
fine, sweet, innocent, craters upon the town!


Sir Frederic. Oh, it would strangely reverse the order of things.


Harriet. Order! -- Faidth, and it would occasion a blissed confusion -- in
Doctor's Commons.


Sir Frederic. For my part, present pleasure is my pursuit; I never disturb my
imagination with dismal conjectures, on future consequences.


Harriet. Faidth, and you are right -- For, as you say, it would be dismal
enough to trace these consequences into -- into streets, and hospitals, and --
places that the imagination sickens at.


Sir Frederic. Marriage, you say, is not your object.


Harriet. Oh, no! I don't like that said matrimony music.


Sir Frederic. A mortgaged rent-roll, only, can make it supportable. A wife is
like a child's whistle, which every breath can play upon, but which no art can
make melodious.


Harriet. Faidth, and you have viry proper notions about wives. So, whin the
dare crater gave a marriage hint, why, I told her a dale of boister, consarning
an old cross fadther, and being under age, and that I could not marry these
three months. For, you know, one does not stand for a good double handful of
oaths, and lies, whin one wants to ruin a sweet, kind, angel, that one loves.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! -- Suppose you were to make a sham marriage.


Harriet. A sham marriage? -- Faidth, and I would make that, if there were not
a parcel of low rascals, that make halters.


Sir Frederic. Pshaw! That Is a paltry, mechanical, fear.


Harriet. But, you -- you were telling me, you know, of -- a -- scheme --


Sir Frederic. Oh! The contract.


Harriet. Ay, faidth! The contract. You said you would show it me.


Sir Frederic. I will -- I have brought it for that purpose [feeling for his
pocket-book]. I, lately, found it an efficacious expedient.


Harriet. And succissful?


Sir Frederic. Would have been, but for an unlucky accident.


Harriet. But there is one small impidimint.


Sir Frederic. What is that?


Harriet. Westminster hall.


Sir Frederic. Baw! A house of cards.


Harriet. Oh, and that it is; for it is supported by knaves, and full of tricks.


Sir Frederic. Here -- here is the very contract I myself gave.


Harriet. Ay! [endeavouring to conceal her eagerness.]


Sir Frederic. And here a counterfeit copy, with a few slight, but essential,
alterations.


Harriet. I understand -- To put the change upon her. [with an anxious eye,
continually, toward the contract.]


Sir Frederic. Which you may easily take, or make, an opportunity to do.


Harriet. [with affected indifference] Will, thin, lind them both to me; and,
faidth, you shall see fine divarsion.


Sir Frederic. No -- I -- I Will have them copied for you. This is signed, and
sealed


Harriet. Arrah, what of that? -- Ha! ha! ha! Sure, you are not afraid you
would be obliged to marry a man?


Sir Frederic. No -- The only danger, in trusting them to you, is that of
losing them. And, even then, there could be no ill consequence; except by
falling into the hands of one who is far enough from London.


Harriet. Ay, ay, lit me have them -- I give you my honor to make a proper use
of them.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! You are a promising youth, and it would be a pity
such talents should be baulked -- So, here -- here.


Harriet. Promising? Oh, faidth, and I hope to surprise even you, yoursilf. You
shall prisently hear of the succiss of your schaimes.


SCENE V. SIR FREDERIC, GABRIEL.
Gabriel. [looking after Harriet] There a' goes -- Hop, step, and jump! --
(Pause) -- Ecod, she does it featly!


Sir Frederic. She! What Is that you say?


Gabriel. How a' skipp'd into the carriage! -- There! Off it drives!
Whur-r-r-r! Rattling away!


Sir Frederic. What does the fellow mean? -- God's Death! -- Sure! -- Who are you
talking of?


Gabriel. Why, of that Irish, gentleman-like, Lady.


Sir Frederic. Lady!


Gabriel. I wur coming straight to tell you -- There is a plot, mun, against
you!


Sir Frederic. A plot! [runs toward the door.]


Gabriel. Nay, you are too late! -- A's gone! -- Three streets off by this.


Sir Frederic. Confusion!


Gabriel. Ees -- She means to breed a confusion.


Sir Frederic. Who?


Gabriel. Miss Harriet.


Sir Frederic. Harriet! -- By heavens it is she! --


Gabriel. Ees -- it is she.


Sir Frederic. Secure fool! Ineffable idiot! -- And, yet, in that disguise,
Lucifer himself could not have discovered her! -- And who told you?


Gabriel. Why, his worship's gentleman, Mr. Lapelle -- A' o'erheard her tell my
Lord aw her plot.


Sir Frederic. What course shall I take?


Gabriel. Suppose I wur to watch, and, when she comes back, let your worship
know?


Sir Frederic. Do so -- But be very careful -- And be very secret.


Gabriel. Ees, ees; I remember the place, mun.


Sir Frederic. Away -- be watchful and be rewarded.


SCENE VI. SIR FREDERIC.
This is a thunder stroke! -- Lord Morden in the plot, too! -- It will come to
Lady Morden's ears, I shall be blown, all my plans disconcerted, myself laughed
at, and my reputation eternally ruined! -- [walks about] Ha! -- There is one
way to prevent the mischief, yet -- By heavens, it cannot fail! -- I will go to
Lady Morden, and, with feigned penitence, tell her every circumstance, myself;
only making her believe I knew Harriet, when I returned the contract. She wist
admire my candor, think my contrition real* and thus will I turn this seeming
disaster to excellent account, by making it an additional proof of sincerity,
and affection for her Ladyship! -- Dear Wit, I thank thee; thou never forsakest
me at a crisis! -- Indeed! -- My Lord! And my young Lady! -- Ah, ha! -- But you
shall find one, perhaps, who can plot, as deeply as yourselves.

END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. LORD MORDEN, LAPELLE.
Lord Morden. INTO what an abyss of evils have I plunged, through inexperience,
want of reflection, and an absurd imitation of fashionable follies! -- Lapelle.


Lapelle. My Lord.


Lord Morden. Is the young -- young gentleman returned?


Lapelle. [significantly] No, my Lord.


Lord Morden. I am on the rack! -- The liberties in which Lady Morden permits
this Sir Frederic are insupportable! -- Unable to be silent, and ashamed to
complain, I am tortured, by contending passions. -- Lapelle -- Let me know the
instant -- the -- the young gentleman comes back.


Lapelle. [going] Yes, my Lord.


Lord Morden. Stay -- [to himself] What if I were to inform Lady Morden of this
affair? -- Surely, she could not shut her eyes against such a palpable, such an
unprincipled, attempt at seduction! -- [aloud] Go, and tell your Lady, I beg to
speak with her, a moment.


SCENE II. LORD MORDEN.
What an absurd being is man! -- Not a fortnight ago, Lady Morden was totally
indifferent to me; and, now I am in danger of losing her, I find I love her --
To distraction love her! -- Yet to sink into a civil, sober, domestic, man --
To become the standing jest of all those highspirited companions whose society
I have courted, whose maxims I have pretended to admire! --

SCENE III. LORD MORDEN, LADY MORDEN.
Lady Morden. So, my Lord, in melancholy contemplation; and at home, too!


Lord Morden. Yes, madam.


Lady Morden. Lud! I wonder how your Lordship can endure home! Of all places,
in the world, home is, certainly, the most disagreeable.


Lord Morden. Did not your Ladyship meet Lapelle?


Lady Morden. Lapelle! no.


Lord Morden. I -- I wished to see your Ladyship.


Lady Morden. To see me! What can your Lordship possibly want with me?


Lord Morden. To speak to you.


Lady Morden. Speak to me! -- You perfectly surprise me.


Lord Morden. On a subject which -- I -- I scarcely know how to begin.


Lady Morden. Ha! ha! ha! What can have made your Lordship so serious? Ha! ha!
ha! I declare, I never saw you look so grave before! -- This must be some very
important secret, that can occasion your Lordship to look so very dismal! -- I
vow, I am quite impatient -- Come, my Lord -- Why don't you proceed?


Lord Morden. I -- I begin to find -- I have been very foolish.


Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Is that the secret?


Lord Morden. I -- I feel I have been to blame.


Lady Morden. To blame, my Lord! How? Which way? -- Or, if you have, how does
it concern me?


Lord Morden. Your Ladyship used to think our interests inseparable.


Lady Morden. For which your Lordship always laughed at me. And, I freely own,
I was a very silly -- out of the way woman.


Lord Morden. Perhaps not, madam.


Lady Morden. How, my Lord! -- Not? -- Your Lordship is very polite, but you
know very well I was.


Lord Morden. Lady Morden, you once loved me -- You yourself, not long since,
kindly owned you did.


Lady Morden. Very true, my Lord; but why -- why now should you reproach me
with my follies?


Lord Morden. I feel the severity of your reproof -- It is no more than I merit!


Lady Morden. [with affected surprise] I, really, don't understand your
Lordship! -- I -- I meant no reproof -- We loved each other as long as it was
agreeable to us, and, if my passion happened to out-last your Lordship's, that
was none of your fault. These are the principles of -- of all rational people,
you know, my Lord.


Lord Morden. They are principles, madam, that, from my soul, I wish I had
never heard!


Lady Morden. Upon my honor, you astonish me! -- Have not I learnt them from
you, yourself?


Lord Morden. Unjustifiable, madam, as my conduct may have been, I never
carried them to the same excess as Sir Frederic Fashion.


Lady Morden. [with an air of pique] Sir Frederic Fashion may, perhaps, be as
capable (...) reformation as your Lordship.


Lord Morden. Your Ladyship may -- may (...) partial.


Lady Morden. Partial!


Lord Morden. Who so great a libertine as (...) Sir Frederic?


Lady Morden. Has been -- He has (...) enough to confess it.


Lord Morden. Has been! -- Madam, (...) exists a present proof of deliberate
seduction! -- An injured Lady! --


Lady Morden. [smiling] Oh! What the -- (...) the Croat.


Lord Morden. Madam!


Lady Morden. What Is your surprise, my Lo^^* Don't I tell you he has confessed
all his follie^ (...) me?


Lord Morden. But, madam, did he menti^^ the contract?


Lady Morden. To be sure! And the -- (...) counterfeit copy -- With the
generous manne^ (...) which he, just now, returned Harriet the origin^^* though
she thought he did not know her.


Lord Morden. I am petrified! -- Lady M^^den -- I perceive, I have lost your
affections.


Lady Morden. My Lord -- I am above dissimulation. Yes -- I own I have a
passion, too permanent to be shaken; and the satisfaction of a self-assurance
that he who, at present, possesses my heart, will not, so soon, be weary of me,
as he who had it before.


Lord Morden. You cut me to the soul! -- Did you know what I feel!


Lady Morden. Feel, my Lord! Ha, ha, ha! Oh fie! -- Your Lordship is a man of
fashion, not of feeling.


Lord Morden. Hovering mischief, madam, has quickened benumbed nature in me.
[kneels and takes her hand] Oh! let me conjure you, Lady Morden, to reflect on
your present situation! I have conducted you to the horrid precipice of guilt,
and destruction! Oh suffer me to save, to snatch, you from danger!


Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha!


SCENE IV. LORD MORDEN, LADY MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC.
Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! How now, my Lord! Ha, ha, ha! Making love to your
wife?


Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Oh! Sir Frederic, if you had but come a little
sooner, you would have heard the most delightful morality!


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! Morality from my Lord?


Lord Morden. Yes, Sir, morality from my Lord!


Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! Nay, I assure you, he is quite serious. [retires
coquetting with Sir Frederic.]


Lord Morden. Rejected! Ridiculed! Despised! Their sport! Their scorn! -- Their
subject for open sarcasm, laughter, and contempt! Oh! Insupportable. [Lord
Morden retires into his own room.]


SCENE V. LADY MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC.
Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! My Lord has a mind to fall in love with me, once more.


Sir Frederic. Nobody, but my Lord, madam, would ever have ceased, a moment, to
love you!


Lady Morden. Well, Sir Frederic, and may I, then, at last, flatter myself I
have found that sympathy of soul, for which I so long have sighed?


Sir Frederic. Alas, madam, I dare not rank myself your equal! -- No, I dare
not! -- There is such infinitude of perfection in your every thought, look, and
expression, that to merit you were to be, as you are, something celestial! --
Yet, such virtue as mere humanity may arrive at, I will exhaust nature with
endeavors, and weary heaven with prayers, to acquire!


Lady Morden. There is, surely, some secret charm in your words.


Sir Frederic. Did I think the gratification of any sinister passion influenced
my present conduct; were it not my hope to remove you from the cold embrace of
satiated apathy, to the swee and endless transports of love, founded on, permit
me to say, on a congeniality of soul and senriment; did I not feel an innate
conviction that there, already, subsists, between us, a tie of the most
indissoluble nature, an immaculate tie, a marriage of the mind, superior
infinitely to all human institutions; did I not think, and feel, thus, I would,
instantly, dreadful as the image is (...) thought, renounce that heaven which I
have had the presumption to contemplate, nay aspire to possess!


Lady Morden. And if, after all this, you should prove false, Sir Frederic!


Sir Frederic. False, madam! -- Oh! Let me conjure you to inflict any
punishment on me, rather than that of suspecting my sincerity! -- Thus,
^^eeling, on this angelic hand, I vow --


SCENE VI. LADY MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC, LORD MORDEN.
Lord Morden. I cannot resist the impulse which -- How! -- Sir Frederic!


Sir Frederic. [rising] My Lord. [with per^^^^ indifference.]


Lord Morden. So, madam!


Lady Morden. So, Sir.


Lord Morden. You can listen to morality from ^^^ers, madam, if not from me!


Lady Morden. Oh! I -- I have no dislike to a ^^^non, when I -- admire the
preacher.


Lord Morden. Madam -- If you have no respect (...) my honor, you might have
some for my feelings, and --


Lady Morden. [interrupting him] A, a -- Hold, ^^ld, my Lord -- You are
beginning your dis^^^^se again; but I am in a hurry, and will hear (...) draw
your conclusions some other opportu^^^^*


Lord Morden. Madam --


Lady Morden. Nay, I will, upon my honor.


SCENE VII. LORD MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC.
Lord Morden. Hold, Sir; a word with you, if you please.


Sir Frederic. With me, my Lord?


Lord Morden. With you.


Sir Frederic. Willingly. Your Lordship seems in so pleasant a humor --


Lord Morden. Sir, I am in a humor neither to be trifled with nor sneered at.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! I can assure your, Ha, ha, ha! your Lordship, no man
is happier to see you in your present temper than I am.


Lord Morden. Look you, Sir Frederic, you and I have been too long of the same
school for me to be ignorant of your principles. But I begin to detest them!


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha!


Lord Morden. They are now, at this very moment, rending my heart. They have
planted a nest of adders in my bosom. -- In short, Sir -- You must forbear your
visits to Lady Morden.


Sir Frederic. My Lord --


Lord Morden. I am serious -- determined.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! When her Ladyship gives me this advice, it may --
perhaps -- be followed.


Lord Morden. It must and shall be followed, Sir, when I give it.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha!


Lord Morden. Ridiculous as it may appear, to you, and such as you, I feel, and
will assert, a husband's rights.


Sir Frederic. Ha, ha, ha! I congratulate your Lordship, on the keenness, and
delicacy, of your feelings; they give me great pleasure; infinite pleasure,
upon my soul. Ha, ha, ha! -- As to -- a husband's rights, I -- have no doubt,
you will -- very shortly -- be in full possession of them all.


Lord Morden. Sir, I will have you know, I am, at present, in full possession
of them all.


Sir Frederic. May be so, egad!


Lord Morden. And can no longer forbear telling you, I believe you to be a
villain.


Sir Frederic. Ah, now, your Lordship is perfectly explicit. [draw and fight.]


SCENE VIII. LORD MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC, GABRIEL, who runs fearless between
them, and looks first at one, then at the other.
Lord Morden. How now, sirrah! How dare you take this liberty?


Gabriel. Nay, ecod, there do seem to be some danger in it; an I had not dared
to dare, but that I thought that your Lordship would na stick I.


Lord Morden. Be gone, sirrah!


Gabriel. Nay, but my Lady sent me, and would be glad to speak wi' your
honor's worship.


Lord Morden. With me?


Gabriel. Oh no! Not wi' your Lordship's honor's worship; but wi' his
worship's honor, Sir Frederic Fashion.


Sir Frederic. This is no place, my Lord: we'll settle this business tomorrow
-- Tomorrow, my Lord -- Tomorrow --


SCENE IX. LORD MORDEN, GABRIEL.
Lord Morden. Damnation! -- Torture! -- Tomorrow? -- He has some concealed
meaning -- A thousand little circumstances tell me, some mischief is brooding
-- I could not have believed Lady Morden so confirmed, so far gone, in guilt.
-- The behavior of them all, their dark allusions, their sarcasms, pointed at
me, convince me, they are acting in conjunction, to hold me up -- How now,
sirrah! What do you stand gaping at? -- How durst you come between us?


Gabriel. Why, ecod, I knew that, wi' us, in the country, murder would have been
against the commandments; and I had forgot that, here, in town, you have no
commandments.


Lord Morden. This fool can see the excesses of passion in their true light.


Gabriel I Am sorry 'at I angered your Lordship's worship; becase as why, I wur
determined to do like the rest of my neighbors; for, sartinly, wur a body to
keep the commandments, while every body else is breaking them -- a'd be a poor
devil, indeed. [Lord Morden walks about] Belike, your Lordship be a bit
jealousy, like?


Lord Morden. How, sirrah!


Gabriel. Nay, I should no' a' wondered an you wur -- An I had no' been told
that your Londoneers be never jealousy, like.


Lord Morden. Should not have wondered! -- Why not, sirrah?


Gabriel. Nay, ecod, I munna tell!


Lord Morden. Tell what?


Gabriel. Nay, that is it -- As I said, I munna tell!


Lord Morden. [puts his hand to his sword] Speak all you know, instantly, or --


Gabriel. [with half serious half sulky reproof] Nay, nay, donna be in a
passion, your worship -- I be no goose, you munna spit me.


Lord Morden. Speak, I say -- I Will have your secret, or your soul.


Gabriel. Ecod, I believe, your worship will be puzzled to find either -- Though
that Sir Frederic be an old fox -- A's used to steal chicken.


Lord Morden. Be explicit; what has he done?


Gabriel. Done -- Oh! -- A's --


Lord Morden. What?


Gabriel. Promised me a place!


Lord Morden. Zounds!


Gabriel. And, moreover, a' ga' me a purse; which is better still: for, your
worship's grace do know that, an egg, in hand, is better nur a hen, in
expectation.


Lord Morden. Suppose, sirrah, I give you my purse, too.


Gabriel. Nay, ecod, an you gi' it me -- I b'lieve, I shall -- I shall take it.


Lord Morden. There, Sir.


Gabriel. Thank your worship's Lordship. -- [Gabriel puts up the purse, and
walks leisurely into Lady Morden's Dressing Room.]


SCENE X. LORD MORDEN, HARRIET.
Lord Morden. [following Gabriel] Why, hark you, sirrah! -- Come back! -- Why,
rascal!


Harriet. [calling] St! My Lord! My Lord!


Lord Morden. [looking back to Harriet, and then recollecting Gabriel]
Astonishing effrontery!


Harriet. My Lord!


Lord Morden. [returning] Oh! Madam, I am distracted.


Harriet. Have patience, but for one quarter of an hour, and I hope to rid you
of all your fears, and inflict that punishment, on the author of them, which he
dreads most.


Lord Morden. How, Madam?


Harriet. By exposing him; making him what he delights to make others, a
subject of laughter and contempt.


Lord Morden. Which way, Madam?


Harriet. We may be overheard; step with me into the antichamber, and I Will
inform you.


SCENE XI. GABRIEL, SIR FREDERIC.
Gabriel. [peeping after Lord Morden and Harriet, and then calling] Sir
Frederic! -- Sir Frederic!


Sir Frederic. Well, what is the matter? How came thou off with his Lordship?


Gabriel. Off? Ecod, I -- I wish you may come off as well.


Sir Frederic. I!


Gabriel. Ees. -- Why, mun, there be the bailiffs, below!


Sir Frederic. Bailiffs!


Gabriel. Ees -- Sent by the Irish gentleman, lady I mean, a'ter your worship!
-- Ecod, hur is detarmined to have you, safe!


Sir Frederic. The Devil! What Is to be done! -- Is she with them?


Gabriel. No; hur be come back, and is gone into the antichamber, wi' my Lord.


Sir Frederic. And has not seen them?


Gabriel. Likely not.


Sir Frederic. Here, quick, change clothes with me, and tell them you are Sir
Frederic Fashion.


Gabriel. Me! -- Ecod, thank you for that -- No, no -- I would na' be in your
coat, for fifty pound!


Sir Frederic. Fool! they durst not detain you.


Gabriel. I Will take care they shall not.


Sir Frederic. God's Death! What Is to be done?


Gabriel. Ecod -- Suppose -- Suppose I wur to go, and tell the Irish gentleman
somebody wanted hur; and so make 'em arrest she?


Sir Frederic. Ha! Exquisite fellow! I conceive -- Away, send her instantly!


SCENE XII. SIR FREDERIC, TWO BAILIFFS.
Bailiff. Is your name Sir Frederic Fashion, Sir?


Sir Frederic. No, Sir; but Sir Frederic will be here, directly; if you have
any business with him.


Bailiff. [aside to his companion] Have your handkerchief ready, should he make
any noise, for fear of a rescue -- This is a very serious affair. [to Sir
Frederic] Pray, Sir, what kind of person is Sir Frederic?


Sir Frederic. Um -- a handsome -- agreeable little gentleman, and very young.


Bailiff. May I ask, Sir, how he is dressed?


Sir Frederic. [aside] Gad! well remembered. -- [to the bailiffs] Dressed, oh!
he is dressed for -- for the masquerade -- Here he comes. [the Bailiffs retire
a little upon the watch.]


SCENE XIII. SIR FREDERIC, BAILIFFS, HARRIET.
Sir Frederic. [to Harriet] Well, Sir Frederic! Ha, ha, ha! How goes your
scheme.


Harriet. Oh, ho! -- Faidth, and are you so jocular?


Sir Frederic. I have been thinking this is a dangerous business, and would
advise you not to give the girl that contract -- It may bring you into trouble.


Bailiff. [aside to his companion] You hear!


Harriet. Oh! Faidth, and she has it safe enough.


Bailiff. [advances] Sir Frederic Fashion [touches Harriet on the shoulder],
you are my prisoner, Sir, -- I have a special writ against you.


Harriet. Ha, ha, ha! Against me! -- Arrah, frind, but you are making a bit of
a bull here.


Bailiff. We know what we are about, Sir; my carriage is below; you shall be
treated like a gentleman; but we must beg you to go with us, instantly, and
without noise.


Harriet. [alarmed and forgetting the brogue] I tell you, friend, you mistake
the person.


SCENE XIV. SIR FREDERIC, HARRIET, BAILIFFS, GABRIEL.
Gabriel. [goes up to Harriet] Here, Sir Frederic; here be a card, from Colonel
Castoff, wi' his compliments.


Harriet. Sirrah! Me!


Gabriel. [with pretended astonishment] Ees, to be sure!


Bailiff. Sir, we must be gone.


Harriet. This is a concerted trick -- Here -- [as soon as Harriet begins to
call, the bailiffs clap the handkerchief over her mouth, and hurry off with
her.]


SCENE XV. GABRIEL, SIR FREDERIC.
Gabriel. Did not I do it rarely?


Sir Frederic. Do! -- I could wonder and worship thee! In half a year, thou
would make an ass of Machiavel! -- Oh that I could but retrieve that cursed
contract.


Gabriel. I do think I could get it.


Sir Frederic. Ay! -- Nay, I do, almost, begin to believe in miracles! Which
way?


Gabriel. No matter for that -- What will you gi' me?


Sir Frederic. Whatever thou can wish -- A hundred guineas --


Gabriel. And the place in the Excise?


Sir Frederic. Any thing, every thing! -- Run, try, fly! -- Think, succeed, and
I Will make an Emperor of thee!


Gabriel. Ees -- I Will be Emperor of Excise-men.


SCENE XVI. SIR FREDERIC, MRS. MODELY, EMILY.
Sir Frederic. The shrewdness, and abilities, of this fellow are amazing!


Mrs. Modely. [entering] Yes, my sweet little Emily, the greatest beauty in
London would be envied, had she made such a conquest.


Emily. Ah! -- *You say so. --


Mrs. Modely. Say! Why, tomorrow morning, the whole town will be in a flame!


Emily. Well, that will be pure!


Mrs. Modely. Oh! Sir Frederic --


Sir Frederic. [runs to Emily] My life! My soul! My transport!


Emily. [to Mrs. Modely] What sweet words!


Mrs. Modely. You are very much obliged to me, I assure you. -- I have been
speaking to my sweet, dear, little Emily, here, in your behalf.


Sir Frederic. Then, Madam, I am, inexpressibly, obliged to you!


Emily. Yes, Mrs. Modely is very much your friend, and very much my friend --
A'n't you, Mrs. Modely?


Mrs. Modely. Yes, my little dear; I am, indeed, very much your friend: and, if
I had not the best opinion in the world of Sir Frederic, would not have spoken
as I have.


Emily. Well, Sir Frederic, have you ordered the chaise and four?


Sir Frederic. [pretending to be afraid Mrs. Modely should overhear]. Yes! --
Hush!


Emily. Nay, you may say any thing before Mrs. Modely. I have told her all;
for, you know, she is my friend.


Mrs. Modely. Yes, yes, Sir Frederic; be assured, I will not betray any secret,
the keeping of which will make my dear Emily so happy!


Emily. Yes, we shall be so happy! -- You know, Sir Frederic, you swear to
marry me.


Sir Frederic. Solemnly! [all through the scene he looks anxiously round, at
intervals, fearful of being surprised.]


Emily. Well, but, swear it again; now, before Mrs. Modely.


Sir Frederic. By all the saints!


Emily. Saints! Pshaw! You should swear by -- by my bright eyes, that dim the
stars.


Sir Frederic. Oh! By those bright eyes, that dim the blazing Sun.


Emily. And -- and, my beauties, that eclipse the blushing Moon!


Sir Frederic. Ay, by those, and all your burning charms, I swear.


Emily. To marry me, the moment we come to Scotland?


Sir Frederic. The moment we come to Scotland.


Emily. And, if we are pursued --


Sir Frederic. To fight for you! Die for you!


Emily. Oh! That will be delightful! --


Sir Frederic. [aside] The Devil it will!


Emily. Come, let us set off! -- My bandbox is ready!


Sir Frederic. That is impossible, my angel!


Emily. Impossible?


Sir Frederic. I have not ordered the chaise, till ten o'clock.


Emily. Oh dear! What, two whole hours longer!


Sir Frederic. They are two ages, I grant -- [looking round] Forgive my fears,
my deares Emily; but, though the pleasure of your company is the most precious
thing on earth -- a -- a -- yet --


Emily. What, you want me gone?


Sir Frederic. Rather than you should think so unkindly, I will run the hazard
of being surprised, and eternally separated from you.


Emily. Will you! I am sure you don't love me then -- However, I Will go. -- You
will be sure to be ready, the moment the clock strikes ten.


SCENE XVII. SIR FREDERIC, MRS. MODELY.
Sir Frederic. Time is precious -- Here have been such plots, against me!


Mrs. Modely. Plots!


Sir Frederic. Oh! I have escaped Scylla and Charybdis! But wind and tide are,
now, both with me -- Lady Morden is to meet me, here, in half an hour. Through
that door is her chamber.


Mrs. Modely. Oh, you vile creature!


Sir Frederic. What prude, tomorrow, will dare pretend that woman, and
education, are a match for man, and nature?


Mrs. Modely. And so you will persist in your wickedness, in spite of my
persuasions!


Sir Frederic. Lady Morden has, still, all the rhodomontade of love, in her
brain -- Thinks of nothing but cooing-constancy, and eternal raptures!


Mrs. Modely. Simple woman!


Sir Frederic. Except, indeed, tormenting her husband; which seems to give the
sin a double sweetness.


Mrs. Modely. Or she would be no wife!


Sir Frederic. So, as soon as I am gone off with Emily, I will have a
consolatory epistle delivered to her.


Mrs. Modely. Compassionate toad!


Sir Frederic. Here it is, ready written; and, if I don't flatter myself, a
masterpiece.


Mrs. Modely. Let me see! Let me see!


Sir Frederic. No, you shall hear. [reads] Dear Madam, Though you are an angel,
if there are other angels, am I to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not.


Sir Frederic. [reads] If man is naturally inconstant, and if I am a man -- am
I to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not.


Sir Frederic. [reads] If nature has made variety the highest enjoyment -- am I
to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not.


Sir Frederic. [reads] If, since happiness is the pursuit of us all, I am happy
as often as I can -- am I to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not.


Sir Frederic. [reads] Farewell, Madam; circumstances, as you will find, force
me, thus suddenly, from your arms, in which, I own, I found heaven centered:
but, if you should call me cruel, perjured, and ungrateful, because I act
naturally, and therefore rationally -- am I to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not! -- Well, as I live, this is a master-stroke!
Perfectly as I thought I knew you, you have astonished me!


Sir Frederic. Yes; it is the true Socratic mode -- But, now, my dear Mrs.
Modely, go you to Emily, prevent her disturbing us, and keep her in readiness.


Mrs. Modely. Well! remember, every thing is at stake, and be yourself.


Sir Frederic. Fear me not; that prescience, which, they say, is the forerunner
of all great events, gives me a happy assurance of success: a confidence, that
makes success certain.


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
General Burland. I Cannot keep from this house! -- There is a foreboding of
mischief, which haunts, and perturbs, my imagination! -- And, I fear, with
reason! -- The malignant joy, the smothered exult, the obscure, ironical,
satire, which ran through the discourse of that Sir Frederic, were not without
a meaning. -- I wish I had not consented to let Emily stay -- He sneered, I
remember, at the moment: nay, it seemed the sneer of triumph! -- I wish she
were safe, at my own house. -- Poor Lady Morden! -- And, is it possible? --
Such rectitude of heart! -- Such purity of sentiment! -- I wish Emily were at
home -- Should my child, my darling fall, I were a wretch indeed!


SCENE II. GENERAL, LORD MORDEN.
Lord Morden. [wildly] I am miserable! distracted! racked! -- The thunderbolt
has struck before I heard it! -- Oh that its exterminating power had been
final! But it has maimed, and deformed, and left a full feeling of wretchedness!


Genesis Burland. How now, my Lord?


Lord Morden. General! -- I am a wretch! -- An irretrievable, eternal, wretch!


Genesis Burland. What, and are you come to a sense of this, now it is too late?


Lord Morden. There Is the misery! -- The curse is accomplished, and hope is
fled!


Genesis Burland. Why, ay! Such is the infatuation of folly, and vice, they will
not believe vengeance has an arm, till its fatal gripe is felt!


Lord Morden. I cannot support these tortures! -- Oh that it were possible! --


Genesis Burland. What?


Lord Morden. To reclaim Lady Morden.


Genesis Burland. What then? Another month and Sir Frederic Fashion, or any other
libertine of fashion, might take her.


Lord Morden. Never! -- Never! -- Were her affections once again mine, the
stroke of death, only, should separate us!


Genesis Burland. [with deep compassion] Well, my Lord, if you are, at last,
convinced of the immensity of your loss -- I pity you!


Lord Morden. Oh, would you could relieve!


Genesis Burland. Would I could! -- But, you were a witness how ineffectual my
endeavors were. However, walk with me, into the antichamber, and let us
consult what is best to be done. -- Her principles, I fear, are shaken; the
only rock on which virtue can stand secure.


Lord Morden. Sapped, destroyed! -- She avows her intents! Unblushingly avows
them! And, recapitulating my errors, my crimes, dares me to complain of, or
notice, hers! Scorns and contemns me, and justly too, that such a thing as I
should pretend to repeat, or respect, the word virtue!


Genesis Burland. It is what every husband, every father of a family, must expect!
His smallest foibles will stand as precedents for a swarm of follies; and, if
he has any vices, they will propagate a hideous brood, that shall extirpate his
name from the earth, or overwhelm it with obloquy!


SCENE III. GABRIEL, SIR FREDERIC.
Gabriel. [peeping after Lord Morden, and the General] Come, mun! -- Your
worship, come!


Sir Frederic. Are they gone?


Gabriel. Ees.


Sir Frederic. Well, what have thou done? -- Where is Harriet?


Gabriel. Oh, I have her safe.


Sir Frederic. Thou!


Gabriel. Ees, mun -- For, when the Bailiffs found out a wur a woman, they wur
parfitly ravenous!


Sir Frederic. And let her go?


Gabriel Ees.


Sir Frederic. God's Death!


Gabriel. But, I secured her.


Sir Frederic. Secured! Impossible! How?


Gabriel. Nay, never do you mind how -- I tell'ee, I have her safe.


Sir Frederic. But where are the Bailiffs?


Gabriel. In this house.


Sir Frederic. The devil they are!


Gabriel. Ees, they be -- waiting for your worship.


Sir Frederic. Death and destruction!


Gabriel. But what o'that? I a'got the contract, mun.


Sir Frederic. Have thou?


Gabriel. Ees, here it is.


Sir Frederic. Precious fellow! I could worship thee! -- Give it me.


Gabriel. [putting his hand behind him.] Nay, hold there! -- I wunna do that.


Sir Frederic. Will Not!


Gabriel. No -- I wunna.


Sir Frederic. Pshaw! Make no words, but deliver it -- and, here -- here is --


Gabriel. Nay, put up your paper, for I wunna part wi' mine.


Sir Frederic. God's Death, fellow!


Gabriel. Nay, be mild tempered -- stand where you be; for an you stir another
step, I Will call the Bailiffs.


Sir Frederic. [aside] Cunning scoundrel! -- He has me in his power, and time
presses. -- Well, Gabriel, be faithful, and, depend on it, I Will make thee a
clever fellow.


Gabriel. Why, ecod, I think I am like a Monmouth-street coat -- ready made.


Sir Frederic. Thou rememberest the instructions I gave thee?


Gabriel. Parfitly.


Sir. Frederic. The chaise is to wait, at the corner of the street.


Gabriel. Ees.


Sir Frederic. Thou art to convey Emily's bandbox away, privately; and, if any
questions are asked, to say it is Lady Morden's.


Gabriel. Ees.


Sir Frederic. Have thou taken care of the letter, I gave thee?


Gabriel. Care! Ees, ees; I a' taken good care on it.


Sir Frederic. Observe, thou art to deliver, it to Lady Morden, half an hour
after we are departed.


Gabriel. Half an hour before you are departed.


Sir Frederic. Zounds! No, half an hour after, man.


Gabriel. Oh! Ees, ees; half an hour after.


Sir Frederic. Now begone.


Gabriel. But -- but, how will your worship get by the Bailiffs?


Sir Frederic. God's Death, that is true! -- Is there no disguise?


Gabriel. Why -- ees -- there be a long greatcoat in the hall.


Sir Frederic. Ay, true! -- Bring it me.


Gabriel. Nay, nay -- I Will put it on first, and let 'em see me -- so, then,
when they see you, they will think it be I --


Sir Frederic. Excellent! Where are Lord Morden, and the General?


Gabriel. In The the other chamber.


Sir Frederic. Unlucky! I wish they were any where else.


Gabriel. Oh! -- an that be all, I Will soon make 'em budge.


Sir Frederic. How?


Gabriel. Nay! -- Lord, you're so quisitive! -- I tell you, I Will do it -- I Will
saunter through this door, lock it, and send 'em packing through the other.


Sir Frederic. Thou art the prince of plotters -- Away, be vigilant.


Gabriel. Oh! never do you fear me!

[Goes into the antichamber.]
SCENE IV. SIR FREDERIC, LADY MORDEN.
Sir Frederic. This fellow would outwit a whole conclave of Cardinals!


Lady Morden. Well, Sir Frederic! here I am, you see; punctual to my promise.


Sir Frederic. [with vast insinuation, seeming sincerity, and humble rapture,
all through the scene.] Oh, Madam, how can I repay this bounty! -- this
condescension! -- Never! -- My life were a poor sacrifice, to such sweetness
and such charms!


Lady Morden. Sir Frederic, this is a trying, a decisive moment! I am going to
be either the most happy or the most wretched of women! You tell me, it is your
wish, your resolution, to be no longer that general lover, that man of the
world, you have, hitherto, been thought.


Sir Frederic. Say not, dear Lady, it is either my wish or resolution! Heaven
can testify, I have not the power to be any thing, but what it shall please you
to make me!


Lady Morden. I have owned to you that, the levity I have lately affected is
not natural to me* that my heart sighs for an acquaintance, a mate* that, like
itself, is subject to all the sweet emotions of sensibility! -- Yes, it was the
first wish of my soul to find this correspondent heart! A heart beating with
the same ardour, vibrating to the same sensations, panting for the same
pleasures, shrinking from the same pangs; pliant, yet firm; gentle, yet
aspiring; passionate, yet pure! -- Such I once thought Lord Morden's -- Should
I, a second time, be deceived!


Sir Frederic. I am poor in proofs of sincerity! I have none to offer! -- My
former errors are present punishments! To deny or even palliate them would
imply intentional deceit; and this is a moment in which I would wish for men
and gods to be witnesses of my truth! -- I have had, I own, most libertine
opinions of your gentle sex; but these I, now, solemnly renounce! -- Had I,
before, met with a Lady Morden, I should, before, have made this renunciation!
-- But, perhaps, the women it has been my misfortune to know deserved, in part,
the light esteem in which I held them. -- Never, till now, did I find one who
could mutually inspire such passion and respect! Such agitated, burning, hopes!
Such excruciating fears, or thoughts so sanctified, as those I, this moment,
feel!


Lady Morden. Yet, Sir Frederic, I cannot help observing your conversation, in
society, seems still tinged with the impurity of your former libertine
principles.


Sir Frederic. I own, Lady Morden, with confusion own, I have not hitherto had
the courage, or, perhaps, I have wanted strength to stem the torrent: but,
aided by you, I feel, I dare promise any thing!


Lady Morden. I confess, Sir Frederic, the mind finds some difficulty in
rooting out fears, planted in it by reiterated accusations. The stories the
world tells of you are dreadful! And, yet, there is such heartfelt conviction
attends your present words that, to me, it is impossible to listen and retain a
doubt.


Sir Frederic. This generous confidence transports me, fills me with gratitude,
and inspires rapturous hope! [clasps her round the waist.] Oh, gently suffer me
to conduct you, where love lies, in panting, breathless, ecstasy --


SCENE V.
To them GABRIEL, abruptly, in a Great-coat, stands fixed, staring. Sir
Frederic. [sternly] How now!


Gabriel. [deliberately] Belike -- You dunna want company?


Sir Frederic. No, Sir.


Gabriel. I thought as much --


Sir Frederic. [laying hold of him] Begone, instantly!


Gabriel Nay! Hands off! [throws him from him] I shall not stir, till I have
delivered my message.


Sir Frederic. What message? What have you to say?


Gabriel. [aloud] Why the chaise and four be come.


Sir Frederic. How?


Gabriel. [still louder] The bandbox ready.


Sir Frederic. Infernal booby!


Gabriel. Miss Emily waiting.


Sir Frederic. [violently] Begone, I say.


Gabriel. Gone! -- Nay, sartinly, you would no' have I run away wi' her.


Lady Morden. [with contempt] Ha, ha, ha!


Sir Frederic. Lady Morden!


Lady Morden. Ha, ha, ha! -- Why, surely, you! The never failing victor! The
fertile-brained Sir Frederic Fashion! who knows not defeat, and who never, yet,
was at a loss for stratagems! Though you are taken somewhat unawares, you
cannot want invention!


Sir Frederic. You Will pardon me, Madam, if I want understanding to comprehend
your meaning.


Lady Morden. Indeed! -- Well, if you are so very dull of apprehension -- am I
to blame?


Sir Frederic. Madam!


Lady Morden. Oh! -- Do you recollect -- this letter?


Sir Frederic. How! -- Faithless fiend! [goes to assault Gabriel, who throws
back his great-coat and appears dressed as a gentleman.]


Gabriel. Keep off, or dread the chastisement I am prompted, instantaneously,
to inflict!


Sir Frederic. Chastisement! -- What is this? -- Who are you?


Gabriel. A man! -- You are --


Lady Morden. For heaven's sake, brother! --


Sir Frederic. Brother!


Gabriel. Gabriel Wilmot; whose head is so full of the nonsense of friendship,
honor, and honesty!


Sir Frederic. I Will be revenged, however.

[attacks Mr. Wilmot again.]
SCENE VI.
To them LORD MORDEN and GENERAL Lord Morden. Turn, wretch, and receive your
punishment from this arm! [Sir Frederic turns on Lord Morden.]


Genesis Burland. [beating down their swords] Oh, for shame! -- Look to the Lady
--


Lady Morden. Oh, General! -- Oh, my Lord! [runs to Lord Morden and falls on
his neck.]


Lord Morden. My life! My ecstasy! My savior!


SCENE VII.
To them MRS. MODELY and EMILY. Mrs. Modely. Bless me, what uproar -- Hey day!
-- [aside] So, so! Here is a very pretty denouement to our plot, indeed! --
[aloud] I see, good folks, you are all embroiled here; and, as it is a very
disagreeable thing to be present at family disputes, I Will -- [is going; the
General plants himself against the door]


Genesis Burland. Pray, Madam, stay, and receive the compliments of the company --
Mine, and your friend Emily's, in particular.


Mrs. Modely. Oh, with pleasure!


Lord Morden. Mr. Wilmot! My best brother! -- Though you have, in part,
acquainted me with what is past, yet, it is so sudden -- And you! my dearest
Lady! To find you still the same is joy unspeakable!


Lady Morden. The task of making you suppose I had effectually become what I
seemed, was, indeed, most painful; but the loss of your affection were not
pain! 'Twere horror! -- I told you my passion was too permanent to be shaken --
Ah! how could you imagine I meant another? Or think it possible I ever could
forget that chaste, that ardent, that eternal, love, I have so repeatedly vowed?


Lord Morden. Oh for words! -- I am all love! gratitude! rapture! and amazement!


Genesis Burland. And so is Sir Frederic, apparently -- Nay, even you, Madam, seem
a little surprised.


Mrs. Modely. Me! Oh dear, no.


Lady Morden. [to Sir Frederic] Dear Sir, though you are a deep and excellent
plotter, if there have been counterplots -- am I to blame? [curtsies.]


Mrs. Modely. [with affected candour] Certainly not.


Lady Morden. If man is sometimes vain, presumptuous, and unprincipled, and if
you are a man -- am I to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not.


Mr. Wilmot. If I assumed a mean disguise, that I might aid a sister, to
detect, and expose, the mean machinations of Seduction -- am I to blame?


Mrs. Modely. Certainly not.


Emily. If, following the advice of this dear Lady [to Lady Morden] simplicity
has made cunning outwit itself -- am I to blame? [curtsying first to Sir
Frederic, and then to Mrs. Modely.]


Genesis Burland. [with vast pleasure] Certainly not.


Lady Morden. If, since happiness is the pursuit of us all, I wish to be as
happy as possible -- [most affectionately taking Lord Morden's hand] am I to
blame?


Omnes. Certainly not.


Sir Frederic. [with affected ease] Certainly not -- So, the catechism being
ended, the scholars may depart.


Mr. Wilmot. Certainly not.


Sir Frederic. Sir!


Mr. Wilmot. You forget the bailiffs.


Lady Morden. Besides, Sir Frederic, before you go, you must give me leave to
introduce you to --


SCENE THE LAST.
To them HARRIET in woman's clothes presented by Lady Morden. -- This Lady.

Sir Frederic. Harriet!


Harriet. Yes, Sir -- that Harriet, whom, hearing she had happiness in view,
and proportioning your ideal triumph to the weight of misery you might entail,
you raised heaven and earth to bring to wretchedness, and ruin.


Mrs. Modely. Upon my honor, you -- you are a sad man, Sir Frederic! -- A very
sad man!

[The company by their looks show they understand Mrs. Modely's real
character.]
Harriet. But your vanity is humbled -- you, now, stand detected; and, instead
of envied, you will be sneered at by the depraved, pitied by the good, and,
henceforth, avoided by the credulous young creatures you, so manfully, have
delighted to involve in guilt, and destruction!


Mrs. Modely. A very dangerous man, indeed, Sir Frederic!


General. [ironically] Ay! beware of him, Madam.


Mrs. Modely. Oh! I -- I will!


Harriet. Yes, Sir, the finger of scorn points where it ought: you are exposed,
and my resentment is appeased.


Sir Frederic. Then, Madam -- the -- the contract --


Harriet. There it is, Sir. [returns it] I never meant to make any other use of
it than what has been better effected, by different means. [curtsying to Lady
Morden and Mr. Wilmot.]


Sir Frederic. Madam! --


Harriet. No thanks, Sir.


Genesis Burland. No; they would sit a little awkwardly.


Lady Morden. And now, Sir Frederic, if, after this lesson, you should still
retain your former principles, and practices, and, hereafter, receive a still
severer punishment, I hope you will acknowledge -- we are not to blame.

Exeunt Omnes.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Miss FARREN.
IN former times -- it is long ago, I own --
Man, seated on the haughty husband's throne,
The wife by such absurd restraints enclosed,
Not one gallant had she -- as he supposed:
But, modest, meek, his jealous doubts appeased,
And soothed her lord and master -- when she pleased.
Then, women led such exemplary lives,
Daughters, almost, as humble were -- a -- as wives!
"A savage Salick law the men maintained;
"O monstrous! We were slaves! and husband's reigned." --
Strange were these customs, obsolete; but we
Consolidate our customs -- and, you see,
Such wise designs no opposition find:
A fair free trade is good for all mankind.
The liberal spirit of our liberal beauties
Has quite annull d prohibitory duties.
The Cicisbeo, and the chere amie,
On the broad base of reciprocity,
Are exports now, and imports, duty free.
As for this Lady Morden's motley merit,
With her half-ancient, her half-modern spirit,
You Will imitate the part you most approve;
Her modish license, or her maukish love!
Of that no more -- The subject of my speech,
The doctrine I came, purposely, to teach,
(Nay, look not lowering, man of mighty sense)
Is rival woman's super-eminence -- *
"Yes, we have proofs where wit, where taste combin'
"To deck, with blended charms, the female mind.
"Say, shall not we, with conscious pride, proclaim
"A female critic raised -- even Shakespeare's Fame!
"Yes, lordly man -- look surly if you please,
"But women beat you out and out, with ease!
"In tales of fancy, tenderness, distress,
"If you dare doubt us -- study The Recess.
"And often let soft Cecilia win your praise;
"While Reason guides the clue, in Fancy's maze.
"In tragedy our triumph all attest;
"Your tears the genuine proof who acts the best --
"In comedy -- But hold -- I dread to say
"How much, of late, even there, you have lost the day."
No, I Will not humble your proud sex so far,
Till you no more remember -- SUCH THINGS ARE.
Gladly our author owns, all this is true;
Nor thinks he is robbed, when others have their due:
Yet, owning, hopes you have kindly heard his cause;
Hopes to participate your just applause.
And, should your hands some grateful wreath combine,
And should that wreath his anxious brow entwine,
The prize most precious memory holds in store,
It there shall bloom -- 'till memory is no more! * The verses, between
inverted commas, were requested from, and written by, a gentleman whose
literary abilities are great, and well known; and the following were,
consequently, omitted.

Is rival woman's super-eminence
In wit, as well as beauty! Proofs I could
But will not cite, to make the assertion good.
Why should I speak, what is known to Fame and you,
Young Andre's woes; the wrongs of old Peru?
Why the Belle's Stratagem, or Percy name;
Or sweet Cecilia's never ending fame?
Our comic, or our tragic, triumphs quote;
Or tell how Siddons acted, Burney wrote?
No, I Will not humble, etc.




