CHEAP REPOSITORY. SUNDAY READING. Bear ye one another's Burdens; OR, THE
VALLEY OF TEARS: A VISION.



Sold by J. MARSHALL, PRINTER to the CHEAP REPOSITORY for Moral and Religious
Tracts) No. 17, Queen Street, Cheapside, and No. 4, Aldermary Churchyard, and
R. WHITE, Piccadilly London.

By S. HAZARD, at Bath; and by all Booksellers, Newsmen, and Hawkers, in Town
and Country.

Great Allowance will be made to Shopkeepers and Hawkers.

PRICE ONE HALFPENNY. Or, 2s. 3d. per. 100. -- 1s. 3d. for 50. -- 9d. for 25. [
Entered at Stationers Hall.]

Bear ye one another's Burdens.
ONCE upon a time methought I set out upon a long journey, and the place
through which I traveled appeared to be a dark Valley which was called the
Valley of Tears. It had obtained this name not only on account of the many
sorrowful adventures which poor passengers commonly meet with in their journey
through it; but also because most of these Travelers entered it weeping and
crying, and left it in very great pain and anguish. This vast valley was full
of people of all colors, ages, sizes, and descriptions. But whether white or
black, or tawney, all were traveling the same road; or rather they were taking
different little paths which all led to the same common end.

Now it was remarkable that notwithstanding the different complexions, ages,
and tempers of this vast variety of people, yet all resembled each other in
this one respect, that each had a burden on his back which he was destined to
carry through the toil and heat of the day, until he should arrive by a longer
or shorter course at his journey's end. These burdens would in general have
made the pilgrimage quite intolerable, had not the Lord of the Valley, out of
his great compassion for these poor Pilgrims, provided among other things, the
following means for their relief.

In their full view over the entrance of the Valley, there were written in
great letters the following words, Bear ye one another's Burdens.

Now I saw in my vision that many of the Travelers hurried on without stopping
to read this instruction, and others, though they had once read it, yet paid
little or no attention to it. A third sort thought it very good advice for
other people, but very seldom applied it to themselves. In short I saw that too
many of those people were of opinion that they had burdens enough of their
own, and that there was therefore no occasion to take upon them those of
others; so each tried to make his own load as light, and his own journey as
pleasant as he could, without so much as once casting a thought on a poor
over-loaded neighbor. Here however I have to make a rather singular remark, by
which I shall plainly show the folly of these selfish people. It was so ordered
and contrived by the Lord of this valley, that if any one stretched out his
hand to lighten a neighbor's burden, in fact he never failed to find that he
at that moment also lightened his own. Besides, the obligation to help each
other, and the benefit of doing so were mutual. If a man helped his neighbor
it commonly happened that some other neighbor came by and by and helped him in
his turn; for there was no such thing as what we call independence in the whole
Valley. Not one of all these Travelers, however stout and strong, could move
on comfortably without assistance, for so the Lord of the Valley, whose laws
were all of them kind and good, had expressly ordained.

I stood still to watch the progress of these poor wayfaring people, who moved
slowly on, like so many Ticket-porters, with burdens of various kinds on their
backs; of which some were heavier, and some were lighter, but from a burden of
one kind or other, not one Traveller was entirely free.

The Widow.
A sorrowful Widow, oppressed with the burden of grief for the loss of an
affectionate husband, would have been bowed down by her heavy load, had not the
surviving children with great alacrity stepped forward and supported her. Their
kindness after a while, so much lightened the load which threatened at first to
be intolerable, that she even went on her way with cheerfulness.

The Husband.
I next saw a poor old man tottering under a burden so heavy, that I expected
him every moment to sink under it. I peeped into his pack, and saw it was made
up of many sad articles; there was poverty, oppression, sickness, debt, and
what made by far the heaviest part, undutiful children. I was wondering how it
was that he got on even so well as he did, till I spied his wife, a kind meek,
Christian woman, who was doing her utmost to assist him. She quietly got
behind, gently laid her shoulder to the burden, and carried a much larger
proportion of it than appeared to me when I was at a distance. She not only
sustained him by her strength, but cheered him by her counsels. "She told him
that through much tribulation we must enter into rest," that "he that
overcomes shall inherit all things." In short, she so supported his fainting
spirit, that he was enabled to "run with patience the race that was set before
him."

The kind Neighbor.
An infirm blind woman was creeping forward with a very heavy burden, in which
were packed sickness and want, with numberless other of those raw materials,
out of which human misery is worked up. She was so weak that she could not have
got on at all, had it not been for the kind assistance of another woman almost
as poor as herself; who, though she had no light burden of her own, cheerfully
lent an helping hand to a fellow traveller, who was still more heavily laden.
This friend had indeed little or nothing to give, but the very voice of
kindness is soothing to the weary. And I remarked in many other cases, that it
was not so much the degree of the help afforded, as the manner of helping that
lightened the burdens. Some had a coarse, rough clumsy way of assisting a
neighbor, which, though in fact it might be of real use, yet seemed, by
galling the Travelers, to add to the load it was intended to lighten; while I
observed in others that so cheap a kindness as a mild word, or even an
affectionate look made a poor burdened wretch move on cheerily. The bare
feeling that some human being cared for him, seemed to lighten the load. But to
return to this kind neighbor. She had a little old book in her hand, the
covers of which were worn out by much use. When she saw the blind woman ready
to faint, she would read her a few words out of this book, such as the
following -- "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven." "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." "I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee." "For our light affliction, which is but for
a moment, works out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory."

The Clergyman.
A pious Minister, sinking under the weight of a distressed parish, whose
worldly wants he was totally unable to bear, was suddenly relieved by a good
widow, who come up and took all the sick and hungry on her own shoulders. The
burden of the parish thus divided became tolerable. The Minister, being no
longer bowed down by the temporal distresses of his people, applied himself
cheerfully to his own part of the weight. And it was pleasant to see how those
two persons, neither of them very strong, or rich, or healthy, by thus kindly
uniting together, were enabled to bear the weight of a whole parish; though
singly, either of them must have sunk under the attempt. And I remember one
great grief I felt during my whole journey was, that I did not see more of this
union and concurring kindness, by which all the burdens might have been so
easily divided. It troubled me to observe, that of all the laws of the Valley
there was not one more frequently broken than the law of kindness.

The Negroes.
I now spied a swarm of poor black men, women, and children, a multitude which
no man could number; these groaned, and toiled, and sweated and bled under far
heavier loads than I had yet seen. But for a while no man helped them; at
length a few White travelers were touched with the sorrowful sighing of those
millions, and very heartily did they put their hands to the burdens; but their
number was not quite equal to the work they had undertaken. I perceived,
however, that they never lost sight of those poor heavy-laden wretches and as
the number of these generous helpers increased, I felt a comfortable hope, that
before all the blacks got out of the Valley, the whites would fairly divide the
burden, and the loads would be effectually lightened.

Among the travelers, I had occasion to remark, that those who most kicked and
struggled under their burdens, only made them so much the heavier; for their
shoulders became extremely galled by those vain struggles. The load, if borne
patiently, would in the end have turned even to the advantage of the bearers
(for so the Lord of the Valley had kindly decreed) but as to these grumblers
they had all the smart and none of the benefit. But the thing which made all
these burdens seem so very heavy was, that in every one without exception,
there was a certain inner packet, which most of the Travelers took pains to
conceal, and carefully wrap up; and while they were forward enough to complain
of the other part of their burdens, few said a word about this; though in
truth it was the pressing weight of this secret packet which served to render
the general burden so intolerable. In spite of all their caution, I contrived
to get a peep at it, I found in each that this packet had the same label; the
word SIN was written on all as a general title, and in ink so black that they
could not wash it out. I observed that most of them took no small pains to hide
the writing; but I was surprised to see that they did not try to get rid of the
load but the label. If any kind friend who assisted these people in bearing
their burdens, did but so much as hint at the secret packet, or advise them
to get rid of it, they took fire at once, and commonly denied they had any such
article in their portmanteau; and it was those whose secret packet swelled to
the most enormous size, who most stoutly denied they had any.

I saw with pleasure, however, that some who had long labored heartily to get
rid of this inward packet at length found it much diminished, and the more
this packet shrunk in size, the lighter was the other part of their burdens
also.

Then, methought, all at once, I heard a voice as it had been the voice of an
angel, crying out and saying, "Ye unhappy Pilgrims, why are ye troubled about
the burden which ye are doomed to bear through this Valley of Tears? Know ye
not that as soon as ye shall have escaped out of this Valley, the whole burden
shall drop off, provided ye neglect not to remove that inward weight of SIN
which principally oppresses you? Study then the whole Will of the Lord of this
Valley. Learn from him how this heavy part of your burdens may now be
lessened, and how at last it shall be removed for ever. Be comforted. Faith and
Hope may cheer you even in this Valley. The passage, though it seems long to
weary Travelers, is comparatively short; for beyond it there is a Land of
everlasting Rest, where ye shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, where
ye shall be led by living fountains of waters, and all tears shall be wiped
away from your eyes.

Z.

THE END.

