SLAVERY, A POEM.

SLAVERY, A POEM.

BY HANNAH MORE.

O great design!
Ye Sons of Mercy! O complete your work;
Wrench from Oppression's hand the iron rod,
And bid the cruel feel the pains they give.
THOMPSON'S LIBERTY. LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

Lately published by the same Author,
1. The Search after Happiness; a pastoral Drama, 9th Edition, 1s. 6d. 2.
Sacred Dramas, chiefly intended for young Persons; the Subjects taken from the
Bible, 5th Edition, 4s. in boards. 3. Essays for young Ladies, 4th Edition, 3s.
in boards. 4. Percy; a Tragedy, 4th Edition, 1s. 6d. 5. Fatal Falsehood; a
Tragedy, 2d Edition, 1s. 6d. 6. Florio; and The Bas-Bleu, or Conversation, 4to.
2d Edition, 1s. 6d. 7. Sir Eldred of the Bower; and the Bleeding Rock; two
legendary Tales, 2d Edition, 1s. 6d.
SLAVERY, A POEM.
IF Heaven has into being deigned to call
Thy light, O LIBERTY! to shine on all;
Bright intellectual Sun! why does thy ray
To earth distribute only partial day?
Since no resisting cause from spirit flows
Thy penetrating essence to oppose;
No obstacles by Nature's hand impressed,
Thy subtle and ethereal beams arrest;
Nor motion's laws can speed thy active course,
Nor strong repulsion's powers obstruct thy force;
Since there is no convexity in MIND,
Why are thy genial beams to parts confined?
While the chill North with thy bright ray is blessed,
Why should fell darkness half the South invest?
Was it decreed, fair Freedom! at thy birth,
That thou shou'd'st never irradiate all the earth?
While Britain basks in thy full blaze of light,
Why lies sad Afric quenched in total night?
Thee only, sober Goddess! I attest,
In smiles chastis'd, and decent graces dressed.
Not that unlicens'd monster of the crowd,
Whose roar terrific bursts in peals so loud,
Deaf'ning the ear of Peace: fierce Faction's tool;
Of rash Sedition born, and mad Misrule;
Whose stubborn mouth, rejecting Reason's rein,
No strength can govern, and no skill restrain;
Whose magic cries the frantic vulgar draw
To spurn at Order, and to outrage Law;
To tread on grave Authority and Power,
And shake the work of ages in an hour:
Convulsed her voice, and pestilent her breath,
She raves of mercy, while she deals out death:
Each blast is fate; she darts from either hand
Red conflagration over the astonished land;
Clamouring for peace, she rends the air with noise,
And to reform a part, the whole destroys.
O, plaintive Southern! Author of the Tragedy of Oronoko.
whose impassioned strain
So often has waked my languid Muse in vain!
Now, when congenial themes her cares engage,
She burns to emulate thy glowing page;
Her failing efforts mock her fond desires,
She shares thy feelings, not partakes thy fires.
Strange power of song! the strain that warms the heart
Seems the same inspiration to impart;
Touched by the kindling energy alone,
We think the flame which melts us is our own;
Deceived, for genius we mistake delight,
Charmed as we read, we fancy we can write.
Though not to me, sweet Bard, thy powers belong,
Fair Truth, a hallowed guide! inspires my song.
Here Art would weave her gayest flowers in vain,
For Truth the bright invention would disdain.
For no fictitious ills these numbers flow,
But living anguish, and substantial woe;
No individual griefs my bosom melt,
For millions feel what Oronoko felt:
Fired by no single wrongs, the countless host
I mourn, by rapine dragged from Afric's coast.
Perish the illiberal thought which would debase
The native genius of the sable race!
Perish the proud philosophy, which sought
To rob them of the powers of equal thought!
Does then the immortal principle within
Change with the casual color of a skin?
Does matter govern spirit? or is mind
Degraded by the form to which it is joined?
No: they have heads to think, and hearts to feel,
And souls to act, with firm, though erring zeal;
For they have keen affections, kind desires,
Love strong as death, and active patriot fires;
All the rude energy, the fervid flame,
Of high-soul'd passion, and ingenuous shame:
Strong, but luxuriant virtues boldly shoot
From the wild vigor of a savage root.
Nor weak their sense of honor's proud control,
For pride is virtue in a Pagan soul;
A sense of worth, a conscience of desert,
A high, unbroken haughtiness of heart;
That self-same stuff which erst proud empires swayed,
Of which the conquerors of the world were made.
Capricious fate of man! that very pride
In Afric scourged, in Rome was deify'd.
No Muse, O It is a point of honor among negroes of a high spirit to die
rather than to suffer their glossy skin to bear the mark of the whip. Qua-shi
had somehow offended his master, a young planter with whom he had been bred up
in the endearing intimacy of a play-fellow. His services had been faithful; his
attachment affectionate. The master resolved to punish him, and pursued him for
that purpose. In trying to escape Qua-shi stumbled and fell; the master fell
upon him: they wrestled long with doubtful victory; at length Qua-shi got
uppermost, and, being firmly seated on his master's breast, he secured his legs
with one hand, and with the other drew a sharp knife; then said, Master, I have
been bred up with you from a child; I have loved you as myself: in return, you
have condemned me to a punishment of which I must ever have borne the marks:
thus only I can avoid them; so saying, he drew the knife with all his strength
across his own throat, and sell down dead, without a groan, on his master's
body. Ramsay's Essay on the Treatment of African Slaves.
Qua-shi! shall thy deeds relate,
No statue snatch thee from oblivious fate!
For thou wast born where never gentle Muse
On Valor's grave the flowers of Genius strews;
And thou wast born where no recording page
Plucks the fair deed from Time's devouring rage.
Had Fortune placed thee on some happier coast,
Where polished souls heroic virtue boast,
To thee, who sought'st a voluntary grave,
The uninjur'd honors of thy name to save,
Whose generous arm thy barbarous Master spared,
Altars had smok'd, and temples had been reared.
Whenever to Asric's shores I turn my eyes,
Horrors of deepest, deadliest guilt arise;
I see, by more than Fancy's mirror shown,
The burning village, and the blazing town:
See the dire victim torn from social life,
The shrieking babe, the agonizing wife!
She, wretch forlorn! is dragged by hostile hands,
To distant tyrants sold, in distant lands!
Transmitted miseries, and successive chains,
The sole sad heritage her child obtains!
Even this last wretched boon their foes deny,
To weep together, or together die.
By felon hands, by one relentless stroke,
See the fond links of feeling Nature broke!
The fibers twisting round a parent's heart,
Torn from their grasp, and bleeding as they part.
Hold, murderers, hold! nor aggravate distress;
Respect the passions you yourselves possess;
Even you, of ruffian heart, and ruthless hand,
Love your own offspring, love your native land.
Ah! leave them holy Freedom's cheering smile,
The heav'n-taught fondness for the parent soil;
Revere affections mingled with our frame,
In every nature, every clime the same;
In all, these feelings equal sway maintain;
In all the love of HOME and FREEDOM reign:
And Tempe's vale, and parched Angola's sand,
One equal fondness of their sons command.
The unconquered Savage laughs at pain and toil,
Basking in Freedom's beams which gild his native soil.
Does thirst of empire, does desire of fame,
(For these are specious crimes) our rage inflame?
No: sordid lust of gold their fate controls,
The basest appetite of basest souls;
Gold, better gained, by what their ripening sky,
Their fertile fields, their arts Besides many valuable productions of the
soil, cloths and carpets of exquisite manufacture are brought from the coast of
Guinea.
and mines supply.
What wrongs, what injuries does Oppression plead
To smooth the horror of the unnatural deed?
What strange offense, what aggravated sin?
They stand convicted -- of a darker skin!
Barbarians, hold! the opprobrious commerce spare,
Respect his sacred image which they bear:
Though dark and savage, ignorant and blind,
They claim the common privilege of kind;
Let Malice strip them of each other plea,
They still are men, and men should still be free.
Insulted Reason loathes the inverted trade --
Dire change! the agent is the purchase made!
Perplexed, the baffled Muse involves the tale;
Nature confounded, well may language fail!
The outrag'd Goddess with abhorrent eyes
Sees MAN the traffic, SOULS the merchandise!
Plead not, in reason's palpable abuse,
Their sense of Nothing is more frequent than this cruel and stupid argument,
that they do not feel the miseries inflicted on them as Europeans would do.
feeling callous and obtuse:
From heads to hearts lies Nature's plain appeal,
Though few can reason, all mankind can feel.
Though wit may boast a livelier dread of shame,
A loftier sense of wrong refinement claim;
Though polished manners may fresh wants invent,
And nice distinctions nicer souls torment;
Though these on finer spirits heavier fall,
Yet natural evils are the same to all.
Though wounds there are which reason's force may heal,
There needs no logic sure to make us feel.
The nerve, however untutored, can sustain
A sharp, unutterable sense of pain;
As exquisitely fashioned in a slave,
As where unequal fate a scepter gave.
Sense is as keen where Congo's sons preside,
As where proud Tiber rolls his classic tide.
Rhetoric or verse may point the feeling line,
They do not whet sensation, but define.
Did ever slave less feel the galling chain,
When Zeno proved there was no ill in pain?
Their miseries philosophic quirks deride,
Slaves groan in pangs disowned by Stoic pride.
When the fierce Sun darts vertical his beams,
And thirst and hunger mix their wild extremes;
When the sharp iron This is not said figuratively. The writer of these lines
has seen a complete set of chains, fitted to every separate limb of these
unhappy, innocent men; together with instruments for wrenching open the jaws,
contrived with such ingenious cruelty as would shock the humanity of an
inquisitor.
wounds his inmost soul,
And his strained eyes in burning anguish roll;
Will the parched negro find, ere he expire,
No pain in hunger, and no heat in fire?
For him, when fate his tortured frame destroys,
What hope of present fame, or future joys?
For this, have heroes shortened nature's date;
For that, have martyrs gladly met their fate;
But him, forlorn, no hero's pride sustains,
No martyr's blissful visions sooth his pains;
Sullen, he mingles with his kindred dust,
For he has learned to dread the Christian's trust;
To him what mercy can that Power display,
Whose servants murder, and whose sons betray?
Savage! thy venial error I deplore,
They are not Christians who infest thy shore.
O thou sad spirit, whose preposterous yoke
The great deliverer Death, at length, has broke!
Released from misery, and escaped from care,
Go, meet that mercy man denied thee here.
In thy dark home, sure refuge of the oppressed,
The wicked vex not, and the weary rest.
And, if some notions, vague and undefin'd,
Of future terrors have assailed thy mind;
If such thy masters have presumed to teach,
As terrors only they are prone to preach;
(For should they paint eternal Mercy's reign,
Where were the oppressor's rod, the captive's chain?)
If, then, thy troubled soul has learned to dread
The dark unknown thy trembling footsteps tread;
On HIM, who made thee what thou art, depend;
HE, who withholds the means, accepts the end.
Not thine the reckoning dire of LIGHT abused,
KNOWLEDGE disgraced, and LIBERTY misused;
On thee no awful judge incensed shall sit
For parts perverted, and dishonored wit.
Where ignorance will be found the surest plea,
How many learned and wise shall envy thee!
And thou, WHITE SAVAGE! whether lust of gold,
Or lust of conquest, rule thee uncontrol'd!
Hero, or robber! -- by whatever name
Thou plead thy impious claim to wealth or fame;
Whether inferior mischiefs be thy boast,
A petty tyrant rifling Gambia's coast:
Or bolder carnage track thy crimson way,
Kings dispossessed, and Provinces thy prey;
Panting to tame wide earth's remotest bound;
All Cortez murdered, all Columbus found;
Over plundered realms to reign, detested Lord,
Make millions wretched, and thyself abhorred; --
In Reason's eye, in Wisdom's fair account,
Your sum of glory boasts a like amount;
The means may differ, but the end's the same;
Conquest is pillage with a nobler name.
Who makes the sum of human blessings less,
Or sinks the stock of general happiness,
No solid same shall grace, no true renown,
His life shall blazon, or his memory crown.
Had those adventurous spirits who explore
Through ocean's trackless wastes, the far-sought shore;
Whether of wealth insatiate, or of power,
Conquerors who waste, or ruffians who devour:
Had these possessed, O COOK! thy gentle mind,
Thy love of arts, thy love of humankind;
Had these pursued thy mild and liberal plan,
DISCOVERERS had not been a curse to man!
Then, blessed Philanthropy! thy social hands
Had linked dissever'd worlds in brothers bands;
Careless, if color, or if clime divide;
Then, loved, and loving, man had lived, and died.
The purest wreaths which hang on glory's shrine,
For empires founded, peaceful PENN! are thine;
No blood-stained laurels crowned thy virtuous toil,
No slaughtered natives drenched thy fair-earn'd soil.
Still thy meek spirit in thy The Quakers have emancipated all their slaves
throughout America.
flock survives,
Consistent still, their doctrines rule their lives;
Thy followers only have effaced the shame
Inscribed by SLAVERY on the Christian name.
Shall Britain, where the soul of Freedom reigns,
Forge chains for others she herself disdains?
Forbid it, Heaven! O let the nations know
The liberty she loves she will bestow;
Not to herself the glorious gift confined,
She spreads the blessing wide as humankind;
And, scorning narrow views of time and place,
Bids all be free in earth's extended space.
What page of human annals can record
A deed so bright as human rights restored?
O may that god-like deed, that shining page,
Redeem OUR fame, and consecrate OUR age!
And see, the cherub Mercy from above,
Descending softly, quits the sphere of love!
On feeling hearts she sheds celestial dew,
And breathes her spirit over the enlightened few;
From soul to soul the spreading influence steals,
Till every breast the soft contagion feels.
She bears, exulting, to the burning shore
The loveliest office Angel ever bore;
To vindicate the power in Heaven adored,
To still the clank of chains, and sheathe the sword;
To cheer the mourner, and with soothing hands
From bursting hearts unbind the Oppressor's bands;
To raise the luster of the Christian name,
And clear the foulest blot that dims its fame.
As the mild Spirit hovers over the coast,
A fresher hue the withered landscapes boast;
Her healing smiles the ruined scenes repair,
And blasted Nature wears a joyous air.
She spreads her blessed commission from above,
Stamped with the sacred characters of love;
She tears the banner stained with blood and tears,
And, LIBERTY! thy shining standard rears!
As the bright ensign's glory she displays,
See pale OPPRESSION faints beneath the blaze!
The giant dies! no more his frown appalls,
The chain untouched, drops off; the fetter falls.
Astonished echo tells the vocal shore,
Oppression's fallen, and Slavery is no more!
The dusky myriads crowd the sultry plain,
And hail that mercy long invoked in vain.
Victorious Power! she bursts their twofold bands,
And FAITH and FREEDOM spring from Mercy's hands,
FINIS.

