THE SONGS, CHORUSES, etc.

[Price SIX PENCE.]

THE SONGS, CHORUSES, AND SERIOUS DIALOGUE OF THE MASQUE CALLED The Institution
of the GARTER, OR, ARTHUR'S ROUND TABLE restored.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, and P. A. DE HONDT, in the STRAND. MDCCLXXI.

Advertisement.
THE eager and almost universal Curiosity, which the late Installation of the
Knights of the Order of the Garter excited in the Public, seemed in a manner
to command our Attention, and justify our Endeavors to exhibit a Representation
of it in the following Masque: The Difficulty was to give an adequate Idea, in
a small Compass, of the various Circumstances of this great Solemnity,
consisting of the Installation, Procession, and Feast.

The late Mr. Gilbert West, published, some Years ago, a Dramatick Poem called
The Institution of the Order of the Garter, which has been much admired: It
was, however, impossible to bring it on the Stage as it was originally written,
because, though rich in Machinery, it was little more than a Poem in Dialogue
without Action: Some select Parts of it however, with a few necessary
Alterations, and the Addition of some comic Scenes, were thought a proper
Vehicle for the different Ceremonies of this great Festival. The Scene is laid
in the Reign of Edward the Third, who was the Founder of the Order, after
having restored that of the Knights of the Round Table, which we have supposed,
with some Writers, to be continued at the Institution of the Garter.

No Expense has been spared, nor, we hope, any Object of Attention overlooked,
which might conduce to make the following Masque as short, as various, and as
faithful to the original Institution as possible.

The Songs, Choruses, and Serious Dialogue are published, that they may be
better underderstood from the Stage. The comic Parts which are intended merely
for the Preparation of the principal Scenes, are not printed, as they would
lose much of their Effect by being separated from the Action of the Performer.

Mr. West, in order to give a greater Variety and to introduce some particular
Characters into his Poem, has taken (as he acknowleges in a Note) the Advantage
of a License usually allowed to Poets, of departing a little from Chronology,
and postponing the Institution of the Order for a few Years.

Under the Sanction of this Authority, we have ventured to make use of the same
poetical License, by throwing the Institution of the Order as many Years
backward, as Mr. West has brought it forward. We have made the Black Prince
nine Years younger than he was, when he was Knighted; and we flatter ourselves
that this Anachronism will be excused for the Sake of the Application.

Some other Liberties of less Consequence are necessarily taken for the Sake of
rendering the whole more Theatrical; we have had too long an Experience of the
public Indulgence, not to know that they will be readily overlooked, should
the rest of the Performance have the good Fortune to be approved.

THE SONGS, CHORUSES, etc. IN THE MASQUE CALLED The Institution of the GARTER.
After the OVERTURE, The Curtain rises and discovers, In SCENE the FIRST, THREE
SPIRITS. FIRST SPIRIT. HITHER, all ye heavenly powers,
From your empyreal bowers;
From the fields for ever gay,
From the star-pav'd milky way,
From the moon's relucent horn,
From the star that wakes the morn;
From the bow, whose mingling dies
Sweetly cheer the frowning skies;
From the silver cloud that sails,
Shadowy over the darkened vales;
From the elysiums of the sky,
Spirits immortal, hither fly!

CHORUS OF SPIRITS. Fly, and through the limpid air
Guard in pomp, the sliding car,
Which to his terrestrial throne
Wafts Britannia's Genius down.

SECOND SPIRIT. Hither all ye heavenly powers,
From your empyreal bowers!
Chiefly ye, whose brows divine
Crowned with starry circlets shine,
Who in various labors tried,
Once Britannia's strength and pride,
Now in everlasting rest
Share the glories of the blessed!
Peers and nobles of the sky,
Spirits immortal, hither fly!

CHORUS of BARDS and SPIRITS answer. We fly, and charm the limpid air,
While the softly-sliding car,
To his sea-encircled throne,
Wafts Britannia's Genius down.

THIRD SPIRIT. Hither too, ye tuneful throng,
Masters of enchanting song,
Sacred bards! whose rapturous strains
Sooth the toiling hero's pains,
Sooth the patriot's generous cares;
Sweetly through their ravished ears,
Whispering to the immortal mind,
Heavenly visions, hopes refined;
Hopes of endless peace and fame,
Safe from envy's blasting flame,
Pure, sincere in those abodes,
Where to throngs of listening gods
Hymning Bards, to virtue's praise,
Tune their never-dying lays.
Sweet encomiasts of the sky,
Spirits immortal, hither fly!

The scene opens and discovers the Genius of England descending, attended by
Spirits and Bards, who sing the following Chorus. We wake our harps to
Britain's weal,
Our bosoms glow with heavenly love,
The bliss that spotless Patriots feel,
Is kindred to the bliss above.

GENIUS speaks. Disdain not, ye blessed denizons of air,
To breathe this grosser atmosphere a while,
Your service I shall need; mean time resort
To yon imperial palace, and in air
Shed your choice influence on the noble train,
There on this solemn day assembled round
The throne of British Edward; I a while
Must here await the approach of other Spirits,
Sage Druids, Britain's old philosophers,
Who still enamored of their ancient haunts
Unseen of mortal eyes, they hover round
Their ruined altars, and these sacred oaks: --
But hence, aerial Spirits; lo, they come!

The Spirits go off -- the Genius and Bards come forward to meet the Druids in
Scene the third. CHIEF DRUID. Inform us, happy Spirit, protecting power
Of this our ancient country, wherefore now
From our sequestered valleys, pensive groves,
And dark recesses, thou have summoned us,
To wait thy orders amongst these sacred oaks?

GENIUS. A great event, sage Druids, that no less
Imports, than this your ancient country's fame,
From contemplation, and your silent shades
Calls you to meet me in this dark recess.

CHIEF DRUID. Our country's weal, even from the bliss of heaven
Can charm down patriot souls to visit earth,
And in her cause exert their holiest ardors.

GENIUS. Know, in yon castle, whose proud battlements
Sit like a regal crown upon the brow
Of that high climbing lawn, does EDWARD hold
His solemn session, and this hour receives
The pleas of all the aspiring candidates,
Who summoned by the herald's public voice
To Windsor, as to Fame's bright temple, haste
From every shore; the noble, wise, and brave,
Knights, senators and statesmen, lords and kings;
Ambitious each to gain the splendid prize,
By EDWARD promised to transcendent worth.
For who of mortals is too great and high
In the career of virtue to contend?
Of these, selecting the most glorious names,
Does England's monarch purpose to compose
A princely brotherhood, himself the chief,
And worthy sovereign of the illustrious band;
A band of heroes, listed in the cause
Of honor, virtue, and celestial truth,
Under the name, and holy patronage
Of Cappadocian GEORGE, Britannia's Saint.

CHIEF DRUID. A plan of glory, which beyond the reach
Of his own conquering arms may propagate
The sovereignty of Britain, and erect
Her monarchs into judges of mankind!
How, Spirit, can we aid this glorious work?

GENIUS. Strait to the chapel, sages, bend your way,
And there unseen, support me in the task
To guide our Edward's choice, clear from the mists
It happily has contracted from a long
Unebbing current of prosperity,
His intellectual eye -- From this day's choice
Of his first colleagues, shall succeeding times
Of Edward judge, and on his fame pronounce.
For dignities and titles, when misplaced
Upon the vicious, the corrupt, and vile,
Like princely virgins to low peasants matched,
Descend from their nobility, and soiled
By base alliance, not their pride alone
And native splendour lose, but shame retort
Even on the sacred throne, from whence they sprung.
So may the luster of this order bright,
This eldest child of chivalry be stained,
If, at her first espousals, her great sire,
Caught by the specious outsides, that deceive
And captivate the world, admit the suit
Of vain pretenders, void of real worth;
Light, empty bubbles by the wanton gale
Of fortune swelled, and only formed to dance
And glitter in the sunshine of a court.

CHIEF DRUID. We will attend thee, spirit, from thy hallowed lips,
Breathe forth the sacred oracles of truth.

GENIUS. And you, immortal bards, charm with your lays,
(The sacred songs of virtue) the pure air,
That evil sprites, if any such lurk here,
May quit the hallowed and enchanted ground,
Nor counter-act our sacred operations!
[Exeunt Genius and Druids.
Bards remain and sing the following Semi-Chorus. CHORUS OF BARDS. Gentle
spirit, we obey,
Thus we charm the silent air;
Fiends and Demons shall not stay,
Raptures of the blessed to share.

SONG.
FIRST BARD. I.
Ye southern gales, that ever fly
In frolic April's vernal train,
Who, as you skim along the sky,
Dip your light pinions in the main;
Then shake them fraught with genial showers,
Over blooming Flora's primrose-bow'rs.
II.
Now cease awhile your wanton sport,
Now drive each threatening cloud away;
Then to the flowery vale resort,
And hither all its sweets convey;
And ever, as you dance along,
With softest murmurs aid our song.

Repeat the chorus. Gentle spirit, etc.


SCENE IV.
The Chapel of St. GEORGE. The KNIGHTS seated in their Stalls. King Edward
comes forward, and meets the Prince of Wales. K. EDWARD. Edward, approach,
beloved and noble son,
In whom my heart more joys, and glories, more
Than in the highest pride of sovereign power:
Last I admit thee, Edward Prince of Wales;
Thus to complete the number of our order,
In evidence whereof -- receive this robe
Of heavenly hue, ennobled by the shield
And ensign of our faith -- about thy knee
Be bound that mystic Garter; to denote
The bond of honor, that together ties
The brethren of St. George in friendly league,
United to maintain the cause of truth
And justice only -- "May propitious Heaven
"Grant that thou may henceforth wear it to his praise,
"The exaltation of this noble Order,
"And thy own glory." -- With like reverence,
"My son, receive and wear this golden chain,
"Graced with the image of Britannia's saint,
"Heaven's valiant soldier, Cappadocian GEORGE;
"In imitation of whose glorious' deeds,
"May thou triumphant in each state of life,
"Or prosperous, or adverse, still subdue
"Thy spiritual and carnal enemies;
"That not on earth alone thou may obtain
"The guerdon of thy valor, endless praise,
"But with the virtuous, and the brave above,
"In solemn triumph, wear celestial palms,
"To crown thy final noblest victory."
[Embraces the Prince.
PRINCE EDWARD. Accept, my sovereign liege, my grateful thanks,
That thou have thus vouchsafed to place thy son
So near thyself upon the roll of fame:
And may thy benediction, gracious lord,
May thy paternal vows be heard in heaven!
That he whom thou have listed in the cause
Of truth and virtue, never may forget
His vowed engagements, nor defraud the hopes,
By soiling with dishonorable deeds
The luster of that order, which thy name
Should teach him to respect and to adorn.

CHORUS. Let his name,
With honor and fame,
Down the tide of ages roll:
Glory shall fire him,
Virtue inspire him,
'Till, blessed and blessing,
Power possessing,
From earth to heaven he lifts his soul!

FIRST PART ends.
PART THE SECOND.
SCENE I.
A gate of Windsor-Castle. This SCENE passes among the COMIC CHARACTERS, and
the following Song is introduced. SONG.
I.
O the glorious Installation!
Happy nation!
You shall see the King and Queen,
Such a scene!
Valor he Sir,
Virtue she Sir,
Which our hearts will ever win;
Sweet her face is,
With such graces,
Show what goodness dwells within.
II.
O the glorious Installation!
Happy nation!
You shall see the noble Knights!
Charming sights!
Feathers wagging,
Velvet dragging,
Trailing, sailing on the ground;
Loud in talking,
Proud in walking,
Nodding, ogling, smirking round --
O the glorious etc.



The Scene opens, discovering a prospect of Windsor-Castle, from within the
gate. THE PROCESSION of the KNIGHTS TO ST. GEORGE'S HALL. SECOND PART ends.
PART THE THIRD.
SCENE I.
St. GEORGE's HALL. Where the Knights are discovered feasting at the Round
Table. After the different ceremonies, the Scene closes, and the comic
Characters have a Scene in another Apartment near the Hall. Then the Scene
changes to a Garden. Soft Music is heard at a distance. The Genius of England
leads on King Edward. EDWARD. What art thou, stranger, and why thus apart
With looks of sweet benevolence and love,
To these delightful shades, with which my eyes,
If memory fails not, never were charmed before;
Draw'st Thou our steps by some resistless power?

GENIUS. Behold the guardian Genius of this isle,
Descending from the realms of cloudless day!
Invisible I Have watched thy glorious deeds,
But on this solemn day I have vouchsafed
To manifest my presence; to declare
Not in those whispers, which have often spoke
Peace to thy conscious heart, but audibly,
And evident to all, the assent of Heaven
To the great business, which has gathered here
This troop of worthies from all nations round:
Know that those actions which are great and good,
Receive a nobler sanction from the free
And universal voice of all mankind,
Which is the voice of Heaven, than from the highest,
The most illustrious act of regal power.
This noble sanction, Edward, in the name,
Not of this age alone, but latest time,
Here do I solemnly annex to each
Of thy great acts, but chief to this most wise,
Most virtuous institution, which extends
Wide as thy fame, beyond your empire's bound,
A prize of virtue published to the world.
Ye registers of Heaven record the deed!
[A Chorus of Bards, Druids and Spirits unseen, repeat it] Ye registers of
Heaven record the deed!

EDWARD. It Is wondrous all! my heart expands beyond
Its mortal bounds to more than earthly bliss!

GENIUS. More wonders are prepared for thee, O king!
Behold what precious fruit the tree shall bear,
Thy hand has planted in this happy isle!
Visions of glory strike his raptured sight!
Ye unborn ages, crowd upon his soul!
Spirits, attend! -- unfold futurity! --
Now, Edward, taste that bliss, which ever flows
From royal virtues, has flowed, and shall flow
From thee, Friend, Guardian, Father of thy people.

[Here a VISION.] EDWARD. This is too much for human strength to bear,
Hold, hold my heart -- the excess of joy o'erwhelms me.

GENIUS. Now, re-ascend the skies, immortal Spirits!
The important act, that drew you down to earth
Is finished -- spare we now his mortal sense,
That cannot long endure the unshrouded beam
Of higher natures -- let him undisturbed,
But not unaided by the heavenly powers,
Complete the illustrious work, which future kings,
Struck with the beauty of the noble plan,
Shall emulously labor to maintain:
And may thy spirit, Edward, be their guide,
In every chapter Thou henceforth preside,
In every breast infuse thy virtuous flame,
And teach them to respect their country's fame.

The SCENE changes. GENIUS. Astonishment seals up his lips -- his heart
Runs over with gratitude -- thy God-like mind,
Exalts thee, Edward, above human-kind;
And from the realms of everlasting day,
Calls down celestial Bards thy praise to sing;
Calls a bright troop of Spirits to survey
Thee, the great miracle on earth, a PATRIOT KING!

Enter Bards, Druids, and Spirits, who all join Chorus. Hail! mighty nation,
ever famed in war!
Lo, heaven descends, thy festivals to share;
Celestial Bards in living lays shall sing,
BRITANNIA's glories, and her MATCHLESS KING.

End of the MASQUE.
The following EXTRACTS from Selden's Titles of Honor, and Ashmole's Order of
the Garter, are inserted to show the Authority upon which we have founded some
Part of our Installation.
AND so much the rather also, because we know by others of our own country,
that in the self-same year, a solemn and great meeting of Knights was appointed
by the King at Windsor Castle, for the setting up of his Round Table there, etc.

And it seems that out of the plot and purpose of this Round Table at Windsor,
erected in the same year wherein the Order of the New Garter was instituted and
appointed to be celebrated on St. George's day of the same year, as we may
collect out of Froissart also, the Order itself had chief part at least of its
original. And the other traditions touching the Garter of the Queen, or of the
Countess of Kent and Salisbury, may well stand with this, thus far, that the
word and the use of the Garter, began as the traditions suppose, but that the
Order was raised chiefly out of this of the Round Table of that time, as out of
a Seminary. For the Round Table was in special use in those ages, for the
drawing together of the braver Knights and Ladies, etc.

Froissart likewise says, Et ordonna (Edward the Third) que d'an en an le jour
Saint Gregore, s'en feroit la feste dedans le chateau de Vindesore, le quell
chateau le Roy Artur avoit fait fair autreffois edifier et in icelui tenir la
noble Table ronde, etc.

SELDOM, edit. 1672. page 658. King Edward the Third having designed to restore
the honor of the Round Table, held a just at Windsor, in the 18th year of his
reign, (but there is an old manuscript chronicle that has these words: King
Edward in his 19th year begun his Round Table, and ordained the day annually to
be kept there at Whitsuntide) and this meeting, in truth, occasioned the
foundation of the most noble Order of the Garter, as shall be noted by and by.

Ashmole, edit. 1672, page 96. He (Edward the Third) did thereupon first design
(as being invited thereto by its ancient fame) the restoration of King
Arthur's Round Table, which he exhibited with magnificent hastiludes and
general justs, to invite hither the gallant and active spirits from abroad; and
upon discovery of their courage and ability in the exercise of arms, to draw
them to his party, and oblige them to himself.

Though King Edward so far advanced the honor of a Garter, as that the Order
did derive its title and denomination from it; yet it is most evident, that he
founded this more famous Order, not to give reputation to, or perpetuate an
effeminate occasion, but to adorn martial virtue with honor, rewards, and
splendour: to increase virtue and valor in the hearts of his nobility; or, as
Andrew du Chesne says, to honor military virtue with some glorious favors and
rewards; that so true nobility (as is noted in the preface to the black book of
the Order) after long and hazardous adventures, should not enviously be
deprived of that honor which it has really deserved; and that active and hardy
youth might not want a spur in the profession of virtue, which is to be
esteemed glorious and eternal.

Upon these grounds no doubt does our learned Seldom affirm, that this Order
was raised chiefly out of the Round Table of that time (the Knights thereof
being in the flower of that age) as out of a seminary.

Ashmole, page 182. FINIS.

