St PATRICK's DAY; OR, THE SCHEMING LIEUTENANT.

A COMIC OPERA: AS IT IS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, SMOKE-ALLEY.

PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS. M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
JUSTICE, DOCTOR ROSY, SERGEANT TROUNCE, CORPORAL FLINT, LIEUTENANT. Soldiers,
Countrymen, etc.
WOMEN.
BRIDGET, LAURETTA.
St PATRICK's DAY; OR, THE SCHEMING LIEUTENANT.
ACT I.
Enter TROUNCE, FLINT, and Four SOLDIERS. 1st SOLDIER. I Say you are wrong, we
should all speak together, each for himself, and all at once, that we may be
heard the better.


2d Sol. Right Jack, we'll argue in Platoons.


3d Sol. Ay, ay, let him have our grievances in a volly, and if we be to have a
spokesman, there is the Corporal is the Lieutenant's countryman; and knows his
humor.


Cor. Let me alone for that, I served three years within a bit, under his
honor, in the Royal Inniskillions, and I never will see a sweeter tempered
gentleman, nor one more free with his purse. I put a great shamrogue in his hat
this morning, and I Will be bound for him, he will wear it, was it as big as
Steven's green.


4th Sol I say again then you talk like youngsters, like Militia striplings,
there is a discipline, look'ee, in all things, whereof the sergeant must be our
guide, he is a gentleman of words, he understands your foreign lingo, your
figures, and such like auxiliaries in scoring. -- Confess now for a reckoning,
whether in chalk or writing, ben't he your only man.


Cor. Why the sergeant is a scholar to be sure, and has the gift of reading.


Ser. Good soldiers, and fellow gentlemen, if you make me your spokesman, you
will show the more judgment, and let me alone for the argument. I Will be as loud
as a drum, and point blank from the purpose.


All Agreed, agreed.


Cor. O Fait here comes the Lieutenant, now Sergeant.


Ser. So then, to order. -- Put on your mutiny looks, every man grumble a
little to himself, and some of you hum the deserter's march.


Enter Lieutenant. Lieu. Well honest lads, what is it you have to complain of.


Sol. Ahem! hem!


Ser. So please your honor, the very grievance of the matter is this; -- ever
since your honor differed with Justice Credilous, our Inkeepers use us most
scurvily. -- By my halbert, their treatment is such, that if your spirit was
willing to put up with it, flesh and blood could by no means agree, so we
humbly petition, that your honor would make an end of the matter at once, by
running away with the Justice's daughter, or else get us fresh quarters, hem!
hem!


Lieu. Indeed! -- Pray which of the houses use you ill.


1st Sol. There Is the Red Lion have not half the civility of the old Red Lion.


2d Sol. There Is the White Horse, if he was'n't case hardened, ought to be
ashamed to show his face.


Lieu. Very well, the Horse and the Lion shall answer for it, at the quarter
sessions.


Ser The two Magpies are civil enough, but the Angel uses us like devils, and
the rising sun refuses us light to go to bed by.


Lieu. Then upon my word, I Will have the rising sun put down, and the Angel
shall give security for his good behavior, but are you sure you do nothing to
quit scores with them.


Cor. Nothing at all your honor, unless now and then we happen to fling a
cartridge into the kitchen fire, or put a spatterdash or so into the soup --
and sometimes Ned drums up and down stairs a little of a night.


Lieu. Oh all that is fair, but hark'ee lads I must have no grumbling on St
Patrick's day, so here take this and divide it amongst you. But observe me now,
show yourselves men of spirit, and don't spend six pence of it in drink.


Ser Nay hang it your honor, soldiers should never bear malice, we must drink
St Patrick's and your honor's health.


All Oh damn malice. St Patrick's and his honor by all means.


Cor. Come away then lads, and first we'll parade round the Market Cross, for
the honor of King George.


1st Sol. Thank your honor. Come along, St Patrick's, his honor, and strong
beer for ever.


[Exit Soldiers. Lieu. Get along you thoughtless vagabonds, yet upon my
conscience, it is very hard these poor fellows should scarcely have bread from
the soil they would die to defend.

Enter Doctor Rosy. Ah, my little Doctor Rosy, my galen a-bridge, what is the
news?


Doc. All things are as they were, my Alexander, the Justice is as violent as
ever, I felt his pulse on the matter again, and thinking his rage began to
intermit, I wanted to throw in the bark of good advice, but it would not do. He
says you and your cutthroats have a plot upon his life, and swears he had
rather see his daughter in a scarlet fever, than in the arms of a soldier.


Lieu. Upon my word the army is very much obliged to him, well then, I must
marry the girl first, and ask his consent afterward.


Doc. So then, the case of her fortune is desperate, hey!


Lieu. O hang fortune, let that take its chance, there is a beauty in
Lauretta's simplicity, so pure a bloom upon her charms.


Doc. So there is, so there is. -- You are for beauty as nature made her, hey!
No artificial graces, no cosmetic varnish, no beauty in grain, hey!


Lieu. Upon my word Doctor, you are right, the London ladies were always too
handsome for me; -- then they are so defended, such a circumvaluation of hoop,
with a breast work of whale bone, that would turn a pistol bullet, much less
Cupid's arrows, then turret on turret on top, with stores of concealed weapons,
under pretense of black pins, and above all, a standard of feathers, that would
do honor to a knight of the Bath. Upon my conscience I could as soon embrace
an Amosen armed at all points.


Doc. Right, right my Alexander -- my taste to a tittle.


Lieu. Then Doctor, though I admire modesty in women, I like to see their
faces. I am for the changeable rose, but with one of these quality amazons, if
their midnight dissipations had left them blood enough to raise a blush, they
have not room enough in their cheeks to show it. -- To be sure, bashfulness is
a very pretty thing, but in my mind, there is nothing on earth, so impudent as
an everlasting blush.


Doc. My taste, my taste -- Well Lauretta is none of these -- Ah! I never see
her, but she puts me in mind of my poor dear wife.


Lieu. Ay faith, in my opinion she cannot do a worse thing. -- Now is he going
to bother me about an old hag that has been dead these six years. [Aside.


Doc. Oh poor Dolly! I never shall see her like again, such an arm for a
bandage -- Veins that seemed to invite the lancet. Then her skin, smooth and
white as a gallipot -- her mouth as round and not larger than the month of a
penny phial. Her lips conserve of roses -- and then her teeth -- none of your
sturdy fixtures -- ask as they would -- it was but a small pull and out they
came. I believe I have drawn half a score of her poor dear pearls, (weeps) but
what avails her beauty. Death has no consideration -- one must die as well as
another.


Lieu. O! if he begins to moralize (takes out his snuss box.)


Doc. Fair or ugly, crooked or straight, rich or poor, flesh as grafs flowers
fade!


Lieu. Here Doctor, take a pinch, and keep up your spirits.


Doc. True, true my friend, grief cannot mend the matter -- all is for the best,
but such a woman was a great loss, Lieutenant.


Lieu. To be sure, for doubtless she had mental accomplishments equal to her
beauty.


Doc. Mental accomplishments! she would have stuffed an aligator, or pickled a
lizard with any Apothecary's wife in the kingdom. Why she could decypher a
prescription, and invent the ingredients, almost as well as myself; then she
was such a hand at making foreign waters for Setzer, Pyrmont, Islington or
Chaly beat she never had her equal -- and her Bath and Bristol springs
exceeded the originals -- Ah! Poor Dolly, she fell a martyr to her own
discoveries.


Lieu. How so, pray?


Doc. Poor soul, her illness was occasioned by her zeal in trying an
improvement on the Spa water, by an infusion of rum and acid.


Lieu. Ay, ay, spirits never agree with water drinkers.


Doc. No, no, you mistake. -- Rum agreed with her well enough, it was not the
rum that killed the poor dear creature, for she died of a dropsy. Well, she is
gone never to return, and has left no pledge of our loves behind -- No little
babe, to hang like a label round papa's neck: well, well, we are all mortal, --
sooner or later flesh is grass -- flowers fade.


Lieu. O the devil again!


Doc. Life's a shadow, the world a stage, -- we strut an hour.


Lieu. Here Doctor. (Offers snuff.)


Doc. True, true my friend -- well, high grief cannot cure it. All Is for the
best, hey! my little Alexander.


Lieu. Right, right, an Apothecary should never be out of spirits. But come,
faith it is time honest Humphrey should wait on the Justice, that must be our
first scheme.


Doc. True, true, you should be ready, the clothes are at my house, and I have
given you such a character, that he is impatient to have you; he swears you
shall be his body guard. Well I honor the army, or I should never do so much
to serve you.


Lieu. Indeed I am bound to you for ever Doctor, and when once I Am possessed of
my dear Lauretta, I will endeavor to make work for you as fast as possible.


Doc. Now you put me in mind of my poor wife again.


Lieu. Ah, pray forget her a little, we shall be too late.


Doc. Poor Dolly.


Lieu. It Is past twelve.


Doc. Inhuman dropsy.


Lieu. The Justice will wait.


Doc. Cropped in her prime.


Lieu. For heaven's sake come.


Doc. Well, flesh is grass.


Lieu. O the devil!


Doc. We must all die.


Lieu. Doctor.


Doc. Kings, Lords and common Whores. --

[Forces him off.
SCENE. Enter LAURETTA and BRIDGET. Lau. I repeat it again mama, officers are
the prettiest men in the world, and Lieutenant O'Conner is the prettiest
officer I ever saw.


Bri. For shame Laura, how can you talk so -- or if you must have a military
man, there is Lieutenant Plow or Captain Haycock, or Major Dray the Brewer; are
all your admirers, and though they are peaceable good kind, of men they have as
large cockades, and become scarlet as well as the fighting folks.


Lau. Psha! you know mama I hate militia officers, a set of dunghill cocks,
with spurs on heroes scratched off a church door. Clowns in military
masquerade, wearing the dress without supporting the character. No, give me the
bold upright youth, who makes love today and his head shot off tomorrow. Dear
to think how the sweet fellows sleep on the ground, and fight in silk stockings
and lace ruffles.


Bri. Oh barbarous! to want a husband that may wed you today, and be sent the
Lord knows where before night; then in a twelve month perhaps to have him come
like a Colossus with one leg at New York, and the other at Chelsea Hospital.


Lau. Then I Will be his crutch mama.


Bri. No, give me a husband that knows where his limbs are, though he want the
use of them -- and if he should take you with him -- to sleep in a baggage
cart, and stroll about the camp like a gipsey, with a knapsack and two children
at your back -- then by way of entertainment in the evening, to make a party
with the Sergeants wife, to drink bohea tea, and play at all fours on a
drumhead, it is a precious life to be sure.


Lau. Nay mama, you shou'd'nt be against my Lieutenant, for I heard him say,
you were the best natured and best looking woman in the world.


Bri. Why child, I never said but that Lieutenant O'Conner, was a very well
bred and discerning young man, it is your papa is so violent against him.


Lau. Why cousin Sophy married an officer.


Bri. Ay Laury, an officer in the militia.


Lau. No indeed, mama, a marching regiment.


Bri. No child, I tell you he was a Major of militia.


Lau. Indeed mama it was not.


Enter Justice. Jus. Bridget my love, I have had a message --


Lau. It was Cousin Sophy told me so.


Jus. I have had a message, love --


Bri. No child, she could say no such thing.


Jus. A message, I say.


Lau. How could he be in the militia, when he was ordered abroad.


Bri. Ay, girl hold your tongue -- well my dear.


Jus. I have had a message from Doctor Rosy.


Bri. He ordered abroad! He went abroad for his health.


Jus. Why Bridget.


Brid. Well dear -- Now hold your tongue miss.


Jus. A message from Dr Rosy, and Doctor Rosy says --


Lau. I Am sure mama his regimentals --


Jus. Damn his regimentals -- Why don't you listen?


Bri. Ay girl, how durst you interrupt your papa?


Lau. Well papa.


Jus. Doctor Rosy says he will bring --


Lau. Were blue turned up with red, mama.


Jus. Laury -- says he will bring the young man.


Bri. Red! yellow if you please, miss.


Jus. Bridget -- the young man that is to be hired.


Bri. Besides miss, it is very unbecoming in you to want to have the last word
with your mama, you should know --


Jus. Why zounds! will you hear me or no?


Bri. I am listening my love -- I am listening -- But what signifies my
silence, what good is my not speaking a word, if this girl will interrupt and
let nobody speak but herself -- Ay, I don't wonder my life, at your impatience,
your poor dear lips quiver to speak -- but I suppose she will run on and not let
you put in a word -- you may very well be angry -- there is nothing sure so
provoking, as a chattering, talking --


Lau. Nay, I Am sure mama it is you will not let papa speak now.


Bri. Why, you little provoking minx --


Jus. Get out of the room directly, both of you, get out.


Bri. Ay, go girl.


Jus. Go Bridget, you are worse than she, you old hag, I wish you were both up
to the neck in the canal to argue there till I took you out.


Enter Servant. Ser Doctor Rosy, sir.


Jus. Show him up.


[Exit Servant. Lau. Then you own mama, it was a marching regiment.


Bri. You're an obstinate fool, I tell you, for if that had been the case --


Jus. You will not go.


Bri. We are going, Mr Surly -- If that had been the case, I say, how could --


Lau. Nay, mama, one proof.


Bri. How could major --


Lau. And a full proof.


[ Justice drives them off. Jus. There they go, ding dong in for the day. --
Good lack, a fluent tongue is the only thing a mother don't like her daughter
should resemble her in.

Enter Doctor Rosy. Well Doctor, where is the lad, where is trusty?


Doc. At hand, he will be here in a minute -- I Will answer for it, he is such a one
as you 'an't met with -- brave as a lion, gentle as a saline draught.


Jus. Ah, he comes in the place of a rogue -- a dog that was corrupted by the
Lieutenant. But this is a sturdy fellow, is he Doctor?


Doc. As Hercules -- and the best back sword in the country. Egad he will make
the red coats keep their distance.


Jus. O the villains! this is St Patrick's Day, and the rascals have been
parading my house all the morning. I know they have a design upon me, but I
have taken all precautions, I have magazines of arms, and if this fellow does
but prove faithful, I shall be more at ease.


Doc. Doubtless he will be a comfort to you.


Enter a Servant. Serve. There is a man below sir, enquires for Doctor osy.


Doc. Show him up.


Jus. Hold -- a little caution -- how does he look?


Serve. A country looking fellow, your worship.


Jus. O, well well, for Doctor Rosy, these rascals try all ways to get in here.


Serve. Yes please your worship, there was one here this morning wanted to speak
to you -- he said his name was Corporal Breakbones.


Jus. Corporal Breakbones!


Serve. And Drummer Crackskull came again.


Jus. Ay! did you ever hear of such a damned confounded crew. Well, show the
lad in here!


[Exit Ser. Doc. Ay, he will be your porter, he will give the rogues an answer.


Enter Lieutenant disguised as Humphrey. Jus. So a tall Efacks, what! has lost
an eye.


Doc. Only a brute he got in taking seven or eight highwaymen.


Jus. He has a damned wicked leer somehow with the other.


Doc. O no, he is bashful -- a sheepish look.


Jus. Well my lad, what is your name?


Lieu. Humphrey Hum.


Jus. Hum -- I don't like Hum.


Lieu. But I be mostly called honest Humphrey.


Doc. There, I told you so -- of noted honesty.


Jus. Well honest Humphrey, the Doctor has told you my terms, and you are
willing to serve, hey!


Lieu. And please your worship, I shall be well content.


Jus. Well then, hark'ye honest Humphrey, you are sure now you will never be a
rogue -- never take a bribe, hey! honest Humphrey.


Lieu. A bribe! What Is that?


Jus. A very ignorant fellow indeed.


Doc His worship hopes you will never part with your honesty for money,
Humphrey.


Lieu. Noa, noa.


Jus. Well said Humphrey -- my chief business with you is to watch the motions
of a rake helly fellow here, one Lieutenant O'Conner.


Doc. Ay, you don't value the soldiers, do you Humphrey?


Lieu. Not I -- they are but zwaggerers, and you will see they will be as much
afraid of me, as they would of their captain.


Jus. And I faith Humphry, you have a pretty cudgel there.


Lieu. Aye, the zwitch is better than nothing, but I should be glad of a
stouter, have you got such a thing in the house as an old coach-pole, or a spare
bed post.


Jus. Oon's what a Dragon it is -- well Humphrey, come with me, I Will just show
him to Bridget, Doctor, and we'll agree, come along honest Humphry.

[Exit.
Lieu. My dear Doctor, now remember to bring the Justice presently to the walk,
I have a scheme to get into his confidence at once.


Doc. I will, I will.


[Shakes hands, Justice enters and sees them. Jus. Why honest Humphrey, hey!
what the devil are you at?


Doc. I was just giving him a little advice -- well I must go for the present
-- good morning to your worship -- you need not fear the Lieutenant, while he
is in your house.


Jus. Well, get in Humphrey -- good morning to you Doctor. (Exit Doctor) Come
along Humphrey. Now I think I am a match for the Lieutenant and all his gang.

Exit.
ACT II.
Enter TROUNCE, DRUMMER and SOLDIERS. SERGEANT. COME, silence your drum --
there is no valor stirring today -- I thought St Patrick would have given us
a Recruit or two today.


Sol. Mark Sergeant.


Enter two Countrymen. Ser. Oh! these are the lads I was looking for, they have
the looks of gentlemen. A'n't you single my lads.


1st Coun. Yes, an please you, I be quite single, my relations be all dead,
thank heavens more or less. I have but one poor mother left in the world, and
she is an helpless woman.


Ser. Indeed! a very extraordinary case -- quite your own master then -- the
fitter to serve his Majesty -- Can you read?


1st Coun. Noa, I was always too lively to take to learning but John here, is
main clever at it.


Ser. So, what, you're a scholar friend.


2d Coun. I was born so, measter. Feyther kept grammar school.


Ser. Lucky man, in a campaign or two put yourself down chaplain to the
regiment. And I warrant, you have read of warriors and heroes.


2d Coun. Yes that I have, I have read of jack the Giant killer, and the Dragon
of Wantly, and the -- noa, I believe that is all in the hero way, except once
about a Comet.


Ser. Wonderful knowledge! well my heroes, I Will write word to the King of your
good intentions, and meet me half an hour hence, at the two Magpies.


Coun. We will, your-honour, we will.


Ser. But stay, for fear I shou'dn't see you again in the crowd, clap these
little bits of ribbon into your hats.


1st Coun. Our hats are none of the best.


Ser. Well, meet me at the Magpies, and I Will give you money to buy new ones.


Coun. Bless your honor, thank your honor.

[Exit.
Ser. (Winking at Sol.) Jack.

[Exit Soldiers. Enter Lieutenant. So, here comes one would make a grenadier.
Stop friend, will you list?


Lieu. Who shall I serve under.


Ser. Under me to be sure.


Lieu. Is Not Lieutenant O'Conner your officer?


Ser. He is, and I am Commander over him.


Lieu. What! be your Sergeants greater than your Captains?


Ser. To be sure we are, it is our business to keep them in order. For instance
now, the General writes to me, dear Sergeant, or dear Trounce, or dear Sergeant
Trounce, according to his hurry, if your Lieutenant does not demean himself
accordingly, let me know Yours, GENERAL DELUGE.


Lieu. And do you complain of him often?


Ser. No hang him, the lad is good-natured at bottom, so I pass over small
things. But hark'ee, between ourselves, he is most confoundedly given to
wenching.


Enter Corporal. Cor. Please your honor, the Doctor is coming this way with
his worship -- We are all ready and have our cues.


Lieu. Then my dear Trounce, or my dear Sergeant, or my dear Sergeant Trounce,
take yourself away.


Ser. Zounds! the Lieutenant, I smell of the black hole already.

[Exit.
Enter Justice and Doctor. Jus. I thought I saw some of the cutthroats.


Doc. I fancy not, there is no one but honest Humphrey, ha! ods life, here comes
some of them, we'll stay by these trees, and let them pass.


Jus. Oh the bloody looking dogs

[Walks aside.
Enter Corporal and two Soldiers. Cor. Holloa, friend, do you serve Justice
Credulous?


Lieu. I do.


Cor. Are you rich?


Lieu. Noa.


Cor. Nor never will with that old stingy booby, look here, take it.

[Gives him a purse.
Lieu. What must I do for this?


Cor. Mark me, our Lieutenant is in love with the old rogue's daughter help us
to break his worship's bones, and carry off the girl, and you are a made man.


Lieu. I Will see you hanged first, you pack of skurry villains.

[Throws away the purse.
Cor. What sirrah, do you mutiny, lay hold of him.


Lieu. Nay then, I Will try your armor for you.

[Beats them.
All. Oh, oh! Quarter, quarter.

[Exit.
Jus. Trim them, trounce them, break their bones, honest Humphrey. What a
spirit he has!


Doc. Aquafortis.


Lieu. Betray my master!


Doc. What a miracle of fidelity!


Jus. Ay, and it shall not go unrewarded -- I Will give him sixpence on the spot.
Here honest Humphrey, there is for yourself, as for this bribe, (takes up the
purse) such trash is best in the hands of justice. Now then Doctor, I think I
may trust him to guard the women, while he is with them I may go out with
safety.


Doc. Doubtless you may, I Will answer for the Lieutenant's behavior while
honest Humphrey is with your daughter.


Jus. Ay, ay, she shall go no where without him. Come along honest Humphrey.
How rare it is to meet with such a servant.

[Exit.
SCENE, A Garden. LAURETTA discovered. Enter JUSTICE and LIEUTENANT. Jus. Why
you little Truant, how durst you wander so far from the house without my leave,
do you want to invite that scoundrel Lieutenant to scale the walls and carry
you off?


Lau. Lud papa, you are so apprehensive for nothing.


Jus. Why hussy --


Lau. Well then, I cannot bear to be shut up all day so like a nun. I am sure it
is enough to make one wish to be run away with -- and I wish I was run away
with -- I do -- and I wish the Lieutenant knew it.


Jus. You do, do you hussy? Well I think I Will take pretty good care of you.
Here, Humphrey, I leave this lady in your care. Now you may walk about the
garden Miss Pert, but Humphrey shall go with you wherever you go. So mind
honest Humphrey, I am obliged to go abroad for a little while, let no one but
yourself come near her, don't be shame faced you booby, but keep close to her.
And now Miss, let your Lieutenant or any of his crew come near you if they can.

[Exit.
Lau. How this booby stares after him.

[Sits down and sings.
Lieu. Lauretta.


Lau. Not so free fellow.

[Sings.
Lieu. Lauretta, look on me.


Lau. Not so free fellow.


Lieu. No recollection!


Lau. Honest Humphrey be quiet.


Lieu. Have you forgot your faithful soldier?


Lau. Ah! O preserve me.


Lieu. It Is my soul your truest slave, passing on your father in this disguise.


Lau. Well now I declare this is charming -- you are so disguised my dear
Lieutenant, and you do look so delightfully ugly, I am sure no one will find
you out, ha! ha! ha! you know I am under your protection, papa charged you to
keep close to me.


Lieu. True my angel, and thus let me fulfill.


Lau. O pray now dear Humphrey.


Lieu. Nay, it is but what old Mittimus commanded.

[Offers to kiss her, Enter Justice.
Jus. Laury my -- hey! what the devil's here?


Lau. Well, now one kiss and be quiet.


Jus. Your very humble servant, honest Humphrey -- don't me -- Pray don't let
me interrupt you.


Lau. Lud papa -- Now that is so good natured -- Indeed there is no harm -- you
did not mean any rudeness, did you Humphrey?


Lieu. No indeed miss, his worship knows it is not in me


Jus. I know that that you are a lying canting hypocritical scoundrel and if
you don't take yourself out of my sight.


Lau. Indeed papa now I Will tell you how it was, I was sometime taken with a
sudden giddiness, and Humphrey seeing me begin to totter ran to my assistance
quite frightened poor fellow, and took me in his arms.


Jus. Oh! was that all, nothing but a little giddiness, hey!


Lieu. That Is all indeed your worship, for seeing miss change color I ran up
instantly.


Jus. O 'twas very kind in you.


Lieu. And luckily recovered her.


Jus. And who made you a doctor, you impudent rascal, hey! get out of my sight
I say this instant or by all the statutes.


Lau. O now, papa you frighten me and I am giddy again -- oh help.


Lieu. O dear lady -- she will fall.

[Takes her into his arms.
Jus. Zounds! what before my face -- why then thou miracle of impudence (lays
hold of him and discovers him) Mercy on me who have we here, Murder -- Robbery
-- Fire -- Rape -- Gun -- powder -- Soldiers -- John -- Susan Bridgett --


Lieu. Good sir, don't be alarmed, I mean you no harm.


Jus. Thieves, Robbers, Soldiers.


Lieu. You know my love for your daughter.


Jus. Fire, Cutthroats.


Lieu. And that alone.


Jus. Treason, Gunpowder. (Enter Servant with a Blunderbuss) Now Scoundrel let
her go this instant.


Lau. O papa, you will kill me.


Jus. Honest Humphrey, be advised -- Ay miss this way if you please.


Lieu. Nay sir, but hear me.


Jus. I Will shoot.


Lieu. And you will be convinced.


Jus. I Will shoot.


Lieu. How injurious.


Jus. I Will shoot, and so your very humble servant, Honest Humphrey Hum.


[Exit separately. SCENE, A Walk. Enter DOCTOR ROSY. Doc. Well I think my
friend is now in a fair way of succeeding. Ah! I warrant he is full of hope and
fear, doubt and anxiety; truly he has the fever of love strong upon him; faint,
peevish, languishing all day with burning restless nights -- Ah! just my case
when I pined for my poor dear Dolly -- When she used to have her daily cholics,
that her little Doctor be sent for -- Then would I interpret the language of
her pulse -- Declare my own sufferings in my receipt for her, send her a pearl
necklace in a pill box -- or a cordial draught, with an acrostic on the label.
-- Well those days are over -- no happiness lasting -- all is vanity -- now
sunshine -- now cloudy -- we are as it were, king and beggar -- then what
avails --


Enter Lieutenant. Lieu. O Doctor, ruined and undone.


Doc. The pride of beauty.


Lieu. I am discovered and --


Doc. The gaudy palace.


Lieu. The justice is --


Doc. The pompous wig.


Lieu. Is more enraged than ever.


Doc. The gilded cane.


Lieu. Why Doctor (slapping him on the shoulder.)


Doc. Hey!


Lieu. Confound your morals, I tell you I am discovered, discomfited,
disappointed, ruined.


Doc. Indeed! good lack, good lack, to think of the instability of human
affairs -- Nothing certain in this world -- most deceived when most confident
-- fools of fortune all.


Lieu. My dear Doctor, I want at present a little practical wisdom -- I am
resolved this instant to try the scheme, we were going to put in execution last
week -- I have the letter ready, and only want your assistance to recover my
ground.


Doc. With all my heart -- I Will warrant you I Will bear a part in it -- but how
the deuce were you discovered?


Lieu. I Will tell you as we go, there is not a moment to be lost.


Doc. Heaven send we succeed better, but there is no knowing.


Lieu. Very true.


Doc. We may, and we may not.


Lieu. Right.


Doc. Time must show.


Lieu. Certainly.


Doc. We are but blind guessers.


Lieu. Nothing more.


Doc. Thick sighted mortals.


Lieu. Remarkably.


Doc. Wandering in error.


Lieu. Even so.


Doc. Futurity is dark.


Lieu. As a cellar.


Doc. Men are moles.


[ Lieut. forcing him out. SCENE, JUSTICE's House. Enter JUSTICE and BRIDGETT.
Jus. Odds Life Bridgett, you are enough to make one mad, I tell you he would
have deceived a chief justice, the dog seemed as ignorant as my clerk, and
talked of honesty as if he had been a church Warden.


Bri. Po! Nonsense, honesty indeed! -- What had you to do pray with honesty: --
A fine business you have made of it with your Humphrey Hum, and Miss too, she
must have been privy to it. -- Lauretta, ay, you would have her called so, but
for my part I never knew any good come of giving girls these heathen christian
names; if you had called her Deborah, or Tabitha, or Ruth, or Rebecca, or Joan,
nothing of this had ever happened; but I always knew Lauretta was a runaway
name.


Jus. Psha, you're a fool.


Bri. No, Mr Credilous, it is you who are a fool, and no one but such a
simpleton would be so imposed on.


Jus. Why zounds! Madam, how durst you talk so, if you have no respect for your
husband, I should think unus quorum might command a little deference.


Bri. Don't tell me -- Unus findlestick, you ought to be ashamed to show your
face at the sessions, you will be a laughing stock to the whole bench, and a
byeword with all the pig-tail'd Lawyers, and bag-wig'd Attorneys about town.


Jus. Is this language for his Majesty's Representative, by the statutes, its
high treason, and petty treason both at once.


Enter Servant. Ser. A letter for your worship.


Jus. Who brought it?


Serve. A soldier.


Jus. Take it away and bury it.


Bri. Stay -- Now you're in such a hurry -- it is some canting scrawl from the
Lieutenant, I suppose, let me see -- Ay. it is signed O'Conner.


Jus. Well, come read it out.


Bri. "Revenge is sweet"


Jus. It begins so, does it? I Am glad of that, I Will let the dog know I Am of his
opinion.


Bri. "And though disappointed of my designs upon your daughter, I have still
the satisfaction of knowing I Am revenged on her unnatural father, for this
morning, in your chocolate, I had the pleasure to administer to you a doze of
poison." -- Mercy on us!


Jus. No tricks, Bridgett, come you know it is not so, you know it is a lie.


Bri. Read it yourself.


Jus. "Pleasure to administer a doze of poison" -- Oh horrible -- Cutthroat
villain -- Bridgett.


Bri. Lovee, stay here is a postcript. N. B. It Is not in the power of medicine
to save you.


Jus. Odds my life Bridgett, why don't you call for help? I Have lost my voice --
My brain is giddy -- I shall burst and no assistance. -- John -- Laury -- John.


Bri. You see lovee what you have brought on yourself.


Enter Servant. Ser. Your worship.


Jus. Stay, John, did you perceive any thing in my chocolate cup this morning?


Ser. Nothing your worship, unless it was a little grounds.


Jus. What color were they?


Ser. Blackish, your worship.


Jus. Ay, arsenac, black arsenac. Why don't you run for Doctor Rosy, you rascal?


Ser. Now sir.


Bri. O lovee, you may be sure it is in vain, let him run for the Lawyer to
witness your will, my life.


Jus. Zounds! go for the Doctor, you scoundrel. You are all confederate
murderers.


Ser. O, here he is your worship.

[Exit.
Jus. Now Bridgett, hold your tongue, and let me see if my horrid situation be
apparent.


Enter Doctor. Doc. I have but just called to inform -- hey! bless me, what is
the matter with your worship?


Jus. There he sees it already -- Poison in my face, in capitals. Yes, yes, I Am
a sure job for the undertakers indeed.


Bri. Oh! Oh! alas Doctor.


Jus. Peace Bridgett. Why Doctor, my dear old friend, do you really see any
change in me?


Doc. Change, Never was man so altered, how came these black spots on your nose?


Jus. Spots on my nose!


Doc. And that wild stare in your right eye.


Jus. In my right eye!


Doc. Aye, and alack, alack, how you are swelled!


Jus. Swelled!


Doc. Aye, don't you think he is, madam?


Bri. O, it is in vain to conceal it, indeed lovee, you are as big again as you
was this morning.


Jus. Yes, I feel it now -- I Am poisoned -- Doctor help me for the love of
justice -- Give me life to see my murderer hanged.


Doc. What!


Jus. I Am poisoned I say.


Doc. Speak out.


Jus. What! cannot you hear me?


Doc. Your voice is so low and hallow as it were, I cannot hear a word you say.


Jus. I Am gone then, hic jacet. Many years one of his Majesty's Justices.


Bri. Read Doctor -- Ali, lovee the will -- Consider, my life, how soon you
will be dead.


Jus. No Bridgett, I shall die by inches.


Doc. I never heard such monstrous iniquity. Oh, you are gone indeed my friend,
the mortgage of your little bit of clay is out, and the sexton has nothing to
do but to close. We must all go sooner or later -- High and low -- Death's a
debt, his mandamus binds all alike -- No bail, no demurrer.


Jus. Silence Doctor Croaker, will you cure me or will you not?


Doc. Alas, my dear friend, it is not in my power, but I Will certainly see
justice done on your murderer.


Jus. I thank you, my dear friend, but I had rather see it myself.


Doc. Ay, but if you recover the villain will escape.


Bri. Will he? then indeed it would be a pity you should recover, I am so
enraged against the villain, I cannot bear the thought of his escaping the
halter.


Jus. That Is very kind in you, my dear, but if its the same thing to you, my
dear, I had as soon recover notwithstanding. What Doctor, no assistance!


Doc. Esacks I can do nothing, but there is the German Quack whom you wanted to
send from town, I met him at the next door, and I know he has antidotes for all
poisons.


Jus. Fetch him, my dear friend, fetch him, I Will get him a diploma if he cures
me.


Doc. Well, there is no time to be lost, you continue to swell immensely.

[Exit.
Bri. What, my dear, will you submit to be cured by a Quack Nostrum monger? for
my part as much as I love you, I had rather follow you to your grave, than see
you owe your life to any but a regular bred physician.


Jus. I Am sensible of your affection, dearest, and be assured nothing consoles
me more in my melancholy situation, so much as the thoughts of leaving you
behind me.


Enter Doctor and Lieutenant disguised. Doc. Great luck, met him passing by the
door.


Lieu. Metto dowsei pulsum.


Doc. He desires to feel your pulse.


Jus. Cannot he speak English?


Doc. Not a word.


Lieu. Palio vivem mortem soonem.


Doc. He says you have not six hours to live.


Jus. O mercy! does he know my distemper?


Doc. I believe not.


Jus. Tell him it is black arsnick they have given me.


Doc. Geneable illi arsnecca.


Lieu. Pisonatus.


Jus. What does he say?


Doc. He says that you are poisoned.


Jus. We know that, but what will be the effect?


Doc. Quid effectum?


Lieu. Diable tutellem.


Doc. He says you die presently.


Jus. Oh horrible! What no antedote.


Lieu. Curum benakere bono fullum.


Jus. What does he say, I must row in a boat to Fulham.


Doc. He says he will undertake to cure you for L. 3000.


Bri. L. 3000! 3000 halters, no lovee you shall never submit to such
impositions, die at once and be a customer to none of them.


Jus. I will not die Bridgett -- I don't like death.


Bri. Psha, there is nothing in it, a moment and it is over.


Jus. Ay, but it leaves a numbness behind that lasts for a plaguey long time.


Bri. O my dear, pray do consider the will.


Enter Lauretta. Lau. O my father, what is it I hear.


Lieu. Quiddam seomriam deos tollam rosam.


Doc. The doctor is astonished at the sight of your fair daughter.


Jus. How so?


Lieu. Damsellum livivum suvum rislibani.


Doc. He says that he has lost his heart to her, and that if you will give him
leave to pay his addresses to the young lady, and promise your consent to the
union if he should gain her affections, he will on those conditions cure you
instantly, without see or reward.


Jus. The devil! did he say all that in so few words -- what a fine language it
is. Well, I agree, if he can prevail on the girl -- and that I am sure he never
will. [Aside.


Doc. Greal.


Lieu. Writhum bothum.


Doc. He says you must give this under your hand, while he writes you a
miraculous receipt.


[Both sit down to write. Lau. Do mama, tell me the meaning of this.


Bri. Don't speak to me girl. -- Unnatural parent.


Jus. There doctor, there is what he requires.


Doc. And here is your receipt, read it yourself.


Jus. Hey! what is here! plain English.


Doc. Read it out, a wondrous nostrum, I Will answer for it.


Jus. "In reading this you are cured, by your affectionate son-in-law,
O'Conner." Who in the name of Beelzebub sirrah, who are you?


Lieu. Your affectionate son-in-law O'Conner, and your very humble servant,
Humphrey Hum.


Jus. It Is false you dog, you are not my son-in-law, for I Will be poisoned
again, and you shall be hanged -- I Will die sirrah, and leave Bridgett my Estate.


Bri. Ay, Pray do my dear, leave me your Estate, I Am sure he deserves to be
hanged.


Jus. He does you say -- hark'ee Bridgett, you showed such a tender concern for
me when you thought me poisoned, that for the future I am resolved never to
take your advice again in any thing. So, do you hear sir, you are an Irishman,
and a soldier, ar'n't you?


Lieu. I am sir, and proud of both.


Jus. The two things on earth I most hate, so I Will tell you what, renounce your
country, and fell your commission, and I Will forgive you.


Lieu. Hark'e Mr Justice, If you were not the father of my Lauretta, I would
pull your nose for asking the first, and break your bones for desiring the
second.


Doc. Aye, aye, you're right.


Jus. Is he, then I Am sure I must be wrong. Here sir. I give my daughter to
you, who are the most impudent dog, I ever saw in my life.


Lieu. O sir, say what you please, with such a gift as Lauretta, every word is
a compliment.


Bri Well my lovee, I think this will be a good subject for us to quarrel about
the rest of our lives.


Jus. Why truly, my dear, I think so, though we are seldom at a loss for that.


Doc. This is all as it should be. My Alexander, I give you joy, and you my
little god-daughter; and now my sincere wish is, that you may make just such a
wife as my poor dear Dolly.


FINIS.

