THE VIRGIN QUEEN, A DRAMA IN FIVE ACTS; ATTEMPTED AS A SEQUEL TO SHAKSPEARE'S
TEMPEST.

O, for a muse of fire, that would ascend
The brightest heaven of invention!
SHAKSPEARE. PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.

1797.

Entered at Stationers' Hall.

TO HIS GRACE FRANCIS GODOLPHIN, DUKE of LEEDS.
MY LORD,
THE honor I have in being, by baptism, your Grace's namesake, a consequence
of my being distantly related to FRANCIS Earl of GODOLPHIN, has emboldened me
to dedicate to your Grace this weak essay at an imitation of our immortal
SHAKSPEARE.

Having, my Lord, no incentive to the liberty I presume to take, but my respect
for your Grace's taste and virtues, I should only sully the purity of my
motive, were I to expatiate on them.

I have the honor to be, My Lord, Your Grace's Most humble, And most obedient
Servant, FRANCIS GODOLPHIN WALDRON.
Cross-court, Bow-street, Covent Garden. May 1, 1797.
THE VIRGIN QUEEN.

PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Alonso, king of Naples, Ferdinand, son to Alonso. Sebastian, brother to
Alonso. Abdallah, king of Tunis. Prospero, duke of Milan. Antonio, brother to
Prospero.
lords, attending on the king of Naples.
Gonzalo, Adrian, Francisco,
Stephano, a drunken butler. Ariel, a spirit. Trinculo, a jester. Caliban, a
savage.
of the king of Naples' ship.
Master, Boatswain,
Claribel, queen of Tunis. Hyrea, a sorceress. Miranda, betrothed to Ferdinand.
Sycorax, a spirit. Spirits, Mariners, etc.
The SCENE is dispersed.

PROEM.
GRAVE Prospero, who charmed in days of yore,
Was deeply read in magick's wondrous lore;
Could call forth spirits from the vasty deep,
And their dread power in strong subjection keep;
Marshal the dapper elves, and fairies trim,
By moonlight sporting near the fountain-brim;
In spell-bound service airy forms enroll,
Who ride the rainbow, glance from pole to pole;
And fiends of fire, more fervid than the sun,
Through realms of thrilling ice compel to run:
Wielded Jove's bolt, bade cloud-capt mountains quake,
And the great globe unto its center shake;
Commanding the rude surge to dash the skies,
From their dark beds of clay the dead arise!
What could he not, whom such a Master drew?
To Nature, in his boldest fictions, true!
Whose Ariel, Caliban, ghosts, witches, elves,
Seem Nature's children nearly as ourselves!
But what can the weak Prospero of these scenes,
Divested of all wonder-working means?
Pity, kind Reader! the rude lack of skill
Which traced the potent Sage with feeble quill!
Nor grieve, benignant Spirit! in thy sphere,
Sweet Shakspeare! to my heart of heart most dear!
That even the humblest of the scenick train
Should dare to ape thy mighty magick-strain;
But rather, with thy wonted goodness mild,
Forgive, and oh! inspire him, Fancy's Child!
THE VIRGIN QUEEN.
ACT I.
SCENE I. PROSPERO'S ISLE.
Ariel descends, singing. ARIEL SINGS. SPIRITS, who the curled clouds ride,
Down slope sunbeams deftly glide;
Through the fissure of the rock,
Rifted by the light'ning's shock,
Fiends, from neither fires ascend;
Nymphs, who on blue Neptune 'tend,
From the sea's pearl-paved bed,
Rear each coral-crowned nead;
Elves, the mountain leave, or dell:
Li^^ Ariel's call!
Assemble all
At your potent master's cell!

Enter Spirits, Fiends, Nymphs, and Elves. ARIEL SPEAKS. YE various ministers
of Prospero's power,
The spell bound servitors of his high will!
By whom the mighty worker has performed
Deeds, far beyond the stretch of human thought;
Soon shall our master's staff be buried low,
His magick-volume in the deep sea drowned:
Strait he will embark; attend him till on board,
And your last, duteous homage to him pay:
Then to the elements be ever free
To Enjoy his boon, your dear-lov'd liberty!

ARIEL SINGS. PURE Spirit, fiend, mild nymph, and say,
Your duty done, make holiday!
And each enjoy their full desire;
Pervade the earth, or sea, or fire!
Or, on light pennon, upward fly,
To wanton in the summer sky!
Pure spirit, fiend, mild nymph, and say,
Your duty done, make holiday!
Burden. Make holiday!

Exeunt. SCENE II. ANOTHER PART OF THE ISLAND.
Enter Boatswain, Trinculo, and Meriners. BOATSWAIN. YARE! yare! -- bear a hand
with that stowage; here is a fresh breeze sprung up, and as fair for Italy as
heart can wish.


TRINCULO. And where is the wonder o'that? -- did not the fairy promise old
grey-beard as much? -- and your true fairies are no courtiers.


BOATSWAIN. A fairy promise? -- why, what a plague, are we to be puffed along
by the devil and his imps! I don't know what to make of this conjuration! and
as for duke Prospero, I Am a lubber if I think him a jot better than an old
wizard!


TRINCULO. Between ourselves, boatswain, I take him to be a kind of friar
Bacon, or doctor Faustus; that I heard so many tales about, in England: and
like them, he has sold himself to the devil in the next world, that he may be
able to play the devil in this: which he did, with a vengeance, when he wrecked
us on this isle of devils!


Sudden darkness. BOATSWAIN. Avast! -- I wish he be not at some of his
diabolical tricks again! -- 'twas as clear a morn as ever shone but now; and,
lo! on a sudden, how it is overcast!


Lightning, Thunder, Wind, etc. And see! -- and hark! -- heigh, how it rumbles!
TRINCULO. 'Mass! I fear mischief's a-foot! and here comes
Stephano in a parlous taking.

Enter Stephano. STEPHANO. Oh, oh, oh! deliver me from such a sight again! --
boatswain! Trinculo! I have been so scared!


BOATSWAIN. With what, I trow?

STEPHANO. The conjuring duke has been sinking his necromancy-book to the
bottom of the red sea here -- it can be no other! -- breaking his
magical-stick, and burying it halfway to Beelzebub; which has caused such a
clatter among the elements, that I thought doomsday was come, at least!


BOATSWAIN. I Am no seaman, if I relish this same witchcraft! -- and the old
magick-monger is going aboard too! -- I wish we get safe to port! -- I doubt
it: -- I Would as lief sail with a corpse as a conjuror!


TRINCULO. By'r lady, boatswain, I Am of your mind! I shall never dare to walk
the deck after dark, Stephano, much less keep watch there all night, as he once
said we should, for dread of spirits, and hobgoblins.


STEPHANO. The bare thought of it gives me the shaking palsy, fellow Trinculo!
-- he were fitter to watch o'nights himself, and let servant-monster be his
mate: then, if any goblins should board us, they could gibber with them in
their own infernal dialect.


BOATSWAIN. He don't intend, I hope, to take that landshark aboard; -- an' he
do not keep him in an iron cage, he will devour all the ship's provisions, and
tear us to pieces for more.


TRINCULO, Who? Caliban? not he, of my troth! -- though he be a monster, he is a
tame one; and no glutton neither: -- give him but the bottle, you stop his
mouth at once.


STEPHANO. Now you talk of the bottle, Trinculo, I think a sup of it would do
me no harm, after the panick I have been in; what say ye to some sack, boys,
before we set sail?


TRINCULO. Ay, and after too; for I quake horribly with apprehension.


STEPHANO. Follow, then; -- the rock, my wine-cellar, is in our way to where
the ship rides: and our word shall be, no night-watching! for fear of spirits
and hobgoblins!


TRINCULO. Ay, spirits and hobgoblins! -- 'mercy on us! say I, and send us all
safe to Naples!


Exeunt. SCENE III. ANOTHER PART OF THE ISLAND.
Enter Prospero, Ferdinand, Miranda, and Caliban. CALIBAN. No, 'pr'ythee,
Prosper, do not leave me here
Amongst fiends and spirits; who, when you are not by
To shield him, will lone Caliban devour!

PROSPERO. Be satisfied; -- there is naught to apprehend.
In Neptune's bed my magick-volume sunk,
And many fathoms eathed my broken staff,
Upon this isle no spirit will abide
Of good or evil, to delight or fear: --
Puppets and elves shall gambol here no more,
In sportive ringlets, by pale Hecate's gleam; --
No more shall hideous specter scare thee home,
Loit'ring and grumbling at thy bidden task; --
For, when I leave thee, thou wilt be more alone
Than when, with Ariel pent in the cloven pine,
A shapeless, helpless thing, I prowling found thee.

CALIBAN. Which loneliness I now mislike and dread,
More than thy sprites and fiends; custom'd to sort
With monkies, apes, baboons, I felt not, ere
My noble lord came here, it is irksomeness;
But thou have taught it me: then leave me not,
I pr'ythee! -- take me hence! -- I Will lick thy feet,
And ever be obedient to control.

PROSPERO. What says Miranda? does my child approve
We take our late offending vassal hence?

CALIBAN. Speak for me, mistress! I Will be naught no more.

MIRANDA. I think, dear sir! the creature's much reformed
Since your forgiveness of his last offense;
And, by commixture with so many men,
He hourly humanizes: pity 'twere
In lonesome wretchedness to leave him now,
The speechless brutes his sole society,
Perforce a savage to become again.

CALIBAN. Thanks! mistress! thanks! -- thou smooth-faced man, speak too!

FERDINAND. 'Please you, sir, take him hence; I dare engage
He Will do you duteous service in return.

CALIBAN. Good now, my king, be moved!

PROSPERO. I am content;
But, have a care! look you deserve this grace!

CALIBAN. Yea, that I will, in sooth, my noble lord!
In the new world thou go to, will I dig
For hidden springs, to slake my master's thirst;
Rend thee down fuel; scoop thee a trim cell;
And be in all things meet thy vassal true!

PROSPERO. Enough; -- endeavor to do well, good deeds
Will follow, and beget thee farther favor.

CALIBAN. Yet grant one other boon, and I am sped!
'Stead of this rugged hide, to 'ray me now
In some sleek garment of my bounteous lord;
Or still yon dolts thy slave will moon-calf call!

PROSPERO. 'Twere not amiss; thou may: -- but tarry not.

CALIBAN. I thank thy greatness! -- I Will return anon,
And be thy lowly foot-licker for aye!

Exit. PROSPERO. Miranda! solace ever of my woes!
Beloved Milan thou will soon revisit;
Whence, with thy hapless sire, thou were outcast
By dire ambition, source of every ill!

MIRANDA. I scarce can guess what it is ambition means;
If ill, I must disclaim it: for all mine
Is centered in my sire's and Ferd'nand's love!

FERDINAND. Thou sweetest flower that ever in desert grew!
In whom the dignity of crowned queens
With rural innocence and beauty joins,
Here let me breathe forth --

PROSPERO. Hush! our friends approach. --
The sugared prattle of chaste love, my son!
However the enraptured maid it may delight,
Or glad the doting parent's listening ear,
To each one else insipid is, and dull!

Enter Gonzalo. GONZALO. My good lord Prospero, I Have searched up and down
This isle of yours, for somewhat to take home;
Some seld-seen rarity, as travelers use:
But, faith and troth, my lord, for aught I see,
Naples or Milan nothing hence can get,
Or valuable, or curious to behold.

PROSPERO. Yes, my Gonzalo! honored friend! to whom
That now I live thence to return I owe!
One thing, at least, to wonder at we'll take;
The mis-created knave you saw ere while,
I now intend --

GONZALO. Not to take home, I hope!
There were too many monsters, native there,
Else had you never him found, or Milan lost.

PROSPERO. That we no more will think on, good old lord!
A fault forgiven should also be forgot;
Or, like a half-heal'd wound, 'twill fester still,
And rankle at the core.

FERDINAND. Consummate goodness!

GONZALO. In The name of all that is savage! what comes here?
The thing we spoke of, surely, new-attir'd!

Enter Caliban. Why, how now, sirrah? wherefore this fine change,
From a rough skin to an embroidered silk?
CALIBAN. I craved this robe, that by yon scoffing apes
I might no more be slouted at, and mocked; --
They called me servant-monster, moon-calf, fish!
Perchance they will think I am more man-like now;
It may be but I am not near so warm:
A shaggy hide, from the chill breeze to 'fend,
Is far more worth than 'broider'd silken robe.

Enter Alonso, Sebastian, and Anthonio. PROSPERO. Welcome, great king! welcome
and health to all!
The earth-dividing sea, now smiling calm,
By swarthy Africa and fair Europe beach'd,
Our good keel soon shall plough; soon we, I trust,
Lost Italy regain!

ALONZO. 'Till we arrive,
Most injured Prospero! each hour's a year;
So much this beauteous maid I wish to see
My Ferd'nand's bride, thee to thy right restored.

ANTHONIO. Nor shall I know a happy moment, sir!
'Till I, in Milan, formally have made
A public resignation of your seat;
Which that I ever usurped sore smites my heart!

SEBASTIAN. No soul in Italy but will rejoice
To see my much-loved brother, Naples' king,
With Milan's rightful duke, and their 'troth'd heirs!

Enter Adrian, and Francisco. PROSPERO. Now, sirs, I pray, is all in readiness?

ADRIAN. All, all, great sir!

FRANCISCO. Our brave, refitted, ship,
With unfurled sails, that swell before the breeze,
Seems, like the mettled racer, ere he start,
Hardly held in, impatient of delay!

PROSPERO. Here, then, I bid adieu to solitude! --
Farewell the desert wild, the sandy beach,
Where often, from dawn to dusky even, I strained
My anxious eye balls to descry a sail;
Farewell my humble cave, whose flinty bed
My aged body hardiness has taught,
But never subdued the feelings of my mind:
While some, whose limbs enervate upon down,
Suffer their hearts to harden into stone.
Farewell Adversity; -- O, tutor sage!
Still may I practice what of thee I learned.
Farewell my sorrows all! -- hail! smiling Peace!
And laud we Heaven for this our blessed release!
Exeunt all but Caliban.
CALIBAN. Now shall I see the wondrous, yearn'd for place,
Where many Prospers, and Mirandas dwell:
He calls it Milan: -- I opine it is Heaven!
It must, it must! for many such as she
Would make a Heaven even of this desert isle!

Enter Boatswain, Stephano, and Trinculo. BOATSWAIN. Come, bear a hand, ye
bibbers! the king and company are just about to embark.


STEPHANO. I told you, Trinculo, I Would get my bottle out of the pool; -- here,
lay to --


TRINCULO. 'Thank you, boy! a good voyage to us, and no hobgoblins!

[Drinks.]
STEPHANO. Who have we here? my man-monster! and in a guarded jerkin?


TRINCULO. The goblins stripped us, last night, of our share of the frippery;
how came thou still so bedecked, mooncalf?


CALIBAN. I am no monster! nor no moon-calf, fools!
Yon' great ones, wiser far than ye! say I Am
A proper man! then henceforth flout no more!

STEPHANO. Trinculo, the wenches in Italy must look to their hearts now, and we
may wear the willow; for there'll be no making love to any purpose, while
Signior Caliban is by.


BOATSWAIN. Belay this prating, and make for the beach; or ye'll be left astern.


TRINCULO. Come along, Ban! -- and, when we are aboard, I Will teach you how to
pare your pig-nut nails, against you go a-wooing.


CALIBAN. Haste thou, vile patch! or here be left alone;
Then, as for food ye faint, ye'll wish in vain
For my long nails, such dainties to unearth:
Prizing what, dolt-like, now ye dare deride!

Exit Caliban. STEPHANO. Say thou so, bully monster? lead the way then; we
are for no such dainties: lead on, Moon-calf! farewell, crab-island! Naples
a-hoy! -- a brisk gale, and no hobgoblins!


TRINCULO. Ay, Stephano! a brisk gale, and no hobgoblins!
Exeunt.
SCENE IV. THE BEACH.
The Ship in view. Enter Ariel, attended by other Spirits; meeting Prospero,
Miranda, Alonso, Ferdinand, Gonzalo, Anthonio, Sebastian, Adrian and Francisco.
ARIEL. HAIL, noble master! still I greet you so;
Though, by your bounty, and your art abjured,
I now am free as the surrounding air!
Summoned by Ariel, the obedient winds
To waft you to fair Italy attend.

PROSPERO. My dainty chick! my bird! that cancels all
The kindnesses I ever have shown to thee!
Are we assembled all, my loving friends?
Where is our servant, Caliban?

Enter Caliban, Boatswain, Stephano, and Trinculo. CALIBAN. Here, lord!
Thy foot-licker is here -- O, Setebos!
What glorious thing is yon', as mountain huge!
Does firmly rest upon the unstable sea?
Fanning, with flickering top, the welkin's cheek!
It Is sure some god, is come to bear us hence
To Milan; which I rightly judged was Heaven!

PROSPERO. None now are wanting; instant' we'll embark:
And, Heaven permitting, Italy soon reach.
Now, my loved Ariel, a last adieu!
As mountain-air, or thought unlimited,
To the elements, and through unbounded space,
Delicate spirit! be thou ever free!

ARIEL. One word, my honored master! ere we part. --
Thy grateful servant would, were it possible,
Assure thy voyage clear of doubt or dread;
But that is not permitted! all he can
Is to advise, and hope his fears are vain.

PROSPERO. What means my gentle Ariel? -- spirit, speak!

ARIEL. Returning from my quest of favoring winds,
As, near the summit of a burning mount,
Even now, I was descending to this spot;
A sulfurous demon, issuing from it is vent,
Poured most unwelcome tidings in mine ear!

PROSPERO. Say on, if they import or mine or me!

ARIEL. The spirit of that foul witch, Sycorax,
Who died, thou know, upon this isle, great sir!
From the blue lake of sire, wherein 'twas plunged,
Will soon be loosed, till the dread day of doom!
Power she will have to cleave the intrenchant air,
And gird with trackless zone both land and sea;
But, as her passions ever earthly were,
And she was native of dark Africk's clime,
On earth, in Africa only, can she harm.
For that her son's your slave, the fiend beware!
Touch not at land, sir! 'till your port you gain;
Where once arrived, you may abide secure.

PROSPERO. Thanks for thy caution, virtue's constant friend!
Though, surely, I can have no cause of fear.
Heaven knows I fostered carefully her son;
That, at his earnest suit, I take him hence,
From solitude to free him, not enslave;
Nor will I basely leave him now, albeit
With hags and fiends no longer can I cope:
But, on the Omnipotent, most firm, rely!
Who, if the variegated earth we tread,
Or plough the printless bosom of the deep,
Is equally our pilot, guide, and guard!
All-ruling! ever-watchful! good and just!

ARIEL. Now, sir, embark; and, as I wish, be blessed!
Farewell, sweet mistress! ever mild-and pure!
Farewell, good master! cheerily on board!
That I corporeal were, to embrace my lord!
Approach, ye spirits! -- 'would I mortal were
One moment, to distill the tender tear!

Whilst Prospero, etc. embark, Ariel sings, and the other Spirits bear the
burden of the Ditty. ARIEL SINGS. NO more by moonlight shall be seen,
Upon this isle's enameled green,
Or on the yellow sands and shelves,
In sportive dance, the fairy-elves;
Since thy low dell, and rock-roof'd cell,
Thou now forsak'st. Farewell! Farewell!
Burden, Farewell! Farewell! To bid adieu, loved master, hark!
Thy faithful watch-dogs hoarsely bark;
And thy departure blithe to cheer,
Loud crows the shrill-ton'd chanticlere.
A parting knell, with tuneful shell,
The sea-nymphs found; ding, ding, dong, bell!

Burden, Ding, ding, dong, bell! Exeunt. END OF ACT THE FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A CABIN IN THE KING OF NAPLES' SHIP AT SEA
Enter Anthonio, and Sebastian. ANTHONIO. TUSH! tell not me; in the night we
might have done't:
Instead of this, 'would I had stayed behind,
In yon' lone isle to reign, a rock my throne,
And been both lord and subject to myself!

SEBASTIAN. But, will you hear? think not I mean you should,
Through Milan-streets, page Prospero's proud heels;
Like captive king in Roman victor's train.

ANTHONIO. Nor will I ever, come what may instead!
Death! to be hooted by a senseless rabble,
The scorn of slaves who knelt in the mire to me!
Deserted and despised! no refuge left,
Unless to shave my crown, turn whining monk,
And supplicate for scanty dole of bread!

SEBASTIAN. You apprehend too quickly; I no more
Than you mean tamely to return, and live
Obscure in Naples, where I thought to rule;
And yet intend: as thou may still in Milan.

ANTHONIO. At length thou speak; say on! I am all attention!

SEBASTIAN. Vainly against Prosp'ro's art we had contended;
But, mark our fortune! ere on board he came,
His wand he brake, and drowned his magic book:
Foregoing, nay abjuring, most fool-like,
The only means by which we had been foiled!

ANTHONIO. It Is true!

SEBASTIAN. We Are equal now! and, by a deed,
The world, were it known, might villainy miscall,
Ere we arrive at Italy's loved shore,
We'll lay in an eternal, dreamless, sleep,
Alonso, Prosp'ro, Ferdinand, nay all!

ANTHONIO. Impossible! so closely we are observed!

SEBASTIAN Go to! to men like us resolved, it is easy!
For, in the night, whose next morn lights us home,
Can we but get the boat, nay even a plank
Whereon to float ourselves, to the crew unknown;
We'll sink or fire the ship, whence none can 'scape!
Then to the amazed multitude on shore,
With hypocritick wailing, tell a tale
Of wreck, and deaths; and reign completely blessed!

ANTHONIO. My Delphick oracle! it shall be done!
IN the ship shall they find death, in the sea a grave,
Where they may ever rest! here break we off --
Our faces mask in smiles, and 'tend the king,
Lest our retirement should be marvell'd at;
Confirming the adage as we play our parts --
Fair visages often cover foulest hearts!

Exeunt. SCENE II. THE DECK.
Stephano, Trinculo, and Caliban. STEPHANO. NOW, Ban! how do you stomach
sailing? is it not rare to skim like a gull thus, 'twixt wind and water? how
do like it, eh?


CALIBAN. I like it much! This is a brave, sine god!
And bears us daintily; -- how swift he is!
He scuds the ocean fleet as fawn the earth!
O, that my dam were living to behold him!
Grim Setebos she would renounce with scorn;
Low, prostrate, fall with me; and thus adore!

[kneeling.] TRINCULO. What Is in the wind, now, 'trow?

CALIBAN. Thou unmatched wonder! -- miracle of power!
Hear thy vowed vassal's prayer, and grant his suit!
Give me but vengeance on my tyrant lord,
(Whom, though I feigned repentance, I detest!)
And in these arms his daughter once to clip,
I Will ever be thy bond-slave worshipper!

Rising. TRINCULO. So! the apostate has got him a new idol, Stephano; you may
return to your dog and bush again; he will worship you no more.


CALIBAN. What means this giddiness? -- I cannot stand!


TRINCULO. And note, if the moon-calf be not drunk too!


STEPHANO. Out, you ninny! -- it is only the ship's motion makes him stagger so;
as it did me erewhile.


TRINCULO. By'r lady, and so it may; -- but a sherris-sack was mixed with the
ship's motion when you caught the staggers.


CALIBAN. Sure I Am become what they call drunk again!
But know not how; -- for, save mere element,
Naught have I swallowed since I left the island.

TRINCULO. How he reels!

CALIBAN. I pr'ythee show where I may lie and sleep,
That Prosper see me not: else he will chide!

STEPHANO. Why, surely, the shallow-brain'd idiot thinks himself drunk indeed!


TRINCULO. A rare conceit! -- we'll humor it; -- and, while he is napping, if
we can find the old necromancer in the mood, try to get off keeping watch here
at night.


STEPHANO. Agreed. -- Come along, you drunken owl! and we'll lead you where you
may roost in safety, 'till your are sober.


CALIBAN. But am I drunk in sooth? -- I pr'yshee, say!


TRINCULO. Drunk, quotha? there is a question! -- ay-reeling-ripe, as when the
piping sairy led us by the ears into the pool; then, indeed, it was with sack:
now, only with the ship's motion: -- but a small matter will turn a weak head!


CALIBAN. Give me sack now! for I can but be drunk!
'Twill drown my fear, and make me full of mirth;
I may as well be jocund-drunk, as sad: --
Give me some sack, I pr'ythee, ere I sleep!

STEPHANO. Here Is a flaggon for you, fish! -- the king in the cabin cannot drink
better.


CALIBAN. It Is passing good! a king 'twill make of me!
This shall my pillow be; -- I Will drink and sleep;
Nor dread sour Prosper, while of this I Have store.

SINGS. I gathered ripe clusters of grapes from the vine,
Then champ'd 'em, and swill'd 'em, rejoiced so to dine;
Yet, like a dull ass, was raid, beaten, and jeered,
Of adder, ape, urchin, and goblin afear'd!
But, liquor celestial now, plenteous, I quaff,
At adder, ape, urchin, and goblin can laugh;
Ho, ho, ho; ho, ho, ho! I now should not fear,
Though Prosper and all his cursed spirits were here.

Exeunt. SCENE III. THE KING'S CABIN.
Enter Ferdinand. FERDINAND. HOW blessed a change has in few hours been wrought,
From dread of death to views of happiest life!
My royal sire preserved; a most rare bride
By heaven, her father, and herself bestowed:
What could I more have wished? how this deserve?

Enter Miranda. MIRANDA. My life, my lord, my Ferdinand! where art thou?

FERDINAND. What means my love? and why this war of white
Against the damask roses of thy cheek?

MIRANDA. Thou will not marvel when thou shall have heard! --
Yet, can it be? can beauteous, godlike man,
Who bears his great creator's face and form,
The continent of an immortal soul,
His heavenly nature by such deeds debase!

FERDINAND. Thou talk in riddles, dearest! be more plain.

MIRANDA. Those villain lords, -- I tremble while I speak, --
Anthonio and Sebastian, I Have o'erheard
Plot a most savage cruelty; and doom
Us all to perish, that themselves may reign!
Resolving, ere we reach the intended port,
(For their own safety taking first good care)
To burn or sink the ship, and all therein.

FERDINAND. Well might thou, trembling, wonder such could be!
Yet, fear no harm; their foul intent foreknown,
Shall make us guard from that, and every ill:
Nor think, O purest maid! for they are base,
That the whole race of mankind is the same.

MIRANDA. That were, sweet love! too simple even in me;
Though all unread in the peopled world's great book.
Our isle's small page has schooled me better lore!
My father comes! shield him, all gracious heaven!

Enter Prospero. PROSPERO. Wherefore these looks and accents of alarm?
Say, has there chanced any unused event?
Or know you aught to come gives cause of fear?

FERDINAND. I trust there is none, sir; -- but, those treacherous
Lords, Sebastian and Anthonio, linked in vice!
Miranda has o'erheard, remorseless, doom
Their nearest blood, Alonso, thee, nay all!
By sea, or-fire, to unprepar'd-for death!

PROSPERO. And are these wretches men? of women born?
Of kin and kind with us? -- retire, retire!
Stay not to see my weakness, should I weep
To think my mother such a monster bore!
Nor he frail Nature's only blot and shame!
Retire, my children; -- nay, I pray you go! --

FERDINAND. Miranda, come! -- let us obey thy sire;
And warn, while absent from him, all our friends,
To guard against those villains' dire design.

MIRANDA. My father! O, my father! guard him, heaven!
Exeunt Ferdinand, and Miranda.
PROSPERO. O monstrous! monstrous! wicked, horrid pair!
Worse than the beast I reared; who, tho'hell-born,
More human is than these most cursed fiends!
Their plot, thus timely known, must prove abortive;
But the intention I Will severely punish!

Enter Trinculo, and Stephano. TRINCULO. There, there he is! -- we have caught
him alone at last. -- Now to try if we can get off keeping watch! -- He seems
but in a crabbed humor tho; -- if I had not taken a cheering draught, I should
not dare to accost him.


STEPHANO. He cannot conjure the cramp into us now, you know; -- so, we may
venture safe enough: -- hem! -- may it please your highness --


PROSPERO. How now! what means this bold intrusion, slaves!

STEPHANO. Heaven defend us from cramp, ague, and palsy!

They both fall upon their knees. TRINCULO. And may the other place keep
lock'd-up all the ghosts, devils, and hobgoblins!


PROSPERO. Hence, drunken fools! upon the deck; away!

TRINCULO. O lord! that is the very place we want to shun! -- it is almost
sunset; -- and I would not stay upon deck when it is dark to be duke of Milan.


STEPHANO. Nor I, though I might marry your highness's fair daughter.


PROSPERO. What say the brainless dolts of duke and daughter?
Foul drunkards, hence! and consort with the monster.

TRINCULO. The monster is now sleeping off his drunkenness; -- good your grace!
let him watch while we sleep off ours.


PROSPERO. Has he! has Caliban been drunk again?

STEPHANO. So drunk, an't please you! that we were forced to lead him to his
kennel; where he lay, cursing your highness, and swallowing sack, 'till he fell
fast asleep.


PROSPERO. Haste! -- 'rouse, and drag the incorrigible hither!

STEPHANO. Here will be sad work, I doubt, Trinculo,
Aside to each other.
TRINCULO. O for a whirlwind now, to carry us out of his unmerciful clutches!


Exeunt Stephano and Trinculo. PROSPERO. Foul abstract of his dam, and hellish
sire!
Nor kindness nor severity avail,
To root out native evil from this beast!
Then let him suffer with these wretched knaves,
And that more-guilty, for less-ignorant pair!
Who, for our safety on this watery waste,
Shall day and night upon the deck abide:
And, when we Naples reach, the bloody lords
I will consign to shame! the savage drive
Into some wild, from haunt of men remote!

Enter Stephano, Trinculo, and Caliban. Caliban singing. Let Us troul a jocund
catch!
Laugh, drink, and sing,
'Till the welkin ring!
I Will firing no more fetch;
But Prosper brain,
And henceforth reign,
Mine own great lord and king!
Whither do lead me! -- what, does Prosper sleep?
And shall we quell the hated tyrant now?
PROSPERO. Approach, thou earth! thou drunken, murderous slave!

CALIBAN. Thou lie! I am no slave; -- but flee as thou!
If I perchance am drunk, 'twas this huge god,
Whose man-sed belly we are now within,
Did make me so while I did worship him.
Must I be ever thus for nothing chid!

PROSPERO. That was the plea before -- a fancied god!
Even this dull sot, as senseless as thyself;
Who, with his mate and thee, conspired my death!
Thy ignorance pitying, I then forgave; --
But for this wilful trespass, on the deck,
Hag-seed! besure thou 'bide, from now till morn.
Pack you both with him, sirrahs! and partake
Alike the punishment as the offense! --
I hoped my fallen brother to have reclaimed,
And humaniz'd this wretched, wayward brute;
It may not be: -- heaven's ruler governs all!
And, though through seeming labyrinths he leads,
The blessed event still justifies his ways!
Exit Prospero.
TRINCULO. So, we must even go upon deck at last! in spite of all our wise
schemes to prevent it! -- if the devil or his dam should pay us a visit in the
night, what will become of us, Stephano?


STEPHANO. Oh, never heed! -- the monster is to be with us; -- and companions
in distress make sorrow the less: -- I don't care for the old one himself, when
I am in good company: do you, mooncalf?


CALIBAN. Peace, ye dull fools! I will no more endure
This scurvy jesting; -- ye are base and false!
Ye first, like fiends, seduce, and then betray!
Beware, soul traitors, how henceforth ye mock;
Lest into both I strike my sharpened fangs,
And against each other dash ye, mongrels, dead!

STEPHANO. What a bloody-minded savage!

TRINCULO. 'Mass! I Am as much afraid of him now, as I was before of hobgoblins.


STEPHANO. Fellow Trinculo, we'll watch 'till he is asleep again; then muzzle,
and lash him to the mainmast: where he may growl his fill, and we not fear him.


TRINCULO. A match! -- I Will make the muzzle, and you shall put it on.


STEPHANO. Come, servant-monster! don't fall out with your man-i'-the-moon-god!
I Will warrant you get no harm upon deck; -- you shall have my cloak to sleep on,
and Trinculo's to cover you; with your skin full of sack to keep the cold out:
and tomorrow we'll devise some rare revenge against this old crabstock,
Prospero.


CALIBAN. The thought of that would make me brave the night,
Though rent-up rocks 'mid yesty waves o'erdash'd,
And livid lightning scath'd my unsty'd head!

STEPHANO. Cheer up, then! -- and, to drive away care, I Will troul the catch you
are so fond of. -- I made it myself, when I was in the bilboes with some more
jolly lads; for railing, in our cups, against duke Anthonio: who was proxy for
the tawny-moor king of Tunis, at our princess Claribel's marriage at Naples.


TRINCULO. I remember it! -- you said, though his skin was whiter, you believed
his heart was as dingy as king Abdallah's face -- so, sing away, boy! and we'll
bear the burden.


STEPHANO SINGS. Flout 'em, and scout 'em -- scout 'em and flout 'em,
thought is free;
Maul 'em and gaul 'em -- vile names to call 'em,
let us agree:
We care for no king -- the duke's a base thing,
worse then we;
In spite of his grace, we'll sing to his face
Liberty!
O sweet liberty! sing, boys, merrily;
O, rare liberty!
We'll drink and be free, like fish in the sea:
O, rare liberty!
Burden. O, sweet liberty! etc.
O, rare liberty! etc.
Exeunt.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. THE DECK, by moonlight.
On one part, Sebastian and Anthonio, walking to and fro; at another, Stephano
and Trinculo, at work; Caliban asleep near them: a Mariner, keeping watch.

SEBASTIAN. WELL, sir, how relish you this treatment, pray?
Is not your gentle brother wondrous kind,
In suffering us to pass the chilly night
Thus upon deck, whilst he lies warm below?

ANTHONIO. O, kind indeed! as you say, wondrous kind!
A precious sample of fraternal love!
To be dragged here at his imperious will,
And left to consort with these wretched slaves!
But, list! yon' mariner, who keeps the watch;
Even now was singing; let us attend the lay:
It may compose, at least divert our thoughts.

MARINER SINGS. WHEN the seaman quits the shore,
Let him think on home no more;
For, of those who tempt the main,
But a part see home again!
Some are wrecked, some tempest-tost,
To the bottom plunged and lost!
Seamen, when you quit the shore,
Think on home and friends no more!
When the raging tempests blow,
High we are mounted, dashed down low!
Amongst the stars now, trembling, peep;
Now explore the yawning deep!
Some arise, some there remain,
Never behold the light again!
Seamen, when you quit the shore,
Think on home and friends no more!
When the sea's with calmness crowned,
And the heavens smile around:
Even then disease may rage,
Death alike snatch youth and age!
Warfare, famine, fire, and drought,
Millions to their end have brought!
Seamen, when you quit the shore,
Think on home and friends no more!

SEBASTIAN. This artless ditty has more power to sooth.
Then many an intricate, and labored strain.

ANTHONIO. 'Thas calmed me for the present: let us repose!

They retire. STEPHANO. Well sung, in faith! though it almost lulled me asleep.
-- Come, Trinculo, have not you


CALIBAN. Ho, ho, ho, ho! thy sword is blunt, old man!
Now could I grind thy pithless bones to dust;
Rend ye to shreds, or tread ye into clay!
But, get ye gone! -- ye may as soon wound air,
Water, or fire, as charmed Caliban!
The spirit of my dam is strong in me!
Has callous made me to weak mortals' blows;
And your united force I stand, and dare!
Ho, ho, ho, ho! what, are ye all aseard?

GONZALO. By'r lakin! I yet never was before;
But my old blood's now curdled in my veins.

PROSPERO. Put up your swords, good sirs! they are but as straws;
A charmed life, in aid of strength, now given,
This beast has power to bring us all to naught!
My life alone fell Sycorax does seek;
And that, to save you, will I gladly yield!
Thou more-than-devil! speak thy dam's behest;
Which, though destruction follow, I obey!

CALIBAN. Make straight to land, dread Sycorax commands!
What there shall hap I know not; -- but, I have hope
All but thy daughter will my dam destroy!
My frustrate purpose then will I effect,
And people the unknown clime with Calibans!

FERDINAND. Peace, monster, peace! heaven never will that permit.

PROSPERO. Patience, my son! my life alone is sought;
And what is a life, compared with chastity,
Connubial crown! we come and go as fast,
As mill-sail shadows course each other over
The sunny earth, in swift successive round!
Nor can I perish, but by that decree,
To which who would not cheerfully resign!
For land, ho! pilot; fearless I Will ashore,
To prove the utmost malice of the fiend!
Lament not, should I sall; -- they are not ills,
Though they appear such, righteous heaven wills

THE SCENE CLOSES. AN AERIAL SCENE. Enter Ariel, meeting other Spirits. ARIEL.
It Is done, my pure co-mates! the word is given?
For land! heroically Prosp'ro said;
And even now the vessel swiftly sails
To the enchanted shore it never shall leave:
Where, to his grief, Alonso soon shall find
His daughter, and her moorish lord, enthralled
By a vile forc'ress, Hyrca, leagued with Sycorax!
Now is the time to prove, celestial bands!
If hellish fiends to us superior are; --
Long have they vaunted, with their burning breath
To dim and scorch our bright ethereal forms;
To hazard that, without good cause, were fond:
But, now, to shield fair virtue is good cause!
By art, or force, then let us essay the deed;
And to good Prosp'ro's rescue instant fly. --
In phalanx firm, with heavenly armor dight;
Virtue the word! for virtue strongly fight!

ARIEL SINGS. VIRTUE's the word!
Sound the trumpet of heaven!
Draw the adamant sword,
Tempered seven times seven!
To war against hell,
And its votaries quell,
Draw the adamant sword!
Sound the trumpet of heaven!

Burden. Virtue's the word! etc.
END OF ACT THE THIRD.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. A GROVE IN PROSPERO'S ISLE; THE SEA IN VIEW.
The Spirit of Sycorax descends. SYCORAX. HERE may I shun the blaze of day!
In these my well-known purlieus stray;
While the doomed vessel steers to land,
Which I Will destroy on Hyrca's strand!
In this dark grove, my mortal frame
A prey to death erewhile became;
And here remained my darling boy,
Young Caliban! born to annoy
All those who are not of his kind;
With mother's form, and father's mind!
In yon' riv'n pine I left the elf,
Close pent, who would not yield himself
To my desires; for I was shy
OF the amorous seamen, sailing by,
And scared them hence! I so disdained
All mortal commerce, since I gained
A spirit for my paramour!
Whose love I lost on Africk's shore,
By one deed, which the moors thought good,
And therefore left me in this wood;
Though by their laws condemned to die,
For murder, lust, and sorcery! --
When I had stolen, for sacrifice
To Setebos, a child; the cries
Of it is sad parents, wide misled,
Made me restore it to their bed:
Fool that I was! but, sweet it smiled,
And, for the moment, clean beguiled
My wayward nature! softened then
To tenderness, unknown by men;
Who dragged me, with unfeeling fangs,
Here, to endure sharp labor's pangs
For unborn Caliban! -- What light
So sudden dazzles? -- it is the sprite
I here left wedged; who bears a wand,
Of potency I cannot withstand!
To Barbary's coast, -- in yon black cloud,
Which thither speeds, and will enshroud
From sunny rays my bat-like eyes, --
I Will hasten; and, in time, apprize
Hyrca, that Prosp'ro, and his crew,
Approach: ere night the deed I Will do!

Exit, ascending. Enter Ariel, with a wand, and other Spirits. ARIEL. Thus far,
pure friends, success our skill has crowned;
And art, to force preferred, well steaded us!
The pliant ground yields not more ready way
To the blind pioneer, the sleeky mole;
Nor to the insinuating worm's more pervious,
Than unto us, in our dispersed search
Of this most precious staff; which my good hap
Chanced first to 'light on: no less thanks still due
To each, who freely eathed his radiant form,
And helped, when found, it is parts to reunite;
Restoring and augmenting its lost power!
This wand retrieved, good Prosp'ro's sure support,
For his drowned book, all fearless, we'll explore
The vast abyss of the ne'er-sounded sea!
Should we recover that, our toil's o'erpaid;
And he again from hellish fiends secure!
Now to the briny ooze; more noisome far
Then vap'rous mine, flint, slime, or clogging clay;
And apt to soil our skiey-tinctur'd wings:
Which must be close compressed, as deep we dive,
And range through groves of coral; where the nymphs,
And sea-born shepherds, 'neath their moist alcoves,
Repeat their vows, and pour forth all their loves!

ARIEL SINGS. WE'LL view the wonders of the deep!
The pearl-spread plains,
The finny swains,
And green-hair'd mermaids coy, who keep
The herds and flocks,
That graze the rocks;
The web-foot sea-beeves, kine, and sheep!
Then sadly mark each drowned man's skull!
And bleached bones,
Like pebble-stones;
Of which blue Neptune's bed is full!
When gained our prize,
To air we'll rise;
And Sycorax' fell decree annul!

Exeunt, toward the sea. SCENE II. A BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY.
Abdallah, King of Tunis, discovered in a sumptuous Pavilion. ABDALLAH. NIGHT'S
curtain is withdrawn, and the clear morn
Blushes like bashful bride from couch upris'n;
Whose yellow tresses, all dishevelled, throw
A golden glare around, creating day!
But what is day after drear nights like mine,
From my sweet bride withheld, my Claribel!
Yet, wherefore do I thus indulge despair?
Still may I hope to be delivered hence;
Still hope I shall regain my crown and throne;
From which, as in a dream, my queen and self,
By Hyrca's sorcery, were hither brought:
Me for her brutal lust, detested hag!
And my fair bride her low-degraded slave!
But, soft! I hear the hasteful step of love!
It Is Claribel! fly sorrow from my breast!
For where she comes naught can abide but joy!

Enter Claribel. CLARIBEL. My dear Abdallah! mine and Tunis' lord!
Fain would I greet thee with a happy day;
But the fell sorceress, Hyrca, wild with ire,
That her foul passion still you treat with scorn,
Since midnight has been working spells and charms,
The prelude of our doomed destruction nigh!

ABDALLAH. Were It but myself her wicked power could reach,
I Would meet her utmost fury with a smile;
Yielding my firm and unpolluted flesh
By fiery pincers to be burnt and torn!

CLARIBEL. And thinks my love that only him would harm?
Thou know whatever of ill should thee betide,
Must wound the love-fraught heart of Claribel!
But, for some hope to mitigate this fear,
As on the ocean's marge even now I gazed,
I saw a gallant vessel furl her sails;
Whilst from her boat stepped diverse on the shore:
And see, dear lord! already they approach.

Enter Prospero, and Miranda. MIRANDA. 'Beseech you, sir! venture no farther on.

PROSPERO. Fear nothing, sweet! lo, yonder is a pair,
Of human form, and most majestic port;
I will accost them!

MIRANDA. Rather, sir, avoid them!
They Are spirits! and, though one seems fair and good,
That, with so dark a hue, is sure a fiend!

PROSPERO. Collect thyself, my child! -- it is but the tinct
Peculiar to the race in Africa born,
Upon whose coast we now in safety tread;
Even such a one, yet courteous as ourselves,
Did Ferd'nand's sister, Claribel, late wed:
Should this man prove but good as Fame speaks him,
And from fell Sycorax' malice Heaven does shield,
We cannot doubt of succor in our need.

CLARIBEL. Heard you, Abdallah, what this stranger said?

ABDLLAH. Dearest! I did; and am abforb'd in wonder!
'Please you, grave sir! approach; and you, fair maid!
Nor lack for aught, save what we also want.

Enter Ferdinand, his sword drawn; and, soon after, Alonso, Adrian, and
Francisco. FERDINAND. The beast no longer seems invulnerable,
But shuns my sword! and, with his foul compeers,
Growling, a different track from us pursues.

PROSPERO. To share my fortunes since ye all persist,
As yet, 'thank Heaven! we are not only safe,
But landed on a seeming plenteous spot;
Where are inhabitants, of manners mild
As their soft climate's sweet salubrious air.

ALONSO. The moorish king, Abdallah, and my child!
It Is sure enchanted ground! -- are we in Tunis?
Do we but dream? or, is it witchcraft all!

GONZALO. Witchcraft, I doubt! and these but devils, sir,
Though in your children's forms!

ALONSO. Art thou my child?
An insubstantial shade? or wicked fiend!

Ferdinand. embracing Claribel. Shade art thou none, but Claribel herself! --
No fiend had ever power to look so fair!

Claribel. kneeling to Alonso. Astonishment has held me dumb till now! --
It Is your own Claribel, your wretched child!

ALONSO. Ha! wherefore wretched? speak, ungrateful king!
Did I deprive our Europe of those charms,
To have my child in Tunis wretched made!

CLARIBEL. Oh, no! -- alack, sir, we are far from thence!

ABDALLAH. Great king of Naples! my most honored sire!
Whom to behold again was past my hope --
Fly, with your goodly company, this place;
And rescue hence your Claribel and son!
But, if that may not be, secure yourselves.

ALONSO. Explain, my son! declare what ill awaits!

ABDALLAH. Here bides a potent sorceress; by whose art
From Tunis we were hither strangely brought,
Soon as your royal fleet had homeward sailed;
Myself the object of her foul desire,
My virgin-queen in bondage basely held!
Her the vile witch would elsewhere fain have stayed,
But had not power; and, though till now debarred
Due nuptial rites, on each returning morn
Like the eastern sun she glads my longing eye!
For even witchcraft cannot divide the pair,
Whose love-link'd hearts are holily conjoined!

PROSPERO. Mysterious Heaven sure pointed out the path,
To free from hence this twain! my mind's at rest!
Let us, my friends, strait victual home our ship;
And, naught impeding, quickly re-embark --
Come, I Will instruct you, sirs, how to ensnare
The antelope, and dappled, bounding fawn;
Whilst younger Ferdinand does agile climb
The trees and cliffs, for birdlings therein nested.

FERDINAND. Miranda, sweet! stay thou with Claribel,
Thy Ferdinand's loved sister, and now thine;
I must accompany our sires and friends,
Swift as the roe-buck to outstrip our game!

ABDALLAH. I Will guide you, strait, to where you will plenteous find
The finn'd and feathered race; unto the haunts
OF the clamb'ring kid, and lowly, and timid hare;
Or, if a nobler game you would pursue,
The (...) buffalo, and tusked boar.

PROSPERO. Lead on, great sir! 'twill be a royal chase,
Wherein a king does rouse for us our game!
Stay with yon' fair one, chuck! nor fear mischance.
This wondrous meeting Heaven, I Am sure, designed
The foretaste of still greater bliss in store!

Exeunt all but Claribel and Miranda. CLARIBEL. Stranger! with whom my
Ferdinand seems charmed,
Say, whence and who thou art? -- a queen? -- his bride?
That, since my nuptials, he has wooed and wed?

MIRANDA. Answer me first. -- Why did you kiss my love?
I much admired, 'till then, your angel-face!
Are you an angel, or of womankind?
For naught to judge by saw I ever before;
Except the mocking shadow of myself,
And Ariel, my grave sire's angelick sprite;
You most resemble me, though fairer far!

CLARIBEL. Thy speech is passing strange! but, if it be sooth,
Thy innocence deceives thee overmuch.
No more can I, a woman like thyself,
Compare with thee, true type of Beauty's queen!
Than can with Ferdinand, the moor, my lord;
Whom, ne'ertheless, past health and life I love!

MIRANDA. What, that dark creature! -- it is impossible; --
As soon the swan might on the raven dote!

CLARIBEL. I thought like thee when first I saw the moor,
And almost loathed where duty bade me love.
But my Abdallah has a snow-white soul,
Which over his hue a beamy luster throws!
He won the heart Alonso could not give,
And changed my mere obedience into choice:
Then be not jealous, fairest! thou'st no cause;
Much as a sister should, I Ferd'nand love;
But not a jot, sweet! more.

MIRANDA. Jealous! what is that?
Is it a Naples, or a Tunis word?
I know not what it means; -- but am content!
So kind you look, and fair you speak, I Am sure
You cannot mean to do me any wrong.

CLARIBEL. Come, then, sweet heart! and, in the adjacent bower,
Repose thee 'till our lords and sires return;
Taste of the pine, or more nutritious fig;
Whilst the pomegranate and sharp citron's juice,
Temp'ring each other, form our pleasing draught.

MIRANDA. Show me, I pray, to the clear, running stream;
With, if you have't, a little new-drawn milk;
Some berries, cracknels, or ripe ears of corn;
And, our creator thanking first, then thee
For thy great goodness to a stranger maid;
I Will break my fast, nor covet better fare!

Enter Caliban, Anthonio, and Sebastian. CALIBAN. They Are out of sight and
hearing far enough;
And I, securely, may my mistress seize.

ANTHONIO. Ha! beauteous Claribel! my long beloved!
Whom I, in Naples, for another wedded;
Hopeless I ever should clasp thee thus, my own!

CLARIBEL. What means Anthonio? -- surely you but jest.

MIRANDA. The villain lords, and that abhorred beast!
Fly, fly, fair queen! or we are for ever lost!

CALIBAN. Stay, gaudy goldfinch! flit not hence so soon!
Nor thou, sweet mistress!

MIRANDA and CLARIBEL. Ah!

screaming. CALIBAN. I have ye fast!

Seizing the females. CLARIBEL. My uncle! dear Sebastian! guard your neice
From this grim monster! good Anthonio, help --

ANTHONIO. To bear thee hence, my matchless Claribel!
Thy father doomed thee to a Moor's embrace,
And left thee, 'mid'st barbarians, a sold slave;
I will enfranchise strait and make thee mine!

SEBASTIAN And with Sebastian shall Miranda share
The joys of life, and splendor of a crown!

CALIBAN. But whom shall I have, if you each take one?
My mistress have I ever hunger'd for!
Sty'd in a rock with her, on acorns fed;
Sea-brine, or stagnant, mantled-pool to drink;
On her alone I, gluttoning, could have gorged:
And nothing lacked, having my nonpareil!

Attempting to clasp Miranda. MIRANDA. Save me, Anthonio! save your helpless
niece!

ANTHONIO. My charge is here; Sebastian's your protector:

SEBASTIAN. Forego your hold! -- Miranda must be mine!
The other female, if Anthonio list,
You Are free to take; but this I Will guard with life!

CALIBAN. It Is well there is another to appease me;
Else her I Would have, or will, or nill ye, fool!
This is as red and white, and finer far!
Will thou be mine, my jay, my parroquet?
You Are wondrous gaudy; I shall love thee much!

ANTHONIO. Stand off, base brute! this is my lovely prize; --
Miranda, only, you came here in quest of; --
Her you must have, or none!

CALIBAN. Oh, ho, oh, ho!

Roaring tremendously with anger. CLARIBEL. Heaven, what a contest!

MIRANDA: No way to escape?

CALIBAN. What, am I both denied? -- then, both I Will have!
Your holds forego, and quit them strait to me;
Or, by my dam's god, Setebos, I swear,
I Will flay ye quick! and rend you joint from joint!

[Caliban seizing the men the semales get free.] CLARIBEL. Fly, fly! --
Abdallah!

MIRANDA. Ferd'nand! father! friends!

Exeunt severally. CALIBAN. Let loose, ye barnacles! -- they both are flown!

ANTHONIO. We hold thee not! -- it is thou detainest us!
Darting your talons through our robes and skins,
Which you can scarce withdraw!

SEBASTIAN. I Am struck to the bone!

CALIBAN. Thus, then, I wrench them forth!

ANTHONIO AND SEBASTIAN. Oh! --

CALIBAN. Howl ye? dogs!
If I could tarry I would give ye cause;
And into atoms tear your quivering hearts!

Exeunt severally. SCENE III. THE SEA-BEACH.
Enter Trinculo, and Stephano with his Bottle. TRINCULO. WHAT a tedious time
these lubbers are, making the boat fast! -- 'would they were come! my belly
cries cupboard most voraciously; and I dare not stir a foot up the country to
look for food by myself, for fear of tumbling into such a pit as Caliban talked
of in his fleep; which that fury, Sycorax, may have dug for the cross old duke!


STEPHANO. By the mass, Trinculo, I would not stand in his shoes, though they
be made of velvet, for his whole dukedom! I warrant she and her imps will give
him a warm reception! boiling in lead or oil is the least he can expect!


Enter Master, Boatswain, and Mariners. MASTER. Come, my hearts! now the ship's
moored, and the boat haul'd ashore, let us take a landcruise in chase of some
provision.


TRINCULO. In Faith, master, my belly clings together like an empty satchel! if
we had not found land here, we should have been pretty sharp set before we
reached Naples; and forced to draw lots for a slice of one another.


STEPHANO. Not whilst we had such sack as this aboard; he that could not sail
all the world over, with this for his comfort, ought never to taste good liquor
while he breathed at nostrils.


MASTER. That may do with you, honest butler; but we want something more
substantial. -- Come, let us go in a body, in case of meeting wild beasts, or
savages; and see what this land produces: -- tend to the Boatswain's whistle!


BOATSWAIN. [Blows his whistle.] Come, bear a hand, bear a hand, my hearts! a
heigh!


STEPHANO. You may bear a hand by yourself, for me! -- I shall neither bear a
hand, nor budge a foot, while this lasts. -- I don't care for roaming any
farther up this coast, for fear of meeting that she-devil, Sycorax; or that
devil's imp, her son! -- should he find nothing else eatable ashore, he will make
no bones of one or two of us!


MASTER. For that reason, we ought to keep all together; that we may make the
better defense against him.


BOATSWAIN. Come, heave a head, you lubber! let us steer upward; it looks like
a plentiful country: -- if inhabited, we may not only get provision, but a
willing wench into the bargain.


STEPHANO. That thought 'rouses me -- a wench, a heigh! O, that I could but
meet my queen, that was to be, the sour duke's sweet daughter; I am in a rare
cue for courtship!


TRINCULO. Mass! I am in a better for a meal's meat! and would exchange the
daintiest duke's daughter in Christendom, ay, and Barbary to boot, for a good
belly-full!


STEPHANO. As the old conjuror is certainly made away with, by this time; if we
can but 'scape witchcraft and cannibals, and my queen and I settle
preliminaries, who knows but I may erect a new monarchy here: -- if so, look to
be great men, all of you!


TRINCULO. O, rare! king Stephano for ever!

STEPHANO SINGS, THE Pilot shall be my prime-minister;
A jewel, a gem, the state-billows to stem:
Should any thing happen that is sinister,
I snug may cry, hem! while you him all condemn.
The Boatswain shall be my head-trumpeter;
His whistle so shrill, he can pipe with good skill:
Queen 'Randa, should any dare frump at her,
The Master, at will, shall imprison or kill.
For a Fool I Am provided in Trinculo;
While I my sack quaff, he may quibble and laugh,
Nor ever fear being in vinculo:
So toss off the draff, and away let us raff.

ALL. For a Fool we are provided in Trinculo;
While we our sack quaff, he may quibble and laugh,
Nor ever fear being in vinculo:
So toss off the draff, and away let us raff.

Exeunt. END OF ACT THE FOURTH.
ACT V.
SCENE I. A RETIRED GROVE.
Enter Caliban, CALIBAN. WHERE can my mistress and that jay be hid?
I can find neither! and could tear myself
For letting them, so dolt-like, both escape!
Had I kept either, she might have sufficed;
Though my own mistress liefer would I clip!
Nor can I spy my dam! I hoped to have seen
The wondrous spirit, when we reached the land,
Destroy that tyrant Prosper! or, while-ere,
I had done's upon the sea! but, what comes now?
Methinks I hear a foot-fall in yon dell;
Perchance it is my mistress; -- that it may!
I will enbush me! then, should she approach,
Like cat-a-mountain springing, seize my prey!

Enter Miranda. MIRANDA. Whither, ah whither shall I bend my steps,
To seek my straying father and dear lord?
Or hide me from -- Protect me, heaven! I Am caught!

CALIBAN. 'Scape if thou can again! thou now art mine,
'Spite of those chattering and deceitful apes;
Who would have talked me out of thee, my right!
Or that much finer, but less beauteous, she.

MIRANDA. Be gentle, Caliban! -- gripe not so hard!
Lest with your talons my frail skin you tear!

CALIBAN. I cannot harm thee! -- though I meant thee scathe,
In punishment for thy late scornful flouts!
Be thou but kind, I will be so to thee!

MIRANDA. Alack, alack! when was I otherwise?

CALIBAN. Full often to me! although I ever loved
And fondled thee! -- when first into my isle
Prosper, a puling babe, Miranda brought;
Weeping through hunger, shivering with bleak winds;
I licked the tears from thy frore, blubbered cheeks,
Nousled and chafed thee in my hairy arms,
Hugging thee close as the dam ape her cub;
Fed thee with eggs; -- into thy coral mouth
From the goat's dug pressed the warm, fost'ring milk;
Of thistle-down and goss'mer made thy bed;
Then hushed and lullaby'd thee to thy sleep,
And lacked my own that thine might be secure.

MIRANDA. I ever strove to thank thee for it; and still,
As from my father speech and sense I learned,
Delighted in imparting both to thee!
I never laid upon thee harsh command;
Assisted always to trim up our cell;
And in each look, word, deed, was ever kind!

CALIBAN. But kinder far to Ferdinand! though he
Never nursed, nor stroak'd, nor fed, nor fondled thee!
In our lime-grove I lurked behind a bush,
And saw the lack-beard kiss that down-like hand;
I could have clawed his lips off, had I dared!
But now, from Prosper's magick-pow'r set free,
Him and my rival, wench, I laugh to scorn;
Here have thee, and will keep thee all my own!

MIRANDA. O, Ferdinand! my love! where art thou strayed?
Haste, and deliver me from this vile thrall!

CALIBAN. 'Twere death, should Ferd'nand interrupt me now!
Though I seemed fearful late, and shunned his sword,
'Twas but in craft, to compass what has happ'd;
Then stint this din, and let thine eyes soft beam;
Nor scorn, nor flout, for I Am not smooth as he!
In beauty what I lack I have in strength;
More needful, to protect and get thee food!
I Will fetch thee, mistress! nests of callow birds;
The rathe lamb roast by fire of scented wood;
Gather the empurpled grape for thy repast;
And weave a flowery garland, thee to crown
Queen of this unknown clime and me, for aye!
Give me the honey of thy lips in lieu,
And let me clip thee!

MIRANDA. Monster! stand aloof!
I feel strange courage, and unusual strength;
Nor longer fear thee or thy brutal force!
A heavenly inspiration does assure
No ill shall against a spotless maid prevail!
The Lybian lion at my feet would crouch,
Though hunger-driv'n, if what I Have read be true;
Nor murkiest fiends, nor thou, more dreadful yet,
Can soil or harm troth-plighted, clear virginity!

Enter Stephano and Claribel. STEPHANO. Go to! I know you are queen of Tunis;
-- the fitter to be my spouse: -- for, I intend to be king of this
new-discover'd country.


CLARIBEL. Hence, rudesby! nor insult me more, bold slave!
Who, thus inebriated, do forget
The due respect unto thy sov'reign's child!

MIRANDA. Ah, my sweet friend! meet we again in woe?

STEPHANO. Bully monster! have thou been looking for a consort too, and lighted
upon my queen of the island, that was to be? -- all is one! -- madam Claribel
will serve my turn, and she is a queen ready-made to my hands.


CALIBAN. This is no time for jests! avaunt, dull ass! --
Lo! who are these? some of my dam's grim goblins!

CLARIBEL. My brave Abdallah comes to rescue us! --
Fierce Hyrca too? still do I fear we are lost!

Enter Hyrca, with a wand, and Abdallah. HYRCA. Ungrateful moor! is this my
love's return?
Was It not enough to wed cursed Claribel!
But you must now with guilty wretches plot
To leave fond Hyrca sighing to the winds!
Who, by her art, safe brought thee to this spot;
Which an elyzium to us well might prove,
Would thou but --

ABDALLAH. What! submit to thy embrace?
Forsake my Claribel, my beauteous bride!
For thee? foul sorceress! formed to loath, not love!
How can thou hope it? in the mirror view
Thy form forbidding, which against love would plead,
Though no deformity of mind thou ow'd'st;
Crying aloud, -- look on fair Claribel!

HYRCA. Rather, thou scornful! -- which thou may repent --
View in the glass or stream thy swarthy hue,
With each peculiarity of clime;
And, wondering say, -- how thus can Hyrca dote?
Or this thy fair-faced moppet but endure!
Then yet be wise; -- your newfound friends are seized,
And Sycorax will vengeance on them wreak!
Would thou not share their fate, throw by this scorn;
Receive my proffered love; quit Claribel;
Or thou their studied torments shall partake!

ABDALLAH. Were thou more fair (could heaven a fairer make)
Than even my beauteous Claribel herself;
With art more potent than all hell in league;
For her alone I live! for her would die!

HYRCA: And die thou shall! my love I blow to air!
Insatiate fury and revenge possess me!
That face, thou think so fair, shall thou see scarr'd;
Those eyes, you call twin-stars --

ABDALLAH. Hear me, fell fiend! --

HYRCA. Speak not! thou shall not! with this touch you are dumb!
Whilst slighted Hyrca has the power of speech,
Abdallah's voice shall but in groans be heard,
In concert with, detested rival! thine;
As you both struggle in the pangs of death!

CLARIBEL. kneeling. Oh! mercy! mercy!

HYRCA. Hence! I know it not!

CLARIBEL. Spare, spare my lord! let only Claribel die,
The lamb, that licks the butcher's bloody hand,
Shall not submit more patient to the knife!

[Thunder heard, and a vast glare of light seen.] HYRCA. Hark! I am summoned
Sycorax to attend!
The ship now blazes on the fatal strand,
Appointed signal of her freight's dread doom. --
Thou, stranger-maid, must share their destined fate!

MIRANDA. If my loved Ferdinand and father fall,
'Twill be Miranda's greatest bliss to die!

HYRCA. Unto the burning vessel strait repair,
And in its flames to perish, Moor! prepare;
Love, Pity, Mercy, hence! Revenge now reigns!
Sycorax and Hyrca stalk the sanguine plains!

Exit Hyrca, waving her wand, and charming Abdallah, Claribel, Miranda and
Caliban to follow. -- Caliban and Stephano remain. STEPHANO. Come, mooncalf,
now the she-fire-drake is gone, have a sup of my bottle; she scared me out of
my seven senses with her quaint jarring, or she should not have taken away my
queen-elect.


CALIBAN. We, too, must follow! -- felt you not her charm?
Me it pulls hard; -- did I not wish to go,
It would compel: -- but, it is my heav'n-on-earth,
That I, at length, shall see my mighty dam
Dash tyrant Prosper to the flinty earth;
On his vile trunk I Will stamp, rend wide his gorge;
Avenging my long thraldom with his blood!

Exit Caliban. STEPHANO. Go thy ways for a blood-thirsty, and most monstrous
monster! when I was pot-valiant once, indeed, I had some notion of knocking out
the old conjuror's brains myself; -- but, now that I am sober, I cannot bear the
thought of murder! no, not even manslaughter! so, that I may n't be an
accessory, I Will even go look after our ship, the fury said was of fire; and, if
it be not burnt, get aboard again, as fast as I can paddle the boat, or oar
myself to it!


[Drinks till his bottle is empty.] Enter Trinculo. TRINCULO. Oh, Stephano!
Stephano! what will become of us, Stephano? we are undone for ever! left upon
this outlandish place, to live upon hips and haws, crab-apples, and pignuts, as
long as such trash will keep life and soul together!


STEPHANO. Why, what a murrain! the ship is not really burnt; is it, Trinculo?


TRINCULO. Every stick and thread of it! as we were going aboard, to wash down
our wild breakfast with a draught of sack; not being able to find the boat
again, we waited 'till the tide should ebb, and leave the ship aground; which
it had no sooner done, than a legion of devils slew over our heads, set fire to
her, and, in a moment, tore her all to pieces, like a handful of lighted flax!


STEPHANO. Mayhap they will make lighted flax of us next! -- what a villainous
voyage we have made on it! -- my wine is all gone, -- I am dry as tinder, and
shall burn like touchwood! this is all owing to the duke's drowning his magical
book, and breaking his conjuring stick: -- if he had but them, safe and sound,
he would be a match for the old-one himself!


[Thunder, etc.] TRINCULO. Oh, lord! oh, lord! the devils are coming here now!


STEPHANO. Are they? why then they may burn my wooden bottle, for there is
nothing in it; and the devil take the hindmost!


Exeunt. SCENE II. THE BEACH.
The Remains of the Ship burning; Sycorax and other Fiends encircling the Fire.
A DANCE and CHORUS. AROUND! and around!
Let the welkin resound,
To heighten our pleasures!
About the burnt ship
Let us gambol, and skip;
While, in mystical measures,
We beat the charmed ground!
After some magical ceremonies, SYCORAX SINGS. MY victims come! let Silence
reign!
Unless the bird of night,
To add to their affright,
By day to cry shall deign!
Or sheeted ghosts howl, yell, and moan;
Or deadly mandrakes shriek and groan;
To aggravate their pain!
Chorus of Fiends. Let Silence reign!

Enter Hyrca, charming Abdallah, Claribel, Miranda and Caliban to follow her;
at the same time Enter, on the opposite side, impelled by fiends, Prospero,
Alonso, Ferdinand, Gonzalo, Adrian, and Francifco. SYCORAX SPEAKS. Welcome, my
friend, and darling son!
These wretches' line is nearly spun!
For, lo! their frames no more can bear;
With stony eyes they, speechless, glare!
Now, Hyrca, shall we vengeance due
Wreak on this cursed, devoted crew!
Done is every charm and spell,
Of melody, or dismal yell;
With mystic incantations dire,
As we circled hell-stol'n fire!
And crackling flames to ashes turned
The vessel we have, joyful, burned!
Now speak, proud tyrant, ere thy breath
For aye expire in horrid death!

PROSPERO. Nor this, nor direst deeds of hell combined,
Can shake, or alter my still steadfast breast!
Conscious I have in naught offended yet,
More than inherent frailty of weak man,
I know just Heaven will not permit my fall;
But, by inscrutable, mysterious ways,
TO accomplish some outweighing good dependent:
Convinced of that, I bow me to my fate! --
Yet, if you know what means the gentle word,
Have pity on my children, and loved friends;
And let my death dread Sycorax appease!

SYCORAX. Thy death appease, fallen tyrant? no!
Thy friends unto thee first I Will show
In torments, worse than regicide,
Or zealous martyr ever tried;
At which if thou dare once repine,
Their pangs shall be delight to thine!
And, what I know will irk thee more
Than tortures manifold and sore,
Ere thy vile thread of life be spun,
Thy daughter will I give my son!

CALIBAN. Ho! ho! ho! ho! I thank thee, gentle dam!
Soon shall she bring brave brood of Calibans!

PROSPERO. Kneeling. All righteous Providence, permit not this!
In thee, Most High! confiding, I resigned
My potent magic, which had now bested; --
Let not thy servant perish for much faith!
But, if pure chastity seem good to thee,
Send down some guardian Angel to defend,
And from perdition snatch a spotless maid!

Grand Harmonious Music is heard. Ariel descends, bearing a wand and book,
attended by other Spirits. THEY SING. VIRTUE is the High One's care!
Who to shield it from vile lust,
Sends his Spirits of pure air,
From the mansions of the just!

The Fire sinks; Sycorax, Hyrca, Caliban, and Fiends, go off howling amidst
Thunder, etc. ARIEL. All hail, my Heav'n-tried master! Prospero hail!
To recompense your former kindnesses,
Has Ariel dived in the oozy Neptune's bed;
Your precious magick-volume rescued thence:
And into Tellus' bosom deeply pierced,
Your broken, buried wand recovering;
With the aid of these, my fellow ministers,
Firm reunited, and of greater force.
Accept them, master! from your grateful sprite;
You now again have power: still use it right!

PROSPERO. Heaven heard my prayer! to Heaven thanks first are due!
Next unto thee, my kind, my gentle Ariel!
And these pure Spirits, who vouchsafed their aid!
My children! loved Gonzalo! dear friends all!
Like monumental marble thus enfix'd,
Move! speak! embrace! ye now, again, are free!

Waving his Wand. ABDALLAH. My queen!

CLARIBEL. My lord!

MIRANDA. My Ferdinand!

FERDINAND. Sweet love!

ALONSO. Thou wondrous man! who have unlocked our spell,
How can we thank or praise thee as we ought!

PROSPERO. Your thanks and praises offer up to Heaven!
Nor Prospero, nor even Ariel, now has freed you;
But the Most High! before whose throne all bow!

GONZALO. My joints are old and stiff; but to my God
No youth with a more supple knee shall bend!

ARIEL. Ye favored friends! -- restoring first this King,
And Virgin Queen, unto afflicted Tunis, --
In Italy you will soon be fully blessed!
Where, by my means informed of these events,
Gentle and simple, old and young, now throng,
Numerous as sands the shore, to greet this train.

PROSPERO. But that, my chick! exceeds my utmost art.
Our ship destroyed, we here must patient wait
'Till Heaven has granted means for our return.

ARIEL. That Heaven has done! the sadly home-bound fleet,
Conducted here by me, now joyful waits
To bear you safely hence.
[The Fleet appears.] Once more embark!
Ye scattered remnants I Am allowed to save,
Haste, and be rescued from a living grave!
All but the usurping duke, and regicide!
Here for their crimes they are ever doomed to bide,
And echo with their groans, on this strange shore,
Hyrca's dire shrieks, cursed Caliban's fell roar!
Whilst Sycorax, replung'd in the lake of fire,
Shall never be freed till Nature's self expire!

PROSPERO. Must then my wretched brother here be left?
Him and Sebastian I could now forgive!

ARIEL. It may not be! -- Heaven's merciful, but just!

PROSPERO. Heaven's will be done!

ARIEL. Here bend the wondering crew.

Enter Master Boatswain, Mariners, Stephano, and Trinculo. ARIEL. Now farewell
all! -- my duty thus complete,
I will but tend to Italy the fleet,
And see my master past all perils' power;
Then seek repose in the bell of some sweet flower!

ARIEL SINGS. FROM Bondage free,
Sweet Liberty
Shall Ariel hence enjoy!
In The Bee's quaint Cell,
Or Musk-rose dwell;
Upon the Goss'mer toy!
Then, sportive, fly
To the azure Sky;
Outsoar the Eagle far:
In Sunbeams play,
The live-long Day;
And shine at Night a Star!

PROSPERO. My gentle friends! ere we depart,
A word or two on magick-art.
Though the dread demons of this hour,
To hell and sorcery owed their power;
Let not all magic be decried,
As hellish and unsanctified.
Virtue's our magick-staff! our book
Pure Piety! -- with Faith who look
Thereon, may antres vast explore;
Or, fearless, hear hoarse Neptune roar:
Pervade the endless, endless skies;
See system upon system rise:
Soar to the center of all space;
Kneel at the Throne of Heavenly Grace!

HYMN, By the attendant Spirits. HAIL, Virtue! eldest born of Light!
Whose ray illumes the darkest cell!
Whose presence makes even Heaven more bright!
With Faith and Piety still dwell!
THE END.

