A TREATISE Concerning the SMALLPOX.

IN WHICH A Plain and Easy METHOD of Curing that Disease under its most direful
Symptoms, is discovered.

AND

The Case of Women with Child at that Time particularly considered; and so
stated, as to be rendered even safer than that of other Women.

The whole made apparent from Reason, and the Natural Disposition of the Parts:
Exemplified by several Instances of Fact.

In a LETTER, written in the Year 1716, to the Learned Dr. JOHN BATEMAN, then
President of the Royal College of Physicians, By F. BELLINGER, Of the College
of PHYSICIANS.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR: And Sold by W. and J. INNYS, in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. MDCCXXI.

To His GRACE JOHN, Duke of Montague; These few PAGES are most humbly offered
by His GRACE'S Most Obedient, AND Most Humble Servant,

F. Bellinger.

THE PREFACE.
IT is now upwards of Four Years since the following Sheets were finished, and
just going to the Press, when a tedious Sickness of a dear Relation, which at
last ended in Death, interposed, and not only for that time suspended my
Thoughts of publishing them then, but even extinguished my Intentions of ever
doing it at all. This I thought necessary to premise, that what may be found
either in the Body, or Historical Accounts of the following Discourse, may not
be supposed in any way to relate to the Contentions which have arisen between
some eminent Practisers, concerning Purging in the Declension of the Small Pox;
but whatever is there, I look upon my self to be answerable for, whither Bad or
Good.

For as on one Hand, it would be an inexcusable Partiality and Peevishness, to
find fault with any Discovery, that may be made in Practice upon so difficult a
Disease as the Smallpox frequently proves to be, in as much, as by such
Suggestion, sick Persons, or those about them, may be deterred from making use
of such Things as may be serviceable and instrumental toward the saving their
Lives: So would it be as unpardonable a Levity on the other Hand, for any one
to depart from a Method he had found successful, with very little Interruption,
in a Disease under its general Designation; and without any at all, when so
particularly circumstantiated as the Smallpox is in Women with Child; which
has been always looked on as a singular Disadvantage to Persons laboring under
it at that time.

One of the first Instances the Learned Dr. Friend gives in his Treatise, de
Purgatione in secunda fiber, etc. is of a Person that miscarried; upon which
Account he consulted with the celebrated Dr. Chamberlen, whose peculiar
Business must frequently lead him into Observations of that kind more than any
others; and as the Case is very extraordinary in all its Particulars, Dr.
Friend closes the Relation after this Manner; That the learned Gentleman he
consulted with, assured sur'd him, that 'twas one of the first Patients he ever
knew recover under those Disadvantages. And indeed, Instances of such Success
have been very rare. Which very Observation, well reflected on, sufficiently
justifies and vindicates any Regular and Rational Attempt (and such I hope the
following will appear to be) that may be made to prevent, if possible, the
tender Sex being reduced to such an unhappy Condition and Dilemma. For by
Abortion, the Life of the Child is certainly destroyed, and at the same time,
and on the same Account (let others say what they please) that of the Mother is
brought into the utmost Jeopardy. And as the first can be saved by no other
Means than by preventing the Miscarriage: So is the last in the most probable
way of being preserved by the same Measures.

When I first laid these few Observations before the very learned Dr. Bateman,
the then President of the College of Physicians, he was pleased to encourage my
publishing them in the following Terms.

"Your Treatise of the Smallpox deserves highly to be published, not only for
the Histories you give of the good Success of your Powder; but especially for
the Cases of the Women, which is quite new. I thank you also for the rare Use
of Blisters, in Case of Haemorrhages, which I never heard of before, etc."

So kind an Approbation, and from so great a Hand, is sufficient to encourage
my Publishing it at this time, had I no other; but when I have, through God's
Blessing, met with the same Success here in London as in the Country; and at
the same time look back upon the two last Years Bills of Mortality, and see so
vast a Number of Persons carried off by the Smallpox, and the Weekly Bills
still continuing in that Article not low: I need make no Excuse surely, if I
endeavor to give a helping Hand in so great a Calamity.

The Manner of treating Women with Child in the Smallpox, is as the
forementioned Learned Gentleman does me the Honor to assure the World, quite
new. And yet I will take the liberty at the same time to affirm, that the
Practice is founded upon Reason and Truth in the natural Disposition,
Administration and Function of the Parts during the time of their being so,
which is indeed undeniable. By this Test all former Practice ought to be
examined, and upon this Foundation all new Discoveries in Medicine ought to be
laid. And if upon such Principles and Considerations, Success has constantly
attended the Practice, what more can be desired? And it will not certainly be
taken for a precarious Way of proceeding, to presume, that some of the
Thousands that were swept away by the Smallpox the two last Years, might be
Women with Child; and the being instrumental in the saving but one Life, will
abundantly justify the present Work; which common Humanity obliges every one to
confess.

As to the Powder here proposed, I must freely acknowledge, that it chiefly
consists of such Parts as are well and commonly known in Use and Practice. But
the manner of its Composition is somewhat new; and then as to the Salt of
Amber, being directed as an Alexipharmick, (and it is certainly the noblest and
most generous one in the whole Pharmaceutick Kind) that I think is also
something new. But that I might neither impose upon my self nor my Readers, I
have again and again reviewed the whole Materia of Dr. Sydenham, Dr. Morton,
and others, and cannot once find it administered as such; which has been Matter
of greater Wonder than Pleasure to observe. I could willingly enter into a long
Account of its Excellency, and a Rationale of its Operation; but I shall
abridge my self of that Pleasure, and in few Words only say, That though it be
reckoned among the Volatile Salts, yet as it vastly excells any of them in its
Effects, it greatly differs from them in its very Nature. Most, if not all the
other, have a Burning Canstick Quality in them, as is evident in Sal volat.
Corn. Cerv. Cranij, vel ossium Humanorum. And all Sorts of Volatile Salts of
Bones and Bone-like Substances, or those sublimed from other saline Bodies, as
Sal Salis Armon. Sal Urinae, etc. and even Sal Viperarum, is not much cooler.
This any one may satisfy himself in, who will but venture to taste them naked as
they are. And must consequently create a Thirst, and are hardly in any Vehicle
possible to be reconciled to the Taste or Stomach. But Sal Succini is really
almost as cool as the most natural Elemental Salt, and even extinguishes
Feverish Heats. In short, it is Alexipharmick, as it is an excellent
Counterpoison; it is Cephalic, greatly relieving the Head, and the whole
Nervous kind, and wonderfully reviving the Spirits at the same Time: It is
Diuretic and Diaphoretick, in its provoking, and that gently, both Sweat and
Urine: Nay, it prevents the other warm Alexipharmicks from acting in too
inflamatory a Manner, and yet gives them Energy and Action. And further still,
it guards and Defends the Brain from the Deliriums, Stupors, or any Comatose
Affections, which the Opium might cause; so that thus taken, there is seldom
any more than a gentle and refreshing Sleep produced; so absolutely necessary
through all the Stages of the Smallpox. I could here proceed to place it in
Opposition to all the Theriacalia and Bezoardica whatever; but it would carry
me too far; once for all I will say, that it is the best I ever made use of,
neither have I in some Hundreds found it disagreeable to the Stomach or Head of
any one.

The Proportion of the Laudanum may be observed to be about one Grain to jj,
and thus it may be adapted to the smallest Infant, for if jj be mixed with a
Julep of Six Ounces, or that may consist of about Twelve Spoonfuls, one
Spoonful at a Time will contain so little Laudanum, that not the least of any
Danger can be apprehended from it; and with Truth, Confidence, and Experience I
can attest, that as an Anodyne it far exceeds Diacodium, or any the mildest
Opiats: Besides, it may be prepared without the Laudanum; but all this must be
left to the Discretion of the attending Physician.

Whether it may be of Use in the Time of the Plague, should the Almighty for
our Sins visit us with that dreadful Scourge, I must submit to the Learned of
the Faculty. However, this in the mean time may be said, that it is conformable
to what we find in Books written on that Subject by Physicians, who lived and
practiced in such Times, when this and other Nations were afflicted with the
Plague. And is agreeable to the Measures now taken in France by the French
Physicians, as they have communicated their way of proceeding to the World in
[The Succinct Account of the Plague at Marseilles, etc.] Besides, the Smallpox
is truly accounted amongst Pestilential Fevers; and Portus with some others
stick not to call it Pestis Minoris Gradus, a Pestilence of a lower Degree; and
very properly they think, since from its manner of being communicated by
Contagion; its too frequently fatal Event: the visible Malignity with which it
sometimes in some Persons appears, together with many particular Analogical
Symptoms, it resembles the Plague not a little. But this only by the by.

To proceed a little farther; the inventing of good efficacious Medicines, is
the Duty and Business of every Physician, and the Interest of the Public that
he should make it so, and is well recommended by a late Ingenious Author in the
following Words: By Study and Practice (says he) the Materia Medica is improved
and enlarged by the Addition of Efficacious Medicines, as well Simple as
Compound, not known before, or not applied to such Uses for which they have
been found to serve better than others in Use. For by every useful new Medicine
so added, the Faculty is so much enlarged, and something contributed toward
the common Benefit of Mankind. Which is a general, and I think a sufficient
Defense for the present Attempt in offering after this Manner, what (with some
Confidence I hope) may be serviceable to the Public in a dangerous Disease,
and such an one from which this great Place, is seldom, if ever totally free,
and which proves too generally fatal.

To conclude; these are the Measures I have taken, this is the Method I have
constantly of late Years observed and followed; upon which I have had very
great, I may say, unusual Success. And I can see no Reason why the same fairly
and honestly applied, may not be as successful in the Hands of another as my
own, for which Reason I make them Public.

Let me throw one Word more into the Mouths of the Critics, before they devour
me, and I have done. It may be said, that what is contained in the Regimen, is
mean, common, or trifling: To which I Answer, that if what is there is truly
useful, as I am sure it is, the more common they are, the more practicable and
intelligible they will certainly be; which I reckon as an Excellency, whatever
others may do; and if a Man's Endeavors are but successful, he need not much
care who acts in the more pompous Manner. But let us in this hear what our
great Master the Divine Hippocrates says on that Head.

Ne Pigeat ex Plebiis Sciscitari, si quid ad Curationem utile. Hippocrat. in
Libro de Praeceptis.

A TREATISE OF THE SMALLPOX: Addressed in a Letter to the very Learned Dr.
JOHN BATEMAN, Fellow and Elect, and late President of the Royal College of
Physicians.
Honored SIR,
I Take the Liberty at last of publishing these few Pages, and giving them the
Ornament of prefixing your Name to them. If there be any Thing that is Valuable
in them in my own Estimation, it is contained in these two Particulars, the
kind Opinion you are pleased to have of them, and the Good I hope they may be
instrumental of in the Disease of which they treat.

Te Cernimus, Albi, Nostrorum Candide judex, Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente,
Bonoque est. With all Submission I proceed to speak of the following Disease,
viz. the Smallpox, that is, of the Method I have taken in the curing of it. In
which I shall be very short, as to the Definitions, Signs, Diognosticks, or
other (...); such Parts having been very copiously treated of by many great
Authors, and in almost every Bodies Hands. The chief Stress of what I humbly
propose, depending upon Historical Instances, and Matters of Fact: Not but it
will be allowed, and it frequently happens, that the Success of Medicines and
their various and multiform manner of Use and Application, has given light into
the Nature and Indoles of Diseases; as the Effect of several Parts of an Animal
in Food or Medicine, has been made use of to explain their Nature, and even
exemplify the Parts of which they may consist; which may be seen in our two
Famous Professors Dr. Glisson and Dr. Willis, the first in his Anatomia, Cap.
vi. the other in many places of his Anima Brutorum; as also in Sir George Ent,
Dr. Morton, and several others; so that Physiology and Practice thus attended
to, may be observed to illustrate each other. And here, Sir, I must again beg
your Pardon, that I shall be forced to place before you Cramben Recoctam,
having already troubled you very much, with many of the Particulars I must here
recount. But before I can come to them, I must speak to a General or two: The
first of which is as to the general Regimen to be used, the Cold or the Hot, as
they are generally and vulgarly distinguished.

For the First, Dr. Sydenham and his Followers strenously appear against the
universal Practice of those that preceded him, as well as his Contemporaries;
and I may say, against Nature her self: For though we may find interspersed in
their reciting the Pharmaceutica, sometimes what will seem to countenance the
Cold Regimen, (in which the Countries and Climates where they practiced might
probably be a great Inducement) yet it is very plain, that they chiefly
depended on Alexipharmicks and the warm Method. Amatus Lusitanus, who was as
bold, I think, as any one in the Use of the Refrigeria, yet has in a Scholium
these Words, Quod variolarum and Morbillorum ad Cutem eruptio, quaedam a Natura
non solum constituta, sed destinata Crisis sit: Consequens erit cum Hippocrate
and Galeno asseverare; quod quando Natura eam conficere tentat, tunc Medicus
Materiam fluere dispositam condensare, aut a via sua cohilere non debet; sed
Magis ipsam disponere, ut per eam viam incedat per quam Natura expellere
Conatur; juxta illud Hippoc. Quo Natura maxim vergit per loca conferentia, eo
ducere. I must confess, this Scholium is hardly to be reconciled with his
Practice, either in the Precedent, or following Curatio; in this last, he tells
us, that being sent for to a Boy blind for Three Days of the Smallpox, which
he mentions as an extraordinary Occurrence, he immediately fell to washing and
other Applications to his Eyes, and with great Pleasure acquaints his Reader,
ex tenebris Puer ipse revocatus. This would be mad Practice in England,
whatever it was in Tuscany; but this I mention to show, how little (as I said
before) is to be depended on Cases Historically only related: And that in
different Climates, it is not the discordant Opinions Physicians maintain
against each other; but there is a Necessity for that very Reason to take
Measures somewhat different. Reverius declares for the Alexipharmicks, and the
warm Regimen, Primo ut Aeger in loco Calidiusculo detineatur, quo Pori Cutis
aperiantur, and variolarum Eruptio adjuvetur, etc. I forbear quoting that
celebrated Practiser at length, that I may be as little troublesome as
possible, and being of no great Consequence to the Readers I chiefly intend
this for. The same Thing might be repeated out of all the Authors of any
Consideration, or Antiquity, which would be as Nauseous, as it would be
Endless. The Mischief which has arisen is this; that in Practice, while there
have been Endeavors used toward an Inprovement, some have advanced from a
Genial necessary Warmth to almost actual Fire; and instead of keeping the cold
destructive Air out, have perfectly suffocated the poor Patients, by letting
them have none at all; making at the same Time such vast Fires (whatever be the
Temper of the Air, or of the Sick Person) which cause Faintings with other
Irregularities coincident with it. And on the other Hand, I shall take the
Liberty to say, that the Reformers have started so far out of that Method, in
order to distinguish themselves by their new Discoveries in disavowing the Warm
Regimen; that one would think there is no being Cool or Refreshing for the
Patient without Freezing. Let me therefore beg leave to follow the Celebrated
Dr. Morton, whose Practice is Regular and Rational, and whose Success was
Answerable. He positively declares for the Warm; and both throughout his
Precedent Rationale, as well as in the subsequent Histories, reprehends the
contrary Proceeding; which he deliberately confutes, and descends even to
mention the Materia made use of in the Cold Regimen; such as Spiritus vitrioli,
Decoctum Album, Diacodium, and the like; nay, he says, that he was informed Dr.
Sydenham himself had toward the latter Part of his Life gone off from that
Opinion. Be that as it will, he was in the wrong, as Dr. Morton thought, and
will appear more to be so, if we take but very little Pains to consider the
Aetiology of the Disease it self, or the Operations of Nature under it. For
what is it that Nature is doing, or how can she perform that visible
Diaploresis, (if I may so call the Eruption) but by a Warmth somewhat higher
than her constant Tenor; so that she acts her self in the Alexipharmick way;
and that must beyond Contradiction be the right. Could we either substitute any
other Discharge to carry off by it with safety the repelled Morbid Humors, or
if ever a Sudorifick, or Expulsive Operation (of that kind) could be performed,
without the Constitution being somewhat more than commonly warm; there would be
room to say something; but when this can never be, which must be confessed by
all, there will need but very little Argument or Persuasion, to direct us which
of the two Regimens ought to be chosen. And yet, notwithstanding the apparency
of the Case, there are still some so blindly devoted to the following that
otherwise great Man; and even notwithstanding their own ill Success, they go on
in a supine, fatal Bigotry, and Dependence on his Word; and think that
Sydenham's Name is sufficient to shelter, and justify their own Inattention to
Nature herself. Insomuch that I have heard it (with some Pain) affirmed, that
Diacodium was the Panacea, which would do every Thing, and that nothing could
be done well without it: That it was in the Smallpox, like the Cortex in
intermitting Fevers, etc. and however diversified the Disease might be, it has
been, upon the ill Success of the first, doubled and trebled, and given the
Patient without the least Guard. Diacodium is questionless sometimes a proper,
as it is a Pacifick Medicine. But suppose we meet with a Comatose sleepy
Disposition in the Beginning, and it should attend the Distemper in the other
Stages, which in Phlegmatic Pituitose Habits is very frequent; must we still
proceed to give this Roapy Opiat? Why, yes, if we believe the Sophistry above,
and which I have known pursued as long as Nature has lasted. But enough of this
unwelcome Subject.

The next General I shall trouble you with is Blood-letting. Though indeed, I
think it ought not to be termed a General, it being impossible, but that it
must be destructive in many Cases, and I believe very dubious in its Success in
any. There is a Question, Sir, I have wanted long to be resolved, and is as
difficult to state, I believe as to resolve. I have in debating occasionally,
whether Bleeding were generally good in the Smallpox, heard it affirmed, that
it certainly was, if timely administered: The same Affirmation I have under the
Hands of some Men Eminent in Practice; we find it likewise in many celebrated
Authors already extant among us. As to the Time, it is agreed as soon as
possible, at least before the Eruption is in any Measure performed; the Reasons
alleged are, that it gives some remission to the excruciating Pains, and even
diminishes the Morbid Matter; so that the Enemy being weakened, Nature must be
the better enabled to withstand the remaining Force. Before I come to
expostualte on the Particulars, give me leave to suggest, First, that it may be
frequently observed, that the Smallpox in some Families is very signally, and
as it were Hereditarily Fatal. This we find both Dr. Sydenham and Dr. Morton
have observed, and granted. Suppose then, Secondly, That in one Family Three
Children of the same Father and Mother should be treated in the Sydenhamian
Way: The first is blooded, has the benign, distinct sort of the Smallpox, and
does well. The next after the same manner is Blooded, has the Confluent, malign
sort, and dies. The Third under the same Administration of Bleeding, upon which
appear the Maculae Nigrae, Lividae, Purpureae, etc. and Nature under so
miserable a Prostration of Spirits, that she quite gives up the Contention; and
yet for any Thing that could be seen or apprehended, this last might have been
the distinct kind, which as Histories are two to one. Such Events as these
ought certainly to put us to a stand; and for the Truth of the Facts, I can
produce undeniable Evidence; but wave it here, because I would not revive the
Grief of those, who make but too severe Remarks upon the Proceeding. What
Measures therefore, Good Sir, must we take? Will the taking of Blood away,
alter the Indoles of the Disease from the Malignant or Confluent kind, to the
Benign and Discreet sort; if so, it ought in all Subjects, and on all Occasions
to be used; and this is what they mean, by saying it will lessen the Quantity,
or for my Part I know not what to make on it: But if this be difficult and
uncertain, nay, I will say impossible to make apparent; then they put Persons
on a very great Hazard, who make use of such dangerous Methods by weakening
Nature, and in no respect lessening the Disease: Which Charge, however severe
and heavy, must in the general be confessed to be true. For here, by the way, I
must take so much Liberty, strongly to presume, that the kind of the Disease,
in respect to its degree, is determined upon the first imparting of the
Contagion: Though out of doubt, the Disposition the Blood and other Juices of the
Body are in at that Time, does strongly dispose to one or the other; such as
was before said, the inherent Crasis of the Blood and Spirits, in respect to
the Parents we are Descendants of, violent Exercise, hard Drinking, or other
crapulous Disorders, and the like; which not only expose us the sooner to the
receiving the Infection (as is vulgarly and truly expressed) but the Poisonous
Miasmata of the Disease, are immediately imparted to every Particle of the
Fluids, being thus made susceptible of them; and thus the Confluent kind of the
Smallpox is formed, and as I said, determined, before it is possible to
adminster any Remedy. So that except by Bleeding we can undertake to change the
very Indoles of the Disease, even after it is formed, though not rendered
Visible, which I believe is impossible; we shall be in Danger of adding to the
Disease, and abstracting from the Strength of the Patient. For 'twill hardly
ever be found, that the taking of Blood away, can restore it, from a Fusion to
its natural Crasis, that is, the Sphaerical red Parts, to their just Magnitude,
and the rest, of what Denomination soever, to their Natural Size, Figure, and
Cohesion See Dr. Morton 's Eleventh Hist.
. By the Loss of Blood, it is well known, that the Mass is attenuated; and for
that very Reason is Phlebotomy administered in many Instances, as in Pleurisies,
the Malacia, etc. that so there may be more room for the Heart in its Pulses,
to dash and toss, as it were, the Blood, by which Action the Lentor or too
cohaesive Parts may be divided into smaller Portions. To this I must add, that
Haemorrhages, from whatever Part they flow, are not occasioned, at least very
rarely, from a Plethora simply so called, or from the Strength and Force of the
Pulse; for then the most robust Animals, and those that use the most violent
Exercise, would be most liable to them, either Man or Beast; which is hardly
ever observable: But most frequently from the Prava Diathesis of the Blood it
self in the Loosening of its Texture; so that in passing the Capillaries, it is
as it were percolated through 'em, or rendered so keen, that it breaks, and, as
it were, eats through. For a Confirmation of which, I appeal to Dr. Lower's
Book de Cord. And where such Symptoms attend the Beginning of the Smallpox,
Bleeding is seldom, I believe I might say never, of any Service. But Blisters
are of excellent Use, which is the next General.

Two Questions therefore, I think, arise from these few last Periods.

First, Whether the Indoles, that is, the Sort or Kind of the Smallpox be
determined in each individual Person upon the very first Attack of the
Infection. Secondly, Whether it be possible by any Administration, especially
Bleeding, to make any Alteration or Mutation from Bad to Good, from the
Confluent to the Discrete Kind.
You see, Sir, my Opinion by what has been already said, which I very humbly
submit to better Judgments.

At the End of the precedent Paragraph I have said, that Blisters are good in
removing, or putting a Stop to that mischievous Symptom, namely, the
Haemorrhages that frequently attend the Beginnings of the Smallpox. These
sometimes appear, even before any other Signs, and prevent the Struggle Nature
generally makes to throw off the Disease from the Center to the Peripheria Dr.
Morton 's Seventh Hist.
. Sometimes Bleeding at the Nose, Spitting of Blood, or an immoderate Flux of
the Menses, appear just at the Eruption; by which Nature in that necessary
Effort is so debilitated, that she cannot perform, nor go through that Task; and
then the Enemy again retires to the Vitals, and acts all imaginable Mischief. I
am well aware what Botallus and many others say, that the Loss of Blood will
not produce the Effect here charged; but I must desire to be excused, from
resigning my Sense and Reason; both which I must do, should I make any Doubt of
the retiring of the poisonous Particles of this Disease; when upon the Loss of
Blood, I see the Humors secreted from the Blood disappear, and a visible
Paleness spread in its stead, both on the Face, and all over the Body, which no
one can deny, who has made any Number of regular Observations. But to return to
Blisters. These Bleedings, as I said before, being occasioned by the dissolvent
Pestilential Particles in the Serum of the Blood, breaking and dividing the Red
Globules into a preternatural Smalness, and by that putting the Blood into a
Fusion, forces it through the Capillary Branches of the Blood Vessels: But the
Blisters drawing off Part of this Saline, Deleterious Serum, by abating its
Quantity, the Globules aforesaid are at Liberty to attract each other, and by
that means to form themselves into their genial and natural Size; and so the
Symptom ceases: For I have had frequent Occasion to observe in Persons that
have been seized with the most violent Effusion of Blood, that as soon as the
Serum has begun to fill the Blister-Bladder, the Bleeding has constantly
ceased. And thus even the Quantity of the peccant Matter may be said to be
diminished. But where Persons are averse to Blisters, as too frequently they
are, we need not be entirely at a Loss, nor have recourse to that desperate
Expedient of Phlebotomy; for I do assure you the Powder does it as certainly,
and after a manner (as I suppose) much like the Blisters; for by very soon
procuring a Diaphoresis, the morbid Matter is brought to the Exteriors, and by
Sweat the Deleterious Serum lessened.

And here, by the way, give me Leave to say, with great Submission, that I take
the Blood to be the first Nidus of the contagious Particles, and not the
Spirits, as Dr. Morton asserts; for as the Matter which fills the Blisters, and
also what fills the Pustles of the Smallpox, are Secretions directly from the
Blood; it is but reasonable, I think, to conclude, that the Fomes or Pena is
there for both. Besides, as the Spirits are formed from the finer Parts of the
Blood, and constantly receive their Supply and Restoration from that Magazine;
so it is but natural to conclude, (till the contrary can be demonstrated) that
what Detriment, Labefaction, or Pollution soever they receive, must be
communicated the same way. As to the Quickness of its Communication, that can
be no Objection to any one, that considers the Pulse of the Heart and Arteries,
and the Motion of the Blood in them; so that it requires but a very few
Minutes, after the receiving of the Infectious Lentor into the Blood, before it
may by stopping in the fine Capillaries of the Meninges, Brain, and Spinal
Marrow, give Occasion to all those violent Orgasms exercised, and communicated
through the whole Systasis Nervosa; and which, while loosely carried in the
Rivus of the Blood, has little Opportunity of exerting those excruciating and
dolorous Sensations. And farther still, it may be made almost a daily
Observation, that Persons having been conversant in Places infected, have
removed to others free of the Disease; yet after many Days the Insults of the
Disease have begun upon the Nerves, which is a pretty plain Instance. But this
by the by. However, when we come to consider the Distemper once formed as
Physicians, the Spirits have their Share, and suffer violently; and except we
consider the Blood and Spirits in this complex View, we shall never discover
the true curative Indications; which is what I come now to speak of, and shall
do it in a very few Words.

Without repeating what has been already said, the Oppression of the Spirits,
the Diathesis the Blood is then in, and the Nature of the Disease, show, I
think, the Necessity of Proceeding in the Alexipharmick Way, by promoting a
general Diapheresis in a gentle manner, by such Medicines as will invigorate
the Nerves and Spirits, by fitting them for, as well as putting them upon
Action; and at the same time promote a Sudoriferous Perspiration over the whole
Body: So that Neurotick, Volatile, Cephalic Medicines, mixed with Anodines, and
such as will cause Sweat without an Inflammation, (all which is to be obtained
by a Right proceeding, and the Alexipharmacon here proposed) is, and must
surely be acknowledged to be the regular Way and Means of assisting Nature in
this Exigency. I have often wondered to find so few of that Class of Medicines,
called Cephalicks, in the Materia of Dr. Morton, who proceeds on such
Principles in affirming the first Attacks to be made upon the Nerves, and their
Propagines; for want of which, many of the noblest Alexipharmicks are rendered
not only ineffectual, but hurtful, by doing nothing else than inflaming the
Blood, and scorching the Vitals, such as Saffron, Rad. Serpent. etc. The like
Mischief may be charged upon Opiates simply given, without the Guard of Volatile
Medicines to attend them; which stop and impede Nature in the Discharge; and
instead of procuring that gentle Requies and Refreshment of Sleep, so
absolutely necessary in the Smallpox, cause horrible Deliriums, Convulsions,
etc. But that I may give you no farther Trouble, I proceed now to lay before
you the Series of the Cure, a Method I have (by God's Blessing) found more than
commonly successful.

As soon as there is any Suspicion of the Smallpox, let the Person attacked go
immediately to Bed, and endeavor, if possible, to get some Sleep: Toward the
attaining of which, let there be kept the profoundest Silence; (which is a Rule
to be observed through the whole Course of the Disease:) For it is hardly to be
imagined, what inexpressible Disadvantages sick Persons labor under, and what
Symptomatick Mischiefs they heap upon themselves, by striving (as they call it)
against the Disease: By going into the Air, they sometimes repel the morbid
Humors to the Vitals; which may be done even before there be any visible
Appearance of them upon the Surface of the Body. Others by Exercise, Diversion,
hard Drinking, and the like, thinking to divert, greatly increase the Disease.
Which can be of no Advantage in the Beginning of any Fever, but in this does
often prove pernicious. Let the Patient be covered with as many Clothes as may
reasonably be supposed will produce such a Warmth, as is natural, acceptable,
and pleasant in the Winter, and no farther. If the Pains and unquiet Tossings
be such, that no Rest can be obtained without Help; at the End of Twelve Hours
from the first Attack, and not sooner without apparent Necessity, let the
following Draught be taken.

Aq. Lactis Alexit. Germ. Querc. a^ j. Theriacal. vj. Pulv. Alex. nostri ss vel
ij. Sir. de Aurantiis ss Ms. f. Haust. And let it be repeated every Eight
Hours. But if there be violent Symptoms, such as Bleeding at the Nose or Mouth,
Fluxus Mensium immodicus vel praematurus, excruciating Pains, Watching, or the
like, it may be repeated every Six or every Four Hours. The precedent Dose is
fitted for Adult Persons: But for Children of one, two, or three Years old,
five Grains is sufficient; and to be repeated according to the Age and Strength
of the Patient, or the Quantity each time given. The Vehicle abovementioned is
what I generally make use of; but the Powder may be given in a little Syrup,
small Sack-Whey, or any thing else, except Diacodium. If the sick Persons are
able, let them be helped out of Bed once every Day; but in this, let their own
Desires, joined with common Prudence, be the Rule; for no other can be set.

The next thing to be considered, is the Quantity of Liquids to be allowed. I
am not for such large Quantities of Malted Liquors, I mean Small Beer, as is
generally in present Practice admitted; neither am I totally for denying them.
But a Decoction of Figs with some Cochineel, and inspirited with some small
Portion of right good Canary, I permit in good Plenty almost to the Patient's
Choice. As, Ficuum Pinginum lbss Cochinel. ss. coqr. in aq. Fontan. s. q. ad
lbij sub finem addendo Vini Canarij iiij plus minusve Bulliant semel tum add
Sir. de Rubo Ideo ss fiat Apozema and refrigeratum libat ad Libitum. This
Liquor exceeds any that I have known made use of; for it keeps the Throat and
Passages of the Lungs free and open, gently promotes the Eruption; at the same
time that it exhilerates the Spirits, and abates the Thirst: And I have not
among some Hundreds met with any one Person, but was pleased with it. For in
Small Beer, there is generally in Fevers a most unwelcome Clamminess succeeding
the drinking of it.

When the Eurption is perfected, so that the first Symptoms are abated, the
Draught abovementioned need be repeated but every Night at the Hour of Rest;
nor even then if there be a Natural Propensity to sleep, and the Smallpox, be
of the mild distinct Kind, (yet I always advise to have it in promptu); but in
the Confluent Kind I think it ought to be taken every twentyfour Hours at
least, through the whole Course of the Disease. When the time of Maturation, or
according to the Vulgar Idiom, the filling and ripening of the Pustles
commences; which according to Dr. Morton, may be reckoned to begin about three
Days after the total Eruption; the foresaid Draught is certainly necessary to
be taken twice every Twenty-four Hours: And then I do very much recommend the
drinking of large Quantities of what we call Milk-Porridge, made after this
Manner: The Oatmeal being finely fifted may be boiled in a due Quantity of
Water for Half an Hour, or very little more, then add a Third Part of New Milk,
and just give it one Boil so as to mix it well together, and it is enough. This
I order sometimes to be taken Hot as Tea or Coffee, thus taken it will keep the
Passages of the Throat clear; and frequently as I have observed, will make the
Scabs of the Smallpox, which are engaged in the Passages scale off, and come
away. At other Times to drink a good Draught of the same very near Cold, and
sometimes to be taken warm as Food. This smooth mild Pabulum clothes, and
indeed does as it were digest the Ichorous Serum of the Blood, to which
Diathesis in the confluent Kind it is very much disposed, and supplies it with
a soft Chylose Matter, wherewith to fill the Pustles. It likewise supplies the
Salivation, where it happens with a proper Fluid, gently raises it when it
abates, and keeps up the necessary Tumesactions of the Extremities. It may be
also a reasonable Means to prevent any Tabid or Consumptive Dispositions, which
are here frequently founded: And I have always observed the Patients very soon
recover their Strength, who have plentifully taken of this simple innocent
Food. In the mean time, the Decoction of the Figs is not to be omitted being
sometimes taken.

Thus, Sir, am I come to the last Stage, the Crisis and Declination of the
Disease, which is attended with less or more Difficulty, according as the
Precedent have been treated; and in which I have found little trouble, where I
have had the Opportunity of directing its setting out; and even still are the
Alexipharmicks to be used, though at greater Distances, so that I recommend the
same Draught every Night, then every other Night, and so to be left off. I
confess at this time, too frequently appears the direful Symptons in the
confluent Kind, and require the utmost Penetration to find out Means to assist
Nature, that she may defend her self against this last Assault. As for
Bleeding, I hope, such Adventrous Undertakings are quite out of Thought. And
really, Sir, I have not been able to collect any great Advantage even from
Blisters as commonly directed, that is on any other Part of the Body except the
Head; for at this time the chief Intention is to stimulate Nature in her
several Offices to act the remaining Part with some Vigor. Neither have I found
there has been any reason to boast of the good Consequences, though the
Blisters have had their common Effect; for there having been so vast an Expense
of Juices already, there is apt to follow Deliquiums, and a great Prostration
of Spirits upon this second additional Discharge; but Blisters on the Head,
from whose Office we expect little more than to excite and stir up the
remaining Force, are, and have been of excellent Use. Nay, Sir, I have made
use, I do assure you, of actual Fire upon the Head, and visibly, under God,
delivered two Persons who were in the very Article, when all was thrown up, and
others had withdrawn themselves, and nothing but Death expected every Moment.
But where the Use of this, by reason of its seeming Severity, should be denied
the Physician, instead of it I advise, that after as much Hair of the Head can
be taken off, as the present Urgency will admit of (though I always order that to
be done at the beginning of the Disease) then to fill a Broad, Thin, Linen
Bag, with bruised Cantharides, and having dipped it into boiling Vinegar, to
lay it almost scalding Hot upon the Head. This, I confess, I never had occasion
to make Trial of but once, and then 'twas with evident Success, the Person
being now living, but especial Care must be taken to see the Bag keeps warm,
for if it turn cold it may prove mischievous.

Having thus far spoken of the Small Pox, in regard to Persons that may be
Patients under it, in an indifferent and general Manner; I now entreat your
Permission, Good Sir, to speak of Women with Child, who are afflicted with that
Disease, singularly, and in a Place by themselves; their Condition having been
always looked on as full of Hazard upon many Accounts; and for whose Sake
chiefly you have all this Trouble, and the present Publication (if it may be
so) is made to the World. Not but that the Distemper is the same in every
respect that regards it self, and must be generally so treated. But the sad
Fatality which so commonly attends these poor People at that time; the
considering that Two Lives are included in one Individual, and therefore that
one Fate must attend them, and both be saved or lost together; with other
Circumstances, which too often go along with it, that it most frequently
happens on a Woman's first Pregnancy; so that the Expectations of a Family on
one Side are certainly extinct, and sometimes it has fallen out that both have
been.

These and other moving Incidents put me upon the utmost Stress of considering
their Cases, with the greatest and most heedful Attention I was Master of. And
I do here, and ever must with all the Gratitude of my Soul, acknowledge and
adore the Divine Goodness on these poor Endeavors; and which I hope are
agreeable to the Proceedure of Nature, and the Ars Medica, by what follows.

Here I must again inculcate, as I must on all Occasions, that the strict
Enquiry into the Animal Economy is and has been the just, regular, and only
Means for discovering useful Remedies; at least the proper Way of rendering any
of the Particulars of the Materia Medica rationally, and therefore as
constantly successful as the Strength of the Disease, or the Weakness of
Humanity will admit of. Thus Dr. Herman Grabe puts it into a Kind of exemplary
Method; and in distinct Chapters tells us, what Ways we are to take, if ever we
intend or desire to make any commendable Discoveries in Surgery or Pharmacy;
and therefore proposes to our Imitation, the Examples of the most considerable
Physiologists of the Time he lived in, or a little before it; beginning at our
Great Countryman Dr. Harvey, and instances in many Particulars, what Light the
Knowledge of the Circulation of the Blood has given to the Pathology of
Diseases, and the Secrets that may be disclosed from the Observations thereon.
He proceeds afterward to the Discoveries made by Bartholine, Wharton, Steno,
Sylvius, and Willis; and severally hinting, what useful Inventions have been,
and still may be made for the Good of Mankind by following their Pattern, which
he presses very earnestly to all the Practisers in that noble Art. And here I
beg you will indulge me so far, to affirm to you, that if there be any thing
valuable in what I now lay before you, it is owing to the considering the Parts
of a Gravid Female more intimately than ordinary, at the Time when these Parts
of the Kingdom were (...) with the Smallpox. And finding so little
Encouragement; and on the contrary, so much Forbiddance in the Success of the
common Procedure, either in Books or Observation; there seemed to me to be a
Kind of tacit Demand made by the tender Sex upon all the Practisers in the
Science, to have their Case peculiarly considered.

To speak first in general, and to consider, that Nature is then intent upon
the great Work of propagating and perpetuating herself in the Species: And that
this is a Task the most arduous in its Performance of all natural Functions, is
sufficiently observable from the great Turn, and, as it were, Revolution made
in the Constitution. Not to entertain you with the shocking Expressions of the
Act of Generation, though really observable enough, but the Consequences of it.
Upon the first setting out of the Primordia of Conception, the Menses are
intercepted; so that the Blood, Spirits, Lymph, and the whole Genus fluidum of
the System take a new Turn; and this not purely for the Nutrition of the but
just conceived Faetus, which it does not, nor is it possible it should receive
the thousandth Part, but for many other Uses and Reasons, and for this general
one amongst the rest, because she would not admit of any Avocation, or
Interruption in this so great an Undertaking. And we almost always see, that
Miscarriages (not to speak of the Loss of the Embryo, which however ought to be
considered, and seems to be a Duty implied in our Oaths) are incomparably more
full of Danger, and ruinous, even to the Health of the Mother, than natural and
timely Births. And this, I suppose, no one will put me upon proving, when
Nature, and every Day's Experience, manifests it to the most superficial
Observation. But when to this is added, the violent Insults of a little less
than Pestilential Fever; when she is forced from this her grand Intention,
called off and diverted to contend with what is so frequently too strong of it
self, and which God in his merciful Administration and Providence has so
ordered, that human Nature is rarely, if ever, more than once in each
Individual subjected to it. When to these general Disadvantages, so
considerable a Part of the Mother, as the Foetus, when of any Magnitude, must
be accounted, is in Danger, if not timely prevented, of being torn from her; by
which so great an Effusion of Blood, and other Fluids, such an Exhaustion of
Spirits must immediately follow: What Intenseness of Thought and Sedulity must
these Considerations raise in every one, that desires, or intends to make
himself serviceable in his Employ, to which he has assigned himself, and is, as
it were, elected? Upon such like Observations as these, I thought my self
excusable, if I took a Method somewhat peculiar, to prevent, if possible, that
which might be otherwise destructive of the Mother and Offspring; and without
this being done, every Day's sad Experience sufficiently shows, that both must
generally be lost together. To detain you therefore no longer; As soon as ever
I have been called to a Woman with Child, and there has been Reason to believe
she would be seized with the Smallpox; as by the usual Symptoms in the Person
her self, or the Place where she lives being visited, together with her own
Fears and Apprehensions being strongly employed or affected; in such a Case,
without staying for the appearing of any other Sign, to make the Diagnostick
certain, I always give something to prevent Miscarriage; and in this, I dare
presume you, Sir, will agree with me, that I am regularly discharging my Duty,
because such Administration can have no Male-Tendency: Besides, the Lucta is so
great, the Convulsion frequently so violent, at the same time that the
poisonous Miasmata are making their Insults upon the Internals before the
Eruption, that the Placenta is in great Danger of being very much loosened, if
not immediately torn and divided from the Mother; upon which, all the Symptoms
before recited, and many more, must be exasperated. And under this Oppression,
while Nature is held in this unhappy Dilemma of attending one or the other,
either to expel the Disease, or preserve the Embryo, and is not able to perform
both; during the Hesitation, both Mother and Child are in the most eminent
Danger of being lost: Immediately therefore I order the following Bolus and
Draught.

Pulv. Rad. Tormentil. ss Bistort. gr. x. cort. Cinnamon. gr. vij. Cons.
Cynosbat. ij. Sir. de Rosis siccis q. s. f. Bolus. Quem capiat Aegra quamprimum
and superbibat Haustum sequentem.

Aq. Cinnamon. hordeat iss. Theriacal. vj. Pulv. e Chel. cancror. Simp. j.
Sachar. Alb. q. s. f. haust.

After this has been taken about Two Hours, I then order the Alexipharmick
Draught beforementioned. In which you see, I regard both the Pregnancy of the
Mother, as well as endeavor to get the Enemy at the same time removed to that
convenient Distance from the Vitals, that we may with some tolerable Safety
parley with him. The Bolus and Draught against Abortion, I certainly repeat at
the End of four Hours after taking the first; but then omit it for twelve
Hours, except some peculiar Reasons from the Patient oblige me to repeat it
sooner. The Signs of an approaching Miscarriage, and that of the natural Birth
being so very like, and Women being so abundantly sensible of the
Particularities in that Case, I need not take up any room here in reciting
them: Upon which Occasions and Informations, I repeat the Bolus and Draught
every three, four, or five Hours, as Need shall require; the Persen herself
being kept in Bed in the most quiet Disposition and Posture that is possible,
till these threatening Signs abate. For at this time I am so intent on tying, as
it were, all things fast in the Communication between the Mother and Foetus,
that in truth I think nothing safe, or like to be so, till that great Point is
secured; and that the forementioned Bolus, or the Rad. Tormentil. (in what Form
the Physician shall think fit, or the Prtient can best take it) will do; at
least I never yet knew it fail. But still I would have the Decoction of Figs
before spoken of, in proper Intervals freely used (and likewise the
Alexipharmick Draught sometimes) as being what will dilute the Fervency of the
Blood, and help to break and divide the morbid and peccant Matter from it, and
is a good Diaphoretick besides. After this, I generally repeat the two
Medicines against Abortion once every Twenty four Hours, as there is
Opportunity, so as not to interfere with the Medicines necessary to bring
forward the general Disease. But however, when that is near the State, and
grows toward a Crisis, I never omit giving it twice at least in Twenty four
Hours. After that is over, I withdraw those restringent Medicines to once in
that Time: Then to once in Two natural Days; and then to once in three or four
Days. But if the Disease be of the mildest Kind, then neither this, nor any
other Medicine, directed to what Intention soever, need be so frequently
repeated. But if it be of the Confluent, or even of the Cohaerent Kind, if we
keep not upon the Guard, we shall be in Danger of being surprised; for in such
Kind of Fevers that are, or are near like Pestilential, there is such
Relaxation, or, may I not call it, a Dissolution in all the Juices, and also in
the internal Membranes, that they too frequently fall, as it were, in sunder;
and thus sometimes disappoint us in our most confident and sanguine
Expectation. When the Crisis is passed, and all the Symptoms much abated, and
Nature under a sensible Alleviation and Refreshment, we may with Reason believe
the Patient out of Danger, considered singly in the Mother; so that the Embryo
ought now to be our peculiar Regard. As soon therefore as it is manifest that
it may be done without Hazard, I would have the inferior Intestines emptied of
the Faeces by the common domestic Clister of Milk and Sugar. The same may be
repeated the next Day; and then intermitting a Day, it may be again made use
of, if the Strength of the Patient will admit of it. But I do positively
declare against any purging Medicine being taken at the Mouth by Women with
Child; because it puts the Child into the utmost Danger of being expelled
before its time: Of which, with Permission, I shall give you Two pretty plain
Instances.

A Gentlewoman of this Town, who had the Smallpox in the mildest manner
imaginable, so that there was little or no Occasion for any Assistance on any
respect whatever, was (though with Child) treated at the latter End, as in common
Cases, with purging Medicines, by which (in her own Opinion, and also in that
of most about her) she miscarried. Again:

Mrs. Snow, a Gentlewoman who was most severely handled, as by her Case
hereafter recited appears, upon her Recovery from the utmost Danger, was so
prepossessed with the Necessity of being purged after such a Disease, that
notwithstanding all I could say, would not be prevailed with, but purged she
would be. I ordered her nothing else but

Mannae, Sal Cathartic. Glauberaa. ss. to be taken in Gruel; by which she had
Five moderate Stools: Yet even this caused in the Child such tremulous,
fluttering and disordered Motions, and in her self such parturient Pains, that
without waiting to know whether the Purge had finished its full Operation, I
was necessitated to give the Draught and Bolus against Abortion: Upon which she
was abundantly convinced, and desired she might have no more Purges. Neither
indeed had she any more, nor any one else with whom I was concerned, who were
with Child, any thing of that Kind, but the Clister beforementioned, till
after the Time of their Delivery. They and their Children are all alive, and in
perfect Health, (Mrs. Dove being long since safely delivered.) And more I think
I need not urge. I only therefore beg your Patience for one Word more of
Comfort to Women with Child. And pardon, I entreat you, good Sir, any seeming
Vanity in it. As I have laid their Case, as well as I can, before you, I may
with some Assurance, as well as Pleasure, say, that thus considered, their
Condition is even not so dangerous as other Women: For it is observed by
Authors, and may be so very often in our own Practice, that the Proceeding and
Advance of the Disease, and its Cure, is interrupted by the Menstruation of
Female Patients, even in their timely and regular manner; and is enumerated
Marton, Cap. 3. P. 207.
as one singular Disadvantage in their Case, and is much worse when (as it
frequently happens) it appears before its Time. For a Confirmation of what I
now say, I refer my self to Dr. Morton's Historical Observations in the 9th,
18th, 36th, 37th, 41st, 52d Histories of Puretology. And for the unhappy Events
subsequent on Abortions, the 43d and 44th Histories of the same Author are
sufficient Testimonies. I shall add but this one general Observation more, on
which it cannot but be imagined I must reflect with some Satisfaction, that
during the Continuance of the Smallpox in these Parts, there was not one
Person with Child, for whom I was consulted, whom I treated not in the Method
above described; and not one of them but is now alive, and so are their
Children: Except Mrs. Withnoe's, which lived above a Fortnight, and then I
believe died on the first Insults of the Smallpox; there being a Necessity, by
reason of the weak Condition of the Mother, and other Disorders of the Family,
to keep it constantly in a Room, where Three others lay miserably afflicted of
the Confluent Sort of Smallpox. And I cannot learn from the strictest Enquiry I
have made, that any escaped that were not thus dealt withal; but both
miscarried and died, except the Gentlewoman before hinted at, who only
miscarried upon her being purged after the Disease.

After what has been said, I shall take Leave to lay before you some Historical
Cases: Which I hope, Sir, will not only seem excusable, but necessary, and even
incumbent on me; that so any Person may be satisfied, that shall think fit to
enquire into the Truth of the Relations from the Persons themselves.

The First CASE.
A Servant-Maid of Mrs. Blythe, at the Red Lion in Stamford, was seized on the
14th of April, 1715. with Vomiting, a racking Pain in her Head, Back, and
Loins; which after about four Hours remitted, and she was able, though very
weakly, to attend the Business of the House. On the 15th her Pains returned,
when I was sent for; and enquiring whether she had had the Smallpox before,
and being answered in the Negative, I told them there was great Reason to
believe she now would. Presently after the Menses broke somewhat before the
natural Time in a pretty large manner, at which the Patient was greatly
terrified. At Night they removed her, with great Care, to another Part of the
Town; and showing a great Disinclination to the taking of any Medicine, from a
covetous Fear, as I perceived, of the Charge, I left her without any. On the
16th, very early in the Morning, Mrs. Blythe came to me, told me that her Maid
was dying, and that the Menses flowed from her like the Floodings of a Woman
after Delivery. I found her indeed in a very weak Condition, her Pulse quick
and low, her self very short breathing, and in frequent Deliquiums. I ordered
her to take the Alexipharmick Draught immediately, and to be repeated every
four Hours for three times; for she had got no Sleep, and at the same time a
large Blister to be laid to her Neck. At Night I found her much refreshed, and
the Smallpox beginning to appear in large Spots on several Parts, as the
Confluent Kind generally does: the Fluxus Catmeniorum was somewhat restrained.
I ordered the same Draught to be repeated at the Hour of Rest; and the Blister,
which had been neglected, to be applied. On the 17th, in the Morning, I found
the Eruption general, the Patient had taken pretty good Rest, and the Delirium,
which had before at intermitting times tormented her, gone off. The Menstrua
still continued, and this Day more than that before. But the Blister, through
the stupid Conceitedness of a poor ignorant Nurse, was not yet applied; and
finding there was no Dependence on her, I laid it on with my own Hands, and
repeated the same Draught as before. At Night I found all things much amended,
the Menses stopped, the Eruption come much forward, the Blister having taken a
full Effect, and the Patient, after a good Sleep, much refreshed. I continued
the Use of the Draught every Night only, till near the Crisis, and then
repeated it Night and Morning for three or four Days. All this Time she took
plentifully of the Decoction of Figs; and toward the Time of ripening, very
freely of Milk-Porridge: And thus, by God's Blessing, under many Disadvantages,
she perfectly recovered.

The Second CASE.
In August, 1715. The Wife of William Weight of Uffington near Stamford, was
seized with the Smallpox. On the Fifth Day of the Disease, and second of the
Eruption, I was sent for, by which time it sufficiently appeared to be the
confluent Kind. She had for Twelve Hours been tormented with a violent
Looseness, and Griping before I came to her; and was now at every Stool
Fainting and Swooning: Upon her Breast, Arms, and many other Parts, appeared
Black, and Livid Spots; which I showed her Sister, who expressed a most tender
Care and Concern for her; at the same time telling her how little Hopes there
was of the Patient. This was the 21st of the Month, and about Noon I ordered
her the Draught, with ij. of the Alexipharmick Powder to be presently taken,
and stayed by her to see the Event. In about an Hour an Half the Lax seemed to
be stopped, and she fell into a Sleep for almost an Hour. She had no Delirium,
but at the first Attack of the Disease, and she now awaked much refreshed, and
was her self sensible of it; so that she told me she could not but conceive
some Hopes of her Recovery; I encouraged her in that good Disposition in order
to keep up her Spirits, and desired she would observe the Rules that should be
set her, which she promised to the best of her Power and Knowledge. I then
enjoined her Sister to let no one Person come near her on any Account whatever,
that so she might take all the Occasions of reposing that could offer. She took
near a Quart of the Decoctum Ficuum every 24 Hours. I visited her twice every
Day, and every Night and Morning she took the Draught till toward the State of
the Disease. I ordered her Sister to withdraw the Draught in the Morning, this
was the 25th Day of the Month, and the Ninth or Tenth of the disease; (...)


