THE Tears of the Muses; IN A CONFERENCE, BETWEEN Prince GERMANICUS, AND A
Malcontent Party.

LONDON: Printed for T. WARD, near Paternoster Row. M.DCC.XXXVII.

TO THE Right Honorable, and Publick-Spirited, The President, Officers, and
Committee, OF THE SOCIETY FOR Encouragement of LEARNING.
My Lords, and Gentlemen,
LEST it should be considered as a Disregard of Propriety, when a Poem of a
Satirical Species, is addressed to the Patronage most distinguished for Extent
of Humanity, please to receive it, as a poetical Janus; of whose Opposite two
Faces, the fairest and best drawn you will find to be Panegyric.

BUT, on That Side, you were attached. -- And, such devoted Admirers of the
Life would with Difficulty have been brought to allow a Resemblance in the
Picture. Whereas, on the Side of the Satire, you could not possibly be Parties
concerned: and were, therefore, best qualified, to judge it, impartially.

YET, since it is not by any Merit of mine, that you are so safe on the
Satirical Quarter, It was fit I should do something, that might have room to
expect your Acknowledgment. I have, therefore, declined any Encomium on your
generous Society; or on Any of its particular Members: though, to Every Reader,
not such, It would have increased the Delight of the Poem.

BUT, You are such Enemies to every Kind of Corruption, that I apprehended the
very Appearance, of an Attempt at evading your Judgment, by engaging your
Generosity in my Favor.

IN this Situation, there are preserved to you all the natural Rights of the
Critic. Yet, I am under no Pain from the Use you may make of that Freedom: For,
what candid Writer would wish to escape a Reproach, where, being sure of its
Justice, he can be made but the Wiser, from Effect of its Severity? And, as to
the more desirable Reverse of the Prospect, no Man is in Danger of missing your
Approbation, unless he has, no where, deserved it.

THE Muses have used you too kindly, not to expect your Concern, for the Fate
you will find 'em reduced to: And, to hear of your Grief, and good Wishes in
their Behalf, may, from the Knowledge they have of your Consequence, deserve to
be thought little less, than a Balance, for the Neglect they are under, from
Thousands.

BUT, to speak a plain Truth, without Metaphor, whatever Advantage the Poetical
World would have derived from imaginary Muses, might be, really, an Effect, of
some such confederate Influence as yours, in good Earnest exerted.

HOW many great and desirable Changes in literate Taste, may we not reasonably
expect, from the associated Prevalence of Numbers, united, as you are, upon the
most generous Principle in Nature, an unprofitable and voluntary Pursuit of the
Benefit of Others, from Effect of your own Cost, and Labor?

TO instance, in One, the most obvious and easy of many: How soon would our
present low Relish for dramatical Buffoonery give Way, to your nobler Example?
-- persevering (indeed, with some necessary Obstinacy) to applaud, and support,
good Tragedy and Comedy: till what is now but mere Reason, might have the
Honor to be considered as Fashion -- by Concurrence of your munificent
Endeavors, but for one or two short Winters?

AND, yet, what a National Deliverance were This! -- With what Effusion of
unmercenary Gratitude would it immortalize those generous Conquerors, who,
protecting the noblest of our Youth from bad Principles, had, by expelling
Mean-spiritedness, Corruption, and Folly, from our Theaters, intercepted them
in their Passage upward, into Situations whence their Effects, extended wider,
become in Proportion more dreadful.

WHATEVER Misconceptions have arisen, with View to your more immediate and
particular good Purpose, from its Relation to the Profession of a considerable
Body, in Trade, whose Interest may appear to be concerned, not in the
Intention, but Effect, of your Establishment, There will never, I am persuaded,
lie any Objection at all against this opener and easier Road, to the Redemption
of one Branch of Polite Learning, that stands in too visible Need of your
Patronage.

AND, now, since All the Motive I had to this distant Address was the Pleasure
of professing, in public, my Respect for so public a Spirit; you will forgive
me, that I withold from your Knowledge a Discovery of so little Importance,
as the Name, of

My Lords, and Gentlemen, Your devoted Humble Servant, The Author.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
NOT assuming such an Air of Authority, as to give Rules, much less Examples,
of Writing, the Author in the following Verses intended no more, than an humble
Attempt, from mere private Curiosity, upon an Idea of Satire, which appeared to
be New: or not practiced.

There is indeed, something so like Cruelty in the Face of that Species of
Poetry, that it can only be reconciled to Humanity, by the general Benevolence
of its Purpose: attacking Particulars, for the Public Advantage.

But, methinks, It gives up this End, (which is Reformation) when, mistaking
the Means, It attempts the good Work with a Hand either too rough, or too
gentle.

In the first Case, It corrodes, where It professes to cure: In the second, It
is only sportive and wanton, with what It should correct, and discountenance.

The Medium perhaps might be found, in an Art like that of the Painters: who,
by opposing their Shades against LIGHTS, call out Darkness into open
Distinction.

So, Enormities, which Satirists would censure, are but dimly and imperfectly
marked, till the Defect admits Disgrace, from the Neighborhood of Perfection.
-- Then Contempt stings more scarply, in One, by the compared Admiration of the
Other: Besides, that the Censured are driven, at the same Time, from their la^t
little Refuge of Vanity, and can no longer recriminate upon the Censurer his
Ill Nature, and Malevolence of Purpose.

I am afraid, there is another Particular, that calls aloud for the Regard of
the Satirist: and That is, a Reflection, how far Decency may make it a Duty, to
abandon his personal Self, and insinuate Opinions, with Modesty. I mean from
the Mouth of some figurative Speaker, whom He ought to suppose of more
Consequence; and whose Sentiments the Reader will be sure to receive with less
Scruple.

There is a Meaning, in the very Name, of a Poet, that should seem to prescribe
us this Duty: And the Use and Necessity of Invention can never be more
manifest, than where the Subject is so ^^vidious, as Satire.

Who is there, to say Truth, so unguilty of the Follies of Life, that he dares,
in his own proper Person, stand out and justify the Right he assumes, of
reproaching the Conduct of Others?

Reproof is too bitter a Potion, to be welcome from our Sense of its Use. And
the administering Hand should be dear, not disgustful, if it would incline us to
taste it, with Pleasure.

I thought it but necessary, to prefix this short Note, to an Essay toward a
New Kind of Satire. I will not pretend to assert my own System: because it is
the most probable Thing in the World, that I should conceive a mistaken Idea.
Yet, since by frequent Attempts and Miscarriages, there are started, at least,
some good Hints, He, whose false Steps have contributed either to the Caution,
or Direction, of Others, may be said to have erred, with Good Fortune.

THE Tears of the Muses; A POEM.
GERMANICUS, for Love, and Empire, born,
At once to govern Kingdoms, and adorn;
Too good for Greatness, but that Kings can bless,
Too firm for Fear, but of his Friend's Distress:
Fore-temp'ring Power by Reason's generous Plan,
To task the Monarch, meditates the Man.
IN a Town Grove, whence Dryads Noise exclude,
And hush loud Streets, to Sylvan Solitude,
Veiled by a verdant Skreen's incircling Shade,
Whose angly Sides eight arching Lights pervade,
Friend to Mankind, their pensive Favorite stood;
Revolving previous Plans of purposed Good.
SOFT, to his Sight, a Female Suppliant pressed,
In all the speaking Marks of Misery dressed:
Down-look'd, relaxed of Mien, often bending, low;
Now stopping short, now re-advancing, slow:
Pardon, she cried, the intruding Sighs of Grief;
Hope is the friendless Wretche's last Relief.
GERMANICUS, who when Distress draws nigh,
Catches quick Sorrow, from the Suff'rer's Eye,
With gentle Waft invites her back'ning Fears,
And smiles the Warmth of Pity on her Tears.
Her, while advancing, heedful he surveyed,
Chance stretched his Eye to the remoter Shade:
Where, dimly obvious from the bord'ring Wood,
Dark'ning the Arches, Eight new Phantoms stood;
All, like the First, thin Forms of shivering Woe,
Wept All -- in dumb, sad, solemn, circly Show!
THINK, cried the Approacher, prostrate at his Feet,
How sharp is Insult! and Relief how sweet!
Pity a wretched Sisterhood of Tears:
Nine friendless Mourners, whom no Comfort chears.
All Arts were Ours, that polished Life could gain:
But Arts, and polished Life, were Ours in vain.
See! what Reward wished Knowledge could impart!
Where Fool is Fashion, Ignorance is Art.
Urged by Derision, and escaping Hate,
We, sad, slow, Exiles, seek some gentler Fate.
To the bleak North's new-rising Coasts we go;
Less cold than These, amidst eternal Snow.
Glory's gay Beams, to whose felt Warmth we run,
More than supply the Absence of their Sun.
There, mourning Merit cannot miss Relief;
Where watchful Power supplants prevented Grief.
Famed for Munificence, Thy princely Hand
Singly absolves an unbestowing Land.
Ah! Save the Friendless -- Help the Wronged away:
Too poor to go, yet too un-lov'd to stay!
Pay but wished Passage from this cruel Shore:
And never, never, will we trust it more.
SCARCE had the imploring Accents voic'd her Prayer,
When the known Sounds and recollected Air
Through the false Semblance, natively conveyed,
To the charmed Prince, a speaking Muse, betrayed.
Round, while, uncrediting the storied Woe,
His curious Eyes discov'ring Glances, throw,
The examined Umbrage, as he turned, revealed
Each Muse, that every distant Arch concealed.
Waiting impatient, for the finished Tale,
Quit your vain Hope, he cried, by Want's thin Veil
Unhid, to 'scape the Reverence of my Zeal,
Who all your Power, through all your Changes, feel.
JOYFUL, He snatched the Implorer from the Ground,
Then, turning graceful, bowed progressive, round;
Pressed their joint Access undisguis'd and gay;
And shone, receptive of each effluent Ray.
SEATED, and circled by the beamy Train,
Their Shapes, resuming, and Themselves again,
Tell me, said He -- Ye Soul-inspiring Nine!
Ye living Fires, that give the Great, to shine!
Who, quickening Regal Courage into Flame,
Guide it, by Justice, to immortal Fame!
Why would ye leave a Land distinguished, long,
For Love of Valor, and for Hate of Wrong?
Where Freedom unrestrained her Empire holds,
And Legal Monarchy new Bloom unfolds?
HE paused -- and CLIO answering, thus began,
Perish pale Malice! -- It oblit'rates Man.
Where Envy blasts, the Muse inspires in vain:
No human Culture, there, extends its Reign.
Lost in Malignity by civil Hate,
Virtues that clash with Virtues curse a State.
Stifled in Faction, Arts unfriended sink:
Or, pigmy'd into partial Flattery shrink.
History must blush, the Wiles of Spleen to pen,
And grace the bloodless Broils of angry Men.
SMOTHERED in Self, there breathes no public Soul,
Where separate Strugglings general Strength control:
There, Policy's old generous Straitness bends;
And shifting Medium crawls, to sidelong Ends.
There, Fraud triumphant tempts the Just to fall:
And every one Man's Gain is Loss, to All.
There, Love internal, checking Sighs that roam,
Begins, and ends, all Charity, -- at Home.
Each Prayer appropriates one Man's modest Aim:
And humbly trusts to God the Common Claim.
Crushed by Contempt of Praise, Exertion dies:
And Public Spirit, laughed at, shuns to rise.
THITHER when Hope misleads the Historic Muse,
Swift let her seek some Scene of nobler Views.
Where guileless Power no Praise to Graft ascribes,
Where Courage scorns Deceit, and Duty -- Bribes.
Where nervous Meaning dares, directly, speak:
And crooked Windings teach no Truth to sneak.
IT IS found -- for, see! -- The icy Pole dissolves!
Honor's new Warmth with sunny Force evolves!
There, glows Event! There, more than Roman Arms
Clash their prophetic Thunder's feared Alarms!
There, the puls'd Public beats, in every Vein:
Strong, to one Purpose, lifts with equal Strain.
No vile Pretension, there, at Titles aims:
No Pride-swoln Lumber lazy Lordship shames.
There, shines the Sword, in Honor's guarded Track,
No Knighthood blushes, on a Miser's Back.
No bought Emblaz'nings Eminence efface,
No dirty Dignity sublimes Disgrace.
There, Heroes multiply: and laboring Fame
Grows busy, -- to record each sparkling Name.
SHE ceased. -- The Prince his Patriot Eyes withdrew,
Weighed the long Charge, and wished it, Half, untrue.
Sighed at the Waste domestic Discord made:
And mourned unfriended Arts, by Spleen betrayed.
Then viewed the Sisters, re-prepar'd to hear:
While ERATO, soft sighing, charmed his Ear.
LURED, said the amorous Muse, from Realms above,
Pleased I descended on this Land of Love;
Looked and approved: and formed aerial Schemes,
Of heartfelt Ties, and Hope's elusive Dreams;
Vainly proposed -- Each Sex by Each to mend;
And smooth the rugged Paths of Life, with Friend.
Snatched at One sweet Example, New to Fame,
Urged its dear Power, the Unhappier to reclaim:
Misguided Millions hailed the acknowledged Charms;
And loved Perfection, when it blessed Thy Arms.
But, ah! too lost a Length Themselves were gone!
They worshipped, and confessed: -- but still sinned on.
Yet I, vain Hoper! Still new Helps apply:
And, ever failing, would for ever try.
To slighted Beauty would new Powers impart;
And stretch the aided Empire of the Heart.
Teach Man, that Woman's Strength in Softness lies:
Teach Woman, why the Modest charm the Wise.
Useless to Either, I from Both, remove.
Money's the inspiring Muse of modish Love!
Over Truth and Passion, Avarice prevails:
All Vows are venal, and all Sighs are Sales.
Interest and Vanity, and Self, disarm
Mutual Esteem, till neither Sex can charm.
Then, blanc unnat'ral Whims pervert Desire:
Attraction failing, they exchange Attire.
Then, Man's laced Lightness apes the Lady's Air:
And bluff big Boldness masculates the Fair.
With changing Sexes, Love's lost Motives change,
From Wish to Wish the short-lived Passions range.
Recorded Constancy becomes Romance:
And, among Millions, Two may love -- by Chance!
WHY should I, then, supporting present Scorn,
Stretch my too patient Hope, to Times unborn?
When, to the North, where Nature shines unstained,
Confiding Sexes love, with Faith unfeigned.
Their native Beauties, in no Clime excelled,
To rising Force by conscious Worth impelled;
While through the sparkling Eye taught Spirit breaks,
And the felt Luster of their Fame partakes.
THE Lover Prince unwillingly believed
Faults, which his nobler Nature scarce conceived.
Touched for the Honor of the Human Heart,
His own glowed painful, with ideal Smart.
When loftier Accents from URANIA broke,
And snatched his listening Soul, while Science spoke.
FROM Heaven's unsounded Depth, she cried, I stole
Angelic Fire, and formed a NEWTON's Soul.
Taught him the secret Walks of God to tread;
And 'twixt the starry Worlds his Spirit led:
All Ether opening to a Mortal's Eyes,
Till Earth sent Colonies, and held the Skies!
What King, for This, magnificently just,
Blessed him in Life, or dignified his Dust?
What voted Honors mark the Aspirer's Race?
What thinking Statues emulate his Face?
He, who immortalized his Country's Name,
Beyond Ten Thousand Conqu'rors bounded Fame,
He, who, to lift Mankind, new Heavens displayed,
And every Human Breather nobler made,
Did He to public Fame All Nature raise?
And is He poorly left to private Praise!
In such a Land, ah! what can Arts expect?
What Claim has hopeless Science, but Neglect?
O! Fate of wintry Worth, by Climate crossed!
Budding untimely, to be nip'd in Frost!
NEWTON has multiplied the Suns! -- yet pours
In vain, the Light of all their Orbs, on Ours.
When will the incurious Courts, for which, He found
New Worlds, find Will to trace an Old one round?
What promised Pension ships the unshaken Soul,
To dare Discov'ry, and ungloom the Pole?
What coasting Keel, indenting Southern Strands,
Starts the long Shores of Cloud-benighted Lands?
No annual Bounty, persevering, kind,
Draws the dark Veil, that covers half Mankind.
What regal Influ'nce, easing Learning's Birth,
Now, adds new Stars to Heaven? or Arts, to Earth?
Who sows Munificence, to root up Sloth,
And call forth Harvests, of eternal Growth?
HAIL, to the Land, where War makes Science Room!
Where Realms from Deserts rise! and Ruins bloom!
Where Conquest, spreading to embrace Distress,
Lets loose Ambition, not to waste, but bless!
There, Power inverts Destruction, into Birth;
And the prolific Sword empeoples Earth!
There, Desolation, fruitful in Decay,
Fades, into Opulence, and strengthens Sway.
There, Ports (un-native) indrawn Seas confine:
And climbing Streams over channel'd Mountains shine.
There, public Splendour swallows private Pride,
And Claims which All Men share in, All Men, guide.
There, Art rewarded, strains excited Skill;
Till dazzling Wonders wid'ning Empire fill.
The fierce free Tartar sees the Tartar taught;
Grins, at advancing Rule, and pants for Thought.
Then, in long Link, new Nations forward draw:
And the drained Wilds of Nature crowd to Law.
Hail, promised Land! -- All, now, that seems severe,
Is -- that, removing hence, We leave YOU here.
URANIA stopped, and bowed. -- The Prince, whose Heart
Inly confessed the Power of cherished Art,
Nobly approving Praise, so justly warm;
Smiled, conscious of his inborn Right to charm.
NEXT, rose TERPSICHORE, -- melodious Muse!
Soft, her first Accents, like descending Dews:
Sweet, and slow-swelling, till in livelier Sound,
Gay, to the ravished Ear, quick Transports bound.
Timed to the tuneful Voice, each trembling Tree
Strained its tugged Roots, and labored to be free.
Warmed through the wak'ning Stone, the sculptured Ear
Of every starting Statue seemed to hear.
Air caught, and lengthening back the mazy Notes,
Curls, while the undulating Music floats.
Earth, listening, to inhale harmonious Pain,
Sighed it, in soft Vibration, back again.
PARDON a mourning Muse, that leaves, with Tears,
The Land, that loved GERMANICUS endears.
But, ah! what Toils, what Anguish, shall thou bear!
What endless Labor must o'erload thy Care!
Ere thy lost Views a Taste like Thine, inspire,
And sparkling Kingdoms catch Thy manly Fire!
NEAR Opera's fribling Fugues, what Muse can stay?
Where wordless Warblings winnow Thought, away!
Music, when Purpose points her not the Road,
Charms, to betray, and softens, to corrode.
Empty of Sense, the Soul-seducing Art
Thrills a slow Poison to the sickening Heart.
Soft sinks Idea, dissolute in Ease,
And all Life's feeble Lesson is, to please.
Spirit, and Taste, and generous Toil, take Flight:
And lazy Love, and indolent Delight,
And low luxurious Weariness of Pain,
Lull the lost Mind, -- and all its Powers are vain.
HENCE, to the Realms of Fame, ye Muses, fly.
There, to the Drum's big Beat, the Heart leaps high.
There, sighing Flutes but temp'ring Martial Heat,
Teach distant Pity and Revenge to meet.
The manly Pipe, there, scorns the expanded Shakes,
That wind waved Nothings, till Attention aches.
There now, concurring Keys and Chords increase
The Heart's soft social Ties, and cherish Peace.
Then, Trumpets, answ'ring Trumpets, shrill, and far,
Swell to the sounding Wind the inspiring War.
There, the roused Soul, in Exercise, grows strong:
Nor pools to puddly Foulness, stopped, too long.
Strengthening, and strengthened by, the Poet's Fire,
There, Music's meaning Voice exalts Desire.
There, Harmony not drowns, but quickens, Thought;
And Fools, unfeeling Words, by Notes are caught.
SOFT sighed the Prince, for suffering Music, pained,
And POLYHYMNIA, rising warm, complained.
Deign to be told, Impartial, Generous, Wise!
Why fruitless Eloquence indignant flies.
Galled at lost Time, in Cases vainly cleared,
At Truths, untouching, and at Sounds, unheard;
Blushing, while Oratory's laboring Strains
On Prae-decision, waste derided Pains;
And flourished Periods, to no Purpose fine,
Like Suns in Deserts, without Notice, shine,
Hating grave Insult, I disdain to stay,
Where Talk but trifles, and where Tropes but play.
If serious Rhet'ric sweats, where sneering Mutes
Hastening the hurried Question, crop Disputes;
If Law sells Argument, yet Forms must reign,
And, Custom pleading, Equity is vain;
If the dark Pulpit's short mysterious Art
Lifts Faith to Heaven; and damns the Moral Heart;
Bear me, dishonored God! to some plain State,
Where Truth, in spite of Aye and No, is Weight.
Where Pleas of Right a reasoning Bench persuade,
And Justice scorns in Precedent to trade.
Where no bold Blasphemy would Faith enslave:
But, humble, honest, doubting, Works can save.
EUTERPE, watchful of her Sister's Close,
Snatched her sunk Cadence, and impatient rose.
Pleasure, she cried, is Mine; Mine, the gay Skill,
To paint the Fancy, and adorn the Will.
But, where dry Avarice has Taste betrayed,
Pleasure is Robbery, in Masquerade,
Contending Sexes push One common Aim:
And Youth, and Wit, and Beauty, meet, to game!
At Cards to conquer, or at Dice to sweep,
Is all the humble Joy, the Polished reap!
OR, if, aspiring to robuster Praise,
Some livelier Genius, Warmth more active sways,
Then, frock'd in groomy Sleekness, tight, and smart,
The pert, capp'd, Racer dares the Jockey's Art.
At Stake and Plate, his Skill profoundly shown,
He from his Horse's Worth, presumes his own.
OR, nobly stung by John the Coachman's Claim,
Climbing the adventurous Box, disputes his Fame!
Scattering malignant Dust, cracks Voice and Thong,
Glows, for a Livery's Right, and burns along!
Proudly displayed, looks back, and shouts, to find
Poor conscious John, less glorious, hang behind:
NOT so, the Olympian Rivals charmed, of Old,
When fiery Youths in whirling Chariots rolled!
Then, the watched Signal bad the Rank disjoin;
And rushing Wheels dissolved the breaking Line:
Strained to the expanded Whip's impulsive Sound,
Light leaped the exulting Axles over the Ground:
'Twixt crowding Nations, partial, panting, gay,
The praised plumed Hero skim'd the lessening Way.
The smoking Steeds obeyed the watchful Rein,
And winding warlike, swept the shouting Plain.
Now, graceful raised, now pendent in Carier,
High, and far-glitt'ring, shone the Charioteer;
Firm in his Seat, superior in his Mien,
Flew over the Course, and flamed along the Green:
Martial in Gesture, Eminent in Grace,
His Birth and Grandeur lightning from his Face.
OR, if to sweeter Contest matched he moved,
And, in some Ball, led the kind Hand he loved,
The modest Fair, slow through the mazy Dance,
Swam to the lovesick Soul, in soft Advance.
No light coarse Frisking kicked off Woman's Air:
No strong, stretched, Limb out-trod Attraction, there.
Decent their Pleasures, and discreetly weighed;
Active the Youth, and delicate the Maid.
Honor, by Elegance, its Right maintained:
And, Thought correcting Rapture, Prudence reigned.
MOURNFUL MELPOMENE, with Tragic Frown,
Spoke next: and thus deplored a tasteless Town.
Why strove the Scenic Muse to shine, in vain,
Where Wit is Levity, and Art is Gain?
Where Law's blind Hope would curb Corruption's Rage,
Yet, left undue Contempt to taint the Stage?
Hence, Theaters, neglected into Shame,
Catching at Concourse, Purity disclaim.
By Power deserted, make their humbler Court
To Rake, and Rancour, or to Fool and Sport.
Piqu'd to Reprizal, unconfed'rate Wit,
Noting the popular, evades the fit.
Then, the Play plots on State-craft, laughs at Truth:
Misguides Allegiance, or unsinews Youth.
Thither crowds Faction, to be taught Complaint:
Where Power, the Martyr, might have reigned, the Saint.
There, Wisdom bleeds, by Pleasure's feath'ry Dart:
And Love's loose Hand unstrings the slackened Heart.
There, Discontent first trys her timorous Force;
Hints, and finds Help, and dares her dangerous Course.
There, Froth, Farce, Flattery, Chance, Sedition, rule:
And Virtue scarce finds Place, in Virtue's School!
FAREWELL, forsaken Stage. -- When Courts refuse
To urge Wit's wandering Rein, she shames a Muse.
Hail! from AFAR -- Thou, fate-foretelling Light!
Beaming prognostic, through the Eye of Night!
Kindling a hundred Realms, the enlivening Flame
Wings the waked Energy of courted Fame.
There, Empire flashing into Glory's Blaze,
Conscious Intention blushes not at Praise.
There, spurring Virtue, Wit has leave to mean:
And Power, exciting Passion, prompts the Scene.
SO must it be, ere Tragic Fire is felt!
But, where grave Thoughts are Marks, for Fools to pelt;
Where tired, illit'rate, viewless, yawning Pride
Must hear, unlist'ning, and, un-taught, decide,
There, let lost Sentiment mispoint no Beam;
To hope, were Blindness: and to wish, a Dream!
UP leaped THALIA, glowing red with Rage,
Fired and indignant at a farceful Age.
Shall Comedy's insulted Muse, she cried,
Hold Hoops, to Tumblers! --
She paused, -- unable to proceed; -- sighed strong:
Repelled the big Disdain -- and traced her Wrong.
SHALL COMEDY, for sworded Harlequin,
Split Lathes? and arm him, for the mimic Scene!
While He, proud Impotence! with modish Strut,
Cocks bluff, diffusive of his wooden Cut!
Must she swing Gypsies over the winnow'd Pit,
Mounting Posteriors, in Defect of Wit!
Or clap some human Whirlwind's blustering Rage,
That, over twelve Heads descending, shakes the Stage!
Stare, while the unmanly Reptile's wriggling Twist
Threads the stav'd Ladder, and descends, unhiss'd?
Or, for the Rope-Aspirer's jirkful Tread,
Shall she poize right their emblematic Lead?
NO. -- Let implored Expulsion wing me thence!
Far let me fly, to some fair Seat of Sense:
Where Life's stolen Humor glows with mirthful Grace,
And Comic Picture copies Nature's Face.
Where imag'd Passion, dear to the Polite,
Leaves low Buffoon'ry to the Rabble's Right.
Tired, yet untask'd, let me no longer wait,
Laughing unheeded, -- at the laughing Great:
While, with the Roar of Boys, to Tricks they run,
Which Mobs should shout at, and the Wise should shun.
Gravely, good Souls! reserving solid Scorn,
For Thoughts, to feel whose Force, Themselves were born.
WARMED in Wit's Cause, lamenting Genius lost,
Nor tasting Ecstasy, at Judgment's Cost,
Listening GERMANICUS, with pensive Grace,
Revolved wished Soft'nings, for a pitied Race:
When, like a Trumpet pouring Music's Flood,
Speaking CALLIOPE thrilled through his Blood.
THERE was a Prince! ah! bid me add, ere long,
There is: -- impulsive of the Epic Song.
Flame of imperial Prominence, He shined:
Terror, at once, and Charm, of Humankind!
All the soft Praise of social Life his Due:
All the raised Powers, of Arms, and Arts, he knew.
Fearless impelled his Father's Fortune on:
And, in Youth's Dawn, a dazzling Victor, shone!
In Force resistless, yet undaring Wrong:
Honest, in Vengeance! and in Pity, strong!
Without, dwelt War, in all her thundering Din:
While Peace, in all her Stillness, wept, within.
Formed for a Lover, for a Thinker taught;
Bloodless reflective Eminence, He sought:
Born to be greatest, chose but to be best:
But Heaven, that knew his Use, forbad his Rest.
Then, from the Calms of conquering Thought, he rose,
Glowed in tempestuous War, and scorned Repose.
Uncrown'd, gave Crowns, at Will, their Thorns untried;
And, more than reigning, without reigning died.
SUCH, though the Land I leave could show me, still,
Calm Seasons call not for a Pilot's Skill.
Peace is the Blessing, Commerce loves to choose:
But War, and Glory, task the Epic Muse.
Farewell, sure Subject of my future Song!
When, rising flameful at a People's Wrong,
In Times yet distant, Thy rememb'ring Hand
Lets loose Correction at some foreign Land.
Then, loud as Thy Applause, reclaim us, All:
And every Muse of Nine shall wait thy Call.
SPEAKING she rose: and, with her, rising slow,
Her Eight sad Sisters, sighing, turned to go.
Lively upstarting from his shadowed Seat,
Stay, cried the Prince, alarmed, -- suspend Retreat.
Just though your Anger, yet Revenge forbear:
Lest, taught by Muses, Man forgets to spare.
Too soon, degenerate Nature warps awry,
The Bad to copy, and the Good to fly.
Have you beheld Wit's Stream discolored glide,
And poured lost Azure on the unconscious Tide?
Think the Blame yours, who Heaven's best Tincture bring,
To stain the Current, yet neglect the Spring!
Would you, at once, coerulean Depth renew?
And, gayly bright'ning, flush the Improvement, through?
High, at the Source, the infusive Tinge bestow:
And every downward Drop shall tinctured flow.
BUT, while, a Vagrant, Inspiration strays,
And, here and there, unlicens'd Power displays,
Though separate individual Strollers share
Some uncollective Scatt'rings, of your Care;
This Way, and That, though some faint Hint of Light
Gleams, like a Meteor, and shrinks back in Night,
Or, mingling Beams, to form some deathless Blaze,
Once in an Age, You, POPES, or THOMSONS, raise:
All the lost Labor serves but to express
How wide our Wants! how thinly we possess!
Till the Day breaks, expect no general Glow:
For, the Sky darkened, keeps all dark, below.
HERE, for Wit's Fountain, dream not of a Court.
False and injurious, slight the unweigh'd Report.
Meant, for a Clime, where Thrones appropriate Power,
And One Man's Passions All Men's Rights devour.
But, in free States, where Liberty may choose,
Taste knows no Monarch, and obeys no Muse.
Senates their Muses, Property their Aim:
Their Boast but Safety; -- and their Plaything, Fame.
NO -- would your willing Culture waste no Toil?
Would your Bays thrive, in a reluctant Soil?
Ductile of Form, and changing Shapes at Will,
Assume new Sex, new Names, new Views, new Skill.
Safe, in sage Politics, conceal your Wit:
Then, by my Bounty, qualified to sit,
Nine Cornish Boroughs might assign you Place,
Where, mixed unthought-of, You may shun Disgrace.
There, breathing unsuspected Influence, lurk,
Till patient Progress crowns your arduous Work.
Thence, shall descending Radiance Taste convey:
And willing Kingdoms make the Muses Way.
Till, Time slow favoring, You may quit Disguise,
And wear Wit, plain, among the unlaughing Wise.
PAUSING, He smiled Humanity, so kind,
That every Muse was touched, and changed her Mind:
All bowed Consent, to His grave Purpose wrought;
And, thus, URANIA voic'd her Sister's Thought.
BORN to a People's Hearts, their DARLING, shine!
Let every Wish, and Hope, and Joy, be Thine!
Moved by the magic Mercy of Thy View,
We feel good Counsel, and embrace it too.
One sole Condition grant, and we obey:
No dangerous Notice must detect our Stay!
Hid in Thy Grove, each menial Muse shall claim
Domestic Shelter from Reproach and Shame:
Till, by thy Scheme, their yet unrivaled Friend!
Their Infl'ence widens, and their Sufferings end.
Then, shown the World, and privileged to please,
And, gathering Face and Fashion, by Degrees,
Seen at Assemblies, Belles may Jokes forbear:
Nor, shocking modest Strangers, turn and stare!
THUS, in his Shade, from public Pain exempt,
Sleeping, the Visionary Poet dreamt.
Then waked; and found his sparkling PRINCE was there:
But every empty Muse was lost in Air.
FINIS.
Shortly will be published, etc.

An ESSAY on the Merits of ASSASSINATION: With a VIEW to The Dictator's True
Character; AND His Designs on the Roman Republic.


