THE THEATERS. A POETICAL DISSECTION.

[PRICE THREE SHILLINGS.]

THE THEATERS. A POETICAL DISSECTION. By Sir NICHOLAS NIPCLOSE, Baronet.

Suppose JOB living 'midst the Critic train,
Our Theaters would open his angry vein.
Behold the Muses ROSCIUS sue in Vain,
Tailors and Carpenters usurp their Reign.


LONDON: PRINTED FOR JOHN BELL, IN THE STRAND, AND C. ETHERINGTON, AT YORK.
M.DCC.LXXII.

TO MRS. ABINGTON, AS A CORDIAL TRIBUTE OF RESPECT, FOR SUCH SINGULAR MERIT, AS
WOULD HAVE BEEN AN ORNAMENT TO THE STAGE, EVEN AT IT IS BRIGHTEST ERA; MERIT,
WHICH THE PUBLIC WISH, AND OUGHT OFTENER TO ENJOY: MERIT, HIGHLY CONSPICUOUS,
THOUGH INJURED BY WANT OF PROPER SUPPORT: THE FOLLOWING SATIRE, THE FRUIT OF
HONEST INDIGNATION, IS DEDICATED, BY ONE WHO DARES SIGN HIMSELF AN UNPREJUDICED
CRITIC, AND THE LADY'S WELL-WISHING HUMBLE SERVANT, NICHOLAS NIPCLOSE.

NIPCLOSE-HALL, Nov. 1771.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT may be depended upon, that the following piece appeals more to Facts than
Fancy; however strong the Coloring may appear, unattach'd judgment will
pronounce it not exaggerated; the Author has particularly dwelt on sordid
Management, as that is the polluted source of all Theatrical dullness and
deficiency: Mr GARRICK is exceedingly blameable, and, therefore, particularly
noticed. About the time he got a share in Drury Lane Patent, our present
Laureat wrote him a letter, Vide 2d Volume of DODSLEY's Collection of POEMS.
in which, among other passages, we find Thalia speaking thus: No more the poor
polluted scene
Shall teem with births of Harlequin;
Or vindicated stage shall feel
The insults of the dancer's heel;
Such idle trash we'll kindly spare
To Op'ras now: they will want them there.
Afterward, addressing Mr. Garrick, the poet says: Consult your own good sense
in all,
Be deaf to Fashion's fickle call;
Nor ever descend to reason's laws
To court, what you command, applause.


How far Roscius has fulfilled the prophecy, or consulted his own DISINTERESTED
good sense, experience sadly tells. Some hireling news-paper friends say, if
the public will follow such trash, the managers are right to furnish it; but
will common sense allow, that those public purveyors should, like common
prostitutes, be allowed to pick young and unwary pockets by false glaring
colors. Public complaint has been loud; yet the tide of avarice and folly most
audaciously flows on. -- The theaters have been likened to taverns, where, if
you don't like the provision or wines, you may stay away, or go to another;
true; but there are MANY taverns; only TWO theaters: a third of the latter,
would make essential difference; allow a small anecdote: QUEEN ELIZABETH,
having received remarkable instances of ardent loyalty from a small country
town, said; if they would ask any reasonable grant, in her power, they should
be indulged. License for an alehouse was the demand. Surprised, me asked the
reason; because, said they, we have but one, and they give us such wretched
trash we cannot drink it; if there was another, emulation would produce us
something worth money: the application is obvious.

One half the money, that either INSTALLATION has cost, nightly extra expenses
included, would have genteely paid Mr. MOSSOP, who is intrinsically worth a
thousand such Christmas-Holliday Productions.

As to the performers, we know they, like a nest of disturbed hornets, will
buzz and whet their stings; it will be called cruelty to attack bread; how
absurd an assertion: if a shoemaker, or tailor, executes, what he is paid for,
badly, have not customers a right to complain? nothing is more true than the
following lines of CHURCHILL, with which we shall conclude; The stage I choose
-- a subject fair and free;
It Is yours -- it is mine -- it is public property:
All public exhibitions open lie,
To praise, or censure, of the public eye.


THE THEATERS. A POETICAL DISSECTION.
GODS of the stage! if any gods there be,
Who deign to glance on modern tragedy;
Or comic strains, which barely serve to keep
The slumbering audiences from perfect sleep,
Inspire the muse -- provide a whip of steel,
To make even avarice, pride, and dullness feel,
Pervade the Grub-street gloom, which wraps around
Our ROYAL SHOW SHOPS, and their guides profound:
For SAINT BARTHOLOMEW let conquest run;
To Smithfield give their tinsel glare and FUN:
For that we cannot humor justly style,
Which scarcely should in barns create a smile;
Grant us correction both for great and small,
For authors, actors, managers and all:
'Till they with pallid tremor shrink and faint,
Sunk into captives of the sausage saint.
Where is the blush, oh DRURY! for thy shame,
Without a remnant of thy ancient fame;
Though tears still fall, and laughter still may roar,
Even mighty ROSCIUS is himself no more:
And for the rest, some few exceptions made,
They sink to criticism's darkest shade;
Scarce more respectable than Falstaff's crew,
Whom SHAKESPEARE paints so laughably to view.
Think not, though on a golden column raised,
Though often justly and unjustly praised;
Though servile authors kiss thy mighty hand,
And cringing actors at wide distance stand;
Though valiant BRATHWAITE Master tailor at Drury Lane.
, armed with steel and goose,
Lets all a taylor's mighty genius loose;
Though SAWNEY JOHNSTON This gentleman, once proprietor of a puppet show in
Edinburgh, is house and box book-keeper, remarkable for ECONOMY,
obsequiousness and taste in decorations by which he has accumulated some
thousands.
, that designing Scot,
Who once moved PUNCH -- now doomed to fairer lot,
Makes gain of darling siller, just defense
For the fell murder of poor common sense;
Though great BEN VICTOR This laurel-crowned Esquire, was a barber, attempted to
be an actor, became a treasurer, then a manager in Dublin; where, in fortune's
frolics, though not able to write a dying speech, he was appointed Birthday
Ode Man, and -- oh poor Ireland! -- his wife complimented with a pension. He is
now treasurer of Drury Lane.
, -- the Hibernian bard --
Had they no native blockhead? -- wondrous hard --
To wear the laurel, and -- oh task sublime! --
Weave birthday sonnets into barbarous rhyme;
That here they came a tonsor to misplace,
And put a shaver in the poet's place;
Though BEN, who in his biographic flights,
Just like the ordinary of Newgate Vide his Lives of the Actors.
writes;
Applauds thy management without rebuff,
Grinning assent with consequence and snuff;
Though LACY, swearing shadow of a shade,
Thy most obedient stalking horse is made;
Think not thy crimes, oh GARRICK, shall escape,
Thy crimes, as manager, of monst'rous shape;
One as a man -- did thou not entering life,
With real merit wage illiberal strife?
Did not DELANE Mr. DELANE, an actor of great merit, and a valuable member of
society, had two peculiarities on the stage, which Mr. GARRICK took off, and
rendered him so ridiculous, that he was constantly laughed at; having generous,
though week feelings, Mr. DELANE took to drinking, and in reality broke his
heart.
-- a bright thea^^ic star --
Fall by the shock of paltry mimic war?
Have thou not since assailed that art with blame Mr. GARRICK when attacked in
the same style by Mr. FOOT, declared his disapprobation of such exhibitions in
strong terms.
,
Which, to assassinate a rival's fame,
Was used without remorse? -- make no reply,
Knock at thy heart, and let repentance sigh.
By royal patent constituted 'SQUIRE,
To what great purpose did thy soul aspire?
Not with true taste to dignify the stage,
In grateful sense of such a generous age;
Whose favors flowed upon thee in a tide
Unknown before; to swell thy purse and pride:
To trick the public, and become supreme,
Were the sole objects of thy selfish scheme.
BARRY was banished when his powers could shine,
Now taken to sneer at in his sad decline;
Or, what is worse, upon the verge of life,
Viewed as a mere appendage to his wife.
MOSSOP This excellent performer was originally refused by Mr. GARRICK, as
unfit for the stage; and immediately after brought out by that ready encourager
of merit Mr. SHERIDAN.
, too great a favorite of the town,
Like the Turk's brothers stood too near the crown;
Therefore avaunt -- you knew the man has pride,
And through that foible stabbed his weakest side;
On self-destruction's wings he fled the field,
And must, we fear, through adverse fortune yield:
Yet be advised, nor cruel terms impose,
Lest friends of merit should become thy foes.
Have thou ever given young genius due reward?
Have thou not rather pinched and gripped it hard?
POWELL and HOLLAND, These two performers were brought out under the most
avaricious terms, and according to their stations did not receive half of what
their performance and the receipts of the theater entitled them to.
both, for seasons, felt
The poor, penurious pittance which you dealt:
You taught the latter, and by teaching spoiled;
You traveled, and the first grew nature's child;
From his own source his stock of merit drew,
And earned just praise by not resembling you This is not meant to depreciate
Mr. GARRICK's indisputable original merit; but the sad, adulterated imitations
of it; of which Mr. HOLLAND, who had superior requisites to Mr. POWELL was a
stiff and painful instance.
.
What balances the mischiefs you have done?
Giving us CAUTHERLY and BRERETON:
Illustrious pair! -- inimitably fine!
Who with an equal share of dimness shine --
Hold, let us own, amidst satyric rage,
You have improved the lighting Taking away the candle rings, and lighting from
behind -- the only advantage we have discovered from Mr. GARRICK's tour abroad.
of the stage:
Yet oh! what man of sense but sighs and stares,
When rags and sticks supply the place of play'rs?
To all but recommended blockheads blind,
Has budding genius ever proved thee kind?
Obsequious to right honorable taste,
(A lord must be discerning, wise and chaste)
You never kindly opened the way to fame,
Unless sustained by some enobled name;
Or such, whose Pens o'ercharg'd with ranc'rous spite,
Have put thy timorous nature in a fright;
Even HOME's Mr. HOME's Douglas was refused till persecution gave it a name in
Scotland, and the thane patronized its author; then two much worse plays were
obsequiously produced.
amazing talents could not suit,
'Till handed forward by the GREAT LORD BUTE.
Agis and Aquilcia came in play,
Though each a nerveless dialogue essay;
Flattery, indeed, that sweetmeat to the vain,
Has found success in thy theatric reign;
While modest worth, though known, if poor,
Might bootless shiver at thy churlish door;
And hope as soon encouragement to meet,
In Asia's wilds as in SOUTHAMPTON-STREET. Mr. GARRICK's residence.

The want of leisure, pitiful pretense,
Apologizes for rejected sense;
Previous engagements too are made a plea,
Engagements known full well to you and me;
Such as to name would make a cynic laugh,
Perhaps to CUMBERLAND or BICKERSTAFF.
Oh, had kind fortune of my father made
An Irish bishop, Mr. Cumberland's father is in that station. An excellent
reason for the son's being a genius, which he modestly avouches himself to be,
in his prologue to the Brothers.
or as good a trade;
Had she, when at my mother's breast I hung,
With thriving Blarney A phrase in Ireland for gross, ignorant, sycophantic
flattery.
tipp'd my supple tongue;
Then of thy smiles secure I might have shone,
As many equal simpletons have done.
Go on, great sir, acquiring praise and pelf,
Take care that none write better than thyself --
FOOT -- let that name never wound thy jealous ear,
His wit and satire rise above thy sphere;
He too possesses what thou never could find,
Judicious taste and elegance of mind.
Go on, great sir, and scribble to the last.
You cannot give us worse than what is past;
Unless your prologue-forging Mr. GARRICK styles himself a prologue smith.
itch remains,
Which throws, relentless, common sense in chains.
Thus of the manager I take my leave,
And, while I view the faithful picture, grieve;
Truth should be told of all in public station,
The monarch of a theater or nation;
Truth, that bright beacon, which, with just alarm,
May folly, vice, and insolence disarm;
If one, or all of these, in thee are found,
Oh that my pen the rotten part may wound;
May probe to heal -- deriving peace from strife,
And make thy private, match thy public life.
COVENT -- alas! -- for many years has been
Of pantomime and frippery the scene;
Like the piazza females, tricked with show,
Most meanly high, most eminently low;
Gods, devils, ostriches, and such a train,
As never were jumbled into human brain
'Till RICH existed, have usurped this spot,
Of childish insipidity the lot;
RICH marked a path, and BEARD pursued his plan,
Now tiny GEORGE, that mere poetic span,
In naught but human Fantoccini dealing,
Wages fell war against genius, sense, and feeling;
Bold in patched coat and pageantry alliance,
Taste and his colleagues Since this piece has been composed, we hear that Mr.
Colman's brother patentees, after having wisely spent some thousands in
litigation, have tamely submitted to move under his leaden scepter.
sets at bold defiance;
Fenced with a shield of subtle legal cunning,
Kindly produced by shrewd, sarcastic DUNNING,
Throws down goose quills, takes up the wooden sword,
A Mede or Persian law his every word;
Works wonders with the thunder of his tongues,
And, miller like, converts the old to young;
Makes harrass'd VINCENT, verg'd on sixty-three,
Smirk, cant, and trip through girls in tragedy;
Makes SAVIGNY -- but soft -- let him appear
In proper season, and his destined sphere --
Field officer -- oh scandal of the age! --
Amidst our wretched train bands of the stage.
Manes of CIBBER, PRITCHARD, QUIN, DELANE;
Rise from the shades -- take human shape again;
See, hear, feel, judge with most impartial thought,
And frown our spouting ciphers into naught.
Hark! to our ear the tragic muse complains,
And pours peculiar grief in melting strains;
Hark to her voice, she well deserves the smile
Of all the great and virtuous in our isle;
Since she depicts such characters and things,
As suit the minds and dignity of kings;
See how she bends her tender, tear-fill'd eye
On distant, cold, neglecting majesty:
Hear her remonstrance -- hear her humble prayer
To him who should caress the melting fair.
The TRAGIC MUSE's PETITION and REMONSTRANCE.
Oh mighty GEORGE, this nation's tender sire,
Whose virtues, more than rank, the good admire;
Why, when unbending from the painful weight
Of cumb'rous monarchy, and toilsome state;
Why, sometimes in my laughing sister's place,
Am I not honored with your royal grace?
The actions and the sentiments I yield
Afford reflection, sure the nobler field;
And ought to rank me, on some kind occasion,
Before such trash as HARLEQUIN's INVASION.
Where not one ray of real merit shines,
To gild the gingerbread of schoolboy lines.
While FRED'RIC Late prince of Wales.
breathed, though not a BRITON BORN, Words used by his present majesty in his
first speech to parliament, which intimated, with magnanimity, that natural
affection would cause him, not only to maintain the constitution, but patronize
ALL the useful arts and sciences, as well as painting, watch-making, and
button-making.

He never insulted me with abject scorn;
Never turned against me FASHION's Which always springs from court.
powerful tide,
But led me forth with all the pomp of pride;
And took a feeling, sensible delight
To trace my SHAKESPEARE through each nobler flight;
Whether he sung ambition's righteous fall,
Or waved his pen at freedom's powerful call;
Whether he moved in high, or humble sphere,
With Juliet sighed, or raved with frantic Lear;
SHAKESPEARE, so little countenanced by you,
Unless in sprightly tale of MUCH ADO. The comedy of MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING,
though far from one of SHAKESPEARE's best plays, is almost the only one
countenanced by commands; and was rather whimsically fixed on two nights after
the funeral of that deliverer of his country, WILLIAM, DUKE of CUMBERLAND.

Early great FRED'RIC gave thee my embrace; His late royal highness had formed
a design to bespeak all SHAKESPEARE's acting plays, one a week, which was
partly put in practice; he, also, caused the princes his sons to act in Cato,
Lady Jane Gray, etc. to give them an idea of public speaking: if the present
young branches of royalty should be placed in such a situation, we are fearful
of hearing that they are to exhibit Dogberry and Verges -- set me down an ass,
would have a sad ominous sound.

I showed thy talents with peculiar grace;
Let her not then in vain thy favor seek,
Who taught thee like an orator to speak.
Often have I seen thee in thy infant state,
Weep for the havoc made by partial fate;
And tears of pity, from a royal breast,
Should still humanely wait on the distressed:
Like Heaven's impartial dew should ever flow
For real worth beneath the clouds of woe.
Fear not to view me -- hear the truths I tell,
Such truths as never from cringing courtiers fell;
Give me your grace, I Will limit my design,
And yield up LIBERTY to RIGHT DIVINE;
No WILKES, through me, shall wound your awful eye,
Presuming wretch, to squint at majesty:
With titled knaves and fools I will not sport,
But show all great and virtuous at thy court;
Thrice happy spot! where every thing is good,
Where no vice taints the streams of noble blood,
Within whose verge corruption never could steal,
And every statesman toils for public weal;
For public weal employs his honest care,
Nor lets self-int'rest claim the smallest share;
Feels sleepless nights -- stands popular abuse --
When all the horrid rage of slander's loose.
Witness, oh NORTH, the facts which I relate,
You guide, ill-paid, this most ungrateful state;
You have no brother bishop'd A phrase we have conveniently used for
episcopated.
ere few have reached a mitre so soon as the present bishop of Litchfield and
Coventry.
his time;
You have no wife made ranger -- post sublime --
Wiser than all who in your post have sat:
Braver than all -- for once you lost a HAT. The scum of the earth being in a
violent ferment, attacked the gentle premier, and, oh lamentable tale! tore --
his hat in pieces.

Witness them, SANDWICH, noble, wise and chaste,
With every moral, pious virtue graced;
SANDWICH, who never in Rochesterian John, earl of Rochester, to whom the
present earl of Sandwich is an exemplary contrast.
way,
On helpless woman made one vile essay. There is a couched meaning here, which
we leave to the intellegent reader.

Witness them, ROCHFORT, The first of these four statesmen has done -- nothing;
the second has divorced his wife, married her cousin, and got a blue ribband;
chancellorship of Cambridge; and now privy seal, for avoiding the storm, which
himself had, in a great measure, raised; the third is an excellent judge of
French wine; and the fourth, president of the council, under direction of his
wife.
GRAFTON, WEYMOUTH, GOWER;
Oh truly patriot, most illustrious four!
Whose very names with utmost reverence strike,
Whom Britain, or her foes, must surely like.
Witness them, BARRINGTON, Our able secretary at war, whose humanity is well
known.
of gentle mind,
The bloodless, tender friend of human kind;
Whose grateful letter perfect pleasure yields,
For the great conquest gained in GEORGE's FIELDS.
Witness them, TALBOT, A peerless steward of the household; who had put Dr.
Cadogan's abstemious scheme in practice, before his pamphlet came out.
thriftiest of the great,
A most superb oeconomist of state;
Who so much rich superfluous viands slights,
That all St. JAMES's are Cadoganites.
Witness, proud POMFRET, that bedchamber lord,
That sunshine A beautiful figurative expression of that resistless orator.
of the sun, in every word;
Who languishes, alas! for Yorkshire mines,
Oh cruel SMITH! to thwart a peer's designs.
Witness, oh WESTMINSTER, where, from the bench,
Sage MANSFIELD This upright chief justice, in the Grosvenor cause, acted quite
different from his predecessor, in Henry the IVth's time; the latter confined
the prince of Wales, only for an affront to his dignity; the former palliated
an affront offered to the law of GOD, by his royal confidant.
never would law from justice wrench,
But holds her scales with such an equal hand,
He may be deemed the MINOS of our land.
Witness the glorious melting kind THIRTEEN, So many, as we remember,
petitioned for the Kennedy's, without the shadow of exculpation.

Who, by a handmaid urged of beauty's queen,
For murd'rers begged, and gracious pardon won: --
No reign ever mercy showed as this has done.
Witness our BISHOPS, and ARCHBISHOPS too,
Who worship lawn, without one worldly view.
Witness, sage GLOUCESTER, reverend with a right,
That holy, mitred, criticizing Commentator on Shakespeare; one of the most
amiable, humble, humane creatures breathing; wherefore, we have singled him out
as an ornament to the woolsack gentry; not but there are several of nearly
equal merit.
wight,
Who still forgives, as he would be forgiven;
Can such an humble prelate miss of Heaven?
Oh glorious proofs of GEORGE's patriot reign,
SEJANUS The infamous minister of that infamous monarch Tiberius Caesar; a
prince depraved by nature, yet rendered worse by his overgrown favorite.
never shall mount the stage again;
No monster like him lurks behind thy throne;
Advising actions which he dares not own:
Still conscious virtue thy calm conscience keeps,
And MAGNA CHARTA on thy pillow sleeps; Magna Charta seems to have been
slumbering several years; but of late has fallen fast asleep: should the
liberty of the press fall into the same lethargic state, then, with Razor in
the upholsterer, we may cry, poor old England.

In thee the stream of policy refines,
And with inimitable luster shines.
Why should proud armaments, prepared around,
Disturb our peace so solidly profound?
Let not such objects stir thy mighty mind,
Conquests at home are of the nobler kind:
What are seized ships, or men in bondage cast?
Perhaps, all mankind may be slaves at last.
Heed not the SPANIARDS, treat their threats as sport,
But oh, keep steadfast eye on PRINCE's COURT; Mr. Wilkes's residence, that
political Leviathan, who should be strictly guarded against, lest to him, like
the dragon of Wantley, houses and churches should be mere geese and turkies.

Smile on a civil parliament, and be
At least, thyself possessed of liberty.
Smile on me too, as formerly, again,
Grant me, oh grant, a Thursday The day commonly honored with royal commands.
now and then;
So shall again my consequence arise,
To captivate the heart and flood the eyes;
So shall I hold the state my rank demands,
And gain due tribute at the public hands.
Thus sues the queen of tears -- may she obtain
That favor citizens have sought in vain.
Pardon, kind reader, that the wandering muse
Should in her subject mingle different views;
Unfrown'd upon, permit her to return,
Nor let a critic indignation burn;
Since all agree the real and mimic state,
In many points, each other nearly mate;
Since blunders, partialities, and pride,
At present, rule the roast on either side;
And merit, without meanness, or a friend,
In both may unsuccessfully attend;
Seek and deserve protection, but in vain,
Herein St. JAMES's joins with DRURY LANE: Let any person who doubts this most
disgraceful assertion, only go through the irksome task of attendance and
dependence, which SWIFT emphatically styled a curse, and he will be feelingly
convinced, that we only advance truth in a modest garb.

Who then, with patience, either spot can see,
Unless who hate desert, and liberty.
Authors come forth -- most venerable tribe --
Whom we not fear to censure -- nor will bribe
With paltry praise -- come all around,
With self-sufficiency and dullness crowned;
At satire's call here blushing bend your way,
Solemn and farcical as LORD MAY'R's DAY.
The poet's brain, how whimsical a spot;
How strange a jumble is the author's lot!
How rich, how poor, how pitiful, how great!
The world his field, and nature his estate:
This day a pampered PEGASUS he rides,
The next, one bare as ROSINANTE's sides;
Like QUIXOTE too, he often takes delight
To brave mankind in fruitless windmill fight;
By him what vast variety is shown,
From the plain cottage to the gilded throne:
Sometimes his thunder shakes a wooden sphere,
Nay, all the elements by turns appear;
Now rosin lightenings blast the desert scene,
Then blooms stage groves, with beauteous vernal green;
He calls the TRAGIC MUSE in pompous woe,
While tears from sympathising passions flow;
'Till yielding to her blither sister, she
Resigns her groans to laughing COMEDY.
Sweet WILLY WHITEHEAD, who, with medium style,
Can never force a tear, or win a smile;
Most simply chaste -- most delicately dull,
Nearly overflowing, and yet never full.
Sweet WILLY WHITEHEAD, first in rhiming sphere,
Who smoothly BALLADIZES We have coined this word, as not knowing any in the
language adequate to our ideas of the laureat's annual productions.
twice a year,
Teaching his laurell'd, pension'd muse to sing
The milkwarm praises of a milkwarm king;
Welcomes the infant year, as custom claims,
And hails, in creeping measure, royal names.
Bold ARTHUR MURPHY, a dramatic wight,
Whom taste must wish had never learned to write;
Who, BRITON like, attacks our Gallic foes,
And, decked in English garb, his plunder shows;
The literary smuggler of this isle,
Whose works from genuine genius claim a smile,
Not of applause; for dullness' self must own,
That modest ARTHUR shares her gloomy throne,
And has, by various labors, fairly won
The glorious title of her eldest son.
Stand clear, ye critics! at due distance stand!
While we produce great DOCTOR CUMBERLAND,
The witty son of a RIGHT REVEREND sire,
Touched with such glow of true Parnassian fire;
That he has given three pieces Summer's Tale, Brothers, and West-Indian, to
which applauded incongruities we refer for proof of the changes brought against
this author, who, as we hear, teems with many more of the same kind. Dreadful
idea!
to our stage,
The pride, the joy, the wonder of the age.
Let probability such authors bind,
As pour productions from a narrow mind;
Let those who wish to merit being read,
Avoid absurd assaults on PRISCIAN's head;
Our DOCTOR scorns to own such narrow views,
Defies all grammar and no theme pursues:
Of incidents supplied with plenteous store,
Off sets his muse and never seeks for more:
Let him go on amidst the public praise,
And proudly gild his never-blooming bays;
Let him proceed with most relentless heart,
'Till nature and the stage for ever part.
Stiff as the stays We do not, by mention of Mr. Kelly's original profession,
mean an illiberal reflection; as it is our candid opinion, that a good
stay-maker may be deemed a more respectable member of society, than a middling
author: though it must be confessed, he cannot so soon commence ESQUIRE.
which once his needle made --
What strange transactions chance from trade to trade;
How wonderful the various turns of men,
Who now a bodkin wield, and now a pen;
Stiff as the whalebone which he once admired,
Behold HUGH KELLY with the muse inspired!
Vending in dialogue sermonic scenes,
THALIA knows not what such preaching means;
And grieves to walk abroad in such disguise
As that dull WORD projected for the WISE. Though Mr. Kelly's comedy of a Word
to the Wise, was treated in a most illiberal manner, yet certain it is, that
the riot did him great service, since, without opposition, the piece would have
had a speedy natural death, without the advantage of a subscription; for such a
phlegmatic affair was never composed before, and we hope never may again.

KELLY between the sister muses steers,
Too grave for laughter, and too light for tears;
If CLEMENTINA claims thee for her sire,
To pastry-cooks consign her, or the fire;
Nor dare to play the double dealer's part,
In sentiments so foreign from thy heart. Several impotent attempts at
patriotic strokes were made in this impotent tragedy; which, if derived from
the Ledger essayist, must be double dealing with a witness.

Wherefore -- oh HUGH! -- with belly fair and round,
With city luxury and dullness crowned;
Will thou aspire to hold an author's name?
If thou art bent on literary fame,
Forego the city's father, That brilliant, sensible, polite knight, Sir Robert
Ladbroke, at whose instance, it is asserted, Mr. Kelly writes.
left his head
Should thicken thine with sympathetic lead.
Observe examples -- they instruct the wise;
Observe those maxims -- none but fools despise:
Breathe freer air -- resign a civic crown,
Even WILKES is made much duller by his gown. The morning after Mr. WILKES was
chosen alderman, a gentleman in the Somerset Coffee-House, who had read his
address of thanks to the livery; remarked, that it was the dullest production
he had ever seen from the new magistrate's pen: to which, a person in the same
box, not unaptly replied, Do you wonder at that sir? consider he was made an
ALDERMAN yesterday.

JOHNSON, that huge Leviathan of wit,
Made once a turgid, tasteless tragic hit;
Told a soft tale in such laborious strains,
As damned the fair IRENE for his pains.
A literary warehouse, well supplied
With learning's lore, and not a little pride;
Who, in his own opinion, sits supreme,
Whatever style he takes, whatever theme;
Who never yet his own applause has missed,
Poet, philosopher, philologist.
JOHNSON, who once, beneath a virtuous face,
Gave venal pensioners to vile disgrace;
JOHNSON, who since, more prudent grown, and old,
Obeys the touch of all-converting gold;
Of a court scribbler takes the paltry sphere,
And damns his fame -- for what? -- three hundred pounds a year.
JOHNSON, thrice happy in a new-coin'd word,
Reigns in full state, most pompously absurd;
In a sad fit of dotage takes up arms,
And crams the public with his FALSE ALARMS; What pity that a man who knows
nothing of practical life, who is a mere bookworm, should expose himself
floundering like an unskillful swimmer in the unfathomable depths of policy,
for the sake of a pension, which, while he had power to enjoy life, he did
without; and for which, when obtained, he had very little, if any, occasion.

Defends a ministry, in whose defense
He murders virtue, liberty, and sense.
GARRICK, the friend of DOCTORS, right or wrong,
Most aptly here adorns satyric song;
GARRICK, who titles loves almost as life,
And nearly well as his beloved wife;
GARRICK, by multitudes so much adored,
Like sir JOHN ENGLISH, worships every lord. We have heard a circumstance of
Mr. GARRICK, which, if not strictly true, is so like him, that we venture to
set it down; being indisposed, he asked his servant what enquiries after his
health; some complimentary cards were presented; he looked over them, and
finding they were only from some esquires, and a baronet or two, he cried,
What! has no lord sent, John! -- no sir; then throw these paltry compliments
into the fire: the nobility must all be sick too, or they could not have
neglected me.

Were all indeed like Hagley's LORD LYTTLETON.
learned peer,
Taste would herself become their worshipper;
But Drury's lord, on greatness only set,
Head or no head, admires a coronet.
Why will thou, DAVY, harrass out thy pen?
Oh may it never judgment wound again;
No ear so dull, but what must surely tingle
To hear the jargon of thy dear Sir Dingle.
Blessed be the sire, but hold -- this starts a doubt --
It Is a wise son can find his father out;
But what of this? legitimacy's fire
Equals not that caught from illegal sire;
Then blessed be he, with warmth we speak the word, --
Should he perchance a footman be, or lord,
That gave us COLY George Column, Esquire the ruling pattentee of Covent Garden.
-- oh luxurious grant! --
That pretty, peevish, pert annuitant:
Oh may he follow still parental path,
And, mother like, give all his love to BATH! We don't mean by this, and the
preceding lines, any ungenerous reflection; a man of merit we esteem, however
born, but think arrogance sullies even bright abilities, and the noblest
descent.

Here may he cry, let wounded withers wince,
I Am an invulnerable FAIRY PRINCE;
Such troops I pay, such management I claim,
As never graced before theatric name:
I Have wrote enough; what needs there any more,
To gain fame's temple, and the public roar?
The LONDON PACKET Two evening papers, of which the managers are proprietors;
therefore every defense of their impositions and absurdities, however vague, is
greedily admitted: indeed we believe every thing favorable is written by
themselves, for certainly no other person, save a fool or a flatterer, would
undertake so impracticable a justification.
, the St. JAMES's join
To vend the puffs which I and DAVY coin:
We, pleaders like, though at the public bar
We wrangle fiercely, wage no hostile war;
Behind the curtain we shake hands and smile,
United BUBBLE MASTERS of this isle.
Why should I write? it costs a world of pains
To drag even dialogue from hard-bound brains:
Then as for wit -- my scull may be its tomb,
Upon my brows no laurel ever can bloom,
They both forswore me in my mother's womb.
GOLDSMITH, who teems with sentiments refined,
Speaks in his works a pregnant, liberal mind;
And showed, though we condemn his general plan,
Strong tints of life in his GOOD NATURED MAN;
Yet don't we wish to meet him on the stage,
'Twill spoil the foremost poet of our age;
Nor would we view him in historic path,
His politics may rouse up patriot wrath;
No writer can in many points excel;
We prize not writing much, but writing well;
Then, DOCTOR, stick to what we call thy own,
And sport in fields of poesy alone.
Come HOOLE, thou gentlest of the tragic tribe,
Thou modest, temperate, unaffecting scribe;
In METASTASIO all thy genius lies,
Where nature fails, to borrow wit is wise;
CYRUS, TIMANTHES, pretty little tales,
Outweigh'd by Gossamore in judgment's scales:
Like tinkling rills, thy rippling verses sound,
And yet with Mexican Alluding to the gold mines, some produce of which Mr.
Hoole has luckily fingered, for his feeble theatrical translations.
applause are crowned:
Oh kindly age, that swallows good and bad,
Oh simple age, gone critically mad!
Witness -- but wherefore should we witness call,
Review our drama and confess it all.
KENRICK, we think, may stand, beyond dispute,
As sensible, discerning, and acute;
But so engrossed with mathematic notion,
His thoughts all center in PERPETUAL MOTION. This author has been long riding
a chimerical hobby horse, which we fear, will at last throw him.

Without a question, born to live by rule,
He never can shine in a poetic school;
And with the drama still must be at strife,
Unless he greatly mends his WIDOWED WIFE. A comedy by Mr. Kenrick.

Come BICKERSTAFF, though late, not least in love;
Full in review thou patch-work author move;
Who, with such front, a brother's thoughts assumes:
Thou scribbling jay, decked forth with borrowed plumes.
In second-hand none can thy equals be;
Thy works the Monmouth-street of poetry.
Some steal one half -- but that for thee's too small,
Thy mighty mind has stomach for it all:
Cut, slice, and pilfer, profit is thy own,
Whilst thou lie prostrate before King DAVID's Mr. Garrick.
throne;
He, like most other kings, can never want
Some subtle, soothing, servile sycophant;
In such a case it would be wondrous hard
Not to repay a fawning, flattering bard.
Come FRANKY GENTLEMAN, from LIFFEY's The river which runs through Dublin.
side,
What frenzy can thee, as an author, guide?
Appear to swell our literary list,
Thou namby pamby, ROYAL FABULIST: This adventurous bard, about five years ago,
produced a volume of fables for the prince of Wales: In this his policy and
poetry keep equal pace; if it would not seem a national reflection, we might
call it a palpable blunder to carry verse and some truth to a court, where
neither was ever welcome.

Might thou not hope more prudently to thrive,
By clinking songs on WILKES and FORTY-FIVE?
Thou more than RUSSIAN Alludes to a sleepy tragedy, with some good lines,
barbarously murdered at the Haymarket, and afterward printed for the use of
pastry-cooks, etc.
conqueror -- whose pen --
O may we never meet its rage again!
Has forced the DARDANELLES with hostile speed,
And laid an hapless SULTAN low indeed;
Thou art another prologue-smith, still fit
To show, like DAVY, plenteous lack of wit.
HULL has good feelings, and possesses sense,
Yet to an author's fame shows small pretense;
Much better must he write, who hopes to rise,
Than SPANISH LADIES, or PERPLEXETIES; Two very lukewarm pieces by Mr. Hull.

To turn a period, or to clink a rhyme,
With little wit, and less of the sublime,
May be called writing, yet is waste of time.
With much collegiate buckram stiff, and prim,
FRANKLIN Who knows not the reverend translator of Socrates etc. etc. etc? Who
seems better acquainted with Greek than English poetry.
appears -- it must, it must be him;
Great WARWICK's ghost pursues his steps, and cries,
Why was I made the worst of tragedies?
Is there a muse existing could inspire,
So cold a scribe with mine or MARG'RATE's fire!
With thee we both have found a wretched fate,
I roar a bully, she a Billingsgate:
Oh, may contempt afford thee just reward,
Thou coxcomb preacher, and more coxcomb bard!
Rough as a rope-maker, lo! REED This gentleman is so tenacious of an author's
name, and withal so choleric, that it is a service of some danger to find even
the slightest fault; however, impartiality leads on to the charge; and we hope
he will not return the lash of criticism, by assailing us with a cat-o'-nine-tails
formed of his own manufacture.
comes forth;
In his own mind, of much poetic worth:
Yet DIDO sure, and eke his TOMMY JONES, A flimzy Tragedy, and drowsy Comic
Opera, engendered and brought forth by Mr. REED.

Instead of laurels, cry for broken bones:
But Madrigal with fair Trulletta joined,
Show they not brilliant parts, and mighty mind?
Burlesque at best we deem a bankrupt trade,
The worst attempt which genius ever made;
A brat of envy born, of dullness bred,
Which never can credit yield to heart or head;
A twist of thoughts, contortion of the brain,
That gives to decent taste unequalled pain;
May hemp of all such poets be the prize,
Even MIDAS, though we laugh, we must despise.
The muse, at length, with painful censure tired,
Meets with an author worthily admired;
Rivaled in strength of character by few,
Rich in a fund of humor ever new;
Whose pregnant pencil takes from life each tint,
Whose thoughts are stamped in brilliant Fancy's mint;
Who never makes a vain, or feeble hit;
Terse in his style, and polished in his wit:
Copious in subject, yet compact in scenes,
Dull explanation never intervenes:
Each line, each person, under just control,
Speaks to the heart, and beautifies the whole:
Laughter attends -- spleen flies the house of joy,
Where GENIUS FOOT and NATURE never cloy.
Acting, which now becomes a wretched trade,
We deem a science -- yet alas! betrayed
To sordid views: while poor neglected Fame
Sinks into nothing but an empty name.
Should one, too dull to fill a footman's place,
Chance to obtain RIGHT HONORABLE grace,
The kindly master writes a kindly line,
And thinks the blockhead may an actor shine;
Kind managers most cringingly receive,
And credit to the awkward mandate give;
Afford to one, who cannot walk or speak,
Perhaps, the sum of TWENTY HOG A theatrical, and St. Giles's phrase for twenty
shillings.
a week;
And complaisantly bid him get by heart
A gentleman's, a beau's, or prince's part:
Indeed if princes on the stage are like
Some that we know; such may a semblance strike:
For sad experience tells -- say all we can,
What makes a PRINCE, cannot make a GENTLEMAN.
Such patrons CHELSEA There are several methods which the great have of
quartering domestics on the public; if they can write, the customs and the
excise; if they cannot; Chelsea, Greenwich, or the stage: though they never
carried a musket, wore trousers, nor can distinguish Shakespeare from a
news-paper.
often and GREENWICH stain,
With the low voidings of their servile train,
As Covent Garden deck and Drury Lane.
How vast the requisites which serve to frame,
That man who would deserve the player's name;
Yet every coxcomb fancies he is fit,
The complicated, arduous task to hit:
If taught Mr. Garrick has been ever remarkably fond of teaching; we wonder he
does not equip every male performer with clothes of his own size, they would
mostly fit as well as his manner -- he found the stage with good actors, how
many will he leave on it -- then what has teaching done?
by GARRICK he must sure succeed,
Of useless nature he can little need;
Oh wretched doctrine, baneful to the stage!
Let every parrot keep its proper cage.
A graceful person, and a feeling mind,
An education of the liberal kind:
Deportment easy, and conception clear,
A well-tuned voice, and a discerning ear;
Fire in his eyes and meaning in his face,
That may discriptively each passion trace;
With solid judgment to conduct the whole --
Judgment of merit the essential soul. --
Must grace the theater and please the crowd,
Without such mumming as is now allowed;
Without such low chicane, such paltry art,
As tricks the eyes, but cannot affect the heart.
Oh GARRICK! it is with honest, social pain
That we have prob'd thee in the failing vein;
But had our dearest brother been to try,
We should maintain impartiality:
Had all thy flatterers, in early life,
Set thee and critic niceties at strife;
They might have made thy techy feelings sore,
But errors had been less, and merit more.
Bold we approach and paint each public fault,
Without reserve, or bitterness of thought;
However we seem, on truth you may depend;
Would every monarch had so just a friend:
What thou have been, with rapture we allow,
Yet, rather grieve to see thee acting now;
QUIN found his failing, in just time, and swore;
He never for gain would whistle FALSTAFF more:
Victorious CHURCHILL John, duke of Malbro', who, in his latter days, like
Swift, lapsed into a lamentable childishness.
turned a child at last,
And with weak dotage stained his conquests past.
Some twenty, or perhaps, ten years ago,
The world knew not thy equal: but how low
Have failing powers reduced thee since that time?
Description would even wound satiric rhyme.
Those eyes which then could animate the stage,
Now show the glaze of swift declining age;
That voice, which once could pierce the dullest ear,
Drops its best notes, less musically clear;
That person, short by nature, made more short
By corpulence; affords proportion sport:
And criticism laughs, though not most strict,
To see a butter-firkin BENEDICK.
Shall it be said, that DAVID GARRICK shines;
When COMIC MAJESTY itself declines
To grace his merits by some kind commands:
Rather content with common vulgar hands?
No, let him cry, and shake a well-stuff'd purse,
Bad as I am, my followers are worse;
The fact is granted, weeping judgment says,
Yet by the grant yields very feeble praise.
Thy carpenters, thy sycophants and tools,
A set of artful knaves, or wretched fools;
Headed by brother GEORGE, Mr. George Garrick was, by his brother's interest,
several years since, elevated to the high station of stablekeeper at the royal
Mews; and is, if fame says true, first puff trumpet to king David.
from royal Mews,
With fulsome stuff thy plyant ears abuse;
Rather trust those who plainly, roughly chide,
And let infirmities suppress thy pride.
BARRY, who vegetated fair and long,
In person graceful, and in feelings strong;
With voice harmonious, yet too apt to whine,
Music of sound his principal design;
Measure of verse not sense bespoke his care,
And rants were caught at, to make groundlings stare;
Without variety of action, still
His arms and legs obeyed mechanic will;
Yet, with all faults, none more could flood each eye,
None better formed to make the ladies sigh;
Now, after various gallantries, devote
To that most paltry prop, a petticoat.
So a tall oak the glory of the grove,
Whom Sylvan deities have viewed with love;
Feeling the gripe of all-devouring time,
No longer shows its stately head sublime;
Shrinks at each blast, of every storm afraid,
And bending, seeks a willow's feeble aid.
REDDISH, alike by nature and by art,
Is formed incapable to touch the heart;
He strives, indeed, through various shapes to please,
Without expression, dignity or ease;
A voice so bounded, it was never meant,
To rise above a moral sentiment;
A figure clumsy, and a vulgar face,
Devoid of spirit as of pleasing grace;
Action unmeaning, often misapplied,
Blessed with no perfect attribute but pride;
Take heed, bold sir, nor friendly caution slight,
In FRAMPTON, and that path, we deem thee right;
But when a hero takes thy awkward gait,
We laugh at both his passions, and his state.
PALMER, composed of more than common size,
With languid features, and more languid eyes;
Stalks a tall gauky on perception's rays,
Too slight for censure, and too dull for praise;
From hollow lungs he rumbles forth a sound,
Enough all sense and feeling to confound:
Emphasis! oh vain, superfluous word,
All rules for speaking, actors deem absurd;
None but a pedant would attempt to teach
By grammar ties, or paltry parts of speech;
This GARRICK knows, and only plies with tricks, Commonly called stage
business, often essential, but oftener used as a take in, to those who have more
eyes than understanding.

But leaves the meaning for themselves to fix;
Or, fond of something critical and new,
A meaning gives beyond the author's view.
What is a voice, though blessed with silver tone,
If love's soft notes in sing-song are made known?
What is a mellow medium, if each line
In dull monotony shows dull design?
Or what QUIN's deep-mouthed base, if with a growl
It wounds each tender feeling of the soul?
Rightly to rule, is truly to possess;
And, powers well managed please us more, though less
Than those luxuriances which weed like show,
And serve to choke the gardens where they grow.
Who has not seen, upon rejoicing night,
Squibs sputter, fret and bounce by partial light?
So elder AICKIN shatters tragic strains,
And fritters nature with uncommon pains;
Struts, foams and roars; good lack! what noise he makes,
While sense and harmony condemn his breaks;
Most cracker like he moves, a short-lived joke,
Shines with false fire, and soon concludes with smoke.
Soft pair of youths, whom we must never divide,
As best, or worst, no mortal can decide:
MORPHEUS over both his leaden mace has cast,
They sleep, and walk, and talk, and sleep at last;
Yet be not CAUTHERLEY, in doleful dumps,
Are you not happy in a QUEEN Mr. Cautherly married, last summer, a daughter of
Mr. Blanchard, Card-maker, with several thousand pounds to her fortune: as
GREAT personages very seldom say good things; we are prompted to record, that
one of the first characters in this kingdom, seeing a handsome house built by
Mr. Blanchard, asked who owned it? being informed the royal card-maker; why
then, says he, I think all his CARDS have turned up TRUMPS.
of TRUMPS?
And thou, oh, BRERETON! haste to get another,
Then Cipher kindly may call Cipher brother.
LOVE, a soft name, but sadly misapplied,
When given to paltry petulance and pride;
Where was it found? 'midst gentle Southern gales?
Oh no, where BOREAS rends resisting sails;
In SCOTIA's clime; no wonder then it is rude;
That clime with softness never was endu'd.
LOVE, as a serious actor, we detest,
With no one pleasing, proper talent blessed;
A face, where motionless composure sits,
And short-lived meaning only gleams by fits;
A bell-man's hollow voice, a bell-man's drone;
Who does not shudder at his CHRISTMAS tone?
With porter's gait, and action of a bear,
He claims more censure than the muse can spare;
Indeed, when Boniface and Falstaff call,
We sit with patience, though the merit's small;
For when the better is compared with worse,
As LEAR observes, it lightens any curse.
HURST, a laborious, imitative drudge,
Of whom it gives us poignant pain to judge;
Discordant, stiff, nay, every thing that is bad
An heap of MOSSOP's errors, quite run mad:
Yet is this wretch, so managers will give,
In some parts, HOLLAND's representative:
Oh, what a dreadful falling off is there,
From HOLLAND, who of faults had plenteous share.
PACKER in all, through every cast the same,
Toils to obtain a useful actor's name;
Often is he seen, and gives as often offense,
While his mean powers, unmeaning sounds dispense;
When he assumes, or levity, or state,
He SADDLES Mr. Packer is a very reputable Saddler; though a miserable actor;
however, he has so many to keep him in countenance, as to his theatrical
deficiency, that he may go on without blushing.
critics with a grievous weight.
AICKIN, the younger, has some gifts to please,
Just sensibility and modest ease;
He aims not there where nature cannot reach,
But lets her guide his gesture and his speech;
The muse concerned, beholds the place he fills;
But all in vain, while so his tyrant wills;
Wishing she could with such persuasion speak,
To gain him better parts, and add some pounds per week.
When JEFFERSON paints age in tragic strains,
Judgment attends, nor slights his well-meant pains;
It Is there he shines not with a radiant blaze,
Yet merit decks him with some pleasing rays;
He vainly aims not at gigantic strides,
But with discretion, medium feelings guides;
Much safer it is the middle path to run,
Than mount aloft to fall like PHAETON.
MOODY we praise, with all the warmth we can,
When he depicts the IRISH GENTLEMAN;
Nor stop we here, since he possesses sense,
To keep from those attempts might give offense;
May just reward his real merit crown,
Who well deserves the favor of the town.
BURTON and BRANSBY, kindly yoked together,
Dull, heavy, cold as dark NOVEMBER weather;
Chill every ear, and puzzle every eye,
Through clouds their dubious meaning to descry;
And, gentle opiates, with composure blessed,
Lull yawning audiences to perfect rest.
INCHBALD, who long on NORFOLK dumplins fed,
Those solid emblems of his solid head;
Imported to the capital, was shown, Mr. Inchbald, though many years an
itinerant hero, was, according to the modern paltry stage-policy, introduced
under that stale device, a first appearance: this is a trick to gain, from
curiosity, what may pay by one night the whole season's pitiful salary of such
actors; several mushrooms have vegetated thus; but none more worthless, or
short-lived, than Mr. Owenson; brought modestly forward in Tamerlane, some
weeks since; without even the requisites of a grown-up schoolboy.

As one well-form'd to mount the Tragic throne;
A first appearance smoothed the thorny way,
Yet, candid judgment damned his wild essay;
The shade of CONGREVE felt each jarring strain,
And fled ere Osmyn could appear again.
DAVIS, a sing-song man, of little worth,
The critic muse relentingly brings forth;
Such feeble objects should her lash escape,
She should not combat with a human ape.
VERNON, in music, gains unbounded praise,
We to his acting yield applausive lays;
Like GREENLAND's sun, too little seen, he shines
Scarce half his time; but when he does, refines
The clouds of dullness which around him gloom,
Nonsense avaunt, and give true merit room!
PARSONS and HARTRY, with strong power of face,
Give sportive humor often successful chase;
Yet each too feeble for a foremost station,
Courts rather than commands our approbation.
WESTON, but wherefore need we speak of him,
Begot by MOMUS upon Lady WHIM;
While laughing multitudes declare, with glee,
His face the essence of true comedy;
Nor does mechanic manner stiffly spoil
The pleasure of involuntary smile;
SCRUB, ABEL-DRUGGER, SNEAK, and DOCTOR LAST,
Must stand unrivaled his peculiar cast;
Though in MEDEA's kettle boiled anew,
GARRICK would lose by parallel review:
Then happ'ly placed, beyond all public strife,
Use, TOM, some caution in thy private life;
So shall not creditors enjoyment damp,
Nor sordid MANAGERS thy income cramp.
DIBDIN, alas! we nearly had forgot,
Perhaps oblivion were the kindest lot:
How he composes, it is not fit, we say,
But grant kind stars that he may never play:
Nor, to enlarge our wish, may ever sing;
MUNGO in this, in that, and every thing.
Why shares not BANNISTER, a fairer light?
He gives no umbrage unto critic sight;
In many parts of weight he might be shown,
With more than usual pleasure to the town;
Let him the task he is equal to approve,
And fill the vacant place of lumpish LOVE.
Who trips it, jantee, over the sprightly scene,
A pretty, pert, significant PANTINE?
DODD, who gives pleasure both to ears and eyes,
Though duodecimo of human size.
We think that BADDELEY can never miss,
A crouching Frenchman, or a flattering Swiss;
Yet, for aught else, his talents are but small;
This praise, perhaps, he cruelty may call:
But critics never justice should retrench;
Let that be left to JUDGES on the bench:
They, in the quibble of almighty law,
At any time can find a ready flaw.
A flaw! what is that? a loophole This term is taken from Mr. FOOTE's Devil on
sticks.
to escape,
Where wrong of right may take the pleasing shape;
A ready passage litigation finds,
To pilfer pockets and impose on minds;
Oh, that the long-rob'd gentry would beware,
And yield poor honesty a better share!
Come last, though first, come pleasant, sprightly KING,
Of whom it is pleasure, or to hear, or sing;
From whose extended merit thousands find,
The transports which attend a joyous mind:
Void of all art, with genius on thy side,
Genius thy never-failing friend and guide;
Mimic of none, originally just,
Judgment approves thee -- right -- because it must.
Thy ease, thy spirit, and thy features wrought,
Pregnant with sensibility of thought;
Thy just conception, and thy utt'rance free,
A pleasing, matchless volubility:
All, all unite to give thy valued name,
The laughter-bearing stamp of comic fame.
Late may the STAGE thy loss, oh! KING, lament,
Year after years in public service spent;
May thou enjoy, retired, a life serene,
And meet with comfort thy conclusive scene;
That cannot fail, to him who keeps thy plan,
Even death is pleasure to an honest man.
The ladies! -- soft! -- a tender, ticklish theme,
It Is rudeness, of their faults to think or dream;
Weakness avaunt! truth must send forth her dart,
Though it should glance a fluttering, female heart;
Politeness may condemn -- complain who list --
But truth becomes an honest satirist;
And we, jealous as any king who lives,
Claim this the first of our prerogatives.
Beauty we worship, and the sex admire;
Their frowns must damp us, and their smiles inspire;
Yet ANTONY's submission never shall prove
In us, that criticism's lost for love:
He to Egyptian charms resigned a world,
In beauty's sad despite our bolts are hurled.
Wherefore, oh time, should thou bring on decay,
Nor let ripe women, girls for ever play?
POPE was, ten years ago, a sprightly lass;
But will increase of flesh now let her pass?
Why not? plump DAVY, near on fifty-six,
Still perseveres to play his boyish tricks;
Through ranger waddles, and is fond to dance,
Learned he such tricks in Italy or France? --
CLAIRON A mad French actress, of whose excellence Mr. Garrick not only chose
to prophecy; but put his infallible opinion at the bottom of an ostentatious
print -- though it is an undoubted fact, that there never was a natural FRENCH
actor or actress.
herself must at her prophet sneer,
To see his age and size in youthful sphere,
And policy, we freely own, should find,
Somewhat that is fatly similar of kind;
For if, like rabbits, coupled fat and lean,
Defects of figure would be quickly seen;
Hence to those tastes, which are not very nice,
POPE may in CHERRY please, and BEATRICE:
We grant that CLIVE, when past Meridian life,
Too often waged with fit appearance strife;
But nature could forgive her size and face,
For apt expression, and well-suited grace;
Let Us not recall the sad remembrance past,
That losing her, we have lost her murdered cast.
Having thus said, when HOPKINS comes in sight,
That bane of laughter; poison of delight:
We grieve, and wonder that a lump so dull,
Should ever rise beyond the Collier's Collier's wife, Recruiting Officer.
trull:
Should murder ladies -- nay, sometimes a queen;
'Till even goodnature falls into the spleen:
Whoever prompts This word we use because the lady's husband is Prompter; and,
as we are informed, the Lord Bute of Drury Lane theater.
her to attempts so wild,
Must think the public easily beguiled.
REDDISH, without a relish, we produce,
As profitless for pleasure, as for use;
Worse than a cipher -- why? because we find,
She moves a FIGURE of obnoxious kind:
Mere water gruel, made most simply small,
Of which one taste sufficiently will pall.
LOVE has some merit, yet of little strength,
She never should rise above a single length: A length, in the language of a
Theater is, as we are told, two sides, manuscript, of a quarter of a sheet of
paper.

And BRADSHAW, likewise, was by nature meant
To stand within the same predicament;
Though we confess her AUDREY is a store
Of Comic humor, makes us wish for more.
AMBROSE and EGERTON, a dismal pair,
Not worth the critic's or the poet's care.
YOUNG, who set out, It was rather a breach of female delicacy, and diffidence
for this lady, to make a first appearance in this character.
as few will do again,
And boldly breeches seized in IMOGEN;
Wants not good powers for kindled love or rage,
Yet, can she not in either much engage;
In action stiff, often dissonant in tone,
Her requisites ungraciously are shown;
Yet, as our Theaters at present stand,
A post of honor she may well command:
She too was banished by a pittance small,
'Till, listening to HIBERNIA's friendly call,
That kindly soil to dawning merit true,
Improved, returned her to the public view;
GARRICK awaked, who, pining, gave her more,
Than his pinched soul denied to her before.
BARRY has long a pleasing favorite reigned,
And warm applause, by sterling merit gained;
So much in serious scenes she gives delight,
We wish to see her each returning night:
Mark her, enraptured, tread the enlivened stage,
Weep with her grief, and shudder with her rage;
In all her various passions sympathize,
And even gaze with transport on her EYES. The author of Thespis, because Mrs.
Barry is near-sighted, and has rather a peculiarity of look, was cruelly rude
enough to call her a wall-ey'd Idiot.

Here let us pause -- to breathe a wish sincere,
That she may keep within her proper sphere;
Nor venture COMEDY of lighter kind;
With laughter she can never touch the mind:
Her Tragic walk is striking, rich and wide,
Enough to gratify even female pride:
Why then intrude on spirited compeers?
Is It not enough to shine the queen of tears?
Come at our call, whom all with joy must see,
The gay Theatrical EUPHROSYNE:
Whose every movement shows peculiar grace,
Whose arch expression cheers the dullest face;
Whose elegance and spirit, aptly joined,
Pour matchless pleasure on each critic mind;
Ask you her name? -- who has not viewed the sun?
Such only should be told -- it is ABINGTON;
And yet, this foremost merit of our time,
Merit, which CHURCHILL scarce could paint in rhyme;
Merit, with general approbation crowned,
Treads but a narrow, a penurious round:
Clarinda, Beatrice and Townly claim,
The enlivening honor of her favorite name;
With many more; yet, vainly plead their cause,
For managers will make the absurdest laws;
But let them blunder -- though we seldom view,
Yet, ABINGTON must charm us when we do.
Of DRURY's long et cetera we say,
That some much better, in their stations, play;
Than plume-crown'd heroes of superior rank,
And such for their endeavors we must thank;
Yet, being placed too low for public same,
'Twould be but superfluity to name.
THE VIEW OF COVENT GARDEN THEATER.
Bad has begun, and worse remains behind.

View COLMAN in the lap of Mother Shiptonl
A better Subject Satire never whipped on.


TO COVENT GARDEN, reader, turn thy eyes,
With painful feelings and increased surprise;
For, who would think the stage could yet produce,
On public favor, still more rank abuse,
Than what we have shown? yet, oh! sad truth to tell,
DRURY, 'midst wretchedness, yet bears the belle;
Shines over her sister, though with feeble light,
And, though deplorable, is still more bright.
See curious COLMAN, negligent of merit,
Of Tragic energy, and comic spirit;
Palm on his servile partners, and the town,
Abject and vile dependants of his own;
Let him of friends and mistresses have store,
We kindly wish he had as many more;
But, why should he, like some amongst the great,
Make whores and favorites pensioners of state;
Or, why should we, obedient to his whim,
Glibly take down whatever pleases him?
Taste is, indeed, reduced to dismal pass,
Beneath control of this assuming ass.
For ass he is, who so mistakes his station,
As to affront the indulgence of a nation;
The time may come, nor can be distant far,
When judgment must commence successful war:
When Genius will revive from second birth,
And crush this pigmy tyrant into earth.
The lowest muse must suffer pain, to stoop
To such a motley, indigested group;
Where lights are all so faint, and shades so strong,
Where right so seldom takes the place of wrong;
Where ignorance prevails, with boundless pride,
And talents, which might please, are misapplied;
Where each man thinks he amply does his duty,
And every woman thinks herself a beauty;
It Is a hard task to paint them as we ought,
Almost beyond the stretch of words, or thought;
And if we should per-chance make dullness feel,
"'It Is breaking butterflies upon a wheel."
Ross, whom we cannot, take him all in all,
With poignant CHURCHILL, a misfortune call,
Wants but the spur of diligence to please,
Blessed with uncommon harmony and ease;
Sometimes we own, his words confess a dose;
And kindly call an audience to repose:
Sometimes on GREEN BOXES, he turns his eyes,
When some affecting passion ought to rise;
Faults we admit, of aggravated kind,
To sensibility of eyes and mind:
Yet, when from dronish indolence he breaks,
And to the meaning of his author wakes,
We must applaud; though still we may regret,
A gem of nature, negligently set:
Bad as he is, we shall not stop to own,
At COVENT he should mount the ROSCIAN throne;
For still more excellence, we boldly deem,
Found in his sleep than other's waking dream.
Oh SAVIGNY! poor SAVIGNY! alas! and oh!
Who could a creature of thy fabric show?
Made of such dross, that not a ray of soul,
No spark PROMETHEAN animates the whole:
Why, at the full meridian of thy days,
Did thou so vainly seek for public praise?
Why, as an ACTOR, at such point of age,
Attempt to strut thy hour upon the stage?
Why madly make so terrible a choice,
Of judgment void -- of figure! -- features! -- voice?
Why to contempt spur on, with matchless speed?
A fool at forty, is a fool indeed.
Could not the temp'ring honest steel suffice?
Let surgeons' instruments sustain thy rise:
For spouting -- insignificant as thine --
Will never make thy fame or pocket shine;
If by impartial audiences disdained,
Though by a selfish manager retained;
Shake off the monkey's mean, designing claw;
Nor, cat-like, furnish a convenient paw:
It Is pitiful, whatever GEORGE may say,
To march a colonel with an ensign's pay This, we are told, is Mr. Savigny's
case.

What shade of merit comes -- so void of pith?
It Is simp'ring, spirited, and squalling SMITH:
Perched on the utmost summit of his voice,
Utt'rance proclaims Monotony his choice;
RICHARD, CASTALIO are but change of name,
We find him everlastingly the same:
Smooth-sounding sing-song issues from his throat --
Regard not emphasis, observe the note:
Seek ye, oh, cruel auditors! for sense?
A shrill-ton'd voice makes ample recompense:
No actor, sure, was ever more vilely class'd,
None ever so faulty, with such fortune passed;
If thou have modesty, SMITH, never presume,
To step beyond the path of CAPTAIN PLUME:
For scenes genteel, give up all Tragic rage,
A gentleman both on and off the stage.
BENSLEY -- good heavens! what language shall we find
To paint this strangest creature of his kind:
This old, this new, this rumble jumble play'r,
This prince of strides, and monarch of wild stare:
This awkward thing, which neither chaunts, nor says,
But by a kind of blund'ring instinct plays.
Mark how his peevish features, strain and strive,
In vain, to keep his characters alive;
See long, ungraceful, wide expanded arms,
With a large catalogue of equal charms;
Joined to a voice -- oh wonderful alliance!
That music sets, and meaning at defiance.
Most, in a wide diversity will show,
Some gleams of merit, if they cannot glow:
But this strange ACTOR, for we strange must call,
One who shows like deficiency in all;
Was formed by nature on peculiar plan,
Or rather by some bungling journeyman;
Yet, he is a favorite, and as such must pass;
Thus COLMAN makes each auditor an ass.
Whom should the muse in due succession mark?
It Is that same tolerable third-rate CLARKE:
Oh, may he never rise to higher place,
Who wants fit feelings, and essential grace;
In medium style, where naught affecting's meant,
We think him capable to give content;
And warmly wish, an honest truth to tell,
The flimzy leaders filled their posts as well.
Patience is shocked, and reason rendered dull:
Yield them some succor, modest, feeling HULL.
It Is true, thy powers, by nature are but slight;
Yet, well-dispos'd, they often give delight:
Thou do not mouth, nor rant, nor strut, nor stare,
Nature's thy guide -- each author's sense thy care:
Yet, sad necessity, sometimes we find,
Imposes tasks of prejudicial kind;
From walking gentlemen keep ever free,
Nor sigh soft plaints of love in tragedy:
Gain parts, which to the verge of nature last,
Paternal feelings are thy proper cast:
Possessed of such, it will complete thy plan,
And match the ACTOR with the WORTHY MAN.
WROUGHTON! what soil gave this same strippling birth?
We know not, nor will call it fertile earth;
For such a weed theatrical never grew,
Unless where dullness sheds her heavy dew:
They must have keener optics, who can trace
One gleam of meaning in his vacant face,
Than we can boast of; and his voice, we own,
To us marks insipidity of tone;
Wretched, indeed, we think that author's doom;
Whose sense in his conception finds a tomb;
Yet he, like BENSLEY meets from GEORGE Colman, Esquire.
support;
Thus blockheads make their way at every court.
We never have seen, and happ'ly never may,
A more correct, or chaste performer play
Than YATES; who, in his proper style,
A cynic of some laughter must beguile;
Without one gleam of paltry, trickful art,
By nature led, he glides upon the heart;
Traces the path, where judgment strikes a line,
And justly scorns by low finesse to shine;
Dispassionate applause rewards his toils,
And reason titles him the KING of SMILES.
For approbation, why does SHUTER soar?
Is all his aim to hear the gall'ries roar?
It Is pitiful ambition -- worthless fame --
Though all St. GILES's echoes with his same:
It Is true, each man enjoys peculiar taste,
Nor males, nor females, can be always chaste;
Yet, every sphere of life should take for guide,
A decent quantum of becoming pride.
Good-natured NED, with public favor drunk,
Never frowns upon a gambler, or a punk;
In public, and in private, speaks his jokes;
Laughs at the sun, and thinks them witty strokes:
Let friendship lay this truth before his eyes,
He that is so merry, is but seldom wise;
And tell him of a swift-approaching age,
When lost to action, he must quit the stage:
What pain to think, that mirth and pleasure past,
Life should convert to tragedy at last;
Avert the storm, in time; lay by some pence;
They Will yield thee comfort, and proclaim thy sense;
Stick by thee, when the host of midnight friends,
Who laugh and follow, but for private ends;
Stand far aloof and follies past condemn,
Lest thy necessities should call on them:
Excuse this freedom, on these truths depend,
They are the language of a zealous friend.
Old dog-trot DUNSTALL keeps the beaten way,
And very seldom mends, or mars a play;
QUICK rises, with advantage to our view,
Better than most, even now surpassed by few:
Some cultivation, through some seasons more,
His talents will command the jocund roar;
Unless his worth the manager should trace,
And for his merit doom him to disgrace.
KNIVETON, presumptively, should never bring
His talents in comparison with KING;
Yet, he has merit in the comic strain,
Though all attempts in tragedy are vain.
In dialogue a dismal, wretched thing,
DU-BELLAMY should never speak, but sing;
The notes of music bear him through with ease,
In these alone he may expect to please.
DYER was never any thing to boast,
A sufferable coxcomb, at the most;
Now sinking fast into the vale of years,
The remnant of a remnant he appears.
GARDNER may safely walk the middle way,
A greater compliment we cannot pay;
Stiff in his figure, bounded in his voice,
Seconds or firsts should never be his choice.
YOUNGER! who is that? a Prompter, just broke loose,
To lisp forth characters -- what strange abuse!
That one by nature happily designed,
To guide the business of the stage behind,
Should stalk a spectacle in solemn scenes,
While half the audience knows not what he means;
For shame, keep pride within the bounds of sense,
Nor let such acting madness give offense.
MATTOCKS has little, or to praise, or blame,
If any, he can boast but lukewarm fame;
Unmoved, we hear him either sing or say;
His powers can never make us grave, or gay.
Come, cheerful HAL, whom time, with gentle hand,
Has kindly strok'd, conclude the comic band;
Lively, descriptive, graceful WOODWARD, come,
With merit that may strike even malice dumb;
CHURCHILL -- the best absurdities advance, --
When he beheld thee, viewed with eyes askaunce;
Else, had he judged impartially thy cause,
He must have honored thee with warm applause:
For sure, in Fops, and parts of outre kind,
All thy competitors fall far behind:
All must acknowledge thy superior glee,
In the gay cast of laughing Comedy;
Yet, let us own, and take it as a friend,
We cannot sea-bred IRONSIDES commend;
Too strained in attitude, too stiff in speech,
The plain, rough Tar you cannot justly reach;
And we acknowledge, with reluctant will,
Through all his scenes we trace thy BOBADIL:
Thy studied grace is a laborious plan,
And shows too often the PICTURE of a MAN:
Yet, we behold with pleasure, and admire,
Thy sportful countenance, thy youthful fire;
While some reflections on GEORGE COLMAN Mr. Woodward was most ignorantly and
illiberally excluded by the quarrel between the managers, now restored, not
very cordially, we believe, by their reconciliation, which also obtained Mr.
Macklin the opportunity of five nights performance.
cease,
For making thee an article of peace.
MACKLIN, now got beyond her youthful bloom,
Why was the stage, she never liked, her doom?
Exerts her stinted powers, with some applause,
Though fettered with a father's rigid laws:
We cannot mechaniz'd instructions love,
Nature, so trammell'd, cannot freely move;
Hence dull correctness active Genius binds,
And rests insipidly on critic minds.
BULKLEY and BAKER, pretty women both,
To speak against them gallantry is loath;
But, howsoe'er goodnature may condole,
To praise their beauty, is to praise the whole.
Next come a pair, with constant pleasure seen,
Though plain of persons, PIT we show, and GREEN;
They move, they speak, they mark, the author's thought,
And prove their merit is from nature caught:
By much the best, as far as they engage,
Of any females now on either stage.
What shall we say of LESSINGHAM, the fair,
She has of managers been long the care;
Oh, that regard would make her all their own,
And snatch a tasteless milksop from the town;
One who for parts eternally would fight,
Without the sense, or talents, to be right.
KNIVETON, a bauble, fit for childish view,
Who scarce to Gipsey Beau Stratagem.
could afford her due;
KNIVETON, as bad as possible to think,
Irksome to hear, as dead small beer to drink.
VINCENT, whose age cries loudly for the fund The provision for superannuated
performers, planned and humanely promoted, as we have been told, by Mr. HULL.

By every eye of nice distinction shunned;
Abhorred by every tender-feeling ear,
Is yet brought forward in a youthful sphere;
Would, she displayed such worth in public life,
As she has shown in mother, friend, and wife;
Applauding multitudes might then contend,
Who should stand foremost her assisting friend.
MILLER, by favor more than nature blessed,
Of foremost characters we see possessed;
What madness guides, what partial planet reigns.
When insignificance such influence gains?
Judgment, with calmest patience joined, must frown,
When one hand mounts, to let the other down;
When grief or declamation drooping flags,
And screech-owl screams tear passion into rags:
Give us a sample, gods! of better store,
Or let us never see an actress more.
Once, in FOOTE's pieces, GARDNER gave us joy,
But bawls repeated, all her powers destroy;
No doubt she thinks herself monst'rous fine,
And yet is BILLINGSGATE in every line.
MATTOCKS, to grant what she may claim as due,
Stands in a favorable point of view;
Spirit, expression, and some pleasing tones,
For comic archness, or for tragic moans;
A figure happily disposed, though small,
Striking in naught -- agreeable in all:
Sometimes too earnest in desire to please,
She steps beyond the boundaries of ease;
Forces her features into painful state,
And rather sinks -- attempting to be great:
Yet few, for general use, can rivals stand;
Or such applause, in various lights, command:
Perhaps, not one -- then let our cordial lays
Give, what they joy to give, impartial praise.
When public favor warmly stamps regard,
To criticize is perilous and hard;
The loud-mouthed multitude rush sweeping by,
And, hound-like, follow as the leaders cry;
Yet, their mad favor, even from WILKES to BUTE,
We often find a paltry prostitute;
So, in the mimic state, it is fashion's laws,
Not merit, calls forth for popular applause:
Thus justice from her equilibrium swerves,
Hence YATES enjoys more than she deserves.
Puffed with importance, and a sweeping train,
Behold she comes -- insufferably vain;
Observe her countenance uplifted high,
Pride on her brow, and fury in her eye;
Mildness or love she cannot represent,
On haughtier subjects are her feelings bent:
In rage, we freely grant, she can excel,
Who plays a tragic termagant so well?
When grief she struggles for, it is harsh and coarse,
Indelicately swelled with needless force;
Her clock-work action painful study shows,
In speech, or movement, nature never glows:
It Is true, that placed among the bad, she shines,
As feeble lamps may light the womb of mines;
But, should a gleam of sunshine strike the sight,
Such pallid fires would sink in endless night.
Thus ends our painful task -- a task, indeed --
Enough to make good-natured bosoms bleed;
Why should we, Caesar Domitian, remarkable for Fly-killing.
like, anatomize,
And seem to triumph in dissecting flies?
The answer's plain; in such a patient age,
It Is just to rouse and vindicate the stage.
FINIS.

