TRANSLATION; A POEM.

By THOMAS FRANCKLIN, Fellow of Trinity-College, CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON: Printed for R. FRANCKLIN in Covent Garden, and sold by R. DODSLEY in
Pall Mall. MDCCLIII. [Price one Shilling.]

TO THE Right Honorable the EARLS of GRANVILLE, CHESTERFIELD, AND ORRERY, The
best Judges of ancient Learning, AND Most distinguished Patrons of modern
Merit; The following LINES are humbly inscribed, BY

Their LORDSHIP's Most obedient and most devoted humble Servant, THOMAS
FRANCKLIN.

TRANSLATION; A POEM.
"SUCH is our Pride, our Folly, or our Fate,
"That few, but such as cannot write, Translate.
So DENHAM sung, who well the labor knew;
And an age past has left the maxim true.
Wit as of old, a proud imperious Lord,
Disdains the plenty of another's board;
And haughty Genius seeks, like Philip's son,
Paths never trod before, and worlds unknown.
Unawed by these whilst hands impure dispense
The sacred streams of ancient eloquence,
Pedants assume the task for scholars sit,
And blockheads rise interpreters of wit.
IN the fair field the vet'ran armies stand,
A firm, unconquered, formidable band,
When lo! Translation comes and levels all;
By vulgar hands the bravest heroes fall.
On eagle's wings see lofty Pindar soar;
Cowley attacks, and Pindar is no more. Line 18. Cowley attacks, etc. Nothing
can be more contemptible than the translations and imitations of Pindar done by
Cowley, which yet have had their admirers, in an Age not quite so sagacious as
our own.

Over Tibur's swan the muses wept in vain,
And mourned their bard by cruel Dunster slain. Lin. 20. See Horace's Epistles,
Satires, and Art of Poetry, done into English by S. Dunster, D.D. Prebendary of
Sarum.

By Ogilby and Trap great Maro fell,
And Homer died by Chapman and Ozell.
IN blessed Arabia's Plains unfading blow
Flowers ever fragrant, fruits immortal grow,
To northern climes the unwilling guests convey,
The fruit shall wither, and the flower decay;
Even so when here the sweets of Athens come,
Or the fair produce of imperial Rome,
They pine and sicken in th'unfriendly shade,
Their roses droop, and all their laurels fade.
THE modern critic, whose unlettered pride, Lin. 31. The modern critic, etc.
Les belles traductions (says Boileau) font des preuves sans replique en saveur
des anciens, qu'on leur done les Racines pour interpretes, and ils scauront
plaire aujourdhui comme autrefois. Certain it is, that the contempt, in which
the ancients are held by the illiterate wits of the present age, is in a great
measure owing to the number of bad translations.

Big with itself, contemns the world beside,
If happily told that Terence once could charm,
Each feeling heart that Sophocles could warm,
Scours every stall for Echard's dirty page,
Or pores in Adams for th'Athenian stage; Lin. 36. See Adams's prose
translation of Sophocles.

With joy he reads the servile mimics over,
Pleased to discover what he guessed before;
Concludes that Attic wit's extremely low, Lin. 39. Extremely low. A favorite
coffee-house phrase.

And gives up Greece to Wotton and Perrault. Lin. 40. Wotton and Perrault. See
Wotton's discourse on ancient and modern learning, and Perrault's defense of
his Siecle de Louis XIV.

OUR shallow language, shallow'r judges say,
Can never the force of ancient sense convey;
As well might Vanbrugh every stone revile
That swells enormous Blenheim's awkward pile;
The guiltless pen as well might Mauro blame,
For writing ill, and sullying Arthur's fame; Lin. 46. Arthur's fame. See
Blackmore's king Arthur, an heroic poem.

Successless lovers blast the maid they wooed,
And these a Tongue they never understood;
That Tongue, which gave immortal Shakespeare fame,
Which boasts a Prior's and a Thomson's name;
Graceful and chaste, which flows in Addison,
With native charms, and vigor all its own;
In Bolinbroke and Swift its beauties shine,
In Rowe's soft numbers, Johnson's nervous line,
Dryden's free vein, and Milton's work divine.
BUT, such, alas! disdain to borrow fame,
Or live like dullness in another's name;
And hence the task for noblest souls designed,
Given to the weak, the tasteless, and the blind;
To some low wretch who, prostitute for pay,
Lets out to Curll the labors of the day, Lin. 60. To Curll, etc. Most of the
bad translations, which we have of eminent authors, were done by garreteers
under the inspection of this gentleman, who paid them by the sheet for their
hasty performances.

Careless who hurries over the unblotted line,
Impatient still to finish and to dine;
Or some pale pedant, whose encumbered brain
Over the dull page has toiled for years in vain,
Who writes at last ambitiously to show
How much a fool may read, how little know;
Can these on fancy's wing with Plato soar?
Can these a Tully's active mind explore?
Great nature's secret springs can these reveal,
Or paint those passions, which they never could feel?
Yet will they dare the pondrous lance to wield,
Yet will they strive to lift the sevenfold shield,
The rock of Ajax every child would throw,
And every stripling bend Ulysses' bow.
THERE are, who timid line by line pursue, Lin. 75, 79. There are, etc. The
reader will easily recollect instances to illustrate each of these Remarks,
more especially the last; half our translations being done from translations by
such as were never able to consult the original. One of these gentlemen having
occasion in his version to mention Dionysius of Halicarnassus, not having the
good fortune to be acquainted with any such writer, makes use of the French
liberty of curtailing, and without scruple calls him Dennis of Halicarnassus.
Mistakes as gross as this often occur, though perhaps not many altogether so
ridiculous.

Anxious to keep the Original in view;
Who mark each footstep where their master trod,
And after all their pains have mist the road.
THERE are, an author's sense who boldly quit, Lin. 75, 79. There are, etc. The
reader will easily recollect instances to illustrate each of these Remarks,
more especially the last; half our translations being done from translations by
such as were never able to consult the original. One of these gentlemen having
occasion in his version to mention Dionysius of Halicarnassus, not having the
good fortune to be acquainted with any such writer, makes use of the French
liberty of curtailing, and without scruple calls him Dennis of Halicarnassus.
Mistakes as gross as this often occur, though perhaps not many altogether so
ridiculous.

As if ashamed to own the debt of wit;
Who leave their fellow-trav'ller on the shore,
Launch in the deep, and part to meet no more.
SOME from reflection catch the weakened ray,
And scarce a gleam of doubtful sense convey,
Present a picture's picture to your view,
Where not a line is just or feature true;
THUS Greece and Rome, in modern dress arrayed,
Is but antiquity in masquerade.
Disguised in Oldsworth's verse or Watson's prose,
What classic friend his altered Flaccus knows?
Whilst great Longinus gives to Welsted fame, Lin. 91. See Welsted's
translation of Longinus, done almost word for word from Boileau.

And Tacitus to Gordon lends his name, Lin. 92. To Gordon.... This gentleman
translated Tacitus in a very stiff and affected manner, transposing words, and
placing the verb at the end of the sentence, accoding to the Latin idiom. He
was called in his lifetime Tacitus-Gordon.

Unmeaning strains debase the Mantuan muse,
And Terence speaks the language of the stews.
IN learning thus must Britain's sons decay,
And see her rival bear the prize away,
In arts as well as arms to Gallia yield, Lin. 99. To Gallia yield. It was said
by a great wit in the last war, that he should never doubt of our success, if
we could once bring ourselves to hate the French as heartily as we do the arts
and sciences. It is indisputable, that they are more warmly encouraged, and
consequently more cultivated and improved in France than amongst us. Their
translations (especially in prose) are acknowledged to be more faithful and
correct, and in general more lively and spirited than ours.

And own her happier skill in either field?
See where her boasted d'Ablancourt appears, Lin. 101. The French had so high
an opinion of d'Ablancourt's merit as to think him deserving of the following
epitaph: L'illustre d'Ablancourt repose en ce tombeau,
Son genie a son siecle a servi de flambeau,
Dans ses fameux ecrits toute la France admire
Des Grecs and des Romans les precieux tresors;
A son trepas on ne peut dire
Qui perd le plus, des vivans ou des morts.


Her Mongaults, Brumoys, Olivets, Daciers;
Careful to make each antient's merit known,
Who just to others fame have raised their own;
Nor wonder these should claim superior praise;
A nation thanks them, and a monarch pays.
Far other fate attends our hireling bard;
A sneer his praise, a pittance his reward,
The butt of wit, and jest of every muse,
Foes laugh to scorn, and even friends abuse,
The great Translator bids each dunce translate, The great Translator, etc.
Pope in his epistle to Arbuthnot, after his enumeration of dunces, concludes
with these two Lines. All these my modest satire bade translate,
And owned that nine such poets made a Tate.
Ver. 189. I make no doubt but the very despicable light, in which Translation
is here represented, may have deterred many from engaging in it, who would
perhaps have made no contemptible figure in that branch of literature.

And ranks us all with Tibbald and with Tate.
BUT know, whatever proud Art has called her own,
The breathing canvas, and the sculptured stone,
The poets verse; it is Imitation all;
Great Nature only is Original.
Her various charms in various forms expressed,
They best have pleased us, who have copied best;
And those still shine more eminently bright,
Who show the goddess in the fairest light.
SO when great Shakespeare to his Garrick joined,
With mutual aid conspire to rouse the mind,
It Is not a scene of idle mimickry,
It Is Lear's, Hamlet's, Richard's self we see;
We feel the actor's strength, the Poet's fire;
With joy we praise, with rapture we admire,
To see such powers within the reach of art,
And Fiction thus subdue the human heart.
WHEN Sarto's pencil traced the faithful line, Lin. 129. Andrea del Sarto,
being desired by Frederic duke of Mantua to copy a picture of Leo X. did it
with so much justness, that Julio Romano, who drew the drapery of that piece
under Raphael, took his copy for the original, and said to Vasari, "Don't I see
the strokes that I struck with my own hand; but Vasari showing him Del Sarto's
mark, he was convinced of his mistake.

The story is told at large in the 27th chapter of the first book of De Pile's
Art of Painting.



So just each stroke, so equal the design,
That pleased he saw astonished Julio stand,
Nor know his own, nor Raphael's magic hand;
Blushing to find himself enamored grown
Of rival charms and beauties not his own.
THEIRS be the task to comment and translate,
Like these who judge, like these who imitate.
UNLESS an author like a mistress warms, Lin. 137. Unless, etc. Roscommon says,
"Choose then an author as you choose a friend." Perhaps the image is better drawn
from the more lively passion.

How shall we hide his faults, or taste his charms,
How all his modest, latent beauties find,
How trace each lovelier feature of the mind,
Soften each blemish, and each grace improve,
And treat him with the dignity of love?
IT IS not enough that, fraught with learning's store,
By the dim lamp the tasteless critic pore,
It Is not enough that wit's misguiding ray
Uncertain glance, and yield a doubtful day,
Not even when both by partial nature given
United bless the favorite of heaven;
Unless, by secret sympathy combined, Lin. 149, Unless by secret, etc. A biass
of inclination toward a particular author, and a similarity of genius in the
translator seem more immediately necessary than wit or learning.

The faithful glass reflects its kindred mind;
Unless from soul to soul the imparted fire
Congenial catch and kindle warm desire;
Even such as lives in Rowe's enraptured strain,
And gives Pharsalia to our eyes again,
Where glowing in each animated line,
We see the fiery soul of Lucan shine; Lin. 156, See Rowe's translation of
Lucan's Pharsalia, at the end of which is a short supplement written in the
true spirit of the original.

Or such as gilds the fair historic page,
For Smith reserved to grace our latter age; Lin. 158. See Smith's translation
of Thucydides, lately published.

Such as over Dryden all its influence shed,
And bade his muse recall the mighty dead,
Such as in Pope's extensive genius shone,
And made immortal Homer all our own. Lin. 162. If Pope had never produced any
thing but his noble translation of Homer, it had been sufficient to have
established his reputation as a poet.

VIEW all that proud antiquity displays,
Count over her boasted heirs of endless praise,
Who thought so nobly or who wrote so well,
Britain can show the illustrious parallel.
Methinks I hear each venerable shade
For base neglect his genuine sons upbraid.
Why would not Congreve Afer's charms revive,
Or tender Hammond bid Tibullus live? Lin. 170. Hammond, author of Love elegies.

Plautus had pleased in Vanbrugh's looser page,
And Otway should have trod the Grecian stage;
Lucian would shine unveiled by Swift alone,
And Tully calls in vain for Middleton;
A Livy's sense demands a St. John's style,
And Plato asks a Melmoth or a Boil.
EVEN now there are, ever learning take her flight,
And gothic darkness spread a second night;
Though science droop, and lingering arts decay,
There are, who gild the evening of our day.
Once more behold, majestic in her tears,
By Gray adorned, fair Elegy appears, Lin. 182. See Elegy in a country
churchyard:

Whilst by her side the soft Elfrida stands, Lin. 183. Elfrida, by Mr. Mason.

And all our love and all our grief demands;
With Roman spirit Johnson's manly page Lin. 185. Samuel Johnson, author of the
Rambler, and also of two fine imitations of Juvenal.

Rises severe to scourge a venal age;
Brown draws the pen in sacred truth's defense, Lin. 187. See Essay on the
Characteristics of lord Shaftsbury.

And Armstrong paints his own benevolence. Lin. 188. See an epistle on
Benevolence, by Dr. Armstrong, author of a poem on Health, one of the best
performances in the English language.

From ancient models these exalted few
Their fairest forms and bright ideas drew;
We know the fountain whence the waters came,
Nor wonder at the clearness of the stream.
YET still, fair Greece, we see thy garlands torn,
We see thee still thy widowed altars mourn;
On us thy heroes still indignant frown,
Or look with awful indignation down;
The tears of Rome for injured learning flow,
And Athens grieves that Britain is her foe.
WILL you not rise then, O! you sons of fame,
To vindicate the Greek and Roman name?
On friends oppressed your generous aid bestow,
And pay the debt of gratitude you owe?
Or can you still their wrongs unpitying see,
Nor social join with Warton and with Me? Lin. 204. Mr. Warton has lately
published a new translation of the eclogues and georgics of Virgil, and joined
it to Mr. Pit's excellent translation of the Aeneid.

WHILST round his brows the Mantuan ivy twine,
Cautious to tread in Attic paths be mine;
To fame unknown, but emulous to please,
Trembling I seek the immortal Sophocles.
GENIUS of Greece, do thou my breast inspire
With some warm portion of thy poet's fire,
From hands profane defend his much-loved name;
From cruel Tibbald wrest his mangled fame; Lin. 212. Tibbald (or Theobald)
translated two or three plays of Sophocles, and threatened the public with more.

Give him once more to bid the heart o'er-flow
In graceful tears, and sympathizing woe;
A father's death while soft Electra mourn,
Or shed her sorrows over a brother's urn;
Or fair Antigone her griefs relate;
Or poor Tecmessa weep her hapless state;
Or Oedipus revolve the dark decrees of fate.
Could I like him the various passions move,
Granville would smile, and Chesterfield approve;
Each lettered son of science would commend,
Each gentle muse would mark me for her friend;
Isis well-pleased would join a sister's praise,
And Came applauding consecrate the lays.
Speedily will be Published, PROPOSALS For Printing by SUBSCRIPTION, SOPHOCLES.
Translated into Blank VERSE, By THOMAS FRANCKLIN, Fellow of Trinity-College,
and (...) Professor in the University of CAMBRIDGE.


