THE WEDDING RING A COMIC OPERA, performed at the THEATER ROYAL DRURY LANE.

LONDON; Printed for T. Becket in the Strand. MDCCLXXIII Price 1s.

THE WEDDING RING, A COMIC OPERA. IN TWO ACTS. AS IT PERFORMED AT THE THEATER
ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, in the STRAND. MDCCLXXIII. [PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
PANDOLFO, Mr. BANNISTER. HENRICO, Mr. DAVIES. ZERBINO, Mr. VERNON.
WOMEN.
FELICIA, Mrs. SMITH, LISSETTA, Mrs. WRIGHTEN.
TO THE PUBLIC.
THE reader will perceive at first sight that the hint of this piece is
borrowed from an Italian Opera, entitled, Il Filofofo di Campagna. There is
also a circumstance from Moliere, which, except about twenty lines taken from
different publications, and thrown occasionally into the songs, are the only
passages in it that have ever appeared either on the stage, or in print.

Indeed conscious of my own inability, I should have collected all the
materials, had it been practicable; but attempting this without success, and
being unwilling to throw away a subject than which it is hardly possible to
conceive any thing more operatical, I determined to make a trial of what I
could do to it myself, and this in no respect with a view of setting myself up
for an author, but merely from a desire of assisting my reputation as a
musician.

And now I should very little deserve the pains they have taken for me, if I
did not in the warmest manner acknowledge my obligations to the performers, to
whose merit I am convinced I owe a considerable share of that applause the
WEDDING RING has been favored with.

I have little more to say concerning the piece. The dialogue is given for
nothing more than such as would immediately arise from the situations; and if
the songs are found to be irregular, I would beg leave to remark, that they
were written so (the comic ones especially) on purpose, it being very often
necessary, that the measure should halt in order to give a novelty to the
expression of the music. And having said thus much, such as it is, I take the
liberty of submitting this trifle to the public; to that public to whom I have
such infinite obligations, whose humanity and generosity I have so lately
experienced, and to whose amusement it will always be my greatest pride, that I
have the honor of endeavoring to contribute.

C. Dibdin.
February 8, 1773.
THE WEDDING RING.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Library, with doors opening into other apartments. -- A table, with
writings; Pandolfo reading a will, and afterward Lissetta enters with
chocolate. PANDOLFO. "I Give and bequeath to Zerbino my son,
"My estates, and effects, one and all, when I Am gone:
"And first, the estates, that were mortgaged to me,
"By a card'nal, a monk, a count, and grandee,
"Worth in all, fifty thousand piastres, or more,
*And for which I advanced something less than a score;
"Next, sold e're possessed, the estates of an heir,
"Consisting of houses in charming repair;
"Which were left him long since by an over-fond grannum,
"And are worth, at the least, a thousand per annum."
Good fortunes, In Faith! next come watches, and rings,
Aigrettes -- solitaires -- by no means bad things,
Of which, some were pawned, some detained, and some plundered,
From widows, and heirs, little short of a hundred;
These, and all his possessions, without one omission,
Are given to this Spark, on the following condition:
"In hopes, that my son will to virtue incline;
"And lead a life careful and honest, like mine;
"Abstaining from usury, avarice, and fraud;
"In short, treading just in the path that I trod;
*I say, in the hope, that of this he will take care;
*I constitute, will, and appoint, him my heir."
All these possessions has old Zerbino left his son, who I intend shall marry
my daughter. Let me see now what the whole will amount to -- fifty thousand
piastres -- a thousand a year -- watches -- rings -- aigrettes -- solitaires --
no less, I warrant, than to the value of --


Lis. Sir, here is your chocolate, and Sig. Zerbino has sent --


Pan. He has been a near miserable fellow.


Lis. Sig. Zerbino, Sir?


Pan. A very sad fellow.


Lis. Well, this is the first word upon that subject I ever heard out of your
mouth.


Pan. But, however, that is nothing to the present business, his son may make a
good husband notwithstanding.


Lis. Oh, I begin to conceive you. Sir, will you hear me?


Pan. It shall be concluded directly. (Takes a pinch of snuff.


Lis. (Removing the snuff box, and putting the chocolate in the place of it)
I Will try to make you feel, if I cannot make you hear.


Pan. I don't think she could possibly have done better. (Going to take another
pinch of snuff, he dips his finger and thumb into the chocolate.) What the
devil's that?


Lis. Only a little innocent method I took to make you understand I was here,
Sir.


Pan. You impudent jade, how dare you serve me such a trick?


Lis. Why, Sir, I have been bawling this half hour to you, but you was so wrapped
up in your deeds and settlements, and stuff, that I might have stood here till
tomorrow morning, if I had not taken the way I did.


Pan. So you have been overhearing what I read.


Lis. Indeed, Sir, it is no secret; we all know well enough that you want to
marry my young lady to a spark with more money than understanding, and I
suppose you was contriving now to load her with riches, in return for the
happiness you intend to deprive her of.


Pan. Did ever any body hear such insolence?


Lis. Lord, Sir, what insolence; it is no more than what every body says, and
it is a great shame, especially when there are so many reasons to prevent it.


Pan. What Is that? Do you know any thing that will prevent it?


Lis. O yes to be sure; you go the way to make me tell you any thing.


Pan. Go, you fool! what could you tell me?


Lis. Why I would not tell you any thing if it was ever so much in my power;
but I Will tell you what, I Will keep every thing from you that I can.


Pan. I wonder what possesses me that I bear all this. Hear me, Mrs. Impudence,
send your mistress to me, and let me have no more of this behavior, if you
expect to stay in my family.


Lis. Very well, Sir, you may do as you please; you are not content I find with
preventing my young lady's happiness, but you want to rob her of the only
friend she has in the world.


Pan. Why don't you do what I order you?


Lis. I am going, Sir.


Pan. And yet now if you knew any thing that --


Lis. Don't ask me, for I will not tell you a word about it.

I Am not such a fool, when I Am snub'd at this rate,
Of matters, with which I Am entrusted, to prate;
The secrets I Am told,
Are as safe as old gold;
And however some folks it may teaze,
My mind is my own,
And I shall as I please;
Though you threat me,
And beat me,
And like a slave, treat me,
Conceal it, or let it alone.
To be sure, it is no business of mine;
But put any one else in my stead;
Let them serve a good humored young lady
With gifts and promises ready;
Who begs of her lover
No word may be said;
And then, let her father
Come threatening, which rather
Would fright one, than make one discover;
I say, in this case,
Let who will, take my place,
And see to which side they would incline.

SCENE II.
PANDOLFO, FELICIA, LISSETTA. Pan. I would fain persuade myself, that all the
chattering of this wench, is no more than the common cant of creatures in her
situation; and yet Felicia's disingenuous behavior has half convinced me, that
there is a lover in the case. When she comes I shall be better able to judge,
and in the mean time I Will go and send an invitation to Zerbino.


FELICIA. I saw, what seemed a harmless child,
With wings, and bow,
And aspect mild;
Who sob'd, and sighed, and pined,
And begged I would some boon bestow,
On a poor little boy, stone blind.
Not aware of the danger, too soon I complied,
For exulting he cried,
And drew from his quiver a dart;
My power you shall know,
Then levelled his bow,
And wounded me -- right in the heart.
I understood, Sir, you desired to see me, but I find you are busy.


Pan. Only laboring for thee, Felicia. I am contriving the securest method of
adding the vast possessions of Sig. Zerbino to the estate of our family.


Fell. But why should you do that, Sir? have not we fortune sufficient already?


Pan. To be sure fifteen thousand crowns a year, well paid, is no contemptible
thing; but, as I told you, I am desiring this for you.


Fell. I cannot see how I am concerned in it, Sir.


Pan. Why thus: Zerbino's father was my particular friend; and I cannot bear to
think that all his vast wealth should be lavished away in equipages,
courtezans, and such sort of expenses; so out of friendship to the young man,
and with a view to your interest at the same time, I intend to make him my
son-in-law.


Lis. There, Madam, you will believe me another time.


Pan. He is this morning arrived from Florence, where he has been to take
possession of a large estate, and I have sent to invite him here.


Lis. Oh, Sir, you might have saved yourself that trouble, for he has sent to
invite himself.


Pan. Then I Will go and hasten him. I dare swear you will be glad to see him.


Lis. How little you know of the matter!


Pan. What Is that you say?


Lis. I, Sir! nothing, I did not speak a word.


Fell. Heavens! what shall I do? (sighing.)


Pan. What do you sigh for?


Fell. I did not sigh, Sir.


Lis. Law, Ma'am, now can you say so? she did sigh, Sir; and I Have a great mind
to tell you what it was for.


Fell. Hold your tongue, Lissetta, for shame!


Lis. Why, Ma'am, you know very well what I say is truth; you do sigh for
something, and I should sigh too, if I was in your place.


Pan. Why I must confess, Felicia, to be ingenuous, you don't seem to enter
cordially into this proposal of mine.


Fell. Sir, if in compliance with any request of yours, I was sure to be
miserable, I don't remember to have given the least room for a suspicion that I
should refuse it.


Lis. Lord, Ma'am! how can you, begging your pardon, be so foolish? I would not
make myself miserable to oblige all the fathers in the world.


Pan. Will you hold your tongue? it is you that have spoilt her.


Lis. I spoil her! I am sure I am always giving her good advice.


Fell. I beg, Lissetta, you will not treat my father in this familiar manner.


Pan. Come, come, I Will cut the matter very short; you will have a visit from
Zerbino within this half hour, and you may guess what sort of behavior I
expect from you to the man I intend for your husband.

When we come to the age of threescore,
By our maxims in vain we set store;
A girl in her teens,
Will find out the means
To fret us, and plague us, and teaze out our hearts;
Till our giant wit,
Is forced to submit,
To her puny arts.
Like bells that eternally jangle,
You may scold, you may fight, you may wrangle;
If they are set on it, you will see
They masters will be;
Nay, though you secure them as safe as your pelf,
They Will lead you the life of the devil himself.

SCENE III.
FELICIA, LISSETTA, and afterward HENRICO. Fell. Was ever poor creature thus
harress'd and tormented!


Lis. You are tormented enough that is certain, and stand in great need of
advice.


Fell. It Is too true, and I have no friend in the world to give it me.


Lis. No, Ma'am! to be sure it is not much in my power to be your friend; but if
Sig. Henrico was to hear you, what would he say?


Fell. Why will you be always talking to me of him?


Lis. Because, Ma'am, I love to please you.


Fell. Heigh ho!


Lis. I say, Ma'am, don't you think he would be able to give you advice?


Fell. What advice would he give me, while my father remains so inflexible? or
if he could, how can I see him?


Lis. Should you like to see him? and would you not be angry if I was to bring
it about?


Fell. Dear girl, don't trifle with me!


Lis. Why then, jesting apart, you may see him now if you choose it.


Fell. How, Lissetta.


Lis. By opening that door. Before your father came in here, I took an
opportunity unobserved of poping your lover into that closet.


Fell. Without my leave! what must he think of me.


Lis. Bless me, Madam! is this a time to stand upon ceremony? you know your
opportunities are few enough, therefore don't lose this.


Fell. Well, but Lissetta.


Lis. Oh madam! indeed I must call him out -- Sir -- Sir -- Sig. Henrico.


Hen. Is the coast clear?


Lis. Yes, yes, you may venture.


Fell. Indeed, Lissetta, I shall not easily forgive this.


Hen. Let me entreat you, Felicia, to forgive her, if there is any
indiscretion, I am the cause of it; and believe me I would not have taken this
method of seeing you, so well I know your delicacy, if I had not been forced to
it by the last necessity.


Fell. It would be ridiculous, Henrico, to deny that I am pleased with your
attention to me; but what can it avail? my father is obstinately bent on this
hateful marriage --


Hen. Shall I tamely stand by, in the moment you are so kind to confess a
partiality for me, and see you sacrificed in so cruel a manner?


Fell. What would you do?


Hen. Boldly demand you of your father; my fortune is not despicable; my family
unexceptionable; and why should not I stand a chance of supplanting this
Zerbino.


Fell. It Is impossible, my father would never consent to it.


Hen. Have I your leave to try?


Fell. Upon condition you will leave me now, I give it you; for I am frightened
out of my senses lest my father should return.


Lis. Come, Sir, I think my lady has consented to a good deal; if we don't take
care to be prudent every thing will be spoiled, you had better, therefore, let
me conduct you out; but above all things remember the instructions I gave you
this morning.


Hen. Must I then leave you Felicia?


Fell. You see it is absolutely necessary.


Hen. In the afternoon I Will see your father, till when I shall be all anxiety
and inquietude.

The trav'lers, that through deserts ride,
By conduct of some friendly star;
When clouds obscure their trusty guide,
Out of their course must wander far.
So I, with pensive care and pain,
In absence still must stray;
'Till you, my star, shine out again,
And light me on my way.

SCENE IV.
FELICIA. I am terrified to death at my situation; I have not the courage to
refuse my father, and yet find it impossible to comply with his cruel request.
Why indeed should I comply with it? Is there the least prospect of happiness
for me if I do; and does not reason, every thing forbid my being compelled to
give my hand to a man I cannot love. But then is not this the request of a
tender and indulgent father, who has always made my happiness his constant
study; and even now wishes this union from no one motive, but to see me placed
in a still superior situation? alas, how weak and vain! as if felicity was the
ceriain consequence of splendor; and that all the pleasures and enjoyments of
life followed in the train of the great. For my part, I must have a new mind
before I can entertain such sentiments; and could wish to be left to the
peaceable enjoyment of content, though I should be obliged to seek for it in a
cottage.

Happy the nymph who never can know
Distractions which from riches grow,
Removed at distance from the great,
Who willing lives in low estate.
One fountain is her mirror, and her drink,
And if she is pleased, what others think
It matters not -- of joy secure,
Blessed in the little heaven has sent,
Her only pride is that she is poor;
Poor but content.

SCENE V.
ZERBINO and LISSETTA. Lis. (Speaking as she comes on) Oh, it is impossible for
any thing to be better contrived. -- Let me see how I go on -- Henrico is
guarded against all that can happen; I have told him that when he comes in the
afternoon he must expect to be snub'd by us all; nothing now remains but to get
rid of this Zerbino, and instruct my mistress in her part. She is gone into her
dressing room I see -- how lucky -- by that means, when this creature comes,
he will be left to my management, and if I don't give a good account of him I Will
be content to be thought the arrantest novice in love-affairs that ever lived.


Ser. Sig. Zerbino is come to wait on my young lady.


Lis. Oh, very well, my lady desires you will show him in here. I Will send him
packing I Will warrant him.


Zer. Bless me! what makes me tremble so?


Lis. He Is frightened out of his wits.


Zer. What ails me?


Lis. When does he intend to speak, I wonder?


Zer. I don't know what to say to her; I wish she would speak first.


Lis. I see if I don't break the ice, we shall wait till the old gentleman
returns, and then all would be spoilt. -- Your servant, Signor Zerbino.


Zer. Ma'am your most humble servant. -- Pray Ma'am are you Signora Filicia?


Lis. I hope, Sir, there is nothing in my appearance should make you suspect I
am not the mistress of the house!


Zer. Oh no! not the least in the world. -- She has a fine spirit, I can see
that already.


Lis. Pray Sir, where did you leave my father?


Zer. He Is only just stepped to the notary about the writings; he will be here
presently.


Lis. Will he, -- then I must make good use of my time. What writings, pray Sir?


Zer. Why, don't you know what I am come about.


Lis. Yes, yes it has been sufficiently dined in my ears, I have been teased
and worried to death with it.


Zer. By your father I suppose.


Lis. B^^ I have behaved with a becoming spirit; does he imagine, that I Will
suffer an obstinate old fellow like him, to control my inclinations as he
thinks proper; no, no, most young ladies of fashion; like me, take delight in
tormenting their fathers, and I love to behave like other people.


Zer. Yes, ye told me you was always tormenting him.


Lis. He did, and do you think, Zerbino, he goes the way to prevail on me? if
it was not that there is something genteel and winning in your carriage and
behavior, I declare, out of contradiction to him, I should order a servant to
turn you out of the house.


Zer. I am sure, Ma'am, I am very much obliged to you.


Lis. Sir, you are obliged to nothing but your own merit, that to be sure has
won upon me; but however, if it was possible for you to be twenty times more
lovely and agreeable than you are --


Zer. Lord you jeer me.


Lis. Upon my word I am serious; I say, Sir, if such a thing was possible, and
I really believe it is not, it would not avail any thing with me, for I beg you
to take notice, that I don't give you my consent out of love, but pure
obstinacy.


Zer. Oh, then you do consent.


Lis. What have I in my flurry been guilty of! Oh, Zerbino! you will despise me
for yielding so easily; you should not have been so solicitous.


Zer. How solicitous? why, I hardly said any thing at all.


Lis. No! did not you implore me to soften the rigor of your sufferings, and
with eyes all full of tenderness, beg me to have pity on you.


Zer. If I did, I don't remember it.


Lis. Ah, this is always the case, the moment a man knows his power he abuses
it; however, Sir, I think, since I have been so condescending, you ought, at
least, to say something handsome to me now on the subject.


Zer. Why, for that matter, I Have a vast deal to say to you, but I don't know how
it is, I Have such a prodigious pleasure in your company, that whenever I go to
speak I cannot get out a word for the life of me.


Lis. There never was so pretty a thing said in this world; entirely owing, I
suppose, to your respect for me.


Zer. Oh, yes, all owing to my respect for you.


Lis. Well, it is impossible for any thing to be more gallant.


Zer. I like her a great deal better than I thought I should.


Lis. But as you are such a passionate and tender lover, I dare say you have
not neglected a most material thing in gallantry.


Zer. Lord, what is that?


Lis. To write some verses on me.


Zer. Why, I could not myself, but I gave a famous poet a hundred piastres to
do it for me, because I Would have 'em done in the best manner; I have got 'em set
to music too, and I Would sing 'em in a great style if you would not be affronted.


Lis. Oh, I Am enchanted, pray let me hear 'em. Now for something fine and
ridiculous.


ZERBINO. The Grand Turk with his wives, and his mufties, and mutes,
In his shining alcoves, in his grottos, and shades,
May carouse to the cymbals, or dance to the flutes,
Or sleep to the music of falling cascades;
Or mew up his concubines in his Seraglio,
Or, decked with a pompous regalia;
While to every subject his word is a law,
May direct the divan,
And keep all to a man,
From Vizier to slave, of the bow-string in awe.
But I even high'r,
Than this, would aspire.
And of harsh sounding cymbals, and delicate flutes,
Which please the Grand Turk, and his mufties, and mutes,
And grottos, and bowers, and cascades, and alcoves,
With baths and perfumes, amber, cassia and cloves,
And much more, having you, I Have my choice;
All that is pleasing to me,
In your person I see;
All that is musical, hear in your voice;
And compared to your love, or your good opinion,
What Is power, or title, or wealth, or dominion.

Lis. Sir, you give me very great proofs of your affection indeed, and if it
was not for a certain delicacy and decorum which you must have remarked in me,
and which I always so strictly preserve, I don't know but I should consent to
be married tomorrow morning.


Zer. Oh let us be married tomorrow morning by all means; see here I have
brought The WEDDING RING on purpose, pray let me put it on your finger.


Lis. Really, Sir, you have such insinuating ways there is no refusing you any
thing; but, Sig. Zerbino, the grand point is, how are we to live after we are
married?


Zer. Oh, we shall not disagree about that, I warrant you, I shall be be the most
loving creature in the world.


Lis. Then I Am afraid we shall disagree; I shall expect a great deal of
indulgence.


Zer. Lord, you shall do whatever you please.


Lis. Yes, yes, I must make a point of that, for my father's severity has
hitherto kept me in the saddest subjection in the world; he gives me so little
liberty that it makes me half mad, and I have a hundred times wished that he
would marry me to any body that I might be out of this constraint; thank heaven
you come very happily for that end, and I shall henceforward prepare to take
diversions, and make up for the time I have lost; I don't intend to be
unreasonable; I believe what with public amusements, gaming, visits, company,
treats, walks, balls, and a ciscesbeo, I shall be pretty well satisfied.

I will have my humor, I Will please all my senses,
I Will neither be stinted in love, nor expenses;
I Will dress with profusion, I Will game without measure,
You shall have the business, and I Will have the pleasure.
By every incentive I Will rouse inclination,
More changing, capricious, and vain, than the fashion;
In short, I Will take care by the bent of my carriage,
To show you the sweets and the comforts of marriage.

SCENE VI.
ZERBINO, PANDALFO, afterward LISSETTA and FELICIA. Pan. Well, Zerbino, have
you seen her?


Zer. Yes, I have seen her.


Pan. And what sort of a reception has she given you?


Zer. Oh, I never was so happy in my life! if she could eat gold she should
have it; you told me she would put on her melancholy airs, and I should be frowned
at, and truly it made me a little afraid at first. But I never saw any thing so
coming, and so good-natured in all my life.


Pan. Why, did not she refuse you?


Zer. Refuse me! why, bless your heart, she is quite in love with me?


Pan. It Is impossible!


Zer. Impossible! what, do you think it impossible for any body to be in love
with me?


Pan, Oh, no, I don't mean that.


Zer. E'cod, if you did, I believe you would find yourself very much mistaken.


Pan. Well, well, but explain this matter.


Zer. Why, I cannot explain it any more than I have; you desired me to come and
make love to your daughter, by that time I had been here five minutes, she was
as fond of me as any thing can be; before we parted I gave her The WEDDING
RING, and we are to be married tomorrow morning.

Oh how my heart is leaping, and skipping,
And bounding, as if from its seat 'twould come out
My head is grown giddy, my heels are a tripping,
And all my five senses are put to the rout.

Pan. I hope she is sincere.
I Will call her again:
Felicia! Felicia! (Goes off.)

Lis. Good Sir, it is in vain, (Coming on.)
You Will not make her hear.

Zer. The old man, I see,
Is as anxious as me.

Lis. Who called me -- Zerbino, wast thee?

Zer. No, Ma'am, 'twas your father.

Lis. I rather
Had hopes it was you.

Pan. Felicia!

Zer. He Is calling you now.

Lis. Then adieu.

Zer. And why so?

Lis. But a whim,
I Am ashamed to confess my affection to him;
But you, on my truth may for ever rely.

Zer. Was ever a lover so happy as I!
Enough, love, enough.

Lis. Here he comes, I Will steal off, (Goes off.)

Pan. Where, where, can she be? (Comes on.)

Zer. He, he, he, he, he,
She was here, Sir, this minute.

Pan. The deuce must be in it!

Zer. It Is true, and she told me,
'Twas joy to behold me;
In short, she grows kinder and kinder.

Pan. I must and will find her.
Felicia. (Goes off.)

Lis. Zerbino, you would better be gone; (Comes on.)
You Will speak to the priest, let me see you anon:
Mean time to my father don't mention a word
Where I am.

Zer. I Am not quite so absurd;
It Is enough you command me!

Lis. Adieu, then.

Zer. Adieu.
Think kindly of me, I Will think kindly of you.
(LISSITTA goes off.)
Zer. I Have seen her again, Sir.

Pan. I Have searched the house round
And cannot see her,

Zer. It Is true,
Nor you will not; bnt I Have no time to waste:
I Am going on business requires some haste.

Pan. But you will come back again!

Zer. Back again -- to be sure.

Pan. Mean time I Will attend you, dear son, to the door. (Go off.)

Fell. Hold up, my poor heart, (FELICIA and LISSETTA comes on)
What a difficult part,
Lissetta, you have given me to play.

Lis. Here, here, take the Ring,
And seem every thing
Your father can wish, that is the way --
I Will insure you success,
And Hymen shall bless --

Fell. Hush, hush, girl, he is here.

Pan. Felicia, my dear, (Comes on.)
Where was you?

Fell. Dear Sir, in my room.

Pan. And have you been kind
To your lover?

Fell. You Will find
That my lover will scarcely complain of his doom.

Pan. You Have confessed an affection,

Fell. To his care and protection,
Myself I would gladly resign.

Pan. I Am out of my wits!

Lis. How well the plot hits!

Pan. Was 'ere so complying a daughter as mine?

Fell. Was 'ere situation so cruel as mine?

Fell. Was ever man gulled like this master of mine?

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Scene continues. PANDALFO, HENRICO, afterward FELICIA and LISSETTA. Pan.
Sir, I will not hear a single word more.


Hen. What are your objections?


Pan. Sir, I shall keep my objections to myself, and you must and shall be
satisfied with my refusing you without telling you why.


Hen. Was ever any thing to unreasonable. But, Sir, if it should so happen,
that the lady is not averse to my proposal, would you still persist in refusing
me?


Pan. I believe, if you stay till you get her consent, your patience will be
pretty well exercised.


Hen. Will you promise me yours, Sir, upon condition that I am so fortunate to
succeed with her?


Pan. Ay, ay, with all my heart; I believe I may very securely make that
promise.


Hen. Sir, I am the happiest man in the world!


Pan. What then you really have the modesty to imagine it practicable?


Hen. Why, yes, Sir, I confess I have.


Pan. Then, know to your confusion, that she has given her consent to another,
and that she wears on her finger, at this minute, a WEDDING RING, in token of
her having promised to marry him.


Hen. Well, Sir, since it is so, will you, as the last request I have to make
you, allow me to hear a confirmation of this from your daughter?


Pan. What, then you don't believe me?


Hen. I don't absolutely say that; but it would be a satisfaction to me, I
confess, to hear it from the young lady herself.


Pan. Oh, Sir, you shall have that satisfaction in a minute, for here she
comes. -- Felicia, here is a strange importunate sort of a gentleman, who has
the audacity to expect my consent to his marriage with you; I told him of the
promise you made me, and nothing, forsooth, will satisfy him but hearing it
from your mouth.


Hen. Indeed, Madam, what I heard from your father might well surprise me, I
was in doubt, I own; and that final sentence, which determines the fate of my
unbounded passion, must be so sensibly felt by me, that it can be no offense if
I desire a repetition of it.


Fell. Sir, I Would have it known, that fate has presented two objects to my view,
which inspiring me with different sentiments, agitate all the passions of my
soul, one, by a reasonable choice whereto honor engages me --


Pan. And your father's consent.


Fell. Possesses all my esteem and love.


Pan. That Is my choice.


Fell. And the other, in return for his affection, has all my anger and aversion.


Pan. That Is you.


Fell. To see myself the wife of one is all my desire.


Pan. That Is my good girl.


Fell. And I Would rather lose my life than be married to the other.


Pan. Pray, Sir, are you contented?


Fell. Sir, he must be contented, and if he has the love for me, he pretends, he
ought not to repine at his fate.


Hen. Ma'am, so far from repining, I admire your sincerity, and shall endeavor
to behave in this affair as I ought.


Fell. I know, it is highly improper for young women to own their love so freely;
but in the condition fate has placed me, these liberties may be allowed, and I
can without a blush confess, that I have declared my real sentiments.


Hen. Very well, Ma'am, your meaning's plain enough, I understand what it is you
urge me too, and shall remove from your sight him who gives you this great
disturbance.


Fell. You cannot oblige me more agreeably.


Hen. The poor exile, who, leaving his friends and his home,
Leaves more than his life, more than fortune, or fame;
Is doomed, without hope, thus unpitied to roam,
His sufferings unmourn'd, and forgotten his name.
But justice condemned him, his sentence is past,
His fate is pronounced, and he must be resigned;
With fortune he struggles indeed -- but at last,
To her rigid will, learns to fashion his mind.

SCENE II.
PANDOLFO, FELICIA, and LISSETTA. Pan. Poor young man -- a very great proof of
his affection indeed -- rather than make you unhappy, he bears his own torments
without seeming to suffer any, truly I pity him.


Fell. Indeed, Sir, it is more than I do.


Pan. Nay, but that is too cruel.


Fell. Sir, I assure you, if you knew, what my sentiments are of him, you would
not think him such an object of pity.


Pan. Nay, but consider, he had an affection for you.


Lis. Very true, Sir, in my opinion, she ought to follow your advice, and not
treat him with so much ill nature.


Pan. We don't want you, Ma'am, to give your opinion about it.


Lis. Lord, Sir, you will not be pleased let one talk how one will; did not you
say, my young lady treated him too cruelly? and would not any body in the world
say the same? is there any comparison now between him and Signor Zerbino? Oh,
Ma'am, your father is perfectly in the right; show more compassion to Henrico
by all means.


Pan. And who the devil gave you the liberty of advising my daughter.


Lis. Sure, Sir, there is no harm in speaking one's mind; I have said no more
than what I actually think of the matter, and you cannot do better than first of
all to marry your daughter to Henrico, and afterward, as a reward for my
faithful services, prevail upon Zerbino to marry me.


Pan. I never heard such a piece of impudence since I was born, but I am angry
with myself for listening to it. Felicia, I am going to see that Zerbino makes
all the necessary preparations, and shall be with you again in half an hour.


Lis. If that is the case, Ma'am, I must run ready to break my neck that I may
be with him before hand.


Fell. Indeed, Lissetta, I dread the consequence of this disingenuous behavior.


Lis. Oh, Ma'am, If you don't exert a little spirit we are undone: I have taken
care to apprise Henrico of all that is going forward; and poor Zerbino -- if he
does not repent his gallantry -- I have such a battery to play off against him;
nay, I Will make both him and your father principal actors in this plot of ours,
even without their knowledge.


Fell. I have no doubt of either your talents or good wishes for me, Lissetta,
but take care you don't provoke my father.


Lis. Never fear, Ma'am, I have conducted you so far on your voyage with
safety, and I warrant you I am pilot good enough to bring you fafe to land.


Fell. Heaven send it.


Lis. Besides, who would not run a little risk for so handsome a man as Sig.
Henrico?


Fell. Indeed, Lissetta, he deserves every thing.

When first the youth his fears forsook,
And that he loved I fondly heard,
What sweetness, was in every look!
What eloquence, in every word!
From her whole store, to make me blessed,
Did fortune bid me choose;
How gladly would I all the rest
For love, and him, refuse.

SCENE III.
An Apartment in Zerbino's House. ZERBINO, HENRICO, afterward LISSETTA. Hen.
Is your name, Zerbino, Sir?


Zer, Yes, Sir, that is my name.


Hen. Then you are the man I was looking for.


Zer. Pray, Sir, what is your business?


Hen. Oh, Sir, I shall tell you my business in as brief a manner as possible;
it seems you have made proposals of marriage to Felicia, Sig. Pandolfo's
daughter.


Zer. No, I did not, 'twas her father made proposals to me.


Hen. Well, that no matter, proposals were made, and pray, Sir, what do you
expect as a portion with her?


Zer. Oh, I am to take her without a portion.


Hen. Indeed you are not.


Zer. No?


Hen. No? I am to pay you her portion.


Zer. Are you, and pray what portion are you to pay me?


Hen. I am afraid you will not like it.


Zer. Not like it, why so -- what is it to be;


Hen. Blows -- wounds -- and death.


Zer. A very pretty portion indeed; I had rather be without it, I thank you.


Hen. Nay, Sir, don't hesitate, you see I am prepared to pay you and take the
portion, or I Will break off the match.


Zer. You break off the match! for what?


Hen. For what?


Zer. Ay, tell me that?


Hen. Because I am in love with the lady myself -- because she returns my
passion -- because -- because her father has consented to our marriage --


Zer. Her father has consented to your marriage.


Hen. He has, and if you dare even to think of her I Will tear you to atoms.


Zer. And all this is most certainly true.


Hen. Death and fire! have you any doubt of it?


Zer. Why, I cannot say but your arguments are very convincing, and yet now if
you would but talk a little cool about this affair --


Hen. Cool! can a man, jealous of his honor, and affronted like me talk cool?
-- Sir! --


Zer. Sir!


Hen. I have but one short word to say to you; renounce all claim to the lady,
this instant, or tremble at the consequence.


Zer. Indeed, Sir, you are very hasty; only let me get over my fright a little;
I never saw you in all my life before, and how do I know but all this may be --


Hen. A lie! I suppose.


Zer. Oh, no, indeed I did not say a lie.


Hen. But you meant it, and I Will not be trifled with, therefore, if you value
your safety, do as I command you.


Zer, Oh, I Will do any thing in the world if you will only give me a little
breath, and change that terrible countenance; Oh, as sure as I am alive here
comes Felicia herself.


Hen. Ah, fond girl, do you follow him to his house? by Heaven! I suspected
this, but I will be revenged!


Lis. Protect me, Zerbino.


Zer. Oh, I am as much frigten'd at him as you can be.


Hen. You Have neither of you cause to fear; for you Madam, your infidelity be
your punishment; and for you, Sir, you are going to punish yourself; but as I
have still some regard left for Sig. Pandolfo, I Will take care he shall not be
made a dupe of, therefore I insist upon your giving this lady your hand, before
me, and promising to marry her.


Zer. That I will, with all my heart, and shall be glad to be friends with you
so easily.


Lis. And as for me, I own, the height of my ambition is to become the wife of
Sig. Zerbino.


Hen. I am satisfied.


SCENE IV.
ZERBINO, LISSETTA. Zer. E'cod he frightened me devilishly at first, but he has
behaved very well upon the whole, has not he?


Lis. I do assure you, Zerbino, I am very much in doubt about that: he is a
very insinuating man, and had, before I came out, persuaded my father into such
a plot, that I am afraid we shall find a great many difficulties to get over
yet.


Zer. Why you surprise me!


Lis. You must know that this cavalier is very well born, and says my father to
me, soon after you went away -- you will pardon me for repeating his words --
Zerbino has a great deal of money to be sure, but then it was all got by rapine
and usury; and to say truth, he is little better than sprung from a dunghill:
now I have been considering this, and am come to an absolute resolution not to
let you marry him.


Zer. Your father say this!


Lis. These very words -- I was thunder struck at them, as you may well guess,
and for heaven's sake, dear Sir, said I, with tears in my eyes, why would you
let me see and converse with him? why would you let me listen to his
insinuating addresses, which have won my affections, and made it impossible for
me to obey you?


Zer. Dear, kind creature! -- well, what did he say to that?


Lis. Oh, he continued unmoved; says he -- in a more resolute tone than ever I
heard him speak to me in my life -- you must conquer your affections; I have
heard of a gentleman well born, and nearly related to the Doge of Venice, and
am so ashamed that I never thought of this man for my son-in-law, that I shall not
be content with merely marrying you to my friend Henrico, but you must consent
to punish Zerbino for having presumed to think of you.


Zer. To punish me! and pray how does he mean to do that?


Lis. I am almost ashamed to tell you.


Zer. Oh, I beg of you to tell me.


Lis. Why he intends -- to trap you into marriage with my maid.


Zer. With your maid!


Lis. With my maid: he is to pass her upon you for me when you come to our
house; and as a proof of what I tell you, he forced from me that Ring you were
so gallant to present me with, and gave it to her the better to carry on his
scheme.


Zer. What a deceitful world this is!


Lis. To be sure she is a relation of ours, and every body thinks her a very
smart girl -- but I Will assure the minx -- to pretend to my lover.


Zer. Ay, indeed -- but suppose we were to go and be married directly, that you
know would put an end to every thing.


Lis. It must not be; I would not have my father think I am so afraid of him,
therefore come at the time you intended, and I Will warrant every thing shall go
as I Would have it.


Zer. Oh, you may depend upon me.


Lis. My father is coming to you presently, and I would advise you to tell him
all this, only don't say how you came to know it.


Zer. Yes, yes, I Will tell him.


Lis. Good b'ye, Zerbino.


Zer. Well, but Felicia.


Lis. What do you say?


Zer. Will Not you give me one kiss before you go?


Lis. Lord, how can you ask such a thing?


Zer. You must indeed. (kisses her.)


Lis. You impudent man you!
Nay, prithee, how can you?
Indeed, I Will assure you,
Will nothing then cure you? --
Nay, now I declare I shall never endure you.
You teaze one to death,
I Am quite out of breath,
I hate and abhor this horse-play;
Besides, it is not right,
To see one this fright,
Lord, what do you think folks will say;
I own too much room,
You have had to presume,
Or you never with these freedoms would teaze me;
For though they might please me,
And with patience I bore 'em;
Yet at least in one's carriage,
On this side of marriage!
One ought to keep up a decorum.

SCENE V.
ZERBINO and PANDOLFO. Zer. How violently she loves me -- Well done Sig.
Pandolfo -- Who would have believed it -- Here he comes -- I Will seem melancholy.


Pan. Well, Zerbino, I could not bear my Impatience, so I came that we may
conclude this business as soon as possible.


Zer. Yes, you seem rather in a hurry, indeed.


Pan. How happy shall I be when I once see you married!


Zer. To your daughter's maid -- I Am very much obliged to you.


Pan. What Is the matter, Zerbino? You look dull.


Zer. No, not at all, I was only thinking what a strange sort of a world this
is.


Pan. Why what complaint can you have against the world? Has any one done you
an ill office?


Zer. How his conscience flies in his face. Why I cannot say but I have been
rather ill treated.


Pan. Ay -- How?


Zer. You shall judge. Do you know one Sig. Henrico?


Pan. Yes, I know him very well. Has he treated you ill?


Zer. He Is well born I believe.


Pan. Yes, yes, he is well born; he is related to the Doge of Venice.


Zer. The very words Felicia told me; and he has made proposals to marry your
daughter, has not he?


Pan. I thought that was coming. Why how came you to know it?


Zer. Oh, a friend informed me; and I Will tell you What I have been thinking of
Signior Pandolfo, that for all I have a great deal of money, since it was got
by rapine and usury, and since I am little better than sprung from a dunghill,
I ought not to aspire to the honor of being our son-in-law.


Pan. You astonish me very much by this discourse.


Zer. I am sure I don't know why you should be astonished about it.


Pan. What does it tend to?


Zer. You don't know I suppose.


Pan. How should I unless you tell me?


Zer. Why then I Will disguise it no longer -- It Is you have used me ill; the
same friend that told me Sig. Henrico wanted to marry Felicia, told me you had
consented to it, and that you was determined to punish me for presuming to
think of her, and a great deal more.


Pan. Was there ever such a strange parcel of stuff heard of?


Zer. Well, let it be ever so strange, you don't contradict it I find.


Pan. Zerbino, I should not bear such an Imputation so easily if I was certain
you had been imposed upon; I suppose this is some contrivance of my daughter
and her maid.


Zer. The maid indeed may have some hand it, but I am sure it is no contrivance
of your daughter's.


Pan. Well, let the contrivance be whose it will, I Am determined to have it
explained.


Zer. I Will tell you how it may be very easily explained.


Pan. How?


Zer. Why let us all come face to face.


Pan. With all my heart, I don't care how soon; and when we do, I Am sure you
will find these women at the bottom of it.

Of woman to tell you my mind,
And I speak from the experience I Have had,
Not two out of fifty you will find,
Be they daughters or wives,
But are plague of our lives,
And enough to make any man mad.
The wrong and the right,
Being set in their sight,
They Are sure to take hold of the wrong;
They Will cajole and they will whimper,
They Will whine, and they will snivel,
They Will coax, and they will simper --
In short, they are the devil;
And so there is an end of my song.

SCENE VI.
ZERBINO. I never saw such a turn, in my life -- Ah, Sig. Pandolfo, you did not
know what you was setting your wit to -- how soon I found him out -- and how
nettled he was -- as if I would not believe Felicia sooner than him -- I don't
wonder now at this fine blustering spark's coming so soon to himself, when he
knew he was so secure of the father -- and this after all is the regard he pays
to the memory of his old friend; in the morning he was dining that in my ears,
and how much he should be obliged to me; and when the notary was reading over
all the list of my estates, tenements, valleys, houses, barns, mortgages and
stocks, I could have betted 'em all to a single piastre, that if the Doge of
Venice himself had offered to have been his son-in-law, he would have refused
him for me; and now to use me in this manner. I am very much deceived if he
does not repent it -- what the deuce docs he want to make of me --

Can such usage be borne?
Indeed -- I Will be sworn,
He fancies to make me a tool;
A lacquey, an ass,
But I Will not let it pass,
No, no, I Am not quite such a fool.
It Is all in my head, and no longer I Will stay,
But go and see how the nail drives;
If I find he desires to be friends,
And strives
For this conduct to make some amends,
Not a syllable have I to say:
But if he thinks
To palm on me this minx,
Whose story's, I warrant, well taught her --
Lord, how I will use him!
I Will scold him, revile him, reproach and abuse him,
And then run away with his daughter.

SCENE THE LAST.
A large saloon in Pandolfo's house, with folding doors on each side, which
being thrown open, discover two different views of Venice. HENRICO, FELICIA,
LISSETTA, afterward PANDOLFO, after him ZERBINO, and then HENRICO again, who
comes forward, after having concealed himself. Fell. Oh, Henrico, what have you
persuaded me too? I tremble to think how my father will be insenc'd when he
finds we have imposed upon him.


Hen. I cannot see that we have any great danger to apprehend; he voluntarily
gave me his promise to day, that I should marry you if you did not object to it.


Lis. So he did, I overheard him; and if I had not, I Would say I had, if there was
a necessity for it.


Hen. Besides, when he sees this Zerbino make himself so ridiculous --


Lis. Which, thanks to my ingenuity, he will very shortly.


Hen. I then have no doubt but every thing will go in our favor.


Fell, The very thing you build upon I am afraid of.


Hen. Well, but my dear Felicia, you have gone on thus far cheerfully, and now
you drop.


Fell. Consider what I hazard, I may lose my father's affection, that is all I
fear, and you should not blame me; for if I am not capable of discharging my
duty as a daughter, what security can you have for my making you a good wife?


Lis. That Is all very true Ma'am, but its nothing to the business in hand, we
must to our posts; for my part I know well enough what I have to do; you, Sig.
Henrico, must get into your old hiding place; and do you Ma'am look as prim and
as demure as if you knew nothing of what is going forward.


Hen. The merchants that with weary toiling,
Are India of its treasure spoiling,
Well might indeed their traffic prize;
If rubies, pearls, and saphires they could find,
Like your dear lips, your teeth, your eyes,
Or orient gold as precious as your mind.

Fell. A thousand cruel doubts distress me,
On every side they thronging press me,
I fear,
I know not why;
And though, Henrico, thou art near,
I tremble, droop, and sigh.

Hen Ah, cease! ah, cease! by heaven I vow,
'Till life be past,
My love shall last,
As pure as now.

Fell. Then wherefore this pain,
Why should I complain?

Both. Love befriending,
Joy attending,
On all our hopes shall smile;
In thee my love delighting,
Requited, and requiting,
Each night, and day,
That rowls away,
With pleasure we'll beguile.

Pan. Felicia, what can be the meaning of a strange story I have heard from
Zerbino?


Fell. Nay, Sir, how should I know?


Pan. I am convinced he could not mean to impose upon me, and yet, upon
reflection, I hardly think you could have been guilty of so much duplicity at
the very time I had every reason in the world to believe you was perfectly
obedient to my will.


Fell. Let me understand you, Sir.


Pan. It does not signify repeating the matter, he will be here in a few minutes
himself, and then -- Oh, here he comes -- Zerbino, I am glad to see you; let us
now clear up this affair; you say you was informed that I intended to refuse
you my daughter, and give her to Sig. Henrico.


Zer. I was.


Pal. Will you be content if I give her to you now, and call in friends to
witness it?


Zer. I don't desire any better.


Pal. Then take her hand, and I hope you will both be happy.


Zer. Sig. Pandolfo, I did not think you was capable of using me so ill.


Pan. Why, is the man mad?


Zer. No, Sir, I am not mad, nor such a fool as you think me; I find it is all
true, and perhaps you may repent it.


Pan. Repent, what?


Zer. Why offering me your daughter's maid. Do you think I cannot see she is
dizen'd out that way on purpose?


Pan. Why Fool -- Idiot --


Lis. Oh you have found it out, have you!


Pan. What would you have?


Zer. Why I would have you keep your promise of marrying me to your daughter;
here she stands by me, frightened out of her wits, and poor soul! I don't
wonder it.


Pan. My daughter! that is her maid.


Zer. I knew well enough you would say so; but your daughter, or not your
daughter, I Will marry her, and no body else.


Pan. Why I tell you you are imposed upon.


Zer. If I am, it is by no body but you, and you are only mad that your scheme
did not take.


Pan. Was ever man thus abused! I could find in my heart to let him continue in
his ignorance, to punish him.


Lis. Don't spoil a poor girl's fortune, Sir; you see he does not deserve your
daughter, bestow her then on Henrico.


Pan. I thank you for the hint; I made him a kind of promise this afternoon,
and I declare if he was here I Would give him her hand this moment.


Hen. Sir, I take you at your word, and hope you will never have cause to repent
your promise.


Fell. And can you, Sir, forgive my having deceived you?


Pan. Felicia, you have not deceived me more than I have dcceiv'd myself; I
therefore not only forgive you, but confess I was rightly served for opposing
your inclinations.


Lis. And now I drop my disguise. I assumed the character of my young lady to
prevent you, Sig. Zerbino, from interrupting her happiness, it has answered my
end and I am sufficiently rewarded.


Hen. Come, come, Lissetta, you are two diffident, this gentleman made a
promise to marry you before me.


Zer. I made a promise to marry her before you?


Hen. Sir, you know you did.


Zer. Well then, if I did, I Will tell you what -- I Will keep it -- she has wit
enough in all conscience, and she ought to be made a gentlewoman of; and as for
money, I have enough for us both, so let us have no more misunderstandings, but
for the future be all friends -- what do you say?


Pan. I accept your proposal with pleasure; since things have turned out in
this manner, and Lissetta, is in some sort a relation of mine, my friendship
and countenance you may command upon all occasions: for my part I am perfectly
convinced, that two young people who have an affection for each other are able
to baffle all the precaution in the world. And for the future, I would no more
attempt to oppose the decrees of love than I would the decrees of fate.


Pan. As lightning shoots from place to place,
Which through the clouds we wondering trace,
Or darts a beam from Phaebus' face,
Whose flight no eye discovers;
Or from the moon a silver ray,
Will, glittering, on a river play;
So pointed arrows wing their way,
To wound the heart of lovers.

Lis. I am your voucher, here is the pair,
But trust me they may thank my care;
Remember, Sir, the carrier,
Who, praying, did endeavor
To help his team along the road,
Cries out, this time is ill bestowed;
Friend, clap your shoulders to the load,
Or you will stay here for ever.

Hen. What will you say in excuse?
Your maxims are in little use;
Too often we find it is wealth profuse
The female heart bewitches;
But you, an instance rare, remove
The shameful prejudice; and prove,
Though riches, most, prefer to love,
Some love, prefer, to riches.

Fell. Zerbirto, take your Wedding Ring,
Of serious, sacred use -- a thing
That used, or well, or ill, will bring
To mortals joy or sorrow:
It saved us both to day -- ah, think,
From a rude precipice's brink,
Where, plunging, we were sure to sink
In misery tomorrow.

Zer. I see it, and the Ring once more
To its right owner thus restore;
By whom 'twas won, it should be wore,
Trust me I Will prove no rover;
And now if fortune kindly sends,
That we have pleased these best of friends,
I Have gained my most ambitious ends,
And all my cares are over.

THE END.

