ZIMRI. AN ORATORIO.
Written by Dr. HAWKESWORTH.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
BALAK King of Moab. ZURAN a Prince of Midian. COSBI his Daughter. Chorus of
Midianites, Attendants on Cosbi. MOSES. ZIMRI a Prince of Israel. Elders of
Israel. A Messenger. Chorus of Iraelitish Virgins.
PART I.
SCENE I.
Balak and Zuran. RECITATIVE. Bal. At length we triumph over the chosen race,
Before whose march the parting sea gave way,
Whose thirst the rock with sudden springs supplied,
Whose hunger drew down manna from the skies.

Zur. In vain was Balaam's willing curse suppressed,
Vain was th'extorted blessing of his God;
If guiltless, they would still, though cursed, prevail;
Though blessed, yet guilty, they must fall before us.

Bal. Therefore in arms we did not vainly dare
The dreadful Cherub, who, before their host
Veiled in a cloud, or glowing like a flame,
Sweeps with one stroke whole nations to the grave.
Like him with silent force our daughters conquer;
Nor can our foes withstand the glance of beauty;
Beauty at once disarms them, and assails;
Subdues, and bids the pestilence destroy:
Save one, their mighty princes all are guilty;
And for their crime have twice ten thousand died.

Zur. That one is Zimri! O mighty Zimri fall!
The boasted strength of Simeon's haughty tribe.

Bal. Him with unrivaled charms thy daughter proves;
And not his gods can save him, if he loves.
AIR. When with love the bosom burns,
Passion, reason, rule by turns;
Weaker still is reason's power,
Passion's stronger every hour.
When the cup of joy overflows;
Vain are hints of distant woes;
What if death in ambush lie?
Lovers pant to drink and die.

RECITATIVE. Zur. Thrice have the circling hours the morn renewed
Since Cosbi's absence; but as yonder camp
Lies full within our view, I often have seen her,
Known by the sportive beauties in her train,
Now passing Zimri's tent with wanton step,
Now lost amidst the tall contiguous shade.

Bal. See where she comes; by all our hopes successful;
The blush of triumph glowing on her cheek.

SCENE II.
Enter Cosbi and Chorus of Midianitish Women. RECITATIVE. Cos. At length
Astarte unresisted reigns,
Our lovely goddess; all whose ri^es are bliss.
Zimri by these incurs the burning wrath
Of Israel's sterner gods, who frown destruction.

Zur. Thrice happy Midian* we to gentle powers
Want tender sighs, and pay delightful vows;
Nor yet to furious jealouly provoke
The dreadful Being, at whose lightest touch
Eternal mountains, like their snows, dissolve!
Before whose presence, when he rides the whirlwind,
The sun grows dark, and earth's foundations tremble.
But tell us now what happy wiles seduced
The steady Zimri from his vowed allegiance.

RECITATIVE accompanied. Cos. When first I met the youth renowned in arms,
My girded robe disclosed but half my charms;
He stopped, he gaz d, then frowning with disdain,
Turned back; yet stopped, and turned, and gaz^d again.
Often as I crossed his walk he still withdrew;
But his slow steps long lingered in my view.
AIR. With thoughtful pace alone he strayed
Along the still sequestered glade;
He strayed, nor cast his eyes above,
But sighed in solitude for love.
Tripping then within his view,
All my wanton train I drew;
Sprightly measures while we played,
Each a thousand charms displayed.
RECITATIVE accompanied. Then loosely dressed, and glowing from the dance,
Alone I stole, on his beloved retreat.
Inflamed, confused, he caught my amorous glance;
He could not fly me, and he durst not meet.
AIR. I saw the pride of virtue fail,
And unresisted love prevail,
The tyrant of his breast;
Now pale, now blushing with disdain,
His varying looks declared his pain,
And every fond desire expressed.
With silent eloquence I soothed the boy,
And reason soon resigned his soul to joy.

RECITATIVE. Zur. Oh, haste away! secure the glorious prize:
(...) he repent, and mercy disappoint us.

Bal. Haste; and the triumph waits thy wished return.
To thee shall temples rise, and altars smoke.
AIR. Love, (...) rules the world beside,
(...) ^f a slave to thee;
Thou, (...) every passion guide,
All subduing thou (...) free.
Join in loud applauding (...).

CHORUS. Beauty now with wisdom reigns.
All the praise of noble aims,
Zuran's lovely daughter claims.
The bids which gods might envy, she beslows,
To save her country, on her country's f^es.
Bear the song to distant plains,
Beauty now with wisdom reigns.
Exeunt.
SCENE III.
The Elders of Israel. RECITATIVE. 1 st Eld. Well may luxuriant Midian sheathe
the sword,
And safety revel, since our sins destroy us.
These send the desolating angel forth,
Who scatters wide the dying from the dead.

2 d Eld. Yes, Israel's princes still to idols bow,
Still mix in rites obscene with Midian's daughters.
AIR. No more our sacred songs their lips employ,
No more in God the first and last they trust;
In conscious virtue now no more they joy;
No more the wise, the mighty, and the just.

RECITATIVE. 3 d Eld. But Moses comes; and in his visage shines
The radiance caught from uncreated light,
The mark of recent conference with God.

SCENE IV.
To them Moses and Chorus of Israelitish Virgins. RECITATIVE. Moses. Cut off
the wicked, and the just shall live.
He in whose sight not heaven itself is pure,
Nor angels wise, commands that every chief,
Who with affections vile, and hands profane,
Has burnt his off^ing on an idol's altar,
And Midian's loveless harlots has caressed,
Shall die; now decked in gems and gay with wine,
Ere night cast out to vultures and to dogs!

1 st Eld. The just decree with reverence be fulfilled
Of sovereign goodness, who destroys to save!
Who thus deters his chosen tribes from guilt;
From guilt, since all the guilty must be wretched.

DUET. Ah! to be guilty, and to die!
To die for ever! who can bear the thought?
In endless night to close the swimming eye!
In endless night, with endless horrors fraught!

RECITATIVE. Moses. It Is dreadful! Ye that shudder, sin no more.


SCENE V.
To them an Israelitish Virgin. RECITATIVE. Vir. Ah! why should those who are
not chaste be fair!
Even Zimri falls, seduced by guilty charms!
Zimri, who stemmed the torrent of defection;
In whom each excellence of youth and years
Combined to form the hero, sage, and saint,
Last night, near yon dark grove, was seen to part
With Zuran's daughter; scarce her loosened zone
Beneath her swelling breast her robe restrained,
And smiles and blushes mingled in her cheek.
AIR. Ah! mourn with me the lovely youth,
Whose heart receives a wanton guest;
A heart where love should dwe^l with truth,
And virtue be by virtue blessed.

RECITATIVE. Moses. A guilt incurred so late, not yet we punish;
To conscience first, the judge within his breast,
It Is fit we leave him. To the sacred tent
Now bend your steps, and let one general prayer
From all the just in unison ascend.

CHORUS. Come, to the sacred tent repair,
And prostrate breathe the fervent prayer.
May Heaven accept the victims due,
And favor Israel's race pursue! Exeunt.

PART II.
SCENE I.
Zimri alone. RECITATIVE accompanied. Again seduced to guilty joys, again
I break away to muse and to be wretched.
Farewell the peaceful hour of meditation,
When conscious virtue wa^ts the soul to heaven!
If I look inward now, I start with horror;
And life becomes a burden and a curse.
SCENE II.
To him Cosbi, and Chorus of Midianitish Women. RECITATIVE. Cos. What haggard
looks? what gestures of distraction?
Why art thou thus, when in the blossomed bower
The voice of mirth invites thee to the banquet,
And love would breathe soft murmurs on thy breast?

Zim. I must not hear thy voice, nor see thy face --
Thy voice is fatal as the southern blast,
Thy face more sure than basilisks destroys!

DUET. Cos. Yet let the fond remembrance last,
Of kinder thoughts, and pleasures past!

Zim. Of all the past I dread the view,
And bid the guilty joys adieu.

Cos. Why dread the scenes that love displays?


Zim. Alas! it is guilt, it is death to gaze!


Cos. Ah! think --


Zim. My thoughts to phrenzy turn.
Again I languish and I burn.

RECITATIVE. Cos. Come then, my love!


Zim. O! no; stand off, seducer;
This hour, the victims of such wiles as thine,
The mighty chiefs of Israel, gasp in death.

Cos. Haste then, suspend the li^ted hand of murder!
I do not talk thy eloquence too high;
Go, plead the cause of nature with her foes,
Till superstition blush, and priests learn mercy.

AIR and CHORUS. A Midianitish Woman. Fly, and disappoint the grave!
Fly, the destined victims save!
And, with them returning, prove,
Life is gain to those who love.

RECITATIVE. Zim. Ah, no! but let me rather perish with them:
How can I else atone my follies past?
How else be sure that I shall not repeat them?

Cos. Thou nor to crime nor folly art seduced;
Nor die the princes by the gods decree.
Cares not the common parent of mankind
Alike for all? one family on earth,
However named, and wheresoe'er they dwell?
Would he, who bids increase, deny the rite,
Because the enamored hearts that long to join,
When first they beat, were distant from each other?

Zim. Ah! could I but believe thy reasoning just!


Cos. That wish had proved it: Nature never gave
Desires, which yet it is duty to suppress.

Zim. Subdued at once by eloquence and love,
My fair enchantress, all my soul is thine.
AIR. That I should yield, thy wit persuades;
Thy wit thy matchless beauty aids,
And gives and justifies delight.
Whenever we err, our fault is less,
More numerous as temptations press;
And all, fair nymph, in thee unite.
Thy charms which prompt my fault, the guilt destroy;
Thy charms, at once my safety and my joy.

RECITATIVE. Cos. See, yonder comes the tyrant of thy race!
Stand firm; to persevere, is now to conquer.
I leave thee: follow with a lover's haste.
O! virgins, aid my purpose with your song.

DUET. Be thy thoughts for ever kind,
Ever firm thy manly mind!
Haste away to yonder plain;
Haste, with all thy kindred train.
Tender joys our gods approve;
Haste with us to live and love!

Exeunt. SCENE III.
To Zimri, Moses. RECITATIVE. Moses. Is yet the hand that softens rocks upon
thee?
Do thou relent? and will thou yet with us
Surround the sacred dwelling of our God,
And see the apostate chiefs of Israel die?

Zim. Relent thou rather, and forbid the murder:
Nor more, when driving on the tainted storm
Disease assails us, feign that Heaven is wroth,
And glut the grave with those that plagues would spare!

Moses. Doubt and suspicion still attend on guilt^
While yet thy life was pure, thy faith was strong.
But tell me, thou, whose intellectual eye
The midnight revel happily has purged,
Why, if contagion uncommission'd spreads,
It teaches not to Midian?

Zim. Tell me rather,
Why, if commissioned, the seducers live?

Moses. Abhorred of God, he leaves them unreclaim'd;
And only deigns to punish those he loves.

Zim. Let reason judge who must are loved of Heaven.
AIR. You happy race on fertile plains recline,
Embraced by beauty, and regaled with wine;
Awed by no terrors, to no laws con^in'd,
Love all the worship for their gods designed.
We, still to hunger and to thirst a prey,
With painful rites relentless powers obey:
From every joy restrained by stern command,
And driven still vagrant over the burning sand,
Forward we look for better days in vain --
It patient, famished; if we murmur, slain.

RECITATIVE. Moses. To sense, not reason, is thy rash appeal.
To brutal appetite, luxurious ease
Is sweet; but man should live to nobler purpose.
AIR. The bliss that never was found below,
Above by virtue we obtain;
And virtue if we wish to know,
We must not strangers be to pain.
Who hopes for Heaven, adversity defies;
And sights on earth, to triumph in the skies.
RECITATIVE. Farewell. Yet one word more -- remember Sinai*

(...) SCENE IV.
Zimri alone. RECITATIVE accompanied. Remember Sinai! would I could forget it!
A thousand dread ideas rush upon me!
Methinks, again I see the mountain shake;
It Is lofty summit now involved in darkness,
Now burning unconsum'd with ruddy fires!
I hear, again, the thunder and the voice;
Again obedient, I believe, and tremble!
AIR. O First and Best, the Parent of mankind,
Who for thy throne the mercy-seat designed!
Receive my fault'ring prayer, my crime forgive --
To thee returning, let thy servant live!

SCENE V.
To Zimri, Cosbi and Chorus of Midianitish Women. RECITATIVE accompanied. Zim.
Again she come^! my resolution fa^ls,
As morning vapors vanish from the sun.

RECITATIVE. Cos. Impatient of thy absence, I return
Ah, let me hear thy voice, and see the^ smile.

Zim. I cannot speak --


Cos. I must not, cannot lose thee!
Thus let me grasp thy hand, and gaze upon thee.
And now, my lovely hero, tell me true,
Has this stern Moses frowned away thy love?

Zim. Oh, leave me now, nor farther urge thy power;
Lest for another momentary dream,
I cast eternal happiness away.

Cos. Leave to the gods eternity; nor trust
For aught tomorrow, which today can give.
AIR. The future is not mine nor thine;
The past, alas! no more returns:
Let love our souls this moment join;
For us his lamp this moment burnt.

RECITATIVE. Zim. Again my soul has caught the sweet infection;
Again I feel the phrenzy of desire!
AIR. Yes, though around me thousands die,
While yet I live, I Will life improve;
The posting moments as they fly
I Will catch, and fill the last with love.

CHORUS. Mortals, thus with haste possess
All that fortune gives to bless;
And, despising slavish rules,
Leave the joys of hope to fools!
Exeunt.
PART III.
SCENE I.
Chorus of Israelitish Virgins. RECITATIVE accompanied. 1 Vir. On time's swift
wing the dreadful hour is come!
With mournful steps, in solemn slow procession,
The princes pass to die; a numerous train
In sackcloth follow -- Hark! the dirge of death. Solemn music.
It ceases -- and now awful silence reigns
Over all the prostrate crowd. The victims now,
(Alas! their sands are few) look round aghast;
And now their eyes are veiled to gaze no more:
They lift their trembling hands, and give the sign!
Now, now, the agonies of death are on them! --
Now the last pang resigns them to the bar
Of heaven's eternal Judge -- tremendous thought!
AIR. Indulge unblam'd your tears, ye virgin train,
When guilt exacts the salutary pain:
For often as Justice wounds with dreadful sweep,
Still gentle pity claims the right to weep;
The friend of man, she melts at every we,
Nor sees her streaming eye who feels the blow.

RECITATIVE. 1 Vir. O sight of yet more horror! turn we from it --
At this dread moment, by the prostrate camp,
Zimri, inflamed by beauty and by wine,
Leads Zuran's daughter, glowing with desire:
Behind them, dancing to the timbrel's sound,
The gay companions of her wanton hours.

2d Vir. Her arts in vain essayed, from death to save
The victims destined to atone the past:
But with fresh insult to provoke our God,
She now prevails, and we for Zimri perish!

1 st Vir. The sky grows dark, presaging swift destruction! --
Ah! what can intercept the impending stroke?
Ah! who propitiate now affronted Heaven?

SCENE II.
To them, Moses. RECITATIVE. Moses. Fear not! -- I saw the foul presumptuous
insult.
But by the sacred influence from above,
Which fills so often my presaging breast,
I know the end of all our woes is near.

CHORUS. Beloved of Heaven, already we behold,
And bless the attesting sign! the glooms disperse,
It thunders one loud peal, and all is clear.

SCENE III.
To them, a Messenger and Chorus. AIR and CHORUS. Tune your harps to songs of
praise!
Happy tidings now I bear;
God with joy our grief repays,
God propitious hears our prayer:
Not averted now his face,
Now his gracious ear inclined,
Now confessed his chosen race --
Give your sorrows to the wind!

RECITATIVE. Moses. Has not some patriot-hand laid Zimri low?


Mes. It has. The apostate, as he passed along,
Embracing and embraced by Zuran's daughter,
Brave Phineas marked; and springing from his seat,
With sacred fury seized his dreaded lance:
"Avenge the cause of Israel's God!" -- he cried.
Obedient to the word the weapon flew,
And with one wound transfixed the guilty pair.
Gasping they fell; and as they smote the ground,
Applauding thunder shook the vault above.
The sun with sudden blaze resumed his glory;
The sick, inspired with instantaneous health,
Leaped up; and horror seized astonished Midian!

Moses. See, where our foes precipitate their flight!

An Israelite. RECITATIVE accompanied. They fly, but not from conscience; in
their breast^
That stern Avenger of our wrongs they bear.
But soon the blameless mind shakes off it is sorrows;
For he whose will is fate, at first decreed,
No bands should long bind innocence to woe.
AIR. Smiling hope, a cherub bright!
Smiling hope is virtue's guest;
Soothing anguish to delight,
Healing soon the wounded breast.
Joy succeeds to sorrow past;
Give the beating heart to joy!
Virtue's joy shall ever last;
Ever last, and never cloy.

RECITATIVE accompanied. Moses. Yes! joy to guilt is but a transient beam,
Like the red lightning that makes night more dreadful:
To blameless minds it is sunshine without cloud,
That gives new splendor to the cheerful day.
But other truths this awful day must teach:
It Is judgments, else, but half are understood.
AIR. Nor wit's deceit, nor beauty's charm,
Nor mirth nor wine's insiduous power,
Eternal Justice ever disarm,
Or stop the sure though lingering hour.
Who break Jehovah's sacred laws,
Whatever the means, whatever the cause,
Shall stand impeached without reply:
If mercy pleads no contrite tear,
Fair virtue's pledge whenever sincere,
The guilty souls for ever die.

CHORUS. Raise then to God the supplicating strain;
To God, whom virtue never addressed in vain!
His gracious voice shall answer to the song --
"Be wise ye simple, and ye weak be strong."
With joy receive the promise of the sky!
And in one chorus let your praise reply.


