WHICH IS THE MAN? A COMEDY, AS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN. By
Mrs. COWLEY.

LONDON: Printed for C. DILLY, in the Poultry. 1783. [Price One Shilling and
Sixpence]

It having been reported, that the Comedy was written by a Military Character;
a Gentleman of acknowledged genius favored the Author with the following
PROLOGUE,
Spoken by MR. LEE JEWS, dressed as an Officer. CALLED forth Thalia's standard
to display,
And here maintain her sovereign comic sway,
As Chief -- I Will reconnoitre well the ground,
To learn what hostile lines are drawn around!
[Surveys the House with a glass. That Is not a dark defile in yonder glade? --
For should it prove a treacherous ambuscade,
No puffing miners have I here in pay,
To sap their works, or turn their covert way;
No mercenary band who have been wont
To hack and hew like pioneers, in front!
With flying shells our Engineers shall try
That well-mann'd battlement which towers so high!
[Pointing to the Upper Gallery. Beneath, our point blank shot will surely
reach,
And in yon half-moon'd battery make a breach.
[To the Second Gallery. These lovely breast-works that adorn the field,
To Nature's gentle summons soon must yield!
[Side-Boxes, etc. This advanced post the picket-guard to keep,
And that reserve, who are entrenched chin-deep,
We hope to carry by a bold exertion,
At least amuse with some well-plann'd diversion!
[To the Pit. My troops are vet'rans: -- it has been their lot,
To form in front of service hissing-hot;
Who, when their ranks are galled, or put to flight,
Are sure to rally, and renew the fight,
Unless -- and then no light-dragoons scour fleeter,
Their powder fails for want of true saltpeter!
Our plan's avowed; it is from this firm station,
To gain the heights of public approbation!
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Fitzherbert, Mr. Henderson. Beauchamp, Mr. Lewis. Belville, Mr. Wroughton.
Lord Sparkle, Mr. Lee Jews. Pendragon, Mr. Quick.
WOMEN.
Lady Bell Bloomer, Miss Young. Julia, Miss Satchell. Sophy Pendragon, Mrs.
Mattocks. Clarinda, Mrs. Morton. Kitty, Mrs. Wilson. Tiffany, Mrs. Davenett.
Mrs. Johnson, Miss Platt. Ladies Miss Stewart, Mrs. Poussin, etc. Gentlemen Mr.
Booth, Mr. Robson, etc.


Servants to Lord Sparkle, Belville, Lady Bell, etc.

WHICH IS THE MAN?
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A DRAWING ROOM. (Mrs. JOHNSON crosses the Stage, a Boy following.) Mrs. John's.
HERE, Betty, Dick! Where are ye? Don't you see my Lord Sparkle's carriage? -- I
shall have my lodgers disturbed with their thundering. -- What, in the name of
wonder, can bring him here at this time in the morning? -- Here he comes,
looking like a rake as he is!


Enter LORD SPARKLE (yawning). Spark. Bid 'em turn; I shall not stay a moment. --
So, Mrs. Johnson, I pulled the string just to see how your Sylvans go on.


Mrs. John's. As usual, my Lord; but, bless me! how early your Lordship is!


Spark. How late, you mean. -- I have not been in bed since yesterday at one!
-- I am going home now to rest for an hour or two, and then to the
Drawing Room. -- But what are the two rustics about? I have not been plagued
with them these three or four days.


Mrs. John's. They are now out.


Spark. I supposed that, or I should not have called. -- But prithee, do they
talk of returning to their native woods again?


Mrs. John's. Oh no, Sir! -- The young gentleman seems to have very different
ideas: -- Miss, too, has great spirits, though she seems now and then at a loss
what to do with herself.


Spark. Do with herself! Why don't you persuade her to go back to Cornwall? You
should tell 'em what a vile place London is, full of snares, and debaucheries,
and witch-crafts. -- You don't preach to 'em, Johnson.


Mrs. John's. Indeed I do, my Lord; and their constant answer is, "Oh, Lord
Sparkle is our friend! Lord Sparkle would take it amiss if we should go;
'twould look like distrusting his Lordship."


Spark. Was ever man so hampered! -- Two fools! to mistake common forms and
civilities for attachments.


Mrs. John's. I fear, my Lord, toward the young Lady something more than forms
--


Spark. (interrupting) Never, upon my honor! -- I kissed her; so I did all the
women in the parish -- the septennial ceremony. The Brother I used to drink
vile Port with, listen to his village-stories, call his vulgarity wit, and his
impudence spirit. Was not that fatigue and mortification enough, but I must be
bored with 'em here in Town?


Mrs. John's. But, Miss, Sir, talks of pressing invitations, and letters, and --


Spark. Things of course; they had influence, and got me the borough. I, in
return, said she was the most charming girl in the world; that I adored her; --
and some few things that every body says on such occasions, and nobody thinks
of.


Mrs. John's. But it appears that Miss did think --


Spark. Yes, 'faith: and on my writing a civil note that I should be happy to
see them in Town, et caetera -- which I meant to have suspended our
acquaintance till the General Election -- they took me at my word; and before I
thought the letter had reached 'em, they were in my house, all joy and
congratulation. I didn't choose to be encumbered with 'em, so placed 'em with
you. The Boy was at first amusing, but our Circles have had him, and I must be
rid of him.


Mrs. John's. I must say, I wish I was quit of them at present; for my constant
lodger Mr. Belville came to town last night, and he wants this drawing room to
himself: he is obliged to share it now with Mr. Pendragon and his sister.


Spark. Hey! Belville! -- 'Gad, that is lucky! There is not a fellow in Town
better received by the women. -- Throw the girl in his way, and get quit of her
at once.


Mrs. John's. If you mean dishonestly, my Lord, you have mistaken your person: I
did not live so many years with your mother to be capable of such a thing. --
Ah, my Lord, if my Lady were living --


Spark. She would scold to little purpose, -- and you may spare yourself the
trouble. -- I tell you, I care nothing about the girl: I merely want to get rid
of her, and you must assist me. -- (Mrs. Johnson turns from him with disgust)
-- Hey-dey! the nicety of your Ladyship's honor is piqued! Ha! ha! ha! -- the
mistress of a lodging-house! -- Bien drole -- Ha! ha! ha! [Exit Mrs. Johnson.
But who is this hobbling up stairs? -- Ha! old Cato the Censor, my honorable
cousin! -- What the devil shall I do? -- No avoiding him, however. --

Enter Mr. FITZHERBERT. I wish I had been out of the house, Fitzherbert, before
you appeared! I know I shall not escape without some abuse.


Fitzh. I never throw away reproof, where there are no hopes of amendment --
your Lordship is safe.


Spark. Am I to take that for wit?


Fitzh. No; for then I fear you would not understand it.


Spark. Positively, you must give me more of the felicity of your conversation:
I want you to teach me some of that happy ease which you possess in your
rudeness; 'twould be to me an acquisition. I am eternally getting into the most
horrid scrapes, merely by politeness and good-breeding. -- Here are two persons
now in this house, for instance --


Fitzh. (interrupting) Who do not know, that the language of what you call
politeness, differs from that of truth and honor. -- You see I know those to
whom you allude. -- But we only lose time! -- Good day, my Lord!


Spark. Lose time! Ha! ha! ha! -- Why, of what value can time be to you? the
greatest enemy you have, adding every day to your wrinkles and ill-humour. I Will
prove to you now, that I have employed the last twelve hours to better purpose
than you have. Nine of them you slept away -- the last three you have been
running about Town, snarling and making people uneasy with themselves; --
whilst I have been sitting peaceably at Weltjie's, where I have won -- guess
what?


Fitz. Half as much as you lost yesterday -- a thousand or two guineas, perhaps.


Spark. Guineas! Poh! you are jesting! Guineas are as scarce with us, as in the
coffers of the Congress. Like them we stake with counters, and play for solid
earth.


Fitz. (impatiently) Well!


Spark. Bullion is a mercantile kind of wealth, passing through the hands of
dry-salters, vinegar-merchants, and Lord-Mayors. -- Our Goddess holds a
cornucopia instead of a purse, from which she pours cornfieldsd, fruitful
valleys, and rich herds. This morning she popp'd into my dice-box a snug villa,
five hundred acres, arable and pasture, with the next presentation to the
living of Guzzleton.


Fitz. A church-living in a dice-box! -- Well, well; I suppose it will be
bestowed as worthily as it was gained! -- Good day, my Lord, good day!


[Turning from him. Spark. Good night, Crabtree -- good night!

[Going off. Enter a SERVANT. Tell Belville I called to congratulate his escape
from the stupid country.

[Going.
Fitz. My Lord!


Spark. (returning) Sir!


Fitz. I am going this morning to visit Lady Bell Bloomer, -- I give you this
intimation, that we may not risk another rencontre.


Spark. Civilly designed; and for the same polite reason I inform you, that I
shall be there in the evening.


[Exit Lord Sparkle. Fitz. Your master in bed yet! What time was he in Town
yesterday?


Serve. Late, Sir. -- We should have been earlier, but we met with Sir Harry
Hairbrain on the road, with his new fox-hounds. -- Fell in with the hunt at
Bagshot -- broke cover, run the first burst across the heath toward Datchet;
-- she then took right an end for Egham, sunk the wind upon us as far as
Stains, where Reynard took the road to Oxford, and we the route to Town, Sir.

[Bowing.
Fitzh. Very geographical indeed, Sir. -- Now, pray inform your master -- Oh,
here we come!

Enter BELVILLE in a robe de chamber. Just risen from your pillows! -- Are you
not ashamed of this? A fox-hunter, and in bed at eleven!


Belv. My dear, morose, charming, quarrelsome old friend, I am ever in
character! -- In the country, I defy fatigue and hardship. -- Up before the
lazy slut Aurora has put on her pink-coloured gown to captivate the plough-boys
-- scamper over hedge and ditch. Dead with hunger, alight at a cottage; drink
milk from the hands of a brown wench, and eat from a wooden platter. In Town, I
am a fine gentleman; have my hair exactly dressed; my clothes au dernier gout;
dine on made-dishes; drink Burgundy; and, in a word, am everywhere the ton.


Fitz. So much the worse, so much the worse, young man! To be the ton where
Vice and Folly are the ruling deities, proves that you must be sometimes a
fool, at others a --


Belv. (interrupting) Psha! you satirists, like moles, shut your eyes to the
light, and grope about for the dark side of the human character: there is a
great deal of good-sense and good-meaning in the world. As for its follies, I
think folly a mighty pleasant thing; at least, to play the fool gracefully,
requires more talents than would set up a dozen cynics.


Fitzh. Then half the people I know must have wond^rful talents, for they have
been playing the fool from sixteen to sixty. -- Apropos! I found my precious
kinsman Lord Sparkle here.


Belv. Ay! there is an instance of the happy effects of total indifference to
the sage maxims you recommend.


Fitz. Happy effects do you call them?


Belv. Most triumphant! Who so much admired? who so much the fashion? -- the
general favorite of the Ladies, and the common object of imitation with the
men. Is not Lord Sparkle the happy man, who is to carry the rich and charming
widow Lady Bell Bloomer from so many rivals? -- And will not you, after
quarrelling with him half your life, leave him a fine estate at the end of it?


Fitz. No, no! -- I tell you, No!

[With warmth.
Belv. Nay, his success with the widow is certain. -- He boasts his triumph
everywhere; and as she is such a favorite of yours, every thing else will
follow.


Fitzh. No; for if she marries Sparkle, she will be no longer a favorite. Yet
she receives him with a degree of distinction that sometimes makes me fear it;
for we frequently see women of accomplishments and beauty, to which every heart
yields homage, throw themselves into the arms of the debauched, the silly, and
the vain.


Enter a SERVANT. Serve. Mr. Beauchamp.


[Exit. Fitzh. Oh! I expected him to call on you this morning. You must obtain
his confidence; it will assist me in my designs. When I found myself
disappointed in my hopes of his Lordship, I selected Beauchamp from the younger
branches of my family: but of this he knows nothing, and thinks himself under
high obligations to the patronage of the Peer; an error in which I wish him to
continue, as it will give me an opportunity of proving them both. -- But here
he comes! -- This way I can avoid him.


[Exit. Enter BEAUCHAMP. Belv. Beauchamp! -- and in regimentals! -- Why,
prithee, George, what spirit has seized thee now? When I saw thee last, thou
were devoted to the grave profession of the Law, or the Church; and I expected
to have seen thee invelop'd in wig, wrangling at the bar; or seated in a fat
benefice, receiving tythe-pigs and poultry.


Beauch. Those, Be^ville, were my school-designs; but the fire of youth gave me
ardors of a different sort. The heroes of the Areopagus and the Forum have
yielded to those of Marathon; and I feel, that whilst my country is struggling
amidst surrounding foes, I ought not to devote a life to learned indolence,
that might be gloriously hazarded in her defense.


Belv. (smiling.) I shall not give you credit now for that fine flourish. -- This
sudden ardor for "the pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war," -- I dare
swear this heroic spirit springs from the whim of some fine Lady, who fancied
you would be a smarter fellow in a cockade and gorget, than in a stiff band and
perriwig.


Beauch. If your infinuation means that my heart has not been insensible of the
charms of some fair Lady, you are right; but my transformation is owing to no
whim of here is: for, oh Charles! she never yet condescended to make me the
object of her thoughts.


Belv. Modest too! -- Ay, you were right to give up the Law. -- But who, pray,
may this exalted Fair-one be who never condescended?


Beauch. I never suffer my lips to wanton with the charming sounds that form
her name. I have a kind of miserly felicity in gloting on her dear idea, that
would be impaired, should it be known to exist in my heart.


Belv. Ha! ha! ha! who can be the nymph who has inspired so obsolete a passion!
-- In the days of chivalry it would have been the ton.


Beauch. I will gratify you thus far: The Lady has beauty, wit, and spirit;
but, above all, a mind. -- Is it possible, Charles, to love a woman without a
mind?


Belv. Has she a mind for you? That is the most important question.


Beauch. I dare not feed my passion with so presumptuous a hope; yet I would
not extinguish it, if I could: for it is not a love that tempts me into corners
to wear out my days in complaints: it prompts me to use them for the most
important purposes: -- the ardors it gives me, shall be felt in the land of our
enemies; they shall know how well I love.


Belv. Poh! poh! this is the gallantry of One Thousand One Hundred and One; the
kind of passion that animated our fathers in the fields of Cressy and
Poictiers. -- Why, no Beauty of our age, man, will be won in this style! --
Now, suppose yourself at the Opera (looking through his hand) "Gad, that is a
fine girl! Twenty thousand, you say? I think I Will have her. Yes, she will do! I
-- I must have her! I Will call on her tomorrow and tell her so." Have you
spirit and courage enough for that, my Achilles?


Beauch. No truly.


Belv. Then give up all thoughts of being received.


Beauch. I have no thoughts of hazarding a reception. The pride of birth, and a
few hundreds for my education, were the sole patrimony the imprudence of a
father left me. My relation Lord Sparkle has procured for me a commission. --
Generously to offer that and a knapsack to a Lady of five thousand a year,
would be properly answered by a contemptuous dismission.


Belv. But suppose she should take a fancy to your knapsack?


Beauch. That would reduce me to the necessity of depriving myself of a
happiness I would die to obtain; for never can I submit to be quartered on a
Wife's fortune; whilst I have a sword to carve subsistence for myself.


Belv. That may be in the great style; but it is scarcely in the polite. Will
you take chocolate in my dressing room?


Beauch. No; I am going to take orders at my Colonel's: where shall we meet in
the evening?


Belv. 'Faith, it is impossible to tell! I commit myself to Chance for the
remainder of the day, and shall finish it as she directs.


[Exeunt at opposite sides. Scene changes to an Apartment at CLARINDA'S. Enter
CLARINDA, reading a Catalogue, followed by TIFFANY. Clar. Poor Lady Squander!
So Christie has her jewels and furniture at last! -- I must go to the sale. --
Mark that Dresden service, and the pearls. (Gives the catalogue to the Maid) It
must be a great comfort to her to see her jewels worn by her friends. -- Who
was here last night? (sitting down, and taking some cards from the table) I
came home so late, I forgot to enquire! -- Mrs. Jessamy -- Lady Racket -- Miss
Belvoir -- Lord Sparkle (starting up) -- Lord Sparkle here! Oh Heavens and
earth! what possessed me to go to Lady Price's? I wish she and her concert of
three fiddles and a flute had been playing to her kids on the We^ch mountains!
-- Why did you persuade me to go out last night?


Tiff. Dear ma'am, you seemed so low-spirited, that I thought --


Clar. I missed him every where! -- At four places he was just gone as I came
in. -- But what does it signify? -- 'Twas Lady Bell Bloomer he was seeking, I
dare swear: -- his attachment to the relict is every where the subject. Hang
those widows! I really believe there is something cabalistical in their names.
-- No less than fourteen fine young fellows of fortune have been drawn into the
matrimonial noose by them since last February. -- It Is well they were
threatened with imprisonment, or we should not have had an unmarried Infant
above seventeen, between Charing Cross and Portman-Square.


Tiff. Well, I am sure I wish Lady Bell was married; she is always putting you
out of temper.


Clar. Have I not cause? Till she broke upon the Town, I was at the top of
fashion -- you know I was. My dress, my equipage, my furniture, and myself,
were the criterions of taste; but a new French chambermaid enabled her
Ladyship at one stroke to turn the tide against me.


Tiff. Ay, I don't know what good these Mademoiselles --


Clar. (interrupting) But, Tiffany, she is to be at court today, out of
mourning for the first time: I am resolved to be there. -- No, I will not go
neither, now I think on it. -- If she should really outshine me, her triumph
will be increased by my being witness to it. -- I will not go to St. James's; but
I Will go to her route this evening, and, if it is possible, prevent Lord
Sparkle's being particular to her. -- Perhaps that will put her in an ill
humor, and then the advantage will be on my side.


[Exit Clarinda. Tiff. Mercy on us! To be a chambermaid to a Miss on the brink
of Thirty requires as good politics, as being Prime Minister! Now, if she
should not rise from her toilette quite in looks today, or if the desertion of
a lover, or the victory of a rival, should happen, ten to one but I shall be
forced to resign, without even a Pension to retire on.


[Exit Tiffany. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
An elegant Apartment at LADY BELL BLOOMER'S. Enter JULIA, with Papers in her
Hand. Julia. WHAT an invaluable treasure! Those dear papers, that have lain
within the frigid walls of a Convent, insensible, and uninteresting to every
one around them, contain for me a world of happiness. He is in England! How
little he suspects that I too am here!


Enter KITTY. Kitty. Mr. Fitzherbert will be here immediately, Ma'am.


Julia. Mr. Fitzherbert! Very well. Has Lady Bell finished dressing yet?


Kitty. (speaking exceedingly fast) No, Ma'am. -- Mr. Crape the hair-dresser
has been with her these three hours, and her maid is running here and there,
and Mr. John flying about to milliners and perfumers, and the new vis-a-vis at
the door to carry her Ladyship to court -- Every thing black banished, and the
liveries come home shining with silver; and the moment she is gone out, every
body will be in such a delightful hurry about the route that her Ladyship is to
give this evening; and they say all the world --


Julia. Ha! ha! ha! Prithee stop! I cannot wonder if Lady Bell should be
transported at dropping her weeds, for it seems to have turned the heads of the
whole family.


Kitty. Oh! dearee, Ma'am, to be sure! for now we shall be so gay! Lady Bell
has such fine spirits! -- And it is well she has; for the servants tell me,
their old master would have broke her heart else. -- They all adore her! -- I
wish you were a little gayer, Ma'am! -- Somehow we are so dull! -- It Is a
wonder so young and so pretty a Lady --


Julia. Don't run into impertinence. -- I have neither the taste nor talents
for public life that Lady Bell Bloomer has.


Kitty. Laws, Ma'am, it is all use! You are always at home; but Lady Bell knows,
that wit and a fine person are not given for a fireside at home (drawling).
She shines every evening in half the houses of half-a-dozen parishes, and he
next morning we have stanzas in the Bevy of Beauties, and sonnets, and
billets-doux, and all the fine things that fine Ladies are so fond of.


Julia. I can bear your freedoms no longer! -- Carry these flowers with my
compliments, and tell her Ladyship I sent to Richmond for them, as I know her
fondness for natural bouquets; and bid Harry deny me to every body this
morning, except Mr. Fitzherbert.


[Exit Kitty. Enter Mr. FITZHERBERT. Fitz. Happily excepted, my dear Ward! But
I suppose you heard my step, and threw in my name for a douceur. I can hardly
believe, that when you shut your doors on youth and flattery, you would open
them to a cross old man, who seldom entertains you with any thing but your
faults.


Julia. How you mistake, Sir! You are the greatest flatterer I have: your whole
conduct flatters me with esteem, and love; and as you do not squander these
things --

(smiling)
Fitz. There I must correct you. -- I do squander them on few objects, indeed;
and they are proportionably warmer. I feel attachments fifty times as strong as
your good-humored smiling people, who are every one's humble servant, and
every body's friend. Where is Lady Bell?


Julia. Yet at her toilette, I believe. My dear Sir, I am every hour more
grateful to you, for having given me so charming a friend.


Fitz. So I would have you. When you came from France, I prevailed on her
Ladyship to allow you her society, that you might add to the polish of elegant
manners the graces of an elegant mind. Here she comes! her tongue and her heels
keeping time.

Enter Lady BELL. Ay, ay, if all the women in the world were prating young
widows, love and gallantry would die away, and our men grow reasonable and
discreet.


Lady Bell. Oh you monster! But I am in such divine spirits, that nothing you
say can destroy 'em. -- My sweet Julia, what a bouquet! Lady Myrtle will
expire. -- She was so envelop'd in flowers and ever-greens last night, that she
looked like the picture of fair Rosamond in her bower. -- My dear Fitz, do you
know we dined yesterday in Hill-street, and had the fortitude to stay till
eleven!


Julia. I was tired to death with the fatiguing visit.


Lady Bell. Now, I, on the contrary, came away with fresh relish for society.
The persevering civility of Sir Andrew and the maukish insipidity of his tall
daughter act like olives: You cannot endure them on your palate, but they
heighten the gusto of your Tokay.


Fitz. Then I advise your Ladyship to serve up Sir Andrew and his daughter at
your next entertainment.


Lady Bell. So I would, only one cannot remove 'em with the dessert. But how do
you like me? Did you ever see so delightful a head? Don't you think I shall
make a thousand conquests today?


Fitz. Doubtless, if you meet with so many fools. -- But pray, which of those
you have already made, will be the most flattered by all these gay insignia of
your liberty?


Lady Bell. Probably, he whom it least concerns.


Julia. Pray tell us which is that?


Lady Bell. Oh, Heavens! to answer that, requires more reflection than I have
ever given the subject.


Julia. Should you build a temple to your lovers, I fancy we should find Lord
Sparkle's name on the altar.


Lady Bell. Oh! Lord Sparkle! -- Who can resist the gay, the elegant, the
all-conquering Lord Sparkle? the most distinguished feather in the plume of
fashion -- without that barbarous strength of mind which gives importance to
virtues or to vices. Fashionable, because he is well dressed: -- Brilliant,
because he is of the first Clubs, and uses his borrowed wit like his borrowed
gold, as though it was his own.


Fitz. Why, now, this man, whom you understand so well, you receive as though his
tinsel was pure gold.


Lady Bell. Aye, to be sure! -- Tinsel is just as well for show. -- The world
is charitable, and accepts tinsel for gold in most cases.


Fitz. But in the midst of all this sunshine for Lord Sparkle, will you not
throw a ray on the spirited, modest Beauchamp?


Lady Bell. A ray of favor for Beauchamp! -- Were I so inclined, to make it
welcome, I must change my fan for a spear, my feathers for a helmet, and stand
forth a Thalestris. -- You know his mistress is War -- (sighing, and then
recovering). -- But why do I trifle thus? -- The hour of triumph is at hand.


Fitz. Of what?


Lady Bell. The moment of triumph! -- Anglice, the moment when, having shown
myself at half the houses in St. George's, I am set down at St. James's, my
fellows standing on each hand, as I descend -- the whisper flying through the
crowd, "Who is she? Who is that sweet creature? -- One of the four heiresses?"
-- "No; she is a foreign ambassadress." -- I ascend the stairs -- move slowly
through the rooms -- drop my fan -- incommode my bouquet -- stay to adjust it,
that the little gentry may have time to fix their admiration -- again move on
-- enter the Drawing Room -- throw a flying glance round the Circle, and see
nothing but spite in the eyes of the women, and a thousand nameless things in
those of the men.


Julia. The very soul of giddiness!


Lady Bell. The very soul of happiness! -- Can I be less? -- Think of a widow
just emerg'd from her weeds for a husband to whom her sather, not her heart,
united her -- my jointure elegant -- my figure charming -- deny it if you dare!
-- Pleasure, Fortune, Youth, Health, all opening their stores before me; whilst
Innocence and conscious Honor shall be my handmaids, and guide me in safety
through the dangerous ordeal.


Fitz. To your Innocence and conscious Honor add, if you have time (archly), a
little Prudence, or your sentinels may be surprised asleep, and you reduced to
a disgraceful capitulation.


Lady Bell. Oh! I Am mistress of my whole situation, and cannot be surprised. --
But, Heavens! I am losing a conquest every moment I stay! -- The Loves and
Pleasures have prepared their rosy garlands -- my triumphal car is waiting --
and ^y proud steeds neighing to be gone. -- Away to victory! --


[Exit with great spirit. Fitz. A charming woman, Julia! -- She conceals a fine
understanding under apparent giddiness; and a most sensible heart beneath an
air of indifference.


Julia. Yes, I believe her Ladyship's heart is more sensible than she allows to
herself. I rally her on Lord Sparkle, but it is Mr. Beauchamp, whose name is
never mentioned but her cheeks tell such blushing truths, as she would never
forgive me for observing.


Fitz. Upon my word, you seem well acquainted with your friend's heart! -- Will
you be equally frank as to your own?


Julia (in great confusion) Sir! -- my heart!


Fitz. Yes; will you assist me in reading it?


Julia. To be sure, Sir.


Fitz. Then tell me, if amongst the painted, powdered, gilded moths whom your
beauty or fortune have allured, is there one whom you would honor with your
hand? -- Aye, take time; I would not have you precipitate.


Julia (hesitatingly) No, Sir -- not one.


Fitz. I depend on your truth, and on that assurance inform you, that a friend
of mine is arrived in town, whom I mean this morning to present to you.


Julia. As a --


Fitz. As a lover, who has my warmest wishes that he may become your husband.


Julia. Do I know the person for whom you are thus interested, Sir?


Fitz. You do not; but I have had long intimacy with him, and it is the dearest
wish of my heart to see him and Julia Manners united.


Julia. I trust, Sir, you will allow --


Fitz. Be under no apprehensions. -- Much as I Am interested in this union, your
inclinations shall be attended to. -- I am now going to your lover, and shall
introduce him to you this morning. -- Come, don't look so distressed, child, at
the approach of that period which will give you dignity and character in
society. -- The marriage-state is that in which your sex evinces its
importance; and where, in the interesting circle of domestic duties, a woman
has room to exercise every virtue that constitutes the Great and the Amiable.


[Exit Fitzherbert. Julia. The moment I so much dreaded is arrived! How shall I
reveal to my Guardian, and to Lady Bell, that I am married? that I have already
dared to take on me those important duties? I must not reveal it -- my solemn
promise to my husband -- But where is he? -- Oh! I must write to him this
moment, that I may not be left defenseless to brave the storm of offended
authority, and love.


[Exit Julia. SCENE II.
BELVILLE's Lodgings. Enter BELVILLE new-drest. Belv. Let my trunks be ready,
and the chaise at the door tomorrow morning by six, for I shall dine in Dover.


Fitz. Ha! just in time, I see! -- You are ready plumed for flight.


Belv. True; but my flight would have been to you. -- Impatient to know the
cause of your summoning me from the Dryades and Hamadryades of Berkshire, your
letter reached me at the very instant I was setting out for Dover, in my way to
Paris.


Fitz. Paris!


Belv. Yes.


Fetz. Poh! poh! stay where you are, stay where you are! The great turnpike
between Dover and Calais is a road destructive to this kingdom; and I wish
there were toll-gates erected on its confines, to restrain with a heavy tax the
number of its travelers.


Belv. I fear the tax would be more generally felt than the benefit; for it
would restrain not only the folly-mongers and the fashion-mongers, but the
rational enquirer and the traveling connoisseur.


Fitz. So much the better! so much the better! -- Our traveling philosophers
have done more toward destroying the nerves of their country, than all the
politics of France. Their chief aim seems to be, to establish infidelity, and
to captivate us with delusive views of manners still more immoral and
licentious than our own. -- Hey-dey! who is this? -- Oh, the Cornish lad, I
suppose, whom Lord Sparkle placed here.


Belv. (laughing) Yes; an odd being! -- He was designed by nature for a
Clodpole; but the notice of a Peer overset the little understanding he had, and
so he commenced fine gentleman. He has a sister with him, who ran wild upon the
commons till her father's death; but she fancies herself a wit, and satirizes
Bruin. -- Here he comes.


Enter PENDRAGON. Pen. My dear fellow-lodger, I Am come to -- Oh! your servant,
Sir! (to Fitzherbert) -- Is this gentleman a friend of yours?


Belv. He is.


Pen. Your hand, Sir! (passes Belville, and stands between them) -- If you are
Mr. Belville's friend, you are my friend, and we are all friends; I soon make
acquaintance.


Fitz. A great happiness!


Pen. Yes, so it is, and very polite too. I have been in the Great World almost
six weeks, and I can see no difference between the Great World and the Little
World, only that they have no ceremony; and so as that is the mark of
good-breeding, I tries to hit it off.


Fitz. With success.


Pen. To convince you of that, I Will tell you a devilish good thing. -- You must
know --


Fitz. (interrupting.) Excuse me now, but I am convinced you will amuse me, and
desire your company at dinner -- they will give you my address below. Mr.
Belville, I have business of importance.


[Exit Fitzherbert and Belville. Pen. Gad, I Am glad he asked me to visit him!
-- He must be a Lord by his want of ceremony. (imitating) "Mr. Belville, I have
business of importance" -- and off they go. -- Now in Cornwall we should have
thought that damned rude -- but it is easy. -- "Mr. Belville, I have business of
importance." -- (going) Easy -- easy -- easy!


Enter SOPHY PENDRAGON. Sophy. Brother Bobby! -- Brother Bobby!


Pen. (returning.) I desire, Miss Pendragon, you will not Brother me at this rate
-- making one look as if one didn't know Life. -- How often shall I tell you,
that it is the most ungenteel thing in the world for relations to Brother, and
Father, and Cousin one another, and all that sort of thing. I did not get the
better of my shame for three days, when you bawled out to Mrs. Dobson at
Launceston Concert -- "Aunt, Aunt, here is room between Brother and I, if Cousin
Dick will sit closer to Father!"


Sophy. Lack-a-day! -- and where is the harm? What do you think one has relations
given one for? -- To be ashamed of 'em?


Pen. I don't know what they were given us for; but I know no young man of
fashion cares for his relations.


Sophy. More shame for your young men of fashion; but I assure you, Brother
Bobby, I shall never give in to any such unnatural, newfangled ways. As for
you, since Lord Sparkle took notice of you, you are quite another thing. You
used to creep into the parlour, when Father had company, hanging your head like
a dead partridge; steal all round the room behind their backs to get at a
chair; then sit down on one corner of it, tying knots in your handkerchief; and
if anybody drank your health, rise up, and scrape your foot so -- "Thank you
kindly, Sir!" --


Pen. By Goles, if you --


(shaking his fist) Sophy. But now, when you enter a room, your hat is tossed
carelessly on a table; you pass the company with a half bend of your body;
fling yourself into one chair, and throw your legs on another: -- "Pray, my
dear Sir, do me the favor to ring." -- "John, bring Lemonade." -- "Mrs. Plume
has been driving me all morning in Hyde-Park, against the wind, and the dust
has made my throat mere plaster of Paris." --


Pen. Hang me, if I don't like myself at second-hand better than I thought I
should! -- Why, if I do it as well as you, Sophy, I shall soon be quite the
thing! -- And now I Will give you a bit of advice: -- As it is very certain Lord
Sparkle means to introduce you to High Life, it is sitting you should know how
to behave; and as I have been amongst 'em, I can tell you.


Sophy. Well!


Pen. Why, first of all, if you should come into a drawing room, and find
twenty or thirty people in the circle, you are not to take the least notice of
any one.


Sophy. No!


Pen. No! -- The servant will, perhaps, give you a chair; -- if not, slide into
the nearest. The conversation will not be interrupted by your entrance; for
they will take as little notice of you, as you of them.


Sophy. Psha!


Pen. Then, be sure to be equally indifferent to the coming-in of others. -- I
saw poor Lady Carmine one night dying with confusion, for the vulgarity and
illbreeding of her friend, who actually rose from her chair, at the entrance of
the Duchess of Dulcet and Lady Betty Blowze.


Sophy. Be quiet, Bobby!


Pen. True, as I am a young man of fashion! -- Then you must never let your
discourse go beyond one word. -- If any body should happen to take the trouble
to entertain the company, you may throw in -- "Charming! -- Odious! --
Capital!" -- Never mount to a phrase, unless to that dear delightful one, of
"all that sort of thing." -- The use made of that is wonderful! -- "All that
sort of thing," is an apology for want of wit; it is a substitute for argument;
it will serve for the point of a story, or the fate of a battle.


Sophy. Well then, -- upon going away?


Pen. Oh, you go away as you came in! -- If one has a mind to give the lady of
the house a nod, (nodding) one may; but it is still higher breeding to leave her
with as little ceremony as I do you.


[Exit Pendragon without looking at her. Sophy. I wish I could be sure it was
the fashion not to mind forms, I Would go directly and visit Lord Sparkle. I could
tear my eyes out to think I was abroad today when he called on Mrs. Johnson!
-- In all the books I have read, I never met with a lover so careless as he is.
-- Sometimes I have a mind to treat him with disdain, and then I recollect all
I have read about Ladies behavior that break their Lovers hearts; -- but he
will not come near me. -- Now I have been three days in a complying humor -- but
it is all one; still he keeps away. I Will be hanged, if I don't know what he is
about soon! -- He sha'n't think to bring me from the Land's End to make a fool
of me: Sophy Pendragon has more spirit than he thinks for.


[Exit Sophy. Re-enter FITZHERBERT and BELVILLE. Bell. A Wife! Heaven's last
best gift! -- But -- a -- no -- I sha'n't marry yet. I have a hundred little
follies to act before I do so rash a thing.


Fitz. But I say, you shall marry. -- I have studied you from eighteen, and
know your character, you faults, and your virtues; and such as you are, I have
picked you out from all the blockheads and fools about you, to take a fine girl
off my hands with twenty thousand pounds.


Belv. It Is a bride, doubtless! -- But what is the Lady; Coquet, Prude, or
Vixen?


Fitz. You may make her what you will. Treat her with confidence, tenderness,
and respect, and she will be an angel; be morose, suspicious, and neglectful, and
she will be -- a woman. -- The Wife's character and conduct is a comment on that
of the Husband.


Belv. (gaily) Any thing more? --


Fitz. Yes, she is my ward, and the daughter of the friend of my youth. -- I
entertain parental affection for her, and give you the highest proof of my
esteem in transferring to you the care of her happiness. Refuse it, if you dare.


Belv. Dare! My dear friend, I must refuse the honor you offer me.


Fitz. How!


Belv. To be serious, it is not in my power to wed the Lady.


Fitz. I understand you. -- I am disappointed! -- I should have mentioned this
subject to you, before I had suffered it to make so strong a feature in my
picture of future happiness.


Bell. Would you had, that I might have informed you at once -- that I am --
married.


Eitz. Married! -- Where, when, how, with whom?


Belv. Where? -- In France. -- When? -- About eight months since. -- How? -- By
an English clergyman. -- With whom? -- Ah, with such a one! -- Her beauty is of
the Greek kind, which pleases the mind more than the eye. -- Yet to the eye
nothing can be more lovely. -- To this charming creature add the name of Julia
Manners, and you know my wife.


Fitz. Julia Manners! Julia Manners did you say?


Belv. Yes, Julia Manners! I first knew her at the house of a friend in Paris,
whose daughters were in the same convent with herself. I often visited her at
the grate; at length, by the assistance of Mademoiselle St. Val, prevailed on
her to give me her hand, but was immediately torn from her by a summons from my
uncle at Florence; whence I was dispatched to England on a ministerial affair.


Fitz. So, so, so, very fine! (aside) -- I suppose you had the prudence to make
yourself acquainted with the Lady's family, before you married her?


Belv. Yes: her family and fortune are elegant. She has a guardian, whese
address the sweet Obstinate refused to give me, that she might herself reveal
the marriage; -- which I had reasons, however, to request her not to do, till
we both arrived in England.


Fitz. Then you have not seen your bride in England?


Belv. Oh no! -- My Julia is yet in her convent. I have been preparing for her
reception in Berkshire, and have written to inform her, that I would meet her
at Calais; but I fear my letters have missed her, and shall therefore set out
for Paris, to conduct to England the woman who must give the point to all my
felicities.


Fitz. (aside) And has Julia been capable of this? -- Ungrateful girl! is it
thus she rewards my cares?


Belv. Your silence and your resentment, my dear friend, whilst they flatter,
distress me.


Fitz. I Am indeed offended at your marriage, but not with you: -- on you I had
no claims.


Belv. I do not apprehend you.


Fitz. Perhaps not; and at present I shall not explain myself.

(going.)
Belv. If you will leave me, adieu! I am going to run over the Town. My mind,
impatient for the moment which carries me to my sweet bride, feels all the
intermediate time a void, which any adventure may fill up.


[Exit. Fitz. Spite of my displeasure, I can hardly conceal from him his
happiness! -- Yet I will. -- Julia must be punished. To vice and folly I am
content to appear severe; but she ought not to have thought me so. I have not
deserved this want of confidence, and must correct it. If I don't mistake,
Pendragon is a fit instrument. -- I Will take him home with me. -- Yes, yes, my
young Lady, you shall have a lover! -- Oh these headstrong girls!


[Exit. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE 1.
LORD SPARKLE'S. LORD SPARKLE and BEAUCHAMP discovered at a Table, on which are
Pens, Paper, etc. SPARKLE superbly dressed. Spark. POOR George! and so thou will
really be in a few days in the bosom of the Atlantic!

"Farewell to green fields and sweet groves,
"Where Chloe engaged my fond heart" --
(rises and comes forward) Hey for counterscarps, wounds, and victory!

Beauch. I accept your last words for my omen; and now, in the true spirit of
Homer's Heroes, should take my conge, and depart, with its influence upon me.


Spark. First take an office which I know must charm you. -- You admire Lady
Bell Bloomer?


Beauch. Admire her! -- Yes, by Heaven --

(with great warmth)
Spark. (interrupting) No heroics, dear George -- no heroics! They are totally
out now -- totally out both in love and war.


Beauch. How, my Lord!


Spark. Indifference! -- that is the rule. -- We love, hate, quarrel, and even
fight without suffering our tranquillity to be incommoded; -- nothing disturbs.
-- The keenest discernment will discover nothing particular in the behavior of
lovers on the point of marriage, nor in the married, whilst the articles of
separation are preparing.


Beauch. Disgustful apathy! -- What becomes of the energies of the heart in
this wretched system? Does it annihilate your feelings?


Spark. Oh, no! -- I feel, for instance, that I must have Lady Bell Bloomer,
and I feel curiosity to know her sentiments of me, of which, however, I have
very little doubt: but all my art cannot make her serious; she fences admirably,
and keeps me at the length of her foil. -- To you she will be less on her guard.


Beauch. Me I you surprise me, my Lord! How can I be of use in developing her
Ladyship's sentiments?


Spark Why, by sifting them. When you talk of me, see if she blushes. Mention
some woman as one* whom I admire, and observe if she does not make some
spiteful remark on her shape, complexion, or conduct; provoke her to abuse me
with violence, or to speak of me with confusion -- in either case, I have her.


Beauch. Your instructions are ample, my Lord; but I do not feel myself equal
to the embassy.


Spark. (with pique) Your pardon, Sir! You refuse then to oblige me?


Beauch. I cannot refuse you -- my obligations to your Lordship make it
impossible: -- but, of all mankind, I perhaps am the last you should have
chosen for the purpose.


Spark. Nay, prithee don't be ridiculous! It is the last service you can do me:
and you are the only man whom I could entrust with so delicate a business.


Beauch. I accept it as a proof of your Lordship's confidence, and will
discharge the commission faithfully. -- (aside) It will at least give me an
occasion to converse with Lady Bell, and to converse with her on love. -- Oh!
my heart! how will thou contain thy ardors in the trying moment?


[Exit Beauchamp. Spark. Ha! ha! ha! I am confirmed in my suspicions, that the
fellow has had the vanity to indulge a passion for Lady Bell, himself. Well, so
much the better! the commission I have given him will sufficiently punish him
for his presumption.


Enter a SERVANT. Serve. Mrs. Kitty is below, my Lord, Miss Manners's woman.


Spark. Ha! Send her up -- send her up. (Exit Serve.) I had began to give up
that affair; but I think I will not neither. It will be rather a brilliant thing
to have Lady Bell for a wife, and her friend for a mistress: -- yes, it will be
a point. I think I Will have the eclat of the thing. -- (Enter Kitty) -- Well,
Kitty, what intelligence from the land of intrigue? What says the little
frost-piece Julia?


Kitty. Oh, nothing new, my Lord! She Is as insensible as ever. -- I makes
orations all day long of your Lordship's merit, and goodness, and fondness, and
--


Spark. (staring) Merit, and goodness, and fondness! And don't you give a
parenthesis to my sobriety, and my neatness too! Ha! ha! ha! you foolish little
devil, I thought you knew better! -- Tell her of my fashion, my extravagance;
that I play deepest at Weltjie's, am the best-drest at the Opera, and have half
ruined myself by granting annuities to pretty girls. -- Goodness and fondness
are baits to catch old prudes, not blooming misses.


Kitty. What, my Lord! is spreading out your faults the way to win a fair Lady?


Spark. Faults! Thine is chambermaid's morality, with a vengeance! -- What have
all my past lessons been thrown away upon thee, Innocence! -- Have I not told
thee, that the governing passion of the female mind is the rage of being
envied? The most generous of them would like to break the hearts of
half-a-dozen of their friends, by the preference given to themselves. Go home
again, good Kitty, and con your lessen afresh: if you can pick up any stories
of extravagance and gallantry, affix my name to 'em, and repeat them to your
mistress.


Kitty. Then she will tell 'em to Lady Bell, perhaps, for a warning --


Spark. (drawling) For a warning, quotha! -- My devoirs to Lady Bell are of a
different kind, and we understand each other. I address her for a wife, because
she is the fashion; and I address Julia for a mistress, because it is the fashion
to have mistresses from higher orders than sempstresses and mantua-makers.


Kitty. And is that your only reason, my Lord, for bribing me so high?


Spark. Not absolutely. I have a pique against her guardian, who, though he has
the honor to be related to me, will not suffer me to draw on his banker for a
single guinea. His estates, indeed, he cannot deprive me of; so as it can do no
harm, I Will have the eclat of affronting him with spirit.


Kitty. Oh Gemini! I am glad to hear that! I Would do any thing to plague Mr.
Fitzherbert, and can go on now with a safe conscience! -- He had like to have
lost me my place once, because he thought I was flighty; -- but I Will be up with
him, now.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Mr. Belville.


[Exit. Enter BELVILLE. Spark. My dear Belville! (apart) Go, Kitty, into that
room, I Will speak to you presently.

[Exit Kitty. Welcome once more to the region of business and pleasure!


Belv. I thank you! But pray, my Lord, don't dismiss the lady.


Spark. The lady! Ha! ha! ha. That lady, Sir, is a Lady's gentlewoman, a'n't
please ye! I suppose you have heard that I am going to marry Lady Bell Bloomer;
we are the two most fashionable people in town, and in course must come
together.


Belv. A clear deduction.


Spark. Now she has a friend, whom I mean at the same time to take for a
mistress: -- will not that be a stroke, eh!


Belv. Decidedly. Your life is made up of strokes! Every thing with you, my
Lord, is a hit.


Spark. True, true! I detest a regular, mechanical mode of doing things. -- Men
of sense have one way of getting through life; men of genius, another.


Belv. Doubtless; and the advantage lies with the men of genius, for to their
genius are all their faults imputed; nay, their faults are considered as the
graceful meanderings of a mind too ethereal to be confined to the rules of
common-sense and decorum; -- a mighty easy way of building reputation! ha! ha!
ha! You are dressed with infinite malice today, my Lord.


Spark. Malice! Not at all. -- The women nowadays are neither caught by
finery or person! -- I am dressed for court. -- I was going to Westminster; but I
hear there is to be a presentation of Misses today, and I would not for the
world lose the dear creatures blushes on their first appearance; for, 'faith,
most of them will never blush again. -- Will you go?


Belv. It Is too late to dress: besides, I have devoted this day to adventure. I
am rambling through the town, discovering what new stars have appeared in the
Galaxy of Beauty during my absence, and a dangerous progress it is! The rays of
a pair of black eyes from a chariot in Pall Mall would have annihilated me, had
not at the same instant two beautiful blue ones from a window given a fillip to
my sinking spirits. A fine-turn'd ancle, whose polish shone through its neat silk
stocking, encountered me in St. James's-street; but I was luckily relieved by a
little rosy mouth, that betrayed, with a deceitful smile, teeth most
murderously white. A Galatea darted by me on the right, whilst a Helen swam
along on the left: -- in short, from such sweet besiegers nothing could have
preserved me but the sweeter charms of a beloved, though absent fair-one.

(sighing.)
Spark. Now, I never trouble my head about absentees! -- I love beauty as well
as any man; but it must be all in the present tense. Shall I set you down any
where? I must go.


Bell. No; but I see your writing-things are here. If you will permit me, I Will pen
a short note to Beauchamp on business I had forgot this morning, and dispatch
it by a chairman.


Spark. To be sure. I penned a note ten minutes since to my steward, to raise
the poor devils rents. Upon my soul, I pity 'em! But how can it be otherwise,
whilst one is obliged to wear fifty acres in a suit, and the produce of a whole
farm in a pair of buckles? Adieu!


[Exit singing. (Whilst Sparkle is speaking, Belville seats himself, and begins
to write.) Bell. (writing) Good morning! -- My compliments to the Ladies blushes.


Enter KITTY; passes BELVILLE in the front of the Stage. Kitty. So, so, his
Lordship has forgot me! I must go after him.


Bell. (coming forward) Hah! that is the confidante! -- So, pretty-one, whose
chattels are you?


Kitty. My mistress's, Sir.


Belv. And who is your mistress?


Kitty. A Lady, Sir.


Belv. And her name?


Kitty. That of her father, I take it.


Belv. Upon my word, your Lady has a very brilliant servant! -- Is she as
clever as you are?


Kitty. Why, not quite, I think, or she would not keep me to eclipse her.


Belv. Bravo! I wish I knew her! Will you tell me her name?


Kitty. Can you spell?


Belv. Yes.


Kitty. Why then you will find it in the four-and-twenty letters.

(going.)
Belv. (catching her) Nay, by Heaven, you have raised my curiosity!


Kitty. Poh! what signifies asking me? You know well enough who she is. -- I
heard you and Lord Sparkle talking about her. Let me go; for I am going to
carry a message to Mr. Fitzherbert.


Belv. Mr. Fitzherbert!


Kitty. Aye, her guardian.


Belv. Her guardian! What, Fitzherbert of Cambridgeshire?


Kitty. Yes; and if you want to know more, he is the crossest old wretch that
ever breathed. You Will find him out by that description; and so, your servant!


[Exit Kitty. Belv. Fitzherbert's ward! and this creature her servant! and Lord
Sparkle plotting to get her for a mistress! -- I am astonished! -- the very
Lady he this morning offered for my bride! -- Well, -- I must find Fitzherbert
immediately. -- Lord Sparkle will perhaps think me guilty of a breach of honor
-- The imputation I must incur, that I may not be really guilty of a breach of
humanity, and of gratitude.


[Exit Belville. SCENE II.
Lady BELL BLOOMER'S. Enter FITZHERBERT, followed by a Servant. Fitz. Tell Miss
Manners I am here. (Exit Servant.) -- I cannot perhaps be seriously angry with
Julia; but I must take some revenge on her disobedience, before I acquaint her
with the felicity that attends her. Come in, Young Cornish, pray!


Enter PENDRAGON. Pen. What, does the Lady live in this fine house?


Fitz. Yes. -- but pray observe, that I don't engage she shall be smitten with
you. I can go no farther than to introduce you; the rest must depend on the
brilliancy of your manners.


Pen. Oh leave me alone for that! -- I knew how 'twould be, if I once showed
myself in London. If she has a long purse, I Will whask her down to Cornwall,
jockey Lord Sparkle, and have the Borough myself.


Fitz. A man of spirit, I see!


Pen. Oh, as to my spirit, that nobody ever doubted! -- I have beat our
Exciseman, and gone to-law with the Parson; and to show you that I did not
leave my spirit in the country, since I came to London I have fined a
hackneycoachman for abuse.


Fitz. Very commendable! -- But here comes the Lady!

Enter JULIA. Mr. Pendragon, this is my ward, who, I am sure, will give your
addresses all the encouragement I wish them.


Pen. Servant, Ma'am! (aside) She looks plaguey glum.


Julia. I can scarcely support myself!

(aside.)
Fitz. Pray, my dear, speak to Mr. Pendragon! You seem greatly confused!


Pen. Oh, Sir, I understand it! Young Ladies will look confused and
embarrass'd, and all that sort of thing, on these occasions; but we men of the
world are up to all that.


Julia. Heavens! is it to such a Being I should have been sacrificed!

(aside.)
Pen. I see your ward is one of the modest diffident ones: I am surprised at
that -- bred in high-life.


Fitz. Oh, now and then, you find a person of that cast in the best company! --
but they soon get over it.


Pen. Yes, formerly I used to blush, and be modest, and all that sort of thing;
but if any one ever catches me modest again, I Will give 'em my estate for a
pilchard.


Julia. Then it seems impossible -- pardon me, Sir! (to Fitzherbert) that a
union can take place between you and me; for I place modesty amongst the
elegancies of manner, and think it absolutely necessary to the character of a
gentleman.


Fitz. Well done, Julia! (aside) -- Fie upon you to treat my friend with such
asperity!


Pen. O leave her to me, Sir; she is ignorant, but I shall teach her. There are
three things, Miss, only necessary to the character of a Gentleman; -- a good
air, good assurance, and good teeth.

(grinning.)
Julia. [to Fitzherbert) Does Not his list want good manners, Sir?


Pen. Oh, no, Ma'am! If you had said good taste, it would have been nearer the
thing; but even that is unnecessary. -- A Gentleman's friends can furnish his
house, and choose his books, and his pictures, and he can learn to criticize
them by heart. -- Nothing is so easy as to criticize; -- people do it
continually.


Fitz. You see, Mr. Pendragon has information, Julia. -- I Will leave you a few
moments, that he may unfold himself to advantage; and remember, if you refuse
the man I design for your husband, you lose me. -- Keep it up with spirit! I Will
wait for you below (to Pendragon). -- Now shall impertinence and disobedience
correct each other!


[Exit Fitzherbert. Pen. Now to strike her with my superior ease! (aside) --
So, Miss, your Guardian, I think, has a mind that we shall -- in the vulgar
speech -- marry!


Julia. Well, Sir; but are you not frightened at your approach to such a state!
-- Do you know what belongs to the character of a Husband?


Pen. What belongs to it? Aye! Do you know what belongs to being a Wife?


Julia. Yes; I guess that to your wife will belong ill-humour with you at home
-- shame with you abroad; -- in her face forced smiles -- in her heart hidden
thorns.


Pen. The Devil! What, you have found your tongue, Ma'am! Oh, oh, I shall have
a fine time on it, I guess, when our connection begins!


Julia. Our connection! -- Pray, Sir, drop the idea! -- I protest to you, that
were it possible for me to become your wife, I should be the most wretched of
women.


Pen. Oh no, you woudn't! I hardly know a wife who is not wretched.


Julia. Unfeeling man! Would you presume to enter into a state, to the
happiness of which, union of soul, delicacy of sentiment, and all the elegant
attentions of polished manners are necessary and indispensible?


Pen. What Is all that! Union of soul! sentiment! attentions! -- That Is not
Life, I Am sure.


Julia. I am not able to conceive by what witchcraft Mr. Fitzherbert has been
blinded to the weakness of your head, and the turpitude of your heart. -- Tell
him, Sir, there is not a fate I would not prefer to that of being united to a
man whose vice is the effect of folly, and whose folly is as hateful even as
his vice.


[Exit Julia. Pen. Yes, yes, I Will tell, depend on it! -- Egad, she is a spirit!
-- So much the better, more pleasure in taming her! -- A meek wife cheats a man
of his rights, and deprives him of the pleasure of exacting her obedience. --
Let me see! -- Vice -- folly -- impudence -- ignorance -- Ignorance too!


[Exit Pendragon. Re-enter JULIA. Julia. What have I done? I dare not now see
my guardian! His displeasure will kill me. Oh Belville! where art thou! Come
and shield thy unhappy bride! -- What steps can I take?


Enter KITTY. Kitty. Dear Ma'am, I Am so grieved to see you so unhappy! If I had
such a cross old guardian, I Would run away from him.


Julia. The very thought which that instant presented itself to my mind! --
Have you not told me, that some relation of yours has lodgings?


Kit.y. Yes, Ma'am; the most elegantest in London.


Julia. I don't want elegant apartments; but I wish for a short time to be
concealed in some family of reputation.


Kitty. To be sure, Ma'am, it is the most prudent thing you can do.


Julia. And yet my heart fails me.


Kitty. Oh, Ma'am, don't hesitate! I Will go and pack up a few things, and call a
coach and be off, before Lady Bell comes from Court.


Julia. I fear it is a wrong step; and yet what other can I take? I dare not
reveal my marriage, without the permission of my husband; and till his arrival,
I must avoid both a guardian's anger and the addresses of a lover. -- The
honor of Belville would be insulted, should I permit them to be repeated.


(aside.) [Exit Julia. Kitty. I know not what she means, but there is some
mystery, I find. So there should be! -- If ladies had not mysteries, a
chambermaid's place would be hardly worth keeping. -- I have mysteries too, and
she shall have their explanation from Lord Sparkle.


[Exit. SCENE III.
CLARINDA'S House. Enter Lady BELL meeting CLARINDA. L. Bell. Ha! ha! ha! my
dear creature, what an embarras! Driving swiftly through the streets, Lady
Whipcord dashed upon us in her flaming phaeton and six, gave a monstrous big
Newmarket word to my poor fellows, and with infinite dexterity entangled the
traces. It happened near your door; so I have taken shelter with you, and left
her Ladyship to settle the dispute with my coachman, ha! ha! ha! But why were
you not at Court today?


Clar. I had a teazing headache; but pray, tell me what happened there. --
(aside) Deuce take her, she looks as well as ever!


L. Bell. Oh, the Ladies, as usual, brilliant -- nothing so flat as the men!
The horrid English custom ruins them for conversation. They make themselves
members of Clubs, in the way of business; and Members of Parliament, in the way
of amusement: all their passions are reserved for the first, and all their wit
for the last.


Clar. It Is better in Paris.


L. Bell. Oh, it is quite another thing! Whilst we aukwardly copy the follies of
the Parisians, we absurdly omit the charming part of their character. Devoted
to elegance, they catch their opinions, their wit, and their bons mots from the
mouths of the ladies. -- It Is in the drawing room of Madame the Duchess, the
Marquis learns his politics; whilst the sprightly Countess dispenses taste and
philosophy to a circle of Bishops, Generals, and Abbes.


Clar. All that may be just; yet I am mistaken, if you have not found one
Englishman to reconcile you to the manners of the rest. Lord Sparkle, for
instance -- your Ladyship thinks, I Am sure, that be has wit at will.


L. Bell. Oh yes, quite at will! -- His wit, like his essence-bottle, is a
collection of all that is poignant in a thousand flowers; and, like that, is
most useful, when he himself is most insipidly vacant.


Clar. With such sentiments, I wonder you can suffer his addresses.


L. Bell. What can I do? The man is so much the fashion, and I shall be so much
envied. -- Why you now, my dear, for instance -- you would be inclined to stick a
poisoned nosegay in my bosom, if I should take him.


Clar. Ha! ha! ha! ridiculous! Believe me, Madam, I shall neither prepare a
bouquet, nor invoke a fiery shower to grace your nuptials.


L. Bell. (aside) No, your shower would be tears, I fancy. -- Here be comes!


Clar. Hah! Lord Sparkle! Your Ladyship's accident was fortunate.


(sneering.) Enter LORD SPARKLE. Spark. Heavens! Lady Bell! your horses fly
like the doves of Venus. I followed you from St. James's; -- but my poor
earth-born cattle wouldn't keep pace with yours.


Clar. Oh, don't complain! If her Ladyship won the race, you see she stopped
for you at the goal.


Spark. Charming Miss Belmour, what an enlivening intimation! Where was your
Ladyship on Thursday? You would have found excellent food for your satire at
Mrs. Olio's: We had all the Law Ladies from Lincoln's End, a dozen gold velvets
from Bishopsgate, with the wives and daughters of half the M. D's. and L. L.
D's. in town.


L. Bell. Oh, my entertainment was quite as good as yours! We were in
Brook-street, at Lady Laurel's, and found her surrounded by her Literati of all
denominations. -- We had Masters of Art and Misses of Science: -- on one hand,
an Essayist; on the other, a Moralist: -- there, a Poetaster; here, a
Translator: -- in that corner, a Philosopher; in the oath r, a Compiler of
Magazines. -- Tropes, Epigrams, and Syllogisms flew like skyrockets in every
direction; 'till the ambition of pre-eminence lighted the flame of controversy,
when they gave each other the lie literary with infinite spirit and decorum.


Spark. Excellent! I Will repeat every word in a place where it will be
remembered, and the satire enjoyed.


Clar. In that hope your Lordship may safely knock at every door in the street:
-- satire is welcome every where.


L. Bell. Yes, if it will bear a laugh -- that is the grand art of conversation.
They pretend we are fond of slander; but rob scandal of its laugh, and 'twould
soon be banished to the second table, for the amusement of butlers and
chambermaids.


Spark. Indeed! Then I believe half our acquaintance would go down stairs to
the second table too! -- they would think their servants had the best of the dish.


(Enter a Servant, gives Lord Sparkle a letter, and exit.) Spark. (reads it
aside) Julia! astonishing! -- So sudden in your movements, Mrs. Kitty? --
(turning to the Ladies) This vulgar thing called business is the greatest evil
in life! It destroys our most brilliant hours, and is sit only for younger
brothers and humble cousins. -- Miss Belmour, I must tear myself away. Shall I
attend your Ladyship to your carriage?


L. Bell. If you please! -- Miss Belmour, "I must tear myself away;" -- but
you will shine upon us at night.


[Exeunt L. Sparkle and Lady Bell. Clar. Shine upon you at night! -- That I
know you are insolent enough to believe impossible. -- What can I think of her
sentiments for Lord Sparkle! Sometimes I believe it is a mere attachment of
vanity on both sides. -- That reserved creature Beauchamp is in his confidence;
but he leaves town this very day, and I shall have no opportunity of conversing
with him. (muses) There is but one chance -- going to visit him. -- But how can
I possibly do that? Deuce take him! If he had a library, one might go to look
at his books. Well, I don't care, go I will; and if I cannot invent an excuse,
I Will put a good face upon the matter, and go without one. (going) I should
expire if my visit should be discovered. Poh! I must risque every thing! -- To
be bold, is sometimes to be right.


[Exit. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Au Apartment at LADY BELL's. Enter LADY BELL, followed by her Maid. L. Bell.
MISS Manners gone out in a hackney-coach, and no message left!


Maid. No, Madam.


L. Bell. Very strange!


Maid. Mr. Beauchamp has been waiting almost an hour for your Ladyship's return.


L. Bell. Mr. Beauchamp! -- Here, go and put some otto of roses in that
handkerchief. (Exit Maid) Now, shall I admit him, or not? This formal waiting
looks very like formal business. Poh, I hate that! -- I suppose he has at
length vanquished his modesty, and is come to tell me that -- that -- Well, I
vow I will not hear him. -- Yes, I will. I long to know the style in which these
reserved men make love. -- To what imprudence would my heart betray me? Yet I
may surely indulge myself in hearing him speak of love; in hearing, probably
for the first time, its genuine language. (Enter Maid, and presents the
handkerchief) Tell Mr. Beauchamp I am here. (Exit Maid) Now, how shall I
receive him? It will be intolerable to be formal. -- (Takes her fan from her
pocket and traverses the stage, humming a tune. -- Enter Beauchamp.) Oh, Mr.
Beauchamp, this is the luckiest thing! -- I have had ten disputes today about
the figures in my fan; and you shall decide 'em. Is that beautiful nymph a
flying Daphne, or an Atalanta?


Beauch. (looking at her fan) From the terror of the eye, Madam, and the
swiftness of her step, it must be a Dephne. I think Atalanta's head would be
more at variance with her feet; and whilst she flies, her eye would be
invitingly turned on her pursuers.


L. Bell. I think you are right! -- Yes -- there does want the kind, inviting
glance, to be sure.


Beauch. What a misfortune to a lover! I know one to whom your Ladyship appears
the disdainful Daphne. -- How happy! could he behold in your eye the
encouragement of Atalanta's!


L. Bell. (aside) Mercy! for so bashful a man that is pretty plain.


Beauch. This is probably the last visit I can make you before I leave England:
-- will your Ladyship permit me, before I leave it, to acquaint you that there
is a man, whose happiness depends on your favor?

(agitated.)
L. Bell. So, now he is going to be perplexing again! (aside) -- A man whose
happiness depends on me, Mr. Beauchamp!

(looking on her fan.)
Beauch. Yes, Madam! -- and -- and -- (aside) I cannot go on -- Why did I
accept a commission in which success would destroy me?


L. Bell. How evidently this is the first time he ever made love! (aside) --
The man seems to have chosen a very diffident advocate in you, Sir.


Beauch. It Is more than diffidence, Madam, my task is painful.


L. Bell. Ay, I thought so! You have taken a brief in a cause you don't like; I
could plead it better myself.


Beauch. I feel the reproach.


L. Bell. It Is difficult for you, perhaps, to speak in the third person? -- Try
it in the first. Suppose now, ha! ha! only suppose, I say! for the jest's sake,
that you yourself have a passion for me, and then try -- how you can plead it.


Beauch. (kneeling) Thus -- thus would I plead it, and swear, that thou art
dear to my heart as fame, and honor! -- To look at thee is rapture; to love
thee, though without hope, -- felicity!


L. Bell. Oh, I thought I should bring him to the point at last!

(aside)
Beauch. (rising, aside) To what dishonesty have I been betrayed* -- Thus,
Madam, speaks my friend, through my lips; -- it is thus he pleads his passion.


L. Bell. Provoking! (aside) -- What friend is this, Sir, who is weak enough to
use the language of another to explain his heart?


Beauch. Lord Sparkle.


L. Bell. Lord Sparkle! Was it for him you knelt? (he bows to her) -- Then,
Sir, I must inform you, that the liberty you have taken -- (aside) Heavens, how
do I betray myself! -- Tell me, Sir, on your honor, do you wish to succeed in
pleading the passion of Lord Sparkle?


Beauch. (hesitating) My obligations to his Lordship -- our relationship -- the
confidence he has reposed in me --


L. Bell. Stop, Sir! I too will repose confidence in you, and confess that
there is a man whom I sometimes suspect not to be indifferent to me; -- but
it is not Lord Sparkle! Tell him so; -- and tell him that -- that -- tell him
what you will.


Beauch. Heavens, what does she mean! What language is this her eye speaks?

(aside)
L. Bell. Do you visit me this evening. Here will be many of my friends, and
you shall then see me in the presence of the man my heart prefers.

(Beauchamp bows, and goes to the door; then returns, advances toward Lady
Bell, makes an effort to speak; finds it impossible, then bows, and exit.)
Heavens! what necessity have lovers for words? What persuasion in that bashful
irresolution! Now, shall I let him quit England, or not! -- What! give up a
coronet and Lord Sparkle for a cockade and Beauchamp! Preposterous! says
Vanity. -- But what says Love? I don't exactly know; but I Will examine their
separate claims, and settle them with all the casuistry of four-and-twenty.


[Exit. SCENE II.
LORD SPARKLE's House. Enter JULIA and KITTY. Julia. I am so agitated with this
rash step, that I can hardly breathe! (throwing herself into a chair) Why did
you confirm me in my imprudent resolution?


Kitty. Imprudent! I Am sure, Ma'am, it is very prudent, and very right, that a
young lady like you should not be snubb'd, and have her inclination thwarted by
an ill-natured positive old guardian.


Julia. (looking round) What apartments! and the hall we came through had an
air much beyond a lodging-house! It Is all too fine for my purpose; I want to be
private.


Kitty. Oh dear Ma'am, you may be as private here as you please! (a rapping at
the door) There Is my cousin come home, I dare say; I Will send her to you, and
then you may settle terms.


[Exit. Julia. I feel I have done wrong, and yet I am so distracted, I know not
how I could have done otherwise. (Enter Lord Sparkle) Heavens! Lord Sparkle
here!


Spark. Yes, my lovely Julia, here I am; and upon my soul, if you knew the
engagements I have broke for the happiness, you would be gratified.


Julia. Gratified! I am astonished! equally astonished at your being here, and
at your strange address.


Spark. Astonished at my being here! Why, to be sure, it is not usual to find a
man of fashion in his own house; but when I heard that you were in my house,
how could I do less than fly home?


Julia. Home! Your own house! What can all this mean? --


Spark. Mean! Love -- Gallantry -- Joy, and ever-new delights.


Julia. Oh! I am betrayed! Where is my wicked servant?


Spark. Poh, never think of her! -- Why all this flutter, my sweet girl! You
have only changed guardians; and you shall find, that being ward to a young man
of fashion and spirit, is a very different thing from --


Julia. Oh Heavens! what will become of me?


Spark. Nay, this is quite ridiculous, after having fled to my protection! I
feel myself highly honored by your confidence, and will take care to deserve
it.


Julia. Why do I remain here an instant?

(going toward the door.)
Spark. (holding her) This is downright rudeness! But you young Ladies are so
fickle in your resolutions -- But be assured, after having chosen my house for
your asylum, I shall not be so impolite as to suffer you to seek another.


Julia. Oh wretched artifice! You know, Sir, that your house and you I would
have fled from to the farthest corner of -- (Enter Beauchamp) Oh, Mr.
Beauchamp, save me! -- I have been basely betrayed! --


Beauch. (astonished) Betrayed! -- Miss Manners! Yes, Madam, I will protect you
at every hazard.


Spark. Come, none of your antique virtues, George, pray! This is a piece of
badinage of the Eighteenth Century, and you cannot possibly understand it! --
Miss Manners chose to pay me a visit, and I desire you will leave us.


Julia. My Lord, how dare you thus trifle with a woman's honor?


Beauch. Be not alarmed, Madam, I will defend you.


Spark. (taking him aside) Poh, prithee, George, be discreet! This is all
female artifice! -- You popp'd upon us, and this is a salver for her reputation.


Beauch. Pardon me, my Lord! In believing you in opposition to the evidence of
this young Lady's terrors, I may be guilty of an irremiable error.


Spark. Nay, if you are serious, Sir, how dare you break in upon my privacy?


Beauch. This is not a time to answer you, my Lord! The business that brought
me here, I am indebted to; I should not else have prevented your base designs.


Spark. Base designs, Mr. Beauchamp!


Beauch. Yes, Lord Sparkle! -- Shall I attend you home, Madam?


Julia. Oh, Sir, I dare not go there! I fled from Lady Bell's, when I was
betrayed into this inhuman man's power. -- Convey me to some place where I may
have leisure to reflect.


Spark. And do you think, Mr. Beauchamp, I shall put up with this? -- Remember,
Sir --


Beauch. (interrupting) Yes, my Lord, that, as a Man, it is my duty to protect
endangered innocence; that, as a Soldier, it is part of the essence of my
character; and, whilst I am grateful to you for the commission I have the
honor to bear, I will not disgrace it, in suffering myself to be intimidated
by your frowns.


[Exit Beauchamp, leading Julia. Spark. So! -- so! -- so! -- an ancient hero in
the house of a modern man of fashion! -- Alexander in the tent of Darius! --
Scipio and the fair Parthenia! The fellow has not an idea of any morals but
those in use during the Olympiads.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Mr. Pendragon and his sister, my Lord.


Spark. Who!

(with an air of disgust.)
Serve. Mr. and Miss Pendragon.


Spark. Then carry 'em to the Housekeeper's room! -- Give 'em jellies and
plumb-cake, and tell 'em -- (Enter Pendragon, leading Sophy) Oh, my dear Miss
Pendragon, you honor me! -- But I am the most unlucky man on earth! -- I am
obliged, upon business of infinite consequence, to be at Whitehall within five
minutes.


Pen. But, first, my Lord, you must settle a little business here with Miss
Pendragon.


Sophy. I tell you, Bobby, I Will speak myself; -- and as few words are best,
pray, my Lord, what do you mean by treating me in this manner?


Spark. I shall be miserable beyond bearing, if any treatment of mine has
incurred your displeasure.


Sophy. Well, now you talk of being miserable, you have softened my heart at
once! But pray, my Lord, is it fashionable for people on the terms you and I
are, to keep asunder?


Spark. What the Devil can the girl mean?

(aside.)
Sophy. Never even write! -- no billets! -- no bribing the maid to slip notes
into my hand! -- Why you don't even complain, though it is five days since you saw
me.


Spark. Complain! I am sure I have been exceedingly wretched.


Sophy. Then why did you not tell me so? Why, that is the very thing I wanted!
If I had known you had been wretched, I should have been happy.


Pen. Well, I see I shall lose an opportunity here! -- I came to challenge you,
my Lord.


Spark. Challenge me!


Pen. Yes! -- Miss Pendragon told me she was dissatisfied: -- then says I, I Will
demand satisfaction: -- and I didn't care if things had gone a little farther;
for to call out a Lord would be a feather in my cap as long as I live. --
However, you are agreed.


Sophy. Do be quiet, Bobby! -- We are not agreed: -- I have heard nothing of
Settlements yet; nothing of Jewels.


Spark. My dear Ma'am, you are pleased to amuse yourself.


Sophy. Why, my Lord, those things must be all settled beforehand, you know.


Spark. Before what!


Sophy. What! Before our marriage, my Lord.


Spark. Marriage! Ha, ha, ha!


Sophy. Heydey! Will you pretend that you did not intend to marry me, when I
can prove that you have courted me from twenty instances?


Spark. Indeed!


Pen. Ay, that she can! instances as striking as your Lordship's red heels. --
Come, Miss Pendragon, your proofs? I Will support 'em.


Sophy. Why, in the first place, my Lord, you once placed a nosegay in my
bosom, and said, "Oh! I wish I were these happy roses!" -- the very speech that
Sir Harry Hargrave made to Miss Woodville! -- Another time you said, "I was a
most bewitching and adorable girl!" -- exactly what Colonel Finch said to Lady
Lucy Luster! -- Another time you said, "How would a Coronet become those
shining tresses!" -- the very speech of Lord Rosehill to Miss Danvers; and
these couples were every one married.


Spark. Married! I never heard of 'em! -- Who are they? Where the Devil do they
live?


Pen. (strutting up to him) Live! -- Why in our county, to be sure.


Sophy. No, no, Bobby, in The Reclaimed Rake, and The Constant Lovers, and Sir
Charles Grandison, and Roderic Random, and --


Pen. Yes, Sir; they live at Random, with Sir Charles Grandison. -- Now do you
know 'em?


Spark. Ha! ha! ha! you are a charming little Lawyer, (to Sophy) and might,
perhaps, establish your proofs for precedents, if Sir Charles Grandison was on
the Bench: yet I never heard of his being made Chief Justice, though I never
thought him fit for any thing else.


Pen. What the Devil's this? -- What, did not you bring all those fine proofs
from fashionable life? -- And are you such a fool as not to understand what we
call commonplace?


Sophy. Commonplace!


Pen. Yes, we persons of elegant life use the figure Hyperbo^le. --


Sophy. Hyperbo^le! What Is that?


Pen. Why, that is as much as to say, a stretch.


Sophy. A stretch! What, then, you have been mocking me, my Lord?


Spark. Not in the least; I shall be the happiest man existing to, to --
(aside) Egad, I must take care of my phrases! -- I mean, that I shall be
always, and upon all occasions, your most devoted, tres humblement serviteur.
-- Were there ever two such Bumpkins!


[Exit. Sophy. What Is he gone? Oh! Villain! Monster! I am forsaken! Oh! I am
rejected! -- All Cornwall will know it!

(crying)
Pen. Tin-Mines and all. But don't ye cry, Miss Pendragon -- don't ye cry!

(sobbing)
Sophy. Oh! I am rejected!


Pen. I am glad on it, with all my heart! I Will challenge him yet, and they will not
know in Cornwall exactly how it was. -- They Will hear that a Lord fought about
ye, and all that sort of thing; and whether for ye or against ye, 'twill be
much the same.


Sophy. But will you challenge him, really, Bobby?


Pen. Upon honor! -- I admire the claw of the thing! Egad, Sophy, I Am glad he is
forsaken thee! Now my character will be finished. A man cannot show his face in
company, till he has stood shot, and fired his pistol in the air.


Sophy. In the air! If you don't fire it through him --


Pen. Oh, never fear! I Will do all that sort of thing. Come along! I Will go home
directly, and practice at the hen-coop in the yard. I Will fire through one end,
and you shall hold your calash against the other; and if I don't hit it, say
I Am no marksman.


[Exit Pendragon, with Sophy under his arm. SCENE III.
BEAUCHAMP's Lodgings. Enter Beauchamp and Julia. Beauch. I entreat your pardon
for conducting you to my own lodgings; -- but here, Madam, you will be safe,
'till you determine how to act. -- What are your commands for me?


Julia. Oh, Mr. Beauchamp, I have no commands -- I have no designs! -- I have
been very imprudent; I am still more unhappy.


Beauch. Shall I acquaint Mr. Fitzherbert?


Julia. It was to avoid him that I left Lady Bell. -- I have reasons that make
it impossible to see Mr. Fitzherbert now.


Beauch. Is there no other friend?


Julia. O yes, I have one friend! -- Were he here, all my difficulties would
vanish! -- It may seem strange, Mr. Beauchamp, but I expect that you believe --
Heavens! here is company! (looking at the wing) It Is Miss Belmour -- the last
woman on earth whom I would trust! -- Where can I go?


Beauch. Miss Belmour! Very odd! -- But pray be not uneasy! -- That room,
Madam, if you will condescend --


(she rushes through the door.) Enter CLARINDA laughing. Clar. Ha! ha! ha! I
expect your gravity to be amazingly discomposed at so hardy a visit; but I took
it very ill that you did not design to call upon me before your departure; and
so as I was passing your door, I stopped in mere frolic to enquire the cause.


Beauch You do me infinite honor, Madam! I am thankful that I failed in my
attention, since it has procured me so distinguished a favor.


Clar. Oh, your most obedient! -- You are going to leave England for a long
while! You Will find us all in different situations, probably, on your return! --
Your friend Lord Sparkle, for instance -- I am informed that he is really to
marry Lady Bell Bloomer; but I don't believe it -- do you?


Beauch. It Is impossible, Madam, for me --


Clar. Poh! poh! impossible! Such friends as you are I suppose keep nothing
from one another. -- We women cannot exist without a confidante; and I dare say,
you men are full as communicative. Not that it is any thing to me; but as I
have a prodigious regard for Lady Bell --


Belv. (behind) Beauchamp! Beauchamp!


Clar. Heaven and earth, how unlucky! Here Is some man! I am the nicest creature
breathing in my reputation: what will he think? I Will run into this room.


(runs toward the door.) Beauch. (preventing her) Pardon me, Madam, you cannot
enter there!


Clar. (pushing at the door) I must -- Oh -- oh! the door is held, Sir.


Beauch. My dear Madam, I am infinitely sorry for the accident; but suppose --
suppose, I say, Ma'am, that a friend of mine has been in a duel, and concealed
in that room.


Clar. Ridiculous! I saw the corner of a hoop and a white satin petticoat: --
is that the dress of your duelling friends? I will go in. -- (struggling) So!
(flinging away spitefully) it is too late!

Enter BELVILLE. So! so! so! I beg your pardon. How could you be so indiscreet,
Beauchamp? Though a young soldier, I thought you knew enough of Generalship to be
prepared for a surprise.


Clar. Oh, so he was; but not for two surprises. -- One has happened already,
and a hasty retreat the consequence.


Beau. Believe me, Belville -- I am infinitely concerned

(to Clarinda.)
Clar. Oh! I detest your impertinent concern! Keep it for the Lady in the other
room.


Bell. A Lady in the other room too! Heydey! Beauchamp, who would have suspected
--


Beauch. It Is all a mistake! The Lady in the next room -- But prithee go. --


Bell. Only tell me if you have seen Fitzherbert. I have been seeking him this
hour, on a business of the utmost consequence.


Beauch. I have not; but about this time you will find him at home.


Bell. Enough! Miss Belmour, pray suffer no concern; depend on my honor. --
Beauchamp (taking him aside), who is the Lady in the other room?


Beauch. Had I meant you to have known, that room would have been unnecessary.


(Belville seems still inquisitive; Beauchamp draws him toward the wing).
Clar. Now do I die to know who it can be! Indeed, it is necessary for my own
sake. -- Whilst she has been hid, I have been exposed; and who knows what the
creature may say? I Will try once more. She has my secret, and I Will have here is.

(forces open the door)
Julia. (rushes out) Belville!

(running toward him.)
Belv. (starting back.) Julia!


Clar. Miss Manners! -- Ha! ha! ha!


Julia. Oh, Belville, throw me not from you!


Bell. Astonishing!


Clar. Oh charming! The modest Julia, and the reserved Beauchamp! Ha! ha! ha!
-- But Mr. Belville, how came you of this sober party? ha! ha! ha!


Julia. Speak to me!


Clar. Now, Mr. Beauchamp, you know the purport of my visit. -- I had heard
that Miss Manners has been seen to visit you, and, not being willing to trust
to such a report, was resolved, if possible, to discover the truth.


Bell. (to Julia) Wretched woman!


Julia. (to Clarinda) Barbarous creature! Oh hear me, I conjure you!


Bell. Hear you! -- No, madam; -- and if my contempt, my hatred, my -- oh! --
You, Sir, I must speak to in another place; -- yet perhaps you were not
acquainted that -- What would I say! -- The word which I have pronounced with
rapture, choaks me. From this moment farewell!

(to Julia).
[Exit Belville. Beauch. What can I think of all this?


Julia. Oh Sir!


Beauch. Permit me, Madam, to ask i you have long known Mr. Belville?


Julia. Yes, too long.


Clar. Oh, oh, too long! -- Aye, young ladies should be cautious how they form
acquaintance. For my part -- But you look ill, child! -- (taking her by the
hand) Well, I have no hard heart; I can pity your weakness, Miss; -- I will not
upbraid you now. -- My coach waits; -- shall I conduct you home?


Julia. Yes, to Lady Bell -- to Lady Bell -- I am very ill!


Clar. Adieu, Mr. Beauchamp! This has been an unlucky frolic! -- It Is amazing,
you grave people can be so careless.


[Exit Julia and Clarinda. Beauch. An unlucky frolic, indeed! And I am so
thoroughly confounded, that I know not what judgment to form of the adventure.
-- I always considered Miss Manners as a pattern of delicacy and virtue; nor
dare I now, spite of circumstances, think otherwise.


Enter LORD SPARKLE. Spark. So, so, Signor Quixote! What so soon lost your
prize! Aye, you see quarrelling for these virtuous women, is as unprofitable as
the assault of the windmills. -- Have you seen Lady Bell in my behalf?


Beauch. Lady Bell, my Lord! Why, sure, it is impossible after your attempt on
Miss Manners --


Spark. Psha! that is a stroke in my favor. Women like to receive the devoirs
of those, whom others of their sex have found so dangerous. What did you
discover of Lady Bell's sentiment toward me?


Beauch. I meant to have given the intelligence softened, but the agitations of
my mind make it impracticable; I must, therefore, inform you in one word, Lady
Bell Bloomer's choice is made, and that choice has not fallen upon your
Lordship.


Spark. Then I must inform you in two words, that I am convinced you are
mistaken. But your reasons, Sir, your reasons?


Beauch. Her Ladyship furnished me with a decisive one: she acknowledged a
pre-engagement; and added, if I visited her this evening, I should see her in
the presence of the man her heart prefers.


Spark. (laughing violently) Excellent! charming ingenuity! Ha! ha! ha! the
kindest, softest, message that ever woman framed; and you, like the sheep
laden with the golden fleece, bore it insensible of its value. -- Ha! ha! ha!
you cannot see through the pretty artifice?


Bauch. No, really.


Spark. Why, it is I who am to be there; there by particular invitation. You Will
see her in my presence; and this was her pretty mysterious way of informing me
that I am the object of her choice.


Beauch. Indeed!


Spark. Without a doubt! But you deep people are the dullest fellows at a hint;
a man of half your parts would have seen it. -- But I am satisfied, and shall
go to her route in brilliant spirits. -- You shall come, and see my triumph
confirmed. -- Come, you rogue! and see the lovely Widow in the presence of the
man her heart prefers. -- Poor George! You must have been cursedly stupid, not
to have conceived that I was the person.


[Exit. Beauch. Yes, I will come. -- Oh vanity! I had dared to explain -- Yes,
I construed the sweet confusion -- Oh, I blush at my own arrogance! Lord
Sparkle must be right. -- Well, this night decides it. -- Narrowly will I watch
each tone and look, to discover -- Oh! -- ever-blest! -- he whom her heart
prefers!


[Exit. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
An Apartment at LADY BELL's. A Table, with Candles. Enter LADY BELL and
SERVANT. L. Bell. ARE the tables placed in the outer room?


Serve. Yes, Ma'am, all but the Pharaoh-table.


L. Bell. Then carry that there too. -- I positively will not have a table in
the drawing room. -- [Exit Servant. Those who play don't visit me, but the
card-tables; and where they find them is very immaterial. -- Let me see! For
whist, Sir James Jennet -- Lady Ponto -- Mrs. Lurchem, and Lady Carmine. -- For
Pharaoh, Mrs. Evergreen, Lord Dangle, Sir Harry -- Hey-dey!


Enter CLARINDA and JULIA. Clar. Come, child, don't faint! -- You had more
cause for terror half an hour ago.


L. Bell. Heavens, Julia! where have you been?


Clar. Ay, that is a circumstance you would not have known, but for an accident;
and I am very sorry it fell to my lot to make the dicovery.


Lady Bell. (taking Julia's hand) Speak, my love!


Julia. Miss Belmour will tell you all she knows. -- I am too wretched!


Clar. Nay, as to what I know, -- I know very little. -- I can tell what I saw,
indeed. -- Having received intimations not quite consonant to one's notions of
decorum, I pretended a frolic, and called on Mr. Beauchamp, and there I found
this Lady concealed.


L. Bell. Heavens, Julia! It Is impossible.


Clar. Nay, she cannot attempt to deny what I myself saw. -- Other discoveries
had liked to have been made too; but Miss Manners may explain them herself; for
I see your rooms begin to fill. -- I shall report that your Ladyship is a
little indisposed, as an excuse for your not immediately appearing.


[Exit Clarinda. L. Bell. (with a countenance of terror) Julia! You at Mr.
Beauchamp's!


Julia. Lady Bell, though I have acted rashly, and was indeed found there, I am
not the guilty creature you imagine. -- I am married! -- I will no longer
conceal it!

(bursting into tears)
L. Bell. Married! Oh Heavens!

(throws herself in a chair, with her back to Julia)
Julia. I dared not reveal it to my guardian, and for that reason fled from
your house.


L. Bell. O Julia, and you are married! What a serpent have I nourished! -- But
forgive me! -- You knew not -- alas! I knew not myself, till this moment, how
much --


Julia. My dearest Madam, do not add to my afflictions! -- for indeed they are
severe.


L. Bell. Ungenerous Girl! why did you conceal from me your situation?


Julia. Good Heavens! is it destined that one imprudent step is to lose me
every blessing! In the agonies of my heart I flew to your friendship, and you
kill me with reproaches.


L. Bell. And you have killed me by your want of confidence! Oh, Julia! had you
revealed to me --


Julia. I dared not; for when Mr. Belville prevailed on me to give him my hand
--


L. Bell. (eagerly) Mr. Belville! -- Mr. Belville, say you?


Julia. Yes; it was in Paris we were married.


L. Bell. (aside) So, so, so; what a pretty mistake I made! -- But it was a
mistake!.......... And so my sweet Julia is married! married in Paris! Sly
thing! But how came you at Mr. Beauchamp's, my Love?


Julia. In my rash flight this morning, my wicked Maid betrayed me into Lord
Sparkle's house. -- There Mr. Beau -- champ snatched me from ruin, and gave me
a momentary asylum in his lodgings.


L. Bell. Did Beauchamp! -- But what is his worth and his gallantry to me?
Cannot he do a right thing, but my heart must triumph?

(aside.)
Julia. At Mr. Beauchamp's my husband found me; -- and found me hid with so
suspicious a secrecy! -- Hah! Here comes Mr. Fitzherbert! How can I see him?


Enter FITZHERBERT. Fitz. My Julia! -- My dear Julia!


Julia. Oh Sir! --


Fitz. Come, I know all; and to relieve one cause of your distress, will tell
you that the lover I shocked you with today, was only my agent in the little
revenge I had resolved to take for your having married, without my consent, the
very man for whom all my cares designed you.


Julia. (clasping his hands) -- Is it possible!


Fitz. At the moment he left Paris for Florence, you received my directions to
return home: thus Belville's letters missed you, and he remained ignorant that
you were in London.


Julia. Oh Sir! had you revealed this to me this morning, what evils should I
have escaped?


Fitz. My dear girl, I decreed you a little punishment; but your own rashness
has occasioned you a severer portion than you deserved.


L. Bell. But where is the Bridegroom? I long to see the necromancer, whose
spells can thaw the Vestal's heart, and light up flames in the cold region of a
monastery.


Fitz. He is without, satisfied from the mouth of Beauchamp of your conduct,
(to Julia) and impatient to fold his Julia to his heart.


Julia. Oh Sir, lead me to him! -- To find my husband, and to be forgiven by
you, are felicities too great.


[Exit, led by Fitzherbert. L. Bell. What a discovery has Julia's marriage made
to me of my own heart! I have persuaded myself it knew no passion but the
desire of conquest; that it knew no motive to admiration but vanity; but the
pangs of jealousy proved to me, in one moment, that all its sense is love!


[Exit L. Bell. An elegant Apartment lighted up, Card-parties seen. -- Two
Servants carrying Refreshments. -- A Lady enters from the Top of the Stage, and
comes down in a hurry. Lady. I protest I have been three quarters of an hour
getting from the top of the street to the door! -- I really believe, when
people give routes, they think more of the bustle they occasion without doors,
than the company they have within.


Clar. Oh yes! I am quite of that opinion. -- The noise and racket in the
streets are frequently the pleasantest part of the entertainment; and to plague
one's sober neighbors is delightful! Ha! ha! ha! My next-door friend, Mrs.
Saffron, always wheels into the country on my public nights, -- on pretense of
her delicate nerves; but the truth is, her rooms will hold but six card-tables,
and mine thirteen.


1st Gent. Well, I protest I wish the ladies would banish cards from their
assemblies, and give us something in the style of the Conversaziones.


2d Gent. Oh no, Sir Charles, that will not do on this side the Alps; -- we have
no knack at conversation: -- we think too much to be able to talk. Good talkers
never think. Sir Harry Glare, full of bons mots, never thinks. -- I myself am
allowed to be tolerable, yet I never think.


Clar. Oh, that I believe all your friends will allow. -- Hey-dey! here comes
Lord Sparkle's borough acquaintance -- Mr. Pendragon.


Enttr PENDRAGON. Pon. Bobs, Miss Belmour, how do you do? I didn't think to see
you. -- Mr. Fitzherbert brought me here, and I have been examining every face,
to see if I knew any body; but fine ladies are so alike, that one must have
long intimacy to know one's acquaintance! -- Red cheeks, white necks, and
smiling lips, crowd every room.


Lady. Hey-dey! a natural curiosity! -- Pray, Sir, how long have you been in
the world?


Pen. How long! Just twenty years, last Lammas.


Lady. Poh, I don't enquire into your age! How long is it since you left your
native woods? -- Was you ever at a route before?


Pen. Aye, that I was, last week! -- It beat this all to nothing. -- 'Twas at
our neighbor's the Wine-Merchant's -- at his country house at Kentish-Town.


2d Lady. Oh, lud! I wish I had been of your party! I should have enjoyed a
Kentish-Town route.


Pen. Oh, you must have been pleased; for the rooms were so little, and the
company so large, that every thing was done with one consent. We were packed so
close, that if one party moved, all the rest were obliged to obey the motion.


Lady. Delightful! -- Well, Sir --


Pen. We had all the fat widows, notable misses, and managing wives of the
parish; so there was no scandal, for they were all there. -- At length the
assembly broke up. -- Such clattering, and squeedging down the gangway
staircase, whilst the little footboy hawl'd from the passage, "Miss Bobbin's
bonnet is ready!" -- "Mrs. Sugar-Plumb's lanthorn waits!" -- "Mrs. Peppercorn's
pattens stop the way!"

(imitating.)
Clar. Oh, you creature, come with me! I must exhibit him in the next room.


[Exit Clarinda and Pendragon. Lady. Oh, stay! -- Take my card. -- I shall have
company next Wednesday, and I insist on yours. -- He is really amusing! --
(Enter Lord Sparkle from the top.) But hide your diminished heads, ye Beaus and
Witlings! for here comes Lord Sparkle.


Spark. (speaking as he comes down) I hope the Belles will not hide theirs; for in
an age where the head is so large a part of the Lady, one should look about for
the sex.


1st Gent. Well, my Lord, you see I have obeyed your summons! I should not have
been here, notwithstanding Lady Bell's invitation, had you not pressed it.


2d Gent. Nor I! I promised to meet a certain Lady in the Gallery at the Opera
to night, -- and I regret that I did not; for I see her husband is here. -- Why
did you press us so earnestly to come?


Spark. Why, 'faith, to have as many witnesses as I could to my glory! -- This
night is given by Lady Bell to ME. -- I am the hero of the fete, and expect
your gratulations. Here the dear creature comes!


LADY BELL comes down from the top, addressing the Company. L. Bell. How do you
do? -- how do you do? (on each side) You wicked creature, why did you
disappoint me last night! Lady Harriet, I have not seen you this age! Oh, Lord
Sparkle! I have been detained from my company by Mr. Fitzherbert, planning a
scheme for your amusement.


Spark. Indeed! I did not expect that attention from him; though I acknowledge my
obligations to your Ladyship's politeness.


L. Bell. (aside) That air of self-possession, I fancy, would be incommoded, if
you guessed at the entertainment. -- Have you seen Mr. Beauchamp?


Spark, For a moment. -- But, charming Lady Bell, (taking her hand) I shall
make you expire with laughing. I really believe the poor fellow explained your
message in his own favor, ha, ha, ha!


L. Bell. Ridiculous! ha, ha, ha!


Enter BEAUCHAMP. Beauch. Ha! it is true! There they are, retired from the
crowd, and enjoying the privacy of lovers.


L. Bell. See there he is! I long to have a little badinage on the subject. --
Let us teaze him.


Spark. Oh, nothing can be more delightful! -- "Hither, sighing shepherd,
come!" -- Come, Beauchamp, take one last, one lingering look! -- sha'n't he,
Lady Bell?


L. Bell. Doubtless, -- if he has your Lordship's leave.


Spark. He seems astonished -- ha, ha, ha! -- Nay, it is cruel! -- If the poor
youth has the misfortune to be stricken, you know he cannot resist fate. --
Ixion sighed for Juno.


L. Bell. Yes, and he was punished too. What punishment, Mr. Beauchamp, shall
we decree for you?


Beauch. I am astonished! -- Was it for this your Ladyship commanded me to
attend you?


L. Bell. How did I command you? Do you remember the words?


Beauch. I do, Madam. -- You bid me come this evening, that I might behold you
in the presence of the man your heart prefers.


L. Bell. Well, Sir, and now -- now you see me! --


Spark. Oh, the sweet confusion of the sweet confession!

(kissing her hand.)
Beauch. (aside) 'Sdeath! this ostentation of felicity, Madam, is ungenerous,
since you know my heart; it is unworthy you! But I thank you for it -- I have a
pang the less.

(going.)
L. Bell. Hold, Sir, are you going?


Beauch. This instant, Madam. -- I came in obedience to your commands; but my
chaise is at your door, and before your gay assembly breaks up, I shall be far
from London, and in a day or two from England. I probably now see your Ladyship
for the last time. -- Adieu!


Lady Bell. Stay, Mr. Beauchamp!

(agitated)
Spark. Ay, prithee stay! I believe Lady Bell has a mind to make you her
conjugal father at the wedding.


Beauch. I forgive you, my Lord. -- Excess of happiness frequently overflows
into insolence, and it is the privilege of felicity to be unfeeling. -- But
how, Madam, has the humble passion which has so long consumed my life, rendered
me so hateful to you, as to prompt you to this barbarity? I have not insulted
you with my love; I have scarcely dared whisper it to myself: how then have I
deserved --


L. Bell. O mercy, don't be so grave! I am not insensible to your merit, nor
have I beheld your passion with disdain. -- But what can I do? Lord Sparkle has
so much fashion, so much elegance -- so much --


Spark. My dearest Lady Bell, you justify my ideas of your discernment: and
thus I thank you for the distinguished honor

(kneeling to kiss her hand.)
Enter SOPHY from the Wing. Sophy. Oh you false-hearted man!

(crying)
Spark. (starting up) Hey-dey!


Sophy. Don't believe a word he says, for all you are so fine a Lady. He Will
tell you of happiness and misery, and this, and that, and the other, but'tis
all commonplace and hyperbo^le -- and all that sort of thing.


L. Bell. Indeed! What has this young Lady claims on your Lordship?


L. Bell. Claims! Ha! ha! ha! Surely your Ladyship can answer that in a single
glance. Claims! Ha! ha! ha! Is it my fault that a little rustic does not know
the language of the day? Compliments are the ready coin of conversation, and
it is every one's business to understand their value.


Enter PENDRAGON. Pen. (clapping him on the shoulder) True, my Lord, true; --
and pray instruct me what was the value of the compliment, when you told me I
should make a figure in the Guards, and that you would speak to your great
friends to make me a colonel?


Spark. Value! Why, of just as much as it would bring! You thought it so
valuable then, that you got me a hundred extra votes on the strength of it; and
you are now a little ungrateful wretch, to pretend 'twas worth nothing.


Enter FITZHERBERT, leading JULIA. Fitz. But here, Lord Sparkle, is a Lady who
claims a right on a different foundation. She had no Election interest to
provoke your flatteries, yet you have not scrupled to profess love to her,
whilst under the roof of her friend, whose hand you was soliciting in marriage.


Julia. Yes, I entreat your Ladyship not to fancy that you are to break the
hearts of half our sex by binding Lord Sparkle in the adamantine chains of
marriage. -- I boast an equal right with you, and don't flatter yourself I
shall resign him.


Spark. Mere malice, Lady Bell! Fitzherbert's malice! -- I never had a serious
thought of Miss Manners in my life.


Enter BELVILLE. Belv. What, my Lord! and have you dared talk of love to that
Lady without a serious thought?


Spark. Hey-dey! what right have you --


Belv. Oh, very trifling! only the right of a Husband -- The Lady so honored
by your love-making in jest is my wife; in course, all obligations to her
devolve on me.


Spark. Your wife! My dear Belville, I give you joy with all my soul! You see
it is always dangerous to keep secrets from your friends. But is any body else
coming? Have I any new crimes to be accused of? Any more witnesses coming to
the bar?


Belv. No; but I am a witness in a new cause, and accuse you of loading the
mind of my friend Beauchamp with a sense of obligation you had neither spirit
or justice to confer.


Lady Bell A Commission, my Lord, which was sent Mr. Beauchamp under a blank
cover, by one who could not bear to see his noble spirit dependent on your
caprices.


Belv. And when his sentiments pointed out your Lordship as his benefactor, you
accepted the honor, and have laid heavy taxes on his gratitude.


Spark. Well, and what is there in all that? Beauchamp did not know to whom he
was obliged; and would not it have been a most unchristian thing to let a good
action run about the world belonging to nobody? -- I found it a stray orphan,
and so fathered it. -- But you, Fitzherbert, I see are the lawful owner of the
brat; so prithee take it back, and thank me for the honor of my patronage.


Fitz. Your affected pleasantry, Lord Sparkle, may shield you from resentment,
but it will not from contempt. Your effrontery --


Spark. Effrontery! Prithee make distinctions! -- What in certain lines would
be effrontery, in me is only the ease of Fashion; that delightful thing, which
enables me at this moment to stand serene amidst your meditated storm. -- Come,
my dear Lady Bell, let us leave these good gentry, and love ourselves amidst
the delights of fashion, and the charms of bon ton.


Lady Bell. Pardon me, my Lord! As caprice is absolutely necessary to the
character of a fine lady, you will not be surprised if I give an instance of it
now; and, spite of your elegance, your fashion, and your wit, present my hand
to this poor soldier -- who boasts only worth, spirit, honor, and love.


Beauch. Have a care, Madam! -- Feelings like mine are not to be trifled with!
Once already the hopes you have inspired --


Lady Bell. The hour of trifling is past; and surely it cannot appear
extraordinary, that I prefer the internal worth of an uncorrupted heart, to the
outward polish of a mind too feeble to support itself against vice, in the
seductive forms of fashionable dissipation.


Spark. Hey-dey! what, is your Ladyship in the plot?


Fitz. The plot has been deeper laid than you, my Lord, have been able to
conceive. As I have the misfortune to be related to you, I thought it my duty
to watch over your conduct. I have seen your plans, which generally tended to
your confusion and disgrace; and many of them have been defeated, though you knew
not by what means. But what fate does your Lordship design for these young
people, decoyed by you from their native ignorance and home?


Spark. Let them return to their native ignorance and home as fast as they can.


Pend. No, no; hang me if I do that! -- I know Life now, and Life I Will have --
Hyde-Park, Plays, Operas, and all that sort of thing. -- But, Old Gentleman, as
you promised to do something for me, what think ye of a Commission? -- The
Captain there cannot want his now; suppose you turn it over to me?


Fitz. No, young man, you shall be taken care of; but the requisites of a
soldier are not those of pertness and assurance. Intrepid spirit, nice honor,
generosity, and understanding, all unite to form him. -- It is these which will
make a British soldier once again the first character in Europe. -- It is such
soldiers who must make England once again invincible, and her glittering arms
triumphant in every quarter of the globe.


Sophy. Well, Bobby may do as he will -- I Will go back to Cornwall directly, and
warn all my neighbors to take special care how they trust to a Lord's promises
at an Election again.


Spark. Well, great attempts and great failings mark the life of a man of
spirit! -- There is eclat even in my disappointment tonight; and I am ready
for a fresh set of adventures tomorrow.


Fitz. Incorrigible man! -- But I have done with you. -- Beauchamp has answered
all my hopes, and the discernment of this charming woman, in rewarding him,
merits the happiness that awaits her; and that I may give the fullest sanction
to her choice, I declare him heir to my estate. This, I know, is a stroke your
Lordship did not expect.


Beauch. And was it then to you, Sir! -- The tumults of my gratitude --


Fitz. Your conduct has completely rewarded me; and in adopting you --


Lady Bell. (interrupting) Oh, I protest against that! -- Our union would then
appear a prudent, sober business, and I should lose the credit of having done a
mad thing for the sake of the man -- my heart prefers.


Fitz. To you I resign him with pleasure: his fate is in your hands.


Lady Bell. Then he shall continue a soldier -- one of those whom Love and his
Country detain to guard her dearest, last possessions.


Beauch. Love and my Country! Yes, ye shall divide my heart! -- Animated by
such passions, our forefathers were invincible; and if we would preserve the
freedom and independence they obtained for us, we must imitate their virtues.


FINIS.

