WINTER. A POEM.

By JAMES THOMSON, A. M.

-- Rapidus Sol
Nondum Hyemem contingit Equis. Jam praeterit aestas.
VIRG. -- Glacialis HYEMS canos hirsuta Capillos.
OVID.

LONDON: Printed for J. MILLAN, at Locke's-Head, in Shug-Lane, near the Upper
End of the Hay-Market; and Sold by J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane, and N.
BLANDFORD, at the London-Gazette, Charing Cross. MDCCXXVI. (Price One Shilling.)

ERRATA. Page 7. Line 22. for black read bleak. P. 8. l. 1. for Rist r. Rift.
P. 11. l. 20. for inspring r. inspiring. P. 15. l. 14. for ito r. into.

TO The RIGHT HONORABLE Sir SPENCER COMPTON.
SIR,
THE Author of the following POEM begs Leave to inscribe this his first
Performance to your Name, and Patronage. Unknown Himself, and only introduced
by the Muse, He yet ventures to approach You, with a modest Cheerfulness: For,
whoever attempts to excel in any Generous Art, though he comes alone, and
unregarded by the World, may hope for your Notice, and Esteem. Happy! if I can,
in any Degree, merit this Good Fortune: as every Ornament, and Grace of Polite
Learning is yours, your single Approbation will be my Fame.

I DARE not indulge my Heart, by dwelling on your Public Character; on that
exalted Honor, and Integrity which distinguish You, in that August Assembly,
where You preside; that unshaken Loyalty to your Sovereign, that disinterested
Concern for his People, which shine out, united, in all your Behavior, and
finish the Patriot. I am conscious of my Want of Strength, and Skill for so
delicate an Undertaking: And yet, as the Shepherd, in his Cottage, may feel and
acknowledge the Influence of the Sun with as lively a Gratitude, as the Great
Man, in his Palace, even I may be allowed to publish my Sense of those
Blessings, which, from so many powerful Virtues, are derived to the Nation they
adorn.

I conclude with saying, that your fine Discernment and Humanity, in your
Private Capacity, are so conspicuous, that, if this Address is not received
with some Indulgence, it will be a severe Conviction, that what I have written
has not the least Share of Merit.

I am, With the profoundest Respect, SIR, Your most devoted, and most faithful,
Humble Servant, James Thomson.

WINTER.
A POEM.
SEE! WINTER comes, to rule the varied Year,
Sullen, and sad; with all his rising Train,
Vapors, and Clouds, and Storms: Be these my Theme,
These, that exalt the Soul to solemn Thought,
And heavenly musing. Welcome kindred Glooms!
Wished, wint'ry, Horrors, hail! -- With frequent Foot,
Pleased, have I, in my cheerful Morn of Life,
When, nursed by careless Solitude, I lived,
And sung of Nature with unceasing Joy,
Pleased, have I wandered through your rough Domains;
Trod the pure, virgin, Snows, my self as pure:
Heard the Winds roar, and the big Torrent burst:
Or seen the deep, fermenting, Tempest brewed,
In the red, evening, Sky. -- Thus passed the Time,
Till, through the opening Chambers of the South,
Looked out the joyous Spring, looked out, and smiled.
THEE too, Inspirer of the toiling Swain!
Fair AUTUMN, yellow robbed! I Will sing of thee,
Of thy last, tempered, Days, and sunny Calms;
When all the golden Hours are on the Wing,
Attending thy Retreat, and round thy Wain,
Slow-rolling, onward to the Southern Sky.
BEHOLD! the well-pois'd Hornet, hovering, hangs,
With quivering Pinions, in the genial Blaze;
Flys off, in airy Circles: then returns,
And hums, and dances to the beating Ray.
Nor shall the Man, that, musing, walks alone,
And, heedless, strays within his radiant Lists,
Go unchastis'd away. -- Sometimes, a Fleece
Of Clouds, wide-scattering, with a lucid Veil,
Soft, shadow over the unruffled Face of Heaven;
And, through their dewy Sluices, shed the Sun,
With tempered Influence down. Then is the Time,
For those, whom Wisdom, and whom Nature charm,
To steal themselves from the degenerate Crowd,
And soar above this little Scene of Things:
To tread low-thoughted Vice beneath their Feet:
To lay their Passions in a gentle Calm,
And woo lone Quiet, in her silent Walks.
NOW, solitary, and in pensive Guise,
Often, let me wander over the russet Mead,
Or through the pining Grove; where scarce is heard
One dying Strain, to cheer the Woodman's Toil:
Sad Philomel, perchance, pours forth her Plaint,
Far, through the withering Copse. Mean while, the Leaves,
That, late, the Forest clad with lively Green,
Nipt by the drizzly Night, and Sallow-hu'd,
Fall, wavering, through the Air; or shower amain,
Urged by the Breeze, that sobs amid the Boughs.
Then listening Hares forsake the rusling Woods,
And, starting at the frequent Noise, escape
To the rough Stubble, and the rushy Fen.
Then Woodcocks, over the fluctuating Main,
That glimmers to the Glimpses of the Moon,
Stretch their long Voyage to the woodland Glade:
Where, wheeling with uncertain Flight, they mock
The nimble Fowler's Aim. -- Now Nature droops;
Languish the living Herbs, with pale Decay:
And all the various Family of Flowers
Their sunny Robes resign. The falling Fruits,
Through the still Night, forsake the Parent-Bough,
That, in the first, gray, Glances of the Dawn,
Looks wild, and wonders at the wintry Waste.
THE Year, yet pleasing, but declining fast,
Soft, over the secret Soul, in gentle Gales,
A Philosophic Melancholy breathes,
And bears the swelling Thought aloft to Heaven.
Then forming Fancy rouses to conceive,
What never mingled with the Vulgar's Dream:
Then wake the tender Pang, the pitying Tear,
The Sigh for suffering Worth, the Wish preferred
For Humankind, the Joy to see them blessed,
And all the Social Offspring of the Heart!
OH! bear me then to high, embowering, Shades;
To twilight Groves, and visionary Vales;
To weeping Grottos, and to hoary Caves;
Where Angel-Forms are seen, and Voices heard,
Sighed in low Whispers, that abstract the Soul,
From outward Sense, far into Worlds remote.
NOW, when the Western Sun withdraws the Day,
And humid Evening, gliding over the Sky,
In her chill Progress, checks the straggling Beams,
And robs them of their gathered, vapoury, Prey,
Where Marshes stagnate, and where Rivers wind,
Cluster the rolling Fogs, and swim along
The dusky-mantled Lawn: then slow descend,
Once more to mingle with their Watery Friends.
The vivid Stars shine out, in radiant Files;
And boundless Either glows, till the fair Moon
Shows her broad Visage, in the crimsoned East;
Now, stooping, seems to kiss the passing Cloud:
Now, over the pure Cerulean, rides sublime.
Wide the pale Deluge floats, with silver Waves,
Over the sky'd Mountain, to the low-laid Vale;
From the white Rocks, with dim Reflection, gleams,
And faintly glitters through the waving Shades.
ALL Night, abundant Dews, unnoted, fall,
And, at Return of Morning, silver over
The Face of Mother-Earth; from every Branch
Depending, tremble the translucent Gems,
And, quivering, seem to fall away, yet cling,
And sparkle in the Sun, whose rising Eye,
With Fogs bedim'd, portends a beauteous Day.
NOW, giddy Youth, whom headlong Passions fire,
Rouse the wild Game, and stain the guiltless Grove,
With Violence, and Death; yet call it Sport,
To scatter Ruin through the Realms of Love,
And Peace, that thinks no Ill: But These, the Muse,
Whose Charity, unlimited, extends
As wide as Nature works, disdains to sing,
Returning to her nobler Theme in view --
FOR, see! where Winter comes, himself, confessed,
Striding the gloomy Blast. First Rains obscure
Drive through the mingling Skies, with Tempest foul;
Beat on the Mountain's Brow, and shake the Woods,
That, sounding, wave below. The dreary Plain
Lies overwhelmed, and lost. The bellying Clouds
Combine, and deepening into Night, shut up
The Day's fair Face. The Wanderers of Heaven,
Each to his Home, retire; save those that love
To take their Pastime in the troubled Air,
And, skimming, flutter round the dimply Flood.
The Cattle, from the untasted Fields, return,
And ask, with Meaning low, their wonted Stalls;
Or ruminate in the contiguous Shade:
Thither, the household, feathery, People crowd,
The crested Cock, with all his female Train,
Pensive, and wet. Mean while, the Cottage-Swain
Hangs over the enlivening Blaze, and, taleful, there,
Recounts his simple Frolic: Much he talks,
And much he laughs, nor recks the Storm that blows
Without, and rattles on his humble Roof.
AT last, the muddy Deluge pours along,
Resistless, roaring; dreadful down it comes
From the chapt Mountain, and the mossy Wild,
Tumbling through Rocks abrupt, and sounding far
Then over the sanded Valley, floating, spreads,
Calm, sluggish, silent; till again constrained,
Betwixt two meeting Hills, it bursts a Way,
Where Rocks, and Woods o'erhang the turbid Stream.
There gathering triple Force, rapid, and deep,
It boils, and wheels, and foams, and thunders through.
NATURE! great Parent! whose directing Hand
Rolls round the Seasons of the changeful Year,
How mighty! how majestic are thy Works!
With what a pleasing Dread they swell the Soul,
That sees, astonished! and, astonished sings!
You too, ye Winds! that now begin to blow,
With boisterous Sweep, I raise my Voice to you.
Where are your Stores, ye viewless Beings! say?
Where your aerial Magazines reserved,
Against the Day of Tempest perilous?
In what untravel'd Country of the Air,
Hushed in still Silence, sleep you, when it is calm?
LATE, in the louring Sky, red, fiery, Streaks
Begin to flush about; the reeling Clouds
Stagger with dizzy Aim, as doubting yet
Which Master to obey: while rising, slow,
Sad, in the Leaden-colour'd East, the Moon
Wears a black Circle round her fully'd Orb.
Then issues forth the Storm, with loud Control,
And the thin Fabric of the pillar'd Air
O'erturns, at once. Prone, on the uncertain Main,
Descends the Etherial Force, and plows its Waves,
With dreadful Rist: from the mid-Deep, appears,
Surge after Surge, the rising, watery, War.
Whitening, the angry Billows roll immense,
And roar their Terrors, through the shuddering Soul
Of feeble Man, amidst their Fury caught,
And, dashed upon his Fate: Then, over the Cliff,
Where dwells the Sea-Mew, unconfined, they fly,
And, hurrying, swallow up the steril Shore.
THE Mountain growls; and all its sturdy Sons
Stoop to the Bottom of the Rocks they shade:
Lone, on its Midnight-Side, and all aghast,
The dark, wayfaring, Stranger, breathless, toils,
And climbs against the Blast --
Low, waves the rooted Forest, vexed, and sheds
What of its leafy Honors yet remains.
Thus, struggling through the dissipated Grove,
The whirling Tempest raves along the Plain;
And, on the Cottage thacht, or lordly Dome,
Keen-fastening, shakes 'em to the solid Base.
Sleep, frighted, flies; the hollow Chimney howls,
The Windows rattle, and the Hinges creak.
THEN, too, they say, through all the burdened Air,
Long Groans are heard, shrill Sounds, and distant Sighs,
That, murmured by the Demon of the Night,
Warn the devoted Wretch of Woe, and Death!
Wild Uproar lords it wide: the Clouds commixt,
With Stars, swift-gliding, sweep along the Sky.
All Nature reels. -- But hark! the Almighty speaks:
Instant, the chidden Storm begins to pant,
And dies, at once, into a noiseless Calm.
AS yet, it is Midnight's Reign; the weary Clouds,
Slow-meeting, mingle into solid Gloom:
Now, while the drousy World lies lost in Sleep,
Let me associate with the low-brow'd Night,
And Contemplation, her sedate Compeer;
Let me shake off the intrusive Cares of Day,
And lay the meddling Senses all aside.
AND now, ye lying Vanities of Life!
You ever-tempting, ever-cheating Train!
Where are you now? and what is your Amount?
Vexation, Disappointment, and Remorse.
Sad, sickening, Thought! and yet, deluded Man,
A Scene of wild, disjointed, Visions past,
And broken Slumbers, rises, still resolved,
With new-flush'd Hopes, to run your giddy Round.
FATHER of Light, and Life! Thou Good Supreme!
O! teach me what is Good! teach me thy self!
Save me from Folly, Vanity and Vice,
From every low Pursuit! and feed my Soul,
With Knowledge, conscious Peace, and Virtue pure,
Sacred, substantial, never-fading Bliss!
LO! from the livid East, or piercing North,
Thick Clouds ascend, in whose capacious Womb,
A vapoury Deluge lies, to Snow congealed:
Heavy, they roll their fleecy World along;
And the Sky saddens with the impending Storm.
Through the hushed Air, the whitening Shower descends,
At first, thin-wavering; till, at last, the Flakes
Fall broad, and wide, and fast, dimming the Day,
With a continual Flow. See! sudden, hoar'd,
The Woods beneath the stainless Burden bow,
Blackning, along the mazy Stream it melts;
Earth's universal Face, deep-hid, and chill,
Is all one, dazzling, Waste. The Labourer-Ox
Stands covered over with Snow, and then demands
The Fruit of all his Toil. The Fowls of Heaven,
Tamed by the cruel Season, crowd around
The winnowing Store, and claim the little Boon,
That Providence allows. The foodless Wilds
Pour forth their brown Inhabitants; the Hare,
Though timorous of Heart, and hard beset
By Death, in various Forms, dark Snares, and Dogs,
And more unpitying Men, the Garden seeks,
Urged on by fearless Want. The bleating Kind
Eye the bleak Heavens, and next, the glistening Earth,
With Looks of dumb Despair; then sad, dispersed,
Dig, for the withered Herb, through Heaps of Snow.
NOW, Shepherds, to your helpless Charge be kind;
Baffle the raging Year, and fill their Penns
With Food, at will: lodge them below the Blast,
And watch them strict; for from the bellowing East,
In this dire Season, often the Whirlwind's Wing
Sweeps up the Burden of whole wintry Plains,
In one fierce Blast, and over the unhappy Flocks,
Lodged in the Hollow of two neighboring Hills,
The billowy Tempest whelms; till, upwards urged,
The Valley to a shining Mountain swells,
That curls its Wreaths amid the freezing Sky.
NOW, all amid the Rigours of the Year,
In the wild Depth of Winter, while without
The ceaseless Winds blow keen, be my Retreat
A rural, sheltered, solitary, Scene;
Where ruddy Fire, and beaming Tapers join
To chase the chearless Gloom: there let me sit,
And hold high Converse with the mighty Dead,
Sages of ancient Time, as Gods revered,
As Gods beneficent, who blessed Mankind,
With Arts, and Arms, and humaniz'd a World.
Roused at the inspring Thought -- I throw aside
The long-lived Volume, and, deep-musing, hail
The sacred Shades, that, slowly-rising, pass
Before my wondering Eyes -- First, Socrates,
Truth's early Champion, Martyr for his God:
Solon, the next, who built his Commonweal,
On Equity's firm Base: Lycurgus, then,
Severely good, and him of rugged Rome,
Numa, who softened her rapacious Sons.
Cimon sweet-soul'd, and Aristides just.
Unconquered Cato, virtuous in Extreme;
With that attemper'd Timoleon.
Hero, mild, and firm,
Who wept the Brother, while the Tyrant bled.
Scipio, the humane Warrior, gently brave,
Fair Learning's Friend; who early sought the Shade,
To dwell, with Innocence, and Truth, retired.
And, equal to the best, the Theban, He
Who, single, raised his Country into Fame.
Thousands behind, the Boast of Greece and Rome,
Whom Virtue owns, the Tribute of a Verse
Demand, but who can count the Stars of Heaven?
Who sing their Influence on this lower World?
But see who yonder comes! nor comes alone,
With sober State, and of majestic Mien,
The Sister-Muses in his Train -- It Is He!
Maro! the best of Poets, and of Men!
Great Homer too appears, of daring Wing!
Parent of Song! and, equal, by his Side,
The British Muse, joined Hand in Hand, they walk,
Darkling, nor miss their Way to Fame's Ascent.
Society divine! Immortal Minds!
Still visit thus my Nights, for you reserved,
And mount my soaring Soul to Deeds like yours.
Silence! thou lonely Power! the Door be thine:
See, on the hallowed Hour, that none intrude,
Save Lycidas, the Friend, with Sense refined,
Learning digested well, exalted Faith,
Unstudy'd Wit, and Humor ever gay.
CLEAR Frost succeeds, and through the blew Serene,
For Sight too fine, the Aetherial Nitre flies,
To bake the Glebe, and bind the slip'ry Flood.
This of the wintry Season is the Prime;
Pure are the Days, and lustrous are the Nights,
Brightened with starry Worlds, till then unseen.
Mean while, the Orient, darkly red, breathes forth
An Icy Gale, that, in its mid Career,
Arrests the bickering Stream. The nightly Sky,
And all her glowing Constellations pour
Their rigid Influence down: It freezes on
Till Morn, late-rising, over the drooping World,
Lifts her pale Eye, unjoyous: then appears
The various Labor of the silent Night,
The pendant Isicle, the Frost-Work fair,
Where thousand Figures rise, the crusted Snow,
Though white, made whiter, by the fining North.
On blithsome Frolics bent, the youthful Swains,
While every Work of Man is laid at Rest,
Rush over the watery Plains, and, shuddering, view
The fearful Deeps below: or with the Gun,
And faithful Spaniel, range the ravaged Fields,
And, adding to the Ruins of the Year,
Distress the Feathery, or the Footed Game.
BUT hark! the nightly Winds, with hollow Voice,
Blow, blustering, from the South -- the Frost subdued,
Gradual, resolves into a weeping Thaw.
Spotted, the Mountains shine: loose Sleet descends,
And floods the Country round: the Rivers swell,
Impatient for the Day. -- Those sullen Seas,
That wash the ungenial Pole, will rest no more,
Beneath the Shackles of the mighty North;
But, rousing all their Waves, resistless heave, --
And hark! -- the lengthening Roar, continuous, runs
Athwart the rifted Main; at once, it bursts,
And piles a thousand Mountains to the Clouds!
Ill fares the Bark, the Wretches' last Resort,
That, lost amid the floating Fragments, moors
Beneath the Shelter of an Icy Isle;
While Night o'erwhelms the Sea, and Horror looks
More horrible. Can human Hearts endure
The assembled Mischiefs, that besiege them round:
Unlist'ning Hunger, fainting Weariness,
The Roar of Winds, and Waves, the Crush of Ice,
Now, ceasing, now, renewed, with louder Rage,
And bellowing round the Main: Nations remote,
Shook from their Midnight-Slumbers, deem they hear
Portentous Thunder, in the troubled Sky.
More to embroil the Deep, Leviathan,
And his unweildy Train, in horrid Sport,
Tempest the loosened Brine; while, through the Gloom,
Far, from the dire, unhospitable Shore,
The Lyon's Rage, the Wolf's sad Howl is heard,
And all the fell Society of Night.
Yet, Providence, that ever-waking Eye
Looks down, with Pity, on the fruitless Toil
Of Mortals, lost to Hope, and lights them safe,
Through all this dreary Labyrinth of Fate.
IT IS done! -- Dread WINTER has subdued the Year,
And reigns, tremenduous, over the desert Plains!
How dead the Vegetable Kingdom lies!
How dumb the Tuneful! Horror wide extends
His solitary Empire. -- Now, fond Man!
Behold thy pictured Life: pass some few Years,
Thy flow'ring SPRING, thy short-lived SUMMER'S
Thy sober AUTUMN, fading ito Age,
And pale, concluding, WINTER shuts thy Scene, Strength,
And shrouds Thee in the Grave -- where now, are fled
Those Dreams of Greatness? those unsolid Hopes
Of Happiness? those Longings after Fame?
Those restless Cares? those busy, bustling Days?
Those Nights of secret Guilt? those veering Thoughts,
Fluttering 'twixt Good, and Ill, that shared thy Life?
All, now, are vanished! Virtue, sole, survives,
Immortal, Mankind's never-failing Friend,
His Guide to Happiness on high -- and see!
It Is come, the Glorious Morn! the second Birth
Of Heaven, and Earth! -- awakening Nature hears
The Almighty Trumpet's Voice, and starts to Life,
Renewed, unfading. Now, the Eternal Scheme,
That Dark Perplexity, that Mystic Maze,
Which Sight could never trace, nor Heart conceive,
To Reason's Eye, refined, clears up apace.
Angels, and Men, astonished, pause -- and dread
To travel through the Depths of Providence,
Untried, unbounded. Ye vain Learned! see,
And, prostrate in the Dust, adore that Power,
And Goodness, often arraigned. See now the Cause,
Why conscious Worth, oppressed, in secret long
Mourned, unregarded: Why the Good Man's Share
In Life, was Gall, and Bitterness of Soul:
Why the lone Widow, and her Orphans, pined,
In starving Solitude; while Luxury,
In Palaces, lay prompting her low Thought,
To form unreal Wants: why Heaven-born Faith,
And Charity, prime Grace! wore the red Marks
Of Persecution's Scourge: why licensed Pain,
That cruel Spoiler, that embosom'd Foe,
Embittered all our Bliss. Ye Good Distressed!
Ye Noble Few! that, here, unbending, stand
Beneath Life's Pressures -- yet a little while,
And all your Woes are past. Time swiftly fleets,
And wished Eternity, approaching, brings
Life undecaying, Love without Allay,
Pure flowing Joy, and Happiness sincere.
The END.

