WHAT A BLUNDER! A COMIC OPERA, IN THREE ACTS: FIRST PERFORMED AT THE THEATER
ROYAL, HAYMARKET, AUGUST 14, 1800.

BY JOSEPH GEORGE HOLMAN, AUTHOR OF "ABROAD AND AT HOME," "VOTARY OF WEALTH,"
andC.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR W. MILLER, OLD BOND STREET. 1800.

Price Two Shillings.

Printed by S. GOSNELL, Little Queen Street, Holborn.

Dramatis Personae.
DASHINGTON Mr. FAWCETT. Sir STURDY O'TREMOR Mr. JOHNSTONE. Count ALPHONSO
D'ESPARZA Mr. HOLMAN. Don MIGUEL DE LARA Mr. SUETT. LOPEZ Mr. FARLEY. JUAN Mr.
EMERY. DIEGO Mr. ATKINS. PATRICK Mr. CHIPPENDALE. Captain of the Banditti Mr.
SAWYER. First Robber Mr. CAULFIELD. Second Robber Mr. J. PALMER. First Friar
Mr. ABBOT.
ANGELINA Miss DE CAMP. LEONORA Mrs. MOUNTAIN. JAQUELINA Miss WHEATLY. VILETTA
Miss MENAGE.
Nuns, Friars, Banditti, Officers of the Inquisition, etc.

SCENE -- VALENCIA.

WHAT A BLUNDER!
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A beautiful Country with a Vineyard. -- Peasants discovered. GLEE.
HAPPY is the peasant's lot,
If he know to prize it:
Comfort lodges in a cot,
Then let none despise it.
Wholesome toil and fragrant air
Sauce our homely rustic fare:
And you see
Poor peasantry
Are merry and full of enjoyment;
While the great,
In all their state,
Are drooping for want of employment.
Diego. Here comes Signor Lopez, head man to the Chief Inquisitor of the
province, Don Miguel de Lara. Stand back, stand back, and pay your humble
obedience to him. (They fall back, and bow to Lopez as he enters.)


Lopez. Save you, save you. (They bow again.) Ah, that will do; that is quite
enough, good people. It is really a tormenting thing to be a man of such
consequence. I don't wonder now, that the Eastern monarchs suffer themselves to
be seen so seldom; for, in good truth, the homage that attends greatness is
very troublesome to men of indolent habits.


Diego. I am glad to see your Honor look so well today.


Lopez. Thank you -- thank you.


Diego. I hope that your Honor likes these parts, and that you be not
displeased with the folk hereabout.


Lopez. Why, as to these parts, honest Diego, they are pleasant enough.
Valencia is a pretty province; but for the neighborhood, my good fellow, that,
you must suppose, is most diabolical to a man like me, used not only to the
society of Madrid, but who have lived in London and Paris. You may well
conceive how wretched is my condition, if you consider that, with all my
talents and information, I am sometimes forced, for want of better company, to
come and sit a whole hour with such a bumpkin as you. It is hard, is n't it?


Diego. I am sorry we entertain you so badly; but we do our best, and always
feel your company a vast honor.


Lopez. That I consider, and therefore put up with all deficiencies. I am
reasonable, and know how to make allowances. Pray have you seen the two
strangers today, that have been in the neighborhood the last fortnight?


Diego. No, Signor Lopez.


Lopez. Whimsical gentlemen! They make free -- seem to feel themselves quite at
home.


Diego. What countrymen are they?


Lopez. What countrymen? Oh, Diego, your ignorance of men and manners! -- Can
any country but one, produce men mad enough to play such wild tricks in his
Most Catholic Majesty's sober dominions, and in full sight of the habitation of
an Inquisitor? No, no, Diego; Englishmen are the only people who never consider
change of place, but are just the same harum-scarum madcaps in all parts of the
world as they are at home: quite as ready to make an uproar in the court of the
Great Mogul, as to break a lamp within the liberties of Westminster.


Diego. I did not understand that these strangers were both from the same
country.


Lopez. You did not understand! -- My dear Diego, you should only listen, and
let other people understand for you! Mark me -- You are of the kingdom of
Valencia, I of Castille -- yet we are both Spaniards. -- So one of these
strangers is of England, the other of Ireland; which though different islands,
yet the natives of both own one country -- one king -- and (this in your ear,
Diego) will, with one heart, defend their country and king against all the rest
of the world. -- Here come two miserable-looking Hidalgos -- fellows, that live
in dirt and poverty, from the fear of debasing their noble descent, by honestly
earning a whole coat and a good meal.


Two Hidalgos enter with great stateliness, and the appearance of extreme
poverty. Lopez. Save you, save you. (They return no answer, but look at him
with great contempt, and exeunt.) These are precious vermin: the most wretched
paupers, with the pride of princes. -- How soon must the nation go to ruin
where it is reckoned dishonorable to be industrious! They have a different
method of considering matters in the country I was just talking of. Instead of
seeing, as we do here, nobility made ridiculous by its entailing on future
generations laziness and poverty, in England you will find some of its most
stately branches raised from the stock of honest industry.


Diego. What is coming yonder?


Lopez. Hey! -- Oh! it is one of the strangers.


Diego. He seems hurt or sick -- his servants are wheeling him along in a chair.


Lopez. That is only one of his mad whims. He fancies himself in a consumption,
and went to Lisbon for the recovery of his health -- there he fell in love, and
is now searching through Spain for his mistress, whose relations suddenly
conveyed her from Portugal. Disappointment has increased his nervous fancies,
and with stamina to last a century he believes that he sha'n't exist a month.
This is the one from Ireland -- he is called Sir Sturdy O'Tremor.


Diego. Well, Signor Lopez, time presses -- I must look to my work.


Lopez. That is right. -- Farewell, honest Diego.

[Exit Diego.
Sir Stur. (Without.) If you don't move me more gently, I Will break every bone
in your skins, you vagabonds.


Lopez. There is a voice for a man in a consumption!


(Sir Sturdy is wheeled on in an invalid chair by two Servants.) Sir Stur.
Gently, gently, you scoundrels! -- Oh, the Devil fetch you, you have not a
spark of compassion for your poor dying master. There! stop, stop; let me rest
a morsel. -- Oh, it is all over with me! -- Even this little bit of a motion is
too great a fatigue for my worn-out frame. Come hither, Pat. -- Now, Pat, -- on
your conscience tell me, don't I look like a corpse?


Pat. By my faith, your Honor, it must be a corpse that died of a scarlet
fever then -- for your gills look as rosy as Father O'Flanagan's, when he has
tossed off the fourth bottle.


Sir Stur. (Starting up in a rage, and seizing him.) You unfeeling brute! to
make a joke of your master's infirmities. -- I Will shake you to atoms, you dog!
(He shakes him, and then sits down again.)


Pat. By Saint Patrick you have a pretty tight grip for a corpse. (Walking away
angrily.)


Lopez. If that be an Irishman in a consumption, Heaven keep me from the
clutches of one in full health and strength!


Sir Stur. (Seeing Lopez.) There is a stranger; he can have no interest in
deceiving me. -- Step this way, my good fellow; I suppose you can read in my
looks, that I am not a man long for this world.


Lopez. (Aside.) I have just gained a practical hint for my behavior; so I
know how to humor you. -- Why, Sir, I am sorry to say I cannot flatter you.


Sir Stur. You are an honest fellow.


Lopez. Not but I am perfectly aware that some persons might mistake that ruddy
complexion.


Sir Stur. Oh, a mere flush -- a melancholy symptom -- a hectic glow.


Lopez. Yes, that is just what I supposed.


Sir Stur. And as for my figure, did you ever see such a poor miserable spectre?


Lopez. Oh Lord! -- Oh Lord! (Aside.) -- As you say, Sir -- your figure -- but
you know, Sir, on that point I am unable to speak accurately, not having seen
you otherwise.


Sir Stur. Why, then it will surprise you to be told that I was once -- a
stout, able*bodied man.


Lopez. I assure you, Sir, I am very much inclined to believe it.


Sir Stur. Yes, indeed; and instead of this little bit of a pipe, I once had a
voice like thunder.


Lopez. That I can readily imagine; for, to say the truth, it still conveys no
faint idea of that sound.


Sir Stur. Oh, yes -- I am all faint, all feeble.


Dash. (Without.) You lazy beggars! I will put a little motion into you; I Will
make you active against your wills. (He enters, fighting with the two Hidalgos.)


Sir Stur. (Starting up.) Two to one -- fair play, you spalpeins! (He rushes on
one of them, trips him up, and seizes his sword at the same time that
Dashington disarms the other.)


Lopez. There is a poor feeble dying man! -- If I stay, I shall certainly laugh
in his face; so I will take myself hence while I am safe. [Exit.


Dash. (To the fallen Hidalgo.) Away, Sir! -- follow your companion; and learn,
that to afford assistance to females in distress is an action that, instead of
being beneath a gentleman, a prince may be proud of. [Exit second Hidalgo.


Sir Stur. What occasioned this encounter?


Dash. You shall hear.


Sir Stur. But first let me seat myself, or I shall sink to the earth.


Dash. Ha! ha! While a man can sink others to the earth with such ease, he is
not in much danger of sinking there himself.


Sir Stur. Ah, my dear Dashington! you don't know my complaints.


Dash. Very true; and, what is still better, you don't know them yourself. --
But to my story. I saw, at a distance, moving along at the solemn stately pace
accordant with Spanish dignity, an old lumbering vehicle, that looked as if it
had been a present from the city of London of one of their cast-off
lord-mayor's coaches. The coachman was very comfortably enjoying his siesta on
the box. Well, on it paced for some time, as orderly and slowly as if it had
been in a procession; when, unluckily, a bed of clover on the road-side
tempting the steeds to deviate from the beaten track, down went the carriage
into an ugly kind of a hollow: I heard the screams of women, and flew to their
assistance. Those fellows were passing, whose aid I required to raise the
carriage. The beggarly rascals, considering such employment a degradation,
insolently refused. I however effected my purpose, without their help, and
fortune throwing them again in my way, I was determined to pay them what I
thought they deserved.


Sir Stur. Oh the vagabonds! I wish I had been with you -- not that, in my
feeble state, I could have rendered any service.


Dash. Yes, I think you could.


Sir Stur. No, no -- it is all over with me.


Dash. Really!


Sir Stur. Yes, quite.


Dash. What a pity!


Sir Stur. No power on earth could enable me to rise from this chair.


Dash. Oh, yes, yes, and I think you might even be brought to take a little
walk with me, only for a mile or so.


Sir Stur. A mile or so! Not there paces, if it were to gain me the wealth of
both Indies.


Dash. Perhaps so; I know you are not covetous; but beauty, angelic beauty,
might allure you.


Sir Stur. Oh, I am in a pretty state for beauty to have any effect on me!


Dash. Then your case is hopeless, indeed. I am heartily sorry for it, and I Will
tell Jaquelina!


Sir Stur. Eh! what did you say of Jaquelina? (Turning toward Dashington very
actively.)


Dash. I said I should tell Jaquelina.


Sir Stur. Ah! you mean if you should happen to see that dear creature after I
am dead.


Dash. If I don't see her till after you are dead, your consumption must be a
galloping one.


Sir Stur. Hey!


Dash. I only mean that you must die in a devil of a hurry, for I am to see
Jaquelina in a few hours.


Sir Stur. What! see Jaquelina in a few hours! (Starting up.)


Dash. Bless my soul, you are on your legs again! But be composed -- sit down,
my dear fellow; you will do yourself harm -- Good bye -- I Will tell you all
another time.


Sir Stur. What do you mean by another time? (Walking after him impatiently.)


Dash. My dear friend, you will fatigue yourself to death. You know you could not
walk three paces for the wealth of both Indies.


Sir Stur. I Would walk to both Indies to see Jaquelina. Where is she, my dear
friend?


Dash. Here -- here, in this very place.


Sir Stur. Tol lol. (Singing and dancing in great ecstasy.)


Dash. Don't agitate your feeble frame.


Sir Stur. Feeble! I am as stout as a lion.


Dash. I knew I should work a miracle. Now learn that Jaquelina, who was so
suddenly removed from your sight at Lisbon, was in the very carriage which
overturned this morning. I had her in my arms.


Sir Stur. And let me take you in my arms, my dear friend! for you have raised
me from the grave.


Dash. But calm your ecstasy: she is confined by bolts and bars.


Sir Stur. Where?


Dash. In a convent -- and, what is worse, she fears that she is soon to take
the veil.


Sir Stur. I Will set fire first to every convent in Spain, in defiance of the
Inquisition.


Dash. I think you may obtain her by less violent means.


Sir Stur. How, how, my dear friend?


Dash. That you shall know with all expedition. The ladies who were in the
carriage with her were so terrified at the accident, that they were a long time
before they recovered their senses: so, while they obligingly continued
fainting, we had opportunity to lay plans for her escape.


Sir Stur. But when?


Dash. This very night.


Sir Stur. Delightful!


Dash. And I am to be a reverend friar for the occasion. Come along, and you
shall know all; but, Sir Sturdy, you forget your invalid chair -- You will not be
so rash as to walk.


Sir Stur. Walk! Why, I could fly, if that were the only way to get a sight of
her. Allons, mon cher ^mi. [Exeunt.


SCENE II.
A Wood, with a Cottage. LOPEZ enters. Surely my master, Don Miguel de Lara, is
the last man in the world that I should have suspected of accepting a post in
the Holy Office. He used to be the most friendly, good-humoured old fellow in
all Spain: what then could induce him to become an Inquisitor? He is mightily
altered, and yet, somehow, the change is only superficial. He frowns at every
body, and hardly speaks a kind word; but I have reason to think his heart is as
humane as ever. He has sent me to seek out a melancholy being who, as he
understands, chooses to live in this lonely place. A man cannot be void of
tenderness who courts the society of the unfortunate. -- This must be the
person I am sent to -- I Will observe him a little, before I accost him.

Enter ALPHONSO, from the Cottage. Alph. Now to my painful task, of seeking
commerce with that hated being man, to purchase means of eking out a life of
wretchedness. Were I not forced by nature's wants to the detested intercourse,
I might be sheltered in this friendly solitude from the sight my eyes abhor,
and my heart sickens at -- a human face. (Lopez comes forward.) -- Ha! What!
hunted to my very den! No beast of prey is chased by man with such unwearied
ardour as he pursues his fellow.


Lopez. My master sent me, Sir. Good Heavens! I surely know that face. My Lord
Alphonso!


Alph. What, my hated name! Have I then fled to this secluded spot, seeking to
shun the sight of man; but most of all to hide me from their view who knew me
in my days of happiness; and must I still meet eyes that in this wretched being
trace Alphonso? -- But to your errand: your master sent you; who is he?


Lopez. Chief of the Inquisition of Valencia.


Alph. What! is that tribunal grown impolitic in cruelty, to seek a wretch like
me to wreak its vengeance on? Those who delight in human misery should single
out the happy, and force the groan of anguish from the heart that never knew
aught but rapture: I am so pre-eminent in wretchedness, that I can look with
tranquil eye on all the horrors of the infernal court -- misnamed the Holy! Can
its gloomy caverns terrify the man who loathes the sight of day? can eternal
silence be a punishment to him to whom all converse with mankind is hateful? or
can the flames which fold around the victim of its wrath, equal the fire which
burns within my bosom? No, no; the flames which kindle at the stake, possess
the mercy too to counteract the vengeance that employs them, and soon consign
the sufferer to eternal peace; while here, here in this tortured heart, a fire
more painful rages, and yet will not destroy.


Lopez. I mourn the cause of your distress, my Lord, whatever it be; but I was
sent to you to bear the greetings of my master, and express his wish for your
society: -- knowing you only by report, as one who seemed of noble bearing, and
unhappy; but when he shall find it is the Count Alphonso --


Alph. Peace! peace! that name no more; the sound is hateful to me. And who are
you, that know me thus sequestered and disguised?


Lopez. My Lord, I was once your servant, and honored by your notice: you may,
perhaps, remember Lopez de M^el.


Alph. Yes, yes, I do remember you; you quitted me to travel with my brother.


Lopez. I did, my Lord, just before your marriage.


Alph. Silence, tormentor!


Lopez. My Lord!


Alph. What demon that delights to press with horrid touch upon the trem^ling
nerve most sensitive to mortal agony, has sent thee to perform his functions?
Begone, thou agent of a fiend's malignity!


Lopez. My Lord, Heaven knows I meant not to offend you.


Alph. Why then unfeelingly proclaim the event to which I owe my misery? But,
perhaps, I wrong you; you may still be ignorant of my shame.


Lopez. Your shame, my Lord!


Alph. Ay, marriage was my shame! my torment! Oh, Heaven! her lovely face
seemed to proclaim that every virtue dwelt within her brea^^; her beauty, while
it filled the eye with admiration, enf rced homage from the heart, for it
appeared the loveliness of goodness; I fancied (poor deluded wretch!) that her
whole soul was mine; that, unworthy as I was, in me she fixed her Heaven of
happiness; -- ha, ha, ha! vain, weak man; and false, false, deceitful woman! A
few weeks absence lost me this treasure; and to a stranger, the acquaintance of
a day, she gave her heart: but he does not live to triumph in my pangs; no,
thank Heaven! vengeance still was left me.


Lopez. Your cause of grief, indeed, my Lord, is weighty; but solitude will
only cherish what the business and the pleasures of the world, in time, might
dissipa^e.


Alph. Talk not thus idly. The world! -- she was the world to me, and now she
is lost, the link is snapped that bound me to creation: the various passions
which possess the human heart, and point to different objects, were in mine
directed all to her. Did I court honors? 'twas to lavish them on Angelina; did
wealth seem worth possessing? 't was that Angelina might command whatever
wealth could purchase; did I seek the circles of the gay? it was that she might
not know a pause from pleasure; for all to me was irksome that compelled one
thought or look to be withdrawn from her -- Leave me; and by the regard which
you profess, report me to your master, not as Alphonso, but as a wretched,
nameless being, to whom man can do no kindness but in shunning him, as he shuns
all mankind. [Exeunt*


SCENE III.
DASHINGTON disguised as a Friar, and Sir STURDY O'TREMOR, enter. Sir Stur.
Upon my soul! and you make a good portly reverend-looking kind of a friar.


Dash. Yes; and I have put on the habit of a priest to perform a priest's
office, to unite two lovers: nobody can say I am out of character.


Sir Stur. You can scarcely conceive the palpitation of my heart at this moment.


Dash. Yes, I can. When you are so near the object of your heart's wishes, it
is a symptom very easy to be accounted for.


Sir Stur. I declare now, every nerve in my whole frame is in commotion.


Dash. Natural enough.


Sir Stur. Yes; and I have such a fluttering here! (Pointing to his chest.) How
my voice trembles!


Dash. Very likely.


Sir Stur. And with what difficulty I draw my breath!


Dash. Plague take your fancies! Because you are agitated with joy from the
hope of regaining your mistress, you would make one believe you are in the agonies
of death.


Sir Stur. And if I were, she would bring me to life again. But, my dear friend,
confess now, is n't it strange to find an effect produced upon every part of me?


Dash. What! when the woman you love is going to leap into your arms? You are
an odd fellow.


Sir Stur. It clearly convinces me that all is not right.


Dash. Now it clearly convinces me that all is right. But I Will leave you now,
my Herculean invalid; I Will go alone, and reconnoitre the convent. Mind that you
follow me with caution.

[Exit Dashington.
SONG. --
Sir STURDY O'TREMOR. Oh! what a great flutter is here in my heart,
And a queer sort of feel runs through every part,
With a heigho! dear me! well-a-day!
I so shiver, that surely an ague I Have got,
But 't is sometimes a cold one, and sometimes a hot;
With a heigho! etc.
My nerves all so friskily caper and prance;
They Are certainly learning St. Vitus's dance:
With a heigho! etc.
With labor I force up each tremulous note,
For the words I would utter they stick in my throat:
With a heigho! etc.
As sure as I live, I Am in danger of death,
For no sign so sure as a stoppage of breath:
With a heigho! etc.
My pulse comes and goes too, so strangely, good lack!
I fear it will go, and will never come back:
With a heigho! etc.
But when I my charmer shall see,
Quickly will vanish all sorrow and pain;
Oh! let her bright eyes beam on me,
Then pleasure will tingle in every vein.
And once let me call her my own,
Rapture will crown me by day and by night;
Joy then will so mighty be grown,
Oh! I shall die with delight! [Exit.

SCENE IV.
A Convent. -- DASHINGTON and Sir STURDY enter. Dash. Now, unless I succeed in
managing the Cerberus of a gardener, and get him to open the garden gate, her
escape is impossible; for the walls, you see, are insurmountable.


Sir Stur. Upon my soul here is a complete fortification: see a light at the
window yonder.


Dash. But her voice must give us confirmation that it proceeds from her
apartment. Hush!


AIR. --
JAQUELINA from a Window in the Convent. How sweetly glide her tranquil days,
Who, free from Passion's sway,
No wish beyond these walls betrays,
Nor wafts one sigh away:
Oh then it is heaven here to dwell,
For seraphs cheer her lonely cell.
But pity her, whom cruel power
A victim here has brought,
To pine away each lingering hour
While absent every thought:
Oh then it is horror here to dwell,
For demons haunt her dismal cell.

Sir Stur. I declare I am ready to faint at hearing that sweet voice again.


Dash. If there is to be any fainting, pray leave that to the lady. -- Here
comes the fellow that I must delude. Now, Sir Sturdy, to your station; be
vigilant, and, if I succeed, make good use of your opportunities. (They both
retire.)


Enter JUAN, from the Garden. Juan. A hard kind of a service this of mine, to
be watch*dog to a convent; and spite of all my care, I am afraid, at last, I
shall lose some of my lambkins. I have found many a sheep stealing rogue on the
look-out: hitherto I have been too sharp for them; but what signifies the best
care in the world, when the goods you have to watch are as willing to be stolen
as the thieves are to steal them? Here comes a reverend father! This is the
only set of men I a'n't afraid of. Not because I think that holiness always lies
under a hood; but because these father confessors being trusted with the sins
of their female acquaintance, why it is fair to imagine, that if they are ever
disposed to sin themselves, they need not go out of their own neighborhood to
indulge their inclinations.


DASHINGTON comes forward. Juan. Save you, father!


Dash. Benedicite! But tell me, son, what are you loitering about here for, at
so late an hour? I hope you have no ill design?


Juan. No: I am placed here to prevent other people's ill designs.


Dash. How am I to be convinced of that?


Juan. I don't know that it concerns you.


Dash. It does concern me much -- My zeal --


Juan. Well, well; your zeal shall be satisfied. These priests will pry into
every body's business. (Aside.) Here, here is the badge of my office -- Here is
the key of the gardens of the convent.


Dash. Are you sure that is the key? (Offering to take it.)


Juan. Am I sure? Yes I am sure, and I will not be called to account any more. I
am doing nothing but my duty.


Dash. A sulky, stubborn rascal this. (Aside.) I doubt very much that you are
doing your duty. I have strong apprehensions that you have some evil intention,
and therefore, to prevent danger, I Will alarm the convent, I Will -- (Raising his
voice a little.)


Juan. Silence! don't let your zeal frighten my Lady Abbess, and the whole
nunnery. I never met such a troublesome fellow in my life.


Dash. If you don't instantly satisfy me, I Will raise them all --


Juan. Hush! hush! A'n't you ashamed of yourself? -- What shall I do? If he
call up my Lady Abbess, I shall get into a scrape. For she is a priestess, and
he is a priest; and so being both parsons, they will take each other's part to a
certainty. (Aside.) -- Well, well, I Will convince you -- There, there you shall
find I am no impostor -- You shall see it is the right key.


Dash. Come then, show me. (Juan opens the garden gate.)


Juan. Now, are you satisfied?


Dash. Yes, yes, now it is clear you are an honest fellow.


Juan. Well, then, let me shut it again.


Dash. Stay, stay; what a refreshing odor arises from the flowers in this
garden, and how neatly it is laid out! Ay, he is a skilful man, he knows his
business, that has the management of these grounds.


Juan. Why yes -- though I say it myself, I am as good a gardener as any in all
this province.


Dash. Ay, or the next to it, or all Spain, you may say, if you are the man --
I must be better acquainted with you -- I know something of your art, and we'll
converse together.


Juan. Whenever you please -- but I Will just shut the gate, for --


Dash. Not yet, if you love me. Delightful! exquisite! Keep it open a little
longer, my good friend; and while one sense is so charmingly indulged, we'll
try if we cannot gratify another -- Here, brother florist -- here is a bottle of
choice stuff; I never go unprovided.


FINALE.
DASHINGTON, JUAN, Sir STURDY, JAQUELINA, Nuns and Friars. Dash. While the
rose's sweet fragrance with pleasure's exhaled,
With wine's rosy juice let the taste be regaled.

Juan. Agreed; and, to prove my regard for the rose,
I Will drink till I Have painted its tints on my nose.

Dash. Now Is your time. (In a whisper to Sir Sturdy while Juan is drinking.)

Sir Stur. -- My noble fellow!

Dash. (To Juan.) Come let us drink till we are mellow.
(Dashington goes up to Juan, and stands in such a manner as to block up his
view of the gate, while Sir Sturdy goes into the garden.)
Juan. What a flavor! How delicious!

Sir Stur. (In the garden to Jaquelina.) Quick, my love, the time is precious.

Dash. Fill again. --

Jaq. Oh, how alarming!

Juan. By the mass this wine is charming!

Sir Stur. Pause no more. (To Jaq.) --

Dash. (To Juan.) Nay, don't give over.

Jaq. Oh, I fear to trust my fate.

Sir Stur. Can you doubt your faithful lover?

Juan. Now, I Will lock the garden gate.

Sir Stur. All is lost then --

Dash. (To Juan.) No, not yet, man.

Sir Stur. Leap, or it will be too late.

Dash. Sure the bottle you will not quit, man;

Juan. But I Will lock the garden gate.

Jaq. Spread your arms then to receive me.

Sir Stur. Boldly leap, and nothing fear. (She leaps.)

Juan. What Is that noise? --

Dash. There Is none, believe me.

Juan. Hark! again a noise I hear.

Dash. Poh! your brain with wine is heated.

Juan. Ha! a window open too.

Dash. Psha! What folly! --

Juan. Oh, I Am cheated;
Help! here, help, I Am tricked by you.

Dash. Cease your bawling (To Juan.) -- Now or never.

(To Sir Sturdy in the garden.) Sir Stur. and Jaq. Coming out of the garden.
Friend, I Am bound to you for ever.
Sir, I Am bound to you for ever.

Dash. Fly, your safety lies in distance. (Exeunt Sir Sturdy and Jaquelina.)

Juan. Help! Oh, help here! some assistance! (Going into the garden, Dashington
following.)

Dash. Silence, silence! --

Juan. Murder! fire!

Dash. Will that cursed tongue never tire?

(Juan suddenly springs out of the garden, shutting the gate, and leaving
Dashington within.) Juan. I Have caught you, my jolly friar.

(Nuns appear at the windows of the Convent, and Friars and Singing-boys enter,
as from an adjoining monastery.) CHORUS. Whence this noise? Why thus alarm us?

Dash. Here am I, a prisoner fast.

Nuns. Did this man intend to harm us?

Juan. Yes; and there he is safe at last.

Dash. Ladies, I no harm ever meant you,
I Am a sober modest man.

CHORUS. What but mischief here has sent you?

Juan. Now be jogging if you can.

CHORUS. A villainous design is clear;
No good, 't is certain, brought him here;
Most sacrilegious his intent,
And he shall meet due punishment.
(Dashington joins in the chorus, and sings) No villainous design is clear,
That drunken rascal locked me here;
Not sacrilegious my intent,
And I defy your punishment.

END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Don Miguel's House. LEONORA and VILETTA enter. Viletta. AH! Madam, all your
thoughts go to one object.


Leo. Yes, Viletta, I cannot help it -- I shall love him for ever. Oh my dear
handsome Englishman, I Will be constant to you in spite of fate!


Vil. How will you manage that, dear Madam? You must marry Don Miguel's son, as
soon as he comes from Lima.


Leo. No, I never will.


Vil. It is impossible that you should prevent it. You know your father, at his
death, left Don Miguel absolute power over you as your guardian, besides
expressly enjoining that you should marry his son Don Philip.


Leo. I don't care -- the dear Englishman I met at Madrid, when I was visiting
my sister, is the only man that shall ever have me for his wife.


Vil. But, pardon me if I say you seem to be constant without reason.


Leo. Women, you know, will have their whims. Many are inconstant without
reason: my whim is at any rate the most harmless.


Vil. But consider he failed in his appointment when you had consented to elope
with him. He broke his word.


Leo. That was very shocking, to be sure. But as I was the person wronged, I
conceive I have a right to forgive if I please: besides, I will never believe
that he intended to deceive me. No; he is of a country too generous to abuse
its conquests. The vanquished in war, the Briton treats with humanity; will he
then fail in tenderness to the heart that love has made his captive?


Vil. Ay, ay, a woman in love can always make good excuses for her passion.


Leo. That is extremely fortunate, for there are very few disposed to make
excuses for her. -- Well, I am determined to cherish the dear idea of enjoying
happiness with the man of my choice.


The hope which animates my heart,
And makes me every fear dismiss --
Deceitful joy can never impart;
No, 't is the harbinger of bliss.
So, when at eve, in tints of gold
The radiant clouds adorn the skies,
They thus prepare us to behold
The morrow's sun in splendor rise.
Yes, I Will indulge the dear belief,
That happy morrows are in store, --
And trust that voice which tells me grief
Shall never haunt my bosom more.
The hope which animates, etc.
Here comes my old sour*faced guardian, and yet, to say truth of him, he is
like the cocoa-nut, a rugged outside with a milky kernel.

(Don Miguel de Lara enters, attended by inferior officers of the Inquisition:
he looks sternly at Leonora and Viletta, and seats himself at a table. -- Juan
and Friars enter with him.) Mig. Girls, what do you stay here for? don't you
see I am on business?


Leo. That is no reason we should go; for your business may be our amusement.


Mig. I am going to try a cause.


Leo. I like to hear a cause tried of all things.


Mig. But it is about carrying a lady away by force.


Leo. Oh! that must be very interesting: I am determined to stay now.


Mig. There it is: whenever a cause comes on where something improper is
expected to be brought forward, the crier may bawl out, "Ladies, leave the
court," till he croaks like a raven; but the devil a woman will budge from her
place.


Leo. You are a very scandalous man, Guardy; and to show you how unjust you
are, we'll withdraw. Come along, Viletta. [Exeunt.


Mig. Poor things! they are sadly balked. Well, let me hear what this
proceeding has been: where is the chief evidence?


1st Friar. Evidence, my Lord! We presumed that every thing of which the Holy
Inquisition took cognizance was enveloped in secresy.


Mig. You did, did you? Then let me tell you, that if you come to me for
justice, you shall see her in open daylight; for though she is blind herself,
she is not ashamed of being viewed by the whole world; and those who pretend
that she likes darkness best, are desirous to palm off some base counterfeit in
her place: so let the witnesses stand forward, and bring in the accused.


DASHINGTON enters, guarded by Officers of the Inquisition. Dash. Well, and who
are you?


Mig. Who am I? My friend, you seem to have changed places with me: that may be
a very proper question from the judge to the prisoner, but I never heard of its
being put by the prisoner to the judge. So be so kind as to tell me who are you?


Dash. Does n't my habit speak for me?


Mig. Not very intelligibly: it is one that commands respect from all, when
worn by him who himself respects it; but a stain on that habit is more
offensive than on any other: the purer the garment, the fouler do spots appear
on it.


Dash. Very true: but don't look so devilish sour; you frown most ferociously.


Mig. Frown most ferociously! why, if I do, you don't seem much terrified at
it. But I admit your censure; mildness alone becomes the seat of justice: the
judge and the executioner should never look alike. But what is the prisoner
charged with? Who accuses him?


All the Friars. I, I, I.


Mig. I, I, I! Why, what a volley of I's is poured all at once! You are as
eager as a shoal of porpoises to devour your wounded fellow.


1st Friar. No fellow of ours; we disclaim him; he is a wolf in sheep's
clothing.


Mig. And what are you? If you are one of the flock, I am sure you are a fierce
old ram, and look a great deal more mischievous than the wolf, as you call him.
But who is he, and what has he done?


Juan. I Will tell your Lordship all.


Dash. I Will save you the trouble, brother florist, and tell his Lordship
myself. -- You must know then, my Lord, that I have no more pretensions to this
cowl, than I have to the Pope's tiara: I put it on to deceive old Cerberus
there (who, by the by, is a very honest mastiff), and contrive to get the
garden of the convent opened.


Mig. Oh, only to get the garden of the convent opened: a very innocent device,
upon my soul!


Dash. Was n't it? I knew you would think so; you are a liberal man, my Lord, that
can make allowances. Those fellows seem to consider the grounds of a nunnery as
their own manor, and want to punish as poachers all gentlemen who go there in
pursuit of their own game.


Mig. A mighty hard case, indeed, that a gentleman cannot pursue his own game
for you.


Dash. Ay, there now, a'n't you ashamed of yourselves? But, my Lord, I did not
go on sport of my own, but merely to aid a friend.


Mig. There, you see the gentleman did not go on his own account, but merely to
assist a friend. Well, so you and your friend, between you, have contrived to
carry away a few young ladies from the convent?


Dash. A few! only one, my Lord, upon my honor.


Mig. Only one! how moderate!


Dash. And that one was a lady he doated on; a lady whose heart was devoted to
him, as his to her, and without whom existence would have been worse than death.


Mig. Bless my soul! and so they want to punish you merely for saving your
friend's life? How shocking!


Dash. Ay, my Lord, you see things in a proper light.


Mig. Yes, yes, and now --


Dash. I suppose I may go?


Mig. No, not yet; I am a little puzzled.


Dash. About what, my Lord?


Mig. Your case. It does not appear quite clear to me.


Dash. What! my case not appear quite clear?


Mig. No; it does not appear quite clear to me, whether the Holy Office will
sentence you for this little friendly transaction.


Dash. Holy Office, my Lord! sentence me!


Mig. Yes; whether it will sentence you to be broke on the wheel, or to die at
the stake.


Dash. Broke on the wheel! -- die at the stake!


Mig. Yes; I declare I have not a notion which.


Dash. Oh, you are joking: ha, ha, ha! it is devilish droll of you. Broke on
the wheel! die at the stake! ha, ha! how comical!


Mig. No, not very: though I am uncertain which, it will be one or the other, I
am positive.


Dash. Lord! you should not mention such horrible things, even in jest: I
declare I feel hot and aching all over at the bare idea.


Mig. Upon my life I don't wonder at it. Leave your prisoner with me, I Will
report him: officers, take charge of him. I declare I am puzzled exceedingly; I
have not an idea whether it will be the wheel or a bundle of faggots. [Exit
Miguel.


Dash. My Lord, hear me! For Heaven's sake don't leave me in this state of
perplexity. Oh, what a fever I am in! I say, my dear friend, (To one of the
officers,) don't you think this is all a joke? (Officer turns away.) Oh, you
sulky dog! Pray, Sir, (To another) what is your opinion? (He puts his finger to
his lips.) Oh, dear! Oh, Lord! what! must nobody speak to me? What had I to do
in this infernal country? I must be seeking adventures, and be cursed to me!
Oh, my sweet, dear, little England, shall I never see you again? There the
worst of scrapes I could ever get into, would end in passing a jolly night in
the watch-house; a jobation from the Justice next morning; and the loss of a
few guineas for smashed panes of glass, and watchmen's broken heads. Oh, Lord!
Oh, Lord! that I should ever be in such a dreadful plight!


SONG. --
DASHINGTON. Oh! what a most horrid*sensation
I feel at this terrible minute!
A curse on this flame-loving nation,
That I should be ever caught in it.
The bent of the mind
From its pleasures we find;
And what is a Spaniard's delight?
Why his great holiday,
Is an auto da se,
And its bonfires the joy of his sight.
Ah! shortly there 'll be
A blaze made of me,
At some joyful event's celebration:
On a festival night
They 'll set me alight
To make part of a grand 'lumination.
The national taste
In horror is placed,
Their Escurial's a symbol of malice:
They, plainly to prove
For torture their love,
In a gridiron's shape built a palace.
For a fault ever so small,
Or for no fault at all,
Here a man dies the death of a sinner:
As gospel 't is true,
He 'll be burned for a Jew
Who cannot eat pork for his dinner.
What an idiot was I
Dear England to fly,
Where good humor so justly is boasted;
Oh, curse on such folk
As cannot take a joke:
Here must I for a frolic be roasted. [Exit guarded.

SCENE II.
A Cave. Two Robbers enter. 1st Rob. Does the woman we brought home yesterday
seem any better reconciled to her new habitation and acquaintance?


2d Rob. Not a bit. Damn it! some people can never be contented.


1st Rob. She must be cursed hard to please; for if she were to search all
Spain, she would not find a more accomplished set of adventuring gentlemen.


2d Rob. Very true; but you know an ill name goes a great way with prejudiced
people; and let a man be as valiant as Caesar, and as fine a gentleman too,
only call him robber instead of conqueror, and all his good qualities go for
nothing.


1st Rob. What you say has too much truth in it. But there must be something
particular about this woman, or she would surely know when she was well off.
What can you find out from her?


2d Rob. That her name is Angelina, the wife of Count Alphonso d'Esparza; and
when we plundered her and brought her to this cavern, she was in pursuit of her
husband.


1st Rob. There you see, Vasquez, the perverseness of the sex. Now ten to one
if the husband had not run away from her, but she would have run away from him:
this accounts for her dislike to us. If her husband were of the party, she
would soon show us the preference.


2d Rob. But to business: it is fixed that we shall plunder the house of Don
Miguel the Inquisitor this very night.


1st Rob. I am ready: the more desperate the business, the better I like it.


2d Rob. Then this is an undertaking not to your mind; for it will require more
caution than enterprise, as we are certain of easy admittance.


1st Rob. How?


2d Rob. We have discovered that this cavern communicates by a private entrance
with a dungeon of Don Miguel the Inquisitor's house; so in the dead of night we
can make good our entrance without noise. Look, here comes the woman; she is
devilish handsome: stand aside.


ANGELINA enters. SONG. --
ANGELINA. Pent within this cavern drear,
Captive of a ruffian crew;
Startled at each sound I hear,
Shudd'ring at each face I view;
In dread I pass the gloomy day,
And weep the sleepless night away.
Ere I mourned a fate so dire,
Sorrow was an inmate here;
Still her beams of heavenly fire,
Hope displayed my breast to cheer.
The gladd'ning ray she now denies,
For dimmed is hope when freedom dies.

(Awhistle is heard without.) 1st Rob. Here come some of our party. See the
Captain, -- ha! and another woman.


2d Rob. Damn it, what a high polish our manners will get! for I am told
nothing improves the behavior so much as female society.


JAQUELINA, the Captain, and more Robbers, enter. Ang. Ha! A companion in
misfortune!


Jaq. What dreadful place is this? -- Oh restore me to liberty, and you shall
be rewarded to your utmost wishes. Oh Madam, entreat for me!


Ang. I entreat for you and for myself, for I, like you, am a wretched captive.


TRIO AND CHORUS. --
JAQUELINA, ANGELINA, and Captain of Robbers. Jaq. and Ang. Compassion to our
woes impart,
Nor vainly let us sue;
The breast that owns a valiant heart,
Is still to pity true.

Capt. Try no more this useless wailing,
Think not that my ears assailing
You my rugged heart can move.

Jaq. and Ang. Kindly grant us freedom's blessing.

Capt. Vain is all this earnest pressing.

Jaq. and Ang. Joys that flow from mercy prove.

Capt. Never such weakness will I prove.
Learn that I drew my infant breath
Within the robber's cave;
And when too young to deal out death,
I dug the dead man's grave.
Then think you that a woman's tear
Can make this bosom feel?
I Am dead to pity as to fear,
My heart is cased with steel.

CHORUS. Then think you that a woman's tear
Can make our bosoms feel?
We Are dead to pity as to fear,
Our hearts are cased with steel.

Jaq. and Ang. Be softened by a woman's tear,
And for our sorrows feel;
To pity wake, though dead to fear,
Nor case your hearts with steel.

SCENE III.
Miguel's House. -- LEONORA and Don MIGUEL enter. Leo. My dear Guardian, what
is this shocking thing I hear --


Mig. How should I know what shocking thing you hear?


Leo. Of the young gentleman in the friar's habit?


Mig. Well, and what of him?


Leo. That he is in danger of being punished.


Mig. And ought he not to be punished?


Leo. No, I think not.


Mig. Indeed! What! not for being concerned in carrying a lady from a convent?


Leo. No! -- if the lady was willing to go from the convent.


Mig. Really?


Leo. Yes, really. Force certainly ought to be punished; and therefore, punish
those, dear Guardy, who placed her there. For surely it is a greater crime to
put a lady into a convent against her consent, than to take her away with her
consent.


Mig. The young gentleman has a mighty warm advocate in you* and I really
believe, that if he were to be tried by a jury of spinsters, they would not
hesitate long in pronouncing him -- Not guilty.


Leo. And do you now, my dear cross-looking good-natured Guardy -- do you
pronounce him -- Not guilty. Consider, she is no nun, that is carried off. She
had not taken the vows; therefore, there is no harm at all in what he has done
-- Now is there?


Mig. A thought has struck me -- you shall go to him.


Leo. Shall I? Oh, thank you, dear Guardy.


Mig. Yes; and you shall tell him from me, that I so much compassionate his
situation --


Leo. That is so kind, now. -- Well, well.


Mig. That I will exert all my interest --


Leo. Ay, do now; there is a dear Guardy.


Mig. Yes -- that I will exert all my interest -- to have him --


Leo. What? -- What?


Mig. Only imprisoned sor life.


Leo. Oh, frightful! -- Imprisoned for life! -- I declare you are quite
horrible!


Mig. Yes, -- imprisoned for life: -- so far you may say from me!


Leo. Psha!


Mig. Yes, but you may say from yourself -- from yourself -- mind, not from me.


Leo. Well! -- What?


Mig. That if he don't like my proposal, and wish at the same time to save me a
great deal of trouble --


Leo. Well, well.


Mig. That he had better --


Leo. Better do what?


Mig. Scamper away as fast as he can.


Leo. Oh, you dear good creature! -- I Will go to him directly.


Mig. No, no, on second thoughts, I Will order him to be brought here, and I Will
take measures so, that nobody shall be in the way to prevent his escape. [Exit
Miguel.


Leo. How happy I am that this poor young man will be so soon freed from his
fears! -- How delightful it is to lift off the load of misery from the bosom
sinking under its pressure! Ah! where is he who alone can banish affliction
from my bosom?


AIR. --
LEONORA. Again my absent love to meet,
Severest toil with joy I Would greet;
At noon through Afric's sands I Would go,
At midnight pace the realms of snow.
When found, such rapture would be mine
As words can never reveal;
For ah! the bliss of love divine
The heart can only feel.

DASHINGTON enters. Dash. What the devil is to be done to me now? I am to
endure a little thumb-screwing, mayhap; or they may be going to amuse
themselves with drawing a row of my teeth; or, lest confinement should injure
my growth, they intend to stretch me out half a foot or so. Some pleasant
little experiment is to be tried, no doubt. What! -- A woman! My dear, dear
Madam, if you have a grain of compassion -- Hey! -- It is she! The lovely
creature I met at Madrid.


Leo. O Heaven! Is it you? you that I am to save?


Dash. And can you, indeed, save me? -- Oh you dear angelic creature! (Going to
embrace her.) But I must not be too free with my raptures. I remember I had a
gentle hint once given me that you were another man's property.


Leo. What do you mean? -- I another's property? Insulting man! do you meanly
attempt to defend your own inconstancy by falsely accusing me?


Dash. Not I. I don't accuse you of inconstancy. I own myself greatly honored
by your very flattering partiality; but --


Leo. But what?


Dash. Why, as you know another person has a certain claim to you --


Leo. That, I conceive, was my consideration, not yours; and when I offered you
my heart, were you mean enough to yield your claims to the frivolous
pretensions of another. Fie, fie! I thought more nobly of you.


Dash. There it is now -- when a woman has a mind to follow her inclinations,
her husband's claims are mere frivolous pretensions. (Aside.)


Leo. No, no; inconstancy, not fear, induced you to break your appointment.
That penetrable bosom was pierced by some new object.


Dash. My dear Madam, you have hit it exactly.


Leo. And do you confess it?


Dash. Upon my soul there is no denying it.


Leo. This audacity is insufferable.


Dash. Patience for one moment, my angel! -- Heaven knows, I mean this not in
the language of figure, but as mere dismal matter of fact. My bosom was pierced
by an object new to me; but not such an object as your fancy pictures, with a
smooth smiling face; but by one with a pair of frowning brows, and fierce
mustachios. -- The weapon that wounded me, was not a sparkling eye, but a
damned long sharp toledo; and instead of being prevented from observing my
appointment, by the act of breathing out my soul from my lips, it was hurrying
very fast out of my body, from a hole that a friend of yours did me the
kindness to drill through me.


Leo. My torment is then returned, and I am doomed to misery.


Dash. Torment! -- Ah, that means husband all the world over.


Leo. But how was he acquainted with our attachment?


Dash. To my shame, I own, by my indiscretion. You remember at our last
meeting, you kindly fixed the day on which you would explain to me all the
particulars of your situation, and fly with me from Spain.


Leo. Yes, yes -- how I repent my weakness!


Dash. Business in the mean time called me some miles from Madrid. -- I however
posted with a lover's speed to observe the appointment -- a violent storm,
which though I was disposed to brave, not all my efforts could persuade my
steed to encounter, obliged me to seek shelter at an inn. There I found a
certain gentleman, likewise weather-bound. Observing my anxiety to proceed on
my journey, he inquired the cause. -- I foolishly revealed it -- on which he
furiously called me villain, bestowed some hearty curses on you, Ma'am, -- so
to tilting we went -- and as it happened, he left me, to all appearance, not
likely to be any man's rival in future.


Leo. 'Twas certainly Don Philip. But how could you describe me? for I never
had revealed my name to you.


Dash. But that I had unluckily discovered.


Leo. What became of your adversary? -- Was he hurt?


Dash. Yes: -- I pinked him a little. But supposing me killed, I learned that
he was immediately removed in a litter, and what became of him I know not.


Leo. He is certainly dead.


Dash. What, then, you have neither seen nor heard of him?


Leo. No; and you are now in the house of his father.


Dash. The devil I am! What, then, the old gentleman, who was a little puzzled
whether I should be broke on the wheel, or die at the stake, is his father?


Leo. Yes.


Dash. Oh, then, I dare swear he will soon make up his mind.


Leo. He had kindly consented to release you. Fly, fly, while you have the
power; for should Don Miguel learn that you are the murderer of his son --
(During this speech Don Miguel enters behind)


Mig. What do I hear? The murderer of my son! Oh the villain! What a mercy it
is that I have you still in my power! -- Here, Sancho -- Perez -- (Two Officers
enter.) take this ruffian -- put him into a dungeon. -- Oh, my poor boy Philip!
-- Well, though I cannot restore you to life, I Will be revenged on your murderer.


TRIO. --
LEONORA, DASHINGTON, and Don MIGUEL. Mig. From my sight this moment bear him.

Dash. Now I fear I Am quite undone.

Leo. You intended, Sir, to spare him.

Mig. What! the man who killed my son!

Dash. Sir, my nature is not bloody.

Mig. Take away that tiger whelp.

Dash. He pok'd me quite through the body.

Leo. What he did he could not help.

Dash. Bless me, Sir! you're vastly cruel,

Mig. To revenge a murdered son!

Dash. and Leo. He fell fairly in a duel,
Which he would not let me him
shun.

Mig. How can you plead for the villain?

Leo. Sir, I plead for justice sake.

Dash. If I die your son for killing,
Let it not be at the stake.

Mig. You shall die my son for killing,
And it shall be at the stake.

Leo. Hear me plead for justice sake.

Dash. Wedded to my country's fashion,
I would rather far be hanged.

Mig. Zounds! you but increase my passion;
I Will no longer be harangu'd.

Leo. Sir, let mercy temper passion,
And with patience be harangu'd.

SCENE IV.
A Forest -- A violent Storm. Sir STURDY O'TREMOR enters. Here is a blessed
night for a man in a consumption! But I should not mind all this soaking and
pelting, if I only knew what is become of my dear little girl. I thought to
find her so snug and so cozey at the village where I ordered my man Pat to
conduct her. Sure honest Pat has n't turned out a big rogue, and carried her
back to the convent! Blood and fury! Why did I leave her in any body's care,
without staying myself to see that they did as I ordered them? I am in a pretty
kind of a hobble. I left my mistress, to look after my friend, and now I have
lost both. -- (Coughs.) Oh, this devil of a night! (Coughs again.) There is
your true genuine hollow churchyard cough. Yes, yes, I may trust to this for
doing my business expeditiously; otherwise, what fine rheumatics and lumbagos
this precious drenching would lay in store for the amusement of my old age! (A
shriek at a distance.) Ha! the scream of a woman! Perhaps it may be Jaquelina
-- if not, 't is certainly a woman -- and in danger -- and when that is the
case, one is n't to wait to know whether she is one's own woman, or whose woman
she is -- for every man is every woman's natural protector. [Rushes off.

SCENE V.
Changes to that part of the Forest where Alphonso's Cottage stanas. -- Storm
continues. -- ANGELINA runs on, and then supports herself against a Tree. Ang.
I have at length escaped them. Overtaken by the ruffians in my flight from
their horrid dwelling, I must again have been forced thither, but for the
generous man who flew to succor me. Blessings, blessings on him! I am sadly
faint. My strength is gone -- quite gone -- Should they vanquish my deliverer,
and again pursue me, I am lost. (Attempts to proceed, but finds herself
unable.) Oh feeble, feeble limbs! will you betray me? -- I feel a faintness at
my heart. Oh, exhausted quite -- Heaven have mercy on me! -- (Sinks down,
fainting.)


ALPHONSO enters. Alph. Ha! such a night as this has charms for me -- Now are
the elements in unison with my perturbed bosom -- Methinks I could endure
existence without repining much, would Nature always look thus terribly. I love
her in this garb of horror -- When she is thus arrayed in night's black mantle,
adorned with vivid flames -- then, then I hail her, for she seems as she had
not forgot there are such wretches as myself, to whom her smiling looks and
robes of gaiety are hateful, and appear as much the guise of mockery, as would
the gewgaw dress of masking revelry at the last solemn rite paid to the dead.
-- This is a night to scare the guilty. The elements are now my ministers of
vengeance -- they give to conscience tenfold terror. The thunder echoes her
reproaches, and the fierce lightning vouches for Heaven's wrath. Now that false
heart that wronged Alphonso trembles! 'T is just, 't is just, oh cruel
Angelina; for what a wretched being have thou made him! -- Have thou not
changed his very nature? He who once felt tenderness for all, has now no
feeling left for any human being, but abhorrence -- (Angelina groans.) What is
that? (She groans again.) The cry of misery.


Ang. Oh Heaven! some help, or life forsakes me!


Alph. Ha! a woman's voice! She called for help -- Well -- death best
administers it. (Going.) That Is harsh -- that is harsh -- she never wronged me
-- she may be some poor deserted being, like myself -- victim of perfidy. The
wretched, however they may shun the offices of kindness to the proud and happy,
who disclaim them, should still relieve the wretched. -- Poor creature, though
perhaps I do thee wrong to lengthen life, the little aid that I can give, I
will not withhold. Come, let me hide thee from the drenching storm beneath this
roof, which I never thought would lodge a human being but myself -- but misery
should be a passport every where.


END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Dungeon, with a Lamp burning. DASHINGTON, in the Samarra Habit, discovered
with JUAN. Juan. WELL, here you are, safely lodged, and properly habited! You
have helped me into a new post, for I am appointed one of Don Miguel's
officers; and to show that I am worthy of my trust, I shall look after you
pretty sharply. Now, my friend, you are to observe, that silence is
particularly insisted on by the holy and merciful ^nquisition, whose prisoner
you have the happiness to be. So -- mum -- no noise, or by virtue of my office,
I must be under the necessity of exercising wholesome chastisement. Take my
hint -- make yourself comfortable, and don't be clamorous. Having now said all
that is necessary, remember our conversation, in future, must be in dumb show.
[Exit Juan.


Dash. O Lord, O Lord! I have brought my adventures to a pretty catastrophe.
Oh, what a cursed blockhead have I been, to play such pranks in a country where
there is this odious, horrible Inquisition! -- A pretty figure I make, with
their cursed jacket of flames and devils! -- But I wish that were the worst
part of the business. If they would let me out alive, and with whole bones, I
would be contented to do penance in this pretty vestment, up St. James's Street
and Bond Street, for the rest of my life. Nay, that would be no punishment, for
I dare swear, as soon as this queer coat was seen there, it would be thought
ugly enough to come into fashion. All my fine women, too, in compliment to me,
would dress a l' Inquisition; and for a whole season, at least, nothing would
be voted stylish that was not of the devil and bonfire pattern. -- But here am
I lodged in this black hole, and my only promenade will be to a bundle of
faggots, where I and my jacket will be turned into cinders and tinder. Oh,
curse it! how horrible! Never did I expect to make such a flaming exit. (A
noise without.) -- Hey! what is that noise? (Noise again.) -- Ah! they are
coming for me. They don't keep me long in suspense. Oh, curse it! what a pity
that such a fine flourishing shoot, in full vigor, should be condemned for
firewood! (The private entrance through the wall is opened.) -- Ah, they are
here; it is all over with me!


Enter Robbers, with caution, not seeing DASHINGTON. 1st Rob. Hush! hush! tread
softly.


Dash. Oh, you need not stand upon ceremony.


1st Rob. We shall soon finish the business.


Dash. I dare say you will -- What a cursed hideous crew!


1st Rob. What is that? (Seeing Dashington.)


2d Rob. It is a ghost.


Dash. Not yet, but I soon shall be. What an effect my misery must have on my
visage, when I even frighten the fellows who come to look for me!


2d Rob. It must be a ghost.


1st Rob. Ghost, you blockhead! It is one of the Inquisitor's prisoners. -- Are
you not, fellow?


Dash. I am, I am -- but I would much rather be a ghost of the two, if I could
be made one without any preparatory ceremony.


1st Rob. If you are a prisoner, we will set you free.


Dash. Set me free? What! Set me free?


1st Rob. Yes, on one condition.


Dash. Any, any condition, my dear friends; for there is nothing I would not
sooner do than be roasted.


1st Rob. Follow us, then, to plunder the Inquisitor's house.


Dash. To plunder the Inquisitor's house!


2d Rob. Yes, but that will not content you; you want to be revenged -- Well,
you shall; we mean to make him and all his family quiet, that they may not tell
of this midnight visit.


Dash. Oh, you do!


2d Rob. Yes, I knew you would be pleased to find Don Miguel's throat was to be
cut.


Dash. No, upon my soul I am not.


2d Rob. Not by any body but yourself, you mean. Well, well, we'll indulge you
-- There -- (Throws him a dagger.) You shall do that business.


Dash. (Takes the dagger.) No, I Will be damned if I do. Look ye, gentlemen, I
thought you were come to perform rather an ugly kind of office. That you are
not, believe me I am truly grateful; but I think that taking the life of
another would be an awkward way of showing my joy for the preservation of my
own.


1st Rob. Stay where you are, then, and we'll soon dispatch --


Dash. Not so fast -- I will neither cut throats myself, nor suffer them to be
cut by others, without doing all I can to rouse their owners to look after
them. I Will try, therefore, if my windpipe can preserve other people's. --
Holloa! -- Murder! -- Robbers! -- Murder!


1st Rob. Silence, villain! -- The house will be alarmed! -- Seize him! gag
him! and bear him with us. We will make you rue this outcry.


Juan. (Without.) What the devil do you make all that bawling about? Did not I
tell you to be silent?


1st Rob. Make haste! -- Close the entrance, or we are discovered and ruined.
(As the Robbers are carrying Dashington through the private avenue Juan enters.)


Juan. Oh, Lord! oh, Lord! What is all this? See, a parcel of devils are flying
away with him through the wall -- He Is a sorcerer, as sure as fate -- That I
should ever see such a sight! -- Help, help! Murder! Devils! Help!


Don MIGUEL and Officers enter. Mig. What are you making this uproar about?
Speak! -- What is the fellow so frightened at? -- Where is your prisoner?


Juan. Gone, gone, gone.


Mig. Gone! Oh, you villain!


Juan. It is no fault of mine -- it is no fault of mine. -- How can I keep a
prisoner if a party of devils choose to fly away with him?


Mig. What does the rascal mean? -- Confess, you dog, confess!


Juan. I Will confess all I know -- but I am so frightened.


Mig. Speak, you villain!


Juan. I will, I will, I will. You must know, then, my Lord, that I locked the
prisoner in this dungeon, as sure as I stand here a living man, and cautioned
him, in a friendly way, not to utter a syllable, or I should be obliged to come
and thump him. Well, my Lord, all was quiet for some time, till at last I heard
a noise, which, at first, I was foolish enough to believe was made by the
prisoner -- but if I had thought a moment* I might have known it was nothing
like a human voice, for it was just as if all the wild beasts in the forest had
been roaring in a thunder-storm. -- Well, my Lord, in comes I -- and -- oh! I
shall never forget it the longest day I have to live -- what did I see but the
whole dungeon in a flame of fire, and a troop of devils flying away with the
prisoner through the wall.


Mig. You rascal! you have made a fine story to account for your villainy. This
will not do with me -- so I shall leave you in his place, and we'll see if any of
his devil friends will be so obliging as to fly away with you.


DUET AND CHORUS. --
Don MIGUEL, JUAN, and Officers. Juan. Show some pity to me, pray, Sir!

Mig. Here you certainly shall stay, Sir.

Juan. Oh, my Lord! 'twill be my death.

Mig. Shall a dolt like you deceive me?

Juan. What I Have said is true, believe me.

Mig. You as well may spare your breath.
I Will show you, you knave, how I punish deceit:
Let him here be locked up, and have nothing to eat.

Juan. To be kept without food will not punish me much;
I Am in too great a fright, Sir, one morsel to touch.

Mig. As the prisoner you say,
Was by fiends borne away;
You shall wait till they bring him again.

Juan. But suppose it their whim
To take me to him,
Think what will become of me then.

Mig. (To Off.) Let no one come here
As my vengeance you fear,
Till I myself open the door.

Juan. Then poor I shall be found
Dead with fright on the ground,
If I Am not whisk'd away long before.

Chorus of Officers. No one shall come here
(We to duty adhere),
Till you yourself open the door.

[Exeunt, leaving Juan. SCENE II.
Inside of Alphonso's Cottage. -- ANGELINA asleep on a Couch. Enter ALPHONSO.
Alph. It Is now broad day, and time that I should offer to my poor
storm-vanquished guest such viands as my humble cot affords. She still is
sleeping -- Well, I will not disturb her slumbers, for rest gives best
refreshment. -- Soft -- she moves.


Ang. (Still sleeping.) Alphonso! my Alphonso!


Alph. My name! It Is strange! Psha! Self, self will still be foremost. Are
there not more Alphonsos than the wretch whom his false wife has driven to
misery? She calls, perhaps, on one, whose dear remembrance her faithful bosom
cherishes, while he may have abandoned her, and heap such anguish on that
heart, as falsehood has lodged here. Let me behold the face of her whose
sorrows I conceive akin to mine. Immortal powers! Has madness mastered my poor
tortured brain, and do my eyes act as the vassals of distempered fancy? or has
just Heaven, thus by a miracle, directed the guilty Angelina to her wronged
husband, to enforce the vengeance due to her crime? (Pauses.) All surrounding
objects are reflected to my sense with truth's distinctness. -- Can I err only
here? No, no! It Is she, and sent, that death, death by his hand she has
wronged, may expiate her perfidy. Why does my heart shrink from an act of
justice? How misery disarms resentment! Yes, yes; it is that unnerves me. Did I
behold her in the hall of splendor, decked in the robes of gaiety, her eyes
sparkling with bliss, then should I rush eager for vengeance, and exult to lay
triumphant guilt in ruin. But here I view a wretched creature whom Heaven's
hand has humbled. Is that pale cheek, where sufferance is marked with care's
sure traces -- is that a stimulant to vengeance? Poor ill-fated girl! Thy heart
has played thee treacherously -- it wanted firmness to prevent thy falsehood,
and yet has not been slack to upbraid thee with it. I did not think to have
wept for thee, frail Angelina; but thus, thus fallen, even I can pity thee.
(Alphonso turns away weeping.)


Ang. (Wakes and looks round.) Soft -- Where am I? My mind is confused -- Ay,
ay, now I remember sinking under fatigue and terror in the last night's storm;
and sure some friendly hand conveyed me to this shelter. Ah! (Seeing Alphonso.)
I trust I now behold my kind protector. (Throws herself at his feet.)


Alph. True, you do indeed behold him who was once your kind protector.
(Turning toward her.)


Ang. Oh, Heaven! My Alphonso! Then am I blessed: here will I cling for ever.
(Throws herself into his arms; he averts his head, and loosens himself from her
embrace.) Why do you avoid me? why throw me from you?


Alph. False, false, perfidious, shameless woman!


Ang. Oh, this I feared! My honor has been wounded by the tongue of some base
wretch.


Alph. It has -- by his to whom you gave your honor. -- Now, now, false woman,
what will avail your protestations? Now call to Heaven to witness for your
faith, and damn yourself more deeply. 'Twas not the breath of doubtful rumor
told an absent husband that his wife was faithless. No -- the cursed tongue
that lured you to dishonor, that tongue pronounced the infernal truth, and --
became dumb for ever.


Ang. Then justly did a villain perish; for if ever the tongue of mortal could
truly charge me with an act, however trivial, or one word or look, that spoke
my heart wandering from thee, may Heaven withhold from me its mercy, and let
the fiercest pangs that dying sinners tremble at, be my eternal lot! Oh, my
Alphonso, spurn not, as faithless, her whose dearest, only joy, has been thy
love; her who, if all the world combined to load thee with its hate, would
still cling to thee with increasing fondness; and who, if miseries pressed on
thy brain too great for reason to support, would tend thee in the cell of
madness, and even there derive more ecstasy from one kind look given in the
transient intervals of sense, than all the unruffled pleasures that the world
without thee can afford!


Alph. Ha! ha! ha! Oh, how finely does woman's glowing fancy picture the charms
of constancy, while her warm bosom mocks the ideal bliss, and burns for each
new lover! Angelin -- Woman -- Woman, I say -- No arts, no well-imagined
fiction of pure faith -- no tears -- no, not the genuine drops of true
repentance, which atone some crimes, can a crime undo. Truth has proclaimed thy
perfidy -- my ears, which heard the horrid tale, are shut to denial and to
palliation. -- My heart is chilled -- heart said I? No, no, that I long since
gave you -- you despised the worthless gift, and threw it from you; but it has
never returned to warm this bosom -- No, all here is cold as death.


Ang. Cruel Alphonso! Turn your remembrance to our past affection. Think on the
days -- the years we have lived together -- Could love like mine be feigned?
Oh, were our dear children here, they would surely waken some tenderness for
their poor mother!


Alph. Angelina! (Endeavoring to suppress his tears.) Shame on this weakness!
but think not, though my eyes betray a sympathy with misery, that my soul can
sympathize with guilt, or that the sacred compact of affection plighted to
purity, shall remain firm to falsehood. To chain the living to the dead, is not
to nature more repugnant, than to link honor with pollution.


Ang. Alphonso --


Alph. No more -- Farewell, thou once adored, farewell for ever! (He breaks
from her, and exit.)


Ang. Yet hear me -- Stay, Alphonso -- Till death I Will follow thee -- till
death protest my truth.

[Exit, following him.
SCENE III.
The Robbers' Cavern. -- JAQUELINA and DASHINGTON discovered. Dash. How oddly
people are thrown at one another in this strange world! -- To meet you here --


Jaq. Is surprising; and providential too, I hope.


Dash. Good society, to be sure, makes the dismallest place cheerful; but I
cannot help wishing that you and I were chatting together somewhere above ground.


Jaq. Are there no means of escape from this horrid place?


Dash. None that immediately occur to me.


Jaq. The Robbers are now on some scheme of plunder -- We are alone in the
cavern -- try the entrance, it may chance they have neglected to fasten the
trap.


Dash. There is no hope of that; for you must know my ears were on very active
duty as they went out, and I heard the door fall with a dismal bang, and the
rusty wards of the lock move with an infernal grating. No, here are we pretty
birds fast in our cage -- we have no opportunity at present of using our wings.


Dash. How wretched is our situation!


Jaq. Most diabolical.


Jaq. Perhaps they have not secured the private avenue, through which you were
conveyed.


Dash. Probably not; but I would rather be excused from making my escape that
way. Of two evils, I should think it wiser to stay in my own house and be
robbed, than avoid a burglary by escaping into my neighbor's while it was in
flames.


Jaq. Be confident of Don Miguel's mercy. I know his character for humanity --
be assured you have much less to dread from him than from the savages who
inhabit here -- besides, the service you rendered in defeating the intentions
of the villains, must plead for you.


Dash. Eh! I have a great mind to try.


Jaq. Don't hesitate -- consider it is our only means of escape.


Dash. True -- well, -- do you follow me -- but I heartily wish I may be lucky
enough to find any other hole to creep out at. [Exit.


SONG. --
JAQUELINA. Oh, should I escape from this place full of woe,
And joyful presages arise in my breast,
Such transport I then shall be fated to know,
That sure I shall be of all mortals most blessed.
Can pleasure be pictured, their joys to exceed,
Who freedom's dear blessing securely retain?
Yes, sweeter their bliss, who from bondage are freed,
And liberty, lost to them, welcome again. [Exit.

SCENE IV.
The Dungeon. -- JUAN discovered. I believe I am safe yet. -- Oh that I may
continue so! -- May be the devils don't think me worth fetching. I pray
heartily they may hold in that mind. Never shall I forget the frightful sight.
I have not courage yet to look to the side of the dungeon where they vanished.
-- If I were to stay here for a year, I should not take a wink of sleep, for
fear of finding myself, when I waked, in a place a great deal too hot for my
constitution. -- What a terrible thing it is to be kept in such a quaking
state! -- I heard a noise -- I hear it again -- Oh, I am a lost man! (He falls
down hiding his face.)

DASHINGTON and JAQUELINA enter through the private avenue. Dash. Well, we have
got out of the Robbers' clutches. -- Still I wish we had escaped into a more
agreeable place.


Jaq. Since we are safe from those wretches, I feel perfect security.


Dash. But the little account I have to answer, I am not at all convinced will
be settled to my satisfaction. -- Who have we here? -- Some poor devil!


Juan. I am no devil, and I wish to have nothing to do with devils -- Oh! -- Oh!


Dash. Look up.


Juan. I dare not look at any thing so frightful.


Dash. Look up, my good fellow.


Juan. Don't think to wheedle me, Beelzebub -- I defy the devil and all his
works.


MIGUEL and Officers enter. Mig. Now I shall see if this fellow cannot give a
better account. -- Hey! what is here? -- Why, this is sorcery with a witness. --
A woman too! -- What, Signor Conjuror, you found you did not like solitary
confinement, and flew away to fetch yourself a companion?


Dash. If you will allow me, my Lord, to remove from this place, or at least
conduct this lady to a pleasanter apartment, you may very easily be satisfied
as to what now raises your wonder.


Mig. Why, Sir, as you clearly have the knack of flying through stone walls, I
conclude you will be just as safe in one place as another. -- So come with me,
and let me know the particulars of this extraordinary transaction; and you
blockhead, (To Juan.) you may come too. Pray, Sir, (To Dashington.) walk before
me, that if you do take it into your head to vanish again, I may at least have
the pleasure of seeing whether you fly or sink, or go off in a flash, or how.
[Exeunt.


SCENE V.
ANGELINA enters supported by Sir STURDY O'TREMOR. Sir Stur. Oh yes, my dear
Madam, I am certain I met the very man you inquire after. He looked scared, and
yet furious -- his eyes starting out of his head; and he ran past me, as if he
was flying for his life. I declare the sight of him gave me a queer kind of
feel -- a sort of a qualm all over. He seemed for all the world as if the rope
had snapped with him at the gallows, and he was running away, half hanged.


Ang. Oh my failing strength! -- Could I follow him, I might still convince him
of my innocence.


Sir Stur. And is it that he doubts? -- Oh, what a misbeliever he must be! --
Why, the man that cannot read innocence in that sweet face, knows nothing of
Heaven's handwriting.


DASHINGTON enters. Dash. Ah, my dear friend, have I found you at last?


Sir Stur. Oh, the sight of you rejoices my heart. But I have lost my dear girl.


Dash. And I have found your dear girl.


Sir Stur. What do you tell me?


Dash. Nothing but truth: she is safe, and I am safe, and all is right; but you
brought me into a pretty scrape -- I was very near getting a niche in the Book
of Martyrs, by you.


Sir Stur. Hey!


Dash. Nay, this is no time to dwell on past perils. -- Jaquelina impatiently
expects you; so make haste to her.


Sir Stur. But this lady needs protection.


Dash. Mine is devoted to her. There is one of my servants; he will conduct you
to your mistress, while this lady may command from me whatever service she
requires. So, without ceremony, fly as fast as your worn-out frame will suffer
you.

[Exit Sir Stur.
Ang. Sir, do not let me tax your kindness, nor dull your joy with my
misfortunes.


Dash. Madam, happiness never found entrance in that breast which was not open
to the sorrows of a lovely woman.


Ang. You are truly generous; but indeed it grieves me much to trespass thus.
You are burdened with a being whose mind is rent with agony, and whose frame is
enfeebled with fatigue and anguish.


Dash. Take comfort, Madam, and hope for happiness; lean on my arm, and let me
conduct you to safety and repose.


Ang. I am bound to you for ever. (She leans on him, and as they are going
Alphonso enters.)


Alph. Horror! it is he! Such a sight would brace the arm of palsied cowardice,
and in the breast of mercy's self infuse a tiger's fury. Matchless extent of
woman's perfidy! a few hours past, with all the seeming of unshaken constancy,
were thou not kneeling at my feet, adjuring Heaven to witness for thy
innocence? and now my eyes behold thee in the arms of thy cursed paramour!
Villain! I thought my sword had long since paid the debt I owed thee: I Will now
make justice certain -- and first to deal it here; -- false woman, die! (Rushes
at Angelina, who faints, and is supported by Dashington, he defending her with
his sword. Sir Sturdy enters, and runs between them: he is followed by Leonora
and Jaquelina.)


Sir Stur. I thought this wild-looking gentleman would be falling foul of
somebody. Sir, if you don't curb your passions, you may depend on it they will
injure your health.


Leo. Heavens! my sister!


Ang. My dearest Leonora!


Leo. But whence this fury and distraction? How altered are your husband's
looks!


Ang. Altered, indeed, my sister! some dreadful error has possession of his
mind.


Alph. Error! Oh, shameless woman! Can it be error now? there stands the author
and proclaimer of your infamy.


Dash. Sir!


Ang. Heaven can witness for me, that till this hour I never beheld his face.


Dash. Give me leave, Sir, to say, that you are a most incomprehensible
gentleman. I am ready to admit, that on a certain stormy day, when you and I
were weather-bound, I was more communicative than I ought to have been to a
stranger; but may devils fly away with me in reality, if I ever mentioned to
you that lady's name (which even yet I have not the honor of knowing); I only
named to you the Lady Angelina d'Esparza.


Alph. And who but she is owner of that name?


Dash. Why, that lady, is n't she? (Pointing to Leonora.) Pray, Ma'am, is n't
your name Angelina d'Esparza?


Leo. No; that is my sister's name, the wife of Don Alphonso.


Dash. Whew! here is a business! Am I really awake, or is this all a dream? Did
I, or did I not, see you at Madrid?


Leo. You did; while I was on a visit to my sister, during Don Alphonso's
absence.


Dash. And -- Lord, I begin to find that I have made a cursed deal of mischief.
The house, Madam, where you did me the honor to receive me, and allow me to
express my passion, was --


Leo. My sister's; and to my shame I own, from apprehension that she would
disapprove my conduct, it was without her knowledge I received you.


Dash. (To Angelina.) My dear Ma'am, I beg you a million of pardons; and, my
dear Sir, notwithstanding you made a lunge clean through me, I confess you have
great reason to be offended: but you see it was all a mistake.


Alph. But whence could this mistake arise? Leonora would never, surely, in her
sister's name, receive the visits of a lover!


Dash. No, Sir; she admitted my visits under no name at all, and obliged me too
to promise not to make inquiries. Her commands I punctually obeyed; but at our
last interview, as I was quitting the house, I heard a passer-by exclaim,
"There lives the beauteous Angelina d'Esparza!" I therefore naturally concluded
that the beauteous Angelina was this lady. (To Leonora.)


Sir Stur. What a blunder! and it is most extraordinary, that, though there is
an Irishman among you, he has had no hand in it.


Ang. Alphonso!


Alph. Oh, forgive me, dearest Angelina!


Dash. Although I confess myself horribly to blame, I must say, Ma'am, (To
Angelina.) that husband of yours is as hasty a gentleman as ever jerked a sword
out of its scabbard. The moment I mentioned the name, out came that damned long
toledo, and in three seconds it was through me. Upon my soul the greatest blame
is due to your rashness.


Leo. No, to your tattling.


Sir Stur. Ah, that is a devil of a fault: never kiss and tell.


Don MIGUEL enters. Mig. So I have found you out at last, and I am happy to
tell you, that those desperate ruffians whom you (To Dashington.) hindered from
cutting our throats, are all in safe custody. But what do you stay here so long
for? There is a devilish good dinner ready; so come in, and be jolly.


Leo. We have discovered the error, Sir, which led us to suppose that this
gentleman had encountered your son.


Mig. Why, I was sure it must turn out a mistake; for I have it under my son's
own hand that he is at Lima, and intends to remain there; and I am not sorry to
find that he has taken himself a wife, since you wish to take another man for
your husband.


Dash. And may I hope, Sir, that you will consent to my marriage with your ward?


Mig. I consent, with all my soul! She is to be married, not I; and, therefore,
I don't see that my inclination has any thing to do but to follow hers.


Sir Stur. Ah, my sweet Jaquelina! if your father would think in this manner,
it would be the saving of my life.


Jaq. And of mine too.


Mig. Would it? Why, then, I have the satisfaction of telling you that her
father is now perfectly disposed to let her please herself. He only placed her
in a convent till he had informed himself thoroughly of your character and
fortune; with both which he is now perfectly satisfied.


Sir Stur. Then I am the happiest man living.


Dash. What, with such a catalogue of maladies!


Sir Stur. Love has cured them all, and I feel at this moment that I am as
stout a man as ever.


Mig. If you are not -- Hercules must have been a shrimp to you.


Leo. Now, my dear Guardy, I have but one favor to ask, which is, that you
will relinquish your office, and cease to be an Inquisitor.


Mig. To that I cannot consent; for I am not sure that any other person holding
my office would do so little mischief as myself.


Dash. Yours is the system of true philanthropy -- Not to be contented with
simply doing good, but also to labor to prevent the evil designs of others --
not only to practice virtue, but to preserve the helpless from virtue's foes.


FINALE.
From sorrow and perils tormenting,
Since now we are happily free,
Our pleasure in harmony venting,
Let Us pour forth the numbers of glee.
So merrily, merrily singing;
Let joy's sprightly sound
Be wafted around,
While the bells are so merrily ringing.
What transport! misfortunes ideal,
And springing from error to find!
And those transports will all become real,
If you to our errors prove kind.
Then merrily, merrily, etc.
THE END.
BOOKS LATELY PUBLISHED BY W. MILLER.
1. MASON's COSTUME of CHINA. 4to. Illustrated with 60. Engravings, English and
French. Price 6l. 6s. 2. STATEMENT of the DIFFERENCE subsisting between the
PROPRIETORS and PERFORMERS of the THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN. 1s. 6d. 3.
SCHILLER's HISTORY of the THIRTY YEARS WAR. 2 vols. 8vo. 12s. 4. A DEFENSE of
the PROFESSION of an ACTOR. 1s. 6d. 5. SKETCHES of MODERN LIFE. 2 vols. 12mo.
7s. 6. LORD SOMERVILLE'S ILLUSTRATION of the BOARD of AGRICULTURE. 4to. 15s.
Boards. 7. REFLECTIONS on the RELATIVE SITUATION of MASTERS and SERVANTS. 8vo.
1s. 8. In January 1801 will be published, in Imperial 4to. The PUNISHMENTS of
CHINA, in 22 Plates, with Descriptions in English and French. Price 3l. 13s.
6d. to Subscribers.

