THE Present Uncertainty IN THE Knowledge of Medicines, IN A LETTER TO THE
Physicians in the Commission for Sick and Wounded Seamen.

With a Postscript to Physicians, showing the Necessity of a True Theory of
Diseases.

By W. Corkburn, M. D. a Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College of
Physicians of London.

Qualitates Ignoramus in Physicis, and illud Vocabulum Qualitas ne quidem
Nominandum est; quippe Res Evidentes majoribus difficultatibus involvit.

Hann. Meth. Cogn. Veget. Simp. LONDON: Printed by R. J. for Benj. Barker, at
the White-Hart in Westminster Hall; and Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall,
1703.

THE PREFACE TO THE Physicians in the Commission for Sick and Wounded Seamen.
Gentlemen,
THE World, I know, will admire what Merit of yours should obtain you this
Address; but their Curiosity will be satisfied when they are told, that your
Pretenses on this Head are very great and singular. You pretend to be complete
Masters of all the Qualities that ever were found about a Medicine; and that
you never fail to determine all its possible Actions by this Infallible Light.
If this proves not a sufficient Apology for me, you your selves must find a
better.

Indeed the former Disappointments that Sedulous Inquirers have met with
already in this Way, were enough to discredit my Assertion; but especially that
such Abstruse Methods are possessed by People who are as unknown as they have
endeavored to be otherwise; but in that you must give them further
Satisfaction. It Is enough for me to have made this part of the Discovery, but
you must tell them more.

For this Trial, I do not give you the Mystery of a Nostrum to resolve, neither
have I put stranger Drugs into your Hands, nor some foreign Root that came but
lately from the East Indies, No, I have first given you a Bark that is the most
Excellent of any Medicine for the Disease it is to Cure; which owes its
Discovery to wild Indians, its Use in Europe to Churchmen, and its
Re-establishment, after the Malice of Physicians to destroy it, to an Empyrick,
and which now Triumphs in this next Age with the great Applause of Physicians;
though their Predecessors would never submit to the Conquest; nay, its Native
Strength equals at least the best Preparations of it, on Purpose to show how it
raised its Reputation in spite of the Fathers, and will have no farther to do
with the Sons than to receive their Submission. And I am ashamed to think how
little Thanks Men owe us that have hindered them so long from the Benefit of so
great a Good: But the following Story does prove how well we are satisfied with
the Thing, and how still we have neglected such Discoveries that might assist
us to give it to more Advantage. But it is this you put us in hope of being
instructed in by you.

The Preface.

I shall say no more of the other Two Instances I give, than that they are of
an Older Date than to bear any Exception against our Opportunity of making
Experiment about 'em.

Yet while I clear my Examples from Objections that may be brought against
their Propriety of being such, I am sensible how ready some People may be to
object against my thus exposing the Uncertainty of Medicines; but one Answer
may be, that it is in order to our arriving at a greater Certainty: But next,
who but such Pretenders ever would have the World think that our Knowledge of
them is Infallible? Don't the frequent Attempts, and as frequent
Disappointments, of worthy Physicians, Prove this very Uncertainty: Some indeed
have attempted Medicines by their Qualities, and have all miscarried in the
Enterprise; but these Gentlemen, who promise n^w to attempt, and I wish they do
not fail in that. Other Physicians have tried to dissect Bodies for the very
Parts of their Composition: But a Noble Gentleman, well skilled in all these
Trials, has sufficiently destroyed that Pretense in his Skeptical Chemist; and
it was only this Gentleman who was the best able, as well as the most proper
Person, to do it.

But if the Strength of this Objection is concealed under the fear of
discovering so much of our Weakness to the World, the Argument is as weak as
the Defense of it is unworthy of a Man. A Cheat has the worst Grace upon a
Gentleman of any thing; and I am convinced that both Physic and Physicians
have really suffered more by the modest conniving at such Tricks of Pretenders,
than ever they can suffer by this Frank Declaration of mine. This is the
Foundation for Quacks and Mountebanks, who know no better where to set up for a
Character. Men of Learning go quite another Way to Work; they do not apprehend
their being esteemed to know nothing except they pretend to know every thing:
Their reasoning is quite the Reverse of this. They say that there are some
things of which they know nothing at all, and these are these first Qualities,
or Physical Causes, these Gentlemen know so perfectly wel'. Some things they
know but Probably, and among them may be the Doctrine of Medicines: But some
other things they know Demonstratively, and among them are some things about
the Theory of Diseases.

From all which I shall observe, First, That the Knowledge by Qualities is as
Vain as it is an Ignorant Pretense.

And, 2dly, That they who set up on this Foot, know nothing at all, not so much
as where to lodge their Pretense: And they are a People who commonly Practice
Physic with a Contempt of all Theories of Diseases, and you see they do it
with an absolute Ignorance about Medicines.

THE Present Uncertainty IN THE Knowledge of Medicines.
BEfore I come to Prove the Charge of Uncertainty on our Knowledge of
Medicines, 'twill be Necessary to lay down some Rules that may be Useful in
examining the Matter of Fact. And these shall be taken from the Descriptions of
the Two different Sorts of Knowledge a Physician is said to have; viz.
Experimental and Scientifical; or, a Knowledge of Experience and Science. By
knowing the Virtues or Powers of Medicines in the First Way, we know that such
and such Medicines are Recommended for, and are good or bad in, Particular
Diseases, and different Circumstances of the Distemper, when either they have
good Success, no Success, or an ill One. This is the lowest piece of Knowledge
that can be expected from Physicians.

Or, Secondly, If by many such Experiments we should discover what Action it is
in any Medicine, whereby it produces its Proper Effects, so as to be able to
deduce the good or bad Effects it will have, as so many Corollaries from the
Knowledge of the Action, That would be as Noble a piece of Science as Physic
can be supposed to admit of, and would contain all that is Necessary.

Having premised the Descriptions, which are the Rules in the ensuing Trial, I
shall begin with all the Distinctness and Brevity imaginable.

But since the Bounds of a Letter will not allow me to try every single
Medicine by it self, or indeed every Class of Medicines in general; yet 'twill
be more to your Satisfaction if I Prove it by Two or Three Examples of
Medicines, that are either most in Use, or that produce most constantly the
same Effects, when the least Caution is had about 'em, and are in every one's
Hands; and if I can Prove our Knowledge of them to be just nothing, and that it
does not so much as arrive at the First Description or Experience, I may
Presume to conclude the like Imperfection to be, at least as great, in our
Knowledge of Medicines, that are not near so frequently used, nor that have
not, by far, so certain and constant Effects; nay, whose Effects are most
unconstant in the best Hands.

The First Instance of this Imperfection shall be of the Jesuits Powder; a
Medicine that every one must own to be the best for Curing intermitting
Fevers; and with that Certainty, that no other known Medicine can do the like
in this or any other Disease; for it generally Cures, not only in the Hands of
Physicians, but even in those of Quacks, and Nurses, by whom it is given with
no manner of Judgment or Discretion.

Yet even this Powder has been wanting in its Success, and Agues have been
known sometimes to stand their Ground against many Charges of it. This is
evident sometimes here; but too often in Virginie.

It Is known that by the taking of it, safe intermitting Fevers have been
changed into those that are continual; which are far more dangerous, and whose
Event is often very doubtful.

And it is very surprising that this Turn of the Disease is not always in the
same manner; for by Jesuits Powder Agues have degenerated into unweildy
Rheumatisms, or a lazy Jaundice; nay, sometimes it has terminated in a sudden
Death.

These are strange and unconstant Effects of Jesuits Powder. It Cures an Ague
the best of any thing; it turns the Patient sometimes out of one Disease into
another; and sometimes it kills him.

But this is not all; it will sometimes make him Costive; it Purges him; it
Sweats him; yet it never has been ranked among Medicines of these Sorts, but
once to Disparage it.

And this is the Rare Medicine which Cures us so suddenly, that it seems to
Operate almost like a Charm, that yet has such strange, though seldom, ill
Effects in the Cure of the same Disease. But since different Conditions and
Circumstances make all the Variety in this Affair, as well as in every thing
else, Physicians ought to be very Industrious to find out what are the
Conditions in this Case, where we find such considerable Turns in Administering
this Excellent Medicine. For, perhaps if they were known, they might be
avoided; at least, if a Cure is to be had by any other Medicine, that rather is
to be tried; and it is at worst better not to attempt a Cure, than certainly to
Kill.

It Is to be thought, that if all, or any, of these ill Accidents that happen by
using the Bark had often been observed, that no Rhetoric could induce the
World to persist in taking it; yet since they have happened, they may happen
again, and indeed every Day; it may therefore be thought very Expedient to know
how either to give it so as to avoid Danger and Mischief, or else to know when
the Proper Time is when we are not to give it at all.

It was for want of this Knowledge the Bark lost its good Name, when Sir --
Underwood, Mayor of London, died by taking of it, whose untimely Death did so
terrify his Relations, that no friezing or fryings of an Ague can ever be
strong enough to force them to take it.

Now since there is so manifest Uncertainty in the Practice of this Excellent
Medicine; besides the Danger of being killed; it must be owned that there ought
to be a good deal of Discretion had when we use it. And he who is possessed of
this Discretionary Knowledge, must be able to know, not only that it is
uncertain, but this must be warranted by my First Rule: He is obliged to know
what Appearances, what Conditions, there were in the Disease; when the Bark
Cured, and when it did not Cure; as also when One got a Jaundice by it, and a
Third died. But if he has no Knowledge of those Times, he is under a vast
Uncertainty in every Patient; neither does he know whose Cure or Death he is
carrying on with the greatest Assurance, though he Practice with the best
Medicine.

I would advise those who think they can Answer for this Sort of Knowledge, to
try their Strength by the Second Rule I proposed; but it is Time enough to do
that when I find my First Request answered. Indeed by this Rule we have the
most delightful, as well as the most useful, piece of Knowledge imaginable; for
by it we might know what the Uniform Action of the Bark is in it self, whereby
it Cures an Ague, and we should be able to deduce these Mischiefs that are
already observed, as so many Corollaries from the Condition of the Disease;
nay, by it are we made capable to suspect all the probable Dangers that can be,
or perhaps have been, though they have escaped the Caution of the Observer.

These related Misfortunes that have happened by taking the Bark, are not the
Calumnies it stands charged with by its bigoted Enemies. There are many more;
but these I have named have happened to many Candid Practitioners, and the most
of 'em Recorded by that Excellent Physician Dr. Sydenham.

But what can be said to the Pother had among many Authors about its under
Actions of Purging, Sweating, etc. when they have Industriously past by so
Considerable Effects of this Medicine.

All the Use I make of this Argument for the Present, is to show you that the
Knowledge of Medicines is as Obscure and Difficult as any thing else in
Physic, notwithstanding of a common Opinion we entertain about their
Certainty. And this I think is very manifest by this First Instance; because
our Knowledge of the best Medicine which answers Expectation most constantly,
and is more used than any one Medicine, is very obscure, and just nothing at
all.

This Argument might be pursued as Successfully in every one of the Medicines
that are most Familiar to us. In all Evacuating Medicines, as well as in those
that produce no Evacuation, but are considerable for some great Effect of
another kind; but so Particular an Aggravation is by no means Necessary,
neither does the present Occasion require it. I shall content my self with an
Instance or Two more, which will be sufficient to Prove my Argument about the
real Uncertainty of Medicines.



Moreover, Opium is observed to give a Check to all Sorts of Evacuations; yet
great Evacuations have been known to be made by it.

It Is noted for either relieving us of Pain, or at least giving an agreeable
respite from it, though great and torturing Pains have sometimes been felt upon
its Account: I mean not only those Headachs, and Pain at Stomach, it often
occasions, and that are felt after its sleeping force is over; but even some
that come at first taking, and that beyond all Patience, and almost to
Distraction; yea, these Pains are also produced by every thing that makes
Sleep, as well as by Opium, or any Preparation of it; and the more Obstinately
we persist in that quieting Design, to greater Degrees we augment the Torture.

Besides all this, Opium is not like other Medicines so easily dos'd; and an
exceeding quantity has worse Consequences than any other Medicine whatever.
Nay, sometimes when we would give it to good Purpose, it is Necessary to give
Three or Four Grains at once, withour our coming Cautiously, and by Degrees, to
that Quantity; or that it is given to People who have been long accustomed to
take it, (all which Considerations alter the Case perfectly), yet there is
nothing more Certain, than that Three Grains have laid People of a proper Age
into an Eternal Oblivion of this World; though the World should not forget him
that gave it.

Now who would not Purchase at any Rate a good Night's Rest, after watching
many Nights, and a long Vigilia? Who would not rid themselves of Troublesome
Pains, and uneasy Evacuations, by taking Opium? But if the Danger that
possibly may come by it was ever imagined, how equal might the Dispute prove
about taking of it on any of the mentioned Designs; but especially if the
Operation of this Medicine should fall short of it; nay, if the contrary
Effects were ever supposed to happen. We ought to suppose at least that a very
Extraordinary Pilot ought to be made Choice of, to guide us where such Hazards,
and Things of so great a Value, are; and more where our Persons may be fatally
concerned.

And therefore let any One who pretends to be familiarly acquainted with this
Pacifick Medicine, examine himself thoroughly by the Rules I have laid down, and
rest satisfied with nothing less than his being qualified by the First.

I confess it is strange enough to hear Men Boast of a Certainty in Medicines,
such as requires no Direction from Reason to Manage beyond their Skill; and yet
such considerable Doubts to remain at this Day about a Medicine of so manifest
Effects, and of so great and ancient a standing. Wherefore it is manifest how
proper an Example this is to Prove our Imperfection about the Knowledge of
Medicines.

But no less an Imperfection may perhaps be found in another Ancient Method of
Curing, which commonly is the utmost Skill, and last Resort of a Doctor, after
other Experience and Medicines have been practiced to no Purpose. And after so
Honorable a Mention made of a Method, every Body must think it is only Proper
to the Bath, as indeed I intend it. I must not be thought to Depretiate either
the bathing or drinking of Waters at Bath, which I do by no Means. On the
contrary, I have a valuable and just Esteem of 'em.

Only I do say, that this useful and ancient Method is far from being so
sufficiently known, that we are able to reap all the Benefit of it, or to avoid
all its Mischiefs, as shall be made appear immediately by Particulars.

Britain; yet if we compare what has been said of 'em, either as to their
Warmth or Medicinal Effects, by Ancient or Modern Writers, we shall find how
little these have improved what the former asserted. Cambden informs us how Old
Necham has conceived the Observations of his Time about these Waters, for their
Use.

Conf^cto profunt balnea nostra seni,
Prosunt Astritis, Collisis, Invalidisque,
Et qurum Morbis Frigida causa subest.
Then he, and most Moderns after him, assign this Reason for the Heat of these
Waters.

S^d quid? Sulphurcum novimus esse locum. At present I am not bound to make all
Proper Inquiries about the Bath; but in general, I will first observe how
disproportionable the Fame of the Cures it has worked are to its long standing,
and great Character given it by some Men. And, 2dly, The extreme Changes its
Reputation has suffered in that Tract of Time: 'Thas often been esteemed a
Panacea, and too frequently thought good for nothing at all. And from both
these Observations I conclude, that if a moderate Knowledge of this Method had
been joined with half the good Uses of these Waters, they never could have had
so great Ebbings in their Fame.

But to be more Particular; it is certain, that though Sulphur impregnating
those Waters, is told us to be the Cause of their Heat; yet our Knowledge of
this Method of Nature is so very obscure, that we can neither imitate her in
medicating Waters after that manner; nor by any Means make other Waters
Serviceable to like Purposes. Wherefore it is also manifest how Insignificant
our boasted Knowledge is, and to how little Purpose our Trials of 'em have been.

I know that there are Authors that Prove, and sufficiently enough, that those
Waters contain more Substances than Sulphur; but the Difficulty remains the
same, mutatis mutandis, viz. by taking the known Compositum, as I took Sulphur
singly in the Argument.

But further, if I should suppose that either the single Ingredient of these
Waters, if there is but one, or a determined Quantity of Ingredients, if more
were known; yet it is certain we should be still Ignorant of their Operations,
if we know not the Effects of these simple Substances, which being mixed with
the Waters, give 'em their Medicinal Qualities; and the Difficulty would always
increase, when we were to account for their Combination. This is manifest from
the Affair of Jesuits Powder, i.e. it is manifest that if the Particular
Ingredients of these Waters were in Substance and Quantity as evident to us as
the Substance and Quantity of Jesuits Powder, yet our Difficulties shall still
remain unsatisfied, except we knew more of the Nature of these Substances, that
are the Composita of the Waters, than we know of Jesuits Powder; and I think we
know less, and by Consequence less also of the Waters, even supposing we knew
their Composition.

But let us suppose that the Bath is good for decayed Old Age; for People that
are Lame, and those who labor under a Disease from a Cold Cause; yet our
Knowledge about the Bath must remain Uncertain, if we are not able to justify
our sending People thither on other Accounts, for Reasons not yet assigned; and
if we cannot show that Effects quite contrary to those it is noted for have not
happened, with the Particular Circumstances of the Case.

Instances of the last Sort are adduced in a good Number by Bath Doctors; and
though possibly the Crutches that hang there may not be the Martyrology of the
Bath, as Doctor Willis would have it; yet they are confessed not to be the
Trophies of its constant Success. But it is most certain that we have not
conveyed to us the Failings and cross Successes which are absolutely Necessary
for the smallest Degree of Certainty in this Affair.

Perhaps the sending People for all Diseases may be alleged for its great Use:
And I do Concur with them who say so, though I think very meanly of the
Judgment of the Physicians who do so; and am Positive, that how soever
excellent the Bath may be, that it neither is Infallible, nor a Panacea; but
that it will always want a suitable Direction, which will be the more
Infallible the greater our Knowledge is.

But the Weakness of our Understandings in this Particular is but too manifest
by some Facts I shall Adduce.

For we know that many People who have been forsaken in the Jaundice by their
Physicians, have yet found their Health at Bath, though the Bath is accused for
bringing the Jaundice upon a great many.

It has been the common Complaint, especially for these Two or Three last
Years, that a vast Number of People have got Rheumatisms at Bath; it is
notwithstanding most incontestably True, that great Numbers have got rid of
Rheumatisms there.

Many more Examples of other Diseases might be brought to Prove this Thing,
besides the sudden Deaths that have happened there; and yet I am apt to believe
that it is very hard to account for these Accidents, even by my Rule of
Experience, which but too sufficiently Proves the great Imperfection our
Knowledge lies under in this very Matter, of the most ancient and useful Method
of the Bath.

But I am ashamed to think that this ancient and useful manner of Bathing
should begin to be so much neglected, as if it neither wanted, or did not
deserve our improving. No manner of Consideration is had about making it have
its best Use, which is so little known, that some great Physicians are
scandalously Nice by giving the Waters by Spoonfuls: As if Old Experience was
to be laid aside to make way for such as they would call New.

What Considerations are raised about Bathing? What Inquiries are made about
our being Immerg'd in Water? What Questions are asked about its entering or not
entering our Vessels? And what Effects it may produce by mixing with the
Liquors in 'em? And, Lastly, what may the Difference be in being Immerged in
Hot and Cold Water?

These Considerations are not only Fine, but Useful, and would soon make us
Masters of all that Affair. It Is sure a Masterpiece of Impudence to pretend to
a Knowledge very Particular of any Bath, and to remain Ignorant of these
Particulars I have just mentioned; nothing can be more strange, except the
setting no Value upon such Inquiries, as those Pretenders are very ready to do.

But not to press this Argument any farther, I may be apt to think that there
can be no manner of Doubt about the great Imperfection of our Knowledge in
respect of Medicines; and how Inestimable a good it would be to be brought out
of this Infirmity.

But, Gentlemen, to put an End to this Matter, I have not only given you
Medicines of most ancient and common Use, but I have but just named such of
their Effects as are recorded by the best Authors; and which consequently
cannot probably be false. It Is therefore your Business to give Satisfaction to
these Examples I have Adduc'd, and that by your Quality-Method of Hot and Cold,
Red and Yellow, Acid and Alkaly, by Taste and Smell, etc. or because you love
high Flights by the Causes of these Qualities; yet if you have any Regard to my
condescending to give you a lower Method, I Challenge you to give such Proofs
in Point of Experience that may assist our administering them in Practice.

But while I speak to your Method of Qualities, I must inform you how Ignorant
your Pretense is in this Particular. You pretend to determine the Power any
Medicine has to Cure a Disease only by knowing some of Its Notable Qualities,
which is manifestly false; because there is scarcely one Disease that has not
Medicines of opposite Qualities found useful in its Cure, and recommended to us
by our Forefathers as such.

This is a Digression, but not an improper one; yet to proceed; is the previous
Knowledge of a Med^cine, or of Medicines, by its or their Qualities, necessary
before we Administer them? And have you this kind of Knowledge? If you have,
show it us, for it is much wanting. If you have not, then require no more of
others than you your selves are Masters of; and order as few Medicines for the
Public as you do to Patients; and none to either of 'em till you have
satisfied us that you can do it in the mentioned Way.

But if you have any tolerating Method whereby you would justify your
administering Medicines in your Probation Time, do as you would be done by;
share your Freedom to others of your Brethren, who are at least in no lower a
form of knowing than you be.

And if you have a special Rule whereby you can prefer the Use of one Medicine
to that of another, for the Cure of the same Disease: If you have, viz. any
Method for which you would rather give Jesuits Powder for the Cure of an Ague,
than any of the other Medicines recommended for the same: Let us have this your
Method of reasoning; for it may be so extensive as to comprehend more Medicines
in this and other Distempers.

I know the Trite and Common Methods among Philosophers, and all Mankind, is
first to know if a thing is so, and then how it is so if we are able to compass
it; but if they should not get this length, you must reckon those little better
than Madmen that deny the actual Existence of a Thing, because we do not know
the Way of its Being. And but justly, because it would have us disbelieve our
Senses, and the Senses of all Mankind; because we cannot answer some Questions
that are, or that happen not, to be the Objects of our Senses, and are too fine
for our Understanding. So that in the Trial, if a Man, or a Thing, is, or does,
such an Action, or produces such an Effect, we must judge of these Changes by
our Eyes and other Senses, or take them upon the Testimony of Honest Capable
People that relate them, if we were not there our selves. This is the Way of
the World, and I shall not enlarge upon it, to avoid Scandal: Though so much I
must say, because you and your Friend have so boldly unhinged all these common
Ways of judging of past Actions, that I am not able to go further with you,
till you have informed us more in those new Methods; yet whether you will do it
or not, depend upon it, a Time may come wherein the World shall be informed how
you use their old ones in Matters of the greatest Importance.

Thus I bid you Farewell, knowing to how little Purpose it would be to invite
you to the following Discourse. For you never once dreamt of any such thing;
and your proper Talent is to Snarl in a Corner at so Generous Attempts.

A Postscript to Physicians about the Necessity of a true Theory of Diseases.
I Continue the Discourse to you on this Subject; not but that I am sensible
how seriously many of you think of this Matter. And that even they who
Calumniate you on this Score, do themselves pretend sometimes to reason about
this Affair; though at the same time they endeavor to persuade the World, that
all Reasonings of this Nature are Vain, and but so much Time lost to the
improving of Practice. You are sensible how they assume the quantity of Blood
in a Man's Body given, and then do determine the Numbers of its Circulations in
a certain Time: So you find, that howsoever they depreciate reasoning in your
Case about things of Physic, they are very fond of the Character of Men of
Reason for themselves; nay, you find they apply Arithmetic too, and therefore
it is not reasoning they are angry with, but that your Reason and Arithmetic
is better than theirs.

After the same manner they being told how Barbarous Indians Cure Yaws with
Guaiacum, do immediately extend its Use to the European Pox, and from that to
Leprosies, etc. This is in the Nature of Man to do; but it is the highest
Ingratitude to Calumniate People that offer them more of such Medicines, or
that would teach them more natural and righter Methods, whereby this extending
of their Knowledge may be more usefully brought on.

And therefore it is that I would persuade you to bear up against the Calumnies
of these ill Men, and continue to do good to Mankind, by improving your
Profession. Be Diligent in your Enquiries about a true Theory of Diseases; for
it is even by that you shall be greatly assisted in ascertaining your Knowledge
of Medicines; and by that you shall be brought beyond what Chance has put into
your Hands.

Besides, if Medicines were as certain in their Effects as our Hearts could
wish, they can do but little good without a true Theory of Diseases; but
especially in respect of the good they do, when assisted with it. And therefore
I shall take Leave to press this Argument a little farther to you than it is
commonly done.

The first of these is very manifest to those who have thought the least on
that Subject; and I believe some time or other I may be able to give some Light
into this Abstruse Affair.

As to the 2d Particular, we find the whole World on our side in the main; for
to what Purpose should an Infallible Medicine serve, if we knew not the Disease
it Cures, when it appears upon us or our Neighbor? Supposing, viz. it were as
great a Difficulty to know an Ague in general, as it is to know it in all its
Circumstances, it is certain that this Excellent Medicine, the Jesuits Powder,
should be of very little Use to us.

So far I may be thought in the right; but next, no general Description that is
almost possible to be made of a Disease, can be of sufficient Use to us in
administering our Infallible Medicines, because we are not always improperly
Sick; but as a Distemper at one Time may Kill us, yet it may Cure us of some
other Disease at another: And if this is possible, it is evident to every
Common Understanding, that the more surely any Medicine did promise the
overthrow of a Disease, with the same certainty it brought along the impending
Fate of the Sick Person. If Diseases thus sometimes Cure others that afflict
us; and if we only want to have them described in order to apply our trusty
Remedy, as it is supposed: It is most manifest that we do really hinder and
obstruct a perfect Cure of a Disease that should be dismissed by some other, if
we did not endeavor to remove this curing Disease by a faithful Medicine; and
yet, perhaps, we rid our Patients of neither of them: Nay, the more Powerful
and Infallible the Medicine is that we Employ, the more do we put it out of the
Power of Nature, or the Strength of Constitution, to conquer the afflicting
Distemper, and the more Noxious Remedy. So that here appears a mighty Paradox,
that one Disease should prove a Cure for another, and yet we never shall be
able to know when one Disease will be the Cure of another, but by a true Theory
of Diseases, which by most is ridiculed, and neglected by too many.

Hippocrates, and all ancient Physicians, especially, have fully proved this
Paradox by their repeated Observations; and neither have they failed in their
Truth among more Modern Physicians, who have thought observing of any Use. It
will not be amiss, I presume, to give some Examples of this Matter: and those
shall be of that Nature, that the Diseases I shall name do most especially
require the quickest Aid, and the most certain Ways of Curing; yet if even they
are the Cures of other Diseases, this whole Matter must be true without
Exception. Fevers, Dysenteries, Dropsies, etc. are of this kind; and who would
not wish for an unerring Specific for their Cure? Yet Hipp. says, That if a
Fever comes upon one afflicted with Convulsions, it Cures him of that
Distemper; and therefore whosoever does attempt to banish this Fever with his
Trusty Medicine, must, according to his Success, either entail this Disease on
his Patient, or destroy him altogether, if Nature is not able to baffle both
the Curer and the Disease.

The same Hippocrates exhorts us not to despair of a Maniacal Mad Person when
he begins to have a Dysentery, or a Dropsy, but to hope the better of his
Recovery; and therefore if any one observing the approach of any such Disease,
should turn to his Receipt book for a Cure, and should be happy enough to have
an Excellent Medicine for either of 'em, must be the more mistaken in the
Success by the Sinistrous Application; for he does with great Certainty confirm
the Madness on his Patient.

Moreover, great Vomitings, which are not only of fatal Consequence, but at
once cut off all Hopes of succouring languishing Nature, do require the
speediest Care of the best Physician, and the most Infallible Methods; yet
these are sometimes of great Benefit when they come in the latter end of a
Lcoseness of a long continuance, as the same Hippocrates assures us, and
constant Experience does vouch. And therefore, though Dysenteries, Fevers,
Dropsies, Vomiting, etc. be Diseases that can of themselves bring Life to its
final Period, and do justly require our utmost Study to discover their Nature,
and to find out the best Methods and Medicines for Curing 'em; yet they come
sometimes as the best and most speedy Remedies for some other Distempers, which
perhaps have already baffled all other Methods already, besides these Diseases
that thus Cure: And there being no other Means left to shake off the Distemper,
it must still continue to be dangerous, if the unhappy Curer has Success enough
to baffle that Healing Disease; and thereis no Possibility of knowing a fatal
Distemper from the same, when it is to prove a Cure, but by knowing the
necessary Productions of Diseases, and the particular Conditions of Human
Bodies, in which they are produced, i.e. by having a true Theory of Diseases.
Wherefore a true and an accurate Theory of Diseases is the most necessary Thing
for advancing a Physician's Knowledge for Curing Diseases.

But, 2dly, This Argument holds very strong in respect of Idiopathical and
Sympathical Diseases; for most frequently the Distemper that makes the greatest
Figure is most taken notice of, and frightens us the most, is very dependent,
and is supported by a very small Cause, and yet it will continue frightful and
threatening so long as all our Applications are for this fearful Part; and its
inconsiderable Cause remains unregarded, except in midst of this Bustle the
Mi^ute Occasion passes off of it self, very much to the Reputation of the
Malignant Curer, though little is added to the Stock of Physic. There be
Thousands of Instances to prove this Thing; but I shall be satisfied to adduce
One, because it is Evident, and of great Use, when extended to all its Length,
and that it fully proves all I have said on this Head. The Example is this Case
of One, who having a Wound, there may be a very moderate Pain, and a Generation
of Pus, and with this there will be a Fever more or less to the Causes. This
Fever may be improved by a Feaver-Doctor, that the Suppuration shall miscarry,
and the fatal Fever get a mighty Strength: Whereas if he is less frightened
with this Common Fever, and has Patience or Art to suffer the Suppuration to
proceed, or to promote it by various Methods, his Fears will vanish with the
Fever, which assuredly goes off in that order that the Pus does take place.

This Argument holds evidently in every thing that relates to the Cure of
Diseases: For Diseases are not only the Cures of Diseases; and not only great
Discretion is to be used in discovering an Idiopathical One; neither do we only
administer Infallible Remedies in undue and unseasonable Times, having no
better Guides than a general Description of Diseases. But also, for not having
a true Theory of Diseases, we do not know when it is time to put a stop to our
Successful Method; and but too frequently carry on a needless Practice, to the
great Detriment and Hazard of the sick Person. There may be sundry Examples
brought for proving of this; but I shall again content my self with One: In the
Jaundice, viz. whose Pathognomonical Sign is most commonly the Yellowness, as
its very Name imports; yet this Yellowness is not always attending the
Indisposition, but does sometimes continue when the sick Person is free of the
Distemper, and past all Danger from the ill Accidents that succeed it; nay,
frequently the Yellowness is augmented by some Methods that Cure the Disease:
By which means the Cure is still managed to the Charge, Abhorrence and Danger
of the Patient, and still with the good Intention of an Ignorant Curer.

Whereas by a true Theory of Diseases, it is not only easy to determine when
one is Yellow, and has the Jaundice, and when one is Yellow, and cured of the
Jaundice. But understanding the Reason of both, he can destroy the Yellowness,
when no Consideration is hald to the first Disease.

I think this does very manifestly convince us that there is something else
Necessary, besides Infallible Medicines, for the Cure of Distempers; though at
the same time the best Theories will Cure no Disease without Proper Remedies;
and the more Excellent they are of their Kind, the more Valuable they are.

Lastly, This Matter will appear manifestly, and at once to our View, if we do
but reflect on the various and opposite Sorts of Medicines, that the faithful
Observations of all former Ages have sent us for the Cure of the same Disease.
For the Variety shows the Defect, as well as the Necessity of trying about for
more, and more certain, Medicines: And the opposite Sorts point out to us the
Variety of Circumstances of the Distemper: So that my former Gentleman, A -- s,
is scarcely initiated in these Matters, when he talks of a Medicine of one
Quality to Cure the same Disease. This in passing. An Example of this is every
Disease. But I shall Instance in the Case of a Consumption, for which
Experience has recommended a very notable Variety of Medicines, and these very
opposite. Are we not told of Milk and Brimstone, Balsams, and Attenuating
Medicines, and a great Abundance of more jarring Things? But to give a fuller
Example in this Particular, I refer you to what I have said on this Subject in
my Alvi Profluvia: By all which it is very plain how insufficient the greatest
Stock of the best Medicines is, without a true Theory of Diseases, even for the
Cure of Diseases.

Let me therefore persuade Candid and Honest Physicians to set about a sedulous
Inquiry for a true Theory of Diseases, and a more exact Method for discovering
the directest and most advantageous Uses of good Medicines, that we may do the
most good to Mankind, and show that the Medicines chance have put into our
Hands, may even have some Improvement from us: Neither let us in this Inquiry
be discouraged with the Impudence of Pretenders nor by the small Advances we
can hope to make; for they only hate you for your doing better than themselves;
and no Body can tell what attempting in this Matter does produce, but they that
have once tried it.

FINIS.

