ALBINA, Countess RAIMOND; A TRAGEDY, By Mrs. COWLEY: As it is Performed at the
THEATER ROYAL IN THE HAY-MARKET.

LONDON: Printed by T. SPILSBURY; For J. DODSLEY, Pall Mall; R FAULDER, New
Bond-Street; L. DAVIS, Holborn; T. BECKET, in the Strand; W. OWEN, T. LOWNDES,
and G. KEARSLY, Fleet Street; W. DAVIS, Ludgate Hill; S. CROWDER, and T. EVANS,
Paternoster Row; and Messrs. RICHARDSON and URQUHART, Royal Exchange.
M,DCC,LXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD HARROWBY.
MY LORD,
ALBINA had the honor of being known to your Lordship, almost from her
infancy. Her faults, and her graces, You are already acquainted with, as she
grew up in some measure beneath your Lordship's eye. She is now arrived at
maturity; and if in her present state, my Lord, you should find her more
polished, than when she had last the honor of your attention, it is chiefly
owing to the hints with which you then favored me.

I have the honor to be, My LORD, Your Lordship's grateful, And obedient
humble Servant, H. COWLEY.

PREFACE.
THE very favorable reception with which the Pieces I have presented to the
Stage, have been honored by the Public, has given them the appearance of great
success; and it is probable that those who were witnesses of their reception,
will be surprised to find this Tragedy prefaced by complaints of hardship and
injury, and to know that it has been productive of a train of mortifications
and disappointments to its Author.

It is with the utmost reluctance that I feel myself compelled to enter into
the disagreeable circumstances which preceded the representation. This is
however necessary, as I now present a Tragedy, which I presume to call
original, to the cooler inspection of the Reader, though I know that the
principal circumstances of the plot, and the leading traits of character, have
appeared in other Plays, previous to the representation of this.

The idea of writing for the Stage struck me by mere accident, and the Runaway
was my first literary attempt of any kind. I am as ready, as the severest
Critic can wish, to admit that it has all the crudeness of a first attempt. It
succeeded however, on the Stage, far beyond my most sanguine expectations; and
during its run, which was stopped by the Benefits, was one of the most
profitable Plays, both to the Author and Manager, that appears on the records
of the Treasury-books at either House. -- A success so encouraging opened a new
prospect of advantage to my Family, which I have since pursued with alacrity;
but this success closed with the unfortunate period in which Mr. Garrick
resigned the management of Drury Lane.

When Mr. Sheridan obtained a share of the Patent, I flattered myself that I
had some right to his attention, as Author of the last piece which was produced
by his able Predecessor; but the first Winter in which he commenced the
management, my Comedy, to use the technical term, was shelf'd. The vanity of a
young Author was piqued; and I wrote to Mr. Sheridan, in the civilest terms I
could, to remonstrate on the occasion; but of my letter not the least notice
was taken. As I was not then informed of Mr. Sheridan's general neglect of
letters, I considered this slight as a particular insult to me, especially as
the Comedy was not played again that year, but by command of their Majesty's,
and for the benefit of Performers. I therefore selt myself under a necessity of
presenting my Tragedy at Covent Garden; but, as I had some reason to dread Mr.
Harris's opinions, it was presented to him, in the Summer of 1777, by a Lady of
Rank, with the name and sex of the Author concealed. After several weeks of
anxious expectation, it was returned, peremptorily rejected. I then waited on
him, and avowed the unfortunate Piece, but had little reason to flatter myself
with the circumstances of my reception: Mr. Harris to d me, that there was no
hope from alteration; that the Play was unfit for the Stage, and that he was
convinced it never could be made fit: he disliked the whole idea of Gondibert's
situation; and thought every incident of the Fifth Act inadmissible, as he
believed no audience would hear it. The last part of this opinion surprised me,
as I had conceived the Fifth Act was the principal strength of the Piece; but I
was compelled to submit: Nor is its rejection the injury of which I complain;
had the ashes of my Tragedy rested undisturbed, I might have mourned over them;
but I would have mourned in silence.

The Tragedy of Percy was soon after announced. I attended its representation
with anxious curiosity, at this Play had been approved by that judgment which
had decided so severely on mine. At the opening of the Piece, I was much
concerned to see an old English story attempted, though it bore little
resemblance to the legendary tales of Percy and Douglas; and that so much was
said of Chivalry, and of expeditions to the Holy Land -- circumstances which,
though finely calculated for the Stage, had been much neglected by our Poets,
in favor of the tales of Greek and Roman antiquity. Yet, as the Crusades are
common historical facts, I could only consider my being in some measure
anticipated, as unfortunate. But I can hardly describe my astonishment, or
distress, when I saw Raby, the Father of the Heroine, appear in almost the same
situation with Westmoreland; and resent his Son-in-law's imputation on the
honor of his Daughter, in a train of ideas exactly similar to those which I
had given to the Father of Adina; and that he even spoke several lines nearly
verbatim; which will be found on comparing the two Tragedies.

I learnt from the Papers of next day, that Percy was a Translation from a
Tragedy called Gabrielle de Vergy, written by M. Belloy. I was soon after
informed, by persons who had read the original, (for I am unacquainted with the
language) that in M. Belley's Tragedy there is no Father. I had remarked,
indeed, during the representation, that Raby seemed to have no connection with
the plot; he was out of the way during all the business of the Play, and
returned just time enough to challenge the defamer of his Daughter, and to call
himself her Champion; which however neither introduces, nor retards a single
event,

Various were my conjectures on this occasion; but prudence suggested a
cautious silence, as I had still hopes at Drury Lane. Mr. Sheridan received me
infi^itely better than I expected, and regretted that I had not brought my
Piece before, as Mr. Jephson and Mr. Craddock had each a Tragedy promised for
the next Winter, (1778-9) which must put it off another Season; but assured me,
in the most explicit terms, that no other Tragedy should come before it,
provided it was proper for the Stage; which, he added in a very polite manner,
he had no doubt of. He soon after received my Farce of Who Is the Dupe? with
equal frankness, and promised that it should be brought out in the best part of
the Season, as some recompense for the delay of my Tragedy. More than
satisfied, happy with my prospects, I had only to regret that I had
misapprehended his neglect of my letter, and caused myself so many uneasy hours.

The Law of Lombardy was soon after put into Rehearsal, and I learnt, with
great surprise, that it bore a resemblance to Albina in the conduct of the
Piece, though not in the Story or Characters. I was greatly alarmed at the idea
of more anticipation; which, whether accidental or otherwise, was destructive
of every prospect of reputation or advantage to me. This resemblance was
mentioned to Mr. Sheridan; and I thought myself happy when, by his
interposition, Mr. Harris was prevailed on to read the Tragedy, on the
suggestion that some alteration had been made; and they acknowledged that, if
both Pieces were entitled to the Stage, the only means of doing justice to
both, was to bring them out, at the same time, at different Houses; otherwise
the novelty of one of them must be destroyed -- and the idea of Rival Tragedies
might be as advantageous as that of Rival Actors had been on some particular
occasions. This matter, of very anxious expectation, was suspended near a
month, as Mr. Sheridan met with great difficulty in finding the Copy of the
Tragedy. In the mean-time, the speaking Pantomime of the Touchstone was brought
out; and, as I was then in great good humor with Mr. Harris, I had a pleasure
in endeavoring to suggest some useful alterations, and was happy when he
accepted the new scene of Lady Fashion's Rout, which I considered as an earnest
that he intended to accept the Tragedy. Mr. Sheridan at length found Albina,
and I attended him by appointment. On this occasion I waited three hours,
(which was rather longer than he had ever made me wait before): he came at
length with the Tragedy in his hand; and I feel myself too much flattered by
what he then said, to omit it, whatever length it may add to my tale.

He made a thousand apologies, (and in apologies for negligence Mr. Sheridan is
remarkably easy and successful) but said he had brought the best in his hand,
which was my Tragedy, saying, "I have now read every word of it. I was
determined not to see you 'till I had; and this it is that has kept me so long.
Before I enter into particulars, I will tell you that I think your Tragedy a
very good one; it will do you much honor, and be of service to the Theater."On
my acknowledgements, he added, "Upon my word, I really think what I say; and,
without a compliment, I am surprised that such a Tragedy could have been
refused. Mr. Harris must have seen it when his head was full of other business:
if he had read it attentively, he could not have refused it. This Tragedy has a
right to the Stage: it must and shall be done."

The Tragedy was then opened, and Mr. Sheridan showed me several indentings
against lines which he wished me to consider. He said the Characters were very
strongly drawn, and the Story interesting; and frequently pointed out passages,
which, on account of the Poetry, or the Thought, he was pleased to admire. The
only objection of importance was, that he thought Gondibert should not see, or
mention, the Bridal Bed, in the last Scene: but, on my attempting a timorous
defense, he added, "Don't alter this, or any other passage, unless it strikes
you as it does me; you ought to be tenacious: every original Writer must give
up passages with difficulty: it is only Translators, and Borrowers, who are so
ready to comply with every hint that is proposed."

The judgment pronounced by Mr. Sheridan made me particularly happy, as Mr.
Harris had promised, the same morning, that he would be guided by Mr.
Sheridan's opinion, who said he would give the Tragedy to Mr. Harris himself,
and tell him what he thought of it. This was adding favor to favor; and my
thanks, I believe, sufficiently expressed my sentiments.

Mr. Harris, a few days afterward, took my Tragedy, as he imagined, into the
country; but, on opening it, found that Mr. Sheridan had, by mistake, given him
a Comedy. This occasioned another week's suspense: it was then however obtained
and read; and I had scarce a doubt, considering every circumstance, that it
would be put into immediate Rehearsal.

All my hopes were however confounded by Mr. Harris's persevering with
inflexible steadiness in his former opinion. He said, there had been no
material alterations, (which was certainly true;) and that it was still his
opinion, that the Tragedy could never be made fit for the Stage. When he was
reminded that Mr. Sheridan entertained a very different opinion of it, he
replied, "I don't believe he has read it: he may have dipped into it; but I am
convinced he has not read it through." This was afterward discussed in the
presence of both, when Mr. Sheridan assured Mr. Harris that he had read the
whole, and that it was his opinion it ought to be done; but Mr. Harris remained
inflexible.

When I next saw Mr. Sheridan, it was on the subject of my Farce. He observed
me dispirited, and kindly taking my hand, said, "Never mind 'em; you and I will
show that we know a good Tragedy."

This Farce Mr. Harris had offered to take, and put into immediate Rehearsal;
but, as I had then no doubt of its being played in an advantageous part of the
season at Drury Lane, I had no inducement to change the House for which it was
intended. Who Is the Dupe, however, in consequence of repeated breaches of
appointments and promises, was not produced till the middle of the Benefits,
when it could not have a regular run; and I was then to pay an Hundred Guineas
(Thirty of which had been added by the present Managers) for the chance of a
Benefit, at a time when the current business of the Theater would not produce
that Sum.

The pecuniary disappointment I did not consider as material in this instance,
as I hoped that the applause with which the Farce was uniformly received, would
have put an end to the difficulty of getting my Pieces on the Stage, which was
infinitely more harrassing to my mind than the labor of producing them. I was
however soon after greatly hurt, to hear that Mr. Sheridan evaded the subject
when it was accidentally men^ioned, and advised me to write a Comedy. -- It was
necessary, for this purpose, that I should have some Comic ideas; and they were
all completely driven from my mind by the vexations I had undergone. I had
indeed made some progress in writing a Piece founded on Turkish manners, the
Scene of which is laid in Asia, and slattered myself with success from the
novelty of the attempt; but it lies, and must lie, in its present state, till I
have reason to believe it will meet with a fair and candid reception from the
Theaters.

Mr. Craddock's Tragedy was then preparing for rehearsal, and the parts given
out; but another Play of Miss More's was discovered to be nearly finished; and
Mr. Harris was so eager to bring it out, though it was then near the conclusion
of the season, that she has said he would hardly give her time to finish it.
There was only one capital Actress at either House, who would undertake a new
part in May; and, though she belonged to Drury Lane, she was cast in Miss
More's Pray at Covent Garden, in consequence of the levelling power of the
Coalition; and Mr. Craddock's Play was put off 'till next season.

Another Play by Miss More alarmed me greatly. The terror of suffering again
what I had felt at Percy, induced me to write to her in much agitation; a d I
am sorry that I was prevented from sending that Letter, and induced to believe
it was impossible that the same palpable resemblance could again happen. Under
this conviction I attended the representation, and heard with astonishment,
what appeared to me to be every essential circumstance in the Plot, and
Character, of my Play; and to observe, that it was changed principally in those
places which had been objected to in mine. In Orlando, as in Gond^bert, the
action springs from Love, which took its rise in a situation wherein Hope was
impossible; though the object is changed, from the Widow of his Brother, to the
betrothed Mistress of his Friend.

The character and offices of Editha were given, though the sex was changed.
From the same motive of aggrandizing his fortune, though without the same
stimulus of a degraded situation, he worms himself into the considence of the
despairing Lover, and persuades him that he is secretly beloved by Isabella,
whilst she receives the addresses of another. Orlando breaks into a rhapsody
similar to that of Gondibert, persuades himself he had seen many proofs of that
concealed passion, and gives himself up to the guidance of his artful
Counselor; which produces a catastrophe that is nearly the same. Orlando, in
the dark, intending to stab Rivers, by a fortunate mistake stabs Bertrand; and
the principal situation of the catastrophe is produced exactly in the same
manner in both Plays; which is, by the critical entrance of the person supposed
to be murdered. The greater part of this, however, passes behind the scenes in
Fatal Falsehood; by which the dramatic effect is weakened; but the principal
objections made to mine, are removed. The character of the Sister of Rivers,
and other parts of the Play, differ from mine; but there is a scene between the
Father and his Daughter, on her being rejected by Orlando, that bears the same
resemblance, in the literal expression, to the scene between Westmoreland and
Albina, in the fourth Act of this Play, as the scene in Percy did to that
between him and Edward.

How all these wonderful resemblances happened, it is impossible for me to know
-- nor do I know that Miss More ever saw my Tragedy -- it was in Mr. Garrick's
possession (under the name of Edwina) soon after the conclusion of the season
in which he he left the Stage; about which time, I have since been informed,
Miss More was an inmate at Hampton, and that the Play, afterward called Percy,
was then translating. My Tragedy was afterward in Mr. Harris's Closet, at the
same time with Percy, and again nearly at the same time with Fatal Falsehood. I
know that Managers are continually employed in giving advice, and in suggesting
alternations to Authors; and I have frequently heard, before I had any
experience in this anxious warfare, of the danger when once an idea is afloat
in the Theatrical Hemisphere, of its getting into other plays. Amidst the crowd
of Plots, and Stage Contrivances, in which a Manager is involved, recollection
is too frequently mistaken for the suggestions of imagination.

Should it, after all, appear to the Public, that there is nothing more in
these repeated resemblances, than what may be accounted for by supposing a
similarity in our minds; and that, by some wonderful coincidence, Miss More and
I have but one common stock of ideas between us, I have only to lament that the
whole misfortune of this similarity has fallen upon me: and, as in this case,
we must continue writing in the same track, it seems reasonable that we should
have our productions brought forward in turn; instead of which Miss More has
had two Tragedies brought out, both of which were written since mine, whilst I
struggled for the representation of this, in vain. But, as there seems to be
little hope of my obtaining this, or any other favor, from the Winter
Managers, I presume at least, that, as I do not pretend to prove -- what it is
impossible for me to know -- that Miss More ever read, or copied me, that it
will be admitted that I have not copied her; had I not been able to ascertain
the fact, that my Tragedy was written long before Percy and Fatal Falsehood
appeared, no proof would have been required, beyond their extreme similarity,
that I had been guilty of the grossest Plagiarism.

I now found myself deprived of all hope of Albina's appearing to the Public as
an Original Play; yet I still conceived myself sure of its being represented at
Drury Lane the next Season: but I soon after accidentally learnt, that Mr.
Sheridan had promised another Tragedy; and, as Mr. Craddock's had been put off,
I well knew that three would not be done: -- this, with his evading the
subject, and saying that he thought Mr. Harris would still do it, reduced me to
the disagreeable necessity of asking an explicit declaration, when I heard with
inexpressible astonishment -- "That he neyer intended to do the Play at
Drury Lane, and that the next Season was engaged to Mr. Craddock, and another
Gentleman."On being reminded of his promises and encomiums, he said -- "It was
still his opinion, that the Tragedy was a very good one, that it ought not to
have been refused, and that he had proposed to prevail on Mr. Harris after all
to bring it out; but, as this had been improperly mentioned to Mr. Harris,
there was now an end of it." I was then charged with having pieced
conversations together, which Mr. Sheridan said should never happen again; and,
from the whole of his behavior, it appeared to me that he meant this to close
his doors against me.

This most injurious and unaccountable conduct appears to me to be the effect
of that coalition of the Theaters, which, by uniting the interests and
prejudices of the Managers, deprives an Author of all hope, after a Piece has
been rejected by one. Had Mr. Sheridan been unconnected with Covent Garden, I
have no doubt, from the opinion he conceived of my Tragedy, but that it would
have been brought out in a most advantageous manner. Ideas of rivalship, which
is the natural and proper effect of two Houses, would have been as favorable
to me, as their union has been ruinous.

The morning succeeding my interview with Mr. Sheridan, Mr. Colman was asked to
bring out a Tragedy for me, at the Haymarket, which both the Winter Managers
had refused. His answer was -- When an Author of reputation thinks proper to
bring me a Piece, I don't think I have a right to deliberate. If Mrs. Cowley
invites the Town to a Tragedy at the Haymarket, I am only the Midwife, to give
it a safe delivery to the World; when one does not know a Writer, it is
different.

This candid and liberal answer I have great pleasure in recording. The
Tragedy, when read, drew an approbation not less warm from Mr. Colman, than
from Mr. Sheridan: and it was not merely praise; Mr. Colman put it into
immediate rehearsal, for which I think myself under the highest obligation, as
Tragedy is inconsistent with the sportive Genius of the Haymarket; and there
was little hope of advantage equal to the expensive preparation of a regular
Tragedy. It was however presented, with no other alteration than the
curtailments, which were necessary, on account of the length, where the time of
representation is shorter than in the Winter Theaters -- and with the
disadvantage of having one of its principal Editha; since given to Miss Sherry.
Characters performed in a style which excited laughter; yet it was received
with a degree of applause, for which I should be ungrateful, were I not vain of
it.

Had I taken up my pen merely in pursuit of applause, I should have been
completely gratified; but this, though so ostentatiously held out as the motive
for productions in the Poetic line, has seldom, in any age or country, produced
works of any considerable reputation. Dramatic Writers, in particular, have
always sought for support from their labor, which is too great to be
undertaken for amusement. This may appear a vulgar topic; but to me it is a
very serious subject of complaint, that, by the conduct of the Winter Managers,
I have been deprived of a reasonable prospect of several hundred pounds, and
have spent years of fruitless anxiety and trouble. My productions have been
uniformly received by the Public with applause; yet I find the doors of the
Winter Theaters shut against me. -- To this severe fate I most reluctantly
submit.

PROLOGUE. The first part of this Prologue, which was intended for Mr. Parsons,
was not spoken on the Stage.

[Prompter, speaking without.] PRAY, Sir, come back -- come back -- The Author
swears,
That, if you speak --
Hang Authors, and their airs!
I say I will speak, though she burst with rage:
What right has She upon our Summer Stage? --
-- With dismal Stories, and long Acts in verse,
Solemn, and slow-paced, as a midnight hearse?
Hey-dey! from floor to roof, displayed in rows,
As though we shivered in December snows!
It Is devilish odd! -- Beneath a burning sky
Who'd crowd it here, to pant, and sob, and cry,
Whilst Madmen swagger, or their Madams die?
'Twas my advice to keep these Doors close shut
Against that ranting, bloody-minded Slut,
Melpomene. I never yet could see
Those charms of hers -- I Am sure she is none for me.
My Mistress -- little Thal -- you know I mean,
The laughing Princess of the Comic Scene --
-- She sent me here, and dubbed me Plenipo.
"Dear PARSONS! Quick!" she cried, "this instant go!
"Fly to yon Audience, who in judgment sit,
"And plead our cause before the Jury Pit.
"Tell 'em this Authorling abjures my reign,
"To fill my haughty Sister's sanguine train;
"A lawless Rebel, from my Banner flown --
" -- I call for justice -- justice from the Town!"
I Will do it, said I; and then, in aid of you,
My wrongs I Will usher to their Worships' view.
Me she forsakes; her little Doily slights,
He who has toiled so many weary nights,
And talked of Algebra, and Greek, and Latin,
Till larned Scholards could no word squeeze pat-in.
Down with her Tragedy! down, down, ye Wits!
For me, and Thal. the fickle Baggage quits.
Spoil her Heroics! her new buskins doff!
And then --
Monster!
[Enter Mrs. Massey. You there! oh, oh, I Am off, I Am off!
[Exit. Not write in Tragic style! -- Pray tell me why?
Sure those who made you laugh, may make you cry.
WHEN the light Scenes, our Author's pencil drew,
Extorted -- all she asked -- a smile from You;
Her grateful mind a newborn ardor caught,
A loftier fancy, and sublimer thought;
To her rapt eye the Martial Ages rose;
And, as her Muse impelled, her Story flows.
It Is true, she calls you from the tempting shade,
The zephyr'd meadow, and the leafy glade;
And not to cheer with Satire's poignant hit,
Ironic Humor, or the flash of Wit.
Her wand she waves; and, instant to your eyes
Tempestuous passions, guilty deeds, arise!
For these our Author's magic line was drawn;
For these she bids you from the fragrant lawn: --
To rend with fear, to melt with tender woe,
And bid the graceful drops of pity flow.
Majestic Nature's plan she follows there,
Who, when thick vapors clog the sultry air,
When glowing Sirius, from his fervid eye,
Sends noxious languors through the sickening sky,
Arous'd -- amidst her THUNDERS she appears,
And in terrific grandeur strikes our ears!
The wide-stretch'd concave blackens with her ire;
Through laboring ether darts the living fire;
The heavens, the earth, all aid her mighty rage,
And elements with wrathful elements engage!
Then -- whilst the trembling world is lost in fears --
She melts the lurid clouds in healthful tears.
Your tears we mean to prompt, whilst You, secure
Amidst the coming storm, the wreck endure:
Harmless our tempest roars within this pale,
Whilst ventilators catch the cooling gale.
But, should a tempest in your quarter rise,
'Twould scare us more than thunder in the skies*
Guiltless to You the storm within these doors;
Do You then save us harmless, Sirs! from yours.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA,
MEN.
KING Mr. Usher. WESTMORELAND Mr. Digges. EDWARD Mr. Dimond. GONDIBERT Mr.
Palmer. EGBERT Mr. Aicken. OFFICER Mr. Egan. OSWALD Mr. R. Palmer. STEWARD to
Westmoreland Mr. Gardner.
WOMEN.
ALBINA Mrs. Massey. EDITHA Miss Sherry. ADELA Mrs. Poussin. INA Mrs. Le Fevre.


Guards and Attendants.

ALBINA, Countess RAIMOND, A TRAGEDY,
ACT I.
SCENE, A magnificent Hall in the Gothic style. Enter the Earl of Westmoreland,
and a Gentleman. WESTMORELAND. BEAR back my duty to my royal Master;
Tell him I will obey his gracious summons,
And meet the Council at the appointed hour: --
-- Yet would I hope the flying rumor false.

GENTLEMAN. Too well, my Lord, the tidings are confirmed;
Again the sacrilegious Turk has broke
The peace he asked -- again the Crescent's reared
Upon the Holy Plains, whilst yellow streamers,
Fanned by the wanton air, which late embraced
The Christian standard, to the world proclaim
The impious war.

WESTMORELAND. Give back the years, O Time!
When such a tale as this had fired my soul,
And sped me to th'unrighteous camp, on wings
Of holy zeal! The fire's not yet extinct,
But cank'ring age the sinews of my youth
Has eat away.

GENTLEMAN. Be not thus thankless to an age,
Which in its slow advance, to gain a welcome,
Brought honors, triumphs, and a nation's love!

WESTMORELAND. Forbear! Thou come a messenger of war;
Away then with the flattering arts of peace,
And deal in words more suited to the times!

GENTLEMAN. Your pardon, Lord! Know then, the King in haste
Orders his vet'ran Nobles to attend him.
A powerful army he will in person lead
To Asia's plains. Ten thousand choicest warriors
Mean time are his precursors to the field,
Led on by him they love -- the gallant Edward --
Who, ere the down of youth forfook his cheek,
Deeds had performed that laurell'd age might envy.

WESTMORELAND. His manhood will fulfill his youth's fair promise --
-- A star, or I mistake, which rose in splendour,
And will in glory set. Had Heaven bestowed
On me a son like him, without regret
I Would sink into the arms of nerveless age;
Count his exploits, grow vain upon his conquests;
And, when my Country claimed her ancient warrior,
I Would proudly show my Son.

GENTLEMAN. Though from your prayers a Son has been witheld,
A Daughter was bestowed, so rich in graces,
So excellent in mind --

WESTMORELAND. She Is my heart's darling --
-- My only pledge of chaste connubial love!
Her mother's beauty, and her mother's worth,
Survive the grave -- They live in my Albina!

Enter a Servant. SERVANT. The Lord Edward, with earnestness, demands
An audience of your grace.

WESTMORELAND. Instant admit him.
[Ex. Serve. and Gent. He comes, to boast a Soldier's happiness.

Enter Lord Edward. WESTMORELAND. Welcome, young Hero! I partake the transports
Which this high honor, this unsought command,
Must give a heart -- panting, like yours -- for Glory.

EDWARD. My Lord!
[confusedly.
WESTMORELAND. How Is this! have I misread your heart?
Now, whilst our fiery youth are all in arms,
And martial ardors dart from every eye;
Edward, as if oppressed with maiden shame,
Blushing, averts his head --

EDWARD. Well may I blush!
The Soldier, chosen by the King, to lead
His warlike bands, and carry Britain's thunder
To holy Zion's gates -- he whose rapt bosom,
No flame, but glory, should confess --
-- He stands before you, with a fainting heart,
To tell a tale -- of love.

WESTMORELAND. The time's unapt;
Yet it is a tale at which a Soldier needs not blush.
He, who most ardent in the sanguine field,
Contemning danger, braves the whizzing storm;
He is most fit to storm a Maid's reluctance,
He best deserves the happiness of love.

EDWARD. This, from a Hero's mouth, warrants my sighs.
Edward no longer then shall fear to own
The power of silken tresses, and fair eyes:
But, Westmoreland! with equal patience hear
That she, who in my heart has raised this flame --
-- She, who does pityless receive its sighs,
Is matchless Raimond -- is thy beauteous Daughter!

WESTMORELAND. Heaven, I thank thee! [aside.] Is this a sudden passion,
Bred from the fever of hot youthful blood?
Or kindled by some casual glance?

EDWARD. Oh no!
A faithful Love -- with my existence twisted;
Nor know I when th'attachment first began.
Deep in my heart she would fixed her beauteous image
When, by my father sent, I England left
For distant lands.

WESTMORELAND. So early!

EDWARD. Even so early.
Ere glory or ambition touched my breast,
Albina filled it with resistless love.

WESTMORELAND. Had you disclosed your passion to my Daughter?

EDWARD. If the unartful language of mine eyes
Disclosed the tale, she knew I was her slave;
But youthful bashfulness sealed up my lips:
And when I left -- reluctant -- Albion's shores,
Not one soft glance my longing eye could catch
To sooth the raging passion in my breast.

WESTMORELAND. But Gallia's shores a ready cure bestowed:
Her beauties kindly heal the wounds they give,
Nor let their lovers languish in their chains.

EDWARD. In vain the beauties of the Gallic Court
Spread out their nets -- In vain the dames of Italy
Displayed their charms -- Impatient I returned
To lay my heart at your Albina's feet --
-- Oh day of horror! She was wife of Raimond!
Fury, despair, seized my distracted mind --
I cursed his fortune, cursed myself, and loathed
His hated name --

WESTMORELAND. Young Lord, you do forget
Earl Raimond was my Son -- the chosen Husband
To whom I gave Albina.

EDWARD. Oh pardon, Sir, the transports of my grief,
Which, at this distant period, shake my frame,
And guess from them what Edward has endured!
Earl Raimond's arms, and mine, against the Saracens
Our monarch did command -- and then I proved
That I was worthy of Albina's hand.

WESTMORELAND. Your valiant acts by fame have been proclaimed.

EDWARD. Of fame, of valor, it is not that I boast,
It Is not the prowess of my arm in war,
It Is of a deed a Roman might have claimed,
And you will thank --

WESTMORELAND. You warm my expectation.

EDWARD. 'Twas on a day, when truce had been proclaimed,
I passed beyond the lines t'observe the foe.
Directed by the gleams of burnished mail,
Within the bosom of a tufted thicket,
Three Saracens, waging unequal fight
Against one English warrior, I espied.
My bounding courser bore me to the spot --
There Raimond I beheld, o'erpow'r'd and prone:
Lifting this tempered sword, I cleft the arm
Which, aiming at his heart, had instant pierced it --
He rose with strength renewed, and we grew victors.

WESTMORELAND. Talk not of Roman, 'twas a Briton's act,
And well became a Christian warrior.
Go to Albina -- boldly speak your passion --
She must, she shall, reward thy truth and honor!
Tell her, her Father does approve thy suit,
And speeds thee, with his wishes, to her heart.

EDWARD. For this, O noble Westmoreland! I thank thee;
But vainly I Have assailed with warmest vows
Albina's heart: Sorrow, like a chill atmosphere,
The beauteous dame surrounds, quenching each dart --
Each burning dart of love. --

WESTMORELAND. Oh, you have not yet been versed in women's ways.
You, who can brave Bellona, when she shakes
Her iron locks, I warrant, are dismayed
At Beauty's frown, and tremble if she sweeps
Her train in scorn: But you must learn t'o'erlook
An hundred follies -- vanity behold
In every shifting form, and yet be pleased --
Still patiently admire, or never hope
to win fantastic woman.

EDWARD. Oh, such services
Albina never claimed; yet, if she did,
Whole years I Would spend to gratify her taste,
And would be any thing to please her phantasy --
But now, to those sweet homages which Love
Delights to pay, a cruel period's fixed --
Within three days, England I quit for Palestine.

WESTMORELAND. It Is a short period. It will scarcely serve
To break a piece of gold, or carve her name,
With yours entwined, on some young willow's bark.

EDWARD. Ah, my good Lord, treat not my griefs thus lightly!
For if I leave your Daughter, Raimond's widow,
I go to certain death -- if Edward's Bride,
I will return in triumph to her arms,
Lay my proud laurels at Albina's feet,
And seek no future glory, but her love.

WESTMORELAND. Well, to my Daughter I will plead your cause.
This do I owe the love your Father bore me,
And to the fame your virtues have attained --
Here meet me in an hour, and hope success.

EDWARD. This -- this, O Westmoreland! I dared to hope;
Yet joy and gratitude, like fires confined,
Struggle within my heart for room -- for utterance --
My tongue, unused to descant on felicity,
Denies its words -- yet trust to me --

WESTMORELAND. Nay keep them
For purposes more fit; words may win Ladies,
But Soldiers must be won by deeds!

[Exeunt severally. SCENE, A Garden belonging to Albina. Enter Editha followed
by Adela. EDITHA. Why shines the sun thus gaily on the world?
Why do the feathered habitants of air
With melody, and cheery songs, insult me?
Is it to prove that, amongst all Nature's beings,
I am the most unblest? Th'unconscious birds
Chant songs of gratitude for good possessed;
I know no good -- I feel no gratitude --
-- An outcast, and undone!

ADELA. Your sorrows, Madam,
Seem to gain strength with time!

EDITHA. To griefs like mine,
Time brings no lenient balm. Each dawning day
Is a fresh witness of my abject state.
Born, Adela, to an exalted rank,
Bright pomp attending on my early years,
And blessings springing round me as I trod --
-- Oh! thou should wonder that my swelling soul
Can stoop a moment to this vile dependence --
-- It cannot stoop! Misfortune bears upon me,
But my aspiring mind is unsubdu'd.

ADELA. You think too deeply; sorrows keen as yours
Are frequent in the page of human life.

EDITHA. It Is from our feelings sorrows take their force --
-- And what are mine? State, fortune, rank, with all
The joys they bring, torn from my eager grasp --
-- Torn from my grasp, still present to my thoughts;
Their shadows haunt me, whilst I bend my knee,
And humbly take, with thanks, my daily bread!

ADELA. Alas! you think unjustly of the Countess:
Still amiable and good, she sooths your griefs,
And, with unceasing kindness --

EDITHA. Hah! her kindness!
And was I born to bear Albina's kindness?
Thou, who art left the sole remaining wreck
Of my lost grandeur, knew'st me once her equal.
Her goodness tortures me -- Earl Sibald's heir
Should grant, and not receive; she should protect,
Not seek protection.

ADELA. Though now dependent,
Yet still such blessings do attend your state --

EDITHA. Thou, Adela! to low dependence born,
Enjoy'st its little comforts; me they torture --
-- The height from which I fell, I must reclimb --
-- The towering Eagle builds not with the Thrush,
Nor stoops to batten with the lowly Wren.

ADELA. Why struggle thus with fate? The noble Countess
Studies your welfare, and deserves your love.

EDITHA. Had I never fallen, and were I not dependent,
I might perhaps esteem, nay, I might love her;
But now! -- hear my whole soul -- then think, my Adela!
How I must love her! Know that it is through Edward,
Through Edward only, I can hope to gain
The glorious steep from which my fate has cast me --
But this Albina -- she whom I must love,
Has caught his sordid vows in nets of gold.

ADELA. Is It possible? Lord Edward!

EDITHA. Even him.

ADELA. Sure 'twas his Father that brought woe on yours;
He winged the ruin that o'erwhelms your House --
-- He caused the ills you mourn.

EDITHA. Have I forgot it?
No. -- His stern loyalty made me an orphan,
And Edward shall repair my bitter wrongs.
The only good Editha can accept,
Is to partake his greatness, and his name. --
-- That would be bliss; all less than that is insult.

ADELA. Will then Lord Edward -- will this bliss be yours?

EDITHA. The Countess stands 'twixt me and all my hopes.
Had Fortune smiled jess lavishly on her,
Edward's whole heart had been resigned to me --
And I restored to all my native honors.

ADELA. And why not still? for she, reserved and cold,
With unselecting eye, beholds her lovers,
And Edward sinks unmarked amidst the crowd.

EDITHA. So may he still!
Raimond scorn Edward! and thou, Edward, know
That all my native hate is but suspended --
-- My mind's in equipoise, ready alike
To hold thee as my Lover, or my Foe!

ADELA. The Countess and her Father come this way.

EDITHA. Hah! then retire unseen [Exit Adela.] My low estate
May make me deemed obtruder on their privacy --
-- This bower conceals me.

[Enters the Bower. SCENE continues. Enter Westmoreland and Albina. ALBINA. Oh,
my good Lord, urge not your daughter thus!
Never be it said of noble Raimond's widow,
That she grew sick of weeds in one short year,
And lightly changed them for the bridal vest.

WESTMORELAND. Full fourteen months have led their pensive hours,
Since the sad obsequies of your dead Lord: --
He was the Husband of my choice, whom you
In duty took --

ALBINA. And will in duty mourn.
Nay, had Albina's heart forgot the virtues,
Which made her Lord so worthy of its love;
Yet still she dares not slight the laws of custom,
Nor to licentious tongues give themes for slander.

WESTMORELAND. Enough to custom, and to grief, thou'st given.
Wilt waste thy blooming youth in widowhood,
Because some months you bore the name of Wife?

ALBINA. I have not sworn to know no second love.
To Raimond's memory grant another year;
And then -- in truth, my Lord, you prompt my tongue
Beyond discretion's bounds.

WESTMORELAND. Come, come, Albina;
Though to a Lover you might wear this guise,
Of coy reserve, yet, to a Father's eye,
Your mind should now appear as legible
As in the days of prattling infancy.
Raimond deserved the tribute of your tears,
And you have wept a deluge to his manes.
Consider now, the brave, the youthful Edward --
The prize for whom contending beauties strive!
His name and wealth amongst the first are ranked,
And he stands high in royal Henry's favor.

ALBINA. I know his merits, and I know his love;
Nay, I will own that when my dying Lord
From Palestina wrote, he gave me charge,
That if again the holy marriage bonds
I ever should wear, that I should choose -- beyond
All others choose -- his Friend, the noble Edward;
But did not bid me hymeneals sing
Upon his turfless grave.

WESTMORELAND. Then sing his dirge,
And with it join Lord Edward's, who will perchance
Be soon entombed -- victim alike of love
And war.

ALBINA. Say you, my Lord!

WESTMORELAND. I say, my Lady,
That in three days Edward returns to Palestine.
Our Royal Master has on him bestowed
The levies for the Holy War; from which
He Will never return, save he leaves you his Wife.

ALBINA. Can this be true? -- Or do you mean to try
If in my heart there is not hid more love
For Edward, than modesty would own?

WESTMORELAND. Truly not:
Modesty has not wove so thick a shade
As to conceal your love. To Holy Land
He surely goes -- In triumph to return,
Or hopeless die -- Albina must decree.

ALBINA. Then coy reserve, and women's arts, adieu!
Danger tears off the veil --
Oh, spare my burning blushes whilst I own,
Edward is dearer to Albina's heart
Than fame or conquest to the bever'd soldier.

WESTMORELAND. Well said, my child! --

ALBINA. When on Lord Raimond you bestowed my hand,
Even then the image of the blooming Edward
Made duty -- to my heart -- an arduous task;
But virtue aided my devoted mind,
Whilst Raimond's worth, and manly tenderness,
Had, I believed, converted all my love --
-- 'Till freedom taught that virtue had but hid,
Not rased, the deep impression.

WESTMORELAND. Well may my heart be proud of such a daughter!
Oh, the pute transport! -- The exalted joy!
By favoring Heaven for parents minds reserved,
When in the fiery combat of the passions,
Their children rise, victorious from the trial!
By honor led -- by sacred virtue crowned!
To thee I give a Child's most glorious meed,
[to Albina. To thee I give a Father's grateful thanks.

ALBINA. Alas! my Lord, you much o'errate a duty,
In which to fail, were gross -- were deadly shame.

WESTMORELAND. The best reward, Albina, now awaits thee;
Thy Edward loves thee -- loves with fervent truth --
-- Yield then thy hand, to him who wears thy heart;
Let me, tomorrow, greet Lord Edward -- Son!

ALBINA. Oh grant a longer space -- a few short days,
To cheer the sadness from my widowed brow,
Lest I insult the blissful marriage feast
With pensiveness, ill-suited to the day!

WESTMORELAND. Within three days, Edward must England quit,
-- Must quit the land where Peace and Beauty reign,
For hostile camps, and scenes of savage war!
Tomorrow, then, consent to be his Bride --
-- Tomorrow, bless the Man thy Country honors!
A Father -- it is a Father asks the boon.

ALBINA. The boon my Father asked, my heart or lips
Have never yet denied; tomorrow, then --
-- Since you, my Lord, command -- tomorrow's sun
Beholds Lord Raimond's Widow, Edward's Bride.

WESTMORELAND. Then all that is good, shine doubly in its beams!
Ye passing moments, bear away her sorrows;
Ye which approach, come fledged with young delights.
-- Lead on the dawn that crowns her truth and virtue;
Be it distinguished in Time's circling ring,
Marked out with blessings and peculiar joys --
-- The favored morn that makes Albina happy!

[Exeunt. Enter Editha from the Bower. EDITHA. Be it accursed! Oh torture! are
my hopes,
Like airy visions, fled? The darling hope,
Which has enriched life's barren scenes, is vanished,
And I awake to horror! mad'ning thought!
Albina triumphs -- and Editha's scorned!
All that remains of yesterday's gay dream
Is to behold a haughty rival's bliss --
At groveling distance, see her towering fate,
And pine away a hated life in envy.

Enter Albina. ALBINA. In tears, Editha! Whence such marks of woe,
Whilst joy and happiness beam forth on me?

EDITHA. When I have cause, I too shall boast of joy,
And brave the mischiefs of the scorning world.

ALBINA. Hear then a cause! You know, with ardent passion,
The noble Edward long has sought my love --
Now know, that, though concealed, the tender flame
Within my bosom glowed; and that, tomorrow,
The holy rites will sanctify our love.

EDITHA. You, therefore, may rejoice -- but on Editha
What glorious fortune beams, that she must yield
Her heart to joy, and dress her face in smiles?

ALBINA. What bliss ever shone on me, that reached not you?
Come, chase away this unavailing gloom!
Albina is your friend; and, in her love,
Thou shall find shelter from the world's cold frowns.

EDITHA. More hateful is this insolence of goodness,
More cutting, than contempt. [Aside.] I thank you, Madam.
Well do I know, I am your bounty's creature:
Your table feeds me, and your cossers clothe.
I, who boast ancestry as great as yours,
Am now dependent on your charity.

ALBINA. And blame you me for this, unjust Editha?
Your ruined fortunes often have I mourned,
And soothed your sorrows with a sister's kindness.
Methinks you lack your usual courtesy.

EDITHA. Your pardon, Lady! --
You know I am not fashioned like my sex;
I have no sympathy for Lover's feelings;
Their hopes, their fears, their soft sollicitudes,
Have here no unison -- the fire which animates
My breast, is a true flame -- it is bright ambition!

ALBINA. Ambition was not meant sor feeble woman.
Leave it the boisterous sex, whose minds capacious
Are aptly fited to so proud a guest!
A sweeter province Nature gave to us --
-- As a fond parent to its last-born child,
For woman she reserved her choicest gift,
And called the blessing -- Love --

EDITHA. Love! be thou ever stranger to my heart!
Thee, more than age, or ugliness, I dread!
Who gives thee place, a ruthless serpent bosoms
To poison her repose, and snare her virtue!
Thou merciless do wreck the virgin's fame,
Shadowing all her cheerful morn of life,
As dreary vapors veil the bright Aurora,
Folding in dismal gloom the springing day.
The curse pronounced on disobedient woman
In love is wrapped, inflicted, and fulfilled.

ALBINA. Oh, it is all false! Thou do profane the source
From whence our blessings spring. --
The heart untouched by love, is like a lute,
Whose powers the master never has called forth,
Or with unskilful finger struck harsh discords;
Yet touch with truth the strings, and harmony will flow,
And tones mellifluous enchant the ear,
Filling with melting music empty space.
When these effusions of a female heart
Thou can with patience bear -- Editha, find me!

[Exit* EDITHA. First will I find Lord Gondibert. --
What revolutions has this love accomplished!
And shall less power belong to bright ambition?
Ambition! thou whose hallowed flame can live
Only in minds refined from the gross elements
Of which the herd of human kind are made!
This Deity of Fools shall yield to thee.
I Will strait to Gondibert, whose long-pent passion
Will, like a torrent, from its mound break forth,
O'erwhelming its opposers: his fierce transports
With the soft voice of Friendship I will meet,
And guide them to my purpose.

END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE, A Gothic Colonade. Enter Gondibert, followed by Egbert. EGBERT. MY
Lord, your sorrows pierce my aged heart;
But I entreat you lend an ear to reason!

GONDIBERT. Reason! Distraction!

EGBERT. When you, my Lord, did study in the schools,
I Have heard you much of Reason talk, Philosophy,
And Virtue -- now, when all their force you want,
You spurn them, with a blind contempt, away.

GONDIBERT. They have no force, no power, beyond the schools
Where they are taught. Do think the fools who preach'em
Ever felt, like me, the energies of passion,
Or the keen torture of an hopeless Love?

EGBERT. That it is hopeless, is a cause --

GONDIBERT. For madness -- Cease, Egbert -- thy chilly blood,
Creeping with torpid motion through thy veins,
Ill suits thee for a counselor to me.
Give me one made of fire! one whose high mind,
Superior to the bugbears of his childhood,
Makes Virtue and Philosophy his servants;
Not stoops to be their slave!

EGBERT. Think on the bars,
The Eternal bars, that Heaven has placed between you! --
Think -- she is your Sister!

GONDIBERT. Curses on the word!
It is a viper's sting -- an incantation,
That conjures up an hundred fiends to rack me.
Oh! were she not my Sister! -- Egbert, Egbert!
I could turn girl, to think on what I Have lost --
-- But two short days before my Brother's marriage,
I from the war returned; and the first hour
She met my ravished eyes -- was at the altar.

EGBERT. It was, in truth, my Lord, a trying moment.

GONDIBERT. Oh! should the curtain'd sun, in full refulgence,
Dart through the shadows of the night his beams;
Not more amaze would seize the minds of mortals,
Than seized on me when I beheld Albina.
Oh, my cursed fortune! one short week had saved me.
For sure the ardors of my burning love --
The powerful pleadings of my youth, and form,
Must soon have taught the timid, beauteous Maid,
That Raimond were for Gondibert well changed.

EGBERT. Your sorrow, then, you virtuously o'ercame;
Why should it now break out with strength renewed?

GONDIBERT. Will she not wed again? --
I could have borne my life without more bliss
Than the soft rights which custom gives a Brother;
To see her every day -- to fix my eyes,
Whole hours, with doting love, upon her face --
To feast my ears with the bewitching music
Of her sweet voice -- Oh, 'twas a mine of happiness!

EGBERT. It was a snare that might have plunged you both
In irremediable woe!

GONDIBERT. Impossible!
For I do swear, such mast'ry of my passion
Had I obtained, to such refinement raised it,
Angels with greater purity never loved:
No wish unhallowed lived within my breast.
But shall she to another yield her heart --
Yield her whole self! --
Earth open first, and swallow me! Or snatch him --
Oh swift perdition! -- snatch him from his joys!

EGBERT. Oh, yield not thus, my Lord, to your wild passions!
Like calentures, they will mislead your reason,
With images that no where do exist,
But in their own false colors.

GONDIBERT. He -- this Edward,
As my ill star, does ever cross my fortune.
His headlong valor in the field my name
Obscured; and in the tournament at Orleans,
In the eye of France, he bore from me the crown:
And now he tears away the scanty bliss,
Which whilst I did possess, I envied not
His trophies, or his fame.

EGBERT. Then be revenged!
Strive to regain the fame of which he robs you --
Court Glory -- woo her in the fields of Death!
She Is the fit mistress for your rank and years!
Oh, shame! to waste those days in languid sighs,
In which your mighty Ancestors obtained
Their deathless names -- by deeds of hardy valor,
In guarding their dear Country's precious rights.

GONDIBERT. Albina wed! No, --
All arts I Will try; and, if they fail, this arm --
This arm shall drench their marriage-torch in blood!

[Exit. EGBERT. How do rude passions the fair mind destroy,
Bestowed by Heaven from the all-perfect source!
This Gondibert would once have shrunk from vice,
As the chaste plant that bears no mortal touch.
From infancy I Have watched his springing virtues;
Seen him beat back misfortunes when they clung,
Like wary Cowards, on each other's skirts;
And bear, with fortitude, Affliction's stripes.
But now, unhallowed Love the pile destroys;
And Vice will triumph over the noble ruin.
Still must I save him. If one spark of virtue
Yet hovers in his mind -- Oh, grant me, Heaven!
To kindle it afresh, and be the flame immortal!

[Exit. SCENE, An Apartment. Edward and Albina discovered sitting on a Couch.
EDWARD. [rising. Blessed be the orders which thou deem'st so cruel.
But for the King's command, more irksome years
I might have sighed, without a gleam of hope,
Nor known -- Oh transport! I was dear to thee.
That rapturous thought is presage sure of victory --
-- 'Twill give thy Edward's arm resistless force,
And fire his soul with more than mortal valor.

ALBINA. Ah! Love, that filled your breast, whilst doubts and fears
Did feed its flame, already yields to glory.
Your eye, by strong imagination fired,
Impatient glances through the burnished field --
-- The clang of arms arouses every sense,
The songs of triumph vibrate on your ear --
-- Love and Albina are alike forgot,
And you're again the Hero!

EDWARD. Then may cowardice
Enerve this arm, when with our valiant hosts
I shall oppose the Mockers of our Faith!
May I forsake, in sight of armed nations,
The Holy Cross, and trembling, plead for mercy*
If for one moment I forget Albina!
It Is over thy charms mine eye impatient roves --
-- The ardors of my love, that you accuse.

ALBINA. Will you in the battle's conflict think on me?
And will you, when seducing glory prompts
To some adventurous charge -- remember then,
That it is Albina's life which you expose?

EDWARD. O Glory! Conquest! what are ye to this?
Yes, I do swear, thou Mistress of my Fate!
Thy bright enchanting image shall withold me,
When a rash enterprise may court my daring.
Mine is no common life -- to thee united;
Marked out for bliss extreme, and boundless joy,
As thine I will preserve.

ALBINA. Here is my picture.
When the shrill trumpet gives the aweful signal --
Ere, in the dreadful ardour of the fight,
Reflection's lost -- Oh bind it on your arm!
When you do look on it, think you see its smiles
To horror turned; the cheerful eye bedimm'd
With ceaseless tears; its lips reproaching you
With deeming lightly of the life to her
Engaged, whose form it bears.

EDWARD. How shall I thank thee
For this rich gift? It is a talisman
Which will protect me when hemmed in by dangers,
And turn aside Death's blunted arrows.

Enter a Female Attendant. ATTENDANT. Lord Gondibert, if it so please you,
Madam,
Has weighty matters for your private ear.

[Exit. EDWARD. Lord Gondibert!

ALBINA. He has a Brother's right;
And does regard me for his Brother's sake.
Indulge us now, my Lord, with privacy!
It Is the sole day -- oh, may the sound delight thee!
In which thou will not claim all embassies to me.

EDWARD. Farewell then, sweet! farewell, my sweet Albina!
How dear, how precious, does the time become,
Enriched with happiness like mine! To leave thee
A moment now, seems a lost age in love.

[Exit. Enter Gondibert. GONDIBERT. Pardon th'obtruder, Madam, who unbidden
Breaks on your happy hours --

ALBINA. This stern excuse,
And that impassioned air, seem meant for chiding;
Such looks sit strangely on a Brother's brow --
They Are most unkind!

GONDIBERT. Smiles, and unruffled looks,
Become those favored youths, who at the feet
Of rigid Beauty may -- oh! Raimond, bear with me!
Fain would I speak to thee with angel's softness,
But tides of passion bear my wishes down!

ALBINA. Of what would speak?

GONDIBERT. Of Him.

ALBINA. Of whom? Lord Edward?

GONDIBERT. Yes, he -- Edward -- your Paramour!

ALBINA. How Is this!
Is this -- this rude reproof, from Gondibert!

GONDIBERT. From whom then should it, Madam, but his Brother,
Whose memory you wear so light? These sables
Ill suit the wanton spirit of your eyes;
Your air, as ill, the sober guise of widowhood.

ALBINA. Surely, my Lord, you stretch a Brother's privilege
Beyond its bounds. Does Gondibert presume --
Does he Albina dare accuse, in words
That would befit the loosest of her sex?
[Weeps.
GONDIBERT. Would all your passions might thus melt in tears,
And weep themselves away! The probe of truth
Does touch you, Lady -- you must bear it still.
The public voice condemns your eager marriage;
And maidens blush, that she, who lately shone
The bright, the envied sample of their sex,
Now sudden, like a panting fawn, o'ersprings
The fence -- that painfully she has endured.

ALBINA. Tears would disgrace me now. Bethink you, Sir,
It Is Raimond's Widow whom you thus insult --
It Is his -- your Brother's honor, which you wound
With these base taunts. I do believe you're false.
The public voice dares not arraign my conduct --
-- Or, if it did -- the Brother of Lord Raimond
Should surely punish, not avow their slanders.

GONDIBERT. Oh, he would trample on the slanderer
Of Raimond's faithful Widow -- with his blood --
With life itself, defend her name, and honor;
But the coarse slanders thrown on Edward's Wife,
He can behold unmoved, and unrevenged.

ALBINA. The Wife of Edward needs no other arm;
He will protect me; he is my guard, and champion.

GONDIBERT. Then arm him! and in me behold the guard,
The champion, of dead Raimond's memory --
Dishonored by your passion.

ALBINA. Hah! dishonored!
Where Is the proud Dame, whose glory would not be
Lord Edward's love? Is there a fame so bright
In Henry's court? His noble birth is vulgar,
Placed by his nobler qualities. His mind
Knowledge illumines, and bright Virtue loves.

GONDIBERT. Perish his fame -- his virtues! -- I abhor him.

ALBINA. He who abhors my Edward, must shun me.
Farewell, my Lord! Henceforward he alone
Can meet a welcome here, who pays just tribute
To Edward's worth.

[Exit. GONDIBERT. Oh, stay -- Albina, stay!
Hah, gone! Curse on my fierce impetuous passions!
What have I done? I Have worked her up to hatred --
In the sole moment that my fate allowed
To win her from the purpose which undoes me.
Fool! fool! were such the arts I had devised?
Fury, and threats, are ye the wiles of love?
Oh, I have fixed my fate! -- Albina will be Edward's.
Hold, hold, thou cracking brain! -- one hope's still left --
One road's still open, to prevent their marriage,
Or to escape the woe. -- I Will challenge Edward:
He falls, or I; and which, to me is equal.
[Going.
Enter Editha. EDITHA. Thou child of fury! Victim of blind passions!
Why challenge Edward?

GONDIBERT. Why! because I hate him.
My vengeance and my love demand the trial --
Both he must satisfy, or both destroy.

EDITHA. Obey their impulse -- Be revenged and happy!
But risk not on a rival's sword thy life.

GONDIBERT. Ha! how? -- what, meanly steal a coward's triumph;
Snatch a vile conquest that my sword might purchase --
-- Creep, an Assassin, on his guardless hours --

EDITHA. Still wilfully, my Lord, you wrest my words.
No plot upon his life I Have formed -- Then hear me!
On what pretenses can thou challenge Edward?
Will thou proclaim thy love for Raimond? No.
Love so unsanction'd starts from human customs,
And from all human laws. Yet still methinks
He should not win the Countess.

GONDIBERT. Should not! shall not.

EDITHA. With what an insolent content he left her,
He passed me! but too full of bliss was he,
To see an object less than his Albina.
Sudden it struck me -- now, with how much ease
This haughty joy might be transformed to woe!
Thy heart now swelling with triumphant passion,
A little word, that touched it with suspicion,
Would, with a serpent's tooth, its raptures cure.
-- Suspicion, once awakened, never sleeps.

GONDIBERT. Suspicion! of Albina!

EDITHA. Yes -- suspicion.
Infuse its poison! -- 'twill be balm to thee.

GONDIBERT. Impossible! --
Resplendent lilies, that in deserts bloom,
Where man's licentious eye has never roam'd,
Boast less unsullied pureness than her mind.

EDITHA. Though to the world she spotless may appear
As mountain snow, yet can no doubtful tint
By a suspicious Brother be discerned?
Lord Raimond may have trusted Gondibert
With fears that he kept chary from the world;
Or, may not you in some unguarded moment --
-- Admitted by a Brother's rights, have caught
Her frigid virtue melting at the suit
Of some young Paramour?

GONDIBERT. Hah!

EDITHA. Your tried honor
Must stamp the story with the face of truth,
And force conviction on his heart, in spite
Of all the doubts which passion may retain
To plead in Beauty's cause.

GONDIBERT. Oh, ye just powers!
What must the passion, what, be the despair
That prompts my haughty soul to such mean arts?
Deceit! till now, a stranger to my heart,
Welcome! with all thy wiles --
Upon my tongue distill thy subtle poison
To blister Edward's peace! Yet it is not possible;
One look, one tone of here is, would controvert
The blackest tales that malice could suggest.

EDITHA. Let him but feel the sting of jealousy,
And every tone, and look, will fix it deeper.

GONDIBERT. Should he be wrought to such accursed belief,
Not he alone, but all mankind would scorn her --
The antiquated Maid, the Wife, the Hypocrite,
Whilst the loose Wanton hails, with impious joy,
A Sister in Albina. Horrid thought!
That form, beheld by the admiring world
With chaste respect -- shall it with loose contempt
Be gazed on? -- shall the angelic mind of her
My soul adores, ever feel the stings, the bitterness
Of scorn!

EDITHA. Be it thy prayer, thy hope, thy comfort!
Think on the riches of that bounteous hour
When Raimond, drooping, sunk beneath the shame
The world will pour upon her guiltless head --
-- By Edward left -- abandoned by her Father;
The eye of Nature, Virtue, Friendship, shut;
In thee alone, she finds respect and love!
Beholds thee weep her woes, and share her anguish --
-- Accomplish this, and thank thy liberal stars!

GONDIBERT. Oh, 'twere a boundless luxury of bliss!
I Would steal her sorrows, rob her of her griefs,
And give her, in exchange, soft peace and love.
Yet, oh! it cannot be -- me she would regard
With a cold Sister's brow.

EDITHA. Lovers, it is said,
Have eagles' sight, that can interpret glances,
And the soft language of a blush explain;
But eyes and blushes speak in vain to you --
Or you have read them backwards.

GONDIBERT. Ha! what say thou?
Lead not, I charge thee, to such dangerous heights!
Yet tell me --

EDITHA. Tell thee! Strange, that Gondibert,
He who can penetrate the veil of policy,
Detect the sophist's arts, and trace the chain
Whose hidden links control the will of man,
That he should need be told, what not to know
Argues gross blindness, or determined error.

GONDIBERT. Blindness to what? Editha, speak. -- Explain!

EDITHA. Recall then to your mind the marriage months
Of the deceased Lord. -- Did no complaint,
No word ambiguous, ever escape his lips,
Reflecting on the coldness of Albina?

GONDIBERT. Her coldness! -- Ha! -- What then?

EDITHA. Nay, answer me.
Can you remember?

GONDIBERT. Yes, I Have never forgot,
That, as he feasted once my greedy ear
With praises of his Bride, he sudden stopped,
And with a sigh -- a sigh which seemed t'escape
From hidden stores -- exclaimed -- Yet Gondibert,
All good and beauteous as she is, not yet
Have I inspired her icy heart with love.

EDITHA. Then hear! She is not ice. Albina's bosom
Glows with all Nature's sympathetic fire.
Know too, that when a Wife untouched appears
By a fond Husband's tender, anxious love,
It Is not because she is formed of flint or snow.
Albina's heart was to her Husband cold,
Because some happier youth engrossed its fire.
Some happy Youth, unconscious of his fate,
The Countess loved, and thou -- yes, thou were he.

GONDIBERT. Then I am most accursed! It cannot be!
Albina loved not me -- or, if she did,
Tell me, perfidious Woman! -- cruel! tell me,
Why did 'till now conceal the glorious secret?
Why now reveal it?

EDITHA. To confirm your purpose,
Compassion to your sorrows has impelled me
Now to reveal a confidence reposed --
-- No, not reposed; to chance I owe the tale.

GONDIBERT. Editha! thou have caught my listening soul --
Her faculties, her every sense, she crowds
To one; I am all ear.

EDITHA. Oppressed with cares,
As once upon a couch I had reclined,
To woo a short repose, Albina entered.
Tender her look, deep thought was in her eye,
Which pensively upon the vacant air
She fixed -- then turned it eager on the portrait,
Where you, a Mars, the living canvas shows;
And for a while, with ardent gaze, surveyed it --
Saying, "Had I the pencil held, that helmet
Had been Love's chaplet; and the uncouth armor
Upon those graceful limbs, bright Hymen's flowery robe".
I started -- she espied me; and overcome
With shame, and sinking e'eu to earth with fear,
Conjured me, by the love I bore her fame,
By all the sacred honor of our sex,
Never to divulge -- never whisper to my heart,
The fatal secret, which through chance was mine.

GONDIBERT. It is enough -- she loves -- Albina loves!
The truth divine swift rushes on my heart,
And all its powers confess the rapturous guest.
Thousand sweet tokens now afresh start up,
Darting like hidden sunbeams on my mind,
And make it drunk with bliss. But Edward -- Edward!
Blind fool! to feast on shadows -- dream of happiness,
Whilst one more daring boldly asks the substance,
And bears it from my arms -- my hopes, forever!

EDITHA. Trust me, my Lord, if you can thwart their marriage,
She will again return with height'ned ardor
To her first love; and with sweet chidings meet
The tardy vows, that gave another leave
To ask the heart she would fain have given to thee.

GONDIBERT. Oh, it is a bribe would tempt my soul to earth,
If at the gates of Paradise. Thou phantom,
Honor! hide thy stern head; Conscience! go sleep;
'Till sated Love shall give thee leave to prate;
Then will I hear thee -- wail in a friar's cowl
The precious sin, and think monastic rigours
Too slight -- too poor a penance for my joys.

EDITHA. To 'scape Suspicion's prying eyes, we'll part.
When night's kind shades shall wrap all mortal things
In doubtful semblance, meet me in the garden;
There Edward you shall see, and frame his mind
To such conviction as I mean to give it.

GONDIBERT. Commands like mystic oracles you give,
Hiding in doubtful words a glorious fate.
To thee, sweet Priestess! I resign my faith,
Nor dare, beyond what you reveal, enquire.
Ye hours! wear wings, 'till we shall meet again.

[Exit. EDITHA. So! --
To mould the frenzy of despairing love,
Is no less easy than to wind the Jealous.
Oh, that man --
A being formed, as if in Nature's vanity,
To show how great, how exquisite her skill,
Should be the slave of such an abject passion!
To a mere humor those vast powers should yield,
By which he grasps Creation's mighty scheme,
And emulates Omniscience. --

END of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE, The Garden. Editha seated. EDITHA. LORD Gondibert, methinks, is slow.
The sun
Darts his last beams from the embroidered West,
Pale twilight leads the pensive evening on,
And he is not yet arrived! Oh! did he feel
The keener jealousies Ambition gives,
He would outstrip a bridegroom in his haste,
And think each moment stretched into a day,
That lent not physic to his bosomed grief.
[Rising. A step advances! -- this must sure be he.
O Fortune! shield me in the approaching conflict!
My fate is busy; and presiding spirits
Now weave the history of my future life.
Whatever th'events, I have a mind to meet them.
Fearless I trust my bark, at once to sink,
Or ride triumphant through the coming storm.

Enter Egbert. EGBERT. Pardon me, Lady, if I have disturbed,
With step unwish'd, your evening meditations!
But sure I may, without offense to Heaven,
Draw down your pious thoughts to earth awhile,
To minister to Virtue.

EDITHA. Egbert! be brief.

EGBERT. My tale, alas! is tinged with shame and sorrow;
Sorrow, that I must yield up him to shame,
Whom to behold on Glory's pinnacle,
All that remains to me of health and life
I Would freely spare. I pray you now conduct me
Strait to Lord Edward and the beauteous Countess.

EDITHA. Lord Edward, and the Countess! Ha! say wherefore?

EGBERT. A story to divulge, that in their ears
Alone should be reposed.

EDITHA. Methinks your errand
Wears a suspicious face; surely its purport
With me may be entrusted.

EGBERT. Lady, I know
You have been long the Countess's tried friend,
And that no secret in her breast she locks
From you. This then to you shall be disclosed,
Though of much weight, and must be chary kept.

EDITHA. Prithee be quick. --

EGBERT. Lord Gondibert, not bearing to behold
The much-loved Widow of his Noble Brother,
So soon forget his death, and light again
The nuptial torch -- discord resolves to shed
Betwixt Lord Edward and his promised Bride;
And to this purpose has framed tales that --

EDITHA. Ha!

EGBERT. Start not, nor blame too deeply, gentle Lady,
This first, this only error of his life!
When time has brushed away the mists of passion,
He Will then rejoice we have saved him from an act
Which all his future days would mark with horror.

EDITHA. With this design did, Gondibert trust you?

EGBERT. Not with the circumstance he means to urge:
I from disjointed converse drew his purpose.
Ere morning dawns he hopes to disunite
The noble Pair.

EDITHA. So! -- this is then your errand?

EGBERT. This is my errand; to preserve their hearts
From fierce distraction's pangs, when they hear things
That else might shake their faith.

EDITHA. It Is well, Old Man!
I will acquaint the Countess with your message,
And bring you, here, her orders.

[Exit. EGBERT. Gracious Heaven!
Pardon, if I do break my faith to him,
Whom I am bound to serve! I serve him now.
I drag him from a deep abyss of guilt;
Which all his future days, in deep remorse,
And acts of virtue spent, would hardly purify.
Repentance calls not back the deed it mourns;
And years of penitence will not raze out
The marks that sin has graved.

Enter Editha, with Servants. EDITHA. Seize that Old Traitor,
And instant in the deepest dungeon plunge him.
The Countess orders this.

EGBERT. Horror! For me?

EDITHA. For thee; who falsely have defamed thy patron,
And stained the honor of Lord Gondibert.
Away! nor listen to his prayers.

EGBERT. Oh, Lady,
Be not so cruel to my hoary years!
Egbert did never cast a stain --

EDITHA. It Is false;
For thou, with rude and most unseemly speech,
Did paraphrase upon the deeds of him
Whose errors should by thee be cloak'd, and screen'd
From mortal eyes. Why stand ye loit'ring thus?
It Is from your Mistress these commands I bring --
If you obey them not, it is at your peril.

EGBERT. Oh! hear me! hear for the sake of him! --

[They drag him off. EDITHA. When fools, like you, will prate, ye must be cag'd;
Lest ye should babble to the gaping world
Of things ye have not powers to comprehend.
To choose that dotard for a confidant!
Better have told the story at the mart,
Or to the mummers, who infest our halls;
To be by them personify'd, on eves
And holidays. Of his imprisonment
His Lord must not be told. Should he survive
These days of trouble, he shall be released;
Mean time he will learn discretion.

[Exit. SCENE, Another part of the Garden. Enter Egbert, and Servants. EGBERT.
Oh, wonder not that I should move thus slow,
Toward so sad an home! -- If I might plead --

SERVANT. Master, fear naught! thou shall taste sleep tonight
More sweet than hers -- not in a loathsome dungeon,
But in repose, upon thy downy couch.

EGBERT. I thank thee; this is kind and christianly.
I feared you too were leagued for my destruction.

SERVANT. Did thou then think I had forgot the hour,
In which from my poor infant eyes you wiped
The streaming tears -- cherished my grief-swoln heart,
And placed me in Earl Raimond's family --
Wherein to youth and manhood I have grown?
Thou, then, were my preserver -- now, I Am thine.

EGBERT. In truth, surprise and terror so dismayed me,
I knew you not; now that I do, I bless you.

SERVANT. Such orders from the Countess never were given;
But proud Editha's power made it unsafe
To thwart her. In that grotto thou may bide
'Till the evening grows more dark -- then use this key;
It leads you to the grove. Farewell, good Egbert!

[Exit. EGBERT. Farewell, my Friend! -- tomorrow, better thanks
I will present thee -- Heaven! 'twas not thy will,
That I should basely perish in my duty.
Forgive me, that my confidence did fail,
And, for a moment, gave me to despair!

[Enter the Grotto. Enter Gondibert and Editha. GONDIBERT. It is beyond my
hopes! it is a design,
Which sure some pitying spirit did inspire,
Who, once enrob'd in flesh, felt Passion's sting --
And, sympathetic still to human sorrows,
Bestowed the vision on thy quickening brain!
But, how requite thee for thy generous aid?
For me thy fame, thy welfare, thou do hazard.

EDITHA. To your great Brother I indebted stand,
That I have now existence. -- It Is but just,
That I should risk for you, the welfare he bestowed.

GONDIBERT. But where is he -- this Edward -- who has thrust
'Twixt me, and my felicity, his claim?
Though now you are perched upon the giddy wheel,
And thank'st thy fate for such a glorious stand,
Edward, beware! for I will have thee down,
Though thou do crush me in thy fall! Where is he?

EDITHA. With Raimond; rioting, perchance, his fancy
On the bright prospect of tomorrow's blessings.

GONDIBERT. Never shall that morrow come -- or, if it does,
The coursing sun, that lights them to the altar,
Shall finish his diurnal round in blood.

EDITHA. Try bloodless means -- give circumstance and proof.

GONDIBERT. Aye, stunning proof; such as would shake a faith
Engraved on the heart, ere its first pulses beat.
No tale, though varnished with the deepest skill,
No circumstance, though guided by the hand
Of art, can shade, or for a moment throw
The slightest cloud on Countess Raimond's fame.
But demonstration -- demonstration, speaking
To his gross sense! that, Edward! that, shall force thee
To curse the paragon of Nature's works,
And yield thee to thy raptured Rival's arms.

EDITHA. Yet tale and circumstance will have their weight;
They Will mould his mind for the broad proof; which else,
Like arrows striking against a marble rock,
Will shiver, or rebound. I go to watch
When he retires, and to direct him hither.
Besure you mark each motion of his heart;
Catch every passion on a barbed hook,
And torture him, 'till he, with agony,
Shall hate her! --

GONDIBERT. The fierce transports of his rage
May prompt him on the instant to accuse her.

EDITHA. To counteract his transports be my care.
This laboring head, my Lord! has not so framed
The close design, for blund'ring chance to mar.
May we depend upon your servants faith?

GONDIBERT. They are devoted to my will.

EDITHA. Enough!
The dress prepared you will find within my closet;
The antichamber enter, at the signal,
And instantly the private stairs descend --
-- The rest, kind Fortune to our wishes guide!

[Exit. GONDIBERT. Painful the race! but Raimond is the prize!
Ye Beings! who, superior to humanity,
Behold, with supercilious eye, our slidings;
Oh, blame not me, thus tempted, if I yield.
Not Man, but thriftless Nature, be accused,
Who to seductions left our minds a prey --
-- Nay more, who does herself ensnare us;
Has hung us round with senses exquisite,
Has planted in our hearts resistless passions,
The first to weaken, and the last to war
On poor, defenseless, naked Virtue!
How dark the night! The moon has hid her head,
As scorning with her lucid beams to gild
This murky business. Through umbrageous trees
The whistling Eurus speaks, in hollow murmurs;
And dismal fancy, in yon shadowy ailes,
Might conjure up an hundred phantoms.
How strong the impression of our dawning years!
The tales of sprites and goblins, that did awe
My infancy, all rush upon my mind,
And, spite of haughty reason, make it shrink.
Who is it approaches?

[Enter Edward. EDWARD. Edward.

GONDIBERT. Gondibert.

EDWARD. What means this summons, at so late an hour?
I sought you here -- sent by the fair Editha,
For the relation of important secrets,
Which to my private ear you mean t'intrust.

GONDIBERT. Could I entrust them, Edward, to your ear,
Without the poison of the words I utter
Distilling to your heart, I would with boldness
Speak them --

EDWARD. Surely a tale thus guarded, and hemmed in
With words so circumspect, must have much weight;
But heavy matters suit not hours like these;
My soul, now banqueting on its felicity,
And all her faculties absorbed in bliss,
Looks down from an exalted height, and scorns
So low a thought as care -- Farewell, my Lord!
You Will be our guest tomorrow -- welcome guest,
Upon the happiest morn old Time ever brought
To supplicating man.
[Going.
GONDIBERT. I charge thee, stay -- thou arrogant of bliss,
My tale perhaps may end in guest forbidding,
In the postponing th'hymeneal feast.

EDWARD. Say thou! postponing th'hymeneal feast?
By heaven, in the wide circle of events
That possibility may teem with, one
Shall not be found, to make me for a day
Suspend the bliss of calling Raimond mine!

GONDIBERT. Blind and presumptuous! --
The passing air has borne away thy vow,
And in its track thy recantation follows.
Edward! Albina never can be thine.
Amazement sits upon thy brow; I swear
That, had the Countess kept her single state,
My ever-cautious tongue had never divulged
What it must now reveal -- But on the edge
Of sudden ruin, Edward! I behold thee,
And now extend my arm to snatch thee from it.

EDWARD. Thy words have formed a chaos in my soul;
Something there lurks beneath their doubtful phrase,
I dread to hear -- yet ask thee to unfold.

GONDIBERT. Then steel your mind, to bear the story's horror.
Call up your fortitude --

EDWARD. Thou tortur'st me -- speak it!

GONDIBERT. The Widow of my Brother -- is a Woman --
Mere Woman -- weak Woman; of mould so tender,
It cannot resist a Lover's melting plea --
Nor bear so harsh a charge as cruelty.

EDWARD. Do I not know that she is tender? soft
As dreams of cradled infancy, or note
Of Philomel -- whose music in the ear
Of the benighted traveller, makes beams
Of roseate morn unwelcome to his eye.
Why then to me mysteriously descant
Upon her gentleness?

GONDIBERT. 'Cause more than thee,
Her gentleness with healing pity views;
And to benighted Lovers, makes the beams
Of roseate morn unwelcome.

EDWARD. Villain, thou lie!
[Drawing.
GONDIBERT. Come, come, this female rage ill suits a soldier.

EDWARD. Ill suits thy blasphemy, base Coward!

GONDIBERT. Coward! --
Edward, thou dare not, shall not, think me Coward.

EDWARD. Then guard thee, or I Will write it in thy heart!

GONDIBERT. Hah! come on then, plunge in thy weapon deep;
Besure take heed thou do not miss the spot,
Where ill-judg'd friendship, in that heart, for Edward,
Tranform'd him into Gondibert's assassin.

EDWARD. Oh! --

GONDIBERT. Shrink not; appease your anger with my blood;
Then to Albina, boast of having slain
The man who had unveiled her to your eyes.
She Will fawn upon thee -- cozen thee -- and gull thee,
With the fond vows that have in other ears
Shed their sweet poison.

EDWARD. Should my Father's spirit
From heaven descend, t'abet thee in this tale,
I Would swear it ly'd.

GONDIBERT. Nay then, I crave your pardon!
Think it rank salfehood -- phantom of my brain;
Raimond was guil'd when he believed her naught.
Goodnight, my Lord.
[Going.
EDWARD. Hold! O stay, Gondibert!
Why, what a frame is mine to shake thus! Raimond
Did say?

GONDIBERT. Yes -- Raimond. But I see too well
You cannot support it. Prithee ask no more.

EDWARD. Nay, but I will ask, though each word you utter
Steals like a chilly poison through my veins,
And binds my blood in frost. Say, did your Brother --
Oh, answer -- answer me! -- I cannot speak it.

GONDIBERT. He did; my Brother often has called her -- wanton,
And, in the anguish of his soul, has cursed her.
The Roman Julia, he would say, to her
Was chaste, whose loose desires --

EDWARD. Now thou do lie;
By Heaven, such purity was never dressed
In frail mortality. Her governed passions
Are the soft zephyrs of a vernal morn,
That breathe their perfume on the blushing rose.

GONDIBERT. The zephyrs of a vernal morn may swell
To hurricanes -- Such undiscerning tumults
Her passions know -- This piece of pure mortality!

EDWARD. Draw, villain! --
Or I will plunge my dagger in thy throat,
And bear thy lying tongue upon its point.

Enter Editha. EDITHA. What horrid noise breaks through the sober night?
Shield me! -- A naked sword!

GONDIBERT. You Will not fight
Before a Lady, Sir! -- I'th'morning meet me --
Meet me, before the hour the Priest expects thee;
That, at the altar, when thou wilt eager join
Thy chiding Bride, thou may atonement make;
And, with the marriage-ring, present the heart --
His bleeding heart, who, with ungentle truths,
To rob her of her Husband -- vainly strove.

[Exit. EDWARD. Perdition catch thy breath! --
Knew you, Editha, when you sent me hither,
The purport of that villain's tale?

EDITHA. Your looks
Affright me so, my Lord! Pray sheathe your dagger!
Fain, fain would I escape this dreadful task!
My duty to the Countess binds my tongue --
Excuse me then, my Lord.

EDWARD. I charge thee speak!
By all the friendship which I bear to thee,
By thy own high regard to truth and honor,
I charge thee, spare me not -- tell all, tell all!

EDITHA. Then I confess me privy to the counsel,
Which Gondibert, to you, designed to offer;
And for your honor 'twere, that you should heed it.

EDWARD. Again thou bring'st me back to all my horror.
Do thou say this, Editha! thou, who know
Each secret winding of her heart!

EDITHA. I do! --
And what I Have said, I Will back with proof.

EDWARD. What proof!

EDITHA. That if you wed her, you will be undone;
That you will only share Albina's love.
Unfair she deems it, having sovereign beauty,
To scant its blessings to a single object;
Like the universal sun, she sheds her glories --
-- Beaming impartially on all mankind.

EDWARD. Vile slanderer! yet hold. There have been women,
Whose bosoms with licentious hell have burned;
But these were monstrous, and of actions horrible!
These did not wear the hallowed looks of virtue --
The soul of chasteness breathed not in their words:
Were Raimond, then, like those --

EDITHA. Hah, my good Lord!
You know not our deceitful, dangerous sex!
Those minds imbued by vice, with deepest stains,
Are often masked in forms almost divine --
Decked forth in words, and looks, that Virtue's self
Might challenge for her own. Such is Albina;
Such did Albina to her Lord appear:
What cause, save that, sent him to Palestine?
Why went he there, for honorable death,
But that her faults did surfeit him of life?

EDWARD. If this is truth, oh, Truth, be thou accursed! --
-- Falsehood's from Heaven -- Deceit! wrap me again
In thick impervious folds! Thou busy wretch!
Why rouse me from a lethargy of bliss?
Yet I Will have truth -- if thou have proof, present it;
If not, fly swifter than the lightning's fork,
Lest, like the lightning, I transfix thee! Oh no.
Swear thou art false, I Will twist thee round my heartstrings.

EDITHA. I will abide the proof. Know that a youth,
Of birth obscure -- in mien, a bright Adonis,
Has long possessed Albina's secret hours --
-- That these last hours, she will devote to him,
And in her chamber you shall see him lodged,
When she retires to rest. --

EDWARD. Nay, now thou weigh'st me down. Oh! oh!

EDITHA. If it o'ercomes you thus, my Lord, go home.

EDWARD. Home! I Will go howl in deserts with the wolves,
Forsake society, curse human kind,
But chiefly woman.

EDITHA. Nay, come with me, my Lord,
I Will lead you to the hall, where you will observe
The doings of our house.

EDWARD. Thou art a fiend,
And tempting me to hell.

EDITHA. Nay then.

EDWARD. Oh, parden me!
Conduct me to my woe.

[Exeunt. Enter Egbert. EGBERT. Go, senseless lamb,
And meet the sanguine knife. Oh, merciful!
And is it a Woman I have seeh? Woman!
On whom thou have bestowed Nature's best feelings,
With nerves of finest tone, to catch each woe,
And strike it on the heart! Oh, I Am ashamed
That I stand kindred, in creation's scale,
With such a being! Happily am I witness
To the base league. Now in the toils, Editha,
Which thou did spread for me, thyself art fallen.
Thus Heaven does punish with our own acts,
And makes our crimes our woe.

SCENE, A Hall, with a Staircase, and Gallery. Enter Edward and Editha from
the Garden. EDITHA. Stand here, my Lord. The hour is now arrived
In which the Countess usually retires.
Yet, oh, be patient! and I pray behold
With fortitude this sample of her faith,
Which I, alas! unwillingly disclose.

[Exit. EDWARD. Now Heaven! -- I cannot pray -- My sinking heart
Scarce yields me life to breathe; and dizzy images
Before my eyes swim in imperfect shape;
She comes! --
Behold her, Slander! -- and withdraw thy shaft.
Her chastity is evident as truth;
It glows, it animates each speaking line
Of her enchanting face. --

Enter Albina, Editha, and Attendants. EDITHA. Shall I attend you, Madam, to
your chamber?

ALBINA. Not now, Editha, for you need repose.
Your pensive mind has suffered much since morn,
From the sad image of long past afflictions:
Forget them now, and may sweet sleep attend you!

[Albina ascends the Stairs, and enters her Apartment. EDWARD. There Is the rich
temple that conceals my Love:
If she be naught, Nature's in league with Vice,
And poured on Raimond such a waste of charms,
To draw from sainted Virtue her disciples.
[Attendants leave the Apartment.] Silence prevails --
Oh, on this spot I will with patience count
The lagging moments of the night, to triumph
In the sure failure of their promised proof.
Hah! -- hark! methought there was a noise. Alas!
The clicking death-watch, or the passing air,
Has now a sound to freeze me.
[A Pause.] [Gondibert enters at one End of the Gallery, and goes into the
Chamber.] Hah! stay, villain; stay!

Editha enters, and flings herself before the Stairs. EDITHA. Ah, cease! cease,
my Lord -- you will undo me!

EDWARD. I am undone -- but I will drag the villain --
I Will tear him from her arms.

[Enter Servants of Gondibert.] EDITHA. Help me -- assist me!
Oh! drag him from the spot. Nay, go, my Lord!
Why wilt in humanly destroy Editha?
[They force him off, Editha following.] It Is finished! --
The lion's caught, and struggles in his toils, in vain.

END OF ACT III.
ACT IV.
SCENE, An Apartment in Westmoreland 's Palace. Enter a Steward, with Servants.
STEWARD. HASTE to Paul's Cross, and be you sure, at seven,
The fountain spouts with wine -- spouts in full streams,
As copious as the Noble Donor's bounty.
Observe, when weak, or aged folk you see,
Pressed by the boisterous multitude, assist them,
And let not sturdy ones take double shares.

FIRST SERVANT. I will be mindful. --

[Exit. STEWARD. You, Edric, for the populace, take care
The ox has been well fed. Let not the poor
Dine on poor food, for a rememb'ring token
Of this most happy day.

SECOND SERVANT. I Will choose the best.

[Exit. STEWARD. Have the old pensioners received their raiment?

THIRD SERVANT. Marry they have, and with overflowing hearts.

STEWARD. It Is thus our Noble Master does rejoice!
Whatever brings joy, or happiness to him,
Is pledge of joy to all within his reach.
Were his lands bounded only by the seas
That girt our isle, he has a heart as wide.
See, he approaches! with a face as gladsome,
As though he had redeemed from glutton Time
His own blessed nuptial morn.

Enter Westmoreland. WESTMORELAND. Come, come; no mirth,
No bustling with ye? Are the cooks all busy?
Is the hall trimmed, and ready for the guests?

STEWARD. All Is as you wish, my Lord.

WESTMORELAND. Then all will feel content this happy morn,
And the dejected eye of sorrow
Be raised, with sparkling gratitude, to Heaven.
But where is thy joy? Thou art as old and gray
As if this only was a common morn.
Is It not Albina's wedding day? Cast off
Thy age, and be a boy! Not sportive youth
Shall go beyond old Westmoreland today
In all the rounds of gay festivity.

STEWARD. My heart does take its part, my honored Lord,
In all the happiness that beams around you.
Behold the sovereign of the feast -- Lord Edward!

[Exit. Enter Edward. WESTMORELAND. Hail to my son! Hail to this chosen morn --.
This morn of bliss! These are a Bridegroom's hours:
-- Thou seem impatient of the lazy clock.

EDWARD. Sorrow, like joy, 's impatient of the hours,
And presses forward to untasted time.

WESTMORELAND. Who talks of sorrow on a bridal morn?
Your tones, methinks, ill suit the occasion.

EDWARD. They suit too well the tenor of my mind!
Edward, alas! thou see, no happy Bridegroom,
With ardor waiting, and impatient joy,
To hail his blushing Bride -- but a sad wretch,
Who hates the day, for breaking on his woe,
And longs for endless night.

WESTMORELAND. Surely my joy
Has been too powerful for my frail age.
Thy words do strike mine ear; but Reason
Her faculty withholds, nor shows their import.

EDWARD. Oh, look not thus! My tale will rive thy heart.

WESTMORELAND. Albina! -- my Child!

EDWARD. Dread the worst;
That when the worst does come, you may support
Its horror!

WESTMORELAND. Speak quickly -- Is my Child well?

EDWARD. She is.

WESTMORELAND. Then what keen stroke has Heaven in store?
Through her alone I can affliction know --
If she be well, what ill can light on me?

EDWARD. Oh!

WESTMORELAND. I prithee speak -- what labors in thy breast?

EDWARD. A deadly poison! -- I can hold no longer --
Last night -- oh, last night!

WESTMORELAND. Hah! what of last night?
[Impatiently.
EDWARD. Memory! you are a scorpion. To forget!
'Twere easier to blot out the horrid'st crimes.
The wrath of Heaven's by penitence appeased.
But what, O Memory! can raze from thee
The ills that thou have registered? Albina!
My heart its vital stream should yield, to expiate
Thy guilt.

WESTMORELAND. Guilt! Do thou join her name with guilt?

EDWARD. Yes; with most foul dishonor -- blackest guilt!

WESTMORELAND. Thou, then, art he -- the villain who have stained her;
And, by the Cross, thou shall repair her shame;
Wed her this day -- make her this hour thy Wife,
And then I Will poniard thee, for having dared
Think lewdly of her.

EDWARD. Thy rage I do respect;
And, whilst my heart with agony is torn,
I pity thee. Unhappy Westmoreland!
Albina had been chaste as cloistered saints,
Had all, like me, believed her honor sacred.

WESTMORELAND. What! with another -- another! Do accuse her?

EDWARD. I do! -- Last night -- oh! -- I will find the villain,
If Earth does not conceal him in her womb,
Or Heaven work miracles to save him --

WESTMORELAND. He is already found. Thy thin-drawn arts
Leave thee exposed, in all thy native guilt.
Thou'st taken advantage of relying Love --
-- On one base hazard, staked a boundless treasure,
And now art Bankrupt, both of bliss and honor.
This wretch art thou, or a most foul deceiver!

EDWARD. This rude, intemp'rate anger, will not heal
Thy Daughter's shame. I tell thee, thou fierce Lord?
These eyes beheld him housed, within her chamber,
At the hour when Virtue and Suspicion sleep,
And Lewdness riots in the mask of Night.

WESTMORELAND. Whom say thou, thou beheld'st?

EDWARD. I knew him not.
Wrapped in Night's sooty liv'ry, like hot Tarquin
To the fair Roman's bed, He softly stole --
-- But, oh! he was not greeted like a Ravisher. --

WESTMORELAND. Cease! -- cease thy impious, thy licentious tongue!
Its venom thou shall purify. Nay, mark me!
Though thou have been deceived; and though, to guile thee,
Each art that wickedness could frame, were practiced;
On thee alone my chastisement should fall.
Thou should have questioned every testimony;
Doubted each sense; and, though they all combined,
Contemned them all -- ere thou had dared to cast
On Chastity the stains that, once infix'd,
Are never purged away.
Thou art the sland'rer of my widowed Daughter;
Her Husband dead, her Father is her Champion --
-- I dare thee to the field --

EDWARD. And I refuse
Thy daring challenge -- weak, yet good, old Earl!
What! prove Albina in the face of day
A wanton! -- Her, on whose pure chastity,
Within a few short hours, I would have staked
My everlasting weal! -- Oh, thou fallen Angel!
I Will mourn thy fault, but in my heart it is buried!

WESTMORELAND. All this might cozen a fond female's anger;
But, Edward! I am Westmoreland! --
In our long line of noble ancestry,
Not one base act ever spotted the fair name,
Or slander dared to breathe on it!
Unsullied I received the glorious heritance,
And will, untarnish'd, bear it through the world.
Thou have defamed my child -- Her who will bear
The name, and princely fortunes, of our house --
-- Thy blood must do away the damning stain!

EDWARD. Would thou oppose thy waning life to mine?
Thou do forget, old Lord! how many Winters
Have left their hoary fleeces on thy head,
Since thou were a fit match for one who boasts
The unslacken'd nerves of youth.

WESTMORELAND. Thy vaunted strength
I do despise. Was ever the nerved arm
Of Youth triumphant on the side of falsehood?
This withered arm, in my Albina's cause,
Shall cover with disgrace the budding laurels
That scarcely yet are fitted to thy brow.

EDWARD. Disgraced indeed! if spotted with thy blood;
And therefore I refuse thy proffered gauntlet.
If it is my life you seek, I shall, this day,
For Palestine embark, and die more gloriously
Than by a froward old Man's petulance.

WESTMORELAND. Insolent Boy! I Will force thee do me right.
I Will instant to our Sovereign, and demand
The law of honor. Ere thou do embark,
Thou sure shall prove my Daughter what thou said,
And leave these wintry locks drenched in my blood --
-- Or I will write thee liar, in thy heart.

[Exit. EDWARD. Is this my bridal morn? --
Oh, ye soft budding joys! -- ye tender sympathies! --
-- Ye offices of Love! -- ye thousand nameless ties!
Where are ye sled? --
The Sun of Happiness, that blazed but yesterday,
And promised through Eternity to light me --
Is extinguished! --
Then, Life, be thou extinguished too; but not
Ingloriously -- To Holy Land I Will speed,
And bear me as a Soldier. Oh, Albina!
The sword that must be buried in my heart,
Thy hand will strike -- A Saracen may wound --
-- It Is Raimond kills.

[Exit. Enter Westmoreland, leading Albina. WESTMORELAND. Ha, my poor Child!
home -- thou must home again.
Put off thy bridal vest, resume thy weeds,
For thou must be a Widow still.

ALBINA. My Lord!

WESTMORELAND. Why, why did yield to thy weak Father's suit?
He pleaded for a Villain.

ALBINA. For a Villain!
What mean those dreadful sounds? Edward a Villain!

WESTMORELAND. He is. Thou too shall think him so.

ALBINA. Impossible!
Lord Edward's breast is Honor's sacred temple!
In him, it is not a scope of moral words,
Or schoolmen's speeches -- but a living soul
That starts from baseness, as annihilation.

WESTMORELAND. Alas! my Child, I judge him from himself.
How shall I tell thee --

ALBINA. What?

WESTMORELAND. Thou art -- rejected.
Yes, he rejects thee. Nay, he has accused --
Westmoreland lives to hear his child accused --

ALBINA. Support, me Heaven! Of what am I accused?

WESTMORELAND. The shame will burn thy modest cheek -- he terms thee -- wanton.

ALBINA. Me! Edward deem me -- Oh!

WESTMORELAND. Yes, thee!
Thee, in whose bosom Chastity is throned:
Thou, the bright pattern of each female virtue,
By Edward art accused of vile licentiousness.

ALBINA. Oh, horrible!
[Sinking into her Father's arms.
WESTMORELAND. Support thyself, my Child!
On thy base slanderer thou shall have justice.

ALBINA. Last night, I well remember, when he left me,
And passed beyond the reach of tender sounds,
Straining his eyes, he stopped -- then toward Heaven,
With emphasis of action, raised his hands,
Seeming t'invoke its blessings on Albina --
Had he conceived a doubt --

WESTMORELAND. He has no doubt --
He dares not doubt the honor of my Daughter --
But the rich prize, which, whilst at distance, placed
Almost beyond the stretches of his hope,
Seemed worthy his ambition to attain --
Now, viewed at hand, palls on his sickly taste,
And he contemns the blessing he aspired to.

ALBINA. Oh! is it for this I rose with early dawn
To bless perfidious Edward? Is It for this
I gave consent, ere custom might allow,
To be again a Bride? Base, base ingratitude!

WESTMORELAND. Take heart, my Girl! thy Father swears thy innocence
Shall not be wronged.

ALBINA. Ah! what avails my innocence?
My lot is wretchedness. Condemned by him
To whom I Would given my heart -- and in whose love
I Would treasured ages of untasted bliss --
Forsaken! scorned! left like a loathed disease!
Oh, to some convent's dreary cell I Will fly,
And there forever hide my shame, and misery!

WESTMORELAND. First shall be sacrificed a thousand Edwards;
Thy virtue shall be proved; and my Albina
Live through a race of blissful years, in honor:
Even now I hasten to the King, to claim
The sacred rights of Knighthood.

ALBINA. Hah! what say you,
My Lord!

WESTMORELAND. Edward I Have challenged to the lists;
There to give testimony, that thy virtue
Is spotless, is unquestioned as thy beauty.

ALBINA. What do I hear? My Father yield his breast
To Edward's sword! Edward! whose skill in arms
Leaves him unrivaled in the voice of Fame!
Oh, shield me from the horror of the thought!

WESTMORELAND. Dismiss thy fears. Thy Father's arm has humbled
Mightier men than he. This breast wears marks --
-- Honorable marks, engraved by the sword of heroes;
And shall a Boy with contumely use me?

ALBINA. Horror! distraction! Oh, [kneeling] if my soul's peace
Be dear to thee, avoid this cruel combat.
My mighty wrongs I will with patience bear;
But, Father! heap not sorrows on my head --
Risk not such precious lives! Whoever does vanquish,
Makes me the wretched victim of his prowess!

WESTMORELAND. Do Edward's life, beyond thine honor, prize?

ALBINA. Oh, frown not thus! I Will tear him from my heart;
I Will shun him, as I would the haunts of vice --
-- But, oh! make not thy Child a Murderer!
A Paricide!

WESTMORELAND. Thy innocence insures
Thy Father's life. In chaste Gunhilda's cause
A stripling triumphed over a mighty giant,
Who seemed the Atlas of a trembling world;
Thus armed by thee, I Would dauntless meet a legion.

ALBINA. Can thou demand a miracle to save thee!
As Man thou wilt perish -- oh! or should, indeed,
A miracle be wrought to prove my truth,
Then Edward dies!

WESTMORELAND. Ah! could thou wish thy slanderer --
Thy fame's assassin, to survive his crime;
I would disclaim thee. Shall the child of Westmoreland --
She, who does carry in her veins the blood
Of royal houses -- whose high Ancestors
Gave honor to the sceptres which they bore --
-- Shall she, when thus accused, be unrevenged?
No more, no more -- lest I think thy chaste Mother
Did play the wanton, and gave me the daughter
Of some ignoble hind.

ALBINA. Wound me not thus!
My sainted Mother, from thy blessed abode,
Look with compassion on thy wretched Child!
Sustain me, help me, in this trying hour,
Lest horror should uproot my tottering reason,
And instant plunge me in the depths of madness!

WESTMORELAND. This keen, tumultuous sorrow misbecomes thee;
It misbecomes thy rank, thy wrongs, thy virtue:
Recall thy fortitude; think what thou art,
And prove thee worthy of the space thou fill'st!

ALBINA. Oh Father! Heaven! where shall I turn for succor?
A Father steels his heart, and Heaven forsakes me.
All things are wild -- It Is surely Nature's wreck! --
-- These fierce contending struggles are too big,
They Will burst the little mansion that confines 'em,
And I shall feel -- shall agonize no more.

[Exit. WESTMORELAND. Oh Honor! Nature! how shall I decide?
Obeying one, I may destroy my Child,
And yielding to the other's powerful claims,
I give her up to shame. Must I do this?
Thy Father yield thee to dishonor! No.
First I Will purge off the venom of black Slander,
Restore its wonted luster to thy fame;
Then, if thou die -- sink with thee to the grave.

SCENE, An Apartment in Gondibert 's Palace. Enter Gondibert. GONDIBERT. O Day!
with heart appalled I meet thy beams.
Thou racking conscience! wherefore torture thus
The breast where thou have lightly reigned till now?
A sleepless night I Have past -- Or, if perchance
A slumber for a moment closed mine eyes,
Sad images of woe conveyed such horror,
That better 'twere to wake to real misery.
And whence these newborn torments? What! have I
Deprived the weeping Orphan of his bread?
Imbrued my hands in murder? Or looked down,
With chilly eye, upon a bosom friend,
Beneath Oppression's iron gripe? Oh, no.
I Have been a child, and ly'd to keep a toy
Of which another would have robbed me. --
I Am even less than Woman -- Not a Female
Who would not laugh at such over strained nice feelings,
For crimes amongst Lovers put in daily practice.
Hah! my bright Genius! --
[Enter Editha. That smile must be the herald of good news;
Misfortune never was couched beneath an air so sweet.

EDITHA. There spoke thy coz'ning sex. Deceit and flattery
Hang all their witchery upon your tongues;
Whilst Maidens, like poor birds, by keen-ey'd basilisks
Allured, behold their danger, yet are charmed
To their destruction.

GONDIBERT. Talk not of Man;
But sovereign Woman -- Tidings of Albina!

EDITHA. Arrayed in bridal pomp, light in her steps,
Joy beaming from her eye, and happiness
Exulting on her brow, she left the palace;
But soon returned -- a truly mournful Widow.

GONDIBERT. Be quick. --

EDITHA. Edward, in perfect faith of last night's guile,
Resigns his willing Bride -- Returns her back
To lonely Widowhood, or the soft cares
Of some more happy Lover.

GONDIBERT. Oh, be that Lover me!
Strait will I hasten to the charming Mourner --
Help her to curse perfidious, changing Man --
Damn my whole sex to gratify her spleen --
And, when her hatred to a frenzy mounts,
Seize on the instant of tumultuous passion,
To lure her back again to Love and Gondibert.

EDITHA. Hold, hold, my Lord! such rashness would undo us.
Beware of proud vindictive Westmoreland!
A single glance to his suspicious eye,
Would be a clue to ravel out our secret.
He has a faculty to see men's souls,
As though their lineaments were written characters,
By which he reads their scarce-existing thoughts --
Fly from the danger, then, if you are wise.

GONDIBERT. Seek Wisdom in the squalid Monks' abode,
Where lean and sallow, by the mouldering lamp
She grows -- In me the passions are wound up
To Nature's highest pitch -- impulse, my law;
That impulse leads to Raimond.
[Still going.
EDITHA. Still I must
Restrain you. I will home, my Lord, to watch
The motions of our house, and give you tidings
When every danger's past. Thou call'st me Friend,
Yet wilt not trust to my sollicitudes.

GONDIBERT. Nay then, I yield -- farewell, my Guardian Spirit --
Oh, count the moments by the Lover's dial,
Where hours are ages! --

EDITHA. Till he does backward on the dial count,
Then ages shrink to points.

[Exit. GONDIBERT. Now then, for Edward,
And for art! art, to hide my doting thoughts,
And deck'em in the sullen guise of hatred.
Only a few short hours these shores confine him;
-- These shores may never greet his eyes again.
Mean time, that he and his Albina meet not
T'exchange reproaches, is my only care:
That point attained -- and all the rest is rapture.
[Going.
Enter Egbert. EGBERT. I come, my Lord, the unwilling Messenger
Of heavy tidings. Hoary Earl Westmoreland
Has challenged Edward, in the field to prove
His calumny against his Daughter.

GONDIBERT. Confusion!

EGBERT. This day they enter on the solemn trial.
The King himself will judge the dreadful combat;
And the whole court, in wondering sorrow wrapped,
Even now are hastening to attend the issue.

GONDIBERT. Issue! it is well -- it is well. Leave me, good Egbert!
Oh! it is too much -- this is too keen a stroke!
How shall I steer me in this fatal tempest?
Confess my wiles? -- Horror! leave me, I say --
Why stand'st thou thus, with such exploring eyes,
As if thou would read the workings of my brain?

EGBERT. If right I read, your mind in balance hangs
'Twixt the opposing principles of good
And ill. Between these two the Power that made us,
Bestowed free will to choose: Oh, let me then
Direct your choice! Let him, whose tongue inspired
The early love of virtue, once more --

GONDIBERT. Can thou
Preach calmness to the furious sea? Wilt bid
The whirlwind, that does break the towering spire,
And in its vortex hurls the forest oaks,
Restrain its rage? -- When they obey thee,
Then Gondibert shall be again a child,
And take instructions from the virtuous Egbert.

EGBERT. Oh, that these hours had not so sudden past!
I can recall, when this despised Old Man
Was dear to you -- when, hanging on my neck,
You Would listen to --

GONDIBERT. No more! I do still love thee,
Still reverence thy virtues -- But oh, Egbert!
I see them as the humid arch of Heaven,
That distant, in bright order glows, and beautifies
The scene -- yet does impart to Man no influence,
Nor yields him more than empty splendour.

EGBERT. Thus do Men talk, who'd rather shine in words,
Than seek for truth. But, oh, my Lord! this once
Let me resume my wonted place. This hour --

GONDIBERT. Hie to thy chamber, Egbert, and make prayers.
Such holy Men as thou art, have no call
In these rude times. The world is headstrong grown,
And needs a firmer curb than thine to guide it.

EGBERT. Since only one way I can gain your ear,
Know, thou rash Lord! I Am privy to the plot --
Th'inhuman plot by female cunning framed,
In which you have most wickedly concurred.

GONDIBERT. Hah! -- how -- when?

EGBERT. I was a hidden witness of the scene
That passed, last night, within Albina's garden --
-- How I came there, will make another tale.

GONDIBERT. That thou were there, thou prying, listening Varlet,
Is thy destruction --
[Half-drawing. Yet hold -- fly me, whilst I command my rage --
-- Fly from thy wronged Master, into whose secrets
Thou have, indecent! forced thyself.

EGBERT. I fear not
Your anger, Lord! -- nay, I will gladly die,
If, dying, on your mind I can impress
Just horror for the --

GONDIBERT. Pedagogue! cease prating;
And know a duty thou have yet to learn --
To treat the slidings of thy Betters with respect;
Nor dare to comment on the will of those,
Who, seen by thee from such a towering distance,
Should make thee jealous of thy own discerning,
And keep thy rude, presumptuous judgment down.
Go -- begone! --
[Pushing him off.] What cursed, untoward chance, made him a witness?
No matter -- keener sorrows now surround me.
Oh, Westmoreland! why must I tear the pillow,
Thus cruel, from thy time-blanch'd head? -- Why drag thee
From age's soft repose, to give thy bosom
To the inhuman spear? No -- perish first.
I Will go, and to the King relate the crimes
To which a furious passion drove a wretch,
Who saw the only treasure of his soul
Torn from his grasp -- to bless the Man he hates.
[Going. What! and thus mark -- thus stamp myself a villain,
To aid the transports of triumphant Edward?
Oh! 'twere a suicide that Honor claims not,
That Nature would abhor. What then?
Oh! guide me, Heaven! or, instruct me, Hell!
I cannot recede; and, to go on, is horror.
In what a sea of crimes has one short day
Immersed me! Vice, oh, thou fierce whirling eddy --
Touch but the outmost circle of thy ring,
Thy strong, resistless current, drags us in;
Torn from the shore, despairing we look back,
And, hurried on, are whelmed, ingulph'd, and -- lost.

END OF ACT IV.
ACT V.
SCENE, The Lists. On one side are ranged the King and Court; on the other, a
Multitude, with Officers. Westmoreland and Edward appear, in Armor, attended
by 'Squires, each under a Banner, on which are emblazoned their Arms, with
Devices; their Lances and Helmets borne. A Herald advances. HERALD. GUTHBERT,
Earl of Westmoreland!
And noble Edward of Somerset!
The King commands that ye do now advance,
And, in the presence, openly declare
The cause for which a combat ye have asked --
-- Risking, in private feuds, the precious blood
Which for your Country only should be spilt.

WESTMORELAND. My Liege! I answer the demand. Lord Edward
Did yesterday, with humble suit, entreat
That in his favor I would move my Daughter --
-- Feigning true passion, and unequalled love.
With warm regard I did accept the charge,
And -- not without some difficulty -- won her.
This morn was fixed, by hymeneal rites
To sanctify the passion they avowed.
This very morn, whilst I, with joy impatient,
Prepared to hail him Son --
He came, with slander charged -- breathing base falsehoods
To stain her name, and gloss the violation
Of his pledged faith -- Therefore I challenge Edward!

KING. This charge, by Westmoreland's good Earl alleged,
We have, with wonder and concern, attended.
Amongst the bright Ladies who adorn our court,
Not one so peerless stands as Countess Raimond;
Not one whose fame more fitly suits her birth;
Nor one whose honor more becomes her fame.
Why then, Lord Edward, have thou, causeless, stained it?
Why thrown away a gem that throned monarchs
Might have beheld thee wear with envy?

EDWARD. Be witness for me, Heaven! You, my dread Sovereign!
And ye, assembled People -- bear me witness!
That Raimond's chastity I held unquestioned,
As the high myst'ries of our holy faith.
I loved her with most honorable love,
And to have worn with her the marriage-chain,
More glorious deemed it, than imperial crowns.
I, who would, yesterday, against a legion
Her honor have maintained, must now -- oh horrible!
Here, in the blushing face of day, stand forth
The forced accuser of undone Albina!

KING. Some wrong interpretation seems to lurk,
And to have caused this mischievous dispute.
We do advise ye, Lords, to take more time.
If, in short space, the knot does not unfold,
We do consent that ye again shall meet,
And prove, at point of sword, whose is the error.

WESTMORELAND. This sword, my Liege! has taught the Eastern world
Submission to your laws. Its faithful point
Has prob'd the hearts of Infidels and Rebels --
May its good service to confusion turn,
And may this arm cling nerveless to my side,
If I depart the lists, ere I have proved it
On the defamer of my spotless Child!

KING. In this nice point, we only with advice
Would interpose, not fetter with commands.
If this be your matur'd resolve, pursue it;
Though deeply we lament, that two such Heroes
Should against each other's bosom turn the lance.
Sound to the combat!

[Trumpet sounds, Herald advances.] HERALD. Ye Knights! who gave and have
accepted challenge,
-- Lords, Westmoreland and Edward, your career
Begin! not doubting but his arm will vanquish
Who lifts it on the side of sacred truth.
God speed the right!

WESTMORELAND. Now, Edward! the gray locks that thou did taunt
Shall prove a wreath victorious.
[Goes eagerly toward his horse.
EDWARD. Since thy fierce spirit will with blood alone
Be satisfied, O Westmoreland! I follow thee.
But, righteous Heaven! direct my erring arm,
That, whilst it guards the life thou bidst me keep,
It may not injure his, who thirsts for mine!

Enter Egbert, rushing from the crowd. EGBERT. Hold -- oh, hold! stay, my
Lords! ere ye commit
A deed, that leads to horror, and repentance.
I have a tale that will unfold --

Gondibert springing forward. GONDIBERT. Villain!
Thou lie! it choaks thee in the utterance.

KING. Whence this irreverence? Disarm Lord Gondibert!
And know, bold Man, that in the eye of Kings
All hold an equal place. I bear a scepter
Which is my People's staff, and shall support
Alike, the Peasant and his Lord. Speak, old Man;
Whatever thy tale, thou shall have patient hearing.

EGBERT. Most gracious Liege! to save the precious blood
Of these much-injur'd Lords, with deepest sorrow
I witness bear, that in a snare they have fallen,
Most wickedly devised for their destruction,

KING. Whom do accuse of this atrocious crime?

EGBERT. There are, my Liege, who have with groundless jealousy
Poisoned Lord Edward's mind, and worked on him
To yield to infamy his spotless Bride.

EDWARD. Blessed old Man! prove me, oh! that monster prove me!

KING. Thou say there are, but nam'st not those in fault.

EGBERT. Hard task! -- in truth, the chief in fault is --

GONDIBERT. Dastard!
Speak out; nor dare insult me with thy mercy.
'Twas I -- I am the chief in fault -- if fault
It be. I practiced on a Fool's credulity,
Showed him an Angel in the garb of hell,
And he believed the cheat'ry.

EDWARD, Oh! thy words
Are barbed arrows. I am sick at heart.

GONDIBERT. 'Twas me thou saw in Albina's chamber.
The tales, to which thou list'nedst of her falsehood,
Were all imposture -- and this I did, because
I love her.

EDWARD. Love her!

GONDIBFRT. Aye! and wherefore --
-- Say wherefore, but the casual name of Brother,
Should not I boast my Love? But for that cause,
Thou, Edward, had not dared to think upon her.

WESTMORELAND. Impious -- most impious passion!

GONDIBERT. Even now
I will maintain it. Instant will I arm,
[To Edward. And meet thee in the Lists -- and, since the laws
Ordain my Love a crime, there thou may rip it
From my heart.
[Going.
KING. Stay, I do command thee, stay!
Thou have no longer title to the rights
Allowed to those, who, in the path of Honor,
Have, persevering, shaped their brilliant course:
Thy crimes beneath our yeomanry degrade thee;
And we decree, that whosoe'er accepts
From thee a challenge, be unworthy held
To try his lance with honorable Knights.

GONDIBERT. My Liege!
[Resentfully.
KING. Nay, deem not this an injury,
Nor this thy punishment --
When men of such exalted rank as thine,
Submit to crimes, to treachery, and baseness,
Justice, unshaken, on your heads should pour
The vial of her wrath; that ye may stand
As dreadful beacons to the world beneath.
Hear then thy doom! -- We banish thee our realm.
If in twelve hours thou shall be found within
The precincts of our Court, or in three days
Within our Kingdom -- be it at thy peril!
Nor frame an answer -- but begone.
[Exit Gondibert, Egbert following. Stay, old Man!
Thou, to whose love of sacred truth we owe
This happy change, by us shall be retained;
Thy King will answer for thy fortunes.

EGBERT. Oh, gracious Liege! unworthy I should be
To tread the earth, could I accept of blessings
From such a source as my loved Lord's destruction:
It is a horrid duty I Have fullfill'd!
To some forsworn abode I Will now retire,
Wasting the cheerless remnant of my days
In sorrow for his fault; and weary Heaven
With prayers for his repentance.

WESTMORELAND. Thy retirement
Is my care. Go, good Egbert, to my palace,
And wait my coming.

[Exit Egbert. EDWARD. Injured Westmoreland!
How -- how shall I approach thee? Shame, despair,
Do rend my breast; nor dare I lift my eyes
To thine, lest I should read my sentence there.

KING. Come, my good Lord! let me for Edward plead --
For him, whose virtues, glory, and descent,
Demand an advocate not less than royal.
Surely, if fair Albina now beheld him,
With eyes in deep contrition bent on earth,
Pity would rob her anger of its sting --
She too would plead; and, in the voice of Love,
Extort a pardon for her Country's Hero.

WESTMORELAND. Though high in spirit, proud, and quickly moved
With aught that glances on my precious honor --
Yet, gracious Sovereign! I can pardon too.
These public proofs of my Albina's virtue,
Restore my bosom to its wonted calm,
And thee, Lord Edward, to thy wonted place.
-- Again I thus embrace thee as my Son.
[Shout.
EDWARD. O great, transporting, unexampled goodness!

KING. This then is still the wedding day -- the rites
Be instantly performed. That no regret
May poison such an hour, we do recall
The order of your service in the East,
'Till we ourself shall in the Orient Sea
Lave our proud oars; and with Britannia's sword,
Blazing destruction, like the guardian Seraph's,
Drive from blessed Zion's walls the humbled Infidel.

EDWARD. My Prince, my Guardian, and my royal Master!
With rapture I accept the leave you grant,
And give my helmet, to the God of Love.

[Westmoreland and Edward kneel at the foot of the throne, and the Scene
closes.] SCENE, An Apartment in Gondibert's Palace. Enter Gondibert, followed
by Editha. EDITHA. It Is thus that men, when sinking, from the ruin
Which their own folly bred, accuse the heavens,
And execrate their stars. Curse not thy fate,
Nor Egbert; it is thyself on whom thou should
Revenge thine injuries.

GONDIBERT. Editha, spare me!
My mind, with wild contending passions torn,
Now, like a heart by worrying dogs forsook,
Sinks into apathy.

EDITHA. Hear then a tale,
Will rouse thee from thy lethargy -- this night
Albina will be Edward's Wife.

GONDIBERT. This night?

EDITHA. This hour!

GONDIBERT. It is enough. My wrongs awake
In all their strength, and cry aloud for vengeance.
There is an insult in this over-haste,
That finishes the whole. [Pausing.] Editha, leave me.
On dreadful things I now would ruminate!

EDITHA, On what? Impart to me thy thoughts -- Instruct me.

GONDIBERT. No. Leave me.

EDITHA. Ha! I see his mind is full
Of some important deed. His lowering brow,
And that fixed eye, bespeak some latent mischief.
Mischiefs, awake! to ye alone my soul
Bears unison. I Will urge him to the quick.
Conceive the transports of victorious Edward!
Conceive his triumph -- triumph over thee!
That, even in Raimond's arms, points every bliss --
Makes rapture sweeter --

GONDIBERT. Fiend! have thou no mercy?
Do riot in my woes? Are these the gifts
Of friendship?

EDITHA. No -- the gifts of wild despair.
Oh, were thou such a dotard to believe
That pity -- pity to thy woes, ever prompted me
To steep my soul in crimes?

GONDIBERT. What is it I hear?

EDITHA. That I aspired to greatness, and perceived
No road to reach my hopes, but through Lord Edward;
That to behold another in his arms,
Is madness; and that thee I made my tool
To interrupt their hated loves.

GONDIBERT. Perdition!
Fly me, thou Monster! lest thy womanhood
I should forget, and scatter thee in atoms
To the tempestuous winds! --
[Exit Editha, with an air of menace. [Musing.] Be firm, my soul! nor let
unworthy weakness
Destroy the vengeful purpose thou have framed.
Banished -- robbed of my country, and my name;
Yet they have left a mind defies their vengeance --
Which, though these limbs were locked in bolts of steel,
And darkness wrapped these precious founts of light,
Would rise superior to their bounded power,
And scorn alike their fetters, and their laws.
He for whom I Am exiled, for exiled Gondibert
Shall weep with his heart's blood; and every vein
Pour tribute to my mighty sorrows. Edward!
This night, in which thy pulse beats high to transport,
Thy senses giddy with approaching bliss --
-- This night beholds thee in Death's icy bands;
Thy shroud shall fold thee, not Albina's arms!

[Exit* SCENE changes to Albina 's Garden. Enter Adela. ADELA. Alas! my
Mistress! vainly have I sought her
Through every gloomy, solitary walk,
To give the tidings that will kill her peace.
Ah! she is here. How mournful is her air!
Enter Editha. The ceremonial's past -- unhappy Lady!
Lord Edward and the Countess now are one.

EDITHA. It Is well! I hear thee, Adela, unmoved!
Can one grow callous from repeated woes?
Shall the scourged wretch not feel the added stripe?

ADELA. With decent pride, and with affected anger,
The Countess long her Lover's prayers withstood.
At length, the King -- to save her from the shame
Of yielding to her heart's most eager wish --
Commanded she should take Lord Edward's hand,
And he himself would join them at the altar.

EDITHA. Demons preside over the detested nuptials!

ADELA. I was preparing to attend you here,
When the Lord Edward met me. Go! said he,
Seek out your Mistress. Much oppressed she seems,
And overcome with care. Bear her these lines --
-- Her anguish they will relieve.

EDITHA. To me, a letter!
Reads. "The injuries the Countess has received, cannot
"be pardoned, yet I Will not expose you. Leave
"Albina's castle, yet leave it as your voluntary
"act. The ills his family has brought on
"you, Edward will not increase, but study to
"relieve. A stipend, suited to your rank, shall
"be assigned you; but you must live at distance
"from Albina.
Insolent!
[flinging away the letter. Shall Edward, then, prescribe my breathing-place?
Shall he point out the spot, where I must eat
The morsel he assigns me? Sibald! Sibald!
Will it not rack thee, even in thy tomb,
That thy Editha must depend for bread
On his cursed Son, who brought thee to the block?

ADELA. Be not thus moved, but rather, Madam, think --

EDITHA. I think on nothing but my wrongs.

ADELA. The Countess
Commanded me to seek her Friend, and chide
An absence -- so unkind!

EDITHA. Must I return,
To witness her extravagance of bliss;
With gratulations meet whom I Would destroy?
Yes; such the joys, Dependence! thou bestow'st;
Such the distinctions that adorn thy slaves!

[Exeunt. Enter Gondibert. GONDIBERT. Receive, ye bowers, ye sacred solitudes!
A Murderer to your shades. Rise, rise, ye horrors!
A Murderer is here -- yet Nature shrinks not!
In such an hour no star should shed its rays,
Nor planet glisten in the lowering sky.
Pale specter now should dart athwart the gloom,
Whose hideous shrieks, tearing the affrighted ear,
Would heighten horror into madness. --
But, hark! how melting sounds of music float
On the air, and hang upon Night's drowsy bosom!
To the chamber -- to teach a wanton Bridegroom
That Death's ill-manner'd, or too proud to wait
'Till he has surfeited on bliss. -- Yet, hold!
Yet let me pause upon this deed of horror!
Murder! Is Murder then so light a thing?
Can I become a bloody, cool Assassin?
Religion! Nature! Oh, thou common Mother!
Thus on thy flinty bosom do I fling
[Throwing himself on the Earth. A ponderous weight of woe. Take me -- oh, hide
me!
Hide from the radiant eyes of Night, a Wretch --
Whose persevering crimes should they behold,
Would blot with horror their celestial orbs!
Hah -- it is too late; Repentance comes too late!
[Starting up. See, see, my hands already died in blood!
He falls, he gasps -- in agonies he writhes!
That groan! -- death's in that groan -- Oh, it has pierced
My brain -- my brain's on fire! the tempest rages --
Come on, ye Furies! I can match ye here --
Here are such tortures as ye never gave.
[Much agitated, and starting with a distracted air.] O blasting sight! it is
Raimond -- it is Albina!
Grasped by a blooming Youth -- another Lover!
She pulls him to her heart -- Nay, then for this --
Vainly thou fliest -- I Will stab thee in his arms.
Hah! 'twas an empty shade -- A shade? -- a vision.
Though Edward bleeds, will not a thousand rivals
Spring, like the hydra, from his grave, and one
At length be blessed? O glorious thought! I Will die --
I Will die -- and bear Albina with me to the grave!

[Runs wildly off. SCENE changes to Albina 's Antichamber. Enter Albina with
Attendants. INA. Permit us, Madam, to perform our duty.
Unusual weight has sudden seized my spirits,
And something here forbids me to obey you.

ALBINA. Such pensiveness often follows, when the mind,
Surcharged with joy, has yielded all her powers
To the insidious guest. But leave me, Ina;
My nightly duty is not yet performed.
Mean time, Editha send; some secret grief
Preys on her mind, and fain I would relieve
Her bosomed anguish.
[Exeunt Attendants, leaving two Candles on a distant Table. Now, whilst giddy
mirth
Shakes the high dome, and festive merriment
Expands the heart -- let me awhile retire,
And offer up my grateful thoughts to Him,
Who has through snares and wondrous perils led me
-- Led me, secure, to happiness and love.

[Exit, taking one of the Candles. After a pause, enter Gondibert. GONDIBERT.
Mad Riot spreads her banners over the house,
Whilst, unperceived, Death, to the Bridal Room
Has worked his way. His way -- alas! for whom?
Will thou not shrink?
[Looking on his Dagger. Will thou not turn and sting me,
Rather than touch her living alabaster?
The Bed! -- The Marriage Bed! -- Arise, ye Furies!
Light your infernal fires within my breast!
Drain from my veins each drop of human blood,
Lest it return, unbidden, to my heart,
And check my arm i'th'act of holy vengeance!
O Jealousy! more fell than the mad tigress
Who roars in anguish for her ravished young --
To what would thou transport me? -- Ask not -- think not --
This moment gives Albina's wondrous beauties,
Her heaven of charms, to Edward -- or to Death!
To Death -- to Death -- It Is fixed. Here will I seek her.

[Exit. Enter Editha. EDITHA. Was not the triumph of Albina finished
'Till lost Editha witnesses the scene?
Still with officious goodness does she haunt me --
Me, who never sought, but hate compassion. Pity!
Why do men call thee gentle? You Are an asp
Within a rose -- thy breath is perfume, and thy words
Sweet blossoms, that contain a venomed sting --
Kindlier is Hatred in her honest garb,
Than stinging Pity in her meek-ey'd mask.
How gay, how full of bliss, is all around me!
But, oh! within is an abyss of wretchedness,
Which the bright beams of Joy can never reach --
And this, O Raimond! do I owe to thee!
Ha! had my wishes but the force of spells,
That Bridal couch should be a bed of thorns --
Thy dreams be clothed with images of horror --
-- With images so strong, they would seize thy brain,
Drag Reason from her throne, and bind her slave
To furious fantasies -- then would thou wake
Unconscious of thy bliss, and execrate,
Like me, the happiness thou could not taste.
She comes! to meet my curses in the teeth --
Ha! no, it is Edward.
[Going.
Enter Edward. EDWARD. Thou will not fly me!
Turn, my heart's treasure! -- to thy Husband turn!

EDITHA. Torture! I am not she!
[Aside.
EDWARD. What says my charmer?
Why do thou cruelly avert the eyes
Whose glance is transport to thy Edward's heart!
Come, my Albina! come; too long thou'st kept me
From the blessed circle of thy arms.

GONDIBERT. [Rushing in.] Stay longer!
[Plunges his Dagger into Editha, who screams and sinks. Stay my leave! -- It Is
Gondibert who wills thy fate.
He whom thou'st scorned -- in love and glory vanquished,
-- Confess him, now, thy conqu'ror! See at his feet
Thy vaunted bliss! But where is the towering joy
That, yesterday, did madden in thy veins,
And bore thy haughty soul beyond humanity?

[Edward stands in an attitude of horror and amazement; then drawing his
Dagger, rushes on Gondibert. EDWARD. This for Albina!

GONDIBERT. Fool! the stroke of death
Is mine.
[Arrests Edward 's arm, whose breast is exposed to his dagger. This for Albina
-- this!
[Stabs himself, and falls.] Now, Edward,
She is my Bride!

EDWARD. Villain! devil! I cannot stay to curse thee.
Albina! my sweet Bride! my murdered Wife!
The tomb must now be our cold nuptial bed.
[Kneeling by the body.] A moment stay -- I follow thee -- I come!

[As Edward lifts his arm to stab himself, Albina enters on the opposite side.
ALBINA. What mean these dreadful sounds? Oh, sight of horror!
It Is death! -- a sea of blood! -- O Edward! come,
And catch me ere I fall.

EDWARD. She lives! she lives!

[Throwing away the Dagger, clasps her in his arms. GONDIBERT. [feebly. Albina
living! Whom, then, have I slain?
Oh, Heaven! thy hand was here.

WESTMORELAND. [without. This way, this way
Lead to my Daughter's chamber -- there is the noise.
[Enter, preceded by lights, followed by Guests.] Oh, dismal sight! --

GONDIBERT. A moment still is spared me to unfold.
The madness of desparing Love, impelled me
To kill Albina -- But in her stead -- oh! --
-- My life does flow too fast! -- Pity -- forgive me!
My guilty passion, even, now expires --
It rushes from my heart, in crimson streams,
And mingles with the dust. My crimes alone
Remain -- they will not forsake -- they will never quit me.
And now I Am summoned -- where --

[Dies. ALBINA. May mercy meet thee!
My Brother! I forgive, and mourn thy errors,
As I adore His hand, who has preserved me.

EDWARD. Accept, high Heaven! my penetrated heart.
This day, in each revolving year, I Will celebrate.
The Debtor shall behold his bonds fall off,
The Poor rejoice, the Orphan's tears be dried --
-- Nor sighs, nor tones of woe, profane the day --
The hallowed day! on which thou say'dst Albina.

WESTMORELAND. [Speaking to the Guests. Oh, mark the effect of passions
unrestrained!
Within the bosom of this noble Youth
Bright virtues sprung, as in their native bed;
'Till Vice -- alluring in the shape of Love --
Crept silent to his heart -- there spread her poisons --
There her black empire fixed; then dragged her slave*
Through infamy, to death.

THE END.

