GIDEON; OR, The PATRIOT. AN EPIC POEM.

GIDEON; OR, The PATRIOT. AN EPIC POEM: IN TWELVE BOOKS. Upon a HEBREW PLAN. In
Honor of the Two chief VIRTUES of a PEOPLE; Intrepidity in FOREIGN WAR: AND
Spirit of DOMESTIC LIBERTY.

With Miscellaneous NOTES, and large REFLECTIONS, Upon DIFFERENT SUBJECTS:
Critical, Historical, Political, Geographic, Military, and Commercial.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, opposite Katharine-Street in the Strand.
MDCCXLIX.

INTRODUCTION TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Poem had begun one, on the Subject, many Years ago: but,
doubting whether in the Plan he was proceeding on he had enough expressed the
Sense of one who had the Blessing to be born and educated in a Land of Liberty,
he had Discretion to stop short: and has postpon'd its Publication, for above
three Times the Space prescribed by Horace for impartial Re-examination of a
Poet's first Conceptions. -- He now finds, from the Result of this
Deliberation, that, though his General Purpose then was right, as but preferring
the Monarchic, to the Popular Forms of Government; yet, had he, at That Time,
gone through his Work, He was in Danger to have erred, in one particular Point,
of most essential Consequence: restraining Monarchy to its too simple Species
-- where It verges to, and looks like, Tyranny.

Early Prejudices are imbibed too deeply to be rooted out at once. Experience,
and Reflection, have, since, taught him, to conjoin, Ideas, which, before,
seemed inconsistent: and to know and own, as he now does, that Monarchy is
there most nobly constituted, where Crowns invest their Wearers with the most
extensive Power to guard, the Public Liberty: without Inducement to expect
Increase of Happiness, or Glory, from Attempts to violate it.

There is That Difference, and no other, between the first, and present,
Purpose of the Poem. -- The Fabric is the same, as formerly: but It has firmer
Ground, for its Foundation. -- The Hebrew System is, and must be, Monarchy: but
It is such a Monarchy, as GOD may be supposed, without Affront to his best
Attributes, to have established at the Head of a Free People: whom he would
not, by a Waste of useless Miracles, have brought up out of Slavery to an
Egyptian Tyrant; to have left 'em Slaves again, in a worse Country, under
Tyrants, of their own Fraternity.

The Plan, as it now stands, is strictly consonant to This Idea: And so little
Difference could arise from the mistaken Species, where the Genus was
monarchical, that almost every thing, in the Poetic View, retains its Place, as
in its first Production: with Exception only to That nobler Taste of Freedom;
which the Writer owed to a disinterested, silent, and sincere Attachment, never
confessed, till now, to the unconscious Object of it. Here, first, and much too
late, his touched Heart called upon him to record the Obligation.

It has been thought advisable to publish only Three Books at a Time: and with
the first the Notes belonging to it. Partly by way of Specimen: but chiefly
because relative to the Design, and general Constitution, of the Epic Species.
-- The Notes to All the Books, will, last, be published, by Themselves: and may
be bound distinct from the Poetic Part: or be annexed to Each Book relatively;
making, so, Two Volumes; at Election of the Reader: who may also, in this
Method, choose to take, or leave, the Notes, at his own Pleasure. -- The
Remaining Three Parts, of the Poem, will be published in like manner as This
First: and at the shortest Distances which can consist with Care, in the
Revisal and Correction of so large a Work, and where Variety of Subjects claim
the closest Application, of a Writer, not insensible with what a Reverence Men
should appear before the Public Eye; who dare aspire to being held in View,
beyond the Dimness of a present Prospect.

He presumes to call his present Prospect but a dim one, without Arrogance, or
Satire: being equally remote from dreaming too sublimely, or too despicably, of
the Age and Nation he was doomed to take his Fate in. -- He, but too well,
knows 'em not the best disposed, in any Kind, for giving Fame to Epic Poetry:
yet, must protest against so far misjudging his Cotemporaries as to suspect it
possible, that many should not now be living, as completely qualified, as in
whatever other Time, or Country, to know how far a Poet has deserved their
Notice: and refuse it only, where It ought not to be granted.

For the Rest, he casts his Hopes upon Futurity: and, having but a short
Reserve of personal Claim to Time, transfers his Expectation of Survival, to
this Child of Leisure, His Poetic Representative.

He has nothing further, here, to add, concerning it, the Notes being very
circumstantial, and explanatory: only, that the Work (which is of Epic, or
Heroic, Species), had for Object, the chief Virtues of a People: Intrepidity,
in foreign War -- and Spirit of domestic Liberty.

As for the Notes, they are not merely of poetical, or critical, Intention: but
consist, occasionally, of enlarged Discourses upon different Subjects, drawn
from old and modern History; to elucidate and give Examples, to, political
Deductions, which arise from Incidents, remarked upon. They are, also,
Military, Geographic, and Commercial: and include Variety of other Subjects: as
the Reader will discover in their Progress.

Among these Reflections, it may possibly give Satisfaction to the Learned and
Reverend Body of our Clergy, in particular, to see the following three Points
touched, in the new Lights here given them.

1st, That the fine Theocracy, of the Mosaic Institution, was destroyed, in its
Progression, but by natural Consequence of one political Defect (that has not
been enough adverted to, by Writers on that Subject), the Military Care
disjoined from the Imperial.

2dly, That the Hebrew Form of Government was never, as it has by Mr.
Harrington (and almost generally) been supposed, a Popular Republic: but a
plain Hereditary Monarchy: the sovereign Power whereof was vested in the
High-Priest's Person.

And 3dly, That, with Exception only to this last peculiar Circumstance, there
arise great Probabilities, toward finding in the first established Hebrew
Model, the Original of All the manly Celtic Forms: and, in particular, of That,
which constitutes the present System in Great Britain; -- not relaxing from
its, known, sound Principles.

Thus much seemed needful to premise. What rests, will follow, with the Notes,
conjunctively: Those on the first Book being published previously, because
explanatory of the General Purpose.

GIDEON; OR, The PATRIOT. BOOK I.
I.
GLOWING pure, with hallowed Fire,
Seek, O Soul! some heavenly Theme:
But, bid no Muse thy Flights inspire;
Vain the Hope, the Name a Dream.
Thou! Great, Almighty Spirit! tune my Verse;
Accept my Offering, sacred to thy Praise:
And while, unfit, thy Wonders I rehearse,
Strike Thy keen Luster, sparkling, through my Lays.
Long, too long! the wandering Art;
Awed by Power, by Beauty charmed,
Low has stooped to sooth the Heart:
And, with a smoaky Fire, the Passions warmed.
But Thou! Great Origin of Harmony!
Breathe through my Numbers a diviner Strain:
And, as thy Servant Gideon, blessed by Thee,
Broke his freed Country's hard-oppressive Chain,
So, now, all-pow'rful Guide! invig'rate me,
Successful, to redeem the Use, of long-lost Poetry!
Thou, the Great Author, of the Theme I choose,
Inspire me, to describe it well: and be, Thyself, my Muse.
II.
War is my Subject: and That favorite Hand
Which, armed by Heaven, redeemed a chosen Race;
When, scarce yet warm in their new-gifted Land,
Wilful they started from protective Grace.
At length, provoked, their High Deliv'rer vowed
To pay with sharp Revenge their dull Disdain:
And, while, to Baal and Ashtaroth, they bowed,
Justly, he bent their stubborn Necks to Pain:
And left 'em Slaves, to serve the Men, whose Gods they served in vain.
Then, Gideon, wise and generous Leader! rose;
And taught faint Israel, by his strange Success,
That Loss of Freedom, from Corruption flows:
And Virtue's Sense restored, repels Distress.
Greatly determined, and sublimely brave,
From a low Fortune, and a Race obscure,
He, who well the Difference knew,
'Twixt being base, and being poor,
Dared noblest Hopes, with humblest Means, pursue:
Showed the just Pref'rence of a balanced Power,
Where Prince and Senate pause, over weighed Debate;
To those blown Clouds which over Dominion lowre,
Where headless Hands, disjointly rash, perplex a struggling State.
When Sons of Faction, born to mis-compose,
Dared, proudly wanton, bid Rebellion reign;
Unvers'd in Rule, while over their Friends they rose,
To fall disgraceful, at the Feet of Foes,
Him, did the God of nobler Hopes ordain:
He, when his Country's just Despair scarce Heaven's high Aid implored,
Redeemed, Alone, th'unhoping Land: and her lost Law restored.
Hail, divine Impulse! -- I thy Force obey.
Hail, glorious Theme, marked out by Heaven, Heaven's Influence, to display!
And Thou, directive Spirit! shine: to point my blazing Way.
III.
But, while I rouse th'immerg'd in Doubt, God's wondrous Paths to see,
What human Power shall I invoke, for Aid?
What PATRON, to protect my Verse, and me,
And lead lost Taste, through Discord's eyeless Shade?
Why ask I this? -- Shame, on the low Desire!
Not Earth's dim Fuel feeds celestial Fire.
Shine clear, my Soul! shun Flatt'ry's reptile Way:
Nor court the imperious Puddlers, of a Day.
On strong Foundation, thy white Building raise:
Nor stain thy Subject by misguided Praise.
Not to Pride's transient Phantoms, poorly, kneel:
But, bid thy Work, that hopes immortal Fame,
Outsoaring Arrogance, to Worth appeal:
And bow, before some world-ennobling Name.
IV.
Hail, BOLINGBROKE! -- from thy still Heights descend;
Come, Virtue's Heart, Wit's Soul, and Reason's Friend!
All the charmed Muses Thine, the Least, now hear.
Why should they stoop to Kings, while Thou art near?
O, come -- What Name shall influent Rapture find?
Great luminary Leader, of the Mind!
Even could the Poet please, the Power were stole;
THY Sense of Freedom stretched his Muse's SOUL.
Erring, where Thousands erred, in Youth's hot Start,
Propulsive Prejudice had warped his Heart;
Bold, and too loud he sighed, for high Distress,
Fond of the Fallen, nor formed to serve Success;
Partial to Woes, had weighed their Cause too light,
Wept over Misfortune -- and misnam'd it, Right:
Anguish, attracting, turned Attachment wrong,
And Pity's Note mis-tun'd his devious Song.
Timely, thy home-bent Radiance, re-display'd,
Struck the dim Doubter, and dispelled the Shade.
Cool-ey'd Reflection checked th'enthusiast Rhyme,
And won the blushful Bigot, from his Crime.
-- Oh! as his Heart, then, caught thy Patriot Glow,
Now, could his Verse, like thy sweet Accents, flow,
Music's whole Power should strike the vocal String,
And every Bird of Pindus clap the Wing.
Guided, he marked the interposing MOUND,
Which License bursting, Liberty were drowned:
Which Monarchy, transcending, towers to fall;
And, grasping more than granted, gives up All.
-- Happiest of Men! most raised of Sov'reigns! He,
Liege-Lord of Lovers! Foremost of the Free!
Who scorns Prerogative, to taint his Will,
And reigns over even the Power, to purpose ill.
Who shows majestic Royalty's plain Face,
With Dignity's unmasked, paternal Grace;
Secured of Reverence, spurns tyrannic Awe,
And stars his Heaven of Power with Lights of Law;
Safely displuming Pride's imperious Crest,
And lodging Sense of Greatest, but in Best.
V.
Such were a ST. JOHN's Thoughts -- such, once, his Crimes,
Doomed, like a Lapland Sun, to down-bent Climes.
Strait was his Beam, but every breaking Ray,
Lost on the oblique Declension, SEEMED to stray.
-- Off with the veily Metaphor's cold Shade!
Plain, to the Great, be Truth's pure Homage paid.
Malice, Disguise, and Fear, to Courts resign;
Warmth, in Thy Monarch's Cause, O Muse! be Thine.
Censures, Resentments, Calumnies, and Hate,
And all the unlasting Levities of State,
Transient, as Dreams, shall break their Mists away,
And leave him glittering, in unclouded Day.
Feel him, O Thames! to thy famed Stream, so nigh,
Bow thy prone Surge, and glide in Reverence by.
Calm, on thy Bank, in patient Pain, he smiles,
Effus'd, like Thee, the Boast of Regal Isles:
Next Neighbor to his GOD! who (close behind)
Breathes the still Altar's Influence over his Mind:
Swells his forgiving Heart with Joy to bless;
And bids him teach his Foes to shun Distress.
Pride of a Land, those Foes were born to stain!
Envy's vast Object! that o'ercharg'd a State,
Till Debt's proud Blush turned Gratitude to Pain,
And Wrongs, and Distance, eased thy dreaded Weight.
What shall I say, Sensations to reveal,
Which, Words not reaching, Thought but aches, to feel?
All I can be, be Thine! -- The Eternal Eye,
That wakes for Virtue, sees, and loves, thy Claim:
Kingdoms shall rise, and in slow Ruins lie,
While new ones, in new Tongues, transmit thy Name.
VI.
O, never to be lost! -- Could Wishes save,
Nations would guard Thee from th'all-cov'ring Grave:
But, 'twill not be. -- The Impatient Moments fly;
Nations, and Times, and St. John's Self, must DIE.
Die, to his Friends; -- Himself Fate strikes in vain;
Death but the Accession, of his dateless Reign.
When All those sacred Atoms sleep in Dust,
If Earth ever veils Thee, -- as, too sure! it must:
Sons of thy Soul shall each dear Remnant boast;
And he charm surest, who retains Thee most.
Realms, in Thy lucid Track, absolved from Night,
Shall blush for Blindness, that repelled such Light;
Live to each Sense, thy faultless Taste inspired,
And bless that Leisure, which thy Wrongs acquired.
Freedom's broad Temple, in this bright'ning Isle,
Pillar'd, on Props, by honored St. John reared,
High, on the Front of her enduring Pile,
Shall wear the immortal Name, through Time, revered.
Then, shall some happier Bard, all-friended, rise,
Whom every Muse shall aid, to touch thy Praise:
He, sweetlier-voic'd, shall these low Strains despise,
For All thy tuneful SOUL shall warm his Lays.
Mean while, O deign, through death-doom'd Aera's bright,
Buoyant, to bear aloft my Speck of Light;
Then, shall I float sustained, in this blessed Page,
And one saved Poet 'scape a sinking Age.
VII.
NOW from the swarming East, for Sev'n long Years,
Had restless Midian poured her swarthy Hosts:
And, planting Canaan with erected Spears,
Awed fainting Israel, to her Western Coasts.
To These, old Amalek her Standards joined;
The marching Hebrews first, and surest, Foe!
Thick, as the Locusts, in some living Wind;
A Tide of Death, over all the Land, they flow:
Force, and Famine, with them go!
Pangless, they stain their Front with Blood: and blot their Rear with Woe.
By God forsaken, God's proud People fly;
Valiant, no longer than obedient, found:
Hopeless to live, and yet afraid to die,
In Caves, and dark Retreats, they dwell on high.
Thence, prone, look trembling with pale Horror round,
While, from the exposed inferior Ground,
Their heavy Harvests load the plund'ring Foe:
And for Support of Those they curse, their Grapes and Olives grow.
Dejected now, their Joshua they forget,
Nor longer, warlike, others Lands invade:
Anxious now, their own they quit,
Poorly from reachless Rocks, to borrow Aid:
And, hid in Safety's eyeless Dusk, their boasted Glory shade.
VIII.
Westward from reverend Jordan's silv'ry Stream,
Where Half the Manasaean Tribe their measured Portion found,
Ophra salutes the Morning's opening Beam,
From the East Brow of an extended Round
Of high-rais'd, rugged, and imperial Ground.
Within th'extensive Circle, copious Plain,
And safe-stretch'd Pastures, high-inclos'd, remain
Impregnably secure, beneath th'exterior Mound.
Far to the North, below, was Jezreel's Valley spread:
Jezreel, by mighty Victories renowned!
'Twas on this Mountain's broad and fertile Head,
JOASH, the destined Hero's Father, dwelt:
Joash, whom home-rais'd Harvests nobly fed;
Who, old in Ease, no Blast of Care had felt;
Crowned with unenvied Plenty, and Respect,
He held a Power, by no proud Faction checked;
And, sole, and natural Monarch of the Place,
Reigned in paternal Majesty, over all his happy Race.
Hard by his House, a reverend Oak there grew,
Which there had flourished, many a Cent'ry past;
Long before Israel GOD, or MOSES, knew,
Or from Egypt's Chain withdrew,
This Tree a Shade over half the Mountain cast.
Stretched on a Bench, beneath th'expansive Gloom,
Gideon, whose struggling Anguish longed for Vent,
Lay, at the earliest Dawn of doubtful Light,
A far Discerner, unexpos'd to Sight;
On mighty Ends, in Contemplation, bent.
IX.
The Morning rising over Israel's Spoils,
Glowed with a burning Blush, to see her Shame:
The wakeful Bees began their searchful Toils,
And humm'd, from Flower to Flower, with tasteful Aim.
High to the bright'ning Skies the soaring Lark
Rose, warbling Welcome to the opening Day:
Below, with humbler Melody,
Hopping from Bush to Bush, from Tree to Tree,
A Thousand Birds in mirthful Concert play.
Slow from the Plain, the melting Dew,
To kiss the Sunbeams, climbing, rose;
And bore sweet Odours, upward, as it flew,
To guide their balmy Influence from the Foes.
Still, some fresh Zephyr fanned the fragrant Vale;
And still a Thousand mingled Sweets rose with the spicy Gale.
Along the Mountain's steep, but blooming Side,
The creeping Vine, and scentful Myrtle spread:
Over the Rock's Margin, high, with frightful Pride,
The over-hanging Palm the Winds defied:
And raised, in dangerous State, its branchy Head.
At the Hill's Foot, with hoarse, and murmuring Sound,
A winding Riv'let rolled its pebbly Way,
And, lingering through th'enamell'd Vale, delighting there to stray,
Late it is loud Passage into Jordan found.
Far, on either Side the Brook,
A ripening Harvest bent her golden Head;
Bowed, to invite the expected Reaping-hook:
And waving wanton, over its airy Bed,
Sadly, at Distance, pleased their Sight, whose Taste it should have fed.
X.
All this fair Prospect, with commanding Eye,
The thought-afflicted Gideon saw, from high:
Happy enough, had this been all his View!
But oh! he saw the Camp of Midian, too!
Proudly spread, in warlike Awe,
Death's whole collected Pomp, at once, he saw.
A mingled Horror glittered from below:
Tents, green, white, sanguine, azure, distant seen,
Varied the Landschape, with a threatening Show:
Whence gleamy Swords, and Lances, glowed between;
And filled, with terrible Delight, the sight-alarming Scene.
Here, and there, high-mettled Steeds
Bound loose, in wanton Exercise, and neigh along the Meads,
In other Parts, the scyth-arm'd Chariots, driven,
Wheel, round each other, with elusive Skill,
Formful of future Schemes to kill:
Swift, every Way, they wind, at Signals given;
And open wide, and close again, at Will:
Their brazen Wheels with Din the Valley fill;
And shoot their clatt'ring Echoes up the Hill:
Then, all at once, with yet more thundering Noise,
The tortured Drums, and sprightly Trumpets, joined,
Proudly proclaim the waking Conqu'ror's Joys;
And swell their savage Triumph up the Wind.
XI.
Light, from his Bench, enraged, young Gideon leapt,
By Doubt, and Shame, and Grief, and Anger, pressed:
GOD, who till now, he cried, his Promise kept,
Leaves us abandoned most, when most distressed!
Why, thou immortal Leader of our Race,
Why were thy Blessings heaped upon this Land?
The Milk and Honey of thy promised Grace
Flowed ev'ry-where, throughout each charmful Space;
But, oh! they flowed to our Destroyer's Hand.
And must it be? and can no Help be found?
Said I, no Help? -- Dishonest Sound!
There can, there must, there shall. -- This galling Yoke,
Which haughty Midian will not ease,
May -- when GOD and Israel please,
From off our Necks, at one determined Stroke,
Be shook, in Fury; or, by Strength, be broke.
But who, alas! what Hand shall guide the Blow?
Heartless, our Tribes indulge their patient Woe;
Half, with Treach'ry, aid the Foe:
And, false to Heaven and Us, the nvader own:
The other Half, who hold their Country dear,
Doubting GOD's Help, because it is slowly shown,
Wish well for Conscience, and submit for Fear.
Now were some single Power a general Bliss:
What wanted Israel, when possessed of This?
The Kings about us, with uncurb'd Command,
Timely directing, save their Land:
We too, once prosper'd in a Monarch's Hand.
Now, misaspiring to be loosely great,
Disjunctive Freedom but enslaves our State.
In Governments, where All would rule, -- and None, by Choice, obey,
Not soon, indeed, the self-disturbing Storm
Yields to subside beneath a Tyrant Sway:
But Power, so parcell'd, melts, in Broils, away;
And noisy Contest, weak'ning Awe, must general Strength betray.
Is there a Man throughout all Israel's Names,
Who dares not, Hand to Hand, assault a Foe?
Singly, All are free, and brave;
Together, but one Coward, and one Slave!
Since, all-excentric, each the rest disclaims,
Why look we wide, th'apparent Cause to know?
We, to defective Rule, our Mis'ries owe.
Led by a Lion, Sheep, like Lions, dare:
And Lions, led by Sheep, like Sheep, despair.
He spoke; and with a swift, and manly Stride,
Approached the Mountain's steepy Side:
Sternly, on Midian, downward bent his Eyes,
Glowed, as he gazing felt new Passions rise:
And rolled 'em sparkling, to the upbraided Skies.
High beat his warm, and wish-disorder'd Heart,
And his hot Bosom tingled with the Smart.
XII.
While thus in busy Silence, fixed, he gazed,
Th'unfolding Heavens with streamy Brightness blazed.
Panting, his tongueless Terror would have spoke --
But, as he viewed th'effulgent Chasm, amazed,
Close, at his Ear, a bursting Thunder broke:
And a Voice reached him, from th'abandon'd Oak.
He turned, and in his late-left Station saw,
Calmly reclined, a Youth divinely fair,
Sitting, like some familiar Friend, some Partner of his Care.
Pensive, he leaned his Head on his Left Hand,
His smiling Eye shed Sweetness, mixed with Awe:
His Right Hand, with a milk-white Wand, some Figure seemed to draw.
A nameless Grace was scattered through his Air:
And, over his Shoulders, loosely flowed his amber-colour'd Hair.
As Gideon, wondering, towered the Stranger drew,
The immortal Visitor approached Him, too.
Hail, happy Youth, he cried! -- GOD's Chosen, hail!
Thou Light of Israel! her commissioned Guide!
Soon shall thy Sword over yon gay Power prevail:
Hope boldly. -- GOD will war on Gideon's Side.
XIII.
Whoever thou art, the Hero, sad, replied,
Who know so well the unhappy Gideon's Name;
Would thou could tell, since GOD is on my Side,
How comes it, he permits my Country's Shame?
Where is the saving Rod of Moses, now?
Where the lost Force of Joshua's warlike Hand?
Where the flashed Flame from night-hid Sinai's Brow?
Oh! for that foe-preventing Cloud, by Day!
Or, by Night, that fiery Ray,
Which led our Fathers to this happy Land!
What need of all this Waste of Wonders done,
If, here, scarce seated, we must fall at last?
Why, out of Pharaoh's Grasp was Israel won?
Why the Red Sea, miraculously, past?
Sure! since our Lot's for Ruin cast,
More nobly wretched 'twould appear,
To be, in Egypt, Slaves, than here!
Why, now forsaking, was he pleased to choose?
Why call us His, at first?
Never to have been blessed, were lightlier cursed.
Hopes, from false Prospect, cruelly amuse:
Better never know a Bliss, than, known, to lose!
As for myself, fain would I credit All:
Long have I dared revolve proud Midian's Fall.
But, void of Means to suit the ambitious Aim,
The Curb of Fortune keeps my Courage tame.
Of all our Tribe, the poorest Race is mine;
And of that poorest Race, the meanest I:
Be it supposed I should incline
War's dreadful Weight to try;
Where is my Power, my Interest, my Fame?
Will Israel's haughty Tribes be led, by one without a Name?
XIV.
The Angel interrupting here, thus awfully replied,
Israel, bold Hebrew, has her GOD defied.
Since from affronted Heaven the ungrateful Race
Hope lost Assistance, and would still prevail,
Why have they broke GOD's Laws, renounced his Grace,
And poorly bowed to Ashtaroth, and Baal?
Were These the Gods, who from the Egyptian Land,
Freed your lost Fathers, with unhop'd Success?
'Twixt wave-built Walls conducted 'em, to Idumaea's Strand?
Safe steered you through the pathless Wilderness,
Gave awful Power to the Mosaic Wand,
All proud Attempts from hostile Earth to check,
And govern Heaven, by its commissioned Beck?
With liquid Rock to stream a springless Land,
Call manna'd Harvests from the unfruitful Sand,
And save, and bless you, with a mighty Hand?
Since, stubborn, for an empty Idol's sake,
Your Articles with Heaven you dared to break,
What vain Presumption bids you judge it fit,
Who slight the Bond, should reap the Benefit?
But-thou would say, Repentance dawns, at last;
That, sadly conscious of their Error past;
Groaning, in Anguish of their Souls, their Eyes to Heaven they cast.
How small th'Atonement, and how great the Sin!
Yet, it suffices, that they, late, begin
To quit the ungrateful Paths, they have wandered in:
Unutterably gracious, GOD disdains
To feel a Pleasure, in his Creatures Pains.
Men, who slight Heaven, but their own Bliss forsake:
I, the Great Pard'ner's Minister, am sent,
To arm Thee, Gideon, for thy brave Intent.
Boldly resolve; and safely undertake.
Hail, Heaven's illustrious Instrument!
Thine be the Ends, on which thy Thoughts were bent.
XV.
Gideon sighed sad, and graceful bowed his Head;
Heedful, to question, ere he yet believed
So strange a Message, though from Heaven received.
The deep-discerning Nuncio plainly read
Each Scruple, in his arguing Fancy bred:
Let me, said he, from yon forsaken Seat,
Share that small Store, thy Grief neglects to eat.
Gideon, with joyful Diligence obeyed,
And humbly, at his Feet, the Napkin spread;
And, in neat Order, hospitably laid
His little Treat of Wine, and Flesh, and Bread:
Yet, doubtful, and amazed, at what he did,
My Lord, said he, who Heaven's high Will reveals,
Stoops not, I fear, to taste of mortal Meals:
The Food of Angels is not Flesh of Kid.
XVI.
Be taught, replied the unbody'd Guest, from this Consent, to know,
Men, to Heaven's Myst'ries, Faith implicit, owe.
Let the Command suffice, nor Reason's Eye,
With dangerous Keenness, seek the darkened Why.
Where GOD has said, I Will have it so,
All curious Inquisition must be spared:
And nothing sought, beyond what stands declared.
Be not, in human Ignorance, too scrupulously wise:
But mindful, that obedient Faith is Man's best Sacrifice.
He said: and, gently stretching out his Hand,
Touched the spread Napkin with his snowy Wand.
As, from hot Furnaces, the vap'ry Stream
Mounts thick, and widens its evolving Steam,
So, when the Angel his Reproof had spoke,
At the watched Summons of the Wand's soft Stroke,
A springy Flame from the dry Surface broke,
And covered, and consumed, th'untasted Store.
Lovely the Fire rose whirling, mixed with Smoke,
Folding, in glorious Volumes, over and over:
And upward, on a curling Cloud, the mounted Angel bore.
Gideon looked after him, and would have spoke;
While, ravished with the fierce Delight, he saw him gently soar:
Till forced to give the th'outlength'ning Prospect over,
His Eyes, in watery Brightness wept, for Bliss, they found no more.
XVII.
Musing a while, and dumb with deep Suspense,
Thus loud, at last, his Wonder broke its Way.
Immortal GOD! whose Glory's high Defense
Thy own Almighty Hand can best display;
Thy Hand, beneath whose angry Touch, whole Worlds would melt away!
Can it be possible! to one, like me!
Without Desert, of no Degree,
It should be left, to draw the Sword for THEE!
But dark, and wondrous, ever, were thy Ways:
All different Means grow equal in thy Hand;
And all Things possible, where Man obeys
His Maker's high Command.
Why weigh I, thus, Decrees, I must fulfill?
'Twas holy Flame, I find, that did inspire
My Soul's ungovernable Fire;
And That was working Providence, which seemed but wild Desire.
Hence, then, with Apprehensions, and Delays;
Hence, with all doubted Want of human Skill.
GOD, if he meant me for his Praise,
Will mould me to his Will.
XVIII.
While he yet spoke, from Ophra's neighboring Walls,
A winding Horn, in short and sudden Calls,
Invades his Ear, with high, and hoarse Alarms:
And, from the Town, a mingled Tumult swarms
Of every Rank, all Ages, weak, and strong:
Flowing, in Tides of Uproar, thick along:
Confusedly armed, and more confusedly led,
They seemed, with eager Threat'nings, to pursue
A Party, which, along the Mountain's Side,
In more Disorder fled.
Gideon, in Haste, to his near House withdrew:
There, with a Spear, his warlike Hand supplied;
And joined th'egressive Crowd, and followed, too.
XIX.
This was a Party, that, from Midian's Camp,
Had, in the covering Dusk of Night, been sent,
To climb the Mountain, silent, and unspy'd,
And, close concealed till Dawn, with dire Intent,
'Twixt the Cragg's bushy Clefts their Cohort hide:
Till, at the opening Portal, rushing in,
Surprise might force, what Siege, would, slowly, win.
But Joash, early rising, every Day,
Took Pleasure to behold the Morning break;
To watch the first faint Shoots of Twilight play:
And Night's dissolving Shades melt soft away.
He, while his fragrant Walk he meant to take,
Round the known Borders of his well-till'd Farm,
Undreaming Danger, as unmeaning Harm,
Down the Hill's Brow discerned the Points of Spears,
Suspiciously in sloping Covert bent;
And saw the sheltry Bushes shake, along the green Descent.
His taught Experience caught prophetic Fears:
Swift to the Town conveyed this strong Alarm;
And roused th'unwary Multitude, to arm.
XX.
Prevented, the discovered Ambush rose,
And fast retreated down the craggy Hill:
Gideon, whose Breast pre-destin'd Honors fill,
Doubly inspired, in Presence of his Foes,
Winged his swift Feet with Heaven's remembered Will;
And, now nigh-reaching, gained upon 'em, still.
Oreb, a Midian Prince, of warlike Fame,
Who led this Party on their close Design,
Saw their Retreat, with mingled Rage, and Shame,
And labored, earnestly, and long, to stop their headlong Flight:
But neither Prayers, nor Blows, could now incline
His scattering Files, to bear the Hebrew's Sight.
Moved therefore by a brave and princely Mind,
He let the rushing Numbers pass him by;
Then, following, marched securely slow, behind:
Often facing, with a fierce, and flameful Eye;
Himself an Army, while his People fly!
He, when he found his Rear too closely pressed,
Turned sudden, in a steep, and winding Way,
Where scarce two meeting Friends could pass, abreast,
Such threddy Concave, here, deep-narrowing lay:
And jutting Rocks, and frightful Steeps, hung horrid over the rest.
Since, like a timorous Herd, said he, yon Cowards haste away,
Nor blush, in Arms, their Sovereign to betray,
Let 'em enjoy their Safety, as they may;
It Is now their Shame, who dare their Charge reject;
'Twere mine, should I the Negligent neglect:
It Is a King's glorious Business, to protect.
XXI.
He said, and over an Angle of the Path,
Observed a tottering Cliff, which loosely hung,
Broke by long-drenching Rains, and wint'ry Wrath,
Acutely pendent, 'twixt two Rock's raised Ends,
Ponderous it seems to arch the Road, and a roof'd Shadow lends.
High, to one pointed Prop, the Prince ascends;
Long, to the vast unweildy Weight, with struggling Labor clung:
And down, at last, across the Path, the loady Barrier flung.
Gideon, who just approached it, as it fell,
Strides back, amazed, and scarce believes his Sight:
Whoever thou art, he cried, thou tim'st it well:
And sure! to do thy envied Courage Right,
He, who so bravely flies, would nobly fight.
XXII.
Scarce had he spoke, when with a threatening Spear,
Down, on the bulwark Rock, Prince Oreb leapt.
Hebrew, he cried, thou art not safe, so near:
Retire: This Pass will be too strongly kept.
Speaking, aloft he shook his death-arm'd Lance,
And to the shouting Thousands turned his Shield:
The slow-descending Foes, now, scarce advance;
But, from th'o'ercrowded Steep, in spiral Line,
Awed, and astonished, at the fierce Design,
Stand gazing at the Wonder, they beheld.
Dreadfully bright, his gilded Armor shone;
Over his left Thigh, a crooked Sword declined:
A feath'ry Plume high from his Helmet rose,
And, loosely gay, waved warlike, in the Wind:
Crimson, with Sable mixed, half-shaded, flows,
Severely charming, to his distant Foes!
Of all the Press, Gideon alone comes on:
The rest, in safe Defiance, threat, behind;
Ignobly hurl their Jav'lins down in vain,
Which, clatt'ring on his Shield, rebound; and tremble, back, again.
XXIII.
Gideon, awhile, revolved the unequal War,
And blushed to see it basely waged from far:
Then, raised his Arm, in Sign, that He, alone,
Would make the general Hazard, all, his own.
Hushed was the Storm: and Oreb, smiling, saw
One threatening Hebrew near him draw.
Yet, cautious, to prevent too bold Advance,
Aimful he poised, and hurled, his beamy Lance:
Timely th'Approacher bowed his watchful Head,
And harmless let the pointed Tempest fly;
But his reached Station felt th'Invader nigh:
Deep, in the cliffy Path, it Entrance found,
And, echoing its Design, with thundering Sound,
Jarr'd upward, as it stood erect, and quiver'd in the Ground.
Gideon sprung near, and from beneath the Rock,
Rising, at Hand, directs a speary Blow:
The ringing Target yielded to the Shock,
And the broad-ent'ring Steel broke thundering through.
Half his bright Sword, the dreadful Oreb drew:
When Fortune -- blind Invertress of Event!
Thus checked the impatient Speed his Ardour lent;
Gideon strongly, from below,
Dragged hard, to disengage the entangled Spear,
Which, while Prince Oreb's Shield retentive bound,
Lightly th'Assaulter, leaping from the Ground,
Helped by the Staff's Resistance, firmly grasped,
Reached the gained Rock, surpised the Foe, and his armed Body clasped.
To Heaven a thundering Shout the Hebrews raised,
Struck, and astonished! and transported, gazed.
Far flies th'incumber'd Shield, wide hurled away;
Laboring, each strives the other's Weight to lift:
Now, curvy Grapplings every Bend, assay.
Now, with a springy Force, in Starts of Rage,
From sinewy Curb, their Joints they disengage:
Soon closed again, with stormy Grasp they meet,
Arms fett'ring Arms, and Feet perplexing Feet:
Elusive long, with new, and wily Drifts,
From Side to Side, the evasive Whirlwind shifts;
They heave, they drag, they twist, bend, lift, and strain:
And tire each practiced Nerve, yet toil in vain.
Fiercely, at length, provoked, at Art's Delay,
Born for plain Conquest, and the Glare of Day!
Strength's utmost Effort, in one Proof, to make,
With Feet firm fixed, and stretch'd-out Arms, the Rock's loose Clefts they
shake.
Sudden, they feel their Prop's false Fabric break:
Time-worn, the flaky Pediment's pressed Slate,
Splitting beneath the human Tempest's Weight,
Rolled one huge Fragment down, while one vast Flake,
Backward reclining, now scarce choked the Straight:
Distant, compelled, th'unclosing Warriors fall,
And the freed Path unbars her Track, to All.
XXIV.
Gideon, awhile, long stunned, above: -- Oreb, who downward fell,
Rolled Sev'n steep Paces, ere his Feet he gained:
But, swift recov'ring, with indignant Swell,
Looked back, and saw, surpised, that this dire Chance,
Bursting the Pass, he had so long maintained,
Had left it open to his Foes Advance.
Then, hopeful, hard Pursuit would now prove vain,
Should the Persisters press his flying Train;
Swift, as a Tiger bounds, he leaps away,
Light, and regardless, where best Passage lay:
Till near behind him came th'o'ertaking Shout.
Then, paused he, calm, looked heedfully about:
Marked in the Mountain's Side, a dusky Cave;
And enters there, with slow Suspense, his future Hope to save.
XXV.
As rapid Currents, choked by float-mix'd Mud,
Checked for a Moment, smooth their troubled Flood;
Then, sluicing on, to clear the obstructed Way,
With tenfold Force renew their sweepy Sway:
So when the Hebrews saw the Passage free,
In headlong Cat'ract, down the Steep they gushed;
And, in rude Flow, fast by the Cavern rushed.
Nor dreamt, that Oreb could so near 'em be.
To the Hill's outmost Verge, at last, they came,
Where a broad Terras, formed by Nature, spread,
And, round the Mountain, reared a pensile Plain.
Hither, by vain Pursuit, the Hebrews, led,
Beheld th'escaping Foe the Valley gain,
And safely, there, in rallying Line, make Head.
Thence, at more Distance, cross the forded Stream,
Squadrons, from Midian's Camp detached, they viewed;
Whose sun-struck Weapons flashed a threatening Gleam.
Then, Gideon found it prudent to retreat,
And, timely wise, reclimb'd the steep Ascent;
But, marching slowly, with attentive Feet,
Examined every Cavern, as he went:
From that, in which Prince Oreb lay, sudden an entering File,
With Eyes cast backward, trembling, outward flew:
Close at their Heels came dreadful Oreb, too;
By Nature, always eager to pursue!
But, soon as Gideon he beheld, and knew,
He sheathed his Sword, and with a graceful Smile,
Now first, said he, this Sword, in vain, I drew.
But, forced to yield, it is best I yield to you.
The generous Hebrew, bowing mild, replied;
Fortune not always favors the most brave:
Had partial Victory still sustained your Side,
She would have robbed me of wished Power to save.
And you had wronged a Hebrew Heart, untried.
XXVI.
While they were speaking, and the should'ring Crowd,
Morosely insolent, and rudely loud,
Was climbing round, all gaping for a View,
As if the Conquest claimed the Insult, too!
A second Chance diverts the impatient Throng;
For some, who newly searched the Cavern, round,
Noiseful returned, and with 'em dragged along,
Ten weeping Slaves, whom, there, concealed they found:
Poor Fugitives of ancient Canaan's Race,
Once happy Owners of that promised Land,
Where, forced to give th'invading Hebrews Place,
They, now, lived subject to their harsh Command.
Severely used, and tired with Length of Woe,
The newfound Ten had from their Masters run:
Drawn by the Nearness of the general Foe,
To meditate Escape, and Slavery shun.
They might, perhaps, with Midian joined, be free;
Worse than they were, they knew, they could not be:
And there is a kind of mournful Ease, in Change of Misery.
XXVII.
When, to the Town, the noisy Press
Returned with Shouts, their Triumph to express;
Shouts, the Voice of proud Success!
The assembled Elders, over the City Gate,
Sat, wisely busied, in serene Debate,
On Questions, which concerned the Good, of Ophra's little State.
Sev'n was their Number; and they chose to sit
In a bowed Crescent's Form, whose Points were filled
By Two of Levi's sacred Sons -- best skilled
To judge of Laws in reverend Mystery writ:
Sage, in the Center, hoary Joash sat,
Renowned for Virtue, and revered for Age:
The assisting Four were Men of Years and Skill,
Famed, Themselves, for shunning Ill:
And, therefore, thought best qualified, to govern Other's Will.
To These, the Crowd their Ten Deserters bring,
And tell where found, and on what Errand bent:
To These they also show the captive King:
But, loud, in every listening Ear, they Gideon's Praises ring.
Paint how he dared; act over th'admir'd Event:
And mock Prince Oreb's brave Resolve, to stop their fierce Descent.
XXVIII.
Slow rose Eliakim, the Town's High Priest;
The ruling Levite, and the Senate's Tongue:
A Man, who dared, in Zeal to Heaven, bewail
Religion lost, and Hebrew Fame decreased:
He well remembered, while he yet was young,
How GOD enabled Israel to prevail:
And sighed, to see the ungrateful People fail,
Nor ever bowed the Knee, Himself, to Ashtaroth, or Baal.
Blessed be our Father's GOD, said he, this Day!
To whom, All owing, we would nothing pay!
Gideon! methinks, I feel thy Father's Joy.
O! may thy blooming Glory never fade!
No Envy, sure! will budding Virtue shade:
Soon does thy Country's Love thy Sword employ!
The Prince, Thy Captive, by the Right of War,
Dispose of, at thy safe Discretion's Choice:
And, since all Ophra's Sons thy Debtors are,
Accept our Thanks, as from the general Voice.
Dare on; fight: prosper! Heaven shall bless thy Aim;
This, but the Dawning of thy destined Fame!
For You -- and then he turned to Canaan's trembling Sons,
Known Custom points us to your mournful Lot:
Since every Slave, who from his Master runs,
Dies -- guilty of an added Crime, or not.
He spoke: and, bending toward the bord'ring Seats,
Asked, if their Judgment full Concurrence lent;
And then, distinctly, his Decree repeats;
And all the Elders rose, at once, to testify Consent.
XXIX.
Gideon, whose fearless Heart was formed to feel,
Sharer, in every Woe he could not heal!
Sighed, pitying the poor Slave's prevented Flight:
And, bowing graceful, spoke in Sorrow's Right.
Who, reverend Fathers! after This, will pause, in Honor's Chase,
The Prize so glorious, and so short the Race!
Too much you pay me, for too little won.
If, but to act our Duty claims such Praise,
For what, alas! has Gideon, further, done?
We live, I fear, in unperforming Days.
But your too kind Applause, perhaps, would raise
A future Worth, by previous Praise.
If, wisely generous, you incline
To make that grateful Lesson mine.
Consenting Will holds modest Purpose dumb:
And humbly takes your present Thanks, for Actions, yet, to come.
One Cause, mean while, not mine, I fain would plead;
I cannot wish to see the Wretched bleed:
Who knows, what Hardships, in their friendless State,
Had galled their patient Hearts, ere yet they fled?
But grant Them guilty -- Law mistakes their Fate.
Death, in the Happy, may create some Dread:
But the cold Grave is Mis'ry's restful Bed.
There are Oppressions, of such monstrous Weight,
That 'twere the happiest Freedom, to be dead.
Such, if their Wrongs, we lose our stern Intent;
And give 'em Ease from Pain -- for Punishment!
Judge not, I pray you, that I mis-presume,
Or pride myself to think, you Favors owe,
If, loving Mercy, I deplore their Doom.
Bring home an alien Danger, THEN, appeal:
Make the Case yours: and sentence, as you feel.
Israel Herself was, once, a Slave:
Grant, Heaven, if ever she, again, be so,
She finds a Moses, or a GOD, -- to save!
If, then, our Fathers found it hard, the Yoke to undergo,
And having, once, been unoppress'd, and free,
Thought it their Glory, and their Right -- to fly from Slavery;
Instruct me, reverend Rulers! why These Men,
Now, in the Case, that was all Israel's, then,
Should merit Death, for counting, in their Claim,
That noble Thirst of Liberty, that, first, gave Israel FAME.
XXX.
He paused: -- Approving Joash smiled with Pride,
And heard, with kindred Joy, his Offspring blessed.
Eliakim, with weak, but willing Stride,
And Hands uplifted (Sign of Zeal expressed!)
Came forward, and to blushing Gideon, cried,
Close let me press Thee to my hope-warm'd Breast.
No narrow Bounds of Custom, Interest, Will,
Shall ever confine the Reach of Gideon's Soul.
A Mind so spacious, and so stretched a Skill,
Were, sure! designed by Heaven for wide Control!
O! take the pardoned Slaves, thy Mercy's Prize:
Thou plead'st too justly, to be heard in vain.
Henceforth, their Fate, in thy own Bosom, lies;
Blessed in thy Service, the saved Ten retain:
What, happier can they wish? -- How, happier be?
Thou gav'st 'em Life: and they shall live for Thee.
XXXI.
The Assembly rose: and the Remains of Day
Were, in triumphant Pastime, noised away:
At length, still Night her solemn Influence shed,
And dew-drench'd Sable wrapped the Mountain's Head:
Sleep's heavy Drag the Rage of Joy depressed,
And weary Tumult hushed herself to Rest.
But Gideon's active Mind was framed to wake:
His new-gain'd Honor, and the Angel's Hail,
Suffered Him no Rest to take:
But led him, pensive, over the Grounds, through Night's opakest Veil.
So, wandering wide, he reached the Grove of Baal.
Westward, upon the Mountain's Edge, it stood,
Where, shaped by Art, a huge round Hill, in terrass'd Stages rose;
Whose far-seen Pyramid, Five Plains compose:
And every Stage was a small, separate, Wood.
The lowermost, planted thick, with baleful Eugh,
Could, with brown Horror, quench the Glare of Noon:
But now, from Night, a deeper Dusk it drew.
The funeral Cypress the next Stage overspread;
The Third, which, narrowing, upward, wanted Room
For Trees of copious, and untonsile Head,
From deep-ting'd Laurel caught umbrageous Gloom.
Round the Fourth Platform, climbing Ivy crept,
And into bushy Shade high-arching grew:
There, in dark-tufted Roofs, black Ravens slept;
And inbred Owls, which never Daylight knew.
Flat, like a tabled Plain, the last high Stage
Nourished one towering Oak, which strongly stood,
The time-swoln Growth of many a perished Age:
And bore, on one proud Trunk, a spacious Wood.
Down, over the shadowed Groves, above, th'enormous Branches hung,
And formed a sheltry Arbor, round the Bole:
Moved, by the Wind, with murmuring Sweep they swung,
And blew cool Horror over Gideon's Soul.
From Stage to Stage, broad Steps, of half-hid Stone,
With curling Moss, and blady Grass, o'ergrown,
Led to the Top, where reigned this Monarch Oak.
'Twixt the black Boughs, hung, melancholy, down,
One glimmering Lamp, dulled by its own thick Smoke:
Which, feebly, through a Lantern's Sides, the bord'ring Darkness broke.
XXXII.
By the pale Radiance, faintly, scattered round,
Full in the Center of this awful Shade,
Gideon, the Idol of the Grove surveyed.
Over a round Altar, by green Foliage bound,
A wooden Sculpture bore the Sun's broad Face:
Hideously kind, in Act of purposed Grace;
Stretching thin Arms, across th'o'ershadow'd Space,
It gleam'd an added Horror round the Place.
Speechless, a while, 'twixt mingled Grief, and Shame,
This Pageantry of Godhead he beheld:
At length, revoic'd, by his remembered Aim,
How long, said he, shall Idol Faith prevail?
How long, the Eternal's Priests bow down to Baal?
And Stones, and Blocks, usurp The Almighty's Name?
All-pard'ning Heaven! I feel thy Wrongs inspire:
Burn we this Demon, in his own dim Fire.
Where can we better Virtue's Race begin,
Than at th'eradicated Shoot of Sin?
XXXIII.
So saying, over the dusky Paths, he, back, explored his Way,
And, silent, to an outbuilt Hovel came,
Where, in safe Sleep, his new-gain'd Servants lay.
They wake, and hear him, and mistake his Aim:
Strain their stretched Eyes, and, trembling, ask his Name.
Be hushed, he answered, and dismiss your Fear,
Only your Patron's Voice, you hear.
Rise, and assist him, in a just Design;
Or no way dangerous, or the Danger mine.
For You -- This done, I set you free,
Fear not to trust your late-given Lives with Me.
Be grateful: 'twill adorn your Liberty.
Uprush the summoned Ten, with glad Consent,
Nor weigh, nor question, his Intent:
Enough for Them, that it is, by Gideon, meant.
From a rough Store of rustic Instruments,
Which next that Hovel, opportunely, lay,
To every Hand a shining Axe he gave,
Bad 'em be resolute, and brave:
And, cautious, marched, in silent Speed, away.
In a fair Pasture, bord'ring on their Road,
A milk-white Ox, in fragrant Plenty, grazed:
Unbroken yet, and alien to the Goad,
Chief, of a chosen Breed by Joash raised.
Him, first, they seize, and having bound him strong,
Drag him, hard-struggling, and displeased, along.
XXXIV.
Instructively informed, as on they went,
Hastening, and prompt, they reach th'unhallow'd Grove:
There, to a Tree, the unwilling Victim tie;
Then, on the pious Mischief warmly bent,
Each, with contending Emulation strove,
Laborious, in Obedience, to outvye.
First, Baal's polluted Altar down they threw,
And scattered wide the Fragments, every Way:
Next, from disjointed Steps, with Toil, they drew
The massy Stones; which, in loose Pile, they lay,
A purer Altar, of new Frame, to raise:
Sacred to a diviner Power, and more exalted Praise.
Now, to the Idol Form, approaching nigh,
Gideon his Sword, in zealous Transport, drew;
Witness, he cried, sole GOD! who hear'st from high,
Witness the Vengeance, from thy Servants due!
Thou, Baal! assert thy Power, and 'scape thy Shame:
Strike, if thou can: I, thus, thy Cause disclaim.
Speaking, he cleav'd the Image, at a Blow,
On either Side, the parted Godhead fell:
Winds, over the Grove, shrill-shrieking Echoes blow,
And all the Demons of the Place, groaned helpless from below.
Encouraged by their Lord, the shaking Train,
To smaller Pieces, hew the chippy God:
Atoning Fire the dreary Spoils maintain,
And the dim Lamp no longer gleam'd in vain.
Then, at th'attentive Leader's waited Nod,
Up the Grove's Edge, the back'ning Ox they strain.
XXXV.
The mounting Fire, now, blazed in tow'ry Pride,
When a fair Bowl, by Gideon's Hand, in previous Care, supplied,
Apt for Libation, Aid of Sacrifice,
High-filling, -- He, upon the hissing Flame,
Poured the warm Blood, and prostrate bowed, to pray;
Not these imperfect Rites, said he, Lord of the Heart! despise:
Call 'em Ablution, and let Israel's Shame
Be, from this Time, for ever washed away!
He said; when, strait, confirming Thunder roared,
And cross whole Heaven, with loud Enlargement, rolled:
Sudden, the dazzling Gates of Light unfold,
And, while the kneeling Hero Grace implored,
Showers of thin Luster quiver'd through the Trees:
The living Lights from every Quarter play;
And the Grove radiates into flashing Day.
A while the Blaze hung over; but, by Degrees,
Rose gently: and, in Distance, flowed away.
Flat, the Slaves, astonished, fell,
And, drowned in the refulgent Torrent lay;
With awe-mix'd Pleasure felt their Bosoms swell:
And, as the ascending Glow unsealed their Eyes,
Trembling, gazed after it, to see it rise,
And, wid'ning upward, more and more, in softening Shades decay.
XXXVI.
Recov'ring, each on other, wild they glare:
Then, humbly, to their honored Patron, kneel:
Words though they want their Meaning to declare,
They more want Coldness to forbear:
For Joys, by Transport, will themselves reveal.
Phurah, best taught, of these devoted Men,
At length, found Voice, for the collective Ten.
Blessed be the GOD of this brave Hebrew Race!
Fall our false Gods before his dreadful Face!
Never could Baal thus vindicate his Name;
Thus speak, in Thunder, and appear in Flame!
O, glorious Mortal, thus, by Heaven approved!
Leave us not wretched, to be blindly free;
Since by the Great Almighty thus beloved,
'Twere to be lost, to be disjoined from Thee:
And to serve Gideon, and his GOD, is noblest Liberty.
He said: and all his Fellows joined his Prayer,
And begged, with pious Tears, permitted Stay:
The generous Hebrew found 'em worth his Care:
If you will still be mine, said he, you may.
Nor shall you suffer by the Lot, you choose;
Whom GOD invites, Man ought not to refuse.
But let us, now, my new-made Friends, proceed,
And finish well the Work, we well began.
So speaking, round th'enormous Oak, he ran;
And, by the Fire's pale Cast, yet glimmering wide,
Saw, from that Quarter, which opposed the West,
That, there, the Boughs o'erhung the Mountain's Side,
Against whose Edge the grovy Summit pressed.
XXXVII.
Once more, his broad well-tempered Blade he drew,
And gash'd, with all his Strength, the knotty Tree:
Then, steely Axes following, Two by Two,
Relieving apt, a long, alternate Toil,
Laboring with fruitless Pain, they wondering see,
From the tough Trunk's big Bulk, back-bounding Blows recoil.
But, still persisting, with unwearied Will,
Wide, toward the Root, a yawning Wound they make;
Whence scattering Chips the bord'ring Bushes fill.
Then, late, the nodding Oak begins to groan;
The leafy Limbs, in general Horror, shake:
Bending, the Forest-Giant breaks, and is, at once, overthrown.
Down rolls the tumbling Monster, over the Rocks,
And sweeps the Grove before it, with its Sway:
From Cliff to Cliff rebounds, with frightful Shocks,
And gores the groaning Mountain, in its Way.
Broad, over the Plain below, it loads the shadowed Ground;
And grazing Herds, with stiffen'd Ear, start, trembling, from the Sound.
NOTES AND Miscellaneous REFLECTIONS ON The FIRST BOOK.
BEFORE the Reader enters on the Notes, in referential Order, He will probably
forgive a short Remark or two upon the Nature of this Kind of Poem: The Age we
live in, so profusely overflowing in the Practice without stopping to consider
Judgment, that, to common Apprehensions, Poetry gives no Idea but of Words with
musical Cadences: that is to say, plain Sense, in Rhyme, and Measure.

It may seem surprising, that Pretenders to this Faculty (few of us having been
thought guilty of too little Sensibility) should rest contented, under the
Injustice of so mortifying a Contraction! -- A Poet, when considered in this
narrow Light, were so contemptible a Creature, that he must give Place to a
good Piper: who unquestionably has Power of raising Sounds, much more
melodious, than Adjusters of mere Words are capable of equalling.

The Truth is, Numbers, in their softest, and most pleasing Fluency, make up
but one Part of the Means, mistaken for the End. They were designed but as a
Vehicle, that should insinuate the instructive Bitter, hid behind the Promise
of Delight. The Music having gained the Ear, the Matter thence found Entrance
to the Heart; and there prevailed against Distempers, which, but for the fine
Disguise it came concealed in, it had never reached with such Advantage; there
being a Reluctance in our Nature apt to rise against a plain Reproof; as, in
our Taste, against such Physic, as is offered us too coarsely.

All, as far as this, was well. The worst was, that this Sweetness in the Art
exposed it, by Degrees, to Profanation by the Ignorant. Prompt Adventurers were
so glad, to find the Pleasant the most Easy, that This Handmaid of supplanted
Poetry, like the treacherous Mayors of the Palace in France, sat her down in,
and possessed, the Throne, she was designed but as a Servant to.

The Learned will favor me with their Indulgence, while I note, for
Satisfaction of some Readers, of the Sex, that will be always surest to hold
Interest in a Poet's Purposes, that Epic Poems are so called, from a Greek Term
for speaking; because, here, the Verse runs narratively: as Stage Poems, on the
contrary, are called Dramatic ones, from the same Tongue, in Reference to their
being Acted.

But it will be still more necessary, that some Definition of this Species
should be also given, by an Attempter of it, who has Modesty, and wishes to
avoid a Charge of high Presumption: Critics having represented it in such a
formidable Light, that they could possibly have done no more, had they been
joined in a Confederacy to prevent Attempts to write at all, instead of
furnishing Instructions how to write discerningly. -- It will suffice, to hear
but one or two of These, as Witnesses. The Voice is all the same; one Note
throughout the whole Fraternity.

It is (says Rapin) the most bold, and greatest Work, that human Wit is capable
of. All the Nobleness, and all the Elevation of the most perfect Genius can
hardly suffice to form one such as is requisite. The Difficulty of finding,
together, Fancy, and Judgment, Heat of Imagination, and Sobriety of Reason,
Precipitation of Spirit, and Solidity of Mind, causes the Rarity of this
Character's happy Temperament. It requires great Images, and yet a greater Wit
to form them. -- Finally, there must be a Judgment so solid, a Discernment so
exquisite, such perfect Knowledge of the Language, in which he writes, such
obstinate Study, profound Meditation, and vast Capacity, that scarce whole Ages
can produce One Genius fit for an Epic Poem. And it is an Enterprise so bold,
that it cannot fall into a wise Man's Thoughts but it must affright him.

By this Time, it grows needful, that I hasten to cry out, and own, that the
most vain, and empty Wretch in Nature, would be such a Poet as, conceiving the
tenth Part of these prodigious Difficulties in his Way, which the French Critic
had, by overheating his Imagination, taught himself to think were really there,
should, notwithstanding such Belief, have Arrogance enough to undertake a Work,
so terribly beyond his Compass! -- under which necessary Shield of honest
Truth, I will dare venture yet a little farther, -- into what our own Sir
William Temple has declared on the same Subject.

I am apt (says he, in his Essay upon the Art we are considering) to believe so
much, of the Genius of Poetry, and of its Elevation, in Homer's and Virgil's
EPIC Works, that I know not, whether, of all the Numbers of Mankind, who live
within the Compass of a thousand Years, for One Man that is born, capable of
making such a Poet, there may not be a thousand born, capable of making as
Great Generals of Armies, or Ministers of State, as any the most renowned in
Story.

Caveats, so high-strained as These, have made it necessary for an Epic
Undertaker to say something, That may justify his Modesty. A Definition of it,
therefore, in the humbler Light I see it by, may hope to show it a less arduous
Adventure; and demonstrate, that the Difficulty, however certainly
considerable, is by no means so insuperable, as These Gentlemen appear to think
it. Critical Systems reconcile two contradictory Extremes: and are, at once,
too vast, and too restrictive. The Cause is, they lean with a too partial
Biass, toward a few Great Names: to whose Example they would chain down Nature.

Many Friends of Fancy, on the other Side, mistake for Epic Poems, any Story,
told in Verse, containing a wild Series of Romantic Incidents, related of some
Hero, whom the Piece takes Name from. But there are scarce two Things in
Nature, which more widely differ, than these Histories in Verse, from Epic
Poetry. -- I wish I could have satisfied myself with Bossu's Definition: It had
saved me the Presumption of attempting one, myself. But His appearing to be
neither full, nor clear; and having never seen a better; I am forced on the
necessity of hazarding a new one, of my own; which will, I fear, be, still,
defective.

I take an Epic Poem, then, to mean some noble Lesson in Morality, delivered
under Color of One Action, which must be illustrious and important, in Itself,
and in its Personages, interest supernatural Powers in its Successes, and be
probably, delightfully, and surprisingly described, in Verse; with ornamental
Episodic Parts, depending on, and rising naturally out of the main Tendency.
Throughout all which the Poet keeps no view before him, but to strengthen, by
Example, That one moral Lesson, he proposes to imprint, upon his Reader's
Admiration.

To explain This Definition, by enlarging its Particulars. -- A Man, who
undertakes an Epic Poem, is not to write a History; but to propagate a Moral.
Homer, for Example, had conceived such Purpose. -- It was not his Design to
write the Fall of Troy; That Story was already known; and could have brought no
Novelty, but in the Pleasure of the Verses. -- Pleasure was not his chief End:
He aimed to give Advice. His Prospect was, to teach the Greeks, split into
little independent States, that Union could recover Victory, when Discord had
transferred it to an Enemy. The Grecian's Triumph over Troy was then discoursed
of with much Vanity, through all their inconfederate Divisions. Homer observed
this Sense of General Glory, and derived a Story from it, that would best
enforce the Moral, he prepared to teach 'em: borrowing Names, and Incidents
from that remembered, and high-boasted War; but giving 'em a new, and proper
Turn, for the Conveyance of his Moral only. -- Had Homer not been born, till
Alexander had made Greece one Monarchy, the Moral he would then have chosen had
been the prosperous Effect of Power in one wise, and brave Man's Hand: and what
sure Benefits accrue from Subjects Loyalty. As, we see, Virgil, living in a
Time, when the Republic of the Romans had given Place to Monarchy, made it the
Purpose of his Poem, to reconcile his Countrymen to single Sovereignty in the
Person of Augustus: under Fiction of a Prince, brave, wise, and pious, who,
being guided by the favoring Gods, established, on the Ruins, of the old, a
new Foundation, for Dominion of so much more Potency, that the whole Empire of
the World was, by Decree of Heaven, to be included in it. -- From That new
Empire, then possessed by Those he writ to, All his Readers had derived their
Glory: so that it was easy to induce them to confide in, and to look for, the
same Blessings from their Change of Government, which their great Ancestors had
gained, by Change of Country.

To impress the Moral forcibly, some Action is to be related, pointing out an
Instance, in as strong a Light as possible, where this insinuated Moral was
proved good by an Example. -- The Action must be suitable: That is, of Dignity
adapted to the Greatness of Events wrought into it, as Steps toward the Result
last purposed. It must be single: That is, unmixed with other Actions of
detached, or independent Tendency. There may be Incidents producing Incidents,
the more Variety the better: but they must be such, as serve but to bring
forward, and illustrate, the One final Action, which intends Example from the
Work. Neither is this Restriction any Nicety deduced from the particular
Opinion of This Critic, or of That: It is a natural Necessity; and a Law of
Reason; because Actions not producing one another, as Effects from Causes,
raise unpointed, and confused Reflections; and divert, and weaken an Attention,
which it is the Business of This Poem to bind down to one strong Object. An
Epic Poet, of the Ariostine Model, is a Traveller, who, if his Road lay strait
through Crete, would take the Labyrinth, in his Journey.

The Action may be feigned, or real: If no Story, famed in History, can be
directly levelled to the Poet's Purpose, He may, then, invent one, to his
Liking: For the Truth, here necessary, consists not in the Reality of the
Events, but in the natural Veracity existing in the Moral.

It must be illustrious, and important; and the Persons animating it, Great
Princes, or distinguished Leaders: because Every Man submits to shrink, at
Consciousness of Dangers, or Misfortunes, which he sees have Power to punish
Error in these Rulers of the World. The Weakness of our Pride (that, looking
down upon, conceives Itself secure, in its superior Situation, from all abject
Misery) not daring to exempt itself from Menaces, It must look up to: but
admitting, in this Case, the Apprehension of its own Exposure.

It must interest supernatural Powers in its Successes; the Influence of
well-invented Circumstances, of this Kind, carrying Terror with it, that
excites a Reverence, and induces Warmth, from enthusiastic Awefulness, into the
Subject; consonant to those Impressions we are educated to religious Sense of:
and which favor Disposition to derive All Good Propensities from Heaven; and
throw off upon the Devil, all Instigations, which propel to bad ones.

It must be probably, delightfully, and surprisingly, described in Verse. --
Probably, because whatever we suppose impossible, we find unworthy our
Attention. Delightfully, because Variety of well-mark'd Characters, surprising
Incidents, smooth-flowing Numbers, Strength of Imagery, exalted Thoughts, and
beautiful Expression, keep awake our Expectation, stimulate the Fancy, and
detain us, to the Author's Purpose. -- And surprisingly is added separately,
though a connected Consequence, and unavoidable Result, from such a
well-maintain'd Succession of unlooked for, and still varying, Beauties.

Episodes are necessary Members of extended Action: which, without them, would
appear too short, and general. But all these Episodic Members must be Limbs,
not Wens: They must unite with such Connection, that displacing any One, will
make the Rest imperfect; and that adding Any would disgrace the Symmetry.

In general, the Note most capable of height'ning our Regard to, and
elucidating the asserted Force of Epic Poetry, is from a Recollection, that it
comes down recommended to us by a Choice and Practice, that to Reason, joins
the best AUTHORITY. -- And without a Parable, spoke He not to them. Being asked
by his Disciples, WHY speak thou to Them in Parables? His Answer is, Because
to YOU it is given to understand the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; but to
THEM it is NOT given. That is, the Obstinacy of these People's Minds, misled by
Habitudes of Evil, makes it necessary, that the Doctrine, I would teach them,
should be covered, and approach attractively: where, else, the Pride, that
alienates their Hearts, would rise against Conviction, pressed too plainly, and
proposed without Disguise; as Humble Men like you are willing to receive it.

It is probable, the Hebrews carried with 'em, out of Egypt, this delightful
Way of teaching; It is clear, at least, that they arrived to great Perfection
in it, before Greece grew civilized from rude Barbarity. So far is it from
true, that Homer, or some other Poet of his Country, was Inventer of the Epic
Species. All the Books of the Old Testament abound with Instances, which prove
the Skill of Hebrew Poets. And the Six hundred thousand Volumes in the
Ptolemaic Library could hardly fail to have contained some of their Poems of
this Kind, in their due Length and Dignity.

To show how little Difference there is, except in Ornament, and Size, between
the Epic Poem, as above defined, and the short Parables, I have been speaking
of, I will select Two only: the first, taken from the Mouth of Christ Himself.
The other I will go so far more backward for, as to the Reign of David, who was
King of Israel so soon after the Trojan War, that he must necessarily have
lived before the Time of Homer, to whom Greece would partially ascribe the
Merit of poetically teaching moral Truth by Fable. I shall give more Instances
than one, of the unwarrantable Presumption of those Grecians Vanity, in
arrogating to Themselves a Praise for Arts they borrowed from the Asiatic
People; and the Hebrews, in particular.

The Persecution of the Prophets, by the Jewish Priests, was what Christ
purposed to reprove: but knew, their Power was great; and that the Pride, It
had inspired 'em with, would render a distasteful Doctrine little Fruit, if not
engagingly insinuated. Under this Conviction, the Divine Reprover thus
addresses them. There lived, says he, in a far Country, a powerful Land-owner,
who had planted Vineyards, raised Enclosures, and built habitable Farms, on a
detached Part of his Territory. He let out These to Husbandmen; and went,
Himself, to where his chief Seat stood; upon a very distant Tract of his
Possessions. -- When the proper Season came, the Lord sent Servants to demand
his Rents grown due. But those ungrateful Tenants, trusting to the Distance for
Security from due Revenge, instead of Payment, murdered the Demanders; They
destroyed in the same Manner, other Servants, sent with like Commission: At
last, resolved to try their Boldness to the utmost, His own Son was sent, to
whom, it was supposed, they could not dare refuse their Reverence. But the
Tenants, on the Heir's Appearance, hoping, by His Death, to make Themselves a
lasting Title to the whole Inheritance, determined on That execrable Deed; and
killed Him also: -- The Auditors inflamed to an impatient Indignation,
interrupt the Story, in this Part of it, and cry out angrily -- The Lord should
have destroyed Those wicked Wretches, and let out his Vineyard to honester
Husbandmen. And, there, condemned by their own Sentence, and struck dumb by
conscious Shame, they catch the Application, before Christ proceeds to make it:
for, as the Text expresses it, They considered his Parable, and perceived, that
he spoke of Them.

In the second Instance, Nathan reproaches David, who had robbed Uriah of his
Wife, and caused the Husband to be murdered. But the Prophet, understanding
well the Danger of the King's Resentment, casts about to take him by Surprise,
and does it under this Disguise of Parable. I am come, says he, to ask Relief
from Royal Justice, in Revenge of a poor Sufferer's Distress, against the
Cruelty of his Oppressor. Two Men lived together: one rich, the other poor. The
rich Man had exceeding many Flocks and Herds; but the poor Man had nothing,
save one little Ewe-Lamb, which he had bought, and nourished up: and it grew up
together with Him, and with his Children. It eat of his own Meat, and drank of
his own Cup, and lay in his Bosom, and was unto him as a Daughter. And there
came a Traveller to the Rich Man: and he spared to take of his own Flock, but
took the Poor Man's Lamb, and dressed it, for the Man, that was come to him.

What Effect this little Story presently produced the Sequel tells us. And
David 's Anger was greatly kindled against the Man: And he said to Nathan, As
the Lord lives, the Man, that has done This Thing, shall surely die, because
he had no Pity. And Nathan said to David, THOU art the Man. He, then,
proceeded, safely, and reproached him, that he had tyrannically given way to an
illegal Impulse of Desire; forcing away the only Wife, of a most faithful
Subject, notwithstanding the unlimited Variety of Women, who were All His own.
Had Nathan spoke the Truth thus plainly, at its opening, It had proved,
perhaps, of dangerous Consequence to his own Life: but the Cloud of the
Invention shielded him; and the King's Passions having first been artfully
secured in the Reproacher's Interest, the Reproached, who had confessed a
generous Sense of the Dishonesty, while not considered as his own, became
ashamed to disavow his Virtue, when the Guilt laid Claim to his Confession. So
David said to Nathan, -- I have sinned against the Lord. -- It is impossible to
produce a livelier, or more pathetic, Proof, both of the Nature and the Power
of Epic Poetry: For it is evident, that these Two Parables differ in nothing,
but their Want of Names, Extent, and Paint of Circumstance, from the Poems of
That Nomination.

From their general Nature, I proceed to the particular Consideration of this
new Attempt, upon the Plan of Gideon.

A Poet, in an Age so factious as the Last has been, must have been blind, not
to discern the Usefulness of recommending Quiet, to a stormy Generation. It
were saying nothing to the Purpose, to object, that we are now remote from
Israel's Case, under no Yoke of Conquest, and above all Danger from a foreign
Enemy. Civil Contest will be always the most likely Means of calling in, and
aiding the Attempts of, such an Enemy. We have seen too recent Proofs, to doubt
that Certainty. But, not to dwell unnecessarily upon our present happy
Prospects, our invaded Ancestors, too often, felt the Weight of such a
Situation, as had made a Gideon the most welcome Public Blessing. -- Could they
have found him, and could all his Miracles have served but to unite them in one
Wish, and one Endeavor, far less lasting, and less bloody, had Those various
Insults, then, been represented, under the Disgrace whereof our History
blushes, while it tells the Triumphs of so many Conquests over us, -- by
Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans! -- Where, therefore, is the Nation to be
found, that better ought to like, than Ours, a strong Example, to so sound a
Moral, as, that though Disunion should enslave a People, joint Attachment to the
Legal Government could soon recover, and protect lost Liberty?

To cloathe this Moral in an Action, some such disunited People was to be made
Choice of, suffering under foreign Conquest, from Effect of their Divisions,
and, when every human Hope had failed 'em, raised, at once, from their Despair,
by Union of an inconsiderable Number, under a Restorer of their Laws and
Freedom.

This being what the Critics call the Allegorical, or General, Plan, I never
could have found a fitter Action to illustrate it, than the Redemption of the
Hebrews, under Gideon's Conduct, from the Yoke of foreign Conquest, as imposed
with infinite Contempt and Cruelty, by a confederate Body of Arabian Princes;
whom the sacred Writ distinguishes by the joint Name of Midianites. For the
Events of this great War are, there, so comprehensively related, as to suit at
once with the Design, they are selected for, and leave sufficient Scope for
bold Invention, and Embellishment, in the particular Deduction. Whereas the
Scripture History of David (Mr. Cowley's Choice) was a completed one, as Mr.
Rymer has objected to it, and is so circumstantially described, as to restrain
a Poet's Fancy. Mr. Dryden, for this Reason, could not have succeeded, in That
favorite Design of His, for forming a new Epic Poem from the Story of our
Civil Wars in the last Century. Yet, I remember he has somewhere told us, that
King Charles the Second, whom he had acquainted with his Purpose, very much
approved it: notwithstanding which, I take it to have been to the Advantage of
That Great Man's Memory, that his Design was never executed. The Story was too
recent, to be treated, as it ought; and the sublimest Beauties of Invention
would have lost their Force on Readers, in whom sad and deep Impressions, from
the Misery of the real Facts, must needs have made All Fiction seem too
sportive, and an unbecoming Freedom taken with their solemn Sorrow. It was the
very Case of Lucan; and his Subject barring out all Aids of the Poetic Kind, at
least Those warm ones, which let loose Imagination, his Pharsalia gained no
Rank but among Histories; and Verse, indeed, is all the Right of That great
Work to be considered, as a Poem.

The Mention, here, of Mr. Rymer leads me to remember an Objection, which, I
think, he has unjustly made to Mr. Cowley's Choice of Subject, merely as a
foreign one: as if it were a Violation of that natural Respect, a Poet owes his
Country, to look out of it, for a great Character! If Mr. Rymer had no better
Reason for this Censure, than that since Homer was a Grecian, and has writ of
Greeks, and Virgil, being a Roman, writ of Romans, therefore, Mr. Cowley, as an
Englishman, should have approved no other than an English Hero, the Argument
appears, to me, to be a very narrow, and mean-spirited one. -- Nature is Nature
everywhere; and I should never look for any Force of manly Reasoning, from a
Soul not large enough, to comprehend Mankind as One Fraternity. -- However,
more is to be said, in Favor of a Hebrew Subject, than of All, or Any of, the
Rest, whatever. -- The Reverence, we conceive, from the Old Testament, for
Those Objects of God's more immediate Care, has made Them Every Body's
Countrymen. Besides, the many Miracles, so terribly displayed among them, are
peculiar Helps, to a Poetic Fancy; and adorn their History, above that of Any
other Nation. Their Country was the Scene, too, of our Savior's Life, and
Sufferings, a Reflection, which entitles it to Veneration, from All Christians.
And, to add one smaller Circumstance, that still gives Strengthening to their
Claim, They were Inventers, or, at least, Improvers, and great Practisers, of
Poetry. The Song of Moses, their first Leader, lists Him early in the Number.
-- Miriam, Deborah, David, Solomon, and innumerable other of their Nation, were
fine Poets. And This ought, methinks, to recommend their Memory to the Respect
of such, who would be thought so, after them.

Having said this, the Reader, I believe, will hardly be displeased to see a
Specimen of Hebrew Poetry. We meet with many noble ones, in the Old Testament;
but they have the Misfortune to lie shadowed under obsolete Translation. -- One
of our Critics has done Justice to the noble Images of these Originals, when he
declares, that there is nothing, so soft, so tender, and pathetic, and at the
same Time, nothing so grand, so majestic, so terrible; and so barmonious, as
the Poetic Part of the Bible: to which All the Heathen Verse is flat, and low.

I look upon the Song of Moses, which Josephus says, was written in Hexameter
Verse, to have been a Kind of Lyric Ode, because it seems to have been sung, to
some String-Music, and to certain measured Motions of the Body. This is plainly
gathered from the Text. And Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron, took a
Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Women followed her, with Timbrels, and with
Dances. -- And, when Moses, and the male Singers, had opened the Ode, Miriam,
and the Women, answered, as a Chorus, Sing ye to the Lord, for He has
triumphed gloriously: The Horse, and his Rider, has he thrown into the Sea!

I leave out the first Verse; as conceiving it to have been but a General Head,
and begin at the next following.

SONG of THANKSGIVING, by MOSES. On the Overthrow of Pharaoh, in the Red Sea.
From EXODUS, Chap. xv. The First Part only. I.
Temples, and Altars, let us raise,
Ours, and our Father's GOD provokes our Praise.
GOD is our Strength, GOD is our Theme:
Where is Egypt's fallen Esteem?
Pharaoh wakes from his proud Dream.
Wakes, to feel a Warrior's Hand,
Lord of a Power, more vast than His -- that shakes his wondering Land!
Vainly, the following Foes our GOD defied,
Their rapid Wheels, in vain, tore up the Strand:
In vain they mocked the waving Wand;
Not all their Noise could the loud Sea withstand;
The watery World flowed fearless, over their Pride,
A drowning Army beat the involving Tide:
On Wave-wash'd Chariots, half-sustain'd, the trembling Captains ride!
Uplifted Hoofs paw'd loose the liquid Way:
And, round 'em, black'ning through the Foam, the floating Legions lay.
Down, down, the ungrounded Footsteps go:
Strained, to feel for Sands, below,
Sands, -- where watery Mountains flow!
Sinking, like Rocks, they clog the Deep with Prey:
High-cov'ring rose the briny Flood, and swept their Rage away.
II.
Saving GOD! Thy Hand was here!
Thou protecting, who can fear?
Threatening aloud, the thundering Legions rose,
And, at thy Chosen, shook the extended Spear.
Behind, amazed! we saw the o'ertaking Foes,
Hearts anticipating Blows.
But, while thy Blast, O, base Despair, blew keen,
Safety, from Heaven, shot down, between!
Dreadful in Wrath, Thy lifted Arm but shone,
And All the unnumber'd Thousands melt away:
Over stubbly Fields, so, Wind-driv'n Fire rolls on,
And sweeps the blazing Breadth, with crackly Sway.
III.
The Almighty's Voice but spoke a loud Command,
And, strait, th'unlinking Surges, backward, rise:
High-climbing Waves in quivering Mountains stand,
And hang their billowy Horrors in the Skies!
In murmuring Cleft, the obedient Deep yawns wide;
And shadowy Glooms lowre dark, from either Side!
Down, through the horrid Vale's moist Concave, led,
Safe, and dry, bold Israel trod.
Gay, 'twixt Terrors, round her, spread!
Her tear-full Eye now-smil'd, once more, and hailed her guardian GOD.
IV.
Hark! aloft, the wondering Foe!
Look! they cried, All pointing low,
Shall the Cowards 'scape us, so?
'Twixt the dividing Waves, they go!
Their Sorc'rer cleaves the Sea, with magic Skill;
Haste, prevent, overtake, and kill.
They hear, they march -- they dare the mad Command:
The Shouting Squares invade the covered Strand;
Chariots, impelled on fiery Wheels, gore wide the encumbered Sand.
Mixed Horse and Foot, in bann'ry Pomp, descend!
See! from each Horn, the inclining Length'ners bend,
Loose, slides the weeping Oose, to shun their Weight,
And the Deep, murmuring, mourns the unusual State.
V.
Hark! the bursting Thunder speaks!
Waves, your watery Ranks disband.
Oh! behold! how vain, how weak,
Strength, that dares its GOD withstand!
Down, at once, from either Hand,
Hoarse-sounding Hills, over Hills let loose, devour the vanished Sand!
Helpless, engulph'd, th'immerging Squadrons roll:
Pharaoh, proud-sinking, drinks down Brine, that chills his fiery Soul.
Mixed on the evolving Surge, awhile, they strive;
Then, like sunk Plumbets, to the Bottom, dive.
Of all the Gods, no God, like Ours, is found!
Join, Heaven, and Earth, Applause like His, let Men, and Angels sound.
It will not be denied, that here is the Sublime among these Images, more
glowing, than in any Greek, or Roman Writer. -- When Longinus seems to have
been moved so strongly by That praised Exaltedness of Thought, where Moses, to
express GOD's Power, with Energy, describes Creation, not in its extended
graduatory Progress, but as starting to Existence at a Word: Let there be
Light: and there was Light -- I half suspect, with the French Critic, He had
heard of, but not seen, the Hebrew Bible. He could never else have passed by
the prodigious Greatness, in the Paintings, and Conception, of the Ode
foregoing; and in many other Tracts of Scripture Poetry. Would he have so
profusely given his Admiration to this Passage, out of Homer, "At every Step
the immortal Neptune took,
"The Mountains trembled, and their Forests shook?"
and have said nothing, upon That of David?

Hills felt their GOD's Approach, and, veiled in Night,
Sunk, through their trembling Roots, to 'scape his Sight.
We may pity, then, the Grecian Vanity, that would divide the Honor of
inventing Poetry, between their Orpheus, Stesichorus, Alcman, Pindar, and a
Number of their Countrymen; whereas, in Truth, the oldest of all These, who was
Orpheus, was but a Cotemporary with Gideon: in whose Eleventh Year he went, a
young Man, with the Argonauts to Colchos. -- Now Gideon was 200 Years since
Moses; and yet Moses died not till the Year of the World 2454. Forty-one years
after writing the foregoing Ode, which must have been at his first landing in
Arabia, after crossing the Red Sea, in the World's Year 2413. -- So that the
Hebrews had the practical Perfection of the Lyric Species for at least 200
Years before the Birth of this Assumer, Orpheus, whom the Greeks pretend to
have been its original Inventer.

It is, indeed, the most unreasonable Improbability, that Greece should have
been skilled in so refined an Art as Poetry, when she was little better than a
Savage; so deficient in Improvements of this ornamental Quality, that, as St.
Augustine has noted, the more necessary Use even of the Grape was still unknown
to the politest of those People (the Athenians), till by Dionysius, in the Time
of Moses: and a Greek Poet, wanting Wine, had missed a surer Inspiration, than
his Muse's. -- Ericthonius of Athens was the first Instructor of his
Countrymen, to yoke their Beasts, for Plowing: and That, not till Joshua's
Days: And it was then, too, that the Use of Letters was communicated to the
Greeks, by Cadmus, from Phoenicia, a close Borderer on the Hebrews. -- Before
that Time, having no Alphabet, how could they make Pretense to Writing? The
same national Vanity was manifest again, in their asserting Ida, and Dactylus,
who lived but after Joshua's Death, during the Government of Othoniel, to have
discovered the first Use of Iron; when it is plain, from the Old Testament (
Genesis iv. and 22.) that Tubal Cain, above a Thousand Years before, had taught
Artificers the Workmanship of Iron and Brass: And nothing can be more
demonstrable (from the so often-mentioned Chariots, Weapons, Armor, and vast
Magazines of warlike Furniture of all Kinds, which we read of, among Kings of
Egypt and Assyria), than that the People of the East were exquisitely skilled
in such mechanic Knowledge, at a Time, when Greece had yet no Name among the
Nations. Thucydides, their own Historian, has confessed, that in these early
Days, wherein she would pretend to arrogate Inventions never Hers, she was
unciviliz'd, and wholly rude: her Lands uncultivated, her Towns few, and mean,
and the Employment of her Heroes, and high Demigods, to rove for Robberies, by
Sea and Land; steal Horses, and make bold with other People's Cattle; without
Sense of Shame, or Secrecy.

But I forget the Elegy, which Mr. Cowley justly calls a most poetical, and
excellent one. -- He purposed to have closed his Davideis with it. -- It
appears to me a Masterpiece of the pathetic Kind: and I produce it, as an
Instance, that the Hebrews were thus skilful, in the simple Species; which the
Greeks, too, with their usual Modesty, put in for the Invention of, long after
this fine Piece had been composed by David.

ELEGY by DAVID: For the Death of SAUL and JONATHAN.
(2 KINGS, Chap. i.) I.
O, Israel! how does all thy Beauty fade!
How are the Mighty fallen! the Strong betrayed!
Never may this Woe in Gath's full Streets be told:
Never, let Ascalon our Fate unfold.
II.
Mountains of Gilboa! may ye drink no Dew!
Let Rain's mourned Want turn red your verdant Hue!
Let your Vines wither, and your Olives die:
And your parched Fields no grainy Wealth supply.
For, there, abandoned Saul, brave Monarch! bled:
As if no awful Oil had hemmed his Head.
III.
Never, in vain, drew Jonathan his Bow,
Never Readiness Sword fell, frustrate, on a Foe:
Lovely, and loving! one dear Life they led:
Nor parted, dying, but together bled.
Swifter than Eagles, to the Fight they flew,
Stronger than Lions, they could Foes pursue.
IV.
Daughters of Israel! weep the Loss of Saul:
In Scarlet, and in Gold, he clothed you All.
Peaceful, beneath his warlike Shade, you smiled:
And triumphed by Their Toil, whose Hosts he spoiled.
V.
Thee, Jonathan, my Brother! Thee I mourn,
With Grief still growing must thy Loss be borne!
Soft, and delightful Partner, of my Soul!
Two Halfs, divided, made us one dear Whole.
Vast was Thy Love, and wonderful, to me:
And never Woman loved, as I loved THEE.
I have said enough, I hope, to justify my Choice of foreign Action, and a
Hebrew one particularly. -- I come now to the new Structure of my Verse: where
I have used the Liberty of varying, everywhere, the Measure, and of mixing, in
one Poem, All the different Kinds, that can be ranked among Heroic. -- What I
hoped from this Extent of Latitude was, to derive Increase of Power, as well as
Harmony. But, as this Choice, and Application of such bold Diversity of
Numbers, will require, and merit, some Defense, I will begin it with a previous
Note or two in Answer to a modern Cry, that has been raised against the Use of
Rhyme, in general.

It has been attacked, but, since we learned to read, and understand, Blank
Verse, from Mr. Milton's noble Work: which (by the way) lay half an Age* at
lea^, unfelt, unfriended, and un-notic'd, in the Country It now casts so bright
a Luster on. The Copy of it was (with Doubt and Hesitation) bought -- for
infamous TEN POUNDS! which not being made demandable but on Condition of a new
Impression, never was received, at all; Its Author having been in his neglected
Grave near Thirty Years, before his matchless Poem (and then only by Effect of
One Man's single Penetration) drew the least Regard upon it from his
Countrymen! to the eternal Scandal be it noted, of our high-presum'd
Discernment, and the miserable State of Patronage, among us! -- This was the
hospitable Welcome Blank Verse found, in England: And, now (so strangely can
our Currents turn!) our Gentlemen of the new Light are indisposed to see, by
any other. They affect the Reputation of a Judgment too severe, to be delighted
by Effect of Sounds: and would explode all Consonance of Termination, as too
trifling, and effeminate, for Ears of Understanding.

What they have objected may, I think, be summed up in these few Particulars.
Rhyme was a Goth, and came in with the Runic Impoliteness: Rhyme is unnatural:
because it puts Constraint upon Expression: Rhyme is needless; because Blank
Verse has nobler Harmony, and gives complete Delight without it.

As to the first of These, it is quite mistaken. Rhyme did not come in with
those Barbarities, they charge it to: and, if it had done so, what nobler
Parentage could It have been derived from, than the same to which we owe our
Plans of Liberty? But, in Reality, It had a far more ancient Origin. The Hebrew
Poetry was writ with Rhyme. The Persian, and Arabian, so peculiarly depended on
this Ornament, that they have a Kind of Poem in distinguished Reverence among
them (and called Cacideh) derived from immemorial Practice, and devoted to the
Praise of GOD, and godlike Characters. Its Frame contains from 50 to 100
Ladies: the two leading Verses rhyme together, and the Rest alternatively,
ke^ping* throughout, but two Rhymes only. So that these Poems run the long^st,
when they light upon such Terminations, as afford most Consonances. There are
many such, of Giami, Hasis, Schemi, Enviri, and others. Some of them appear to
have been moderniz'd Reductions (as our Chaucer's Works, by Dryden) their old
Language being grown obscure, in Both of the Countries abovementioned. -- So,
this Argument, of Rhyme's Defect from want of due Antiquity, will carry little
Weight against it; and might have an Answer still more pointed and particular,
if it deserved to be allowed, that Anything, in its own Nature good, could be
the less so, for its Novelty.

They call Rhyme unnatural, because it puts Constraint upon Expression; which,
however, is not true; for Poets have not only Liberty of changing stubborn
Rhymes for ductile ones, but are obliged to do it, till they find such new
ones, as assist the Sense, instead of stiffening, or obscuring it. But, were
there All the Force they would ascribe to it, in this Objection, from
Constraint on the Expression, what a partial Eye is Theirs, who censure such
Constraint, as an unpardonable Slavery, where authorized by Custom in a modern
Tongue; yet see no Consequence but That of a pretended Beauty where it borrows
Sanction, but from the same Authority, of Custom, in the Ancient Languages?

For, not to rest upon their hard, and troublesome Restraints, to Quantity,
what Curb can possibly be more opposed to Nature, and her easy Order of
Expression, than their interweaving Words, and ranging them in so remote, and
dislocative a Position, as the patulae in Virgil's Verse hereunder, from the
fagi, it immediately related to? for, while the genuine Construction is, You,
Tityrus, reposing under the Shade of a spreading Beech, the Latin was
constrained, before it could arrange the Line to Harmony, to force it into this
distorted Order.

Tityre, tu, patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi.
That is, in English of the same Position,

Tityrus, you, of a spreading reposing under the Shade, Beech.
What strange Perplexity is, here (by Custom, which we can indulge, without a
Question) thrown upon the Sense, to liquidate the Sound, and make the Measure
musical! -- Let the Reproachers of constrained Expression show where Rhyme has
ever wrung an English Verse into so cramped a Posture.

So, again, in Martial,

Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto.
What a charming Figure, in our Language, does This Latin License make, in the
same literal Arrangement!

Chaste her Sword when had delivered Arria to Paetus.
It must not be pretended, that these Instances are chosen ones. The very
Genius of the Roman Tongue made such disjointed Shuffle of the Words, for ever
necessary: And, yet, which of our Exploders of the infinitely less-constraining
Use of Rhyme would think it reasonable to condemn the not to be disputed
Elegance of Latin Verse, in Detestation of a Practice, which is visibly
unnatural?

Even their celebrated Horace, notwithstanding his peculiar Claim to the
Concinnitas, and That Curiosa Felicitas, so exquisitely fine, in his
Expression, could no more sail free from the oblique Propulsion of this Side
Wind, that blew every Roman Poet wide of his true Course, than Any weaker, and
more careless Pilot. Witness his

Me doctarum hederae praemia frontium
Diis miscent superis.
What would be thought of a Writer, in our Tongue, who, when he was purposing
to say clearly, Ivy Garlands, the Rewards of learned Brows, rank me with the
High Gods, should express it in this extraordinary Manner -- Me of learned Ivy
Garlands the Rewards Brows with the Gods rank high.

Surely, no Man, who, knowing Latin, knows that such Constraint as This is
unavoidable, in all their Versification, will pretend to argue, against Rhyme,
that It can possibly deserve Explosion for a Fault, It is not half so guilty
of, as This allowed bad Practice; which is, notwithstanding, overlooked, and
held as nothing, in Comparison with the acknowleg'd Graces, in the Tongues it
throws such Intricacy on!

Rhyme, then, is neither newer, in its Practice, nor less natural, in its Use,
than other Licenses to Verse, which, yet, its Enemies are very partially
attached to. -- We will see, in the last Charge, whether It ought to be held
needless, from Superiority of Harmony, or any nobler, or more masculine
Perfection in Blank Verse -- or Measure without Consonance.

Lord Roscommon, one of the first Fallers in with the Applause of Milton
(newly, in His Time, beginning to attract Consenters), writes his Essay on
translated Verse, in the best Rhyme he found Himself at Leisure to afford it:
But, drawing near the End, and growing out of Humor with his Choice, breaks
out at once into a rapturous Declamation, against Rhyme, and Bondage; in a
Specimen, which he picks, here and there, and pieces artfully together, out of
some of the sublimest Parts of Paradise lost, to recommend Blank Verse, where
He, Himself, had just been disregarding it. I think this Manner of proceeding
not a fair one: The strong Images, which animate the glowing Lines, he there
selected, would have made Prose, Poetry. They shake the Fancy, and allow no
Leisure to the Judgment to examine Numbers. -- We are hurried on by the
Exaltedness of Thought, and rise above Perception of the Mechanism! Would he
have tried the Cause impartially, he might have found a thousand Lines in
Milton, every one of which had turned it quite to the Reverse of his Intention.

But now, to let the Reader see, what Kind of Verse it is, these Gentlemen
would substitute in Place of Rhyme, I take the following Pattern from the
mentioned Lord's Translation of the Ars Poetica.

These are the likest Copies, which are drawn
By the Original of Human Life.
Sometimes, in rough and undigested Plays,
We meet with such a lucky Character,
As, being humored right, and well pursued,
Succeeds much better, than the shallow Verse,
And chiming Trifles, of more studious Pens.
We shall presently discern, by only placing these lean Lines in the prosaic
Order, whether they have any Title to their Claim of Poetry. -- VERSE, in the
literal Sense, we must allow it to be called, because we but derive the Word
from turning back; and These, I own, do That, as often as they have stretched
themselves to their due Length of Measure. But observe, how readily this Prose
may be unversified!

These are the likest Copies, which are drawn by the Original of Human Life.
Sometimes, in rough and undigested Plays, we meet with such a lucky Character,
as, being humored right, and well pursued, succeeds much better, than the
shallow Verse, and chiming Trifles, of more studious Pens.

If the Enemies to Rhyme had nothing better to produce in Room of it, than
This, It would not fail to live and prosper; nor, indeed, is there an Argument
they use for the Defense of their Opinion, but might better aid their Enemies;
and serve (as most Deserters do) with double Violence, against its Masters.
Meanwhile It is a pleasant Kind of Tyranny they are for exercising over Reason!
First, they warp to their own Side the Pretense of Right to Harmony: and when
they have applied all Sorts of Argument, unjustly, for their Service, and left
none for ours, but what they think they may refuse us, as of Counsel for the
Plaintiff, they would run us down, full Cry, as if we had no Weapons to defend
ourselves withal. -- It puts me in Mind of an honest Indian Traveller, who
coming, in hard Weather, to ask something, at the House of a Great Man, and
being barked at by his Mastives, stooped for a Flint, but found it frozen to
the Surface. Deliver me, said he, from the unreasonable People of this Country!
They let loose their Dogs, and fasten their Stones.

In Tragedy, Blank Verse may claim a Preference, as coming nearer to our
natural Mode of Speech, and yet retaining Dignity enough, by virtue of its
Measure, to exalt it above Prose. But Epic Poets speak in Person; and,
describeing at full Leisure, are supposed to have due Time for Ornament; and it
will therefore be expected from them: so that Blank Verse does not suit Their
Use; since where its Flatness is not animated, as in Tragedy, by restless
Agitation of the Passions, It must ever lean to one of these Extremes: either
degenerating to plain Prose, as in the Example before us; or becoming harsh,
affected, stiff, and obsolete; as but too many Times it does, in our Great
Milton, from a Purpose to induce Appearance, of the Venerable, where the Sweet
was wan^ing.

The delightful Mean is Rhyme. It keeps Prose distant, yet helps Ease, as well
as Energy: for it was never meant to cramp Expression, but lend Sound a
Liveliness; and, what is evidently (and indeed peculiarly) a Benefit derived
from this connective Aid to Recollection, is, that by Retention of the Rhyme,
the Memory catching readily at the coherent Matter, it becomes much easier to
hold Ideas this way given us, than in Any other Form of Words whatever*

Mr. D^nnis, who was one, of a too numerous Brotherhood, who suffer Pangs, in
mortifying Lengths of Labor, at the Birth of Every Rhyme, and therefore,
naturally hate the Child, that cost 'em too much Pain in its Delivery, was for
turning his broad Axe against our very Root of Argument, and has denied, that
Rhyme is musical, because, says he, there is no Harmony in Unisons. The Face of
this Pretense is specious: but It ought, before it can have real Weight, to
find some Poem, where All Terminations close with the same Rhyme repeated. No
one Note, indeed, will make a Tune: But, as we hear with Pleasure the same Note
sounded sometimes twice, or thrice (in solemn Compositions more especially),
and then give way to different ones, the artful Intermixture of All which is
Music, so any tuneful Note, though sounded separately, and more than once, is
Harmony. -- No JARRING Note can stand in Music. Discord there must be; but That
Discordance is to rise, from Oppositions All harmonious in their proper, and
disjunctive Particles: and but differing (not clashing) into Melody, by joint
Concurrency of Variations; not of Inconsistencies. -- Neither will it be
needful to confess, that Rhymes are Unisons. The Question is of no Importance,
or it would be easy to explain their Difference.

Another Reason in Behalf of Rhyme is, that no Language is so naturally formed,
as English, for receiving and becoming it. The Latin Verse, tormented and
constrained, as I have shown it, in Pursuit of Harmony, could no way have
admitted This: which that it was not in its Genius constituted for, or capable
of, we need no plainer Proofs, than the sequestered Muses of the Monks have
furnished us -- if ever Muse, at all, inspired a Monastery.

-- Vir honoratus -- jacet hic tumulatus,
Qui prudens, gratus -- justus fuit, et moderatus.
And again:

Hic Vir pacificus Shipley Richardus humatur,
Verus Catholicus, Domus haec hoc testificatur.
Which, to english 'em, just as well as they deserve, would thus be rendered.

Here a brave Man is thrust -- down deep in the Dust,
Who was true to his Trust -- prudent, moderate, and just.
And, for the other,

Poor peaceful Dick Shipley's here left in the Lurch:
That he was a good Catholic, witness this Church.
Not even the Greek Tongue could have been capable of Rhyme: nor had it truly
the least want of it. -- It was so musically ductile, so sonorously
significant, that it was naturally a full Tide of Harmony: It seemed to roll
along, like one of its own Homer's Torrents, down the Side of a vast Mountain;
sparkling, rapid, and sounding, in all Parts of its Passage.

Yet, fain would I, with all the partial Fondness of a Lover, set in Balance
some Defects, of this triumphant Rival of the Beauty I wish best to, against
That great Advantage, which it would be Blindness to deny her claim to, in the
tuneful Texture of her Cadences. I detest, for Instance, those abominable Aids,
called Expletives: a mean, and lazy Crutch, which not the lamest Poet of our
Nation, now, submits to heave himself along by! They were the dull, and
insignificant Stop-gaps of Greek Enclosures; a Degree at least below the
venerable from whences, for to's, unto's, and fine eke's and aye's, of our old
cleric Compositions.

But if Sincerity refuses Patience to a calm Surveyor of this Grecian License,
what would it not inspire Contempt to say, against the servile Disposition of a
Race, called Commentators, who would have the Privilege, Their Poets used, of
mixing in one Piece, their different Dialects, and altering Accents, at their
Pleasure, pass for an Advantage to their Poetry! as if People, long habituated
to a Pronunciation the Reverse of many of those motley Rusticisms, could, in
Reverence of a worthless Skill in weaving them together, quit their natural
Partiality to their own Mode of speaking! -- On the contrary, rejected Idioms
must have been extremely irksome to a polished Ear: and left a Kind of coarse
provincial Brogue, upon the best Performances.

Were an English Poet, for Example, to avail himself of this licentious
Practice of the Greek ones, in extending these five Words to Numbers, and due
Length of Meter, -- These People were learned Writers; and admit he should be
told that, in some Counties of the North and West, it was a Custom to give
drawling Prolongation to their Syllables, and open all the Diphthongs; and
that, by Assistance of this noble Privilege, He might spin out a Verse, thus
elegantly,

Le -- ar -- ned Writers These Pe -- o -- ple were.
Or, because it would be Pity to want Choice of good Examples, let it be
supposed, that the Three Words -- meet, glorious, Occasion, were to be
stretched out, on some of these Greek Tenters.

Me -- et, glo -- ri -- o -- us, Oc -- ca -- si -- on.
It is visible enough, the Verses are filled up, by Help of such a frightful
Anglo-Graecism. But from what Force of Custom could we reconcile such Jargon to
a London Ear? No Matter what Relief a lazy Poet might draw from it. It would
never give his Reader Satisfaction. Yet, allow it but to be supposed, that
English had been a dead Language for about a thousand Years, and now but
studied, as a learned one, for the Sake of ancient Stores of Knowledge,
treasured up in its Remains, in That Case, even the manifest Absurdity above,
as grossly as it seems to shock us, in a living Tongue, had passed, perhaps,
unnotic'd, in the dead one, or but brushed us, with a faint Perception.

But Peace be to the Manes of the Greek, and Latin Tongues! Their very Faults
are venerable; from the early Prejudice, that roots a Reverence in us, for
these first Imprinters of our School Ideas. -- The modern Languages have no
such Right to Preference; and their Defects may be observed more easily, and
censured with less Danger. -- Tassone, noting a most obvious one, in the
Italian Poetry, confesses, with a candid Freedom, that he knows not, whether to
impute it most to the Ill Fortune of his Country's Writers, or a certain
Weakness in the Language, which, says he, wants Energy, and is unfit for high
Expression. This Defect, in That so favorite Tongue, which stands acknowleg'd,
by their own Consent and Testimony, chiefly flows from a Redundancy of Vowels,
which, though sweet'ning a soft Sound, enervates it. -- Italian is the Language,
wherein Love would choose to sigh, or Laughter to be light, and wanton. It
supplies, with Fullness and Delight, the Uses of Intrigue, and Conversation; but
wants Weight and Spring for Passion, and bends under the Demand of
Comprehensiveness. It Is like the flowing of soft Sand, in Hour-glasses: seeming
liquid, while confined to its close Currency; but flies dispersed, and opens
its loose Quality, as soon as shaken out, and trusted to hard Weather.

Not to insist, in this Place, on the too offensive Frequency of their
Elisions, I make Haste to note another, where the rash Condemners of our own
Excess in Monosyllables will wonder, I find Cause to charge it. But I take
their Poverty, in That Particular alone, to be the Reason, why Italian Rhymes
induce a Kind of leaping Levity, upon the Terminations of their Verses. They
run generally in Stanzas, the Rhymes double, and the Structure in this Order.

-- Capitano, -- Christo. -- Mano, -- Acquisto. -- Vano -- Misto. -- Santi, --
Erranti.
But disyllable, or trisyllable Rhymes, if I mistake not, carry with 'em
something of the Burlesque Air; and suit more aptly with that grinning Face of
Wit, that loves to wear Grimace upon good Sense, like Hudibras, than with the
grave and serious Majesty, that ought to dignify the Epic Poetry.

Both these Defects are French, as visibly, as they must be confessed Italian.
But they find some Remedy in France, in that their Accent frequently is placed
on the last Syllable of their long Words; and so their Rhymes appear to
terminate more gravely, than Italian ones; which carry it upon their last
excepting one. Take an Example of this best Kind of French accenting, from
Boileau.

Amors Discourse. Unif^rme Endorme. Ennuyer Psalmodier. Lecteur Achepteur.
Here, All the Rhymes depend upon the terminating Syllable: But, yet they are
not careful to preserve this Benefit; too frequently degenerating into double
Rhymes, like the Italians, as in this, of the same Boileau.

De la Foy d'un Chrestien les Mysteres terribles
D'Ornemens egayez ne sont point susceptibles.
Et de vos Fictions le Melange coupable
Meme a ses Veritez done l' Air de la Fable.
I will english these four Lines, as near as I can do it, to the very Trip of
the French Cadence; that the Reader may conceive a proper Notion of their
debonair Heroics.

Of the Faith of a Christian the terrible Myst'ries
Reject the gay Dress of impertinent Hist'ries.
And the Fictions when mixed, though as well as you're able,
To the pure Truth itself give the Air of a Fable.
I judge with a too partial Ear, or there is something so distastefully alert
(to use a Phrase of their own furnishing) in the pert Skipping, of this Verse,
a Kind of Pause-check'd Recoil of Motion, like the Half whirl of a
Spinning-wheel, -- like the unlacing of a Muse, as Mr. Hobbes expresses it, or,
to hit the Image better, in Lord Dorset's Simile, like the unvaried Rumbling of
a Wheel-barrow, that the Numbers of their serious Poems seem as ill-adapted to
their Subjects, as Jigg Tunes to a Church Anthem. -- We may discover, in their
very Verse, the dapper Genius of their Nation: a Sort of spirited, or animal,
Vivacity, that dances gaily through the Fancy, without stopping at the Judgment.
I except their few Examples (which have been by Nature too excepted) of a
fierce, yet steady, Fire, and a Reflection both profound, and volatile.

Concerning other modern Tongues, it will be needless to say much. What has
been hinted, of Italian, will effectually include the Spanish, and the
Portuguese; the German must be owned worth great Regard for its Antiquity, and
Manliness; but will content itself with That just Praise, and claim no Merit
from its Harmony. Whatever Roughness English may be thought to have retained,
is but of Saxon Origin; and, to acknowledge a too obvious Truth, Poetry in
High Dutch, is like the Nile among its Cataracts: It may be rapid, and deep;
but it is tumbling, and terrible: It has its Course obstructed, everywhere, by
Mountains it must clamber over. -- To carry Poetry still further North, would
be but dragging her to seek for Friends, among her Enemies, the Goths, and
Vandals.

The English then, of modern Tongues, is fitted best for Poetry. Its copious
Choice of Monosyllables (which many have been rash enough to call a Blemish)
make it strong, significant, and comprehensive. Its Derivatives, from Greek and
Latin, have adorned it with Variety of Cadences; and intermixed its masculine
Excess of Consonants with a melodious Fluency, from interposing Vowels. -- It
adorns, and is adorned by, Rhyme; yet takes it in but as a Subject, not obeys
it, as her Tyrant: It is grave, slow, stately, soft, swift, wanton, or
majestic. It has all the Lentor of Complaint and Pity; yet has all the
Transport of excursive Energy: It is an inexhaustibly full Treasury, supplied
from the selected Tributes of whatever was most excellent, in other Speeches;
but possesses them with so improved an Aptitude, as to have made That HONEY,
which was raw Juice, in the Flowers It drew it from.

But I digress too far from what I had begun to say, upon the Structure of my
Verse, which differs little from a Species, Mr. Cowley, toward the Close of the
last Century, first reduced to Practice, and misnam'd Pindaric: But if he
conceived a Greek Name necessary, Dithyrambic had, I think, expressed his
Purpose better. From the Latitude of so diversified a Numerosity, there must
arise a fuller Harmony, than can consist with common Measure. Else, a Concert
can be equaled by a single Instrument: our usual Couplet-writing sooner
satiates, by too frequent, and too limited Returns, of the same Measure.
Whereas, in this perpetual Change of Cadence, and new Course of Numbers, the
Attention is beat up, provoked, and rendered lively; the Ear, everywhere,
relieved; and Images of Actions, Sounds, or Things, how different soever they
may be, are clothed with Words, best suited to their Nature.

The Compass, and the Freedom of this Range of Verse, have recommended its
Attempt to many Practisers in Odes, and such brief Sallies; but, too generally,
with bad Success: They checked the Gracefulness of Stepping, by too visible a
Fear to fall. Like Children, who, first learn to go alone, they took short,
tottering Starts; and hung upon, and rested at, All stopping Places, they could
stretch their Hands to. They confined their Muse, too humbly, to a Lyric Length
of Leading-strings: and gave the snug, set, roundhead Crop, to Stanzas, that
should flow out cavalierly. Pindaric, in short Measure, is a Woman of Quality,
in Knee-deep Petticoats; she may have very well-shap'd Feet: but they can never
be so fine, as to atone the Indecorum. Lyric Numbers carry song-like and
familiar Levity, quite inconsistent with the Epic Gravity. A few bold Writers
of Pindaric Odes have ventured, now-and-then, as far as the Hexameter: but
hardly dared so much as dream of the Heptametrical seven-footed Line, of
fourteen Syllables: Indeed the shortest Measure is too long, unless That Length
is filled with Meaning. For nothing can be more ridiculous, than a weak
languishing Extent of Verse without proportioned Vigor in the Sentiment: Such
Verse plays loose, like some vast main Sail of a Ship, that flags, and flutters
heavily upon the Prospect of a Breeze, but presently falls back against the
Mast, for want of Wind, to swell it into Energy. It is in Poems such as These,
where, as was paintedly expressed by Mr. Pope (but might have been still more
so, by his lengthening out his second Verse to the Heptameter Extent just
mentioned, and hereunder given it by an Addition only of the two small Words,
in Roman Characters)

A needless Alexandrine ends the Song:
And, like a (weak and) wounded Snake, drags its slow Length along.
Mr. Dryden, who was willing enough to allow That Praise to Mr. Cowley, justly
due to him for having introduced a new, and noble Way of Writing, is, however,
of Opinion, that much still was wanting to his Practice, of That wished
Perfection, which This Kind of Verse seemed capable of. He instances the
Roughness, and the oft-deficient Numbers: The Truth is, Mr. Cowley's Judgment,
not his Ear, deceived him. What his learned, and Reverend Editor would
represent, as an Effect of generous Negligence, in a too active Race of Fancy,
seeming to have been the cool, and most deliberate Result of wrong Election: we
may plainly gather This, from his own Note to the first Book of Davideis; where
he speaks of This strange Line.

Nor can the Glory confine itself to the endless Space.
It was in his Intention, to express the Struggle of an overflowing Luster,
laboring for Room, in the whole Breadth of Heaven. -- I am sorry (says Mr.
Cowley) that it is necessary to admonish the most Part of Readers, that it is
not by Negligence, that this Verse is so loose, long, and, as it were, vast: It
is to paint the Nature of the Thing, which it describes: which I would have
observed in diverse other Places, that else will pass for very careless Verses.
And then, he names these following.

Down a Precipice deep, down he casts them, All.
And This,

Like some fair Pine, o'erlooking all th'ignobler Wood.
Painting the Image, by the Sound, is, questionless, one of the liveliest
Beauties, of which Verse is capable. But how far That is done, by running out
of Measure, and admitting plain Prose, as an Ornament in Poetry, I leave to be
determined by the Judgment of the Reader. He will recollect, that Homer was,
and Virgil (in his Imitation) everywhere, ambitious of this verbal coloring:
but They neither of 'em thought it necessary to That End, to disarray, and
prosify their Numbers. On the contrary, they raised, and added to, their
Harmony, by a melodious Latitude, that circumscribed, at once, and dissipated,
by Effect of this all-comprehending Practice. Mr. Cowley needed not have
started out of Numerosity, to reach effectually the View before him. -- For
Example --

Nor finds the struggling Glory Room, close-press'd, over boundless Space.
For the Second,

Down over a Cliff's steep Precipice, deep down he casts 'em all.
For the Third,

O'erlooking, like some tow'ry Pine, the ignobler Under-wood.
And here are three successive Instances, of the great Use and Benefit, an
English Poet has it in his Power to make, by sparingly (and always aptly)
daring to launch out, into the long Heptameter Extent of Measure. But there
will be found too much obstructive VOID, in this poetic Readiness big Armor; if a
Dwarf, in Genius, should attempt to wear it.

Mr. Cowley's Ear indulged him in another equally untuneful Practice, which (in
Reverence to the never-failing strong Characteristic of the Tribe of Imitators)
the Implicites in His Track have All, with devious Diligence, been careful not
to start a Step from. He, too often, placed his Pauses, in the wrong Part of
his Verse. They should, in the long Measures, be found always posited exactly.
I subjoin an Instance of the Error.

Lo! how the Years to come, a numerous and well-fitted Quire.
Here was nothing, that resembled Numbers: no Harmony at all, unless the Reader
paused at Nume in the Word numerous: and if he did so pause, in that divided
Word, he made a disagreeable Hiatus, in the Sense; and would have wounded a
nice Ear, as harshly as an old Greek Expletive. How infinitely more
majestically, flows the Verse hereunder, though the Measure is the same, and Both
are Mr. Cowley's! -- for no other Reason but, because the Pause is, here,
placed rightly.

The Mountains shake and run about, no less confused than They.
Run about, indeed, may want a little of the purposed Greatness, from the too
light Vulgarity of the Expression. -- Strive to fly, had been, perhaps, more
aptly suited to both Sound, and Image. But I introduce the Verse, in this
Place, only with a View to the right placing of its Pause, so wrongly judged in
the preceding one.

That noble Writer seems to have been sensible of the Perplexity, this
Roughness of his Numbers, now-and-then, must throw a Reader into. For he gives
a most exact Description of Pindaric Verse (as he then practiced it) in his Ode
upon the Resurrection.

It Is an unruly, and a hard-mouthed Horse,
Fierce, and unbroken, yet:
Impatient of the Spur, or Bit!
Now, prances stately, and anon flies over the Place:
Disdains the servile Law of any settled Pace.
Conscious, and proud of his own natural Force,
'Twill no unskilful Touch endure,
But flings Writer and Reader, too, that sits not sure.
This was the true Condition under which he left it. But if he had lived to
give the needful Hand to what he so successfully had introduced, it is probable,
he would have so far changed his Practice, that it had been nearlier described,
in This, from his fine Ode, on Liberty.

The plain Heroic Strain let others take,
Mine the Pindaric Way I Will make;
The Matter shall be grave, the Numbers loose, and free;
It shall not keep one settled Pace of Time;
In the same Tune, It shall not always chime:
Nor shall each Verse, just to his Neighbor, rhyme.
A thousand Liberties It shall dispense,
But, yet, shall manage All, without Offense,
Or to the Sweetness of the Sound, or Greatness of the Sense.
A Species, once, I think, was tried in Tragic Poetry, not wholly differing
from this new Composite Order. Aristotle notes it of a Work of Cheremon, a
Scholar of Socrates. The Piece was called the Centaur, and composed, he says,
of All the different Sorts of Verse. He should have added, except long ones:
For he disapproves That Practice, in dramatic Works, because Iambics, and
Tetrameters, and such SHORT Measures were too skipping, and too light, for
serious Poetry. Our Language carries natural Gravity, and might allow short
Measures with less Lightness. Yet, they ought not to be often used, in Epic
Writings, even of This new Sort: and never, but in Places, where they help the
Harmony, without detracting from the Dignity.

That This Poem is divided into Twelve Books, was a Determination of so little
Consequence, that 'twere impertinent to offer at a Reason for it. These are
Points indifferent; and in which a Poet will not need to strengthen his own
Practice by Examples. The Extent of his Design should be a Guide, in his
Division of it. Mr. Cowley professedly imitated Virgil, in his Choice of Twelve
Books, to his Davideis: though, I think, he might as justly have rejected
Virgil's Number, as He ( Virgil) had rejected Homer's: The Number of whose
Books, too, the Roman would, methinks, more gracefully have been a Borrower of,
than of his Episodes, and Incidents. -- Sir William D'avenant springs quite
aside from this old imitative Road; but into an Extreme, as wrong, though
opposite. He is for neither Books, nor Proposition, Invocation, or Machinery.
Like some of those stiff-hearted Puritans, who dirtied his own Times, and would
hear Sermons with their Hats upon their Heads, in Defiance of Church Ceremony.
He divides his Gondibert into Five Acts, as if it were a Tragedy: and Each Act
into Cantos, which may hold, he says, the Place of Scenes. -- This Method Mr.
Hobbes, in a long prefatory Tract, thought worth his Pains to justify; but was,
I think, Himself, the sole Supporter of his Argument. In Matters left
indifferent, the old Way, if not best, is sure to be the modestest. For my
Part, if Division into Twelve Books needs more Reason than, because the Subject
offered Matter, for That Number, I should think it fully justified, from the
Division of That People, whom it treats of, into their Twelve Tribes: If still
a stronger Reason should be asked for, take it thus. The Action of an Epic Poem
ought not to be stretched beyond one Year; and Twelve Months make up the
Division of the Term, so limited. -- And now I enter on the Referential Notes,
in Every Section marked progressively.

Sect. I. L. 2. -- Seek, O Soul! some Heavenly Theme.

It was the Custom of Greek Poets to mix in one the Proposition and the
Invocation. The Latins (and the Moderns, mostly, follow them) proposed their
Subject first, and then invoked Assistance from the Muses. -- It becomes a
Christian Poet better, to begin with Invocation. It is a Way more solemn, and
proportioned to the Weight of an Address to our Inspirer, not alone to pray his
Aid in the Performance, but his previous Guidance in the very Choice of what we
go upon. -- That Invocation should, by no means, be omitted, seems a Point
agreed, for many different Reasons. A Work, that has its first Foundation in a
Moral Purpose, owes a Reader (says Bossu) a good Example, for his Piety and
Veneration. Add, that many Things must be described, in Course of these Great
Poems, which the Poet not being thought in any reasonable Likelihood of coming
to so full a Knowledge of, by any common Means of Information, He could never
hope to give his Testimony Weight enough to merit Faith, but from impressing,
first, his Reader's Mind, with a Conceit, that Heaven infused it. -- Sir
William D'Avenant, then, did ill, to throw aside his Prophet's Mantle. What the
Robe is to the Judge, the Poet owes to Invocation.

Sect. I. L. 18. -- Redeem the Use of long-lost Poetry.

Every body knows, that the Original of Poetry was in the Worship of the Gods,
and Celebration of their Glory. It is equally notorious, how degenerate It is,
since, become in its too beggarly Flattery (as Mr. Cowley calls it) of Great
Men. He adds, in idolizing Women; which last Observation, to discredit
Gallantry He was so fitted for, and so excusable for painting, I would
certainly have let alone, had I been Author of his MISTRESS. -- To redeem the
Use of Poetry, then, is to restore it to the Praise of God, to the Advancement
of true Virtue, and to Animation of those noblest Passions, which lend Wings to
human Ardour.

Sect. II. L. 4. -- Wilful, they started from protective Grace.

Among the many Arguments enforced by Democratic Writers, against Monarchy, It
seems the most immodest one, and the least founded upon Reason, when they are
for Listing God Himself into Their Party! From what Appearance they derived
this Claim, it is not easy to discover: since the Unity of Power ascribed to
the Almighty, by Themselves, as well as their Opponents, does not seem, at all,
to favor any Preference, of the remotest Form of Government on Earth, from
That which Heaven is ruled by. Yet there runs no Principle, more universally
asserted, through the Writings of the warm Enthusiasts of the last unquiet
Century, than, that GOD declared Himself aloud for the Republican System, by
his personal Command to Moses, for prescribing That selected Form to his own
chosen Race of People: For they insist, that the Mosaic Model was a Popular
one. They hold it, too, a Claim assigned them with so full a Right to their
political Free Will, that GOD submitted Laws, and Propositions, to the People's
Confirmation, or Refusal: and became the Civil Magistrate of their Theocracy.
That, when accordingly they found it proper to DEPOSE Him from his temporal
Authority (I use the very Word, which Oceana, and many other of their
Treatises, take Boldness to make free with) and to choose Themselves a King, who
should reign with them, in His Stead, GOD blamed but their Ingratitude,
confessing, and admitting, their asserted Right, (to Samuel) -- It is not Thee
they have rejected; but they have rejected Me, that I should not reign over
them; and, that what is meant by giving them a King IN WRATH, was a Reproach,
that they inclined to choose a King at all, and so, but consequential Menace,
that Their Monarch should enslave 'em, into a corrected Sense of That superior
Happiness, they parted with, in Favor of him.

This still continuing to be the Light, wherein they see That Hebrew
Revolution, 'twill be pulling down one Prop of their political Fabric, to make
plain, in Course of these Reflections, that the Government of Israel, as
assigned by GOD, was not a Commonwealth, but an Hereditary Monarchy: and that
All the Hebrew's Miseries, in those successive Slaveries they fell into, for
three hundred Years together, were a natural Effect of Factions, and
Confusions, which the Princes of their Tribes became divided by, upon assuming
to Themselves, in their provincial Severalties, a secular Direction of the
military Power, which, in their first Institution, was the Sovereign's
Prerogative, exclusively; together with a Right of Judicatory in the last
Appeal on Civil Causes: only reserving to the Popular Assent or Dissent the
Election, or Rejection of new Laws, originally to be brought before the
Congregation, and enacted by and with the People's Approbation, and the Regal
Fiat, of the Sovereign Authority.

I propose to leave it undeniable, that This Sovereign Power was vested in the
High Priest, personally, and that Moses placed it, not in his defective Line,
but, in his BROTHER's, who had many Children; down, successively, to whom,
descended the Monarchic, with the Sacerdotal, sole Supremacy; and formed That
Species of Administration, called Theocracy, not to be understood, as if GOD,
in his own immediate Person, condescended to be King in Israel; but as
assisting with his influential Presence, always virtually (and sometimes
openly, and miraculously), to inspire, and actuate, the High Priest's
Determinations. I pretend to make this System clear, in all its Branches, and
to reconcile to it the whole Gradation of Events, to That destructive Period
under Saul, at which Time, first, the Priestly Power became subordinate to, and
dependent on, the temporal Royalty: as in the other Eastern Nations, that lay
nearest to 'em.

It may merit Recollection, that the Papal Claim to an Infallibility, in
Christian Spirituals, has sometimes made such near Approach to take in temporal
Supremacy conjunctively, as in no very wide Degree to hold Itself removed from
Prospect of a new Theocracy. And nearer still was That, of the old Caliph's
Claim, in the Mohammedan first Outstart of Enthusiasm.

Sect. II. L. 10. -- Then GIDEON, wise, and generous Leader, rose.

This Line begins the PROPOSITION, (and the Progress of the Section specifies
the ACTION, of the Poem.) -- In its Opening, it is general -- to teach, in the
Example of the Leader named, that the Inspired by Heaven are to apprehend no
Danger, from the most unequal Opposition: all divided Power becoming weaker, on
Exertion; while united moves direct, and still grows stronger, in That Motion.
The Proposition next descends to the particular: declaring it to be the
Redemption of Israel, from her Yoke of foreign Conquest.

It is a terrible Dust, the Critics raise, in their Disputes, concerning the
best Way of opening Propositions. Every body agrees, with them, in recommending
Modesty: but Fullness, too, seems not at all unnecessary. -- I can be as
unsatisfied with Statius, as Bossu has been, for his encumb'ring the
Proposition of his Achilleid with Declarations, that his Hero had frighted the
Thunderer: as also with his personal Boasts, how nobly He (the Poet) had
exhausted Inspiration; insomuch, that Thebes, so sung by Him, should reverence
him, as her second Founder. In a just Dislike of This, All Men, of common
Sense, must join; but, from Effect of the same Sense, they ought to quit his
Cause (I mean Bossu's), when undiscerningly attached to every casual Choice, of
Homer, or of Virgil, he deduces an Authority to state Their Practice, as a not
to be disputed Standard for All Epic Plans to follow.

There is a celebrated Ipse dixit, which has been too long consented to, upon
this very Subject, of the Proposition, and which it is now high Time to weigh,
and find too light, even after I confess it Horace's. If I have any Notion,
what it is he means, He either has meant evidently wrong, or (which 'twere
bolder to suspect him guilty of) has mis-express'd his own true Meaning. --
hear him, in Lord Roscommon.

Do not begin, as That old Scribler did,
Priam's proud War, and Fate, I mean to sing.
What, worth such Noise, produced this bellowing Bard!
How much more just spoke Homer, always wise!
Muse, paint the Man, who, after Troys great Fall,
Manners, and Men, and numerous Cities saw!
Not Smoke from Fire, but Fire from Smoke, HE draws,
And from This Flat, to dreadful Wonders towers:
To barking Scyllas, Cyclops, and Charybdis!
In the first Place, I can see no Reason, why, because One Man has undertaken
to describe a War, and proved not equal to his Enterprise, Another therefore
should be arrogant, in but proposing the same Subject. And, as to Modesty of
Proposition, for the want of which the Writer is here treated ill by Horace,
and accused of Noise, and Ostentation, I am frank enough to dare confess, that
the Immodesty, if there is Any here, lies too concealed for my Discernment.
Pray, what could any Author, who designed That Subject, have contrived to say
upon it, less, when he was entering on the Proposition of it? Where is the too
much Fire in his Beginning? Smoke in the Progress can be nothing to our
Purpose: why is there more of Pomp expressed, or why more Expectation raised,
from a plain Promise to describe the Ruin of one Town, and Death of one Man,
than to show the Manners of many Men, and treat on the Affairs of many Cities?
If we were not to expect Accounts, of not alone the Things Ulysses saw, but
also why he saw them, to what End then did Homer promise any thing about 'em,
in his Proposition? If we were to entertain That Expectation, certainly our
Hopes are higher raised by Homer, who assures us, we shall hear of many Cities,
and of many Men, than by the other, who proposed to set before us but the Ruin
of one City, and one Man's Destruction.

There is a Narrowness in these implicit Reverencers. They understand, and
follow in their Author's Rear, with a too creeping, and too blind Servility.
Who reads, and is not Horace's Admirer? and yet, who shall be afraid of saying,
He would better have instructed us, by some intelligible plain Precept, on this
Point, of Propositions, than by Two ill-understood, and wide Examples? -- To
conclude with my own humble Notion of the Matter, He certainly proposes well,
who comprehends within his Proposition, the Extent of his whole Meaning, and
adds nothing further: And He errs, as certainly, who, being scrupulously
terrified, by Words without a Reason, is kept back by groundless Fear of saying
more, than This or That Man would have said upon the Subject, and says less,
than his own Meaning calls for.

Sect. III. L. 11. -- Not to Pride's transient Phantoms poorly kneel.

I would not be misunderstood, in this Place, as renouncing Reverence for the
Age, I live in, or for Any Great Man, who adorns it. (I except all such, whose
Minds are no Partakers in their Greatness.) What I mean by my unfashionable,
and not over-politic, Abjuration, is no more, than that I blush to find, it is
not thought below the Condescension of a Man of Genius, to confine his Views to
little Hopes, and transient Interests from the Powerful: His Business, as I
take it, being rather, to assert, and vindicate, neglected Excellence, than to
be poorly prostituting his Hosannah, to the HIGHEST. The Poet, and the Priest
(Antiquity so joined 'em) ought to guide their Ends, not, by the Humors,
Inclinations, or immediate Passions, of the Age, they write in. They should
carry down their Prospect through Futurity, and never rate their Recompense at
all the lower, from their Person's being doomed to die, before it reaches 'em.

Sect. VII. L. 2. -- Had restless Midian poured her swarthy Hosts.

What People these Midianites were, into what Nations divided, how governed,
and where seated, as also who are now their Descendents, I shall have Occasion
to describe in the next Book. This Race had wasted Israel, for seven Years;
within the last of which, about the Time of Harvest, the Poem takes Beginning:
that so, the Unity of Action might be properly maintained, in comprehending
only their Redemption, without Retrospect to their Invasion; which had formed
Two different Actions, and destroyed the Regularity, required in Epic Poetry.
Critics believe they see, that for this Reason only, Homer commenced his Iliad,
in the tenth Year of the Siege, and Virgil his Aeneid in the last Year of the
Voyage. No doubt, they had been, else, encumbered by Excess of Matter.

Sect. VII. L. 5. -- To These old Amalek her Standards joined.

This numerous and mighty Nation will have Place at large, among the Notes of
the succeeding Book. They were the Hebrew's first and surest Enemies: First,
because, They, first, attacked 'em, in their March; when they were beaten,
under Moses. -- And surest, as the Israelites received particular Command from
GOD, never to make Peace with the Amalekites, but pursue, till they had quite
eradicated them. And this, at last, they very nearly had accomplished, after
many hundred Years were past, first. What, in this Affair, I find least
comprehensible, is, GOD's remembering, for a People, who Themselves had long
forgot, this Right to Vengeance. They appear to have deserved it very little:
it being after their Rejection of His Care concerning them. I am at some Loss,
therefore, to account for the surprising Rigor of the Curse denounced on Saul,
by Samuel, three hundred and fifty Years after the Injury received: in
Punishment of but a generous Pity, shown to Agag, when his Prisoner. As the
Compassion was a Virtue, and 'twere hard, to think the Prophet's Love of
Vengeance keener than the King's, the Anger could arise but from a
Recollection, that such Mercy, shown to Amalek, was a Contempt expressed, of
Heaven: there standing out an un-repeal'd Decree, for total Extirpation of That
People.

Sect. VII. L. 17. -- Their heavy Harvests load the plund'ring Foe.

From the Story of this War, as in the Book of Judges, It was predatory, and
incursive: and the Hebrews, after their first Contest, had abandoned all the
Plains, and open Country, and secured themselves among their Fastnesses, on
rocky Mountains: while the Enemy, maintaining Winter Quarters in some Cities,
which they held on Purpose, made Excursions thence, in Summer, to destroy the
Harvest, burn the open Towns, and Villages, and carry off (as Plunder) People,
Cattle, and whatever else fell into their Possession.

Sect. VIII. L. 2. -- Where Half the MANASSAEAN Tribe, etc.

Jordan, that rises in the northern Part of Palestine, runs, almost strait
South, through the whole Length of the Country; nine Tribes, and a Half, of the
Twelve, in the Division made by Joshua, of the conquered Lands, had been
allotted the Possession of That Tract, between the western Shore of Jordan, and
the Neck of the Levant, or Syrian Sea: excepting only, that the Coast Itself,
together with a Breadth of some Miles inward, was possessed by the Philistines,
and the rich, and powerful trading States of Tire, and Sidon. The other two
Tribes and a Half, being Those of Reuben, Gad, and one Half of Manassah, held
the Country, lying Eastward along Jordan, which was conquered, first of All, by
Moses, from the Amorites, and their Allies. But That Half Tribe of the
Manassans, which is here alluded to, had their Allotment to the West of Jordan.
It was a long, but narrow, Slip of Land, which trended, from the River's Brink,
'twixt Issachar, and Ephraim, almost to the Sea Coast abovementioned. On a
Mountain, toward the East End of this Slip of Land, in Sight of Jordan, stood
the City of Ophra (Gideon's Birthplace), safe from Insults of an Enemy, by its
impregnable Situation. At the Foot of this high Mountain, opened a large,
beautiful, and fruitful Valley, That of Jezreel; where the Midian Army is
supposed to lie encamped at This Time, whence the Poem takes Beginning. This
Valley of Jezreel has been the Scene of many bloody Battles. It was there, our
Gideon overthrew the Midianites, Saul, the Philistines: Achab the Syrians; And,
in more modern Times, the Tartars the Saracens.

Sect. VIII. L. 23. -- This Tree a Shade over half the Mountain cast.

That there was a Tree, and a Bench under it, before Joash's House, we have the
Testimony of the Bible, which informs us, that an Angel of God came, and sat
there: but, that it was so large, and old a Tree, is a poetical Discovery. That
it was remarkable however for its Size, and Situation, may be gathered, from
its being thought worth so particular a Notice in the sacred Story. But,
because I have supposed it many Ages old, and yet in its full Flourish, It is
necessary, I say something, in Defense, and Honor of these venerable Children
of the Earth.

Pliny tells us of Oaks, growing in his Time, supposed to have been coeval with
the World Itself. Their Roots, says he, were united, and raised into Arches,
like the Gates of Cities; and the Earth was swelled, about 'em, into Mountains.
-- Josephus has made Mention of a Turpentine Tree, that was thought as old as
the Creation. Mr. Maundrel, in his Journey to Jerusalem, affirms, He measured
one of the Few yet remaining Cedars of Lebanon, and found it above twelve Yards
round the Body: and that, at almost one hundred Foot high, It spread out into
five several Limbs, the least of which would have been singly a great Tree. --
Sir Francis Drake informs us, that he measured a huge Mastic-Tree, in one of
his Voyages, that was four and thirty Yards about! It is easy to infer, These
vegetable Giants must have borne the Growth of no small Number of Ages. -- St.
Jerome, too, relates, that he had seen the very Sycamore Tree, Zacchaeus climbed
into to look upon our Savior, when he rode in Triumph to Jerusalem. -- But the
Tree of Trees, at last, is an old English Dryad: one that Mr. Evelyn, in his
Sylva, mentions, with becoming Gravity; and hands down to us the Record of such
a Magna Charta in its Reverence, as deserves to be remembered, and maintained,
to an immortal Length of Triumph. And no Doubt, It will be so, by those bold
Sons of Liberty, who boast the Honor of their Birth within due Distance of its
Shadow. The abovenam'd Gentleman asserts, from his own Knowledge, that there is
This pleasant Kind of Privilege annexed to an old Oak, which has, Time out of
Memory, been the Glory of Knoll Wood, near Trely Castle, in Staffordshire: The
Shade of This Tree's Boughs, he says, is very ample; and, in due Respect to its
Antiquity, whoever will make Oath, on Birth of any Child who must call nobody
Its Father, that This Child was actually begotten within any Part of Its
Shadow, the Offense is free, and stands exempted from all Cognizance, whether
of civil, or ecclesiastic Magistrate. -- But, to return to the Longevity of
Trees, undignified by so indulged a Sanctuary, Mr. Lawson, in his Tract of
Orchards, has brought reasonable Arguments to prove, a Pear-Tree's Life may be
a thousand Years. And truly, if the Age of Man, before the Flood, was from Six
hundred to Nine hundred Years, it can be no great Rashness to imagine, that an
Oak, so much more durable, and solid, in its Substance, and not subject to the
Dangers and Diseases, which disorder human Bodies, may be capable of living
many thousand Years; the Soil supposed adapted, and no Accident arising, that
might interrupt, or stop its Progress. -- And thus much I thought it not amiss
to note, in Reference to the Age I have assigned the Oak of Gideon.

Sect. IX. L. 1. -- The Morning rising over Israel 's Spoils.

The Description, which this Verse begins, I took some Pains to make a pleasing
one; but would not have it thought, I introduced it, to make Way for Ornament.
-- Not but Description is the Life of Epic Poetry; and it is There (as Boileau
well observes) the Poet ought to lavish all his Fancy, and his Rhetoric; yet,
if it serves no other End than mere Delight, the Poem will be found to
languish; for, the Race of Action is too coldly stopped, in Favor of detached
Ideas. BOSSU writes much, to say a very little to the Purpose, in his Chapter
of Descriptions: Mr. Dennis is more clear, and hits the Point directly, in one
short Remark of his Discourse against Prince Arthur. Descriptions, says this
Gentleman, ought never to be made, in Epic Poems, unless necessary; which they
never can be, but in one of these two Cases; either where of Use, for giving us
a reasonable Account of some Part of the Action, whereby to make it probable;
or when they serve to imprint strongly some important Circumstance.

It is in this last View, that the Description of the Morning, dawning over
Gideon, shadowed by his Oak, was introduced, in order to impress a strong
Conception, not of the Place and Posture simply, but of all the hostile
Prospect opening before him, to convey a local Image, and transmit the Sense of
Danger, and of his Reflections on it, from the Hero's, to the Reader's,
Passions, as we see in common Life how forcibly Regards of Place assist
Imagination. He, who had seen Edge Hill, or Newberry, or Naseby, would have
found himself more strikingly attached, in reading the Accounts, our History
records of those three Battles.

Sect. X. L. 12. -- Here and there, high-mettled Steeds.

The Use I make of Horse, in the Progression of this War, being frequent, and
considerable, I take Occasion, from their first being mentioned, in this Verse,
to assert the Use of Cavalry among the Hebrews, lest some hasty Doubt, perhaps,
might censure it, as not in Practice, in That early Period. And the rather,
because Homer, writing of a War much later, makes no Mention in His Work of
Horsemen: but describes That noble Creature in no other Manner, than as
harnessed to the skirmishing little Chariots, of his Greek or Trojan Captains.
-- How this happened in the Iliad I am not able to account for: though, that his
Countrymen were then unskilful to back Horses, I can easily enough believe,
because, not long before, they had mistaken the first Horsemen they had ever
seen for compound Creatures, Half-Man Half-Horse, and given 'em the Name of
Centaurs: from the Business they seemed fondest of, which was, to steal their
Cattle. But, that such, too, should have been the Case among the Trojans, must
not be so readily admitted. Troy held the Empire, then, of Asia Minor, and drew
powerful Allies to her Assistance, from so many distant Places, that it is
impossible to fancy, they were All unskilled in Riding; when so many Ages
before That, the Wars all over Asia had been dreadfully distinguishable for the
Number of their Cavalry -- Ninus, the Founder of Nineveh, had entered Bactria
with Two hundred thousand Horse, besides his Chariots; which were above a
Hundred thousand; Semiramis, his Wife, who was the Builder of Babylon, invaded
India (says Suidas) with a Million of Horsemen: and of Chariots armed with
Scyths at the End of their Axle trees, above a Hundred thousand, also.

It may be surmis'd, that Horsemen in such Numbers, in those early Ages,
probably were over-rated by the Inaccuracy of Historians: Let it be so; It has
no Force against the Use of Horse in War, so anciently. -- If, therefore, the
Assyrians thus abounded in their Cavalry, It must be past Dispute, that
bordering Nations also had the Use of 'em: and could not have come so far with
Purpose to invade the Hebrews, without bringing Numbers, in their Armies. -- As
for the Hebrews Themselves, Scripture is full of Instances, how early They were
able Horsemen: and it had been strange, indeed, to find them otherwise, when we
remember they came out of Egypt: where the Pharaohs were so generally powerful,
in Arms, and so particularly furnished with fine Cavalry, that One of 'em
pursued the Hebrew People, in their March to the Red Sea, with Fifty thousand
Horse (says Josephus) and Two hundred thousand Foot; besides all the Chariots,
of Egypt.

Sect. X. L. 14. -- In other Parts, the Scyth-arm'd Chariots driven.

Concerning these Chariots, an ancient and terrible Invention, and of infinite
Effect, in those vast open Plains, of Asia, the most proper Place to speak, at
large, will be in the Remarks upon the second Book: and, there, a full
Description will be found, not only of the Chariots Themselves, but of the
different Ways of using, and avoiding them; and what Effects they did produce;
and might have been made capable of producing.

Sect. X. L. 22. -- The tortured Drums, and sprightly Trumpets joined.

The Ancients made great Use of Drums; though differing, in Shape, and Mode of
beating, from the Ways in modern Practice. They were not struck upon by Sticks;
but with strong Pulsion of the Hands alone, and both at Top and Bottom; being
ornamented, round their Rims, with thick-set Plates of jingling Brass. -- And
certainly, such Drums must have derived their Use from the most early Times;
having been found with the Chinese, when first discovered by the Europaeans.
And, for the Trumpet, there are such concurring Proofs of its Antiquity, in
Holy Writ, that I was much surpised at Mr. Pope's Assertion, in his Notes on
Homer, that it was not yet invented, in the Trojan War! That War was in the
Time of Abdon's judging Israel; and Trumpets were so long before in Use among
the Hebrews, that the Ark was never moved, nor any Congregation summoned, but
by the Sound of this known Instrument. They had a Festival, too, called the
Feast of Trumpets. The Walls of Jericho fell down, at Sound of Joshua's
Trumpets. Gideon blew a Trumpet, and All Abiezer was gathered after him. Moses,
in the very Wilderness, directs the making Silver Trumpets, whose Shape, and
Dimensions suit exactly with Those, now, among us. -- How has Mr. Pope then
formed this Notion, that they knew no Use of Trumpets in the Trojan War? Was
it, because he found it not in Homer? Possibly his Greeks were, yet, too rude
to have acquired the Practice in their Armies. Possibly they held it too
inspiring, and exciting: as we read, that some of their vain Countrymen (the
Lacedaemonians) rejected it, long after, as a Stirrer up of Courage: which, it
seems, they had a mind to represent, as naturally over-active, in their
Constitution. -- Therefore, marched to Battles with the soft appeasing Sound of
Flutes and Flagelets, before 'em: They would induce their Enemies to think,
They rather found it needful to correct the overboiling of their Ardour, than
propel and irritate it. Virgil, however, gives Aeneas a Trumpeter; and says, He
had, before, belonged to Hector: Virgil, therefore, thought the Trumpet was of
That Antiquity: and, out of all Dispute, It was of older Origin.

Sect. XI. L. 1. -- Light, from his Bench, enraged, young Gideon leapt.

From designed Effect of those fine Prospects, which lay stretched before him:
For the natural, and improved Embellishments of such a fruitful Valley, when
surveyed together with the Enemy, whose Rapine held it from the famished
Owners, must inflame the Spirit of a suffering Observer, into aggravated Sense
of what he felt, and apprehended, for his Country. The natural Consequence of
such a Flame, in such a Mind as Gideon's, was the rousing all those Passions,
which break out in his Soliloquy: -- and serve to open his true Character: the
Reader being, yet, a Stranger to it: and It must have touched him in a fainter,
and less animateing Manner, had It been, in a cool Form of Narrative,
anticipated to him.

Sect. XI. L. 24. -- Now, were some single Power a general Bliss.

The Hebrews, after Joshua was dead, concluded only a slight War, of little
Consequence, in the South Parts of Judah, during the Reign of Phinehas; and
then, with one concurrent Lapse from any further Application to their
instituted Modes of military Practice under general Attachment to dependent
Regulation, threw That Care, in a divided Trust, to their provincial Heads of
Tribes: who, now, had their allotted Severalties, in Territory, and in Civil,
and Palatinate Pretensions: and fell in with the whole People's Disposition to
improve, and cultivate their Lands; drinking (as the Text expresses this
Desertion of the Public Duty, for the private Interest) Every Man under his own
Vine, and eating under his own Fig Tree.

This universal Spirit of Defection met too little Opposition, from a Want of
due Attention in their priestly Sovereigns, to the Civil Branch of their
Prerogative, and of the Military still more willingly; as from their Turn of
Education, less adapted to its Duties. They depended on the awful Influence of
their divine Pre-eminence, and their Possession of the Ark of God, whereto lay
All Appeals, and to whose final Sentence, in the High Priest's Voice, the
People were enjoined implicit, and direct, Obedience, under Penalty of present
Death, by stoning; so, they took no Care to educate some martial Genius (such
as Joshua's had been), and to attach him, by his Interest, to sole Dependence
on the Royal Safety: under whose delegated Right to That Supremacy in warlike
Exercise, the Tribes had been, till then, enured, and disciplined, and held
unitedly together.

The Knot had long been loosening; but Love of Ease, and Taste of Luxury, now
all at once dissolved it. -- Till this fatal Lure, in their detached Divisions
of the Land, the Want of Property among Particulars sustained no other than the
general Interest. Hope of the future, from the State's Prosperity, kept every
Individual Easy in his present Indigency: The joint Distress of their
collective Body held it close compacted, like a Heap of Pebbles, in a watery
Soil, froze hard together: The new Warmth of Self-dependency, dissolving the
Adhesion, Every Off-falling Pebble became a separate Body, and contributed no
longer to the Texture of the Universal. In this dispersed Condition, what,
before, had been immovable, by virtue of its Weight, lay liable, thenceforth,
to be trod down by every Hoof; and only magnified its Breadth, to ruin its
Consistency.

Plenty in Ease was the first Step toward Anarchy: It drew on Disregard of
public Happiness: The next was Wealth with Luxury; to which succeeded Pride;
and That, in natural Consequence, produced Contempt of Law; soon followed by
Defiance of Authority. The sure Result of All together was Dissension, and
Confusion. -- Turbulent Ambition set up Every Tribe to wish, and act, with
views to Independency; and under this relaxed Insensibility to National
Coherence, the Remainder of the Canaanites (whom Avarice, not Mercy, had too
indiscretely spared) took Arms against so visible a Weakness; and succeeded
frequently in their Revolts: till they not only brought this factious People to
the lowest Pitch of Infamy, but taught the Nations, that surrounded 'em, to
think of, and to treat 'em, with Contempt: than which no State can possibly be
cursed with an unhappier, or more dangerous, Condition.

The Progress of all This was natural. -- It helped 'em little, that they still
had Strength enough, to have repulsed their Enemies. The Feet and Arms, like
Those in the Old Fable, of Menenius Agrippa, thought it hard, that they should
work to feed the Stomach: and destroyed themselves in not sustaining, what they
were sustained by. -- While those proud Hebrews multiplied their Claims into
lean Independencies, Exemptions, and Immunities, they were plucked, One by One,
away, like the Hairs of Sertorius's Horse-Tail, which if pulled at, All
together, had been found irradicable. -- It is in Bodies Politic the same, as
in a Body Natural: In the Rapidity of some wild Race, a Man perceives a gaping
Pit, before him; what a Happiness, in such a Case, to have the Seat of Counsel,
and of Power, the same! He sees the Ruin in the Moment, that he shuns it in;
for, Reason and Authority, concurring in the Head, put present Stop to the
retracted Members; and they stand secured, upon the very Verge of their
Precipitation. But, could we here suppose our Limbs stuck over with fine Mouths
and Eyes, like Virgil's Fame, and the imaginary Argus, and that every Mouth,
and Eye, because it looked a little like a Face, would set up for a Head too,
and lay Claim to Privilege of Contradiction; what Consequence could we expect
to see, from such a Popular Balance? Clamor, more than enough, there could not
fail to be, to give Alarm to such a Body; but the Monster's Neck would run the
Hazard to be broke, before each Member could be asked his Sentiment. There
could not well be fansied a more lively Emblem, than, when Reasoners for
Monarchy compare a Commonwealth to That imaginary Serpent, some old Writers
dreamt of, with seven Heads, and but one Tail. The turbulent Reptile would, in
spite of its big Hissing, only hang itself in every Hedge: whereas, with but
one Head, It would draw all its seven Tails through, and find no Danger, or
Encumbrance.

Sect. 13. L. 4. -- How comes it He permits my Country's Shame?

The leading Character, in Epic Poetry, must be distinguished, not alone from
other Characters of the same Poem, but from other Poem's Heroes. He is to be
marked by some Peculiar, of a noble Kind, by which He would be known in every
Company; not only as a brave, wise, glorious Man: -- but as That very
individual brave, wise, glorious, Man. -- We are not satisfied by a too general
Description, even of a fine Woman; but we listen with full-pointed Approbation,
when, besides the Attributes, She holds in Common with the other Beauties, of
her Sex, we are brought closer to her Image, by Communication of some one
Peculiar Grace, that teaches, and appropriates, HER separate Manner of
engaging. Then, we form her, to our Fancy; and become acquainted with her
Picture. -- Thus, in Virgil's Hero, the Characteristic is benevolent Piety. In
Homer's, It is Fierceness: and in Gideon, Patriotism.

Sect. XIII. L. last. -- Will Israel 's haughty Tribes be led, etc.

No Observation can be juster than is That, of the Political Writers, that
Authority is POWER; and Reputation is AUTHORITY. The Nature of Things, and
Actions, can be examined but by few: their Appearance reaches Many. Machiavel
had Reason for his Observation, that the only Difficulty in Ascent to Greatness
will be found at its Beginning. Never Man (says he) attained considerable
Height, from low Condition, without infinite Fatigue, and Danger from
Opponents. Repose a Millstone on the very Border of a Hill; It there lies fixed
for ever, if it wants the Impulse of some new first Motion. Let That Push be
given, and not a Rock, in its Descent, will have the Strength to stop its
Progress. All That Envy, which impels our Opposition, when we cross the Way of
some new Riser, (from the natural Stimulation of a Vanity, that makes
Comparison betwixt a Consciousness of our own Worth and His) becomes
extinguished, in Amazement, when we contemplate the Hazards, of some terrible
Reputation. The Honors, of a Man so dangerously raised, we can no longer look
upon with Malice: we surrender 'em, as but the Perquisites of the adventurous
Post, he won 'em in: and while Everybody admires, applauds, expects, --
Resistance is discouraged, and falls in with Furtherance; till, now, the Man,
whom All believe most capable, grows capable, in Consequence of that Admission.

However equal, therefore, Gideon might, in Nature, have been formed, for
Prosecution of his Purpose, as to his unnoted and self-reap'd Advantages, from
Meditation, Study, Virtue, Observation, Courage, or Experience, It had been to
disregard the common Course of Things, had I made slight of those Restraints,
which heap up Mountains upon Mountains to raise Bars against unaided Merit. I
durst not, under this Conviction, dream his Virtue rash enough to have presumed
a Glory, so unlikely, and remote from his supposed Pretensions (wanting Power,
Authority, and Reputation) till the GOD, who had inspired him with adapted
Qualities, impelled 'em also into Action by Impression supernatural; or, to
take the Story in its literal Sense, by the Apppearance of an Angel, to
encourage him.

Sect. XVI. L. 1. -- Be taught, replied the unbody'd Guest, etc.

Gideon distrusted the Reality of so improbable a Charge, though seemingly
derived from Heaven, because the Vastness of its Depth was more than he could
sound, by the short Line of human Reason. The Celestial Missionary discerned
this natural Struggle betwixt Faith and Foresight, and removes it, by a
Document, included in, and made impressive by a MIRACLE. -- Reach me (said the
Angel) yon neglected little Store of your last Night's Provision. Gideon, in
mere Respect to the Command, complies with it, in Doubt, and Wonder at its
Meaning: and That Doubt and Wonder gave Occasion to the Angel to enforce the
Credit of his Errand, and exact the like implicit Reverence to it, without bold
Examinations of its human Probability. I take the Liberty to look on This, as
the true Meaning of the Passage in the Text: For, certainly, it could not be
consistent with the Dignity of an Ambassador from God, to order Meat and Broth,
to be poured out upon the Rock, with that too trivial Purpose, merely to blow
it up, that he might vanish in the Fire, and leave Gideon in the Smoke. --
Whereas ascending in the Flame after Delivery of so solemn and authoritative an
Injunction, must have answered fully the majestic View, with which it seems to
have been done: and left the Doubter animated into a becoming Faith and
Resolution.

Sect. XX. L. 7. -- Oreb, a Midian Prince of warlike Fame.

Too limited a Knowledge in Things military, founded on a superficial
Observation of the Pride, and formulary Petulancies, of disputed Rank; and
querulous Exceptions to, or Emulations of Detached Commands, in modern War;
will probably object, against This Place, that Oreb was a Person of too high a
Quality, to lead a Party out to lie in Ambush for Surprise of a small City. But
I recur to ancient Practice, and protest against defective Testimony. --
Actions of most Renown, were These Surprisals, and light Ambushes: Ulysses,
thus, and Diomede, go out disguised, by Night, as but Discoverers of the
Enemy's Camp. -- Achilles reproaches Agamemnon with his Backwardness upon
Occasions of this Nature. And we must not bring down Gideon's Days to ours, and
buckle Reason to Perversity of Will, in faulty Adulation of Men's Pride and
meaner Passions. But, to make a large Step from Antiquity, which everywhere is
crowded with Examples; Modern Times have had their Proofs, that noblest Spirits
fly above these petty Loftinesses. Marshal Montluc, in his Commentaries, prides
himself upon appearing personally, at the Head of all such Enterprises; and
ascribes his whole Good Fortune (which was certainly the longest lasting, and
the happiest, nay, indeed, the most unmatched and wonderful, that ever was
recorded) to his resolute persisting in This single Practice: the Duke of Rohan
too, in his military Work, maintains (with some Degree of Anger, that it should
be questioned) that no General, who is not prompt, by his own Presence, to
promote the Execution of these little Services, can ever bring his Soldiers,
either to That Vigilance, or That Opinion of his Valor, which are necessary to
Authority. And, now of late, in our own Times, we saw good Proof of the
Validity of That French General's Remark, in the Successes of the Earl of
Peterborow, overrunning some of the best Provinces in Spain, against the
Opposition of an Army, in Comparison with which His own might have been well
mistaken for his traveling Retinue! This illustrious Kind of Victory, which
Men obtain by inbred Energy of Genius, is what properly deserves the Name of
Conquest. A Power of beating down one Force, by an opposing Equal one, can
claim no other Title but of Overthrow.

Sect. XXI. L. 2. -- Observed a tottering Cliff, that loosely hung.

Aristotle is for the Wonderful, in Poetry; by which, however, I suppose, he
could not mean, that we should disregard the Probable, in Search of the
Miraculous. But, if it must be looked upon as reasonable, that Hector in the
Twelfth Book of Homer's Iliad, could throw a Stone of Weight enough to burst
the Gate of the Greek's Fortification before their Ships, and throw it with
such Force, too, as to break the Bars in Pieces, and snap all the Iron Hinges
(which thundering Stroke had the Good Fortune to please Tasso, so surprisingly,
that he made bold to borrow it for the Use of his Rinaldo, against the Temple
of Jerusalem) -- if This, I say, can, reasonably, be believed, it will be no
great Difficulty for the Reader to allow it likelier, that Oreb should push
down a Cliff, that hung half loose already: Men, who travel on the Alps, the
Mountains of Switzerland, or cross the Pyrenees; or even among our own Scotch
Alps, or Welsh ones; meet with nothing commoner, than such huge Craggs, broke
off from upper Rocks, and stopped by some protuberating Point, half over which
they hang, so loosely, and so tottering, that a very little Impulse from
behind, would serve to throw 'em downward; though a Team or two of Oxen would
have much ado to move 'em, from a Place they lay on, horizontally.

Sect. XXII. L. 19. -- Ignobly hurl their Jav'lins down in vain.

This Weapon was a very ancient one, in Use among most Nations: though it is now
scarce known, in Europe, except only in the Turkish Part of it. They call it,
there, Jeritt, and are extremely dext'rous in its Exercise. The Moors too, all
through Africa, retain the Use of it; and so do the Arabians; and some Nations
of East India, where it has the Name of Zagai. The Hebrew Soldiers, and great
Leaders, kept 'em in their Hands by way of Ornament, in Time of Peace. Saul
threw one of these Javelins at Jonathan, while he sat at Table with him. It was
one of These, that Joab thrust through Absalom. They were brought early out of
Asia into Use among the Greeks; for we find few, in Homer, killed by any other
Weapon. Mr. Pope translated unreflectingly, in calling it a Spear. What
graceful Image can we form, of Hector brandishing two Spears? By Spear, we are
to understand, a Pike. Whereas the Javelin was but a short Staff, for casting
at a Distance. The Romans called it Pilum, and became so fond of it, that they
affected to be thought Inventors of its Use: so much is certain, that they met
no Enemy, who used this Weapon; for what else can Lucan mean, when, in
describing the Pharsalian War, he tells us that Piles threatened Piles? Had
other Nations been so armed, This might have been the Case, in any of their
Wars. But since the Use was proper to the Romans, to say Javelins against
Javelins served as strongly to express a Civil War, as if he had said Romans
against Romans.

The People of Rome could not have borrowed it from Greece, because we find in
Livy, that They used it before any Intercourse had yet been opened with That
Nation. And beside, the Greeks themselves had, then, disused the Javelin: and
been trained to the Egyptian Practice, of long Pikes, of four and twenty Foot;
in Bodies, which consisted of a Thousand in the Front, and Sixteen Men in File:
sometimes, reduced to only Eight in Depth, the Ranks thereby extending to a
double Length, when they would shun the Danger of being charged in Rear, by
Enemies, who might out-wing them. In this Order, they composed a firm,
impenetrable, and, on plain Ground, scarce resistible oblong Figure, called a
Phalanx: where the Soldiers, armed defensively with Helmets, Tassets, Corslets,
Brass-Boots, and Targets, closing Ranks, and propping and sustaining one
another, with their Pikes presented over the preceding Shoulders, like the
Quills of Porcupines, it is easy to imagine what Impression such a
well-compacted Weight was capable of making; and how firmly It supported
Charges from an Enemy; unless where Ditches, Hills, or other Inequalities of
Ground, disturbed, and broke their Order into little Gaps, or Intervals, at
which (as in the Example of Aemilius, against Perses, at the Battle of Pydna)
the Roman Legionary Maniples forced Entrance, and assaulting them in Flank,
with their short Swords, gained frequent, and considerable Victories.

As to the Pilum, it is most probable the Romans had it, with their Trojan
Founders, who no doubt brought into Italy, All Weapons they had been accustomed
to, before their Emigration. Vegetius and Polybius, Both, describe this Pilum,
but a little differently. As far as can be gathered out of Roman Tactics, It
was a Staff, of weighty Wood, of four Foot long, exclusive of the Steel, one
End of it was fastened into. This Steel Head was triangular, in Length two
Foot, and very sharply edged, and pointed; so that the whole Length of the
Javelin was about Six Foot: It was largest, where remotest from the Iron
(though sometimes they are described as double-headed): The poizing Place, for
Grasp, was commonly about an Inch and a Quarter in Diameter.

The Legionary Foot, All, carried this peculiar missile Weapon: and could hurl
it with surprising Aim, and Force, against an Enemy. The Manner of their
casting it was thus -- When the first Rank observed the Distance within Reach,
they threw their Javelins, point blank, and sunk immediately upon one Knee, to
give the second Rank uninterrupted Sight, who, then, threw also, and knelt
down, to give the same Advantage to the Third. And thus, when Ten whole Ranks
had thrown successively (which was dispatched with an unceasing Swiftness, and
Agility), They started up together, with a general Shout, drew All their Swords
at once, and so rushed in upon the Enemy.

What terrible Effects have been produced by Javelins, we have innumerable
Instances in History: but none more worthy Notice, than That Great one, at
Pharsalia; where Caesar, with his usual Skill, foreseeing, that Pompey's Horse,
composed of the most warm, and fiery Spirits of the Roman Youth of the
Patrician Houses, would be endeavoring to fall in upon his Rear, on That Wing,
where his own few Horsemen were exceedingly out-reach'd, by Pompey's, He
placed, in oblique Line, extending from behind the so-expos'd and threatened
Flank of Cavalry, six chosen Cohorts of his veteran Foot (which made about
Three thousand Men) and ordered These, when they received the Squadrons in
their coming round upon 'em, to aim All their Javelins at the Faces only of
Those gay young Chargers. It succeeded, to his Wish. The Horse came furiously
about: but starting unexpectedly on this Reserve of such experienced Wounders,
were received with so successive Showers of Javelins, in their Eyes, Cheeks,
Necks, and Foreheads, that unable to support the Horror of such maimed, and
miserable Faces (for the Horse had no Vant-braces to their Helmets), they All
turned their Backs precipitately, and disordering their own Foot, lost Pompey
that important Day; and gave the World to Caesar.

Sect. 25. L. 5. -- Then Gideon found it prudent to retreat.

There is no Chance, and most especially in War, which so effectually, and
suddenly, destroys the Interests of Men, as Want of due Discernment where to
stop, in the smooth Race of Fortune. They see nothing but plain bowling Way,
before 'em: and, if they ever look behind, it is not till their Rear is broken
in upon. There is an Eye on every Side of Prudence, and she sees all round her.
Gideon, who had so lately gained the Out-set of his Influence, by the Valor he
had shown in the Dispute with Oreb, was to make Advantage, of the favorable
Opportunity. As he was Leader, in this hot Pursuit, and saw, that he was
followed by his Countrymen without Regard to Consequence, He might have pushed
the Enemy beyond the Hill, and made considerable Slaughter, as they passed the
River. But how, there, should so disorderly a Body have resisted, on plain
Ground, the Re-inforcements coming up, to the Assistance of the flying Enemy?
In calm Debate, within Himself, he found the Hope of added Glory, from the
Conquest, overbalanc'd, by a Certainty of losing That already His, in case of
Disappointment, and Defeat in Hazard for it. He determines, therefore, to
retreat, and guard the Safety of the People with him: on whose Favor he was
now to build, for All the Promise of his future Fortune.

Sect. XXVII. L. 4. -- The assembled Elders, over the City Gate.

The frequent Devastations brought upon the Jews, first, by the Princes of the
East, then, by the Roman Emperors, and, in All Ages since, by the Resentment
and Revenge of Christian Zeal, for ever warm against them, have so
irrecoverably destroyed their Records, that, excepting their Remains of Law and
History, preserved in the Old Testament, there can be nothing more obscure,
than the Formalities in Civil Government, observed by this unhappy People.
Their Priests, who were the sole Repositories of their Learning, Faith, and
Ceremonies, have been cut off, almost to a Man, in general and commissioned
Massacres: and Opportunities, which This produced, gave Room for Forgeries, and
infinite Impertinence, and superstitious Dreamings, to their Rabbis, and their
Talmudists. Nor have the Christian Writers, to say Truth, cleared more from the
Confusion, than appears to have been added to it. Josephus lived at the same
Time with Christ's Apostles, and is one of our best Guides, in Searches of this
Nature; but, besides that he is often not so full, as might be wished, his
Countrymen had undergone so many Changes before then, that Ten Tribes of the
Twelve were utterly extirpated: and the Government, and Customs of the other
Two, so different, in many of their most considerable Circumstances, from the
Institutions left by Moses, that for Matters of remote Antiquity we cannot
safely rest on his Authority. Thus much, however, may be gathered, from his
Testimony, and the Hebrew Model, as remaining in the Bible, that Each City had
a Senate, of her Elders; that These were generally Seven, with a Levite on each
Hand, for Exposition of their Law, and to record, as well as regulate,
Proceedings. They sat exactly in the Form described: The Place above the City
Gate; to signify, that Justice was to guard, and circumscribe, their
Habitations. These Senates of their Cities judged All Points of Right within
their Districts: but were under Check of an Appeal to Capitals of Tribes: the
Cause might, there, be heard again, before the Prince of That particular Tribe;
who had Election also of his City Senates: Lastly, from these provincial
Princes, lay Appeal, in final Termination, to the Sanhedrim: But, till the
general Defection altered the Mosaic Order, Appeal lay from the Sanhedrim to
the High Priest; and His Decision was the last; and under Penalty of Death, to
be submitted to. -- All which shall be progressively, made evident, in Notes
upon the Books to follow.

Sect. XXX. L. 10. -- Were, sure, designed by Heaven, for wide Control.

The Accident, that had so lately given Occasion of Applause on Gideon's
Bravery, returning with a Royal Prisoner; and which had opened to his
Countrymen an unexpected Promise from his Virtues; is the Point of Sight in his
particular Case, some one, of which, Men often are placed in by Fortune: but
whence, if they have fit Discernment to make use of the Advantage, they find
All their future Way more easy. They dazzle, by their sudden Splendour; and
prevent Inspection, by Excess of Luster. Like Men, who hold Dark-lanterns up
before 'em, they present a strong, but undistinguishable, Glare, behind which
They Themselves discern Things clearly, through the Light, which makes Those
blind, who look against them.

Such a Light enlarged the Influence of Gideon's Virtues. It is not from the
Merit of the Truths, he has been recommending, that the Senators derive their
Warmth of Admiration. A Man, to whom such Sentiments were natural, would
doubtless have expressed 'em many Times before, when, yet, they had produced no
such Effect in Favor of the Speaker. But the Case is, now, grown different. It
is not to Gideon, the Son of Joash, their Fellow Citizen, and old Acquaintance,
they have all this while been listening. It is to Gideon made illustrious, by
Applause and Wonder of the People. What had been common in the MAN, was grown
prodigious in the Conqueror; and Words, which were, before, thought only worth
Neglect, are found, by this new Light, to merit more than Admiration.

Every Thing we have heard of, Every Thing we admire, will be found, upon
Reflection, to have been the Gift of Opportunity. Had not Lucretia's Death
succeeded to her Rape; or some equivalent Excitement roused the till-then
latent Indignation of the Roman People into Transport; Brutus would still have
been constrained to have kept on his Cloak of unexampled Dissimulation; and the
History of His Times had wanted one ferocious Instance, that Disguise of
Passions can consist with the most stern Inflexibility.

In the same City, the same Senate, and same People, who, while under Hope, or
Fear from Pompey's Fortune, gave Consent to all Indignities his Jealousy could
heap on Caesar, and who, with a malignant Laziness, supposed him, in his
Absence, of no longer Consequence, changed Disposition in a Moment, and had,
now, no Ear for any Thing but Caesar. -- Caesar's Valor! Caesar's Goodness!
Caesar's Fortune! -- For they saw All This by the new Light, his unexpected
March to Rome had lent 'em. The terrible Success of so astonishing a Boldness
taught 'em to consider, as invincible, a Courage, that could meet such Danger
with a steady Eye. And That first daring Step drew Half the Nation from his
Rival's Interest.

Sect. XXXI. L. 11. -- So, wandering wide, he reached the Grove of Baal.

Baal was the Sun, and Ashtaroth the Moon; at least, they were most generally
so reputed. But concerning these great Eastern Idols, and the different
Accounts, in Writers, of their Forms, and Modes of Worship, much more might be
noted, than could be of Use, or Pleasure, here. -- It will be All the Subject
calls for, to observe, that they were generally placed on Hills, with gloomy
Groves surrounding them. For they were worshipped in the open Air, because it
was supposed presumptuous to confine their Gods to Temples, who were
Omnipresent, and illimitable. -- Therefore, when the Hebrews (as they often
did) fell off to the Idolatry of their next-bord'ring Nations, They made them
Images, says Scripture, and planted Groves about 'em; and set up an Idol upon
every high Hill, and under every green Tree; after the Abominations of the
Kingdoms, which were round about them.

The Description of the Grove of Baal, and of the Image, was to be as full, and
circumstantial, as it could be made; first, as it was a matter of Importance in
the Story, there having really been, at Ophra, such a Grove, and Idol; most of
the Inhabitants, and even Gideon's Father, seeming to have been its Worshipers:
and secondly, as there arose poetical Occasion, for an Ornament, from the
Position, Figure, Grove, and solemn Picture of the Hill; which commonly was
artificial, many still remaining, in some Parts of Palestine.

Sect. XXXII. L. 17. -- Where can we better Virtue's Race begin?

It is with a prophetic Spirit, Gideon's Zeal transports him in this Place; the
sacred Text discovering, that the Consequences, of his cutting down the Grove
of Baal, became the Means of raising him to a Capacity of gathering into one
collective Body That first military Strength, to which he owed his own
succeeding Triumphs, and his Country's double Rescue, from the Arms, and Idols,
of their Enemy.

Sect. XXXIII. L. 15. -- Enough for Them, that it is by GIDEON meant.

From the Aid he here receives from the Ten Slaves, whom he had taken in the
Cave, and saved their Lives, when sentenced by the Senate, there arises
seasonable Opportunity to speak a Word or two, concerning Episodes, in general.
They never must deserve the Name, which Horace gives the independent Parts of
some of his Cotemporary's Pieces; they are, instead of the DISJECTI membra
Poetae, to be found attached, as well as beautiful. To heap together a wild
Store of Incidents unlooked for, and surprising, will require but the
Assistance of a lively Fancy. To choose which is fit, which not, This is a
Business for the Judgment. There was, some time since, a Sheep, with a fine
Top-knot on its Head: There was a little after, an Hungarian Girl, who had a
Sister growing to her Back. Both These were Objects unexpected, and surprising;
but they were, however, Monsters, and offensively unnatural. They were like the
Poems of Ariosto, (and I wish I could not add, some Passages in our Great
Spencer's) into which a fairy Dance of incoherent light Adventures, of the most
Romantic Model possible -- if we except the Tales in the Arabian Night's
unmatchable Extravagancies -- crowded on, and wedged themselves without
Connection, Cause, or Consequence; All, loose, and separate, in their Natures,
and yet ramm'd together by the Impulse of the Poet's Spirit. In reading such a
Poem, I imagine it like looking down upon a Sea, where long Successions of huge
Surges after Surges, foaming from all Quarters, without Point of View to rest
upon, move Horror, though, at the same time, they strike with a wild Kind of
Wonder, something like Delight. The Whole amuses the Attention: nothing leads
it, in particular. A regular Epic Poet draws along the Mind, as Rivers do the
Sight: however strong the Current, and the Course though vast and winding, yet
the Flow itself is orderly, the Force confined within its Banks, and if it
takes in Episodical Brooks, it is, to deepen, not divide, its Chanel.

Should therefore this Deliverance of the Slaves have purposed nothing further,
than to set off Gideon, and display his Generosity, the Contrivance had been
flat, and wanted the Characteristic of an Epic Episode. For, while it could not
be discerned, that It had any Influence toward Advance of the main Action, the
Reader would have thought their History too inconsiderable to atone for the
Digression, they misled him into. But the Interest of these honest Men becomes
entitled to our whole Attention and Concern, as soon as we observe, that, from
their Gratitude, an Action is derived, that gives Foundation to the great one,
purposed by the Poem: and reflect, that no Men, less obliged, could have been
drawn to a Participation, in so menacing a Danger.

It is probable, in actual Truth, that These ten Servants, who, the Text says,
aided Gideon, in the Night (for Fear of the Inhabitants of Ophra, and the Rest
of their own Family), were Persons, whom He had engaged to his particular
Interest, by Effect of some uncommon Obligation; It being impossible they
should not have foreseen the Uproar and Resentment, which attended their
Presumption: and no Ordinary Temptation had prevailed on Men of Their exposed
Condition, to provoke so visible a Hazard.

It is the same again, in That next Episode; where the Defeat of Oreb's Party,
and His being made a Prisoner, was not introduced to give a Proof of Gideon's
Bravery, but, from Effect of its Exertion, to possess him of the Public
Admiration. I repeat the Observation, though already noted, to imprint
Remembrance of this not to be dispensed with Requisite, in Episodes, that they
produce, and make Each other necessary; and contribute, All, to the Completion
of the Epic Action.

Sect. XXXV. L. 4. and 5. -- On the hissing Flame,
Poured the warm Blood.
I purposely abridge the ceremonial Rites of Sacrifice: not only as the formal
Apparatus for, and Practice in 'em All ( Burnt-Offerings, Peace Offerings,
Sin Offerings, and the Rest), may be particularly found, in the Mosaic
Writings, but, as Gideon, in so unforeseen a Call to the Occasion, could not be
expected to have come prepared for the Formalities; nor was he vested, for it,
with the Right of Priesthood: and He knew sufficiently, by the Direction he
proceeded under, that His Offering could need no Punctuality, to render it
acceptable.

But over and above All This, there cannot be denied to rise offensive Images,
from a too long Detail of Cutting up of Beasts, washing their Bowels, broiling
the Fat, and such carnific Circumstances. I consent with all my Heart, to Lord
Roscommon's Notion of this Matter.

"For who, without a Qualm, has ever looked
"On holy Garbage, though by Homer cooked!
"Take foul Descriptions, in which Light you will;
"If Like, they nauseate: if unlike, they are ill.
Sect. XXXVII. L. 6. -- From the tough Trunk's big Bulk, back-bounding Blows
recoil.
I hope I need not apprehend this Line in Danger to be looked upon, as guilty
of more Roughness, than It very well can justify, from what was touched in a
preceding Note, concerning the Assimilation of the Sound to the described Idea.
But, as the hard Rebound is owing here, to the selected Monosyllables, I ought
to add, in their Defense, that, used with any Choice, or Care, they are a
Beauty, and Advantage; and both tune our Language and enrich it. I will wish no
plainer Proof, in Favor of, than Mr. Pope has brought, against them.

And ten low Words often creep in one dull Line.
By the Way, creep THROUGH, had better answered his Intention, than creep IN.
But, if it had not been for our abundant Choice of Monosyllable Words, how then
could Mr. Pope have imitated, with so beautiful a Force, the very Fault he was
exposing? The Truth is, It is not a long String of such short Words, that makes
Verse jar upon the Ear. -- Short Syllables, when they are Words, may, by
judicious Intermixture of the Vowels, with the Consonants, succeed Each other
with as smooth a Cadence, as can Syllables, which are but Parts of Words. --
The studied Roughness, in this Verse of Mr. Pope's, arises only from a refluent
Reluctance of its Accents to concur, in That Insertion into one Another, which
is necessary, to make Words harmonious. I could show a thousand Monosyllable
Lines, in Mr. Dryden's, and great Numbers, too, in Mr. Pope's own Poems, than
which nothing can be capable of a more exquisite Smoothness. -- It is easy to
derive the same Proof, even from Blank Verse, and Milton, where it seems least
reasonable to suppose too nice a Care of Softness, from Selection of his
Syllables. -- In Eve's Reproach of Adam, for Example, Paradise lost, the Ninth
Book.

Why should be mean me ill, or seek to harm?
She speaks it of the Devil; and the Author, therefore, will be scarce
conceived to have endeavored this sweet Flow of Monosyllables. Verse composed
so, never carries Roughness, where due Care is taken, that the Syllables are
heavily, or lightly ACCENTED, in just Proportion to the Sense, they move with.
But, in Mr. Pope's, the Words are purposely so chosen, that Each Syllable
requires Emphatical Expansion: and, in That Case, there can be no Music, for
the very Reason, that makes Difference betwixt the Tolling out one Bell, and
ringing a whole Belfry.

I have omitted a short Note, which ought to have been placed in the Beginning,
The Reader will observe, I commonly make Choice of the Appellative, Hebrews. --
The Word Israelite is no more fit for Poetry, than Children of Israel: To have
called 'em Jews had been a visible Absurdity; since That was a posterior Name,
on their Reduction to Two Tribes, and the exclusive Kingdom of Judah only. The
other Ten Tribes, till their final Extirpation, owned no Name but their
Original one, of Israel. Their general Appellative, among the bordering Aliens,
seems to have been Hebrews; which effectually includes 'em All; and was derived
to 'em from Heber, Sixth, in Ascent, from Abraham; and Second, from Arphaxad,
Noah's Grandson.

GIDEON; OR, The PATRIOT. BOOK II.
I.
'TWAS Morning: and, over Ophra's Towers, the Sun
Rose lovely, with unusual Luster bright:
For, pleased to find the long-wish'd Task begun,
His Fires glowed sparkling, with intense Delight.
But Gideon, well reflecting what was done,
Restless had mused away the tedious Night;
And from a Garden's silent Shade, looked longing, for the Light.
There Joash, risen from interrupted Rest,
Found, and breathed Blessings over, his pensive Son:
And, now by Wonder, now by Fear, oppressed
Heard All distinctly; from the Angel's Hail,
To the Grove's Ruin, and the Fall of Baal.
II.
Gideon, said He, Prop of my failing Years!
If what thy Father's doubtful Love shall speak
Should seem too coldly weighed, too kindly weak,
Think, in Excuse of what may harsh appear,
Youth is too full of Hope; and Age, of Fear.
He paused, and turned: and dried a starting Tear.
It Is great, continued He, this Thirst of Fame!
Bright, though dangerous, is the Flame,
That warms thy manly Breast, with this extensive Aim.
But, art thou not deceived, by some fair Dream?
Things strongly wished, Men often believe they see:
For vigorous Fancy can so subtly seem,
That Nonexistence may be thought to be.
If 'twas, in Truth, an Angel, thou have seen,
Joash is happy, and his Country blessed:
Afflicted Israel, then, shall soon find Rest:
But, if my Gideon has deluded been,
Then, who from Misery my sad House shall screen?
Who, save Thy harmless Infants, from the Sword?
Thy Soul-distracting Grief, alas! will no Relief afford:
Thy Punishment include a People's Fate;
And thy too bold and honest Heart, be undeceived, too late.
III.
Reverend, and wise, replied the attentive Chief,
Your Doubt of Me, by past Experience moved,
Admits, obscure, and slowly, the Belief,
That I am heav'n-approv'd.
Yet; coldest Caution safely may confess,
Weakness, where GOD supports, can strongly bless.
Nor blush, unlikely as it is, the glorious Hope to own:
Occasion, often, has latent Virtue, shown,
Where Kindred's too close Sight distinguished none.
Called by the Almighty's leading Voice, I go,
Fearless, amidst yon Camp, on Jezreel's Plain.
Fain would I thence remove th'incumbent Foe:
Their neighboring Weight does my warm Wish restrain.
To Arms, till then, 'twere dangerous to repair.
Lest our awed Tribes, th'Oppressor viewed too nigh,
Shrink from assumed Resolve; disperse, and fly.
You, venerable Sire! mean while, prepare
Th'assembled Senate, for the important Hope;
Tell 'em, God's Promise lends Contraction Scope;
The Fall of Baal, with its great Cause, declare:
And charm 'em with th'inspiring News, of Heaven's recovered Care.
IV.
Speaking, he bowed; and, turning swift away,
Left the sad Father's Answer, half unmade.
Joash broke short what Prudence meant to say:
Silent looked after him; his Words, long weighed;
Then, stretched to Heaven his aged Arms, and begs the doubted Aid.
-- On the North Range of Ophra's rugged Wall,
Rose a round Tower, of white and massy Stone:
Seen, from whose Summit's far-commanding View,
High-posted Archers Bows unerring, drew;
Thence, over steep Windings, awed the Road below,
Checked the rash Hope of an adventurous Foe:
Stopped Passengers, and left the Ascent to None,
Till Who they were, and whence they came, was shown.
Deep, in the vaulted Base, Life's languid Tomb!
A still, damp, Dungeon lodged eternal Gloom.
Its iron Door, which rust-worn Hinges hung,
Harsh grating, through the stony Portal, swung.
Echo's hard Groan threw sad Sensation round,
And thought-bound Silence started, at the Sound!
Painful Regard strained sharp her visual Ray,
To catch faint Embryos, of excluded Day;
Where, through thick Walls, oblique, thin Ghosts of Light,
Gleam'd from pale Loop-holes, quiver'd to the Sight.
V.
Here, well secured, the State her Prisoners, kept:
And here, this Night, confined, Prince Oreb slept.
Yet, no vile Chain insulted his Restraint;
Well treated, by his generous Guardian's Care;
Who, from Captivity, to chase Complaint,
Shut out no Freedom, but of Light, and Air.
Here, with swift and furious Stride,
Close-folded Arms, and short and sudden Starts,
The fretful Prince, in dumb and sullen Pride,
Revolved Escape, and cursed, in Pain, his People's coward Hearts.
VI.
So Gideon finds him: and, with gentle Grace,
Accosts him thus -- Great Prince! your scopeful Will
Suffers Restraint, I see, but ill.
Those Feet, long used your Enemies to chase,
Spurn at Detention; and were nerv'd for Space.
Though manly Suff'rers loud Complaint restrain,
Impatient Silence paints internal Pain.
But, Smiles are Wisdom, where Regret is vain.
Great Minds, in Want of present Ease,
Should teach some future Hope to please.
Such if your Prospect, I would aid its Claim.
Take, Sir, your Sword: and, from this Moment, free,
Re-fire your Camp, to War's recovered Flame:
Go, ransomeless. -- No Grace deserves Regard,
That stoops to barter Virtue, for Reward.
My noblest Gain, let This due Glory be,
That He, whose erring Arms oppressed the Free,
Owed His own forfeit Liberty, to me.
VII.
The silent Prince, whom this new Chance alarms,
Stood fixed, awhile, with an astonished Air:
Then, swift advancing, snatched him to his Arms.
O Baal! he cried, How much, in War, they dare!
Yet, after Victory, how mild, they are!
Why am I hostile, to such manly Charms?
More he had said, but Gideon, whose warm Mind
Flashed its first Greatness over his Captive's Soul,
And schem'd a lengthening Luster, yet behind;
Thus interrupted, ere he spoke the Whole.
Nations ill taught make War a barbarous Trade:
But Men who fight for Liberty, and Peace,
When their Arms prosper, by the Almighty's Aid,
Feel their Revenge impow'r'd: and bid it cease.
Near is your Camp. Yet, lest th'impeded Way
Prove dangerous, while this Mountain you descend,
Myself, your Safeguard, will your Steps attend.
Charged with ALLIANCE, offered to your State,
Let your met Kings, th'auxiliar Purpose weigh,
Hold us Confed'rate, and retract their Hate.
Pledge me your Royal Faith, lest slight Pretense
Bids Force detain me: or, returning, thence,
Some ambush'd Wrong provokes unwish'd Offense.
-- By the high thundering Baal! the Prince replied,
By blood-stained Moloch! -- pale Astarte's Beam!
Hot Belial! and whole Heaven's collective Host!
Gods, Male and Female, who yon Realms divide!
Those, whom We worship! Him, of whom You dream!
And whose joint Aid is warlike Midian's Boast:
All, who shall dare Thy Wrong, My Sword defies.
Thou shall be safe: or Oreb, with thee, dies.
VIII.
He spoke: and stooping through a Postern Gate,
Which, from the Tower, led, winding, down the Hill,
Gideon, descending, with eductive Skill,
Steers his Companion, 'twixt the mazy Rocks,
And the deep Cleavings of the Hill unlocks.
Dark'ning and cool, beneath th'incumbent Shade
Of goat-browz'd Bushes; which, in Sylvan State,
Bowed, by their own declining Weight,
Hung deep'ning over the ragged Cliffs, and in the Breezes played;
A short, unpeopled, Path, their Feet explore;
High from whose shelvy Steeps far round, hoarse-tumbling Torrents roar.
Down, cross the craggy Lab'rinth, safely flow,
From Rock to Rock they slide; from Shade to Shade;
Each lending Other, heedful Aid:
Till, from the Glooms of their untrodden Way,
As Men, from Night, wake sudden, into Day,
They saw the silver Stream, at Distance, flow:
And flashed upon the opening Plain, below.
IX.
Now, on the Valley's Edge, th'egressive Pair
Outstarting, spied, from far, a dusty Cloud,
Which wid'ning circled towered 'em, in the Air;
And half concealed a wild and noisy Crowd,
Through which, the Ring of brazen Wheels, was heard distinct and loud.
When to the River, unobserved, they came,
They found the Charioteers of Oreb, there:
Wat'ring their wanton Steeds, with heedless Aim.
Wide-dispers'd, and loose, they were:
Thoughtless of Danger, All, and void of Care.
The Prince beheld 'em, with indignant Shame:
His Pride felt Anguish, and his Eyes shot Flame.
Unwary Slaves! he cried -- Is This the Way?
Retrieve Ye, thus, the Fame so lately lost?
My Coward Foot, in Arms, their Prince, betray:
My Horse, untaught by their Companion's Cost,
Regardless Negligence, un-arm'd, display:
And long to be as infamous, as They!
Why met I not your Outguards, posted here?
What, on this Quarter, thus exposed, our neighboring Camp, defends?
Since, for me, the Road was clear,
What, if the Foe lay ambush'd, near?
Wretches! is yon strong Mountain held, by Friends?
His People heard him, with a glad Surprise:
Mixed, in their Breasts, the varied Passions rise:
But Joy, triumphant, stifling Sense of Shame,
A Storm of Shouts rose ceaseless, to the Skies:
Echoing, the bord'ring Hills th'Alarm proclaim,
And the wide Valley rings, with Oreb's Name.
X.
High, on an open Chariot's airy Seat,
In State, the Prince and Gideon onward ride:
Re-closing swift, th'outstarted Squadrons meet,
And flow behind 'em, like a following Tide.
Poured from the Camp, the mingled Nations roar,
Sweeping, tumultuous, over the dusty Plain:
Loose Horse and Foot, in stretched Extent, still lengthening more and more,
In endless Chain of Triumph, swell the Train.
But, when Both Swarms met mixed, upon the Green,
And Oreb's high-rais'd Chariot shone, between:
Should'ring, the clamorous Concourse gathered round,
And clogged his Progress, and o'erwedg'd his Ground:
Slow moved th'incumber'd Pomp, through deaf'ning Noise;
And the Prince labored, with the People's Joys.
So, when, within some Island's sea-wash'd Straight,
A Bark, with full-blown Canvas, holds her Course,
Two billowy Currents urge encount'ring Weight;
And, swelled to Uproar by cross Clash of Tides;
Roll murmuring on; and, climbing wild and hoarse,
Work over Each Other, with contending Force:
Heaved through ascending Foam, the way-stop'd Vessel rides,
And scarce, with All her bellying Sails, th'encircling Roar, divides.
XI.
Safe, to th'expecting Camp, at last, they come,
Where, waiting, All th'assembled Chiefs, they found;
There, did Joy's liveliest Ecstasies abound:
And false Congratulation, too, bowed formal, to the Ground.
From Every Side at once, the thundering Drum
Beat his hoarse Welcome; while, in shriller Sound,
The Trumpet's soft and trembling Note flowed undulating round.
White, on a smooth and gently rising Hill
Full in the Center of the Camp, was pitched
One crowned Pavilion, of unmatched Extent;
Lined with an azure Field of Silk, by crimson Groves enriched:
Whence gold and purple Fruits, in Clusters bent,
Fed the charmed Eye, with feastful Ornament.
Three Walls, of circly green, the imperial Tent,
Guarded at equal Distances, invest:
Wide, round th'exterior Third, lay, far outspread,
Smooth Void, whose silent Range admits no vulgar Tread:
For, there, th'associate Monarch's Feet the hallowed Surface pressed.
XII.
Hither, to Council, while they bent their Way,
In his right Hand, Prince Oreb, Gideon, led:
The graceful Hebrew marched at Ease, and gay;
And from his Eyes a radiant Sweetness, shed.
Circled by Kings, and taller, by the Head,
His native Majesty eclipsed their Pride:
A Leopard's Skin, the Paws, together, tied,
Dreadfully gay, was over his Shoulder, spread:
And, to the Right, slop'd pendent, from his Side.
A rich wide-skirted Crimson Vest
O'er-wrap'd, with conscious Glow, his manly Breast:
Girt by a purple, silver-studded Belt;
In which his fated Sword at Freedom hung.
While, at each Step, his Arm, was gently swung,
The low-poiz'd Spear, majestic, seemed to nod:
And swayed, with threatening Grandeur, as he trod.
Cool, over his fair and bloom-enliven'd Face,
A jet-black Plume waved slow, with shadowy Grace.
XIII.
Now, round the entered Umbrage, marching slow,
The Royal Brotherhood their Places, fill.
Encircling Legions edge the Plain below:
Over whose close Heads unfurling Ensigns flow;
And, from the important Space to ward off Ill,
A steely Grove of glittering Spears rise round the dreadful Hill.
From the Tent-door, a Chief his Javelin shook,
And thrice distinctly sounded on his Shield:
The watchful Guards the well-known Signal took,
And rung it downward, through the war-dress'd Field.
Silenced, the distant Soldiers sit, and wait
The Event of All their Sov'reign's joint Debate.
Gradual, the floating Roar of War subsides,
And sinking Clamor draws back All her Tides.
Soft, the sweet Trumpet's Echoes die away;
And the yet murmuring Drum, unwilling sleeps:
Through the still Air, thin-body'd Whispers play;
And voiceless, over the awe-hush'd Camp, profound Attention creeps.
XIV.
Then Oreb, glowing generous, thus began:
Brothers in War! Kings, of confed'rate Sway!
Lend Action Every grateful Power you can:
Words are too weak, to thank this godlike Man.
If, to behold me here, alive, Today,
Aids your Arm's Prospect, and you wish to know,
From what kind Source, my future Hope must flow,
'Twill sound surprising, in your Royal Ear,
That when, unmanned by a repulsive Fear,
Despairing Friends abandoned Fame, and Me;
This wondrous Foe, this Hebrew, whom you see,
Conquered, to save; and set me free!
Then, touched with Warmth, but to the Generous known,
He told his People's Flight: told, how, Alone,
He stopped the Hebrews, with the Giant Stone.
Told, how he fought, escaped; and, from the Cave,
Pursuing Others, lost Himself, again:
Told, how his Conqueror, serenely brave,
Ransomless, his Freedom, gave.
And, shall, said He, this glorious Act, but, empty Praise, obtain?
No. -- Though th'unvenal Benefactor's Mind
Flowed out on Virtue, even for Virtue's Sake,
They, whom such stainless Obligations bind,
Should doubly weigh the Worth, of All they take:
And, where they find the Debt without Allay,
With tenfold Gratitude, make Haste to pay.
He paused: -- and, with a loud, concurrent, Praise,
Spread, on the Breast, his Hand, Each Monarch lays:
Jointly obliged, Each separate, Vows Regard;
And bids the Stranger name his wished Reward.
XV.
Gideon smiled satisfied: and, bowing low,
Replied -- Great Kings! you Nothing owe.
Light were His Virtue, and of narrow Scope,
Who weighed his Sense of Duty, by his Hope.
Much you o'er-rate a Mark of due Respect:
Blessed, as I was, to snatch the important Care,
A Prince, of MIDIAN, to protect!
Esteem it but an Instance of That Pride,
With which our Tribes remember, who you are.
Nor think me vain, The Occasion, so, supplied,
If I remind you, we are near allied.
-- Midian, the mighty Founder of your Name,
Was, even as Isaac was, our ABR'AM's Son.
Both had an equal Start, and Spur, to Fame:
Both, in one Father's Blessing, equal Claim:
Though, (thence our Grief!) in different Paths, to run.
O, Power, of Custom! Law, Religion! Place!
Little, alas! our common Parent thought,
His time-chang'd Sons, unmindful of their Race,
In different Lands, a different Interest taught,
With hostile Rancour, should Each Other chase;
And Wan, fraternal Glory to efface!
But, Heaven be thanked. It was not, always, so. --
When from proud Egypt's hard Oppression, led,
When, deep through desert Wastes, compelled to go,
Kind MIDIAN taught our cherished Feet to tread:
Even to these Plains where Midian now, encamps, our fiercest Foe,
We were, by Midian, led.
When hospitable JETHRO' -- Hail, great Name!
You know it, mighty Princes! -- for, you claim
Derived Succession, both in Blood and Fame;
When He, kind Guide! left Country, Power, and Ease,
Our March's Guardian, through its hard Degrees!
Even to This Canaan, whence, (oh, Force, of Years!)
You strive to root us out, in Blood, and Tears:
He knew, that Midian's Sons, with Israel's joined,
Were Brothers, parted long, and re-combin'd.
Doubtless, his Wisdom had found good, to weigh,
That Countries, given to Abr'am's general Race,
Might not alone be soonest won,
By Deeds of War conjointly done;
But, that, so conquered, such Extent of Space
Might stretch joint Blessing, for our mixed Embrace.
Israel, he knew, no separate Claim, could lay,
Since Midian's Race had Abr'am's Right, as notedly as They.
Why are we Foes then? -- Armed, on Midian's Side,
Lead us to Realms, whose Wealth we might divide.
As yet, the poorest Part of Canaan's ours:
Her western Coast defies even Midian's Powers.
Wide, from Gaza, Northward, spread,
Lie Countries we regard with Dread.
Who has not heard of SIDON's boastful State?
And the proud Opulence of tradeful TIRE?
We, barrenly confined to inland Rocks,
Unhappily are warred on, by our Friends:
They, unexpos'd to hostile Shocks,
Bribing Indemnity, when Pride offends,
On foodful Pastures shear unnumber'd Flocks:
And, safe, in all the Insolence of Peace,
Grasp golden Plenty: and provoke Increase.
XVI.
Oreb, with sympathetic Rapture fired,
Starts from his Seat, impelled by Gideon's Flame:
Shall Hebrews, then, by alien Gods inspired,
For hostile Midian, point out Paths to Fame!
BAAL moves 'em! -- I attest His dreadful Name:
Blast He my Fortune, if, by me required,
This Hebrew's Hint re-starts my favorite Aim!
Since, lately, half-resolv'd, we weighed this Scheme,
Let us no longer willing Friends oppress:
It Is Reason's Debt, Esteemers to esteem.
Pay not proposed Attachment, with Distress.
Grant aidful Israel her indulged Desire:
And turn War's Thunder on devoted Tire.
A few Days March conducts us to her Walls,
Open, the Road; the Country stored, and gay,
Sheds wanton Plenty over th'inviting Way.
What can we want then? -- Haste, at once, away.
Surprised defenseless, now, while Fortune calls,
All Hope forsakes 'em: and their City falls.
XVII.
Grave from his Place rose Zeb, in formal State:
Heavy with Age; yet, Age his smallest Weight.
Fortune had given him only Bliss to bear:
But Nature heaped him with a Load, of Care.
His parsimonious Soul but ill could scan
The Difference, 'twixt the Monarch, and the Man.
Courage he wanted not: but held in vain --
For, his chief End, in every War, was Gain.
Deep, in his labour-furrow'd Look, his Avarice stood engraved:
And even his Silence told the Eye, he craved.
This Tyrian War, says He, has my Consent.
Rich is the Country: praiseful the Intent.
Since Israel's Right of Kindred, we confess,
Let us her Poverty no harder press.
Even let her, once for All, her Tribes assess:
And, gathering friendly what she can, buy off th'undue Distress.
Pity pleads for 'em. We can do no less
Than let 'em hold, in Peace, their thin Remains.
Spare the poor Penitents. -- Alas! Their Plains
Were, long since, Ours; Their Mountains yield small Gains:
And lean Contention is not worth our Pains.
Sidon and Tire with endless Wealth abound:
A thriving People! skilled in gainful Arts!
Commerce their Treas'ry fills: Herds hide their Ground.
Trade a big Weakness proudfully imparts:
But trembling Hands ill guard presumptuous Hearts.
XVIII.
Agag, of Amalek, sat next:
A Prince, of tempered Courage; wisely cold.
No rising Passion His slow Thought perplexed:
Doubtful, with Vigor, and with Caution, bold.
A long Experience taught him to suspect:
He feared All Counsels; but would none neglect.
Justly he weighed: and did, with Choice, reject.
Alike 'twould grieve me, the wise Prince began,
To miss the Meaning, or mistake the Man.
Yet, least errs He, who weighed Conclusion draws;
And, seeking Consequence, looks back to Cause.
Mischief, disguised, may deep and dangerous lie:
Pow'rless to hurt when obvious to the Eye.
Grant us of Strength to shake the Walls of Tire:
Grant the March short: Have we not Foes, still nigher?
These Hebrews, wisely weary of us here,
Kindly provide us nobler Conquests, near.
Strong is our Hope: but stronger is Their Fear.
Old Claims of Blood, from Dates so sunk in Time,
Impel but faintly, where no Interest leads.
One Step still higher, retrorsive let 'em climb,
And, since so strongly Kindred pleads,
CANAAN's whole Offspring, even her TYRIAN Race,
Name Parent Noah, but, in Abr'am's Place,
Are Midian's Brothers, with like Claim to Grace.
Last Night -- nor think Night Visions always vain;
Often, they the Wills of silent Gods, explain.
Last Night, This strange, this thrice-repeated Dream,
Harrow'd my aching Fancy, with the Sight
Of air-form'd Shapes, that chilled my Soul to Fright!
For, never did Shadows so substantial, seem!
I saw you, Princes! in the imperial Tent
Assembled, as we now, collective, meet,
And on like Business bent:
When, from yon sable Mountain's dire Descent,
Fast in Pursuit of warlike Oreb's Feet,
Rolled a mean rustic Loaf, of Hebrew Bread.
On-bigg'ning, into monstrous Bulk It spread;
Till, gradual, an unbounded Pile, It grew:
Whelming its Way, These Royal Seats o'erthrew.
Then, rumbling, thunder-like, resistless, round,
Swept the crushed Camp before it, to the Ground.
Taught, by such Dreams --
-- There, Oreb held, no more:
But, rising stormy, looked him scornful over.
Take heed, presumptuous Prince! nor dare, said He,
Oblique, to glance reproachful Doubt, at me.
Dream for Thyself: hintful of base Distrust,
Creep beneath Faith, through allegoric Dust.
Souls, sagely impotent, or darkly cold,
Ever suspicious, thus alarmed, behold
Th'uncover'd Climb, of Honor's active Flame:
And dive through Virtue, for some mystic Aim.
Dishonest Mark, of an infected Mind!
Whom should I fear? What View shall I conceal?
Who shall prevent, where Oreb has designed?
Or, what, resolving, shuns he to reveal?
No. -- Be it left to cautious Lumps, like Thee,
To veil feared Truths, or through False Mediums see;
My Heart's hot Beat on its felt Strength, relies;
And flames too furious, to admit Disguise.
But, by revenging Baal! --
XIX.
-- There, Zebah rose:
A Man of Noise, and apt to interpose.
Vainglorious, insolent, and rashly brave!
His Courage, deaf to Danger, sought his Foes:
But, to his Friends, unsure Dependence gave;
Bold, to destroy: but ign'rant how to save!
Impetuous he began; and streamed in Tongue:
Round rolled his Eyeballs; and his Arms, in tum'rous Gesture, swung.
Oreb watched stern, for what He meant to say:
And Agag, half-enrag'd, before, now smiled his Warmth away.
What! must we, thus, in civil Broils engage?
And can we find no foreign Wars, to wage?
Last, let us jarr: nor will it then be vain,
When None to conquer, but Ourselves, remain.
But, let us, first, march on, to shining Tire:
And leave Her brighter, in her funeral Fire.
I hate her: proud Engrosser of the Seas!
The wafted Pilf'rer floats from Shore to Shore;
Freighted for Luxury, and choked with Store
While we, far nobler, dumbly unrenown'd,
Short-elbow'ing, from our Mountain's circly Bound,
Harrass, with faint and fameless Force, the hardy Nations, round.
Were Navies ours, what could not Midian do?
Then, might we Toils worth bleeding for, pursue:
Find some new World, possess, and drain it, too:
And spread the Glory of our Arms, where Fame, yet, never flew.
Now, barred by Rocks, or hemmed by barren Sands,
Why called they happy such secluded Lands?
Our crowded Hive ejects reluctant Swarms.
But, when yon Eastern Ocean's Depth, behind,
Shall groan beneath th'Excursion of our Arms;
Or, over the Atlantic West, we Outlet find;
Then shall we grasp a Power, like Zebah's Mind!
Then shall the Nations trembling ask, what Midian has designed:
And our wide-dreaded Name be heard, in Every changing Wind.
Since Agag, safely cautious, shuns to go,
And sees sure Danger, in an untried Foe,
Be it His guardian Task, to watch, behind:
Distinct, in two strong Powers, our Army, led,
At once, shall hold yon Hebrew Dames confined,
High, on their Mountain's wholesome Tops, to whiten, in the Wind;
And shake presumptuous Tire, with Midian's Dread:
Faint-hearted Slaves, in their own Purple bred;
By Pleasure softened, and by Plenty fed:
Our tawny Soldier's iron Front, shall look the Miscreants dead.
XX.
Zalmunna smiled, at Zebah's hope-wing'd Flight,
And spoke, resolved to close the warm Debate.
This Prince assumed an all-superior Might:
Honored in chief, by Each divided State;
Though, by Descent, and Right of natural Claim,
Lord but of One, to the mixed War, he came.
Haughty and fierce, his daring Bosom felt
A savage Pleasure, in the Wastes of Woe:
His cruel craft-revolving Depth of Mind
Dark distant Schemes, of tyrant Reach, designed:
No Warmth of Pity his hard Heart could melt;
All Things were just, which rid him of a Foe:
All was beneath him, in the World below:
And Heaven but bowed to, that it might bestow.
Princes! said He, well-judg'd, Your Hopes appear.
Yet, you misconstrue Agag's Caution, Fear.
Skilled in Discernment, let the WISE detect,
And point out Dangers, for the BRAVE's Neglect.
On, to the West: be Tyre's proud State defied.
Israel, often already tried,
Dares nothing: or must dare on Midian's Side.
Phoenicia's peopled Coast, This March makes Ours.
Then lie These Hebrews central, 'twixt our Powers.
Southward and Eastward, we, already, spread,
And edge their Tribes, with a removeless Dread.
Northward, accessless Hills run rough'ning on,
From Arnon's Ridge, to ced'ry Lebanon:
Add the wished West; and the Sea's subject Roar
Salutes stretched Midian, and adorns her Shore.
So, hemmed on every Side, and, each Way, near,
Hope Israel's Service; and conclude her Fear.
Peacefully safe, a Vassal, calm and still:
Or conquered Rebel, to be crushed, at Will.
Hebrew! return: and, soon as thou shall hear
That our resistless Arms encompass Tire,
Bid your Twelve Tribes choose, Each, a Legate, fit
To kneel before us with their joint Desire.
Hope, then, what Terms Compassion can admit:
Away. -- Find Comfort: and your Caverns quit.
Princes! debate no more. It stands decreed.
Sidon must fall: and purply Tire shall bleed.
Baal! bless Tomorrow's Dawn; safeguard Thy Host!
Push we the March, ere Spies alarm their Coast.
Gideon glowed secret; pleased, prophetic, gay:
And Each King, rising, moved, a separate Way.
But, Oreb's generous Heart, humanely bent,
Studious to entertain his Hebrew Friend,
Led him, impatient, to his feastful Tent:
Where social Hours, in charmful Converse spent,
Brought the pleased Day to an unwilling End.
XXI.
All Night, the Camp hums loud, with murmuring Swarms,
And rings with Echoes, from the hammered Arms.
Through every Quarter, hurrying Concourse pours:
And Preparation toils away the Hours.
At last, the cheerful Morning's opening Eye
Glows, through the solemn Shade, from high:
Hovering, and moist, attracted Vapors rise.
Then, the Sun's Outset, seen and hailed, with day-discov'ring Cries,
In worshipped Pomp, rolls glorious up, to Sight:
And every ray-touch'd Mountain smiles, and every Field looks bright.
First, the loud Drums a solemn Warning beat,
And Each roused Soldier, prompt to War's Alarms,
Strong, for the notic'd Movement, girds his Feet:
Then, the shrill-starting Trumpet sounds to Arms;
And All the swarthy Nations run, and at their Standards meet.
Slow, move the cumb'rous Wagons, long in Train,
And, dull of Motion, creek with Weight; and labor over the Plain.
Next, loaded high, the bunchy Camels go;
Stepping, with strait-rais'd Neck, sublimely slow:
One loose-ty'd Length of living Line, in stretched and endless Row.
With These, for Safeguard from th'attempting Foe,
Selected Bands, of active Horsemen, ride:
A dreadful Battle-ax adorns each Side;
And each right Hand, a double-pointed Spear,
To dart a distant Death, or guide one, near.
These, first, off-filing, the whole following Host
Received joint Signal, and to move began:
Each in his Turn, wheeled martial, from his Post,
Rank behind Rank, and Man preceding Man.
XXII.
Seen, from a Chariot, on a rising Ground,
Along whose Range the Army must ascend;
Or, near, beneath whose Brow their Way they found,
Oreb sat mounted, with his Hebrew Friend.
Thence, as the Squadrons passed, with courteous Care,
Informed him, whence they came, and whose they were.
My Friend, said he, for, from this happy Day,
Let us forever, mutual, share That Name:
It joys me, that our Forces march away,
And yield wished Peace, to Israel's future Claim.
Swift let your Legates sent, firm Contract, bind.
Proud and imperious is Zalmunna's Mind!
But I, to aid your Envoy's purposed Prayer,
Will, with a warm and well-asserted Care,
Curb his malignant Hate; and make him kind.
Mean while, this fair Occasion, safely take,
To sit, and well observe our martial Host.
No Strength, brave Nations, thus allied, can break.
Such Weight oppressing, if we felt you shake,
This Truth, confessed, secures your Country's Praise;
Sev'n Years assaulted, you withstood us, All:
While in perhaps as few triumphant Days,
Before our death-diminish'd Power, the Pride of Tire shall fall.
All the wide Bosom of the spacious East
Had emptied her Best Spirits, on your Land:
It Is true, by Time's wide Waste, and War's, decreased,
Many have fallen: nor has my Loss been least.
Yet shall you see the Numbers we command
Thick, as the Locusts in the Wind, and countless as the Sand.
Be it your Glory, you could Kings, withstand,
Who grasped your State with such a nervous Hand.
XXIII.
In Five broad Lines, th'advancing Army moves.
For, where smooth Plains extend unbroken Way,
Wide Order, every practiced Chief approves;
As least exposed, so stretched, in formed Array,
And making double Marches, every Day.
See, clear 'twixt Line and Line, what Space we leave:
Some Furlong's Interval, unfill'd and free:
Hence, no Impression, we, when charged, receive,
Can, through more Lines than One, extended be:
But All, each other, aptly may relieve;
And, where One shrinks, th'advancing Next retrieve.
Mark this approaching Front, with heedful Care.
My Ensigns only, All These Squadrons bear.
I know not how, of late, so changed, they were!
They want not Skill: and have been used to dare.
See, how their Wings with Iron Chariots shine!
On either Horn Four hundred. Each of These
Bears Two armed Drivers, whom Three Horses draw,
Trained to give Charge in a broad-breasted Line.
Impatient of the Curb, they bound, and paw!
From each strong Point of death-arm'd Axle-trees,
Sharp-cutting Seythes emerge, with edgy Slant:
These, in revertive Bend, we move, at Ease;
Raised, or declined, as the skilled Guiders please.
But, when out-driv'n, to rush upon the Foe,
Rattling aloud their brazen Wheels advance,
How weak and useless are the Sword and Lance!
Rider and Horse, cut through, they overthrow:
And while the shaft-arm'd Archers, from within,
Point missive Deaths, in dreadful Tempest, round,
The loose-main'd Coursers, with impetuous Din,
Burst through the Ranks, and thunder over the Ground,
With rapid Motion some, they trample down:
Others, who, thronging back, evade their Force,
The raz'ry Scythes with reeking Edges sweep;
And mow destructive, in their bloody Course.
Of these Eight hundred, which you, passing, see,
Six hundred have no other Lord, but me.
Two hundred, watery Moab's Monarch owns:
Our Lands conjoin: confed'rate are our Thrones.
XXIV.
Now, mark my Foot: in Three Divisions led
The Midmost holds my Country's bravest Sons:
Firm Souls; to great and long-try'd Dangers, bred.
Cross our Dominions, ridgy Gilead runs:
Gilead, whose Groves sweat sovereign Balm, to heal
The Wounds, her brave Defenders rush to feel.
Twelve thousand These; who, once, in Arms unskilled,
The palm-producing Plains of Midian tilled.
Or scoop'd fallen Cedars, on her Mountain's Side:
And, in light Floats, on fishy Arnon, plied.
Those to the right, confed'rate Moab sends,
Eight thousand Spearmen, armed in radiant Steel:
Bold Hiram leads 'em; Midian's high-priz'd Friends!
We love their Courage: nor their Worth conceal.
Near fenny Nebo, and moist Hesbon, They,
Cities, loudly known to Fame!
Dwell in deep Vales, whose rich, but stubborn, Clay
Does strong Resemblance to their Nature claim:
Valiant; but hardly modeled to obey!
Who has not heard what Giants they o'erthrew?
Emims and Anakims, of duskiest Hue!
Broad-striding Champions! big-bon'd Monsters, All!
Hard, as their Oaks: and, as their Cedars, tall!
Near us here, my Foot's firm Left
Contains five thousand, Aids, from Ammon sent.
North-East, from Moab, bord'ring Ammon lies:
These also, Giants, of their Land bereft.
Even to this Day, the Realm, a Giant Race, supplies.
In Rabba's Town, a Proof of strange Extent!
The iron Bed of Og, may, yet, be seen:
In Length, Nine Cubits -- Four such Cubits, wide!
You know the Story well. His fatal Pride,
Vast, as his Bulk, your happier Arms defied:
And, by the Hand of your Great Chief, he died.
On their Hill's healthy Top, delightfully serene,
A Soil, with Sage, and Rue, and Wormwood, green,
Their luckless Balak stood to curse your Race:
When Balaam blessed you, to his Lord's Disgrace.
These three distinct Divisions, I command;
Our Army's first, and not her weakest, Line.
Warm Emulation flames, through every Band:
Fearless of Death, in War's loved Pomp they shine.
See! how through Clouds of Dust they march: nor Heat, nor Labor, shun!
With glowing Temples urge their Way, and sparkle, in the Sun!
XXV.
But look! -- the Army's Second Line comes on.
These, too, from Midian, mighty Founder! spring.
Hard, as their hilly Country's native Stone,
They serve a rich, but an ungen'rous, King.
Mean as their Monarch's Mind; their Dress, how plain!
Zeb's homely Spirit, in his plumeless Train.
Five thousand Foot, thrice told, this Prince attend.
Three thousand Slingers, upon Camels, ride.
From This raised Center, his Foot Cohorts bend,
And, Right and Left, two equal Wings, extend:
Which, rounding forward, Each with sharp'ning End,
In hollow Compass, deep, at once, and wide,
March, like a Crescent, in whose midst, their sullen Prince they hide,
Experienced Archers, These. Their left Hands bear
Tough and springy Bows, of Steel.
Arms of slender Proof they wear:
And the big Shield's safe Weight abhor to feel.
Across their Shoulders, loose, with careless Air,
Hang Quivers, stored with Arrows sharp and strong:
Hark! how they sound, as they step swift along.
From rock-built Selah, a secure Defense,
For weak-soul'd Avarice, and Wealth immense,
These half-dress'd, rough, unsightly Squadrons came:
Neighbors to Hor, a Desert known to Fame
For many a Chance! with one, by you, supplied:
'Twas there, your venerable Aaron died.
Southward, from Moab's Plain, the Region runs:
And borders, eastward, upon Edom's Sons.
Barren of Corn: a harsh, ill-water'd Soil,
Where Lab'rers, un-refresh'd, would die with Toil;
Did not rich Vineyards round the Mountains twine,
And float the thirsty Glebe, with Floods of Wine.
XXVI.
See, next, in haughty State, with conscious Pride,
Sovereign Zalmunna's towered us, towering, ride.
Bounding, he leads our midmost Squadrons on:
Too wide extended, to be half discerned.
This Monarch, who supreme Pretense, has won,
In the dark Myst'ries of Ambition, learned,
Rules but, by native Right, a distant Land:
Midian's utmost Southern Bound;
Along the rich Red Sea's indented Strand --
Wide, that Tract, his Realms surround,
Where your Great Moses, JETHRO's Daughters, found.
A Soil, that does with Every Growth abound,
Though streaked with tiresome Veins, of fruitless Sand,
Ten thousand Horse, This mighty Sovereign brings:
Nervously rapid, as the Eagle's Wings!
See! how, in Heat of Blood, they paw the Ground:
And champ the Bit, and Sidelong prance:
And tear up half the Plain, as they advance!
His Foot, that, bright in Armor, wing those Horse,
Are Thrice ten thousand, famed for wily Force:
Unwearied Veterans, of fearless Heart,
All, deeply practiced, in War's bloodiest Art:
Used to All Arms; and tried, in every Part.
These Chariots, which, upon their Left, roll by,
Obscured by Hills of Dust, which, with 'em, fly;
Are Six dread Hundreds, armed and guided well:
The same stretched Number, wid'ning from their Right,
Would terrify your wondering Sight;
But the long Distance tires the aching Eye.
Zalmunna's Power does All the King's excel:
And what his Strength, and what his Aim, it is Time alone can tell.
XXVII.
But, This Way now, direct thy Eye;
Where Agag, on his silver Chariot rides:
Shining far, and seated high.
Four milk-white Coursers, with hot-panting Sides,
Vexed to be curbed, and struggling with the Rein,
Draw him disdainful, over the smoking Plain.
This Prince is Lord of Amalek's wide State:
His Seat is Pharan, and his Empire great.
Arabia's, midmost, rocky Tract, He sways,
Peopled by one of Ishmael's wandering Stems;
Called Hagareens, from Hagar, Abra'm's Maid;
The swarthy Mother of this rugged Race.
Northward, his Lands, the wind-mov'd Desert hems:
Where wandering Hords, in shifting Cities, dwell,
Safe from the Sun, beneath their canvas Shade;
Thence, swift as Roes, the Savage Wilds invade,
To hunt the lordly Lion, from his Cell.
Three thousand Horse, This crafty Monarch guides:
Each a skilled Archer, who, in rapid Flight,
Turns in his Seat, and dext'rous, as he rides,
Aims his Shaft backward, with a dreadful Slight,
And, flying, kills more surely, than in Fight.
These, in two dusky Cornets, sweep along;
Wings, to That Center, which, between, you see:
Firm-wedg'd with hardy Foot, ranged deep, and strong.
Four times Five thousand, they are said to be:
Abstemious Highlanders, All rough of Soul;
Patient of Toil, but restive in Control.
XXVIII.
Rash Zebah, last, brings up the gloomy Rear,
Impetuous as a Tempest armed with Hail!
All Passions shake him, in their Turns, but Fear:
Over his warm Hope, no Danger can prevail.
Mark, with what martial Majesty he treads!
Armed with a Spear, and looking fiercely round,
On-foot, his Twenty thousand Foot, he heads:
And measures slowly the unheeded Ground.
Four hundred noisy CHARIOTS wing this Band:
And, yonder, boasting the same Chief's Command,
Six thousand Horsemen, loosely spread, behind,
Close the gay March: and, with elated Mind,
Lift their high Standards, to the following Wind.
Happy Arabia's aromatic Plains
Stretch their sweet Bosoms, where this Monarch reigns:
There, the rich Hills a gummy Harvest, shed;
And Myrrh and Frankincense the Groves overspread.
Even from their Beasts, a musky Vapor flows:
And the Spice-breathing Wind, with amorous Softness, blows.
From their broad Heaths, wild Thyme, and Camomil,
Their coarsest Air, with breezy Fragrance, fill.
Physic's wide Want, this druggy Tract supplies:
Let the sick Elephant lie down to roll,
From the crushed Couch, balsamic Odours rise:
And the snuff'd Scent revives his savage Soul.
XXIX.
As when some sudden News alarms a State,
Of threatening Consequence, and full of Fear;
All meaner Cares and Themes, suspended, wait:
While This alone does worth Regard, appear.
But, when by slow Degrees, the Rumor dies,
And thought-recov'ring Crowds expect no more;
Each to his proper Task his Care applies:
And All is hushed and languid, as before.
So, while the Prince and Gideon heard the Noise,
And saw the swarmy Legions passing by,
No other Sound their hurried Ear employs;
No other Object fills their busy Eye.
But now, the Army past, the Sound scarce heard,
And, each changed Prospect rolled in Dust away,
Pleased, they observe the Plains about 'em cleared;
The cheerful Birds, above their Chariot, play:
And Nature smiling round 'em, stilly gay.
Then, Oreb, rising from his Chariot-Seat,
Beck'ning, gave Sign, to a well-mounted Band;
Which, shadowed by a Grove's serene Retreat,
At Distance, waited their loved Chief's Command.
Sudden, they move; and closing in, behind,
The Prince, reseated, shakes the loosened Rein:
Fleet, his Horses, as the Wind,
With sounding Hoofs, fly rapid over the Plain.
XXX.
While to the guarded Mountain's barred Ascent,
Their eye-directed Way they bent,
To Gideon, thus the generous Oreb spoke:
Since my illustrious Friend declines to take
Such due Returns as grateful Sense would make,
And merits Honor, but, for Virtue's Sake,
What shall I do, to show him my Regard
Of Greatness, I confess, above Reward!
It must be left to Time, and Chance, to find
Some vast Occasion, for my Thanks designed:
Till when, the Debt must rest unpaid, to load my struggling Mind.
Mean while; and, there, he from his Finger drew
A Ring, that glittered, with a dazzling Ray,
From the most radiant Gem, that ere, in orient Quarries grew:
Wear This -- in Memory, but, of what I owe;
And, that I mean to pay.
XXXI.
Gideon, long-press'd, at last, averse, gave Way,
And smiled, with thankful Grace: when, hid below,
On the Hill's Side, appeared a Hebrew Band:
Which, by the late Attempt, instructed well,
Under a wary Chief's Command,
Took Place, the Night before, to watch what passed,
And future Mischief, in th'Advance, repel.
These Gideon saw: and from the Chariot stepped;
Swift after him, Prince Oreb leapt:
And, with a zealous Warmth of Heart, embraced.
Then, courteous, took his Leave: and, all in Haste,
Remounting, turned his Horses towered the Host:
And reached it soon, and foremost shone; conspicuous in his Post.
GIDEON; OR, The PATRIOT. BOOK III.
I.
WHILE to the Host his Way Prince Oreb bent,
And urged his flying Coursers over the Plain;
Gideon climbed slow the Mountain's steep Ascent,
Oppressed with Thought, and anxious for the Event.
Deep he revolved, with soul-afflicting Pain,
What strange Success had crowned his first Intent,
Crowned with Success, in vain,
Should the chief Labor of his Hope imperfect, still, remain.
The Foe removed might soon receive Alarm,
And, doubly fierce, return, should Israel arm.
Well had he marked, and weighed, their dreadful Skill;
Their countless Numbers, their rapacious Will:
And All their fine and varied Arts, to kill.
How should dejected Israel, then, make Head?
Who should effectual Summons, spread?
Or, did they meet, how hopeless still, they would, by HIM, be led!
Much he reflected, on the generous Aid
Of Oreb's Friendship: mixing Hope, with Pain.
For, while ZALMUNNA's barbarous Pride he weighed,
ZEB's Avarice; AGAG's Caution; ZEBAH's Rage:
Wisdom's cool Doubt awakened sad Presage,
That One Man's Truth might leave Dependence vain:
Where fraudful Numbers joined, averse, its Influence to restrain.
Distracted thus, amid the hurried Sway
Of cross-cours'd Passions, clashingly, combined;
Deeply perplexed, he climbed his pensive Way:
And, now, despairing, human Schemes, resigned.
Now, thought of Heaven, and left all Doubt behind.
II.
But, while, in Midian's Camp, his active Thought
Had, wisely laboring, traced his Country's Good,
His Country's Sons, by no such Virtue taught,
With equal Ardour their own Bliss withstood.
For, 'mid th'o'ermantling Stillness of the Night,
While Gideon, late, had hewed the Grove's vast Oak,
The Priest of Baal, who, on the Mountain's Side,
Cavern'd, in solitary Silence dwelt,
Heard the loud Echoes bound, from each bold Stroke,
Which the Trunk, repugnant, felt:
Saw the fierce Flame revolve its blazy Light,
Whirled through the Gloom, and trembling to his Sight.
Scarce his astonished Soul believed
Th'alarming Witness, which his Senses bore!
Fearing, yet longing, to be undeceived,
Th'apparent Truth, still nearer, to explore,
Cautious he climbed the Hill, with quivering Knees.
There, safe, behind the Shade of sheltry Trees,
Chilled with Amazement, he had stood, and watched,
While Gideon and his faithful Ten, their daring Task, dispatched.
III.
But, when the pious Hebrew left the Place,
And silent Horror over the Ruin reigned;
Soft, the Priest, with timorous Pace,
Crept from his Covert; now no more restrained;
And, ghastly gazing over the naked Ground,
On which the dying Embers faintly shined;
Viewed the accomplished Desolation, round.
There, when no Remnant of his God he found,
Soul-freezing Horror ic'd his coward Mind!
Bathed in the dew-drench'd Darkness of the Night,
Trembling he stood; un-man'd with inward Dread;
If an Owl scream'd, he started into Fright;
And shrunk from every sighing Wind, that skimm'd his palsy'd Head.
Slow, the pressed Ground beneath him seemed to rise,
Gradual a Groan broke mournful from below:
Out-roll'd a dusky Form, that brushed his Eyes;
And, gliding upward, ceased not still to grow:
Huge, as the Oak it rose from, It appeared:
And its vast Reach, unmeasurably, reared!
Death-like, It raised an Arm, but half revealed:
For, ambient Clouds the shadowy Dart concealed.
Two ghastly Meteors, lost within its Head,
With emb'ry Glare pal'd over its spect'ry Eyes:
Sicklying the Sable, with a bloodshot Red;
Whose glimm'ry Semblance, in appearing, dies.
Nothing distinct was seen: yet, each dark Part
Moved, in convul sive Writhe, and seemed to smart.
IV.
This was the Guardian Demon of the Grove;
Who, against superior Power, too weakly strove:
Forced, from his Charge, in tortured Shame withdrew;
But, now, reproachful, vaunted, over the View.
-- Wretch! too unmindful of my Shrine, and me!
Why have thou suffered this atrocious Deed?
Trusting Thy Vigilance, and Piety,
Thee, my Grove's sacred Guardian, I decreed:
Myself, from Care of my own Altar, freed.
But, by thy Absence, or Neglect, betrayed,
Rising, I find my holy Hill profaned:
Day's influent Range supplants my favorite Shade;
Burnt is my Image: and my Honor stained.
But one Way, now, can thou Perdition, shun,
And 'scape the eternal Anguish, of my Hate:
Detested Gideon, this bold Act has done.
Go: while he dares new Mischiefs meditate:
Go: rouse the faithful Ministers of Fate;
Drag him, expelled, from the cursed City's Gate.
Headlong, go, hurl him, over the Mountain's Brow.
So, expiate Ophra's Guilt: and save the State,
From high-doom'd Vengeance, that o'er-hangs it, now.
This not performed, presume no more to raise
Altars, or Groves, to my insulted Praise.
Unexpiated Sins move Heaven, in vain:
Go: act my Sentence -- or my Rage sustain.
V.
So threatening, mounted on a Flash, he rose:
And, in a Peal of Thunder, tow'r'd away.
Kindling behind, an Arch of Sulphur flows,
And streaks his Passage, with a Trail of Day.
Far from the Mount, with gradual Slope, he fell:
And, lightning downward, sought his native Hell.
Thus, when, in War, the death-embowell'd Ball
Slants upward, over some hostile Mark, to fall;
In fiery Curve th'exploded Mischief flies;
And sweeps, thick-sparkling, through the measured Skies:
Till, on the destined Point, its Weight declines;
And, bursting broad with flashful Force, for circly Ruin, shines.
Who can describe the Pangs, which now oppressed
The panting Heathen's superstitious Breast!
Awed, and un-soul'd, beneath the unruly Fright,
Still, his Ears echoed, to the Groans of Night:
Still the thin Phantom skimm'd before his Sight.
Wildly devout, and stung by frantic Zeal,
Swift, to the Remnant of the hallowed Oak,
Fearful, with wide-extended Arms, he ran:
In pious Pity the mourned Trunk, to clasp;
Weep its dry Wounds, and warm 'em with his Grasp.
So, tired with Ecstasy, and toiled with Dread,
While his age-wasted Spirits flowed away;
Down sunk the sleep-attracted Sage's Head:
And, senseless as his Oak, supine he lay.
VI.
There while he slept, unconscious what was done,
High, over his Weakness, rose the smiling Sun.
When Joash, mindful of the Grove overthrown,
Entering the Town, with wise and early Care,
Anxious to make its Motive timely known,
Found the sought Senate close assembled there.
Of these, Eliakim, with fruitless Pain,
Had long regretted Israel, left by GOD:
Long had he viewed her Rashness, with Disdain,
And traced Destruction, in the Paths she trod.
Yet, taught by Pity, to attemper Zeal,
Patient, he waited some adaptive Chance,
That might contribute Balm, her Wounds to heal,
And her true Interest, to his Hopes, advance.
He, lately, busying many a trusty Scribe,
In secret Correspondence practiced well,
Had one charged Levite, drawn, from Every Tribe;
Safely, such Schemes, to ponder, and prescribe,
As dangerous Distance made it rash, to tell.
Chiefly, he wished more Weight, in Levi's Scale:
Conscious that Freedom must, with Faith, prevail:
But little guessed he, 'midst his cool Design,
How GOD, on Gideon, had vouchsafed to shine:
Less dreamt He of the Idol Grove destroyed;
Or what new Wonders his vast Views, employed.
Even now, deputed, from the sacred Race,
Twelve aweful Delegates, commissioned, came:
Men, of high Wisdom, and distinguished Grace!
Propell'd, by pulsive Heaven, beyond their Aim.
Now, first, in Ophra's Senate, taking Place,
They learnt, from Joash, what, That Night, was done:
Learnt, how an ANGEL had inspired his Son,
Baal's consecrated Altar to destroy:
Learnt, with Astonishment, too strong for Joy!
That, with commissioned Flame, His shining Hand
Would rise, his Country's blazing Soul; and free th'illumin'd Land!
VII.
While they, yet listening, weighed th'alarming Tale,
The awakened Priest with loud Complaint rushed in:
Roared the hot Wrath of violated Baal;
And urged due Vengeance, on the all-damning Sin.
The wise Assembly heard, in dumb Disdain;
Yet scarce contained the Warmth, with which they glowed:
But now, cool Caution, they to Prudence, owed.
The People's Zeal, they knew, was fierce, and blind:
Hence, outward Marks, of purer Fire, restrain,
Till Faith's raised Torch might apt Effulgence, find.
Grave Joash, slowly rising from his Seat,
Soft, to the impatient Priest, this Answer made.
No more, thus loud, thy boisterous Prayer, repeat:
Heard were thy Words: and shall be duly weighed.
No Son of Mine, I think, has, yet, been known
Actor of any Deed, he dared not own.
Gideon returning, charge him, to his Face:
We, but for Justice, hold this aweful Place.
VIII.
It Is as I feared, th'outrageous Voice replied:
Guilt has its Judges, on its Side:
And, by th'Abettors of his Crime, The Offender must be tried.
O Baal! dread Power! distinguish, in thy Rage:
Thou should not, can not, thus provoked, thy purchased Wrath, assuage:
Let it but on thy Foes, THESE FOES, be bent.
Nor, with the Guilty, strike the Innocent.
Speaking, he beats his quivering Breast; his priestly Vestments rends:
And, madly frantic, to the Streets, with out-stretch'd Arms, descends:
There, on his Head, the gathered Dust he threw,
And, round him wide, th'inquiring Rabble, drew.
To Every List'ner, he repeats his Tale;
Tells the God's Wrath; and aggravates the Deed:
Dwells, on the dreadful Apparition seen;
Varies his Accents, and his Looks: and trembles, often, between.
The frighted Multitude their Fate bewail:
Howl to the Priest, with Baal to intercede,
And, from his Vengeance, Them and Theirs, to screen.
Loud, and more loud, the rising Tumult grew;
At length, All Ranks, into Itself it drew:
And, roaring wild, outswell'd Control; and Order overthrew.
So, into Towns besieged, some stormy Night,
A mischief-guided Fire-ball, secret, falls:
It kindles, first, some Roof remote from Sight;
Thence, breaks augmented, over the bord'ring Walls.
Contiguous Houses catch the infectious Flame,
Which, towering upward, meets the wafting Wind:
Then, driven from Street to Street, with hungry Aim,
Over the whole Range, in blazing Sheets, inclined,
Broad Wasters unresisted Passage find.
Loud, into gathered Rage, the mingled Fires,
Combining, curl to Heaven, with twisted Spires.
United Help, to quench, now vainly aims:
And crackling Ruin the wide Woe proclaims.
IX.
Alarmed, by frequent and increasing Shouts,
And terrified by Dread of vulgar Rage,
The shocked Assembly sat, involved in Doubts;
Measuring slow Means, the Tumult to assuage.
Till wise Eliakim, reflecting well,
That Popular Distaste, to soothing Arts,
Remits th'Intemp'rance of transported Hearts,
Chose rather to prevent, than to repel.
Down to the noise-distracted Streets he ran,
Where, by the generous Love of Peace, inspired,
Feebly, with faint Advance, the Good old Man,
Whelmed in the Torrent of the Press, began
To cool those Passions, which the Priest had fired.
Often, in vain, he strove to speak:
Th'unlist'ning Rabble drowned his Voice, in Roar:
Tottering and pushed, by Age, and Anguish, weak,
With stagg'ring Steps, and Arms uprais'd, he labored to implore.
Sometimes, the dumbly sullen Multitude,
Awed by his Presence, their wild Shouts forbore:
Then, suddenly again, grew loud, and rude;
And swelled to stormier Madness, than before.
So, on the angry ORIENT's raised Degrees,
Some Bark, untimely, trusts repugnant Seas:
To the black Whirlwind, shifts her heedful Helm,
Careful to rise with every climbing Sweep,
Which, met transversely, would her Side overwhelm;
And plunge her found'ring, in the foamy Deep.
Now shocks her surge-struck Stern: now shakes, her Head:
There while she stays, checked, motionless, and dead,
Loud over her Quarter, roars, with deaf'ning Sound,
Some sidelong Blast; that whirls her, dreadful, round.
Now, for awhile, the slack'ning Wind gives way:
And murmuring Seas her answered Helm obey.
Then, all at once new-wak'd again, the mad'ning Tempests roar:
Deluge aloft her covered Decks; and wash her Topmasts over.
So fared Eliakim; on every Side
Oppressed, and floated with the should'ring Tide.
Now, short-lived Silence listened to his Prayer:
Now, thick'ning Clamor stormed his Ear; and stunned him to Despair.
X.
Joash, who weighed his Interest in The Event,
Marks, and adopts, Eliakim's Distress.
Following, he seconds the good Seer's Intent:
Fast after Him, the reverend Elders press;
And the twelve Levites, All, descend, to try their joint Address.
Awed, by such strong-combin'd Authority,
The Crowd, whom one Man's Influence failed to sway,
Give back, when they the united Congress see;
And, falling off, by slow Degrees, melt, murmuring, away.
But, restless, in his Idol's Cause, to fail,
All Day, from House to House, the Priest of Baal,
With laboring Malice, urged the menaced Fate,
That lour'd incumbent, over the guilty State.
Paintive, he shaped a thousand fansy'd Woes,
Woes, by their angry Deity resolved,
Should they, relaxed, His known Command, oppose;
And, in the Offense unpunished, fall involved.
XI.
Night came: and, with a strong and sudden Blaze,
The smothered Embers, into Contact fanned,
Furious broke out, and shot rekindling Rays,
That flashed Destruction round, on every Hand.
Gathering, with Swords, and Clubs, and Spears, and Staves,
Hoarse as a Sea, the rising Rabble meets:
With all its Tongues at once, the Monster raves;
And, with the Roar of Rapine, shakes the Streets.
Like some new Breach, too slightly stopped in Haste,
And pil'd and turf'd, to bar the watery Waste:
At first, effective, the short Hope is tried:
The Bank, triumphant, checks th'assaulting Tide.
But, while, with dimply Smile, the Current glides,
And, edging on, with treacherous Smoothness slides;
The sapping Moisture mines the Work, below,
And, trickling gradual, eats, and pierces, slow:
Then, gathering Strength, It flotes the soaky Mound;
Loosens the Piles, and heaves 'em from the Ground:
And All the Bank gives Way at once -- and all the Fields are drowned.
XII.
Eliakim, who judged, the People's Rage
Would, to the House of Joash, drive their Aim,
Found his precautious Hint no vain Presage:
Thither, Baal's Priest directs the kindled Flame.
But near each Portal, and the Hall of State,
A faithful Guard, in martial Order placed,
Often as the Rabble pressed, withstood their Weight:
Broke and repulsed 'em; and, vindictive, chased.
Often thus dispersed, often making Head again,
In Ebbs and Flows of Noise the Night was spent.
Varying from Hopes to Fears, with pensive Pain,
The Senate, listening, watched the unsure Event.
As Men well-hous'd, in wintry Storms of Rain,
Hear, from without, the show'ry Tempest rise:
Now, in calm Interval, the Wind blows low,
And soft and short Suspensions hush the Skies.
Then, the big Blasts, and sluicy Drifts, hoarse and impetuous, grow:
And the strained Beams, in swelling Gales, groan conscious, from below.
The Morning came; and crossed the Senate's Hope;
Which promised Peace, with the returning Light.
But Day, restored, restored the rebel Scope,
Of headstrong Range, that had been curbed by Night.
For, now, grown bolder, by their Number seen,
Fierce on the guarded Hall, th'Assaulters press:
The deep-rang'd Soldiers, firmly stretched between,
In warlike Posture, each tried Pass, possess.
Here had Contention drawn a crimson Flood;
And civil Fury stained her Face with Blood:
But mild Eliakim, who, coolly, dared;
Whose Heart, at once, was cautious, and prepared,
From a high Gall'ry, faced the raging Crowd;
Taught 'em, by speechless Signs, how Madness erred:
Then, gathering, distant, round, they grew less loud,
While the loved Sage thus charmed the gaping Herd.
XIII.
Alas! -- What Frenzy, my misguided Sons!
Transports your honest, but impatient, Minds?
Mistaking Zeal, when It thus blindly runs,
Never the Path, to Reason, finds.
Furious Revenge toils hard, for fruitless Ends:
He must not, cannot, fall, whom GOD defends.
Oh! be advised: fear Heaven; not Baal; my Friends!
Cursed as we are, but, for this Idol Baal,
Let not the Idol's Priest prevail.
Now, ere Redemption's opening Path is trod,
'Twere an ill Time, to offend a pard'ning GOD.
Gideon -- if Him, These rash Resolves pursue,
Not uncommission'd, Sin's black Grove, destroyed:
Great are the Wonders, He was born to do!
Your Faith's Redeemer, and your Freedom's, too.
Blast not the promised Blessing, un-enjoy'd:
Nor doubt his Triumph, since by Heaven employed.
Pensive, of late, beneath his Father's Oak,
A shining ANGEL, from the opening Sky,
Descending near him, God's Great Purpose, spoke.
GOD SPOKE: -- Hear Heaven's Decree, proclaimed from High.
Israel REQUIRES him: and He shall not die.
XIV.
He ceased to speak: and the awe-silenc'd Throng
Gaze on Each other, with repentant Air:
Some bow their Heads, in conscious Shame: Some gape, with stupid Stare:
Some weep, some pray; but All for Peace declare.
Baal's Priest observed it; disconcerted, long:
At last, determined, Craft's whole Force, to try,
Loud, he broke out; with a reproachful Eye.
-- Is Baal grown pow'rless, since his Grove was felled?
Or, by their formless, fansy'd, GOD, expelled?
That ye, thus lightly, lose your generous Aim,
And start, and tremble, at an empty Name!
Were only Israel's Natives blessed with Eyes?
Are All the mightier Nations, round us, blind?
Where dwells this sad, sole, Sovereign, of the Skies,
Whose House, no People, but the Hebrews, find?
Greater, than Baal, since he pretends to be,
Why fled we, from their Arms, who worship Baal?
Sure! Such a proud, unpartner'd Power, as He,
Might lend his Vot'ries, Victory!
If to inferior Gods, you must not bow,
Let this Supreme one save you, now.
If boastful Gideon has an Angel seen,
Never let His Party Baal's Resentment, fear.
Since GOD's Arm stays him, Who can step between?
Why flies he Tumults, if his Call was clear?
Follow me bravely. We'll the Truth explore.
If by our Hands he falls, we cut short Sin,
And Baal shall frown no more.
But, if His God's Protection walls him in,
And from doomed Vengeance his cursed Head secures,
Perish, even Baal! and Gideon's GOD, be yours!
XV.
He paused: and the will-wav'ring Multitude,
Awed and hushed but just before,
Found their first Purpose suddenly renewed:
And burst, assentive, into savage Roar.
Thus, over the blasted Heath, where Storms have blown,
The light, thin, thistly, breath-obeying Down
Hangs on the Air, a Plaything for the Wind:
Moves, to each Breeze, and can no Balance find.
Now, soft-sustain'd, sinks, indolently slow:
Now, rises rapid on the Gale: and leaves the Birds, below.
Aptly, the Priest, in Choice of Season, learned,
The smiling Moment's opening Dawn discerned.
From the next Hand, he snatched a glittering Spear:
Haste to the Contest Each brave Soul, said he.
Gideon and Baal dispute, for Israel's Fear.
Whose Power is greatest, come resolved to see:
Let his God fight for Him: and mine for me.
XVI.
So threatening, to a Postern-Gate, with Speed
He led the Way: and, after, rushed the Throng.
That Gate, he knew, was watched with slackened Heed:
For, when, of late, the Crowd swept, thence, along,
With vowed Resolve the Senate's Wall to force;
Its Guard, off-call'd, to stem Distraction's Course,
Swift-quitting That Out-post, had marched away:
Prompt for Defense, where likeliest Danger lay.
By this new Chance surprised, the Gate gave way:
Through the wide Arch, with thronged and boisterous Sway,
Pours the mad Multitude, in shouting Swarms:
With horrid Faces, wildly mixed; and rage-collected Arms.
Fierce, over the Mountain, raves the impatient Throng:
And, with the Rush of Ruin, roars along.
Sicilian Aetna, thus, Eruption makes,
When melted Sulphur swells her smoaky Lakes.
Through the broad Mouth, out burst the flaming Tides:
And roll their blazy Torrents down her Sides.
Rampant the fiery Streams, un-chanel'd, flow:
And, scorching dreadful, burn up Woods; and ride the Plains below.
XVII.
Joash, who heard, his House designed for Prey,
Thither, protective, winged his timely Way.
There while with Vows and Prayers, bestowed in vain,
He urged his Friends th Approaches to maintain,
Gideon appeared: returning from the Plain.
To meet him, trembling at his Sight, the tender Father flies:
Tells the near Danger -- and with watery Eyes
Thus, the safe Counsel of his Love applies.
Go, fated Youth! return: Thy Ruin shun.
Never, till now, did I thy Presence hate.
Pity thy Father's Fears, too daring Son!
Nor to his Load of Woes add Thou the Weight,
To make him Witness of Thy dreadful Fate.
While he yet spoke, the Noise grew near and loud:
And rising Dust proclaimed th'arriving Crowd.
Gideon observed it: and, with pious Care,
Thus, generous, interrupts his Father's Prayer.
Reverend and wise! whose Wishes give me Laws;
Fear were dishonest, in a Freeman's Cause.
GOD, though a weak and worthless Hand he chose,
Forbids his Soldier to avoid his Foes.
Let 'em come on: They who in Numbers trust
Raise tow'ry Models -- but they build with Dust.
He ceased. -- but Joash, hopeless of Relief,
Hung on his Neck, with speechless Tears: and looked persuasive Grief.
XVIII.
Gideon, who held the Multitude in View,
Closed his sad Father's pale and trembling Hand;
In his brave Brother's: who, so charged, withdrew,
Housed in safe Post, to make defensive Stand.
Then, faced the Crowd: chose a conspicuous Place:
And stood, the great Protector, of his Race.
As, when Arabian Hunters, in full Cry,
Run down the timorous Stag, with preyful Eye,
If, turning short, amid some winding Way,
They start a Lion, grimly couched, for Prey,
Sudden, the Dogs shoot wide: and, cow'ring low,
Creep trembling backward; and their Chase forego:
So, the transported and tumultuous Throng,
Hot in their Rage, and rushing wild along,
When, unexpectedly, they Gideon saw,
Fell off, confounded; and oppressed with Awe.
GOD had impressed him, with a Stamp divine;
And over his Features beamed an aweful Shine.
Back'ning, they gazed, at Distance, on his Face:
Admired his Posture; and confessed his Grace.
His Right Hand grasped his planted Spear, with nerv'd and manly Pride:
His Left, bent careless, rested on his Side:
Half-frown'd his Brow, resentive Wrath to feign;
But his keen Eye smiled cold, with sharp Disdain.
Sudden, the Priest of Baal, who stood most near,
Felt his Joints loosen with resistless Fear:
And dropped, insensibly, his useless Spear.
The pitying Hero marked the Croud's Surprise;
And slow disarmed the Rigor of his Eyes:
Yet, with reproachful Air, the Silence broke --
And, with high Voice, and aweful Mien, to the mixed People spoke.
XIX.
Blood-thirsty Wasters of your Father's Fame!
Haughty 'midst Woes! and wanton, even in Shame!
Why stop you short? Why cools your threatening Flame?
Your Souls are worthy of your Aim.
Baseness, by Nature, must all Danger, hate:
Well add you therefore your whole coward Weight;
To crush a Worth, you dare not imitate.
Yet, whence could all this Waste of Anger flow?
Did it, to Baal profaned, such Transport owe?
Weak is his Godhead, if sustained by You!
Why does not Baal the Foes of Baal subdue?
Omniscience, sure! like His, The Offender, knew:
Why did He not prevent him, too?
Rash Fools! -- by blind and feeble Zeal betrayed!
Are Men their God's Protectors, made?
Shall Baal who could not save Himself, find Power to give you Aid?
Oh! what a DIFFERENT GOD, your Fathers knew!
No Help, from Earth, our Great JEHOVAH drew.
From His own Hand, His blastful Lightnings flew.
The dreadful Truth, when impiously denied,
Proud Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, tried:
Leagued, against MOSES -- and misled, like you!
While they, in Him, his GOD, and Theirs, defied;
Deep, in the swallowing Earth's wide Yawn, overwhelmed with Fire, they died.
No passive Baal, unprompt in his own Cause,
Stood the dread Founder of your Laws;
When, warranting Success, to Joshua's Arms,
Even at the Horn's unfear'd Alarms,
Strong Jericho, in trembling Horror, falls:
And Israel entered her, at Ease, led over her prostrate Walls.
Was it Baal's Hand, that, baneful to your Foes,
To time-stretch'd Slaughter, doomed collected Force?
Held back, twelve Hours, the impatient Steeds of Night:
And, on the Sun's declining Track, poured Floods of lengthening Light?
Ungrateful! stubborn! ill-discerning Men!
Why are you, now, less blessed, than were your Fathers, then?
Reigns Amalek, more powerful, in your Land,
Than when you chased him, over his native Sand?
But four, of Midian's Kings, remain our Foes:
Five, against meek and age-worn Moses, rose.
Twelve thousand Hebrews Those five Kings, o'erthrew:
These four, (base Difference!) twelve whole Tribes, pursue!
Dream you, that Moab's present Chiefs excel
That Eglon, who, by Ehud's Poniard, fell?
Or, will your unmanned Race, in Bondage wait,
Till some brave WOMAN rise, to save the State?
Some second Deb'rah! skilful to inspire:
And warm our heartless Sex, with female Fire?
Go -- since you burn with such resistless Rage,
Go, in this Brav'ry, and your Foes, engage.
Late, when at hand their shadowy Legions lay,
When, on yon Plain, with your best Plunder, gay,
Full in your Sight they shared your Flocks, in Prey;
And led your Wives, and Infants, Slaves, away:
Then was a Time, this Fury to display.
But you, for warier Charge, reserved your Fire!
To no such dangerous Vict'ries, you aspire!
Basely secure! from the proud Foe, you fly:
And Those, who would efface your Shame, ingloriously defy!
XX.
He paused. -- For, conscious Guilt, with Terror mixed,
Oppressed the awed and speechless Multitude:
In murmuring Wonder, they had, first, been fixed;
But silent Expectation, now, ensued.
When, panting breathless, 'twixt their Haste and Fear,
The reverend Elders, who pursued the Crowd,
Brought up the sacred Twelve. -- These, now drawn near,
Th'impressive Voice of Gideon, sweetly loud,
Wafted his charmful Music to their Ear.
Then, with impatient Rapture fired, through the moved Throng they pressed,
On the young Hero, laid their Hands: and his Great Purpose blessed:
Loud Prayers and Praise, to favoring Heaven, addressed --
To Heaven, that re-assum'd lost Israel's Care;
And shot bright Prospect, through her dark Despair.
XXI.
Baal's Priest, by slow Degrees, with straining Eyes,
Waked into Reason; and repelled Surprise:
Much, his recov'ring Thought revolved the Fright,
That, over his Soul, rose cold, at Gideon's Sight!
Fain would he, still, conclude his Vision true:
Yet, wondered, then, whence his Confusion grew!
And why, if Baal inspired his Breast, he had not armed it, too!
Dim, burnt His Zeal, while checked by conscious Awe,
The reverend Levite's purer Flame, he saw.
His Taper, formed for gross and gloomy Night,
Absorbed, in Day's more powerful Shine, lost half its trembling Light.
At length, exerting Force to speak his Doubt,
Thus, his faint Diffidence was murmured out.
Much I applaud, brave Youth! your generous Aim!
Yet, ah! beware, lest ardent Thirst of Fame
Disguise Ambition, with Religion's Name.
Great was This GOD, if what we hear, from you,
And what was heard by our dead Fathers too,
Be not far more traditional, than true.
These Wonders, Ages past pretend so known,
Why are they not to us, poor Suff'rers, shown?
Ask Baal's Believers, They, of Baal, unfold
Potent past Trophies, pompously enrolled:
But one new Proof would more convince, than All the uncertain old.
He said: and pleased Concurrence caught his Voice.
The Crowd, The Impression of his Doubt, receive:
Let Gideon's GOD, they cried, now, own his Choice.
Give us one Miracle: and we believe.
XXII.
Th'indignant Hero marked th'unfaithful Cry:
But, all unable to comply,
Pausingly thoughtful, rolled his angry Eye.
Strait -- from a bushy Covert, near behind,
Rushed a grim Lion, furious after Prey:
To rend some Sheep, the hungry Beast designed,
From a fair Flock, which, there, at Pasture lay.
High, over his Back, his Tail, turned upward, waved;
Rough and thorn-tangled hung his shaggy Main:
His lank Sides, pining, missed the Food he craved.
Red were his Eyes; and sparkled on the Plain.
He saw the Press: and, with discov'ring Stare,
Stood fixed, awhile, in savage Glare:
Then, with a Roar, that shook the Mountain round,
Sprung on: and, like a Tempest, swept the Ground.
This was a Lion, that, for many a Year,
Had in the craggy Hill's dark Borders lain:
And filling All the neighboring Towns with Fear,
Was hunted, often, in vain;
By the swift Horsemen, late encamped, on Jezreel's grassy Plain.
By frequent Danger, taught to shun the Vale,
Where, in Times past, his Hunger had been fed,
Hard-pinching heav'n-sent Want did now prevail:
And led him searchful, to the Mountain's Head.
XXIII.
The frighted Flock, alarmed, together rise:
And bleating helpless skip, in Crowds, away.
Fierce in Pursuit the greedy Savage flies:
And while, amid the Multitude, they for Protection stray,
The Crowd, as much alarmed as They!
Roll over each other, a promiscuous Prey.
Close before Gideon's Feet, with joyful Roar,
The leaping Lion stretched his Paws, and one poor Bleater, tore.
Back stepped the Hero; and grasped hard his Lance:
And watched, with lifted Arm, his next Advance.
Thou shall not safe return, said he, that dare presume, thus near,
In Spoil of Innocence, to shake off Fear.
Sudden, he saw the Beast in Act to rise:
And, swift as Thunder, downward aimed a Wound.
Deep, through the Monster's gaping Throat, the buried Weapon flies;
Vindictive Fires flashed Lightning from his Eyes:
Half an imperfect Roar its Passage found;
And the nailed Monster, quivering, beat the Ground.
XXIV.
The ravished People their Applauses shout;
And Every busy Tongue its Wonder told:
To the dead Lion gathering wide about,
Th'extended Monster they with Joy behold:
Astonished at an Act so timely bold!
Gideon, just then, with glowing Foresight fired,
Stooped, by directive Heaven inspired;
And, round him, from the death-disorder'd Ground,
Gathered a snow-white woolly FLEECE, the Lion's Paws had spread:
Then freed his Spear from the retentive Wound,
And, wiping off the ensanguin'd Red,
Wreathed in a soft and milky Roll, the Lance's shining Head.
Approach, ye stubborn Infidels! said he,
Ye, who are Lions, where but Sheep, you see!
And timorous Sheep, where ye should Lions, be!
Once more That GOD, who set your Fathers free,
Unworthy as you are! will let yoa know,
That Israel, penitent, may prosperous grow.
XXV.
This said, in his Left Hand he took the Lance,
And held it, with its woolly Crown, erect:
Then, raised his aweful Right, with slow Advance;
And bowed his Rnee to Heaven, with deep Respect.
Dumb, the still Multitude attentive gazed:
Hushed! expectant! and amazed!
While Gideon thus invoked That GOD, who his new Hope had raised.
Thou! sacred, high, un-utterable, Name!
To whom lost Israel owed her ancient Fame,
From whose just Anger flows her present Shame;
Pity thy devious People's hardened Hearts;
Grossly deceived, by Hell's too busy Arts.
Let some strong Influence force 'em to believe:
What their Soul sees not, let their Sense conceive.
If, by thy Servant's weak and worthless Hand,
Thou will save Israel, and her Power increase;
Let show'ry Rains descend, at Thy Command,
And nothing DRY remain, but this soft FLEECE.
XXVI.
Scarce the powerful Prayer was spoke,
When, from the West, a startling Thunder broke;
Continuous, and advancing still more strong,
Gradual it rolled its lengthening Burst, along.
Fast after it, black gathering Clouds arise:
And, circling dusky, sadden all the Skies.
First, a weak Wind, with hollow Faintness, sings;
And shakes soft Moisture from its sleepy Wings.
Now, the wet Breeze, with more collected Force,
Thickens its Breath; and blows direct, and hoarse.
Then, the big Drops, in drowning Fierceness, fall:
And rushing Rains come driving, over All.
Rebounding Torrents the hard Surface dash:
And smoking Floods the darkened Mountain wash.
The People turn their Faces from the Shower:
And, on their Backs, feel the broad Cat'ract pour.
Gideon, mean while, upon the rising Ground,
In a bright Ring, the heav'n-taught Floods surround.
On Him no straggling Drop presumes to fall:
For, over his Fleece, a sun-resembling Ball
Rolls guardful round, to slope the Shower away:
And shows him, glittering, in abstracted Day!
Behold! ye unbelieving Souls! he cried:
See! what a GOD you have defied;
And learn, from This, Who fights henceforth, on happy Israel's Side.
The People shout to Heaven their raging Joys:
And Baal's Priest, trembling, sickens, at the Noise.
XXVII.
Once more, my GOD! cried Gideon, yet, once more,
Indulge the varied Sign their Doubts implore.
Call off these Rains: unflote the deluged Ground --
And, when All else is round me dry, wet let the Fleece be found.
The Almighty heard: and, swift as rapid Thought,
Reverted Showers to Heaven are caught.
The beamy Sun, again, shoots down his Rays:
And, burns restored, with a triumphant Blaze.
The flaming Air ejects irradiate Heat:
And cross-flash'd Lightnings, in descending, meet.
As when some sudden Whirlwind's circly Sweep
Drives the light Straws, and lifts each scattering Heap,
Smoothing the Surface in its winding Way:
So, the keen Radiance, curv'd and quivering round,
Mazy and wanton in its varied Play,
Curls its flashed Progress over the hissing Ground:
And close-adhering to the steamy Soil,
With its blue Tongues, licks up the Flood; and works, with fiery Toil.
The Fleece, mean while, which swelling Moisture fills,
The raptured Crowd behold with glowing Souls:
From its soft Sides, a trickling Stream distills;
And down the Hill, in a thin Current, rolls.
This when they saw, they on their Faces fell;
Struck with an Awe, which Hope could scarce repel:
They felt a pain-mix'd Joy, they could not tell.
But, in joint Voice, with general Ardor fired,
Lead us, they cried, Thou Chief, by Heaven inspired!
Govern our State: for, under Thy Command,
Ophra, first blessed, shall bless th'awak'ning Land.
Thus, was the People's Voice the Voice of GOD.
Gideon smiled graceful, with assentive Nod.
On, to the Town, said he: Assembled, there,
These reverend Sages shall my Purpose share;
Aid my Endeavors; and divide my Care.
XXVIII.
Opening, they move, mid Triumph's wildest Noise,
Ungovernably wanton, in their Joys:
Baal's Priest, still, foremost, leads the shouting Throng;
Converted, to the other, best, Extreme!
Leaping, and turning, as he passed along,
The Praise of Israel's GOD, was, now, his Theme.
Next, came the mixed and swarming Multitude;
With All their Tongues, and All their Hands, employed:
Long Trains of Dust their peopled Path pursued.
Then, was a short, respectful, Space, left void,
For the charmed Elders, two preceding two.
Amongst These, the good Eliakim, o'erjoy'd,
Often, turned, the following Hero's Face, with new Delight to view:
Armed with his fleecy Spear, distinguished far,
Gideon adorned his happy Father's Side;
Now, burst, o'erjoy'd, from his domestic Bar,
And filled with All a Parent's virtuous Pride!
Near, after Gideon, the Twelve Levites came;
Their Eyes on Heaven, in reverend Wonder, bent:
Their Souls contemplatively fired, with GOD's decreed Intent!
Last, marched the Soldiers, ranged in lengthening Band;
These, from the City, had pursued the Throng;
Hastening, their menaced Fury to withstand.
But, charmed, now hail the Event, of purposed Wrong:
Guard back their loud-acknowleg'd Lord: and, martial, moved along.
XXIX.
Ophra regained, to Council they ascend:
Senate and Legates share divided Place.
Moony, they, round their great Deliv'rer, bend:
Who fills the Center, with majestic Grace.
Mild, from his Eyes, the radiant Fire to chase,
A Smile, of soft Humanity, unbends his placid Face.
As when, by Night, through some still Forest's Walks,
A Swain, from whom his favorite Child has strayed,
'Twixt the dark Shrubs, in listening Silence, stalks;
And, joyful, starts, at every rustling Shade:
Breathless, turns short, attentive, to the Wind;
And hopes, in every whistling Breeze, an Infant's Cry, to find.
So tender, and so still, when Gideon spoke,
Th'expecting Audience swallowed Every Word:
No breathing Sigh the solemn Silence broke;
And scarce an air-suspended Atom stirred.
XXX.
Fathers of Israel! we have seen, this Day,
That, if we will be blessed, we may.
GOD, ever gracious, has new Proof displayed,
That Faith's Endeavor cannot want his Aid.
Yet must not therefore Human Care be less:
It Is Ours to labor; as it is His to bless.
Heaven but inspires us with a Will to choose;
Reason weighs Means; and Virtue bids us use.
Hail, venerable Twelve! ye Souls of Prayer!
Reverend and holy, as you are,
Be it your Province, born to claim That Care,
To clear Religion's Stream, from idol Mud;
And strike lost Brightness, through her troubled Flood.
My humbler Duty but prepares the Way:
And bows th'awak'ning People, to your Sway.
Already, to my Care, They owe,
That absent Midian seeks a distant Foe.
Should Tire be Hers, it is, for our Safety, won:
The Rich retains 'em: and the Poor, they shun.
Should they miscarry, they new Powers provoke:
And Strength divided, by less Strength is broke.
Zalmunna, Sovereign of their haughty Host,
Demands, from Every Tribe, one Chief, dispatched
Envoys, for Israel's Peace, to Sidon's Coast:
Now, be this fair Occasion aptly snatched!
Lend, holy Twelve! lend, All your reverend Weight:
From your respective Chiefs, commissioned, fly;
The United Representers of our State:
And shine and prosper, in th'Insulter's Eye.
Alliance granted, we are free: -- denied,
Be it my Task, in Arms, to check their Pride.
But, to wished Peace while All our Hopes are led,
Wisely fore-arm'd, your martial Influence, try:
And draw the arrayed Allotments to a Head.
Known, though neglectful, These can promptly move:
And our old Force of warlike Order prove.
Named, and enrolled, Each comes, when Summons goes: --
Roused, by the favoring Absence of the Foes,
These, to Conjunction, urge, on Ophra's Hill.
Send 'em, unexercis'd: the active Will
Soon disciplines Obedience, into Skill.
Some Tribes, remote, too slowly, may appear:
Nor, timely, join our hastening Standard, here.
But Zebulon, and Asher, bord'ring, lie:
Napthalia's Tract not far removed: the Manasaean, nigh.
You, sacred Seers, from Those four Districts sent!
Remind your Princes, that our first Alarms,
Should they, from Tire, call back the Midian Arms,
Bring through their Bosom, the revengeful Foe:
Thence, must Their Safety, from their Courage, flow.
That weighed Reflection wings their needful Speed:
And, since Tomorrow's Dawn may greet you, there,
And heav'n-commission'd Wishes soon succeed,
These, who shall find War's Every Nerve supplied,
From Stores, my previous Care shall, here, provide,
Might with so swift Advance, for March prepare,
That, on the fifth revolving Day,
They may their Ensigns, on these Hills, display.
Press their Departure, whose first Aid we need:
For, soon as Midian learns that Israel arms,
She may, perhaps, from Tyre's touched Wall, recede:
To blast our Purpose, with returning Swarms.
Now, ripening Harvest smiles on every Plain;
To heap our Magazines, with needful Grain.
Foes have, it is true, our ablest Horse destroyed:
But War's chief Strength is Foot, not ill employed.
Next, -- would my Father's Will indulge my Prayer,
He, to this Hope, would lend his missive Care:
He, first, to OREB, Midian's noblest King,
Should bear, precautious, this credential Ring.
Say, when His hospitable Eye, your welcome Presence meets,
Gideon, obliged, the Royal Giver, greets:
Greets him, with Claim of promised Friendship due,
Say, Ophra's General -- and add, Israel's, too:
Does, with new Levies, HIS known Wish pursue.
Tell him, to war on Tire, as Midian's Friend,
We, for joint Use, fraternal Strength, extend.
Add, that Twelve Legates, hence, commissioned, go:
To sign formed Contract, against our Common Foe.
XXXI.
He ceased: and joyful Wonder, and Applause,
Concurred, in Rapture of avowed Consent:
Faith, from His Measures, bright'ning Prospect, draws;
And, to pale Doubt, enlivening Comfort, lent.
The Senate rose; on separate Charges, bent:
The People, as they pass, transported shout.
And Ophra's echoing Domes resound: and Triumph reigns, throughout.

