OATLANDS; OR THE TRANSFER OF THE LAUREL.

A POEM.

BY JOHN O'KEEFFE.

London: PRINTED FOR J. DEBRETT, OPPOSITE BURLINGTON-HOUSE, PICCADILLY. 1795.

OATLANDS; OR THE TRANSFER OF THE LAUREL.
A POEM.
REASON, (a dame not often in the wrong)
Bethought, (for much to think is Reason given)
On what is ill, and what is left undone,
And how disposed of all the gifts of Heaven.
Perceiving Fortune off could fling her hood,
And stop to cast on knaves a partial eye,
And that when come where blushing merit stood,
Up went her bandage, and she passed him by.
Within a sacred grove (to peace consigned)
A branch by Fortune from the Laurel torn,
Was straight into a graceful wreath entwined --
She said -- "by Victory let this be worn!"
To Victory the sculptured arch was raised
High over the smoking ruins of a town!
And bells rang loud, and every window blazed,
And tuneful minstrels sang her vast renown.
And on her forehead Glory was inscribed
In glittering letters great of beaming gold,
Fair Honor's fount she seemed to have imbibed,
In sooth, her form was gracious to behold.
And blasts were puffed from trump of vaunting Fame,
That Justice to her had the wreath decreed!
Yet Reason doubts the gay Virago's claim,
If sans desert, why wear the liberal meed?
Let Emulation for that wreath contend!
Let youthful ardour pant to reach the goal!
A gilded prize may be the purposed end,
Or fierce Ambition only fire the soul.
In proud cathedrals why Te Deum raise?
Say, why to Victory the choral joy?
Such songs, indeed, were pure immortal praise,
Did God create for man but to destroy.
"Her conquests, rapine are!" sage Reason cried --
"Her flash of Glory, all illusive! vain!
"Her fair-fac'd Honor, fallacy and pride,
"And crimson slaughters do her hands distain.
"Should light-heel'd Vanity for trinkets pine,
"She makes of Victory a pliant tool,
"To work a star or riband wondrous fine,
"Reward of coward -- knave, or valiant fool.
"Before the rustic youth can form a choice,
"Some trick conveys him to a foreign land,
"By custom braz'd, in carnage can rejoice,
"The brutal hero of a cutthroat band!
"The perfect general shows his needled star,
"The mangled private may go hang or beg,
"Dispute his charter to the trade of war,
"He swears, and shows it in his wooden leg.
"Fire! pest! and famine does she give mankind,
"Is Victory then the Laurel won by thee?
"The sovereign good, O Wisdom! let me find,
"I hold this evergreen her honored fee.
"'It Is Charity that wipes the briny tear,
"Which Victory bids adown the cheek to flow,
"That lifts with smiles the mourner from the bier,
"And puts aside the bitter cup of woe.
"Perish her hopes of Industry the bane!
"That turn the ploughshare to a murderous sword,
"And make the ruffian, once a simple swain!
"Atchieve exploits by earth and heaven abhorred.
"The husband and the parent she has slain!
"Widows and orphans Victory has made!
"Untilled, nor waving ears adorn the plain,
"For Desolation marks her ruthless trade."
Few know where bashful Charity does hide,
Full seen of Heaven, she shrinks from mortal ken,
And many a devious round, and far and wide
Did Reason seek her, 'mid the haunts of men.
Quoth Wisdom, "Reason, you are as Fortune blind!
"For just decision idly thus to roam,
"When Charity, beneficent and kind,
"Dwells near at hand, and OATLANDS is her home.
"'It Is not alone with paltry gold to part,
"Or chase pale sorrow from the cottage door,
"She there, stores treasured moral in the heart,
"God's own appointed agent for the poor."
Blithe on a velvet turf of mossy green,
Where Naids from the silver Thames resort,
Surrounded by her playful charge was seen,
The lovely mistress The Duchess of York.
of their harmless sport.
Far Vice and Folly fly at her command!
And sure success attends her sweet employ,
And as the mental buds to flowers expand,
She views her labors with a mother's joy.
To little acts let great ones lowly bend,
Where rank by pride is only understood;
To works angelic her white thoughts ascend,
Aspiring to the height of doing good.
Reason convinced, that Charity benign,
Of OATLAND's grove had made her loved retreat,
Bade Victory her Laurel Crown resign,
To lie at beauteous FREDERICA's feet!
Nature her noblest task had well performed,
Endowed the babe with intellectual grace,
The lambent spark that all his bosom warmed,
Shone full confessed in air, shape, limb, and face.
In culture, Fortune! take an ample share!
Or else the plant may wither in the bloom:
Why genius (that with Phosper might compare)
Condemn to waste? a lamp within the tomb!
Not that each shrub can hang with golden fruit,
Or roses issue from the humble sod,
But Reason best can lift him from the brute,
When man shall know that he is the work of God.
Or say, that nature leaves her work most crude,
Still more it stands in need of polished aid,
Untaught, we view our kind, a savage rude,
And wonder at the monster we have made.
But wealth can cherish! draw the talents forth,
A sun! which Fortune's cold neglect supplies,
Then more than mines the bounteous heart is worth,
That gives what sordid penury denies.
Hail, heavenly FREDERICA! God of all,
Pour every blessing on the gentle fair!
Should ills assail, anticipate her call,
Who takes the helpless infant to her care.
THE END.

