A TREATISE OF THE PLAGUE. Being an INSTRUCTION how one ought to Act, in
Relation, I. To APPAREL and LODGING. II. To DIET. III. To ANTIDOTES or
PRESERVATIVES. IV. To such MEDICINES, as are necessary to be made use of, when
any one shall be so unhappy, as to be visited with the DISTEMPER.


Wherein is Inserted A rare Collection of a great many Recipe's of very
valuable Medicines, made use of in the PLAGUE, by the greatest Physicians in
the World, and published for the General Good of Mankind, especially the meaner
Sort.

By EUGENIUS PHILALETHES, Jun.

LONDON: Printed for JAMES HOLLAND, at the Bible and Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard; LUKE STOKOE, near Charing Cross; RICHARD MONTAGUE, in Sheer-Lane;
and JOHN SACKFIELD, at Lincoln's End Back-Gate. MDCCXXI.

TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of Montague.
MY LORD,
A STRANGER humbly presents to Your Grace the following Pages; he has very good
Reasons to believe, they cannot shelter themselves under the Protection of a
Patron more proper than the Duke of MONTAGUE.


MY LORD,
I do not address my self now to a Priest, or a Levite, inured to shedding
Blood; who, insensible to the Groans of a Wounded Traveller, pass regardless
by: But I have the Honor now to speak, as to a good Samaritan, whose
Profession is to Heal; and yet, as much as possible, to conceal from the Eye of
the World, his Charities and Benefactions.

Alas! What signify those pompous, mad Buildings, erected at vas^ Expenses, and
richly founded, i^ their Poor Inhabitants pass a ted^ous Life in a Splendid
Poverty or rather, have the Honor to d^^ daily in Places fit for Monarch^
while those who ought to have the Care of them, luxuriously riot, and grow fat,
on the very Blood and Vital Marrow of the poor Invalids.

Not so, my Noble Lord, is our Profession: A true Believer will not reveal to
any one his good Works, but to such only to whom it may belong; does Acts of
Charity in Silence, covers all with the profoundest Secrecy, and receives from
within that sublime Satisfaction, which none but good Men know. This is what
makes us truly Great, and truly Noble: This elevates us to the highest Degrees
of true Glory, and makes us equal with Kings. It is the most precious, and most
valuable Jewel in the World; a Jewel of great Price, redder and more sparkling
than the finest Rubies, more transparent than the purest Crystal of the Rock,
brighter than the Sun, shining in Darkness, and is the Light of the World, and
the Salt and Fire of the Universe.

Your Grace, who is Master of so many illustrious Qualities, which make a Man
truly Great, knows the Importance of this Eternal Truth; and as you have
hitherto practiced, as well as speculated, pursue your glorious Enterprise; do
good to your poor Brethren, (for we are Children of the Great One Eternal GOD,
the Lord and Master of us all) and especially, if we should, (as we richly
deserve it) be visited with a Contagious Distemper, exert your self; Remember
the Poor, and take Care to provide them with proper Medicines: The Motto of the
good Samaritan is, I Cure and say Nothing.

I speak with the Liberty of a Lover of Truth, not as a Mercenary Dedicator,
who racks his Brains to flatter his Patron. This Philalethes never did, nor
will; and I know your Grace hates it as much as I do. But while I presume to
talk after this Manner, I have not the Vanity to imagine I have said any thing
that may inform your Grace, or tell you what you did not know before: Learned
Men hear Sermons, not to be instructed in what they knew, as well as, (and
sometimes perhaps better than) the Preachers, but they consider them as so many
seasonable Remembrancers, or like a faithful Clock, that warns his Master of
the Hour of the Day.

In this Light, I hope your Grace will consider Philalethes: You are the
Master, and I the Clock, an Automaton, a Movement, moved by the first great
Spring, and strikes accordingly.

I am, My LORD, With entire Submission, Your Grace's true, Most Obedient, and
Most Humble Servant, EUGENIUS PHILALETHES, Jun.
Aug. 8, 1721.

A TREATISE OF THE PLAGUE.
ECCLES. Chapter vii. V. xiv. In the Day of Prosperity be joyful; but in the Day of
Adversity consider.


IF ever France had Reason to be joyful, she has as much Reason now to consider
the greatest Adversity that ever could befall an unhappy People, now involving
some of her richest Cities in the most inexpressive Misery and Woe. When I talk
after this Manner, every Body knows I mean the Plague, which now rages with
such invincible Fury in its extreme Parts; and, in all Probability without a
particular Turn of Providence, must rage too in its very Bowels. And thus,
France, once the Terror of its Neighbors, is now become the Object of their
Pity and Commiseration. Alas! How are the Mighty fallen! How unsearchable, O
Thou One Eternal Being, are thy Counsels, and thy Ways past finding out!

Indeed, human Life is Nothing but one continued Series of Miseries; and we are
born to Trouble, whic his as natural to befall us, as for the Sparks to fly
upwards; or to use the Words of a Modern In the 2d Vol. of the Penitential
Tables, a Work printed for J. Sackfield, near Lincoln's Inn. See Dedication to
Lady Harpur.
Author, Our Life is checkered with Misfortunes, or rather, it is a Piece of
Mournful Mosaic, where the Black far exceeds the White. Well then may we be
allowed a little Mirth in our short Prosperities, by the Preacher, when our
long Adversities furnish us with Matter of so much Consideration.

The Time of Consideration is arrived; Adversities enough surround us through
the unnatural Ruin of our own once flourishing and glorious Country, and how
far the dreadful Calamity, raging so furiously among our Neighbors may reach
us, Heaven only knows. Proximus ardet, when the next House is on Fire, it
requires all our serious Consideration, Attention, and Application, to prevent
catching hold of our own.

To do this, we ought to make use of all the Helps of Nature and Art; and the
rich, who have Means to procure both, will not want all possible Aid and Care:
The Poor and the middle Sort, are here, as in all other Cases, to be the
greatest Sufferers. It is for the Sake of those I publish this small, but I
hope, useful Treatise.

The Physicians and Apothecaries surely will not take this amiss, it would be
cruel to think so; I know there are but two sorts of these, the Good, and the
Bad; the Good will not, and as for the Bad, those very few are not worth our
Notice.

I am very well satisfied, that there have come into the World a great many
ingenious Treatises relating to the Plague; but as they have been, for the most
Part, very speculative, they have served rather to display the fine Genius of
their several Authors, than to be of any real Use to Mankind. Alas! What avails
it to know the nice Definitions of a Distemper, its remote and proximate
Causes, and a long Jargon of Particles, Effluvias, Insects, and that infinite
Gallimatias of Pestilential and pestiferous Vehicles, if I know not how to
preserve my self from their Contagion, or rid my self of it, when I am so
unhappy as to labor under it? What I shall do then, in the following Pages, is
in the plainest and most easy Terms, familiar to the meanest Capacity to write
what I have learnt in relation to that which may be serviceable to my Reader
concerning the Plague, which I am afraid, I have too just Fears, will, in all
Probability, without a particular Providence of the most High, visit our
already too wretched and undone Country.

But that I may not burden my Readers Memory and Attention, I shall, as short
as the Nature of the Thing will admit of, present them with what are my
Sentiments hereupon; and for Order Sake, divide this little Treatise into four
Heads or Chapters.

I. The First relates to Apparel or Lodging. II. The Second to Diet. III. The
Third to Antidotes or Preservatives: And, IV. The Fourth to such Medicines as
are necessary to be made Use of, when any one shall be so unhappy, as to be
visited with the Distemper.
CHAP. I. Of Apparel and Diet.
THOUGH at all Times we ought to abstain from all Manner of Excess, yet chiefly
ought we so to do in the Time of Pestilence; especially from Excess of outward
and inward Heat, as that of the Sun, Fire, Clothes, and hot Air, all very
pernicious; this I call outward Heat; inward Heat is such as proceeds from too
much eating of Salt, and salted Meats, Spices, and all Food of a strong and
intense Heat, and all strong Malt Liquors, and strong Wines and Spirits.

Violent Exercises are also to be avoided, such as provoke Sweatings, and
particularly, Coition, and all the Passions of the Mind. One must likewise
abstain from all Repletion of Meat and Drink, that is, to rise from Table
without loading your Stomach. The other Excess too is equally dangerous, I mean
too great a Hunger and Thirst; a great deal of Sleep, especially at Daytime,
is also to be carefully avoided, as well as letting the Body be too much bound
up or costive: Thus much in General.

As to Apparel, what is made of Linen, is certainly best; thick Woollens are
apt to gather Infections; but Silk and Furs, and Stuffs made of Hair, are
principally to be shunned, because they very easily admit the contagious Air,
and retain it a long while. But above all, let every body be particularly
careful in being clean in their Dress, as well as Lodging. Hangings are by no
Means to be allowed, bare Walls, or plain, unpainted Wainscot, are the best
Furniture; these cannot be kept too fresh and clean.

The frequent Washings among the Jews, though they had something mystical in
them, and were a Part of their Religion, were yet very conducive to Health; and
in Reality, there can be no Religion in being a Sloven; Paupertatem and non
Sorditiem Habitus diligit Deus, God loves the Poverty, not the Slovenliness of
a Habit, said St. Bernard, of some dirty Religious of his Time. The good old
Man thought there was no Religion at all in being dirty or lousy.

The first Thing that is to be done in the Morning by those that wear their
Hair, is to comb it with an Ivory Comb Forty Times at least, from the Forehead
toward the Pole; after that, let them wash all the Organs of the Senses, that
is, the Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Tongue, and Teeth; in short, the whole Face, with
pure Water, and they who wear Wigs, are to wash their Head in like Manner. The
Eyes are not only to be washed, but dipped, or plunged into cold Water, and all
the Foulness removed from the Eyelids with this cold Water; it is very
necessary sometimes to mix Rose Water, or Fennel-water and good strong
Whitewine Vinegar; and after the Neck is washed, which must never be omitted,
let it be rubbed with a Towel, somewhat coarser than ordinary. All this
comforts the Body, makes the Mind more lively and cheerful, and preserves the
Sight.

The Gums and Mouth ought to be particularly taken Care to be washed and
cleansed, and especially the Teeth; to do which, nothing is more proper than
the following Dentifrices, or Teeth-Powders, viz.

A cheap Powder to cleanse the Teeth.
Take three dried Egg-shells, of Red Coral three Drams, a small Quantity of the
Threads of white Silk burnt to Ashes in a new earthen Pot or Pipkin; Cinnamon,
one Dram; Cloves, two Drams; Pelitory-Root, two Drams.

Reduce all to a very fine Powder, and rub your Teeth every Night and Morning,
washing them with cold Water mixed with Vinegar, or Rose Water, or both: you
may buy the Red Coral of the Apothecary, ready powdered.

Another.
Take of Red and White Coral, of each one Ounce; Pelitory-Root, Mace, and
Mastick, of each an Ounce; of Pumice-stone, and Bole Armoniack, of each an
Ounce.

Reduce all to a very fine Powder, searsing the same through a Tiffany Searse,
as you should the former.

Purify your Chamber and your Clothes with clear Fires made of Juniper,
Cypress, Pine, or Ash-wood; as also with frequent Sprinklings of Rose Water and
Vinegar. It is also very good to strew about your Rooms, sweet Herbs, and
Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Vine-leaves, Pennyroyal, Thyme, Lavender, and the
like, and frequently to make use of several Kinds of odoriferous Fumes to purge
and purify the Air, and perfume your self and Clothes, and very often to wash
your Hands and Face every Day with Water mixed with Vinegar and Rosewater, and
never go abroad without a Piece of the Root of Dittany, or Zedoary, or some
candid Spice, in your Mouth, and a Nosegay, or some refreshing Persume in your
Hand; among which, I recommend a little Box of Warham's Apoplectick Balsam,
made only at the Golden Ball in Fisher-Street, near Red-Lyon-Square; which is
of wonderful Efficacy, and with which it is good to anoint or smear a little
the Temples; Eyebrows, and Nostrils: and always just before you go out, take a
Piece of Bay-leaf, or Orange-peel, or Juniper Berries, which being bruised and
soaked in a little Vinegar, pour upon a red hot Iron, hold your Head over the
Fumes, receiving them into your Mouth, Nostrils, and every Part of your Body
and Clothes. Some will not go out without a little Bunch of Hyssop, or Rue,
which is very good.

Those who can take Tobacco, would do well to smoke a Pipe in the Morning the
first thing they do. Dr. Evans, of St. John's College in Oxford, told me not
long since, that he designed Tobacco should be his chief Medicine whenever it
should please God to visit us, and that he would fume his Chambers and Clothes
with nothing else; which may be very good for those who are used to Tobacco;
and I have been told, that during the last Sickness in London, the Tobacconists
escaped the Contagion.

Having mentioned several Fumes and sweet Waters, I shall here give a Receipt
how to make those most useful, which because they are cheap, and easily made,
may probably be not much esteemed by some, who love Nothing but what is costly;
but I write for the general Good.

A Receipt for an Useful Odoriferous Sweet-Water.
Take of Rose Water, and strong White Wind, that is, good Mountain, or Lisbon,
(Madera, if you can conveniently have it) of each an equal Quantity; of Vinegar
of Roses, a Fourth Part; Loaf Sugar, a third Part; which dissolve therein; some
add a little Saffron, which is certainly better.

With this wash your Hands, Face, and Joints, as also your Eyes, and rince your
Teeth, and sprinkle with it your Linen; and if you swallow down a little, it
would not be amiss. But that you may not mistake the Quantities of each, I
shall here give a particular Receipt or Recipe.

Take of the best Vinegar of Roses, four Ounces; of Rose Water, and the
strongest and best flavour'd White Wind, of each one Pound, that is, of each a
Winchester Pint; of the best Saffron, one Scruple; of Loaf-Sugar, to be
dissolved in the Liquor, 3 or 4 Ounces.

Another.
Take a Pint and a half of Rose Water, in which half an Ounce of Cinnamon has
steeped two Days; of Mace, one Dram; Violet Roots, two Drams; of Cloves, half a
Dram; Nutmeg, one Dram; all which having distilled, add five Grains of Saffron.

Another more costly.
Take of Rose Water, three Pints; fresh Lavender Flowers well picked, three
Handfulls; fresh Cloves and Cinnamon, of each half an Ounce; White Violet
Roots, two Drams; Mace, two Drams; dried Rose Leaves, one Handful; Gum Benzoin,
vulgarly called Benjamin, two Drams; Storax Calamita, two Drams; Musk and
Amber, two Grains. Add to these an Ounce of strong Mountain Wine, set all,
being well mixed in a Glass Vessel well stopped, in the Sun for one Month.

Sweet Candles, good against the Plague, and all Pestilential Distempers.
Take of Labdanum, three Ounces; Storax, ten Drams; Benzoin, six Drams;
Frankincense, half an Ounce; Staechas, two Ounces; Damask Roses, three Ounces;
Cloves three Ounces; Lemon Peel, and Sandalum Citrinum, of each two Drams;
Juniper Berries, half an Ounce; Musk and Amber, a sixth Part of a Dram;
Charcoal, half a Pound, finely powdered.

Let all these be mixed up with Rose Water, and Gum Tragacanth, and put over a
Fire, till they are reduced into a Paste, of which make small Candles, and let
them dry gently.

How to make little sweet Balls, good also against Infection.
Take of Storax, and Benzoin, of each an Ounce; Labdanum and Mastick, of each
half an Ounce; Cloves, Xyloaloes, and Sandalum Citrinum, of each one Dram;
Guinea Pepper, two Drams; with a little Turpentine, of which make little Balls.

These may be perfumed with six Grains of Musk and Amber, dissolved in Oil of
Cloves.

How to make sweet Pastills.
Take of Gum Benzoin, two Ounces; Cinnamon, and Xyloaloes, or Lignum Aloes, of
each half an Ounce; Storax, one Ounce; fine Sugar, eight Ounces; Musk, sixteen
Grains, dissolved in Rose Water. All which mix up with an Infusion of Gum
Tragacanth in Rose Water.

A rare curious Receipt how to make other Odoriferous Pastills more rich and
costly, particularly made use of by the Countess of Arnsburg, which I here
insert as a very valuable Rarity.

Take four Ounces of White Roses, pull off the Leaves, to which, after they
have been well pounded in a Mortar, add two Ounces of Gum Benzoin, that has
lain twenty four Hours disselv'd in Rose Water; to these add, of Amber, two
Grains; Musk, one Grain; and the fourth Part of a Grain of Civet. Mix these
last well on a Marble Stone, and then incorporate them with the Roses.

Add to all half an Ounce of the finest Sugar, let the whole, being well ground
together, stay eight and forty Hours stopped close up in a Mortar, out of which
make your Pastills; but you must not forget to mix with it some Gum Tragacanth
dissolved in Rosewater, and roll up every Pastill in a little Dragon's Blood,
that they may dry the sooner, then wrap up every Pastill in two Rose Leaves.

But because burning of these Candles, Balls, and Pastills, must necessarily
occasion Smoke in the Rooms where they are so burnt, which may in some measure
affect the Head and Lungs, I would advise you to cast them into a silver Dish,
or (those who cannot have Silver, may make use of what they can get, an earthen
Pipkin well glazed will do, or a Tin or Pewter Dish, but by no Means use Brass
or Copper) which set over a Lamp or Candle, and the Fumes will be more
agreeable.

This manner of Fuming is frequent among the Italians, especially among Persons
of Distinction, who have generally one of these Sweet Pots fuming in a Corner
of their Rooms.

You may use any of the Sweet Waters abovementioned, after this manner.

I have been the longer on this Head, and have described the greater Variety of
Receipts, according to the Variety of the Season, and my Readers Purses; but
for the poorer Sort of all, I shall give them a Receipt which they may almost
always make use of, which is as follows:

Take a little White Wine Vinegar, if you add Rose Water, 'twill be the better;
which set over a Lamp or Candle, when it begins to fume, put in two or three
Bay Leaves, a few Cloves, a little Cinnamon and Mace, all bruised, and let all
fume together; a little Seville Orange Peel, or Lemon Peel, makes it yet more
agreeable.

These Fumes are excellent against all manner of Pestilential Infection, and
purify the Air.

And besides all these, you must often wash your Mouth with Vinegar, boiled up
with Rue and Hyssop, and especially when you cannot get any of these Fumes,
though I think it will be almost an Impossibility not to compass what I have last
described; but never be without a Piece of Zedoary, which now and then you must
chew, especially when you go abroad.

CHAP. II. Of Diet.
IT is very easy to describe what Kind of Diet should be used in such Times of
Sickness, but it is not so easy for all People to observe it. I shall only say
in general, that such Food as the Appetite most delights in, is the best: and
of Consequence, that which it does not care for, ought to be avoided. I do not
speak here of a depraved Appetite, which has been ruined and debauched by
Luxury, for there can be no Rules prescribed for such, at least what it will
observe.

The simpler, and the more plain the Diet is, the better. And here I could wish
Man had kept up to Nature, and followed what the great Creator of all Things
had prescribed to the Infant World, and had still fed on that innocent Food,
the Fruits and Herbs of the Earth, and Milk, and the Golden Productions of the
Industrious Be: Then would his Blood have flowed free from those noxious
Juices engendered from such a Heterogeneous Commixture of the Spirits of so many
Thousand Animals which an unbounded cruel Luxury continually sacrifices and
delights.

Before the Flood, Men did not eat the Flesh of Animals, and yet they lived
much longer.

The Jewish Law, indeed, in some measure indulged its Followers in this
Respect; but it must be remembered, the Bill of Divorce was in like manner
tolerated, for the Hardness of their Hearts. The Flesh Pots of Egypt, (the
French Ragous of that Time) ran in their Minds; but a Toleration is a quite
different Thing from an Approbation; and how many Restrictions this Toleration
was attended with, every one knows that looks into the Bible; the most
delicious Food was absolutely forbidden, as Swines Flesh, and all Shell Fish;
and the manner of dressing was such, as required the utmost Scrutiny in
Relation to the Health of the Animal; and the Blood, as the Life or Soul, was
particularly prohibited.

But the Christian, who has a better Religion, who professes to follow a
suffering Lord, and Self-denying Savior, tyrannizes over the whole Creation,
flies at all, and without the least Remorse or Scruple, devours Things
strangled, and swallows Blood, though expressly forbidden in the same Place with
Fornication, in that which he owns to be written by Inspiration, and a Law
decreed by the Holy Ghost.

The poor Cow, to instance no more, after having fed Families with her own
Dugs, must by cruel, ungrateful Man, be knocked on the Head, for all her good
Offices, and at last devoured; and the tender Lamb, just dropped from its Mother,
(true Emblem of sweetest Innocence) be snatched, kneeling at the Teat, and
sacrificed to satisfy the Appetite, perhaps of a lewd Harlot.

It is true, Man is the Lord of the Creation; so is a Master of his Family: But
what Lord devours his own Subjects? Or, what Father feasts upon his own
Children and Servants?

I could answer all the vain, idle, frivolous Objections, that have been raised
against this unlawful Practice of destroying the Creation; but my Business is
not to write of Controversy, but Health; and however novel this may seem to
some, I am sure, its opposite is only an ancient inveterate Error.

And I am satisfied, that Men, if they would or could abstain from eating the
Flesh of Animals, would find themselves much better in Health; for it is that
dreadful mixture of the Souls, if I may say so, of so many thousand Animals,
destroyed to pamper one, that raises that terrible War in the Blood, which has
made it a Prey to such Distempers, as have baffled the Skill of the most
learned Physicians.

Let us cast our Eyes toward India, and we shall see the Brachmans, or
Bramins, who never eat the Flesh of Animals; and yet they live frequently to an
Hundred Years of Age.

In Italy, there is a Religious Order called the Camaldolese, or Monks of St.
Romuald, who look healthy, and live long, and by their Profession they neither
eat Flesh nor Fish.

The Monks of La Trappe in France, do the same. This Regimen of Life renders
the Passions calm and quiet; while your Flesh-Devourers are soon irritated,
immediately take Fire, and even, in some Sense, participate of the Nature of
the Brutes they feed on.

And then how many Delicacies may be made without the Death of Animals? how
many Ways of dressing Herbs and Fruits, with Milk and Cream, Sugar and Honey,
and Aromatic Spices? all the innocent Luxury of Pastry and Confectionary, may
here be introduced.

But because this Evil came in by Degrees, so by Degrees it must be extirpated;
and since it is impossible quite to forsake it at once, we having derived from
our Parents, a Blood made up of these Spirits, I shall only advise my Readers
to make Use of Flesh Diet as sparingly as possible, especially in Time of
Pestilence; let them choose that Sort, that they know they can best digest, and
dress it thoroughly, and that too after the plainest and most simple manner,
avoiding all rich Soupes, Ragous, Fricasies, A la Royalles, a la Daubes, or a
la Diables, and all those Heterogeneous, Gallican, or rather Egyptian
Slipslops, which are poisonous, and create such malignant Juices in the Blood,
which easily unite with the pestilential Effluvia, and become a proper Fuel
for the Plague.

Broyling is undoubtedly the best Way of Dressing, over a clear Fire, the Meat
being thoroughly first cleansed from all Blood, and moderately seasoned with
Salt; for Salt savours all Things, and the Fire purifies all Things.

The next is Roasting, for the same Reasons.

Boiling comes next, which must be done with a large Quantity of Water, that
the Meat may have Room enough; and as soon as the Pot boils, take off the
Cover, that the Steam may go up.

Frying and Stewing are the worst of all, unless the Stew Pan be uncovered; and
Frying is not very wholesome, because of the Fat the Meat must necessarily swim
in, which hinders the Fire from passing through the Meat. And Stewing, unless
there be a great deal of Liquor, is only a genteel Name for Frying.

As to Sauces, or Seasoning, I recommend, especially with fresh Fish, (though
indeed I do not approve of any Fish in the Time of Contagion: I say, for Sauces
or Seasonings, I recommend) Tormentil, Dittany, Fennel, Dill, Gentian, Zedoary,
Sanders, never forgetting Roses; and also Vinegar, and Vinegar of Roses;
especially, Citron, Seville Orange, and Lemon Juices; as also Juice of Sorrel,
Verjuice, Juice of Pomegranates and Barberries, for all Acids or Sours resist
the pestilential Poison, for they are refreshing, drying, comfort and preserve;
however, if they offend the Breast, qualify them with Sugar; if the Stomach,
with a small Quantity of Pepper; for Pepper resists the Putrefaction of the
Humors, strengthens Digestion; and, provided it be not ground too small, but
powdered a little, that is, just broken, it helps the Liver.

Besides these Kinds of Seasonings, you should also use Onions, Garlic,
Saffron, Radishes, Succory, Capers, pickled Cucumbers, Samphire, Mangoes, and
all sorts of four Pickles, especially where there is Garlic in the Pickle.

As for Drink, choose the best of its Kind, not too strong Wine, and Malt Liquor
clear and well brewed, now and then a Cordial of Epidemick Water, vulgarly
called Plague-Water, and for Variety-sake, Treacle-Water; but all Things in
Moderation.

CHAP. III. Of Antidotes, or Preservatives.
THE next Thing in Order to be considered, are Antidotes, or Preservatives
against Pestilential Infections. In the first Place, I shall give a Description
of two Amulets, which being hung about the Neck, have an extraordinary Virtue;
after that, I shall give Receipts, how to make such Medicines, as inwardly
taken, have had also very good Effects.

Take of White Chrystalline Arsenick, two Ounces; of Red, one Ounce.

Make of these two a little Cake about an Inch broad, mixed up with the White
of an Egg, or a Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, that is, with Gum Tragacanth
dissolved in Rose Water, till it be of the Thickness of a Jelly.

Let this Cake be sewed up in a Piece of clean Linen Cloth, enclosed with
Silk, and hung about the Neck, toward the Heart.

You need not put your Shirt between; for though Arsenick taken inwardly be
mortal, not on Account of any occult Quality, but its corrosive Nature; and so,
properly speaking, is no Poison; yet being outwardly applied, it resists every
thing that is so.

Another.
Take of Sapphires, Emeralds, Hyacinths, Rubies, Red and White Coral, of each
one Dram; of Saffron, a Scruple; of Pearls, half a Dram; White Arsenick, two
Drams; Ambergrease, six Grains; dried Iris Roots, half an Ounce; burnt
Hartshorn, a Dram; Orpiment, half an Ounce.

Grind all together, and make a little Bag, to be sewed up in purple Silk, and
hung about the Neck, as the former.

An Antidote to be taken inwardly.
Take of dried Wallnuts, six Ounces; dried Figs, four Ounces; half an Ounce of
dried Rue-Leaves; of Salt, two Drams.

Let all these be bruised, and steeped in Rosewater, with an equal Quantity of
Whitewine Vinegar, or Juice of Sorrel, to which you may add, half an Ounce of
Juniper Berries. Take the Quantity of a Chestnut of this Preparation, fasting.
It is an excellent Preservative.

Another.
Take of the best Cinnamon, half a Dram; Zedoary, one Dram; Bole Armoniack
prepared, three Drams; Camphire, seven Grains; Seeds of Lemons huskt, that is,
the Husks taken off; of Sorrel, and Lemon Juice, of each an Ounce and a half;
Roots of Dittany, Tormentill, and Pimpernell, half a Dram; Ivory Shavings, and
the Bone of a Deer's Heart, of each a Dram; of Elks Hoof, Hart's Horn, and
Amber, of each half a Dram.

Take of this, mixed up with half an Ounce of Sorrel Juice, or any other eager
Juice, the Quantity of two Beans, fasting.

This Preservative Electuary was used with good Success by Don Priscian of
Corduba, Physician to Pope Leo X. and recommended by the famous Rantzovius.

And these Antidotes which follow have also been known to have great Success.

Take of Rose Water, Vinegar of Roses, Sorrelwater, and Mountain Wine, of each
an equal Quantity; in which infuse of the Powder of Zedoary Root, Lemon Peel,
and Bole Armoniack, of each an equal Quantity; to which add a little Saffron,
and, if you will, some old Conserve of Roses; put all into a Glass Bottle well
stopped, and keep it for your Use; of which take every Morning, and oftentimes a
Day, a little Quantity.

This Antidote is admirable, for it hinders the Putrefaction of the Blood and
Humors, and powerfully resists the pestilential Poison.

Another.
Take of the Paste of Pill Ruffi, which having dissolved in seven times its
quantity of Celadine-water, or Honey Water, which is better; distill in the
Bath, after having been steeped three Days: This is of wonderful Efficacy,
being drank in a moderate Quantity, like the former.

Another Excellent Antidote.
Take of the best Venice Treacle, two Ounces; of the best Myrrh, three Drams;
of the purest Camphire, two Drams.

Mix all in a Pint of Rose Water, of which after having steeped it three Days
in Glass Vessels well sealed; drink a little every Morning.

The Electuary of Nuts.
Take of Fat Cartacs, half a Pound; of Rue, half an Ounce; of green Walnuts, a
Quarter of a Pound; of Sea Salt, a Dram and a half.

Let all these be incorporated in a Mortar with clarified Honey, or Syrup of
Lemons; of which take every Morning fasting the Quantity of a Hazle Nut, with a
small Quantity of Vinegar and Rose Water.

I shall now give you another Receipt of great Virtue, which is,

The Electuary of Eggs.
Take a new laid Egg, which, after having taken out the White, and Cock's
Tread, fill with the best powdered Saffron, then close the whole, and burn it
over a slow Fire till it turn black, then grind it in a Mortar; to which add
its Weight of Seed of Eruca, or white Mustard; incorporate the whole very well.

Of this Electuary take the Quantity of a Pea, every Morning, with a little
Wine and Rose Water; you may add to this, if you will, (for it makes the
Composition much better) White Dittany, and Tormentill, of each two Drams; Nux
Vomica, one Dram, separately powdered before you add them to the rest. Add also
of the Roots of Pimpernell, Zedoary, Angelica, and Camphire, and as much
Treacle as the Weight of the whole.

This Electuary is not only an excellent Antidote or Preservative, but is good
when one is actually infected, in order to cure the Distemper; to be given one
Dram with Whitewine, if the Sickness begins with Cold; or with Rose Water, or
Scabious Water, if with Heat; but it ought to be taken in Twelve Hours Time
after the Beginning of the Distemper

These are the best Antidotes or Preservatives against the Plague, which may be
used with good Success; but by no means omit taking Pill Ruffi once or twice a
Week, about the Weight of a Scruple in the Morning, without any other Medicine.

But if the Season be very hot, then let the Aloes and Myrrh, which are in the
Composition of that Pill, be well washed in Rose Water; and you may add of the
best Camphire, a third Part of the Quantity of Myrrh; but in cold Weather, and
in cold Complexions, the Pill must be taken without these Prepations of Washing
and Camphire.

Besides, as these Pills are somewhat too opening, it would be good in such
Cases, to add to them a small quantity of Bole Armoniack, or to roll them up in
its Powder; and as sometimes they hurt the Stomach, this Evil is to be
corrected with a little Mixture of the best Mastick, and a little
Venice-Treacle, or Mithridate, that is, two or three Scruples. This is to be
taken every ten Days, with a Draught of Rose Water, or Sorrelwater.

CHAP. IV. Medicines to be made use of when any one is so unhappy as to be
visited with the Distemper.
WHEN any one finds himself infected, if Age or Strength permit, let him be let
Blood as soon as possible; then let the following Medicine be immediately
applied, and the sooner the better, because this Distemper admits no Delays.
After that let the following Draught be immediately administered, and repeated
according to the Strength of the Patient.

Take of white Onions, six in Number, which open at the Top, and take out the
Heart, or Inside, fill them with Venice Treacle, mixed with a little Powder of
Dittany Root and Tormentill; put them into wet Paper, and roast them in the
Embers till they are soft, then p^^ Part of them to the Part affected; for this
being applied like a Pultise to the Boil, is a sovereign Medicine for drawing
out the Poison.

Take the remaining Part of these Onions so prepared, and let them be bruised,
and mixed with Syrup of Lemons about an Ounce, and a little Vinegar, which
squeeze through a straining Cloth, and give of this Liquor lukewarm, three
Ounces, and let the Patient be laid in a warm Bed, abstaining from Meat and
Drink six Hours, and by all Means take Care of sleeping, which is ever
dangerous in this Distemper.

This Medicine is very efficacious, expelling by Sweat the poisonous Infection.
But if you add to this a small Quantity of the abovementioned Electuary of
Eggs, it will be admirable.

But if the Patient be full of ill Humors, and not let Blood, or that it is
not convenient to diminish the Blood, add a little opening Medicine to this
Potion; that is, for the weaker Sort, half an Ounce of Trifera Persica, with
one Dram of the Electuary of Hamech; for those of stronger Constitutions,
instead of Trifera, add to the Confection of Hamech, an equal quantity of the
of Conserve Roses, and the like of Electuary of India, and two Drams of
Diafericon; but in both Cases, give the Potion hot or warm, with Scabious
Water, Rose Water, or Vinegar.

There are a great many other Medicines, which I purposely omit, these being
the soonest prepared, the cheapest, and most efficacious. But the last and most
excellent Remedy for this Evil, is Adam's Earth, that is, the first matter of
our Creation; for this is the One and Only Medicine, and greater than which
cannot be; nor will it be a little, when purged by the Artifice of Fire, and
reduced to its Simplicity by a congruous Lotion. But of this enough.

He that has Understanding to understand, let him understand.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Here follow some Receipts, that have been omitted in their proper Places.
A rare Preservative against the Plague.
TAKE Wood Sorrel, and pick it from the Stalk, and pound it well in a Stone
Mortar; to every Pound of beaten Sorrel, add a Pound of fine beaten Sugar, and
two Ounces of Mithridate, or Venice Treacle; which being well beaten up
together, keep it in Pots for your Use. The Dose is the Quantity of a small
Wallnut.

This is the famous Dr. Butler's Receipt, made use of afterward by Sir Kenelm
Digby, and his Family, who all of them escaped the Plague.

An Excellent Perfume against the Plague.
Take Angelica Roots, and dry them a little in an Oven, or by the Fire, then
bruise them very soft, and lay them in Wine Vinegar to steep three or four
Days; then heat a Brick hot, and lay some of it on every Morning.

This is excellent to air the House and Clothes, or to hold one's Head over
every Morning Fasting.

A most admirable Receipt against the Plague.
Take three Pints of the best Canary, and boil in it Sage and Rue, of each one
Handful, till it come to about a Quart, then strain it, and putting it over the
Fire again, add to it a Dram of Long Pepper, and half an Ounce of Nutmegs, all
beaten together; which having boiled about a Quarter of an Hour, take it off,
and dissolve in it Venice- Treacle, and Mithridate, of each three Quarters of
an Ounce, and put to it a Quarter of a Pint of the best Angelica Water.

Take of this always warm, both Morning and Evening, a Spoonful or two, if
infected; if not, one Spoonful in the Morning, and half a Spoonful in the
Evening Keep this, as your Life, above all worldly Treasure; and trust to this
(under GOD), for it has been observed, that this never failed Man, Woman, or
Child.

ERRATA.
Page 4. Line 15. for or, read and. Chap. 1. for Apparel and Diet, read Apparel
and Lodging.


