Tony Lumpkin in Town: A FARCE.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

Tony Lumpkin in Town: A FARCE.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN THE HAY-MARKET.

BY J. KEEFFE, Author of the Musical Farce, called THE SON-IN-LAW.

LONDON: Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand.

MDCCLXXX.

DEDICATION TO GEORGE COLMAN, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
I AM happy that the mode of dedication presents me with an opportunity of
paying even so small a portion of that respectful tribute due to politeness,
probity, and candor, as laying this Farce at your feet; but most particularly,
I felicitate myself on an occasion of offering my acknowledgment of thanks, for
the great part you bore in the success of the SON-IN-LAW. By the indulgent
reception with which you favored my first piece, I was flattered into a
desire, of attempting a second, when you first pointed out the principal
material; and then, by your judicious alterations, happy additions, and strict
attention to the conduct, you promoted the SON-IN-LAW to whatever rank it now
may hold in the public favor. The town, possessed of judgment to perceive
merit, and liberality to reward it, seems, by its beneficent patronage,
sensible of your endeavors and abilities, to render the drama upon your
Theater, what it should be, an entertainment of elegance, instruction, and
delight. That each purpose is amply answered, accept my sincere congratulation.
With ardent wishes, that the generous warmth of public approbation may continue
to cherish your hopes, and crown your deserts, I have the honor to remain,

SIR, Your most obedient, Much obliged, and truly devoted humble servant, JOHN
KEEFFE.
Cork, July, 1780.
PROLOGUE.
Written by GEORGE COLMAN. Spoken by Mr. PALMER.
IF there is a Critic here, who hates what is LOW,
We humbly beg the gentleman would go:
He Is very welcome to have seen the Play,
To take his money back, and walk away.
Our Poet is the fearfull'st man on earth,
And fears too much four sense may spoil your mirth;
He wishes plain blunt folks, that laugh and cry,
As nature prompts, and ask no reason why.
Tonight no Two-Act Comedy you will view,
But a mere Farce! the characters not new,
And all your old acquaintance: Tony Lumpkin,
In town, it is true, but still a country bumpkin.
His friend Tim Tickle too, who danced the bear;
Bruin, the bear himself -- nay, never stare;
He shall not hurt you, ladies -- keep your places!
The bear-leader has given him the graces.
This rustic groupe, bear, boar-leader, 'Squire, Clown,
The frolic muse of Farce now drives to town.
Her elder sister, Comedy, has wit,
But Farce has fun, and often a lucky bit;
If she yields laugh, a laugh let none despise;
Be merry, if you can, and not too wise.

PERSONS.
Mr. Jonquil, Mr. LAMASH. Tony Lumpkin, Mr. PARSONS. Doctor Minim, Mr. R.
PALMER. Pulville, Mr. BLISSET. Tim Tickle, Mr. BANNISTER. Frank, Mr. EGAN.
Diggory, Mr. MASSEY. Shoemaker, Mr. KENNY. Tailor, Mr. PIERCE. Painter, Mr.
DAVIS. Footman, Mr. PAINTER.
Mrs. Jonquil, Mrs. HITCHCOCK. Lavender, Miss HALE.
SCENE, Mr. Jonquil's house in London.

TONY LUMPKIN IN TOWN.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Hall. -- Horn sounds. Enter Diggory, meeting Frank. Diggory carrying
a dish of cold beef, and a tankard. A Footman following Frank with a tea-board.
Frank. MR. Diggory, your master's up; I hear his horn.


Dig. Aye, Master Frank, I Have got his breakfast here.


Frank. Beef and porter! his stomach is delicate this morning.


Dig. Why, yes, he is always a little puny after a night's hard drinking. Aye,
about a pound and half, or so, will make him easy 'till near two, and then --

(Bell rings)
Frank. Ha! I think my master's a little impatient too for his breakfast.


Footman. Shall I take up the things, Mr. Frank?


Frank. 'Sdeath! what do you wait here for? Fly! I imagined you had left 'em
above this half hour.


Foot. Why I thought --


Frank. You thought! Ah! this thinking is the ruin of us. Now if you would not
think, but do as you are desired, it would make --


Foot. I suppose a man may have leave.


Frank. No conversation, I beseech you. (Bell rings.) Have you any ears?


Foot. I have, and hands too, and that you shall find some time or other. --
Takes more box upon himself than the master!

[Half aside, and exit with the tea things.]
Frank. The impertinence and freedom of these scoundrels is absolutely
intolerable.


Dig. Who should he make free with, if he would not with his fellow servants?


Frank. Fellow servants, Mr. Diggory! Do you make no difference between a
fellow in a livery, and a gentleman's gentleman? In the country, I suppose,
it is "hail fellow, well met;" but here, sir, we are delicate, nice, in our
distinctions; for a valet moves in a sphere, and lives in a style as superior
to a footman, as a Pall Mall groom porter to the marker of a tennis-court.


Dig. For certain, sir, we vale-de-shams are grand fellows; but you will see more
of that when I get on my new regimen -- I mean my new liver; -- psha! my new
clothes, I mean. Did you breakfast, sir?


Frank. Yes, I Have had my chocolate.


Dig. Do take one slice of beef.


Frank. What a vulgar breakfast! beef! shocking!


Dig. I don't know as to that, sir, but I have heard my old master, Mr.
Hardcastle, say, that beef was Queen Elizabeth's breakfast; and, if that is the
case, I think it is good enough for I.


Frank. But is not that for your master?


Dig. O, I Will leave enough for he, I Will warrant.

(Bell rings.)
Frank. That must be for me, Mr. Diggory. Bon Jour!

Exit.
Dig. How genteel he looks in his master's old clothes!


Enter Tim Tickle. Tick. Ha, Diggory! the London air agrees with you, I find;
keep working, lad; strong beer is our stream of life, liberty our vital air,
and in good beef lies the marrow of an English constitution -- that is in the
genteel way.

(Horn sounds.)
Dig. I must follow the sound of the horn.

Exit with beef, singing.
Enter Frank. Frank. Mr. Tickle, several persons are waiting below for Mr.
Lumpkin, and they ask to see you.


Tickle. Persons!


Frank. Yes, sir; there are tailors, shoemakers, milliners, perfumers,
dancing-masters, music masters and boxing masters.


Tickle. I Will be with them in a pig's whisper.


Frank. Pig's whisper! what a fellow for a gentleman's tutor! O! he is a
shocking dog!

Exit.
Tickle. Aye! now how could he do without me? If he wants a coat cut in the
kick, who can show him? I -- A tasty nab? Why Tim. -- Handsome pumps? I know
the go. If he would have a tune from his music-master, a thrust from his
pushing-master, a step from his dancing master, or a square from his
boxing-master, I Am the boy that can show him life in the genteel way.

Enter Diggory.
Dig. Master Tickle, the 'Squire wants you.


Tickle. I stir.


Dig. I Will tell him so.

Exit.
Tickle. They can do nothing without me. Tony Lumpkin's nobody without Tim
Tickle. I Will go -- no -- I think I Will step first and give my bear his
breakfast; poor soul! many a good one he has got me; aye, and may again for
aught I know. The 'Squire's good at a promise, that is certain; but what is a
promise? Pye-crust. I Would no more depend upon a gemman's promise, than I would
upon a broken staff, or a candidate for the county after he had gained his
election.

Exit.
SCENE, A Chamber. Mr. Jonquil discovered in a morning undress, Frank attending
with chocolate. Jonq. Frank, has your lady quitted her apartment?


Frank. Yes, sir, I think I heard Mrs. Lavender say -- Oh, sir, here is my lady.

Exit.
Enter Mrs. Jonquil and Lavender. Jonq. A good morning to you, my dear.


Mrs. Jonq. Thank you, love. Lavender, give those cards to Pompey, and desire
him to deliver them agreeable to their address. I have an immensity of visits,
but must pay them this morning in paper; or, Shock, you dear polite toad, will
you take the chair, and be my representative to the ladies?

(to a lap-dog, which Lavender carries under her arm.) Exit Lavender. Oh, my
head! such a night! Mr. Jonquil, when did you break up at the masquerade?


Jonq. I fancy, my dear, 'twas five.


Mrs. Jonq. I might as well have accompanied you there, for I counted the clock
'till four. A masquerade to this house last night, was a Quaker's meeting. Such
a noise and uproar!


Jonq. Uproar! what was the mrtter?


Mrs. Jonq. Only your cousin Tony holding his nocturnal revels.


Jonq. Tony! So, so, 'twas here he came, when he slipped from me at the
Pantheon.


Mrs. Jonq. Yes, here he came indeed; and such a ball as he held with the bear
and the servants, and the mob out of the street, I believe!


Enter Lavender. Lav. Madam, I Am sorry I Am obliged to complain of a servant,
but don't blame me, ma'am; but indeed there is no such thing as living in the
house.


Mrs. Jonq. What is all this?


Lav. Why ma'am, Mr. Diggory, 'Squire Lumpkin's man, ran into your ladyship's
dressing room, and snatched your cold cream off the toilet.


Jonq. Ha! ha! ha! what in the name of delicacy could Diggory want with the
cold cream?


Lav. He said it would do to oil his wig, sir.


Jonq. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Jonq. Nay, but Mr. Jonquil, this is beyond bearing. I Will assure you I Will
--


Jonq. Come, my dear, don't be discomposed, 'twill soon be at an end.

Exit Lavender. Let me see what time his mother proposes to be in town, for I
think she says she will take a house for him. I have his letter here, I wish he
was in a house of his own, from my soul, for in a fortnight I should not know
mine from a carrier's inn.


Mrs.Jonq. What gives me most singular amazement, is, that you choose to be seen
in public with him.


Jonq. I grant he is not the most eligible companion for a man of fashion: but
at a masquerade I was safe from censure, for every body imagined the
uncouthness of his appearance, and rusticity of his manners, merely the effect
of his imitative genius. The company thought his behavior all assumed, put on
pour l' occasion; for he threw off his domino, and I Will assure you, simple
nature got him insinite reputation. He gaped at the masks, roared most
stentoriously discordant with the music; overset the pyramids, pocketed the
sweetmeats, broke the glasses, made love to an Arcadian dairy maid, tripped up
the heels of a harlequin, beat a hermit, who happened to be a captain in the
guards, and gave a bishop a black eye.


Mrs.Jonq. But his mother's epistle; I languish to hear it.


Jonq. I ask your pardon; here it is.

Takes out a letter and reads. Dear Cousin,
In the bearer of this, I introduce to your care and friendship my dear son
Tony. I Will assure you, cousin, Tony with your help will make a bright man, as
he is already humoursome and comical. I shall be in town myself in about a
fortnight, or three weeks, and then I intend taking a house for him, in some
airy, fashionable part, somewhere near Duke's Place, as I Would have him near the
King's Palace. No more at present from your loving cousin,

DOROTHEA HARDCASTLE.
P.S. Mr. Hardcastle's and my love to cousin Emilia. I requcst you will take Tony
to Sadler's Wells, as I Am sure he will like operas.

A horn sounds without.



Mrs. Jonq. Bless me, what is that?


Jonq. Oh, that is Tony's summons for his man; he says he hates the ringing of
bells, therefore has invented that polite substitute.

Tony calls without.
Tony. Hollo, Diggory, hollo.


Jonqu. Oh, here he comes.


Tony. (without) Hollo! slap up the bear here.


Mrs.Jonq. Heaven defend us, sure he will not drive in a bear here.


Jonq. No, no, my dear, don't be alarmed.


Tony. (without.) Come along, Bruin.

Enter Tony Lumpkin. Come in; I long to introduce Bruin to my relations. Cousin
Milly, will you see the bear, ma'am, if you please?


Mrs. Jonq. Bear! oh heavens!

Runs off.
Tony. Cousin Milly's very timbersome, sure; Bruin is a mighty civil beast; why
he is as gentle as the good-natured lion in the Tower, that let us the dog lie in
his den with him.


Jonq. I don't entertain a doubt of his politeness or goodnature; but you will
eternally oblige me by sending him down.


Tony. Now would it oblige you in downright earnest?


Jonq. Beyond measure,


Tony. Tim, walk Bruin down again: bid him first make his honors at the door
though. Come here -- only, cousin, look, -- only look at him. Servant, sir; why
he learned among the grown gentlemen at Hatton-garden. Ah do now let him in,
and he, and I, and you, will dance the hay. He Is muzzled! Tim, an't he muzzled?


Tim. (without.) Yes; Sir.


Tony. Oh! then there is no danger; you see he could not bite you, if he had a
mind; he can only scratch you a little.


Jonq. Gads curse, but I Am not disposed to be scratched this morning.


Tony. Oh! very well; any other time. Only say the word; and Bruin's the boy
for it. Slap him down, lad.


Jonq. I wish the Devil had you and him together; Such a fellow! -- Mr. Lumkin,
have you a fancy for. this house?


Tony. Anan?


Jonq. I say, do you like this house?


Tony. Like it? for certain I do.


Jonq. Then to you and the bear, I must absolutely resign it.


Tony. I thank you for your kind offer; but if you was to give me your house,
and your pyebalds, and your visee vie, I would not thank you; because them that
give all, give nothing at all. But indeed if you d let me bring in a little
queen with me some night or other, unknown to cousn Milly, you would make me as
happy as a king.


Jonq. Oh, fie!


Tony. Oh fie! Baw! shake hands! Why don'you get drunk sometimes? It Is mighty
pleasant! ay, and very wholesome, once a week. Dr. What-d'ye-call-um says so,
in the book that lies in my mama's window: what say you to a bout, cousin, ha?


Iong. Excuse me; drinking is, in my opinion, the most savage and barbarous
method, that ever brutality invented, to murder time and intellects.


Tony. By jingo, then mama is the first time-killer within ten miles of
Quagmire Marsh: Oh! she loves a sup dearly.


Jonq. For shame! Mr. Lumpkin.


Tony. Oh! take me, it is all in the genteel way, though; for my mama always
sipp'd her cordial out of a tea-pot; and then, before folks, it was only a drop
of cold tea, you know.


Jonq. Ha, ha, ha!


Tony. Ay, and Cousin Con, Miss Nevill, that was courting me, used to drink
like a glass-blower, all in the sentimental way: Over a love-story book, she
and my mama would read and sip till it came out of their eyes. Sure Cousin Con
was in love with me; Oh! how sweetly she would kiss me after a chapter of Mildmay,
and a twist of the tea-pot.


Jonq. Yes, yes, what I Have always found; curse me! if there is a woman in the
world easier had, than the die-away romantic novellist.


Tony. How fine I tell lies! he swallows them like syllabub.

(Aside.)
Jonq. But you gave me the slip last night, at the Pantheon; why did not you
wait for supper?


Tony. Why, I love my supper as well as any body, especially after a day's
hunting; because then we have something to talk of. But the song way for my
money; and we had our own gig here at home; I never saw the bear so airy.


Jonq. But what think you of the splendour of the Pantheon? Is'n't it the temple
of Elegance? an Olympus hall, worthy the gods to revel in?


Tony. Gods do you call' em? I took some of 'em for rascals. A fool of a fellow
would have it, that I was a lady; now I am sure I have not a bit of the lady
about me, except the softness of my voice: but the monkey was a macaroni; and
those beaux, I fancy, make as much use of a woman, as they do of a sword; they
keep both merely for show. Oh, now I talk of that, by jingo, I saw a power of
fine shows yesterday, o'top of Ludgate Hill.


Jonq. Shows?


Tony. Ay, I believe I Have seen all the fine shows now; aye, Dog and Magog, St.
Paul's and the Tower, and the high post near the Bridge, that is going to fall
upon the neighbors heads; and I Have seen a hanging, and a house on fire; and I
paid a halspenny to walk over the Thames at Blackfriars; and I eat calves-head
turtle, opposite the Bank; and saw Lord Thingumme's fine coach, and the
Lilliputian Patagonians, and the stock-brokers on 'Change; the mad folks in
Bedlam, and the actor folks at the play houses: one of the play men at
What-d'ye-call-it playhouse was very like you, and --


Jonq. But, Mr. Lumpkin, I imagine it is time for you to begin to dress; some of
the Scavoir Vivre and Dilettanti dine with me today, and you will be a precious
exhibition.

(Aside.)
Tony. y, ay, I Will be as fine as the sheriff's horse, by-and-by.

Enter Diggory in a new livery; and struts in an awkward conceited manner,
across the stage. Tony leads him by the arm back to the door.] Get out!


Dig. Why, sure, 'Squire, you will be proud enough yourself of your new clothes
when you get into them.


Tony. Yes; but there is difference between the miller and his dog. Pray know
your distance; and I desire, Diggory, you will never dare to be so superftitious
with me, before company.

(Aside.)
Dig. Well, I will not.


Tony. You will not? -- I think you might call me, my honor; and not waste much
of your manners.


Dig. If that is the case, there is all kinds of nice tradesfolks, and ingenious
learners, of all sizes, waiting below for My honor.


Tony. Your Honor, you cuckold, it is my honor they want.


Dig. I Will tell them so, sir; your honor, I mean.

Exit.
Tony. Well, now, cousin:, I Will go; and --


Jonq. Sir, Mr. Lumpkin, I have a trisling request to make.


Tony. What is it? I Will give you any thing you ask.


Jonq. That you will dress with all possible celerity; for I languish to see
you one of us.


Tony. Hollo, for lace and powder. Hollo, Diggory; hey, for grandeur -- yoies;
-- hark forward, tailors, milliners, and glorious haberdashers! hollo, hollo!


Jonq. Such a fellow! -- makes more noise than a kennel of hounds.

Exit.
SCENE, An Antichamber. Several tradespeople, and Tim. Tickle. Tim. He will; I
sent his man to tell him.


Tay. Greatly obliged to you, sir.


Tim. You are so, if you knew all; but, for my good word, 'Squire Jonquil would
have took Monsieur Frippery, the new fashion French tailor.

Enter Diggory.
Dig. He Is coming; pray sit down, gentlemen; it is as cheap sitting as standing.


Tim. Diggory, keep your own station. I do all in the gentleman usher way, do you
see; because why, I know the genteel thing; but take me, neighbors, I don't
want you to stand, do you mind me; only, Diggory, your encroaching upon my
compartment, is just as tho'f, as how, as if my bear was to snatch my
hurdy-gurdy out of my hand, and pok'd me till I moved a hornpipe.


Dig. For certain, that would not be manners; but I was only --


Tim. Say no more! you're an ignorant man; and you don't know the genteel thing.

Enter Tony.
Tony. Hey, for grandeur, lace and powder! which of you is my tailor?


Tay. I Am the man, sir.


Dig. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Tim. What do you laugh for?


Dig. Ecod, I cannot help it, to hear the tailor call himself a man; when we all
know he would take eight of his journeymen to make him one.


Tony. Come, come, keep the line. Have you my clothes, Mr. Tailor?


Tony. Here they are, sir; and a more fashionable suit never hung upon the back
of an ambassador.


Tony. Tim, do they fit me?


Tim. Quire the kick.


Tay. But will not your honor try them on?


Tony. No; it is too much trouble. I make Tim try on all my new clothes for me.


Shoe. Your shoes, sir.


Tony. Black satin, beautiful! ah, Tim, if I had but my silver Artois buckles
I lost!

Dr. Minum sings without.
Tory. Hey! what merry sellow's this? Get along, boys, leave your goods, and
send your bills to Tim.

Exeunt tradesmen. Here, Diggory, lay my clothes ready.

Exit Diggory with clothes.
Enter Frank. Frank. Doctor Minum.

Exit Frank. Enter Minum, singing.
Doct. (sags) Tol de roll, loll. Gentlemen, I ask ten thousand pardons: I
thought Mr. Jonquil had been here; but if I don't mistake, Mr. Lumpkin, I
presume.

( to Tim.)
Tim. You're wrong, tight boy, that there is the 'Squire; I Am Tim Tickle, his
tutor.


Doct. Sir, I Am very glad to see you well,


Tony. That Is a damned lie, if you're a right doctor, and know I Have got fifteen
hundred pounds a year.

aside.
Doct. If your auricular organs be happily humaniz'd to the celestial science
of harmony, from your affinity to a gentleman of Mr. Jonquil's taste, you may
command my assistance.


Tony. Oh, I Am not long enough in London to stand in need of a doctor.


Tim. No, do you see, lad, we want no doctors nor poticaries yet. I don't know
how long we may remain so.


Doct. Your pardon, gentlemen -- but, I fancy --


Tony. Did you know Jack Slang, the horse doctor?


Doct. Entirely unacquainted with any of the faculty; but under favor, there is
a trifling mistake in this overture to our acquaintance. Give me leave to
inform you, gentlemen, I am not one of the prescribing performers, who convey
this human instrument, the body, to its mortal case, by pill, bolus, or
draught; but I shift the soul above the stars, in sounds seraphic, by minum,
crotchet, and quaver. And please to obscrve, that though I am a doctor, I Have no
more skill in the materia medica than an advertising quack; I am a professor of
music, and composer of original pieces, in that elegant and mellifluous
science; and, to oblige my friends, a select set of the first rank and
distinction, I instruct on the violin.


Tony. Then ten to one, but you know how to play the fiddle.


Doct. I Would venture to accompany you in that bett:


Tony. Zounds, man, could not you say at once that you were? fiddler, and not
come round to it with such a circumbendibus?


Doct. Fiddler, in the name of Orpheus! Eh! what! fiddler? allow me, sir, a da
capo to my own introduction?


Tim. A what?


Doct. Three bar rests; if you please, sir; I am surpised you can be so much
out of tune, gentlemen: I am one of the connoscenti -- have had the honor to
be balloted a member of three select private concerts, composed of persons of
the first rank, aye the Alto' Primo of taste -- had the refusal of the band of
Carlisle House -- led the band for five seasons at Vauxhall -- had some
thoughts of purchasing the gardens myself -- I have composed two oratorios, ten
serenatas; three sets of overtures, concertos for Signior Florentini's
violoncello, songs for the Capricci of Palermo, and solos for Madam Sirmen's
violin, grand ballets for Signor Georgettini, Signora Caperini, Signora
Baccini, Signora --


Tim. Damn your Signioras and your Signiors your Inis and Winis; can you play,
Water Parted, or Lango-lee? -- that is the genteel thing.


Tony. Oh, may hap they are too hard' for him. Give me your hand; I Will give it
you again; I love a fiddler, because one may make him play till he is tired, and
then kick him down stairs -- Do, dine with me tomorrow.


Dect. I Will promise you any thing, to get from you today. (aside.) I shall
positively do myself that honor, sir.


Tony. That Is a good fellow; but bring your fiddle under your coat, will you?
you shall have as much liquor as you can carry.


Dact. You're superlatively good, sir.


Tony. The devil a better -- You shall hear Tim Tickle touch up his hurdy-gurdy.


Doct. Oh, sir!


Tony. You shall! see the bear dance too.


Doct. That must be fine indeed!


Tim. Why, it is the genteel thing; 'Squire will have the dulcimer man.


Doct. Ah, Caro Divino! we shall have a delightful concert -- I shall certainly
attend you, gentlemen; but a most particular engagement obliges me to deprive
myself of the felicity of your company at present.


Tony. Hold, hold, doctor; you must give us a rasp before you go; Tim, fetch
the fiddle out of the next room; cousin Jonquil was playing on it just now.


Tim. I stir.

Exit.
Doct. Orpheus, protect me!

(Aside)
Tony. You will give us a scrape; ha, boy?


Doct. Oh, sir (bows) how shall I get out of this scrape?

(Aside)
Tony: (capering before a glass) Ay, do you find fiddling; I'il find dancing.


Doct. (stealing toward the door) Andante, Andantino, Piano, Pianissimo,
Allegro, Presto!

Runs off. Enter Tim with a violin.
Tim. Here Is the coal-box, Doctor; what! he has borrowed himself!


Tony. Gone! -- yoies -- hollo, fiddler, hollo! (Running out, is met by Frank)
Where Is this fiddler?


Frank Fiddler, sir! oh, Doctor Minum, I suppose, you mean; lord, sir, he flies
as if twenty Dutch concerts were in the wind.


Tony. The next time I catch the rascal, I Will make him play for me, and kick
him all the while.


Frank. Then, sir, you will kick him to some tune; but, sir, my master's
compliments, and wishes you would please to get dressed; it is now close upon three.

(Looks at his watch, and exit.)
Tim. The fellow has got a tattler, strike him plump.

(Aside)
Tony. Zounds! I wish I could get a watch, that the figures of it was not in
letters; I never can know what a clock it is, by the X's and the V's and the
I's -- I wish I could get a watch with the figures in figures upon it.


Tim. 'Squire, that is because you know how to cipher.


Tony. I suppose so -- Hollo, Diggory, my new clothes; and then for grandeur,
lace and powder -- Hollo, hoilo.

Exeunt.
End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, A Dressing Room. Mrs. Jonquil at her Toilet, and Lavender. Mrs. Jonq.
Ha! ha! ha! Indeed, Lavender, I think so too: but where is the savage now?


Laven. Ma'am, I fancy by this time he is almost transformed into a very fine
gentleman. He Is gone to dress.


Mrs. Jonq. Dress! Ah! his native rusticity is invincible by the powerful
combination of art and elegance. His tutor a bear-dancer, you tell me; ha! ha!
ha! with such a pupil a bear-leader we must grant him.


Laven. Ma'am, he has brought Mr. Tickle purposely to London with him, to show
him taste and high life in the genteel way, as he says.


Mrs. Jonq. Yes, taste and gentility at a Sunday tea-garden, and high life on
the top of St. Paul's!

Enter Tim and Painter.
Tim. Come, master Painter, come along; this way, I believe, we can take a
short cut to the 'Squire's room.


Mrs. Jonq. Who are these? what is the matter?


Tim. Only going to quarter the ground.


Laven. Fie, Mr. Tickle! what business have you here? and why would you bring
fellows into my lady's apartment?


Tim. Fellows! why, ma'am, this is Jack Raddle, the sign-painter, that is so
clever a hand at a shoulder of mutton.


Paint. Yes, and the Split Crow, Tim.


Tim. And the Bird in Hand. Why it was this here Jack that painted the Three
Jolly Pigeons at Quagmire-marsh, down in our parts.


Paint. Yes, and the Saracen's Head, Tim.


Lavend. Come, come, get you along out of this, with your split crows and your
shoulders of mutton.


Tim. Get out! Strike me plump! is that your manners, ma'am?


Lavend. Go, man; pray take your Saracen's Head out of this room.


Tim, Sr.racen's Head? I Hark'ee, if you deny that You paint a Saracen's Head
every morning, your tongue gives the lie to your cheeks.


Paint. Tim, that was a dash with the pound brush!


Tim. Ay, ay; I Am the boy for it. Come along; Ha! ha! ha!


Paint. Ha! ha! ha!

Exeunt Tim and Painter.
Lavend. An impudent fellow! I paint a Saracen's head indeed! A pretty
discerning tutor for a young gentleman!


Mrs. Jonq Lavender, hand me the eau-de-luce. I die! oh heavens, the fellow!
throw up that sash! I shall expire!


Lavend. And no wonder, ma'am: I Am sure the chamber smells of oil worse than
Greenland-dock.

Enter Diggory, who searches all round the room.
Mrs. Jonq. Heavens! what is this now? what do you want, man?


Lavend. Why is the devil in the fellow? For shame, Diggory! why do you come
into my lady's apartment this way?


Dig. This way! why would you have me come in at the window?


Mrs. Jonq. For mercy's sake, do, good man, withdraw.


Lavend. Curse you all, I say; what do you want?


Dig. I want my master's boots.


Lavend. What the mischief could bring his boots into my lady's dressing room?


Dig. His legs, I believe; for I think 'twas here he took them off.


Mrs. Jonq. Do, pray retire, I bcsecch you, sir.


Dig. I beg pardon, ma'am, I see the boots are not here; so I Will go look in the
stable.

(A tapping at the door.)
Mrs. Jonq. What monster have we now?


Jonq. (without.) Avec permission!


Lavender. My master! madam.


Mrs. Jonq. Entrez, monsieur.

Enter Jonquil.
Jonq. This way, my dear, for wonder sake, quick, quick. Ha! ha! ha! such a
sight, transcending all Soho!


Mrs. Jonq. My dear, I think it must be something supernatural that can excite
my wonder now. But allons for his miracle. Exeunt Mr, and Mrs. Jonquil.


Leven. (looks in the glass) A Saracen's head? yes, it must be my lady he meant.

Exit.
SCENCE, a gallery hung with pictures. Enter Mr. and Mrs. Jonquil. Jonq. Now
settle your features.


Mrs. Jonq. O, I set risibility at defiance.


Jonq. Mr. Lumpkin, are you apparelled, quite completely a-la-mode?

Enter Tony, dressed
Tony. O yes, I think I Am the very colliflower of the mode. Tell me in
downright earnest, how do you like me, (turns round) Eh! Cousin Milly? I
believe, now I Am something like a tanzy; how do you like my hair, though?


Mrs. Jonq. Charming!


Jonq. The style most happily fancied.


Tony. So it is, cousin Milly; you have a fine head of hair, if it is all your own
-- it is very like some of the heads I saw in the barbers windows.


Mrs. Jonq. Now, that is so civil.


Tony. That Is what every body says of me, that I Am so civil; but do you know
that my mama used to dress up my hair herself every Sunday, whether I would or
no? she would rub it up with soap, and put a paper in the top, just like the sign
of the unicorn.

Enter Lavender, and whispers Mrs. Jonquil.
Mrs. Jonq. Presently; Mr. Lumpkin, will you allow me the liberty to withdraw
myself for a moment or two?


Tony. Ma'am, I Will excuse your going away with a great deal of pleasure. How
polite fine clothes make a body!

(Aside)
Exeunt Mrs. Jonquil and Lavender. Enter Tim, who speaks, half aside, to Tony.
Tim. 'Squire, the Painter's ready.


Tony. Mum.

(apart to Tim.)
Jonq. Pardon my curiosity, Mr. -- excuse me, sir -- you spoke of a painter;
are you acquainted -- I mean have you a penchant?


Tim. A what?


Jonq. That is, do you admire the art?


Tony. Oh, Yes, sir; my tutor's very knowing in the picture way. Tim, shall I
tell cousin you carried a shew-box?

(Apart to Tim.)
Tim. You need not mind it now.

(Aside to Tony.)
Jonq. There are some tolerable paintings here, sir.


Tim. Yes; they are quite genteel.


Tony. I warrant, now, they stood you in a matter of fifteen or twenty pounds.


Jonq. Above ten thousand.


Tony. Pounds?


Jonq. Positively.


Tony. What a stud and a kennel of hounds that would! uy a man!


Tim. What a collection of wild beastisses!


Jonq. Besides the money I have expended in my Flemish and Italian acquisition,
during my tour, I have, at this moment, a pecuniary understanding with most of
the eminent picture-dealers and auctioneers in town; and, consequently, the
refusal of antiques, coins, china, lap-dogs and original pictures.


Tim. How do you order it?


Jonq. Briefly thus: if an extraordinary engagement prevents me from a private
peep, previous to the sale, suppose me in the auction-room: a full sale, good
pictures, my favorite piece, up, friend Mallet, in the heat of his oration,
casts me an eye significant; I, unperceived by the company, return an
affirmative signal; and one, two -- down, the picture's mine for one third of
the value.


Tim. What then becomes of his poundage?


Jonq. That, sir, I make good by an ample douceur.


Tony. Well, let them say what they will of slock paper, pretty pictures for my
money; cousin, you must choose me some nice ones, when my mama takes a new
house for me.


Tim. Ay, I dare say, 'Squire Jonquil knows all the painters in town, in the
genteel way.


Jonq. In town? -- no -- no -- Mr. -- sir -- if a modern ever intrudes upon a
panel of mine, taste must give the preference to Flemish and Italian; if the
contrary should transpire, sir, I Would be excluded the ton, as void of all virtue.


Tony. Virtue! It does not show much virtue to encourage foreigners, and let
your own countrymen want bread; damn me, if I do that; and damn them that do.


Tim. Well said, tight boy; there is a fine fellow, and I Am his tutor.


Jonq. I own, sir, I Am of your opinion; but powerful fashion! --


Tony. Tim, there is a clever fellow, running after a pretty girl among the
bushes!


Jonq. -- Apollo, pursuing Daphne, by Corregio; observe the modest grace in the
slight of Daphne; and that figure of Apollo, what fine proportion in the
outline! what a ravishing attitude!


Tim. He ought to keep his ravishing attitude 'till he catches her; now, that
there I call a tall woman.


Jonq. A Vandyke!


Tony. Mrs.Vandyke?


Jonq. No, no; it is the portrait of Beatrix Constantia Contacroyana, painted
by that master. The Judgment of Paris, the sleeping Venus, and that delightful
picture of the Cardinal Virtue, Faith, Hope and Charity, are by Carraci; a most
enchanting piece! observe how finely the Hope is relieved.


Tony. Relieved by Charity; poor soul!


Tim. That Is a pretty woman that is looking up at the sky.


Jonq. A Cleopatra, by Guido.


Tony. See the little eel in her hand! that is a dark looking man in the black
bonnet.


Jonq. A Rembrandt, by himslf.


Tony. Yes; he is all alone; there is a woman riding on a white bull.


Jonq. Europa, an undoubted Raphael.


Tony. No!


Jonq. As true as the cartons.


Tim. Riding on a bull! strike her plump; Squire, the woman and the goose!


Jonq. Jupiter and Leda; upon my honor, I never saw a more capital picture! --
but, dear sir, the goose happens to be a swan.


Tony. Mayhap'twas only a goose before you got it. Tim, who is that like in the
black wig?


Jonq. That is the portrait of Charles the Second.


Tony. He Is mighty like Matt Muggins the excise-man.


Jonq. It Is a Sir Godfrey Kneller; but I fancy king Charles never sat for it.


Tim. And so they have drawn him standing. Who is the lad with the long hair?


Jonq. Lod, sir? that is a Magdalen, by Guido.


Tony. She Is a plump Mag. Who is that thin ill-looking fellow?


Jonq. It Is a picture of Cassius, that stabbed Caesar -- ^t's a Rubens, very
bold.


Tim. Yes, he was a bold fellow.


Jonq. Good keeping!


Tim. Fast enough; I remember they kept him in Newgate.


Jonq. Charmingly brought out!


Tim. He was brought out in a white cap, tied with black ribbon.


Jonq. What a glow of coloring!


Tim. I never saw a man look better upon the occasion.


Jonq. Greatly designed! forcibly executed!


Tim. Only the peace-officers at his execution, no calling in the military; we
have had enough of that already.


Jonq. What harmony of light and shade! What noble masses!


Tim. Masses! He a Papish! I Will bett half an ounce, that Tom Cassius, that
stabbed Squire Caesar, died a Presbyterian.


Tony. How knowing my tutor is!

[During the above speeches of Tim, Jonquil stands en-raptur'd with the
picture, not attending him.] Coufin, Cousin Jonquil, hollo!

(Slaps him on the shoulder.)
Jon. Sir!


Tony. I intend to have my picture taken off some evening or other.


Jonq. You're a very good subject.


Tony. The King has not a better.

Enter Frank.
Frank. Sir, Lord Spindle has sent to let you know, he waits for you at the
Cocoa-tree.


Jonq. The chariot at the door?


Frank. Yes, sir.

Exit.
Jonq. Adieu, mon cher Ami!

Exit.
Tim. Absolutely, 'Squire, this cousin of yours is a tip-top macaroni.


Ton. Yes, he is a famous mac.


Tim. And his man Frank says he is a dillitante?


Tony. Oh, he is a great dilly; but though he seems to love his pictures, as I do
my horses, he does not take half so great care of em. Think of old bonnets and
black and brown heads! Cost him ten thousand pounds too. Why my iittle Robin,
my Whipper-in, looks more decent then the best of them.


Tim. Aye! but when my friend Jack Raddle the painter comes, brush upon 'em,
they will be quite another thing.


Tony. But what keeps him?


Tim. Here he is.

Enter Painter, with a pot of paint and large brush. Are you there, Jack? Come,
fall to.


Tony. Hold, you remember the, bargain: Tim, be witness. You're to paint fine
large powdered pretty wigs upon every head in this room, at the rate of half a
crown a nob all round.


Tim. That Is the bargain.


Painter. And I scorn to go back, though it is a tight price, your honor.


Tony. How charmingly they will look!


Tim. Yes, they will be quite genteel. Hark'ee, Jack, do you see, I recommend you
to this here fquire; so do the job neatly. None of your little starved caxons,
with, one buckle, and that no larger than a pipe stopper; but let me see the
brownest face against this wall, wigg'd like an alderman.


Painter. Say no more.


Tony. But quick, quick, bustle; you must have 'em done before coufin comes
back.

Enter Diggory.
Dig. Sir, the gentleman's come.


Tony. What gentleman?


Tim. How should he know? I Will go see myself.

Exit.
Tony. Come, come, fall to.


Paint. Don't fear, sir; they fhall soon be quite another thing.


Tony. Come along, we'll be with you soon again. Come; Lord! how delighted
cousin Jonquil will be!

Exeunt Tony and Diggory. [The painter, whistling, takes one of the pictures
down, and as he sits to it, the scene closes.]
SCENE, the antichamber. Enter Pulville, meeting Tony, Tim, and Diggory. Dig.
Here Is my master.


Pulv. Sir, your humble servant.


Dig. Sir, this is the --


Tim. Diggory, I tell you once for all, if you come the gentleman usher, while
I am by, you will absolutely knock your head against my fistis.


Dig. Why sure I --


Tony. Go, go, you fool, and see that the painter slaps away briskly.

Exit Diggory. Well, sir, are you a barber?


Pulv. A barber! no, sir; my name is Pulville.


Tony. But what are you?


Pulv. (...) am a perfumer, sir.


Tony. Now, (...) me, if I know what trade that is. (^side.) Tim do you talk to
him.


T^^. A perfumer? I Am at home, though he is too (...) supp^^^ he ^^o^lted in
Monmouth. ( (...) up to Pulville conceitedly.) Master, how do (...)?


Pulv. Sir?


Tim. Do you shoot 'em?


Tony. Aye, do you shoot 'em? -- What, Tim?


( apart to Tim.) Pulv. I shoot, Sir!


Tim. Aye, how do you order it?


Pulv. If you mean my business, sir; by calcination, infusion, mixtures,
compositions, philters, and distillation.


Tim. What, then mayhap you don't use the ferret?


Pulv. No, sir, the only essential animal is the civet cat.


Tim. The cat will catch them, I allow; but then they mangle them so cursedly.


Pulv. Mangle who, good sir?


Tim. Ever while you live, take rabbits with a ferret, that is the genteel
thing. Mayhap, lad, you're in the hedgehog way. Have a care, though, for since
some busy fellow put it into the news-paper, that they were as good as a
partridge -- my bear to a lapdog, if hedge-hogs don't soon be included in the
game-act. You're the first rabbit catcher I ever knew that --


Pulv. I a rabbit catcher! I don't understand you, gentlemen. I Would have you to
know, I keep one of the first perfumer's shops in St. James's parish; I cannot
imagine what you mean, by talking to me about rabbit-catchers and hedge-hogs.


Tony. I believe my tutor knows every thing.


Pulv. Sir, I thought every body knew Mr. Pulville. However, sir, I have the
honor to be very well known to the nobility, as my book-debts of ten years
standing can sufficiently testify. Rabbit catcher! Sir, sir! I Am original
inventor of the genuine Circassian beautifying cosmetic lotion, cream of roses,
and powder of pearl. Step into my shop a crocus, and you walk out a narcissus;
my sweet lip-salve can change a blubber to a pouting -- a walnut to a
cherry-lip. Then, sir, my perfumed powders conquer nature; I can give a lady a
pink head, a green head, or a blue head. Do you know, sir, that I make the
chemical Paphian wash, for eradicating hair; so innocent, it may be used by
infants just born, and yet so powerful, that three ablutions give an Esau the
hand of a Jacob? And now, sir, with me, and me alone, the elderly maiden ladies
deal, for their sweet-scented shaving powder.


Tony. I said he was a barber.


Pulv. Rabbit-catcher! -- Why, sir, my bear's grease --


Tim. Do you dance a bear, tight boy?


Pulv. Sir, do I look like such a scoundrel?


Tim. Scoundrel! Strike you plump, am I a scoun-drel?


Pulv. You, sir! I --


Tim. Aye, poke you well -- I dance the spright-liest bear in all England,
that is in the genteel way.


Pulv. Hem! -- Sir! -- when you want any thing in my way, you will see my name,
P. Pulville, over the door. Rabbit Catcher!

Exit Pulville.
Tim. (after Pulville is off) A bear dancer, a scoundrel! you rascal, I Will --
he is gone -- he was right; my name is Tim Tickle; and now you have told me your
place of abode, call upon me when you will.


Tony. Knows all the points of honor.


Enter Diggory. Dig. Oh, sir, they are just done; and 'Squire Jonquil is just
walking out of his carriage.


Tim. I told you, 'Squire, Jack Raddle could touch 'em up in the genteel way,
because he is the boy for it; come, we'll take a squint at his handy work.


Tony. Come, I Am as glad as a guinea; how my cousin Jonquil will be delighted!

Exeunt.
Scene opens; discovers the picture gallery, most of the portraits with large
white wigs; the Painter sits daubing a wig upon a picture, which he has on a
chair. Diggory officiously attending. Dig. Do, let me give him another curl.


Paint. I cannot stand it, man; -- be still, I say; let him be.


Enter Jonquil. Jonq. What do I see! confusion! what is all this?

(Stands amazed)
Dig. I knew he would be delighted.


Jonq. Stop your sacrilegious hands, you profane villain.


Paint. Bless your heart, master, I don't grudge you a curl or two more

(Whistles and paints)
Jonq. My Rembrandt! from the Florentine gallery! You assassin, why did you
murder me?

(Seizes the painter.
Paint. Sir!


Jonq. Answer me, you miscreant; who brought you here? what mortal enemy to the
fine arts, what fiend, whispered you to perpetrate such an infernal action?


Paint. If this moment was my last, sir, it was white lead of eightpence a
pound.


Jonq. White lead, you caitiss!


Paint. How could a poor fellow, like me, afford flake-white-for the price?


Jonq. What price? you barbarian; explain, sirrah; confess, or I Will have you
flayed like Marsyas.


Paint. Sir, 'Squire Lumpkin, the little, round, fine gentleman, employed me to
paint white wigs, upon all the pictures, at half-a-crown a head.


Dig. Indeed, sir, I Am sure my master would not grudge twice the money, to make
them look decent, as they belong to your honor.


Jonq. I Am undone!


Enter Tony and Tim. Tony. Eh, Tim! (Looks exultingly at the pictures) I
believe they are the thing.


Tim. Bang me, but they are quite genteel!


Jonq. Mr. Lumpkin, I thank you, sir.


Tony. I guessed you would.


Jonq. I am infinitely obliged to you, sir.


Tony. You're mighty welcome.


Jonq. I am eternally your debtor.


Tony. I Will never charge you a penny for it. I believe now they look like
gentlemen. How pleased I am that I thought of it!


Dig. I thought of it first.


Tony. You lie.


Tim. You do, Diggory; 'twas I advised the 'Squire to it. because I know the
genteel thing.


Jonq. Oh, pray, no contention for the brilliancy of the thought; for I Would give
three or five thousand pounds to undo what you have done.


Tony. What!


Jonq. You have ruined me.


Tony. Anan!


Jonq. You Have undone me, sir!


Tony. Who, I! as how?


Jonq. You Have spoiled my pictures.


Tony. Tim!


Tim. I said, at first, it was a damned stupid thing of you.


Dig. And you know, 'Squire, I told you, that none but an ass could think of
such nonsense.


Tony. Can you unwig 'em again?


Paint. What will I get by that?


Jonq. I Will give you fifty guineas,


Paint. Lay it here,


Jonq. There Is the money; charm my longing eyes, once more, with the fight of
my Rembrandt's dear, dear, black bonnet,


Paint. Then, sir, they are only done in water color; so a wet towel and a
little soap settles their wigs in five minutes.


Jonq. Tol de roll, loll. Give me your hand; I was dreadfully alarmed; but now I
can laugh at it. Ha! ha! ha! what a whimsical thought! but, you stupid rogue,
why would you ruin the women?


Paint. I never ruined a woman in my life, sir.


Jonq. I mean, why would you put wigs upon the ladies?


Paint. Sure it is the fashion now for all ladies to wear wigs. How charming
they look! Poor fellows, ye must soon lose your grandeur!


Enter Frank. Frank. Sir, the company are come.


Jonq. Very well.

Frank looks at the pictures, laughs and exit,
Dig. Please your honor, may I laugh at them a little?


Tony. Tutor, kick Diggory out of the room, if you please.


Tim. To oblige you, 'Squire.


Dig. I Will save you the trouble.

Exit.
Jonq. All is now very well; but I have one request to make you.


Tony. What is it, pray?


Jonq. Only to dismiss one of your retinue.


Tim. That Is Diggory.

(aside)
Tony. Who?


Jonq. The bear.


Tony. What! the bear?


Jonq. That Is the gentleman.


Tony. Why, Tim, do you hear my cousin? Will you?


Tim. Look'ee, 'Squire; this here harmless soul, this bear of mine, has
maintained me some years, when I could not do for myself; and though, thanks to
my good breeding, I Am grown polite enough to be a gentleman's tutor, yet I Will
never be so much in the fashion as to forsake an old benefactor.

Exit Tim.
Tony. I wish I could get any regular family to board him with: enquire among
your acquaintance, sir.


Jonq. Sir, I Will do myself the honor to enquire.


Tony. Bruin's a lad of few words, but he is as civil a fellow as ever stood
upon two legs. But, cousin Jonquil, I will not offer you your fifty guineas you
gave the painter.


Jonq. Say no more; you meant well, and that palliates the confequence. But,
for Rubens' sake, forego your pretensions in future to a taste in pictures.


Tony. Well, I know the points of a horse, and that is made by a better workman.


Jonq. Therefore, to the knowledge of horses and dogs, like a true 'Squire,
from this moment confine your claim; for if a man will, in opposition to
nature, meddle with matters of which he is fo extremely ignorant, he must
inevitably render himself the object of ridicule and laughter.


Tony. Laughter! and what is pleasanter than a laugh? By jingo, a laugh is all I
wanted.

If I Have raised some sweet smiles on those lovely fair faces,
I am glad I put wigs on their sisters, the Graces:
I would not offend you for more than I Will mention;
To please all my friends, was my only intention.

THE END.
Of T. CADELL, Bookseller, opposite Catherine-street, Strand, may be had the
following pieces:
BONDUCA: a Tragedy, written by Beaumont and Fletcher, with Alterations. THE
DEVIL UPON TWO STICKS, THE MAID OF BATH, The COZENERS, The NABOB, and The TRIP
TO CALAIS, to which-is annexed The CAPUCHIN, all written by the late SAMUEL
FOOT Esquire and published by Mr. COLMAN. Also The TAILORS, a Tragedy for warm
weather. BUXOM JOAN, a Burletta in one Act, and the Airs, Duets, Trios, and
Finale introduced in the Comedy of the SPANISH BARBER; Likewise SUMMER
AMUSEMENT; or, An ADVENTURE AT MARGATE, a Comic Opera, and the Airs, Duets, and
Trios in the Musical Farce called The SON-IN-LAW, as they are all performed at
the Theater Royal in the Hay-Market. The MANAGER IN DISTRESS, a Prelude, on
opening the Hay-Market Theater, May 30, 1780. Written by GEORGE COLMAN.

