THE WATERMAN; OR, The First of August: A BALLAD OPERA, IN TWO A^^S. AS IT IS
PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, HAY-MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, the Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand. 1774.
[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
TUG, Mr. BANNISTER. BUNDLE, Mr. WILSON, ROBIN, Mr. WESTON.
WOMEN.
Mrs. BUNDLE, Mrs. THOMPSON, WILELMINA, Mrs. JEWEL.
TO THE PUBLIC.
FINDING among the different pieces I have composed for Ranelagh and the
Theater a number of Ballads which I took great pains with, and which have been
but little heard, I thought I could not better employ my leisure time than in
furnishing upon some familiar plan the dialogue necessary to work up these
materials into a Ballad Farce, a species of entertainment which has always been
well received, and which as it has lain dormant for some time, I thought would
have so far the charms of novelty to recommend it.

I had heard of a piece of this sort, which has the characters of a Waterman
and a Gardener in it; and the scene of which is laid at Battersea: This I
enquired after, but was informed it was out of print; I nevertheless liked the
idea of those two characters so well, that I determined to pursue the hint as
for as it was necessary for my purpose; I dare say it must be evident to every
one that I have done no more; I never read the piece in question, nor do I for
a certainty at this moment know the title of it.

I mention this circumstance because I am resolved to acknowledge at all times
from whence I collect any matter for the trifles I may have an opportunity of
presenting to the public. I must be an egregious egotist indeed, and little
entitled to the indulgence they have hitherto favored me with, if I could be
so unconscious of my own inability as to suppose I ever can present them with
any thing worthy their notice without assistance of this sort; beside, in this
I am serving myself, for I must be well convinced, the most effectual way to
secure their indulgence is to deal as honestly by them as they deal generously
by every man in my situation.

With regard to the performers, if I mentioned the merit of any one in
particular, I should do injustice to the rest; I shall therefore say in
general, that their assiduity has been unwearied upon this, as well as upon
every other similar occasion.

The piece is indeed incomparably performed, and it is very apparent that the
greatest part of its success is owing to this circumstance.

THE WATERMAN; OR, The First of August.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Gardener's Garden, where several Gardeners are at Work, some digging, etc.
others, together with several Women, tying up bundles of Asparagus. BUNDLE and
TUG, seated under a Tree, at Breakfast upon cold Roast Beef; a Tankard of Beer
upon the Table. CHORUS.
LABOR, lads, ever youth be gone,
For see apace the day steels on;
Labor is the poor man's wealth,
Labor it is that gives him health;
Labor makes us, while we sing,
Happier than the greatest king;
Then labor, lads, ever youth be gone,
For see apace the day steals on.

BUN. This, now, is my delight, to sit at breakfast while the men work. Come,
honest Tom, let us make an end of our tankard, before my wife gets up; her
raking so in London, (where between you and I, she stays a devilish deal longer
than while she sells the sparrow-grass) keeps her a-bed woundy late of a
morning.


TUG. Why, Master Bundle, I have oftentimes thought to myself, that it was a
wondersome kind of thing, how it came to pass, that you two agree so badly;
when, out of all the four and twenty hours, you are hardly ever above two of
them together.


BUN. Ah, Thomas! Thomas! it is very hard that a man like me cannot be allowed to
get drunk once a day, without being called to an account for it; but between
you and I, she is the arrantest --


Mrs. BUN. (within) What are you all about there? Where Is your lazy, idle
master?


BUN. You hear she has begun to ring her usual peal; this is the way the moment
she is up.


TUG. And I believe she seldom leaves off till she goes to bed; does she Master
Bundle?


BUN. No, nor then neither; every thing must be her way, or there is no getting
any peace. As soon as the marketing's over in town, away she and her favorite
Robin, trudge to the two-shilling gallery of one of the play houses; where they
have picked up such a pack of damned nonsense, about sentiments and stuff, that
I am not only obliged to put up with her scolding me all the time I do see her,
but I am scolded in a language I don't understand.


TUG. Why, I should like that best now; for then, you know, one has no right to
take it for scolding at all.


BUN. Oh, when once she raises her voice, you never can take it for any thing
else.


TUG. Why then, mayhap, it is all concerning this same playhouse business, that
she is so stout against me, and does all she can to serve Master Robin with Miss
Wilhelminy?


BUN. Ay, there was another of her freaks; she was then as fond of romances, as
she is now of plays; and though my father, who was as plain a man as myself,
swore he would not leave us a farthing, if we did not call the girl Margery;
nothing would satisfy her forsooth, but we must give her the name of Wilelmina:
-- It Is such a damned, confounded, hard name, that I was a matter of three
years before I could pronounce it right.


TUG. Well, stand to your oars, for here she comes!


SCENE II.
Mrs. BUN. IS it not a most mavelous thing, Mr. Bundle, that I must be such
an eternal slave to my family, in this here manner, while you and your
cologuing companions are besotting, and squandering away your time with your
guzzling, and every thing goes to rack and manger. I that am such a quiet,
well-bred, easy, tame creature, that never scolds, nor riots, nor dins your
faults in your ears; but am always as gentle and as patient as a lamb.


BUN. You are a very good wife to be sure, my dear, only a little inclined to
talking; if you, now, had no tongue, or I had no ears, we should be the
happiest couple in the world.


Mrs. BUN. What a provocating creature! -- tongue! But this comes of marrying
such a scum of a fellow, one that you may throw away all the tenderness in the
world for, before it makes any oppression upon him. -- But it serves me right,
for it is very well known, what great offers I refused upon your account!


BUN. I don't know how it should be otherwise than well-known, my love; for I
generally hear of it about six times a day: But, my dear, don't you think it
will be necessary to give orders about loading the cart, against you go to
London?


Mrs. BUN. Sir, I shall not go to London tonight at all: Robin, Miss
Wilelmina, and I, are invited to go with a party to see the rowing match, this
afternoon; and afterward there is to be a hop at Mr. Wick's, the
tallow-chandler's, where I intend to settle the purliminaries about my
daughter's wedding: And I desire you to take care, that the pines are not all
gone before next week, for I intend to invite the whole party to a hop here.


TUG. But, Madam Bundle, be'n't you some how or other afraid, that what with
one thing, and what with another, you will hop all the money out of your
husband's pocket?


Mrs. BUN. I don't direct my discourse to you, Sir; but it is my husband that
encourages you to behave in such a brutish and outrageous manner. He has
promised you I know, that you shall have my daughter, but I Will make him know
who is at home -- I will: -- I Will assure you, indeed! -- Such a fellow as you!
-- A nasty, idling, scurvy rapscallion, that leads a filthy, drunken, lazy
life; sotting in one alehouse, and sotting in another; and shall such a low
brute dare to expire to the honor of marrying Miss Wilelmina Bundle?


TUG. I Will tell you what, Ma'am Bundle, I should not care much for marrying
your daughter, if she was not of a little better temper than yourself.


Mrs. BUN. Oh, the villain! -- Why you vile, wicked --


BUN. My dear, how can you put yourself in such a passion, you, you know, who
are such a tame creature -- one that never scolds, or riots? --


Mrs. BUN. I Will riot you all to some tune, I will -- therefore Mr. Bundle,
unless you would have me sue for a separate maintenance -- mind what I say --
next time I go to London, I shall take Robin with me to Doctor's Commons, and
nothing but your consent to his marrying your daughter, shall ever make me look
upon you again.

AIR.
My counsel take,
Or else I Will make
The house too hot to hold you;
Be ruled, I pray,
I Would something say,
Did I ever rout or scold you?
But spite to wreak,
On one so meek,
Who never raves or flies out;
On me, who am,
Like any lamb;
Oh! I could tear your eyes out.

SCENE III.
BUNDLE and TUG. TUG. Well, and what do you say to all this?


BUN. Why, I Will tell you what, honest Thomas; for me to contradict her, would
be much the same thing, as for you to row against wind and tide.


TUG. Why, then that would be bad enough, Master Bundle.


BUN. But I Will try what I can do with my daughter for you, and all I can say to
put you in heart, is, that if I find her as headstrong, and as perverse as her
mother, I shall advise you to have nothing to do with her, and so save you from
hanging yourself in a month.


TUG. But, Master Bundle, if I marries Miss, I expect to be a little happier
than you are.


BUN Ah, Tom, Tom! the wisest of us may be deceived!

AIR.
I.
I just as eagerly as thee,
Thought when I got a wife,
My joy of course so great would be,
It needs must last for life;
When she agreed to tie the knot,
I thought of nothing else;
Then all was glee,
'Twixt her and me,
Nor did I grudge the king his lot,
When ding-dong went the bells.
II.
But, ah! our joys were fleeting soon,
Words that did sweetly fall,
Ever we had passed the honey-moon,
To wormwood turned and gall;
Whatever of furies they invent,
Broke out of flaming cells,
You now may see,
In her and me;
We fight, and scold, and both repent,
That ding-dong went the bells.

SCENE IV.
TUG. I don't know but you are in the right of it. A waterman would be a
confounded fool, that would put up a sail with the wind and tide both in his
teeth. -- But here comes Miss Wilhelminy: -- If she marries me, I Will see if I
cannot get her to change her name.


SCENE V.
AIR. Miss WILELMINA.
I.
Two youths for my love are contending in vain,
For do all they can,
Their sufferings I rally, and laugh at their pain;
Which, which is the man
That deserves me the most? let me ask of my heart,
Is it Robin, who smirks, and who dresses so smart?
Or Tom, honest Tom, who makes plainness his plan?
Which, which is the man?
II.
Indeed to be prudent, and do what I ought,
I do what I can;
Yet surely papa and mama are in fault;
To a different man
They, each, have advised me to yield up my heart;
Mama praises Robin, who dresses so smart;
Papa honest Tom, who makes plainness his plan;
Which, which is the man?
III.
Be kind then, my heart, and but point out the youth,
I Will do what I can,
His love to return, and return it with truth;
Which, which is the man?
Be kind to my wishes, and point out my heart,
Is it Robin, who smirks, and who dresses so smart?
Or Tom, honest Tom, who makes plainness his plan?
Which, which is the man?

TUG. Take my advice, Miss, and let it be honest Tom.


WILL. Oh, you brute! did you hear me?


TUG. Why, Miss, suppose if I did, you a'n't afraid of speaking your mind, be
ye?


WILL. My mind! why you have not the assurance to pretend, that I said any thing
in favor of you?


TUG. Why no, I cannot say directly that you said as how you would have me; but I Am
sure you cannot help saying yourself, that it sounded a little that way.


WILL. And do you imagine then I could perfer you to Robin, sweet Robin, as the
song says, that is all over a nosegay, and the very pink of good breeding.


TUG. For my part, I makes no comparisments, as a body may say; but I Would be
sorry, Miss, if there was not others as agreeable, and well behaved as he,
however.


WILL. What, yourself I suppose? -- Do you know, you odious creature, that he
can spout Romeo by heart, and that he is for ever talking similies to me?


TUG. I know he is for ever talking nonsense to you.


WILL. Oh! hold your filthy tongue: Did you but hear him compare my cheeks to
carnations, my hands to lilies, my beautiful blue veins to violets, my lips to
cherries, my teeth to snow-drops, and my eyes to the sparkling dew that hangs
upon the rose trees in the morning -- what would you say then?


TUG. Ah, but you know, Miss, that is all in his way.


WILL. Then he writes verses, Oh, dear me! the author of the opera book, in the
parlour window, is a fool to him for writing, Oh! he is a very Ovid's
Metamorphose!


TUG. Why, for the matter of that, Miss, there are other folks that can write
as well as he; what would you say now, if I had wrote something about and
concerning my falling in love with you?


WILL. I should then begin to have some hopes of you.


TUG. Should you? -- Why then I have.


WILL. Oh, dear! let us see it?


TUG. It Is a song, Miss; I Will sing it to you, if you please.

AIR.
I.
And did you not hear of a jolly young waterman,
Who at Black-friars Bridge used for to ply;
And he feathered his oars with such skill and dexterity,
Winning each heart, and delighting each eye:
He looked so neat, and rowed so steadily,
The maidens all flocked in his boat so readily,
And he eyed the young rogues with so charming an air,
That this waterman never was in want of a fare.
II.
What sights of fine folks he often rowed in his wherry,
'Twas cleaned out so nice, and so painted with all;
He was always first oars when the fine city ladies,
In a party to Ranelagh went or Vauxhall.
And oftentimes would they be giggling and leering,
But 'twas all one to Tom, their gibing and jeering,
For loving, or liking, he little did care,
For this waterman never was in want of a fare.
III.
And yet, but to see how strangely things happen;
As he rowed along, thinking of nothing at all,
He was plied by a damsel so lovely and charming,
That she smiled and so straitway in love he did fall;
And would this young damsel but banish his sorrow,
He Would wed her tonight before tomorrow:
And how should this waterman ever know care,
When he is married, and never in want of a fare?
Well, Miss, how do you like it?


WILL. Like it! why it is the very moral of yourself! -- If you had not passed
half your time between Wapping and the Tower Stairs, you could never have wrote
such a song.


TUG. Didn't I tell you as how it was the thing? -- Well, now, I hope you will
consent!


WILL. Consent to what?


TUG. Why, to marry me: To be certain you will not find me like your Mr. Robin, an
inconsiderative puppy, that will say more in half an hour, than he will stand to
in half a year! I am a little too much of an Englishman, I thank you, Miss, for
that; my heart lies in the right place, and as we say, it is not always the best
looking boat that goes the safest.


WILL. And so, Mr. Thomas, you really think by all this fine talking to make me
dying for love of you?


TUG. Why, Miss for the matter of that, I don't see why I should not.


WILL. Well, then, I Will tell you what, if you ever expect to have any thing to
say to me, you must kneel at my feet, kiss my hand, swear that I am an angel,
that the very sun, moon, and stars, are not half so bright as my eyes; that I
am Cupid, Venus, and the three Graces put together.


TUG. Why, to be sure, all this may be very fine; but why should I talk to you
in a lingo I don't understand?


WILL. This, as my dear Robin says, is the only language of true lovers, and if
you don't understand it already, you will learn it for my sake.


TUG. I Will tell you what, Miss, if you don't marry me, till I make such a fool
of myself, it is my mind you will never marry me at all. I love you to be sartain,
there is nobody can say to the contrary of that; but you will never catch me at
your Cupids and Wenisses; I am plain, and downright; I Would do all that in my
power lay to make you happy, if you would have me, and if you will not, I have nothing
to do but to cast away care, and go on board a man of war, for I could never
bear to stay here if you was married to another.


WILL. What, then, you would leave England and all for the love of me?


TUG. That Is what I would, Miss.


WILL. Well, that would be charming! Oh! how I should dote upon it, if I was to
hear them cry through Battersea-Streets, The unfortunate sailor's lamentation
for the loss of his mistress!


TUG. I Will stick to my word, I assure you; if you will not have me, I Will go on
board a man of war.

AIR.
I.
Then farewell my trim-built wherry,
Oars, and coat and badge, farewell;
Never more at Chelsea Ferry,
Shall your Thomas take a spell.
II.
But to hope and peace a stranger,
In the battles heat I go;
Where exposed to every danger,
Some friendly ball shall may me low.
III.
Then may-hap when homeward steering,
With the news my mess-mates come;
Even you, the story hearing,
With a sigh may cry -- poor Tom!

SCENE III.
WILELMINA and ROBIN. WILL. Well, it is a most charming thing to plague these
creatures -- die for me -- If I had not given myself some airs to him, he never
could have thought of such a thing; but that is the way, if one does not use
them like dogs, there is no getting any thing civil from them -- but here comes
Robin, I must plague him in another way.


ROB. Miss Wilelmina, may I have the unspeakable happiness to tell you, how
much words fall short of the great honor, you would prefer upon me, if you
would grant me the request, of favoring me with your hand this evening at the
hop.


WILL. Why, Mr. Robin, what particular inclination can you have to dance with me?


ROB. What inclination, Miss! ask the plants why they love a shower? ask the
sun-flower why it loves the sun? ask the snow-drop why it is white? ask the
violet why it is blue? ask the trees why they blossom? the cabages why they
grow? it is all because they cannot help it; no more can I help my love for you.


WILL. Lord, Mr. Robin, how gallant you are!


ROB. Oh, my Wilelmina! thou art straiter than the straitest tree! sweeter than
the sweetest flower! thy hand is as white as a lilly! thy breath is sweet as
honey-suckles! and when you speak, grace is in all your steps! heaven in your
eye! in every gesture -- Oh dear!


WILL. Lord, Mr. Robin, you have said that so often --


ROB. Well, you never heard me say this in your life -- now mind. My heart is
for all the world just like a hot-bed, where the seed of affection, sown by
your matchless charms, and warmed by that sun, your eyes, became a beautiful
flower, which is just now full blown; and all I desires, Miss, is that you will
condescend to gather it and stick in your bosom.


WILL. And what pretensions have you to think I shall ever consent to such a
thing.


ROB. Pretensions, Miss! because my love is boundless as the sea, and my heart
is as full of Cupid's arrows, as a sweet briar is full of thorns.


WILL. But I am afraid if I was foolish enough to believe you, you would soon
forget me.


ROB. Forget you, Miss! it is impossible! sooner shall asparagus forget to grow,
seed forget to rise, leaves to fall, sooner shall trees grow with their roots
in the air, and their branches buried in the earth, than I forget my Wilelmina.


WILL. Well, I do declare there is no resisting you.


ROB. Resisting me, Miss! no I don't know how you should; my heart is stocked
with love, as a flower garden is stocked with flowers. The Cupids that have
fled from your eyes and taken shelter there, are as much out of number as the
leaves on a tree, or the colors in a bed of tulips; You are to me what the
summer is to the garden, and if you don't revive me with the sunshine of your
favor, I shall be overrun with the weeds of disappointment, and choked up
with the brambles of despair.


WILL. That would be a pity, indeed.


ROB. So 'twould indeed, Miss.


WILL. Do you really love me then?


ROB. Love you!

AIR.
I.
Bid the blossoms never be blighted,
Birds by scare-crows never be frighted,
From the firm earth the oak remove,
Teach the jessamine how to blow,
Teach the holy-oak to grow,
Trees bear cherries,
Hedges berries,
But prithee teach not me to love.
II.
Grass shall grow than cedars higher,
Pinks shall bloom upon the briar,
Lilies be as black as jet,
Roses smell no longer sweet,
Melons ripen without heat.
Plumbs and cherries,
Taste like berries,
When Wilelmina I forget.

SCENE IV.
BUNDLE and WILELMINA. WILL. Oh, Papa! are you there?


BUN. Hush! hush! speak softly! you have not seen your mother, have you?


WILL. No.


BUN. Because I wanted to talk with you, Wilelmina, my dear.


WILL. What upon the old subject, I suppose.


BUN. Yes, but I would not have her hear us.


WILL. Oh! she is safe enough, scolding the men in the garden.


BUN. Oh! that will take her some time. Well, have you seen Thomas?


WILL. Yes, I have seen him, and a most deplorable figure he cuts; I believe by
this time he has entered himself on board a man of war; that so, as the history
book says, he may put an end to his existence and my cruelty together.


BUN. Why, did he say he would?


WILL. Don't I tell you I was cruel to him, and how could he do any less.


BUN Why the girl's distracted! but this comes of gadding about with your
mother; if you had listened to my advice, I would no more have suffered you to
put on such ridiculous conceited airs -- why, you and your mother are the
laughing stock of the whole place; I never pop my head into the Black Raven, to
get my pennyworth in a morning, but all the folks are full of it.


WILL. Why, Papa, we are only a little genteeler than the rest of the people of
Battersea, that is all.


BUN. Genteeler! Do you call it genteel then to take a pleasure in being
pointed at? But I Will not bear it; therefore hear what I have to say, or --


WILL. Why do you tell me of all this? Why don't you speak to my Mama? It Is no
wonder she does what she pleases with me, when you know you don't dare to
contradict her yourself.


BUN. Not dare to contradict her?


WILL. No, Papa; you know she will have her own way, and since she has desired
me to have Robin, what can I do but be dutiful?


BUN. What then you owe no duty to me, I suppose?


WILL. Indeed I do; and if I could see that you owed a little to yourself, I
would oblige you willingly.


BUN. But as it is, you will not marry Thomas?


WILL. I cannot, indeed,


BUN. And for no other reason but because your Mama insists upon your marrying
Robin?


WILL. No other.


BUN. Very well, I Will settle the matter; she shall do as I please, and if she
was to come across me now --


SCENE V.
BUNDLE, WILELMINA, and Mrs. BUNDLE. Mrs. BUN. What then, Mr. Bundle?


BUN. My dear.


Mrs. BUN. What could have conduced you to raise your voice to such a pitch? I
hope you had not the assurance to be tampering, and plotting, and undermining
my daughter's infections; and, above all, I hope you was not hatching up any
vile scheme to impose my authority.


WILL. Poor Papa! how he looks.


BUN. Why, my dear, I did intend to say something to you on that subject, but
as my tongue does not go quite so fast as a water-mill, I am afraid it would be
but to little purpose.


Mrs. BUN. Scurvy creature!


WILL. If you don't speak, Papa, I shall be obliged to marry Robin.


BUN. I cannot help it.


WILL. It Is all your own fault now; don't blame me -- I must marry Robin, you
have perfectly given me your consent.


BUN. So thou could but unmarry me, I Would consent to your marrying whoever you
pleased.


Mrs. BUN. Well, my dear, what has he been saying to you? nothing I hope to
discourage you in your infections to Robin.


WILL. Indeed he has, and I cannot think of being undutiful.


Mrs. BUN. Undutiful, indeed! I say undutiful -- which will reflect most upon
you do you think? to obey a mean, poor spirited, drone of a father, who has
nothing but low mechanical ideras, or a mother who is acquainted with
Shakespeare, goes to all the sentimental comedies, can play at cards, dance
kittelions and allemands, and knows every particle of purliteness and
high-breeding.


WILL. Very true, Ma'am; but then Mr. Thomas is such a sweet young man.


Mrs. BUN. He!


WILL. So good-natured!


Mrs. BUN. The Vandil!


WILL. So honest!


Mrs. BUN. Low creature!


WILL. Such an immensity of love!


Mrs. BUN. The Hottentot! I Will tell you what, Wilelmina, your father has put
all this into your head I Will go and give it to him heartily, while my blood's
up, for daring to be beforehand with me; and then I have but one word to say to
you, either comply and marry Robin, or else I Will disinherit you from any share
in the blood of my family, the Grograms; and you may creep through life with
the dirty, pitiful, mean, paltry, low, ill-bred notions which you have gathered
from his family the Bundles.

AIR.
Wilelmina, you see I Am quite cool,
Obey me, it is all for your good;
Or may I be counted a fool,
If I own you for my flesh and blood.
Prefer such a lout, Miss, for shame,
To Robin so spruce and so trim;
But your father it is that is to blame,
And so I shall even talk him.

SCENE VI.
WILELMINA. Well, in all I have read, I never met with a girl of more spirit
than myself -- for I make two lovers, and a father and mother as miserable as I
can desire; and yet, am I to blame? are not they the authors of all this bustle
themselves? If I oblige one, I disoblige the other; I shall, therefore, set all
other considerations aside, and consult only my own heart.

AIR.
I.
Too yielding a carriage,
Has often before marriage,
To ruin and misery pointed the way:
You're shunned, if complying,
But your lover once flying,
How eager he will follow and beg you to stay.
II.
A coquette never proclaim me,
Ye maids, then, nor blame me,
If I wish to be happy, whenever I Am a wife;
Each lover's denial,
Was only a trial,
Which is he that is most likely to love me for life.

The END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
BUNDLE, Mrs. BUNDLE, afterward WlLELMINA. BUNDLE. WHAT shall I do with this
perverse girl? I have but poor comfort for my friend Thomas -- However, all
things considered, I don't know whether I should not have done him a more
unfriendly office by marrying him, than by keeping him single. For my own part,
was I to choose whether I would keep my wife, or have the plague; on my
conscience I should run the risque of the last. But mercy on us! here she comes
-- it is a strange thing that I never mention the word plague, but she is at my
elbow.


Mrs. BUN. Mr. Bundle -- I shall be very cool, Sir.


BUN. I hope so, my dear.


Mrs. BUN. What the devil is the reason that you have been making all this here
piece of work?


BUN. My dear.


Mrs. BUN. I say, Sir, how comes it to pass, that in spite of all my
conjunctions to the contrary, you will behave so monstrously shameful as to
oblige me to put myself in these here passions.


BUN. Why, my dear, are you ever in a passion?


Mrs. BUN. Don't provoke me -- you think, I suppose, because you have got your
daughter on your side, to carry all before you; but, Mr Bundle, though you have
been coaxing and wheedling her to marry that low, dirty -- I will not bemean
myself by repeating his filthy name. Though I say she has been undutiful, and
wicked enough, to suffer such a low unpolite clown as you, to persuade her to
marry a fellow as vulgar and as mean as yourself; yet if I have any authority,
you shall no more carry it off in the manner you think --


BUN. My dear --


Mrs. BUN. I will not hear a word.


BUN. Have a moment's patience now, and I Will convince you.


Mrs. BUN. I will not have patience; nor I will not be convinced; it is a shame and a
scandalous thing; and whoever tells me to be patient, or wants to convince, me
it shall be the worse for them.


BUN. Go on, my dear.


Mrs. BUN. Oh, how I am used! I could hang myself for vexation. (Crying.


BUN. My dear, if you had about half as much reason as you have passion, how
very easily could all these matters be settled; for you are wrong, from the
beginning to the end, in this affair; in the first place, I don't think it would
be very undutiful in a girl to do what her father desires her, was it as you
say; in the next, I desired her to give her consent to marry Thomas, it is true,
but she refused me.


Mrs. BUN. Why this is worse than the other -- First use me ill, and then result
me -- for the girl told me with her own mouth, that she promised you to marry
Thomas.


BUN. And she told me, with her own mouth, she had promised you to marry Robin.


Mrs. BUN. What am I to think of this?


BUN. Even what you please, my dear, you know I never dictate to you.


Mrs. BUN. Here she comes herself, we shall know the truth of all this. Come
here, child, speak ingenuosly now: Did not you tell me, that you would not
marry Robin?


WILL. I did, Ma'am.


Mrs. BUN. There, Mr. Bundle -- and pray what reason did you give me for it?


WILL. Because Papa had persuaded me to marry Thomas.


Mrs. BUN. And have you the confidence to look me in the face, after all this?


BUN. Pray hear me one word.


Mrs. BUN. I will not hear a syllable.


BUN. Nay, let me speak in my turn. Wilelmina, come hear, child, speak
ingenuously; did not you tell me you would not marry Thomas?


WILL. I did, Sir.


BUN. There, Mrs. Bundle -- and pray what reason did you give me for it?


WILL. Because my Mama had persuaded me to marry Robin.


BUN. And have you the confidence to look me in the face after this?


Mrs. BUN. Why you little dirty trollop, have you been making a jest of us both?


BUN. Indeed, my dear, there is something --


WILL. Hear me, my dear Papa and Mama; when first you proposed Robin to me, and
you Thomas, I determined to have neither, 'till one or the other had given me
some proof beside telling me so, that he would make me a faithful and
affectionate husband; the first that does shall have me; and though I would not
wish to have either of you think me undutiful, on that alone shall depend my
giving my consent to be a wife.

AIR.
I.
In vain, dear friends, each art you try,
To neither lover's suit inclined;
On outward charms I Will never rely,
But prize the graces of the mind.
The empty coxcomb, whom you chose,
Just like the flower of a day,
Shook by each wind that folly blows,
Seems born to flutter and decay.
II.
Your choice an honest aspect wears;
To give him pain I often have grieved;
But it proceeded from my fears;
Than me, much wiser are deceived:
I thank you both, then, for your love,
Wait for my choice a little while;
And he who most shall worthy prove,
My hand I Will offer with a smile.

SCENE II.
BUNDLE, Mrs. BUNDLE. BUN. Well, my dear, what do you say to all this?


Mrs. BUN, Say! why that I am perfectly in a quandary; the confidence of the
baggage goes beyond all -- One would think she had never been edicated by me.


BUN. Oh! I am afraid it is her having been edicated by you, as you call it,
that has taught it her.


Mrs. BUN. What do you stand muttering there about? it is you she may thank for
all these mean notions; if she would but suffer me to teach her a little the
bone-tone, she would despise the idera of consulting her heart about marrying,
such low mechanical stuff has been out of fashion a long time since, among
people that know how to bemean themselves.


BUN. Well, but I suppose, you intend to let her do what she pleases.


Mrs. BUN. No, Sir; do you think I am so tame as to be ruled by my daughter? I
believe you can witness for me that I seldom let any body rule but myself.


BUN. You never let any body rule but yourself, my dear; and really you do it
so well, it is a pity to hinder you.


Mrs. BUN. None of your sneers, Sir -- But I see into the bottom of all this;
it is a scheme between you and your daughter, to make a fool of me; but I Will
after her and cure her of her ridiculous notions of love, and a pack of stuff,
and she shall marry the man I have chose for her, or -- In short, I have
determined what to do, and let me hear you, or her, say a single word against
it, if you dare.

AIR.
How can she thus, low minded be?
A girl of her merit!
What Is become of her spirit?
Would the baggage take pattern by me,
She Would value the pleasure of no man!
But hold up her head,
And in all that she said,
Claim the privilege due to a woman.
Our wil^s ought to be without measure,
And the best thing that you,
Male creatures can do,
Is to buckle to our will and pleasure.

SCENE III.
BUNDLE, TUG. TUG. Master Bundle, how fares it? I wanted to speak to you, but I
never likes to interrupt people when they are in agreeable company.


BUN. What you saw my wife with me, she is the most agreeable company, it must
be confessed.


TUG. Why she did not seem to be cantancaras with you now.


BUN. No, her anger was levelled at her daughter; but it is all the same, I feel
the good effects of it, let her be cantancaras, as you call it, with who she
will.


TUG. But, Master Bundle, how comes it to pass that she should be angry with
Miss Wilelmina? she has not refused to marry Robin, has she?


BUN. But she has though, and refused to marry you too.


TUG. Ay, ay, why I never heard she had any other sweetheart.


BUN. I don't know what the girl has got in her head, not I -- a parcel of
absurd s^uff! she has a mind to make fools of us all I believe; but there was
something well enough too in what she said, if she is sincere; but the lord help
those that trusts too much to them, say I.


TUG. Why, what does she say?


BUN. Why, that she does not know which she shall have yet; but that she will
marry the first that does any thing to deserve her.


TUG. Does she? -- why then it is my opinion she will marry me.


BUN. Why so?


TUG. I know why, well enough; but could not a body speak to her now?


BUN. I am going in, and I Will send her to you; but I would not have you depend
too much on her.


TUG. I Will run the risque, Master Bundle.


BUN. Only see the difference between us, you are all agog to get married, and
I would give the world to be rid of my shackles.


TUG. Why, I believe if a man was to take up the trade of unmarrying folks, he
would get more money by it, than you and I do by our's.


BUN. More money!

AIR.
I.
Did but the law appoint us one,
Tired couples to release again,
What shoals of all degrees would run,
To break their matrimonial chain!
The widow old,
Herself and gold,
Who to the healthy spendthrift gave;
And the rich churl,
Who took a girl,
Poor wretch! with one foot in the grave.
II.
Prudes, who at men would never look,
Yet slily tasted Hymen's joy;
And wild Coquets, who husbands took,
When they could get no other toy:
Millions would try,
The knot to untye:
Toward the goal of liberty,
Lord! what a throng,
Would crowd along,
And in the midst my wife and me!

SCENE IV.
TUG and WILELMINA. TUG. Yes, but I hope I shall not have such a crank and
humoursome piece of stuff to deal with as you have; I don't know not I, but for
my share, I cannot see why married people may not be happy as well as others;
it is my mind, Miss here, is trying which is the most loving of us two, and if
so I would not give my little Robin threepence for his chance, for I know as
well as can be, that he has no more notion of making a woman happy than nothing
at all -- but here she comes.


WILL. Hey, day! Why I thought you was gone on board a man of war before now?


TUG. Why no, Miss, I e'n't yet gone, I am in hopes there will be no occasion,
if there should, I am always one of my word.


WILL. Oh, you unkind creature! to disappoint me so, I was in hopes by this time
to have received a long letter from you, upbraiding me with my cruelty, and
telling me that you were gone abroad with a broken heart at being disappointed
of me.


TUG. Why, Miss, as to breaking my heart, to be sure I should go well-nigh to
do that, if I could not persuade you to have me; but I have been thinking that
it would be better to try if I cannot stay at home, and do something to obtain
your consent, for to be sure the pleasure of having you, is not what every body
deserves.


WILL. Oh! 'till I hear you have been venturing your life for me, I shall never
relent.


TUG. Well now, Miss, I for my part, think you will.


WILL. Indeed, you have a great deal of confidence to think any such thing.


TUG. I hope you will not be angry, if I do my best to make you --


WILL. And what do you call doing your best?


TUG. Why it is not my way to brag, and so I will not say any thing about it now,
but I have a favor to beg of you if you please.


WIU. What is it pray?


TUG. Why, you know that the young watermen are to row for the Coat and Badge
this afternoon, and so I have made bold to bespeak a room at the Swan, for you
and your friends to go and see the sight.


WILL. That Is very gallant, indeed, Mr. Thomas! but you talk of trying to
deserve me, why did not you make one among the watermen, and so win the Coat
and Badge yourself?


TUG. Well, never you mind any thing about that, will you accept of my proffer
of the room?


WILL. Why, I think I will.


TUG. And do you think now, if ever I was to do any thing with an intent to
please you, that you could bring yourself to look upon me with kindness?


WILL. Why, I don't know but I might.


TUG. Why, then I assure you, if ever you should be agreeable to marry me, you
should be as happy as ever love and an honest heart can make you.

AIR.
I.
Indeed, Miss, such sweet-hearts as I am,
I fancy you will meet with but few;
To love you more true I defy them,
I always am thinking of you.
There ere maidens-would have me in plenty,
Nell, Cicely, Priscilla, and Sue;
But instead of all these were there twenty,
I never should think but of you.
II.
False hearts all your money may squander,
And only have pleasure in view;
Never from you a moment I Will wander,
Unless to get money for you.
The tide, when it is ebbing or flowing,
Is not to the moon half so true;
Nor my oars to their time when I Am rowing,
As my heart, my fond heart, is to you.

SCENE V.
WILELMINA, ROBIN. WILL. There Is great honesty about this poor fellow -- Here
comes the other; I see I must choose soon, or there will be no peace for me. So,
Mr. Robin, what news have you?


ROB. News, My angel! news that will make your heart dance with joy, and clear
away the clouds and mists that hang on thy beautiful face; just for all the
world as the sun clears away the showers in the month of April.


WILL. Indeed! I should be glad to hear it.


ROB. You cannot think how you will be overjoyed.


WILL. Shall I? Why don't you tell it me then?


ROB. Well then, Miss, I Will keep you no longer in suspense; your mother is
determined that we shall be married tomorrow morning.


WILL. What, whether I will or no?


ROB. Whether you will or no! how can you help it; don't I love you better than
the ivy loves oak, better than cucumbers love heat, or birds love cherries; I
love you better --


WILL. Hold, hold, Mr. Robin, it is necessary in this case I should love you a
little.


ROB. And don't you! -- Hear this, you blooming jonquils, and lose your
sweetness! turn white you roses, and you lilies red! each flower lose its
fragrance and it is hue, and nature change, for Wilelmina's false!


WILL. Indeed, Mr. Robin, you have such winning ways; that pretty speech has
half persuaded me to consent.


ROB. Has it?


WILL. It has upon my word.


ROB. Jonquils smell sweet again! roses and lilies keep again your color! and
every flower look brighter than before, for Wilelmina's true!


WILL. How dearly you do love me, Mr. Robin!


ROB. Why, Miss, the passion which is planted in my heart has taken root, as
like as can be to a great elm which there is no grubbing up, but it spreads
farther and farther, and you cannot for the life of you destroy it 'till you saw
down the trunk and all.


WILL. That Is as much as to say, that you will love me as long as you live.


ROB. The very thing -- Lord how sensible you are, Miss!


WILL. Really, Mr. Robin, you are so gay and agreeable --


ROB. E'n't I, Miss? So every body says -- only think then how you will be
envied -- Well then, I Will step to your Mama and tell her what has past; and
then I shall have nothing to do but to go to town tomorrow for the ring and
license.

AIR.
I.
Cherries and plumbs are never found,
But on the plumb and cherry tree;
Parsnips are long, turnips are round,
So Wilelmina's made for me.
II.
The scythe to mow the grass is made,
Shreds to keep close the straggling tree;
The knife to prune, to dig the spade,
So Wilelmina's made for me.

SCENE VI.
WILELMINA, ROBIN, Mrs. BUNDLE. Mrs. BUN. Well, Robin, have you reformed her
what I ordered you? -- What I suppose you have been a fool now? -- there never
was such a timersome fellow in the world -- I tell you what, Wilelmina, if I
find you have been imposing upon this poor bashful creature, you will put me in
a passion, and you know when I am once in a passion, I am not easily pacified.


WILL. Let me understand you, Ma'am?


Mrs. BUN. Why I sent this blockhead to let you know that I am disolved to see
you married tomorrow morning, and I know you have been giving yourself some
confounded airs or other, and so he has been afraid to tell you.


WILL. I wonder, Ma'am you should be uneasy on that account -- he told me, and
in very plain terms.


Mrs. BUN. Well, and I hope you had not the conference to say any thing against
it.


WILL. So far from it, Ma'am, I now plainly see the great absurdity of
attempting to oppose your will.


Mrs. BUN. And have you consented to have him, then?


ROB. She has Ma'am.


Mrs. BUN. Then thou art my child again -- Mr. Wick's family will be in
raptures at this; run, Robin, and tell them we shall call at their house in our
way to the rowing match.


WILL. And will you forgive my former disobedience, Ma'am?


Mrs. BUN. Oh! it was all your father, my dear; but I Will now take the pains to
instruct you how to behave yourself.


WILL. I am obliged to you, Ma'am, but I don't think I shall ever be so
accomplished as you.


Mrs. BUN. Why, I don't think you will ever get my genteel air; but as for
other matters they are easily understood.


WILL. Are they, Mama?


Mrs. BUN. I Will tell you.

AIR.
To be modish, genteel, and the true thing, my dear,
In short, to be monstrous well-bred,
You must ogle and simper, and giggle and leer,
And talk the first nonsense that comes in your head.
In grave, fusty old-fashioned times,
'Ere ease and deportment went hence;
To be bold was the vilest of crimes,
And deceit was an heinous offense:
But the fashions are now of another guess kind,
Our modes are by no means the same;
For, blessed with good eyes, we pretend to be blind,
And with strength to run miles, appear lame.

SCENE VII.
WILELMINA. Indeed, Mama, I beg your pardon, but I shall not receive any
instruction from you -- Let me see -- I have promised her to marry her favorite
Robin; to heighten the plot a little more, I Will even go and promise my Papa to
marry favorite Thomas; and then for the Swan, where, I think, there will be a
tolerable confusion. What a bustle this same love makes among us, we all seem
to be afraid of it, and yet all wish to possess it.

AIR.
I.
Girls, during courtship, should, at least,
No lover trust, but doubt him;
But when they have sworn before the priest,
Then find no fault about him.
II.
Who venture all upon a stake,
Undone, if they miscarry;
The risks they run, from each mistake,
Behooves them to be wary.

SCENE, the Last. A ROOM at the SWAN.
Mrs. BUNDLE, ROBIN, and Company, afterward WILELMINA; and afterward TUG and
BUNDLE. Mrs. BUN. My dear Mr. Wick, as to that, gentility's every thing -- I
hates to see a parcel of trumpery that knows nothing of life. Do, Robin, step
and see after Wilelmina -- what can be become of the girl?


ROB. She Is here, Ma'am.


Mrs. BUN. Come, my dear, you will lose the sight; they tells me that the rowers
have set out from the Old Swan some time.


WILL. They are very near surely; for see what a number of boats are come in
sight.


Mrs. BUN. Oh! I can see them very plain. How many is there?


WILL. One, two, three, four, I think I can count five.


Mrs. BUN. That smart young man will certainly win it; how clean and neat he
looks!


WILL. Here he comes; his boat perfectly flies!


Mrs. BUN. Oh! he will win it.


WILL. He has won it already, Madam; he is past the stairs.


ROB. See, he jumps on shore.


WILL. And see he is coming this way -- Surely it is not --


BUN. (Coming on.) Here Is your Thomas for you! he is coming! -- I told you he would
be the first that would do any thing to deserve you -- Here he is!


WILL. And was it you that won the Coat and Badge?


TUG. 'Twas indeed, Miss.


WILL. And what made you?


AIR, TUG.
I rowed for the prize,
To receive from those eyes
A kind look, from those lips a sweet smile;
But lest I should lose,
And you for that fault your poor Tom should refuse,
My heart it went pit-a-pat all the while.
When we came to the pull,
How I handled my skull,
'Twou'd have done your heart good to have seen us:
There was never a boat's length between us.
But the Swan once in view,
My boat how it flew,
And verily b'lieve 'twas all thinking of you.

WILL. Thus then I reward you.


ROB. What is all this?


TUG. Why, all this is that I am a happy fellow, and you are knocked out of
your chance.


WILL. Is not he a sweet fellow, Ma'am? How ne^ and clean he looks!


Mrs. BUN. Wilelmina, don't put me in passion.


WILL. I have no intention, Ma'am, to do any such thing.


Mrs. BUN. Why, you impudent slut! have not you deceived me? Deposed upon me?
Promised me to marry this young man? -- and now --


WILL. Indeed, Ma'am, you must excuse me; but in so serious a matter, I thought
it of much more consequence to consider myself than you; besides, I was so
situated that I must have disobliged either you or my Papa, for whenever I gave
you a promise, I gave one to him, and had your choice appeared to me the most
likely to make me happy, I should not have hesitated a moment in refusing his.


ROB. My hopes are all blighted then, I find.


Mrs. BUN. I said all along, that this was a contrived thing between you; but,
Mr. Bundle, you shall smart for it.


BUN. My dear, you know I am a man of an easy temper and few words, but I am
pretty firm in keeping a resolution; I have suffered you to expose me at home
pretty well; but if you are resolved to carry your folly to such a height as to
expose me abroad, I am resolved it shall not be for nothing: Therefore, either
promise before this company, to bid adieu to scolding for the future, or before
this company I will do what you threat'ned me this morning -- be separated from
you.


Mrs. BUN. Why, I am thunderstruck!


BUN. I expected little less; but am resolved, depend upon it; however to let
you see that you are very welcome to be mistress of your own house, manage your
concerns as you like, do what you please, so you let me be quiet: In short, do
nothing to give me uneasiness, and I make an agreement from this moment, for
you to govern while I smoke.


WILL. Dear Mama, it is impossible for any thing to be fairer.


BUN. Come, come, she must have a little time to think of it; but she will agree
to the terms, I Am sure of it; and now let us think of nothing but pleasure, and
as this is the happiest day I ev^^ saw in my life, I say let us make it the
merriest.


AIR.
TUG.
Never let your heart, my girl, sink down;
That I am true, believe me,
Or next time that I row to town,
May wind and tide deceive me!
By this here breeze,
My heart at ease,
Now dances at high water;
My labor's over,
I Have gained the shore,
And free from fear,
Am landed here,
With my dear Gardener's Daughter.
Mrs. BUNDLE.
I see, my dear, it is all in vain,
Since this you think expedient,
If of the past you will not complain,
Henceforth I Will prove obedient.
Folks used to cry,
A tartar I
Had proved, and you had caught her;
But now shall raise,
Each voice in praise,
Through all her life,
Of the Gardener's wife!
As well as of his daughter.
BUNDLE.
My child, you have fairly won my heart,
You took no counsel from us;
But prizing love, and scorning art,
Preferred your honest Thomas:
'Twas wisely done,
Shake hands, my son,
Love's lesson you have taught her;
And now, my dear,
Be but sincere,
I do not fear,
There'll never appear,
So good a wife and daughter.
WILELMINA.
And now, good friends, pray take my part,
I kept them to their tether;
For I had sworn my hand and heart,
Should always go together.
From fops and beaux,
A maiden chose,
An honest heart that sought her:
See her appear,
On trial here,
This very right,
If she was right,
Applaud the Gardener's daughter.

FINIS.

