THE LITTLE HUNCH-BACK; OR, A FROLIC IN BAGDAD.

A FARCE.

IN TWO ACTS.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN, WITH UNIVERSAL
APPLAUSE.

WRITTEN BY JOHN O'KEEFFE.

Author of Tony Lumpkin in Town -- Son-in-Law -- Dead Alive -- Agreeable
Surprise -- Positive Man -- Castle of Andalusia -- Poor Soldier -- Birthday;
or, Prince of Arragon -- Fountainbleau; or, Our Way in France -- The Beggar on
Horseback -- Young Quaker -- Peeping Tom -- Siege of Curzola -- Love in a Camp;
or, Patrick in Prussia -- Farmer -- Prisoner at Large -- Highland Reel -- The
Toy -- Pharo Bank, etc.

LONDON: Printed for J. DERRETT, opposite. Burlington-House, Piccadilly, 1789.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Bassa (of Bagdad) -- Mr. DAVIES. Crumpy (the Hunch-back) -- Mr. QUICK.
Cross-Leg (the Tailor) -- Mr. BLANCHARD. Zebede (a Jew, the Purveyor) -- Mr.
REEVE. Babouc, -- Mr. PAINTER. Cadi, -- Mr. EVATT. Doctor Quinquina, -- Mr.
CUBIT. Crank, -- Mr. BOOTH. Absalom (the Barber) -- Mr. MACREDY. Habby, -- Mr.
MILBURNE. Dominique, -- Mr. ROCK. Crier, -- Mr. THOMPSON. Courier, -- Mr.
LEDGER.
WOMEN.
Dora, -- Miss ROWSON. Juggy, -- Mrs. WEBB.
Janissaries, Mutes, Officers, Mob, Boy, etc. etc.

Scene Bagdad.

Time, an Evening, Night, and Morning.

THE LITTLE HUNCH-BACK.
ACT I
SCENE I. A Street in Bagdat. The Bassa's Palace in View.
Enter Zebede. Zebede. LET me give just one look at my bill of fare. (takes out
a paper) Let Us see at which of the tradesmen's shops do I first touch in my
voyage; to lay in every delicacy for our grand entertainment (horn sounds
without) Eh! the courier with the dispatches from Constantinople.


Enter Courier, blowing Horn. Cour. By'r leave! Letters for his Highness, one
of the great Officers, to --


Zeb. Stop, I am a great Officer, Prime Caterer to the Bassa -- he could not
live without me, for I provide him his dinner every day.


Cour. Perhaps you have provided a dinner for me too. -- A long post this last
from Rabba -- so I Will beat up your palace pantries if you will give these two
letters to Babouc the Aga, for his Highness the Bassa.

(gives the letters, then runs off, blowing horn)
Zeb. Babouc the Black-a-moor! No; I will deliver them to his Highness myself,
and that will show my great care and diligence. (Putting the letters into his
pocket, drops one on the ground without knowing it.) Lie you there safe and
snug; here comes my nephew, Absalom -- the villain is going to marry with a
christian woman's, after my bringing him up so genteely; and binding him
'prentice to a barber. Ah, here is the rascal, witn the very dow'rless damsel,
and that hungry beggarman, Cross-Leg the tailor; I Have a mind -- but let me
contain my passion.

Enter Absalom and Dora. So nephew Absalom, you're about to marry?


Abs. Yes, Sir.

(bows)
Zeb. And, Miss Dora, you're going to be married?


Dora. Yes, Sir.

(curtsies)
Zeb. You have moneys?

(to Absalom)
Abs. No, Sir.


Zeb. You bring a portion?

(to Dora)
Dora. No, Sir.


Zeb. Where do you eat your wedding supper?

Enter Cross-Leg
Cross-Leg. At my house.


Zeb. Is it bought?


Cross-Leg. Yes; when you give a little money to buy it.


Zeb. Oh! then I Am to buy it.


Cross Leg. Will you -- Gad, old Zebede's growing kind. (Aside.) I thought you
would; none can do it better, as you're his Highness the Bassa's Caterer; no
man, in Bagdad, genteeler knows how to provide, and this is only a neat little
bit of supper for a poor young couple and their few friends.


Zeb. Eh!


Abs. Yes, Sir, you know a poor couple have but few friends.


Cross-Leg. Now if you would only take a pretty little walk (you see its a very
pleasant evening) just round to the Bassa's butcher, poult'rer, fishmonger,
confectioner, and wine merchant, and order us in a small joint, two capons, a
brace of carp, a cream tart, and a hamper of Cyprus wine; you, the generous
founder, shall be toasted in noble bumpers by us the grateful confounders.


Zeb. Thank'ee, Timothy Cross-Leg. Then as it is a very pleasant evening, why I
will take a pretty little walk, and desire the poulterer, butcher, fishmonger,
confectioner, and wine merchant --


Dora. Good Sir!


Abs. Kind Uncle!


Cross-Leg. Most comfortable Caterer!

(all together)
Zeb. If the've got a small joint, two capons, a brace of carp, a cream tart,
and an hamper of Cyprus wine, that they take particular care to --


Dora. What good nature!


Abs. Generous Uncle!


Cross-Leg. Plentiful Purveyor!

(together)
Zeb. To keep them safe in their shops.


Cross-Leg. Eh!


Zeb. Then, my poor young couple, I wish you joy of your wedding supper. Ha!
ha! ha! Eh! so you will marry a Christian you wicked reprobate.

Exit.
Cross-Leg. (after a pause.) Oh! I wish I had only an order from the grand
Signor to sew up your ugly mouth, I Would do it with as much pleasure as ever I
stich'd a button-hole.


Abs. I Am not disappointed.


Cross-Leg. So, because your Uncle will not have you marry the daughter of a
Christian, and your step-father will not let you have the son of a Jew, you must
both starve poor things! You shall not this night, however, for a wedding supper
you shall have, though I pawn my goose for the price of it. Heark'ee -- hasn't
Father Anselm, the Armenian Friar, promised to marry you.


Abs. Appointed Dora and I to come to his cell, by the Fountain of Palms, at
eight.


Cross-Leg. Then go you, boy, and dress in your belt; Dora shall meet you
there. As she cannot go home to her father's, my wife, Juggy, shall trick her
out nicely. There they will consult about the cookery. Tol, lol, lol! Courage, my
young folks. Come Dora!


Dora. Then, my dear Absalom, don't let us be cast down by the cruelty of those
who should be kind to us. True love is the best of good cheer!


Cross-Leg. You shall have somewhat more substantial, I warrant! My Juggy will
toss us up a comfortable morsel, without the help of -- Hang me if I should
think a christan wedding lucky, if the supper was provided by a Jew. Ha! ha!
ha! cheer up, I am but a poor tailor to be sure; but an honest mind is my
workshop; there Content sings all day to the music of a good Conscience.

Exeunt Cross-Leg and Dora.
Abs. It goes cursedly against my spirit to lay all the expenses of my wedding
on my honest friend the tailor! What to do now to raise but a little money. Oh!
for a few beards to mow, even at an asper a chin. If I -- What Is this (looking
on the ground, takes the letter up which Zebede dropped. Reads the
superscription) For his Highness the Bassa of Bagdad, trod under foot. Now if I
could deliver this letter to the Bassa myself, he would probably give me a reward
sufficient to defray the charges of my wedding. How the deuce shall I get
admission though? My old Uncle has always kept me at such a distance, that I Am
not even known at the palace; and the attendants there are so saucy -- No,
they will never let a poor strange barber pass the antichamber. (Crumpy sings
without) Odso! here comes little Crumpy, the Bassa's favorite Hunch-back
jester; he is a good-natured fellow; and from my saving him from a beating in
the street quarrel, that his jokes brought him into the other night -- If I
could prevail on him -- he has high interest at court, and -- (enter Crumpy
singing and dancing) How do you do, Mr. Crumpy?


Crumpy. Fellow! (proudly, but changes on recollecting Absalom) Ha! my gay
spirited -- my little finger (holds out his hand) don't slip my ring off. Your
prowess in that re-encounter, when those villains attacked me the other night,
saved -- Did you ever see the like? The fellows thresh'd me as if I was a
wheat-sheaf; had I the lives of seven cats they would have hammered them out, for
there I lay like a little anvil, and the rascals laid on me like so many
Cyclops, turned me about as if was a three-penny nail -- only for your passing
by just at the nick, those ruffians would have broke my bones. Yes, they would have
cracked my ivory; their heads were so hard, and their fists so heavy, that my
great wit and little body -- Oh dear!


Abs. Going to the palace, I presume, Sir?


Crumpy Ay, his Highness has got into a merry mood, and just sent for me.


Abs. Then, Sir, that horse with the fine trappings, that I saw the slaves take
by just now, was to carry you to court?


Crumpy. Yes; they had the insolence to think I Would peck upon a poney; but if I
must ride to court, it shall be on an elephant.


Abs. Certainly, Sir.


Crumpy. By virtue of my high office, lord chief justice joker, I am obliged,
when called upon, to be provided with some comical story to divert him, enter
nous, though my wit is as ready as any man's, I am some times plaguily put to
it; but as I Am determined to keep my place to pick up novelty and character, I
get upon those night rambles in the street, which often, with a little of my
ingenuity in dressing up, furnish a good merry tale or pleasant incident for
the Bassa to laugh at the next morning.


Abs. I thought, Sir, you statesmen was too wise to laugh?


Crumpy. He that is wise enough to refuse a good hearty laugh in this world,
will be cursedly bob'd, if there should be no laughing in the next. Here he has
sent for me now, takes me a little unprovided, so I Will go make my bow, and
retire.


Abs. What a prodigious favorite you are, Sir.


Crumpy. Ay, ay; the Circassian beauties dance ambassadories; black, blue and
yellow pay compliments; courtiers smile, cringe and tell lies, but no life at
court without little Crumpy (sings and dances). Oh, barber, could you supply me
with a decent, fashionable, flourishing whisker?


Abs. Why, Sir, you have a very handsome pair already.


Crumpy. Only one real, the other was plucked off by the roots in that affray;
this is false, a favorite lock fell from the forehead of a celebrated beauty
at the last ball, I picked it up, and stuck it on with a little gum, and it
graces the lip of her humble admirer. Ha! ha! ha!


Abs. How gallant.


Crumpy. Yet the courtiers smiled, the ladies teehee'd, but Honi soit, -- I
should not wonder if the circumstance gave birth to an order of knighthood, and
the black eagle and golden fleece give way to the knights of the whisker.


Abs. Ha! ha! ha! Sir, I Have a letter here for the Bassa, and --


Crumpy. A petition? Give it me; I Will deliver it into his Highness's own hand?


Abs. Ah, Sir, if you would only procure me the honor of laying it at his
Highness's own feet?


Crumpy. You served me; I will be grateful; you shall have an audience; come
along my noble shaver.

(going)
Abs. Ay, but will his Highness condescend to listen to so poor a fellow as I?


Crumpy. What, don't you know our Bassa has traveled through Europe, been at
the English court, whose king has been the model for all his noblest actions,
like their gracious monarch, the father of his people, he is above the little
consideration of the color of a face, or the sod where a man first drew
breath, when diftress is to be relieved or merit rewarded.


Abs. But, Sir, if any of the grand officers in waiting should stop me?


Crumpy. What! when I take you by the hand.


Abs. These court eunuchs are such great men --


Crumpy. They great men; the rascals, slaves, ah, hah; trip, skip; come, tol,
lol, lol. (Exit singing and dancing, Absalom follows, admiring him).


SCENE II. An Antichamber of the Palace.
Enter Zebede and Habby meeting. Zeb. (greatly distressed) Oh, ruin Habby! I Am
undone for ever.


Habby. Hey, what is the matter, master?


Zeb. I have lost (I don't know how) one of the letters the courier gave me for
the Bassa. Oh, I shall lose may place that I have held so long with credit. I
have been prime Purveyor to him, ay, fifteen years next Pentecost.


Habby. But this trust, how discharge?


Zeb. Discharged, you dog! I have charged and over charged; take that, you
scoundrel.

(strikes him.)
Habby What Is that for?


Zeb. You, my clerk, throw out your inuendo's against my honesty when you see
me distressed and enraged -- get out of my sight.


Habby. (aside) Good master, I Will give you a blow worth two of this.

Exit.
Zeb. Oh, this letter; what will become of me? If I confess I lost it, I may
not only lose my place but my life too. I will deny that I did receive any
letters; and, even if the courier do say he did give me them, my word will be
taken before his oath: yes, that will save me; it is a good thought.


Enter Babouc, attended. Bab. Zebede, the Bassa desires his letters; he would learn
if --


Zeb. His Highness wants to learn his letters.


Bab. His di^patches, the express.


Zeb. Well, express.


Bab. Psha; the letters for him?


Zeb. Me; I did get no letters for him.


Bab. No! Why his highness himself saw from his window the courier give them to
you.


Zeb. The devil! what eyes he has got! he saw! I quite forgot, my memory is
distracted with my accounts and marketings. Lord -- yes, here they are -- What
shall I do (aside).


Enter Absalom, looking about. Abs. I wish Mr. Crumpy would come on, I Am afraid
to --


Zeb. My nephew! How dare you put your face into the palace? You graceless
vagabond.


Bab. Go, go, friend; what brings you here?


Abs. No; I have business.


Zeb. You business, you impudent --


Bab. Guards, thrust him out.

(Slaves attempt it. Crumpy within
Crumpy. Very well; you may all depend upon my influence and interest.


Zeb. Do stand out of the way fellow. Here comes the Bassa's first favorite,
and if he sees such shabby rogues as you here, he will order you to the whipping
post.


Enter Crumpy singing, but with great consequence. Crumpy. Eh! what noise is
here? Babouc, I Will have none of these doings.


Bab. Sir, my station and rank demands --


Crumpy. Rank! don't I allow you to be the greatest black in the palace? Ha! my
good friend, I ask you millions of pardons for making you wait.

(to Absalom.)
Zeb. Eh! good friend! (surprised) How did my nephew do this.

(aside)
Abs. Sir!

(to Crumpy)
Crumpy. Come, come along! Fling open the folding doors there. I protest a man
has scarce room to pass. Come.

(to Absalom)
Abs. Yes, Sir, but these gentlemen may have some objections.


Crumpy. Gentlemen! Give me your hand. (takes Absalom's hand) Room there, ye
slaves -- stand by.


Bab. Room there for Mr. Crumpy.

Exit Crumpy with great importance, and Absalom. You must stop, Zebede, till
Mr. Crumpy has his audience.


Zeb. And my poor rascally nephew. Dear me, what is all this?

Exeunt.
SCENE III. An magnificent Apartment in the Palace.
Enter Bassa and Babouc. Bab. Zebede is bringing your Highness the dispatches
from Constantinople.


Bassa. Oh, Babouc! happy is the wife of a Bassa whose government is at a
distance from the sublime Port, and good was my friend, the Vizier, to appoint
me Bassa of Bagdad. While the seraglio there is distracted with cabal and
faction; here, an Emperor in epitome, I enjoy all the pleasures of peace and
security, my nod gives death, and my smiles preferment; have you ordered ihe
dance, the banquet, and sent for my little Hunchback Jester? My soul, and every
sense, are this evening devoted to laugh, love, and joy.

(Crumpy sings without)
Bab. Here is Crumpy, please your Hihgness.


Bassa. Approach my man of whim and frolic.


Crumpy. (without) Stand aside, make way there.


Bassa. Ha! ha! ha! he has got introducing some cf the Mesopotamian Plenipo's.


Enter Crumpy, with great importance, takes a sweep round, pais the officers
and slaves aside. Crumpy. Room -- hem! Sir, permit me the honor of introducing
to your Highness this most magnificently -- magnanimous -- Come in Barber.


Enter Absalom. Bassa. Impertinence! your office is to please; a step beyond
that and you offend, remember Crumpy --


Crumpy. I wish you would remember Crumpy when there is a good place to give away.


Bassa. Leave me!


Crumpy. When I go I shall not take you with me; this humble barber comes with an
humble petition.


Bassa. A petition, I were indeed unworthy of the luxuries of life myself, did
I lose an opportunity of diffusing the comforts of it to all around me --
What Is your grievance.

(Absalom, kneeling, delivers the letter)
Crumpy. That Is his grievance, and he delivers it to your Highness.


Bassa. How came you by this? the grand Vizier's hand!


Abs. Sir, I found it in the street.


Crumpy. Yes, Sir, the grand Vizier's hand was at a poor barber's foot.


Bassa. (Reads) The joys of a long and happy life attend my dear Abdallah, the
fuccess of our Russian and Austrian enemy has set Constantinople in a clamor
against the christians, the rumor of your partiality for this sect has reached
the Emperor, who, to appease the Divan, was compelled to send you the dreadful
letter you receive with this. -- Eh! this is part of the dispatch the courier
gave Zebede for me; how careless must he have been to lose it! (aside) (reads)
The orders for your death, contained in that mandate, being merely a matter of
state policy, you may safely disobey, your mind may be satisfied, as I enclose
you the copy of your pardon; but the conditions are, that in future, you treat
the christians under your government with the utmost rigor. Your friend for
ever, SELIM, Vizier.

Yes; Zebede dropped this; and here, had not it been found by the meerest
accident -- Had I received only the other, from what I imagine the contents to
be, my life was gone, (Aside) Ah! you have done me a signal service!.

(to Absalom)
Crumpy. Eh! What Is that?


Bassa. You found this letter in the street?


Crumpy. Yes, Sir, he found it in the street, upon my honor! -- Did you?


Abs. Yes, my Lord, and thought it my duty to deliver it to your Highness.


Crumpy. Of such consequence! then I Will come in for my share (aside). Yes, my
Lord, I thought it my duty to see it delivered to your Highness; the young man
here was for running back in a vast hurry to finish dressing a lady, daughter
of a grand French merchant; but, says I, man alive, never mind her; bring this
to the Bassa directly: for, my Lord, says I, is the most generous, liberal,
prince-conditioned -- he will not matter what he gives you and I for this piece of
service. Well, Sir, he would go, I insisted he should come; he brandishes his
curling tongs; I whipped out my sabre, tucked him under my arm, and in five
strides of a game cock, dashed into the palace, cut, kicked, shuffled and
elbow'd my way through the guards, mutes, janissaries. -- Here I've' have
brought him, while poor mademoiselle waits, her hair half papered, half friz'd,
fretting like an affronted porcupine, ha! ha! ha!


Bassa. For which the three first requests you make, if in my power, I grant
them (to Absalom).


Crumpy. Oh, Sir, I thank you, hem! -- you will grant us our three first
requests! -- So, here we have a brace and a half of promises from a Lord; but
one performance we'll get the Lord knows when!


Bassa. Here (to slaves) take this young man (pointing to Absalom) cloth him
splendidly.


Crumpy. Aye, take me, and cloth me splendidly.


Bassa. You! its the --


Crumpy. Psha! -- His Highness calls me young man; you know he is always
complimenting me.


Bassa. And let my treasurer instantly pay him down 1000 zingerlees.


Crumpy. My good, bountiful Lord! -- it is really too much! 3000 is full
sufficient for me.


Bassa. You! (smiling) I mean --


Crumpy. I know you mean every thing that is good for me. As to the splendor of
the robes, the more gold lace the better; they will fit me: and I have a little
bag for the 5000 zingerlees. Come along barber, you shall have a hundred and
fifty for your trouble; and the rest shall rest with me.


Bassa. Why, I mean it all for --


Crumpy. Me. I know it -- but I will be generous -- I will give the lad the
fifty, as I said I would -- Come, I am good myself, and I do good; but till I
am big myself I will be good for little. Shaver follow me.

Exeunt Crumpy, Absalom, and officers.
Bassa. Finding this letter was a most fortunate circumstance! Yes, here is my
pardon (looking at a paper that he had taken from the letter) the conditions of
it, severity to the Christians. Persecution is against my nature; but to
disobey, would be ingratitude to my prince. I Will do it by proclamation through
the city, order the Cadi here, ha! ha! ha! Here comes Zebede. How will he bring
himself off for losing this; as yet I don't think he knows it has been brought
to me.


Enter Zebede, bowing. Zeb. This letter for your Highness.

(gives it.)
Bassa. From Constantinople, signed by the Emperor himself. -- Ay, this is the
dreadful mandate; but now it brings no terrors

(aside). (Reads) Trusty and well-beloved, greeting: We do command you, that
within three hours after the receipt of this, you have yourself strangled; but
first leave orders for your head to be cut off -- and sent to us. This fail not
to do, on pain of our high displeasure. Ha! ha! ha!


Zeb. Well; I did not think that strangling and beheading was so good a joke.


Bassa. Yes; he does not know that I am in possession of this other letter,
that countermands this order. (reads) Given at our Sublime Port, 1^67th year of
the Hegira, ACI^^^T. Since my Emperor thinks I should die, I obey, (^isses the
letter) and this night I sup with Mahomet -- to (...) my very careful steward
(aside). I Will first settle my worldly affairs, instantly prepare your accounts
for my inspection.


Zeb. Oh! the devil! I have cheated him so damnably that my head goes off, if
he finds out my rogueries (aside). Sir, you would best think of nothing now but
obeying the Emperor's command, he may be angry, indeed; he says, instantly send
me your head, on pain of our high displeasure.


Bassa. Now I Will put his fidelity to the full proof (aside) I am surprised my
friend the Vizier would not interpose in my behalf, not even to condole or
comfort me. Pray was there no other letter came with this?


Zeb. No; as I am an honest man, this is all the letter I got -- Except the one
I dropped (aside).


Bassa. Then I must die!


Zeb. Do, my Lord, it will prove your great loyalty, and your readiness to
oblige the Grand Signior, dear, yes, my Lord, and here your Lordship may have
all done in your own house, so comfortable every thing; all the conveniences
of death here within yourself; your own trusty mutes, with a fine soft silk
string, will choke you so gently; and then you have your own faithful black
Babouc, with his shining scimeter of Damascus too -- he will slive off your head
I warrant; he will do it so neatly, that you will never say after, Babouc, you did
hurt me that time. I Will order them to prepare (going).


Bassa. But, my good steward, prepare your own accounts, I Will look over your
book.


Zeb. Oh! the devil! then Babouc will have the first slice at my head (aside).


Bassa. I Will leave a fair name behind me; bring hither your accounts,


Zeb. Oh! my dear lord, you and your head are old acquaintance, and since
you're so soon to part for ever, at such a time don't think of troubling it
with my foolish totums of sugar, rice, coffee, soap, and candles. You mutes,
you ministers of death prepare (speaking to the officers).


Bassa. Prepare supper (suddenly changes to sprightliness)


Zeb. You forget your Highness was engaged to sup above with Mahomet.


Bassa. Ha! ha! ha! Why no; I Will send him an apology.


Zeb. Apology!


Bassa. Ay, and you shall take it.


Zeb. Me!


Bassa. Or suppose, Zebede, you go sup with him in my stead?


Zeb. Thank you, Sir; but I eat no supper nowadays.


Bassa. Refuse the honor of supping above with our great prophet!


Zeb. It Is a great honor, but I Would rather eat even a pork chop here below, than
partake of the finest feast that was ever prepared above for Mahomet's table.


Bassa. (Changing to firm resentment) Where Is the other letter you received for
me.


Zeb. Ruined! Somebody's told him. (aside, and terrified). Oh! mercy, my lord;
as I hope for heaven I dropped it out of my pocket.


Bassa. Then heaven shall be your reward; first for your negligence of such a
precious charge, next your perfidy in denying you received it. Dispatch him.

(to mutes)
Zeb. Oh! Lord! where, where is this letter?


Bassa. Here (shows it) brought to me by my guardian angel.


Enter Crumpy elegantly dressed. Crumpy. Ay; brought to him by me and his other
-- You see what a pair of fine angels we are. Come, my friend --


Bassa. Perform your duty

(to the mutes, who seize Zebede, he drops on his knees)
Zeb. Oh! save my life!


Enter Absalom, richly habited. Abs. My uncle in the hands of the mutes! Dread
Lord, I claim as one of the three requests you promised me. Whatever be his
crime pardon it.


Crumpy. Half the promises were mine; so let him be half choked.


Abs. Hold.


Crumpy. Be quiet; his crime deserves death. Pray what has he done, my Lord?

(to Bassa)
Zeb. This my nephew!

(looking with surprise at Absalom's dress)
Bassa. The important service of bringing me that letter, lost by his
negligence, has a claim much beyond that promise. Live.

(to Zebede: the mutes quit him)
Zeb. Gracious Highness (with great joy) Oh! my dear nephew -- you damned
scoundrel; what, did you give him the letter? (apart) my beloved lad, you have
saved my life -- I Will hang you; you picked my pocket, you thief.

(apart)
Bassa. Instantly let me see your accounts; then quit my service and my sight
for ever.

Exit Bassa and attendants.
Exit Zebede, on the opposite side, with a revengeful look at Absalom. Crumpy.
Now, why would you interfere? One little squeeze of the bow-string would have
done no harm to a Jew.


Abs. What brought my uncle into this scrape?


Crumpy. Yours! Well, I would not suffer such a rogue to be an uncle of mine,
even my father -- though according to the present state of things, no man can be
born before his father; yet if mine was a bad man, I Would disinherit him, I would
by -- he is as great a little old robber -- Since now you have money, damn it,
never own such a rascally relation. I and my guitar are tuned for a frolic. I
must sally now into the streets in search of a night adventure, to lay in a
morning's hearty laugh for the Bassa. You Will come. When I Am in my joking humor
I like to have one in company that is able to fight for me. I can fight myself,
but I Would as leave let it alone, Indeed I have never been matched; bigger than
myself will not fight me; less than myself I scorn to fight; and a man exactly my
own size must be such a microcosm, such a neat picture of perfection, that I
could not find in my heart to hurt him. Come.


Abs. I Am engaged. Near my time to meet Dora at the Friar's, and then to supper
with the tailor.

(aside)
Crumpy. Nay, do come boy.


Abs. You must excuse me tonight -- Every expense poor Cross-Leg may be at I
am now able to reimburse.

(aside) Good bye, generous Sir, I humbly thank you for the honor you have
procured me.


Crumpy. Aye, but don't, like other great men, forget the friend that raised
you; so as I Am going tonight (...) perhaps some dangerous frolic, if in your
walks you should find any hard fists raised over my fine head, remember, my
brave barber, my sword and shield are your (...) and basin. Tol! lol! lol!

(sings and dances)
Exeunt severally. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A street; Cross-Leg's house near the front; toward the back, the Doctor's and
Zebedes. Late in the evening, a tumultuous huzzaing without. Enter Cadi with
officers, Crier, and a great mob; Zebede and Cross-Leg, with a basket,
following. Cadi. CRIER, proclaim the proclamation.


Crier. All take notice, by order of his Highness the Bassa. Any Christian who
offends a Mussulman shall receive the bastinado; and death if he kills one,
even by chance.


Zeb. (apart to Cross-Leg) Ah! ha! Did you hear that, master Cross-Leg!


Crier. Take notice, That any Jew who kills a Mussulman shall be hung on a
gibbet thirty feet high.


Cross-Leg. (apart to Zebede) Did you hear that, old Zebede.

(Zebede sneeks into his house)
Cadi. Now to the marketplace, and the four gates.

Exeunt all, mob huzzaing.
Cross-Leg. What could have wrought this sudden change in the Bassa, he that
was always such a friend to the Christians to begin now to persecute us! Yet,
ha! ha! ha! I Am glad the Jews are included for sake of that old arch knave
Zebede. Wife, Juggy, Juggy. (calls and knocks at the door) Hanged! I shall
dread to take up my shears to make a measure, for fear they should take an
affidavit I Am going to snip off their noses. My prentice-boy is a Mussulman,
and if I should kick him, though I even caught him cribbing my cabbage, I Am
lug'd before the Cadi, and bastinado'd with my own lapboard. My wife is so busy
preparing our supper, that I fancy she hasn't heard me (knocks loud). Absalom
and Dora by this time are married, and if they bring the jolly father, Anselm,
with them, I Have got a glass of good wine here (pointing to his basket) It Is
necessary; for this plaguey proclamation has let down my spirits, and taken away
my appetite -- dangerous to be in the street! Now if we had all our little
company safe within the walls of my castle, and some merry fellow to tickle the
guitar, while I tune up my small pipes in a cheerful song, I Would lock my doors
for the night, and we'd all be as snug as the lady in the lobster (Crumpy sings
without). What Is yonder! a Mussulman! I Will get out of his way (knocks very loud
at his door) -- Deafen this wife of mine. Juggy!

(calls, Juggy opens the door)
Juggy. Now, husband, what kept you so long?


Cross-Leg. I say, wife, what kept you so long?


Enter Crumpy, at the side, and playing on his guitar. Crumpy. Oh! honest
friend! --


Cross-Leg. As you say, Sir, it is a very fine night; heaven save the firmament!

(goes into his door, and shuts it hastily)
Crumpy. What the devil's the matter with all the Christians and Jews I meet in
the street? I frighten them away, as if I was some hob-goblin! Even the pretty
girls trip from me, that used to take such pleasure in listening to my guitar,
laughing at my jokes, and throwing up their veils to cast languishing ogles on
my comely person -- Nobody, (looking about zounds! I begin to despair of an
adventure -- Though by my office, I Am privileged to say what I please, yet the
character of jester is difficult to support. -- He! he! he! my introducing the
barber into his presence was rather lucky; yet, damn it, I Have got some how flat
-- being obliged to tell the same story three times over, and my patron is
always gaping for new jokes, like boys at bob-cherry -- Eh! for a nice neat
story to have for the Bassa, spick and span! -- I Would venture a few knocks of the
pate, or even get into a hobble for one -- but, zounds! -- I can meet with no
living being, except our Turks, and they are so muz'd with their betel and opium
-- my only gig is amongst Jews and Christians -- none can I meet -- the devil!
-- I cannot make fun out of the posts and window-shutters! I Will try if my
instrument cannot draw some company about me; if it is only a few cocks and hens

(sits on a bench at Cross-Leg's door and plays, Cross-Leg opens a window and
peeps)
Cross-Leg. A rare musician! If he was not a Mussulman I Would -- but its now so
dangerous even to talk to one, for fear of giving the least offense. Ha! ha!
ha! -- I should like to invite him in, his guitar would add such life to our
little entertainment (aside) -- (Crumpy plays) Oh! sweet! -- I think as we are
all such quiet folks, there is no danger of a quarrel to bring us under the
penalty of the proclamation -- I Am strongly tempted to venture -- Juggy, come
here and listen -- she is so busy dressing supper -- Ecod! I Will ask him in;
I Will try his temper first, and if he is good-humored, there'll be no fear of --
(throws a flower-pot on Crumpy)


Crumpy. Hey!


Cross-Leg. Zounds! in trying his patience, I have tried his skull!


Crumpy. Lucky I Have so many yards of muslin in my turban!


Cross-Leg. Sir, I ask pardon, I thought nobody was there.


Crumpy. No body -- Yes, Sir, and pray mind there is some head here -- Ha! ha!
ha! -- My friend, do you know you have made me laugh?


Cross-Leg. Well, I Would take two knocks on my pate before you could make me laugh
so --


Crumpy. I Am laughing to think, that if my head had been a glass bottle, what a
clatter you would have made about my ears.


Cross-Leg. Sir, I only intended to clear it for fresh flowers in the morning.


Crumpy. Ha! ha! ha! All wet! You rogue, you must have stained my vest.


Cross-Leg. Oh! my dear Sir! -- If you would only light enough to see my sign,
you would find that Cross-leg, the tailor, has done no fault but what he can easily
rectify.


Crumpy. A tailor! -- Oh, oh! -- then you spoil people's clothes for the good
of trade. Ha! ha! ha!


Cross-Leg. Yes, Sir. Ha! ha! ha! And since you take my blunder in such good
humor, if you will only send me the stuff; I shall be proud to make you a new
vest for nothing; and then -- Sir, your guitar is most melodious.


Crumpy. Is it?

(plays)
Cross-Leg. Beautiful! He Is so good-natured too! -- I think no harm can come of
asking him in (aside) -- Sir, worthy Sir! we have an humble wedding here tonight,
and if you will honor us with your agreeable company, and partake of our little
supper, you will make us the happiest of folks?


Crumpy. Ha! ha! ha! I delight in a wedding; the pleasantry of the occasion
draws out my jokes, like party-colored ribbons from a juggler's mouth -- I Will
engage I Will set every lad's wish agog to be a bridegroom, and make the bride
laugh, without bringing a blush into her face? Pray who is to be married?


Cross-Leg. A poor, but very honest lad, Sir; one Absalom.


Crumpy. A barber! -- my intimate friend!


Cross-Leg. You a friend to my friend Absalom! -- Stop a moment, my dear Sir --
Juggy -- a light

(retires)
Crumpy. Ha! ha! ha! but, zounds! don't tread down your house, through your
hurry to let me into it -- but never mind, with a pack of cards I Will build as
good -- I hope no wind will rise till I get out again -- I Will sing here, curse
me if I venture to dance -- Ha! ha! ha! Absalom going to be married! -- Sly
rogue! would not tell me! -- but I find the tailor don't know of the barber's
good fortune, by my means.


Enter Cross-Leg (from the house) Cross-Leg. Do, Sir, please to walk in -- we
expect Absalom and his bride every moment from the Friar's -- You Will have a
so-so supper, but a hearty welcome -- We Have only got a bit of fish, Sir, as
it is Friday.


Crumpy. Never talk! I Would sup with my friend upon the fin of a herring -- if any
fun should offer here, I Would make the most of it.

(aside)
Cross-Leg. Pray step in, Sir -- Please to stoop, Sir, my door is low.


Crumpy. And we tall fellows -- hem!


Cross-Leg. Juggy, hold the light (they go in, and the door shuts) (within) up
stairs, Sir -- this way, Sir -- have a care, there is an ugly turn --


Crumpy. (within) All very well! How do you do Ma'am, Ha! ha! ha!


Enter Absalom and Dora. Abs. The fecetious father Anselm has kept us so long,
that poor Cross-Leg's supper will --


Enter Habby, from Zebede's. Hab. I think that is Absalom's voice?


Dora. Where are you, my love?


Abs. So dark, I can scarce distinguish the taylor's door. Oh, here!


Hab. Absalom!


Abs. That Habby -- Ha, my boy -- What, my uncle's gone to bed, and you are
come to sup with us

(joyful)
Hab. Hush! -- are you married?


Abs. Yes.


Hab. Then all is safe -- I Have engaged the mate of an English tartane, that now
lies in the Tygris, to take us to one of their factories, and thence for Europe
by their next ships -- So to lay in a little sea-store, Absalom, you step with
me to your uncle's, I Have something there for you. -- Dora, do you sneak into
your step-father's, the Doctor's, and pick up you there what you can.


Abs. I thought I had made my fortune today; but Crumpy seizing the Bassa's
two other promises, makes it necessary to get a little more cash; but the
tailor is waiting supper for us.


Hab. Never mind his supper. Come, business -- plague! --


Dora. But, my love, if we part now, when, where and how shall I meet you?


Hab. Leave all that to me -- Softly!


Abs. My dearest!

(kisses her hand)
Hab. Foolish! -- You Will have time enough for kissing. Go. (to Dora). Come --


Exeunt. Dora into Doctor's, and Absalom and Habby into Zebede's. SCENE II.
Inside of Cross-Leg's.
(Turkish boy brings on a table, lays cloth, etc. and goes off.) Enter
Cross-Leg, Crumpy and Juggy. (laughing) All. Ha! ha! ha!


Jug. That Is the handsomest song, Sir, I ever heard.


Crumpy. Then you like my singing?


Cross-Leg. Much.


Crumpy. So do I. Ha! ha! ha!


Jug. What comical things you jokers say.


Crumpy. Jokers should say comical things.


Jug. And you can dance -- do Sir, pray --


Crumpy. Dance! pray excuse me?


Jug. Excuse me, Ha! ha! ha! Lord, if I don't delight in you; you're so jocobus.


Cross-Leg. Yes, Sir; as my wife Juggy says, you're quite jocobus. Ha! ha! ha!
But I Am to equip you with a suit. I Will cut a measure, Juggy, the parchment.


Crumpy. Parchment! you will not put me into a lawsuit? Ha! ha! ha!


Cross-Leg. Oh! you courtiers, Ha! ha! ha! Do you know, Sir, I Would try to be one
myself; that is -- in the small way.


Crumpy. What, like me?


Cross-Leg. Yes, Sir; only I Am so much afraid I might have my head chopp'd off.
Ha! ha! ha!


Crumpy. Oh, ho! master tailor, you have an eye to your upper button. Ha! ha! ha!


Cross-Leg. Right, Sir. Ha! ha! ha!


Crumpy. I tell you I was all right 'till put wrong, by accident, when an
infant. I was the prettiest, plumpest little rogue -- why I was named the
Blossom of Beauty, and Bud of Delight.


Jug. Lord! how odd!


Crumpy. I was an absolute cherry on the tree.


Cross-Leg. Then the birds have been pecking at you a good deal, Sir?


Crumpy. But one unlucky day, my mother's maid, starting upon the sudden sight
of her sweetheart, struck out my first two teeth with may coral; slapp'd one of
the bells into this left eye; knocked me off the nursery-table, and, breaking
my back, made me -- regardez -- I'effet --

(showing his hunch)
All. Ha! ha! ha!


Crumpy. Ay, you may laugh; but this hunch props my fortune at court; but, Ha
ha! ha! Do you know, that by the help of a second looking-glass, I often stand
and laugh at it myself?


Jug. Ha! ha! ha! Yes, Sir; and in the front glass, you, and your hunch peeping
over, must look the picture of the ape and her brat in the fable. Ha! ha! ha!


Crumpy. Ay; but if it even grieved me -- there is a nose, what say you to that
feature? (takes hold of it) So much beauty before -- I reflect that with my
hunch -- I leave all my sorrows behind me -- (all laugh) and then there is a leg.

(puts it up)
Cross-Leg. So it is, Sir. Look, Juggy, his honor stands upon a most fine
turned pedestal --


Jug. A beautiful calf!


Crumpy. For all this, I Will lay the price of my new suit of clothes, I show as
good a leg in company as this.


Cross-Leg. Oh, no, Sir! No, no; you don't!


Crumpy. (puts up his other) That Is as good. Gad I Have won! They Are fellows, and
good follows too. Ha! ha! ha!


Jug. Very handsome -- beautiful --

(admiring, then turns)
Cross-Leg. (apart to Juggy) Did you ever see such a bandy rascal? but he is a
great man, and we must flatter him.


Jug. But I protest husband I will wait no longer for Absalom and Dora; our
little supper will be quite spoiled; and since you have invited this gentleman,
and prevented his getting a better elsewhere, if he will condescend to partake
of our homely meal --


Cross-Leg. It Is certainly very bold of such lowly folks as us to expect that
his highness, the Bassa's chief favorite, would humble himself to --


Jug. Hold your tongue, for here is the supper.


Cross-Leg. Supper! -- then I Will stop my mouth.


Enter boy, with a dish of fish, etc. which he places on the table. Exit Jug.
It Is as pretty a little bit -- Come, pray, Sir, make free; you know, if fish
get's cold --


Cross-Leg. It Is a nice morsel! -- Juggy, help the gentleman, and hold your
clack.


Crumpy. Why, faith, you seem to live very comfortable here -- and your morsel
does look so nicely tempting -- Egad, I will.

(they all set)
Jug. Do, pray, Sir; we had this prepared for a young couple.


Cross-Leg. Ay; by their stay father Anselm has brought them in to sup with his
brethren in their refectory; -- those holy fathers, Sir, love to live well.


Crumpy. If it is holy to live well, this is the most pious dish I ever tasted.

(eating)
Jug. Then do, Sir, pray eat heartily?


Cross-Leg. Juggy, fill a glass -- Sir,

(Juggy fills, and offers a glass to Crumpy)
Crumpy. Why, right; fish should swim three times; water, sauce, and wine. (all
laugh and drink) As I Am Mohammedan I Am forbid wine; but when I Am amongst you
Christians -- Ha! ha! ha!


Cross-Leg. Right, Sir; at Rome do as Rome does.


Jug. (helping Crumpy) That Is a neat morsel, Sir.


Crumpy. I Will taste it with attention.

(all laugh)
Cross-Leg. Oh! Sir! I don't wonder at the Bassa putting you into office, or
giving you a fine pension -- I Would do just the same; and I think you would do so by
me. You might get a body a skirt of something pretty at court though?


Jug. Will you never ha'done with your bodies and skirts? Always showing the
tailor!


Cross-Leg. I will not. (apart to Juggy) My wife, Sir, is as sharp as a needle;
but, Sir, as I was saying, what a place would I give such a witty gentleman as
you, was I a Beglarbeg, or a Walachian despot, I Would give you the finest place --


Crumpy. I believe you are a Holland stadholder, for you have given me a very
fine Dutch plaice; (all laugh) but I must try to kick up some frolic here to
night, to make out a joke for the Bassa, that bill (slipping a paper into
Cross-Leg's pocket) sets the tailor and Zebede by the ears, that is some
mischief (aside)


Cross-Leg. Aye, now you talk of us Christians, Mr. Crumpy, as you are such a
great man at court, if you would only use your interest to get this cruel new law
against us repealed --


Crumpy. New law, what! Oh! true the proclamation. Oh! oh! Now I have it.

(aside)
Jug. Sir, that is what made my good man at first so much afraid of asking you
in.


Cross-Leg. For, Sir, if you should, which is impossible, be affronted, or
receive the smallest hurt under this poor Christian roof, what would become of
me and my dear orthodox spousy?


Crumpy. Eh! this promises a joke

(aside)
Cross-Leg. This fish is very sweet, but it has a great many bones!


Crumpy. Bones; a good hint (aside) -- and so you were afraid if any thing
should happen to me in your house, 'twould bring you into the clutches of the
Cadi, and his bailiffs and terrible catchpoles

(eats greedily)
Jug. That we were, Sir.


Crumpy. As you say, this fish is very sweet, but it has a damned deal of bones
indeed; and as I have a cursed narrow swallow -- Egad! I must take care --


Jug. Pray do, Sir; but don't spoil your meal.


Cross-Leg. I was saying, Sir, this severity to us is rather hard; for, was I
the Bassa of Bagdad

(Crumpy eating greedily, throws himself into violent contortion, stares and
gapes)
Jug. You see how you get yourself laughed at, with your Beglarbegs and Bashaw,
you noodle

(to Cross-Leg.
Cross-Leg. Now, Sir, am I a noodle?


Crumpy. Cluck! -- Cluck! --

(grimaces, and points to his throat)
Cross-Leg. Ay, Sir, laugh; for ha! ha! ha! I cannot help laughing at it myself,
ha! ha! ha! and yet, Sir, if you look into history, as unlikely things have
happened.


Jug. I vow, husband, your folly makes the gentleman laugh so, that he cannot
eat --


Cross-Leg. Why, Sir, now recollect pray, was not the Grand Vizier to Mahomet
the Second a cobbler? -- And the great Prince Menzikoff was a pastry-cook.


Crumpy. (Grimacing).
Jug. Entertaining gentlemen with cobblers and pastry-cooks.


Crumpy. Cluck! -- Cluck! --

(grimaces)
Cross-Leg. Ha! ha! ha! Well, Sir, to be sure it was a good joke, ha! ha! ha!
and I Am glad it makes you so merry; but if I Am not allowed to be a Bashaw,
don't let us have our fish cold

(Crumpy grimaces)
Jug. Why, husband, you're so very ridiculous, that I vow to heaven, if you
haven't set the gentleman into convulsions, laughing at you! Do pray, Sir, eat
your supper, and never mind him.

(Crumpy grimaces)
Cross-Leg. Oh! well, Sir, with submission to your great wit and grand quality
-- yet for a man to be laughed at, at one's own table, though one's poor! --


Jug. Why sure the gentleman cannot speak! (looking at Crumpy with terror) I Have
heard say, a fit of laughing is as bad as a fit of crying -- Eh! -- Oh, Lord!
husband, something's the matter! Do, Sir, take a glass of wine!


Cross-Leg. No, then I will -- Sir, your health (drinks) which of us now is the
laugh against? Ha! ha! ha!


Jug. (alarmed) Mercy! -- (Crumpy points to his throat) the fish! -- a bone
stuck in his throat -- hit him on the back.

(she hits him)
Cross-Leg. Zounds! wife, you will knock his hump off, and then he will lose his
place at court

(filling wine)
Jug. Will you let the bottle alone, and do something --


Cross-Leg. Oh! very well! but I thought I could not do better --


Jug. Dear Sir, have you finished your supper?

(Crumpy groans)
Cross-Leg. No; but his supper has finished him!


Jug. Yes, he is choked!


Cross-Leg. In our house! -- a Mohammedan! -- then we shall be choked!


Jug. Oh dear! good Sir, -- if you cannot speak, do tell us?


Cross-Leg. Wife, be quiet, (puts his ear to Crumpy) he is quiet! -- not only a
Mussulman, but the Bassa's prime favorite! -- if he is found dead in our house,
you and I are thrown over a cross stick and hanged like a pair of breeches.


Jug. He Is dead!


Cross-Leg. As Adam, the first tailor.


Jug. Ah?

(screams)
Cross-Leg. The devil! -- have you a mind to bring the Janizary's patrol upon
us?


Jug. This comes of your peeping in the streets at night -- you cannot sit to
your supper without music, and be cursed to your fine ears!


Cross-Leg. I Will try some wine down his gullet.


Jug. We were happy and well, and you could not quietly wait for Absalom and
Dora, but you must bring your great turbans, and your Crumpy's and Humpy's in
upon us.


Cross-Leg. I think still there is life -- Absalom's a barber, if he was come,
he should bleed him! -- Stay, I Will cut open a vein with my shears.


Jug. Do.


Crumpy. (Groans)
Cross-Leg. Was that you, Juggy?


Jug. No; you devil! 'twas the man you killed -- you would ask a Turk to eat
fish of a Friday, and then talk of bleeding him with your shears.


Cross-Leg. Zounds! I Would bleed him with a pick-axe, if it could bring him to life

(Crumpy makes a noise)
Jug. Did you hear? Tim, suppose you try to thrust the bone down with a horn
spoon,


Cross-Leg. No; I Will pull it up with these nut-crackers -- but hold, we may
squeeze out the little life he has left -- Juggy, my dear, do you step down
stairs, and open the street door softly, Doctor Quinquina's house is not six
doors off: if his soul has not got out of hearing, the Doctor may whistle it
back again: listen; is the street clear.


Jug. Yes; there is a moon though.


Cross-Leg. Our side of the way, to the Doctor's, is all in the shadow, I Will
take Crumpy on my back (takes him up) Come along, you most ugly son of a broken
back! -- I wish my back had been broke before I had asked you up my stairs.


Jug. A pretty thing, that honest women must go to market to buy fish for you
to choke yourself with; you most abominable freight!

(shakes him by the whisker, one comes off in her hand)
Cross-Leg. Zounds! Have you plucked off his eyebrow? By the Lord she will pull
him to pieces before I can get him off my back!

Exit Juggy. This little Turk is not as big as half a Christian, and yet he is
as heavy as two popes. Oh, dear:

Exit with Crumpy.
SCENE III. The street before Cross-Leg's house.
(Moon light) Enter Juggy at the door. Jug. Nobody in the way; and if there
should, what will become of us? Will you make haste, you Tim Cross-Leg!


Enter Cross-Leg (stumbling) with Crumpy on his back. Cross-Leg. Now, Juggy,
you will leave our pattens in the entry.


Jug. Come, quick!


Cross-Leg. Any one in the street? -- If the patrol catches us!


Jug. Stop! Is not that a watchman's staff sticking out?


Cross-Leg. Yes; keep back (frightened) -- Oh! no; its only a barber's pole.


Jug. Do you think there is any life?


Cross-Leg. Hold your tongue. Give just one knock at the Doctor's door. (she
knocks a great deal) What the devil do you want to alarm the town?


Jug. Lord, how I tremble! I Have given five knocks instead of one!


Cross-Leg. If this same doctor cures him, why then he will be well -- may be --
and if he kills him, its only another death added to the doctor's list; and I
shift the danger off my shoulders (it darkens) that cloud comes across the moon
rarely. (Dominique within,) Who Is there?

(they start)
Cross-Leg. It Is only Dominique the doctor's man-wife. Do you answer?


Jug. Cannot you?


Cross-Leg. Answer, I tell you.


Jug. Indeed I shall not.


Cross-Leg. And I Am sure I will not then.


Dom. Who Is there?

(very loud)
Both. It Is I!

(much terrified)
Dom. And who are you knocking at peoples doors at night? Go along, or I Will
call the patrol.


Cross-Leg. Oh, Lord!


Jug. I tell you Tim Cross-Leg, fling Mr. Crumpy down, and let us run away!

(the door opens suddenly, Doctor Quinquina and Dominique rush out)
Doct. Qui est la, Who is dat? You, Dominique stand here. I say, who are you?
It Is so dark I cannot know any man's face!


Cross-Leg. I Am glad of that; I Will darken my voice too.


Doct. Speak what you want, or I Will knock your visage

(laying hold of Dominique)
Dom. Lord, Sir, it is I! Here is the man.

(presents Juggy)


Jug. Here, Sir; here is the man

(points to Cross-Leg)
Cross-Leg. An't please you, master Doctor, I and my mother here --


Jug. Mother -- Sirrah! -- upon my word

(apart)
Cross-Leg. She Is a midwife, Sir, and having been called up to a poor woman
that was suddenly taken ill, I thought I Would see her safe -- so coming along, she
desired me -- Billy, says she, what is that leaning against that there postess?
I directly went to look -- for I Am a very dutiful boy -- an't I mammy?


Doct. Diable! -- Vat you call me out in de cold street chattering about you
and your mammy

(going in enraged)
Cross-Leg. But, Sir, I Have brought you a patient -- and he brings you a fee.


Doct. You are de patient vid de fee; dat is quite anoder ting!


Cross-Leg. Yes, Sir, 'twas this gentleman --

(points to Crumpy)
Doct. Sacre Dieu! vat is dat?

(looks close up at Crumpy and starts)
Jug. Yes, Sir, 'twas this gentleman we saw leaning; he seemed to have been
taken ill --


Cross-Leg. And knowing you to be a doctor --


Doct. Cest vrai -- dat all de town knows -- I Am a very great doctor --


Cross-Leg. Finding him so bad, we brought him to you in hopes --


Doct. Ventre Bleau! you tink I am to take into my house all de bad vagabond
you pick out of the street? Allez -- bring him to the vatch-house for tonight,
and in de morning dey will send him to de hospital -- take de man from my door!


Jug. Lord, Sir, he is no man but a gentleman.


Cross-Leg. Noble Sir, only look close at him; his fine cloths prove he is some
very great personage.


Doct. Eh! bygar his coat do shine vid gold!

(looking at Crumpy)
Cross-Leg. Yes, Sir, if the lining agrees with the outside, he may turn out a
good patient!


Doct. I will never turn out a good patient; bring de gentleman in, I will cure
him in half of tree minutes.


Cross-Leg. Move him gently, there -- take care of his leg, Juggy.


Doct. Oui, take care of his jug, leg! (goes in and speaks) You, Dominique,
assist to help the gentleman up to my laboratory.


(Cross-Leg and Juggy put Crumpy in and shut the door) Cross-Leg. Good doctor,
there you have him; and now, kill or cure him as you can -- Come Juggy.


Jug. Run for it (drums and Turkish march without)


Patrol. (Without) The twelfth hour; all is well,


Jug. Get in!

(they go in)
Cross-Leg. (Peeping out at the door) All Is well!

(Cross-Leg shuts the door)
SCENE IV. Doctor's study, with books, phials and anatomical subjects.
Enter Dora. Dora. Lud! I Have got into step-father's study, surrounded by his
horrid skeletons near one! -- then no chance of the street door being opened
again tonight -- How shall I get out! perhaps my Absalom and Habby are waiting
for me. (listens) The Doctor's up! sure somebody's come in below -- since I
have got my jewels (shows a casket) -- I must only watch patiently for the
first opening of the hall door.


Doct. Bring him up

(without)
Dora. Oh, Lord! -- they have been robbing the churchyard!


Doct. (Without) Help my patient up here.


Dora. No; it is not a dead man!


Doct. Quick, you Dominique, then lock the street door.


Dora. Then I must be quick and first get out, if I can

(stands behind the door)
Enter Doctor. Doct. Help the gentilhomme up to my laboratory (very busy) Here!
place him in my own easy grand chaise (places an elbow chair) We will see what
ve cannot do for him. Come Depechez vous Dominique.


Enter Dominique.(Doctor turns suddenly and lays hold of him) Doct. Sit you
down, Sir. (thrusts Dominique into the chair, and feels his pulse without
looking at him) Ah! you're much malade! very bad!


Dom. Not I, Sir! I Am very well.


Doct. Diable! What, Dominique! Get you out of my grand chaise (Dominique
rises) What you mean? Where is the sick gentleman, my patient?


Dom. Patiently waiting below, Sir.


Doct. And vy you and de midwife no bring him up, Sire!


Dom. Lord, Sir! the midwife and her son Billy are gone -- they flung the
gentleman into the hall, slap'd the door, and run away.


Dora. (aside) Then the door's not locked yet!


Doct Dey are rogues! -- dey have first picked his pocket -- if so, he cannot
pay me my fee; but he seems noblesse from his gold coat, so I will cure him at
a venture -- Sir, vil you please to walk up? (calls) He Is weak -- Dominique,
you go assist him. Exit Dom. I will hold de light for you myself; I am not too
proud for dat.

(takes a candle and exit.)
Dora. Now is my time to get out before the door is fastened for the night.


Doct. (without) Dominique, bring the gentilhomme up gently. You see you must
carry him -- don't knock his head vid de bannisters -- he is very weak -- ah!
pouvre? -- very well? -- bien! -- softly! -- up vid him -- ah, hah! (Doctor
walks in backwards with the candle, and still looking toward the door) Dear,
now he is safe, and vel up -- set him on his leg on de landing -- Comment vous
portez vous, Monsieur? (bowing at the door) Ay, he cannot talk, he is so weak;
-- lift him up, and bring him in, set him gently --


Dom. (without) Lord, if he hasn't a hunch!


Doct. Ciel! -- it is Mr. Crumpy the Bassa's favorite, Litte Hunch-back, joker!
Mon dieu! if I cure him it will make my fortune at court, tol, lol, lol, (sings
and capers) take care you, Dominique, don't hurt his hump! How do you do, Sir?

(making a bow toward the door)
Dora. Now for it --

(she blows out the candle in the Doctor's hand and exit hastily. A noise heard
of tumbling down stairs)
Dom. (without) Oh, Lord!


Enter Dominique (frightened) Doct. Sacre Dieu! -- Vat is dat?


Dom. Hush! don't make a noise, Sir; who or whatever that is, it has tumbled
the sick gentleman from the top of the stairs to the bottom. -- Yes; it has
certainly killed him!


Doct. Killed de man dead! -- Ah! malheurreux, den I Have lost my fee! We must
instantly send his dead body to the court

(going)
Dom. Hold Sir! -- Do you forget the proclamation against the Christians? -- so
severe that they are getting out of the city as fast as they can carry off their
effects. Why, Sir, if his dead body is found here --


Doct. C'est vrai, 'twill 'be said I did kill him! I shall be hanged, and my
head will undergo amputation -- I am miserable! -- but vat was dat, that did do
dis?


Dom. Lord, Sir! no time for enquiry now -- the only thing to think of now is
to save our lives, by getting rid of Mr. Crumpy's soul case.


Doct. En verite, 'twould vex me to be hanged for killing such an ugly coquin,
if it was even me dat did kill him, it would be some comfort -- ah, ha! -- I
have conceive grand toughts (brightens up) Dominique, we must get dis Monsieur
Crumpy out of my house, and I have tink of de way to put him into somebody
else's house. Get me a rope, dat is all I vant, and den run up stairs and open
de sky-light window dat goes out to de leads a-top of my house --


Dom. Suppose, Sir, you feel his pulse?


Doct. Feel a dead man's pulse! Ah, Hebete! Quick, do my command (going) --
Stop! (he turns) -- I will go up myself and open de sky-light window, while you
get de rope.


Dom. I don't know where to find a rope.


Doct. Den if yon don't, de hangman vil find a rope for you and me, allez
depechez vous.

Exeunt severally.
SCENE V. A room at the top of Zebede's house, a table, account books, ches^s,
strong boxes, etc.
Enter Habby. Hab. So, Absalom and Dora, with their booty from uncle and
step-father, I have left safe on board the English sloop -- my coming back
takes all suspicion from me; and I Will pick up something for myself too, and
then for Europe with the younkers -- Egad, old master Zebede, we have already
made a rare haul upon your chests and bags here, that will teach you to beat
your clerks as you have done me.


Zeb. (without) Up another story.


Hab. Zounds! here he comes to see what I Have done to his books.


Enter Zebede and Cross-Leg: Zeb. Aye, this garret is my compting-house, ha!
ha! ha!


Cross-Leg. Up in the clouds, like my workshop!


Zeb. Now your business?


Cross-Leg. Private.


Zeb. Habby, go down! (he is going) Oh, stop! -- Have you put all my accounts
into confusion, to puzzle my master, the Bassa, if he should look over them.

(apart to Habby)
Hab. Yes, Sir; you will find all here in a very fine confusion.

Exit.
Cross-Leg. How this draft of Crumpy's came into my pocket I don't know! except
it was to pay for his supper -- however, if the Jew here will but give me cash,
I Will have made a good night's job of it.

(aside)
Zeb. An unseasonable hour for you to call!


Cross-Leg. I thought money never came out of season with a Jew; discount that
bill

(gives it)
Zeb. I have no objection -- that is, for the premium -- Why this is payable to
Mr. Crumpy? Oh, he has sent you for the moneys?


Cross-Leg. Yes -- I Am plaguey bad at a lie; I wish my wife had come

(aside)
Zeb. But where is Little Hunch-back himself?


Cross-Leg. (confused) He Is -- I -- I -- suppose he is at home. By this the
Doctor has made an otomy of him

(aside)
Zeb. Eh!

(examining the bill)
Cross Leg I Am all on the tenters! But even if Crumpy's death should be found
out, I shall now have money to carry me to Europe with the other Christians,
that are getting from the Bassa's persecution

(aside)
Zeb. It Is a good bill, but I suspect not come honestly by; and I could stop
you and it, but as you are a neighbor I will pay you the whole money, if you
give me half.


Cross-Leg. (aside) I Am found out -- why man -- did you think I Would wrong --

(embarras'd)
Zeb. Hush! Hunch-back is a damned little impudent scoundrel -- it is nothing to
me if any body has robbed, or even cut his windpipe.


Cross-Leg. I choke him! or know any thing at all of his death -- Oh, Lord!
what do you go to say that for?

(terrified)
Zeb. (calmly) Why, is he dead?


Cross-Leg. Why, if he -- how should I know whether he is dead or alive? You Have
a bad conscience, Mr. Zebede, that is what makes you so frightened as you are.

(endeavoring to conceal his perturbation)
Zeb. Me! -- why should I be frightened?


Cross-Leg. And why should I, if you go to that?


Zeb. Why, what the devil are you at? -- one would think you had been concerned
in --


Cross-Leg. Every body knows that I Am a man -- that -- despises all that kind
of -- what sort of -- unlucky dismal looking place to bring a man into.


Zeb. Dismal! -- (looks round) Be quiet, you're enough to make one afraid,
indeed,

(with fear)
Cross-Leg. Oh, Lord! (aside) (a brick falls down the chimney) What do you do
that for? -- None of your tricks.


Zeb. Gad, I Am in no humor for tricks! (frightened)


Cross-Leg. Mr. Crumpy may be dead for what I know; but if he thinks I had any
hand in it, I Would tell him he lied -- aye, to his very whiskers

(Crumpy is let down the chimney)
Zeb. What Is that!

(looking at Crumpy)
(Cross-Leg sneaks off) Zeb. (falls on his face) Are you the devil, or the cat?
-- but what could bring puss in a pair of gold breeches -- it is certainly the
-- Oh? Samuel, Saul, and the Witch of Endor? -- Oh! don't stare so with your
big bull's eyes, and your wide mouth like a maiden jay (Crumpy stoops his body)
Oh! you are very polite -- Eh! he looks -- if it should be a live man he is a
robber! I Will drag this great chest of plate and dollars out of this room -- I
wish I had Habby here to help me, it is so heavy (lays hold of the chest with
both hands, and putting his strength to it as if expecting great weight,
suddenly falling on his back, he pulls it over him) Oh! death of Israel! -- the
chest is so light it must be quite empty! (Crumpy bows) What, you know that,
you damned thief (rises hastily, opens the lid of the chest, and looks in it)
Yes, my money and plate is all gone, and you have come down my chimney for more,
you drop-gibbet! -- but I will defend my property, if you were Bell and the
Dragon (strikes Crumpy, who falls) you banditti! -- bandeliro! -- you Arab,
plunderer of caravans; come before the Cadi, speak -- Eh! -- he is dead! --
bless me! -- if it should be I that has killed him -- a hunch! save me, if it
is not Mr. Crumpy himself only come down my chimney to play his jests upon me --
or if it should be he that did rob my chest, the Bassa will never believe me --
he is dead! -- Oh! heavens! now I recollect the proclamation against the Jews!
If this is found out, it is certain death for me; and as I Am already in
disgrace -- nobody saw me strike him -- few people in the streets, and so near
morning, the watch are gone off their stands -- you nasty little beast! -- you
was my plague when alive, and now you must throw your death upon me with your
gambols (feels Crumpy) he is yet warm -- but once he is out of my house, let him
die or live! Come on my back, and the devil take your hump.

Exit, with Crumpy on his back.
SCENE VI. The street. (day break)
(Zebede discovered placing Crumpy up against a wall) Enter Crank and
Cabin-boy. (Crank elevated with wine) Crank. (sings) "God save great George our
King" -- the Christian passengers are waiting in my sloop -- they will find
brandy enough in my lockers to amuse them -- tell them we will fall down the
pool this tide.

Exit boy. These pippin -- squeezers to break up company, we never begin to
cotton together and be jolly till it comes to the little hours (sings) tol!
lol! lol!

"How can we depart,

"When friendship has grappled each man by the heart."


Zeb. There, stand or tumble down for Zebede -- good morning to you, Mr. Crumpy
--

(going)
Crank. Holloa! -- stop!


Zeb. Yes; there he stops for you.

Exit Zeb.
Crank. Take one bottle with me -- you will not -- a pint -- a gill -- then you're
a sneaking rascal! -- so that is your Bagdad Scanderoon manners. I wish I was
back again in Old England -- What a damned country this is, that I cannot get
one honest fellow to take a bottle with me!


Crumpy. Cluck! -- Cluck! --


Crank. Who Is that? (turns and looks at Crumpy) -- a very capital Turk, upon my
honor! How do you do, Sir? (bows) You might make a leg, I don't expect you will
take off your hat, because you have none -- will you do me the favor to take a
glass with me, or I must turn into my hammock -- Eh! what do you say? -- Oh! I
know you're not allowed wine -- none of your winking! -- over the way they have
the nicest liquor -- how he licks his lips (aside) but come along -- Eh! you
may give a civil answer though -- damme! who minds your grinning or grunting?
Very proud -- but the Grand Turk himself needn't be ashamed to talk to a
Briton. Heark-yee, my lad, if you intend to affront me, damme if I don't lend
you a dowse of the chops (strikes him down) rise and stand up to me, an
Englishman scorns to strike a fallen enemy.


Enter Cadi and Janissaries. Cadi. Seize him!


Crank. Will you drink a bottle with me?


Cadi. Yonder Is his Highness the Bassa himself coming from the mosque.


Enter the Bassa (attended) Babouc, Zebede, Doctor, Cross-Leg and Juggy,
followed by a crowd, etc. Bassa. The matter here?


Cadi. Please your Highness this Christian has killed a Mussulman!


Bassa. Heavens! -- it is Hunch-back

(looks down on him attentively, and with great concern)
Cross-Leg. How I tremble! -- if he finds out 'twas I -- Oh! cruel man (to
Crank) How could you be so wicked as to take his life?


Jug. (apart to Cross-Leg) Don't go near the body, or it will bleed afresh!


Doct. Nobody suspect 'twas I did kill him. I am so frightened

(aside)
Zeb. I have got his murder off my shoulders mighty lucky! (aside) What a
wicked man you must be to kill my dear little friend!


Bassa. What proof, that this is the murderer?


Crank. Please your worship -- Mr. -- my Lord Mayor -- I confess I did give
this pretty little gentleman a dowse, but if it did kill 'twas in my own
defense.


Bassa. How?


Crank. I cannot drink alone -- he would not drink with me -- I should die
without drinking -- so let your jury of twelve bring it in manslaughter.


Bassa. (apart to Babouc) I Have thought of a method to come at the truth of this
matter. Whoever killed him, instead of punishment shall have a reward. This
buffoon was once my favorite, but growing most intolerably stupid, I Have long
wished him out of my way. Give the Briton a purse of a thousand tomilees.


Crank. If I Have killed a man I could weep for it; but the price of blood shall
never stain this hand

(throws the purse down on the ground)
Zeb. I could cry myself for poor Crumpy -- but give me the purse, for finding
you wanted to get rid of him, to oblige your Highness, 'twas I that killed him.


Doct. You! Begar it was I dat did de murder him, to please you, my Lord, vid
von grande kick of my fist I did give him de fine knock, a tumble down my tree
pair of stair; and den I did drop his body down your chimney -- so give de
money --


Cross-Leg. To me (holds out his hand) for with a fish bone, at my house, I
gave him the fatal Cluck! -- Cluck! (mimicks) -- and that I might be sure of
his being killed, I brought him to the Doctor's.


Jug. Aye; but who went to the market to buy that fish? My Lord, on the word of
a woman, 'twas I that put the very bone on his plate that stuck in his
throttle! --


Bassa. So the reward has extorted a confession I wanted, and convicted you all
of intentional murder from your own lips -- Guards seize them -- In reality his
death grieves me, and the man that extracts the bone, and restore's the life of
my poor favorite, shall have the purse I promised.


Crumpy. Then that man am I (puts his hand to his mouth and takes out the bone)
lay the cash here

(holds out his other hand, springs up, sings and capers)
Bassa. What is this!

(amazed)
Crumpy. A frolic; ha! ha! ha! -- I Have suffered this delicate little body of
mine to be lug'd, thumpt, jumbled and tumbled all night, only to make a laugh
for you this morning -- and if you don't laugh, egad, you yourself in future
for Crumpy!


Zeb. What!


Doct. Comment!


Cross-Leg. Juggy! --

(Crumpy grimaces to them as he appeared when choked)
Bassa. Why, by Mahomet, it has been a laughable night's frolic indeed! -- but
all, but the honest Englishman, whose truth was above hope of reward or fear of
punishment, shall die.


Crumpy. I Sieur Crumpy, Lord Chief Justice Joker, swear upon my hunch and
honor, that nobody shall die, except Zebede the Jew, Quinquina the Doctor,
Cross-Leg the Tailor, and Dame Juggy his orthodox spousy.


Enter Officer and Guards, with Absalom, Dora, and other Christians prisoners.
Officer. My Lord, we took these suspected Christians, with those rich goods, on
board.

(showing bales, caskets, etc.)
Crank. My sloop, a breach of the peace with England, my Lord!


Crumpy. A truce!


Bassa. (to Absalom) What, my preserver flying from my favor!


Abs. I feared, Sir, I should forfeit that, by turning Christian; and,
converted by Dora, here I --


Zeb. (looks at the caskets) You began your Christianity by robbing your uncle
-- justice, my Lord, on this!


Crumpy. Stop; well remembered! -- the barber and I here have yet two promises
to claim; one is, that you will give the purse to the generous Englishman, to
give to me when I refuse next to drink with him -- the other, that you will
repeal the law against the Christians -- and the other --


Bassa. What three?


Crumpy. Be quiet -- this is the best of all -- that you will hang Zebede and the
Doctor, if they don't give their consent and capital fortunes to this worthy
young couple.


Bassa. Presuming on my friend, the Vizier's favor, I Will grant them.


Crumpy. I grant you should -- Christians, Turks, Jews, my seeming death has
proved my kind master would mourn my worthless life! and when I cease to wish
my Prince may live long and merrily, may I be choked with a whalebone.

All noble chops in princely Bagdad,
Have often my poor frolicks waged at;
Still yours the laugh, and mine the thump,
So you're still pleased with Little Crump.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for J. DEBRETT.
JOURNAL of a VOYAGE from PORT JACKSON, NEW SOUTH WALES, to CANTON, in 1788,
through an UNEXPLORED PASSAGE; with Views of the ISLANDS DISCOVERED, a correct
Diary of the Weather, etc. etc. By THOMAS GILBERT, Esquire. Commander of the
Charlotte Elegantly printed in 4to.

Speedily will be published.

A JOURNAL of a VOYAGE to BOTANY BAY, in NEW SOUTH WALES; with a full and
accurate Account of his Majesty's Settlement at that Place, Port Jackson, and
Norfolk Island; a Description of the Natives, a correct Diary of the Weather,
Latitudes and Longitudes, etc. etc. By JOHN WHITE, Esquire. Surgeon-General to his
Majesty's Forces, and to the Settlement in New South Wales. Illustrated with a
great Variety of Plates of Non-descript Animals, Birds, Serpents, Lizards,
curious Cones of Trees, etc. etc. and other natural Productions of New South
Wales, copied from Nature, by Miss Stone, Mr. Nodder, Mr. Catton, etc. and
engraved by the best Artists. Elegantly printed in one Volume, Royal 4to.

The Editor takes the Liberty of informing the Subscribers to the Work, and the
Public in general, that it is in great forwardness, and will be published with
all possible Expedition, consistent with the necessary regard to be paid to the
Engravings. He begs Leave to add, that in the Execution of this important Part
of the Work, no Expense nor Care have been spared; and that the most celebrated
Artists in each Department have been employed.

* Specimens of the Subjects of the Engravings may be seen at J. Debrett's.
Gentlemen desirous of early Impressions of the Plates, are requested to
transmit their Names as above, or to their respective Booksellers.


