MY TRUST IS IN GOD an angel standing atop the upper half of a globe beneath a
banner

A Dissertation upon the Nervous System to show its Influence upon the Soul.

Man can know little, and yet he wants to know all things, He is confined to a
point of time in this life, yet extends his Views backwards and forwards,
through Millions of Ages, till he is lost in eternity. He is confined to some
minute part of this Globe; yet while his feet stand on it, his Soul is
traveling through the whole planetary System, traversing the immensity of
Space, till he is at last lost in Infinity.

Published September 1780.

DISSERTATION ON THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, etc.
SECTION I.
BEFORE we proceed, it will be necessary to explain, in a simple manner, the
Nature of those bodily powers, which Constitute the very Principles of Life.

The Human Body is sustained and kept alive, by three principal powers, which
like the movements of a Clock or Watch, cooperate and assist each other: The
first is the brain and Nervous System proceeding from it, the grand Source of
all Sensation; The Second, is the Heart and Arteries, or blood Vessels, which
give motion and circulation to the Blood; And the Third is the Stomach and
Bowels, which prepare the Aliment and supply Nourishment for those, as well as
all parts of the Body.

In speaking of Digestion it will be remarked, that the Stomach loses its power
when deprived of Nervous Influence; and we should here take notice, that the
Regularity and Vigor of the Heart's motion, chiefly depend on the same cause.

As therefore the Brain and Nerves, the Heart and Arteries, and the Stomach and
Bowels, are the principal instruments of all Sensation, Circulation, Nutrition,
Life and Motion, and the very Agents which govern and direct the whole Animal
Machine; It will be necessarily consequent, that when any of them becomes
disconcerted, and put out of order, the vital functions of the Body depending
upon them, must then be unduly performed. "where one Link's broken, the whole
chain's destroyed."

Such is the extraordinary Sympathy and intercourse between those several
organs, that like so many little provinces, allied by mutual Interest, not one
of them can exercise its full power without the assistance and concurrence of
the rest; for as the Heart and Stomach cannot act without the assistance of the
Brain, or the Stomach Digest without receiving a due Quantity of blood from the
Heart; so neither can the Heart have sufficient force to keep up the
circulation, without a continual supply of nourishment from the Stomach; or
even the Brain itself exert its Influence over those organs without being duly
nourished by Both. Although it will evidently appear, that the Nerves are the
Immediate organs of all vital motion and Sensation, and the medium by which
impressions made on the Body are instantly conveyed to the mind; yet the
precise manner by which this misterious intercourse is carried on, remains a
secret in nature with which, perhaps, we shall never be acquainted

So intimately connected are the Body and Soul, and such their Correspondence,
that Impressions made on the one naturally influence the other with the like
feelings: Thus, by immoderate grief the digestive faculty of the Stomach is
impaired and taken away, and by a blow on the head which injures the Brain, the
Soul is as it were dethroned, and losing its empire over the Body, all sense
and motion are instantly destroyed. The Soul, or Intellect, whilst confined to
the Body, "That muddy Vesture of decay," is obliged to stoop to the state and
condition of the Nerves, whose feelings are liable to alteration from a
thousand accidental or unavoidable causes, so as to occasion diseases, or being
totally abolished, to produce instant death. Those, as well as many other
circumstances, concur to prove that the faculties and disposition of the mind,
in a great measure, depend on the bodily organs with which they cooperate, and
where those are changed from their natural State, so are its appetites and
operations.

How different is the State of the Body and Soul when the vessels are empty or
full, viz. after long fasting, or a plentiful meal, in the first the pulse is
weak and unequal, the Complexion pale, the Body languid, and the Spirits
desponding: But after eating and the moderate use of wine, the Springs of Life
are wound up, and the Body and Soul are restored to their native vigor.

The consent between the Brain and Heart is remarkable, for, intense Study or
thinking quickens the Pulse, and a sudden fright will occasion palpetations or
a convulsive Struggle of the heart, even sometimes to a mortal suffocation: in
both these cases, the first impression is made on the Brain, and the Heart,
like a faithful companion, suffers by sympathy; but whether the Nerves act as
Tubes, or Vibrating Cords, like the Strings of a musical Instrument, or whether
they serve as conductors to some subtle fluid similar to that of Electric Fire,
we are wholly ignorant The Brain seems therefore to the Nerves, what the Heart
is to the Blood Vessels or Arteries; for too violent a degree of Action in the
last, will produce heat and increase circulation, as may be observed after
violent exercise, or in the time of a Fever: in like manner, when the power of
the Brain and Nerves is too violently impressed on the Body or Soul, their
Sensations will be rendered too quick and exquisite; like the motion of a
watch, which becomes rapid and irregular when the main spring acts too strongly
on the several wheels and subordinate movements.

Impressions made on the Soul will often totally subdue those of the Body: and
on the contrary, such as are made on the Body, will remove those of the Soul;
all which may supply an Intelligent observer with useful hints in the cure of
such diseases as have been unsuccessfully treated by medicines.

Religious doubts which perplex the Soul with alternate Hopes and fears, a
Sedentary life, or warm, damp air, all dispose the constitution to Melancholy,
by weakening the Nervous power. Those are the general causes of low Spirits, and
acquired melancholy, which always operate most powerfully on People of nice
Sensations, whose Pleasures and Pains from over-delicacy of the Nervous System,
are too exquisite for sense; but the precise manner in which they produce their
effects, or why such causes do not always occasion similar consequences, in
such a particular State of the Nerves, is utterly unknown.

"Where Joy most revels, Grief does most lament;
Grief Joys. Joy grieves, on slender accident."
Those, on the contrary, of more clumsy organs, who are possessed of little
more than Vegetable-feeling, never experience the misery of Nervous Disorders;
but if they have less pleasure, the account is balanced by their enduring less
pain.

We have already observed, that the Body and Soul, receive all their
information by means of the Brain and Nerves, and that by Those they mutually
converse and sympathize with each other; hence it will follow, that whenever
those Organs are Injured, and like unfaithful Messengers, do not truly execute
their Office, and represent things as they are, the Patient will then be
imposed upon, by Delusive Perception, and figure to herself things which have
no existence, but in her own distempered Brain.

They suppose that every one looks upon them with a malignant eye, and puts the
worst construction on what they say and do; In short, though they are
industrious to torment themselves, by means which appear ludicrous, they
experience substantial misery, and are sometimes driven to desperation, and
Suicide; so that in the whole catalogue of earthly evils, human Nature cannot
present an object more truly pitiable!

What then shall be said of those who either from Ambition or the view of gain,
stifle the feelings of honor and humanity, and sordidly submit to form
alliances which Entail hereditary miseries on their posterity, more grievous
than death itself! and who, therefore, instead of remembering the Authors of
their being with filial affection, must behold them with indignation and sorrow!

Retirement and bodily ease are not destructive to the melancholy, for whilst
they sit still unemployed, they become a prey to their own thoughts. On the
contrary, exercise and severity of Diet, are beneficial; for no one can think
or study with the same attention, when impressed with the disagreeable
sensation of Hunger, or tormented with a raging tooth, as when he is perfectly
at ease.

Since we find that painful sensations applied to the Body or Mind, often
destroy health and occasion Melancholy; by parity of reasoning it may be
concluded, that pleasurable feelings of a contrary nature will bid fairest to
restore it: The chiefest of those are, Cheerful Company, Poetry, Music, and
Dramatic entertainments of the Comic kind, Frequent exercise in the open
Fields, or flower Gardens, the waters of Tunbridge or Spa, assisted by that
sovereign remedy the Peruvian Bark, and the use of the cold Bath, will also be
found powerfully Salutary.

The Study of Natural History, and employment of delineating some of its most
beautiful and minute objects arranged under their proper classes, as those of
Birds, Insects and Flowers, will afford very pleasing and rational
entertainment and assist in diverting the mind from things of a more serious
nature. Particular thoughts and reflections of the mind are joined with certain
conditions of the Body; and therefore, our manner of living, in a considerable
Degree, changes our manner of thinking. Hence by Pravelling, the universal
benefits of Air, Exercise and Diet, will at once be most agreeably obtained;
all which tend to strengthen the Constitution, and to wear out disagreeable
impressions made on the Body or mind by introducing others of a different
nature.

The next Sovereign remedy in diseases of the mind is Music. Cicero asserts
it is amazing power, and Plato Supposes the effect of harmony on the mind is
equal to that of air on the Body: Its Divine influence is exemplified by David
in the Cure of Saul; and the Eastern Monarch who had conquered the world, was
himself Subdued by the Seraphic Strains of Timotheus's Harp, which so
captivated his ear, that he was roused into madness, or soothed into melancholy
as the sounds became sprightly and animated, or Solemn and Slow.

So wonderful is the empire of Music over the mind, as recorded by the
ancients, that it leads the soldier undaunted to the "Imminent deadly breach."
and alternately stops the rage of conquest by its varied power: It mitigates
bodily pain, suspends the malignant force of madness and despair, and lulls the
Soul into traquility and peace.

The effect of music however will be different according to the style, and
manner of its composition, and therefore should be adapted to the particular
state and disposition of the mind. The plaintive Tone of soft Flutes will
induce a pleasing languor, and compose it when tortured with rage or irritated
by the more violent passions; and on the Contrary, the merry pipe and Tabor
will exhilerate, and raise the moping head of melancholy, depressed by
Religious Despair, Disapointed Ambition, or hopeless Love.

Let us appeal to the refined feelings of those most susceptible of the Divine
power of harmony, to prove its sovereign influence over the mind; that it is
the true oblivious Antidote, the Nepenthe of the Gods, to heal a wounded
Spirit, to exalt the Soul above low-thoughted care, and lap it in Elysium.

This great sensibility occasions people of Rank to be Victims of their most
favorite feelings; all that afflicts or threatens others, all the evil
incident to mankind in general, are to them real grievances, affecting them,
very frequently, more than their own private complaints, and essentially
destroy their health; in a word, infinitely more sensible of tender
impressions, and exposed to a much greater number than the Peasant, of
necessity they must suffer much more.

Nerves continually agitated by humors which are always irritative, by
disordering the harmony of the Organs, and enfeebling the Body, murder the
mental faculties; which are so much dependant on the Situation of its
surrounding body, that whatever disorders The economy of the one, absolutely
prejudices the mode of thinking in the other.

"That bright'ning ray, by God himself bestowed,
Blends with our Senses, and like them grows weak."
Nervous disorders, that disposition to be too easily affected and susceptible
of irregular and painful emotions, is one of the most cruel scourges to people
of rank that has been advanced. It most commonly occurs, and till now, has been
particularly unhappy in a mistaken treatment, because its origin had not been
sufficiently investigated: it is different Species, which required very
different remedies, was left unexamined. This Branch of Physic is at present
too much confined to hypothesis, the Subject of party disputes, or at least
influenced by Fashion.

Many Eminent Physicians, regarding all disorders of the Nerves as the
Consequences of relaxed fibers, and weak digestions, would effect a cure by
means of remedies which are hot, and strengthening, by Gums, Steel, Bitters,
Camphire, Castor, Musk, Spirituous Tinctures, Opium, etc. which is an error
similar to the following, in speaking of indigestion and Stomachic remedies. In
attributing all Nervous complaints to one cause, they have proposed but one
kind of remedy, which unhappily has no better success than in complaints of the
Stomach. Nerves inflamed by the immoderate use of Aromatics, are not relieved
by using Assafoetida; a sharper Medicine than the most piquant Aromatic: those
who are dried up by the abuse of Barbados Water and Marasquin, will not find
assistance by drinking great quantities of the Tincture of Gentian, of
Valerian, or of Castor; but those remedies so hurtful, in these cases, are very
beneficial in cases where a weak fiber, or poor and watery Blood are the true
causes of the complaint, and such cases often do occur.

That Tea affects the Nerves of the Stomach is evident, by its communicating
disagreeable Sensations upon the Soul. That the Soul becomes affected when the
digestion of the Stomach is impaired, is also evident, so that the Soul cannot
be answerable in that case, for Actions of the Body; for without the Nerves are
braced up to the Standard of the Soul, it is ideas are imperfectly connected: so
that it is clear, the Nerves operate upon the Soul, as the Works of a Clock
regulate the Movement in keeping Time.

That extreme sensibility to all Impressions, which render many so unhappy,
should be treated like disorders of the Nerves, on which it depends, and often
requires cold Baths, Milk diet, much exercise, and the courage to brave the
open Air, and those things which we most dread.

Sometimes the Disorder only exists in the Imagination. The vapourish persuade
themselves they are not able to do any thing, when they are very strong; they
fancy every thing incommodious which they are very well able to bear; they
deprive themselves of, and renounce, all enjoyments, frighten themselves with
an unexisting Bugbear, and court a real one. Such Cases require the Physicians
utmost penetration: If he is deluded, the Patient is lost; but if he deceives
the Patient, and gains his confidence, a Cure is the work of a minute. I have
seen five such Persons, who fancied they could neither bear light, noise, air,
or food, keep their Beds in a dark and matted Chamber, where none were suffered
to walk, move, or speak out, but with the utmost precaution; lived only on
Broth and Jellies; thought themselves dangerously ill, settled their Affairs,
and all this while they were perfectly well: I compelled them to see, hear,
speak quit their Beds, and even their House, to eat and act like other People,
to feel themselves well, and pass in one quarter of an Hour from the greatest
Misery to the greatest Happiness.

We must be persuaded the Nerves are immediately affected by the Labors of the
Soul: inactivity is also sufficient to destroy them, and often produces this
effect, even in Persons whose mind is as indolent as their Body The Nerves are
the principal parts of the Machine, whenever any of the Animal Functions are
disturbed, they must undoubtedly be injured.

When the Nerves are affected without any sensible cause, one would be led to
suppose, that some disease would soon appear, the source of which might
possibly be discovered by attentive observation and be the more easily
destroyed before the disease had come to any height. Some disorders, (of the
Stomach especially) show themselves more readily by the effects they have on
the Nerves; for they being a kind of Medium between the Soul and the Body, are
exposed to suffer from the irregularities of each, and communicate to the one,
the injuries they receive from the other: thus it is that the Soul becomes
prejudicial to the Body, and the Body hurtful to the Soul, and that they are
both combined in destroying the Nervous System.

SECTION II.
LET us now consider what is to be done to obtain a cure in Nervous Diseases.

First then, we are exactly to regulate the use of non-naturals; For in vain is
a prescription of medicines, if the Patient is not directed and willing to
observe certain regulations, in relation to Air, diet* and Exercise. Choose a
free open Air, not encumbered with Hills or Woods A dry cool Air, braces and
Invigorates the whole Body; while a Hot, confined, and damp Air, weakens and
relaxes the Habit. When the Stomach and Bowels are weak* they should be well
guarded against cold and Damps especially in Winter; and there is no dress
better and more necessary to keep up a due perspiration, than Flannels worn
next the Skin.

Constant exercise, every day that allows of it, either in walking, on
horseback, or in an open Chaise, is of vast service; it should be as much as
the strength will admit, without weakness, fatigue or hurry; never weary
yourself, nor raise a Sweat, go no further, than you can return with as much
spirit as you went out. Exercise strengthens the whole Nervous System, assists
digestion, (but retards it after a full meal; therefore after dinner sit a
while) Sangnification, and the distribution and secretion of all the Animal
Fluids. By muscular motion, the blood and Juices are kept in a due state of
Fluidity; their Viscididity is broken and dissolved, and all obstructions
either prevented or removed. The flesh Brush is an excellent thing for
strengthening the Solids; as friction, either with the flesh brush, flannel or
coarse Linen Cloth, strengthens the Body, promotes the circulation, and is
particularly useful in weak Bowels.

People of weak Nerves are generally quick thinkers, from the delicacy of their
sensitive organs, which we therefore more liable to be fatigued and relaxed
with exercise, than those of a Coarser make; whence we see the necessity of
keeping the mind easy, quiet and cheerful, since nothing hurts Nervous People
more, than fear, grief, and anxiety. Use therefore agreeable amusements, and a
little slight, entertaining and diverting reading, that requires no thought,
for all Study is pernicious and hurtful. Conversation should be agreeable
trifling and easy, without dispute or contradiction; amusements be Innocent,
various, and not expensive: otherways, upon reflection, the money laid out
would do more hurt, than the amusements could recompense. In a word, all
thought and care must be laid aside; and rationality must give place for a
while, to a way of life, which Bath gives a pattern of. I cannot but highly
approve of a practice there, of having music, while the Patients drink the
Water; which has a very great and good effect upon the motion of the finer
animal Fibers. Music has been allowed, in all ages of the world, to have a
Noble power in raising the dejected ideas of the Soul. Those that have the most
delicate constitutions, are most sensible of its good effects; it opens the
obstructions of the finest Vessels; assuages the passions, and at the same time
communicates a pleasure to the Soul, and makes its ideas cheerful, gay and
lively; by the oscillatory motion of the Air, vibrating against the tempanum of
the ear, there is such an impulsive motion given to the finest fibers of the
Brain, (upon which the Soul more immediately displays its Faculties) as to
enable them to bring regular impulses to the sensorium.

But music, though it restores the Tone of the finest Fibers of the Brain; yet
the inferior organs demand coarser treatment, to restore them to the Standard
of health

We must abridge the Quantity and Quality of our food, which ought to be
nourishing, easy of Digestion, and suited to the Stomach of the Patient. Fat
meats, and heavy sauces are hurtful; and all excess is to be avoided. The
Patient ought never to eat more than the Stomach can easily digest: eat
therefore little at a time, but often, of innocent, plain and simple meat; for
every time the stomach is overloaded, the strength is impaired, and its Nerves
are disordered.

Above all things, heavy suppers ought to be avoided; since the stomach is much
more apt to be oppressed with the same quantity of food, in an horizontal
position, than in any erect posture; and since the Digeston goes on Slower in
time of sleep than when awake, as the vessels are then much relaxed.

It is a great blessing, that loathing, and want of appetite in some degree,
attend all disorders, which prevent many people from in fallibly and quickly
ruining themselves without resource. Those who have only a few transient
symptoms, and are but in the first stage of Nervous Diseases, should live with
a due degree of temperance suited to their constitution; and abate a little of
the quantity of their food, while they are more immediately under the symptoms.
Indeed, if the disorder is deep, and has continued so long as to produce more
violent symptoms, there is a necessity to be still more careful. Drink small
Beer, soft fine ale, or Wine and water; but never use water alone. Wine in
excess enfeebles the Body, and impairs the faculties of the Soul; but a few
glasses of wine, in time of eating, assist digestion. A Glass of wine before
Dinner, on an empty Stomach, and when one is Languid, feeble or faint, is of
great service. Wine in general, is preferable to Malt Liquor; the best Wine is
Rhenish, Mountain, or small French Wine. When the stomach and Bowels are
troubled with acidity, water mixed with Rum or Brandy, is preferable to Wine,
or Malt Liquor. That too common drink Tea, is very hurtful to both the stomach
and Nerves, especially if drank hot, with little Bread: I would therefore
recommend* not the disuse, but the more moderate use of Tea: it were, well, if
something else was Joined with it in the morning; Or instead of Tea, which is
almost constantly hurtful to the Neves, a Tea made of Balm and mint, in every
dish of which should be put a ^ea spoonful of the Balsamic mixture of Cream and
Yolks of Eggs, with two or three drops of Oil of Cinnamon; which makes an
agreeable Beverage, and is highly grateful to the stomach, as I have myself had
occasion to observe.

But of all things* the cold Bath is the greatest strengthener of the Nerves;
it removes glandular obstructions, raises the Spirits, and vivifies and
strengthens the whole Man; for Children, delicate constitutions, and Women
liable to miscarriages, or troublesome floodings, nothing can be better. Cold
Bathing. I am persuaded, is analagous to the Bark, which is also a very proper
Medicine, for it strengthens the Stomach, Muscles, Nerves, and even the Soul
itself, and enables them to support fresh fatigues. I have known several young
Persons throw themselves into the Cold Bath, after being wearied and depressed
with Study, who always found upon coming out* a peculiar strength of mind, and
a fresh disposition to Study. But I shall here observe, that where the Stomach,
Liver, or other Viscera are unsound, the Cold Bath is improper.

That eminent Physician Mr Lewis, says, "That of all Remedies* whether external
or internal, there is none can equal the virtue of the Cold Bath: -- it cools
the Body more, strengthens the Nerves better, and promotes perspiration more
effectually than any medicine taken down the throat can do."

The use of Bark and the Cold Bath together is pointed out by the Nature of
their Virtues; they produce the same Effects; and being combined will cure
disorders, which every other Remedy would only have increased. Being
strengthening, sedative, and febrifugal, they reinvigorate, diminish the
feverous and Nervous heat, and calm the irregular motions produced by the
Spasmodic disposition of the Nervous System; they fortify a weak Stomach, and
quickly dissipate its attendant pains. They restore Appetite, they facilitate
digestion and nutrition: they promote all the functions, and particularly
perspiration, which render them so efficacious in all cata^rhous and cutaneous
disorders, in a word, they remove all disorders occasioned by weakness provided
the Patient is not afflicted with indissoluble obstructions, inflammations, or
internal Ulcerous obscesses, which conditions almost necessarily exclude the
Cold Bath, but which frequently allow of the Quinquina From my own experience,
I can assure the Reader, that I have my self plunged into the Cold Bath, when I
have found my Spirits so depressed, that without the utmost exertion of a
powerful Resolution, and being as it were supernaturaly assisted. I could never
have attempted it. Yet on coming out I have found my Nerves so Braced, and my
spirits so strengthened, that in a manner I viewed an other and a Spiritual
State, with such extacy as made me ready and desirous to enter into it. I shall
here too further recite what I once met with at Margate in Kent, where the late
King of Britain arrived from Germany, and used the Cold Bath, and drank the
Waters with great Advantage which is expressed, by an inscription on a statue
erected on purpose, in this manner.

"Thy Baths give Vigor, and thy Waters Health." For although the Water only acts
immediately on the Cutaneous Nerves and Vessels, yet it is strengthening power
is, by sympathy, communicated to the inmost parts of the Body, and mixes
radically with the Fluids.

Daily experience convinces us of the power of the Soul upon the Stomach. Those
most addicted to reflection, perform their Digestion with greater difficulty;
on the contrary, those who think little, generally digest well. We frequently
see Persons of weak understandings eat and drink very freely, without suffering
any inconvenience, although they lead sedentary lives, and have not remarkably
strong constitutions. On the contrary, how many sensible Men do we see, whose
Digestion is performed with much pain and difficulty, although they are of a
good habit of Body, and use some exercise.

The connection of the Soul with the Body is in fact so strong, that it is even
difficult to conceive how one of them should act, and the other not be
sensible, in a greater or a less degree, of that action. The Organs of Sense
being put in motion, convey the Subject of thought to the Mind, by acting on
the Fibers of the Brain; and while the Soul is employed in thinking, the parts
of the Brain are in a greater or less forcible motion, and in a less or greater
degree of tension. These Motions fatigue the medullary or Nervous portion of
the Brain; and this delicate substance, after a long course of Meditation,
becomes as much exhausted, as a strong Man is after exercise. Whoever has
thought intensely, even once in his Life, must have experienced this in
himself: and there is certainly no very Studious Man, who has not often felt,
on coming out of his Closet, violent pains in his head, attended with a great
degree of heat in this part. This heat will depend on the proportion of
weariness and inflammatory tension, which the medullary substance has
undergone: the eyes soon become sensible of this fatigue; and if we consider a
Man who is deeply engaged in thought, we shall see that the Muscles of his Face
are all upon the stretch, and sometimes appear even convulsed.

A great Author has taken notice of the Danger of fixing the Attention too
strongly. "When the Action of the Soul is too powerful," says he, "it attacks
the Body so violently, that it throws it into a consuming State: if the Soul
exerts itself in a peculiar manner, on certain occasions, the Body is made
sensible of it, and becomes heated and debilitated."

Another Author of note has observed the same, and says; "The union of the Soul
with the Body is so intimate that they, reciprocally share the good or evil
which happen to either of them. The Mind or Soul cannot put forth its powers,
when the body is tired with immoderate exercise: and too close an application
to study destroys the Body, by dissipating the Animal spirits, which are
necessary to recruit it."

The brain, which is the immediate seat of these emotions, the nerves which
arise from it, and the Stomach, which is furnished with many nerves of an
exquisite sensation* are the parts first attacked, and commonly most injured by
the immoderate labor of the mind; but if it should continue for any length of
time almost all the parts of the body become partakers of the injury.

The first symptoms which indicate a weakness of the Nervous System, are a kind
of pusillanimity we were before strangers to; Diffidence, fear, grief,
dejection and Dispiritedness: he who was the most intrepid man now becomes the
most timorous; the slightest undertaking frightens him, the most trifling
unforseen incident makes him tremble; the slightest indisposition appears to
him a fatal disease; and the idea of Death fills him with intolerable horrors.
Some Tyrants have condemned certain Philosophers, whom they hated, to death,
but have never been able to make them fear it; how much more effectually would
their cruelty have been exercised if by suffering them still to Live, they
could have inspired them with those fears of Death hypochondriacs are tormented
with? We see instances every day of men of Learning, who perceiving the first
signs of this distemper, have been obliged to forsake their favorite studies;
whose Nerves being weakened, they become incapable of attention; their memory
fails: their Ideas are confused; a Sensation of heat in the Head, palpitations,
a total dejection, and the apprehension of death makes the pen fall from their
hands.

The injury the mind has done the Body soon recoils upon itself; for it has
been the will of the supreme Being, that as long as these two Substances
continued together, the labors of the mind should in a certain degree depend
upon the health of the Body: this truth has been ever acknowledged. An Author
has emphatically declared, that "the props of the Body supported the Soul," And
that, "Health increases the powers of the mind; when the body is diseased the
mind is not capable of reflection" It is not therefore surprising that the mind
should be weakened, after it has exhausted the Brain and Debilitated the Nerves.

An Eminent Physician who lived long in a City where learning is much
cultivated, says, That study begins by impairing the Stomach and that if the
complaint is not relieved, it may degenerate into a melancholy. And that a
vitiated Stomach attends Learned People, as surely as the shadow follows the
Body. That he has seen Patients who suffered for this immoderate thirst of
Learning, first by a loss of appetite, an entire inability of the Digesting
Powers, and a total debility which ensued; afterward they have been tormented
with spasms, convulsions and at length with a total privation of all their
senses.

When the Digestion is imperfect, the humors imbibe a crude quality, which
renders them unfit for their various destinations; and which particularly
prevents Nutrition, upon which the reparation of all the Powers depends. To be
convinced of the general influence of the Stomach, it is only necessary to
observe the State of a Person who labors under a difficult Digestion; the
Powers are lost in a few minutes, a general uneasiness makes the weakness more
insupportable, the Organs of Sense are benumbed, the faculties of the Soul are
exercised very imperfectly, the Memory, and particularly the Imagination, seems
to be annihilated; in a word, nothing makes a sensible Man so much resemble an
Idiot, as the difficulty of Digestion. This Observation equally points out to
us, that of all Disorders, there are none which more quickly affect the Soul,
than those of the Nervous System.

There is one general precaution, which is, to refrain from all Liquors in
great quantities; they weaken Digestion, by relaxing the Stomach, drowning the
degestive Juices, and by precipitating the Aliments before they are digested:
they relax all the parts, dissolve the humors, excite making Water, or
draining Sweats. I have seen disorders occasioned by Weakness considerably
diminished without any remedy, but the mere retrenching of the quantity of
Liquor the Patient usually Drunk.

We know, that an unnatural State of the Nerves of the Stomach may either
produc a craving or an aversion to food; that low Spirits and Melancholy often
proceed from that cause: nor is it to be doubted, that when the Nerves of the
Stomach are, for certain causes, affected in a manner somewhat different, an
indifference for food, a weak Digestion, a languor and coldness, a slow Pulse,
and wasting, may be the consequences. By proper food, the Nerves of the Stomach
are gratefully stimulated, and the whole Body is thence enlivened and
strengthened; so that, besides its use for nutrition, food in the stomach
becomes, altogether necessary in some delicate Nervous People, for keeping up
the strength of the Body, and the due exercise of all its suctions. The morbid
affection of the Nerves of the Stomach, by sympathy, impairs the Vigor and
energy of the whole system.

It is said in Holy Write, "That where much is given, much will be required"
May I presume then to put a Question, which I wish to do without giving offense
to God or the world. How it has happened in all ages, That men of the greatest
sensibility of Soul, should be endued with such delicate Nerves, as pervert the
mental Faculties and prevent the Soul from exerting its noblest Powers, to
shine and illuminate in contemplation of the Works of God?

I shall conclude this Section with Dr Chene's observation, in his English
Malady, the reading of which, strikes the Human Mind with astonishment: "But of
all the miseries that afflicts human Life, (says that Eminent Physician) and
which principally relate to the Body, in this Valley of Tears, I think Nervous
disorders, in their extreme and last Degree, beyond all comparison the worst."
It was the observation of a Great Man, that he had seen persons laboring under
the Gout, Stone, Cancer and every other disorder, which could tear the Human
Machine. But had he compared them all (and indeed scarce any, willing to lay
down cheerfully the Load of Clay, we will except those, who were supported by
divine power) but such as labored under an Internal Anxiety, meaning those
most Cruel, Sinking, Suffocating and Strangling, Nervous Disorders, they
greatly exceeded. It is almost the only misery to be dreaded and avoided in
Life, if possible it can be by any means. For when once the supporters are
gone, the Dissolution is perfect.

SECTION III.
THE Human Body is made up of such frail Materials, that they must necessarily
decay, and often be put out of order.

We are not only subject to pain, and diseases; but also to Irregularities of
the Passions, and Influence of the Weather; all which affect the Spirits,
Intellects and Memory, so as to render the same Person very different, at
different times, in thinking, speaking, and acting; as any one, who is not
robustly insensible must naturally discover from his own feelings, at one time
or other. Considering its admirable Structure, the Number and exquisite
fineness of its movements, that in a healthy State, all its parts must conspire
to perform their proper office, and that the least failure generally occasions
some disease; it appears matter of astonishment that we are more than the
transitory Beings of a Day.

In this frail and uncertain state, the human System is subject to an Inclement
Atmosphere without, and the violent Passions within, it may suffer from
Intemperance in Diet, the advances of Age and the prevalence of Injurious
Habits, so as to render it more unstable than the Weather-Glass, and in a
perpetual state of change, from the Cradle to the Grave.

Well may human Life, thus surrounded by a train of unavoidable dangers, and
calamities be compared to a fleeting shadow which never contiues in one stay.
Like an unballasted bark in a troubled Ocean, it becomes the sport of Winds and
tides; and without the aid of Religion, Reason, and Philosophy, is in continual
danger of being swallowed up and lost.

Perhaps, however, very few can properly be said to die of old age merely; for
even the Life of Old Parr might probably have been still prolonged, had he not
changed his Air and manner of Living.

Here we may observe, that by a kind of Fatal Necessity, Animal Bodies are worn
out and destroyed by that very cause which constitutes the principles of Life,
namely, the circulating power of the Blood; and consequently, that the number
of years to which man may attain, will probably be in proportion to the
Velocity of the Pulse: If so, it will then follow, that such a particular state
of the Constitution as produces the greatest degree of strength and vigor in
youth, is not most likely to prolong Life, that those of weak solids, and
delicate habits in their early state. grow old more slowly than others; and if
the Viscera is sound, become for a time, more strong and Healthy from the
effect of Age

The disorders produced by the efforts of the mind fall soonest upon such as
are incessantly engaged in the contemplation of one object* "Study (says Mr
Rousseau) makes men tender, weakens their Constitution, and when once the Body
has lost its powers, those of the soul are not easily preserved. Application
wears out the Machine, exhausts the spirits, destroys the strength, enervates
the mind, makes us pusillanimous, unable either to bear fatigue, or to keep our
passions under."

The whole Body becomes hard in process of time, and old age itself is a
general induration. In laboring Men, those parts most used in their respective
employmen^s grow callous; in men of Letters, the Brain itself is attacked in
this manner. They become incapable of connecting ideas, and grow old much
before their time.

In Children the Brain is too soft in old Persons too hard, and in the two
extremes it is equally unfit to communicate the Oscillations exerted by
thinking. Galen has rightly observed, that our memory fails first, and
forebodes the weakening of our reason The Nerves are not the only parts
affected by deep thinking, for, as Gunzius has observed, the weariness of the
eyes is alone sufficient to produce Nervous diseases, There is no one but must
have experienced, as I have often done, how much the head is weakened by long
attention of the sight. If after a Fever or other Indisposition, it should
happen to me, before my strength is well recruited to fix my eyes for a long
time on any Object, I am immediately seized with Giddiness, sickness at
stomach, and my whole Body suffers a painful Sensation of being fatigued and
exhausted

If such are the Injuries brought on the Constitution by irregularity and
excess of the Passions, it ought to be the care of every Rational Being, to
guard against their insults, and to oppose their Effects with becoming
resolution, and a Virtuous Resignation to the Will of Providence.

Happiness and Misery are the Lights and Shades which fill up the out-lines in
the Portrait of Human Life Every Man naturally endeavors to attain the one,
and avoid the other; but by very different means, which are often
disproportioned to that end.

We frequently deceive ourselves, both in the pursuit and enjoyment of our
wishes. Extravagance of Hope often ends in disappointment; and even a constant
Series of pleasurable Events will at last lose their power. To give them true
relish, and make them lasting, the mind must refer to some former painful
sensations.

Thus a Person who always possess^d Health, is scarce sensible of its value;
but when lost, let it again return, and he will bless the means which restored
it. None enjoy Riches so much as those who have been at great pains to attain
them: He who always was affluent, has no competent idea of Indigence, to
contrast such a State, or exalt his enjoyment. Were, our exquisite pleasures
too lasting, they would lay so much stress on the vital powers of the Body, as
would soon wear it out. Every extreme, therefore, corrects itself; and every
Evil works its own cure.

If the violent Passions harrow up the Soul, and disturb its union with the
Body, a Conscience pure and uncorrupted, the inestimable reward of Virtue, will
best reconcile them to each other, and cause them to dwell in harmony: That
will always speak peace to the Mind, whatever the World may say, and shield it
from the impotent attacks of slander and abuse. Whoever is over solicitous
about Censure, Fame, or the possession of temporal Enjoyments* will seldom find
repose: an ungratious look from his superiors, or unmerited insolence from
those below him, will vex and discompose him. If he is anxious for long life; a
Coffin or shroud, the apparatus of Death, will alarm and appal his senses;
whilst he who dispenses with unavoidable ills with a Philosphic indifference,
who is neither weary of living or afraid to die, will find within himself an
inexpressible, and perpetual calm.

By giving way to sorrow, or anger, they at last become habitual and reign
triumphant: In a word, the government of the passions is as essential toward
preventing diseases of the mind, as Temperance contributes to hinder them
attacking the Body.

That man ought to be deemed richest, who is the happiest; and he is the most
likely to become so, who, with a virtuous resignation is prepared for the
unavoidable evils which flesh is heir to; who expostulates with the folly and
extravagance of his own desires, and though a hard task, at last convinces
himself that what he likes best. is not always best for him; who preserves at
all times, a decent equality of mind, is not arrogantly elated with the
delusive smiles of Prosperity, nor servily cast down by the surly visage of
Misfortune.

The Organs of the Body may be entirely unfit to be acted upon by the Soul,
when it remains wrapped up in itself, like a criminal in a Dungeon. Some people
are born with imperfect nerves, which are stopped up, and never all their lives,
unfold themselves, and shake off the Clog of Matter which obstruct them.

Though the Soul has a power over the involuntary motions of the Body, in a
healthy state; yet when the Body is diseased or imperfectly formed, the
operation of the Soul then is irregular.

Even the strength of the Constitution is itself dangerous. Young people of
excellent Constitutions, apply themselves to study with indefatigable industry;
the powerful action of the Soul increases that of the Organs, and they are
attacked with inflammatory diseases, the consequence of irritation long kept up
in vigorous habits. Sometimes they expire in the first attack; more commonly
they get the better of that; and if they find themselves perfectly recovered,
their constitution recovering its vigor, they give themselves up again to the
same labors, and relapse into the same disorders. There are frequent instances
of robust young men close applying to study* who are attacked with inflammatory
fevers every year; at last, in process of time, being worn out by these attacks
and by their labors, they lose their strength, and are seized with consumptive
diseases, against which they are no longer able to resist.

Health is frequently destroyed by excessive devotion. An Author has collected
several interesting observations on this head, in which devout Melancholy is
well delineated; its symptoms are very unaccountable, alarming, and grievous;
and there are few practitioners who have not had opportunities of seeing some
shocking instances of this disease. The greatness and excellence of the object,
and the satisfaction the Soul experiences in giving itself up to the
contemplation of the Almighty, excites too lively a Sensation, and produces in
the Brain, attention too violent and too continual, to be supported for a long
time together without Injury; it soon throws the soul into fanatical madness,
and exhausts the Body. Some most amiable young Persons, led away by an
erroneous System, fade and fall into decay, neglecting the duties of their
calling, in order to give their thoughts up wholly to the supreme Author of
their ^^^ng, who could not have been more properly glorified than by a strict
Attention to those duties. A Student is still regrated, One of the greatest
abilities, born with strong powers of the mind, whose candor and other Virtues
would have been an acquisition to the Church; But who unfortunately devoted
himself to a sect, of which he soon was the victim, the powers of his Body
decaying as fast as his mind became more zealously inflamed.

Sometimes even the most lucky thoughts arise in the midst of recreation. One
of the greatest Geniuses of our age computed his immortal works walking about
in the Country. The Soul unfolds itself in open Air, but is imprisoned within
the confined walls of a Study; it is elevated by the fragrance of Flowers,
depressed by the smell of a Lamp. Plutarch's comparison on this subject is very
just and excellent: "A little water," (says he,) "nourishes and strengthens
"Plants; and a greater quantity stifles them." Thus it is with the mind;
moderate labor is its food; excessive labor destroys it. When activity was
mentioned as the second cause of the disorders here treated of, exercise was
certainly represented at the same time, as one of the most powerful
preservatives and restorers of the health of the Learned.

In the foregoing article, the advantages of open air have been considered,
these are greatly enhanced, if accompanied with some degree of motion. The
Learned in general, are not sufficiently convinced of the influence the Body
has on the Soul, although it was well known to our greatest men, who have been
sensible that the Mind was subject to the powers of Physic as well as the Body,
"The Soul, says Des Carts, is so much influenced by the Constitution, and the
State of the Bodily Organs, that if it were possible to find out a method of
increasing our penetration, it should certainly be sought for in Medicine."
Walking alone is very beneficial, but not quite sufficient; and it cannot be
too much recommended to them to ride out frequently on Horseback; this kind of
exercise is of use to the Head, the Breast, and the Viscera of the lower Belly,
especially by preventing or dispelling their obstructions.

The hypocondriac disease may also be reckoned among the Evils learned Men are
exposed to, from that kind of inactive life, which disturbing the circulation
in the abdodominal Viscera, produces obstructions in them. This di^ease
generally attacks the Indolent, the Luxurious, the Unfortunate, and the
Studious. Men of a Melancholy temp^rament* whose minds are capable of great
Attention, and whose passions are not easily moved, are in the advanced periods
of Life, most liable to this disease. It may rather be called a complication of
Maladies, than a single one. To what a wretched condition are the best of Men
often reduced by it! Their strength and appetite fail; a perpetual gloom hangs
over their minds; they live in the constant dread of death, and are continually
in search of relief from Medicine, where, alas! it is not to be found.

Those most liable to this Disease, are the Virtuous, the Valiant, the Brave,
and those of an enlarged understanding, whom it would be the interest of the
world to wish, they were free from that and every other illness; and except for
that alloy, they would have too large a share of human happiness. To this we
owe the irrepareable loss of Doctor Young, and the best and most approved Men
that have appeared among us.

Hypochandriac persons ought never to fast long, and their food should be solid
and nourishing, all acescent and windy vegetables are to be avoided. Flesh
meats agree best with them, and their drink should be old Claret or generous
Madeira.

In all persons afflicted with Nervous disorders, there is a great, delicacy
and sensibility of the whole Nervous System, and an uncommon degree of weakness
of the Organs of digestion. These may be either natural or acquired. When owing
to a defect in the Constitution, they are hardly to be removed; but may be
mitigated by proper care.

But Nervous Affections arise more frequently from causes which it is, in a
great measure, in our power to avoid, than from Diseases, or any Original fault
in the Constitution. Excessive grief. intense Study, improper diet, and neglect
of Exercise, are the great Sources of this extensive Class of diseases.

Grief indulged destroys the appetite and digestion depresses the spirits. and
induces an universal relaxation and debility of the whole System. Instances of
this are daily to be seen. The loss of a relation, or any other misfortune in
Life, is often sufficient to occasion the most complicated series of Nervous
symptoms Such misfortunes indeed are not to be avoided, but surely their
effects, by a vigorous and proper exertion of the mind, might be renderd less
hurtful. The effects of intense Study are pretty similar to those occasioned by
Grief. It preys upon the Animal Spirits, and destroys the appetite and
digestion To prevent these effects, studious Persons ought, according to the
Poet, O^^oy with their Books. They should never Study too long at a time; nor
attend long to one particular Subject, especially if it be of a serious nature.
They ought likewise to be attentive to their posture, and should take care
frequently to unbend their minds by music, diversions, or agreeable Company.

With regard to Diet, I shall only observe that Nervous diseases may be
occasioned either by excess or inanition, both these extremes hurt digestion,
and vitiate the humors.

But the most general cause of Nervous disorders is Indolence. The active and
laborious are seldom troubled with them They are reserved for the Children of
ease and affluence, who generally feel their keenest force. All I shall say to
such Persons is, that the means of prevention and cure are both in their own
power. If the Constitution of human nature be such, that man must either labor
or suffer diseases. surely, no individual has any right to expect an exemption
from the general rule.

If the stomach is bad, either naturally or from errors in diet, this Organ
will be affected by the exercise of the mind, while the Nerves shall remain in
a sound state; on the contrary, if the Nervous System is weak, and the Stomach
strong, Nervous diseases of great importance, will be brought on before the
Stomach is Injured.

A fit of Illness, undigested food, or any similar cause often occasions broken
unconnected dreams, and prevents our receiving the arising from sound sleep;
the reason of which probably is, the fermentation and discordance of the
nutritive juices* incapacitating our senses or organs (through which the soul is
empowred to act) from being in a perfect state of rest, the soul must
consequently partake of that irregular and unconnected quality, by which the
bodily organs are at that juncture actuated: But in Death the case is quite
reversed; the Soul, instead of being Clogged up and embarrassed by Bodily
impediments is absolutely and entirely freed from them; for we cannot suppose
it is longer confined to Nerves and Arteries, which there is no possibility of
its ever making any further use of, such a supposition must be ridiculous: So
that in sleep the Soul's situation is directly contrary to what it must be in
death; in the first case it is by material influence prevented from exerting
its powers, whereas in Death, that is, on its enlargement from its Material
body it finds itself for the first time at full Liberty, and in full power of
expanding and exerting them to the utmost.

It is evident that Virtue and Vice are not Constitutional, and dependent on
any particular habit of Body, and though our material part, has an influence over
the soul, in regard to the exertion of its Faculties, yet that influence,
extends only to the enlarging or contracting our intellectual faculties, and
not to our making a good or ill use of those faculties, that rest solely in
Ourselves, and if we make a wrong use of that power; if we unnaturalize
ourselves, as I may say, by deviating from the Paths of Virtue, whom are we to
blame? The Deity who has formed us as we should be, or ourselves, who with an
ungrateful hand, rejected the opportunity he has given us of attaining virtue,
and in consequence, eternal felicity?

Are we not assured too, by the Deity, that according to our different
abilities, situation, various contingencies etc we shall hereafter be judged?
Our actions will be scrutaniz'd in proportion to the talents entrusted to us,
and according to the opportunities and incitements we have had, to make use of
them and not taken in that superficial light, mortals look on them: It is not
those who have the greatest share of, but those who make the best use of their
moral and intellectual powers, who will be regarded hereafter; justice and
goodness are the Deity's Attributes, and by them we are hereafter to be judged:
As to Idiots, etc who (like the Brute Creation) are under the dominion of
matter, at least, have as little power of exerting their faculties, the Deity's
Justice will hardly expect from them duties, which it is impossible they should
perform. What use they and many more beings are of in the Creation we know not;
but let us not, short sighted as we are, for that reason arraign Divine wisdom:
We are sure every part of the Creation was ordained for some wise purpose, though
to what end we are perhaps ignorant; And in regard to the diversity of power,
talents, etc. which we observe among men, so far from being a blemish, they are
a great pros of the Deity's Wisdom: Instead of their being the cause of
confusion it is on that, the link which supports all, chiefly depends: was it
otherways, half the omnipotent's Power and goodness on earth, would have been
in vain.

We may assure ourselves, That Death, (which is indeed but the Souls Birth)
instead of being a gloomy Messenger, is in reality our best Friend, since by
his means we shall be freed from the fetters of the flesh, and introduced into
a state of freedom, Knowledge, and (I hope) Happiness, where our intellectual
Powers will have full scope: where we shall he all Ethereal Sense, and capable
of innumerable Joys which in our present state we can have no conception of: as
Swans are said to sing melodiously before Death, from an instinct of some
extraordinary Good approaching, so should good men rejoice on their
elinquishing this mortal State: let us consider what happiness even in this
life the contemplation of an eternity produces! To indulge in the hopes of
meeting again with our long-lost best beloved Friends; of living in intimacy
and conversing with, not only the He^oes and Philosophers of all ages, but with
Angels and other superior Beings; of indulging the amiable curiosity of
searching into and admiring the works of the Deity, through the immensity of the
creation, where infinite variety must prove an infinite fund of unspeakable,
insatiable, and ever increasing happiness; must not reflections like these
animate our Spirits and stimulate us to virtue? I own I often indulge the
thought, and am never so happy as when I am thus, as it were, anticipating
eternity; besides, nothing contributes so much to cheerfulness, Religion,
Humanity and all the social virtues, as the contemplation and hopes of a
futurity; whereas to the contrary opinion, is ever united a melancholy which
rankles within us, which preys upon our Spirits, and which by divesting us or
all fears of a future Judgment, encourages Vice; and too often induces us to
give such a loose to our passions as makes us incapable of Happiness either in
this world, or the world to come.

And for the Good and Virtuous, the cause of their Immortality is continually
creasing even in this world: The longer they exist, the more they improve in
Knowledge and virtue and consequently, the more they merit an Eternity. We
might as well suppose, the Deity should annihilate Angels, and other superior
Beings, as the Souls of Virtuous Men. When we most please him, to imagine we
shall be most severely punished by him, were absurd; and surely to the virtuous
and happy, Annihilation must be the most dreadful of Punishments. The
Immateriality of the Soul implies too, that it is a Substance incorruptible and
invariable and consequently eternal, unless it shall please the Deity to
annihilate it; and can we suppose, that Truth and Goodness, which are
emanations from the Divine Creator, will not eternally exist?

Every part of the Creation evinces, in the most striking characters, the
Existence of a Deity; and because we are not acquainted with the Nature and
Essence of the Deity, shall we for that reason alone, doubt there is a Deity?

The Case is the same in all immaterial substances; nor is it possible for us
to be admitted to a nearer intimacy with them, while we are confined to this
bodily prison, where, as I before observed, we can have no distinct idea of any
thing but what is material, since all our perceptions are the effects of
material impulses, and conveyed through material Organs to the Soul. The human
understanding is limited to every human boundaries How many things are there,
even in the material Creation, which seem mysterious, and are kept from us? Yet
this should not give us the least uneasiness, since whatever is available to
our happiness here, or hereafter, is laid open to us. The knowledge of a Deity,
and the Soul's existence, are truths absolutely necessary to make us happy and
virtuous.

It is worth observing, That we are assured in Scripture, -- "Angels and other
spiritual Beings, neither Marry, nor are given in Marriage:" They all have one
common Parent, The Almighty.

Our Bodies, like all other material systems are not designed for eternal
duration, are ever variable, and so ordered, as to stand in need of daily
recruits of Food, Sleep, etc.: During our sleep, a swoon, or any similar cause,
the Soul being embarrassed and clogged up, as it were, is in a state of
Deliquium at least, if it does think, its actions are so incongruous, as not to
be traced in our waking hours notwithstanding which, we are not to suppose that
the Soul is in reality more defective then, than at another time; but the
Organs, through which it is obliged to act, being obstructed, its faculties are
consequently impeded. If we lose our Eye-fight Or hearing, the Soul is not in
the least maimed thereby, it has but lost its Instrument or Bodily Organ, its
original power is still the same; and were our optical or auditory Organs
reduced to order, the Soul would again re-exert its usual Faculties.

"Thus," as an Author observes, the Musician cannot, if his Instrument be
disordered, bring forth any harmony; his skill, nevertheless, remains; which,
on the Instrument's being re-put in order, he again exhibits." Idiotism,
Forgetfulness, Dotage, etc. are not Weaknesses of the Soul, but of the Senses;
and we are not to suppose, our Immaterial Principle, in such cases, loses its
faculties, more than the Sun loses his meridian brightness, when hid from us,
by dark clouds intervening. Thus, during Sleep, which is absolutely necessary
to the refreshment of our Bodily part, we must suppose, there is such a
relaxation of our material Organs, that our whole System becomes too languid
for the Soul to be capable of exerting its Active faculties; but when the Body
is recruited with proper strength, the Soul recovers its pristine power; it
again dictates to, and governs the Body, and we may perceive it is the same
thinking Principle, the very same Soul that actuated us before Sleep. Matter
cannot divest the Soul of its faculties, though it can render it impossible for
it to exert them upon the Body; which may be disordered so, as not to be
directed by it. The Soul's Faculties then are not annihilated, but suspended
from Action: or to speak more properly, are wrapped up in itself. A Being may
undoubtedly exist, without giving appearance of its existence. The Soul,
therefore, may exist, without giving signs of its existence, or affecting
Matter, so as to be conscious of its own existence: as in sleep, without
dreaming, it remains the same invariable essence; though the Indisposition of
the Bodily Organs renders it impossible to display those faculties, from whence
thought and reflection come.

The Soul h impassible, consequently incapable of change: all the changes that
happen to an individual, arise from the different affections of the Bodily
Organs. The Soul of a newborn Child is the same as that of an Old Man; and
that of a Fool, as that of a Philosopher.

The Bodily Organs, on Which the operations of the Soul depend, greatly vary;
by which, the exercise of its Faculties are proportionably lessened or
improved: but it is particular existence, faculties and powers remain the same,
impassible to the Laws of Matter and Motion. The difference between the lowest
and most abject, and the highest and most elevated natural capacity, depends
upon the Instruments by which the Soul acts, and is affected; which seem to us
to alter its operations. The cause is in the Material Organs, which make
representations of its operation, according to their just or imperfect
Mechanism. If the Bodily Organs happen to be perfectly Organized, and exactly
modulated to receive and convey to the Sensorium or Seat of the Soul, the ideas
of Objects, with a proper impulse, then it exerts its faculties in a reasonable
manner: the Senses receive a just or sufficient degree of impulse from the
Objects; which impulse the Organs convey, in a just and sufficient degree,
which excites in the Soul, the distinct idea of the object.

The brightest Wits, the most exalted Understandings, may be reduced to a level
with the most abject, stupid, and unintelligent Fool. By the Mechanical
Affections of Matter and Motion, we often see a Man of the brightest parts, and
most enlarged understanding, who has penetrated into the secret recesses of
nature, despoiled of all his Wisdom and noble endowments, by the tyranny of a
violent Nervous Fever, etc. Thus we behold him now divested of the exercise of
his Faculties. But can we suppose this change made in the Soul itself? No:
certainly it remains the same, and differs not from what it was before. Recover
him from the Fever, etc. and remove the impediment it has thrown upon the
Organs of the Senses, and the exercise of all the Faculties of the Soul
returns; his Parts brighten, his understanding revives, and, in short, he
becomes in every respect, the same amiable Person as he was, before the Fever,
etc seized him.

Thus we see, that the Bodily Organs may be so disordered, or the Stimulus,
applied to them, so great, as to put it out of the Soul's power to suspend or
contract them; and though it is the source of all motion, both voluntary and
involuntary, yet it may be reduced to an Inactive passive State, or forced into
involuntary Action.

Though all voluntary Motion proceeds from the immediate influence of the Soul,
yet some of the voluntary motions, by the force of custom and habit, come at
length to be performed with little or no attention of the Soul, though it has
full power to begin or stop the Motion when it pleases. Thus a Man may Walk,
and not be sensible of it; have an Object before him, without seeing it; and
put his hand to a Thing, without feeling it; because he is intent upon
something else, therefore overlooks these smaller sensations; and these
voluntary motions are, in some degree, mechanically performed.

I believe it will be allowed, that our Ideas or thoughts are immaterial; that
is, are not bodily substances. Who ever thought there was any thing corporeal
in a Judgment, a Doubt, etc? If our Thoughts are corporeal, where could they
be lodged? How infinitely complicated and extended must that material Soul be,
to be able to contain those immense volumes of learning, which some Men have
treasured up in their Souls.

The large size, the wonderful texture, great care and security, the God of
Nature has employed about the Brain, make it highly probable, that it is
designed for the noblest uses: -- the Temple, Tabernacle, or Dwelling House of
That Immaterial Being, That Immortal Guest, I hat That Spark of the Deity, That
Breath of Life, THE LIVING SOUL or MAN.

Every thing we say or do, our every Action and Thought, proves and ascertains
the reality of the Soul: the very doubting its Existence, is a strong proof of
it. Whence proceeds the Power of Doubting? It is evident, that the particles of
matter of which our Bodies are formed were not long since lifeless vegitative
Particles, for which we are indebted to the Fields that nourished and produced
them, and which are but transplanted, as it were, into another soil: These
particles of matter, though differently modified and formed into a most
surprising piece of mechanism, are in reality (as to their original power and
nature) the same, and as incapable of thought, self motion etc. as when growing
in the Field, Matter, it is true, by a proper modification, may become a fit
dwelling for Thinking Being; what then shall we call that Principle within us
which doubts, which reflects, which dictates to us, and sways us in every
Action of Life? What is it that endows us with the power of self-motion, which
enables to recollect past actions, to look forward into futurity, and in a
manner, to foretell future consequences? It is certainly somewhat of a Different
nature from the lifeless particles of which our Bodies are formed: it is
somewhat, which, though we cannot rightly define, we are sure is somewhat; and
this it is we call, THE SOUL.

While the Body is kept in order, the Soul is easy; when it is not, the Soul is
in pain. When the functions of the Body cease, the Soul quits the Association,
but exists in a separate state. For as every particle of the body (however
transformed) will remain after the separation, so will the Soul also; for
whatever has once received a Being from God, cannot cease to be without his
interposition. We are told in Scripture, That man is made after God's own
Image. Now, as the Deity cannot be supposed a material Being, what can it imply
but that our Being like him, is an Immaterial Immortal substance, endowed with
Reason, Reflection, and the power of distinguishing between good and evil etc
It is, it must be owned a very bold Eastern Metaphor, as the difference and
distance between us is so Inexpressible.

In describing the Bliss of Immortal Beings, we have while in this life, no
ideas more expressive than those which depend on the senses of seeing and
hearing, which senses seem principally designed for the service of our immortal
Part, and may be called vehicles for the Soul's Food, as those of tasting,
smelling and feeling, are designed purely for the Body's use. After Death, the
Soul will doubtless, be gifted with many powers and inlets to happiness, or
misery, which we at present can have no idea of.

It has been a received opinion in all ages, that immensity swarms with
invisible immaterial Beings, who are the Agents of Providence, and witnesses of
our most private actions.

The thought of our existance terminating with this Life naturally checks the
Soul in any generous pursuit, contracts her views, and fixes them on temporary
and selfish ends; It dethrones the reason, extinguishes all noble and heroic
Sentiments; encourages Lust, Fraud, Violence, and all kind of Vice, by which, a
Man may wickedly make his Fortune, or indulge a pleasure without fear of
temporal damage, either in Reputation, Health, or Fortune: In short, the inward
compunctions of a wicked, as well as the joys of an upright mind, are grafted
on the Assurance of another state.

Hence arise the natural Hopes and fears of men; hence spring the means of
future rewards, and appearing pleasing to the Deity, though persecuted in this
world, and likewise the inward stings of Conscience and dread of punishment
attending prosperous Vice, though hid from Human eyes.

As it is probable that there may be different Degrees of happiness for Souls,
in proportion as they have been more or less perfect, it is as probable too,
that in those stations, Souls will be furnished with opportunities of eternally
improving in Virtue and knowledge, and consequently of increasing in happiness;
notwithstanding, which gradation to perfection, they most ever remain
infinitely distant from the Deity, who is Perfection itself.

SECTION IV.
O MAN, greatly beloved by thy Creator! The Darling of Providence thou art
distinguished by his goodness; distinguish thyself also by thy one undivided
aim to glorify him, who has been at so much expense to gratify thee; -- while
all these inferior creatures in silent eloquence declare the glory of God, do
thou lend them thy tongue, be thou the High Priest of the mute Creation; let
their Praise become vocal in thy songs. Adore the supreme Benefactor, for the
blessings he showers down upon every order of beings; adore him for numberless
mercies which are appropriated to thyself: But above all, adore him for that
Noble gift of a Rational and immortal Soul.

A celebrated modern Author has elegantly expressed his sentiments on this
subject.

"O ye timorous Souls, that are terrified at the found of the passing Bell,
That turn pale at the fight of an opened Grave, and can scarce behold a Coffin
or a Skull, without a shuddering horror."

"O Eternity! Eternity! how are our boldest; our strongest thoughts lost and
overwhelmed in thee! Who can set landmarks to limit thy dimensions, or find
Plumbers to fathom thy depths? Arethmeticians have figures to compute all the
progressions of time; Astronomers have instruments to calculate the distances
of the Plannets; but what numbers can state, what Lines gauge, the lengths and
breadths of Eternity? "It is higher than Heaven, what can thou do? deeper
than Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the earth,
broader than the sea" Mysterious, mighty existence! a Sum not to be lessened by
the largest deductions! an extent not to be contracted by all possible
diminutions! none can truly say, after the most prodigious waste of ages, "So
much of Eternity is gone:" for when millions of Centuries are elapfed, it is
but just commencing; and when millions more have run their ample round, it will
not be nearer ending. Yea, when ages, numerous as the bloom of Spring;
increased by the Herbage of Summer, both augmented by the Leaves of Autumn, and
all multiplied by the drops of rain, which drown the Winter -- when these, and
ten thousand times ten thousand more -- more than can be represented by any
similitude, or imagined by any conception -- when all these are revolved and
finished, Eternity, vast, boundless amazing Eternity, will only be beginning.

"Man goes forth to his work and to his labor till the Evening; but then his
strength fails, his Spirits fly, and he stands in need not only of some respite
from Toil, but of some kindly and sovereign refreshment: what an admirable
provision for this purpose is sleep! sleep introduces a most welcome vacation
both for the Soul and Body: The exercises of the brain, and the labors of the
hand, are at once discontinued; so that the weary limbs repair their exhausted
vigor, while the pensive thoughts drop their load of sorrows, and the busy
ones rest from the fatigue of application. Most reviving Cordial! equally
beneficial to our Animal and intellectual powers: It supplies the fleshly
machine, and keeps all its nice Movements in a proper posture for easy play: It
animates the thinking faculties with fresh Alacrity, and rekindles their Ardour
for the Studies of the Dawn; without these enlivening recruits, how soon would
the most robust constitution be wasted into a walking Skeleton, and the most
learned Sage degenerate into a Hoary Idiot.

"How many of our Fellow creatures are, at this very Instant, confined to the
bed of languishing, and complaining with that illustrious sufferer of old,
"Wearisome nights are appointed to me;" Instead of indulging soft repose, they
are counting the tedious hours; telling every striking Clock; or measuring the
very moments by their throbbing Pulse

"How many harrassed with pain, most passionately long to make some little
truce with their agonies in peaceful slumbers! How many sick with disquietude,
and restless even, on their downy Pillows, would purchase this transient
oblivion of their woes almost at any rate! That which wealth cannot procure,
which multitudes sigh for in vain, thy God has bestowed on thee, times out of
number.

"But (sweet recollection! Ravishing Expectation!) the Songs of Saints in Light
never admit a Pause for sadness: All Heaven will resound with the Melody of
their Gratitude, and all Eternity echo to their Triumphant acclamations! The
Hallelujahs of that world, and the harmonious Joy of it is Inhabitants, will be
as lasting as the Divine Perfections they celebrate. Come then, Holy Love, and
tune my Heart! descend, celestial Fire, and touch my Tongue! that I may stand
ready to strike up, and bear my part in that great Hosanna, that everlasting
Hymn.

"Yes, yes, ye flowery nations, ye must all decay; and, indeed, could you add
the strength of an oak, or the stability of a Pyramid, to all the delicacy of
your texture, yet short, exceeding short, even then, would your Duration be;
for I see, "that all things come to an end," The pillars of nature are
tottering the foundations of the round world are falling away: "The heavens
themselves wax old like a garment." But, amidst these views of general ruin, he
is our refuge: this is our consolation, "we know that our Redeemer lives."

"What a striking argument is here for resignation, unfeigned resignation, to
all the disposals of providence! too often are our dissatisfied thoughts apt to
find fault with divine dispensations. We tacitly arraign our makers conduct, or
question his kindness with regard to ourselves; we fancy our lot not so
comodiously situated, or our condition not so happily circumstanced, as if we
had been placed in some other station of life.

"Be still, then, thou uneasy mortal; know that God is unerringly wise; and be
assured that amidst the greatest multiplicity of beings He does not overlook
thee. Thou art of far superior value in the estimate of omnipotence than all
the herbage of the field. If his sacred will ordains sickness for thy portion,
never dare to imagine that uninterrupted health would be more advantageous. If
he pleases to withhold or carry away children never presume to conclude that
thy happiness is blasted because thy hopes of an increasing family are
disappointed. He that marshalls all the starry host, and so accurately arranges
every the meanest species of herbs, he orders all the peculiarities, all the
changes of thy state with a vigilence that nothing can elude, with a goodness
that endures for ever. Bow thy head, therefore, in humble acquiescence. Rest
satisfied that "whatever is," by the appointment of Heaven, "is right, is
best." Alas! how blind are mortals to future events! how unable to discern what
is really good.

"Fools often account the life of the righteous but madness, and their end to
be without honor, but they are numbered among the children of God; and their
lot, their distinguished and eternal lot, is among the saints. However,
therefore, an undiscerning world may despise, and a profane world vilify the
truly religious, be this the Supreme, the invariable desire of my heart; "Let
me live the life, and die the death of the righteous, Oh! let my latter end and
future state be like theirs"

"But most of all, in that tremendous day, when the heavens are rent assunder,
and wrapped up like a scroll; when the Almighty arm shall arrest the sun in his
career, and dash to pieces the structure of the Universe; when the dead both
small and great, shall be gathered before the throne of glory, and the fate of
all mankind shall hang on the very point of a final irreversible decision,
then, Blessed JESUS let us be owned by thee, and we shall not be ashamed,
defended by thee, and we shall not be afraid, O! may we at that awful, that
unutterably important juncture, be covered with the wings of thy redeeming
love, and we shall behold all the horrible convulsions of expiring nature, with
composure, with comfort! we shall even welcome the dissolution of all things,
as the "times of refreshing from the presence of the LORD"

Almighty God! Eternal Sovereign of the universe! whose intelligence I
perticipate by whose power I am sustained, whose existence and attributes
investigate, whose impulses I seem to feel incessantly prompting all my active
powers to exert themselves for universal good; to what sacred light, what
unexpolred source shall I fly for information! How shall I dissipate the gloomy
uncertainty, whose incumbent horror depresses all my being, and leaves its
brightest hopes, its noblest enterprises absorbed in endless and infinite
despair? in vain am I told that, upon the mixture of the Human character,
depend the varieties of its fortune. Misery is indeed the native consequente of
vice; but why should vice take place in human nature? that error and mistake
are the result of limited powers, I can easily grant; but will it follow from
thence, that uninterrupted peace and tranquillity are incompatible with finite
existence? Is there no supposable state, in which a mind, though circumscribed
in its powers, and confined to a particular sphere of action, may be free from
misery?

God of nature! to whose eyes the depth of Eternal wisdom, the numberless
vicissitudes of infinite possibility are obvious? why am I, and all the
fraternal race of Men, born to the wretched inheritance of inexpiable guilt and
immovable woe? as images reflected by the polished surface of an opaque body,
vanish in swift sucession, without impressing any mark of their existence, and
leave the open expanse unoccupied for others; so swiftly pass the fluctuating
race of men, friends and allies robbed of half themselves, dissolved in tears
and anguish; whilst expiring guilt entails on its connexions the detestable
heritage of shame and execration.

Father of the human spirit! amidst the general confusion of things, in which
the beams of thy gracious countenance alternately sink in impenetrable
darkness, or emerge in celestial glory to mortal Eyes; still, still my Soul
persuades me, not only of thy Existence, but of its infinite and inseparable
perfections.

FINIS.

