A DAY IN TURKEY; OR, THE RUSSIAN SLAVES.

A COMEDY, AS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN COVENT GARDEN.

BY MRS. COWLEY.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, IN PATERNOSTER ROW. MDCCXCII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HINTS have been thrown out, and the idea industriously circulated, that the
following comedy is tainted with POLITICS. I protest I know nothing about
politics; -- will Miss Wolstonecraft forgive me -- whose book contains such a
body of mind as I hardly ever met with -- if I say that politics are
unfeminine? I never in my life could attend to their discussion.

TRUE COMEDY has always been defined to be a picture of life -- a record of
passing manners -- a mirror to reflect to succeeding times the characters and
follies of the present. How then could I, pretending to be a comic poet, bring
an emigrant Frenchman before the public at this day, and not make him hint at
the events which had just passed, or were then passing in his native country? A
character so written would have been anomalous -- the critics ought to have had
no mercy on me. It is A LA GREQUE who speaks, not I; nor can I be accountable
for his sentiments. Such is my idea of tracing CHARACTER; and were I to
continue to write for the stage, I should always govern myself by it.

THE illiberal and false suggestions concerning the politics of the comedy I
could frankly forgive, had they not deprived it of the honor of a COMMAND. The
passages on which those misrepresentations were built, were on the second night
omitted, but immediately afterward restored; and the DAY IN TURKEY leaves the
press exactly as it has continued to be performed amidst the most vivid and
uninterrupted plaudits -- or interrupted only by the glitter of soft tears; a
species of applause not less flattering than the spontaneous laugh, or the
voluntary collision of hands.

SOME of the performers in this comedy have played so transcendently well, that
their names deserve to be recorded; but to particularise any, when all have
aimed at perfection, would be invidious.

H. COWLEY.
Feb. 17, 1792.
PROLOGUE.
SPOKEN BY MR. HARLEY. NOT from the present moment springs our play,
The events which gave it birth are past away --
Five glowing moons have chased night's shades from earth,
Since the war fled which gave our Drama birth.
" Not smiling peace over RUSSIA's wide-spread land
" Waved gently then, her scepter of command.
" No! thousands rushed at red ambition's call,
" With mad'ning rage to triumph -- or to fall.
" 'Twas then our female bard from BRITAIN'S shore
" Was led by fancy to the distant roar" --
'Twas then she saw sweet virgins captives made,
'Twas then she saw the cheek of beauty fade,
Whilst the proud soldier in ignoble chains,
Was from his country dragged to hostile plains.
Thus was her bold imagination fired
When battle with its horrid train retired;
Yet, sure the story which she then combined,
Should not to drear oblivion be resigned --
No -- let it still your various passions raise,
And to have touched them, often, has been her praise:
Trusting to candor, she solicits here,
Your smile of pleasure, or your pity's tear;
For though the time is past, the FEELING true,
She dedicates to NATURE, and to YOU!
Note. -- The lines distinguished by italics are from the pen of DELLA CRUSCA.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
MEN.
IBRAHIM, MR. HOLMAN. ORLOFF, MR. FARREN. A LA GREQUE, MR. FAWCET. MUSTAPHA,
MR. MUNDEN. AZIM, MR. CUBIT. SELIM, MR. INCLEDON. MULEY, MR. M'CREADY. ISMAEL,
MR. FARLEY. OLD MAN, MR. THOMPSON. SON, MR. CROSS. ^TURK, MR. EVATT.
MALE SLAVES, etc.
WOMEN.
ALEXI^^, MRS. POPE. PAULINA MRS. ESTEN. LAURETTA, MRS. MATTOCKS. FATIMA, MRS.
MARTYR. FEMALE SLAVES, MRS. FAWCET, MRS. ROCK, and others.
A DAY IN TURKEY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Forest.
IN THE BACK GROUND A TURKISH CAMP. Several Turks are seen at a Distance
passing and repassing with Haste; some of them look out from amidst the Trees,
and then retire. Enter PAULINA, precipitately. At the Bottom PAU. WHERE -- O,
where shall we fly? [Looking round wildly.] Brother -- father -- come! We are
driven from our cottage; we have no longer a home -- let us run some where to
seek another.


Enter OLD MAN and SON. SON. Come father lean on me, and let us walk faster, or
we shall be picked up by some of the turban'd gentry. They are out a foraging;
and they always consider christians as useful cattle. Let us fly.


FATHER. Fly! alas, with the load of seventy years upon my shoulders, how hard
a task! We shall never escape them, child -- Thou Wilt see thy father murdered,
and worse luck than that will be thy fate.


PAU. Worse luck than to be murdered! I should be glad to see the day -- What
worse can happen?


OLD MAN. Thou Wilt be made a slave, -- slave to a Turk [CRIES] -- I shall see
thee in a vile Turk's seraglio, no better, as it were, than the handmaid of a
Jew.


PAU. Well, I may outlive such a misfortune as that; but I never heard of
out-living a throat cut -- So, dear father, cheer up, and let us hurry on to
the next village. Peter, take care of that bag -- for it contains all we have
in the world.


SON. Aye; and if it had not been for some of our own soldiers, I had been a
lost man -- They were so kind as to strip our cottage yesterday, and left us no
more than I can very conveniently move under.


PAU. Yes; and more than all that, they took away my very best gown, and my new
fur cap! [crying] yes; and he who took them said it was in friendship, for that
otherwise my very best gown and cap would certainly fall into the hands of the
enemy.


SON. Yes; it was truly a very friendly action, and they performed it like
gentlemen -- No words, but their very looks were oaths, and the black eyebrows
of one of them spoke louder curses than I ever heard between fifty Siberian
boar-hunters [clashing of swords without.] There -- there! do you hear? Our
friends are coming down upon us; and our enemies are at hand! Come, let us run
[with a look of terror] -- From friends and enemies, holy Michael, defend us!
Exeunt.


[ Clashing of swords; A LA GREQUE enters running at top, then stops, looks
back and speaks.] A LA GR. There it goes -- There it goes! Nothing can save
thee, my gallant master -- This comes of your reconnoitering -- Had you not
better have been in your tent, quietly breaking your fast, than here, breaking
the heads of the Turks -- So, now he is disarmed -- Well, nobody bid ye -- it is
all your own fault -- Now, how comely he looks with his arms folded, and his
sword in the hands of that beetle-brow'd Turk! Pardie! I feel now as great a
man as my master.


Enter ORLOFF, surrounded by Turks. MULEY. Courageous Russian, thou art ours!
Could valor have saved thee, captivity and you had never met -- Your empress,
we trust, has not many such soldiers in the neighboring camp. -- Come, droop
not, Sir, this is the fortune of war.


ORLOFF. Had I been made your prisoner, whilst on a post of duty, I could have
borne my lot -- A soldier can support not only death, but even slavery, when a
sense of duty gives dignity to his chains; but my chains are base ones, for I
reconnoiter'd without command, and have lost my liberty without glory.


A LA GR. Then I have lost my liberty too without glory, for I attended you
without command, and now -- Oh, le diable! I am valet de chamber to a slave!


TURK. Let not that affect thee! The fortune of war, which has wounded your
master's pride, ought to elate yours, for you are now his equal -- both slaves
alike.


A LA GR. [Eagerly.] Are we so? And has he no farther right to command me, nor
threaten me? Kind Sir, tell me but that -- tell me but that --!


TURK. None, none.


A LA GR. Hum! [Puts his hat on, takes out his snuff box, takes snuff, then
goes to his master, and offers his box.] Take a pinch, don't be shy.


ORLOFF. Scoundrel! [Throws up the box with his arm.]


A LA GR. Nay, no hard names -- let us be civil to each other, as brother
slaves ought to be -- And now I think of it -- Hark ye! I suppose your slaves
take rank according to their usefulness.


TURK. Certainly.


A LA GR. Well then, my master -- I mean that man there, who was my master, can
do no earthly thing but fight, whilst I, on the contrary, am expert at several.


MULEY. Your qualifications?


A LA GR. They are innumerable -- I can sing you pretty little French airs, and
Italian canzonettas -- No man in Paris, Sir -- for I have the honor to be a
Frenchman -- No man in Paris understands the science of the powder-puff better
than myself -- I can frize you in a taste beyond -- Oh, what you are all CROPS,
I see -- fore fronts, and back fronts -- Oh, those vile turbans, my genius will
be lost amongst you, and a frizeur will be of no more use than an oyster-woman.
-- Why, you look as though you had all been scalp'd, and covered your crowns
with your pillows.


TURK. Christian, our turbans are too elevated a subject for your sport.


A LA GR. Dear Sir, [pointing to his turban, and then to the ground] drop the
subject, it will be a proof of national taste.


MULEY. Thy speech is licentious and empty; but in a Frenchman we can pardon it
-- it is national Taste -- However, if your boasted qualifications end here, it
is probable, you will be a slave as little distinguished as your master.


A LA GR. Pardonnez moi! I can do things he never thought of -- You have heard
the story of the basket-maker amongst savages? I do not despair of seeing my
master my servant yet -- Courage, Monsieur Ie Compte! I Will treat you with great
condescension, depend on it, and endeavor to make you forget in all things the
distance between us.


MULEY. He seems too deeply absorbed in melancholy, to be roused by thy
impertinence!


A LA GR. Poor young man! Times are altered, to be sure; and at present he is a
little down in the mouth; but he is fond of music, cheer him with a Turkish air
-- Helas! all the air we have will be Turkish now.


ORLOFF. Ah no! forbear your music, and bring me your chains! Drag me to your
dungeons! The intellectual bitterness of this moment cannot be increased by
outward circumstance.


A LA GR. Chains and dungeons! Why sure the ghost of our dead bastille has not
found its way hither -- Hey, Messieurs! Have you lantern posts too, and hanging
Marquisses in this country?


ORLOFF. [angrily.] Peace!


A LA GR. Peace! That Is a bold demand. -- Your Empress cannot find it at the
head of a hundred thousand men, and the most sublime Grand Signior is obliged
to put on his nightcap without it, though he has a million of these pretty
Gentlemen to assist him -- Besides, England has engrossed the commodity.


ORLOFF. Come, Sir, let us not loiter here -- I would have my fate determined,
and my misery complete. Alas! is it not already so? Yes, my heart has been long
the property of sorrow, and it will never relinquish its claims.


MULEY. I shall lead you to the palace of the Bassa Ibrahim -- it is in the
neighborhood of yonder camp which he commands, what your fate may then be, his
humor determines.


A LA GR. Then I hope we shall catch him in a good humor, and what care I
whether a Turk or a Ruffian has the honor to be my master? Now you see the
misfortune of being born a Count! Had he lost no more than I have, he would be as
careless as I am -- Come, brother slave -- no ceremony, no ceremony, I beg.


Exeunt -- A LA GREQUE pulls back his master, and walks out before him. SCENE
II. ROCKS.
[ Enter PETER -- runs across the Stage, is followed by PAULINA shrieking --
they go off -- Two Turks pursue them, and bring them back.] TURK. Stay, stay,
young ones! it is but manners to wait for your father -- You see he is hobbling
up as fast as he can.


PAU. Aye, very true -- Oh, Peter, how could we run away, and leave our father?


PETER. Why, we only took care of number one, and we have a right to do that
all the world over. So we are captives now then, and slaves in downright arnest?


TURK. Aye.


PAU. Look at my poor father! If your hearts were not harder than those very
rocks, you could never make a slave of him.


Enter the FATHER, guarded by two TURKS. FATHER. O my dear children! Those
flints which wound my feet are not so sharp as the wounds which gash my heart
for you.


PAU. There! -- Do ye hear? O the miseries of war! I wonder war is ever the
fashion -- Pray, Sir, what made the King of the Turks and our old Empress agree
to go to war together?


TURK. To give brave soldiers an opportunity of running away with such pretty
girls as you.


PAU. O fie on them! I think if they were now to see my father and brother
Peter, and I in this condition, they would be both ashamed of themselves.


PETER. Ashamed of themselves! Don't talk so ign'r'ntly. -- Excuse her,
gentlemen, she knows nothing of the world. She thinks Kings and Empresses are
made of the same stuff as other mortals.


TURK. [To the Father.] Come, Honesty, cheer up! at the next village there is a
wagon, into which you and your family shall be put, and carried to the end of
your short journey.


PAU. Laws! A wagon -- whose is it?


TURK. It shall be your own for the present.


PAU. Our own! that is droll enough; so we are made slaves in order to ride in
our own carriage.


Exeunt. SCENE. The Gardens of the Bassa, decorated with Palms, Fountains, etc.
in the Eastern style. Enter MUSTAPHA. MUS. Where is she? Where is she? I don't
see her here -- She Is generally leaning on that fountain, looking like the
nymph of the stream, swelling it with her tears.


AZIM. [without.] But I say no -- do you mark me, I say no --


Entering with two SLAVES. MUS. Then I say yes, do ye mark me? What a bawling
you make -- What are you coming here for, hey?


AZIM. To look for that insolent female slave, that Russian, that I may manage
her a little.


MUS. You manage her! Your ill humor toward her is never to be satisfied --
You are as malicious as you are high -- Don't I know how to manage an obstinate
female as well as you?


AZIM. Ha, ha, ha! All the knowledge that nature could contrive to pack into
that little carcass of thine would be insufficient for such a purpose -- Manage
an obstinate female! The greatest generals in the world, and the greatest
tyrants have been foiled at it -- Leave her to me -- I have discretion -- she
shall be kept on bread and water.


MUS. Mark his discretion! Keep a pretty woman on bread and water to make her
contented and kind.


AZIM. It Is right, I Will maintain it to her teeth -- for, first, she is a
Russian and a bear --


MUS. The beautiful Alexina a Russian bear! Well, secondly?


AZIM. She is a christian, and those christians are the most unnaturalist
creatures in the world -- Why, man, they betray their friends, and love their
enemies, ha, ha!


MUS. Do they so? Then she is no christian -- for as to loving her enemies, I
have heard her say to thy face, that she hates thee -- So, let her be treated
like an honest Turk.


AZIM. So she shall -- an honest Turk returns hate for hate, and so, do you see,
her feast shall be a fast.


Goes off at the top. MUS. Take care of the orders I gave ye -- When our master
arrives, let no one be over busy to speak of this Russian slave -- if possible,
I would have him forget that she is in the Haram.


SLAVES. We shall be careful. Exeunt SLAVES.


Enter ALEXINA from the top, followed by AZIM. ALEX. Pursue me not, thou
inexorable slave! You invade my retirement, you drive me from solitude, though
solitude alone can mitigate my sorrows.


AZIM. Nonsense -- Solitude and retirement! they were made for birds of night;
owls may rejoice in them, but women should seek daylight.


ALEX. Daylight gives me no joy. Through eleven weeks have I dragged on a
torpid existence -- See! ( going to a tree) here is the sad register of my days
of infelicity. My bodkin on its tender rind has marked the return of each
unhallowed SABBATH; -- the wounds now but just discernible will deepen as the
tree advances to maturity, and speak in another age, the miseries of Alexina.

[Takes up a folded paper from amongst the shrubs.] A paper! -- poetry! ah, how
descriptive of my own sensations -- which of my companions has thus
melodiously sung her sorrows? [reads]

I a poor captive feel each day
That slowly creeps with leaden pace,
Blessed freedom here never lends her ray --
Her bright steps here, we never trace.
Oh that wild on some high mountain
I could catch the wandering winds,
Or starting from some desert fountain,
Emulate the bounding hinds!
The clouds that swim in air's soft ocean,
Seem to scorn my prison towers,
Zephyr's light unfettered motion,
Deeper, heavier, makes my hours.

AZIM. [snatching the paper from her hand.] Such a wailing about freedom and
liberty! why the christians in one of the northern islands have established a
slave trade, and proved by act of parliament that freedom is no blessing at all.


MUS. No, no, they have only proved that it does not suit dark complexions. To
such a pretty creature as this, they would think it a blessing to give every
freedom -- and take every freedom.


AZIM. Come, come, be gay and happy, like the rest of the slaves. How stands
your mind today toward a handsome Bassa? Our master is returning from the
camp -- The cessation of hostilities will give him a short leisure, which he
will certainly devote to pleasure and his haram.


ALEX. Mustapha, do not let that unfeeling slave talk to me -- thou have
humanity.


MUS. Would I could administer to his disease, it is a terrible one! the love
of talking is in him an absolute frenzy! To silence him is impossible -- but as
I have power over him, I can oblige him to retire -- Go!


AZIM. Go! What, shall an insolent christian? --


MUS. Go, go!


AZIM. She shall repent. Exit.


ALEX. Does your master indeed return today?


MUS. Yes; and all the women of his haram are preparing for his reception --
they, half frantic with joy, wonder to behold your tears.


ALEX. I am not a woman of his haram [with disdain.]


MUS. But, charming Alexina, can you hope longer to escape? Today he will see
you.


[ALEXINA stands a moment as though struck; then clasps her hands with an action
of despair; then turns.] ALEX. Oh Mustapha! behold a lowly suppliant. [Kneels]
She is of no vulgar rank who thus kneels to you for protection.


MUS. For protection! I am myself a slave -- Rise, dear lady.


ALEX. [Rising] But thou have power with thy master. Oh! invent some excuse --
say something to save me from the interview.


MUS. I will consider -- I -- [music at a distance] Nay, if it must be so,
conceal yourself at once, for I hear the music which announces his approach;
and he will probably hasten hither.


ALEX. O miserable speed! I go -- Mustapha, on thy eloquence depends my breath
-- The moments of my life are numbered by thy success -- Press fearlessly the
cause of virtue, and glow with the sainted subject.

Thus, though a slave, thy soul's high state
Shall prove its origin divine,
Soar far above thy wretched fate,
And over thy chains sublimely shine. Exit.

MUS. Why, as to chastity, and all that, which you make an orthodox article of,
sweet one! we Turks are a sort of dissenters -- a woman's virtue with us, is to
CHARM, and her religion should be LOVE. -- Ah, ah! here comes Ibrahim, and his
whole haram -- His creed is love, and there is not a more orthodox man in the
country.


Enter LAURETTA and FATIMA [hastily.] LAUR. Ah! Mustapha, the Bassa is arrived
full of triumph, full of wishes, panting to behold Alexina -- What will become
of her? Where is she?


MUS. She just now run off on that side, and I shall run off on this -- for I
have not settled what to say about her, and BASSAS and TIGERS are animals not
made to be trifled with. Exit.


FAT. Well, let that pretty melancholy slave feel as she pleases -- I, for my
part, am half out of my wits, to think how happy we shall be now the Bassa is
come back -- we shall have nothing but whim and entertainment. -- Have you been
looking at the new pavilion today?


LAUR. No.


FAT. O dear! it is almost finished. -- The hangings are gold tissue, and when
our beautiful sofa, which we have been making for him is set up, and the Bassa
sees it all together, he will be transported. -- Do you not think so? Hark!
here he comes with all the ensigns of war at his heels. -- O no -- they come
first, I protest -- I Will stand here, and take a view of the whole.


[A march is played. Standard bearers advance first; they are followed by
female slaves, who dance down the stage to light music, and exit. The chorus
singers follow; female slaves strewing flowers from little baskets succeed; the
Bassa then appears at the top with his principal officers.] Chorus. SELIM,
LAUR. FAT. etc.
Hark! sound the trumpet, breathe the flute,
And touch the soft melodious lute:
To heaven let every grateful sound ascend,
Thanks for our prince restored,
Our lover, and our friend.
Victorious hero! blooming sage!
The scourge and glory of our age!
Let roseate pleasures round thy footsteps twine,
And lead thee on to joy,
And bless thy valiant line!
Vain breathes the trumpet, and the flute,
And lost the soft melodious lute,
When, Ibrahim! thy praise they would display.
Sunk in the lofty theme,
As twilight yields to day!


IBRA. Enough of praise, and of triumph! A sweeter triumph than your songs can
bestow, awaits me -- Where is the lovely Russian, who, though my captive more
than two moons, I have not yet beheld?


AZIM. We rejoice in our lord's return, that her pride may be humbled. -- The
insolence of her carriage, and the perverseness of her temper, are intolerable.


IBRA. Thou have seen her, Muley, does she justify Azim's description?


MULEY. She is reserved, my lord, reserved and melancholy -- but she is too
gentle to be insolent.


AZIM. Muley knows her not -- Can thou believe it, mighty Bassa, the idea of
surrend'ring her charms to thee, and of being raised to the honor of thy
notice, has never once softened her ill humor, nor abated her melancholy.


IBRA. Indeed! [Angrily] Bring her to me instantly -- yes, instantly bid her
come to my presence, and tell her -- No -- hold -- I will receive her in my
hall of audience, dazzle her with my greatness, and astonish her into love.


LAUR. Ha, ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha!


IBRA. Why that laugh, Lauretta?


LAUR. Ha, ha, ha! at your new invention of astonishing people into love. -- If
you can contrive to do that, you will be the most astonishing Bashaw in all
Turkey.


IBRA. How then?


LAUR. Grandeur and dignity to inspire love! Ha, ha, ha! they may inspire your
pretty captive with veneration and respect -- but veneration and respect is an
atmosphere so cold, that love starves in it.


IBRA. What then must I do to touch her heart with love?


LAUR. Affect humility, not greatness. You must become a suppliant, before you
can hope to be a victor.


IBRA. Do thou speak truth, my pretty Italian? -- Thy country is the country
of love, and thou should be an adept in the science.


LAUR. Yes; I know the history of the heart, and do assure you, that you must
become the slave of your captive, if you ever mean to taste the sublime
excesses of a mutual passion.


AZIM. [contemptuously] Mutual passion! Sir, she is your slave, command her!
Such baseness may befit an Italian, but a mussulman is more sensible to his
dignity.


IBRA. I will hear you both further on the subject -- The iron labor of the
war is for a few weeks suspended -- and during that cessation, Pleasure! I am
thine. Prepare your banquets, compose new delights, let every hour teem with
fresh invented joys, till I forget the toils of the sanguinary field, and bathe
my wounds with rosy-finger'd love. Exit with part of his train.


FAT. Well, he is in delightful spirits -- But how strange it is that the
Russian slave should not have presented herself to welcome her master, and to
give him an impression of her charms.


LAUR. Stranger if she had, when nothing frightens her so much as the idea of
inspiring him with a passion -- I am interested for her, and it is for this
reason I shall endeavor to make Ibrahim pursue a conduct not usual from a
mighty mussulman to his slave. Exit.


FAT. Hark ye, Azim! What makes your lovely countenance look so grim, when we
are all so gay? I declare your glum face suits the day as little as a black
patch upon a gold robe -- Change it, man, change it! and don't be afraid of
losing any thing by it, for you must look carefully to pick up a worse. Exit.


MULEY. Azim, since I saw thee last, I have trod the paths of glory -- I have
slumbered amidst the frosts of the night, I have toiled amidst the streams of
burning day; but I return and find thee the same. -- With me all things have
changed, but thou art unaltered. -- Thy temper, like the deep shadow of the
forest, is sometimes checkered by the dart of the angry lightning, but the
serene cheerfulness of the morning dwells not with thee.


AZIM. Well, and what then? If you like me not, thwart me not. There Is room
enough in Turkey for thee and for me. -- Let the crow and the vulture rest on
the same tree; but may thou and I live as far apart as the streams of Ilyssus,
and the waters of the Bosphorus.


SELIM. Surely thy evil disposition must be a scourge to thy soul -- it must be
affliction to thee.


SONG, SELIM.
Ah! teach thy breast soft pity's throb,
And harmonize thy rugged mind,
Ah! teach thy lid soft pity's tear,
That gem of sentiment refined.
Could thou once know the tender bliss
The sympathizing bosom knows,
When at meek sorrow's sacred touch,
Responsive sadness round it flows --
No more thy brow would wear that frown,
Thy glance no more so sternly dart,
But joys would glitter in thy eye,
And peace cling gladly to thy heart. Exeunt.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE An Apartment in the BASSA 's Palace.
IBRAHIM discovered, seated under a Canopy, Officers and Slaves attending.
Enter MULEY. IBRA. SAY, valiant Muley, where are your prisoners?


MULEY. Waiting at your threshold for admittance.


IBRA. Are they of rank?


MULEY. I suspect one of them conceals his rank with the hopes of lowering his
ransom -- the other is his servant.


IBRA. Bring them before me. Exit MULEY.


Re-enter MULEY with ORLOFF and A LA GREQUE. IBRA. Who are you?


ORLOFF. A soldier.


IBRA. The enemy of our faith.


ORLOFF. The enemy of those only who oppose the interests of my sovereign -- To
chastize them I this morning bore a sword which your slaves won from me,
hardly! Let them consider it as the noblest acquisition of the day.


IBRA. Christian, this air of intrepidity, when amidst the soldiers of the
Russian camp, might have suited thy condition; thou art now a slave thyself,
acquire then that humility which becomes thy state.


ORLOFF. Dishonorable! I demand my liberty. -- A truce has been proclaimed,
and --


IBRA. Not till after thou were captured; thou art, therefore, by the laws of
arms, fairly our prisoner. -- Give him the slave's habit, and set him to
labor. Who art thou?


A LA GR. Not a Russian, dear Sir, 'pon my honor, nor the enemy of your faith;
I believe it is a very genteel faith, and I have all the respect in the world
for Turkish gentlemen. -- I never saw prettier behaved, prettier dressed people
in my life -- they have as much politeness and good breeding as though they were
my own countrymen.


IBRA. Of what country are thou?


A LA GR. Oh, Paris, Sir, Paris. I traveled into Russia to polish the brutes a
little, and to give them some ideas of the general equality of man; but my
generosity has been lost; -- they still continue to believe that a prince is
more than a porter, and that a lord is a better gentleman than his slave. O,
had they but been with me at Versailles, when I helped to turn those things
topsey turvey there!


IBRA. Did you find them equally dull in other respects?


A LA GR. Yes. Finding they would not learn liberty, I would have taught them
dancing, but they seemed as incapable of one blessing as the other; so, now I
am led a dance by this gentleman [turning to his master] into your chains, in
which, if I can but dance myself into your favor, I shall think it the best
step I ever took.


IBRA. The freedom of thy speech does not displease me.


A LA GR. Dear Sir, I am your most obedient humble slave, ready to bow my head
to your sandals, and to lick the dust from your beautiful feet.


IBRA. Ha, ha, ha!


A LA GR. Ah, ah! -- ca ira! -- ca ira! [ springing].


IBRA. Go, take thy late master into thy protection, and see if thou can
inspire him with thy own good humor; his chains will be the lighter.


A LA GR. Oh Sir, as to chains, I value them not a rush; if it is your
highness's sweet pleasure to load me with them, I shall be thankful for the
honor, and dance to their clink -- Bless ye, Sir, chains were as natural
the other day to Frenchmen as mother's milk.


IBRA. Take them away.


Exit ORLOFF, A LA GREQUE, etc. IBRA. Well, Azim, where is this lovely Russian?


Enter AZIM. AZIM. Mighty lord, thy servant dares scarce pronounce his errand.
-- She refuses to come.


IBRA. How!


AZIM. I delivered your commands, I ordered her on pain of death to appear
instantly before you, yet she still refuses. She talks of her sacred honor,
and I know not what.


IBRA. [Pausing] Cold, -- unimpassion'd, -- not to be awed, -- and a sacred
regard for her honor -- Then, at length, I shall taste the joy of overcoming
RESISTANCE. [with an action of pleasure]


AZIM. What means my lord?


IBRA. I am satiated, I am tired with the dull acquiescence of our eastern
slaves, and rejoice that I have at length found one, who will teach me to hope
and to despair.


AZIM. Mighty Bassa, she will have the insolence to despise equally your
threats and your love -- Punishment ought to be inflicted.


IBRA. Beware how thou endeavourest to weaken her hauteur! I will abate nothing
of her inflexibility, I will be enamored of scorn, her cruelty shall be my
triumph.


Enter LAURETTA. AZIM. I say then, my Lord.


IBRA. What! am I to be opposed -- retire, slave!


LAUR. Why do you not go? have you not leave to depart? Come, try the fresh
air, Goodman Whiskers. ( pulling him out by the sleeve) I declare, my Lord,
that busy meddling slave is not able to conduct an affair of this sort -- but,
Sir, if you will follow my advice, I Will engage --


IBRA. I Will follow no advice -- My heart spurns at instructions, and equally
contemns both your lessons and his --


LAUR. Upon my word, he is advanced a great way in a short time -- follow no
advice! [aside]


IBRA. There is a transport which I have never yet experienced, but which my
soul longs to possess -- Yes, my heart languishes to remove the timid veil of
coyness, to soften by sweet degrees, the ice of chastity, and to see for once,
reserve sacrificed at the altar of tenderness; these, cruel Love! are luxuries
thou have never yet bestowed on me. Exit.


LAUR. So, so! it is dangerous to give some people a hint, I find -- I thought
to have held the master-spring, and to have managed him like a puppet; but
presto! he is out of sight before I knew I had lost him, and leaves his
instructor grovelling behind -- I must seek some other field for my talents, I
see. [considering] Yes, I think, I think that may do -- Muley, and the other
four, with our little Mustapha -- Yes, yes; with these half dozen, I Will weave a
webb of amusement to crack the sides of a dozen gloomy harems with laughter --
Mercy! what a sleepy life would our valiant Bassa and his damsels lead, but for
my talents at invention. Exit.


SCENE The Garden.
Enter MUSTAPHA, AZIM, and FATIMA. MUS. All thy malice is not worth that. [
snapping his fingers].


FAT. That Is right, my little Mustapha, [patting him on the shoulder] don't
mind him; he is never happy, but when he is plaguing somebody -- What has the
pretty Russian done to you, that you should be so set on making her wretched?


MUS. I tell thee Alexina shall not be made miserable whilst I have a hair in
my beard.


FAT. There, do you hear, Mr. Sour-Chops? I am sure if all the slaves who have
the care of us, had your ill nature, I had rather sink down into the condition
of a water-carrier, than live in a great man's harem.


AZIM. I tell thee, that should she become the favorite slave, thou will
repent thy blind prejudice -- We shall then all be in her power -- tremble at
her revenge.


MUS. Tremble thou, whose persecutions will make thee a proper object of her
revenge -- for me, what will she have to return me but offices of respect and
kindness? Go, go, thy turbulent spirit makes thee hateful.

Voice [without] Fatima! Fatima!


FAT. I Will come instantly -- And you shall come with me. [ running up to AZIM]
Nay, it is in vain to resist, there is a dozen of us in the next walk, and we'll
mould you into a better tempered monster before we have done with you, I
warrant. Selima! Basca! come and help me.


MUS. Begone, I say.


FAT. O, what you move, do you? The creature is mended already. Exit, dragging
out AZIM.


MUS. So, my Lord Bassa, that hasty step, and that eager look proclaim thy
errand -- I know thou will catch the bird at last; but I will keep the little
flutterer from thee as long as I can.


Enter IBRAHIM, [ hastily]. IBRA. Where is the Russian slave? the women tell me
she spends her hours in my garden, but I cannot see her here, though her
fragrant breath seems to salute me from the rose trees, and her melodious voice
from amidst the bushes, where the painted songsters pour forth their strains.
Where is she, Mustapha?


MUS. I saw her awhile ago at the right there somewhere, but may be she is at
the left by this time -- There Is no guessing.


IBRA. Azim complains that she is an insolent and scornful beauty, not gentle,
nor complaisant in the least.


MUS. I Will follow the lead, and destroy every wish he may have to behold her.
[aside] Yes, yes; as to insolence, match me her fellow if you can -- Bless us,
to see the difference! Why, my Lord, our Eastern beauties are so gentle, so
complying, they scarcely give you time to wish


IBRA. Thou say right [ smiling].


MUS. Pretty creatures! if a man does but look at them, they drop like a ripe
cherry from the bough -- No coldness, no disdain; but as to this proud Russian,
it would be easier to march an army to St. Petersburgh, and whip the Empress
through a keyhole into your baggage wagon, than to subdue her petulance.


IBRA. Do thou think so? Oh, every word thou utterest gives new ardor to my
hopes, new impulses to my desires -- I adore her.


MUS. Alack! alack! [ with surprize].


IBRA. Oh, Mustapha, my imagination paints her her till my heart grows sick
with love! I see the beauteous scorner dart living lightnings from her eye, and
her cheek glow with chaste disdain; I weep in anguish at her feet, I implore
her compassion -- Melted with my love, yet still rigid and reserved, I behold
the bewitching conflict in her soul -- I triumph in the discovery, yet conceal
my delight, still implore, still complain, then seize some happy instant, when
her whole soul is touched, and boast a victory indeed!


MUS. What then -- What then, my Lord, you are not displeased at her
haughtiness?


IBRA. Displeased! [ smiling].


MUS. So, so, so! I have been driving on when I thought I had been pulling
back; spurring a mettled courser, and neglecting the check rein [ aside].


IBRA. Go on to paint her -- pencil her in all her fascinating pride, deck her
in the coldness which dwells on the polar Alp! My glowing soul shall burn at
the description, and blaze with the fierceness of newly tasted love.


MUS. Why, as to that -- to be sure as to that, she is as cold as the Alps, and
all their snow-balls -- she perfectly make's one's teeth chatter at her. -- But
then --


IBRA. What? [impatiently] then what?


MUS. Why, if truth must be spoke, there is, after all, something oddish about
her.


IBRA. Oddish!


MUS. Why now, my Lord, look at me -- pray look at me -- Ay, my Lord Bassa,
examine me well.


IBRA. To what purpose?


MUS. Why, the ladies of your harem say that this same beautiful Russian is
exceedingly like me.


IBRA. Ridiculous!


MUS. Particularly about the nose. [Ibra. shows impatience] Nay, there are
handsome likenesses, my Lord -- I don't say but that she may be rather
handsomer.


IBRA. Thou art mad.


MUS. Not that ever I saw the likeness myself -- except something in the shape
indeed -- But there I have the advantage, for her right shoulder, and her right
ear, have too right an understanding, they are always together. Then her hair,
to be sure it may suit some people, but according to my fancy, the color is
execrable.


IBRA. Wretch, were thou a christian, I should believe thee intoxicated with
wine -- But I Will this instant seek the charmer, and judge how far -- [going off]


Enter SELIM on the opposite side. SELIM. My Lord, a Messenger from the Divan.


IBRA. [turns and stamps] What say thou?


SELIM. A message from the Divan with weighty dispatches.


IBRA. I wish they had been weightier, that his speed might have been less --
Let him wait and be refreshed. [still going]


SELIM. He is ordered to hurry your reply, and to return without delay to the
Sublime Port.


IBRA. Impossible! I say -- I -- would the Sublime Port were sunk beneath
their own lumber. Exit.


SELIM. What is all this? What does the wind carry now?


MUS. [angrily] Whims and oddities of all sorts and colors -- The humors of
Bassas I find it is as impossible to guess at, as at the weight of moonshine.


SELIM. See! Alexina is weeping in that arbor.


MUS. Bless her! And her cheeks through the shining tear, look like carnations
when they are first washed in the dew of the morning. -- Retire for a moment.
Exit SELIM.


Enter ALEX. from an Alcove. ALEX. O Mustapha! I have witnessed thy kindness
trembling and grateful -- But, alas! what will it avail? The darkness of night
hangs upon my soul -- Hope has forsaken me!


MUS. Ay, that is because you did not grasp her fast -- Treat Hope as you would
a favorite lover, Lady! never lose sight of it.


ALEX. Thou art light!


MUS. Even so is hope -- as light as one of your own country reindeer -- and
to carry on the comparison, it will whisk you like a reindeer over all the
bitter frosts of life: Buckle hope to your sledge, and you will travel over the
tiresome waste, disdaining the blast, and smiling at the tempest.


ALEX. O that I could seize her! But how is it possible within these walls?
These walls, the temple of loose desires, the abode of a tyrant and his slaves?
Mustapha! could thou effect my escape?


MUS. There indeed, hope will give you the slip -- for I could as easily escape
into the air, and pluck a feather from the flying eagle, as help you in that,
and to tell you the truth, my master will not much longer be dallied with.


ALEX. Dreadful words! Thou can not guess at their weight -- a tumbling rock
to crush this worthless frame, would not, -- could not give me half the horror.


MUS. She frightens me -- her eye is wild!


ALEX. I do swear to thee, -- THEE! to whom my fruitless vows were paid, never
to forget that I am thine -- never to suffer the slightest violation of our
sacred love. -- This [drawing a dagger] is thy surety. To be used in that
moment, when heaven itself will approve the suicide, when applauding angels
will nerve my arm to strike the blow! and this vow, I call thee, heaven, from
thy highest throne, to witness and record!


Exit. MUS. By my turban, I hardly know where I stand. Women of different
countries have different souls, I believe; and I am sure this is the first time
this sort of soul was ever in a harem [ walks a little, and considers]. Come
hither, Selim.


Enter SELIM. MUS. Go to the Janissary Heli, he has sent me notice, that he has
captured some slaves and other merchandise. -- Tell him I shall be directly
there, to look at his women and his velvets.


SELIM. So! then we shall have some other females, fate willing to plague us. I
swear of all the merchandise our traders deal in, that of women is the most
troublesome and unprofitable -- And our wise and puissant Bassa is as much out
in his chart of courtship, as he would be in that of the moon. -- Why, he is as
melancholy as a moping Spaniard on the outside of his mistress's grate.


DUETTE. SELIM and MUSTAPHA.
Deuce take whining,
Pouting, pining,
What jokes in all this pother,
If one wont do,
Nor let me woo,
I Would fit me with another.
If blue eyes frown,
I Would turn to brown,
Nor lose an hour in sighing,
Should all the sex
Combine to vex,
They Would never see me dying.


SCENE A wide Court with several unfinished Buildings.
[ Slaves discovered at work at a distance. Two slaves drive barrows across the
stage, and go off, followed by A LA GREQUE.] A LA GR. Aye, wheel away, comrades
-- wheel away! Hang me if I do though. I Will wheel no more of their rubbish. Let
the Bassa dig his own dirt [ oversetting the barrow]. Why, the sun here in
Turkey seems to mind nothing but how to keep himself warm [ seating himself on
the ground]. The poets talk of his being a coachman by trade; but hang me if I
don't believe he was a baker, and his oven is always hot. -- I wish he would make
acquaintance with a north wind now, for half an hour, or a good strong south
wester. -- Lud, lud! how I do long for a wind! If I was in Lapland, I Would buy all
that the witches of that country have bottled up for ten years to come [ sings].

Blow, ye pretty little breezes,
Bustle, bustle midst the treeses.

Enter AZIM. AZIM. How now, you lazy boar! What are you seated for, and tuning
your pipes in the middle of the day? -- To work -- to work, sirrah!


A LA GR. Tuning my pipes! Why, I like to tune my pipes -- and I don't like to
work, good Mr. Mussulman -- I don't indeed!


AZIM. Then you shall smart, good Mr. Christian [shaking his whip.]


A LA GR. What, would you take the trouble to beat me such a day as this? My
dear Sir, the fatigue would kill you -- I cannot be so unchristian as to suffer
it [Azim gives him a stroke.] Nay, if you strike, [getting up] I stand. --
Pray, Sir, what may be your office in this place?


AZIM. To keep you and your fellow-slaves to their duty.


A LA GR. And who keeps you to your duty?


AZIM. Who? why, myself to be sure.


A LA GR. Then I think yourself is a very ill-favored scoundrel, to oblige you
to perform a duty so distressing to your politeness.


AZIM. You are an odd fish!


A LA GR. No, I am one of a pair -- I have a twin-brother just like me.


AZIM. The man who was taken with you?


A LA GR. No -- he has not such good fortune; he is a Russian count, poor
fellow! and was my master. -- Gad, I could make you laugh about him.


AZIM. Well!


A LA GR. About two months ago, Mr. Slave-driver, he was married.


AZIM. Well!


A LA GR. A pretty girl faith, and daughter to one of our great Russian boyards
-- a boyard ranks as a marquis did in France, and as a lord still does in
Scotland -- I love to elucidate.


AZIM. Well!


A LA GR. So, Sir, a few hours after the ceremony, before the sun was gone
down, and before the moon had thought about dressing herself for the evening --
Whip! his pretty bride was gone.


AZIM. Where?


A LA GR. That Is the very thing he would get at. -- Ma'am and he were walking
like two doves in the boyard's garden, which garden was bordered by trees,
which trees were bordered by the sea -- Out springs from the wood forty Turks
with forty sabres, and forty pair of great monstrous whiskers, which so
frightened the bride, that, instead of running away, she fainted away, and
staid there.


AZIM. Hah, hah! then my countrymen had a prize.


A LA GR. That they had, worth two Jew's eyes. Six of them hurried off with her
to a Felucca, which lay at the edge of the wood; and all the rest employed my
master. I suppose they would have had him too, but the boyard, with a large
party of friends, appearing at the top of a walk, they thought fit to make off
with what they had. -- Well, my master's bridal bed was, that night, the beach,
where he staid raving and beating himself, as though he took himself for one of
the Turkish ravishers.


AZIM. Ha, ha, ha! thy story is well -- so, all that night, he walked in the
garden -- Oh, and the nightingales, I warrant, sung responses to his
complaints, and the melancholy wood dove cooed in sympathetic sorrow. -- It
must have been very pleasant.


A LA GR. O, a pleasant night as could be; but it cost him a fortnight's lying
in bed; for a hissing hot fever laid hold of him; and the doctors, with all
their rank and file of phials and bolusses, could hardly drive him out of his
veins.


AZIM. Well, now go to your labor [ twirling him round].


A LA GR. O, my dear domine, I have not finished yet. -- I want to tell you how
he joined the army, to have an opportunity of revenge, and how, in all the
skirmishes we have had, he has drawn more Turkish blood than --


AZIM. Go! you are an idle rascal, and would rather talk an hour than work a
minute -- Go, or I will draw some of thy French blood to balance accounts with
your master.


A LA GR. Sir, you are extremely polite; the most gentleman-like, civil,
courtly, well-behav'd slave-driver I have ever had the felicity to encounter
[takes up the barrow] My service to your Lady, Sir! [Azim lashes him off.]


AZIM. The time he mentions, about two months, is about the period when our
Felucca landed Alexina, and his account tallies exactly with the account of the
sailors -- Aye, it must be so -- Now, would it add to her misery to know that
her husband is so near her? I must consider, and she shall either know it, or
not, according to the effect which I think it will produce. -- I know she hates
me, and let her look to it.

Enter ORLOFF. My good Lord Count, pray be so good as to take this spade in
your hand -- Dig you must, and shall -- I have had the honor to bring down as
noble spirits as yours to the grindstone before now.


ORLOFF. Inflict your punishments! to those I can submit, but not to labor.


AZIM. Why not? Has Nature made any distinction between you and the rest of the
slaves? Look at yourself, Sir! -- Your form, your limbs, your habit! are they
in aught different from the rest?


ORLOFF. [haughtily] BIRTH has made a distinction!


AZIM. That I deny -- The plea of birth is of all others the most shadowy.
There, at least, Nature has been strictly impartial: the son of an Empress
receives life on the same terms with the son of a peasant.


ORLOFF. Pride then, and Fortune, make distinctions.


AZIM. True; but Fortune has deserted you, and pray recommend it to your pride
to follow her, that you may, without trouble, attend to your business. -- Here!
take the spade.


ORLOFF. [snatches the spade, and flings it down] There, if you dare again to
insult me, I Will hurl thee there, and tread on thee.


AZIM. Now, if the Bassa had not commanded me to be gentle to him, I would have
beaten him with thongs till his broken spirit brought him to my feet for mercy:
but if I cannot bend it, I Will torture it. [aside] So, you think to master me, do
ye?


ORLOFF. I think not of thee.


AZIM. No, I suppose -- Ha, ha! -- I suppose your pretty wife is --


ORLOFF. My wife -- my wife -- Oh, art thou appriz'd that I had a wife? [AZIM
grins] Oh! speak to me, tell me if thou know her -- Nay, turn not from me!
-- All the lineaments of thy face become important -- if thou will not speak to
me, let me gaze on them, and there gather my fate.


AZIM. Well, gaze and gaze! Can thou there read her story? Do thou know
whether she breathes, and where? Do thou behold thy lovely wife triumphant in
a seraglio, or submissive in a bathing house?


ORLOFF. Oh, villain! monster! neither. By every glittering star in heaven, if
she lives, she is chaste! [pauses, and strikes his forehead] Had I gold and
jewels, I would pour the treasure at thy feet, but now have mercy on me -- Oh,
I beseech thee, tell me if Alexina lives.


AZIM. Ha, ha, ha! if Alexina lives! [laughs again, then walks slowly off.]


ORLOFF. Nay, thou shall not avoid me -- I will pursue thee, kneel at thy feet,
perform the most menial offices, so thou will tell me of my Alexina!


AZIM. [turning] Now, where are the distinctions of thy birth? Do they prevent
thy feeling like the vulgarest son of Nature?


ORLOFF. Thou shall chide long, if thou will at length soften the anguish of my
soul -- Oh, hear me, hear me! Follows him out.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. The Garden.
Enter MUSTAPHA. COME along, I say -- Why, what do you stand there for? -- O
the difference of women! This is a stubborn one, I warrant her -- Though she
saw me pay down the money for her, she has not the least notion that she is a
slave -- Well, if you will not come, Madam, I Will fetch ye. -- [ Goes out and
reenters with PAULINA, new-dress'd.]

PAU. Law! how you hawl one -- I tell ye, I don't like to walk here -- Let me
alone. [Trying to disengage her hand.]


MUS. Come, come, Madam, none of your airs -- You must here be obedient and
civil -- Come along. The Janissary of whom I bought you, told me you was a good
natured, complaisant creature.


PAU. Yes, but he was not so rough as you are; he made me throw away my peasant
weeds, and gave me all these fine clothes. See this tiffany, all spotted with
silver; look at this beautiful turban -- He gave it me all!


MUS. Why, that was only to set off your beauty, that you might fetch a better
price; but I bought you for your good humor only. Here is a sweet woman who
pines and sighs till she puts one in mind of a myrtle blossom, all paleness and
fragrance.


PAU. [with quickness] What Is that to I? I suppose I shall be pale and flagrant
too, if I am to be kept down by you.


MUS. Who wants to keep you down? Behave yourself prettily, and you may live as
merrily here as sparrows upon a may-bush. The gentle creature for whom I bought
ye, is your countrywoman, and I guessed you might divert her with your sensible
prattle.


PAU. Ah, did you so? Why, you guessed as though it was your trade then -- for
I am the most divertingest creature in our whole village, and if I could but
see my father, and brother Peter --


MUS. Well, if you behave discreetly -- I Will buy your father, and brother Peter.


PAU. Buy! buy! Why, you talk of buying us, as though we were baskets of eggs,
or bales of cotton.


MUS. Yes, it is the mode here -- Every country has its fancies, and we are so
fond of liberty, that we always buy it up as a rarity.


PAU. What, did you buy all those ugly men that I see at work yonder?


MUS. Men! Make no mistakes, child -- It would be death for a man to be seen
here. None ever venture a foot within these shades.


PAU. No! why then do you venture here?


MUS. O, as for me, I -- I -- hold your tongue, [angrily] and make no
impertinent enquiries.


PAU. But I will make enquiries. What do all them there ugly men do here, I say?


MUS. Why them there ugly men were bought to keep you pretty women in order.


PAU. In order! Why what control have they over us?


MUS. Oh, they are guards and spies; and are now and then convenient at taking
off a lady's head, or suiting her neck with a bowstring, when the whim happens
to seize a great man, of amusing his seraglio with a tragic gala.


PAU. Why, what wicked wretches you all are, then! Get out of my sight, do! You
look so ugly I cannot bear ye, and if I was a great man, I Would string you all
together upon a rope that should reach from here to Saint Petersburgh.


MUS. Ah, you have a spirit, I see -- Hark ye, hussy. [seizes her arm.]


PAU. O, dear heart, do not look so ferocious! I really believe you are a
female tiger.


MUS. Dread my claws then! See, here is the gentle creature for whom I bought
thee -- had she had thy impertinence, she might have pined in solitude for me.


Enter ALEXINA, [hastily.] ALEX. Nay, but it is -- Impossible! And yet it is
so! Art thou not Paulina, the daughter of my father's vassal, Petrowitz? --
Alas! thou art. Unhappy girl! what --


PAU. Goodness, goodness! If it is not the Lady Alexina, may I be whipped!


ALEX. Dear Paulina, what dreadful destiny brought thee hither?


PAU. Destiny do you call him? [looking at Mustapha] Why, this place is all
full of dreadful destinies, I think. Some with black whiskers, and some with
gray ones. Was it this little odd destiny who bought you too?


ALEX. Alas! thy question brings back such a rush of sorrows -- Oh! thou can
not be ignorant that I was torn from my husband within the very hour that made
me his, [weeps] and dragged from bliss to slavery.


PAU. I did not know that you was here -- but I am monstrous glad to meet you
here -- It is the luckiest thing -- I have always been in luck!


MUS. Yes, that compliment is a proof of it. You are vastly lucky there! Well,
go on, and amuse her, child -- I shall enlarge your party presently. [Goes out.]


PAU. The little body is as pert as though it was five feet high -- But, for
all him, I will say, my dear lady, that I would not but have seen you here for
the best gown I have -- Not even for this, though it is so fine.


ALEX. Hah, Paulina! I fear that this dress is the mark of thy dishonor -- I
fear thou art undone!


PAU. Undone indeed! I think we are both undone; to be brought into such an
odd, out-of-the-way country as this -- ha, ha, ha, ha. I have been here but an
hour, and it seems an hundred -- In one place a parcel of copper-colour
creatures, without tongues, pop out, glaring with their sawcer eyes, and if you
want to talk and be a little sociable, ba, ba, ba, is all you can get -- I
believe they learnt their alphabet of the sheep -- Then in another corner --


ALEX. [impatiently] Pray reserve your observations -- I have questions to ask,
which tear my heart strings to pronounce -- Speak to me of Orloff -- Oh, my
Orloff! Speak to me of my parents. -- Did they support the moment which dragged
me from them?


PAU. Truly as bad as you could wish. -- At last 't was said that my Lord, the
Count, went into the army, and there he has played about him valiantly! I
warrant he will pay the Turks for robbing him of you, though, may be, they will not
like his coin.


ALEX. Oh, preserve him THOU, in whose hand remains the fate of battles!


Enter MUSTAPHA, with LAURETTA. MUS. Here, I have brought ye Lauretta; she is a
girl of enterprise, and I have a fancy which her intriguing spirit will bring
to perfection.


ALEX. Alas! how can she serve me? Can she restore me to my country -- to my
husband --?


MUS. Fear her not -- she has as many plots as dimples; so I leave ye together.
-- Stand on one side. [To Pau. who is in his way.]


PAU. Aye, on any side but yours, Mr. Destiny [crosses] -- I hope you and I
shall be always at contrary sides.


MUS. So hope I, Miss Nimble Tongue! For if you were always beside me, I should
soon be beside myself. Exit.


LAUR. Dear madam, look a little cheerfully -- I have a thought in my head --
Hark ye, my dear [to Paulina] -- you are a Russian, I find -- What sort of
lovers do your countrymen make?


PAU. How should I know? I never had but three -- One was old enough to be my
father, so, I used to kneel down and ask his blessing -- So, one day, he gave
me a curse, and walked off. -- The next was a schoolmaster, and he had such a
trick of correction, that, had I married him, I should have been in constant
fear of the birch. -- The third was a soldier -- but as I neither liked to
follow the camp, nor to live a widow bewitched, I made him beat his march.


LAUR. Brava! you disposed of them all like a girl of spirit, and yet, I think,
had the case been mine, I should have taken a march with the soldier -- I do
love soldiers. -- A regiment on its march always makes my heart shiver to
pieces amongst a thousand Caesar's and Alexanders, [To Alexina.] Has the Bassa
seen you yet?


ALEX. He sent by Muley to command me to his presence, but I will first rush
into the arms of death.


LAUR. Ha, ha, ha! such a resolution in this country! Rather rush into the arms
of death, than into the arms of a handsome lover! the notion is exotic -- it is
an ice-plant of the North -- and our hot sun will wither its honors, depend
on it.


ALEX. [Scornfully.] Are you the friend who was to soothe my sorrows? Alas!
where shall HONOR be honored, if the mouth of WOMAN casts on it contempt!


LAUR. Ah, pardon my levity, for I mean to serve you.


ALEX. In you, the contented inhabitant of a seraglio, such profanation may be
pardoned; but alas! in the world, the grace of chastity is scarcely longer
acknowledged! I have heard the wife and the daughter affix ridicule to the
name. O virtue! where can thou expect worship, when the speech of the matron
and the virgin unhallows thy sacred idea?


LAUR. I am not so lost, but I can feel and thank you for your reproof; and as
the first fruits of it, I will labor for your escape from a situation, which,
to you, must be misery indeed! But, madam, we must confer alone -- I entreat
you to retire with me.


ALEX. Alas! so miserable is my situation, that I am obliged to accept services
from those whom the feelings of my heart would impel me to shun.


Exit. LAUR. [To Paulina, who is following.] Ah! not so quick, miss! Do you
stay here 'till I return -- Stir not, I charge you. Exit.


PAU. Stay here, indeed! There is pretty good care taken that one shou'dn't run
away. The walls are as high as a cathedral, and such frightful looking oddities
prowling about, that a mouse could not run from one shrub to another without
observation -- How they all stare at me! So! there is another of them -- He
looks rather better than the rest -- but I shall have nothing to say to him.
[Regards her dress, etc.]


Enter IBRAHIM, followed by slaves. He turns and speaks to them with
impatience. IBRA. No more, no more of business. Let not a thought of public
duty here obtrude itself -- I have already sacrificed those hours to it, due to
a dearer cause. [The slaves retire.] And now for my reward! Now will I seek the
charming obdurate, nor ever leave -- Hah! she is there! The lovely fugitive --
I have found her -- I have found her!


PAU. Heigho! what shall I do with myself! I Will gather flowers for lady Alexina.


IBRA. Yes, she has a thousand charms, and my heart is already in her chains.
-- How dared Mustapha deceive me? He talked of deformity -- her form is
symmetry itself, and her hair which he decried, is fit for the bow-strings of
the god of love.


PAU. Hang this sharp thorn, it has made my finger bleed.


IBRA. [Advancing.] But you, charming Russian! still more barbarous, are born
to make hearts bleed. [PAU. looks at him attentively, then tosses her head
scornfully away.] What a true picture they have given me of her scorn! Will you
not speak to me?


PAU. [Looks at him again.] I wonder at some people.


IBRA. What do thou say? Oh, that mouth is too lovely to be closed so soon.


PAU. [Talking to her flowers.] You are very pretty, and you are very sweet,
but you are not complete yet -- Good Mr. What-d'ye-call -- reach me that flower
that grows so high.


IBRA. With transport! [presents the flower.] Shall I arrange them for you?


PAU. Get along, do!


IBRA. Teach me to do something that may not displease you.


PAU. Get out of my way, I say.


IBRA. Do you know me?


PAU. Not I, nor never desire to know ye -- I wish I was out of this wretched
place altogether, I know that.


IBRA. It shall be the business of my life to make you happy in it.


PAU. You! ha, ha, ha.


IBRA. You are surely unacquainted with my rank, and my situation.


PAU. No, no -- I know that. -- Do hold your nonsense.


IBRA. [With displeasure.] Your haughtiness I was prepared to bow to, but I
know not how to meet your contempt.


PAU. Don't begin to redden at me -- I mind ye no more than I do this sallow
leaf -- There -- see -- I blow it, and away it flies -- go after it -- there
lies your way.


IBRA. But not the attraction -- You bid me go, whilst your eyes chain me here.


PAU. Then I Will shut them -- There -- now how do you like me?


IBRA. In vain you shut your eyes, unless you could likewise hide that rosy
mouth, those teeth, those features, that form! I could love you though you were
blind.


PAU. Love! What, can you love? Such a hardhearted -- Turkish -- creature as
you love?


IBRA. Can I? yes, to distraction! It is not possible for me to tell you how I
could adore you -- Whole days would be lost in gazing on your charms! I could
hang on your breath like the humming-bird on the vapor of the rose, and I
should drink your glances, 'till my soul, sick with excess of pleasure, would
leave me scarce power to murmur forth my bliss.


PAU. Now, what can he mean by all that? I believe a bishop could not talk
finer! [Aside] I tell ye what, mister, you may make grand speeches about this
and that; but I hate both you and your love; and if ever you teize me with it
any more, I Will make you repent, that I will [ sings].


SONG. PAULINA.
You think to talk of this and that,
And keep me here in silly chat,
But I know, I know better.
There clearly lies, kind Sir, your way,
Pursue it then I humbly pray,
And me you will make your debtor.
Why, bless my stars, it is very odd,
That here upon this harmless sod,
I cannot stay in quiet.
But now you know so clear my mind,
Mayhap you will leave me here behind,
The path seems wide, pray try it.


IBRA. Charming songstress! -- I dare not pursue her. -- How well she knows the
power of love, to treat with disdain the man in whose hands is her fate! Hah!
would I suffer her thus to leave me, but that at last she must be mine! Go
then, lovely tyrant, indulge thy scorn, and treat me like a humble slave -- A
moment comes when thou shall repay me! Exit.


PAU. [Coming down] So! he is gone!


Enter ALEXINA, MUSTAPHA, and LAURETTA. LAUR. Hah! see what sweet flowers I
have gathered for you! Why did you stay so long?


ALEX. Oh, let me embrace thee!


PAU. What, all this for the flowers?


ALEX. No, for hope -- for soft returning hope! Paulina, the powerful Bassa is
thy slave -- He loves thee -- I have witnessed your interview, and bless that
fortune which has done for me in an instant, what, by a train of artifices, we
meant to have procured.


MUS. Ah, but, you little rogues, it is I that have done it, it is I that have
brought about all this, though like some other great actions, more is owing to
chance than skill.


PAU. Why, what have you done to be so full of your brags?


LAUR. What, are you not sensible of your happiness? To have subdued the heart
of one of the handsomest, and most powerful men in the empire?


PAU. Men! -- What are you talking about? Oh then, that handsome man is not one
of those odious creatures who bowstring us? Laws! how could I treat the
gentleman so? I Will run after him, and make it up. [running off.]


ALEX. [following and holding her] Stay! or you undo me.


PAU. Well then, the next time I see him, I Will tell him that I Am ashamed of
myself; and I Will try by all due civilities to appease his anger.


ALEX. Oh, not for worlds -- Still you will undo me, my fate is in your hands.


MUS. Hark ye, my pretty maid, our Bassa, like all great men, has his fancies,
he does not like too much honey on his bread.


PAU. Laws! Ha, ha, ha!


LAUR. If you wish to retain his heart, you must plague it -- if you are tender
you will lose him.


PAU. Why, that is the way in my country too; as soon as our ladies grow fond,
their lovers grow cold; for all the world like the little Dutch painted man and
woman in the weather box, when one pops out, the other pops in -- never in a
mind.


MUS. Keep the lesson in your mind, and you may be a great lady -- only take
care not to begin your pops too soon. You see she is apt.


LAUR. O, as a parrot! Come, my good girl, you shall go to my chamber, and I
will give you the prettiest lesson you ever yet learnt -- I Will teach you in
half an hour all the arts of a fine lady, and you shall be able to play on your
lover as you would on an harpsichord. The whole gamut of his mind shall be in
your possession, and every note of it obedient to your wish.


ALEX. Be attentive to her lessons, my dear Paulina; perhaps my honor, and my
felicity, depend on your success -- O preserve your own innocence, and be the
guardian of mine!


PAU. Preserve my own innocence! Ay, to be sure I will -- for my father has
read to me in many a good book, which says, that a woman, when she loses her
innocence, loses her charms, and that, like a faded rose dropped from the tree,
the foot of every passenger will tread on her in her decay. O, who would lose
their innocence! My dear lady, why, your eyes look as bright again as they did
when I first saw you.


ALEX. It is because Hope has shed its luster on them. [LAUR. leads off
PAULINA.] My heart is full; my veins confess a warmer flow, and the brightest
visions glide before me. O, nature! thou who have made us capable of so much
bliss, why is it thy decree that we shall sink in sorrow? Why must our joys be
so often shrivel'd by the cold touch of indurating DESPAIR! Exit.


Enter SELIM and FATIMA. FAT. Selim, was not that the Russian slave who
departed as we entered? Surely it was, and with a look of pleasure! --


SELIM. Pleasure! I am glad to hear it. I am sure her melancholy has thrown a
gloom over the whole harem.


FAT. What an odd whim it is in our master to grow fond of the mind of a woman!
Did ever any body hear of a woman's mind before as an object of passion?


SELIM. I don't understand it.


DUETTE. SELIM and FATIMA.
Give me (you) a female soft and kind,
Whose joy 'twould be to please me (ye);
The beauties of her precious mind,
Would neither charm nor teize me (ye).
The dimpled cheek, and sparkling eye,
To me (you) are wit and sound sense;
And better worth a lover's sigh,
Than stores of mental nonsense.
The touch of honied velvet lips
Is reason and bright science,
And he who at that fountain dips,
May scorn the Nine's alliance.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- A Quadrangle -- On one Side of the Square is a very high Garden
Wall; behind which are heard frequent Bursts of Laughter -- A LA GREQUE is seen
moving from Place to Place, trying to peep through.
A LA GREQUE. DEVIL take the workmen who built the wall! Not a chink or cranny
can I find to send in the thousandth part of an eye-beam [ laugh within]. There
they go again! Oh, you sweet tits you! I wish I was one amongst ye. [Enter a
Turk, and crosses.] Hark ye, Mr. Gravity! Is there no getting a peep at these
jolly girls?


TURK. No.


A LA GR. What, are they never suffered to be seen by a handsome Christian
young fellow like me?


TURK. No.


A LA GR. Do You think they would take it amiss if a man was to venture his neck over
the wall, to get at them?


TURK. No.


A LA GR. Do You believe the Bassa would forgive such an innocent piece of
curiosity?


TURK. No.


A LA GR. Egad, you manage your words discreetly -- Are you afraid your stock
will not last the winter, should you spend too many these summer months?


TURK. No.


A LA GR. Well done, my boy! Since you are so fond of the word, I Will give ye a
song on the subject.


SONG, A LA GREQUE.
A pretty gemman once I saw,
The neighbors said he studied law,
When full of grief,
In's hand a brief,
A poor man came,
Good Sir, he cried,
Plead on my side,
The lawyer careless answered -- No!
A rich gown'd parson would you ask
To do a charitable task
For Tom and Sue,
A couple true,
Who'd fain be tied,
With eye elate,
And strut of state,
The parson surly answers -- No!
Should laboring honest low-fed Dick,
In spite of starving, very sick
To doctor send,
By some kind friend
To beg advice;
He strait will see
No hope of fee,
And ten to one he answers -- No!
A senator you asked to vote,
The dear red book he knows by rote,
His country's good
He understood
You had in view,
But should he find
No place designed,
His bow polite you know, means -- No!
To a young beauty would you kneel,
And talk of all the pangs you feel?
With eye askance
She Will steal a glance,
And blushing sigh,
But should you press
Her power to bless,
She Will whisper forth a trembling -- No!


TURK. I like your song.


A LA GR. I like your praise.


TURK. And to reward ye, I Will show ye a place, where, by the help of loose
bricks, and good climbing, I sometimes get a squint at the girls; -- though if
it was known, I should never squint on this side paradise again.


A LA GR. You are an honest fellow, and it is pity you are a Turk -- but it
cannot be helped, and it is to be hoped a man may travel to heaven at last,
though he never leaves the country in which he was swaddled. -- Come along!
[hurries him off]


SCENE II. The Garden.
Enter female Slaves, singing and beckoning to their companions, who enter from
opposite wings all the way up. During the song others enter, dancing to the
music. CHORUS -- OF FEMALE SLAVES.
Come away! come away!
Companions so gay!
Come away! Come away!
Companions so gay! etc.
SONG, AND CHORUS.
This is Freedom's precious hour,
Welcome, airy, sportive Mirth!
We'll enjoy thee whilst we have power,
Give to all thy whimsies birth.
Let the cross ones burst with spite,
We'll never heed their shrugs or frowns,
Vary every sweet delight,
While blythe Joy our labor crowns.
CHORUS.
Come away! etc.


A LA GR. [from the top of the wall] Hah! hah! you little merry rogues, you're
there, are ye?


The women shriek, and all go off, except LAUR. and FATIMA. LAUR. What
audacity! Presuming slave, do you know the consequence of your temerity?


A LA GR. Yes, I can guess at it, that you are all set a longing, and are ready
to ask me to come down amongst you.


LAUR. You are impertinent. Exit.


FAT. Do you hear, young man? -- "you are impertinent" -- Yes, you are an
insolent, presuming, audacious -- sweet fellow, hang me if he is not. Exit.


A LA GR. Ah, you sweet little saucy jade, come under the wall, and blow me a
kiss -- You will not! Why get along then, you ill-humour'd baggages -- Hah! what,
you look back, do you? You Would better think on it, and turn -- What, the grapes
are sour, are they? Ah, ah! I understand you -- this is a fine place for the
gypsies, hang me if it is not -- These Turks have a life on it -- Such fine
girls, and such fine gardens -- Whu! who comes here? This is another -- Yes,
yes, I Will turn Turk -- There Is nothing like it, I see.


Enter PAULINA. A LA GR. Hark ye, pretty maid -- come this way.


PAU. Gracious! where can that voice come from? I see nobody. [running about]


A LA GR. I say, you little rogue, if -- Why, how can this be? If my eyes are
my own eyes, and if her eyes are hers, it is Paulina, the daughter of old
Petrowitz.


PAU. [Clapping her hands.] As sure as that impudent head was once on the
shoulders of A la Greque; who ever thought of seeing it on the top of a Turkish
wall? How came you amongst them? Did they buy you too?


A LA GR. Buy me! No, I was taken fighting in a little skirmish, where I had
only time to disarm half a dozen Turks, and kill a few Bassas; and now the
cowardly rogues have shut me up here, for fear I should do them further
mischief -- I believe they think I have a design upon the crown.


PAU. Law! only think of it.


A LA GR. Didn't you hear that the Grand Turk had offered a reward for my head?


PAU. Your head! -- Why, what could he do with it?


A LA GR. Faith, I had no inclination to enquire, so I took to my heels and
carried it off.


PAU. Then how came it there? [pointing.]


A LA GR. Didn't I tell ye that a whole army set upon me and my master, and
brought us --


PAU. Mercy! is your master here, count Orloff?


A LA GR. Is he? aye, locked up within the brazen gates of this --


PAU. Why, if ever I heard the like -- Within the same gates is locked up lady
Alexina, who was stole from him by these odious Turks.


A LA GR. She here too! Why, this place is like the sick lion's den, where all
the beasts of the forest assembled together.

Voices [without] Help! help! here is a man talking to one of the female slaves.


A LA GR. I Will prove ye a liar in your teeth [ goes down].


SLAVES enter. ISM. Where is the man to whom you talked?


PAU. Man! -- Do men grow on the bushes in your country? There is no other way
of a man's finding himself in this garden, I fancy.


ISM. I heard his voice -- Let us drag her before the Bassa. -- Go you and
search the gardens.


2d. SLAVE. [Apart] Take care what ye do -- This is the new slave whom we were
commanded to treat with so much respect -- We shall bring mischief on ourselves
-- Her word will go further than ours as long as she is in favor.


ISM. I understand you -- [turning] -- I thought I heard the voice of a man, --
but sounds deceive one -- it might be a bulifinch perhaps -- beg pardon for the
mistake, lady. Exeunt SLAVES.


PAU. A man a bullfinch, ha, ha, ha! These stupid creatures might be persuaded,
I dare say, that a cat was a green s^ipper. Well, how oddly things turn out! --
Little does lady Alexina think her husband is so near her. -- Hist! A la
Greque! A la Greque! -- [Looking toward the top of the wall] -- Psha! he is
gone now -- Well, I Will run and bless her with the news, and then take one more
lesson for my behavior to the Bassa. -- I shall be able, after that, to behave
as proudly as though my father were a noble of the land -- Let me see -- How is
it to be a fine lady? First, I must disguise all the feelings of my heart --
But how can I do so without telling fibs? Well, fine ladies don't mind that* --
Second, when he kneels, I must turn from him, or hum a tune -- thus -- [hums]
-- Did you speak to me, Sir? -- And when the charming man -- O Lord! I shall
never do it, as though I were used to it -- When he attempts to kiss me, I must
complain of his insolence, and walk away in this manner. [Walks off scornfully.]


SCENE, The Buildings.
Enter AZIM, with other SLAVES. AZIM. Shall we stand by each other, brothers?
Will you be faithful?


ISM. Aye, that we will; we must do as you bid us -- You are over us. By
allowing that, we generally come over him. [To another.]


AZIM. Well then, you see how the case stands; she is come wonderfully into
favor, and will, without doubt, be revenged on us, for the severities she
received in our lord's absence. The Bassa has just now threatened vengeance to
all who displease her.


SLAVE. Will it not displease her then to be put into a prison?


AZIM. It Is likely it may -- but what is that to us? We can, whenever we
determine to do so, connive at her escape; and if we allow her to leave the
palace, she will readily pardon the prison; so, she will be gratified, and we shall
be skreen'd.


ISM. Well, well; let her be locked up as you said, and then persuade him she
has escaped.


2d. SLAVE. We can dig down part of an old wall, and drop a ladder at the
bottom, and then it will not be doubted.


AZIM. Yes; and that old tower will be a proper place to confine her in; then,
if need be, she can hereafter be produced, for I don't entirely approve of
poisoning her.


ISM. No, not at present -- it may be more convenient hereafter -- [drily] --
Where shall we seize her?


AZIM. She is generally in the garden, and alone -- -- it will not be difficult
if we watch for a moment when Mustapha is absent.


SLAVE. Here Is some one coming.


AZIM. Then let us disperse several ways. People who have a plot in hand should
never be seen together -- A flight of crows always proclaims a carcass.


Exeunt severally. Enter ORLOFF, followed by A LA GREQUE. ORLOFF. Pursue me
not, thou contemptible wretch! My sorrows are too profound to be interrupted by
resentment at thy folly -- Oh, most inhuman fate! To know that my Alexina
lives, to know that she exists in this province, and not to know where -- My
chains are become heavy indeed! -- They are insupportable!


A LA GR. Let me lift them for you, Sir -- I can make them jingle lighter.


ORLOFF. Begone, I say.


A LA GR. Well, I Will go -- People often drive their good fortune from them,
like you. I shall only say, as I was saying before, that this house has a
garden, and that this garden has a wall.


ORLOFF. Oh, my charming bride! could I but cheer thee by my voice, could I but
lessen thy anguish, by speaking to thee my own.


A LA GR. Well, a wall -- What is a wall to me?


ORLOFF. Could I, each morning, when I greet its rays, behold but thee, I could
bear to live even in this wretched state, and every heavy night I could creep
to my straw pallet with less despondency, having first received from thy sweet
eyes, farewell!


A LA GR. To be sure the wall is a high wall, and a strong wall; but it is but
a wall.


ORLOFF. If thou dare mention the wall again.


A LA GR. Well, I will not then; but was I to tell you, my Lord, what that wall
contains, I really believe you would forgive all my sauciness for ten years to come.


ORLOFF. Surely thou have a meaning! What would thou say?


A LA GR. A meaning! Aye, such a meaning!


ORLOFF. Oh, trifle not!


A LA GR. Why then, in two words, I have climbed the garden wall, and who do
you think I saw in the garden -- Who do you think?


ORLOFF. Oh speak! [grasping his hand] Speak! my soul hangs upon thy words --
Could thou but know what I feel!


A LA GR. Then, my Lord, there, as sure as you lost your bride on the day of
marriage, there I saw the fair Paulina, daughter of old Petrowitz.


ORLOFF. Oh! [drops]


A LA GR. Mon Dieu! if the joy of that has been too much for him, how would he
have borne it, if I had seen his wife? [goes to him] My Lord -- my Lord! Why
he is as pale as death -- I dare not tell him now that Alexina is within a
hundred yards of him.


ORLOFF. Bitter, bitter disappointment! it has been a stab to my heart --
Barbarous wretch! [rising and seizing him] to raise and feed my hopes with such
artful cruelty, and then -- but why do I talk to thee? Exit.


A LA GR. So! what he is disappointed then! Why if he would but have had
patience, I was just going to tell him that his wife -- but hang patience! it is
a scurvy virtue, and not fit for a gentleman. I have no patience to know there
are so many fine girls caged up here for that greedy DOG the Bassa. I Will try to
pick a bone with him, though; -- and if I can once lay hold of one of his
pullets, he shall find it as difficult to get her out of my fangs, as it would
be to make a judge dance, or a bishop cut capers. Exit.


SCENE, The Prison.
[ Voices are heard without, ALEXINA shrieks.] AZIM. [entering] Stop her mouth,
and drag her in.


[ALEXINA is dragged in -- her hair dishevelled.] ALEX. Monsters! if ye are of
the human race, desist -- O drag me not from day, and from my husband!


AZIM. This is your habitation, Madam, make the best of it.


ALEX. At whose command is it my habitation? What is my crime? You act without
the knowledge of your Lord -- and if you do, doubt not his vengeance! O, it is
not possible that he can authorize this cruelty!


AZIM. Come, come, Madam, a few weeks spent here will quiet you a little --
Your sorrows will not be half so violent a fortnight hence as they are now -- Let
that comfort you.


ALEX. A fortnight! Oh, it is an eternity! Death is nothing to this. Dragged at
such a moment from light, and health, and hope! [running wildly about] O, Azim,
my HUSBAND is here -- my HUSBAND is at hand!


AZIM. Then let him get ye out, if he can.


ALEX. O, best of men, hear me! [kneeling] Tell him only that his Alexina is
here, that he may walk round my prison, that I may hear his steps through the
chinks of these dismal walls, and my soul shall bless thee.


AZIM. Oh, you are mighty humble now; yet you know what insolence I have borne
from you.


ALEX. I meant it not -- Oh, forgive me, forgive me! Here, take this ring, let
it purchase my forgiveness. [rising] It is rich, but not half so rich as shall
be thy reward, if thou will be my friend -- if thou will pity me!


AZIM. Well, I am so far softened that I permit thee to use the apartment next
to this -- It has more air and light -- I Will unlock it -- its last inhabitant
had it fourteen years. [ whilst he goes to unlock it, ALEXINA clasps her hands,
and fixes her eyes wildly] There! you shall each day have your allowance of
food regularly brought; but whether you are ever released or not, depends on
yourself -- Be patient! That only can serve you.


ALEX. Patient! Oh yes, I Will try to be patient, though much I fear my brain
will be disturbed.


AZIM. Well, you will be disturbed by nothing else -- Your apartment will be
quiet enough, whatever your brain may be -- Come, Madam. [Puts her in, and
shuts the door.] There, she is safe, and that makes us safe. -- Now, let us go
and fix the rope-ladder, and then swear she has escaped. Comrades! They talk of
countries, where, what we have done, might be punished by the law -- but we
fear no punishment while we can deceive our master. Exeunt, laughing.


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, A spacious Apartment in the Harem.
Enter PAULINA, running from the Top. PAU. [Looking back.] THE sweet man
follows me still. Hah! Lauretta little thinks the difficulty I have had to
behave to him as though I hated him -- How hard it is when one sees a great
gentleman, and so handsome withal, ready to die at one's feet, to be forced to
be snappish and ill-natured -- Laws! he is coming here -- Which way shall I run
next? [Looking about.]


IBRA. [Entering] Oh, fly me not -- yet fly! Even the distance you throw me at
gives you a thousand charms, and whilst it tortures, it bewitches me.


PAU. [Aside] I do like to hear him talk.


IBRA. You smile! Ah, did you know the value of those rosy smiles, you would
not bestow on me more than one in a thousand hours -- Each is worth a diadem.


PAU. I suppose you hope by all this to make me forget I am a captive, and a
slave [ pretending to cry, then turning away, laughing].


IBRA. You can be neither -- It is I who am your slave -- You hold the chains
of my destiny -- Ha! let me catch your tears!


PAU. I tell you once again, that I can never be happy here -- I hate the life
people lead in harems -- All is dismal, not even a window to the street!
Nothing to look at but trees, and fountains, and great whiskers, and black
slaves.


IBRA. Could I but have the transport to touch your heart, all those objects
would give you new impressions -- This hated harem would seem transformed, and
would become an enchanted palace of pleasure.


PAU. But I tell you, I will never suffer my heart to be touched. -- It is very
hard that I must belie my conscience so, my heart leaps every time I look at
him. [Aside.]


IBRA. Who knows what persevering, constant love may do? You may at length be
softened, at length -- Oh rapture! confess the delicious pain!


PAU. [Aside] I long to confess it now, if I might speak out.


IBRA. Most charming creature, deign but to look on me, say only that I am not
hateful to you.


PAU. Aye, that would be the truest word I ever spoke [ aside]. But I will say
that you are hateful to me, and I do declare, if you ever speak to me about
love again -- I -- I don't know what may be the consequence -- I must get away,
or all my fine lessons will be forgot [ aside]. In that room yonder I see
ladies singing and playing; but don't you come to us now, I charge you -- I
will not have you come, or if you do come in half an hour, not a word [looking
back] -- No, not one word about love. Exit.


IBRA. Oh, if there is language in eyes, her words are false -- Her lips forbid
my love, but her eye invites it -- Charming sex! who know how to make refusal
bliss; and who can give delight even in denying! Half an hour did she banish me
-- Oh, I Will follow her instantly -- Every moment spent where she is not, is a
moment not to be counted in my existence. [Going -- Noise behind.] Ha! what
noise is that? [Puts his hand to his scymetar.] The sounds of violence in the
bosom of my retirement!


ORLOFF. [Without.] Base slaves, in vain you oppose me! Were your master
surrounded by instruments of torture, and ministers of vengeance, I would force
my way.


Forcing in, Slaves endeavoring to withhold him -- after them, MULEY enters.
IBRA. [Fiercely.] Your way! What, here? Those apartments, christian, are
sacred; and did not I pay some regard to your fame as a soldier, and your rank
in the Imperial army, by Mahomet, your life's quick stream should pay me for
the insult.


ORLOFF. Talk not of life, dishonorable man! Restore to me my bride -- Restore
-- but can thou restore her? Oh, can thou restore to me the SPOTLESS angel,
whom heaven's most sacred ordinance made mine?


IBRA. Wretches! allow a madman to invade my retirement.


ORLOFF. Thy retirement! Thy life, base Turk! shall be invaded. No madman, but
an injured husband stands before thee! Restore her! -- Give her back to me
chaste as that morn, when trembling, blushing from the altar, I led her to
parental fields -- That morn unblest.


IBRA. Slaves! speak, declare whom it is he means, or dread my vengeance -- A
fear has seized my soul, that curdles all my blood -- Should it be so --
speak! [Furiously.]


MULEY. Mighty Bassa! We fear he means the lovely Ruffian, who adorns your
harem.


IBRA. Ah! [wildly] Is she his wife? Christian, art thou the husband of the
beauteous slave I love?


ORLOFF. Love! Dare thou give birth to such a phrase? Love! Oh that the words
had scorpion's teeth to tear the throat which utters them!


IBRA. And art thou -- O cursed discovery! It is too true -- My heart tells me
it is true, and hates thee for the conviction. Tear him from my presence -- I
dread the energies of my own temper -- tear him away, lest I should stain my
honor with the blood of her husband whom I adore.


ORLOFF. I will not stir -- Give way to all your vengeance -- Vengeance would
now be mercy.


IBRA. Amidst the agonies I see thee in, thou art my envy! She is thy wife, she
surely loves thee, and pants to be restored to thy arms -- By what tortures
would I not purchase with such a bliss -- Bear him off, I command -- Yet hurt
him not, but drag him from the harem.


ORLOFF. At your peril, slaves.


[They drag him off.] IBRA. And now, oh wretched Ibrahim! what remains for
thee? A moment since, the fruit of felicity bent down within thy reach; the
branches were laden with happiness, and thy joys bloomed forth in tender
blossoms; but a hurricane is come, the tree is torn up by the roots, and its
fruits are devoured by disappointment.


TURK. Mighty Lord! is not the beauteous slave within thy power?


IBRA. Within my power! No, she is removed from it for ever. As my slave, I
have undoubted right over her; but as the wife of another, she is sacred.


MULEY. Then remove her from your presence, and give her back to her adoring
husband.


IBRA. Never! O virtue, in exacting that, thy commands are too rigorous. Never,
never can I send her from me -- I will go this moment, and at her feet -- Oh, I
dare not -- If I see her I am lost -- All barriers, human and divine, would
sink before me -- Beholding her within my grasp, and the dread of losing her,
would be a conflict in which I should be lost, and she would be undone! I fly
from her -- I tear myself from the sweet enchantment -- Oh wretched husband, I
assume voluntarily the miseries I have bestowed on thee!


[ Goes off wildly; on the side opposite that, at which PAULINA went.] TURK.
What! run away from the woman he loves, when she is in his power! She is his,
and I would force her to make me happy.


MULEY. His generous spirit would abhor the deed! What, though his passions are
headstrong as the mighty north, which shakes the pyramid to its base, and lifts
the rooted forest from the embracing earth, yet will REFLECTION like a
celestial minister arrive, and courge from his soul each spot and sordid tint,
that virtue ought to scorn, or manhood blush at. Exeunt.


Enter FATIMA, and another Female Slave. FAT. Ah! this room is luckily empty.
So, bring in the Bassa's seat -- We'll set it up here before it goes to the
pavilion; that we may judge of it -- Come, make haste. [speaking to those
without]


[Two or three bring in between them a light stool, on which is a white satin
covering, ornamented with festoons; another brings a small white satin
mattrass, trimmed with gold fringe.] FAT. There, set the stool just there --
Now put on the covering -- Give me the mattrass -- There, do you see how nicely
it fits? Now bring the canopy. [Slaves bring in a canopy ornamented with
festoons, gold fringe, and tassels.] Fix it just here -- There -- that will do
-- Is it not pretty? [walks round it]


2d. SLAVE. It is delightful! How charmed the Baffa will be when he sees it in
his pavilion at supper; and he will praise both our industry and our taste.


FAT. Mercy! what is that noise? -- Why -- here comes that impudent slave who
was hanging over the garden wall.


Enter several female Slaves hastily, followed by A LA GREQUE. A LA GR. My dear
pretty little creatures, why do you fly from me at this rate? Grant me one kiss
to save my life, -- for I am famished.


FAT. That kiss would cost thee thy life, should it be known.


A LA GR. Known! [getting to a small distance, and speaking in rant] Madam!
what do you take me for? Do you think that I, Madam, am a man to betray a
lady's favors? I, who have been well received by duchesses and marchionesses?


FAT. [interrupting him] Duchesses and Marchionesses! What are they?


A LA GR. [in his usual tone] They were a sort of female creatures, my dear,
who once infested Paris.


FAT. And where are they now?


A LA GR. Now, my sweet charmer, there is not one in the country, I mean of
native growth; and if the neighboring nations do not now and then send them
one for a sample, a duchess will be as rare an animal in France, as a
crocodile. -- You sweet fellow! [ throwing his arm round FATIMA.]


FAT. You bold fellow! [breaking from him] Why you are quite at your ease.


A LA GR. I always am; -- and I Will sit down on this pretty seat, and be quite
comfortable.


FAT. You must not sit there -- it is a seat made on purpose for the Bassa.
[Two or three endeavor to prevent him.]


A LA GR. Well, cannot you fancy me the Bassa? [Sits.]


Enter LAURETTA. LAUR. Mercy! mercy! What, a man amongst ye? are ye all
bewitched?


A LA GR. No; they have only bewitched me -- Ah! you lively little rogue.
[flying to her] -- Come here, and sit down by me, and you shall be my
Bassa-ess. I like you best of all.


LAUR. If you like your own life -- Fly swifter than the light.


A LA GR. [rising] With you any where.


LAUR. Stranger, this is no place for gallantry, or for jesting; are you not
afraid of death?


A LA GR. Afraid of him? No -- Death is an aristocrate! and I am bound, as a
Frenchman, to hate him.


AZIM. [without] Search every where, I say -- He must be hereabout -- I saw him
ascend. -- Come this way.


LAUR. There! Now your carelessness or your courage will be equally
ineffectual. Unhappy stranger, you are on the threshold of death.


The slaves clap their hands, and seem agoniz'd. 1st. SLAVE. We too are lost!


A LA GR. Not unless I am found. What a dozen women without a trick to save one
man! Ah! I am sensible of my imprudence too late. [Throws himself on his knees,
turning first to one, then to another.] Oh, save me! save me!


LAUR. What signifies your kneeling? -- yet, it shall signify -- Lower!
[pushing him] Lower still! rest on your hands -- Reach that covering -- quick
-- quick!


They cover him with the drapery, mattrass, etc. and place the canopy behind
him. AZIM. [Without] Come this way then -- here he must have entered. [Enters,
with others.] Fly all of ye -- hide yourselves -- A man is somewhere in the
harem.


LAUR. And what are we to fly for? Is a man a tiger, that we should be so
scared? Who is he?


AZIM. The new French slave -- Frenchmen, there is no being guarded against. --
They make free every where.


LAUR. At least they have made themselves free AT HOME! and who knows, but, at
last, the spirit they have raised may reach even to a Turkish harem, and the
rights of women be declared, as well as those of men.


AZIM. Don't talk to me of the rights of women -- you would do right to go and
conceal yourselves as I ordered ye -- You, Ismael, and Hafez go and search the
inner apartments, I Will wait here, with the rest, to intercept him, should he
escape ye.


Two slaves go off. LAUR. O, we'll intercept him, never fear -- you would better
follow the rest. [Pushing him.]


AZIM. I choose to wait here, and I Will sit down, for I Am horridly tired.


LAUR. Pardon me, Mr. Azim -- I am going to sit there myself. [Sits, on A la
Greque.]


AZIM. I say I Will sit there, Madam, so get up.


LAUR. I wonder at your impertinence. Surely we may keep our seats, though we
have lost our liberties.


AZIM. I have been walking ever since sunrise.


LAUR. Then walk till it sets -- Motion is healthful.


AZIM. I say I will sit down. -- Give me the seat.


LAUR. A sit-down I would give you with all my heart, and such a one as you
should never forget; but this seat you shall not have.


AZIM. Say you so -- I Will convince you in a moment.


Goes to LAURETTA, and seizes her hand to pull her up. ISM. [Without] We have
found him -- We have found him -- There is a door fastened on the inside -- He
must be there.


AZIM. Hah! follow -- follow -- Now, we'll show a Frenchman what liberty is in
Turkey.


Exit with the male slaves. LAURETTA rises. A LA GR. [Getting up with the
covering about him] That fellow is certainly descended from Cerberus, or an
English mastiff. My precious burden, how shall I thank you! Jupiter, when
loaded with Europa on his back, was not half so much charmed with her, as I am
with you. Slaves speak without.


LAUR. Waste not an instant -- They are returning -- Begone!


A LA GR. Well, good bye then, and heaven bless ye all, and send to each
LIBERTY and a HUSBAND!


They push him off. 2d. SLAVE. What a kind man he is! How happy must
Frenchwomen be to have such lovers for husbands.


LAUR. Yes, my dear, they would be so; but unluckily husbands forget to be
lovers -- Let us run and appease Azim, you hear he is loud, and his vengeance
may fall upon us -- Haste -- haste!


Exeunt hastily, all but FATIMA. FAT. I Will make no haste about it. [Looking
round irresolutely.] Hang me if I don't try to change a word or two with that
agreeable Frenchman -- I should like to know a little of their customs -- Such
an opportunity cannot happen above once in one's life -- So, Monsieur Azim, ha,
ha, ha! What a fool he is now. Exit.


SCENE, The Garden.
Enter IBRAHIM from toward the Top, thoughtfully, followed at a small Distance
by MULEY. -- He sighs deeply. MULEY. Alas! my Lord, dare your slave offer you
consolation?


IBRA. I can receive none.


MULEY. I know that in afflictions like yours, there can be but one support,
that is in virtue -- there, my Lord --


IBRA. [Interrupting] Yes, I have resolved! -- She shall be sacred -- her
chastity for ever inviolate! and perhaps, [sighing] perhaps I may hereafter
restore her to her husband.


MULEY. That will be a moment of triumph to yourself. -- When magnanimity thus
conquers affliction, affliction may be envied. -- Such a moment is the
imprimature of heaven on the purified heart -- it is the exaltation of virtue.


IBRA. O VIRTUE! when I can do that, thou may boast a victory indeed! When I
can resolve no more to look on the soft radiance of her eyes -- When I can
resolve to behold no more the natural and unartful graces that adorn her --
When I shall seek those groves in vain for that dear form; when I shall listen,
and hear her voice no more -- then, then, O virtue! thou may boast thy
triumph. [After a pause.] Leave me, for night and solitude best suit the color
of my mind. Exeunt.


[ORLOFF appears at the top of the wall, where A LA GREQUE had before been
seen, and calls to him.] ORLOFF. Quick, pri'thee! mount, and give me the rope
-- O! thou art as slow as if this moment were not the most precious of my life!
As though this garden did not contain my Alexina.


A LA GR. [Appearing] Consider, I have but just had one escape, my Lord, and
another escape may escape me -- There; here is the rope, if you will be so
venturesome -- but don't blame me if they should make you dangle at the end of
it.


ORLOFF. [takes the end of the rope, and is let down] There! Environed with
dangers as I am, this moment is dear to me, and the first, that for succeeding
months has given my benighted soul one gleam of comfort.


A LA GR. Well, my Lord, I leave ye to your comfort -- I am off -- The very
moon over my head seems to say, "Sweet Monsieur A la Greque, your master is
very little better than a lunatic; so, take care of yourself" -- I am off [goes
down]


ORLOFF. Ye conscious walks, which the feet of my Alexina have so often
pressed, ye bending trees, whose boughs have given to her beauties your soft
shade; ye fountains, whose murmurs have sometimes lulled her sorrows to repose,
my full soul greets ye! Hah! surely her voice floated on that passing breeze --
No -- all is still. That passing breeze may bear upon it is wings a thousand
notes, but none like hers. O, thou pale moon, thou art not decked tonight in
half thy glories; shine brighter, put on thy most seducive rays, to tempt my
angel from her sad retirement! [Soft music at a distance.] Music in the
gardens! Near that spot then I shall not fail to find her -- It is an
adjuration her soul must yield to, for her soul is harmony. Exit. Music
continues a few bars.


Enter PAULINA. PAU. Where, where can the Bassa conceal himself? I am tired
with seeking him -- Can he be offended with me, that he flies me thus? Alas! I
feel I could not bear to offend him -- Oh no, I could not! [ Enter MUSTAPHA.]
Ah, Mustapha, have thou seen the Bassa?


MUS. Not I -- I have been taken up in watching the motions of Azim, who, I am
sure, has some plot in hand, though I cannot divine what -- Where is the gentle
Alexina.


PAU. [Pettishly] I don't know -- I hav'n't seen her a great while.


MUS. Nor I -- I Will go in quest of her -- Should the Bassa have seen her, I
would not give a cockle-shell for our scheme. [Going.] But what is the matter?
Why, you look as dismally as a widow at the funeral of her thirteenth husband.


PAU. I cannot find the Bassa -- I have been looking for him 'till my eyes ach
-- He flies me now; he does indeed [ sighing].


MUS. Ay, ay, I understand it -- You would put too much honey on his bread,
though I gave ye the caution -- You have been too kind to him.


PAU. [With quickness] I am sure I have not.


MUS. Pho! pho! I know better -- Have you not learnt, child, that fondness is
the most cloying food in the world? Dash your sweet sauce with acid, if you
would not have it pall upon the palate.


PAU. [Angrily] So I did then -- I was as cross as I could possibly be -- I
never treated a gentleman so hard hearted before. To be sure I must say, that
at leaving him, I told him -- I told him he might follow me. [Confused.]


MUS. Ay, there is the case -- You invited him to follow, and he in course runs
away. [Angrily.]


PAU. Oh dear! [Takes out a fan to hide her tears.]


MUS. If I were a woman, would I tell a man to follow me? [Snatches her fan.]
This is the away you should treat 'em -- Keep your distance, Sir -- how can you
be so rude? Fie! my Lord, it is quite shocking! [Very affected and extravagant
with the motions of the fan.] Oh, monstrous! if you come nearer I shall faint!
I hate you now, I do indeed -- I cannot possibly bear ye! This, you see, would
be graceful and captivating [throwing away the fan.]


PAU. Graceful and captivating! [With surprise.]


MUS. I tell ye, the women are all fools! and if the sweet rogues knew what
they lost by substituting rouge for blushing, and an undaunted look for modest
timidity, we should soon see all their affectations swallowed by one, and that
would be the affectation of modesty. Exit.


PAU. I hate affectation -- For all he thinks he knows so much, the next time
I Will follow my own way -- I am sure I know as much of the matter as he does.


Re-enter MUSTAPHA. MUS. [Peeping in through the wing.] Remember the hint I
gave you -- If our master should see your countrywoman, all your hopes are gone
in a hurricane. You may as well attempt to catch a husband with bird-lime as to
catch him after that; so prevent it.


Exit. PAU. How can I prevent it? Besides, Mr. Destiny, I have good reason to
think, that, as far as the matter of beauty goes, I am not behind hand with she
-- Alack-a-day! no, no, he has hit upon it! -- As sure as harvest is yellow,
Lady Alexina has certainly seen the Bassa, and he will now be her ADORER as he
calls it -- May be they are now together, and he is at her feet sighing, as he
did today at mine -- Oh, I cannot bear it -- The sight would crack my
heartstrings! Now I do feel that I dearly, dearly love him -- Oh mercy! he is
here -- he is here!


Enter IBRAHIM musing; seeing PAULINA, starts. IBRA. Oh Paulina, hide thee,
hide thee! At sight of thee every resolution fades, and the altar of virtue
seems to blaze no more [ gazing on her long]. Cruel charmer!


PAU. Cruel! Oh no, my heart melts to see your distress, and I am sure you have
no occasion for it.


IBRA. Why did thou not at first tell me thou were another's! Why suffer my
heart to burn with tumultuous love, to waste itself in glowing flames, whilst
thine beats only for another.


PAU. What other?


PAU. sings "Never 'till now I felt love's dart --
"Guess who it was that stole my heart,
"'It Was only you, if you will believe me!" These lines were introduced by Mrs.
Esten. -- She sings them without instruments, and they are always followed by
rapturous applause.


IBRA. O thou enchantress! [Starting back.] Thou wife of Orloff! thou have my
soul in chains -- drag it not to perdition!


PAU. Why should you call me wife of Orloff? Oh, forgive me if I speak too
plain -- My heart, my whole heart is yours. You have awakened its first tender
thought, and you shall fill it to the last! There can be no other.


IBRA. Nay then, farewell to every dread! Though hell should gape beneath my feet,
I shrink not. -- Rush on my soul, ALMIGHTY LOVE! absorb each faculty and
thought, for I am thine! -- [ turning to PAU.] -- for I am thine! [Throws
himself prone; then rises and clasps her.] Transcendent moment! O, bliss too
exquisite!


ORLOFF. [Rushes in] Base woman! adulterous villain! [ Presents a dagger to
IBRAHIM's breast.]


PAULINA shrieks and runs off. IBRA. Hah! [wrests the dagger] my life attacked
-- Ho! slaves! [Slaves rush in from various wings.] Twice today! Once in the
bosom of my harem, and now in the sacred walks of my garden -- Seize him [ to
the slaves, who obey]. Thy death shall expiate thy double crime.


ORLOFF. Do think to give me terror? -- I welcome death -- I welcome it
'midst tortures!


IBRA. Christian, thou know me not! Whilst left to myself, I could command
myself! My ardent passions I could hold in chains, and suppress that love which
honor could not sanction -- But thou shall know when thus opposed, I own no law
but will -- drag him away. Exit.


ORLOFF. Tyrant, I know that I shall die; but the bitterness of death is past
-- To live after having seen my wife embrace thee, and embraced -- Oh madness!
speed your death, I rush to meet it.


Exeunt. SCENE The Prison.
Enter ALEXINA through the Flat. ALEX. Surely this is the darkest hour of the
night! The dim light my solitary window afforded has long been past, and gloom
and silence every where prevail. No sound, no footstep, no voice of soft
consoling love, or weeping friendship. Can I be her whom the beamy fingered
morn, till lately, ever roused to joy? I, her who not a short hour since glowed
with delight -- whose troubled sky felicity and freedom began to gild? Oh, the
reverse is too deep, too direful!

Voices [without] This way -- make sure the outer gate.


ALEX. Hah! slaves and lights! perhaps they come to end my wretched being --
Ah! nature shrinks at the idea, and whilst I almost dread to live, I fly from
death, by impulse irresistible!


Exit hastily through the flat. [ORLOFF is brought in by slaves.] SLAVE. There,
Sir! Here you must stay till our master has determined on the sort of death
you are to die, for we have great variety in this country. This bowstring is
the easiest you can hope for. We'll leave you a lamp though, to show the
apartments, and make your last hours a little pleasant -- Wish your honor a
good night. Exeunt slaves.


ORLOFF. May this hour of bitterness be short! Here, on the flinty earth I Will
pass it, and give to thee -- despair! the fleeting moments that remain.


Throws himself on the ground. ALEXINA enters, fearful, from the flatt. ALEX.
What wretch can he be, who, in this dreary place, is the victim of tyranny and
despotism? [Advancing, and looking over him.] By every sacred power it is my
husband! Orloff -- [seizing his hand] my Orloff! [He starts up, throws her off,
and flies to the opposite side.] Do thou distrust thy senses? It is thy
Alexina -- thy wretched -- happy Alexina!


ORLOFF. Abandoned woman! do thou follow me to my prison to insult my last
moments? Or do thou come to administer the bowl of death?


ALEX. Heavens! what mean you? ( rushing toward him with open arms.)


ORLOFF. Nay, touch me not -- By heaven, rather than be enfolded in thy
adulterous embrace, I Will -- [draws a dagger] O, my thoughts are desperate!
Avoid me if thou would live.


ALEX. Alas! affliction has made him mad.


ORLOFF. Oh! [flings away the dagger.]


ALEX. Or if thou art not mad, to threaten death is needless. Be witness for
me, ye celestial spirits, that I Will not live an instant to endure a husband's
hate -- All other miseries I Have borne, but this last subdues me. [snatches up
the dagger] Thou accusest me of crimes I shudder at -- Orloff, an adultress
would not dare this blow.


ORLOFF. [springs forward, and seizes her arm] Die! Yes, thou ought to die;
but let my fate come first -- It lingers not -- its ministers are at hand!
[gazing on her] O, had I not seen thee in his arms, had I not heard thy vows of
never-ending love to the tyrant.


ALEX. [Interrupting eagerly.] My vows! ah, my Orloff, a beam of radiance once
more breaks in on my afflicted soul. I have never seen the Bassa -- Nay, look
not thus incredulous -- this dungeon proves it -- I am a prisoner here as well
as you, and was this day brought hither.


ORLOFF. [Gazing wildly.] Oh fate, spare me a moment! Scarcely dare I give way
to the overpowering thought! yet it must be so! It was not thee, my heaven!
whom I beheld in Ibrahim's arms -- No, it was another, and Alexina's pure!


ALEX. As pure as at that sacred hour, when at the altar you received my virgin
vows; and heaven is witness, that this form has never been pressed in any arms
but thine.


ORLOFF. [Clasping her.] Then art thou dearer in these prison walls, dearer in
this thy faded beauty, than when a blaze of charms o'erpower'd my senses,
beneath the haughty dome where first I wooed thee.


ALEX. How matchless is the power of virtuous love! Having thus seen thee,
having thus once again been pressed to thy fond bosom, I am prepared for death.


ORLOFF. Behold! they mean that we should die together -- The ministers of
death are entering.


Going toward the wing. MUS. [Without.] Make fast the outer gate -- bring him
along. [ Entering. Slaves bring in AZIM, in chains; they are followed by
LAURETTA, FATIMA, and females; male slaves bearing torches.] I thought we
should nick you at last. The lime twigs which you have been so busily spreading
for another, have at length entangled thyself.


LAUR. Yes, my friend Azim; I promised you a set down, and now I think you will
have it. Joy -- joy to Alexina!


MUS. To Alexina and her lord.


ORLOFF. Ah! what mean ye? A tide of bliss breaks in upon my soul, which yet I
dare not yield to.


LAUR. Fear not to trust it! Our master has heard from Paulina your touching
story, and has sent us to conduct you to his presence.


MUS. Go, Madam! and make room for your persecutor Azim; -- he shall take your
place here.


ALEX. Farewell -- farewell, ye dreary walls! We fly to light, to liberty --


ORLOFF. To love!


Exit, leading ALEXINA, followed by part of the slaves. MUS. [To Azim.] Why you
look a little strange; -- pray make free, Sir; you are as welcome as though you
were at home. [Bowing ludicrously.]


LAUR. Come, hold up your head, man! and look round your new apartments.
Examine the furniture -- is it not elegant! Look through its spacious windows
-- are you not charmed with the prospect? Thou monster! to this dreary abode
thou would have consigned innocence and virtue.


AZIM. O, that those cursed chains were off! -- I to be imprisoned in a dungeon!


MUS. Come, come -- a few weeks spent here will quiet you a little. I have
heard every thing from your accomplice there. Your sorrows will not be half so
violent a fortnight hence, as they are now -- let that comfort ye.


AZIM. [Furiously.] Dogs!


MUS. Be civil, and I Will permit thee to use the apartment next to this -- its
last inhabitant had it fourteen years. you know. [Tauntingly.] Nay, it is in
vain to struggle, drag him in! Exit.


[ Slaves drag AZIM in; the door is shut.] LAUR. Ah! he is caught at last. [Runs
up to the door.] Good night, my pretty Azim. [He rattles his chains.] Good
night -- I Will give ye a friendly call once a month or so, for the next ten
years. [He rattles.] Farewell -- pleasant fancies hang about your dreams! [
Exit, followed by the slaves with torches; AZIM rattling his chains within.]


SCENE, The Bassa's Apartment.
Enter IBRAHIM at top, leading PAULINA. IBRA. O, adored Paulina! what wonderful
events are these! Thou may be mine! it is no crime to love thee. I have
struggled against a passion which heaven had determined to reward.


PAU. It blesses my heart to see you so happy! And shall my father and brother
be released from slavery -- shall they witness my happiness?


IBRA. They shall partake it. Riches and honor await those so dear to thee.
Lo! they are here.


The father and son are introduced. PAU. O, my dear father! Peter! what a day
this has been! Here am I going to be a great lady, and not the handmaid of a
Jew, as you told me this morning. [To her father.]


FATHER. My dear child, I cannot speak for joy. Say something for us to the
Bassa -- we shrink before him.


ALEX. [Without.] Hasten! -- O, my Orloff, let us hasten to his presence.
[Entering.] Mighty Ibrahim, I no longer tremble to appear before thee; -- in
the presence of my husband, I dare to look upon thee, and to ask thy mercy.


IBRA. Mercy! how poor the word! I give ye instant liberty, and in giving ye
that, I give ALL, for ye love! What then remains to perfect your bliss!


ORLOFF. Hear thou, ALEXINA? Ah! what sounds -- they rush upon my soul in
transport.


IBRA. Valiant Russian, I embrace thee! The poniard you directed to my breast,
had it entered there, would have pierced a heart, which, amidst the
turbulencies of war, and the infatuations of a court, has yet preserved its OWN
RESPECT; -- accept its friendship!


ORLOFF. With earnestness unspeakable; and I return it with such gratitude and
fervor, as becomes a soldier and a husband.


IBRA. Such charms, I could not have beheld insensibly, [to Alexina] had I
known them before Paulina engrossed my heart -- but now, that heart can beat
for her alone. Tomorrow you shall be escorted to your camp, and I, to give
that dignity to love, without which it sinks into lowest appetite, will make
this charmer mine, by sacred rites.


ORLOFF. Illustrious Turk! Love has taught thee to revere marriage, and
marriage shall teach thee to honor love.


A LA GR. Why what ups and downs there are in this world! My lord, [to Orloff]
I am once again your most duteous servant -- for fellow slaves, I perceive, we
shall be no longer -- So there goes my dignity! I Will make a bold push for a new
one though. Azim, I find -- pardon me, my lord, [to Ibrahim] Azim, I find, is
out of place, will your mightiness bestow it on me, and make me your principal
slavedriver?


IBRA. [Laughing.] What would thou do?


A LA GR. Any thing, and every thing. I Would imitate the smack of Azim's whip, and
roll my eyes as he does, to frighten your male slaves, and transform myself
into a satin seat, with a canopy over my head, to amuse your female slaves.


IBRA. Transform thyself into a satin seat, with a canopy over thy head --
thou art bewildered. [To Alexina.] Pronounce, Madam, the fate of the profligate
slave, whose villainy had nearly brought about such disastrous events -- Shall
he perish?


ALEX. Ah, in this hour of felicity, let nothing perish but misfortune! Be the
benevolent Mustapha rewarded, and let Azim have frank forgiveness.


IBRA. Charming magnanimity! if it flows from your CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES, such
doctrines must be RIGHT, and I will closely study them.


ALEX. [Stepping forward.] And may our errors have frank forgiveness too!
Bestow on us your favor, and make the DAY IN TURKEY one of the happiest of
this happy season!


THE END.
EPILOGUE.
WRITTEN BY MRS. COWLEY.
SPOKEN BY MRS. POPE. ESCAPED from Turkey, and from prison free,
Yet still a SLAVE you shall behold in me;
An English slave -- slave to your every pleasure,
Seeking your plaudits as her richest treasure.
Whilst thus you feast with cheering praise my ear,
For our soft poet I confess some fear.
Perhaps you will say, -- "Two marriages for love!
"Thus foolish female pens for ever rove;
"But give us, Madam, give us, real life,
"Who goes to Turkey pray, to fetch a wife?"
Critic! a few months past I would allow
Your comment just, but not, Sir Surly, now!
For now we know A PRINCE can cross the seas
TO obtain a wife, a nation's hearts to please.
" The age of chivalry" again returns,
And love, with all its ancient splendour burns;
Yes --
Tell the rapt Orator whose magic pen
So late chastised the new found rights of men --
Who feared that honor, courage, love were lost,
And Europe's glories in the whirlwind tossed;
Tell him " heroic enterprise" shall still survive,
And " loyalty to sex" remain alive;
" The unbrought grace of life" again we find,
And " proud submission" fills the public mind;
Toward her, now borne to BRITAIN's happy coast --
A husband's honor, and a nation's boast.
" Just lighted on this orb the vision shines
" Scarce seems to touch," and as it moves, refines!
O, may she long adorn this chosen isle,
Where the best gifts of fate unceasing smile!
When, " like the morning star" at wondrous height,
She soars at length beyond this world and night,
Still may your blessings to her name be given,
While soft she fades into her native heaven!
THOSE who read will know, that in the above Epilogue all the passages
distinguished by italics are taken from an effusion inspired by another royal
lady; -- agitating the lightning pen of a man who in his head is all REASON, in
his heart all SENSATION. A man whom politics seized, and seems to have dragged
reluctantly from LOVE. Let the women of future times weave to his memory the
fairest garlands, and twine amidst laurels and roses the name of BURKE.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE SOPHA.
THE canopy is composed of two umbrellas of white satin, or stuff; the upper
one very small, each trimmed with gold fringe, festoons of flowers, and
tassels. The covering for the stool, of the same materials, is made in the form
of a hammer cloth; a white satin mattress is laid on it, trimmed with gold
fringe.

LIST OF MRS. COWLEY'S WORKS: TO BE HAD OF MESSRS. ROBINSONS, IN
PATERNOSTER-ROW.
DRAMAS.
THE RUNAWAY. Comedy. ALBINA. Tragedy. WHO IS THE DUPE? Farce. BELLE'S
STRATAGEM. Comedy. WHICH IS THE MAN? Comedy. BOLD STROKE FOR A HUSBAND. Comedy.
MORE WAYS THAN ONE. Comedy. SCHOOL FOR GREYBEARDS. Comedy. THE FATE OF SPARTA.
Tragedy.
POETRY.
MAID OF ARRAGON. SCOTTISH VILLAGE.
POETRY OF ANNA MATILDA; To which is subjoined, the DIARY OF SIR WILLIAM
WALLER; STYLED RECOLLECTIONS; GENERAL IN THE PARLIAMENT ARMY.

BELL.


