GRAY'S POEMS.

POEMS BY Mr. GRAY. A NEW EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall. M DCC LXVIII.

ODE ON THE SPRING.
ODE.
LO! where the rosy-bosom'd Hours,
Fair VENUS' train appear,
Disclose the long-expecting flowers,
And wake the purple year!
The Attic warbler pours her throat,
Responsive to the cuckow's note,
The untaught harmony of spring:
While whispering pleasure as they fly,
Cool Zephyrs through the clear blue sky
Their gathered fragrance fling.
Wherever the oak's thick branches stretch
A broader browner shade;
Wherever the rude and moss-grown beech
O'er-canopies the glade -- a bank
O'er-canopied with luscious woodbine.
Shakesp. Mids. Night's Dream.
,
Beside some water's rushy brink
With me the Muse shall sit, and think
(At ease reclined in rustic state)
How vain the ardour of the Crowd,
How low, how little are the Proud,
How indigent the Great!
Still is the toiling hand of Care.
The panting herds repose:
Yet hark, how through the peopled air
The busy murmur glows!
The infect youth are on the wing,
Eager to taste the honied spring,
And float amid the liquid noon "Nare per aestatem liquidam -- " Virgil. Georg.
lib. 4.

:
Some lightly over the current skim,
Some show their gayly-gilded trim
Quick-glancing to the sun -- sporting with quick glance
Show to the sun their waved coats dropped with gold.
Milton's Paradise Lost, book 7.
.
To Contemplation's sober eye While insects from the threshold preach, etc.
M. GREEN, in the Grotto. Dodsley's Miscellanies, Vol. V. p. 161.

Such is the race of Man:
And they that creep, and they that fly,
Shall end where they began.
Alike the Busy and the Gay
But flutter through life's little day,
In fortune's varying colors dressed:
Brushed by the hand of rough Mischance,
Or chilled by age, their airy dance
They leave, in dust to rest.
Methinks I hear in accents low
The sportive kind reply:
Poor moralist! and what art thou?
A solitary fly!
Thy Joys no glittering female meets,
No hive have thou of hoarded sweets,
No painted plumage to display:
On hasty wings thy youth is flown;
Thy sun is set, thy spring is gone --
We frolic, while it is May.
ON THE DEATH OF A FAVORITE CAT, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes.
ON THE DEATH OF A FAVORITE CAT, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes.
'T WAS on a lofty vase's side,
Where China's gayest art had died
The azure flowers, that blow;
Demurest of the tabby kind,
The pensive Selima reclined,
Gazed on the lake below.
Her conscious tail her joy declared;
The fair round face, the snowy beard,
The velvet of her paws,
Her coat, that with the tortoise vies,
Her ears of jet, and emerald eyes,
She saw; and purr'd applause.
Still had she gazed; but 'midst the tide
Two angel forms were seen to glide,
The Genii of the stream:
Their scaly armour's Tyrian hue
Through richest purple to the view
Betrayed a golden gleam.
The hapless Nymph with wonder saw:
A whisker first and then a claw,
With many an ardent wish,
She stretched in vain to reach the prize.
What female heart can gold despise?
What Cat's averse to fish?
Presumptuous Maid! with looks intent
Again she stretched, again she bent,
Nor knew the gulf between.
(Malignant Fate sat by, and smiled)
The slippery verge her feet beguiled,
She tumbled headlong in.
Eight times emerging from the flood
She mewed to every watery God,
Some speedy aid to send.
No Dolphin came, no Nereid stirred:
Nor cruel Tom, nor Susan heard.
A Favorite has no friend!
From hence, ye Beauties, undeceived,
Know, one false step is never retrieved,
And be with caution bold.
Not all that tempts your wandering eyes
And heedless hearts, is lawful prize;
Nor all, that glisters, gold.
ODE ON A DISTANT PROSPECT OF ETON COLLEGE.
(...). MENANDER.
ON A DISTANT PROSPECT OF ETON COLLEGE.
YE distant spires, ye antique towers,
That crown the watery glade,
Where grateful Science still adores
Her HENRY'S King HENRY the Sixth, Founder of the College.
holy Shade;
And ye, that from the stately brow
Of WINDSOR'S heights the expanse below
Of grove, of lawn, of mead survey,
Whose turf, whose shade, whose flowers among
Wanders the hoary Thames along
His silver-winding way.
Ah happy hills, ah pleasing shade,
Ah fields beloved in vain,
Where once my careless childhood strayed,
A stranger yet to pain!
I feel the gales, that from ye blow,
A momentary bliss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing,
My weary soul they seem to sooth,
And, And bees their honey redolent of spring.
Dryden's Fable on the Pythag. System.
redolent of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring.
Say, Father THAMES, for thou have seen
Full many a sprightly race
Disporting on thy margent green
The paths of pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant arm thy glassy wave?
The captive linnet which enthrall?
What idle progeny succeed
To chase the rolling circle's speed,
Or urge the flying ball?
While some on earnest business bent
Their murmuring labors ply
Against graver hours, that bring constraint
To sweeten liberty:
Some bold adventurers disdain
The limits of their little reign,
And unknown regions dare descry:
Still as they run they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind,
And snatch a fearful joy.
Gay hope is theirs by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when possessed;
The tear forgot as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast:
Theirs buxom health of rosy hue,
Wild wit, invention ever-new,
And lively cheer of vigor born;
The thoughtless day, the easy night,
The spirits pure, the slumbers light,
That fly the approach of morn.
Alas, regardless of their doom,
The little victims play!
No sense have they of ills to come,
Nor care beyond today:
Yet see how all around 'em wait
The Ministers of human fate,
And black Misfortune's baleful train!
Ah, show them where in ambush stand
To seize their prey the murderous band!
Ah, tell them, they are men!
These shall the fury Passions tear,
The vulturs of the mind,
Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear,
And Shame that sculks behind;
Or pineing Love shall waste their youth,
Or Jealousy with rankling tooth,
That inly gnaws the secret heart,
And Envy wan, and faded Care,
Grim-visag'd comfortless Despair,
And Sorrow's piercing dart.
Ambition this shall tempt to rise,
Then whirl the wretch from high,
To bitter Scorn a sacrifice,
And grinning Infamy,
The stings of Falsehood those shall try,
And hard Unkindness' altered eye,
That mocks the tear it forced to flow;
And keen Remorse with blood defiled,
And moody Madness -- Madness laughing in his ireful mood.
Dryden's Fable of Palamon and Arcitc.
laughing wild
Amid severest woe.
Lo, in the vale of years beneath
A griesly troop are seen,
The painful family of Death,
More hideous than their Queen:
This racks the joints, this fires the veins,
That every laboring finew strains,
Those in the deeper vitals rage:
Lo, Poverty, to fill the band,
That numbs the soul with icy hand,
And slow-consuming Age.
To each his sufferings: all are men,
Condemned alike to groan;
The tender for another's pain,
The unfeeling for his own.
Yet ah! why should they know their fate?
Since sorrow never comes too late,
And happiness too swiftly flies.
Thought would destroy their paradise.
No more; where ignorance is bliss,
It Is folly to be wise.
HYMN TO ADVERSITY.
(...) --. AESCHYLUS, in Agamemnone.
HYMN TO ADVERSITY.
DAUGHTER of JOVE, relentless Power,
Thou Tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and torturing hour,
The Bad affright, afflict the Best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain
The Proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple Tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy Sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling Child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly Birth,
And bad to form her infant mind.
Stern rugged Nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore:
What sorrow was, thou bad'st her know,
And from her own she learned to melt at others' woe.
Scared at thy frown terrific, fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse, and with them go
The summer Friend, the flattering Foe;
By vain Prosperity received,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom in sable garb arrayed
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid
With leaden eye, that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend:
Warm Charity, the general Friend,
With Justice to herself severe,
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh, gently on thy Suppliant's head,
Dread Goddess, lay thy chast'ning hand!
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful Band
(As by the Impious thou art seen)
With thundering voice, and threatening mien,
With screaming Horror's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, oh Goddess, wear,
Thy milder influence impart,
Thy philosophic Train be there
To soften, not to wound my heart.
The generous spark extinct revive,
Teach me to love and to forgive,
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are, to feel, and know myself a Man.
THE PROGRESS of POESY. A PINDARIC ODE.
(...)
(...)
PINDAR, Olymp. II.
ADVERTISEMENT.
When the Author first published this and the following Ode, he was advised,
even by his Friends, to subjoin some few explanatory Notes; but had too much
respect for the understanding of his Readers to take that liberty.

THE PROGRESS of POESY. A PINDARIC ODE.
I. i.
Awake, my glory: awake, lute and harp.
David's Psalms. Pindar styles his own poetry with its musical accompanyments,
(...) Aeolian song, Aeolian strings, the breath of the Aeolian flute.

The subject and simile, as usual with. Pindar, are united. The various sources
of poetry, which gives life and luster to all it touches, are here described;
its quiet majestic progress enriching every subject (otherwise dry and barren)
with a pomp of diction and luxuriant harmony of numbers; and its more rapid and
iresistible course, when swollen and hurried away by the conflict of tumultuous
passions.


A WAKE, Aeolian lyre, awake,
And give to rapture all thy trembling strings.
From Helicon's harmonious springs
A thousand rills their mazy progress take:
The laughing flowers, that round them blow,
Drink life and fragrance as they flow.
Now the rich stream of music winds along
Deep, majestic, smooth, and strong,
Through verdant vales, and Ceres' golden reign:
Now rolling down the steep amain,
Headlong, impetuous, see it pour:
The rocks, and nodding groves rebellow to the roar.
I. 2.
Power of harmony to calm the turbulent sallies of the soul. The thoughts are
borrowed from the first Pythian of Pindar.
Oh! Sovereign of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs,
Enchanting shell! the sullen Cares,
And frantic Passions hear thy soft control.
On Thracia's hills the Lord of War,
Has curbed the fury of his car,
And dropped his thirsty lance at thy command.
This is a weak imitation of some incomparable lines in the same Ode.
Perching on the scept'red hand
Of Jove, thy magic lulls the feathered king
With ruffled plumes, and flagging wing:
Quenched in dark clouds of flumber lie
The terror of his beak, and lightenings of his eye.
I. 3.
Power of harmony to produce all the graces of motion in the body.
Thee the voice, the dance, obey,
Tempered to thy warbled lay.
Over Idalia's velvet-green
The rosy-crowned Loves are seen
On Cytherea's day
With antic sports, and blue-eyed Pleasures,
Frisking light in frolic measures;
Now pursuing, now retreating,
Now in circling troops they meet:
To brisk notes in cadence beating
(...)
HOMER. Od, O.
Glance their many-twinkling feet.
Slow melting strains their Queen's approach declare:
Wherever she turns the Graces homage pay.
With arms sublime, that float upon the air,
In gliding state she wins her easy way:
Over her warm cheek, and rising bosom, move
(...)
(...)
PHRYNICHUS, apud Athenaeum.
The bloom of young Desire, and purple light of Love.
II. i.
To compensate the real and imaginary ills of life, the Muse was given to
Mankind by the same Providence that sends the Day by its cheerful presence to
dispel the gloom and terrors of the Night.
Man's feeble race what Ills await,
Labor, and Penury, the racks of Pain,
Disease, and Sorrow's weeping train,
And Death, sad refuge from the storms of Fate!
The fond complaint, my Song, disprove,
And justify the laws of Jove.
Say, has he given in vain the heavenly Muse?
Night, and all her sickly dews,
Her Specter wan, and Birds of boding cry,
He gives to range the dreary sky:
Or seen the Morning's well-appointed Star
Come marching up the eastern hills afar.
Cowley.
Till down the eastern cliffs afar
Hyperion's march they spy, and glittering shafts of war.
II. 2.
Extensive influence of poetic Genius over the remotest and most uncivilized
nations: its connection with liberty, and the virtues that naturally attend on
it. [See the Erse, Norwegian, and Welsh Fragments, the Lapland and American
songs.]
In climes beyond the solar "Extra anni solis:que vias"
Virgil. "Tutta lontana dal eamin del sole."
Petrarch, Canzon 2.
road,
Where shaggy forms over ice-built mountains roam,
The Muse has broke the twilight-gloom
To cheer the swv'ring Native's dull abode.
And often, beneath the odorous shade
Of Chili's boundless forests laid,
She deigns to hear the savage Youth repeat
In loose numbers wildly sweet
Their feather-cinctured Chiefs, and dusky Loves.
Her track, wherever the Goddess roves,
Glory pursue, and generous Shame,
The unconquerable Mind, and Freedom's holy flame.
II. 3.
Progress of Poetry from Greece to Italy, and from Italy to England, Chaucer
was not unacquainted with the writings of Dante or of Petrarch. The Earl of
Surrey and Sir Tho. Wyatt had traveled in Italy, and formed their taste there;
Spenser imitated the Italian writers; Milton improved on them: but this School
expired soon after the Restoration, and a new one arose on the French model,
which has subsisted ever since.
Woods, that wave over Delphi's steep,
Isles, that crown the Aegean deep,
Fields, that cool Ilissus laves,
Or where MAeander's amber waves
In lingering Lab'rinths creep,
How do your tuneful Echo's languish,
Mute, but to the voice of Anguish?
Where each old poetic Mountain
Inspiration breathed around:
Every shade and hallowed Fountain
Murmured deep a solemn sound:
Till the sad Nine in Greece's evil hour
Left their Parnassus for the Latian plains.
Alike they scorn the pomp of tyrant-Power,
And coward Vice, that revels in her chains.
When Latium had her lofty spirit lost,
They sought, oh Albion! next thy sea-encircled coast.
III. I.
Far from the sun and summer-gale,
In thy green lap was Nature's Shakespeare.
Darling laid,
What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
To Him the mighty Mother did unveil
Her aweful face: The dauntless Child
Stretched forth his little arms, and smiled.
This pencil take (she said) whose colors clear
Richly paint the vernal year:
Thine too these golden keys, immortal Boy!
This can unlock the gates of Joy;
Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
Or open the sacred source of sympathetic Tears.
III. 2.
Nor second He Milton.
, that rode sublime
Upon the seraph-wings of Ecstasy,
The secrets of the Abyss to spy.
" -- flammantia moenia mundi." Lucretius.
He passed the flaming bounds of Place and Time:
For the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels -- And above the
firmament, that was over their heads, was the likeness of a throne, as the
appearance of a saphire-stone. -- This was the appearance of the glory of the
Lord. Ezekiel i. 20, 26, 28.
The living Throne, the saphire-blaze,
Where Angels tremble, while they gaze,
He saw; but blasted with excess of light,
(...) HOMER. Od.
Closed his eyes in endless night.
Behold, where Dryden's less presumptuous car,
Wide over the fields of Glory bear
Meant to express the stately march and sounding energy of Dryden's rhimes.
Two Coursers of ethereal race,
Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? Job.
With necks in thunder clothed, and long-resounding pace.
III. 3.
Hark, his hands the iyte explore!
Bright-eyed Fancy hovering over
Scatters from her pictured urn
Words, that weep, and tears, that speak. Cowley.
Thoughts, that breath, and words, that burn.
We have had in our language no other odes of the sublime kind, than that of
Dryden on St. Cecilia's day: for Cowley (who had his merit) yet wanted
judgment, style, and harmony, for such a task. That of Pope is not worthy of so
great a man. Mr. Mason indeed of late days has touched the true chords, and
with a masterly hand, in some of his Choruses, -- above all in the last of
Caractacus,

Hark! heard ye not yon footstep dread? etc.


But ah! it is heard no more --
Oh! Lyre divine, what daring Spirit
Wakes thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride, nor ample pinion,
(...) Olymp. 2. Pindar compares himself to that bird, and his enemies to
ravens that croak and clamor in vain below, while it pursues its flight,
regardless of their noise.
That the Theban Eagle bear
Sailing with supreme dominion
Through the azure deep of air:
Yet often before his infant eyes would run
Such forms, as glitter in the Muse's ray
With orient hues, unborrow'd of the Sun:
Yet shall he mount, and keep his distant way
Beyond the limits of a vulgar fate,
Beneath the Good how far -- but far above the Great.
THE BARD. A PINDARIC ODE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The following Ode is founded on a Tradition current in Wales, that EDWARD THE
FIRST, when he completed the conquest of that country, ordered all the Bards,
that fell into his hands, to be put to death.

THE BARD. A PINDARIC ODE.
I. I.
'RUIN seize thee, ruthless King!
'Confusion on thy banners wait,
'Tho' fanned by Conquest's crimson wing
' Mocking the air with colors idly spread,
Shakespeare's King John.
They mock the air with idle state.
' Helm, nor The Hauberk was a texture of steel ringlets, or rings interwoven,
forming a coat of mail, that sat close to the body, and adapted itself to
every motion.
Hauberk's twisted mail,
'Nor even thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail
'To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
'From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears!'
Such were the sounds, that over the -- The crested adder's pride. Dryden's
Indian Queen.
crested pride
Of the first Edward scattered wild dismay,
As down the steep of Snowdon was a name given by the Saxons to that
mountainous tract, which the Welsh themselves call Cragian-eryri: it included
all the highlands of Caernarvonshire and Merionethsire, as far east as the
river Conway. R. Hygden speaking of the castle of Conway built by King Edward
the first, says, "Ad ortum amnis Conway ad clivum montis Erery;" and Matthew of
Westminster, (ad ann. 1283,) "Apud Aberconway ad pedes montis Snowdoniae fecit
erigi castrum forte."
Snowdon's shaggy side
He wound with toilsome march his long array.
Stout Gilbert de Clare, surnamed the Red, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford,
son-in-law to King Edward.
Glo'ster stood aghast in speechless trance:
To arms! cried Edmond de Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore.

They both were Lords-Marchers, whose lands lay on the borders of Wales, and
probably accompanied the King in this expedition.


Mortimer, and couched his quivering lance.
I. 2.
On a rock, whose haughty brow
Frowns over old Conway's foaming flood,
Robed in the sable garb of woe,
With haggard eyes the Poet stood;
( The image was taken from a well-known picture of Raphael, representing the
Supreme Being in the vision of Ezekiel: there are two of these paintings (both
believed original), one at Florence, the other at Paris.
Loose his beard, and hoary hair
Shone, like a meteor, streaming to the wind.
Milton's Paradise Lost.
Streamed, like a meteor, to the troubled air)
And with a Master's hand, and Prophet's fire,
Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
'Hark, how each giant-oak, and desert cave,
'Sighs to the torrent's aweful voice beneath!
'O'er thee, oh King! their hundred arms they wave,
'Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breath;
'Vocal no more, since Cambria's fatal day,
'To highborn Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellyn's lay.'
I. 3.
'Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
'That hushed the stormy main:
'Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed:
'Mountains, ye mourn in vain
'Modred, whose magic song
'Made huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-top'd head.
The shores of Caernarvonshire opposite to the isle of Anglesey.
'On dreary Arvon's shore they lie,
'Smear'd with gore, and ghastly pale:
'Far, far aloof the affrighted ravens sail;
The famished Cambden and others observe, that eagles used annually to build
their aerie among the rocks of Snowdon, which from thence (as some think) were
named by the Welsh Craigian-eryri, or the crags of the eagles. At this day (I
am told) the highest point of Snowdon is called the eagle's nest. That bird is
certainly no stranger to this island, as the Scots, and the people of
Cumberland, Westmoreland, etc. can testify: it even has built its nest in the
Peak of Derbyshire. [See Willoughby's Ornithol. published by Ray.]
Eagle screams, and passes by.
'Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops,
That visit my sad heart --
Shakesp. Jul. Caesar.
'Dear, as the light that visits these sad eyes,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops,
That visit my sad heart --
Shakesp. Jul. Caesar,
'Dear, as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
'Ye died amidst your dying country's cries --
'No more I weep. They do not sleep.
'On yonder cliffs, a griesly band,
'I see them sit, they linger yet,
'Avengers of their native land:
'With me in dreadful harmony See the Norwegian Ode, that follows.
they join,
'And See the Norwegian Ode, that follows.
weave with bloody hands the tissue of thy line.'
II. 1.
"Weave the warp, and weave the woof,
"The winding sheet of Edward's race.
"Give ample room, and verge enough
"The characters of hell to trace.
"Mark the year, and mark the night,
Edward the Second, cruelly butchered in Berkley-Castle.
"When Severn shall re-eccho with affright
"The shrieks of death, through Berkley's roofs that ring,
"Shrieks of an agonizing King!
Isabel of France, Edward the Second's adulterous Queen.
"She-Wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
"That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled Mate,
Triumphs of Edward the Third in France.
"From thee be born, who over thy country hangs
"The scourge of Heaven. What Terrors round him wait!
"Amazement in his van, with Flight combined,
"And sorrow's faded form, and solitude behind."
II. 2.
"Mighty Victor, mighty Lord,
Death of that King, abandoned by his Children, and even robbed in his last
moments by his Courtiers and his Mistress.
"Low on his funeral couch he lies!
"No pitying heart, no eye, afford
"A tear to grace his obsequies.
"Is the sable Edward, the Black Prince, dead some time before his Father.
Warrior fled?
"Thy son is gone. He rests among the Dead.
"The Swarm, that in thy noontide beam were born?
"Gone to salute the rising Morn.
"Fair Magnificence of Richard the Second's reign. See Froissard, and other
contemporary Writers.
laughs the Morn, and soft the Zephyr blows,
"While proudly riding over the azure realm
"In gallant trim the gilded Vessel goes;
"Youth on the prow, and Pleasure at the helm;
"Regardless of the sweeping Whirlwind's sway,
"That, hushed in grim repose, expects his evening-prey.'
II. 3.
Richard the Second, (as we are told by Archbishop Scroop and the confederate
Lords in their manifesto, by Thomas of Walsingham, and all the older Writers)
was starved to death. The story of his assassination by Sir Piers of Exon, is
of much later date.
"Fill high the sparkling bowl,
"The rich repast prepare,
"Reft of a crown, he yet may share the feast:
"Close by the regal chair
"Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
"A baleful smile upon their baffled Guest.
"Heard ye the din of Ruinous civil wars of York and Lancaster.
battle bray,
"Lance to lance, and horse to horse?
"Long Years of havoc urge their destined course,
"And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.
"Ye Towers of Julius Henry the Sixth, George Duke of Clarence, Edward the
Fifth, Richard Duke of York, etc. believed to be murdered secretly in the
Tower of London. The oldest part of that structure is vulgarly attributed to
Julius Caesar.
, London's lasting shame,
"With many a foul and midnight murder fed,
"Revere his Margaret of Anjou, a woman of heroic spirit, who struggled hard to
save her Husband and her Crown.
Consort's faith, his Father's Henry the Fifth.
fame,
"And spare the meek Henry the Sixth very near being canonized. The line of
Lancaster had no right of inheritance to the Crown.
Usurper's holy head.
"Above, below, the The white and red roses, devices of York and Lancaster.
rose of snow,
"Twined with her blushing foe, we spread:
"The bristled The silver Boar was the badge of Richard the Third; whence he
was usually known in his own time by the name of the Boar.
Boar in infant-gore
"Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
"Now, Brothers, bending over the accursed loom
"Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom."
III. 1.
"Edward, lo! to sudden fate
"(Weave we the woof. The thread is spun)
Eleanor of Castile died a few years after the conquest of Wales. The heroic
proof she gave of her affection for her Lord is well known. The monuments of
his regret, and sorrow for the loss of her, are still to be seen at
Northampton, Geddington, Waltham, and other places.
Half of thy heart we consecrate.
"(The web is wove. The work is done."
'Stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
'Leave me unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn:
'In yon bright track, that fires the western skies,
'They melt, they vanish from my eyes.
'But oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon's height
'Descending slow their glittering skirts unroll?
'Visions of glory, spare my aching sight,
'Ye unborn Ages, crowd not on my soul!
'No more our long-lost It was the common belief of the Welsh nation, that King
Arthur was still alive in Fairy-Land, and should return again to reign over
Britain.
Arthur we bewail.
'All-hail, Both Merlin and Taliessin had prophesied, that the Welsh should
regain their sovereignty over this island; which seemed to be accomplished in
the House of Tudor.
ye genuine Kings, Britannia's Issue, hail!'
III. 2.
'Girt with many a Baron bold
'Sublime their starry fronts they rear;
'And gorgeous Dames, and Statesmen old
'In bearded majesty, appear.
'In the midst a Form divine!
'Her eye proclaims her of the Briton-Line;
'Her lyon-port Speed relating an audience given by Queen Elizabeth to Paul
Dzialinski, Ambassador of Poland, says, 'And thus she, lion-like rising,
daunted the malapert Orator no less with her stately port and majestical
deporture, than with the tartness of her princely checkes.'
, her awe-commanding face,
'Attemper'd sweet to virgin-grace.
'What strings symphonious tremble in the air,
'What strains of vocal transport round her play!
'Hear from the grave, great Taliessin Taliessin, Chief of the Bards,
flourished in the VIth Century. His works are still preserved, and his memory
held in high veneration among his Countrymen.
, hear;
'They breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
'Bright Rapture calls, and soaring, as she sings,
'Waves in the eye of Heaven her many-colour'd wings.'
III. 3.
'The verse adorn again
Fierce wars and faithful loves shall moralize my song.
Spensers Proeme to the Fairy Queen.
'Fierce War, and faithful Love,
'And Truth severe, by fairy Fiction dressed.
'In Shakespeare.
buskined measures move
'Pale Grief, and pleasing Pain,
'With Horror, Tyrant of the throbbing breast.
'A Milton.
Voice, as of the Cherub-Choir,
'Gales from blooming Eden bear;
The succession of Poets after Milton's time.
'And distant warblings lessen on my ear,
'That lost in long futurity expire.
'Fond impious Man, think thou, yon sanguine cloud,
'Rais'd by thy breath, has quenched the Orb of day?
'To-morrow he repairs the golden flood,
'And warms the nations with redoubled ray.
'Enough for me: With joy I see
'The different doom our Fates assign,
'Be thine Despair, and scept'red Care,
'To triumph, and to die, are mine.'
He spoke, and headlong from the mountain's height
Deep in the roaring tide he plunged to endless night.
THE FATAL SISTERS. AN ODE, (From the NORSE-TONGUE,) IN THE ORCADES of
THORMODUS TORFAEUS; HAFNIAE, 1697, Folio: and also in BARTHOLINUS.

VITT ER ORPIT FYRIR VALFALLI, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author once had thoughts (in concert with a Friend) of giving the History
of English Poetry: In the Introduction to it he meant to have produced some
specimens of the Style that reigned in ancient times among the neighboring
nations, or those who had subdued the greater part of this Island, and were our
Progenitors: the following three Imitations made a part of them. He has long
since dropped his design, especially after he had heard, that it was already in
the hands of a Person well qualified to do it justice, both by his taste, and
his researches into antiquity.

PREFACE.
IN the Eleventh Century Sigurd, Earl of the Orkney-Islands, went with a fleet
of ships and a considerable body of troops into Ireland, to the assistance of
Sictryg with the silken beard, who was then making war on his father-in-law
Brian, King of Dublin: the Earl and all his forces were cut to pieces, and
Sictryg was in danger of a total defeat; but the enemy had a greater loss by
the death of Brian, their King, who fell in the action. On Christmas Day, (the
day of the battle,) a Native of Gaithness in Scotland saw at a distance a
number of persons on horseback riding full speed toward a hill, and seeming to
enter into it. Curiosity led him to follow them, till looking through an
opening in the rocks he saw twelve gigantic figures resembling women: they were
all employed about a loom; and as they wove, they sung the following dreadful
Song; which when they had finished, they tore the web into twelve pieces, and
(each taking her portion) galloped Six to the North and as many to the South.

THE FATAL SISTERS. AN ODE.
NOW the storm begins to lower,
(Haste, the loom of Hell prepare,)
How quick they wheeled; and flying, behind them shot
Sharp fleet of arrowy shower --
Milton's Paradise Regained.
Iron-sleet of arrowy shower
The noise of battle hurtled in the air. Shakespeare's Jul. Caesar.
Hurtles in the darkened air. Note -- The Valkyriur were female Divinities,
Servants of Odin (or Woden) in the Gothic mythology. Their name signifies
Chusers of the slain. They were mounted on swift horses, with drawn swords in
their hands; and in the throng of battle selected such as were destined to
(slaughter, and conducted them to Valkalla, the hall of Odin, or paradise of
the Brave; where they attended the banquet, and served the departed Heroes with
horns of mead and ale.

Glittering lances are the loom,
Where the dusky warp we strain,
Weaving many a Soldier's doom,
Orkney's woe, and Randver's bane.
See the griesly texture grow,
('It Is of human entrails made,)
And the weights, that play below,
Each a gasping Warriour's head.
Shafts for shuttles, dipped in gore,
Shoot the trembling cords along.
Sword, that once a Monarch bore,
Keep the tissue close and strong.
Mista black, terrific Maid,
Sangrida, and Hilda see,
Join the wayward work to aid:
It Is the woof of victory.
Ere the ruddy sun be set,
Pikes must shiver, javelins sing,
Blade with clattering buckler meet,
Hauberk crash, and helmet ring.
(Weave the crimson web of war)
Let us go, and let us fly,
Where our Friends the conflict share,
Where they triumph, where they die.
As the paths of fate we tread,
Wading through the ensanguin'd field:
Gondula, and Geira, spread
Over the youthful King your shield.
We the reins to slaughter give,
Ours to kill, and ours to spare:
Spite of danger he shall live.
(Weave the crimson web of war.)
They, whom once the desart-beach
Pent within its bleak domain,
Soon their ample sway shall stretch
Over the plenty of the plain.
Low the dauntless Earl is laid,
Gored with many a gaping wound:
Fate demands a nobler head;
Soon a King shall bite the ground.
Long his loss shall Eirin weep,
Never again his likeness see;
Long her strains in sorrow steep,
Strains of Immortality!
Horror covers all the heath,
Clouds of carnage blot the sun.
Sisters, weave the web of death;
Sisters, cease, the work is done.
Hail the task, and hail the hands!
Songs of joy and triumph sing!
Joy to the victorious bands;
Triumph to the younger King.
Mortal, thou that hear'st the tale,
Learn the tenor of our song.
Scotland, through each winding vale
Far and wide the notes prolong.
Sisters, hence with spurs of speed:
Each her thundering faulchion wield;
Each bestride her sable steed.
Hurry, hurry to the field.
THE DESCENT of ODIN. AN ODE, (From the NORSE-TONGUE,) IN BARTHOLINUS, de
causis contemnendae mortis; HAFNIAE, 1689, Quarto.
UPREIS ODINN ALLDA GAUTR, etc.
THE DESCENT of ODIN, AN ODE.
UP rose the King of Men with speed,
And saddled strait his coal-black steed;
Down the yawning steep he rode,
That leads to Nislheimr, the hell of the Gothic nations, consisted of nine
worlds,to which were devoted all such as died of sickness, old age, or by any
other means than in battle: Over it presided HELA, the Goddess of Death.
HELA'S drear abode.
Him the Dog of Darkness spied,
His shaggy throat he opened wide,
While from his jaws, with carnage filled,
Foam and human gore distilled:
Hoarse he bays with hideous din,
Eyes that glow, and fangs, that grin;
And long pursues, with fruitless yell,
The Father of the powerful spell.
Onward still his way he takes,
(The groaning earth beneath him shakes,)
Till full before his fearless eyes
The portals nine of hell arise.
Right against the eastern gate,
By the moss-grown pile he sat;
Where long of yore to sleep was laid
The dust of the prophetic Maid.
Facing to the northern clime,
Thrice he traced the runic rhyme;
Thrice pronounced, in accents dread,
The thrilling verse that wakes the Dead;
Till from out the hollow ground
Slowly breathed a sullen sound.
PR. What call unknown, what charms presme
To break the quiet of the tomb?
Who thus afflicts my troubled sprite,
And drags me from the realms of night?
Long on these mouldering bones have beat
The winter's snow, the summer's heat,
The drenching dews, and driving rain!
Let me, let me sleep again.
Who is he, with voice unblest,
That calls me from the bed of rest?
O. A Traveller, to thee unknown,
Is he that calls, a Warriour's Son.
Thou the deeds of light shall know;
Tell me what is done below,
For whom yon glittering board is spread,
Dressed for whom yon golden bed.
PR. Mantling in the goblet see
The pure bev'rage of the be,
Over it hangs the shield of gold;
It Is the drink of Balder bold:
Balder's head to death is given.
Pain can reach the Sons of Heaven!
Unwilling I my lips unclose:
Leave me, leave me to repose.
O. Once again my call obey.
Prophetess, arise, and say,
What dangers Odin's Child await,
Who the Author of his fate.
PR. In Hoder's hand the Hero's doom:
His Brother sends him to the tomb.
Now my weary lips I close:
Leave me, leave me to repose.
O. Prophetess, my spell obey,
Once again arise, and say,
Who the Avenger of his guilt,
By whom shall Hoder's blood be spilt.
PR. In the caverns of the west,
By Odin's fierce embrace comprest,
A wondrous Boy shall Rinda bear,
Who never shall comb his raven-hair,
Nor wash his visage in the stream,
Nor see the sun's departing beam;
Till he on Hoder's corse shall smile
Flaming on the funeral pile.
Now my weary lips I close:
Leave me, leave me to repose.
O. Yet a while my call obey.
Prophetess, awake, and say,
What Virgins these, in speechless woe,
That bend to earth their solemn brow,
That their flaxen tresses tear,
And snowy veils, that float in air.
Tell me whence their sorrows rose:
Then I leave thee to repose.
PR. Ha! no Traveller art thou,
King of Men, I know thee now,
Mightiest of a mighty line --
O. No boding Maid of skill divine
Art thou, nor Prophetess of good;
But mother of the giant-brood!
PR. Hie thee hence, and boast at home,
That never shall Enquirer come
To break my iron-sleep again;
Till Lok is the evil Being, who continues in chains till the Twilight of be
Gods approaches, when he shall break his bonds; the human race, the stars, and
sun, shall disappear; the earth sink in the seas, and fire consume the skies:
even Odin himself and his kindred-deities shall perish. For a farther
explanation of this mythology, see Mallet's Introduction to the History of
Denmark, 1755, Quarto.
Lok has burst his tenfold chain.
Never, till substantial Night
Has reassumed her ancient right;
Till wrapped in flames, in ruin hurled,
Sinks the fabric of the world.
THE TRIUMPHS of OWEN. A FRAGMENT. FROM Mr. EVANS'S Specimens of the Welsh
Poetry; LONDON, 1764, Quarto.
ADVERTISEMENT.
OWEN succeeded his Father GRIFFIN in the Principality of NORTH WALES, A.D.
1120. This battle was fought near forty Years afterward.

THE TRIUMPHS of OWEN. A FRAGMENT.
OWEN's praise demands my song,
OWEN swift, and OWEN strong;
Fairest flower of Roderic's stem,
North Wales.
Gwyneth's shield, and Britain's gem.
He nor heaps his brooded stores,
Nor on all profusely pours;
Lord of every regal art,
Liberal hand, and open heart.
Big with hosts of mighty name,
Squadrons three against him came;
This the force of Eirin hiding,
Side by side as proudly riding,
On her shadow long and gay
Denmark.
Lochlin plows the watery way;
There the Norman sails afar
Catch the winds, and join the war:
Black and huge along they sweep,
Burdens of the angry deep.
Dauntless on his native sands
The red Dragon is the device of Cadwallader, which all his descendents bore on
their banners.
The Dragon-Son of Mona stands;
In glittering arms and glory dressed,
High he rears his ruby crest.
There the thundering strokes begin,
There the press, and there the din;
Talymalfra's rocky shore
Echoing to the battle's roar.
Where his glowing eye balls turn,
Thousand Banners round him burn.
Where he points his purple spear,
Hasty, hasty Rout is there,
Marking with indignant eye
Fear to stop, and shame to fly.
There Confusion, Terror's child,
Conflict fierce, and Ruin wild,
Agony, that pants for breath,
Despair and honorable Death.
ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD,
ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.
THE Curfew tolls -- squilla di lontano
Che paia'l giorno pianger, che si muore.
Dante. Purgat. I. 8.
the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
The mopeing owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude Forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour.
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye Proud, impute to These the fault,
If Memory over their Tomb no Trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery sooth the dull cold ear of Death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear:
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little Tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbad: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
Ch'i veggio nel pensier, dolce mio fuoco,
Fredda una lingua, and due begli occhi chiusi
Rimaner doppo noi pien di faville.
Petrarch. Son. 169.
Even in our Ashes live their wonted Fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonour'd Dead
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If chance, by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred Spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed Swain may say,
'Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
'Brushing with hasty steps the dews away
'To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
'There at the foot of yonder nodding beech
'That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
'His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
'And pore upon the brook that babbles by.'
'Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
'Mutt'ring his wayward fancies he would rove,
'Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
'Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
'One morn I missed him on the custom'd hill,
'Along the heath and near his favorite tree;
'Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
'Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he;'
'The next with dirges due in sad array
'Slow through the church way path we saw him born.
'Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
'Grav'd on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.'
The EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of Earth
A Youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown.
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to Misery all he had, a tear,
He gain' d from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
( -- paventosa speme. Petrarch. Son. 114.
There they alike in trembling hope repose,)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
THE CONTENTS.
PAGE. ODE on the SPRING I ODE on the Death of a FAVORITE CAT 9 ODE on a
Distant Prospect of ETON COLLEGE 15 HYMN to ADVERSITY 27 The PROGRESS of POESY.
A Pindaric Ode 35 The BARD. A Pindaric Ode 51 The FATAL SISTERS. An Ode 73 The
DESCENT of ODIN. An Ode 85 The TRIUMPHS of OWEN. A Fragment 97 ELEGY written in
a COUNTRY CHURCHYARD 107
FINIS.

