CALEDONIA, A POEM, etc.
IN Northern Hights, where Nature seldom smiles,
Embraced with Scas, and buttress't All the Western and Northern parts of
Scotland are fenced with small Islands, which not only break off the Force of
the Atlantic Ocean, but make excellent Harbors for Shipping, and
Conveniences for Trade.
round with Isles,
Where lofty Shores The Shores to the North of Scotland may be said to regard
the adjacent Pole, either because it lies directly open to the Great Northern
Ocean, which no Sailer could ever yet find the Extent of; or because it sees
that Pole elevated to a great Height.
regard the adjacent Pole,
Where Winds incessant blow, and Waves incessant roll;
Where Tyrant I call that continual Cold in the Frozen Seas here Tyrant Cold,
because he reigns Uncontrolled by the Accession of any Heat from the Sun.
Cold in Glacy Ocean reigns,
And all the Habitable World disdains,
Defies the distant Influence of the Sun,
And Shines in Ice. The Ice and Snow always give a kind of Light, tho faint and
melancholy.
shines in Ice.
First Youngest Sister, because the North Capes and the Coast of Greenland
(...) to be of the same Family, but advanced farther North. First youngest, a
License taken to exp^ess Scotland the first of the Habitable, or at least
Sociable Parts of the World so far North.
youngest Sister to the Frozen Zone,
Battered by Parent Natures constant Frown*
Adapt to Hardships, and cut out for Toil;
The best worst Climate, and the worst best Soil.
A rough, unhewn, uncultivated Spot,
Of old so famed, and so of late forgot.
NEGLECTED SCOTLAND shows her awful Brow,
Not always quite so near to Heaven as now.
Circled with dreadful Clifts and Barbarous Shores,
Where the strong Surff with high impetuous Roars,
Invades the Rocks, and these their Rage disdain,
And with redoubling Noise they are hurried home again;
The hollow Caverns Mutual Roars return,
And Baffled Neptune The Raging of the Sea will often resemble Fire, and seem
to burn, especially as some say on a Southerly Wind.
raging makes the Ocean burn.
The furious Elements in vain contend,
Unmoved the mighty natural Breast-works stand.
Their awful Hights in threatening Grandeur shine,
Emblems of mightier Hearts of Stone within.
The Instructing Rocks, Invincible and Strong,
Describe the Race that to these Rocks belong,
And bid the quick retreating Waves declare,
And warn the World against a Northern War*
Tell them the Hopes of Conquest must be vain;
When Hands of Steel shall Rocks of Flint maintain.
The high Shores could be in no place more needful to place Bounds proportioned
to the furious and vast Northern Ocean that beat upon Scotland* from whence
there is nothing but Water to the very Frozen Zone of the North Pole. Those
Rocks therefore are the Lands Defense, and the Ocems Bridle, and consequently
Beauties in their Kind, made so by the Necessity of them.
These are the eternal Bounds of Providence,
The Oceans Bridle, and the Lands Defense.
The Warts and Wrinkles placed on Natures Brow
That her Maternal Care and Conduct show.
The meanest parts of Nature have their Use,
And some to Terror, some to Strength conduce:
Nor is their Ornament at all the less;
For Beauty's best described by Usefulness.
Behind this Rugged Front The Situation of Scotland is certainly her Defense
against either the Fury of the Ocean from the North, or of Invaders from the
South; the dangerous Coast being such, that no Fleets care to venture
themselves long at Sea that way.
securely lies
Blessed Caledonia, and with Ease defies
Her Northern, or her Southern Enemies.
Fixed by Decree, Her Nature's not to fear
Huge Navies there, or Icy Mountains here.
Here Towering Clifts, and there the Beachy Shoal
Defy the By the Monsters of the Pole may be understood the Whales, in former
times terrible to Mariners, as frequently oversetting the small Barks they
sailed in; Or since, by the greater Skill in Navigation, that fear is at an
end, it may be taken for the Monstrous floating Islands of Ice, which by the
Fury of the Winds, are driven about the Northern Seas.
Raging Monsters of the Pole.
There equally they Floating Worlds, Navys and Fleets of Ships of War to
assault that Country, and transport Armies to make Descents and Depredations on
the Coast.
Floating Worlds defy,
Bid them stand off and live, advance and die:
The Hardy Wretch that sees the Hint too late,
Fails not to find his Folly in his Fate.
Behind this Rugged Front securely lies
Old Caledonia, all the Worlds The Worlds Surprise to find so fine a Country
so Peopled, and so Inhabited behind such terrible places, which to the Sea-ward
promise nothing but Desert, and abandoned, uninhabited Places.
Surprise.
Her Native Beauty and her Wealth concealed
Waits The Union, whereby Improvement shall reveal the hidden Fruitfulness of
Scotland.
the blessed Hour when both shall be revealed.
In Age and Fancied Poverty Secure,
And yet She Is ever Young, and never Poor.
Here laboring with the Injuries of Time*
Inclement Air, Inhospitable Clime,
Foreign Invasions and Intestine Wars;
Yet all her Native Beauty still appears.
Brittain's Scotland is allowed the Left hand of Britain as to Wealth, England
as her younger Sister in matter of Antiquity, must however be allowed the Right
hand in Wealth and Trade, at least till Union, if ever that shall happen, make
them all one.
Left hand, which when she shall unite,
As Nature dictates, and the Fates Invite,
And join her younger Sister on the Right:
How shall they Mutual Wealth and Strength convey,
And with Contempt the weaker World Survey!
Till THAT BLESSED HOUR, how does her Injured Name
Sleep in the Rubbish of her Ancient Fame?
Buried in The scandalous Reproaches of Authors pretending to describe either
her Climate, People, or Government have been intolerable, and have buried her
Character with Noise and Slander; which being never yet defended in public, or
any Attempt made to clear up those things to the World, Foreign Nations are too
much possessed with the Belief of what, when the Truth comes to be examined,
appears mere Fiction and Falsity.
Slander, by Reproach laid low:
And all the distant World believes her so:
Then let us first survey her Fancied Hearse,
She Will find some Resurrection in our Verse;
Till rousing from a long declining Fate,
WHOLE BRITAIN shall her Glory reinstate.
How have Cleavland in his Poem upon Scotland, has said a Thousand extravagant
things on these Heads.
we placed her out of Nature's Eye,
Where Constant Colds Few Seeds of Life supply?
Where Nature Chilled some despicables dwell,
Immured with Darkness and allied to Hell.
No Moderate Blessings, no Endowment share,
Nothing that is Pleasant see, nothing delightful hear:
But see the Horrid By the Horrid Bear is to be understood the Constellation so
called, which Scotland, being so far North, easily sees in its whole Circular
Motion round the Pole.
Bear march round the Pole,
And feel her Piercing Breath Congeal the Soul.
Their Musick's Whirlwind, and the shrill Echoing Roar
Of Frozen Seas on the Deserted Shore.
Legends of Fables fill our partial Heads,
Of Lands where Grass never grows, or Mortal treads;
Where keenest Winds and Storms Incessant blow
On Mountains covered with Eternal Snow;
Where Nature never blooms, and Sun never shines,
But Cold with Cold, and Frost with Frost Combines,
This is as suggested by Foreign Authors, in open Injury of Scotland, and one
of the principal Reasons of this Poem.
Inhospitable Clime. --
What Countrey's this? And whither are we gone?
Bright Caledonia, where will Fable run?
Suffer the impartial Pen to range thy Shore,
And do thee It Is presumed this Part will clear the Author from a Charge of
Flattery, he designing to say nothing in this Poem, but what Justice and the
Nature of things require.
Justice, Nature asks no more:
Fitted for Commerce and cut out for Trade;
The Seas the Land, the Land the Seas invade.
The Promontory Clifts with Hights embosst,
And large deep Bays adorn thy dangerous Coast;
Alternately the Pilot's true Relief,
These warn at Distance, those receive him safe;
The deep indented Harbors then invite,
First court by day, and then secure at night:
The wearied Sailors safe and true Recess,
A full Amends for wild Tempestuous Seas.
Nature that well foreknows a Nations Fate,
Thus fitted Caledonia to be great.
Her Various Aspects, Respecting the Situation of the Coast, or the Plan of the
Country, which easily discovers that Scotland is equally qualified for Trade
with any Nation in the World, whether we consider her Openness to all Parts of
the Trading World; or the Convenience of her Harbors, safe Roads, and
Neighborhood both to the German and Atlantic Oceans.
various Aspects the Design explain,
And Her unhappy Circumstances, with respect to the rest of Britain, have,
without doubt, been the great Obstructions of her Prosperity, particularly as
to Trade.
Circumstances shall resist in vain.
Subject no more to every cross Event,
She shall be Great and Rich, as Nature meant.
View next her Seas, from ancient Terrors named,
For Bugbear Storms, by Bugbear Sailors famed.
The Ancients, in their sailing these Seas, were strangely surprised at two
things, 1. The Length of the Days, which they, being generally Phenicians and
South-Countrey Merchants, had not been used to: From whence some of them, more
addicted to superstitious Observations than the rest, blindly imagined, that
(since the farther they went Northward, the Days were the longer, and in some
parts hardly any Night) the Elisium Shades must needs be thereabouts, and that
if they should go further, they should come at length to Bright Eternal Day. 2.
They were surpised not with the Storms and Tempests only, but with the Tides
and Currents, which were not only strange to 'em, but particularly terrible, in
that they drove 'em in amongst the Rocks and Shores, where they often perished,
not from any Real Danger, but for Want of Judgment From whence we have them
often expressing themselves in this manner, -- And BRITISH Seas,
II here Storms incessant blow,
And Tides uncertain ebb and flow.

Phenician Sailors, wise in Ignorance,
That dreamed of Thule, an Island in the north of Scotland, was frequently
fabled among the Ancients to represent the Elisium, which could be for no other
Reason than the Length of the Days.

Bright THVLE far advanced in raging Seas.
Dierum spatia ultra nostri () his mensuram and nox clara, and extrema
Britanniae p^rte b ^vis, ut finem atque initium Lucis exiguo discrimine
internoseas -- Nec Solemn occidere and exsurgere, sed transire adfirmant. Tacit.
Vit. Agricolae Cap. 12 Sect. 5.


THULE, yet afraid to advance;
Thy lengthened Sun with uncooth Joy survey,
And vainly dreamed it led to bright Eternal Day:
Unblessed with Art, yet from thy Ocean fly,
Afraid to live, because afraid to die.
To them thy Wealth and Stores were unreveal'd,
And all beyond thee happily concealed.
Had they thy Scally Shoals of Blessings known,
They Would long since chose thy Shores, and quite sorgot their own.
Thine had been India, and thy Golden Seas
Had filled their Antique Songs.
But Fear, that Negative of Glory, gave
This Gift appropriat to a Race more brave.
The frighted South-taught Navigators fly,
And mocked with Fear, their own Success destroy.
Unpracticed in thy watery Wars, they shun
Thy safer Coast, and at a Distance run.
Thy Seas, tho vast, and in Extent unknown,
In Wealth and Strength to Thee The Seas indeed in these parts are subject to
Storms, but nothing unusual, or uncommon with the rest of Britain.
subservient grown.
Calm Tides, smooth Surface, and a shining Brow,
And gentle Gales for Wealth and Commerce blow.
These reconcile the once so dreadful Waste,
And Art and Industry supply the rest.
This is a Poetical Excursion upon the extraordinary Improvement and Perfection
which the World has attained in the practical part of Navigation.
Hail Science, Natures second Eye,
Begot on Reason by Philosophy,
Man's Tellescope to all that is Deep and High;
What Infinites do thou pursue!
The Tangl'd Skeines of Nature how undo!
Pierce all her darkest Clouds, her Knots untye,
And leave her naked to the wandering Eye.
What Gust of Knowledge blew thee off to Sea?
A desperate Curiosity.
In Mountain-Waves, and raging Wind,
Tell us, what could thou hope to find?
It Is answered, -- These are Natures Schools,
To teach the Power of Art and Rules:
From hence what vast instructing things thou'st brought;
Besides the Huge Remains not yet found out.
But of all Knowledge, this was sure the best,
As it is the Pole Star to the rest.
How winged with Science, men might trace
The foaming Oceans roughest Face;
Plow the vast Furrows of th'amazing Deep,
With Ease and Safety sail and sleep.
No more the uncertain Northern Tides shall fright,
Familiar Dangers lessen to the Sight;
The Rocks and Sands, the threatening Shore,
Pledges of certain Death before.
Now Roads and Harbors found for help appear,
And show the Follies of our ancient Fear;
Under their Weather Banks we calmly ride
Danger and Safety they divide.
Now they appear the Aids of Providence,
The Sailors Safety, and the Lands Defense.
Bold Science whither will thou stear,
See how the Tempests armed with Death, appear;
Read but the threatening Language of the Skies,
How gathering Clouds, with-Child of Thunders rise;
See Mountains heaped in strong Rebellion move,
See Ossa top'd with Pelion, threatening Jove;
See angry Nature roused to Civil War,
'Twas Prudence first taught Mankind how to fear;
Bold Science, whither will thou Steer!
Vain Caution! See the daring Nymph sets Sail,
What Fear calls Storm, she calls a welcome Gale;
On raging Waves, and Mountain Billows tossed,
She sees with Joy her Port, with Joy she quits the Coast;
The Wind's embraced with high expanded Wings
The Sailors sleep and fly, the Pilot sings;
Sometimes he mounts so high, he turns his Ear,
And listens for the Music of a Sphere;
Charmed with the Symphony, he will Consort keep,
And Beat true Time, though he reviews the Deep.
She Is gone, new Worlds she seeks, new Worlds she finds,
She rides on Tempests, and improves the Winds,
The Elemental Terrors she will despise,
And Bully Neptune boldly she defies.
See how Mankind by her Experience taught,
Has all to Rule and Method brought;
The Practicable Seas, made so by the Improvements of Navigation, and
particularly the Extraordinary Methods of Building, as well as of Managing
great Ships, sitting them to bear the roughest Sea, and to sail to the remotest
parts of the World.
Practicable Seas to Art submit,
And Wealth and Commerce freely circulate,
With steady hand the experienced Pilot Steers,
And laughs in Northern Waves at Southern Fears,
Defies the two and thirty Hosts of Air,
And sits composed in the midst of Elemental War,
All unconcerned at Natures Quarrels, he,
To his own Use, applies their Enmity.
The Furious Wind, the Water's Rage,
He wisely joins to his Just End, the Voyage:
In this he makes their pointed Rage agree,
And forms their Discord into Harmony.
So jarring Parties in a State,
By the Wise Conduct of the Crown,
Are managed to support the Magistrate,
And fix that Power they struggle to pull down.
Knowledge gives Courage, Science makes Men brave;
Folly drives headlong to the Grave:
For Ignorance and Fear make Cowards run
Into those Dangers they are afraid to shun.
Discretion only makes Men safe and bold,
While Fears the Remedies withhold;
Fear holds the Gates of Reason fast,
Shuts out its help, and so the Coxcomb's lost.
The Pilot now, Consummate in his Skill,
Made safe by Nature, mounts the Watery Hill;
Through Paths untrod, and Mazes of the Deep,
He Cuts his Guided Course, the rough, the steep,
Are all made smooth to him, he knows his Way,
He neither fears the Night, nor Courts the Day:
Through all the Tempests Midnight Rage he slies,
Visits the Bottoms now, anon the Skies.
When up to Heaven he mounts, the Cheering Sun
Makes glad, and ' it is the same when darting down;
To all the Dark abyss he shoots and see's,
The Hollow Deeps of Natures Nudities;
Till his Blessed Port with steady Hand he finds:
And thus to Art he reconciles the Winds.
Thus vanishes the Horrid and the Wild,
And Nature's now with pleasant Eyes beheld;
When Boreas mad with northern Vapors raves,
We smile, and with Contempt survey the Waves
Art reconciles the Elements, and Trade
Can now with ease the Globes Extremes invade.
Eternal circulating Commerce flows,
And every Nation, every Nation knows.
Torrid and Frigid scale, and join the Poles,
And far as Wind can blow, or Water rolls,
Ships sail, and Men in search of Wealth will trace
All the Meanders of the Universe.
The rough, the smooth, to men of Art submit;
The Northern Winter Cold, or Southern Heat,
With equal Safety, and with equal Ease,
Calm Caspian Lakes, and Caledonian Seas.
By Natures Aid, and Arts concurring Law,
Dangers are only Helps to draw.
The Thirsts of Honor Generous Minds bewitch,
And Danger tempts the Brave, as Gold the Rich.
'Twas Courage first that ventured out to Sea,
Young in Experience, as Philosophy.
Noah himself had certainly been drowned,
Had not his Courage, as his Faith, been sound.
Hail Caledonia, by vast Seas embraced;
Those Seas for Glory, Wealth and Terror placed.
Dreadful in Fame, to thee familiar grown,
Suited to no men's Temper like thy own.
The bounteous Ocean Fraught with Native Gold, i. e. the Treasure of the Fish,
which is Gold efficiently, because an immense Treasure is drawn from it by all
those Nations that apply themselves to that Trade.
fraught with native Gold,
Saved it for thee; by its own Curse, That Cold which by the Ancients was
thought intolerable and kept those Seas for so many Ages impracticable,
doubtless prevented the Discovery of the great Treasure of the Fishery, was,
not that their taking of them could have lessened the Quantity; but without
doubt Foreign Nations might have been prompted not to have fished here only,
and in time have been too strong to be displaced, but perhaps have taken
Possession of the Land for the sake of the Vast Trade: And so a more powerful
Nation have dispossessed the Scots both of their Trade and their Country too.
the Cold.
Had not the Storms and Tempests governed here,
And fenced this long hid Treasure round with Fear,
Past Ages had thy rifled Store decreast,
And Foreign Nations all thy Wealth possessed.
Wealth that well suits a hardy Race like thine,
That dares through Storms and Death pursue the Mine.
Wealth hid from Cowards, and the fainting Hand,
Scared with the Sea's content to starve by Land.
But when thy daring Sons the Wave explore,
The Ocean yields her Not our Experience only allows the Store to be
unexhausted, in that the Quantity is every Year renewed; but Authors tell us
that even in their daily Fishing in one and the same place, when great
Quantities are taken up, yet those that remain, and may immediately be taken in
the same place, seem not to be lessened. Minorum ad littora piscium tanta
benignitate Dei Opt. Max. praeventus est, and quo major frumenti Caritas est,
eo etiam uberior; ut cum uno quovis die ingentem vim abstuleris, postridie
illius Diei non minor codem in loco appareat. Hect. Boeth. Scot. Reg.
Discriptio. p 8.
unexhausted Store:
Thy open Harbors all her Gifts divide,
And Seas of Wealth roll in with every Tide:
The Golden Shoals thy very Nets pursue,
Laugh at the lesser Treasures of Peru;
Prompt thee to change the meanness of thy State,
Bids thee, when e're thou will, be rich and great.
Tell us ye Sons of Mystery, from what Hand,
What Secret high Command. The wonderful Original and Causes of the Prodigious
Quantity of Herring which appear in their exact Seasons. Places and Quantities
upon all the Coasts of Scotland is the Occasion of this Digression.
secret High Command
Gives out the Word that is heard to Natures Deep,
Where all the Scaly Tribes their Councils keep?
Who tells them when the very Month arrives?
And who the secret Order gives?
When from the Womb of Wonders far by-North,
The mighty Slymy Hosts come forth;
The numerous Legions spread the Sea,
The wondering frighted Waves give way;
Forward the Mighty moving Hosts push on,
All guided by a Hand unknown.
The Involuntary well directed Fry,
The unknown something readily obey.
No Pilot can with more Exactness steer,
Not Sun or Moon divides the Year.
Not the revolving Stars their Course obey*
Not Darkness can succeed the Day,
With a more punctual steady Pace,
In Manner, Measure, Time and Place;
True to the very Distance of the Shore,
They Are never, where they never were before
Where there is but few, there ever was but few,
To every Circumstance so true.
Such Courses steer, such Orders keep,
Through all the wandering Mazes of the Deep;
As if the Ancient Paths they could discry,
Or read their Father's History:
Then Caledonians lend an humble Ear,
And your own Ill accepted. It must be owned, Scotland has not given that full
welcome to this Gift of Heaven, the Fish that Nature and Providence seemed to
expect from them, for whose Benefit without Doubt they were appointed.
ill accepted Blessings hear,
From the profound unmeasured Deeps
Where Nature all her Wonders keeps.
Her Instinct is here represented as delivering a Message in the Watery
Audience, and making a Speech to the Fish, the Image, its hoped is not
improper, nor is the Liberty taken at all unpoetical; so I make no excuse for
it, but think, that what we call Instinct, may serve to represent Nature in all
the Creatures obeying their Times and Seasons, exactly according to the great
and just Law of Creation, and the Influence of Invisible Providence.
Handmaid Instinct, this Blessed Message gave
To all the Watery Crew beneath the Watery Cave.
Go Numberless and spread the Finny Sail,
And find Britannia Nature's Darling Isle;
There spread your Scaly Squadrons, and submit,
Your Makers Law Commands, To Every Net.
Be You Their Wealth and plenteously supply
What Coldest Soil and Steril Climes deny.
Be You Their Envied Blessing, and attend
The willing Prey, to the undustrious Hand,
In proper Squadrons all your Troops divide,
And visit Every Creek, with Every Tide.
Present your selves to every Hungry Door,
Employ The Diligent, and feed The Poor.
If they reject the Bounties of the Sea
Bid'em Complain Indeed it is strange to think they should let such a Wealth
pass by them, and at the same time complain of Poverty.
no more of Poverty.
Upbraid their sloth, and then return to me,
Visit no other Port, it is plain they are not found in any considerable
quantity in any Seas but these, and it is supposed they return to the Northward
again, where the Prodigious Breed must increase sufficiently to supply for the
next Years Voyage.
Visit no other Port. Without question they supply very much any Defect of
Provisions, which either by the Sterillity of the Country, or rather want of
Improvement, that People may labor under.

The punctual well instructed Fish obey,
And Scaly Squadrons spread the Northern Sea,
Directly point their Course, and find the Shore,
As if they would all been here before.
Their equal Distance keep, divide and join,
As if they are taught by Book, or steered by Line:
Their strong Detachments send to every Creek,
In just Proportion their own Mischiefs seek.
Seek out the Harbors, seek the Indented Shore,
Timploy the Diligent, and feed the Poor.
No other Port they visit.
Ah! Caledonia, mark the High Command,
And mark the Caution of the Heavenly Hand;
If thou reject the Bounties of the Sea,
No more Complain of Poverty.
Had thou in early time with Wisdom graced
Heavens Bounty, as in Duty bound, embraced,
Above the Nations thou had raised thy Head,
At Home their Envy, and abroad their Dread,
Thy Wealthy Clime would all the World invite,
They Would Court Thee to Unite.
No more of Barren Hills and Seas complain,
Reproach the Land with Blasts, with Storms the Main.
Not all the Spicy Banks of Ganges and Nilus, one a River in India, the other
in Egypt; The first famous for its rich Spices and Drugs, and the other for the
Prolific Virtue of its Water, on the constant Regular Overflowings whereof, the
Fruitfulness of the Land depends. Whence some tell us, The seven Years Famine
in that Country in the Time of Joseph was occasioned from the Nile's not over
flowing its Banks during that Term.
Ganges Stream,
Not Fruitful Nile so often the Poets Dream,
Not Islands so called lying in the Gulf of Mexico, where the Pearl Fishing
has been worth Immense Sums to the Spaeniard.
Isles of Pearl, not rich The Great Ocean on the West Side of America,
Vulgarly, Tho I think Improperly, called, The South Seas.
Pacifick Seas,
Not the more Fruitful The Caribbees Islands, which, as now Improved by the
English, are supposed to yield the greatest Produce of any Spot of Ground in
the World of equal Extent.
Caribbees,
Not Guinea in Africa, and Chili in America, being the two principal places
which supply the World with Gold.
Africks Wealth or Chilean Stores,
The Silver Silver Mountains. The Mountains of Potosi in the Country of Peru,
thought by some to be all Silver, but without Question, is the richest of that
kind in the World. Golden Shores: Meaning the Rivers of Guinea, in the Sands of
which is taken up the Gold Dust, as it is washed out of the Mountains by the
Water.
Mountains, or the Golden Shores,
Could such an Vnexhausted Treasure. The Fishery, and therefore very well
proposed to match the Treasures before spoken of, not only in its Value, but in
this Peculiar, That it is never exhausted. Nor is it all the less for the
Prodigious Quantities that are or might be Annually taken. Which some Authors
have observed, That they were enough to subsist the whole Nation, if there were
no other Provision. Tanta Piscium est Exundantia, cum ubique tum quo magis ad
Septentrionem accedas, ut vel ii soli sufficere possint ad pastum Insulae
totius: Boeth. de Descrip. Reg. Scot
Unexhausted Treasure boast,
A Treasure how supinely lost!
What Pains has Scotland taken to be Poor,
That has the Indies at her Door;
That lets her Coursest Fate of Choice remain,
And sees her Maker Bountiful in Vain.
When Caledonians, when will you be wise,
And search for certain Wealth in Native Seas?
A Wealth by Heaven designed for none but You,
A Wealth that does your very Hands pursue,
Upbraids You with Neglect of Your own Right,
And courts Invading Neighbors in your Sight.
When Caledonians, when will You be wise?
When from Your Clouded Circumstances rise?
Banish Invaders, Heaven's own Gifts enjoy,
This would Your Native Poverty destory.
This would restore Your Ancient dear bought Name,
This, and Your Valor, would revive Your Fame;
How would Your Navies quickly spread the Seas,
And guard that Wealth they help You to possess?
How would Your Commerce all Your Sons restore,
And they would seek Home that shunned that Home before?
With Wealth and People, Happy, Rich and Free,
You Would first Improve the Land, and then the Sea;
Be Strong, be Great, be Rich, be Europe's Fear,
Their War, their Wealth, their Trade, their Honors share.
But let us Retreat, Who can the Scene survey,
And View this Wealth the Neighbor Nations Prey;
What Eye, that is Caledonia's Friend, can see
Her Sons on Shore, and Strangers spread the Sea?
Who can, with Patience, View her People Poor,
And Mines of Wealth snatched up at every Door?
The Bounty Heaven for their Peculiar meant,
Reap't by the Hands to whom 'twas never sent.
The Ocean plundered, the Advantage sold,
While these enjoy the Tempests, those the Gold.
Hail Blessed Conjunction, Brittain's last best Hour,
Shall Caledonia to her self restore;
Assert her long neglected Property,
Her Blessing, her Inheritance, the Sea.
In hopes of this, let us land and range the Shore,
And view the Nation that the World calls Poor.
Plenty's a doubtful Word mistook by most,
A modern Term for Luxury and Waste.
So Canaan flowed. the Lands in Plenty drowned;
Yet Egypt did in vast Increase abound.
The World's amused with different Forms of Words,
When various Sense the various Thought affords.
Nature's by vast Comparisons explained,
And all her Contradictions so maintained.
So Scotlands Barren, Fruitful, Poor and Rich:
Speak Malice, Speak Insulters, tell us which.
Describe the Globe, run all the Climates over,
She Is Poor compared to Rich, and Rich compared to Poor.
In Climates next, let us view her Northern Coast,
A fruitful Style, with Epithets embos't,
The Horrid, Boistrous, Barren, and the Cold,
What Fabl'd Monstrous Stories have been told!
Yet range the Globe, and her Extremes survey,
And sail from The two extreme Parts of America, and almost both uninhabitably
Cold, and to which Scotland being compared, may be styled a hot Climate, as
compared to Mexico and Peru, she merits the Name of Cold.
Magellan to Hudsons Bay;
Ditto the Jest, and when the Truth's but told,
She Is Cold compared to Hot, and Hot compared to Cold.
Nor is there less of Injury appears
About her Mountains, or her Mountaineers.
View but the Savage A most savage People, that go naked, live on raw Flesh,
and are the most Brutal of any people in the World.
Madagascar Moors,
Campeche Indians are some of them the most Barbarous and Inhnmane of any of
the American Race, among whom have been found absolute Cannibals, that devour
one another
Campeche Indians, or The Circassian Boors are a sort of Tartars now under the
Dominion of the Czar of Muscovy, very Cruel and Barbarous, and far worse than
the most was ever pretended of the wild Irish or any sort of People in these
parts of the World.
Circassian Boors,
And when the Characters we shall compare,
A Northern Highland-man's a Christian there.
Polite his Manners, and his I take the Highland Played, or the Dress of these
Highland-men, to be the Remain of the Mantle of the Ancient Goths, and the same
thing, applied to the same Uses of the -- of the Moors of Africa, since both
People use it to cover them in the Night, and therefore make no Scruple to
carry it by Day in the hotest Weather.
Modern Dress,
Is Beauty all, when matched with Ugliness.
PART II.
THe Plan's Described, the Seas and Shores Surveyed;
Let Us now the Treasures of the Land Invade,
Traverse their Hills, and all their Vales Descry,
And spread their just Description to the Eye.
The Rugged Nation placed by Nature here,
Shall in their fancied Poverty appear;
The World shall blush, when they their Picture see,
And Fame grow Proud to Print their History.
The Soil no more unjust Reproach shall bear,
For all they Talk of Barren's slander here,
And it is, or may be Fruitful every where.
A hardy Race possess the stormy Strand,
And share the Moderate Bountys of the Land,
Fitted by Nature for the Boistrous Clime,
And larger Blessings will grow due by time.
The numerous Offspring patient and sedate,
With Courage special to the Climate wait.
When Nigard Nature shall their Nation hear,
Shall smile, and pay them all the Vast Arrear.
A manly surliness, with Temper mixed,
Is on their meanest Countenances fixed.
An awful Frown sits on their threatening Brow,
And yet the Soul's all smooth, and Calm below;
Thinking in Temper, rather grave than Gay,
Fitted to govern, able to obey.
Nor are their Spirits very soon enflamed,
And if provoked, not very soon reclaimed.
Fierce when resolved, and fixed as Bars of Brass,
And Conquest through their Blood can only pass.
In spite of Coward Cold, the Race is Brave,
In Action Daring, and in Council Grave;
Their haughty Souls in Danger always grow,
No Man durst lead 'em where they durst not go.
Sedate in Thought, and steady in Resolve,
Polite in Manners, and as Years Revolve;
Always secure their largest share of Fame,
And by their Courage keep alive their Name.
The laboring Poor dejected and suppressed*
See not the approaching Prospect of their Rest.
Knowledge of Liberty's their only want,
And loss of Expectation's their Content.
Too much subjected to immoderate Power,
Their Petty Tyrants all their Pains devour.
The The Racking the Tennant, is not only a suppressing of the Poor, and
discouraging of his Industry, but an Error in the Landlord himself as to his
own Interest, preventing the Improvement of his Land, and disabling him from
doing abundance of things, which would in the End be his own Advantage: And
though abateing this might in some measure lessen the immediate Income; yet would
certainly in Time, turn to the Advantage of the Family, as well as the
Encouragement of the People.
extorting Masters their just hopes Restrain,
And 'Ts impossible the Farmer in Scotland can ever grow Rich, while the Rent
of his Farm amounts within a small matter to the Extent of the Product, and
while if a scarce Year comes, he is entirely Ruined; whereas if a good Year
comes, he either enjoys not the Benefit, or does not enjoy it long; it being in
his Landlords Power, upon all Occasions, to raise his Demands.
Diligence is no where more in vain.
The Little Chiefs, The Author is here willing to suppose that generally
speaking, no Landlords, but such as are of small Estates, would thus disregard
their own Interest, or continue the Oppressions of the Poor, Their Necessities
not permitting 'em to be more Generous.
Little Chiefs, for what they call their due,
Eat up the Farm and eat the Farmer too;
Suck the Lifeblood, of Tennant and Estate,
And needless Poverty to both create.
Mistake their Interest, Nati'nal Ills procure,
And make the Poor be very very poor.
Th unhappy Drudge, yet bears the mighty Load,
With strange unnat'ral Temperance endowed,
So servile, so unused to Liberty;
He seems the last, that wishes to be free,
Prepostrous Wonder!
Where will Nature run,
That Men should Struggle to be twice Undone;
Afflictions make Men Stupid, Nature winks,
And Sense o'relaid, he acts before he thinks;
Subjected Nature fettered with Distress
Dozes, and Bondage does the Soul possess,
Endeavor Slackness, all the Prospects die,
And with the Hope, the Love of Liberty.
Yet under all the Hardships of their State,
They Have something seems to claim a softer Fate;
Nor does it claim alone, The Grand Portent
Foretells the Blessing, and decrees The Event.
It Is plainly printed on the Painful Brow,
They shall not always be suppressed as now;
The Approaching Light at Distance dawns, the Ray
Darts a Dim Earnest of the Welcome Day.
When sleeping Bondage doomed to lasting Night,
Shall help to make the Chearing Beam more bright.
Th'enlighten'd Crowd shall their own Freedom see,
For willful Blindness only, shuts out Liberty;
Bondage is Ignorance, and he that sees,
Needs no directer Cure for that Disease.
Knowledge and Liberty go Hand in Hand,
Fools only will obey, when Knaves command;
The Sordid Yoke no longer can be born,
When once he sees he must the Grievance scorn;
He that in Blind Dependence now submits,
Will rouse his Strength, when he shall rouse his Wits;
Nature prevails, and Sense in Exercise
The Chains on Reason nat'rally unties.
Thus when new Sight shall once but bless the Poor,
It Is these will Scotland's Liberty Restore;
The strong Conviction no Man can resist,
And Blindness shall against her Will be blessed;
And now, in all their Miseries, let us View
What Blessings they industriously pursue;
What just Equivalent they can supply,
For loss of Wealth, and loss of Liberty:
The Instructed Poor Laborious and Suppressed;
Yet in their very Miseries are blessed;
Crushed with injurious Homage they obey
GOD and their Landlord, but with different Eye;
And yet to both they pay without Regrett,
To this the Homage, and to that the Debt.
The Negatives of Nature they Endure,
In Virtue Rich, tho in Possessions Poor,
Knowing in Sacreds, in Religion Nice,
And ignorant in nothing more than Vice:
What Crimes they have, they borrow from Mankind,
Hell's Manufactures here are contraband.
Imported by the help of Foreign Trade,
Clandestinely enjoyed, clandestinely conveyed.
Unusual Judgment fills the meaner Heads,
Devotion follows as Instruction leads.
Grave in Behavior, in Discourse sedate,
And apter to believe than to debate;
And if they can exceed in doing Well,
It Is in a little little TOO MUCH ZEAL.
In Doctrine sound, in Discipline severe,
The Church obtains her True Dominion here.
And yet her foft Coercives yield no Power,
Either to persecure, or to devour.
Fiercely tenacious of determined Truth,
Dreadful to Error, Vigilant of both.
The wild Opinions of a Neighboring State,
Find here no Atom-Fancies to create:
The strong fermented Venom hither brought,
Like Irish Poisons, perish in the Thought;
Here no Enthusiastic Notion grows,
The only Barrenness the Nation knows.
A Mitred Jest indeed, the Land perplexed,
Of Pomp and Pride, and Policy so mixed;
The awkward medly left us in Debate,
Whether it did proceed from Church or State,
Begot by Power, and introduced by Plot,
With Tyranny came in, with Tyranny went out;
But ill agreeing with preciser Air,
It soon grew yellow, pale and sickly here.
The People Wise, and in Religion Nice,
Could not be gulled with such a Faint Device.
Some Blood the Monster drank, but when it tried
To take a Dose of Liberty, IT Died.
But it their Civil State some Praise affords,
Much greater are the Trophies of their Swords.
Ages of Blood have brought them up to War
And their strong Legions breath in every Air,
At the Battle of Leipsick, the Scots were the first that were ever seen to
fire with their Ranks closed foreward, and their Pieces over one another's
Shoulders, or as we call it, kneel, stoop, and stand, which was such a Surprise
to the Germans, pouring in such a Quantity of Lead upon them together, that
they could not stand it, which the King of Sweden owned, was the great Occasion
of the Victory, and practiced it afterward among all his Troops.
They taught the very Swedes themselves to Fight,
And spite of Dullness armed the The Scots Officers have all along been the
Instructors of the Muscovites, and if they are the worst Soldiers in Europe, it
has not been for want of good Masters but by being dull Scholars, tho something
may be ascribed to the Constitution of their Country, arming only the Boors,
and not entertaining 'em as Soldiers, but demitting 'em after the Occasion, to
their Employments again, which Method the present Czar having altered, the
Russians to Europe's Cost, are not unlikely to show the World they have been
very well taught.
Muscovite;
The sordid Russ, to discipline they Train
And fain would teach the The Pride and Haughtiness of the Pole has made him
disdain to be Instructed, and consequently their Foot (especially) are good for
nothing in the Field.
Poles, but that is in vain.
The untracted Brute in Ignorance too Wise,
Learned only how Experience to despise.
Nothing keeps Nature closs in Jayl like Pride,
Squadrons of Page-like Crimes before her ride,
And Ignorance is always next her side.
Where shall we all their Ancient Glory trace,
The forward nations court the very Race:
Not Europe ventures to commence a War
But Caledonian Blood demands her Share,
And if it is bought or sold, it is always very dear
Particularly famous for the great Battle between the Imperialists and the
Swedes, the 3 d. of September, Anno -- and afterward for being the occasion of
the great Battle at Lutzen, where the King of Sweden was slain, having made a
long March to relieve this City then besieged by the Impertialists: But coming
to late, he attacked their Army, and overthrew 'em, but lost his Life.
Leipfick -- a Name in Fames red lettered Roll
Matchless in War, where from the Frozen Pole
The Fnland Horse in the Swedish Army grew a Terror to the Germans by their
Extraordinary Bravery and Discipline.
Finland sent Monsters, Strangers to the Sun,
Bred up to fight, by great Gustave led on;
And yet by hardy The Scots at the Battle of Leipsick were very ill clothed,
and had complained of it to their Officers, who had often promised 'em a
Supply, and being just entering into the Battle, Sir John Hepburn, who commanded
'em, pointing to the Imperial Army, Jestingly told them, Their Clothes were
come,

Tilly had brought 'em en purpose for 'em, and if they would have 'em, they
must fight for 'em.


naked Scots outdone.
Voracious Tilly just made drunk with Blood,
At Tilly had just taken Magdeburgh by Storm, and in a terrible manner sacked
and destroyed the Town, put Seventeen thousand People to the Sword, Men, Women
and Children, and aftewards burnt the whole City to Ashes, and made himself
Terrible to all the Protestants in Europe.
Magdeburgh he raised the Crimson Flood,
Tho gorged with Slaughter, yet a Thirst for more,
Approach't, all Europe trembled at his Power.
In Leipsick Plain the dreadful Scene begun,
On brighter Deeds the Sun himself never shone.
Tilly's first Fury broke the The Duke of Saxony's Troops formed the Left of
the Swedish Army the King of Sweden having the Right: upon the first Charge,
the Right of the Imperialists broke the Saxons, and drove 'em quite out of the
Field, killing between two and three Thousand upon the Spot; and had not the
Scots interposed, they had been all cut to pieces.
Saxon Line,
And cried Victoria, all the Troops fall in,
With Blood and Terror glittering Eagles shine.
The Scots reserved for Dangers hither fly,
Dangers their Post by Nation, taught to die,
And winged with Rage they The Scots being about twelve Battallions of Foot,
joined with some Dragoons, made the second Line of the Swedish Army; and
finding how Matters went with the Saxons on their Flank, they immediately
wheeled to the Left, and joining a Brigade of Foot of the Saxons, not yet
broken, they fell in upon the pursuing Imperialists, and by their extraordinary
Fury, turned the Fortune of the Day.
ravished Victory.
Not the unequal Squadrons, not the Day
Half lest, not slaughtered Saxons in the way,
Not formidable Death, that Jest of War,
In whatsoever shapes she durst appear,
Could their intrepid stedy Motion stay,
Nothing but slaughterd Foes and Victory;
The Imperial Dragoons being recalled from the Pursuit of the Saxons, and being
Superior in Number, surrounded the Scots, falling in upon their Flank, which
making them Desperate, they fought like Mad men, and made a terrible slaughter
of the Enemy.
Surrounded, they with doubled Fury fight,
And pleased with Danger, shine in ( In the Fury o^ this Fight, the Scots threw
off their Clothes and fought in their Shirts; the Novelty of which struck a
strange Terror into their Enemies, and convinced 'em, that despising all
Danger, these were resolved to Conquer.
naked white,
The King of Sweden hearing of the Distress the Scots were in, came in Person
with a Body of Horse and Dragoons to their Relief, Charged the Imperial
Dragoons who had engaged their Flank, and soon cleared 'em of that Encumbrance.
But seeing how bravely they fought, and that there was no Danger on that Side,
he called out Laughing to Sir John Hepburn, Al I EGREMENT, which is as much as
to say in English, Bravely done Boys; and went back to his own Forces, where he
soon overthrew the Imperialists, and completed the Victory.
Gustavus saw how Fury like they fought,
And better witness never Soldiers sought;
The mighty Hero smiled, with Wonder pleased,
And still they fought the more, the more he praised.
They Crowned his Head with Lawrell's first, and he
To their just Valor Both the King of Sweden and the Elector of Saxony,
publicly Complemented Sir John Hepburn, and the rest of the Scots Colonels
upon the Occasion; and owned the Victory to be very much owing to their
extraordinary Behavior.
owned his Victory.
From whence advancing with a just Applause,
The ruined Protestants abandoned Cause;
Religion and the Country they restore,
And grateful Germany commemorates the Hour.
In thirty Months continued fierce Campaign,
From Leipsick Plains, the Neckar, and the Main,
The Rhine, the Danube, and the Lech they cros't,
No Battle where they fought was ever lost.
Never was such an Army, such a Head,
Such Men to follow, such a King to Lead:
such Countries Traversed, or such Battles won,
Such Conquests made, or In two Years and three Quarters, they Overrun two
third Parts of the Empire, and were possessed of the whole Country from
Wolfenbuttle in Westphalia, where Duke Hamilton with another Body of Scots
acted, to Prague in Bohemia; and had the King of Sweden Outlived the Battle of
Lutzen, he had bid fair to have taken Winter Quarters at Vienna.
Conquests made so soon.
Where shall we all their ancient Glories trace?
Let Us hasten down to Ramellies a pace;
But stop at Phillipsburg, and ask Turenne,
And read their ancient Trophies on the Rhine,
How they did there the Gallick Name advance,
And by their Blood gave Plumes to To growing France. The Scots Regiments under
the Viscount de Turenn, and particularly Douglass's Regiment, consisting then
of 4 or 5000 Men, were the Flower of his Infantry, and helped to make France
Terrible; as at that time She was to all her Neighbors.
growing France
France, that on Foreign Valor raisd their Throne,
By other Nations Swords, and not their own,
Stripped of that Help how easily they fall,
And faint like Jericho without her Wall.
Recalled from hence they Williams Sword. The Scots were Recalled out of the
French Service by King Charles the second, at the Instance of his Parliament,
soon after the Marriage of the late King William then Prince of Orange, with
the Princess Mary, a little before the Peace of Nimeguen, and Ordered to join
the Prince of Orange's Army in Flanders.
Williams Sword obey,
And beat the French at Mons for Want of Pay, When the Scots were Recalled from
the King of France's Service, they were very ill treated, carried to the
Remotest Parts of France, and there Dismis'd with but very little Money,
ordered to Travel but two or three together, the Country ordered not to Trust
them; and every where great Rewards offered 'em to List, on purpose to force
'em unto their Service; by which means very few of that great Body reached
Home, but they that did, Vowed to be revenged of the French if ever they came
to hands with them, which they made good at the Battle of Mons.
want of Pay;
Soon as the Caledonian Bands appear,
Not Luxemberg himself, The Duke of Luxemberg Commanding the French Army at
Mons, Placing some of his best Infantry at a Post where he expected the Prince;
told some of his Officers, that if the Prince of Orange ventured to Attack him
there, he was sure it must be with the Scots Regiments; intimating that they
were the fittest Troops he had for so desperate a Work.
Luxemberg himself disdaind to fear;
'Twas on their Valor he had raised his Fame,
He knew they would Conquer where soever they came.
He Would seen 'em fight when great Turenn lay dead. When Turenn was killed, the
Scots Brigade stood the shock of the first Line of the German Army, with so
much Resolution, that very much Recovered the French out of the Surprise they
were under for the Loss of their General.
Turenne lay dead,
He Would seen them follow where he Durst not lead! 'Twas Luxemberg's Post that
Day, to have been with the advanced Troops, amongst which the Scots were
posted; but he thought fit to get himself employed elsewhere, which some said,
was taken notice of in the Army, as if he thought the Service too Hot for him.
durst not lead;
He Would seen them fight when all the Army fled.
When wise Wise D. Lorge* who took upon him the Command of the Army at the
Death of Turenn, obtained great Reputation by retreating the Army to an
advantageous Post, while the extraordinary Bravery of the Scots, kept the whole
German Army in play.
de Lorge to shun his own Defeat,
Under their Valor sheltered his Retreat.
The experienced Hero, grave in War and State,
In this as sober, as in that sedate.
Advisd his Master, cautioned by his Fear,
To gain the Scots, or else decline the War.
Then view 'em under fifteen Years Recess,
Ranging through Europe to avoid the Peace.
Battle and Death they make their chief Delight,
And in all Nations teach the World to fight.
Buda the dreadfull'st Siege the World ere saw,
What Hero's did the Fame of Danger Draw?
Lesly. This was, Old Lesly, General of the Imperial Forces, and made Ban or
Governor of Croatia by the Emperor, the same that burnt the Bridge of Esseck,
and tho near 80 Years of Age, and tortured with the Gout, yet performed a great
many desperate Services against the Turks during that War, and some of them in
the Depth of Winter.
Lesly the Old Croatian Ban appears,
And daring Scots led up the Volunteers.
What Actions passed, let only such relate,
Who know how Men resolved to Conquer meet;
Never was Town with such strange Fury filled,
Such Deeds Victoria seldom has beheld;
Such Storms, such Fury, Flesh and Blood nere bore,
Nor Town was ever so maintained hefore;
The desperate Garrison disdain to Fear,
With their own slaughtered Bones the Breach repair;
Contemning Mercy, they like Furies fight,
And just as fast as Life declined, submit.
What Streams of Blood must in such Fights be lost?
What Fatal Price must such a Conquest cost?
Life so bestowed, is always sold too dear,
But VALIANT SCOTS, what Business had you here?
With Noble Blood adorned, and blooming Years,
You were not made to storm like Musketeers;
Scotland run too much venture in your Blood,
To have your Rate so little understood;
You had no desperate Fortunes there to raise
Your Names enough, you could not fight for Praise:
Then why so lavish, why so rashly brave?
To play away the Lives you ought to save;
Scotland has Sons indeed, but none to spare,
To furnish out the Shows and Sports of War;
You are her tenderest part which touch the whole,
And what lets out your Blood, lets out her Soul.
Pardon the Satyr's interrupting. It Is hoped no Gentleman in Scotland will take
this for a personal Satyr; but as I take Volunteering to be a Vice in War, as
it is now practiced, where Men fit to lead Armies, serve as private Sentinels,
the Author hopes he may be excused in condemning the Practice as an Injury to
their Native Country.
Satyrs interrupting here,
She owns, she hates this volunteering War,
When neither King nor Country to retrive,
The injured help, or the Oppressed relieve,
Neither to gain Dominion, or to save;
Men die for nothing but the Fame of Brave.
So Foster hanged himself. A foolish Fellow in England, who often talked of
hanging himself, that he might have a fine Funeral, and at last did it, but
whether upon that account or no, is not very certain.
Foster hanged himself with deep Design,
Only to see himself be buried fine.
Hard Fate of Men, that only for a Name,'
Will in their own Destruction seek their Fame.
That covet Dangers, and ride Post to die,
To live in Air, and WALK in Memory;
Vain Fame with high Fermented Vapor hot,
To be remembered, strives to be forgot.
Wrapped in his Jest, the bubbl'd Hero dies,
Immortalizd in Mortal Memories,
Fill's up a Ballad, made too great in Rhyme,
Is fabl'd into Tale, and dies again by Time.
And this for nothing, but to have it known,
He died an ASS of very great Renown,
A forward Coxcomb, who in haste to die,
Fought for he cared not who, nor cared not why.
One just Excuse indeed some few may give,
That die, because they cannot tell how to live:
These shall in Pity 'scape our Censure here,
So Cowards dare not live, and hang themselves for Fear.
He Is truly brave that Fights in Just Defense
Of Virtue pressed, of injured Innocence,
Himself, the Laws, his Neighbor, or his Prince;
Dares all the lawful Call's of Fate obey,
No Danger will decline, no Trust betray;
While he that heal's his Tortures in the War,
Own's he is a Coward, and only fights for Fear:
As for the Sport of Fighting, that is a Jest,
They talk of most, that understand it least.
Buda reduced, and Gallantry laid by,
Europe the Sweets of short lived Peace enjoy:
Not the Recess of Arms can cool their Fire,
Quenched in the Act, they burn in the Desire;
Not Capuan Plenty, not luxuriant Ease,
The Man of Action's first and worst Disease,
Can Taint their Temper, quench their Thirst of Fame,
Or Rust the pollish'd splendour of their Name.
Their Arms may tarnish, but the Soul's kept bright,
For, spite of Practice, they by Nature fight;
Born Soldiers, fitted from the Birth for Fame,
Bodies all Iron, and their Souls all Flame.
The War revives, Bellona sounds to Arms,
The Scots by Nature ravished with her Charms,
From their remotest Mountains hear the sound,
And Troops of Hero's spread Hibernian Ground;
With Native Fire and sense of Glory filled,
And winged with Joy, they rush into the Field.
In every Action that deserved a Name,
They shared the Hazard, others shared the Fame;
William with Pleasure often led 'em on,
They gave, they guarded, and they loved his Crown;
Smiling he viewed the Wonders of their Hands.
Happy the General Troops like these Commands,
The gladded Monarch said,
when at Namure,
Ramsay fell on and mocked the Gallick Power,
And emulating Nations wondering first gave over.
At Derry, Limrick, Agrim, or the Boyn,
Athlone, Namure, at Steenkirk, or ^anden;
At all, their Hero's fought, at all they died,
And latent Virtue want of Victory supplied.
William, that Men of Courage loved to obey,
How mourned he Douglass, Angus, and Mackay?
Too great a Loss for one unhappy Day.
A Loss that yielded France the Victory;
A Loss that none but Scotland could supply;
None had such to survive, or such to Die.
Should we to recent Memory apply,
And trace the Scots in Modern History:
The present rising Glory of their Name,
Comes up to all that is ancient in their Fame.
At Schellemberg how could they choose but fight,
New Vigor swelled their Nation at the sight;
The very Spot where Hepburn Stormed before. The Scots in the King of Swedens
Army beat John de Werth the Bavarian General, out of his Intrenchments at
Schellembergh, where they had posted themselves almost upon the same Ground
where the French and Bavarians were now Posted. Here Ramsey, and Rea, two
Colonels of the Scots, according to the usual and particular Bravery of these
two Ancient Families, entered the Intrenchments Sword in Hand, with a very great
slaughter of the Enemy.
Hepburn Stormed before,
And Conquering Scots, Imperial Standards tore.
Where Ramsey, Murray, Rhea, and Hamilton,
Like Lions fought, the Swedes amazed looked on,
And saw the impregnable Intrenchments won.
And now the Scots in Valor still the same,
Worthy the Race, and equal in their Flame,
With the same Fury, gain the same Applause,
The same the Courage, and the same the Cause:
The same the Circumstance, the same Success,
That great Gustavus saw. The Bavarians Complemented Gustavus Adolphus, on the
taking the Intrenchments at Schellemberg, as a thing they thought
impracticable; and the People of the Danawert say, it has been thirteen times
Attacked, and never was taken till then; which I take to be an equal Honor to
the Scots Troops under the Duke of Marlborough, as to their Ancestors under the
King of Sweden, these having a great share in the late Attack under the Command
of Lord Orkney, as the other had under Colonel Hepburn.
Gustavus saw, great Marlbro' this.
Let future Poets Blenheims Trophies sing,
And Ramellies to Chime, with Leipsick bring;
There Orkney, Campbell, Hamilton, and Hay,
Shall match the Hero's, and shall match the Day.
To Times last Period hand their Nations Fame,
And every Ages Glory shall the next Inflame.
PART III.
THeir Foreign Deeds are traced, and now we come,
To search the Fund of Fame that is left at Home;
A Thousand Kings. Alluding here to the ancient Figure, in which the Isle of
Britain is generally supposed to be, when every Nobleman was a Sovereign upon
his own Estate, some Marks of which Sovereignty are yet remaining, and within
few Years past, were very visible in several of the Noble Families of Scotland,
particularly in the Family of Douglass, who Pursued, fought, took Prisoner of
War Sir William Hairis of Terriglis, for having withdrawn himself from his
Vassalage or Dependence, and esteeming him as his own Servant, taken in Arms,
where his Jurisdiction or Regality extended, upon his own Authority put him to
Death. Godscross's History of the House of Douglass page 187. The same Earl of
Douglass executed Justice upon Macklalane Tutor of Bumbee, Chief of his Name,
and one of the Principal Houses in Galloway for Murdering one of his Servants,
King James himself interceeded for him in vain.
Kings the mighty Land possess,
In Merit greater, though in Title less.
Kings in Command and in superior Race,
And Virtue Ripens such for Crowns a pace.
Nobility of Blood, their Actions suit,
And Action here indents the Attribute;
Here Families in Lines of Virtue run,
The Father's Merit doubling in the Son.
The growing Honor forms a just Increase,
First Crowns in War, and then Rewards in Peace.
Illustrious Blood with more illustrious Hand,
In proper Channels has been here retained:
The Antiquity which other Nations boast,
Would here turn Modern, and in age be lost.
Scotland in Senior Glory will contend,
When lame Chronology with Age grows blind.
Here mighty Ancestors preserve their Style,
From long Prescription, ancient as the Isle.
Not raised on Party Favor, Bribes and Fear,
Blood, Tyranny, Oppression, Theft and War;
Not raisd by strength OF FACE, or strength of Purse,
A Stock of Money, or a Stock that is worse;
But from the Youth of Time, their Names remain,
When Virtue only could that Fame obtain.
Back, further back than Story can relate,
When Infant Nations fixed their Forms of State.
When Tricks of State and Court Intreague unknown,
No mighty Knave could Brother Villain Crown.
From Blood to Blood their Violence pursue,
First steal their Honors, then proclaim 'em due.
By Fraud and strong Oppressions Crowns obtain,
While those support the Frauds, and these the Reign;
Alternate Violences Fame supply,
The modern Fund of mean Nobility.
If there be any thing in Birth and Blood,
Or were Antiquity but understood;
If the old Trophies of our Fathers Fame,
When thoughts of Virtue burn, would fan the Flame;
Make us their Steps of Dignity pursue,
And Ancient Honors would excite to new.
If any true Nobility remains,
And Virtue could by Blood possess the Veins.
Then let us no farther search the World in vain,
To Ancient Rome, and lost Records of Spain;
Nations in Barbarous Hydra-mixtures raised,
And only by their own too partial Flatt'ries praised.
Fabii, Cornellii, and the Bruti yield
To Caledonian Tribes the Ancient Field.
Cummin, Duff, Donald, Strathern, Hay, and Keith,
And Names would run Fame's Trumpet out of Breath.
Their old Armorial Honors still retain,
While Rome in modern Lines contends in vain.
Nor has the Country lent her partial Fame,
And from her later Towns bestowed the Name,
Not Towns the Names, but Names the Towns Command
And Families take Titles from the Land:
So Douglass, Mar and Southerland survive,
And not from Towns, but Provinces derive.
Kingdoms of old, who tho the Claim's laid down,
Yet in the Antiquity they keep the Crown.
The Blood of Princes in their Race we see,
And modern Merit joins to old Nobility.
Blessed are the Families that great in Blood,
Have thus their truest Honor understood,
That on the Base of Virtue Built their Fame,
And join to that Lesser Praise. I know this word is objected against as
ungrammatical, and therefore by some very carefully avoided in Verse, and by
others, perhaps, too critically Censured; but as I have very good Authority for
the word, I venture the Indignation of the Critics, and anticipate their
Observations, by referring them to the following Examples, (...) prior (...)
minor (...), Which in English cannot be expressed by any other Word than what I
here make use of, LESSER, which is formed from the Comparative Less, exactly
after the same manner.
lesser Praise their Name,
The only Just and truly great Design;
For Virtue helps Nobility to shine.
Then who shall search the long forgotten Roll,
Examine all the Parts, or Sum the whole,
Who shall the Impotence of Art supply,
Beyond the reach of Books or Heraldry?
It Is hoped the Gentlemen whose Names are included in these Lines, will not
sind Fault with the Author for not observing Preceedency either in Dignity or
Antiquity, the necessity of Rhyme, Measure and Cadence being his just Excuse,
and which he desires them to accept in that particular.
There Gordon, Lindsay, Crawford, Mar and Wem^s,
With Seaton, Ramsey, Cuninghame and Gra'ams,
Forbes, Ross, Murray, Bruce, Dunbar and Hume,
And Names for whom no Poet can make Room;
Remote in Birth, in Names and Honors known,
The Caledonian Glory through the World have show'n.
Where shall the Galick Trophies now appear?
The Ancient Belgae would look modern here.
Not Mommerancy, not the great Nassau,
Could Ancestors like these, directly draw.
Douglass with Native Dignitys adorned,
Ancient beyond Record,
Records they scorned.
The World's the general Record. Here I make no question but to be animadverted
upon for my different way of expressing the word Record, and changing the
Quantity, making the Vowel long in the last Syllable of the first, and short in
the last Syllable of the second. But for this, I have so good an Authority,
that all Men will allow it sufficient to justify me; being from such a Master
of the Language as Buchannan himself, as follows. Dies tene^tbras and tenebrae
Dient, Buch. Ps. 19. ver. 2. l. 1. Which being the Verse called Dactilicus
alchaicus, the second Foot is always Jambus, and the third and fourth Dactyli.
Record of their House,
When Histories are silent and abstruse.
The Fund of Families is in their Blood,
And the Famed Scoti. The Author of the History of the House of Douglass, tells
us, That William Douglass, Grandchild to Sholto Douglass, was the Father of the
Noble Family of the Scoti at Placenza in Italy. Fol. 5. And some say, That by a
Marriage between a Branch of the said Family of Scoti, and some of the Ancient
Line of the House of Mar in Scotland, was the Original of the Family of
Marr-e-Scoti, a great and flourishing Family in Italy to this day.
Famed Scoti on their Shoulders stood,
A Race of Princes from their fruitful Stem,
Has been a living History to them.
Their Fame that is past, foretold their Fame to come,
They Are Dukes abroad before they are Dukes at home.
The Nation's willing Honors did afford,
And these cut out their. Glory by the Sword;
For 'twas the early Fortunes of their Blood,
To have their Worth both Crowned and understood;
Princes by their strong Swords possessed their Crowns,
And grateful France their Ancient Glory owns.
When Men are of true Merit first possessed,
Justice prevails, the World supply's the rest.
For Characters will always suit Men's Deeds,
Honors will follow, when our Virtue leads.
The Mighty Branch that now supports the Race,
Ripens the blooming Stock for Fame apace,
With high instructing well directed Hand,
Shows him both how to obey, and how Command,
By Just Example guides him to pursue,
And double all their Ancient Deed's with New.
Himself with steady hand the State directs,
Suppresses Factions, Liberty protects,
Scatters the threatening Clouds, prevents the Storms;
And gently al! mistaken Zeal reforms;
Backward to punish bears the insulting Street,
Yet makes his Patience and his Justice meet:
And when their Pride his Government defies,
PITYS: For it is below him to despise.
Great ANN'S Illustrious Scepter it is he sways,
And while he rules, Envy her self obeys;
Malice may swell, and wild Dislike appear,
But all their Spleen ferments into despair:
Grovling they ly in Grief and Discontent,
Crushed by the Chariot Wheels of Government.
So Devils chaind, their Hate of Heaven express,
But as their Rage grows great, their Power grows less.
Campbells the modern Glory of this Isle,
Their doubling Fame's encreas't in great Argile;
Born to be great, to Noblest Blood allied,
He keeps the Honor, and abates the Pride,
For Action fitted, to the Wars inclined,
True Caledonian Courage swells his Mind;
Fitted his Country's Character to raise,
And by great Actions hand along her Praise.
Of ancient Stock, and long forgotten Race,
Nature has stamped their Glories in his Face.
The strong Impress of every manly Line
In Characters of Native Honor shine,
An Index of the brighter Soul within.
A Race to Caledonia always dear,
And on whose Blood her Liberties appear.
A Race to Honor, and their Country true,
They furnished Funds of Old, he heaps up stores of New.
Nor shall weak prejudice debauch our Pen,
To flatter prosperous Fate, and guild the Crimes of Men
But undistinguished Virtue we'll rehearse,
For partial Praises are below our Verse.
Cursed be that Party-spleen that shuts Men's Eyes,
From the just Merits of their Enemies;
That prepossessed by Feud, denies Applause,
And dares not praise the Man without the Cause.
Where Honor claims it, Honor will be just,
And where Men's Actions praise 'em, all Men must.
Gordon, by Family and Fortune's great,
Though lost in Solitude and long Retreat,
Shall rise in Honor, as He Is great in Mind,
Brave as the Roman, as the Christian kind,
A Generous Enemy, a Faithful Friend.
Faction's below him, if he does dislike,
He always dares to show his Face, and strike;
Treason's a Stab in the dark, that Man that is brave,
May show the En'my, cannot show the Knave.
The Hamiltons of old allied to Fame,
Illustrious in Blood, and more in Name;
In ancient Wars e're other Lines begun,
These had a length of towering Fortunes run.
Titles from Titles from France. The ancestors of this Noble Family obtained
the Title of Duke of Chateas Reault in France; and by which Title they were
known in Scotland, at the time of the Reformation.
France; from Sweden Wounds and Scars,
And battered Bones they bring from Belgic Wars;
Yet fraught with Honor, and rewards of Fame,
Honor revives, and Years increase the Flame.
Eight Noble Branches hand their Glory down,
Channels of Blood from Caledonia's Crown,
Each have large shares of Merit of their own.
Each in their proper Lines their Houses raise,
By Pers'nal and Hereditary Praise;
What Debt of Praise are to the Lesly's due?
Who shall their Family or Fame pursue?
The Bloody Steps no single Line can trace,
Nor Envy fetched from Hell, their History deface.
Born Generals, all by Nature framed for War,
In every Battel's Front their Names appear;
The Swede, the Russ, and the Hungarians yield,
To them the willing Tribute of the Field;
From Esseck Bridge to mighty Astracan,
Their Terrors with the Barbarous Crowds remain.
Grasted to this Old Stock, and to their Fame,
Leven adds Modern Glory to the Ancient Name;
Scotland depends on his experienced Hand,
Safe, Not in Armies, but in his Command.
HE, young in Years, yet very old in Arms,
Guards her from Foreign or Domestic Harms,
His faithful Aids new vigorous Life afford,
And boldly draws Hereditary Sword.
Stuart ancient as the Hills from which they sprung
The Mountains still do to the Name belong;
From hence they branch to every high Degree:
And Foreign Courts embrace the Progeny.
The rising Stem with thirst of Glory fired,
Not he to th'Crown, the Crown to him aspired;
His high attracting Fame the Nation drew,
They gave old Crowns, and Fate supplied the new.
Thy Scepter Caledonia in their Hand,
First raised the real Glory of the Land;
And seven successive Branches held the Crown,
Till Britain veiled, and made the Stuarts her own.
What Blood, what Wars, what strong convulsive Throws,
Britania filled with inbred Vapor knows?
How often the interveening Hand of Blood,
Has their successive Happiness withstood?
Spread the dark Vail, let us hide the dismal Scene,
Let others paint the Horrid-draught, our Pen
Shall show the bright, and wish the rest unseen.
ANN, the remaining Glory of the Race,
With unexampl'd Luster fills the place,
Without their failings all their Virtue shares,
And Britains bright Imperial Joy prepares.
Blessed be the Hour, blessed that auspicious Reign
When ANN, the Stuarts last Glory, shall obtain
That Calm both Nations long have wished in Vain.
When Years of Rapine and Revenge shall cease,
And Feuds of Blood be lost in Floods of Peace;
Reserved for her, reserved to Crown the Line,
Severed too long, the listening Nations Join.
Nature directs, concurring Cause invites,
The Nations say Amen, and all of course Unites.
Then Party Hate and Border Spleen laid down,
Our Hearts shall first unite, and then the Crown;
Britain be one, one End and Interest view,
And hand in hand one Happiness pursue.
A Gallaxy of Worthies now appear,
And spread the Caledonian Hemisphere;
ROXBURGH enjoys the Curse of all man's Praise,
And TWEEDDALE adds trueLustre to the ancient HAYS,
Grave and sedate, he filled his Sovereign's Throne,
Maintained its Honor, and increased his own.
Montrose revives the Ancient Race of Gra'me,
From Time and Injury retrieves the Name,
Lays all his Family Oppressions by,
And in his Countrey's Good, lets just Resentment die;
In Scotlands Secret Council he presides,
With early Prudence every Action guides,
Sober, not dull, Pious, and not precise,
Grave, without Age, without Experience wise;
More thinking, more sedate than he appears,
And older in Understanding than in Years.
Glasgow adorns the Ancient Name of BOIL,
The Name's a constant Honor to the Isle,
A Name Britania always boasts to hear,
For Learning, Wisdom, Wealth and Character
Increased in England, and increasing here.
The God of Music joins when COLVIL plays,
And all the Muses dance to HADDINGTONS Essays;
The Charms are mutual, piercing and complete,
This in his Art excells, and that in Wit.
Seafield, and Mar, and Loudoun guide the State,
By Birth and Place, still more by Merit great.
No Malice can their Characters conceal,
But those direct the Scepter, this the Seal.
The well instructed Pilots of the Realm
Who while just Queensberry steers, assist the Helm:
With waking Cares they all surround the Throne,
Support the Well known burdens of the Crown;
The important Drudgery with Pleasure do,
Their Countrey's Safety, not their own, pursue.
Through Storms of Tumult and Distraction steer,
Not raised with Hope, and not suppressed with Fear;
With Calm, but steady hand the Factions guide
At once, they yield to, and resist the Tide:
Wisely they calm the Feuds Weak Heads create,
And heal the wild Distempers of the State;
To every tender part their Hands apply,
And to the Mischiefs suit the Remedy;
True Patriot Principles their Minds possess,
Their Country them, and they their Country bless.
But their just Zeal to ANN's Immortal Throne,
Makes every Noble Character their own.
Nothing a Princes Wisdom more displays,
Than choice of Counselors,
The double Praise.
Is always first the Monarchs, then their own,
First it illustrates, then supports the Throne.
But we'll no more pursue the mighty Train,
Whom to describe our Verse attempts in vain;
The Muses vail before the Illustrious Throng,
Too bright for Verse, too numerous for our Song;
Our Ancestors had merited in vain,
If our new steps did not their old maintain:
But as our Modern Virtue stands as high,
The present Worthies do the past supply;
A certain Pledge, our Name shall never die.
And now with Just regard let us view the Fair,
Beauty can make no Breach of Union here;
The Equalities agree on either hand,
The Ladies no equivalent demand;
Nor will their Virtue be exhausted here,
But still the Sex their just Proportions bear:
Blessed Mixture, equally Devout and Gay,
For Virtue only can both smile and pray.
No Scale of calculated Right will ly
Betwixt the Quantity and Quality;
England indeed the larger Roll may claim,
And English Beauty will preserve her Name;
But these the Merit equally divide,
Have all their Beauty, only want their Pride.
And now to Wonders turn your listening Ear,
Visit the Commonwealth of Learning here;
See how Apollo's Nurs'ry thrives, and how
Wit blooms in spite of Climat, Storms and Snow;
The Muses all laborious and severe,
Are Gardeners bred, and work like Horses here;
There Seeds of Science carefully they sow,
Here cultivate the Soil, to make 'em grow,
Plant, Prune, Inocculate, the Seasons tend,
And every fruitful Scyon to its Stock they bend.
See here how every Plant in order thrives,
And spite of Clime the tenderest Blossom lives.
Here Epicks thick, as Groves of Laurel grow,
And strong Heroicks, placed in Walks below,
Lyricks and Pastorals in even Lays,
And Panygericks circled round with Bays,
There Knowledge grows, for Quantity and Kind,
The best, and best prepared to instruct the Mind,
Tempered with Modesty, it is set by Set by Zeal. Alluding to the Custom of
Planting Rue and Sage together, which whether it be a vulgar Error or no, is,
that the Rue is supposed to be effectual to keep Toads, and Venomous Creatures
from the Sage.
Zeal
Fitted her rash Infections to repel.
Next this in constant Bloom's a Range of Wit,
And every day it is weeded of Conceit,
Kept thin, entrenched, and never runs to seed,
But ripens gently in its flowery Bed;
For Wit's a Plant so apt to grow in haste,
It shakes the Root, and then decays as fast.
Strong Sciences in pleasing Order stand,
With Borders of Philosophy on either hand.
These well reward the Lab'rers constant Toil,
Are nourished by, and yet improve the Soil.
But above all the Wonders of the Spot,
A simple, Men of Learning often forgot,
In a small Border very cold and dry,
Here thrives that Tender Trifle, HONESTY;
Neglected Weed! from what strange Climate brought,
How seldom found, indeed, how seldom sought?
How do the easy World appear content
With spurious Kinds,
How very often vent
The False for True, and give their Sense the lie,
And make their Interest pass for Honesty?
Another Plant, but ah! how faint it grows?
Not that it is hurt by Climate, Frost, and Snows;
But as if Nature suffered strong Decay,
It withers every where, and dies away.
FRIENDSHIP!
The nicest Plant that ever grew,
Talked of by many, understood by few.
It Is only Help is Honesty, and where
That thrives, it gets some Strength; but's very rare,
By Weeds of Self and Jealousy ore'run,
It Is choked for want of Air, and shaded from the Sun.
But who shall now the thriving Plants describe,
The Ever-greens, that quickening June imbile,
And furnish new Recruits to Levi's Tribe?
Sons of the Prophets at Gamaliel's Feet,
Who extract Learning, then refin't to wit,
By the laborious Lymbeck of the Brain,
Condense the Sp'rit, and let the Humid parts remain,
No loytring Sing-song Muses trifle here,
Weaving THIN FANCY into Webs of Air;
But here they Wed the Sciences for Wives,
And beat like Hemp at Bridewell for their Lives:
The Enquirers here to Ida's Top aspire,
Parnassus coolest Springs, can only quench their Fire.
To Learning's highest Pinacles attain,
By strong assiduous Travel of the Brain,
Ravish the Muses, in their Deeps delight,
And learn with the same Fury as they fight;
To curious search, to things, and Books so pressed,
The Ancients or the Moderns find no rest,
Till Universal Knowledge fills the Mind,
And all the Soul's from Dross, and Ignorance refined.
Hence they to every strong Attainment reach,
And what they learn so well, as well they teach;
In every Art, in every Science grow,
Not proud of knowing, but are proud to know.
Push to a Vice the Lust of doing well,
And in whatever they Practice they excel.
Humes and Da'rymples here adorn the Law,
With steady Justice,
Neither drive nor draw
But with the Head informed, and Hand upright,
Give every Cause its own impartial Weight,
In every Branch of Learning here they rise,
Nothing too high they fear, too low despise,
In every Science, every Just Extreme,
Men of Perfection may be found with them.
The Laws in Mists and Darkness they make clear,
And Physic thrives in spite of wholesome Air,
Pharmacopaea, void of simples, Lives,
And Surgery in barren Practice thrives,
Philosophy mere simple Knowledge vents,
Rather by Nature than Experiments.
Music in spite of Discord, charms the Ear,
And Jarring Parties break no Consort here.
Thus blessed with Art, enricht with Heads and Hands,
Producing Seas, and more productive Lands;
The Climate sound, the People prompt and strong;
Why is her Happiness delayed so long?
Why with such Patience, and so long endure,
Distempers Prudence could so quickly cure?
Why still on Natures Common Bounty live?
And why so soon content with what She Will give?
For where Contentment makes Endeavor less,
It Is then a Vice, and not a Happiness.
So the Prove. The Sluggard would not pull his Hand out of his Bosom to put it
to his Mouth.
famed sluggard starved, and reason good,
For want of feeding, not for want of Food;
Bear the Reproof, the fruitful Climate's known,
Not Heaven or Nature blame, the Fault's your own;
The Earth Adapt to bear, the Air, the Sea,
All fruitful, all to Plenty show the way;
No Barrenness, but in your Indust'ry.
It Is Blasphemy to say the Climates cursed,
Nature will never be fruitful till she is forced;
'Twas made her Duty from her first Decay,
The sweating Brow alone, and laboring hand to obey,
And these she never does, nor dares deny.
And yet this Sloth is not their proper Crime,
It Is due to Poverty, and that to Time.
Hail SLOTH and POVERTY from Stygian Air,
Ushers to Death, and Handmaids to Despair.
Strange Birth, themeer Perfection of a Curse,
That find Men Mis'rable, and make them worse,
Of ill connected self ingendring Birth,
First circulate themselves, and then the Earth;
Infernal Harmony of Causes make,
And in true Circles of Distress they walk,
Vile Sloth and Poverty of Spurious Breed,
Neither from Heaven or Earth, but of themselves proceed,
Begot in Life, by long degenerate Time,
'Twixt Stagnate Virtue, and Impregnate Crime.
'Twin Monsters neither Seed nor Offspring kno',
(...) ^reate, by mere Succession flow.
No proper source, but from themselves they find,
And by supine Infusions reach the Mind.
All Natures Rules by their own Power reject,
And are themselves the Cause, themselves the Effect;
The alternate Misery never leaves the Door,
But Poverty makes Sloth, and Sloth makes poor,
Unnatural Mixtures form the gendring Pair,
Alternately they both beget and bare.
No Proper Seeds of Life, or living show,
They Are born in Death, and in Consumptions grow;
Superior Witchcraft forms the dismal Race,
And Devils unknown below', connect the Face.
The unhappy Wretch, when Hag-rid and possessed,
The Crimes are in his Countenance confessed.
A sanguine Pale and drooping brightness shine,
This always Saturnine, and that supine,
Joined hand in hand, they living Death display,
And Life in full perfection of Decay.
No Misery's so great, but they make worse,
Each others Being, and each others Curse.
They mingle Death with every punct of Time,
And only in Destruction are sublime;
Slow Poisons which no Antidote can cure,
Lingering in Life and in Destruction sure;
Potent in strength their strong Dominions grow,
Not Men but Nations they can overthrow.
Wake Scotland from thy long Lethargic Dream,
Seem what thou art, and be what thou shall seem,
Shake off the Poverty, the sloth will die,
Success alone can quicken Industry.
No more the bondage of reproach endure,
Or bear those Harms thou can so quickly cure.
(...) Land Improvement (...) to Trade apply,
They Will plentifully (...) Industry.
^he barren Muir^ shall weighty sheaves bestow,
The uncultivated (...) Pastures show,
The Mountains Flocks and Herds in stead of Snow.
Natures a Virgin very Chaste and coy,
To Court here is nonsense, if ye will enjoy,
She must be ravished,
When she is forced she is free,
A perfect Prostitute to Industry;
Freely she opens to the Industrious hand,
And pays them all the Tribute of the Land.
The strong labourious Head she Cannot Deny,
She Is only Backward where they will not apply.
Here fruitful Hills, and there the Flowery Plain,
Deep undiscov'rd Funds of wealth contain.
The Silver Veins and vast Mettallick store,
Forbid to call her wildest Mountains poor.
The Mines of Lead, of Copper, and of Coal,
Enrich the several parts, those parts the whole.
Nothing remains to make her Wealth complete,
But that her right Hand and her left may meet.
FINIS.

