A Short View OF The Present State OF THE Protestant Religion IN BRITAIN, AS It
is now professed in the Episcopal Church in England, the Presbyterian Church in
Scotland, and the Dissenters in Both.

EDINBURGH, Printed in the Year, M.DCC.VII.

A Short View OF The present State OF THE Protestant Religion in BRITAIN, etc,
I Always observed in such Cases as this, the only way to come at a Clear
Understanding of Particulars, was to go back to their Generals, to search the
Original of things, and see from thence not how they are represented, but how
they really are in their mere Nature, and Native Circumstances.

In doing this, I shall study as much as in me lies, to give no Offense to any
body, nor concern my self with any thing, however warmly said on that Head, but
to my utmost, keep closs to impartial Truth in Fact, and give my own thoughts
as calmly as I can.

Perhaps the Historical part may be counted superficial, and I am content it be
so; no body can expect a succinct History of Religion in three Sheets of Paper,
nor shall I, remote as I am from Books, Vouchers, and Persons, enter into many
Quotations, designing no other History of these Affairs; but what every Man's
Memory may reflect on, or by very short reading, be informed about.

I have no room to spare for Apologies; As I intend no Offense to any one, so I
hope, no Man will take Offense at me, misconstrue my Meaning, or cavil at
Mistakes in the manner --. If they do, if they will raise Strife from what is
designed for Peace, the Strife shall be theirs, the Peace shall be mine; and to
all false or railing Accusations, I answer in the words of the Text, in the 9
th. Verse of the Epistle of Jude, and no more.

In the beginning of the Fifteenth Century, this whole Island was under the
entire absolute Dominion of Popery; Rulers and People too much united in
following after Vanity and Idols, and very small faint Glimerings of the
Glorious Resurrection of Truth were then only to be seen.

Henry VII. reigning in England, and James IV. in Scotland, had nothing in them
inclining to an Alteration of Religion, but supinely slept -- under the
invincible Operation of the Roman Opiat: Priest Craft, and the Pomp of Religion
had dozvd Mankind, and that Glorious Light which the Spirit of GOD, by the
Preaching of the Apostles, had spread through the World, seemed so overclouded
with the Universal Vail of Superstition, and vile Traditional Performances,
that it looked as if the General Dispensation was at End, the Church of GOD
completed, and the World given up to Original Blindness.

I would not be misunderstood here, as if there were no Appearances in
Particular Places and Persons of a true Light; For God has never left the
Church quite desolate: And I know what has been alleged of the Waldenses,
Albigenses, and other suffering Christians --. But I desire to be taken as I
mean, that a General and dreadful Darkness had at that Time overspread the
World, all the Potentates of Europe bowed at the Feet of Baal; and the Romish
Pontiff executed a Tyrannick Power without Control, if there were any
Professors of Truth, they behooved to be Confessors also; and what Light
appeared, tho it was received with Love, it was a Guest that brought certain
Death with it --: Indeed the wonderful Power of the invisible irresistible
Grace of GOD was in nothing more conspicuous, than in furnishing almost all to
whom he revealed his Truth, with such a Love to it, Zeal for it, and Resolution
in it, that Persecution and Martyrdom were but mere Agents in the Propagation
of Truth; and Sanguis Martyrum was at that time more than ever proved to be
Semen Ecclesiae.

In this suffering posture the Affairs of the Church stood at the coming of
Henry VIII. to the Crown of England; the first part of his Reign gave little
Hopes to any that a Reformation could have its Rise in a Prince who committed
the Famous John Lambert to the Fire, and appeared qualified to be the most
Famous Persecutor of Gods Church that ever was in the World, being in his
Conduct Politic, in his Nature choleric and cruel, in his Government
Tyrannical, and in his Religion nothing at all, but -- what was guided by his
Ambition and Interest.

But behold how the Divine Power is magnified, in making his Enemies destroy
themselves; Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, and the Wrath of Man in this day,
brought to pass the Glorious and determined Designs of God, and the Consusions
and Extravagancies of the World assisted to open the Eyes of such whose Hearts
God at the same time had touched with His Grace; and now the Great Light of
Truth began to break out between the Clouds, and by wonderful and various steps
of Providence, too long to relate, All the Mists of Darkness, Ignorance and
Superstition fled away, and Truth in its Native Luster shone over these Parts
of the World.

For now Luther had broke in upon Error in Gormany; like a Torrent the Kings of
the Earth began to hate the Whore; and all the Northern Part of Europe fell off
from Idolatry, both Princes and People.

The various Turns in England under Henry VIII. about the Article of Divorce,
the Regale, and other things, widned a Breach between him and the Pope; and
those lucid Intervals gave such breathings to the Reformed Religion, that it
advanced exceedingly, till even in his Reign, it crept into, first his Cabinet,
and then his bed.

In this Crisi^, he struck the two great Preliminary Strokes at the Root of
Popery, in which, tho I see no Ground to suggest, he had any Religious aim, yet
Providence, who acted him as the Instrument, without giving him the Principle,
brought to pass the End by the involuntary Agency of what Means he thought sit.

These two Blows at Popery, which I call preliminarys, were casting off the
Popes Supremacy, and overturning these Seminaries of Filthiness and.
Superstition, the Abbeys and Monasteries.

And here any Body may see the Reason of my going thus far back in this
Account, and which perhaps they might begin to think impertinent to my purpose.
But the Case is this, Had King Henry's Zeal been for Retormation indeed, or
rather had he not been acted by Pride in one, and Avarice in the other, that
Step had been taken another way, which if it had, the Snares that have
followed, had been perhaps prevented. I explain my self thus.

Had Henry VIII. been Enlightened by a true Knowledge, in proportion to his
Circumstance, had his Fury been a Religious Zeal --, had he been acted by the
Christian, not the Monarch, when he pulled down the Supremacy of the Pope, he
had erected the true Gospel Supremacy of Christ Jesus, and in this unhappy
Mistake, has been found all the brooding Snakes of Ecclesiastic Tyranny, which
this part of the World has been plagued with ever since.

I Will repeat it another way yet plainer, I hope I shall be excused the
Tautology.

Henry VIII, A mere Tyrant, a Man of no Religion in his inside, and but very
little in the outside; for the Tyrant was too rampant in him, to suffer him to
be a Hypocrite, when he pulled down the Supremacy of the Pope, immediately set
up his own; this was, I say, only dethroning one Devil to set up another;
however, the Church was yet Popish, the Reformation young, and the Heads of the
Reformers were glad to lay hold of this Handle to pull down what they really
struggled with, as Tyrannical; not foreseeing that the Tyranny still remained,
tho the Masters were changed, or that this Monster called the temporal
Supremacy, was big with future Mischiefs, which generating from one another,
would still bring the Church of God into, at least, unscriptural Bondage.

But let no Man read this with Prejudice at the Good Men who were the Agents,
who in the simplicity of their Souls, did this, and by it laid the Ax
effectually to the Root of Religious Subjection; and the impious Ambition of
the Church of Rome: If God Almighty for our Sins, and partly for Punishment,
suffered yet this Canaanite to remain in the Bowels of the Reformation, without
doubt he had his Divine Ends in it, which I shall not presume to enquire into.

On this Foundation has however been built, that unhappy Structure of Division,
which has made such Chasms in Gods Church, broke in so much upon our Charity,
and fatally upon our more perfect Reformation, even to this Day.

For the Supremacy in Matters Ecclesiastical, being resolved in the King, began
to produce strange Effects, and some Martyrs, as they call them, on the Romish
side died for denying it, such as Sir Thomas Moor, Bishop Fisher and others, as
in Burnets History of the Reformation, Vol. 1. may be seen at large.

I shall touch at some of the Evils, that setting this Dignity on the head of
the Temporal Prince brought with it, and these were two. First, That in Matters
indifferent in themselves, the Command of the Civil Magistrate, has Power to
determine us, and make those indifferent things necessary, and hereon is built
all our Ceremonial, that has since caused such Division in the Protestant
Churches here. And, Secondly, This I give as the Reason, or rather the
Occasion, that our English Church reformed into Episcopacy, and a Pompous
Hierarchy, rather than a Calvinistical Parity.

This is what we mean by the Regale, which of course brought the Pontificate
along with it, and in this Scotland had the Advantage of England; for that the
Reformation in Scotland being not in the Direction of the Prince, but rather in
Opposition to the Regent the Queen Mother, the Pomp, the Magnificence, and the
outside of the Matter lost all the Reverence it had in the Court of Princes,
where it seemed to be Carress't from some suitableness between them in Matters
of Dominion.

It Is true, Queen Mary resigned this Authority to the Pope, and Queen Elizabeth
was not very hasty in resuming it again, as it is plain from Burnet's History of
the Reformation.

The Church of England, though first Reformed, being under the Reign of a Young
King, he was easily prevailed with to form the Model of Church Government in
this manner, as having his Eye more at the main Point, viz. The rooting out of
Idolatry and Superstition, but had not yet had the Episcopal Hierarchy debated,
or its Scriptural Authority called in Question.

As to Queen Elizabeth, she rather went back in the Reformation of Ceremonies,
than foreward in destroying them; for which two Reasons are assigned by the
Writers of that Age.

1 st. Policy, That by the preserving some sunilitude to the old Rites, she
might, if possible, bring the Papists to comply with her way, and so prevent a
Division.

2. Her natural Gayness of Temper, which inclined her to be much in Love with
the Pomp and Shows of Religion.

In King James the first, a new and unheard of Doctrine started into the World,
found first in the Heads of his Flatterers, That Kings were immediately clothed
with their Power from above, that they Governed Jure Divino, and consequently
must be obeyed as Gods Ordinance, and without any Control.

I shall not run into the dark Particulars of that wretched Doctrine, nor the
Mischiefs it brought upon both Nations; but having assigned the proper
Original, both of Prelacy and Ceremonies, the two great things now debated, I
shall proceed to examine what has been the Consequence of these things in these
Kingdoms.

And First, I must own they brought immediate Contention into the Reformed
Churches, and afterward all the Divisions, Schisms some call them, and Debates
that have been in the World, since their Foundation.

There were indeed early Differences in the Reformed Churches in England, and
Bishop Hooper, and Bishop Ridly cont^^ded a little too warmly on both sides,
till Affliction and Suffering taught both of them more Charity; and when they
came both to die for the Essentials of Religion, it taught them to own, the
Root of Religion might be sound, where the Blossom had not the same flagrance;
that the Faith, Hope, Love, and other Christian Graces might be preserved,
where they differed in the Circumstances.

However, I believe no man will Dispute with me, that the very Bishops
themselves in those Times were Good Men; of Holy and Blameless Lives, sound and
wholesome Doctrine; constant and Laborious in Preaching, of firm and unshaken
Faith, of invincible Fortitude in the Cause of Christ, and sealed the
Reformation with their Blood; and tho I am as far from Episcopacy in my Opinion
as any man in Scotland, yet I must do Justice; these were Bishops, of whom five
besides Archdeacon Philpot, past the Fiery Trial, and laid down their Lives in
the Glorious Cause of Religion.

These were not dumb Dogs, but Zealous Teachers of the Good People, and having
taught Christ first, they died for him afterward: A thing easier to talk of
than to do.

In Queen Elizabeth's Time, the Regale and Pontificat continuing still in the
Church, Bishops and Ceremonies, reserved their Legal Sanction or Confirmation
rather; but as the World began to increase in Knowledge, and Light spread it
self further than usual; so People began to be much out of Love with the Pomp
of Service, as with a thing remote from the true Institution of the Gospel; and
tho several Acts of Parliament were made against them, yet their Number
increased every Day; the Queen indeed proceeded very severely with them, to
reclaim them: And King James, tho bred up under another kind of Church
Government himself, carried it yet higher.

But as force never yet could be effectual over Religion; so all these
Proceedings served but to make the persecuted People increase.

Their Original, and I must own, I think a most just Objection was, that the
Church required a yet farther Reformation, that it was their Duty to serve God
in the way which was most agreeable to the Scriptures, and they having disliked
several things in the Ceremonies and Liturgy of the Church of England, pressed
for a greater Purity of Worship: Hence they were called PURITANS.

The Holiness and Blamelessness of their Lives, the inoffensiveness of their
Behavior to all Persons, and the General Character they had, was such, that
the Name first given them in Derision, was afterward in great Honor, both at
home, and especially among the Protestant Churches Abroad; and Erasmus, who was
in England at that time, and converst with them; gave his Opinion of them in
this noble Expression, Sit anima mea cum Puritannis Anglicanis.

Yet even these Puritans, than whom Europe never showed better Christians,
remained in the Communion of the Church of England, and in Subjection to
Episcopacy.

The Reason they gave for it was, that tho they could not join in many things
of their Worship, yet they thought it their Duty not to separate, and make a
Breach or Schism in the Church.

Note, for I desire to be rightly understood, I do not say it was their Duty
not to separate, but they were convinced of its being their Duty, and so it
might become a Duty to them.

And that it was apparently thus, appeared afterward, even that when their
Kings put that abominable Book of Sports upon then, for which all the most
Godly and Pious Ministers were deprived; yet they did not gather separate
Churches, they went about Preaching, Catechizing, and Instructing Private
Families; but they neither Baptized nor administraed the Lords Supper, but
their People Conformed in that to the established Church.

If it is inquired why I observe this, it is because, 1. I would note with what
Force and unwillingness the Dissenters in England have been driven to be
Dissenters, and as it were, thrust out of the Church. 2. Because of alike
backwardness to separate, which appeared at the last juncture in 1661, which
some Censure the Dissenters, I think too severely for.


But to return to the Puritans:

The Government being resolved to push them upon all extremities, and put every
thing upon them that they knew they would not comply with, an Opportunity
offered to try whether it was merely for the sake of Persecution and
Oppression, that they were thus used, or whether being really afraid of them,
their General Absence would have been grateful to them.

For the Discovery of a Planting in the North part of America, called New
England, happening about this time, they Petition King James for Leave to go
over and plant themselves there --, which not to enter here into the
Circumstances of their Address, or its Reception, tho the History of it is very
diverting, was granted them.

Immediately the whole Kingdom was in motion, and nothing was to be seen, but
hiring Ships, packing up Goods, selling Estates, Jewels, Household Stuff, and
Equippages, as if the whole Nation was going to transplant.

The first Families that went, met with Terrible severity in ^old, Famine, and
Want of all things, particularly of Habitations in a barren uncultivated
Wilderness; but what will not People suffer for the Liberty of their
Consciences? not discouraged by the Distresses they went through, they went on,
and were followed by such Multitudes, and with such Wealth, that if I remember
right above 19000 People were found to have gone over in a very few Years; and
so generally were they bent upon it, that the Council had it several times
under debate to stop them.

But King James dying, and the Confusions of the next Reign coming on, the
Civil Wars broke out, and the Power of the Parliament prevailing, the Principle
before mentioned, of Purity in Worship, obtained on the Nation, Episcopacy was
wholly suppressed, and a New form of Church Government erected.

This not only established Liberty to all the Puritans, and put a stop to their
flying Abroad, but the Scriptures with the Pattern of the Primitive Churches,
being the Rule of their Establishment, a General Assembly of Divines was
called, who sat at Westminster --, what their proceedings were, how they
entertained a Brotherly Correspondence with the Assembly in this Country, how
they unhappily divided again into different Opinions, the Contests about the
Jus Divinum of Church Government, and of their manner in particular; these are
things too long to enter upon here, and something Foreign to my Purpose also.

But to come as fast as possible to the present Times, at the Restoration of
the Monarchy in King Charles II. this whole Fabric, so it seemed good to the
Almighty, fell at once, and the Episcopal Hierarchy, Liturgy, Ceremonies, etc.
were restored.

The King, whether sincerely desirous to unite his Subjects, in possible, or
not, is needless to determine here, the Consequence best explained his Meaning;
but however, in pretense and outside he called it, appoints a Conference at the
Savoy, and granted a Commission to certain on both sides, to treat of an
Accommodation of Differences.

The Ministers gladly accept of this Conference, and principally being made to
believe that Concessions being made on their side, like Concessions would be
made on the other, and it might be possible to prevent a Breach in the whole.

They then had several Meetings among themselves, to consider how far they
might comply, and as they all thought it their Duty to go as far as possible:
So the Latitude of some People went farther than others.

I shall not Justify or condemn here, it is not my present Business; I shall
readily own some Men went farther than any Body of the Dissenters in England
would go now, and farther than they themselves would ever after have gone again.

They offered to submit to a Superintendency; or call it what you will, a
moderate Episcopacy, and I shall not dispute with any Man, whether they did not
offer to go higher than is consistent with a Presby terian Parity.

They saw that whole Body going to be rent in Pieces; they saw themselves going
to be deprived of their Ministerial Function, and rendered incapable of doing
the Good they were dedicated to, and they thought it their Duty to go as far as
possible to avoid the greater Evils they saw before them, to themselves, the
Church of God, and the Power of Religion in general.

Let those that please to condemn their Latitude, take it in what Sense they
think fit, I readily grant all that is Matter of Fact in their Concession, and
which Mr. Baxter has at large given an account of in the History of his Life.

I shall not examine how far the present Body of the Dissenters are affected by
it, or are to be censured for it, or are any way concerned in it, and I wave it
here for that Reason.

The Concessions of the Dissenters being delivered in, the King told them, He
was well pleased they agreed to the Essence of Episcopacy; and renewed his
Assurances to them of his earnest Desire of an Accommodation.

What the Treatment they met with from the Church Party upon these Concessions
was, is very remarkable, and might put it out of any bodies thought ever to
apprehend a Conjunction.

Their Concessions being rejected, the Ministers were immediately put to the
Test of their Fidelity, and it is remarkable; that of all these that offered
their Concessions, very few, if any, conformed; above 3000 of the best, most
Learned, and Pious of the Ministers, and who enjoyed the largest Benefices
rejected the Offers of Bishoprics and Preferment, and quitted their Livings;
because they could not comply.

And thus the Episcopal Hierarchy was again re-established in England --,
several Persecutions of the Dissenters followed in the times of King Charles
II. the Rigor and Cruelty of which are standing Testimonies that they are very
far from being Episcopally inclined.

Several Acts of Parliament have been since made to render them as uneasy as
possible, as the Act of uniformity, I mean the Amendments to it, the five Mile
Act, the et cactera Oath, the Sacramental Test, and others.

But the Gentlemen on that side have seen their Error, and even these we call
High-Church Men, are now forewardest to make Concessions to the Dissenters, in
order to bring them in to the Church --, what their Design is, he must be
blinder than I will suppose any of my Readers to be, that does not see; but
they do the Dissenters this Service in it, to testify for them, that no
Concessions will now bring them in, but such as shall bring the Worship and
Discipline of the Church down to the Test of the Scriptures --, and this
farther clears them of all Suspicion of being Episcopally inclined.

And thus I have brought the Church of England part of this Discourse down to
the latter Times of King Charles II.

At his Death the Successor was a Papist, and the first Step he took, was to
face about to the Dissenters, and by the Gloss of Charity, and General Justice,
court them to his Party, giving them Liberty, but on the foot of his
Prerogative, not the Laws, to draw them into the Snares, of, at least, a tacit
Acknowledging his Right to do so.

The Generality of the Dissenters saw the hook through this Bait, and tho they
accepted their Liberty, and carried it dutifully to their Sovereign; yet they
professed their Dissatisfaction at having it given in an unparliamentary manner.

Upon which these Famous Lines were made which every Body had in their Prints
and Discourse. The Declaration's but a Trojan Horse,
The Form's illegal, and the Matter's worse.


Some indeed were drawn into the Snares of Addressing, tho they were generally
Opposed by the best and greatest part of the Dissenters, and those that did it,
thank't him for the Liberty indeed, yet were ignorant both in the Design, and
unbelieving in the Consequences, as appeared in that as soon as their Eyes were
opened, they started back, and testified their Concern for having been drawn in
so far, of which presently.

This also farther appeared in that, when the King, who thought he had gained
one Point, was for pushing at another, vlz. the taking off the Penal Laws and
Test; the Dissenters, tho they had suffered so deeply, and these Penal Laws
were both wicked in their Nature, and particularly pointed at them; yet they
generally rejected it, and declared they had rather be oppressed by the Church of
E. than have both the Church of England and themselves too, torn to Pieces by
Popery or those Laws invaded by the dispensing Power of the Prince; nor could
all King James his Booted Apostles bring them off from this.

In the Sense of this the Church of England, and the Dissenters made that
famous Capitulation, on which the inviting over the Prince of Orange,
afterward the Glorious Restorer of Britains Liberty was built, and which is
expressed in the Eighth Article of the Memorial to that Prince, on the
Performance of which Treaty, the Establishment of the Church of England, and
the Tolleration of the Dissenters are equally built, and supported by Right,
Truth, and Fundamental Law, and thus they both stand at this Day.

I come now to the Reformation of the Church of Scotland; which beginning later
than that of England, by about twelve Years, and having no Bonds of Tyranny
upon them, which as I have noted, drew England into the Snare of the Regale;
but their Reformation being made by the People themselves, and Mr. Jobn Knox
being their Calvin, and who sent or went to Geneva on purpose to concert the
best Grounds of a National Settlement, they had nothing imposed upon them, nor
any body to impose it.

The Lords which headed them, referred the whole Settlement of Religion to the
Ministers, they had the Mischiefs England was fallen into by a partial and
pompous Reformation before their Eyes, and thus they reformed at once into the
complete Model, both as to Discipline and Worship, which we find at this day.

Nor were they so dark in their Foresight, as not to expect all the Rage and
Opposition the Enemies of such a Reformation could be guilty of, and to secure
the People therefore as far as possible in the strict Adherence to the mighty
Work they were engaged in, they contrived the most Solemn, Awful and Tremendous
Obligation, that I believe, any Nation ever bound themselves in, since the Oath
of God, which Moses made the Children of Israel take at Mount Horeb.

This is what they call the National Covenant, in which the People bind
themselves and their Posterity, in the most solemn manner to God Almighty, to
adhere to, maintain and defend to the utmost of their Power the Reformation
they had settled, the Doctrine, Discipline and Government of the Church, as
expressed in their confession of Faith, and several other Articles both of Civil
and Ecclesiastical Constitution therein expressed, needless, and too long to be
repeated here.

This Covenant was made first in the Year, 1581. the new Reformation being then
threatened with many Enemies, as well Foreign as Domestic --, and it was
renewed again, in the Year 1590.

I am far from raising the least Scruple at, or making any Reflection upon the
Nature, the Canse, the Manner, or Obligation of this Covenant, or any Branch of
it; they that construe me so, do it to cover the Shame of the other ill
Treatment which I have daily from them.

I frankly own it a solemn, and almost just Obligation, and declare I never
meant in any thing I said, or printed, the least Reflection against it; and
it is very just I should have the explaining my own words.

If what I have said any where, gives a seeming Reflection, I should be very
sorry, for the sake of them that may ignorantly mistake me; as for those that
maliciously and wilfully mistake me, they are worth no Honest Man's Notice, nor
is it on their account in the least, that I take notice of it here; but to
disabuse those who are imposed upon by such.

I freely recognize the National Covenant, and what I said in the sixth Essay
of our Fathers eating these sour Grapes, and us their Children's Teeth set on
edge by them. I wonder any Man should be so unjust as to turn my words to a
Meaning, That the Covenant is a sour Grape that sets the Childrens Teeth on
Edge. I therefore declare it to be only brought as an Allusion to those People
who load themselves with more Obligations in their Notions of the Covenant,
than the Covenant really imposes upon them --, and the Sense of the place in
which it is brought, will allow me this to any impartial Person.

I was proving that the National Covenant is not at all concerned in the Union;
I acknowledge first, that the Covenant is binding to Posterity, and I add, that
for Argument sake, I Will grant; whether I believe it or no, it has all that
Obligation they allege, let that be what it will --, signifying thereby, they
do reckon greater Obligations than really are in the Covenant, and this I call
eating sour Grapes, 6 th. Essay, P. 20. and this I leave to any impartial
Censure.

If this be not Satisfaction to any Honest Man, that I have not the least
Disrespect for the National Covenant, I shall on any Reasonable Sentence of
indifferent Judges, make such more solemn Declaration or Acknowledgment as they
can desire.

But to go on with my History of the Reformation in Scotland, there was a great
Difference in it from what had been in England, for here it was made perfectly,
without the Assistance, and contrary to the Intention of the Sovereign --, and
the Regale therefore found no body to espouse it, but the Reformers had
opportunity to make their Model as complete as they could.

I know it has been objected, that in the Infancy of the Reformation, they
found the very Essence of Episcopacy necessary, and that was in the
Superintendents named in the Church Policy, one of the first Instruments of
settlement devised for their Church, the Model of which had been brought from
Geneva by Mr. John Knox, and some have raised Pleas from hence for the
Prelatick Power, as the most Original Institution, and the like of the Common
Prayers.

But the Bishops would be ill pleased to be no other kind of Bishops than those
were, who tho they had a Diocese indeed, yet were subject to be deposed by the
ordinary Ministers of their own Bounds, and therefore I do not bring this to
justify Prelacy, but to relate as near as I can, the Fact as it lies, and the
Use of it shall appear presently,

The Superintendents indeed had their Diocesses prescribed, and it is called by
that very name, and they had power to plant Ministers, settle Churches, and do
several things, which at that time could not be done without them; but I must
always insist upon their subjection as a Clause that Chocks all the Efforts to
prove the first Reformation Episcopal.

However, they were Superintendents, and therefore some kind of Superintendency
may not be inconsistent with Presbyterian Parity, and that's all the use I shall
make of it.

I find another instance of this, which serves the present Occasion, and that
is a Letter written in the Year (...) from the Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, to the Bishops in England, and in a differing Style from what we
write here now; the letter begins thus.

The Superintendents, Ministers and Commissioners of the Church within the
Realm of Scotland to their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors in England, who
have renounced the Roman Antichrist, and have professed with us the Lord Jesus
Here is something very remarkable, and worth nothing. 1. That the Church of
Scotland esteemed, even the Bishops and Pastors in those days, as Brethren
profelling with them the Lord Jesus, a quite different Language from those who
style them Dumb Dogs, poor Rogues, etc. Indecencys, which must be offensive to
modest Ears, were the case much worse than it is. 2. The Church of Scotland was
as far from owning Episcopacy it self then as now, and in the very Letter, they
exclaim against the Pomp and Ceremonies of Worship; but it did not at all break
off their Charity from the Persons of the Bishops and Pastors, whom they still
called Brethren, and owned they profess't with them the Lord Jesus. 3. The
Appellation of Brethren was most just, for that the


Bishops in those days, tho Prelates, vested with Civil Power, wearing the
Habit, and every way practicing their Church Power as now, yet were Holy and
worthy Christians, and of the same Class with Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer, Farrar,
and Blessed Hooper, who all of them sealed the Reformed Religion with their
Blood, and durst pass to the Stake, and the Flames in maintaining the true
Protestant Faith, against that Roman Antichrist here mentioned.

Let no Man suspect me here of favoring Episcopacy; for tho of late Years, the
very Men have been a Scandal to the Office; yet I profess were the Bishops Now
all Hoopers and ranmers; I could not agree to their Church Government: However,
I cannot call it a damning Error; certainly a Bishop may go to Heaven, or else
our want of Charity must be great for the Martyrs; I am therefore for letting
them alone, so far, I mean as respects Civil Treatment, and fair Usage --; it is
enough the Church of Scotland is fenced against them by Law, and the Debt of
common Civility is due to all the World.

In like manner we find the Church of Scotland using a Liturgy in former Times
--, I shall not infer that she ought to be distrusted on that Score, as likely
to relapfe to it.

But this I shall observe, that Liturgies unimposed, have always been in use in
the Church, even from the first 300 Years, and therefore are not so Frightful
as some people make them, and the Directory is a Liturgy in its kind; all the
Reformed Churches have Liturgies, and all that could be desired in that case,
by the Dissenters in 1661 was, 1. That they be reformed. And, 2 dly. That they
be not imposed.

To prove that a Liturgy and Common Prayer were used in Scotland, take the
following Instances.

1. In the Church Policy mentioned before, we have these words, In great Towns,
we think it expedient, that every day there be either Sermon or Common Prayer.
And again, On the day of the Public Sermon, we do not think the Common Prayer
needful to be used. 2. In the Directory for the public Worship in Scotland, we
have this Introduction or Preface; "In the beginning of this Blessed
Reformation, our wise and Pious Ancestors took care to set forth an Order for
redress of many things, which they then, by the word, discovered to be vain,
erroneous Superstitions and Idolatrous in the public Worship of God --. This
occasioned many Godly and Learned Men to rejoice much in the Book of Common
Prayer at that time set forth."
The Sum of all this is, not at all to favor either Episcopacy or Liturgy in
their Attempts to be either justified or restored in Britain: let no Man
mistake me, but to do Justice against furious Censures, who at the same time,
that the Nations professing both sorts, are going to unite, your to represent
them as mere Popery or Heathenism, that the Dissenters in England may be the
easier Censured for offers of Compliance with them, and this I profess to be my
single Reason for giving these Instances; as for those who will have me mean
what I never intend, I leave them to their own ways, and contemn their want of
Candor.

It Is enough the Church of Scotland is reformed from this, all the burdens of
Ceremony, Forms and Hierarchys are taken away, and Purity in both Worship and
Discipline obtained; but there is a Christian Temper and Charity toward the
Church of England certainly due, who, tho not so far reformed, are yet our
Brethren, and of whom we yet hope, and ought to pray that they shall one day be
effectually Illuminated; this Temper and Charity, I hope, shall now increase on
an Union, and that all the Contention shall be to out-preach, outlive, and
out-practise one another, emulating, and thereby provoking one another to Love
and to Good Works.

But to go back to the Church of Scotland, the several Convulsions she has felt
by the Interposition of Tyranny, Conquest, and sometimes Episcopacy, are to be
seen at large in the Historys of both Kingdoms, and I shall not enter upon them.

The Persecutions of the Honest suffering Inhabitants are a melancholy
Testiwmony of the Assaults the Devil and his Agents have made upon the
Reformation here, the Courage, Constancy, and vigorous Opposition of the
Zealous Confessors of Christ and his Church in this Nation deserve a better
Historian, and one less a Stranger to Scotland than I am, to record, and call
for more leisure, and more room than I have in this small Tract, and I
therefore leave them with this Remark, That no Nation in the World has with
more Zeal and Fidelity opposed all the Impositions, Innovations and Barbarities
of the Enemies of Truth; than this Nation, and more I cannot say here.

Under these suffering Circumstances, they continued, with some short
Intervals, till their being incorporated with England in the time of Oliver
Cromwell, when tho they seemed to be under a Military Government; yet they had
their Representatives in Parliament, were Taxed but in Proportion to the
Representative; and as I am informed here, their Subjection, such as it was,
was attended with an Increase of Wealth, Trade and Property.

At the Restoration, they had Episcopacy, Tranny and Superstition restored just
as in England; Ministers that could not conform, turned out, silenced,
persecuted, fined, banished, imprisoned mutatis mutandis, just as in England,
except only that their Cruelties and Inhumanities here went farther than they
did there.

Thus they continued till the Revolution, at the happy coming of the Great
Deliverer of the whole Island, King WIlliam; when Tyranny fled, and Guilt drew
in her blushing Countenance; Law, Truth, Justice and Liberty reviving, the
Church of Scotland obtained a Resurrection from a Hundred Years of Misery,
Uncertainty, and Distress.

Then Episcopay again vanished in its turn, and its Elder Sister Tyranny,
abdicated with her; the Presbyterian Government of the Church was restored to
its Primitive Freedom, and to the full Exercise and Extent of all its Legal
Rights, as it is this day, and thus far relates to the History of both Churches.

I come Now to the Dissenters in England, as the third Class of People, I am to
enter upon.

Of the Dissenters in England.
I left them ejected, contemned, persecuted, and oppressed during the Reign of
the late King Charles; wheedled and amused, under his Brother King James,
restored and tolerated under King William; and yet farther secured of that
Liberty, tho under several Invasions, by the Vigilance of the Honse of Lords,
and the Honor, Justice and special Favor of her present Majesty, whose
Concern for them, Clemency and Justice to them, and free Adherence to their
complete Toleration, I hope they wlll never forget.

Here I desire to speak something to the Matter of dissenting from the Church
of England in general, and then to the Endeavors of Reconciliation on both
sides; and I hope that true stating the Matter of Fact, will clear up all the
Doubts People may entertain on both sides without invectives, personal
Reproaches, Railery, or ill Treatment of the Parties, with which I shall no
ways concern my self.

I have deduc't the Dissenters from the Church of England, from them they came
out, the Reason of their dissenting, I have confined to one Main Head, viz.
Purity of Worship, which was the first; subsequent Scruples followed indeed,
which were levelled at, what I call the Regale and Pontificate, the Supremacy
of Civil Power, and the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

These drove them out of the Church, and these only; for as to Doctrinal
Articles, they are allowed to be Orthodox, and all the Dissenters frankly
subscribe them, the Quakers excepted, and the last Clause of the 27 th. Article
to the Anabaptists.

It being objected by some, That Offers have been made by the Dissenters to
come into the Church, I desire to speak directly to it, only to premise
something which I think necessary in this place, relating to the Church of
England her self.

1. The Dissenters, in their separating from the Church of England; do by no
means disown her being a true Church, they charge her with no Doctrinal Error,
nothing Heretical or Antichristian, I mean as a Church.

2. No Man can be so void of Charity as to judge that a Man adhering to the
Church of England, and whose Conscience is not farther enlightened, cannot be
saved.

3. No Man then can deny, but that the Dissenters in England would gladly come
into the Church of England, and become one Body with them again, and ought to
do so, would they abate, alter, or remove all those things in which they differ
from them, which do not appear warranted by the Word of God.

This being laid down, it will follow. 1. That a simple offer of complying with
the Church, can be no matter of Charge against the Dissenters, if the
Conditions on which they offer it are thus qualified. 2. Those that have
offered more, are not to be justified, nor shall not by me; and those that have
not, ought not to be condemned for the Mistakes of their Brethren, and a just
Distinction shall be the Work before me.


I come then to speak to the Matter of Fact, as some have alleged it, that the
Dissenters in England have made Offers to conform to the Church of England --;
I readily grant it is true, and I think I may as readily grant all that has
been said upon that Head, which amounts to this, and no more, That some of the
Dissenting Ministers at the Conference at the Savoy, and before at Breda,
willing, if possible, to avoid a Breach, and keep the Office of their Ministry,
did offer to submit to a moderate Episcopacy, or as the King himself called it,
owned the Essence of Episcopacy.

I Will grant, that the latitude of some of their Principles, and the particular
extensive Charity of others, and the Circumstances of the whole at that time,
carried them farther than would consist with the Presbyterian Parity now
insisted on by both Churches.

Nay, I Will grant more than is asked, and I perceive, more than some People
desire I should grant, viz. That they went farther than themselves, when they
saw farther into it, would afterward agree to, and a great deal more than
others of their Brethren, even, at that time, would comply with.

But I make no question to prove here, that there can be no just Argument drawn
from hence, to prove that the Dissenters now in England, should be charged with
the same Compliance, or distrusted on the Account of what then past --. But on
the contrary, that there are very good Demonstrations to prove they would by no
means comply with any such thing; and that the dissenting in England, and in
Scotland, is on the same Foundation with one another, and no other.

The Debate therefore of the Compliance in 1661, I take to be at an end here;
Because I grant all that can be alleged on that head, I neither Justify nor
approve the Concessions offered, tho at the same time the other Party alleged
they were no Concessions at all, but what were destructive to Episcopacy, and,
as they called it, a Plot against it.

I must own, I think, That suppose the Compliance of those Men as sinful as we
please, they were Great and Good Men, they are dead, and gone to their Rest,
and their Works follow them; their Labors remain standing Monuments of their
Worth and Excellence, and seem to merit that their Infirmities should be buried
in the Grave with them.

Let any Minister in Britain first make it appear, that he has been blessed with
being made the Instrument of the Conversion, restoring and comforting as many
Souls, as Mr. Baxters Call to the Unconverted, his Saints everlasting Rest, and
Mr. Hows Blessedness of the Righteous, and he shall pass with me for the
greatest Blessing of his kind, that God has left us in this Day.

Works of this Value deserve their Savor in the Hearts of all good Christians,
and if some Opinions of these Men do not agree with ours; yet Charity ought to
restrain our Censures of such Men, as God has made eminently useful in his
Church, at least let us abstract the Good, and let the Bad sleep, that what we
Dislike may not prejudge the Minds of those who may receive Good from the other.

This I think is a Christian way of dealing with them, and they that reflect
most upon their own miscarriages and failings will be aptest to allow for other
people, the rest is all cavil and indecent.

Having yielded thus to the utmost, I am now to prove that the Dissenters in
England are not of the same Mind now, and would on no account go the same
length, the Consequence of which will be plain, that they are not to be
Censured or distrusted for what was then done.

I confess my Absence from Books and Vouchers in England, deprives me of some
Helps; but I must work with such Tools as I have; and tho my performance may
not be so perfect as otherwise it would be; yet I hope it shall be convincing,
and any moderate Person will allow for the Disadvantage of mere Memory.

First, I have living Testimony now in this place, who have heard most, if not
all the Dissenting Ministers of England that have been here, declare in their
own Names, and on account of their Brethren in England, that it is the general
Opinion of the Dissenters in England, That if the Church of England would abate
their whole Liturgy, Habits, Ceremonies, etc. yet that they could not conform
merely on account of Episcopacy; and if it shall be of any weight to add my own
Testimony, I declare I have heard them universally profess the same thing in
England.

But to come farther, lets take the Testimony of their Enemies, which is no ill
way of coming at a charge; the Author of the Regale and Pontificate, an Eminent
Advocate for the Episcopal Hierarchy in England, charging the Dissenters with
their rejecting all offers of Compliance made from the Church, concludes thus,
it is impossible that any Union can be made between the Church and them; because
they refuse the REGALE and PONTIFICATE, and on this he charges them with
incurable Schism.

The Author of the Wolff stripped, one of this Country Men, and a great
Scholar, inviting, or rather challenging the Dissenters to the stating their
Scruples before the Convocation, in order to a Reconciliation, has these words
--. We should have little Quarrel with the Dissenters about all the Objections
they make as to Habit, Ceremonies, Liturgy, and even the grand Point of
Ordination by Presbyters, if it was not for their Schism, and gathering
separate Congregations, in Opposition to the true Episcopal Authority of the
Church.

Here Is Liturgy, Ceremonies, Habits, and almost every thing sacrifiz'd to the
Dissenters, BUT EPISCOPACY, and why did they not accept the Challenge; but
because the Main and Material thing was behind, without which there could be no
Compliance, viz. Episcopal Hierarchy.

What is the Compliance of Mr. Baxter, etc. to these things? what was then
done, is near 50 Years ago, and the State of things is somewhat altered since
that time; for it is otherways now.

And here I think it will be proper to remind the Dissenters Enemies, or those
that distrust them on this account, with that many headed Monster called A
COMPREHENSION, which some People --, in the abundance of their Ignorance, have
charged the Dissenters with contriving.

I believe the Challenge may very modestly be made in the Name of all the
Dissenters in England to any Man, to prove that a Comprehension had ever its
Rise among them, or that any Dissenter ever closed with it.

I know Bishop Usher's Model was the famous Foundation, and several Dissenters,
I believe, at that time, might have come into that.

But even that Model was far from a Comprehension, and when ever the Word
^omprehension came to be considered, and brought down to the Edge of Practice,
it was always found impracticable, and therefore the aforesaid Author of the
Regale and Pontificate declares an Union between the Church and the Dissenters
impossible; because the Dissenters will not come up to Episcopacy.

I know some People are foreward to tell us there is a project in England now,
of making Abatements to the Dissenters to bring them in, I shall give a short
answer to it, if it be to take away the Regale and Pontificate, they will
accept it, for that is not coming in to the Church, but receiving the Church in
to us; if it be only as formerly, to abate Rigorous Exacting of Conformity, I
pledge the Value of all I have said upon it. 1. That it is a high Church
Project. 2. That the Dissenters reject it.


Now, I would fain ask those Gentlemen that fear the Dissenters and the Church
of England should unite, who of the Church, the Dissenters should be most
likely to join with, the High Church or the Low Church; the Low Churchmen do
not seek it, for they are willing to give the Dissenters all the Liberty and
Toleration they desire, knowing they cannot come in; as to the high Church, I
believe no body will suspect the Dissenters of coming over to them.

But here is another Question will be harder to decide still; How comes it to
pass, that the High-Church Men quarrel the Low-Church-Men on this Head, and
charge them with shifting the Cause of the Schism off from themselves, telling
them, they are not so willing to yield in indifferent things to the Dissenters,
as they are; to prove this the same Author quoted before, inviting the
Dissenters to offer their Demands to the Convocation, and telling them
indifferent things will be given up to them, has these words.

'And if they will do this, it will soon appear whether the High or Low Church
will go farthest to purchase the desired Reconciliation, and which of them do
in most earnest wish for it.

'Next says the same Author, Let those of the Low Church, who make such Boasts
of their Project for Reconciliation, produce the Terms of it, that it may
appear they were none but indifferent things that were to be given up,
otherways let them too, cease their railing at the High Church Men for
suspecting them.

'The High Church desire that they and the Low Ohurch may be tried by their
Actions --, thus you see an Alternative, the Low Church are suspected by the
High Church of giving up all, or giving up none, and Comprehensions,
Abatements, etc are all offered on the High Church Men's side.

The Reason is plain, they see an effectual Gate, to the Ruin of the
Dissenters in making Division among them, by yielding in part --, but are
mortally averse to giving up the Substantial and effectual Articles, which once
removed, would bring an Universal Conjunction.

If I am ask't here in General, whether we would on any terms join at all with
them. I answer. and believe all good Christians will answer, Yes, with all our
Hearts --, and so will the Church of Scotland too.

And as it is natural to say in the next Question, What are the Conditions,
Truly such as on the Foundation of which, we would all join with the Papists,
or any Church in the World, and I hope, no body will take Offense at the
General way of expressing it; for it is not stepping foreward, but receiving
those that step forward to us.

If any Christian Church will abate what is either in their Doctrine, Worship,
or Discipline, not warranted by the Word of God, I Will readily say, we shall all
join with that Church. But to come to Particulars, as this is not the first
time that Question has been ask't and answered, I Will give five Heads which have
been offered to the Church in this Case by the Dissenters, and on which, I
believe; the Church of Scotland, the Church of England, and the Dissenters,
should soon be one united Body, and these are long since made public in
several Tracts, particularly in an Answer to the High Church Challenge printed
in the Year 1704. 1. That as to Liturgies, they may suffer such amendment and
Alterations as are justifiable by Scripture and the Practice of the Primitive
Church. 2. That when they are so amended, they may not be imposed, or the
Minister tied up, and prescribed by the Letter of the Book, but be at liberty
to enlarge or abridge as his own abilities may supply, or the Case require. 3.
That Ordination of Ministers be established in the Presbyters, and no
reordination or unreasonable Oaths imposed. 4. That Habits and Ceremonies,
such as kneeling at the Sacrament, bowing at the name of Jesus, the Cross in
Baptism, the Surplice, Vestments, and all the rest, scrupled by the Dissenters,
and owned to be indifferent, may be wholly left out, or left at the Discretion
of the People, as that they may not be imposed upon them without their Consent.
5. That Church Government be reduced to such a pitch of Authority, and vested
in such Persons as may be justified by the Scriptures, and no other.


In all these Offers, I do not see the least Tendency toward a Compliance with
any thing, either in Discipline or Worship, which the Church of Scotland would
not agree to, or that can render the Dissenters suspected; I do not say these
are all the things to be insisted on, and let no Man take that weak hold by the
Barrenness of Expression to suggest a corrupt Meaning; but I think there is
nothing the Church of England can be ask't, but what is contained ^airly in
these Generals.

On the Conceding therefore these five Heads, the Dissenters, yea, and the
Church of Scotland too, might very easily close with the General Union, and
become one great Protestant, and purely reformed Church, for it would be one
Presbyterian Church.

Upon the whole, the Matter of Fact I think is plain, that the grand Difference
between the Church of England and the Dissenters, at this time, is just the
same as in Scotland, and no other, I mean Church Government, or, in the High
Church Language, the Regale and Pontificate, and all the Dispute in both may be
said to turn upon two Points. 1. Episcopal Hierarchy. 2. The Supremacy of the
Civil Magistrate, or his Power to Impose Indifferent Things, and thereby to
make them necessary.


This is the Sum of the Matter, and most of it lies in the first Head too; For,
were the Hierarchy reduced, it is plain, the Church would soon give up the rest:
And, as the Author before Quoted observes, Would have little Dispute about
Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgies and Ordination; They are indeed but the Pomp and
Jingle of the other, and the Scripture Rule would soon reduce them to Primitive
Plainness.

I know the Nicety of the Subject I am writing upon, and the want of Charity
with which some will read, and this forces me to frequent and otherwise
needless Excursions.

I hope I retain an Air of Integrity in my Meaning, and for Misconstructions,
especially wilful ones, I despise them: I see nothing in my Discourse, that
should make me be suspected of being Episcopally inclined -- Tho I cannot be
for Sealing all that are of an Episcopal Church to Reprobation. -- Nor Treating
them as Antichristian: I believe the Hierarchy Unscriptural, and enter my
public Protest against both Regale and Ponitificate. -- And I think this is as
much as any Christian can be required. -- But I cannot call the Church of
England Antichristian, because neither Regale or Pontificate are Essentials of
Doctrine, and when ever they shall be quitted by them, they are from that time
the same individual Reformed Presbyterian Church with this in Scotland.

Some have taken pains to prove, that the Dissenters in England, I desire to be
understood of the Dissenters, the Presbyterian Dissenters, except where I
explain it otherways, declare themselves now for moderate Episcopacy --. But
this can never be proved upon them; Nor does Mr. Calamy any where suggest i^,
that I remember, if he says No Body Questioned the Lawfulness of it at the
Conference at the Savoy, it does not amount to a Proof, that they allowed the
Lawfulness of it, much less that they do so now.

But then I find it is objected, That they Sign the 37 th Article of the Church
of England, which Recognizes the Regale, or Power of the Civil Authority: But
he that Quotes the Words of that Article, and leaves out the Explanation with
which they Sign it, does not Act the most candid part of a Reconciler, nor
Treat them fairly.

It Is known, That the Explication is made part of that Article, and with that
Explication the Dissenters are satisfied; and satisfied, that they do not own
the Supremacy of the Civil Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, farther than all
the Protestant Churches in Europe do.

Again, this cannot be brought as a single Argument to distrust the
Presbyterian Dissenters, if it be any Proof at all, it is against the whole
Body; For even the Anabaptists Sign that Article, as well as the Presbyterians,
and no Man ever suspected them of owning the Supremacy.

Lastly, And which is more than all the rest, the Church her self is come off
from the Regale in General, and the Oath of Supremacy formerly imposed was one
of the first things left out of the English Constitution at the Revolution, the
Act for it repealed, and has never been imposed upon any Bo-dy since.

So that I think no Compliance can be charged on the Dissenters in England upon
that Foundation.

I have met with but one thing more, in which the Dissenters are attack't,
relating to Scotland, and that is, that they set up for a Toleration of
Dissenters there.

I must own, I have not the same formidable Opinion of a Toleration here, as
some Gentlemen have: And as to the Episcopal Dissenters here, I firmly believe,
it is the true method to dissolve and reduce them to nothing, of which hereafter
but this is nothing to the case; For I see no Proof, that the Dissenters in
England have, one way or other, concerned themselves in it: And therefore, if
any Man charges them on that Head, it ought to be proved; For to say it is so,
as far as we know, is only to make it appear, we know but little or nothing of
the Matter.

But to offer at something relating to their Principles in that case, it may be
noted, 1. that when Essays at Universal Toleration have been made in England,
the Dissenters have always opposed them; particularly as in taking off the
Penal Laws against Papists, when they chose rather to bear the Unreasonable
Burden of those Laws themselves, than to tolerate what was destructive to the
General Constitution of the Protestant Religion.

2. Another later Instance is, in a Famous Letter lately written by Mr. Toland
to the respective Heads of the Dissenters in England, pressing them to declare
their Opinions of the Universal Liberty of Christians, and the Toleration of
all Opinions merely Religious: The Original of which Letter I have here with
me, for it was never printed, and shall freely show to any Body that desires it.

Upon this Application, backed with Mr. Stephens and several others -- the
Dissenters meeting and consulting about it, unanimously resolved, not to give
any Answer at all to it, or to make any Declaration of their Opinion on that
Head --. Now if they have thus refused to declare their Opinion in England
where accepting Toleration themselves, it is most likely they should be for
giving it to others, it is very unlikely they should officiously declare
themselves for it in Scotland, where they have nothing at all to do with it.

However to such Objectors I refer them to my Opinion of that Matter stated in
the Preface to Jure Divino, now to be seen in this Town, and which I shall take
the Freedom to appeal to.

I think therefore they are free from any of the Reproaches thrown on them on
that score.

I find but one thing more objected against them and that is about their
prompting the Dispensing Power of the late King in England, by their Addresses
of Thanks for an Illegal Indulgence.

This has been directly answered already, and is briefly sum'd up thus, Some
few Dissenters did Address and Thank the King for their Liberty, which, though I
do not, nor ever did approve, because that Liberty was their Native Right, yet
as Ignorance, Good Manners, and Wilingness to ^ultivate the Benefit which they
had many Ages mourned for want of, moved some, and the prevailing Arts of Court
Flatteries others, yet none of those Addresses being a real owning the
Dispensing Power, they cannot be directly charged. And it was plain, they were
not designed as such by the Addressers, since, as soon as they discovered the
Fraud, they all started back, and acknowledged the Mistake.

Nor can it be argued, as is weakly insinuated, That Thanking him for an
Indulgence, is a Thanking him for a Dispensing Power, as that Indulgence was a
breaking in upon the Laws by a Dispensing Power, because the one was apparent,
the other concealed.

That some were drawn in I own, but to what? -- To Thank the King -- Well,
what did they Thank him for? -- For what was THE EFFECT of a Dispensing Power.
Note again, not for the Dispensing Power it self, for they did not foresee it
--. The HOOK Tyranny, was covered with the BAIT Liberty, as in all Ages of the
World it has been --. And it is Disingenuous to charge that Ignorance as a Sin
against Knowledge, and the more so, because as soon as their Eyes were opened,
they corrected the Mistake.

Suppose a Man, with a Villainous Design to Murder me, makes me a Present of a
Poisoned Nosegay, I accept his Present, and ignorantly Thank him for it --. But
I Thank him for the Flowers, I do not Thank him for the Poison; But, as soon as
I discover the Treachery, I throw away the Gift, and prosecu^ the Murderer.

Again, these People that were thus drawn in, were but a few, not One to
Twenty, some say, not One (...) Fifty, and to charge this on the whole Body,
looks (...) if the Enemy had a great Barrenness of Fact, (...) wants Charity
more than it wants Malice.

But I am told very Scholastically, That speaking indefinitly does not imply
the whole, and to (...) THE DISSENTERS may mean but a few, (...) cause in
School Logic, an Indefinite in a Matter Con^gent is taken but for a part.

I forbear any Reflection on the Sophistry of this, the Case before us is too
honest to need such Equivocations, and plai^ Reason with the help of Fact will
clear it up all.

If, to say THE Dissenters did so, may signify but some of them, then, if ten
Dissenters did it, it may be said, The Dissenters did it.

On the other hand, by the same Rule, if ten th^^sand did not do it, it may be
as truly said, The Dissenters did not do it.

So by this blessed sort of School Reasoning, it may be true, and very proper
to say, the Dissenters did it, and the Dissenters did not do it, both at the
same time.

This is the Art of Reasoning which I confess my self untaught in and when I
handle a Cause that wants it, I Will go to School to learn it, but I thank GOD I
am defending a Cause and a People, who want nothing but Truth in the plainest
Dress to defend them, and a plain Fellow is therefore the fitter to plead for
them.

Sincerity is the Glory of a Christian, it makes his Life all of a piece with
his Profession, this is the Glory of the Cause of the Dissenters, which is like
the People, plain and sincere, if they have slipped in any thing, Humanum est
Errare, but they have fallen like Christians to rise again: And what People in
the World has done it less? in Thirty Years Oppression, they have stood their
Ground, they have upheld the Justice of their Nonconformity, till tired with
persecuting them, the very Church that opposed them has yielded to Truth, and
complied with their most reasonable Demands.

To charge the Body for the Mistake of a few, is unjust and unfair, and yet I
dare say, that the Fact is not right neither, viz. That they really owned the
Dispensing Power in any one Address, or any other way countenanced it than
tacitly, and by consequence without Design

I could say a great deal to defend their General Behavior toward the Church.

They have always behaved decently and respectfully, as to a Body of Fellow
Christians, with whom, the they cannot Conform to their Ecclesiastical
Constitution, they desired no Difference in Matters Civil and Neighbourly, I
cannot think any Body will censure them for this --.

They have defended themselves against their Argument, but not against their
Persons, they have kept their Consciences, but submitted every thing else to
the Civil Government: Nay, they have gone further, they have not only
acquiesc'd in the Civil Government of the Church of England, Magistracy, but,
on all occasions, when Popery and Tyranny have invaded the Church of England,
they have joined with them as their Brethren, and as Persons embarked in the
same Bottom with them, both as to Civil and Religious Interests.

When the late King Caressed the Dissenters, when he used all possible Artifice
to draw them in to side with him against the Church of England, he found it
impossible; But the Church of England being the^ in Distress, and threatened
with Destruction by the High ^ommission Court, and several Gentlemen applying
to the Dissenters to join in calling over the Prince of Orange, they readily
laid aside all their Resentments at their former ill Usage, and not
distinguishing the Niceties and Disputes between them, as Church of England and
Dissenter, at such a time as that; the^ joined heartily as one General Body of
Protesta^^ United in Interests, United in Doctrine, however differing in
Opiuions and Circumstances; and Capitulating for their Liberty only, they
universally joined in (...) Blessed Revolution of this Island.

If any Man will undertake to censure the Con^^^ of the Dissenters in this
Case, and say, they Acted with less Policy than Charity, or with more Good
Nature than Discretion, I must desire them to remember, the Dissenters and the
Church in England ought to be considered in several and separate Capacities.

1. As a Nation, and respecting their Civil Policy as Englishmen, they stand
all upon (...) Foundation, viz. Of Law, Liberty and Rig^^ when ever they
separate, they are both destroyed and both undone, and therefore, when ever the
Dispute comes to be between Liberty and Tyranny, between Law and Dispensing
Power, Property and Arbitrary Government, the Church of England and Dissenter^
were ever together, as one Body of Free-(...) Englishmen, United in Opposition
to Slavery and Bondage, and they must both have been distracted, if it had been
otherwise. 2. As Protestants, respecting Reformation in general, they are still
one United Body of Christians, in Doctrine, Charity and Interest the same, and
therefore, when ever the Dispute comes to be between the Papist and the
Protestant, between Idolatry and true Worship, between the Purity of Religion
and the Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, they are still one Body
of Protestants, Detesting and Renouncing the Errors of Rome, Espousing heartily
the true Reformation, and Professing together the same Lord JESUS. 3. But if
you respect them as Particular Churches, then indeed you find them differing in
Judgment and Opinion about the Circumstantials of Religion, such as Habits,
Ceremonies, Worship and Discipline; yet this Difference, as it is not essential
to Religion; so it does not, or, at least, ought not to break in upon their
Mutual Charity, or National Interest; much less upon their Civility and good
Manners, and therefore all Revilings and Reproaches are to be carefully avoided
between the Lovers of Peace on both sides, and it is what the Dissenters have
always pleaded for, having suffered most by that ^sage; and I hope, shall be
the last that return upon the Church, what they have so long complained of. 4.
In speaking of them as regarding the Church of Scotland, this Distinction also
ought to be made, viz. That the Dissenters were once a part of the Church of
England, and have only separated from them for Purity of Worship, Church
Government, etc. It Is therefore quite another thing for them, to desire to be
restored to their National Union, than for the Church of Scotland, who never
were a part of their Body; And since yet they do not offer to comply, but on
Terms justifyable by the Word of GOD, there remains no Censure due to them, but
such as do blame them, show their want of Judgment and want of Charity both
together; Nor is it any sufficient Exception, to say they did not declare
against the Compliances of any, since they have always in Practice done it, and
it is known they have no Power of Censure --.
Through infinite Persecutions, Fines, Jails, and harrassing of several kinds,
they are at last arrived to a legal Liberty, a true Foundation Right which is
called a Toleration; on this Foot they now stand.

On all Occasions they have declared they cannot comply with the Church in the
Article of Bishops --, Comprehensions have been projected; but they have always
been concluded impracticable, and the Presbyterian declares himself not able to
conform.

Their Difference are merely conscientious, they have suffered all Severities
for their Consciences, and cannor without great want of Charity, be distrusted
or suspected as Episcopally inclined.

CONCLUSION.
IT remains to say someting here to the present Circumstances of both Kingdoms
as now going to incorporate and unite, and in this I shall be very plain; but,
I hope, not at all injurious to any body, and shall direct my words as General
as I can.

The Word Union directs my Discourse, Union is the Theme; and it is Peace in
this Union I shall plead for; however, you contemn the Man, listen to the
Doctrine; for let who will send the Teacher, the Teaching is from Heaven.

I cannot but think every Obstruction to this Doctrine, out of Season, I am
sorry so Just a hint should give so great Offense, but Truth will never fail to
justify its Owner.

It cannot but be out of Season, to talk of the sinfulness of a thing after
it is done, which we applauded or at least, against which we said nothing before.

It cannot but be out of Season to rip up the Follies and Mistakes of Men who
are dead, and cannot answer for themselves, especially of Good Men, whose
shining Patterns deserve better Treatment.

It cannot but be out of Season, to Preach up distrust between a Society of
Brethren at a time, when they are going to unite.

It cannot but be out of Season, to fill the Heads of the People with these
Distrusts, and raise Jealousies and Divisions, where General Charity, and
mutual Assistance must be the Principal Humane Support of both.

In the present Circumstances of these Kingdoms, I know nothing so essential to
the Felicity of both, as mutual Confidence in, and Affection to one another.

The want of this is the only thing that can make all the Phlegmatic
Predictions of the Enemies of both come to pass, Union of Nations, without
Union of People, Union in Generals, without Union in Particulars, Union of
Constitution, without Union of Interest, will make the Union a mere Name and
bring to pass all the Mischiefs either side can apprehend.

'Twill defeat all the Endeavors either side can exert, to convince one
another of their Sincerity; every kind Action, every Concession, every
Contrivance to oblige and engage on either side, will be rendered suspected, and
taken for Traps and Snares to draw in and circumvent one another.

Mutual Distrust will be the Poison of every Good Desire, 'twill ruin
Commerce, debauch Conversation slacken Endeavors, discourage Friends,
encourage Enemies, blow up Feuds, scandalize Religion, dishnour God, and ruin
the Nation.

I shall sum up this Matter here in as short a Head as the Subject will permit,
I have not room to speak to the Head of the Dissenters here in Scotland, (...)
I purposed to do, I hope, in another place, I may (...) that Case, together
with my Thoughts about Toleration, in a larger manner: Mean time, I desire to
apply a little what has been said to the present Circumstance between the
Dissenters and their Accusers --

First, I frankly own the Distrust and Jealousies endeavored to be fomented
here, between the Church of Scotland and the Dissenters in England, is far from
being the General Act of the Ministry, or of the most Judicious of the People
here: And among those (...) of the Reverend Ministers, who I have the Honor
(...) Converse with, I find a General Concern, that (...) thing so Unkind
should be offered to them; Nor shall I fail to do them all the Justice, both
here and in England, that I can on that Head, that the Spirit of distrust may
spread no farther, and the Innocent (...) not be Censured with the Guilty.

My Discourse therefore is not to them, but to th^^ who the Unhappy Temper has
prevailed upon, and who are too much drawn in to entertain fatal Suspicions,
and ill grounded Prejudices, against their Brethren, and it is to them I crave
the Liberty of speaking.

What Love Gentlemen? What Charity? What Mutual Assistance? What Advantages of
Commerce? What Strength against Foreign, or Guard against Domestic Enemies?
what Security of Liberty at Home, or Safety from Encroachments Abroad? If we
cannot trust one another.

It Is mutual Distrust has kept these Nations so long divided, and been the
Occasion of such Seas of Blood being shed between them; all the widowed
Families, the helpless Orphans, the distressed Provinces in either Kingdom, for
these 300 Years bypast, have been principally produced by this Monster --. This
Child of Hell has been in every Mischief, in every Plot, in every War between
the two Nations.

To destroy this Devil, this present Union is contrived; it is for this all the
Councils of both Kingdoms have been employed; It Is to prevent this all the
Enemies of our Peace have struggled: And if after all the Hazards run, all the
Tumults, Rabbles and Mischiefs threatened, all the Endeavors of the Queen and
her wisest Counselors, this part should not be obtained, all the Attempts of a
politic Union will be in vain.

What shall we say to an Endeavor after an Union, is as it were concluded
between the Nations, to render the best People in both Nations, and perhaps in
the World suspected to one another --. Shall I, through Favor, or Fear of
Reproach, say ' it is Honest, or Fair, or Christian, or Seasonable: God forbid I
should dare to approve, what the Scripture says himself hates, Prove. 6. 19. Him
that sows Discord among Brethren.

Brethren of the Church of Scotland, If the Dissenters in England are not to be
trusted; whither will ye seek? what shall your Temporal Peace depend upon? what
upholds the Interest of Religion in Britain; but that Glorious Body of
Protestants, that from a few Years of the first Reformation, have been daily
Confessors for that Purity of Worship, which they always professed, and which you
enjoy?

Why should they be distrusted that never abandoned their Cause, that never
deserted the strong Foundation of Truth and Liberty, that have defended it, and
are at last built upon it in common with your selves.

The Laws of Britain are their Safety now, and yours also; the Civil Capacity
is the Foundation Security now of your Religious Capacity; Magna charta is
yours by the Union as well as theirs; the Great Liberties of England are now
laid open in common with you --, a Foundation so strong, so certain, so sure,
that should the greatest Monarchs that ever reigned in Britain invade it, even
the Persecutors themselves would join with you, to pull them down.

You are all built upon Law and Liberty, that is the Rock that supports you
all, and you have now nothing to do, but like your Stones in an Arch, by
shouldering up one another, make your Strength invincible; thus united like the
same Arch, the more weight is laid on you, the stronger you grow; but dislocate
one Stone only, and it falls by its own weight, into a heap of mere Rubbish and
Disorder.

Suffer a Stranger to exhort you to what your own Interest ought to guide you
to, and to what your Experience will bless him for hereafter, unless by your
unbelief, your Careasses fall in this wilderness of Strife, and if that should
happen, your Posterity will acknowledge it.

Study Peace, Study to be Quiet, and mark such as sow Divisions among you --;
for where there is Strife and Contention, there is Every evil Work.

For my self, I shall say little, I have quitted the just Resentment at
unsufferable Insolences, that I might with the utmost Calmness of Mind, move
Scotland to Peace, and practice the thing I exhort to --; the Gentleman that
opposes me in this, shall not rally me only in Print, but he shall trample me
under his Feet; I am content to be all that is contemptible and vile in his
Eyes, and in every Man's else, if I can but be instrumental in the least to this
blessed healing Temper.

I can hear him and his Platterers go about defaming my Morals to lessen my
Argument, reproaching the Man, to weaken his Discourse, a certain Token of the
sterility of better Answers --. It moves me not --. It shall all be in vain --.
Slander and Backbiting shall do me no Injury --. I have been an open Reprover
of other Men's Vices at the extremest Hazard --. If my own Practice had been
scandalous, as these Men suggest, I should, long since, have had it Printed in
my Forehead; for this is not the first time it has been attempted. I am sorry
they force me to say any thing in my own Defense, a most insignificant Triffle
to what I am upon: But as it is done with a Design to lessen the Esteem of what
I say in this Cause, I am obliged to speak. They report me a Drunkard, a
Swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, and what not --. Impotent Slanders! what Shift is
Malice driven to? The Issue is short and plain, and their Honesty shall be
tried by it. I challenge them to bring the Man either here, or in England, that
ever saw me drink to Excess, that ever heard me swear; or in short, can charge
my Conversation with the least Vice or Immorality, with Indecency, Immodesty,
Passion, Profaneness, or any thing else that deserves Reproach; when they can
do this, I Will burn this Book at the Market Cross, and desire all the World to
regard no more what I say, and till they can do it, all Honest Men will abhor
the Practice.

It Is hard, Gentlemen, to force any Man to say thus much of his own Character,
and so far, as it looks like Ostentation, I ask Pardon for it; I am far from
valuing my self upon negative Virtue; yet I thank God that I am able to say
thus much, and thought my self obliged to convince the World how they are
imposed upon, and how a Stranger is treated here; and I beg the Gentlemen that
use me thus, not to oblige me to recriminate upon their Morals, which I could
do with too much Advantage.

It wounds every Honest Man to the Soul, to see a Spirit of Bitterness and
Slander gone out among you, biting and devouring, and distrusting one another,
at a time, and in a very Debate of National Union.

I verily believe God in his Providence has determined the Blessed Union of
these two Nations; I foresee all the Malice of Hell cannot oppose it; the
strange concurrence of Circumstances points out the Finger of Providence in
every Point of it, 'thas been made up of Miracle, and unaccountable Junctures
in its Periods. I beseech you Gentlemen, let not your unbelieving rob you of
the Blessing of it, and adjourn the Comforts so, that like the Elders at
Samaria, you should see it, but not taste of it.

I see nothing objected but Chimeras, Maybe's, supposes, Suggestions --,
what-ifs, and the like; one convincing Demonstration of the sincerity of your
Brethren (...) England will crush them all, and how will you be ashamed of your
Suspicions and Jealousies, how will you regret the unkind Treatment of your
Friends, who will thus requit you Good for Evil, and heap Coals of Fire on your
Heads,

If you would compare the certain Evils you have avoided by it, with the
suggested Evils that they say are in prospect, there can be no rational
Comparison drawn, Jacobitism. Popish Succession, French Tyranny, Popery and War
--, these are avoided, and must have followed, what can there be before you to
equal these.

If therefore you have any regard to Justice, to Truth, to your Interest, to
your Religion, Liberty or Posterity, calm your Minds, and fortify your Souls
with peaceable Ideas, leave Jealousies and Suspicions to ly asleep in the misty
heads of the Ignorant; For distrust is the Product of a Barren Understanding,
if your Eyes are open, you cannot but see your Safety and Prosperity in an
hearty Affection, an Union of Love, an Union of Intrests, and an Union of
Charity.

Without it, all is an empty Shadow, and must in time tend either to the Ruin
of the General Peace, or of the particular opposers of it.

My Friends tell me I lay my self too low in this and that the Adverse Party
have Ingenuity little enough to insult me upon this head; indeed I find little
Ingenuity enough in the Party: But when I consider who they are, how mean in
Character, how seandalously few in Number, how empty their Malice, and how
ridiculous their Methods with me, it is a complete Satisfaction, and I am
perfectly unconcerned for the rest.

Most of the Persons, whose ill treatment I complain of are realy contemptible
in every part of them; their Principles, (...) they are opposite to mine, are
so to all Honest Men, their Reproaches I value not enough to gratify so much
as their meanest Expectations; for with me it shall ever be calm without, when
it is clear within; and for just Matters of Scandal, I have ^airly defied them.

As they are Enemies to God, so they are to the Government, to the Reformation;
and to Good Men, and by Consequence to the Union, which is plainly the Work of
the first, and the desi^^ of the last, and it is the Glory of her Majesty's
Government, that it aims at nothing but what concurrs both with the Glory of
one, and the Wishes of the other, I mean Piery and Peace.

If there was any thing else in the Design, I bless God, I was never a Slave to
any Government in the World; I was never frighted by Power, when I was (...) by
its (...), and I could never be bribed by its Gi^s, when in the most proper
circumstances to want them, I would not write a word, no, nor for the Queen her
self, if my Conference and Principles did not say Amen to the Subject; and I
challenge the World to say, when ever I acted otherwise.

The Party therefore in nothing more mistake me, than in thinking, that when,
for Peace sake, I avoid Reflecting on their Follies, it is for any Value or Fear
of their Resentment, they must be little acquainted with the Scenes I have
acted in the World, who know me no better than that, and I refer them to the
Resentments of Men much more Capital than their Ambitious Thoughts can pretend
to, and let them see the^ Influence their Anger has had on me.

But all this Humility of mine is for the sake of a few, a very few indeed,
who, though Passion and Prejudice may overruled them; and run them to
Inconvenien^^^, though they may go a little out of themselves, I (...) hope are
good Men in the Main, and Design no gen^ral Mischief, these, however they treat
me, I am (...) of exposing, and though in this they unwarrily propagate the
Jacobite Cause, and unhappily fall in (...) that fatal Principle that would
ruin us all, yet (...) Tenderness to their Characters and Office, and (...)
other Account, I behave calmly and carefully to (...) hoping, that in due time,
they shall be bet^^r informed, and then, I doubt not, they will do me Justice
--

For the rest, their Principles are Abominable, their Ways of Propagating them
are Unchristian and Irrational, their Methods are Detested by all honest Men,
and to me they merit the utmost Contempt.

Very few also are the Number of the ^^ceiv'd Proselites they have made, not
one in twenty, even of the Ministers that I have known, are of (...) Opinion:
And I have such a Testimony from (...) of the best of that Reverend Body, of
their Satisfac^^^^ in my honest Design, their Resentment of this (...), and
their just Regard to the Dissenters in England, that I can, with the utmost
Peace, bear the Reproa^^^^ of the small Number that thus Attack me.

May the God of Peace move this Nation to thoughts of their own Happiness, and
cool the evil Spirit that now endeavors to disquiet the Minds of those the
otherwise mean no ill to their Native Country.

FINIS.

