SELECT SCOTTISH BALLADS.

VOLUME I.

CONTAINING BALLADS IN THE TRAGIC STYLE.

THE SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.

SELECT SCOTTISH BALLADS.

VOLUME I.



LONDON, PRINTED BY AND FOR J. NICHOLS.

MDCCLXXXIII.

HARDYKNUTE, AN HEROIC BALLAD, NOW FIRST PUBLISHED COMPLETE; WITH THE OTHER
MORE APPROVED SCOTTISH BALLADS, AND SOME NOT HITHER TO MADE PUBLIC, IN THE
TRAGIC STYLE.

TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED TO DISSERTATIONS, I. ON THE ORAL TRADITION OF POETRY.
II. ON THE TRAGIC BALLAD.


JAMQUE SACRUM TENERIS VATEM VENERSTUR AB ANNIS.

TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of BUCCLEUGH.
MY LORD,
IT is with much pleasure I embrace this opportunity of testifying my sincere
respect for YOUR GRACE's exalted character, as the friend and as the ornament
of your country, by addressing these volumes to a name so much revered and
beloved by the nation whose poetry they are intended to preserve and to
illustrate.

The chief compositions in this volume, MY LORD, will be found to breathe the
living spirit of the Scottish people, a race of men who have left monuments of
their martial glory in every country. YOUR GRACE, it is hoped, will with
pleasure here recognize the noble ardour your example lately tended to revive,
by raising and commanding in person a military force in defense of your
country, at a period when her natives had not discernment to perceive, nor
spirit to assume, the privileges of British subjects.

The second volume, MY LORD, contains chiefly pieces descriptive of rural
merriment, and of love and domestic happiness. Even these, it is humbly
believed, YOUR GRACE will not disdain; for it is well known that the felicity
of the poor in general, and of your numerous tenants and dependants in
particular, is regarded by YOUR GRACE as essential to your own. In reward, YOUR
GRACE enjoys a domestic felicity now seldom or never known to the great who are
generally obliged to exchange the free enjoyment of true pleasure for the gaudy
slavery of ostentation.

At a period when many of the British nobility are wasting their patrimonial
estates in profligate dissipation; men trained to arms in defense of their
rights and liberties, villages beautified and rendered salubrious, and their
inhabitants rendered happy, have been the monuments of expense of the DUKE OF
BUCCLEUGH.

The silent gratitude of the poor will ever speak YOUR GRACE's praises with an
expression unknown to the most exalted elocution; and it were surely absurd for
any writer to enlarge on what is the common subject of conversation, and known
to all; I shall not therefore any longer intrude on YOUR GRACE's patience.

That SCOTLAND may long consider YOUR GRACE as one of the best guardians of her
liberty, and the living assertor of her ancient spirit, is the earnest wish of,

MY LORD, YOUR GRACE's Most obedient Servant, JOHN PINKERTON.

CONTENTS.
DISSERTATION I. Page xv DISSERTATION II. Page xxviii 1. Hardyknute, Part I.
Page 1 1. Hardyknute, Part II. Page 16 2. Child Maurice. Page 34 3. Adam o
Gordon. Page 44 4. The Child of Elle. Page 52 5. Gilderoy, Page 62 6. "The
Gypsies came to our good Lord's gate. Page 67 7. The Cruel Knight. Page 69 8.
Young Waters. Page 72 9. Sir Hugh, or the Jew's Daughter. Page 75 10. Flodden
Field, or the Flowers of the Forest. Page 78 11. Edward. Page 80 12. Sir
Patrick Spence. Page 83 13. Lady Bothwell's Lament. Page 86 14. Earl of Murray.
Page 88 14. Sir James the Rose. Page 90 16. Lord of Woodhouselie. Page 94 17.
Lord Livingston. Page 98 18. Binnorie. Page 102 19. Death of Menteith. Page 105
20. Lord Airth's Complaint. Page 107 21. "I wish I were where Helen lies." Page
109 Fragments. Page 111 Notes. Page 115 Glossary. Page 156
DISSERTATIONS ON THE ORAL TRADITION OF POETRY, AND ON THE TRAGIC BALLAD.
DISSERTATION I. ON THE ORAL TRADITION OF POETRY.
IT has long been a subject of regret, that the inventors of the fine Arts have
by oblivion been deprived of the reputation due to their memory. Of the many
realms which lay claim to their birth, Egypt seems to possess the preference.
Yet, like the Nile, which animates that country, while they have diffused
pleasure and utility over kingdoms, their origin remains hid in the most
profound obscurity.

That poetry holds a distinguished superiority over all these sciences is
allowed; yet the first practiser of this enchanting art has lost the renown it
was designed to confer. We must either allow the contested claim of the Osiris
of the Egyptians, and Apollo of the Greeks, or be content to withhold from any,
the fame which indeed seems due to as many inventors as there are distinct
nations in the world. For poetry appears not to require the labor of
disquisition, or aid of chance, to invent; but is rather the original language
of men in an infant state of society in all countries. It is the effusion of
fancy actuated by the passions: and that these are always strongest when
uncontrouled by custom, and the manners which in an advanced community are
termed polite, is evident. But the peculiar advantages, which a certain
situation of extrinsic objects confers on this art, have already been so well
illustrated by eminent critics Particularly Dr. Blackwell, in his Enquiry into
the Life and Writings of Homer; and Dr. Blair, in his elegant Dissertation on
the Poems of Ossian.
, that it is unnecessary here to remember them. I have besides noted a few such
as immediately concern the compositions now under view in the subsequent
Dissertation; and only propose here to give a brief account of the utility of
the Oral Tradition of Poetry, in that barbarous state of society which
necessarily precedes the invention of letters; and of the circumstances that
conspired to render it easy and safe.

Among the Egyptians, probably the most ancient authors of the elegant, as well
as useful sciences, we find that verses were originally used solely to preserve
the laws of their princes, and sayings of their wise men from oblivion Herodot.
Diodor. Sicul. etc.
. These were sometimes inscribed in their temples in their hieroglyphic
character, but more frequently only committed to the memory of the expounders
of their Law, or disciples of their sages. Pythagoras, who was initiated in
their secret science, conveyed in like manner his dictates to his disciples, as
appears from the moral verses which pass under his name at this day. And though
the authenticity of these may be questioned, yet that he followed this mode of
bequeathing his knowledge to his followers, is proved from the consent of all
antiquity Jamblichus de vita Pythag. passim; and particularly lib. I. cap. 15.
and 25.
. Nay, before him, Thales composed in like manner his System of Natural
Philosophy. And even so late as the time of Aristotle, the Laws of the
Agathyrsi, a nation in Sarmatia, were all delivered in verse. Not to mention
the known laws of the Twelve Tables, which, from the fragments still remaining
of them, appear to have consisted of short rythmic sentences.

From laws and religion poetry made an easy progress to the celebration of the
Gods and Heroes, who were their founders. Verses in their praise were sung on
solemn occasions by the composers, or bards themselves. We meet with many
before Homer, who distinguished themselves by such productions. Fabricius In
Bibliotheca Graeca, tom. I.
has enumerated near seventy whose names have reached our times. That immortal
author had the advantage of hearing their poems repeated; and was certainly
indebted to his predecessors for many beauties which we admire as original.
That he was himself an AOIDOS, or Minstrel, and sung his own verses to the
lyre, is shown by the admirable author of the Enquiry into his Life and
Writings Sect. VIII.
. Nor were his poems rescued from the uncertain fame of tradition, and
committed to writing till some time after his death Aelian. Var. Hist. lib.
xiii. c. 14.
.

Such was the utility of the poetic tradition among the more polished nations
of antiquity: and with those they denominated Barbarians we find it no less
practiced The reader, who would desire more intelligence on this head, may
consult a curious Dissertation on the Monuments which supplied the Defect of
Writing among the first Historians, by the Abbe Ansesm, in Les Memoires de
l'Academie des Inscriptions, etc.
. The Persians had their Magi, who preserved, as would seem in this way, the
remarkable events of former times, and in war went before the army singing the
praises of their illustrious men, whom the extraordinary gratitude and
admiration of their countrymen had exalted into Deities. If they gained the
victory, the Song of Triumph recorded the deeds of those who had fallen, and by
their praises animated the ambition of those who enjoyed the conquest to
farther acts of valor. The latter custom was in use still more anciently among
the Jews, as appears from the songs of Moses Exodus XV.
and Deborah Judges V.
preserved in Sacred Writ.

The Druids of Gaul and Britain afford a noted instance Et Bardi quidem fortia
virorum illustrium facta heroicis composita versibus, cum dulcibus lyrae
modulis cantitarunt. Ammian. Marcell. lib. xvi.
. Such firm hold did their traditions take of the memory, that some of them are
retained in the minds of their countrymen to this very day Atque horum
(Bardorum seu Druidarum) cantiones, aut ad similitudinem potius earundem fictae
etiamnum aliquae extant die Moister Gesange, sed recentiores pleraeque, nec vel
quingentos annos excedentes. Bessel. in notis ad Eginbart. Traject. 1711, p.
130. Nonnulli eruditi viri observarunt veterem illam Gallorum consuetudinem (
scil. visci saerum usum apud druidas) etiam nunc multis Galliae loeis retineri,
cum anni initio clamitant, Au guy l'an nouf. i. e. Ad viscum; annus novus.
Hotoman. ad Caes. l. 6. Druydes vero Heduorum, qui tunc habitabant in quodam
loco, hodiernis temporibus Mons druidum dictus, distans a nostra civitate
Heduensi per unum milliare ubi adhuc restant vestigia loci habitationis eorum,
utebantur pro eorum armis anguibus in campo azureo; habebant etiam in part
superiore ramum visci quercinei (ung rameaul de guyg de chasne) et in part
inferiore unum cumulum parvorum anguium seu serpentium argenteorum quasi tunc
nascentium, qui vulgo dicitur, coubee de serpens d'argent. Chasseneuz Catalogi
Gloriae mundi, 1529, folio verso 26.
. The Germans, as we learn from Tacitus, had no other mode of commemorating the
transactions of past times than by verse. The brave actions of their ancestors
were always sung as an incentive to their imitation before they entered into
combat. The like we read of the ancient Goths Jornand. See Warton's Hist. of
English Poetry.
, those destroyers of all literature, who yet possessed greater skill in the
fine arts than is commonly ascribed to them. From them this custom passed to
their descendants the inhabitants of the Northern regions, many animated
specimens of whose traditional poetry have been preserved to our times See the
Histories of Saxo Grammat. Jo Magnus, Torfaeus, etc. passim; and Dr. Percy's
Five Pieces of Runic Poetry.
and quoted by their modern historians as uncontrollable vouchers; as the
Arabian historians refer for the truth of many events to the Spanish romanzes,
saved in like manner by tradition for many ages, many of which are of very
remote antiquity, and abound with the higher beauties of poetry Hist. de las
guerras civiles de Granada. A most beautiful imitation of their manner may be
found among the Poems of Voiture. The Spanish word Romanze seems now applied to
any short lyric tale on whatever subject. We find in Gongora, their most
eminent poet, Romances Amorosos, y Burlescos.
. Traditional verses are to this day a favorite amusement of the Mohammedan
nations; though, instead of recording the illustrious actions of their real
heroes, they chaunt the fabled exploits of Buhalul their Orlando Huet, Lettre a
Monsieur Segrais, sur l'origine des Romans, p. LXVII. edit. d'Amst. 1715.
, or the yet more ridiculous ones of their Prophet Historiale description de
l'Afrique, escrite de notre temps par Jean Leon, African, premierement en
langue Arabesque, puis en Toscane, et a present mise en Francois -- En Anvers,
1556. lib. III. p. 175.

A curious specimen of the Eastern religious poetry may be seen in Sir John
Chardin's Voyage to Persia, vol. I.


. From them it would appear that rhyme, that great help to the remembrance of
traditional poetry, passed to the Troubadours of Provence; who from them seem
also to have received the spirit and character of their effusions. Like them,
they composed amorous verses with delicacy and nature; but when they attempted
the sublimer walk of the Heroic Song, their imagination was often bewildered,
and they wandered into the contiguous regions of the incredible and absurd
Huet, ubi supra, p. LXX. Ermengarde vicomtesse de Narbonne -- L'accueil
favorable qu'elle fit aux Poets Provenceaux, a fait croire qu'elle tenoit cour
d'amour dans son Palais, mourut 1194. Almanach Historique de Languedoc, a
Toulouse, 1752, p. 277. See Hist. Liter. des Troub. Paris, 1774. Translations
of Provenzal Sirventes, and an imitation of the Provenzal Heroic Romanze, may
be found in a volume lately published by Mr. Dilly, entitled, RIMES. Odes,
Book II. Odes, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.16.
.

In proportion as Literature advanced in the world, Oral Tradition disappeared.
The venerable British Bards were in time succeeded by the Welsh Beirdh History
of Wales, by Caradoc of Lhancarvan, etc. 1702. p. 159
, whose principal occupation seems to have been to preserve the genealogy of
their patrons, or at times to amuse them with some fabulous story of their
predecessors sung to the harp or crowd This is the instrument meant in the
following verses of Ven. Fortunatus, lib. vii. Romanusque lyra plaudat tibi,
barbarus harpa,
Graecus Achilliaca, Crotta Britanna canat.


See more of the Harp in War. Antiq. Hibern. cap. 22. And Mr. Evans, Dissert.
de Bardis, p. 80.


, an instrument which Griffith ap Conan, King of Wales, is said to have brought
from Ireland, about the beginning of the twelfth century.

In like manner, among the Caledonians, as an ingenious writer Mr. Macpherson,
in his Dissertation on the Era of Ossian, p. 228. ed. 1773.
acquaints us, Every chief in process of time had a bard in his family, and the
office became hereditary. By the succession of these bards the poems concerning
the ancestors of the family were handed down from generation to generation;
they were repeated to the whole clan on solemn occasions, and always alluded to
in the new compositions of the bards. The successors of Ossian were at length
employed chiefly in the mean office of preserving fabulous genealogies, and
flattering the pride of their chieftains at the expense of truth, without even
fancy sufficient to render their inventions either pleasing or plausible. That
order of men, I believe, is now altogether extinct; yet they have left a spirit
of poetry in the country where they flourished See Martin's, and other
Descriptions of the Western Isles, passim.
; and Ossian's harp still yields a dying sound among the wilds of Morven.

Having thus given a faint view of the progress of the Oral Tradition of Poetry
to these times For an account of the more modern minstrels see Dr. Percy's
Dissertation, which is so complete that it leaves nothing to add:
, I proceed to show what arts the ancient bards employed to make their verses
take such hold of the memory of their countrymen, as to be transmitted safe and
entire without the aid of writing for many ages. These may be considered as
affecting the passions and the ear. Their mode of expression was simple and
genuine. They of consequence touched the passions truly and effectively. And
when the passions are engaged, we listen with avidity to the tale that so
agreeably affects them; and remember it again with the most prompt facility.
This may be observed in children, who will forget no circumstance of an
interesting story, more especially if striking or dreadful to the fancy; when
they cannot remember a short maxim which only occupies the judgment. The
passions of men have been and will be the same through all ages. Poetry is the
sovereign of the passions, and will reign while they exist. We may laugh at Sir
Isaac Newton, as we have at Descartes; but we shall always admire a Homer, an
Ossian, or a Shakspere.

As the subjects of these genuine painters of nature deeply interested the
heart, and by that means were so agreeable and affecting, that every hearer
wished to remember them; so their mode of constructing their verse was such,
that the remembrance was easy and expeditious. A few of their many arts to aid
the memory I shall here enumerate.

I. Most of these Oral poems were set to music, as would appear, by the
original authors themselves. That this was the custom so early as the days of
Homer, may be seen in the excellent author formerly adduced Enquiry, etc. Sect.
VIII.
. How should we have been affected by hearing a composition of Homer or Ossian
^ung and played by these immortal masters themselves! With the poem the air
seems to have passed from one age to another; but as no musical compositions of
the Greeks exist, we are quite in the dark as to the nature of these. I suppose
that Ossian's poetry is still recited to its original cadence and to
appropriated tunes. We find, in an excellent modern writer Mr. Warton, in his
History of English Poetry.
, that this mode of singing poetry to the harp was reckoned an accomplishment
so late as among the Saxon Ecclesiastics. The ancient music was confessedly
infinitely superior to ours in the command of the passions. Nay, the music of
the most barbarous countries has had effects that not all the sublime pathos of
Corelli, or animated strains of Handel, could produce. Have not the Welsh,
Irish, and Scottish tunes, greater influence over the most informed mind at this
day than the best Italian concerto? What Modern refined music could have the
powers of the Rance de Vaches See Rousseau, Dict. de Music, sur cette
article. Though the Swiss are a brave nation, yet their dance, which
corresponds to the Rance des Vaches, is, like their others, rather expressive
of an effeminate spirit. Les dances des Suisses consistent en un continuel
trainement de Jambe, ces pas repondoient mal au courage ferme de cette nation.
Coquillart en son Blazon des arms, et des dames. Les Escossoys font les
repliques,
Pragois et Bretons bretonnans,
Les Suisses dancent leurs Moresques,
A touts leurs tabourins sonnants.
Mons. L. D. Notes a Rabelais, Tom. IV. p. 164. 1725.
of the Swiss, or the melancholy sound of the Indian Bansha See Grainger's
Proso-poetic Account of the Culture of the Sugar-cane, Book IV.
? Is not the war-music of the rudest inhabitants of the wilds of America or
Scotland more terrible to the ear than that of the best band in the British
army? Or, what is still more surprising, will not the softer passions be more
inflamed by a Turkish air than by the most exquisite effort of a polite
composer? as we learn from an elegant writer Letters of Lady M. W. Montague,
XXXIII.
, whom concurring circumstances rendered the best judge that could be imagined
of that subject. The harmony therefore of the old traditional songs possessing
such influence over the passions, at the same time that it rendered every
expression necessary to the ear, must have greatly recommended them to the
remembrance.

II. Besides musical cadence, many arts were used in the versification to
facilitate the rehearsal. Such were:

1. The frequent returns of the same sentences and descriptions expressed in
the very same words. As for instance, the delivery of messages, the description
of battles, etc. of which we meet with infinite examples in Homer, and some, if
I mistake not, in Ossian. Good ones may be found in Hardyknute, Part I. v. 123,
etc. compared with part II. v. 107, etc. and in Child Maurice, v. 31, with v.
67; and innumerable such in the ancient Traditional Poetry of all nations.
These served as land marks, in the view of which the memory traveled secure
over the intervening spaces. On this head falls likewise to be mentioned what
we call The Burden, that is, the unvaried repetition of one or more lines
fixing the tone of the poem throughout the whole. That this is very ancient
among the barbaric nations, may be gathered from the known Song of Regner
Lodbrog, to be found in Olaus Wormius Regner Lodbrog, King of Denmark,
flourished in the Ninth Century.
; every stanza of which begins with one and the same line. So many of our
ballads, both ancient and modern, have this aid to the memory, that it is
unnecessary to condescend on any in particular.

2. Alliteration was before the invention of rhyme greatly used, chiefly by the
nations of Northern original, to assist the remembrance of their traditional
poetry. Most of the Runic methods of versification consisted in this practice.
It was the only one among the Saxon poets, from whom it passed to the English
and Scottish See Hickes, Ling. Vet. Sept. These. c. 23. From the Saxons he
observes, that the author of Pierce Plowman drew this practice, c. 21. This
poem was written about 1350. There is a remarkable similarity in its style and
manner with those very curious pieces of ancient Scottish poetry, styled The
Prophecies of Thomas Rymer, Mavelous Merling, Beid, Berlington, Waldhave,
Eltraine, Banister, and Sybilla, printed at Edinburgh in 1615, and reprinted
from that edition, 1742, 8vo. It is very surprising that the respectable editor
of Ancient Scottish Poems, from the MS. of George Bannatyne, 1568. Edin. 1770,
seems to regard these as not more ancient than the time of Queen Mary. His
reasons are only founded on the modern appearance of some particular passages.
That they have been modernized and corrupted, I will readily allow; but that
they are on the main nearly as ancient as Rymer's time, who died about the
beginning of the 14th Century, I believe the learned must confess from
intrinsic evidence, in such cases the surest of all. Not to mention that Sir
David Lindsay, who wrote in the reign of James V. is an undoubted witness that
they must be more ancient than this eminent Antiquary would infer. For in
enumerating the methods he took to divert that prince while under his care in
his infancy, after condescending on some risible circumstances, as When thou
wast young I bare thee in my arm
Full tenderly till thou began to gang;
And in thy bed often happed thee full warm,
With lute in hand than sweetly to thee sang,
Sometime in dancing fiercefully I flang,
And sometimes playing fairses on the flure,
And sometimes of mine office taking cure.
And sometimes like a feind transfigurate,
And sometimes like a greesy ghost of gay,
In diverse forms often times disfigurate, etc.


He adds, The Prophesies of Rymer, Bid, and Merlin,
And many other pleasant history
Of the red Erin, and Gyre Carlin,
Comforting thee when that I saw thee sorry.
Episile to the King, prefixed to his Dream.

They begin thus: Merling says in his book, who will read right,
Althouch his sayings be uncouth, they shall be true found,
In the seventh chapter read who so will,
One thousand and more after Christ's birth.
Then the Chalnalider of Cornwall is called,
And the wolf out of Wales is vanquished for aye,
Then many ferlies shall fall, and many folk shall die.


This exordium is evidently retouched by a modern hand. -- But very many of the
passages seem to stand in their original form, as the following lines, which
are all in the Saxon manner, will testify: And derfly dung down without any
doom --
A proud prince in the preis lordly shall light,
With bold Barons in bushment to battle shall wend. --
There shall a galyart goat with a golden horn. --


And many similar. That prophecy which bears the name of Thomas Rymer is not
destitute of poetic graces. It opens with the following lines: Still on my ways
as I went
Out throuch a land beside a lee,
I met a bairn upon the bent Modernized way, though against the rhyme.
,
Methought him seemly for to see,
I asked him wholly his intent;
Good Sir, if your will be,
Since that ye bide upon the bent,
Some uncouth tidings tell you me:
When shall all these wars be gone?
That leil men may live in lee;
Or when shall Fasehude go from home,
And Lawtie blow his horn on hie?
I looked from me not a mile,
And saw two knights upon a lee, etc.


I imagine, however, they are all the composures of one hand; and, if I may use
a conjecture, were written immediately after the visions of Pierce Plowman,
every English poem of note in those days being soon succeeded by an imitation
in Scotland.


. When rhyme became common, this which was before thought to constitute the sole
difference between prose and verse, was still regarded as an accessory grace,
and was carried to a ludicrous length by some poets of no mean rank in both
nations. So late as the reign of Queen Elizabeth we find the following lines in
a court poet: Princes puffed; barons blustered; lords began lowr,
Knights stormed; squires startled, like steeds in a stowr;
Pages and yeomen yelled out in the hall King Ryence's Challenge, in the
Relics of Ancient English Poetry. Vol. III. p. 27.
.


And William Dunbar, the chief of the old Scottish poets, begins a copy of
verses to the King thus, Sanct Salvator send silver sorrow Bannatyne's Scottish
Poems, p. 68.
.
I asked him wholly his intent;
Good Sir, if your will be,
Since that ye bide upon the bent,
Some uncouth tidings tell you me:
When shall all these wars be gone?
That leil men may live in lee;
Or when shall Fasehude go from home,
And Lawtie blow his horn on hie?
I looked from me not a mile,
And saw two knights upon a lee, etc.


I imagine, however, they are all the composures of one hand; and, if I may use
a conjecture, were written immediately after the visions of Pierce Plowman,
every English poem of note in those days being soon succeeded by an imitation
in Scotland.

III. But the greatest assistance that could be found to the tradition of
poetry was derived from the invention of rhyme; which is far more ancient than
is commonly believed. One of the most learned men this age has produced Le
Clerc, Biolioth. Universelle, tom. IX.
, has shown that it is common in Scripture. All the Psalms consist of riming
verses, and many other passages which he names. They were used among the Greeks
so early as the time of Gorgias the Sicilian, who taught the Athenians this
practice. And though the spirit of the Greek and Latin languages did not always
admit of them in poetry, yet they were used as occasional beauties by their
most celebrated writers. Homer, Hesiod, and Virgil, have a few, though
apparently more from chance than design. The ancient Saturnine verses were all
rimes, as an old commentator Servius ad Georg. II. ver. 386.
informs us. And it is more than probable they were so constructed merely that
the memory might the more easily preserve them, their license forbidding their
being committed to writing. Those who would wish to know more particularly the
universality of this mode of versifying among the other ancient nations, may
consult the Huetiana of the most learned and respectable Bishop of Avranches
Sect. 78.
. The Eastern poetry consists altogether, if I mistake not, of riming lines, as
may be observed in the specimens of Hafiz their most illustrious writer, lately
published Jones, Comment. Poeseos Asiaticae -- Richardson's Specimen of Persian
Poetry.
. It appears, however, that alliteration supplied the place of rhyme with the
Northern nations till within a recent period Ol. Worm. Lit. Run. p. 165 and 176.
. Ossian's poetry, I suppose, is in stanzas something like our ballad measure;
though it were to be wished the translator had favored us with some
information on this head evidenced by specimens of the original. He indeed
acquaints us that Each verse was so connected with those which preceded, or
followed it, that if one line had been remembered in a stanza, it was almost
impossible to forget the rest Dissert. on the Era of Ossian, p. 228, ed. 1773.
: but this stands greatly in need of explanation.

The common ballad stanza is so simple, that it has been used by most nations
as the first mode of constructing rimes. The Spanish romanzes bear a great
resemblance in this, as in other respects, to the Scottish Ballads. In both,
every alternate line ends with similar vowels, though the consonants are not so
strictly attended to. As for instance, in the former we have bana, espada;
mala, palabra; vega, cueva; rompan, volcanos; for rimes: and in the later,
m^dale, girdle; keep, bleed; Buleighan, tak him; etc. The English, even in the
ruder pieces of their first minstrels, seem to have paid more attention to the
correspondence of their consonants, as may be observed in the curious
Collection published by Dr. Percy.

As the simplicity of this stanza rendered it easy to the composer, and
likewise more natural to express the passions, so it added to the facility of
recollection. It Is tone is sedate and slow. The rimes occur seldom, and at
equal distances: though when a more violent passion is to be painted, by
doubling the rimes, they at once expressed the mind better, and diversified the
harmony. Of this the reader will observe many instances in this collection, as,
Here maun I lie, here maun I die: Like beacon bricht at deid of nicht: Na river
heir, my dame, (...) deir: etc. and, to give a very solemn movement to the
cadence, they sometimes tripled the rhyme, an instance of which may be observed
in the first stanza of Child Maurice.

When all the circumstances here hinted at are considered, we shall be less apt
to wonder, that, by the concurrence of musical air, retentive arts in the
composition, and chiefly of rhyme, the most noble productions of former periods
have been preserved in the memory of a succession of admirers, and have had the
good fortune to arrive at our times pure and uncorrupted.

DISSERTATION II. ON THE TRAGIC BALLAD.
THAT species of poetry which we denominate Ballad, is peculiar to a barbarous
period. In an advanced state of arts, the Comic Ballad assumes the form of the
Song or Sonnet, and the Tragic or Heroic Ballad that of the higher Ode.

The cause of our pleasure in seeing a mournful event represented, or hearing
it described, has been attempted to be explained by many critics Aristotle,
Scaliger, Dubos, Trapp in his Praelections, Hume, Essay on Tragedy; but, above
all, Mr. Burke in his Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful.
. It seems to arise from the mingled passions of Admiration of the art of the
author, Curiosity to attend the termination, Delight arising from a reflection
on our own security, and the Sympathetic Spirit.

In giving this pleasure, perhaps the Tragic Ballad yields to no effort of
human genius. When we peruse a polished Tragedy or Ode, we admire the art of
the author, and are led to praise the invention; but when we read an unartful
description of a melancholy event, our passions are more intensely moved. The
labored productions of the informed composer resemble a Greek or Roman temple;
when we enter it, we admire the art of the builder. The rude effusions of the
Gothic Muse are like the monuments of their Architecture. We are filled with a
religious reverence, and, forgetting our praise of the contriver, adore the
present deity.

I believe no Tragic Ballad of renowned Antiquity has reached our times, if we
deny the beautiful and pathetic CARMEN DE ATY in Catullus a title to this
class; which, as a modern critic of note has observed Essay on the writings and
genius of Pope, p. 324. 3d ed.
, seems a translation from some Greek Dithyrambic The Dithyrambics were Heroic
Songs, written with the highest glow of poetic fancy in honor of the ancient
deities. Aristotle informs us, that the Greek Tragedy originated from them; as
their Comedy did from their Pastoral Love Songs.
, far more ancient than the times of that poet. His translation of Sappho's Ode
might show that he took a delight in the ancient Greek compositions, from which
indeed he seems to have derived in a great measure his peculiarly delicate vein.

But it was with the nations in a state of barbarity that this effusion of the
heart flourished as in it is proper soil; their societies, rude and irregular,
were full of vicissitudes, and every hour subject to the most dreadful
accidents. The Ministrels, who only knew, and were inspired by the present
manners, caught the tale of mortality, and recorded it for the instruction and
entertainment of others. It pleased by moving the passions, and, at the same
time, afforded caution to their auditors to guard against similar
mis-adventures.

It is amusing to observe how expressive the poetry of every country is of its
real manners. That of the Northern nations is ferocious to the highest degree.
Nor need we wonder that those, whose laws obliged them to decide the most
trifling debate with the sword Frotho etiam III. Danorum rex, quemadmodum Saxo,
lib. V. refert, de qualibet controversia far decerni sanxit: speciosius
viribus quam verbis, confligendum existimans. Schedius de diis Ger. Sing. II.
c. 46.
, delighted in a vein of poetry, which only painted deeds of blood, and objects
horrible to the imagination. The ballad poetry of the Spaniards is tinged with
the romantic gallantry of the nation. The hero is all complaisance; and takes
off his helmet in the heat of combat, when he thinks on his mistress. That of
the English is generous and brave. In their most noble ballad, Percy laments
over the death of his mortal foe. That of the Scots is perhaps, like the face
of their country, more various than the rest. We find in it the bravery of the
English, the gallantry of the Spanish, and I am afraid in some instances the
ferocity of the Northern.

A late writer Miscellanies by John Armstrong, M.D. vol. II. p. 254.
has remarked, that, the Scottish tunes, whether melancholy or gay, whether
amorous, martial, or pastoral, are in a style highly original, and most
feelingly expressive of all the passions from the sweetest to the most
terrible. He proceeds, Who was it that threw out those dreadful wild
expressions of distraction and melancholy in Lady Culross's Dream? an old
composition, now I am afraid lost, perhaps because it was almost too terrible
for the ear.

This composition is neither lost, nor is it too terrible for the ear. On the
contrary, a child might hear it repeated in a winter night without the smallest
emotion. A copy It is entitled, A Godly Dream compiled by Elizabeth Melvil,
Lady Culross younger, at the request of a friend. Edinburgh, 1737, 12mo. p. 20.
It is either reprinted from some former edition, or from a MS. It was written,
I conjecture, about the end of the Sixteenth Century; but in this edition I
suspect several expressions are modernized and altered to accommodate it to the
common capacity.

The lady Culross here meant was Elizabeth daughter of Sir James Melvil of
Halhill, and wife of John Colvil Commendator of Culross. She is believed to
have been the mother of Samuel Colvil the satirical poet, author of the Scots
Hudibras, etc.


of it now lies before me, and as some curiosity may have been raised by the
above remark, I shall here give an account of it. The dreadful and melancholy
of this production are solely of the religious kind, and may have been deeply
affecting to the enthusiastic at the period in which it was written: It begins
thus; Upon a day as I did mourn full sore,
For sundry things wherewith my soul was grieved,
My grief increased, and grew more and more,
I comfort fled, and could not be relieved;
With heaviness my heart was sore mischieved,
I loathed my life, I could not eat nor drink,
I might not speak, nor look to none that lived,
But mused alone, and diverse things did think.
This wretched world did so molest my mind,
I thought upon this false and iron age,
And how our hearts are so to vice inclined,
That Satan seems most fearfully to rage,
Nothing on earth my sorrow could aswage,
I felt my sin so strongly to increase;
I grieved the spirit was wont to be my pledge;
My soul was plunged into most deep distress.


Her Savior is then supposed to appear in a dream, and lead her through many
hair-breadth scapes into Heaven: Through dreadful dens, which made my heart
aghast,
He bare me up when I began to tire;
Sometimes we clamb oer cragie mountains high;
And sometimes stayed on ugly braes of sand,
They were so stay that wonder was to see;
But when I feared, he held me by the hand. --
Through great deserts we wandered on our way. --
Forward we past on narrow bridge of tree,
Oer waters great which hideously did roar, and.


The most terrible passage to a superstitious ear, is that in which she
supposes herself suspended over the Gulf of Perdition: Ere I was ware, one
gripped me at last,
And held me high above a flaming fire.
The fire was great, the heat did pierce me sore,
My faith grew weak, my grip was very small.
I trembled fast, my fear grew more and more.
My hands did shake that I held him withal,
At length they loosed, then I began to fall, etc.


At length she arrives in view of the Heavenly mansions in a stanza, which, to
alter a little her own expression, 'Glisters with tinsel.'

I looked up unto that castle fair
Glistering with gold; and shining silver bright
The stately towers did mount above the air;
They blinded me they cast so great a light,
My heart was glad to see that joyful sight,
My voyage then I thought it not in vain,
I him besought to guide me there aright,
With many vows never to tire again.
And the whole concludes with an exhortation to a pious life.

But what has the Christian religion to do with poetry? In the true poetic
terrible, I believe, some passages in Hardyknute yield to no attempt of a
strong and dark fancy. The Ballad styled Edward may, I fear, be rather adduced
as an evidence that this displeases, when it rises to a degree of the horrible,
which that singular piece certainly partakes of.

The Pathetic is the other principal walk of the Tragic Muse: and in this the
Scottish Ballads yield to no compositions whatever. What can be imagined more
moving than the catastrophes of Ossian's Darthula, the most pathetic of all
poems? or of Hardyknute, Child Maurice, and indeed most of the pieces now
collected? Were ever the feelings of a fond mother expressed in a language
equal in simplicity and pathos to that of lady Bothwell? -- This leads me to
remark, that the dialect in which the Scottish Ballads are written gives them a
great advantage in point of touching the passions. Their language is rough and
unpolished, and seems to flow immediately from the heart (...).
. We meet with no concettos or far-fetched thoughts in them. They possess the
pathetic power in the highest degree, because they do not affect it; and are
striking, because they do not meditate to strike.

Most of the compositions now offered to the public, have already received
approbation. The mutilated Fragment of Hardyknute formerly in print, was
admired and celebrated by the best critics. As it is now, I am inclined to
think, given in it is original perfection, it is certainly the most noble
production in this style that ever appeared in the world. The manners and
characters are strongly marked, and well preserved; the incidents deeply
interesting; and the catastrophe new and affecting. I am indebted for most of
the stanzas, now recovered, to the memory of a lady in Lanarkshire.

A modern lyric poet of the first class Mr. Gray. See his Letters published by
Mr. Mason. Sect. IV. Let. XXV.
has pronounced Child Maurice a Divine Ballad. Aristotle's best rules, says he,
are observed in it in a manner that shows the author had never read Aristotle.
Indeed if any one will peruse Aristotle's Art of Poetry with Dacier's
Elucidations, and afterward compare their most approved rules with this simple
Ballad, he will find that they are better illustrated by this rude effort of
the Gothic Muse, than by the most exquisite Tragedy of ancient or modern times.
The Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles, the Athalie of Racine, the Merope of Maffei,
and even the very excellent Drama, which seems immediately founded on it, not
excepted; there being many delicate strokes in this original, which the plot
adopted by that author forbade his making proper use of. This does honor at
once to the unknown composer of this Ballad, and to the first of critics. In
the former the reader will admire a genius, that, probably untracked by
erudition, could produce a story corresponding to the intricate though natural
rules of the Greek author. To the latter will be readily confirmed the applause
of an ancient Apud Suidam.
, that, he was the secretary of Nature, and his pen was ever dipped in good
sense.

These, and the other monuments of ancient Scottish Poetry, which have already
appeared, are in this edition given much more correct; and a few are now first
published from tradition. The Editor imagined they possessed some small
beauties, else they would not have been added to this Selection. Their seeming
antiquity was only regarded as it enhanced their real graces.

MDCCLXXVI * These Dissertations, etc. were written of this date, but slight
additions have been made to them from time to time; as the reader will observe
from references to books published since that period.
.

HAVING in the First of the foregoing Dissertations mentioned with applause the
Spanish Ballads, or Romanzes, contained in the HISTORIA DE LAS GUERRAS CIVILES
DE GRANADA, and that book being seldom to be met with, and written in a
language of no wide study, the Editor has been induced to give a few
translations from that work; the two which Dr. Percy has published having
rather excited than gratified curiosity.

Before producing these translations, it may be proper to give some short
account of the work whence they are taken. The History of the Civil Wars of
Granada is a well-written narration of those dissentions which tore that
kingdom in pieces, for some years before the period that Ferdinand and
Isabella, king and queen of Christian Spain, conquered it, down to the time of
conquest. The chief sources of those dissentions were the two great Vandos, or
factions, of the Zegris and the Abencerrages; whose exploits and adventures,
with those of their adherents, are here displayed with a minute detail that
savours very strongly of romance, though the great outlines of the work are
evidently founded on historical truth; which, if the reader pleases, is indeed
only another name for a certain species of romance.

This History, as we learn from the work itself toward the close, is a
translation from the Arabic of an anonymous Moor, who fled to Africa with many
of his countrymen, when Granada was yielded to the arms of Ferdinand. His
grandson, by name Argutaafa, found this work among his grandfather's papers,
and presented it to a Jew, called Rabbi Santo, who translated it into Hebrew;
and gave the Arabic Original to Don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, Conde de Baylen.
That lord being interested by it, as his ancestors had been concerned in the
wars there related, ordered the Jew to translate it into Castillan Spanish; and
afterward gave the translation to the Spanish editor, whose name from the
first edition, Barcelona printed by Seb. Matevad, 1610, appears to be Ginez
Perez.

On almost every occasion the author produces some romanze, as the voucher of
his incidents, translations of a few of which shall now be produced. It must,
however, be premised, that the first translation is merely meant to convey to
the reader an idea of the verse in which most of the originals are written; for
which purpose one of the feeblest was chosen, as, had strength of thought or
incident been attempted in this way, the spirit would have totally evaporated
in the midst of attention to the double rimes, of which the English language is
remarkably penurious.

ROMANZE I.
I.
AT the pleasant dawn of morning,
Moorish knights in numbers sally,
To maintain a solemn turney
In Granada's verdant valley.
II.
Justing they wheel their fleet horses;
On his lance each warrior steady
Bears a rich and beauteous penon,
Wrought with art by his fair lady.
III.
The bright sun they dazzle, showing
Jupes of silk and golden tissue:
Each young hero hopes to soften
His proud dame by that day's issue.
IV.
From the towers of proud Alhambra The celebrated palace of the Moorish kings
of Granada.

Moorish ladies view the trial;
And among them two the fairest
Of the court without denial.
V.
Fatima they and Xarifa
Love on both has played his quiver:
Thee, Xarifa, O that Alla
Would from jealousy deliver!
VI.
Tho friends they, for this has silence
Over them spread his sullen pinion.
Fatima the heart has stolen
Of Xarifa's faithless minion.
VII.
Abendarrez call the rover;
Guiltless she of his defection;
For of Fatima's firm passion
Abenamar was the election.
VIII.
Spoke at length the wronged Xarifa,
As with scorn her rage to cover;
For she thought her friend with favor
Heard the suit of her false lover.
IX.
'Love cannot be hid, my sister,
'But himself he still discloses;
'Of thy tongue where is the prattle?
'Of thy cheeks where are the roses?
X.
'Thou art not in love, I know it!
'See the cause of thy condition;
'Thy knight, Abendarrez, tilting,
'Hopes the prize with fond ambition.
XI.
Beauteous Fatima her silence
In wise answer thus has broken:
'Never yet did Love, Xarifa,
'Of my heart receive a token.
XII.
'If my speech and color leave me
'It is not without a reason;
'Short time since my gracious father
'Died by Alabez's treason.
XIII.
'And if ever Love, my sister,
'To his law could bring me over,
'Abendarrez should not win me,
'From thy charms a cruel rover.'
XIV.
Thus the Moorish dames have spoken;
Then in silence closed their prattle,
To remark each gallant chieftain
Who maintained the seeming battle.
ROMANZE II.
I.
WHEN valiant Ferdinand beheld
Granada to his prowess yield;
And over Aihambra's highest tower
The banner fly of Christian power;
II.
Thus to the flower of Spanish ground,
His peers and loyal leaders round,
The mandates of his mighty breast,
The monarch in his pride addressed.
III.
'Who when the morning springs, will go
'Our chief against the mountain foe;
'And spread our princely ensign tall
'O'er Alpuxarra's rebel wall When Ferdinand was occupied with the arquisition
of Granada, Alp^xa^ra, and some other Moorish towns newly conquered, took the
opportunity to revolt.
?
IV.
In silence every troubled peer
Read in each other's face his fear:
The journey full of perils great
They knew, and doubtful the retreat.
V.
Each tremulons beard in terror shook,
Till from his seat, with frowning look,
Alonso de Aguilar sprung
And thus bespoke with fearless tongue.
VI.
'O king, for me is this emprize,
'And shame or praise that thence may rise;
'The queen her sovereign promise gave
'No other the bright claim should have.'
VII.
With joy the king the valiant heard.
Soon as the morrow's dawn appeared,
Alonso with his eager van
To climb Nevada's heights began.
VIII.
Five hundred horse to battle bred,
A thousand infantry he led;
The Moors in silent ambush lay.
In crowds to guard the rocky way.
IX.
Amid the pathless cliffs the cry
Of conflict echoes to the sky:
The cavalry no footing gain,
But fall by stony fragments slain.
X.
Alonso, and the foot-array,
Sore lessened by the bloody fray,
At length attain an upland dale,
Where countless Moors their ranks assail.
XI.
Tho bleed around whole bands of foes,
Yet who such numbers may oppose?
The chief at length beheld his host,
In one unbounded slaughter lost.
XII.
Tho left alone, the lion-knight
Declines not the unequal fight;
Wherever he turns his eyes of fire,
As struck by lightning crowds expire.
XIII.
Fresh Moors possess the bloody field;
No longer strong his sword to wield,
The victim of a thousand wounds,
The shade of death the chief surrounds.
XIV.
Tho bravely dead, each coward Moor
With caitiff lance his body tore;
Then to Ogixar they him brought;
Where all to see the warrior sought.
XV.
Each Moor and Moorish dame with joy
Saw him, who wont their hopes destroy,
No more exert his matchless force,
But harmless ly a bleeding corse.
XVI.
A Christian captive of the crowd
Yet moved their tears with outcry loud:
For she had nursed him at her breast,
And in the cradle footh'd his rest.
XVII.
'Alonso, Oh Alonso brave!
'May heaven thy generous spirit have!
'The Moors of Alpuxara slew
'The bravest knight that fame ever knew.'
ROMANZE III.
I.
EIGHT to eight, and ten to ten,
Knights of valor and renown,
Turney in Toledo fair
The glad day of peace to crown.
II.
An high festival the king
Gives his pleasure to evince;
Concord reigns between his brother
And Granada's warlike prince.
III.
Others say the feast is given
Zelindaxa bright to please;
Mistress of the king's affection,
She ordains him pain or ease.
IV.
The Zarrazins and Aliatores,
There in gallant union ride;
The Alari^es and Azarques
Them oppose with equal pride.
V.
The Zarrazins, a noble band,
On sorrel horses there were seen;
Their mantles and their jupes distinguished
By the orange hue and green.
VI.
On their shields a cimiter,
Bent as Cupid's bow, they wore;
And the words FUEGO Y SANGRE Fire and blood.
,
As the chosen motto bore.
VII.
Equals in the gallant show
Next the Aliatores shone;
In carnation garbs arrayed
With white foliages bestrown.
VII.
For device, upon the strength
Of Atlas stood a stable heaven;
TENDRELO HASTA QUE CANSE He will support it till be is weary.

For the motto there was given.
IX.
Them ensued the Alarifes
In most costly manner clad;
Their sleeves right curiously were purfled
On the yellow cloth and red.
X.
A naked Hercules they gave,
Who a savage monster tore;
And above FUERCAS VALEN Strength is powerful.

As the valiant word they wore.
XI.
Them the eight Azarques followed,
And in pride exceeded all;
Straw's pale dye and brownish gray
Were their hues of festival.
XII.
On each chieftain's verdant shield
Held two daring hands a sphere;
EN LO VERDE TODO CABE In the green every thing is comprehended.

As the words of honor were.
XIII.
Among this band the king beheld
The rival of his lady's love,
And jealousy his cruel heart
To thoughts of utmost fury drove.
XIV.
To Selin thus, high constable,
The sovereign spoke in frantic mood:
'The sun that dazzles now mine eyes,
'Ere long I trust shall set in blood.'
XV.
The graceful knight so strongly threw It was anciently the custom for the
Spanish gentry to amuse themselves while on horseback with throwing small rods,
or canes, into the air; on darting of which with such force and skill as to
delude the eye, they much valued themselves.

His rods, they vanished in the air;
Nor could the power of keenest eye,
Their progress or their fall declare.
XVI.
Each lady, from the windows high,
Or scaffolds, that enjoyed the sight,
With anxious looks of fond desire
Bent forwards to behold the knight.
XVII.
As he advances or retires,
'May heaven thee save!' the vulgar cry:
While, burnt with jealousy's fierce flames,
The king still answers, 'Let him die!'
XVIII.
Bold Zelindaxa, sovereign fair,
As near the royal tower he drew,
Tho 'Hold! hold!' cried the angry king,
Sprinkled the chief with fragrant dew.
XIX.
The turney stopped: in silence deep,
And expectation, stood the ring;
While, giving reason's rein to rage,
'Arrest the traitor!' cried the king.
XX.
The two first troops their lances seize
The princely mandate to fulfill.
Alas! what barrier can be set
Against an amorous monarch's will!
XXI.
The other two defense prepared,
Had not the Azarque to them said,
'Friends, tho the king's love has no laws,
'Remember laws for yours were made.
XXII.
'Lower your lances, tho my foes
'Ye eager see my blood to spill.
'Alas, what barrier can be set
'Against an amorous monarch's will!
XXIII.
They took the noble Moor. His friends
Dropped tears of rage his fate to see.
In wild disorder rushed the crowd,
By force the captive knight to free.
XXIV.
They had no chief to guide their ire,
And fled before superior skill.
Alas, what barrier can be set,
Against an amorous monarch's will!
XXV.
Fair Zelindaxa cried aloud,
'Rescue, ye Moors, your warrior brave!'
And rose as if she meant to leap
From the high tower her knight to save.
XXVI.
Her mother her embraced, and cried,
'Ah, are you mad yourself to kill!
'Alas, what barrier can be set
'Against an amorous monarch's will!'
XXVII.
The furious king a message sent
The mournful damsel to convey
To a lone mansion of her friends,
In lasting durance there to stay.
XXVIII.
'Tell him,' she said, 'where'er I go,
'My firm love shall attend me still.
'Alas, what barrier can be set
'Against an amorous monarch's will!'
ROMANZE IV This ballad is composed of three different ones on the same
subject; the first beginning, Por la placa de San Lucar; the second, Sale la
estrella de Venus; and the third, No de tal braveza lleno.
.
I.
ALONG San Lucar's ample square
See gallant Gazul ride;
In snowey hue arrayed, and green,
And purple's radiant pride.
To Gelves he designs to go,
His valiant skill to try;
In turnament with many a knight
Of high renown to vie.
II.
The chief a noble dame adores;
Of her farewell to take,
A thousand anxious turns before
Yon mansion see him make.
Lo, from the balcony at length,
The lovely maid inclines,
As over a distant hill the morn,
In rosy radiance shines.
III.
Swift from his steed the warrior lights,
And kneels upon the ground,
As struck with awe: such power has love
The valiant to confound.
'O fair,' he cries with trembling voice,
'This day must fame be mine:
'What chance can hurt me now that I
'Have seen thy charms divine?
IV.
'Yet of thy favor I beseech
'Some badge to bear along It was the custom for ladies to present their lovers
with the penon or fireamer they were to wear on their lance in combat or
turney. The penon was commonly richly inwoven with the lady's cipher. See
Stanza XIII.
;
'That, with it graced, my haughty lance
'May as my love be strong.'
In jealous rage the maid replied,
For then full well she knew
That Zaida, his first desire,
An elder duty drew.
V.
'If in the combat thy success
'My heart's desire may crown;
'No more, false knight, shall thou return,
'But life lose, and renown.
'To God I speak my eager wish,
'Sincere as thou do lie,
'That in the fight by secret foes
'Ignobly thou may die.
VI.
'O may thy enemies be strong!
'Thy friends all dastards prove!
'O be thou dead, as is thy fame,
'And not even pity move!'
The leader thinks she speaks in jest,
And thus in haste replies;
'The Moor who would us set at strife,
'Believe me, lady, lies.
VII.
'May all thy curses on him light!
'My soul must now abhor
'That Zaida; tho wont, I own,
Her beauty to adore.
'After long years of service, she
'For a base Moor me left -- '
The fair retired, nor more would hear,
Of patience quite bereft.
VIII.
A page appeared, and gallant steeds
Him brought in rich array:
'Return,' the frantic warrior cried,
'We try no arms this day.'
In frenzy then against the wall
That hid his fair from view,
So fierce he tilted, that his spear
In thousand splinters flew.
IX.
In anguish now he paused a while,
Now rode in furious mood,
Till madness fired his inmost soul,
And prompted deeds of blood.
His wandering way to Xerez far
Along the shore he held;
Where with her sire his former love,
False Zaida, now dwell'd.
X.
The star of eve with golden light
Illumed the western wave,
When near to Xerez Gazul drew,
As Rodamonte brave.
Not he, that king of Argel high,
When for his fair he strove
With Mandricardo, stood in praise
Young Gazul's name above.
XI.
Now near her mansion, with fresh rage
His dauntless bosom burned;
And thus he spoke, while plaintive waves
And rocks the sound returned.
'O Zaida, more faithless far
'Than that inconstant sea;
'Not half so savage are these rocks,
'Not half so hard as thee!
XII.
'How can thou give thy youthful hand
'To him thy suitor old;
'And leave the riches of the mind
'For sordid wealth of gold?
'Oh, may even he, thy suitor old,
'Thy falsehood learn to scorn!
'May never love thy anxious nights,
'Nor joy thy days adorn.
XIII.
'At zambra A moresque dance.
, nor at festival,
'May never knight appear,
'Thy cipher on embroidered sleeve,
'Or silken badge to bear.
'May jealousy even of his age
'Thy peace still violate.
'May he live long! Thy fiercest foe
'Can wish no worse a fate.'
XIV.
Thus as he spoke the gradual night
Descended all around;
And, as he near the mansion drew,
Of mirth he heard the sound.
Sudden before a rushing crowd
The doors were open thrown;
And through the gloom in bright array
A thousand torches shone.
XV.
In midst the future husband held
Young Zaida's false hand.
To church they went, where stood the priest
To fix the sacred band.
This cruel sight when Gazul saw,
His madness found new flame;
A while he rested, till at hand
The brilliant troop now came.
XVI.
Then spurred his steed into the midst,
And thus his lady's choice
Addressed, while all in sudden fear
Stood trembling at his voice.
'Hope not, base traitor, to enjoy
'This lady, once my love;
'Defend thyself if ever thy arm
'Could skill or valor prove.
XVII.
He spoke. They fought. The aged Moor
Lay dead upon the ground.
Swift to revenge his wretched fall,
His numerous friends drew round.
Against their force the warrior stood
With more than mortal might:
Then, slow retreating, refuge found
Amid the shades of night.
LA PLUPART DE CES CHANSONS SONT DE VIEILLES ROMANCES DON'T LES AIRS NE SONT PAS
PIQUANS; MAIS ILS ONT JE NE SAIS QUOI D'ANTIQUE ET DE DOUX QUI TOUCH A LA
LONGUE. ROUSSEAU.
HARDYKNUTE. AN HEROIC BALLAD.
PART I.
STATELY stepped he east the ha,
And stately stepped he west;
Full seventy yeirs he now had seen,
With scerce sevin yeirs of rest.
He livit when Britons breach of faith
Wrocht Scotland meikle wae,
And ay his sword tauld to their cost
He was their deidly fae.
Hie on a hill his castle stude,
With halls and touris a hicht,
And gudely chambers fair to see,
Whar he lodgit money a knicht.
His dame sa peirles anes, and fair,
For chaste, and beauty, seen,
Na marrow had in a the land,
Save Emergard the queen.
Full thirtein sons to him she bare,
All men of valor stout,
In bluidy ficht, with sword in hand,
Nine lost their lives bot doubt;
Four yet remaind; lang mote they live
To stand by liege and land:
Hie was their fame, hie was their micht,
And hie was their command.
Greit luve they bare to Fairly fair,
Their sister saft and deir,
Her girdle shawd her middle jimp,
And gowdin glist her hair.
What waefou wae her beauty bred!
Waefou to young and auld,
Waefou I trow to kyth and kin,
As story ever tauld.
The king of Norse, in summer tide,
Puffed up with pouir and micht,
Landed in fair Scotland the isle,
Wi money a hardy knicht.
The tidings to our good Scots king
Came as he sat at dyne
With noble chiefs in braive array,
Drinking the bluid red wine.
"To horse, to horse, my royal liege!
"Your faes stand on the strand;
"Full twenty thousand glittering speirs
"The cheifs of Norse command.
"Bring me my steid Mage dapple gray."
Our good king raise and cried:
A trustier beist in all the land,
A Scots king nevir said.
"Gae, little page, tell Hardyknute,
"Wha lives on hill sa hie,
"To draw his sword, the dreid of faes,
"And haste and follow me."
The little page flew swift as dart,
Flung by his master's arm;
'Cum down, cum down, lord Hardyknute,
'And red your king frae harm.'
Then reid, reid grew his dark-brown cheiks
Sae did his dark-brown brow;
His luiks grew kene, as they were wont
In danger grit to do.
He has taken a horn as grene as grass,
And gien five sounds sa shrill,
That tries in grene wode shuke thereat,
Sae loud rang ilka hill.
His sons in manly sport and glie
Had past the summer's morn;
When lo! down in a grassy dale,
They heard their father's horn.
'That horn, quoth they, neir sounds in peace,
'We have other sport to bide;'
And sune they hied them up the hill,
And sune were at his side.
"Late, late yestrene, I weind in peace
"To end my lengthend life;
"My age micht well excuse my arm
"Frae manly feats of strife:
"But now that Norse does proudly boast
"Fair Scotland to enthral,
"It Is neir be said of Hardyknute,
"He feird to fecht or fall.
"Robin of Rothsay bend thy bow,
"Thy arrows shute sa leil,
"That money a comely countenance
"They Have turned to deidly pale.
"Braive Thomas taike ye but your lance,
"Ye neid na weapons mair;
"Gif ye fecht wi't, as ye did anes,
"Against Westmoreland's ferce heir.
"And Malcolm, licht of fute as stag
"That runs in forest wild,
"Get me my thousands thrie of men
"Weil bred to sword and shield:
"Bring me my horse and harnisine,
"My blade of metal clear."
If faes but kend the hand it bare,
They sune had fled for feir.
"Farewil my dame sae peirless good,"
And tuke her by the hand,
"Fairer to me in age you seim
"Than maids for beauty famd:
"My youngest son sall here remain,
"To guard these stately touirs,
"And shute the silver bolt that keips
"Sae fast your painted bowers."
And first she wet her comely cheiks,
And then her boddice grene;
The silken cords of twirtle twist
Were plet with silver shene;
And apron set with money a dyce
Of neidle-wark sae rare,
Wove by nae hand, as ye may guess,
Save that of Fairly fair.
And he has ridden our muir and moss,
Our hills and money a glen,
When he came to a wounded knicht,
Making a heavy mane:
'Here maun I lie, here maun I dye
'By treacheries fause gyles;
'Witless I was that eir gave faith
'To wicked woman's smyles.'
"Sir knicht, gin ye were in my bouir,
"To lean on silken seat,
"My lady's kindly care you would pruve
"Wha neir kend deidly hate;
"Hirsell wald watch ye all the day,
"Her maids at deid of nicht;
"And Fairly fair your heart would cheir,
"As she stands in your ficht.
"Arise young knicht, and mount your steid,
"Bricht lows the shynand day;
"Choose frae my menie wham ye pleise,
"To leid ye on the way."
Wi smyless luik, and visage wan
The wounded knicht replied,
'Kind chieftain your intent pursue,
'For heir I maun abide.
'To me nae after day nor nicht
'Can eir be sweit or fair;
'But sune benethe sum draping try,
'Cauld death sall end my care.'
Still him to win strave Hardyknute,
Nor strave he lang in vain;
Short pleiding eithly micht prevale,
Him to his lure to gain.
"I will return wi speid to bide,
"Your plaint and mend your wae:
"But private grudge maun neir be quelled,
"Before our countries fae.
"Mordac, thy eild may best be spaird
"The fields of strife fraemang;
"Convey Sir knicht to my abode,
"And meise his egre pang."
Syne he has gane far hynd, out owr
Lord Chattan's land sae wide;
That lord a worthy wicht was ay,
When faes his courage said:
Of Pictish race, by mother's side:
When Picts ruled Caledon,
Lord Chattan claimed the princely maid
When he saved Pictish crown.
Now with his ferce and stalwart train
He recht a rising hicht,
Whar brad encampit on the dale,
Norse army lay in sicht;
"Yonder my valiant sons, full ferce
"Our raging rievers wait,
"On the unconquerit Scottish swaird
"To try with us their fate.
"Make orisons to him that saved
"Our saul's upon the rude;
"Syne braively shaw your veins are filld
"Wi Caledonian bluid."
Then forth he drew his trusty glaive,
While thousands all around,
Drawn frae their sheiths glanced in the sun,
And loud the bugils sound.
To join his king, adown the hill
In haste his march he made,
While playand pibrochs minstrals meit
Before him stately strade.
'Thrise welcum, valiant stoup of weir,
'Thy nation's shield and pride,
'Thy king na reasoun has to feir,
'Whan thou art by his side.
When bows were bent, and darts were thrawn,
For thrang scerce cold they fly,
The darts clave arrows as they met,
Eir faes their dint mote dry.
Lang did they rage, and fecht full ferce,
Wi little skaith to man;
But bluidy, bluidy was the field
Or that lang day was done!
The king of Scots that findle bruik'd
The war that luik'd like play,
Drew his braid sword, and brake his bow,
Sen bows seim'd but delay.
Quoth noble Rothsay, 'Mine I Will keep,
'I wate it is bleid a score.'
"Haste up my merry men," cried the king,
As he rade on before.
The king of Norse he socht to find,
Wi him to mense the faucht;
But on his forehead there did licht
A sharp unsonsie shaft:
As he his hand pat up to feil
The wound, an arrow kein,
O waefu chance! there pind his hand
In midst atweene his eyne.
'Revenge! revenge!' cried Rothsay's heir,
'Your mail-coat sall nocht bide
'The strenth and sharpness of my dart,'
Whilk shared the reiver's side.
Anither arrow weil he marked
It perc'd his neck in two;
His hands then quat the silver reins,
He law as eard did fa.
'Sair bleids my liege! Sair, sair he bleids!
Again with micht he drew,
And gesture dreid his sturdy bow;
Fast the braid arrow flew:
Wa to the knicht he ettled at;
Lament now queen Elgreid;
Hire dames to wail your darling's fall,
His youth, and comely meid.
'Tak aff, tak aff his costly jupe,'
(Or gold well was it twined,
Knit like the fowler's net, throuch whilk
His steily harnes shynd.)
'Beir Norse that gift frae me, and bid
'Him venge the bluid it weirs;
'Say if he face my bended bow
'He sure nae weapon feirs.'
Proud Norse with giant body tall,
Braid shoulder, and arms strong;
Cried, 'Whar is Hardyknute sae famd,
'And feird at Britain's throne?
'Tho Britons tremble at his name,
'I sune sall make him wail,
'That eir my sword was made sae sharp,
'Sae saft his coat of mail.
That brag his stout heart could na bide,
It lent him youthfu micht:
"I Am Hardyknute. This day," he cried,
"To Scotland's king I hicht
"To lay thee law as horse's hufe;
"My word I mean to keip:"
Syne with the first dint eir he struck
He gar'd his body bleid.
Norse ene like gray gosehauk staird wild,
He sich'd wi shame and spyte;
'Disgrac'd is now my far famd arm
'That left thee pouir to stryke.'
Syne gied his helm a blow sae fell,
It made him down to stoup,
Sae law as he to ladies used,
In courtly gyse to lout.
Full sune he raised his bent body;
His bou he marveld sair,
Sen blaws till than on him but dared
As touch of Fairly fair.
Norse ferlied too as sair as he,
To see his stately luik;
Sae sune as eir he struck a fae,
Sae sune his life he tuke.
Whar, like a fire to hither set,
Bauld Thomas did advance,
A sturdy fae, with luik enraged,
Up toward him did prance.
He spurd his steid through thickest ranks
The hardy youth to quell;
Wha srude unmuvit at his approach
His fury to repel.
'That short brown shaft, sae meinly trimd,
'Lukes like poor Scotland's geir;
'But dreadfu seims the rusty point!'
And loud he leuch in jeir.
"Aft Britons blude has dimmed its shine
"It Is point cut short their vaunt."
Syne perc'd the boster's bairded cheik
Nae time he tuke to taunt.
Short while he in his sadil swang;
His stirrip was nae stay,
But feible hang his unbent knie,
Sair taken he was, fey!
Swyth on the hardened clay he fell,
Richt far was heard the thud;
But Thomas luk'd not as he lay
All waltering in his blude.
Wi careless gesture, mind unmuv'd,
On rade he north the plain
His seim in peace, or fercest strife,
Ay reckless, and the same.
Nor yet his heart dames' dimpeld cheik
Cold meise saft luve to bruik;
Till vengefu Ann returned his scorn,
Then languid grew his luke.
In thrauis of death, wi wallow'd cheik,
All panting on the plain,
The bleiding corpse of warriors lay,
Neir to arise again:
Neir to return to native land;
Na mair wi blythsum sounds
To boast the glories of that day,
And shaw their shynand wounds.
There on a lee, whar stands a cross
Set up for monument,
Thousands fu ferce, that summer's day,
Filled kene wars black intent.
Let Scots while Scots praise Hardyknute
Let Norse the name aye dreid;
Ay how he faucht, aft how he spaird,
Sall latest ages reid.
On Norway's coast the widowed dame
May wash the rocks wi teirs,
May lang luke owr the shiples seas
Before her mate appeirs.
Ceise, Emma, ceise to hope in vain,
Thy lord lies in the clay;
The valiant Scots na rievers thole
To carry life away.
Loud and chill blew the westlin wind,
Sair beat the heavy shouir,
Mirk grew the nicht ere Hardyknute
Wan neir his stately touir:
His touir that used wi torches bleise
To shine sae far at nicht
Seim'd now as black as mourning weid:
Na marvel sair he sich'd.
"There Is na licht in my lady's bouir,
"There Is na licht in my ha;
"Na blynk shynes round my Fairly fair,
"Na ward stands on my wa.
"What bodes it? Robert, Thomas, say."
Na answer fits their dreid.
"Stand back my sons I Will be your gyde."
But by they past wi speid.
"As fast I ha sped owr Scotland's faes -- "
There ceis'd his brag of weir,
Sair shamd to mind ocht but his dame,
And maiden Fairly fair.
Black feir he felt, but what to feir
He wist nae yet wi dreid:
Sair shuke his body, fair his limbs
And a the warrior flied.
PART II.
"RETURN, return, ye men of bluid,
"And bring me back my child!"
A dolefu voice frae mid the ha
Reculd, wi echoes wild.
Bestraught wi dule and dreid, na pouir
Had Hardyknute at a;
Full thrice he raught his ported speir,
And thrice he let it fa.
"O haly God, for his deir sake,
"Wha savd us on the rude --
He tint his prayer, and drew his glaive,
Yet reid wi Norland bluid.
"Brayd on, brayd on, my stalwart sons,
"Grit cause we ha to feir;
"But ay the canny ferce contemn
"The hap they canna veir."
'Return, return, ye men of bluid,
'And bring me back my child!'
The dolefu voice frae mid the ha
Reculd, wi echoes wild.
The storm grew rife, through a the lift
The rattling thunder rang,
The black rain shour'd, and lichtning glent
Their harnisine alang.
What feir possessed their boding breests
When, by the gloomy glour,
The castle ditch wi deed bodies
They saw was filled out owr!
Quoth Hardyknute "I would to Christ
"The Norse had wan the day,
"Sae I had keipt at hame but anes,
"Thilk bluidy feats to stay."
Wi speed they past, and syne they recht
The base-courts sounding bound,
Deip groans since heard, and throuch the mirk
Lukd wistfully around.
The moon, frae hind a sable cloud,
Wi sudden twinkle shane,
When, on the cauldrif eard, they fand
The good Sir Mordac layn.
Besprent wi gore, fra helm to spur,
Was the trew-heartit knicht;
Swith frae his steid sprang Hardyknute
Muv'd wi the heavy sicht.
"O say thy master's shield in weir,
"His sawman in the ha,
"What hatefu chance cold ha the pouir
To lay thy eild sae law?"
To his complaint the bleiding knicht
Returned a piteous mane,
And recht his hand, whilk Hardyknute
Claucht streitly in his ain:
'Gin eir ye see lord Hardyknute,
'Frae Mordac ye maun say,
'Lord Draffan's treasoun to confute
'He usd his steddiest fay.'
He micht na mair, for cruel death
Forbad him to proceid;
"I vow to God, I winna sleip
"Till I see Draffan bleid.
"My sons your sister was owr fair:
"But bruik he sall na lang
"His good betide; my last forbode
"He Will trow belyve na sang.
"Bown ye my eydent friends to kyth
"To me your luve sae deir;
"The Norse' defeat mote weil persuade
"Nae riever ye neid feir."
The speirmen wi a michty shout,
Cried 'Save our master deir!
'While he dow beir the sway bot care
'Nae reiver we sall feir.'
'Return, return, ye men of bluid
'And bring me back my child!'
The dolefu voice frae mid the ha
Reculd wi echoes wild.
"I am to wit my valiant friends:"
And to the ha they ran,
The stately door full streitly steiked
Wi iron boltis thrie they fand.
The stately door, thouch streitly steiked
Wi waddin iron boltis thrie,
Richt sune his micht can eithly gar
Frae aff it is hinges fly.
"Whar ha ye taken my dochter deir?
"Mair would I see her deid
"Than see her in your bridal bed
"For a your portly meid.
"What thouch my good and valiant lord
"Lie strecht on the cauld clay?
"My sons the death may ablins spair
"To wreak their sisters wae."
Sae did she crune wi heavy cheir,
Hit luiks, and bleirit eyne;
Then teirs first wet his manly cheik
And snawy baird bedeene.
'Na riever here, my dame sae deir,
'But your leil lord you see;
'May hiest harm betide his life
'Wha brocht sic harm to thee!
'Gin anes ye may believe my word,
'Nor am I usd to lie,
'By day-prime he or Hardyknute
'The bluidy death shall die.'
The ha, whar late the linkis bricht
Sae gladsum shind at even,
Whar penants gleit a gowden bleise
Our knichts and ladys shene,
Was now sae mirk, that, throuch the bound,
Nocht mote they wein to see,
Alse throuch the southern port the moon
Let fa a blinkand glie.
"Are ye in suith my deir luvd lord?"
Nae mair she doucht to say,
But swounit on his harnest neck
Wi joy and tender fay.
To see her in sic balefu sort
Revived his selcouth feirs;
But sune she raisd her comely luik,
And saw his faing teirs.
"Ye are nae wont to greit wi wreuch,
"Grit cause ye ha I dreid;
"Hae a our sons their lives redemd
"Frae forth the dowie feid?"
'Saif are our valiant sons, ye see,
'But lack their sister deir;
'When she is awa, bot any doubt,
'We ha grit cause to feir.'
"Of a our wrangs, and her depart,
"When ye the suith sall heir,
"Na marvel that ye ha mair cause,
"Than ye yet weit, to feir.
"O wharefore heir yon feignand knicht
"Wi Mordac did ye send?
"Ye suner wald ha perced his heart
"Had ye his ettling kend."
'What may ye mein my peirles d^me?
'That knicht did muve my ruthe
'We balefu mane; I did na dout
'His courtesy and truth.
'He maun ha tint wi sma renown
'His life in this fell rief;
'Richt sair it grieves me that he heir
'Met sic an ill relief.'
Quoth she, wi teirs that down her cheiks
Ran like a silver shouir,
"May ill befa the tide that brocht
"That fause knicht to our touir:
"Ken'd ye na Draffan's lordly port,
"Thouch cled in knichtly graith?
"Tho hidden was his hautie luik
"The visor black benethe?"
'Now, as I am a knicht of weir,
'I thocht his seeming true;
'But, that he sae deceived my ruthe,
'Full sairly he sall rue.'
"Sir Mordac to the sounding ha
"Came wi his cative fere;"
'My fire has sent this wounded knicht
'To pruve your kyndlie care.
'Your sell maun watch him a the day,
'Your maids at deid of nicht;
'And Fairly fair his heart maun cheir
'As she stands in his sicht.'
"Nae suner was Sir Mordac gane,
"Than up the featour sprang;"
The luve alse o your dochter deir
'I feil na ither pang.
'Tho Hardyknute lord Draffan's suit
'Refus'd wi mickle pride;
'By his good dame and Fairly fair
'Let him not be denied.'
"Nocht muvit wi the cative's speech,
"Nor wi his stern command;
"I treasoun! cried, and Kenneth's blade
"Was glisterand in his hand.
"My son lord Draffan heir you see,
"Wha means your sister's fay
"To win by guile, when Hardyknute
"Strives in the irie fray."
'Turn thee! thou riever Baron, turn!'
"Bauld Kenneth cried aloud;
"But, sune as Draffan spent his glaive,
"My son lay in his bluid."
'I did nocht grein that bluming face
'That death sae sune sold pale;
'Far less that my true luve, through me,
'Her brither's death sold wail.
'But syne ye fey our force to prive,
'Our force we fall you shaw!'
"Syne the shrill-sounding horn bedeen
"He tuik frae down the wa.
"Ere the portculie could be flung,
"His kyth the base-court fand;
"When scantly o their count a teind
"Their entry micht gainstand.
"Richt sune the raging rievers stude
"At their fause master's side,
"Wha, by the haly maiden, swear
"Na harm sold us betide.
"What syne befell ye weil may guess,
"Reft o our eilds delicht."
'We fall na lang be reft, by morn
'Sall Fairly glad your sicht.
'Let us be gane, my sons, or now
'Our meny chide our stay;
'Fareweil my dame; your dochter's luve
'Will sune cheir your effray.'
Then pale pale grew her teirfu cheik;
"Let ane o my sons thrie
"Alane gyde this emprize, your eild
"May ill sic travel dry.
"O whar were I, were my deir lord,
"And a my sons, to bleid!
"Better to bruik the wrang than sae
"To wreak the hie misdede."
The gallant Rothsay rose bedeen
His richt of age to pleid;
And Thomas shawd his strenthy speir;
And Malcolm mein'd his speid.
'My sons your strife I gladly see,
'But it fall neir be said,
'That Hardyknute sat in his ha,
'And heird his son was slain.
'My lady deir, ye neid na feir;
'The richt is on our side:'
Syne rising with richt frawart haste
Nae parley wald he bide.
The lady sat in heavy mude,
Their tunefu march to heir,
While, far ayont her ken, the sound
Na mair mote roun her eir.
O ha ye sein sum glitterand touir,
Wi mirrie archers crowned,
Wha vaunt to see their trembling fae
Keipt frae their countrie's bound?
Sic ausum strenth shawd Hardyknute;
Sic seimd his stately meid;
Sic pride he to his meny bald,
Sic feir his faes he gied.
Wi glie they past our mountains rude,
Owr muirs and mosses weit;
Sune as they saw the rising sun,
On Draffan's touirs it gleit.
O Fairly bricht I marvel fair
That featour eer ye lued,
Whase treasoun wrocht your father's bale,
And shed your brither's blude!
The ward ran to his youthfu lord,
Wha sleipd his bouir intill:
'Nae time for sleuth, your raging faes
'Fare down the westlin hill.
'And, by the libbard's gowden low
'In his blue banner braid,
'That Hardyknute his dochtir seiks,
'And Draffans death, I read.'
"Say to my bands of matchless micht,
"Wha camp law in the dale,
"To busk their arrows for the fecht,
"And streitly gird their mail.
"Syne meit me here, and wein to find
"Nae just or turney play;
"When Hardyknute braids to the field,
"War bruiks na lang delay."
His halbrik bricht he braced bedeen;
Fra ilka skaith and harm
Securit by a warloc auld,
Wi money a fairy charm.
A seimly knicht came to the ha:
'Lord Draffan I thee braive,
'Frae Hardyknute my worthy lord,
'To fecht wi speir or glaive.'
"Your hautie lord me braives in vain
"Alane his micht to prive,
"For wha, in single feat of weir,
"Wi Hardyknute may strive?
"But since he meins our strenth to sey,
"On case he sune will find,
"That thouch his bands leave mine in ire,
"In force they are far behind.
"Yet cold I wete that he wald yield
"To what bruiks nae remeid,
"I for his dochter wald nae hain
"To ae half o my steid."
Sad Hardyknute apart frae a
Leand on his birnist speir;
And, when he on his Fairly deimd,
He spared nae fich nor teir.
"What meins the felon cative vile?
"Bruiks this reif na remeid?
"I scorn his gylefu vows ein thouch
"They recht to a his steid."
Bownd was lord Draffan for the fecht,
When lo! his Fairly deir
Ran frae her hie bouir to the ha
Wi a the speid of feir.
Ein as the rudie star of morn
Peirs throuch a cloud of dew,
Sae did she seim, as round his neck
Her snawy arms she threw.
'O why, O why, did Fairly wair
'On thee her thouchtless luve?
'Whase cruel heart can ettle aye
'Her father's death to pruve!'
And first he kissd her bluming cheik,
And syne her bosom deir;
Than sadly strade athwart the ha,
And drapd ae tendir teir.
"My meiny heid my words wi care,
"Gin any weit to slay
"Lord Hardyknute, by hevin I sweir
"Wi life he sall nae gae."
'My maidens bring my bridal gown,
'I little trewd yestrene,
'To rise frae bonny Draffan's bed,
'His bluidy death to seen.'
Syne up to the hie baconie
She has gane wi a her train,
And sune she saw her stalwart lord
Attein the bleising plain.
Owr Nethan's weily streim he fared
Wi seeming ire and pride;
His blason, glisterand owr his helm,
Bare Allan by his side.
Richt sune the bugils blew, and lang
And bludy was the fray;
Eir hour of nune, that elric tide,
Had hundreds tint their day.
Like beacon bricht at deid of nicht,
The michty chief muvd on;
His basnet, bleising to the sun,
Wi deidly lichtning shone.
Draffan he socht, wi him at anes
To end the cruel strife;
But aye his speirmen thranging round
Forfend their leider's lyse.
The winding Clyde wi valiant bluid
Ran reiking money a mile;
Few stude the faucht, yet death alane
Cold end their irie toil.
'Wha fly, I vow, sall frae my speir
'Receive the death they dreid!'
Cried Draffan, as alang the plain
He spurd his bluid-red steid.
Up to him sune a knicht can prance,
A graith'd in silver mail:
"Lang have I socht thee throuch the field,
"This lance will tell my tale."
Rude was the fray, till Draffan's skill
Oercame his youthful micht;
Perc'd throuch the visor to the eye
Was slain the comely knicht.
The visor on the speir was deft,
And Draffan Malcolm spied;
'Ye should your vaunted speid this day,
'And not your strenth, ha sey'd.'
"Cative, awa ye maun na fly,"
Stout Rothsay cried bedeen,
"Till, frae my glaive, ye wi ye beir
"The wound ye fein'd yestrene."
'Mair o your kins bluid ha I spilt
'Than I docht evir grein;
'See Rothsay whar your brither lies
'In death before your eyne.'
Bold Rothsay cried wi lion's rage,
"O hatefu cursed deid!
"Sae Draffan seiks our fister's luve,
"Nor feirs far ither meid!"
Swith on the word an arrow came
Frae ane o Rothsay's band,
And smote on Draffan's lifted targe,
Syne Rothsays splent it fand.
Perc'd throuch the knie to his ferce steid,
Wha pranc'd wi egre pain,
The chief was forcd to quit the strife,
And seik the nether plain.
His minstrals there wi dolefu care
The bludy shaft withdrew;
But that he sae was barred the fecht
Sair did the leider rue.
'Cheir ye my mirrie men,' Draffan cried,
Wi meikle pride and glie;
'The prise is ours; nae chieftan bides
'Wi us to bate the grie.'
That hautie boast heard Hardyknute,
Whar he lein'd on his speir,
Sair weiried wi the nune-tide heat,
And toilsum deids of weir.
The first sicht, when he past the thrang,
Was Malcolm on the swaird:
"Would hevin that death my eild had taken,
"And thy youtheid had spard!
"Draffan I ken thy ire, but now
"Thy micht I mein to see."
But eir he strak the deidly dint
The sire was on his knie.
'Lord Hardyknute stryke gif ye may,
'I neir will stryve wi thee;
'Forfend your dochter see you slain
'Frae whar she sits on hie!
'Yestrene the priest in haly band
'Me joined wi Fairly deir;
'For her sake let us part in peace,
'And neir meet mair in weir.'
"Oh king of hevin, what seimly speech
"A featour's lips can send!
"And art thou he wha both my sons
"Brocht to a bluidy end?
"Haste, mount thy steid, or I sall licht
"And meit thee on the plain;
"For by my forbere's saul we neit
"Sall part till ane be slain."
'Now mind thy aith,' syne Draffan stout
To Allan loudly cried,
Wha drew the shynand blade bot dreid
And perc'd his masters side.
Law to the bleiding eard he fell,
And death sune closed his eyne.
"Draffan, till now I did na ken
"Thy death cold muve my tein.
"I would to Christ thou valiant youth,
"Thou were in life again;
"May ill befa my ruthless wrauth
"That brocht thee to sic pain!
"Fairly, anes a my joy and pride,
"Now a my grief and bale,
"Ye maun wi haly maidens bide
"Your deidly faut to wail.
"To Icolm beir ye Draffan's corse,
"And dochter anes sae deir,
"Whar she may pay his heidles luve
"Wi money a mournf^^teir."
II. CHILD MAURICE*
I.
CHILD MAURICE was an erle's son,
His name it waxed wide;
It was nae for his great riches,
Nor yet his meikle pride,
But it was for his mother gay
Wha livd on Carron side.
II.
'Whar sall I get a bonny boy,
'That will win hose and shoen,
'That will gae to lord Barnard's ha,
'And bid his lady come?
III.
'And ye maun rin errand Willie,
'And ye maun rin wi speid;
'When ither boys gang on their feet
'Ye sall ha prancing steid.'
IV.
"Oh no! oh no! my master deir!
"I dar na for my life;
"I Will no gae to the bauld barons,
"For to triest forth his wife."
V.
'My bird Willie, my boy Willie,
'My deir Willie,' he said,
'How can ye strive against the streim?
'For I sall be obeyed.'
VI.
"But O my master deir!" he cried,
"In grenewode you are your lane;
"Gi owr sic thochts I wald ye red,
"For feir ye sold be taken."
VII.
'Haste, haste, I say, gae to the ha,
'Bid her come here wi speid;
'If ye refuse my hie command,
'I'll gar your body bleid.
VIII.
'Gae bid her tak this gay mantel,
It Is a gowd but the hem:
'Bid her come to the good grenewode,
'Ein by hersel alane:
IX.
'And there it is, a silken sarke,
'Her ain hand sewd the sleeve;
'And bid her come to Child Maurice;
'Speir nae bauld baron's leive.'
X.
"Yes I will gae your black errand,
"Thouch it be to your cost;
"Sen ye will nae be warnd by me,
"In it ye sall find frost.
XI.
"The baron he is a man o micht,
"He neir cold bide to taunt:
"And ye will see before its nicht,
"Sma cause ye ha to vaunt.
XII.
"And sen I maun your errand rin,
"Sae sair against my will,
"I'se make a vow, and ke^p it trow,
"It sall be done for ill."
XIII.
When he came to the broken brig,
He bent his bow and swam;
And when he came to grass growing,
Set down his feet and ran.
XIV.
And when he came to Barnards yeat,
Would neither chap nor ca,
But set his bent bow to his breist,
And lichtly lap the wa.
XV.
He wald na tell the man his errand
Thoch he stude at the yeat;
But straight into the ha he came,
Whar they were set at meat.
XVI.
'Hail! hail! my gentle sire and dame!
'My message winna wait,
'Dame ye maun to the grenewode gae,
'Afore that it be late.
XVII.
'Ye're bidden tak this gay mantel,
It Is a gowd bot the hem:
'Ye maun haste to the good grenewode,
'Ein by yoursell alane.
XVIII.
'And there it is, a silken sark,
'Your ain hand sewd the sleive;
'Ye maun gae speik to Child Maurice;
'Speir na bauld baron's leive.'
XIX.
The lady stamped wi her foot,
And winked wi her eye;
But a that she cold say or do,
Forbidden he wald nae be.
XX.
"It Is surely to my bower-woman,
"It neir cold be to me."
'I brocht it to lord Barnard's lady,
'I trow that ye be she.'
XXI.
Then up and spak the wily nurse,
(The bairn upon her knie),
"If it be come from Child Maurice
"It Is deir welcum to me."
XXII.
'Ye lie, ye lie, ye filthy nurse,
'Sae loud as I heir ye lie;
'I brocht it to lord Barnard's lady
'I trow ye be nae she.'
XXIII.
Then up and spoke the bauld baron
An angry man was he:
He has taken the table wi his foot,
Sae has he wi his knie,
Till crystal cup and ezar dish
In flinders he guard fly.
XXIV.
"Gae bring a robe of your cliding,
"Wi a the haste ye can,
"And I Will gae to the good grenewode,
"And speik wi your lemman."
XXV.
'O bide at hame now lord Barnard!
'I ward ye bide at hame;
'Neir wit a man for violence,
'Wha neir wit ye wi nane.'
XXVI.
Child Maurice sat in the grenewode,
He whistled and he sang:
"O what meins a the folk coming?
"My mother tarries lang."
XXVII.
The baron to the grenewode came,
Wi meikle dule and care;
And there he first spied Child Maurice,
Kaming his yellow hair.
XXVIII.
'Nae wonder, nae wonder, Child Maurice,
'My lady loes thee weil:
'The fairest part of my body
'Is blacker than thy heil.
XXIX.
'Yet neir the less now, Child Maurice,
'For a thy great beauty,
'Ye'se rue the day ye eir was born;
'That head sall gae wi me.'
XXX.
Now he has drawn his trusty brand,
And slaided owr the strae;
And through Child Maurice fair body
He gar'd the cauld iron gae.
XXXI.
And he has taken Child Maurice heid,
And set it on a speir;
The meinest man in a his train
Has gotten that heid to beir.
XXXII.
And he has taken Child Maurice up,
Laid him across his steid;
And brocht him to his painted bower
And laid him on a bed.
XXXIII.
The lady on the castle wa
Beheld both dale and down;
And there she saw Child Maurice heid
Cum trailing to the town.
XXXIV.
"Better I lo that bluidy heid,
"Bot and that yellow hair,
"Than lord Barnard and a his lands
"As they lig here and there."
XXXV.
And she has taken Child Maurice heid,
And kissed both cheik and chin;
"I was anes fow of Child Maurice.
"As the hip is o the stane.
XXXVI.
"I gat ye in my father's house
"Wi meikle sin and shame;
"I brocht ye up in the grenewode
"Ken'd to mysell alane:
XXXVII.
"Aft have I by thy craddle sitten,
"And fondly sein thee sleip;
"But now I maun gae 'bout thy grave
"A mother's teirs to weip."
XXXVIII.
Again she kissed his bluidy cheik,
Again his bluidy chin;
"O better I loed my son Maurice,
"Than a my kyth and kin!"
XXXIX.
'Awa, awa, ye ill woman,
'An ill death may ye die!
'Gin I had ken'd he was your son
'He had neir been slain by me.'
XL.
"Obraid me not, my lord Barnard!
"Obraid me not for shame!
"Wi that sam speir, O perce my heart,
"And save me frae my pain!
XLI.
"Since nothing but Child Maurice head
"Thy jealous rage cold quell,
"Let that same hand now tak her life,
"That neir to thee did ill.
XLII.
"To me nae after days nor nichts
"Will eir be saft or kind:
"I Will fill the air wi heavy sichs,
"And greit till I be blind."
XLIII.
'Eneuch of bluid by me's been spilt,
'Seek not your death frae me;
'I'd rather far it had been mysel,
'Than either him or thee.
XLIV.
'Wi hope'ess wae I hear your plaint,
'Sair, sair, I rue the deid. --
'That eir this cursed hand of mine
'Sold gar his body bleid!
XLV.
'Dry up your teirs, my winsome dame,
'They neir can heal the wound;
'Ye see his heid upon the speir,
'His heart's bluid on the ground.
XLVI.
'I curse the hand that did the deid,
'The heart that thocht the ill,
'The feet that bare me wi sic speid,
'The comlie youth to kill.
XLVII.
'I'll aye lament for Child Maurice
'As gin he war my ain;
'I'll neir forget the dreiry day
'On which the youth was slain.'
III. ADAM O GORDON.
I.
IT fell about the Martinmas,
When the wind blew shrill and cauld:
Said Adam o Gordon to his men,
"We maun draw to a hauld.
II.
"And what a hauld sall we draw to,
"My mirrie men and me?
"We will gae strait to Towie house
"And see that fair lady."
III.
The lady on her castle wa
Peheld both dale and down,
When she was ware of a host of men
Riding toward the town.
IV.
'O see ye not, my mirry men a,
'O see ye not what I see?
'Methinks I see a host of men,
'I marvel wha they be.'
V.
She wein' it had been her luvely lord,
As he came ryding hame;
It was the traitor Adam o Gordon,
Wha reck'd nae sin or shame.
VI.
She had nae suner busked hersel,
And putten on her gown,
Than Adam o Gordon and his men
Were round about the town.
VII.
The lady ran to her touir heid
Sae fast as she cold dry,
To see if by her speiches fair
She cold wi him agree.
VIII.
But when he saw the lady safe,
And the yates a locked fast,
He fell into a rage of wrauth,
And his heart was all aghast.
IX.
"Cum down to me ye lady gay,
"Cum down, Cum down to me:
"This nicht ye sall lie in my arms,
"The morrow my bride sall be."
X.
'I winna cum down ye fause Gordon,
'I winna cum down to thee;
'I winna forsake my ain deir lord,
'Thouch he is far frae me.'
XI.
"Give owr your house, ye lady fair,
"Give owr your house to me;
"Or I sall brin yoursel therein,
"Bot and your babies thrie."
XII.
'I winna give owr, ye fause Gordon,
'To nae sic traitor as thee;
'And if ye brin me and my babes,
'My lord sall make ye dry.
XIII.
'But reach my pistol, Glaud my man,
'And charge ye weil my gun,
'For, bot if I perce that bl^idy butcher,
'We a sall be undone.'
XIV.
She stude upon the castle wa
And let two bullets fly;
She mist that bluidy butchers heart,
And only razd his knie.
XV.
"Set fire to the house," cried fause Gordon,
A wood wi dule and ire;
"Fause lady ye sall rue this deid
"As ye brin in the fire."
XVI.
'Wae worth, wae worth ye Jock my man,
'I paid ye weil your fee;
'Why pow ye out the ground-wa stane
'Lets in the reik to me?
XVII.
'And ein wae worth ye Jock my man
'I paid ye weil your hire;
'Why pow ye out the ground wa stane
'To me lets in the fire?'
XVIII.
"Ye paid me weil my hire, lady,
"Ye paid me weil my fee:
"But now I Am Adam o Gordon's man;
"And maun or do or die."
XIX.
O than bespak her little son
Frae aff the nource's knie,
'Oh mither deir, gi owr this house,
'For the reik it smithers me!'
XX.
"I wald gie a my gowd, my child,
"Sae wald I a my fee,
"For ae blast o the westlin wind,
"To blaw the reik fiae thee."
XXI.
O than bespak her dochter deir,
She was both jimp and sma,
'O row me in a pair o sheits,
'And tow me owr the wa.'
XXII.
They rowd her in a pair o sheits,
And towd her our the wa,
But on the point o Gordon's speir,
She gat a deidly fa.
XXIII.
O bonnie bonnie was her mouth,
And chirry were her cheiks;
And cleir cleir was her yellow hair,
Wharon the red bluid dreips!
XXIV.
Than wi hi^ speir he turned her owr --
O gin her face was wan!
Quoth he. "Ye are the first that eir
"I wishd alive again."
XXV.
He turned her our and our again --
O gin her skin was white!
"I micht ha spair'd that bonny face
"To hae been sum man's delight.
XXVI.
"Busk and bown, my mirry men a,
"For ill doom I do guess:
"I canna luik on that bonnie face,
"As it lies on the grass."
XXVII.
'Wha luik to freits, my master deir,
'Freits will ay follow them:
'Let it neir be said, Adam o Gordon
'Was daunted by a dame.'
XXVIII.
But when the lady saw the fire
Cum flaming our her heid,
She weip'd, and kissed her children twain;
"My bairns we been but deid."
XXIX.
The Gordon than his bugil blew,
And said, 'Awa, awa:
'Sen Towie House is a in a flame,
'I hauld it time to ga.'
XXX.
O than bespied her ain deir lord,
As he came owr the lee;
He saw his castle in a blaze
Sae far as he cold see.
XXXI.
Then sair, O sair, his mind misgave,
And a his heart was wae;
"Put on, put on, my wichty men,
"Sae fast as ye can gae.
XXXII.
"Put on, put on, my wichty men,
"Sae fast as ye can dry.
"He that is hindmost o the thrang
"Sall neir get good o me."
XXXIII.
Than sum they rode, and sum they ran,
Fu fast outowr the bent,
But eir the foremost could win up
Both lady and babes were breat.
XXXIV.
He wrang his hands, he rent his hair,
And weipt in teinfu mude:
"Ah traitors, for this cruel deid
"Ye sall weip teirs o bluid!"
XXXV.
And after the Gordon he has gane,
Sae fast as he micht dry:
And sune in his foul hartis bluid
He has wreken his deir lady.
IV. The CHILD of ELLE.
I.
ON yonder hill a castle stands,
With walls and towers bedight;
And yonder lives the Child of Elle,
A young and comely knighte.
II.
The Child of Elle to his garden went,
And stood at his garden pale,
When, lo, he beheld fair Emmeline's page
Come tripping down the dale.
III.
The Child of Elle he hyed him thence,
Y-wis he stood not stille,
And soon he met fair Emmeline's page
Come climbing up the hille.
IV.
Now Christ thee save thou little foot page,
Now Christ thee save and see,
Oh tell me how does thy lady gaye,
And what may thy tydinges be?
V.
My lady she is all woe-begone,
And the tears they fall from her eyne;
And aye she laments the deadly feude
Between her house and thine.
VI.
And here she sends thee a silken scarf,
Bedewde with many a tear;
And biddes thee sometimes think on her
Who loved thee so dear.
VII.
And here she sends thee a ring of gold,
The last boon thou may have;
And biddes thee wear it for her sake
When she is laid in grave.
VIII.
For ah! her gentle heart is broke,
And in grave soon must she be,
Since her father has chose her a new love,
And forbid her to think of thee.
IX.
Her father has brought her a carlish knight,
Sir John of the north countraye,
And within three days she must him wedde,
Or he vows he will her slaye.
X.
Now hye thee back, thou little foot page,
And greet thy lady from me.
And tell her that I, her own true love,
Will dye or set her free.
XI.
Now hye thee back, thou little foot page,
And let thy fair lady know
This night will I be at her bowre-windowe,
Betide me weal or woe.
XII.
The boy he tripped, the boy he ran,
He neither stint na stayed,
Until he came to fair Emmeline's bower,
When kneeling down he said;
XIII.
O, lady, I Have been with thy own true love,
And he greets thee well by me;
This night will he be at thy bower window,
And die or set thee free.
XIV.
Now day was gone and night was come,
And all were fast asleep:
All save the lady Emmeline,
Who sat in her bower to weep.
XV.
And sune she heard her true love's voice,
Low whispering at the wall;
Awake, awake, my dear lady,
It Is I thy true love call.
XVI.
Awake, awake my lady dear,
Come mount this fair palfraye;
This ladder of ropes will let thee down,
I Will carrye thee hence away.
XVII.
Now nay, now nay, thou gentle knight,
Now nay this may not be;
For aye should I tine my maiden fame,
If alone I should wend with thee.
XVIII.
O lady thou with a knight so true
May safelye wend alone,
To my lady mother I will thee bring,
Where marriage shall make us one.
XIX.
"My father he is a baron bold,
"Of lynage proud and hye,
"And what would he say if his daughter
"Away with a knight should fly?
XX.
"Ah well I wot he never would rest,
"Nor his meat should do him no good,
"Till he had slain thee, Child of Elle,
"And seen thy dear heart's blood."
XXI.
O, lady, were thou in thy saddle set,
And a little space him fro,
I would not care for thy cruel father,
Nor the worst that he could do.
XXII.
O, lady, were thou in thy saddle set,
And once without this wall,
I would not care for thy cruel father,
Nor the worst that might befalle.
XXIII.
Fair Emmeline sighed, fair Emmeline wept,
And aye her heart was woe,
At length he seizde her lilly-white hand,
And down the ladder he drew.
XXIV.
And thrice he claspde her to his breast,
And kissed her tenderly;
The tears that fell from her fair eyes
Ran like the fountain free.
XXV.
He mounted himself on his steed so talle,
And her on a fair palfraye,
And slung his bugle about his neck,
And roundlye they rode away.
XXVI.
All this beheard her own damselle,
In her bed whereas she lay,
Quoth she, My lord shall know of this
So I shall have gold and fee.
XXVII.
Awake, awake, thou baron bold!
Awake, my noble dame!
Your daughter is fled with the Child of Elle,
To do the deed of shame.
XXVIII.
The baron he woke, the baron he rose,
And callde his merry men all;
"And come thou forth, Sir John the knighte,
"The lady is carried to thrall."
XXIX.
Fair Emmeline scant had ridden a mile,
A mile forth of the town,
When she was aware of her father's men
Come galloping over the down.
XXX.
And foremost came the carlish knight,
Sir John of the north countraye,
"Now stop, now stop, thou false traitor,
"Nor carry that lady away.
XXXI.
"For she is come of hye lynage,
"And was of a lady borne;
"And ill it beseems thee a false churles's son,
"To carry her hence to scorn."
XXXII.
Now loud thou lie, Sir John the knight,
Now thou do lie of me;
A knight me got, and a lady me bore,
So never did none by thee.
XXXIII.
But light now down, my lady fair,
Light down and hold my steed,
While I and this discourteous knighte
Do try this arduous deed.
XXXIV.
Fair Emmeline sighd, fair Emmeline weept,
And aye her heart was woe;
While twixt her love and the carlish knight,
Past many a baleful blow.
XXXV.
The Child of Elle he fought so well,
As his weapon he wavde amain,
That soon he had slain the carlish knight,
And laid him upon the plain.
XXXVI.
And now the baron and all his men
Full fast approached nigh,
Ah what may lady Emmeline do?
'Twere now no boot to fly.
XXXVII.
Her lover he put his horn to his mouth,
And blew both loud and shrill,
And soon he saw his own merry men
Come ryding over the hill.
XXXVIII.
Now hold thy hand thou bold baron,
I pray thee hold thy hand;
Nor ruthless rend two gentle hearts
Fast knit in true love's band.
XXXIX.
Thy daughter I have dearly lovde,
Full long and many a day,
But with such love as holy kirk
Has freelye said we may.
XL.
O give consent she may be mine,
And bless a faithful pair;
My lands and livings are not small,
My house and lynage fair.
XLI.
My mother she was an erle's daughter,
And a noble knight my sire --
The baron he frownde, and turned away,
With mickle dole and ire.
XLII.
Fair Emmeline sighed, fair Emmeline wept,
And did all trembling stand;
At length she sprang upon her knee,
And held his lifted hand.
XLIII.
Pardon, my lord and father dear,
This fair young knight and me,
Trust me, but for the carlish knight,
I never had fled from thee.
XLIV.
Often have you called your Emmaline,
Your darling and your joye;
O let not then your harsh resolves
Your Emmaline destroy.
XLV.
The baron he stroakd his dark broun cheek,
And turned his head aside,
To wipe away the starting tear
He proudly strave to hyde.
XLVI.
In deep revolving thought he stood,
And mused a little space;
Then raised fair Emmeline from the ground,
With many a fond embrace.
XLVII.
Here take her, Child of Elle, he said;
And gave her lillye hand:
Here take my dear and only child,
And with her half my land.
XLVIII.
Thy father once mine honor wronged,
In days of youthful pride,
Do thou the injury repair
In fondness for thy bride.
XLIX.
And as thou love her, and hold her dear,
Heaven prosper thee and thine;
And now my blessing wend wi' thee
My lovelye Emmeline.
V. GILDEROY.
I.
GILDEROY was a bonny boy,
Had roses till his shoon;
His stockings were of silken soy,
Wi garters hanging down.
It was, I ween, a comely sight
To see sae trim a boy:
He was my joy, and heart's delight,
My handsome Gilderoy.
II.
O sic two charming even he had!
Breath sweet as any rose:
He never ware a highland played,
But costly silken clothes.
He gained the luve of ladies gay,
Nane eer to him was coy:
Ah wae is me, I mourn the day
For my dear Gilderoy.
III.
My Gilderoy and I were born
Both in ae town together;
We scant were seven years beforn
We began to luve ilk ither:
Our dadies and our mamies they
Were filled wi mikle joy,
To think upon the bridal day
Of me and Gilderoy.
IV.
For Gilderoy, that luve of mine
Good faith, I freely bought
A wedding sark of Holland sine,
Wi dainty ruffles wrought;
And he gied me a wedding ring
Which I received wi joy:
Nae lad nor lassie eer could sing
Like me and Gilderoy.
V.
Wi mickle joy we spent our prime
Till we were both sixteen,
And aft we past the langsame time
Amang the leaves sae green:
Aft on the banks we'd sit us their,
And sweetly kiss and toy;
While he wi garlands decked my hair,
My handsome Gilderoy.
VI.
Ch ^h^t he still had been content
Wi me to lead his life!
But, ah, his manfu heart was bent
To stir in feats of strife.
And he in many a venturous deed
His courage bauid wad try;
And now this gars my heart to bleed
For my dear Gilderoy.
VII.
And when of me his leave he tuik,
The tears they wat mine ee:
I gied him sic a parting luik!
'My benison gang wi thee!
'God speed thee weil mine ain dear heart,
'For gane is all my joy;
'My heart is rent, since we maun part,
'My handsome Gilderoy.'
VIII.
My Gilderoy, both far and near
Was tear'd in every town;
And bauldly bare awa the geir,
Of money a lawland loun.
For man to man durst meet him nane,
He was sae brave a boy;
At length wi numbers he was taken,
My winsome Gilderoy.
IX.
Wae worth the louns that made the laws
To hang a man for gear;
To reave of life for sic a cause
As stealing horse or mare!
Had not their laws been made sae strick
I near had lost my joy;
Wi sorrow near had wat my cheek
For my dear Gilderoy.
X.
Gif Gilderoy had done amiss,
He might hae banished been; --
Ah what fair cruelty is this,
To hang sic handsome men!
To hang the flower o Scottish land,
Sae sweet and fair a boy: --
Nae lady had sae white a hand
As thee, my Gilderoy.
XI.
Of Gilderoy sae feared they were,
Wi irons his limbs they strung;
To Edinborow led him their,
And on a gallows hung.
They hung him high aboon the rest,
He was sae bauld a boy;
Their dyed the youth wham I lued best,
My handsome Gilderoy.
XII.
Sune as he yielded up his breath
I bare his corse away,
Wi tears, that trickled for his death,
I washed his comely clay;
And siker in a grave right deep
I laid the dear lued boy:
And now for ever I maun weep,
My winsome Gilderoy.
VI.
I.
THE gypsies came to our good lord's gate;
And vow but they sang sweetly!
Our lady came down the music to hear,
They sang sae very completely.
II.
And she came tripping down the stair,
And a her maids before her;
As soon as they saw her weil-fared face,
They coost the glamer our her.
III.
Gae tak frae me this gay mantile,
And bring to me a plaidie;
For, if kith and kin and a had sworn,
I Will follow the gypsy laddie.
IV.
Yestreen I lay in a weel-made bed,
And my good lord beside me;
This night I Will ly in a tenant's barn,
Whatever shall betide me.
V.
Oh come to your bed, says Johnie Fa,
Oh come to your bed my dearie;
For I vow and swear by the hilt of my sword,
Your lord shall nae mair come near ye.
VI.
I Will go to bed to my Johnie Fa,
I Will go to bed to my dearie;
For I vow and swear by what past yestreen,
My lord shall nae mair come near me.
VII.
And when our lord came hame at even
And speird for his fair lady,
The taken she cried, and the ither replied,
She Is awa wi the gypsy laddie.
VIII.
Gae saddle to me the black black steed,
Gae saddle and make him ready;
Before that I either eat or sleep
I Will gae and seek my fair lady.
IX.
And we were fifteen well-made men,
Of courage stout and steady;
And we were a put down, but ane,
For a fair young wanton lady.
VII. THE CRUEL KNIGHT.
I.
THE knight stands in the stable door
As he was bownd to ride;
When out their comes his fair lady,
And him desires to bide.
II.
"How can I bide, how dare I bide,
"How can I bide wi thee?
"Have I not killed thy ae brother?
"Thou had nae mair but he."
III.
'If thou have killed my ae brother,
'Alas and wae is me!
'But if I save thee from the pain,
'My luve's the mair to thee.'
IV.
She has taen him to her secret bower,
Steik'd wi a siller-pin;
And she is up to the highest tower,
To watch that nane come in.
V.
She had nae weil gane up the stair,
And entered in the tower,
When four and twenty armed knights
Came riding to the door.
VI.
'Now God you save, my fair lady,
'Declare to me I pray,
'Did you not see a wounded knight
'Come riding by this way?
VII.
"Yes bloody bloody was his sword,
"And bloody were his hands;
"But, if the steed he rides be good,
"He Is past fair Scotland's strands."
VIII.
Then she is gane to her darksome bower,
Her husband dear to meet;
He deemed he heard his angry faes,
And wounded her fou deep.
IX.
'What harm my lord provokes thine ire,
'To wreak itself on me?
'Have I not saved thy life frae faes,
'And saved for sic a fee!'
X.
"Now live, now live, my fair lady,
"O live but half an hour;
"There Is near a leech in all Scotland
"But shall be at thy bower."
XI.
'How can I live, how shall I live,
'How can I live for thee?
'While running fast oer a the floor,
'My heart's blood thou may see!'
VIII. YOUNG WATERS.
I.
ABOUT yule, quhen the wind blew cule,
And the round tables began,
There came to wait on our king's court,
Money a weil-favour'd man.
II.
The Quein luik'd owr the castle-wa,
Beheld both dale and down,
And then she saw young Waters
Cum riding to the town.
III.
His footmen they did rin before,
His horsemen rade behind:
Ane mantel of the burning gowd
Did keip him frae the wind.
IV.
Gowden-graith'd his horse before,
And siller-shod behind;
The horse young Waters rode upon
Was fleeter than the wind.
V.
Up then spak a wily lord,
And to the Queen said he,
Tell me quha is the fairest face
Rides in the company?
VI.
I Have seen lords, and I Have seen lairds,
And knichts of high degree,
But a fairer face than young Waters
Mine even did never see.
VII.
Out then spak the jealous king,
(An angry man was he,)
"And if he had been twice as fair,
"You might have excepted me."
VIII.
You're neither lord, nor lord, she says,
Bot the king that wears the crown;
There Is not a knicht in fair Scotland,
Bot to thee maun bow down.
IX.
For a that she could say or do,
Appeased he wad nac be;
Bot for the words that she had said,
Young Waters he maun die.
X.
Sune they hae taen young Waters,
Put fetters on his feet;
Sune they hae taen young Waters,
And thrown in dungeon deep.
XI.
They hae taen to the heiding-hill,
That knicht sae fair to see;
And for the words the queen had spak
Young Waters he did die.
IX. SIR HUGH; OR, THE JEW's DAUGHTER.
I.
THE bonnie boys o merry Lincoln
War playin at the ba;
And wi them stude the sweet Sir Hugh,
The flower amang them a.
II.
He kepped the ba there wi his foot,
And catchd it wi his knie,
Till in at the cruel Jew's window
Wi speid he guard it fly.
III.
'Cast out the ba to me, fair maid,
'Cast out the ba to me:' --
"Ye neir sall hae't my bonnie Sir Hugh,
"Till ye come up to me.
IV.
"Cum up sweet Hugh, cum up dear Hugh
"Cum up and get the ba;"
'I winna cum up, I winna cum up
'Without my playferes a.'
V.
And she has gane to her father's garden
Sae fast as she cold rin;
And powd an apple red and white
To wyle the young thing in.
VI.
She wyld him sune through ae chamber,
And wyld him sune throuch two;
And neist they came to her ain chamber,
The fairest o them a.
VII.
She has laid him on a dressin board,
Whar she was usd to dine;
And stack a penknife to his heart,
And dressed him like a swine.
VIII.
She rowed him in a cake o lead,
And bade him lie and sleip;
Syne threw him in the Jew's draw-well,
Fu fifty fathom deip.
IX.
When bells were rung, and mass was sung,
And ilka lady gaed hame;
Than ilka lady had her young son,
But lady Helen had nane.
X.
She rowed her mantel her about,
And sair sair can she weip;
She ran wi speid to the Jew's castle,
When a war fast asleip.
XI.
'My bonnie Sir Hugh, your mither calls,
'I pray thee to her speik:'
"O lady rin to the deip draw-well
"Gin ye your son wad seik."
XII.
Lady Helen ran to the deip draw-well,
And kneeled upon her knie;
'My bonnie Sir Hugh gin ye be here,
'I pray ye speik to me;'
XIII.
"The lead is wondrous heavy mither,
"The well is wondrous deip;
"A kene penknife sticks in my heart,
"A word I dounae speik.
XIV.
"Gae hame, gae hame, my mither deir,
"Fetch me my winding sheet;
"For again in merry Lincoln town
"We two sall never meit."
X. FLODDEN FIELD; OR, THE FLOWERS OF THE FOREST.
I.
I Have heard o lilting at the ewes milking,
Lasses a lilting eir the break o day;
But now I hear moaning on ilka green loaning,
Sen our bra foresters are a wed away.
II.
At bouchts in the morning nae blyth lads are scorning,
The lasses are lenely, dowie, and wae;
Nae daffin, nae gabbing, but siching and sabbing;
Ilk ane lifts her leglen and hies her away.
III.
At even in the gloming nae swankies are roaming,
'Mang stacks wi the lasses at bogle to play;
For ilk ane sits dreary, lamenting her deary;
The Flowers o the Forest, wha're a wed away.
IV.
In harst at the sheiring na yonkers are jeiring;
The bansters are lyart, runkled, and gray;
At fairs nor at preaching, nae wooing nae fleeching,
Sen our bra foresters are a wed away.
V.
O dule for the order sent our lads to the border!
The English for anes by gyle wan the day.
The Flowers o the Forest, wha ay shone the foremost,
The prime o the land lie cauld in the clay!
XI. EDWARD.
I.
WHY does your brand sae drap wi bluid,
Edward, Edward?
Why does your brand sae drap with bluid,
And why sae sad gang ye O!
O I hae killd my hauk sae good,
Mither, mither:
O I hae killd my hauk sae good;
And I had nae mair but he, O!
II.
Your haukis bluid was nevir sae reid,
Edward, Edward.
Your haukis bluid was nevir sae reid,
My deir son I tell thee O!
I hae killd my reid roan steid,
Mither, mither:
O I hae killd my reid roan steid
That erst was fair and fry O!
III.
Your steid was auld, and ye hae mair,
Edward, Edward:
Your steid was auld, and ye hae mair,
Sum ither dule ye dry, O!
O I hae killd my fadir deir,
Mither, mither:
O I hae killd my fadir deir,
Alas! and wae is me O!
IV.
What penance will ye dry for that,
Edward, Edward?
What penance will ye dry for that,
My deir son, now tell me O!
I Will set my feet in yonder boat;
Mither, mither:
I Will set my feet in yonder boat;
And I Will fare owr the sea, O!
V.
What will ye do wi touirs and ha,
Edward, Edward?
What will ye do wi touirs and ha,
That were sae fair to see, O!
I Will let them stand till they down fa,
Mither, mither:
I Will let them stand till they down fa,
For heir I maunae be O!
VI.
What will ye leive to bairns and wife,
Edward, Edward?
What will ye leive to bairns and wife,
When ye gang owr the sea O!
The warld's room to beg throuch life,
Mither, mither;
The warld's room to beg throuch life,
For them I neir maun fee, O!
VII.
What will ye leive to your mither deir,
Edward, Edward?
What will ye leive to your mither deir,
My deir son, now tell me O!
The curse of hell frae me sall ye beir,
Mither, mither:
The curse of hell frae me sall ye beir,
Sic counseils ye gied me, O!
XII. SIR PATRICK SPENCE.
I.
THE King sits in Dunfermlin town,
Drinking the bluid-red wine:
"Whar sall I get a good sailor,
"To sail this ship o mine?"
II.
Than up and spak an eldern knicht,
Wha sat at his richt knie;
'Sir Patrick Spence is the best sailor,
'That sails upon the sea.'
III.
The king has written a braid letter,
And signd it wi his hand;
And sent it to Sir Patrick Spence,
Wha walked on the sand.
IV.
The first line that Sir Patrick red,
A lewd lauch lauched he;
The neist line that Sir Patrick red
The teir blinded his eye.
V.
"O wha can he be that has don
"This deid o ill to me,
"To send me at this time o yeir
"To sail upon the sea?
VI.
"Make haste, make haste, my miny men a
"Our good ship sails the morn."
'O say na sae, my master deir,
'For I feir deidly storm.
VII.
'I saw the new moon late yestrene,
'Wi the auld moon in her arm;
'And I fear, I fear, my master deir,
'That we will cum to harm.'
VIII.
Our Scottish nobles were richt laith
To weit their shyning shoen;
But lang or a the play was owr,
They wat their heids aboon.
IX.
O lang lang may their ladies fit
And luik outowr the sand,
Or eir they see the bonnie ship
Cum sailing to the land!
X.
Mair than ha^ owr to Aberdour --
It Is fifty fathom deip --
Lies good Sir Patrick Spence for aye
Wi the Scots lords at his feit.
XIII. LADY BOTHWELL's LAMENT.
I.
BALOW, my babe, lie still and sleip,
It grieves me sair to see thee weip;
If thou wilt be silent I Will be glad,
Thy maining maks my heart full sad;
Balow my boy, thy mither's joy;
Thy father breids me great annoy.
II.
When he began to seik my luve,
And wi his sucred words to muve;
His feining fause, and flattering cheir,
To me that time did nocht appeir;
But now I see that cruel he
Cares neither for my babe nor me.
III.
Lie still, my darling, sleip a while,
And when thou wakest sweitly smile;
But smile nae as thy father did
To cozen maids: nay, God forbid,
What yet I feir, that thou sold leir
Thy father's heart and face to beir!
IV.
Be still, my sad one: spare those teirs,
To weip when thou have wit and yeirs;
Thy griefs are gathering to a sum,
God grant thee patience when they cum;
Born to proclaim a mother's shame,
A father's fall, a bastard's name.
XIV. THE EARL OF MURRAY.
I.
YE Hielands and ye Lawlands
O whar hae ye been?
They have slain the Earl of Murray
And laid him on the green!
II.
'Now wae be to you Huntly!
'O wharfore did ye sae?
'I bad you bring him wi you;
'But forbad you him to slay.'
III.
He was a bra galant,
And he rid at the ring;
The bonnie Earl of Murray
He micht ha been a king.
IV.
He was a bra galant,
And he played at the ba;
The bonnie Earl of Murray
Was the flower amang them a.
V.
He was a bra galant,
And he played at the gluve;
The bonnie Earl of Murray
He was the queen's luve.
VI.
O lang will his lady
Look owr the castle down,
Ere she see the Earl of Murray
Cum sounding throuch the town!
XV. SIR JAMES THE ROSE.
I.
O Heard ye o Sir James the Rose,
The young heir o Buleighan?
For he has killed a gallant squire,
Whase friends are out to tak him.
II.
Now he has gane to the house o Mar,
Whar nane might seik to find him;
To see his dear he did repair,
Weining she would befreind him.
III.
'Whar are ye gaing, Sir James,' she said,
'O whar awa are ye riding?'
"I maun be bound to a foreign land,
"And now I Am under hiding."
IV.
"Whar sall I gae, whar sall I rin,
"Whar sall I rin to lay me?
"For I ha killed a gallant squire,
"And his friends seik to slay me."
V.
'O gae ye down to yon laigh house,
'I sall pay there your lawing;
'And as I am your leman true,
"I Will meet ye at the dawing.
VI.
He turned him richt and round about
And rowd him in his brechan:
And laid him down to tak a sleip,
In the lawlands o Buleighan.
VII.
He was nae weil gane out o sicht,
Nor was he past Milstrethen,
When four and twenty belted knichts
Came riding owr the Leathen.
VIII.
'O ha ye seen Sir James the Rose,
'The young heir o Buleighan?
'For he has killed a gallant squire,
'And we are sent to tak him.'
IX.
"Yea, I ha seen Sir James,' she said,
"He past by here on Monday;
"Gin the steed be swift than he rides on,
"He Is past the Hichts of Lundie."
X.
But as wi speid they rade awa,
She loudly cried behind them;
"Gin ye'll gie me a worthy meid,
"I Will tell ye whar to find him."
XI.
'O tell fair maid, and, on our band,
'Ye'se get his purse and brechan.'
"He Is in the bank aboon the mill,
"In the lawlands o Buleighan."
XII.
Than out and spak Sir John the Graham,
Wha had the charge a keiping,
"It Is near be said, my stalwart feres,
"We killd him when a sleiping."
XIII.
They seized his braid sword and his targe,
And closely him surrounded:
"O pardon! mercy! gentlemen,"
He then fou loudly founded.
XIV.
'Sic as ye gae sic ye sall hae
'Nae grace we shaw to thee can.'
"Donald my man, wait till I fa,
"And ye sall hae my brechan;
"Ye'll get my purse thouch fou o gowd
"To tak me to Loch Lagan."
XV.
Syne they tuke out his bleiding heart,
And set it on a speir;
Then tuke it to the house o Mar,
And shawd it to his deir.
XVI.
'We cold nae gie Sir James's purse
'We cold nae gie his brechan,
'But ye sall ha his bleeding heart
'Bot and his bleeding tartan.'
XVH.
"Sir James the Rose, O for thy sake
"My heart is now a breaking,
"Cursed be the day, I wrocht thy wae,
"Thou brave heir of Buleighan!"
XVIII.
Then up she raise, and forth she gaes;
And, in that hour o tein,
She wanderd to the dowie glen,
And nevir mair was sein.
XVI. THE LORD OF WOODHOUSELIE.
From TRADITION.

I.
SHYNING was the painted ha
Wi gladsum torches bricht;
Full twenty gowden dames sat there,
And ilkane by a knicht:
Wi music cheir,
To please the eir,
When beauty pleased the sicht.
II.
Wi cunning skill his gentle meid
To chant, or warlike fame,
Ilk damsel to the minstrels gied
Some favorit chieftan's name:
"Sing Salton's praise,"
The lady says --
In suith she was to blame.
III.
'By my renown ye wrang me sair,'
Quoth hautie Woodhouselie,
'To praise that youth o sma report,
'And never deim on me:
'When ilka dame
'Her fere cold name,
'In a this company.'
IV.
The morn she to her nourice yeed;
"O meikle do I feir,
"My lord will slay me, sin yestrene
"I praised my Salton deir!
"I Will hae nae ease,
"Till Hevin it please,
"That I lie on my beir."
V.
'Mair would I lay him on his beir,'
The crafty nourice said;
'My saw gin ye will heid but anes
'That sall nae be delaid.'
"O nourice say,
"And, by my fay,
"Ye sall be weil appaid."
VI.
'Take ye this drap o deidly drug
'And put it in his cup,
'When ye gang ot the gladsum ha,
'And sit ye down to sup:
'Whan he has gied
'To bed bot dreid,
'He'll never mair rise up.'
VII.
And she has taken the deidly drug
And pat it in his cup,
When they gaed to the gladsum ha,
And sat them down to sup:
And wi ill speid
To bed he gied,
And never mair raise up.
VIII.
The word came to his father auld
Neist day by hour of dyne,
That Woodhouselie had died yestrene,
And his dame had held the wine.
Quoth he "I vow
"By Mary now,
"She sall meit sure propine."
IX.
Syne he has flown to our good king.
And at his feet him layne;
'O Justice! Justice! royal liege,
'My worthy son is slain.
'His lady's feid
'Has wrocht the deid,
'Let her receive the pain.'
X.
Sair muvit was our worthy king,
And an angry man was he;
'Gar bind her to the deidly stake,
'And birn her on the lie:
'That after her
'Na bluidy fere
'Her reckless lord may slay.'
XI.
"O wae be to ye, nourice,
"An ill death may ye dry!
"For ye prepared the deidly drug
"That guard my deiry die:
"May a the pain
"That I darraine
"In ill time, licht on thee!
XII
"O bring to me my goun o black,
"My mantel, and my pall;
"And gie five merks to the friars gray
"To pray for my poor saul:
"And ilka dame,
"O gentle name,
"Bewar o my sair fall."
XVII. LORD LIVINGSTON. From TRADITION.
I.
'GRAITH my swiftest steid,' said Livingston,
'But nane of ye gae wi me;
'For I maun awa by mysel alane
'To the foot of the grenewode tree.
II.
Up spak his dame wi meikle speid.
"My lord I red ye bide;
"I dreimd a dreiry dreim last nicht:
"Nae good sall you betide."
III.
'What freit is this, my lady deir,
'That wald my will gainstand?'
"I dreimd that I gaed to my bouir door,
"And a deid man tuke my hand."
IV.
'Suith dreims are scant,' said the proud baron,
And leuch wi jearing glie;
'But for this sweit kiss my winsum dame
'Neist time dreim better o me.'
V.
'For I hecht to meit with lord Rothmar,
'To chase the fallow deer;
'And speid we weil, by the our o nune,
'We sall return bot feir.'
VI.
Frae his fair lady's sicht he strave
His ettling sae to hide;
But frae the grenewode he came nae back,
Sin eir that deidly tide.
VII.
For Rothmar met him there bot fail,
And bluidy was the strife;
Lang eir the nunetide mess was rung,
They both war twined o life.
VIII.
'Forgie, forgie me, Livingston!
'That I lichtly set by your dame;
'For surely in a the world lives not
'A lady mair free frae blame.
IX.
'Accursed be my lawles luve
'That wrocht us both fic tein!'
"As I forgie my friend anes deir,
"Sae may I be forgien.
X.
"Thouch ye my counseil sold ha taken
"The gait of gyle to eschew;
"Yet may my saul receive sic grace
"As I now gie to you."
XI.
The lady in her mournfu bouir
Sat wi richt heavy cheir,
In ilka sough that the laigh wind gied
She weind her deir lord to heir.
XII.
When the sun gaed down, and mirk nicht came,
O teirfu were her eyne!
'I feir, I feir, it was na for nocht
'My dreims were sae dowie yestrene!'
XIII.
Lang was the nicht, but when the morn came,
She said to her menie ilk ane;
'Haste, saddle your steids, and seik the gerenewode,
'For I feir my deir lord is slain.'
XIV
Richt sune they fand their lord and Rothmar
Deid in ilk ither's arm:
'I guess my deir lord that luve of my name
'Alane brocht thee to sic harm.
XV.
'Neir will I forget thy seimly meid,
'Nor yet thy gentle luve;
'For sevin lang yeirs my weids of black
'That I luvd thee as weil sall pruve.'
XVIII. BINNORIE.
From TRADITION.

To preserve the tone as well as the sense of this Ballad, the burden should be
repeated through the whole, though it is here omitted for the sake of
concisemess.

THERE were two sisters lived in a bouir;
Binnorie, O Binnorie!
Their father was a baron of pouir,
By the bonnie mildams of Binnorie.
The youngest was meek, and fair as the May,
When she springs in the east wi the gowden day:
The eldest austern as the winter cauld,
Ferce was her saul, and her seiming was bauld.
A gallant squire came sweet Isabel to woo;
Her sister had naething to luve I trow;
But filld was she wi dolor and ire,
To see that to her the comlie squire
Preferred the debonair Isabel:
Their hevin of luve of spyte was her hell.
Till ae ein she to her sister can say
"Sweit sister cum let us wauk and play."
They wauked up, and they wauked down,
Sweit sang the birdis in the vallie loun!
When they came to the roaring lin,
She drove unweiting Isabel in.
'O sister! sister! tak my hand,
'And ye fall hae my silver fan;
'O sister! sister! tak my middle,
'And ye fall hae my gowden girdle.'
Sumtimes she sank, sumtimes she swam,
Till she came to the miller's dam:
The miller's dochter was out that ein
And saw her rowing down the streim.
"O father deir! in your mill dam
"There is either a lady or a milk white swan!"
Two days were gane when to her deir
Her wraith at deid of nicht cold apeir:
'My luve, my deir, how can ye sleip,
'Whan your Isabel lies in the deep?
'My deir, how can ye sleip bot pain,
'Whan she by her cruel sister is slain?'
Up raise he sune in frichtfu mude,
'Busk ye my meiny and seik the flude.'
They socht her up and they socht her down,
And spied at last her glisterin gown:
They raised her wi richt meikle care;
Pale was her cheik, and grein was her hair!
'Gae, saddle to me my swiftest steid,
'Her fere, by my sae, for her death fall bleid.'
A page came rinning out owr the lie,
"O heavy tiding I bring!" quoth he,
"My luvely lady is far awa gane,
"We weit the fairy hae her taken;
"Her sister gaed wood wi dule and rage,
"Nocht cold we do her mind to suage.
"O Isabel! my sister!" she would cry,
'For thee will I weip, for thee will I die!"
"Till late yestreene in an elric hour
"She lap frae aft the hichest touir" --
'Now sleip she in peace!' quoth the gallant Squire,
'Her death was the may that I cold require:
'But I Will main for the my Isabel deir,
'Binnorie, O Binnorie!
'Full money a dreiry dyy, bot weir,
'By the bonnie mildams of Binnorie.'
XIX. THE DEATH OF MENTEITH.
From TRADITION.

I.
SHRILLY shrieked the raging wind,
And rudely blew the blast;
Wi awsum blink, throuch the dark ha,
The speidy lichtning past.
II.
'O hear ye nae, frae mid the loch,
'Arise a deidly grane?
'Sae evir does the spirit warn,
'Whan we sum death maun mane.
III.
'I feir, I feir me, good Sir John,
'Ye are nae safe wi me:
'What wae wald fill my heart gin ye
'Sold in my castle dry!'
IV.
"Ye neid nae feir, my leman deir,
"I Am ay safe when wi thee;
"And gin I maun nae wi thee live,
"I here wad wish to die."
V.
His man came rinning to the ha
Wi wallow cheik belyve:
'Sir John Menteith, your faes are neir,
'And ye maun fly or strive.
VI.
"What count syne leads the cruel knicht?"
'Thrie speirmen to your ane:
'I red ye fly, my master deir,
'Wi speid, or ye'll be slain.'
VII.
"Tak ye this gown, my deir Sir John,
"To hide your shyning mail:
"A boat waits at the hinder port
"Owr the braid loch to sail."
VIII.
"O whatten a piteous shriek was you
"That sough'd upon my eir?"
'Nae piteous shriek I trow, lady,
'Bot the rouch blast ye heir.'
IX.
They socht the castle, till the morn,
When they were bown'd to gae,
They saw the boat turned on the loch,
Sir John's corse on the brae.
XX. LORD AIRTH's COMPLAINT.
From a MANUSCRIPT.

I.
IF these sad thoughts could be expressed,
Wharwith my mind is now possessed,
My passion micht, disclosed, have rest,
My griefs revealed micht fly:
But still that mind which does forbere
To yield a groan, a sich, or teire,
May by its prudence, much I fear,
Increase it is misery.
II.
My heart which ceases now to plain,
To speak it is griefs in mournful strain,
And by sad accents ease my pain,
Is stupefied with woe.
For lesser cares do murne and cry,
While greater cares are mute and die;
As issues run a fountain dry,
Which stopped would overflow.
III.
My sichs are fled; no teirs now rin,
But swell to whelm my soul within,
How pitiful the case I Am in,
Admire but do not try.
My crosses I micht justly pruve,
Are common forrows far abuve;
My griefs ay in a circle muve,
And will do till I die.
XXI.
From TRADITION.

I.
I WISH I were where Helen lies!
Night and day on me she cries
To bear her company.
O would that in her darksome bed
My weary frame to rest were laid
From love and anguish free!
II.
I hear, I hear the welcome sound
Break slowly from the trembling mound
That ever calls on me:
Oh blessed virgin! could my power
Vye with my wish, this very hour
I Would sleep death's sleep with thee.
III.
A lover's sigh, a lover's tear,
Attended on thy timeless bier:
What more can fate require?
I hear, I hear the welcome sound --
Yes, I will seek the sacred ground,
And on thy grave expire.
IV.
The worm now tastes that rosy mouth,
Where glowed, short time, the smiles of youth;
And in my heart's dear home,
Her snowey bosom, loves to lie. --
I hear, I hear the welcome cry!
I come, my love! I come.
V.
O life begone! thy irksome scene
Can bring no comfort to my pain:
Thy scenes my pain recall!
My joy is grief, my life is dead,
Since she for whom I lived is fled;
My love, my hope, my all.
VI.
Take, take me to thy lovely side,
Of my lost youth thou only bride!
O take me to thy tomb!
I hear, I hear the welcome sound!
Yes life can fly at sorrow's wound.
I come, I come, I come.
FRAGMENTS.
I.
EARL Douglas then wham nevir knicht
Had valor mair nae courtesy,
Is now sair blamed by a the land
For lichtlying o his gay lady.
'Gae little page, and tell my lord,
'Gin he will cum and dyne wi me,
'I'll set him on a seat o gowd,
'And serve him on my bended knie.'
'Now wae betide ye black Fastness,
'Bot and an ill deid may ye die!
'Ye was the first and foremost man
'Wha pairted my true lord and me.'
II.
She has called to her her bouir maidens,
She has called them ane by ane:
"There lies a deid man in my bouir,
"I wish that he war gane."
They ha booted him and spurred him,
As he was wont to ride,
A hunting horn tied round his waist,
A sharp sword by his side.
Then up and spak a bonnie bird,
That sat upon the try;
'What hae ye done wi Earl Richard,
'Ye was his gay lady?'
"Cum down, cum down, my bonnie bird,
"And licht upon my hand;
"And ye shall hae a cage o gowd,
"Whar ye hae but the wand."
'Awa, awa, ye ill woman!
'Nae cage o gowd for me;
'As ye hae done to Earl Richard,
'Sae wad ye do to me.'
III.
See ye the castle's lonelie wa,
That rises in yon isle?
There Angus mourns that eir he did
His sovereign's luve begyle.
'O will ye gae wi me fair maid?
'O will ye gae wi me?
'I'll set you in a bouir o gowd
'Nae haly cell ye'se dry.'
"O meikle lever wald I gang
"To bide for ay wi thee,
"Then heid the king my father's will,
"The haly cell to dry.
"Sin I maun nevir see nor speak
"Wi him I luve sae deir,
"Ye are the first man in the land
"I wald cheis for my fere."
IV.
Whar yon cleir burn frae down the loch,
Rins saftlie to the sea,
There lately bathed in hete o nune
A squire of valor hie.
He kend nae that the fause mermaid
There used to beik and play,
Or he had neir gane to the bathe,
I trow, that dreirie day.
Nae suner had he deft his claiths,
Nae suner began to swim,
Than up she raised her bonnie face
Aboon the glittering streim.
'O comely youth, gin ye will cum
'And be my leman deir,
'Ye sall ha pleasance o ilk sort,
'Bot any end or feir.
'I'll tak ye to my emraud ha
'Wi perles lichted rouud;
'Whar ye sall live wi luve and me,
'And neir by bale be found.
NOTES.
HARDYKNUTE.
PART I.
HARDYKNUTE.] This name is of Danish extract, and signifies Canute the strong.
Hardy in the original implies strong, not valiant; and though used in the
latter sense by the English, yet the Scots still take it in its first
acceptance. The names in Cunningham, says Sir David Dalrymple, are all Saxon,
as is the name of the country itself. Annals of Scotland, an. 1160, note. The
Danish and Saxon are both derived from the old Gothic, and were so similar,
that a person of the one nation might understand one of the other speaking in
his proper tongue. From the names and whole tenor of this poem, I am inclined
to think the chief scene is laid in Cunninghamshire; where likewise the battle
of Largs, supposed to be that so nobly described in the first part, was fought.

Ver. 5. Britons.] This was the common name which the Scots gave the English
anciently, as may be observed in their old poets; and particularly Blind Harry,
whose testimony indeed can only be relied on, as to the common language and
manners of his time; his Life of Wallace being a tissue of the most absurd
fables ever mingled.

V. 9. Hie on a bill, etc.] This necessary caution in those times, when
strength was the only protection from violence, is well painted by a
contemporary French bard: Un chasteau scay sur roche espouvantable,
En lieu venteux, la rive perilleuse,
La vy tyrant seant a haute table,
En grand palais, en sal plantureuse, etc.
D' Alliac, Eveque de Cambray.

V. 12. Knicht.] These knights were only military officers attending the earls,
barons, etc. as appears from the histories of the middle ages. See Seldom, Tit.
Hon. P. II. c. 5. The name is of Saxon origin, and of remote antiquity, as is
proved by the following fragment of a poem on the Spanish expedition of Charles
the Great, written at that period: Sie zeslugen ros unde man
Mit ire scarfen spiezen;
Thie got mosen an theme plote hinnen uliezen:
There site was under gotten kneghten,
Sic kunden wole vochten.
i. e. Occiderunt equos et viros
Acutis suis hastis;
Deos opportuit sanguine fluere:
Hic mos erat inter nobiles milites,
Poterant optime pugnare.
MS. de Bello Car. M. Hisp. apud Keysler diss. de Cultu Solis, Freji, and
Othini; Halae, 1728.

The oath which the ancient knights of Scotland gave at their investiture is
preserved in a letter of Drummond of Hawthornden to Ben Jonson, and is as
follows:

I shall fortify and defend the true holy Catholic and Christian Religion,
presently professed, at all my power.

I shall be loyal and true to my Sovereign Lord the King his Majesty; and do
honor and reverence to all orders of chevalrie, and to the uoble office of
arms.

I shall fortify and defend justice to the uttermost of my power, but feid or
favor.

I shall never fly from the King's Majesty my Lord and Master, or his
lieutenant, in time of battle or medly with dishonor.

I shall defend my native country from all aliens and strangers at all my
power.

I shall maintain and defend the honest adoes and quarrels of all ladies of
honor, widows, orphans, and maids of good fame.

I shall do diligence, wherever I hear tell there are any traitors, murderers,
rievers, and masterful thieves and outlaws, that suppress the poor, to bring
them to the law at all my power.

I shall maintain aed defend the noble and gallant state of chevalrie with
horses, harneses, and other knichtly apparel to my power.

I shall be diligent to enquire, and seek to have the knowledge of all points
and articles, touching or concerning my duty, contained in the book of
chevalry.

All and sundry the premises I oblige me to keep and fulfill. So help me God by
my own hand, and by God himself.

A curious account of the rise and progress of knighthood, and its influence on
society, may be found in a learned and ingenious work lately published by Dr.
Stuart, entitled, A view of Society in Europe, or Enquiries concerning the
History of Law, Government, and Manners.

V. 16. Emergard.] In the common copies it is Elenor, and indeed in all the
recitals I have heard; but in a late edition published with other Scottish songs
at Edinburgh, 1776, it is rightly read as here. Emergard, or Ermengarde, was
daughter of the Viscount of Beaumont, and wife of William the Lion. She died in
1233 As the name was uncommon, and of difficult pronunciation, the rehearsers
seem to have altered it to Elenor, which has none of these defects.

The battle of Largs, supposed to be that meant in this poem, was fought on the
first of August 1263, so that queen Emergard was dead thirty years before; yet
this can amount to no error in chronology, as the verses evidently imply that
the lady of Hardyknute had no equal in the kingdom for beauty save the queen in
the prime of the youth and beauty of both, which might well be forty years, or
more, before the period of action in the poem.

V. 25. Fairly.] This name seems likewise of Saxon origin. There is a small
island and a rivulet in Cunningham still called Fairly isle and Fairly Burn.

V. 43. Twenty thousand glittering speirs, etc.] This agrees with Buchanan's
account, Acho -- viginti millia militum exposuit. lib. 7. Torfaeus asserts this
number of the Norwegians was left dead on the field; but upon what authority I
know not, as the ancient relations of the battle of Largs support not his
testimony. See Johnstone's Translation of Haco's Expedition to Scotland in the
year 1263, from the Plateyan and Frisian MSS. printed at Copenhagen 1782.

V. 49. Page] The Pages in the periods of chivalry were of honorable account.
The young warriers were first denominated pages, then valets, or dameiseaux,
from which degree they reached that of ecuyer, or squire, and from this that of
knight. See Du Cange, voc. Valeti, and Domicellus. St. Palaye, Mem. sur l'anc.
Cheval. P. I.

V. 61. He has taken a horn; etc.] The horn, or bugil, was anciently used by the
Scots instead of the trumpet. They were sometimes richly ornamented, as appears
from Lindsay's description of that of Sir Robert Cochran. The horn he wore was
adorned with jewels and precious stones, and tipped with fine gold at both
ends. Hist. of Scotland, J. III.

V. 88. Westmoreland's ferce heir.] Heir, in the old Scottish acceptance, seems
derived from the Latin herus, and signifies not apparent successor, but present
lord. As in the following lines of Blind Harry: Of Southampton he hecht both
heir and lord.
B. 7. c. 1. Of Gloucester the huge lord and heir.
B. 12. c. 1. And in this of Dunbar, Befoir Mahoun the heir of hell.

V. 107 -- 112.] This minute description might lead us to suspect, that a
female hand had some part in this composition. But, before our minstrel, Homer
has shown himself an adept in the lady's dress. To the curious remarks on the
variation of the British habit, given us by Mr. Walpole, in his Anecdotes of
Painting, and Mr. Granger, in his Biographical History, might be added the
following notice from a reverend minister of the church of Scotland. About School
the women got a custom of wearing few garments: I myself have seen the young
brisk ladies walking on the streets with masks on their faces, and with one
only thin petticoat and their smoke; so thin that one would make a conscience
of sweiring they were not naked. Miscellanies, by Mr. John Bell, minister at
Gladsmuir, MS. pen. Edit. title Apparel.

V. 112. Save that of Fairly fair.] Working at the needle, etc. was reckoned an
honorable employment by the greatest ladies of those times. Margaret, the
queen of Malcolm III. as we learn from her life written by Turgot her
confessor, employed the leisure hours of her ladies in this manner. See Lord
Hales' Annals of Scotland, an. 1093.

V. 121. Sir Knicht.] The addition Sir to the names of knights was in use
before the age of Edward I. and is from Sire, which in old French signifies
Seignieur or Lord. Though applicable to all knights it served properly to
distinguish those of the order who were not barons. Dr. Stuart, View of
Society, etc. Notes on sect. 4. chap. ii. p. 269.

V. 123 -- 128. The custom of the ladies tending the wounded knights was common
in those romantic ages. Lydgate, whose story is ancient, but whose manners are
those of his own times, has an instance in The Story of Thebes, part ii.
Speaking of the daughter of Lycurgus and Tideus; To a chamber she led him up
aloft.
Full well beseine, there in a bed right soft,
Richly abouten apparrailed
With clothe of gold, all the flower irailed
Of the same both in length and bread:
And first this lady, of her womanhede,
Her women did bid, as goodly as they can,
To be attendant unto this wounded man:
And when he was unarmed to his shert,
She made first wash his woundis smert,
And search hem well with diverse instruments,
And made fet sundry ointments, etc.
And in an excellent piece of old English poetry, styled Sir Cauline, published
by Dr. Percy in the first volume of his Relics, when the king is informed
that knight is sick, he says, Fetch me down my daughter dear,
She is a leeche fulle fine.
v. 29, 30.

V. 145 -- 152.] This stanza is now first printed. It is surprising it is
omission was not marked in the fragment formerly published, as without it the
circumstance of the knight's complaint is altogether foreign and vague. The
loss was attempted to be glossed over by many variations of the preceding four
lines, but the defect was palpable to the most inattentive peruser.

V. 154. Lord Chattan.] This is a very ancient and honorable Scottish surname.
Some genealogists derive them from the Chatti, an ancient German tribe; but
others, with more probability, from the Gilchattan of Ireland. St. Chattan was
one of the first Scottish confessors, to whom was dedicated the priory of
Ardchattan in Lorn, founded in 1230, and some others through the kingdom. The
chief of the clan Chattan dying in the reign of David I. without male issue,
the clan assumed the ancestor of the M'Phersons for superior, by which means
the name appears to have been lost in that of M'Pherson. See Buchanan's Brief
Enquiry into the Genealogy and Present State of Ancient Scottish Surnames.
Glasgow, 1723, 4 to, p. 67.

We however find the Clan Chattan mentioned as late as 1590 in The History of
the Feuds and Conflicts of the Clans, published from a MS. of the reign of
James VI. Glasgow, 1764; where a Macintosh is called their chief.

V. 159.] Though we learn from Buchanan's Equiry, etc. that the clan Chattan
are said to have come into Scotland long before the expulsion of the Picts, yet
I do not find this pretty anecdote, which is much in the spirit of Homer, has
any foundation in history. The empire of the Picts was demolished by Kenneth
about four centuries before the apparent date of the events narrated in this
poem.

V. 169. Make orisons, etc.] This is perfectly in the style of knighthood.
Before they entered into combat they solemly invoked the aid of God, their
Savior, or their mistress: religion and gallantry being the prime motives of
all their adventures. Les premieres lecons qu'on leur donnoit regardoient
principalement l'amour de Dieu et des dames, c'est a dire la religion et la
galanterie. St. Palaye, tome i. p. 7. The poets of these times began, in like
manner, the description of a savage conflict, or of their lady's graces, with
religious invocation. Many examples of which appear in the Histoire des
Troubadours of L'Abbe Milot, and the Specimens of Welsh Poetry published by Mr.
Evans. So blind is the untutored mind to the proper discrimination of it is
ideas!

V. 179. Playand Pibrochs.] Of the pibroch I cannot give a better account than
in the words of an excellent author. A pibroch is a species of tune peculiar, I
think, to the Highlands and Western Isles of Scotland. It is performed on a
bagpipe, and differs totally from all other music. Its rythm is so irregular,
and its notes, especially in the quick movement, so mixed and huddled together,
that a stranger finds it almost impossible to reconcile his ear to it, so as to
perceive its modulation. Some of these pibrochs, being intended to represent a
battle, begin with a grave motion resembling a march, then gradually quicken
into the onset; run off with noisy confusion, and turbulent rapidity, to
imitate the conflict and pursuit; then swell into a few flourishes of
triumphant joy; and perhaps close with the wild and slow wailings of a funeral
procession. Essays by Dr. Beattie, 8vo. ed. p. 422. note.

V. 188. Eir faes their dint mote dry.] This is substituted in place of a line
of consummate nonsense, which has stained all the former editions. Many such
are corrected in this impression from comparing different rehearsals, and still
more from conjecture. When an ignorant person is desired to repeat a ballad,
and is at a loss for the original expression, he naturally supplies it with
whatever absurdity first occurs to him, that will form a rhyme. These the Editor
made not the smallest scruple to correct, as he always imagined that common
sense might have its use even in emendatory criticism.

V. 203. But on his forehead, etc.] The circumstances in this description seem
borrowed from those of different battles betwixt the Kings of Scotland and
Norway. I find in no historian that Alexander was wounded in the battle of
Largs; on the contrary, it is even doubted whether he was present; but in that
near Nairn Malcolm II. was wounded on the head. Rex, accepto in capite vulnere,
vix a suis in propinquum nemus ablatus, ac ibi equo pofitus, mortem evasit.
Buchan. lib. VI.

V. 223. Hire dames to wail your darling's fall.] This custom of employing
women to mourn for the warriors who fell in battle, may be traced to the most
distant antiquity. Lucilius, one of the earliest Roman poets, in a couplet
preserved by Nonius, mentions this practice; Mercede quae conductae flent
alieno in fanere praeficae
Multae and capillos scindunt, and clamant magis.
Among the Northern nations it partook of their barbarity. Inter eas autem
ceremonias a barbara gente acceptas fuisse et has, ut genas roderunt
mulierculae, hoc est unguibus faciem dilaniarent et lessum facerent, id est
sanguinem e venis mitterent, doloris testandi ergo; id quod Germani patria voce
dicunt, Ein lassu thun oder baben. Elias Schedius de Diis Germ. Sing. II. c.
51. A similar mode of testifying their grief for the death of their chiefs,
still obtains in the Highlands, as we are informed by Mr. Pennant in his
amusing Tour in Scotland.

V. 225. Costly Jupe.] This was the Sagum, or military vest of the Gauls and
Germans. Dr. Stuart has with curious ingenuity derived the science of Blazonry
from the ornaments which were in time added to them. Ubi supra, p. 286, 287.

Virgil has a passage remarkably similar to this, in describing the habit of
the Gauls, I think in Aeneid VIII. Aurea caesaries illis, atque aurea vestis
Virgatis lucet sagulis.


V. 229. Beir Norse that gift, etc.] This has been generally misunderstood: the
meaning is, Bear that gift to the King of Norway, and bid, etc.

V. 239. 245.] These vaunts are much in Homer's manner, and are finely
characteristic. The obscure metaphor which conveys them illustrates a beautiful
remark of an ancient critic, That allegory has a sublime effect when applied to
threatening. (...). Demet. Phal. de Eloc. c. 99.

V. 265. Whar like a fire to hither set.] This apposite simile alludes to an
ancient practice of the Scots, termed Mure burning. The progress of the flame
was so quick, that many laws appear in their Acts of Parliament, prohibiting
its being used when any corn was standing on ground adjacent to the heath
intended to be burnt, though at a considerable distance from the spot where the
flame was kindled.

V. 285. Sore taken he was, fey!] Fey here signifies only indeed, in fay, or,
in faith: it is commonly used by the old Scottish poets in a sarcastic or
ironical sense.

V. 305. On Norway's coast, etc.] These verses are in the finest style of
Ballad poetry. They have been well imitated by a modern writer, who seems
indebted, for the best strokes of his first production, to a taste for such
compositions: Ye dames of Denmark! even for you I feel,
Who, sadly sitting on the sea-beat shore,
Long look for Lords that never shall return,
Douglas, Act III.

I cannot conclude my observations upon the description here given of the
battle, without adding, that though perhaps not the most sublime, it is the
most animated and interesting to be found in any poet. It yields not to any in
Ossian for lively painting, nor to any in Homer for those little anecdotes and
strokes of nature, which are so deservedly admired in that master. 'Poetry and
Rhetoric,' says the author of an Enquiry into the origin of our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful, do not succeed in exact description so well as Painting
does; their business is to affect rather by sympathy than imitation; to display
rather the effect of things on the mind of the speaker, or of others, than to
present a clear idea of the things themselves. This is their most extensive
province, and that in which they succeed the best. Will he forgive me if I
offer this rude Scottish Poem as an example sufficiently illustrative of this
fine remark?

V. 321. Loud and chill blew the Westlin wind, etc.] This storm is artfully
raised by the magic of Poetry to heighten the terrible, which is soon carried
to a degree not surpassed in any production ancient or modern. It will recall
to the reader the like artifice employed in the most sublime passage of Tasso's
Gierusalemme, end of Canto 7.; and of Homer's Iliad, VIII. ver. 161. of Mr.
Pope's Translation.

V. 327. Seimd now as black as moruning weid.] It was anciently the custom on
any mournful event to hang the castle gates with black cloth. This is alluded
to here, and more particularly mentioned in an excellent modern Ballad,
entitled The Birth of St. George, which displays no mean knowledge of the
manners of chivalry: But when he reached his castle gate
His gate was hung with black.
Relics, Vol. III. p. 222.

HARDYKNUTE. Part II.
I HAVE given the stanzas now added the title of a Second Part, though I had no
authority from the recital. The break formerly made here by accident seemed to
call for this pause to the reader.

V. 115. Penants.] These were small banners charged with the arms of the owner,
and sometimes borne over the helm of the ancient knight by his squire, and, as
would seem, even that of the prince, Earl, or Chief Baron, by his Baneret. See
ver. 331. The English word is penon: And by his banner borne is his penon,
Of gold full rich; in which there was ybete
The minotaure that he wan in Crete,
Says Chaucer speaking of Theseus in The Knight's Tale.

V. 252. Draffan's touirs.] The ruins of Draffancastle are in Lanarkshire. --
They stand upon a vast rock hanging over the Nethan (see v. 329.) which a
little below runs into the Clyde. From this a house situated very nigh the
ruins is called Craignethan. This castle is so ancient, that the country people
there say it was built by the Pechts, which is their common way of expressing
the Picts.

V. 273. His halbrik.] This term for a coat of mail occurs in Blind Harry. It
was properly used for one composed of small rings of steel which yielded to
every motion of the warrior, and was the same with the lorica hamata of the
Romans, so picturesquely described by Claudian: Conjuncta per artem
Flexilis inductis hamatur lamina membris,
Horribilis visu, credas simulacra moveri
Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.
In Rufin. Lib. II.

V. 275. Securit by a warloc auld, etc.] The belief that certain charms might
secure the possessor from danger in combat was common in dark ages. I know a
song, by which I soften and enchant the arms of my enemies, and render their
weapons of no affect, says Odin in his Magic. Northern Antiq. Vol. II. p. 217.
Among the Longobards they were forbidden by a positive Law. Nullus Campio
adversus alterum pugnaturus audeat super se habere herbas nec res ad maleficia
pertinentes, nisi tantum corona sua, quae convenient. Et si suspicio fuerit
quod eas occulte habeat, inquiratur per Judicem, et si inventae fuerunt,
rejiciantur. Post quam inquisitionem, extendet manum suam ipse in manu Patrini
aut Colliberti sui, ante judicem, dicens, se nullam rem talem super se habere,
deinde ad certamen prodeat LL. Longob. apud L. Germ. J. Basil. Herold. A
similar notion obtained even in England, as appears from the oath taken in the
Judicial Combat. A. de B. ye shall swear that ye have no stone of virtue, nor
herb of virtue, nor charm, nor experiment, nor none other enchauntment by you
nor for you, whereby ye trust the better to overcome C. de D. your adversary,
that shall come agens you within these lists in his defense, nor that ye trust
in none other thing propirly bot in God, and your body, and your brave quarrel.
So God you help and all halowes, and the holy gospells. Apud Dugdale, Orig.
Juridic. and Miscell. Aulica, Land. 1702. p. 166. And we find in a most acute
and ingenious treatise on the point of honor, written in the middle of the
sixteenth century, that this precaution was esteemed necessary so late as that
period. Il Duello del Mutio Justinopolitano, In Vineg. 1566. lib. II. c. 9. De
i maleficii ^t incante. Et non senza ragione i moderni Padrini fanno spogliare
i cavallieri, che hanno da entrare in battaglia, et iscuotere, et
diligentemente essaminare i loro panni, etc. Many instances occur in the
accounts of the civil wars of France, and of the Netherlands: and more
particularly in the very curious story of Gowrie's Conspiracy, published by
James VI. at Edinburgh, 1600, 4to. His Majesty having before his parting out of
that town, caused to search the said Earl of Gowries pockets, in case any
letters that might further the discovery of that conspiracy might be found
therein. But nothing was found in them, but a little close parchment bag full
of magical characters, and words of enchantment, wherein it seemed that he
had put his confidence, thinking himself never safe without them, and therefore
ever carried them about with him; being also observed, that while they were
upon him, his wound, whereof he died, bled not; but incontinent, after the
taking of them away, the blood gushed out in great abundance, to the great
admiration of all the beholders. See likewise Memoirs of the Affairs of
Scotland, by David Moses, Edin. 1755. where this piece is reprinted verbatim.
Master William Rynd, a servant of Lord Gowrie's, deposition in the same
volume, p. 297, has singular anecdotes with regard to these characters.

V. 276. Fairy charm.] The word fairy seems to have been accepted by the
ancient English and Scottish poets for supernatural, or enchanted. So Chaucer
speaking of Cambuscan's horse, It was of fairie, as the people seemed. Squires
Tale, p. 1.

V. 362.] It was the privilege of the knights to hide their faces with armor,
so that it was impossible to distinguish any one from another, except by his
blazon, which seems at first to have been displayed over them, but came at
length to be painted on their shields, whence Coats of Arms. A villein was
obliged to have his countenance uncovered in battle. This circumstance attended
to will save our wonder at Hardyknute's not knowing Draffan in the First Part,
and Draffan's not perceiving Malcolm here till his spear tore off his visor:
though Rothiay knows Draffan either from his wearing a blazon on his armor, or
from his face being uncovered in order to breathe from the combat.

V. 389. Cheir ye my mirrie men, etc.] It should have been remarked on the
first appearance of this word, P. I. v. 199, that mirrie was anciently used in
a very different sense from its present. It signified honest, true, faithful,
but no where jovial. King James VI. in his Daemonologie MS. pen. Edit. Surely
the difference vulgaire put betwixt them is verrie mirrie, and in a manner
true. p. 10. And again in p. 18. Many honest and mirrie men. In like manner
Merlin's Prophecies are styled ' Mirrie words,' in that of Beid. Proph. of
Rymer, etc.

V. 413. Oh King of Hevin!] This is a common appellation of the Deity with the
more ancient Scottish Poets. By Hevins King, is the familiar oath of Blind
Harrie's heroes.

V. 419. By my Forbere's saul.] Swearing by the souls of their ancestors was
another used mode in those times. The greatest thought this oath most strong
and honorable; probably because it implied the souls of their forefathers were
in heaven, and, as was then believed, might lend them a supernatural aid, if
the intention of their oath was just and unblameable.

V. 421. ' Now mind your aith,' etc.] This passage is obscure: the meaning I
apprehend is, that Draffan had, before the combat, exacted an oath of Allan his
baneret, that he would slay him, should the necessity of his affairs demand
this sacrifice. More willing to lose his own life than possibly to take that of
his great antagonist, he commands Allan to fulfill his engagement, which, with
all the heroic faith of those times, he does without a pause. The particular
expression The shynand blade might lead us to imagine, that it was thought
impossible to pierce the supposed enchanted armor, but with one particular
weapon, likeways perhaps charmed.

V. 437. Icolm.] The Nunnery at Icolm, or Icolmkill, was one of the most noted
in Scotland. The Nuns were of the order of Augustine, and wore a white gown,
and above it a rocket of fine linen. Spotiswood's Account of the Religious
Houses in Scotland, p. 509. The ruins of this nunnery are still to be seen,
with many tombs of the Princesses; one of which bears the year 1000. Martin's
Western Islands, p. 262.

I cannot conclude my remarks on this Poem without wasting one on the story of
Mrs. Wardlaw. That this lady may have indeed received a MS. of it as mentioned
in Dr. Percy's introductory note, is highly probable. Many valuable MSS.
prepared for the press, have had a worse fate. But that she was the author of
this capital composition, so fraught with science of ancient manners as the
above notes testify, I will no more credit, than that the common people in
Lanarkshire, who can repeat scraps of both the parts, are the authors of the
passages they rehearse. That she did not refuse the name of being the original
composer is a strange argument: would not the first poet in Europe think it
added to his reputation? If conjecture may be allowed where proof must ever be
wanting, I suspect, if we assign the end of the fifteenth century as the date
of the antique parts of this noble production, we shall not greatly err; though
at the same time the language must convince us that many strokes have been
bestowed by modern hands.

Since the first publication of this volume, Sir David Dalrymple, Lord Hales,
whose abilities have been so often, and so successfully, exerted in
illustrating the antiquities of his country, to the law and the literature of
which he is so great an ornament, has communicated to the Editor some notices
with regard to this poem of Hardyknute, which shall here be laid before the
reader, almost in his own words.

The following are extracts of a letter written by Sir John Bruce of Kinross,
to Lord Binning, about the year 1719.

To perform my promise, I send you a true copy of the manuscript I found, some
weeks ago, in a vault at Dumferline. It is written on vellum in a fair Gothic
character; but so much defaced by time, as you will find that the tenth part is
not legible.

Sir John transcribes some stanzas, which he calls verses. After l. 112, P. I.
he says, here are four verses defaced, and then he transcribes l. 113.

At l. 128 he adds, hiatus in MS. and then he transcribes l. 153. At l. 320 he
says, Here are ten verses (stanzas) so spoilt that I can only guess by the many
proper names, that they contain the order of battle of the Scots army, as they
stood ranged under their different chieftains.

In conclusion Sir John says, there is a vast deal more of it, but all defaced.

The reader is left to judge whether this story of the manuscript on vellum,
etc. has most the appearance of a true narrative, or of a jeu d' esprit
addressed to a familiar friend.

Lord Hales has a copy of the original edition of Hardyknute, with MS.
alterations, in the hand writing of Dr. John Clerk, Physician in Edinburgh. At
l. 85, it has ' brade Thomas;' Sir John Bruce has bred Malcolm. At l. 98, Sir
John Bruce's MS. has 'Walter' instead of 'Malcolm.' At l. 103, 'brazen' for
'silver;' and at l. 104, 'iron doors,' for painted bowers.

In Dr. Clerk's MS. lines, 176 -- 180 run thus; To join his king adown the hill,
In have his strides he bent;
While minstrels playand pibrochs fine,
Before him stately went.


In Dr. Clerk's MS. the stanza On Norway's coast, etc. comes in after the
stanza There on a lee with much propriety: that reading is therefore followed
in this edition.

At l. 337. for 'owr' the MS. has 'oy'.
The last line in the MS. was originally,
He feared a coud be feared;
but has been changed into that which occurs in later editions.

CHILD MAURICE.
THIS is undoubtedly the true title of this incomparable Ballad, though
corrupted into Gil Morris by the nurses and old women, from whose mouths it
was originally published. Child seems to have been of equal importance with
Damoiseau (See note on P. I. v. 49. of Hardyknute) and applicable to a young
nobleman when about the age of fifteen. It occurs in Shakspeare's Lear, in the
following line, probably borrowed from some old romance or ballad, Child Roland
to the dark tower came.
Act III. S. 7.

And in Chaucer's Rhyme of Sir Topas, Child is evidently used to denote a young
and noble knight. Many instances might likewise be brought from Spenser for
this signification.

Gil Morris is only the northern pronunciation of the true name of this
ballad: Gil about Aberdeen, etc, still signifies Child, as it does in Galic;
witness the name Gilchrist, the child of Christ, etc.

V. 52. He bent his bow.] Archery was enjoined the Scottish warrior at a very
early age, as appears from many special laws to that effect, and particularly
the following one of James I. Item, That all men busk them to be Archeres fra
they be twelfe yeir of age, and that in ilk ten pundis worth of land their be
maid bowmarkis, and specially neir to Paroche kirkis, quhairin upon haly days
men may cum, and at the leist schutte thrice about, and have usage of archerie:
and quha sa usis not the said archerie, the Lord of the land sall raise of
him a wedder; and giff the Lord raises not the said pain, the King's
schireffe or his ministers, shall raise it to the King. Parl. I. 18.

V. 95. ezar.] This word is perhaps the same with mazer, as used by the English
poets, A mighty mazer bowl of wine was set.
Spenser, F. Q. II. 12. 49. A mazer ywrought of the maple ware,
Spenser's Calendar, August. So golden mazer wont suspicion breed
Of deadly hemlocks poisoned potion:
says Hall in the prologue to his admirable Satires. Ezar cup will then mean a
large bowl of any material.

V. 107, 8. O what means a the folk coming? My mother tarries lang.] This
stroke of nature is delicate. It paints the very thought of youth and
innocence. In such happy tenuity of phrase, this exquisite composition is only
rivalled by the Merope of Maffei, the most finished Tragedy in the world. Some
lines fancifully interpolated by a modern and very inferior hand are here
omitted.

V. 122. And slaided owr the strae.] The meaning is, He went bastily over the
rank grass.

V. 144. As the hip is o the stean.] This would appear the corruption of some
nurse; but taking it as it stands, the simile, though none of the most
delicate, has a parallel in the Father of English Poetry: But he was chaste and
no lechoure
And sweet as is the bramble flower
That bearethe the red hip.
Chaucer, Sir Topas.

ADAM O GORDON.
THE genuine subject of this Ballad has long remained in obscurity, though it
must have been noted to every peruser of Crawford's Memoirs.

'But to return to Gordon,' (viz. Sir Adam Gordon of Auchindown, brother to the
Earl of Huntly) as these two actions against Forbes, or, to speak more
properly, against the rebels, gained him a vast reputation -- his next exploit
was attended with an equal portion of infamy; and he was as much decryed for
this unlucky action (though at the same time he had no immediate hand in the
matter) as for his former ones he had been applauded. He had sent one Captain
Ker with a party of foot to summon the Castle of Towie in the Queen's name. The
owner Alexander Forbes was not then at home, and his lady confiding too much in
her sex, not only refused to surrender, but gave Ker very injurious language;
upon which, unreasonably transported with fury, he ordered his men to fire the
castle, and barbarously burnt the unfortunate gentlewoman with her whole
family, amounting to thirty-seven persons. Nor was he ever so much as cashiered
for this inhuman action, which made Gordon share both in the scandal and the
guilt. An. 1571. p. 240. edit. 1706.

In this narrative is immediately perceived every leading circumstance in the
Ballad. The Captain Car, by which name it was distinguished in Dr. Percy's
Manuscript, is evidently the Ker of Crawford. The House of Rodes I have
corrected, according to the truth of story, Towie. Of which name, I find in
Gordon of Straloch's map of Aberdeenshire, there were two gentlemen's seats, or
castles, in his time, one upon the Don, and another upon the Ythan. The nearest
seat to the latter is that of Rothy, which from wrong information may have
originally stood in the Ballad, the mistake rising naturally from the vicinity
of their situation, and from this have been corrupted to Rodes. The courage of
this lady, as represented in the Ballad, was equalled by that of the famous
Countess of Salisbury, at the siege of Roxborough; and of Ladies Arundel and
Banks, in the last civil wars of England. See particularly the Mercurius
Rusticus, etc. Land. 1647. Sections V. and XI.

V. 129. Freits.] This word signifies ill omens; and sometimes as here
Accidents supernaturally unlucky. King James VI. in his Daemonologie, MS. pen.
Edit. B. I. cb. III. p. 13. But I pray you forget not likeways to tell what are
the Devill's rudimentis. E. His rudimentis I call first in general all that
quhilk is called vulgairelie the virtue of wood, herb, and stain; quhilk is
used by unlawful charmis without natural causis. As lykeways all kind of
prattiques, freitis, or uther lyk extraordinair actions, quhilk cannot abide
the tre^ twiche of natural raison. It occurs again in the same sense in p. 14.
marg. note; and in p. 41. speaking of Sorcerers. And in general that naime was
gevin thaime for using of sic chairmis and freitis, as that craft teachis them.

THE CHILD OF ELLE.
THIS ballad is admitted into this collection, as being supposed, from many
minute marks, to be a Scottish ballad in an English dress. When for when, kirk
for church, etc. are some of these marks.

Though it is published by Dr. Percy, and of consequence in every body's hands;
yet it was necessary to give it here, else this digest of such Scottish tragic
ballads as deserve preservation could not have been called complete.

VI.
John Faw was king of the gypsies in Scotland in the reign of James IV. who,
about the year 1495, issued a proclamation, ordaining all sheriffs, etc. to
assist John Faw in seizing and securing fugitive gypsies; and that they should
lend him their prisons, stocks, fetters, etc. for that purpose: charging the
lieges, that none of them molest, vex, unquiet, or trouble the said Faw and his
company in doing their lawful business within the realm; and in their passing,
remaining, or going forth of the same, under penalty: and charging skippers,
masters of ships, and mariners, within the realm, at all ports and havens, to
receive said John and his company, upon their expenses, for furthering them
forth of the realm to parts beyond sea. See Mr. Maclaurin's Remarkable Cases,
etc. p. 774.

V. 8. Glamour.] The glamour was believed to be a kind of magical mist raised
by sorcerers, which deluded their spectators with visions of things which had
no real existence, altered the appearance of these which really did exist, etc.
The Eastern nations have a similar superstition, as we may learn from Mr.
Galland's Mill et un nuit, and other translations of works of Oriental fiction.

SIR HUGH, OR THE JEW's DAUGHTER, is composed of two copies, one published by
Dr. Percy, the other in a collection of Scottish Songs, etc. Edin. 1776. The
Mirryland town of the former, and Mirry Linkin of the latter, evidently show
that the noted story of Hugh of Lincoln is here expressed.

FLODDEN FIELD.
THE stanzas here given form a complete copy of this exquisite Dirge. The
inimitable beauty of the original induced a variety of versifiers to mingle
stanzas of their own composure. But it is the painful, though most necessary
duty of an Editor, by the touchstone of truth, to discriminate such dross from
the gold of antiquity.

SIR PATRICK SPENCE is given from Dr. Percy's Edition, which indeed agrees with
the stall copies, and the common recitals. I have, however, lent it a few
corrections, where palpable absurdity seemed to require them. The phrase in v.
25. of seeing the old moon in the arms of the new is still familiar in
Scotland. It means that the opaque part of the moon's disk casts a glimmering
light, while the illuminated part is waxing; and is to this hour esteemed to
prognosticate a storm.

LADY BOTHWELL's LAMENT.
THESE four stanzas appeared to the Editor to be all that are genuine in this
elegy. Many additional ones are to be found in the common copies, which are
rejected as of meaner execution. In a quarto manuscript in the Editor's
possession, containing a collection of Poems by different hands from the reign
of Queen Elizabeth to the middle of the last century, when it was apparently
written ( pp. 132.) there are two Balowes as they are there styled, the first
The Balow, Allan, the second Palmer's Balow; this last is that commonly called
Lady Bothwell's Lament, and the three first stanzas in this edition are taken
from it, as is the last from Allan's Balow. They are injudiciously mingled in
Ramsay's Edition, and several stanzas of his own added; a liberty he used much
too often in printing ancient Scottish poems.

EARL OF MURRAY.
V. last. Town.] This word is often used in Scotland to denote only, perhaps, a
farm-house and office-houses, or a number of hovels scattered here and there;
and on which the English would not bestow the name of a village.

A very eminent Scottish antiquary informs me, that in Saxon ton signifies an
habitation: and that castle down in the last stanza of this ballad ought to be
read Castle Down, the seat of Lord Murray in his own right.

SIR JAMES THE ROSE is given from a modern edition in one sheet 12mo. after the
old copy. A renovation of this Ballad, composed of new and improbable
circumstances, decked out with scraps of tragedies, may be found in the Annual
Register for 1774, and other collections. Rose is an ancient and honorable
name in Scotland: Johannes de Rose is a witness to the famous Charter of Robert
II. testifying his marriage with Elizabeth More, as appears in the rare edition
of it printed at Paris, 1695, 4to. p. 15.

V. 27. Belted Knichts.] The belt was one of the chief marks which
distinguished the ancient knight. To be girt with the belt of knighthood often
implied the whole attending ceremonies which constituted that order. That of
the common knight was of white leather.

LORD OF WOODHOUSELIE.
THIS Ballad is now first published. Whether it has any real foundation, the
Editor cannot be positive, though it is very likely. There is a Woodhouselie
nigh Edinburgh, which may possibly be that here meant.

LORD LIVINGSTON
(...) probably an ancestor of Livingston Earl of Linlith^^^^, attainted in
1715. This affecting piece likewise, with the four following, now appears for
the first time.

V. 13. Says dreims are scant] This seems a proverbiai expression: King James
in his Daemonologie, That is a suith dream (as they say) sense they see it
walking. MS. p. 100.

BINNORIE.
V. 32. Her wraith.] And what meanis then these kyndis of spreitis when they
appear in the shadow of a person newly dead, or to die, to his friend? E.
When they appear upon that occasion, they are called wraithis in our langage.
Ib. p. 81.

The following larger extract relating to the Fairies, another creation of
superstition, is given by way of specimen of this singular MS. Book III. Chapter 5.

ARGUMENT.
The description of the fourth kind of Spreitis, called the Pharie. What is
possible chairin, and what is but illusions. Whow far this dialogue entreates
of all their thingis: and to what end.

P. Now I pray you come on to that fourt kind of spreittis. E. That fourt kind
of Spreitis, quhilk be the gentiles was called Diana and her wandering court,
and amongs us was called the Pharie (as I told you) or our guide neighbouris
(the King has added on the margin 'or silly wightis') was ane of the sortis of
allusions that was ryfest in time of Papistrie; for allthough it was holdin
odious to prophecy be the devil, yet whom these kind of spreittis carried
away, and informed, they were thought to be sonciest, and of best life. To speak
of the many vain tratlis foundit upon that illusion; how their was ane king
and queine of Pharie, of sic a jolie court and train as they had; how they had
a teind and a dewtie, as it were, of all guidis: how they naturally raid and
yield, eat and drank, and did all other actions like natural men and women; I
think it is lyker Virgilis Campi Elisei, nor any thing that aught to be
believed be Christianis.

This Manuscript is written in a beautiful Italic hand, so nearly resembling
copper-plate engraving, as to have been taken for such even after accurate
examination. It is bound in gilded vellum, stamped with the King's eypher
beneath the crown; and is in all probability the original copy of this royal
monument of superstition. Many additions are inserted on the margin, as would
seem, of the handwriting of James VI. and some notes for his own private use.
As for instance on B. II. chapter 1. speaking of the Magicians of his time, over
against the words They are sum of them rich and worldly wise, he has noted
F. M. sum of tham fat or corpulent in their bodies, R. G. and may pairt of
them altogethir gevin over to the pleasours of the flesche, B. N.

We need not wonder at the severity with which the imaginary crime of withcraft
was punished in his reign, when we remark his sentiment expressed on this head,
in B. III. chapter 6. of this singular tract. P. Then to make ane end of our
conference sense I see it drawis leatt, what form of punishment think ye
merits their Magiciens and Witches? For I see that ye account them to be all
alyke guilty. E. (The King) They aught to be put to death, according to the
law of God, the civil and imperial law, and the municipal law of all
Christian nations. P. But what kind of death I pray you? E. It is commonly
used be fire, but that is ane indifferent thing to be used in every country
according to the law or custume thairof. P. But aught no sex, aage, nor rank,
to be eximed? E. NONE AT ALL.

The language of this pedantic Monarch is particular; it is that of a Scottish
schoolboy beginning to read English.

In the printed copies the style is much altered and improved. It was printed
at Edinburgh, and reprinted at London in the same year, 1603, 4to.

LORD AIRTH's COMPLAINT.
THESE verses, though somewhat uncouth, are moving, as they seem to flow from
the heart. They are now first published from the Editor's quarto Manuscript, p.
16. corrected in some lines, which appeared too inaccurate for the public eye.
Two entire stanzas are rejected from the same cause. I know nothing of the
nobleman to whom they are ascribed.

In the same Manuscript (p. 17. and 116) are to be found the two following
Poems, which I believe have never been in print. They are here added, with a
few corrections. They were both written by Sir Robert Aytoun, who bore some
office under government in the reign of James VI. if I mistake not. His Latin
poems are in the Delitiae Poetarum Scotorum.

SONNET.
WILL thou, remorseless fair, still laugh while I lament?
Shall still thy chief contentment be to see me malcontent?
Shall I, Narcissus like, a flying shadow chase?
Or, like Pygmalion, love a stone crowned with a winning face?
No, know my blind Love now shall follow Reason's eyes;
And as thy fairness made me fond, thy temper make me wise.
My loyalty disdains to love a loveless dame,
The spirit still of Cupid's fire consists in mutual flame.
Had thou but given one look, or had thou given one smile,
Or had thou lent but one poor sigh my sorrows to beguile,
My captive Thoughts perchance had been redeemed from Pain,
And these my mutinous Discontents made friends with Hope again.
But thou I know at length art careless of my good;
And would ambitiously embrew thy beauty in my blood:
A great disgrace to thee, to me a monstrous wrong,
Which time may teach thee to repent ere happily it be long:
But to prevent thy shame, and to abridge my woe,
Because thou can not love thy friend, I Will cease to love my foe.
SONG.
WHAT means this strangeness now of late,
Since Time must Truth approve?
This distance may consist with state,
It cannot stand with love.
It Is either cunning or distrust
That may such ways allow:
The first is base, the last unjust;
Let neither blemish you.
For if you mean to draw me on,
There needs not half this art:
And if you mean to have me gone,
You over-act your part.
If kindness cross your wished content,
Dismiss me with a frown;
I Will give you all the love that is spent,
The rest shall be my own.
FRAGMENTS.
The two first of these are given from a Collection, Edinburgh, 1776, but
polished by the present Editor; the two others from recital.

GLOSSARY.
A
Ablins, perhaps. Aboon, above. Ae. ane, one. Aff, off. Aft, often. Aith, oath.
Ain, own. Alse, except. Anes, once. Auld, old. Austerne, stern. Ayont, beyond.
B
Ba, ball, tennis. Baird, beard. Both both. Bairn, child. Bale, misery. Balow,
bush. Band, solemn oath. Base-court, bas court, French, the lower court of a
castle. Basnet, helmet. Begyle, beguile. Bestraught, distracted. Bansters,
blusterers. Beik, bask. Belyve, immediately. Besprent, covered. Betide, n.
fortune. Bedeen, presently, Bleise, blaze. Bleirit, dim with tears. Blink,
glimpse of light. Blinking, twinkling. Blude, blood. Blythsum, sprightly.
Boughts, sheepfolds. Boist, boast. Bonny, pretty. Botand, likeways. Bown, make
ready. Bogle, hobgoblin. Bot, without. Bouir, a room arched in the Gothic
manner. Bouir woman, chambermaid. Bra, bravely dressed. Brae, side of a hill.
Braid, broad. Brand, Isl. a sword. Brawe, brave. Brayd, hasten. Bruik, enjoy.
Brin, burn. Brig, bridge. Busk, prepare. Brechan, played; cloak striped with
various colors.
C
Cauld, cold. Cauldrif, chill, damp. Canny, prudent. Cheis, choose. Claught,
grasped. Cliding, wardrobe.
D
Daffin, waggery. Dared, lighted, hit. Darrain, suffer, encounter. Deft, taken
off hastily. Dint, blow, stroke. Dawning, dawn of day. Dought, could. Doughty,
valiant, strong. Dowie, dreadful, melancholy. Dry, suffer, endure. Dule,
grief.
E
Eard, earth. Eild, eld, old age. Eine, eyes. Eithly, easily. Eydent, ayding,
assisting. Elric, dismal. Eldern, ancient, venerable. Egre, eager, keen, sharp.
Effray, affright. Emraud, Emerald. Ettle, aim.
F
Fae, foe. Fay, faith, sincerity. Fere, companion. Ferly, wonder. Feid, enmity.
Fey, in sooth. Flinders, splinters. Fleeching, flattering. Forbere, forefather,
ancestor. Forbode, denial. Frae, fro, from. Frawart, froward.
G
Ga, gae, gang, go. Gabbing, prattle. Gait, way, path. Gar, cause. Gie, give.
Gin, gif, if. Glaive, sword. Gleit, glittered. Glie, mirth. In H. P. II, 120.
it seems to signify a faint light. Glent, glanced. Glist, glistered. Gloming,
dusk. Glowr, glare, dismal light. Grein, desire. Greit, weep. Graith, dress, v.
and n. Gousty, ghastly. Grie, prize, victory. Good, good. Gurly, bitter, cold;
applied to weather. Gyle, guile. Gyse, manner, fashion.
H
Harst, harvest. Hauld, hold, abode. Hain, spare, save. Hap cover. Hecht,
promised. Hip, the berry of the wild rose. Hit, frantic. Hyn^, hence.
I
Jimp, delicate, slender. Ilk, ilka; each. Irie, terrible.
K
Kaming, combing. Kin, kindred. Kyth, v. to show or make appear. Kyth, n.
acquaintance, friends, companions.
L
Laigh, low. Lane, alone. Lap. leaped. Law, low. Lave, the rest. Leil, true,
faithful. Leir, learn Leglen, a milking pail. Leman, lover, mistress. Leugh,
laughed. Lawing, reckoning. Lever, ^ather. Leech, physician. Lift, the
firmament. Lig, lie scatteredly. Lilting, merry making with music, etc. Lin, a
fall of water. Linkis, lamps or other artificial lights. Loaning, a common
green near a village. Loch, lake. Low, v. and n. flame. Lown, sheltered, calm.
Lout, to bow. Lue, love. Lure, cunning device, snare. Lyart, hoary.
M
Makless, matchless. Maun, must. Mair, more, f. rather. Mahoun, Mahomet, and by
abuse the devil. Mane, moan, lament. Meikle, much. Meiny, train, army. Mense,
to measure, to try. Mede, reward. Meid, port, appearance. Meise, soften,
mollify. Mirk, dark. Money, many. Mote, might.
N
Na, nae, no, none. Neist, (...) Norse, often the King of Norway, so France ^s
often used by Sha^spere for the king of that country.
O
On case, perhaps. Any, any. Or, f. ere, before, f. else. Owr, Over. Outowr,
Over above. Orison, Fr. prayer.
P
Pall, robe of state. Pain, penalty. Perle, pearl. Pleasance, pleasure. Pou,
pull. Pratique, experiment. Preass, to press, to pass with difficulty. Prime of
day, dawn. Prive, pruve, prove. Propine, reward.
Q
Qu, is used in old S^^^sh spelling for W. as Qunat, What, etc. Quat, quitted.
Quell, subdue.
R
Raught, recht, reached. Recule, recoil. Read, warn. Reiking, smoking. Rief,
robbery. Riever, robber, Reid, red. Roun, sound softly, whisper. Rue, repent.
Ruth, pity. Rude, cross. Runkled, wrinkled.
S
Sark, shirt. Saw, a wise saying. Sawman, counselor. Sabbing, sobbing. Scant,
scarce. Scorning ( F^od. v. 5.) jesting ironica^^y. Sey ^ss^y, try. Seen, to
see. Seim, appearance. Selcouth, uncommon as a prodigy. Share, to cleave,
pierce. Sic, such. Sindle, seldom. Skaith, hurt. Slaid, to move speedily. Slay,
v. slay. Sen, seeing. Sin, since, since. Soncie, lucky. Stalwarth, stout,
valiant. Steik, to shut. Sleuth, sloth. Strecht, stretched. Swankies, merry
fellows. Swaird, turf, grassy ground. Swith, quickly. Steid, estate. Spent,
drew. Splent, armor for the thighs and legs. Speir, ask. Stoup, pillar.
Sucred, sugared. Sire, lord.
T
Taken, taken. Targe, shield. Tein, sorrow. Teind, tyth, tenth part. Thilk,
their. these. Thole, suffer, permit. Thud, sadden noise. Tide, time, season.
Tint, lost. Triest, make an assignation. Twined, parted, separated.
V U
Veir, avoid, or perhaps alter. Unmusit, without wonder; to muse often means to
wonder in Shakspere. Unsonlie, unlucky.
W
Waddin, strong, firm. Wad, wald, would; would. Warloc, wizard. Wallow,
withered, and fig. pale. Ward, sentinel. Wate, warrant. Wax, to spread, to
become famous. We, little. Weit, wet, rain. Wete, hope. Westlin, western. Wae
worth ye, woe befall you. War, aware. Whilk, which. Wighty, strong. Wicht, from
Wiga Sax. a hero, or great man. Winsum, agreeable, winning. While, until. Weir,
war. Weily, full of whirlpools; a weil is still used for a whirlpool in the
west of Scotland. Wraith, a spirit or ghost. Wit, blame. Wreak, revenge.
Wreken, avenged. Wreuch, grief, misery.
Y
Yestreen, the evening of yesterday. Yet, gate, Yied, went. Youthheid, state of
youth,
THE END.

