THE IMPARTIAL. AN ADDRESS, without FLATTERY. BEING A POET's Free Thoughts ON
THE Situation of our PUBLIC AFFAIRS, ANNO 1744.

LONDON: Printed for M. COOPER, in Paternoster Row. M. DCC. XLIV.

TO THE GREAT ORIGINAL Of the Following PICTURE.
MY LORD,
THAT I decline the Honor of attending, with at least one honest Address, is
from some Hazard there might be, of your mistaking the true Motive of it. Free
from all Ambition to make One, among the Worshippers of your Fortune, I present
you, and at Distance too, a bare Confession of your Virtues.

TO know the Writer of this Piece, can be of no Importance to your Lordship. He
lies too low to merit a great Minister's Inquiry. It will please the Public
better, that he knows YOU, rightly: and, that he does so, he appeals to the
Poem.

HE is too well acquainted with the modern Turn of Sentiment, in some, (who,
for a few Years, must be called) Great Men, to look for any present
Consequence, from Poetry; where even the Best finds more Contempt than due
Discernment. But, at the same time he knows, that this is One, among the Faults
of bad Administration, which a Soul like Yours came qualified to think worth
mending: And we might have had more Certainty, that you would do it, had you
been as pleased with your own Profit, as the Public's; since the clearest
Interest is His, in every Honor done the Muses, who is born for Actions, of a
Pitch above the Spirit of cold Writers.

I HAVE nothing more to trouble you with, except the warm and just good Wishes
of

Your LORDSHIP 's quondam Schoolfellow, And One of your sincerest Humble
Servants, IGNOTUS.

THE IMPARTIAL: AN ADDRESS, without FLATTERY.
ARE these the Marks, then, of our promised Shame!
Or did Detraction steal the Patriot's Name?
Weak, if we were, how rose we, now, so strong?
Or whence, if powerful, were we scorned, so long?
Burn, sooty Slander, burn, thy blotted Scroll:
Greatness is Greatness, spite of Faction's Soul.
I GAZE, astonished Kingdom, over thy Face,
And each weighed Wonder to its Fountain trace.
Glory flows in, where Infamy was spread:
And long-lost Triumph lifts her tow'ry Head.
Warm, over the icy North, thy influent Awe
Bids hostile Leagues dissolve, in friendly Thaw.
Up Rhine's long Stream Britannic Thunders wind,
And Alpine Mountains shake -- and States, behind.
Austria's plumed Eagle, beak'd and winged once more,
Sees baffled Bourbon driven, from Shore to Shore.
Sea-shook Ausonia, red with warring Hosts,
Starts, from her Adrian, to her Tyrrhene, Coasts.
Even Rome's imperious Mitre learns to bow!
And Spain's THALESTRIS is, but, Woman, now!
WHENCE this amazing Change? -- 'twas, late, all, Fear:
No warring God, invoked, inclined his Ear.
Tyrants, combined, found Freedom's Rights betrayed:
Faith, fast-expiring, saw the False invade,
Commerce cajoled, Reluctance bribed, Rage tame:
Even Empire trod on -- yet, untouched by Shame!
Then, was the Crisis; then, Fate's Hand appeared:
Then might the World be deaf -- for, Britain heard.
Wave-worship'd Britain! One, to All, opposed!
By Friends deserted, and by Foes enclosed,
Fills the World's Eye; dispels the Doubter's Care;
Bids the Bold tremble, and the Backward dare:
High, to the Nations, points their Guardian's Throne,
And acts, and arbitrates, and shines, alone.
AND have such Fires inflamed a patient Reign?
Immortal Heaven! and must we, still, complain?
Still, must we rail, and blacken, and suspect?
At once, curb Vigilance, and goad Neglect?
Deep let my Soul detest the adhesive Pride,
That, changing Sentiment, unchanges Side:
True, to Contempt of Truth, repents within --
Yet, screens Conviction; and strains hard, to sin.
SHAME on this Craft, to scare! -- this Toil, to seem!
O Heart, indignant, fly th'unmanly Scheme:
Blush, for thy past Injustice; shrink no more;
But wake -- and wonder, thou were dark, before!
Learn, from whose Hand th'unlook'd-for Effluence came:
And, in the Teeth of Insult, sound his Name.
WHAT, though some Friend thou love had narrower Sight?
Truth knows no Parties; and involves, like Light.
Shadows and Names fright Cowards -- but the Strong
Never call That Lightness, which is Scorn of Wrong.
Dare to be just: it is all that Brav'ry means*
He stoops too basely, who to Flattery leans:
But, whom pale Prejudice has taught his Part,
Born, for a Slave, wears Fetters, on his Heart;
Sees, undiscerning; feels, without his Touch;
Judges, too little -- and decides too much.
POETS have nobler Souls: Fame's Paths, they show:
They glow themselves -- and teach the World, to glow.
Satire's whole Power their own -- yet, Praise, they choose:
Even of unconscious Kings, who slight the Muse.
Proud of neglected Force, each Heav'n-touch'd Mind,
Open, to Reason, is, to Interest, blind:
Self all un-thought of, can, for others, think:
Swim, till the State rides safe -- then, smile, and sink;
Lift, even the Worth that hates him; love it shown;
And, for his Country's Joys, exclude his own,
This is to think, like Muses; act, like MAN:
This, Princes OUGHT to feel -- and Poets CAN.
YE, once misguided! is Retraction vain?
Trust the Brave injured: nor persist, to stain.
Why should Suspicion Penitence outlive?
None doubt Forgiveness, but who never forgive.
HEAVEN has been wronged: yet, still, goes on to bless.
For, Sins of Blindness err, beneath Distress.
So wronged, so pard'ning, Cart'ret heeds no Foe;
But saves -- unangry at, the Rage below.
OFF with these shackly Quoils, of twine'd Intrigue;
These Nets for Liberty, these Links of League.
Trite, venal, Cants! which Envy's Arts can teach
To censure every Power, we fail to reach.
No generous Heart, misdrawn to devious Beat,
When Truth's new Luster shines, disclaims its Heat.
Charmed, and surprised, I hug my Country's Fame;
Compared, O Heaven! with Years, of lengthening Shame.
YE Sons, who love Her, weigh the threatening Swell,
Of Spain, France, Faction, Calumny, and Hell!
Weigh, with what Speed, repelled from Mound to Mound,
Subsiding Danger sought her bidden Bound!
Hail the white Cliffs of Albion, held, serene,
While round her, redd'ning, rolls the bloody Scene.
I hail it, All: -- and hail the acknowledged CAUSE!
Hail the Mind's Reach, that gives Earth's Uproar LAWS!
Safe, mid surrounding Menace, guards Mankind!
Guides every Council! busies every Wind!
Shakes the World's Shakers! hears, for Land and Main,
And binds fell Tyrants, while they bite their Chain.
YE Muse-made Mentors! raised, on Fancy's Wings,
To think for Heroes, and to reign for Kings;
When could your Sons, of Time's feigned Births, do more?
For, never, true Story reached these Heights, before.
FAVORITES have, often, in many a troubled State,
Poised the King's Love, against the People's Hate;
Often, the firm Leader, in some Patriot Scheme,
Has, with bold Steerage, stemmed the Royal Stream:
And, sometimes, too, -- yet rare, too rare, that Praise!
The Safe at home, abroad have gathered Bays.
But NONE, till Cart'ret rose, ever hoped to see
One mast'ring Genius grasp the UNWILLING THREE!
Prince half confiding -- People All unjust --
Abroad All Discord, and at home, Distrust --
Propp'd on Himself, like the World's Weight, he lay;
And, through Contention's Impulse, shape'd his Way;
Heard the clash'd Elements -- despised their Brawl --
Rolled on, self-centred -- and inorb'd 'em, All!
FINIS.

