THE HAUNTED TOWER, A COMIC OPERA IN THREE ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

Written by Mr. COBB.

DUBLIN: Printed for P. BURN, Grafton-Street; and J. JONES, College Green.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Lord William, Mr. Kelly. Baron of Oakland, Mr. Baddely. Hugo, Mr. Moody.
Lewis, Mr. Suett. De Courcy, Mr. Whitfield. Robert, Mr. Dignum: Martin, Mr.
Williames. Charles, Mr. Sedgwick. Hubert, Mr. Webb. Servant, Mr. Lions. And
Edward, Mr. Bannister, jun.
WOMEN.
Lady Elinor, Mrs. Crouch. Cicely, Miss Romanzini. Maud, Mrs. Booth. And Adela,
Signora Storace.
Chorus of Peasants, Huntsmen, Soldiers, etc.
THE HAUNTED TOWER,
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- The Sea, Dover Clifts and Castle -- Thunder and Lightning. Lewis
and several Attendants of Lady Elinor appear in a boat, they land -- then Enter
Fishermen and Peasants, male and female different sides, who sing the following
CHORUS.
TO Albion's Genius raise the strain,
Whose power has awed the angry main,
And gives us shelter on the coast
Of this blessed isle; old Ocean's boast.
See, retiring over the deep
Distant lightnings harmless sweep;
The storm condemned to lose its prey,
In hollow murmurs dies away.
[Exit Lewis.
Fishermen and Peasants Exit on each side, Lady Elinor and Cicely appear in a
boat and land. Lady Elinor plainly dressed. Cicely Now madam, give me leave to
congratulate you on your safe arrival on the English coast.


Lady Elinor Ah Cicely, if the storm that opposed our landing had fulfilled its
threats, it would have relieved me from a world of misery.


Cice Are you then resolved to obey your father and become the victim of his
ambition, by marrying the young Baron of Oakland, whom you have never seen?


L. Eli I am, at least I think I am.


Cice O, Madam! how can you determine to forget Sir Palamede, he who loves you
so.


L. Eli Poor Palamede, yet, why was he absent when I left my father's court?
why did he not bid me adieu? --


Enter Lewis and Maud. Lew Madam, most of your attendants are come ashore, but
it is a great way to Oakland Castle, and its very cold.


L. Eli Where are they?


Lew Why, Madam, at this good old lady's cottage, where there is a charming
fire, and I would advise you madam, to go there and warm yourself, for I am
sure you must be very cold.

[Exit Lady Elinor and Maud.
Cice [To Lewis who offers to follow.] Where are you going sot? Stay here and
wait for the rest of Lady Elinor's attendants; and do you hear, the next voyage
you take, I would advise you to keep yourself sober.

[Exit.
Lew Why, that is very pretty indeed, so, I am to stay here freezing by way of a
direction post, I got tipsey and lost my money in France, and began to come to
myself, when I was about half seas over; and now when I thought, I should be
comfortable by a good fire, I must remain freezing here, in all the horrors of
sobriety. It is the fate of genius to make discoveries by which other people
profit -- why, who have we here? sure it cannot be! yes it is -- what my dear
Master, Sir Palamede!


Enter Lord William. L. Will Is that Lewis?


Lew Yes sir, I was Lewis, till I was froze into an isicle, how did you come
over from Normandy?


L, Will In the same ship with you, though concealed from the knowledge of Lady
Elinor.


Lew I guess the rest, ah! you are a happy man, you are in love; I wish I was
in love or in liquor, then I should have warmth enough in me to brave the
weather.


L. Will I saw your Lady land, whither is she gone?


Lew Why, Sir, to a cottage hard by, where is such a delighful fireside: --
Oh, I wish, I dared, follow her.


L. Will Go, thither instantly -- and say, I entreat permission to fulfill my
duty in attending her.


Lew I Will be there immediately, but may I say I came by your orders.


L. Will Yes, begone! -- [Exit Lewis.] To what a wayward fate, am I subjected to
love! -- without hope and to pursue disappointment.

AIR -- Lord William.
From Hope's fond dream though Reason wake,
In vain she points with warning hand;
I dread advice I cannot take,
Love's powerful spells my steps command,
The bird, thus fascination binds,
When darting from the serpent's eyes,
The fatal charm too late he finds,
He struggles, and admiring dies.

SCENE -- The inside of Maud's cottage. Enter Lady Elinor, Cicely and Lewis. L.
Eli How Lewis, Sir Palamede in the same ship with us, and coming here
immediately!


Lew Yes Madam, if he is not froze by the way.


L. Eli [Aside to Cicely] Oh, Cicely! assist me to conceal my joy. -- What can
Sir Palamede mean by surprising me thus? -- agreeably -- oh! heavens he is here.

[Exit Lewis.
Enter Lord William. L. Will Pardon my intrusion Madam! an humble dependant on
the Lord de Courcy, may well dread his presumption.


L. Eli Sir, the clandestine manner, in which you quitted my father's court,
renders it impossible for me to consider you as his friend.


L. Will Oh, forgive me! -- long I adored you in secret, and should have fallen
a silent sacrifice to my presumptuous love.


L. Eli Was it well done to take advantage of my father's friendship for you,
and watch an opportunity to triumph over the weakness of his daughter -- not
that you ever will triumph over her weakness; -- but -- but why did you follow
me?


Cice Ah Sir, why did you follow my Lady?


L. Will Destiny compelled me hither, compelled me to a land where my footsteps
are forbidden, where my presence is a treason, where my life is proscribed!


L. Eli Good heaven, what have you to fear!


L. Will Nothing: for I have lost you.


L. Eli I must not trust myself to pity him -- Yet how can I avoid it, in
seeing him unhappy.

AIR -- Lady Elinor.
Though pity I can not deny,
Ah! what will that avail you?
Alas! I dare not hope supply,
For hope too sure would fail you.
Think when the flatterer shall deceive,
In vain you will repent you;
Yet should you hope without my leave,
^is true I cannot prevent you,
My hand directed to bestow,
In England here I Am landed;
And daughters always act, you know,
Just as they are commanded.
Then let not flattering hope deceive,
Or else you will repent you;
Yet should you hope without my leave,
It Is true I cannot prevent you.
[Exit Lady Elinor and Cicely
Enter Maud and Martin. Maud Sir; I beg your honor's pardon for my boldness,
but do you accompany the Lady, because my Grandson, Martin here, will be your
guide to the Baron of Oakland's Castle.


L. Will Why, do you know the Baron of Oakland?


Maud Aye Sir: I knew him before he was a great man!


Mar Yes Sir, so did I, for all he holds his head so high now, and quite
forgets when he was plain Edmund, the Ploughman.


L. Will What, do you say -- why then who is this lord?


Maud Ah, Sir, it does not become poor folks to speak ill of people behind
their backs, for that it might get to their ears again.


Mar No Sir; as my grandmother says, it don't become poor folks to say. --


L, Will Psha, it becomes every one to speak the truth -- torment my curiosity
no longer.


Maud Why, then Sir, you must know that about ten years ago, the old Baron,
Lord William, was accused of being in a plot, and conspiring against the life
of our good King William, the Conqueror, and was banished.


L. Will I remember it.


Maud He took with him his only son, a fine youth, about twelve years of age;
but, alas! Sir, he has not been heard of since.


L. Will I am all impatience?


Maud Now Sir, about a year ago, Lord William's wicked accuser died, and
declared the good baron innocent.


L. Will Alas!


Maud The King willing to make reperation, for the wrongs he had done him,
endeavored to find him, but all in vain, therefore his lands and estates have
been in possession of a distant relation of the family; -- then sir, there is a
young baron the present heir to. --


Enter Cicely. Cice Aye and a pretty fellow he is too, -- you may go in good
woman, we have no further occasion for you I believe.


Maud Good woman -- Marry, come up I say, have I lived all these years to be
called good woman, by a lady's waiting maid! come along Martin -- a good woman
indeed!

[Exit.
Mar Good woman indeed!

[Exit.
Cice I have heard the whole story Palemede.


L. Will Oh, Cicely! --


Cice Oh Cicely! -- ah, you may spare your long speeches, poor Palamede! -- you
are in a sad delima truly, and have'nt wit enough to extricate yourself; but
want me to help you, I pity you to be sure, but I cannot help laughing at you.


L. Will I have now still stranger motives for wishing to accompany Lady Elinor
to the Castle, motives you cannot guess at.


Cice Well, Well! so you shall, leave the management of the affair to me, and
don't you appear till we are setting off.


L. Will I want words to thank you.


Cice I am very glad of it, for words would take up too much of our time at
present, but away and wait till I send for you, [Exit Lord William] well would
we were at our journey to Oakland Castle, I wish to see this baron's son, --
Dear Curiosity how I long to -- gratify you!

AIR -- Cicely.
Nature to woman still so kind,
Among her best boons bestowing;
What every female sure must find,
A wondrous desire to be knowing.
Man, the proud and envious elf,
So jealous of our discerning;
Decries in us, what he prides in himself,
The wish, for whatever's worth learning.
[Exit.
SCENE -- A Rural prospect -- A Cottage. Enter Robert, and Huntsmen, -- in the
course of the song, several Huntsmen enter. AIR -- Robert and Chorus.
Hark! the sweet horn proclaims afar,
Against the stag the mimic war;
While future heroes' hearts rebound,
And pant to hear the trumpet sound.
The warlike genius of our isle,
Who on the hunter deigns to smile,
In echoes gives the chase applause,
Which strings the nerve for Glory's cause:
Where ever the devious chase may bend,
Still freedom shall our steps attend;
And bid us, as her pleasures rise,
Defend the blessings which we prize.
[Exit Huntsmen.
Ed [Without] How are ye my lads? -- How are ye?


Rob O, here comes our young Master, Lord Edward


Enter Edward. Rob Does your Lordship hunt to day?


Edw [Sees Adela at the cottage window, and makes signs to her.] No, Robert not
this morning.


Rob What Sir! do you give up the chase when the game's in view: [Points to
Adela's window.]


Edw Hush, that is my dear Adela, whom I told you of; she arrived here yesterday
evening unknown to any body -- if you betray the secret.


Rob I, Sir! no, no, I am your father's butler, the post of all others which I
love, and while I have the management of the wine cellar, it is quite
indifferent to me how the world wags; -- so I shall follow the Huntsmen.


Edw But hark'ye Robert, not a word about the Haunted Tower, or you will
frighten her out of her wits.


Rob No, no, Sir --

[Exit.
Edw Here comes father, strutting along; ecod he did not strut so when he
followed the plough.


Enter Baron and Three Servants. Bar Heyday, how dare you appear abroad without
your servants with you, why are you walking alone?


Edw Why father, if one must always move in a crowd, one might as well be
bell-weather, to a flock of sheep.


Bar Sirrah, Sirrah; don't put me in a passion, you have been civil to those
rascals, I know you have, why don't you frown at 'em as I do? how often have I
told you, there is nothing supports dignity like ill-humour: but you have no
ambition.


Edw Not much indeed.


Bar Why, have'nt you more pride? hey, if you are not proud you dog, I Will break
your bones.


Edw Why, I cannot help nature, father.


Bar Nature; why, look at me, do you see any thing like nature about me? No,
no, yet I, myself, am as vulgarly and naturally pleased as any body; but I Will
not show it, I Will defy the best friend I have to say, I have given him a civil
word since I have been Baron of Oakland -- an't I the terror of the
neighborhood.


Edw Yes, that you are; especially since you imprisoned the poor fellow for
catching a hare -- and it is proved since that he is innocent.


Bar Innocent, I am very sorry for it -- that is -- I should be sorry, if I was
not a Baron -- give him this money; [Gives Edward money] but don't let him know
it comes from me, but tell him I have the power to hang him; for I will have no
man dare to think I am in the wrong; justice holds her seat in my breast, and
is to all parties equal and indifferent.


Edw Very indifferent indeed.


Bar What Is that you say? if I desired you to behave ill to other people, I
did not mean you should to me -- do you know who I am? that I am the Baron of
Oakland, and that all dignity flows me.


Edw Yes, it flows from you pretty fast, I think none seems to stay with you.


Bar Don't you grumble Sirrah, but do you hear? prepare to receive the Lord de
Courcy's daughter, whom I intend for your wife, I expect her arrival every day.


Edw But perhaps I may not like her, father.


Bar That may be, but you shall marry her for all that, I insist on it, aye;
and love her too -- no, -- I don't know that I may insist upon that.


Ser Ha! ha! ha!


Bar Why, you impudent scoundrels, how dare you laugh so! I Will have no persons
to attend upon me that have'nt a proper respect for my dignity -- follow me you
rascals --

[Exit with servants.
Edw I hope I shall be too sharp for you, though father, for I am determined to
marry nobody but Adela, [knocks at the cottage door and retires, after calling,
Adela! Adela!]


Enter Adela from the cottage looks surprised at not seeing Edward! AIR --
Adela.
Whither my love! ah! whither art thou gone!
Let not thy absence cloud this happy dawn.
Say -- by thy heart, can falsehood ever be known?
Ah! no, no, I judge it by my own.
The heart he gave with so much care,
Which treasured in my breast I wear;
Still for its master beats alone,
I Am sure the selfish thing's his own.

[Edward appears after the song.] Adela Oh, my dear Edward! I am glad you are
here, I have got a thousand questions to ask you -- is the Lady Elinor de
Courcy arrived yet?


Edw She is not, so all you have to do is, to dress yourself in the clothes I
gave you, and to pass upon father for her.


Adela Egad, and so I will -- I always longed to be a fine lady, but how shall
I manage to behave like one?


Edw Faith, I cannot tell you -- however, it don't signify, any thing will pass
upon father.


Adela But are you sure now Edward, he has not much dignity, if he has, I shall
only be confounded and look foolish; but is he much like a great gentleman?


Edw Ha, ha, ha! heaven bless you, father is no more like a gentleman than I am
--


Adela I am glad of it, for the presence of our great quality folks always
takes my breath away, and though I cough and hem, for an hour, the deuce a word
can I get out.


Edw It Is just the same with me -- though I am a Baron's son, for my part, I
never feel myself so much like a great man, as when I am with the servants -- I
hate talking to my betters.


Adela I am pleased to hear you say so, I was afraid you would have forgot poor
Adela, for the rich lady, de Courcy.


Edw What marry a woman of quality -- oh! I shall be a lost man; I should never
be able to make free with her -- should she use me ever so ill, I could never
venture to scold her.


Adela But when you marry me --


Edw Oh! I love you so much, that I could scold you with the greatest
satisfaction.


Adela But will not marriage --


Edw Never fear Adela, love has hitherto been our constant attendants -- I Will
warrant you he will follow us to church.


Adela Ay, but they say, he has a sad knack of leaving married couples at the
church door.


Edw Psha, love and marriage are better friends then you think for.


Adela Yes, perhaps they are best friends at a distance.


Edw No, no, like true friends, love and marriage must meet together, to
perfect the happiness of both -- Oh! Adela, when I come to the title and
estate, and you are my lady.


Adela Oh, we shall be as happy as the day is long.


Edw Aye, and the night into the bargain.


Adela Then such dancing --


Edw And such tilting and cudgel playing.


Adela And such fine talking and singing --


Edw And then such eating and drinking.


Adela And such fine company, and then. --


DUET -- Adela.
Will great lords and ladies,
Dressed up on gay days,
Come to visit you and I?
Edward. All smiling, bowing,
Great friendship vowing,
While we hold our heads so high.
Adela. But should the fine gentry smoke us,
Lud! how they will joke us;
How they will laugh at silly me.
Edward. Pshaw, we shall be ever
Reckoned vastly clever,
While our pocket's full, do you see.
Adela. Then every day
Edward. New joy shall bring,
Adela. And ever gay
Edward. We'll dance and sing.
Both. Fall lall de rall,
How merry shall we be.
Adela. Of great fortune vaunting,
Low people taunting,
Dignity we must support.
Edward. Among high barons bouncing,
Fine ladies flouncing,
We may chance to go to court,
Adela. Well, fegs, I care not,
Court, though we share not,
If at home we happy be.
Edward, Soon I may be bold
To hope that I shall hold
A little baron on my knee.
Adela. Then every day
Edward. New joy shall bring,
Adela. And ever gay
Edward. We'll dance and sing.
Both, Fall lall de rall,
How merry shall we be.
[Exit Edward and Adela.
SCENE -- A Field. Enter De Courcy and Attendants. De Cour Here let us remain,
till I gain some intelligence of the object of our search, I am sure my sister
and her attendants must have been on board that very ship, which we saw at a
distance in the late storm.


Enter Charles. De Cour Well Charles! what news of my sister?


Charles My lord, I learn that the lady de Courcy is on her road to the Baron
of Oakland's Castle, which is at no great distance.


De Cour And Sir Palamede --


Charles My lord, I am sorry to say he is with her.


De Cour Infamy, and dishonor! but I will pursue her, and avenge the wrongs of
my family; go forward Charles, and procure every intelligence you can gain -- I
shall wait for you within a mile of the Baron's Castle.

[Exit De Courcy and Attendants.
Charles I will, because it is my duty; but would I were in Normandy again,
nothing should induce me to quit it, except my regard for so good a master.

AIR -- Charles.
My native land I bade adieu,
And calmly Friendship's joys resigned;
But ah! how keen my sorrows grew,
When my love I left behind.
Yet should her truth feel no decay,
Should absence prove my charmer kind,
Then shall I not lament the day,
When my love I left behind.
[Exit.
SCENE -- The inside of Maud's Cottage. Enter Lord William, Lady Elinor, and
Cicely. L. Eli Well! Palamede, I will frankly own to you, that the account, I
hear of the Baron of Oakland's son, is far from pleasing me; and though I dare
not disobey my father, yet I will do every thing in my power to delay the
marriage --


Cice In short, Si,r my lady agrees to my scheme of visiting the castle as Lady
Elinor's Attendant till she h^ars further from the Baron, her father.


L. Will Transporting tidings!


TRIO -- Lord William, Cicely and Lady Elinor.
Against the shaft of cruel fate,
Why cannot virtue prove a charm,
And of her blind misguided hate,
Capricious Destiny disarm?
Yet who engaged in Virtue's cause,
To tread her paths would fear confess,
And on the road reluctant pause,
Because it leads not to success.
[Exit.
END OF ACT FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE -- An Apartment in the Castle. Enter Hugo and Robert. Hugo Well Robert!


Rob Make yourself perfectly easy, friend Hugo, every thing shall be in perfect
order to receive Lady Elinor.


Hugo Aye, I hope so, for the honor of the family; It is near three score
years since I was first a servant in Oakland Castle, and have seen three
possessions of it; I have come down from father to son, with the rest of the
old furniture.


Rob And a fine tough piece of English Oak you are.


Hugo I remember the death of Edmund Ironside and the restoration of Canute; I
remember the Harolds and Hardy Canute, and the good King Edward the Confessor;
and I remember the good Baron, who now haunts the old Tower.


Rob Hush! no more of that.


Hugo Ah Robert, if you were old enough to remember what I can.


Rob I am just as well pleased as it is.


Hugo We shall have music and dancing enough at the wedding, I hope Robert --
for the honor of Lord Edward.


Rob Yes, yes, when a man is desperate to attack matrimony, the more noise and
bustle the better; like trumpets in a battle, it drowns reflection and prevents
cowardice.


Hugo Are all the pikes and javelins burnished up, and the armoury put in
order, and the large stag's horns in the hall dusted?


Rob Horns are most ominous wedding decorations -- No, no, friend Hugo, I have
ordered the horns to be taken down.


Hugo Bless my soul! why, I remember 'em in the family these fifty years.


Rob For which reason, the young lady ought not to see them.


Hugo Then is the Lady Elinor very beauteous Robert?


Rob Why do you ask Hugo, do you admire beauty yet?


Hugo Oh yes, Robert! I never could yet behold a beauteous woman without
admiration; the setting sun may surely cheer my sight though it cannot warm my
heart.

[Exit.
Rob I hope Adela has got her fine clothes on, to pass for Lady Elinor -- O!
here she comes!


Enter Adela, elegantly dressed from a door in the back scene. Adela Well, here
I am at last ready dressed, to pass for a fine lady; but how long shall I
remain so?


Rob Why, you are now in the high road to success.


Adela Aye: but there is so many turnings and windings that one is never sure
of being right,


Rob What! Madam with such a guide as Merit.


Adela Yes, Merit is often apt to lead one a stray; -- Oh dear! I do think the
old Baron is coming -- hey, O no! he is'nt -- O! I wish the meeting was over.


Rob You have no idea, how much you look like a woman of quality! --


Adela Indeed?


Rob Nature certainly intended you for a fine Lady.


Adela Then indeed show as very much mistaken; for I never in all my life could
tell a lie, without blushing; so I am sure I shall never do for a fine lady.


Rob But I hope you have your lesson by heart.


Adela O ay, let me see, I am come over from Normandy, from my friends, and
arrived here to day, did not I, Sir?


Rob You did ma'am.


Adela And anxious to pay my respects to the Baron of Oakland, left my servants
on the road?


Rob Yes ma'am.


Adela O! but there is one material circumstance I have forgot, I don't know who
my father is.


Rob That may happen in the best regulated families; however, I Will tell you --
your father is the Baron de Courcy of Normandy, a great favorite of our good
King William, and you will remember, that the King wrote to your father,
recommending this marriage.


Adela Well, I Will endeavor to recollect if I can, but you know it is not very
strange, I should forget what never happened.


Rob Well madam! I will go and acquaint my lady of your arrival -- and pray be
careful in what you say.


Adela You may depend on it Sir, I Will not speak truth if I can possibly help
it. [Exit Robert.] These gay trappings hang very much in my way, I shall make a
sad fine lady I fear; I wish I could fancy myself in my every day clothes
again, when I think where I am and on what occasion, I wonder at my own
confidence! Nothing but love could have inspired it, and to gain my dear
Edward, I would attempt a thousand times as much!

AIR -- Adela.
Be mine, tender passion, soother of care,
Life's choicest blessing, shield from despair;
Do not deceive me, ah! never leave me,
Still may my bosom thy power declare.
In vain thy influence fools may revile,
Constancy ever gains thy smile.
And of their destiny can those complain;
Whose falsehood dares thy laws profane?
Resolved I brave all danger, to every fear a stranger;
Thy sweet rewards, oh, Love to gain.
Then let me combat not in vain;
But in my triumph share,
Thy smiles, for which I bravely dare.
O! here he comes, ah! its all over -- I shall never be able to get through:


Enter Baron and Robert. Bar Ah! there she is sure enough -- she seems very
pretty, what a fine eye she has. [Aside to Robert.]


Adela My courage fails me -- 'twill never do I find! -- Aside,]


Bar Her coming so suddenly is so cursed unlucky, I don't know what to say to
her, I have not got my speech in my pocket; she turns her back upon me. I
believe she is very proud -- [Aside to Robert.]


Adela Ay, now he is laughing at my aukwardness -- I wish he^d speak first,
[Aside.]


Bar Well, come if I must speak, here goes -- My lady, the joy! -- I say my
lady the joy! -- that is joy my lady creates happiness -- and is -- is -- joy
my lady -- which joy I say my lady is -- I hope your Ladyship is pretty well.


Adela Yes, pure well, I humbly thank your lordship -- O lord! I am glad it is
over, the first word is a great matter, [Aside.]


Bar She Is wondrous, condescending, Robert, considering her high blood, [Aside
to Robert,] -- Well my lady, as you have been in such a hurry as to leave your
servants on the road, and only to come here on a hop, as a body may say; I hope
your ladyship will have the goodness, to excuse all faults.


Adela O yes, my lord, I Will excuse all your faults with a good deal of pleasure.


Bar All my faults, aye, she has found me out already, [Aside.] -- Why to be
sure my lady, we all have faults; but if one is of a good family, you know my
lady, it does'nt so much signify.


Adela O! to be sure not, for though some people are a little awkward and
bashful before company, yet I don't think they are a bit the worse for that.


Bar No, no -- that is a hit at me -- [Aside.]


Adela For you know my lord, if one is not used to strange company, one's very
apt to look like a fool --


Bar Ye -- e -- s so one is my lady -- yes she means me, [Aside,] but come my
lady, let us talk of something else; how does the lord, your father, I respect a
man of his great family.


Adela Ay my lord, a great family indeed?


Bar Oh, she is proud enough of her high blood, though, [Aside] well my lady! no
offense, but I fancy I may venture to say, my family is equal to his!


Adela Why, I thought Edward told me, he was his only child, [Aside] indeed my
lord!


Bar Aye, indeed my lady; -- now my blood is up, I can talk to her, [Aside] and
give me leave to assure your ladyship, whatever notions you have formed of a
great family, you will not be disappointed.


Adela Ha! ha! ha!


Bar Ha! ha! ha! [mimicks her aside,] What the devil does she mean?


Adela I declare your lordship makes me laugh, ha! ha! ha!


Bar Yes I see I do, but I think your ladyship need not be so polite as to tell
me so.


Adela Nay, now your lordship looks angry.


Bar Have'nt I reason! what did your ladyship mean by affronting me, in telling
me of your fathers great family!


Adela Why so he has, there are eleven of us, boys and girls.


Bar [Surprized] Hey, what?


Adela [Aside] O what have I said!


Bar [Aside] O! I suppose this is some quality joke, and that is the reason I
don't understand it.


Enter Edward. Bar Come here sirrah, there is the Lady Elinor de Courcy! go and
talk to her, bid her welcome; and do you hear, don't be bashful, and dishonor
your family; but attack her with your whole stock of impudence.


Edw ^ bashful! no I thank you, we people of fashion know what is what. [Dancing
up to Adela.] Tol. de roll. ^am prodigiously happy to see your ladyship; --
hope you left all friends in Normandy well, all right and tight, had good
weather, and a good ship, no sea sickness; even we people of fashion are
subject to it sometimes, as well, as well as other people -- an't we father --
hey!


Bar Why, the boy's assurance astonishes me -- oh! he has touched her hand and
caught it of her.


Adela [Whispers to Edward.]


Edw [Aside to Adela,] Never mind I Will bring you off with the old fellow -- ha!
ha! ha! a monstrous good joke indeed, very well faith, very well, ha! ha! ha!


Adela Ha! ha! ha!


Bar [Looks surprised and then laughs heartily.] Ha! ha! ha!


Edw My dear father: Lady Elinor tells me she has joked a little with you, as
we people o fashion do without meaning any thing -- ha! ha! ha!


Bar Aye we people of fashion do, ha! ha! ha! I beg your ladyship woud'nt think
of it.


Edw Zounds, father don't be bashful -- [To Adela.] why don't you bounce a
little as I do.


Bar Well my lady, I am now going to my great hall, where I Will receive you in
form, and I believe I shall trouble your ladyship with a bit of a speech on the
occasion, come my lady -- no, no, you must not go before me -- I am a baron you
know, consider my dignity!

[Exit.
Edw I say Robert, I think we shall be too cunning for old dignity, though:

[Exit.
SCENE -- A view near the Castle. Enter Lord William and Lady Elinor. L. Will We
are at length arrived at Oakland Castle, continue your disguise madam, but a
little longer.


L. Eli And do you Palamede, recommend disguise, you who pretend to be a lover?

AIR -- Lady Elinor.
Hush, hush; such counsels do not give,
A lover's name profaning;
And can her heart deceit advise,
Where mighty love is reigning?
Dissimulation's path you have trod
Too often to go astray,
And whilst to me, you point the road,
Your footsteps mark the way.

Enter Cicely. Cice Oh! madam here comes the old Baron, but pray think of
something melancholy, or you will certainly laugh; nature and art have made him
such a strange animal, that he seems only to be laughed at; but here he is!


L. Will And is this the representation of our family, degrading thought! but I
must dissemble [Aside.]


Enter the Baron. Bar [To Cicely] So you are an attendant on lady Elinor de
Courcy, hey! but who is that [pointing to Lady Elinor.]


Cice Oh! that is my lady's own waiting woman, and a very great favorite of my
lady's Sir, -- I assure you.


Bar She must be a great favorite of every body's for she is a monstrous pretty
girl; and pray who is that gentleman, is he a favorite of your ladyship's?
[pointing to Lord William.]


Cice O no! that is -- that is Sir Palamede the Baron's Jester.


L. Will A curious character she has assigned me, but I must carry it on, [Aside]


Bar Why, jesting is a very pleasant employment to be sure, though not a very
profitable one. -- I should think -- hark'ye friend, don't you sometimes get a
bone cracked?


L. Will You are mistaken, my lord, we jesters are privileged people; we
anatomize vice and folly.


Bar Ay, that is you cut up people by way of amusement.


L. Will Improvement my lord -- satire well applied, is the medicine of the mind
--


Bar That may be, but I don't take physic, so you may spare your trouble; and
so the baron pays you for jesting, hey? that is one way of enjoying a jest, at
his own expense; but I should think now, so good-natured as the world is, that
he might contrive to get laughed at, Gratis.


L. Will Your lordship finds it so, I have no doubt, now as a specimen.

AIR -- Lord William.
Though time has from your lordship's face
Made free to steal each youthful grace,
Yet why should you despair?
Old busts often please the connoisseurs,
So folks of taste, perhaps like yours,
And that removes your care.
It Is true that silly girls believe
In joys that youth alone can give,
But why should you despair?
It Is folly governs youth, you know,
And so far young you soon may grow,
So that removes your care.
Whatever your faults, in person, mind,
(However gross) you chance to find,
Yet why should you despair?
Of flattery you must buy advice,
You're rich enough to pay the price,
So that removes your care.

Bar Ah! that is another hit at me, but, I dare not resent it, [Aside] well, but
if you are attendants on the lady Elinor de Courcy, where have you been all
this while?


Cice Oh! Sir, we have left my lady behind on the road.


Bar Your lady has left you behind you mean -- why she is here in the castle. --


L. Will Indeed!


Bar Yes, indeed, Mr. Jest-hunter, and, I am going to give her ladyship
audience in my Great Hall -- and if we want any body to laugh at -- we'll send
for you -- there, I hit him I think.

[Exit.
L. Eli What can he mean -- give me your advice, Palamede.


Cice Ah, madam! you forgot that Sir Palamede is a lover, and consequently
advice is a commodity he does'nt deal in; but if you will take my opinion,
ma'am?


L. Will Well?


Cice It is plain some imposter has assumed your ladyship's name, for what
purpose we must endeavor to find out; therefore suppose we continue our
disguise, wait on the mock lady Elinor, overturn her with respect and confound
her with courtesy --


L. Will Admirable! --


Enter Lewis with letters, which he delivers to Lord William. Lew Sir, the
messenger is returned and brought these letters -- Aye, madam, your shadow is
here before you, find --


L. Eli Hush! not a word, I charge you; from whom are those letters? [Aside to
Lewis.]


Lew That Is what I want to know, I wish you would ask Sir Palamede, the
question?


L. Will Lady Elinor, every moment furnishes additiona^ reasons for requesting
you will be guided by Cicely's advice.

[Exit with Lady Elinor.
Lew Ah! Cicely, there they go, a pair of as true turtles as ever bill'd -- Oh!
what a fine thing mutual love is if you would but let us follow their example,
and fall in love with me in a strange place, now! --


Cice Oh! you may spare your rhetoric -- I promise you. I prize my liberty too
much to be talked out of it.

AIR -- Cicely.
What blessed hours, untainted by sorrow,
Does the maiden prove,
Who knows not love,
So merri'y she sings through the day;
"Dull sorrow shall threaten in vain,
"The delight of heart to restrain,
While from Cupid free,
Blessed in Liberty,
"Not a sigh she blends with the strain."
As she gaily carols along,
Let me join sweet Freedom's song,
O! may my heart
Ever bear a part,
In the envied jocund lay,
While merry the happy maid,
So blithely sings through the day.
[Exit.
SCENE -- An Apartment in the Castle. Enter Edward. Edw Where the duece is
Adela? if we can but get married before she is discovered -- but, why is she
absent? she for whose sake Oakland Castle resounds with jollity, till the old
walls crack to their foundations.

AIR -- Edward.
Now all in preparation,
For the nuptial celebration,
Each maiden on the occasion,
Feels her heart in palpitation;
Now a blush, and now a sigh,
Trembling too, she knows not why,
While every lad with expectation,
Finds his heart beats high.

Enter Adela hastily. Adela Ah! it is all over, there is an end of our scheme.


Edw How!


Adela I knew how it would happen.


Edw Did you, I wish then you had told me so before!


Adela Well, it is all a scheme of your own.


Edw Mine! why you know it was your scheme.


Adela Why did not you first propose it?


Edw Yes, because I was sure you first thought of it.


Adela Why, did I ever leave my spinning wheel for fine clothes? why did I quit
my father's cottage.!


Edw Because I got you a better situation to be sure -- you will not deny that I
sent you to a relation's house in Suffex, six months ago, where you lived like
a lady, and had nothing to learn, to read all the day along.


Adela So much the worse, improving the mind as they call it, only serves to
make one lazy; in my father's cottage, industry took up all our time, Wealth
never came near our door.


Edw If he had, you would have been glad to have asked him in.


Adela No Sir! there Innocence, and Happiness were our guests.


Edw 'Twas lucky they did not take up much room, or the house woud'nt have been
big enough to hold 'em -- I fancy all the spare corners were occupied by birds
and beasts.


Adela Well, I own it! we did all sleep under one roof; the family, the pigs,
and poultry all in harmony, peace and friendship.


Edw Except now and then, when you ate some of your company for dinner.


Adela [Sobbing] Oh! oh!


Edw Why look'ee there, now that is always your way, if one says any thing to
you -- you fall a crying! --


Adela You want to break my heart! -- I see that.


Edw No, I don't --


Adela Yes, you do --


Enter Robert. Rob Why, what signifies quarrelling now my lord.


Edw Why, I don't know Robert, she will quarrel I think.


Adela No, it is you --


Rob Come be friends I say, we are all in a pretty hoble to be sure.


Adela Yes, and I believe you brought us into it.


Edw It Is my opinion he did --


Rob Me!


Adela Yes, I am sure, Edward woud'nt have thought of such a thing, if you
had'nt put it into his head.


Edw No, that I shoud'nt --


Rob You are both very entertaining and so I shall leave you to yourselves.


Edw Nay, but Robert, don't desert us.


Rob Faith I shall make my peace with your father, by falling on my knees, and
asking pardon immediately.


Adela Had'nt we better do the same, Edward? for consider we are all in the
same boat, and if we pull different ways, we shall certainly go to the bottom.


Edw That is very true, -- so Robert you shall be our pilot.


Rob Well! then we must 'een meet the old baron in the hall of audience, at any
rate; [how wonderfully does common interest beget friendship!]

[Exit.
Edw Adela --


Adela Well --


Edw You forget we have been quarrelling, kiss and friends, you know -- [kiss
and exeunt.]

AIR -- Edward.
While swords and shields are clashing,
Archers aiming, cudgels thrashing,
The ale to none denying,
Flaggons far and wide supplying,
With tilters fencing, wrestlers boasting.
Bonfires blazing, oxen roasting;
And all the vassals flock around,
What pleasures now abound!
Now all in preparation,
For the nuptial celebration.

SCENE -- An Antique Hall, a State Chair on several People discovered, Tenants,
Servants, etc. Enter Lord William, Lady Elinor, Cicely, Lewis, Martin and
Charles. Cice Well Charles, how did you come over from Normandy?


Charles Why, Cupid lent me his wings and I hovered over your ship -- come,
come, Cicely you know as well as I, there were more lovers aboard than the
Captain knew of --


Cice I believe I had better ask no more questions.


L. Will Lewis, come hither, you are sure that not a whisper has escaped you;
likely to discover Lady Elinor.


Lew Lord, Sir! I have done nothing but ate and drink since I have been here,
so that I have no time for talking.


L. Will And our honest guide here: [pointin got Martin.]


Lew Oh! no, Sir, he has been so taken up between hunger and wonder -- that he
has not thought of secrets.


L. Eli You are certain the servants know what to do Cicely?


Cice O yes, madam, I have given them all their lessons, and you will see them
receive the mock Lady Elinor, as you could wish, but see, she comes! --


Enter Adela, Edward, and Robert. Cice Now, ma'am, to complete their
astonishment!

SESTETTO.
Lord William, Cicely, and Lady Elinor. By mutual love delighted,
Here Fortune's favorites see,
In Hymen's bonds united,
How happy must they be.
Adela. Whom can they mean? -- not me.
Edward. Nor me.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for me.
Charles. What grace! -- what an air!
Lord William. A face so fair.
Cicely and Charles. Born to command the happy pair.
Lord William, Cicely, and Lady Elinor. By mutual love delighted,
Here Fortune's favorites see, etc.
In Hymen's bonds united,
How happy must they be.
Edward. Egad the joke we'll humor;
Adela. With all my heart, say I.
Edward. Who for success can do more,
Than every chance to try,
Charles. Her courage faulters -- mark her eyes;
See from her cheek the color flies.
Cicely. Poor girl -- I pity her distress,
Yet Mischief says we cannot do less.
Robert to Adela. You tremble -- courage -- come, go on,
Adela. Ah me! my boasted spirit's gone;
Alas! why did thou, hapless maid,
By silly vanity betrayed,
Expose thy peace of mind to gain
A prize, thou never can obtain?

Enter Baron, -- Struts to the Chair, sits down with great ceremony, then
rises, and speaks; his hat in his hand with the speech in it -- which he
occasionally looks at. Bar Hem! my Lady Elinor de Courcy -- now some men in my
situation, would make you a set speech on the occasion; but I shall give your
ladyship a touch off hand; as to your great family, my lady, all the world
knows that -- and as to your beauty -- why that speaks for itself, as a body
may say; -- but I say, when I consider, my lady -- I say -- when I consider how
vain it would be to number your numberless qualifications, and when I think of
your goodness, in -- confering this visit -- I want words -- [Edward takes the
speech slily out of his father's hat:] I say, my Lady Elinor, I want words to
-- [misses the speech.] Hey! egad, I do want words! -- I say -- madam -- my
ladyship I, -- I, -- I, want words! --


Edw If my father had not wanted words madam, he would have attempted to
express, his inexpressible satisfaction -- but it is just as well as it is --
the less that is said, the more there is to guess at.


Enter Servant. Ser My Lord! a gentleman wishes to speak with you immediately.


Bar I come to him. [Exit servant.] I declare my lady! I am quite ashamed that
I --.


Adela O, pray my lord make no apologies! -- you know you want words, and it is
quite time to have done, when one has'nt any more to say --


Bar Aye, my lady, but I had a great deal more to say -- if I had'nt lost my
speech -- [aside and exit.]


Adela [To Edward] I cannot make out the meaning of all this, I don't understand
the jest! --


Edw Nor I, upon my soul -- but I Will try to find it out, for my part I think we
are in a dream.


Adela I am sure it is a very pleasant one, I have'nt the least desire to be
waked from it.


[They Sing part of the last Air again, and exeunt, Lord William, Lady Elinor,
Cicely, Lewis, Charles, Edward, Adel., and Robert.] Lord William, Cicely, Lady
Elinor, Charles, and Robert. Alas! behold the silly maid,
By pride by vanity betrayed:
Expose her peace of mind to gain
A prize she never can obtain.

SCENE -- A Room in the Castle. Enter Baron and De Courcy. Bar This way my
lord, this way, I am glad to see your lordship --


De Cour Hush, my lord! remember that I am here in disguise; I must depend on
your friendship, to conceal me from my sister's attendants, till I am revenged
on Sir Palamede --


Bar And so this Palamede --


De Cour He has long privately loved my sister, but the mean advantage he has
now taken of our confidence in him --


Bar O! hang him, an abusive sneering knave, to pass on me for your lordship's
jester; I wish I had known this --


De Cour But we must be cautious -- [Laughing within.] dark! what noise is that?


Bar Only my vassals carousing, in consequence of this marriage of your
sister's in our family.


De Cour The sounds of festivity, but ill accord with my feelings; a more
retired apartment might suit our purpose better.


Bar Certainly, my lord, private concerns, must give way to public justice.

[Exit.
SCENE -- The Kitchen, Tenants and Servants, discovered at different tables --
at the upper end an Ox, roasting, Cooks, etc. basting it. Robert comes forward
and sings. AIR -- Robert.
Now mighty roast beef is the Englishman's food,
It ennobies our veins, and (...) our blood,
Our soldiers are brave, and our ^ons are good.
Oh! the roast beef of Old England, and Old English roast beef.
Our barons, my boys, are robust, stout and strong,
And keep open house with good cheer all day long,
Which makes their plump tenants rejoice in this song,
Oh! the roast beef, etc.

Enter Lord William, Lady Elinor, and Cicely. Rob Come, my lads and lasses, at
this feast every one must contribute to the common stock of merriment, that is
the only reckoning we have to pay.


FINALE.
Lady Elinor, and Cicely. Love's sweet voice to Hymen speaking
Breathing through the dulcet flute;
List^ning joy the accents seeking,
Bids complaining Care be mute.
CHORUS. High above dull Sorrow's level,
Now the tide of joy display;
Love and Hymen bid us revel,
Bid us hail this happy day.
Lord William. Let the vine's enlivening treasure
Rising kiss the goblet's brim,
Till we see exulting pleasure,
On the smiling surface swim.
CHORUS. High above dull Sorrow's level,
Now the generous tide display;
It Is gay Bacchus bid us revel,
Bids us hail this happy day.
Cicely. While the merry bells resounding,
Shall in pleasure's chorus chime,
From the trembling floor rebounding,
Let the varied dance beat time.
CHORUS. High above dull Sorrow's level,
Now the tide of joy display,
Love and Hymen bid us revel,
Bid us hail this happy day.

END OF ACT SECOND.
ACT III.
SCENE -- A Room in the Castle. Enter De Courcy and Charles. De Courcy, YOU are
sure that the soldiers are placed at every avenue to the Castle?


Char My lord, it is impossible Sir Palamede should escape!


De Cour And you say, you observed him this evening?


Char I did, my lord, and notwistanding he appeared to join the general
festivity; yet at times he sighed so piteously, that I could not help saying to
myself, your honor could never find in your heart to kill so brave a gentleman.


De Cour Leave me and be ready at the time appointed -- and shall this slave
boast a virtue to which I am a stranger -- shall his rugged heart feel
compassion for wretched, whilst I unmoved doom to destruction, him! who has
been my Companion! -- my Friend! -- my Brother! -- [Aside,] Poor Palamede, I
will see him and converse with him -- perhaps he is not so guilty as he appears
-- at least let me remember that he is unfortunate!

[Exit.
Char There spoke the generous feelings of de Courcy.

AIR -- Charles.
Wherever true valor can its power display,
There meek-ey'd Pity, anxious still to bless,
With jealous honor holds divided sway,
And from avenging anger shields distress.
Never shall the sword of Honor dare invade
The spell bound spot, where Pity drops a tear;
For where Misfortune casts her sacred shade,
There deepest injury must disappear,

Enter De Courcy and Baron. Bar O, my lord de Courcy, I am glad I have found
you, I have strange news to tell you: only think my lord, when I thought my
vassals had retired fatigued, and gone dutifully drunk to bed, the whole
village is up and scouring their old helmets and armor; I am sure there is
mischief in the wind when these rascals are so industrious.


De Cour Compose yourself my lord, you seem quite alarmed! --


Bar Alarmed my lord! why, though I am naturally as brave as a lion; yet I do not
like to be taken thus by surprise; it is that which alarms me -- and Sir
Palamede I am sure is at the bottom of this.


De Cour Perhaps then he has heard of my arrival, and finding himself
discovered, means to oppose force by force.


Bar You are right my lord, he has been sending and receiving letters and
messages all night in a continual ebb and flow of mischief.


De Cour God's Death, can he descend so low as to mislead the rabble into revolt --
the traitor shall perish -- but where is my sister?


Bar I don't know my lord, but here comes my son, I dare say he will tell you.


De Cour Do not discover me yet, even to him.


Bar Why my lord, as he is shortly to be related to your lordship, I cannot see
that it signifies -- but it shall be as you please; harkee sirrah! come here,
where is lady Elinor?


Enter Edward half drunk. Edw In her own room, I took her a cup of wine just
now -- but the dear creature preferred ale: she seems prodigiously fond of ale.


De Cour Who! Lady Elinor, Sir?


Edw Yes Sir, Lady Elinor, my wife that is to be; what have you to say to that?
Sir!


De Cour Pardon me Sir, -- but are you assured of the lady's affections?


Bar Aye sirrah, are you sure that she is fond of you.


Edw Fond of me, ha! ha! ha! dammee look at me!


De Cour I believe she was once attached to another, one Sir Palamede.


Edw I believe not friend, and my reason for thinking so, is that the dear
little wench never saw Sir Palamede in all her life.


De Cour Sir, when you name that lady, you should remember the respect due to
her family.


Edw [Snaps his finger] That for her family -- she is a bud of beauty, which I
have gathered to wear next my heart, and the devil may take the rest of the
family-tree for me, here she comes in faith --


Enter Adela. Edw Ah! my dear lady Elinor --


De Cour Astonishment! -- this must be some plot of Palamede's, [Aside.]


Bar Why, my lord, your sister does not seem to know you. -- ah, this is
another quality joke, now I Will be sworn.


De Cour He is deceived too! [Aside.]


Bar Why, my lord, I think there is a very strong family likeness between you.


De Cour I perceive my lord, you are imposed on, but you shall soon be avenged.

[Exit.
Bar How imposed on! O, he means they have been joking on me, -- ay but he was
serious; -- egad, I believe I should be angry, -- but then if I should be in
the wrong; -- I Will even go after him and ask whether I ought to be in a passion
or not.

[Exit.
Adela Why, I say Edward, the Lady Elinor's attendants did call me their lady
for the jok's sake; yet it must soon be out that I am myself.


Edw That Is not unlikely.


Adela And if Lady Elinor should be as handsome, as we heard, and your father
should be very pressing --


Edw Then you think I should desert you! -- hah.


Adela Your deserting me would then be called by another name, for fine folks
have fine names for bad actions, to make them seem like good ones.


Edw Why, look'ye. my dear Adela, -- I was always a blundering fellow at a fine
speech; [ecod I am like my father for that,] but if I thought my being a
nobleman would make me love you a jot the less, deuce take me if I had not
rather remain a ploughman all my life, -- now do you believe me?


Adela I do.

AIR -- Adela.
Love from the heart, all its danger concealing,
Reason they say, the fond spell can remove;
But bliss kindly stealing,
Still the delusion so sweet may I prove.
For should you betray me, your falsehood perceiving,
Too well do I love you, the peril to shun:
So if you must cheat me, still further deceiving;
Oh! blinded by hope, to the last leads me on.

SCENE -- The Sea at the back of the stage and a light house, -- a part of the
Tower is seen, the cellar door by the second wing; -- a little further, a
flight of stairs leading to a door, -- stage lights down. Enter Lady Elinor
solus. Why, did I not insist on Sir Palamed eexplaining this mystery? -- [She
retires up the stage.]


Enter Lord William, Welcome, thrice welcome, ye scenes which remind me of
happier days; -- every step I take -- every object of remembrance, warms me
with new incitements to assert my birthright, -- [Lady Elinor comes forward,]
How Lady Elinor!


L. Eli O Palamede! for heaven's sake, why this mystery?


L. Will Spare me the explanation of what is yet improper for you to know; --
show me esteem by confiding in my honor, -- he who is beloved by you, cannot
act unworthily.


L. Eli I am uneasy only on your account, -- therefore do not flatter me, or
keep me longer in suspense!


L. Will To night is the Crisis of my fate, and tomorrow's sun shall dispel the
cloud of mystery in which it is involved.


DUET -- Lord William and Lady Elinor.
Lady Elinor. Dangers unknown impending,
Doubt multiplies my fears,
Lord William. Laurels my steps attending,
Shall spring from beauty's tears.
Lady Elinor, Thus in suspense to leave thee,
Lord William. Think thou, I can deceive thee?
Lady Elinor. -- To leave thee.
Lord William. -- To leave thee!
Both. Say, will thou still prove true?
Yes, I will still prove true.
And must we bid adieu?
[Exit Lady Elinor,
L. Will Cruel concealment, yet it must be so, one only have I trusted in this
castle and he is here.


Enter Hugo, sword on. Hugo Ah! my dear young master, what pleasure does your
old servant feel, in seeing you once more in your native land! Heaven help us,
what strange events have happened, since the good baron your father quitted
England. -- I long to hear your adventures in France.


L. Will It is a long story my friend.


Hugo So much the better, -- I like long stories, -- I often tell long stories
myself, -- remembrance forms the old man's banquet, and let the viands be ever
so ordinary, memory cooks them to his liking.


L. Will Hugo this is not time for words, I must support my claim to the honors
of my ancestors and this hour, --


Hugo What my lord?


L. Will Hear me! I have written to an old and allied friend of my father's, a
powerful nobleman, and near the king's person, he has assured me of my
sovereign's favor, -- and I expect hourly letters from the king, acknowledging
me Baron of Oakland.


Hugo Well my lord!


L. Will In the mean time my zealous friend. has advised me to surprise the
castle without delay, to man all resistance to the king's commands.


Hugo Surprise the Castle! why my lord, I Will fight as long as I can, [draws his
sword.] but here are only two of us.


L. Will Good old man! I shall not need your assistance, a guard of an hundred
chosen troops sent by the good Lord Hubert, entered the village in the dusk of
the evening; -- the news of my return is received by the vassels with
transport, and they are this momemt arming in my cause.


Hugo Then, why do we stay here, I Will go and get on my armor?


L. Will It is not yet time; -- the tolling of the Curfew will give me notice
when all is ready: but tell me Hugo, was not my father's armor kept in an
apartment in that Tower?


Hugo Yes, my lord in that very apartment over the wine cellar.


L. Will And has the armor ever been removed from thence?


Hugo Never! I Will answer for that, -- the room has been shut up these ten years
past to my knowledge; I have still preserv^d my key to the door which leads to
it through the long gallery,


L. Will Give time, [Hugo gives a key,] now let us be gone.


Hugo Excuse me my lord, I Will follow you to battle; but not into that apartment.


L. Will Why not?


Hugo Ah, my lord I tremble at the thoughts of it, no living soul has entered
that room for these ten years, -- voices have been heard and lights seen, -- in
short it is haunted, and though I loved your worthy father when he was alive --
I, -- I, -- I, [light is seen at a window in the Tower.]


L. Will By heaven's a light appears through the casement at this moment.


Hugo And so there does, my dear master don't be rash.


L. Will Hark! I hear a noise from the Tower, wait for me here, [draws] and
beware your fears do not betray you, [goes up the steps and unlocks the door
and exit.]


Hugo My lord, -- my dear lord William don't leave me alone! -- he is gone! --
oh that cursed Haunted Chamber! I cannot stay near it -- I, -- I, find the only
means of perserving my courage is to carry it along with me.

[Exit.
Enter Baron. Why, sure that was old Hugo, yes and with his sword drawn, oh,
he is in the plot! -- O lord! O lord! there is the spirit playing his
illumination tricks in the Haunted Chamber; -- Oh, how I long to attack this
old rogue Hugo, because I am sure I could beat him; -- aye, but then I dare not
venture alone, valor with me is of a companiable nature and don't like
solitude; -- My courage is something like the vine, to produce good fruit it
must be well supported; -- hey, sure I hear somebody coming out of my
wine-cellar! -- egad, I Will step aside, I may make some discoveries here.

[Retires,
Enter Robert and Martin from the Cellar door. Rob Well my boy, now I have made
you free of our cellar.


Mar [Half drunk] Give me your hand, give me your hand, Master Robert, I Will
live and die with you, of all inventions that ever were thought of, there is
none to my mind like good eating and drinking.


Rob And for that, Martin, I Will match all Kent, I know the privilege of a
diligent butler too well to suffer my master to taste wine till I have approved
of it.


Bar [Aside] Oh! the villian


Mar That Is right, that is right, give me your hand again; O Master Robert! what
a happy dog you are to have the command of such a wine cellar.


Rob Ay, Martin, there I sit, absolute monarch of all the prostrate bottles.


Bar [Aside] Mighty well! -- but I Will be even with you rascals. [Exit into the
Cellar,]


Enter Servant. Rob Well, can you find friend Lewis, in the garden?


Ser No master Robert.


Rob He has certainly lost his way, let us go in search of him, Martin?


Mar Aye, Master Robert, do you go one way and I Will go the other.


Rob And to prevent accidents I Will lock the cellar door for the present, we'll
soon return and finish the evening. [Locks the door and Exit with Servant.]

[Exit Martin.
SCENE -- A Room in the Castle. Enter Lady Elinor and Cicely. L. Eli And so the
mock Lady Elinor is coming, Cicely? -- Yet how can I trifle thus? While
Palamede's fate is in suspense.

AIR -- Lady Elinor.
Dread parent of despair,
Thou tyrant of my mind,
Who lingering seem to spair,
To point the worst behind.
At once complete my woe,
Display thy ills in store,
Ah! quickly strike the blow!
It Is all that I implore.

Cice Ah madam! it must be a sad thing to be of a good family, thank heaven! I
who have no noble blood in my veins have the dearest of all privileges, that of
choosing a husband for myself.

AIR -- Cicely.
From high birth and all its fetters,
My kind stars my lot remove;
I shall envy not my betters,
Give me but the youth I love.
Love's the riches of the poor,
A prize that wealth can never procure;
My rich mistress fain would be
Just as poor as Cicely.
From high birth, etc.

Enter Adela and Robert. Adela These waiting maids pester me to death with
questions, here they are again, --


Cice [Aside to Lady Elinor,] Now madam, to throw her off her gaurd, endeavor
to provoke her and gratify your curiosity.


L. Eli Why, I should like it, but she looks as if she could beat me; -- pray
madam would your ladyship please to go to bed?


Adela No, my ladyship does not please to go to bed.


Rob No, her ladyship does not please to go to bed.


L. Eli It is my duty to wait on your ladyship.


Adela Well. wait in another room then.


Rob Aye, wait in another room.


L. Eli Pray my lady forgive me.


Adela No, I will not forgive you! -- I cannot hear it [Aside] begone! I
discharge you my service.


DUET -- Elinor and Adela.
Adela. Begone! I discharge you! away from my sight!
In my presence appear never after this night.
Lady Elinor. Your ladyship's orders with grief I obey;
Yet, e're I depart, a few words may I say?
Adela. I Will try to keep my passion under,
And treat the flirt with silent scorn.
Lady Elinor. You're too poor to move my rage.
Adela. Prithee now this wrath assuage.
Lady Elinor. How the saucy creature stares.
Adela. Tell me, madam, why these airs.
Both. Though pride and folly should intrude,
They cannot good breeding pain;
Their silly jests, so bold and rude,
Raise laughter and disdain.
Of rank and education,
What wretched imitation;
Contempt must sure befall you,
You vain -- what shall I call you?
Though at scolding so alert,
I fancy now she is really hurt.
[Exit Adela, Robert, Lady Elinor and Cicely.
SCENE -- A Chamber in the Tower, folding Doors in the back Scene, and arch
leading to another Apartment through which enter Lord William. L. Will Now to the
object of my search, [opens the doors and discovers his fathers armor brings
forward the sword and shield] kind fortune I thank thee! -- sacred to the
defense of a just cause, the shield of the father shall protect his son,
fighting for the rights of an illustrious family.

AIR -- Lord William.
Spirit of my sainted sire,
With success my soul inspire,
Deeds of glory done by thee
In mem'ry's mirror now I see.
Let the great examples raise
Valor's purest, brightest blaze,
Till the prowess of my arm
The eye of fickle Conquest charm,
And same shall, when the battle's won,
Declare that I am all thy son.
Spirit of my sainted sire,
With success my soul inspire.
The inspiration now I feel,
The ardent glow of patriot zeal,
Brighter prospects now arise,
The voice of Conquest rends the skies.
[Exit and shuts the folding doors after him.
Rob Well Lewis! since we have met with you at last, I Will give you a specimen
of English Hospitallity, we have plenty of liquor in the cellar underneath, and
egad we'll make a night of it.


Lew That Is right master Robert, and I love good eating and drinking, so I Will
drink with you if it is only to show you I like your company.


Mar But you have'nt told me yet about this Haunted Tower.


Lew Well, I declare I Am glad of it for your sake, for I am sure you must be
dry after telling such a long story.


Rob Come my boys, lend me a hand, [They bring in a table with wine and ale,
and three three-legg'd floos. Robert sits at the head of the table, Martin and
Lewis on each side.]


Lew What have we got here?


Rob Some of the best wine in Christendom, my lad; aye, and some of the best
ale too, which to me, is the best of all liquors; -- the scurvy old knave, my
master, who I dare say is a-bed and a sleep, little thinks the honor we are
doing to his cellar.


Lewis and Martin Ha! ha! ha!


Rob Now for it my boys, here is to ye!


CATCH -- Robert, etc. etc.
As now we are met, a jolly set,
A fig for sack or sherry;
Our ale we'll drink,
And our cans we'll clink,
And we'll be wondrous merry
Merry, my hearts -- merry, my boys,
We'll sing with a hey down derry,
The baron himself knows no such joys,
We are so wondrous merry.

Rob Come, drink about, [sings] "And we'll be wondrous merry."


L. Will [Behind, imitates Robert.] "And we'll be wondrous merry."


Rob Hey day! what is that?


Lew That, oh! that is an echo, I suppose.


Rob An echo! I never observed one here, I --


Mar O Master Robert! is'nt this the chamber you said was haunted?


Lew Egad then, its haunted by a jolly spirit -- so here is to the ghost! --
[sings] "And we'll be wondrous merry."


L. Will [Behind, in Lewis's voice] "And we'll be wondrous merry," [a noise
underneath the stage.]


Rob What think ye now?


Lew Why, I think there is a damned noise in the cellar, [The trap door that
Robert had pointed to is thrown open and knocks down the table, which they had
placed on it, and the Baron appears coming through it.


Bar Gentlemen, your most obedient, pray don't let me disturb you, pray go on,
my butler here, sets you a good example; so pray make free with my property, --
upon my life this is a very pretty Chamber to be haunted; the ghost has an
excellent choice, but I never knew that your troubled spirits were, such
consummers of ale and wine before. [a knocking at door,] pray who is that? is
it any friend or yours gentlemen.


Mar Yes, please your worshipful honor, it is only Hubert with the supper.


Bar O! Hubert with the supper, is it? desire him to walk in [the Baron opens
the door. Enter Hubert with some beef and bread.] Come in Hubert, here are none
but friends, O never mind me, come put the supper on the table. [Hubert puts it
on the table] And now gentlemen sit down and eat heartily.


Lew I am much obliged to your honor, but I am not hungry now.


Rob If but your honor would but hear me.


Bar O! with a great deal of pleasure, honest Robert, I was but ill situated in
the cellar to hear that catch you sung just now; -- rogues! rascals! robbers!
whose only sign of fear is, you cannot bear your own consciences, so you are
afraid of spirits; where is the echo, you conjured up just now?


Rob Indeed! me lord, we heard an echo.


Bar Did you? well, sing again then, and let me hear it, I Will show you a
pattern of resolution you rapscallions.


Rob Now mark my lord, [sings] "And we'll be wondrous merry."


L. Will [Behind in Robert's voice] "And we'll be wondrous merry."


Bar [Alarm'd] Egad, but its an odd sort of an echo.


Lew Suppose your honor was to speak to it, perhaps it would answer you
civilly.


Bar O! I dare say 'twill have a proper respect for my dignity, -- what are you
ghost or spirit?


L. Will [In Baron's voice.] "Ghost or spirit."


Bar [Very much frighten'd] O lord! O lord! -- why! -- why! don't some of you
speak to me? -- what -- what, -- are you afraid of? -- Robert, what makes you
look so pale? -- for my part -- I! -- I! -- I don't believe in apparitions, do
you friend? [to Lewis.]


Hugo [Behind] Lord William, my dear master Lord William!


Rob Hark my lord! there is a voice.


Bar Oh! I am a lost man, -- but -- why, -- do you all tre-m-b-le so! [a bell
tolls] O lord! there is the Curfew going at this hour.


A Trumpet is heard at a distance, Lord William throws open the doors and walks
with great solemnity in his father's armor, and exit. The trumpet is heard
till he is quite off. The Baron etc. retire very much frightened. Bar O, dear
me it is the old Baron's ghost! I have seen him wear that shield and helmet a
thousand times.


Lew [During this speech of the Baron's, creeps round, as looking after Lord
William.] O! my lord here is more miracles! the spirit has met some armed men
and they are all fighting, -- that is right, -- that is right; -- well done my
boys -- dammee they have killed the ghost, huzza.


All Huzza, -- huzza! --


Bar Egad, that is rare news, come lets go and see what its all about, I Will lead
the way, do you follow me, -- hey -- no Robert, you shall go first; -- no, --
no, -- stop, come back -- we'll all go together, and then we can take care of
one another -- [drums and trumpets heard.]

[They exeunt very much alarmed.
SCENE -- An Apartment in the Castle, drums and trumpets without. Enter Edward
and Adela [Edward with a sword and shield.] Adela O Edward! I am frightened to
death! it was an unlucky day for us when I turned fine lady and nothing but
unlucky days have we had ever since.


Edw Lucky or unlucky, -- I fancy there is an end of 'em now, bad as the days
were, I wish they were to come over again.


Enter Baron, [with his sword drawn, and some old armor aukwardly put on. Bar
O dear! O dear, they are all at it.


Edw What! what are they at?


Bar Why, fighting, O my Lady Elinor! why don't you order your soldiers to fall
on? -- O how I hate a man that will not fight.


Adela What, is any body killed my lord!


Bar Killed, why we shall all be killed, men, women and children.


Enter Lady Elinor finely dressed. L. Eli For shame my lord! why do you stand
idle here? your soldiers call on you to head 'em, -- where is my brother?


Bar Your brother, why what signifies your brother, why they are thirty
thousand strong.


L. Eli I mean the Lord de Courcy.

[Exit.
Bar The Lord de Courcy, -- why an't you --


Adela O, no indeed my lord, I am not, -- I am quite sick of passing for a fine
lady.


Enter Servant. Ser My lord, you must come immediately, they are forcing the
castle gates.

[Exit.
Bar Forcing the castle gates, O lord I shall die of a fright! and never live
to be killed.

[Exit Baron, Edward and Adela.
SCENE -- Changes to the Hall, after alarms of drums and trumpets. Enter Edward
and Adela. Edw They have gained the Citadel, and we shall be put to the sword.


Enter De Courcy, Lord William and Knights. De Cour Once more my noble friend,
I congratulate you on your success.


Enter Lady Elinor, Cicely and Charles. L. Eli My brother!


De Cour My father contracted you in marriage with the young Baron of Oakland;
-- I present him to you, I deemed him my enemy till I knew him, it is now my
pride to call him my friend.


L. Will This is a more valuable present my lord, than the life you gave me,
when overpowered by your soldiers in the garden you, still thought me your
enemy.


Enter the Baron between two armed Men. Bar O dear! spare my life, and I Will
agree to any terms.


Adela [To Lord William.] then Sir, begging your pardon for my boldness, I
suppose you are the ghost we heard of?


Bar Yes, and you I suppose are the sham Lady Elinor, we have heard of; egad,
now I find how things are, I have reason to be in a passion.


L. Will You Sir, [to Baron] have a right to an explanation, I scorn to owe my
title to force; I am confirmed by my sovereign in the dignity and estates of my
father: -- be assured however, that I shall be ambitious to prove myself your
friend.


Bar And that is an ambition I shall be very glad to gratify you in.


L. Will [to Edward and Adela] As for this young couple, I hope I shall have the
satisfaction of adding to their store of Hymen's comforts.


Ewd. I -- Thank you my lord, -- I begin to be much less inclined to Nobility
after the bustle I have seen tonight, and I Am fain to comforts myself with the
old remark, -- "that a title cannot bestow happiness."


Adela Yes, but I can though there is a title for which I Would give up to all
others, it is the wife of my Edward.


L. Eli My fluttering heart cannot express the joy it feels at your triumph.
[to Lord William.]


L. Will A truimph crowned by the possession of that heart which now approves it.


FINALE.
The banished ills of heretofore
At happy distance viewing;
Of the past we'll think no more,
While future bliss pursuing.
When engaged in Pleasure's chase,
Never look behind you;
Back if you should turn your face,
Misfortune's dust may blind you.
Lord William, and Lady Elinor. Here let the titled wedded pair,
A lesson take from humble life;
Nor in the lady and the lord,
Forget the husband and the wife.
Never shall the example us reprove,
Whose proudest boast shall be our love.
SESTETTO.
The present hour is ever ready,
To assume a smiling face;
If to wisdom's councels steady,
Pleasure's precepts you embrace.
Edward. Though no more I am a lord,
Give my love but this reward,
Rank and title I forego.
Adela. No, my Edward, say not so.
CHORUS.
The banished ills, etc.

FINIS.

