THE STATE of the WAR, AND THE NECESSITY OF AN Augmentation.

THE PRESENT STATE OF THE WAR, AND THE NECESSITY OF AN Augmentation, CONSIDERED.

LONDON: Printed, and sold by J. Morphew near Stationers Hall. 1708.

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following Essay has endeavored to draw into one continued
Scheme the whole State of the present War, and the Methods that appear to him
the most proper for bringing it to a happy Conclusion.

After having considered that the French are the constant and most dangerous
Enemies to the British Nation, and that the Danger from them is now greater
than ever, and will still increase till their present Union with Spain be
broken, he sets forth the several Advantages which this Union has already given
France, and taken from Great Britain, in relation to the West Indies, the
Woollen Manufacture, the Trade of the Levant, and the Naval Power of the Two
Nations.

He shows how these Advantages will still rise higher after a Peace,
notwithstanding our present Conquests, with new Additions, should be confirmed
to us; as well because the Monarchy of Spain would not be weakened by such
Concessions, as because no Guarantee could be found sufficient to secure them
to us. For which Reasons he lays it down as a fixed Rule, That no Peace is to be
made without an entire Disunion of the French and Spanish Monarchies.

That this may be brought about he endeavors to prove from the Progress we
have already made toward it, and the Successes we have purchased in the
present War, which are very considerable if well pursued, but of no effect if
we acquiesce in them.

In order to complete this Disunion in which we have gone so far, he would not
have us rely upon exhausting the French Treasury, attempts on the Spanish
Indies, Descents on France, but chiefly upon out-numbring them in Troops,
France being already drained of her best Supplies, and the Confederates Masters
of much greater Forces for Multitude and Strength, both in Men and Horse, and
provided with Generals of greater Fame and Abilities.

He then considers the wrong Measures we have hitherto taken in making too
small Levies after a successful Campaign, in Regulating their number by that of
the Enemies Forces, and Hiring them of our Confederates; showing at the same
time the Inconveniences we suffer from such hired Troops, and several
Advantages we might receive from Employing those of our own Nation.

He further (...) this Augmentation of our Forces, to (...) the keeping up a
Standing Body of (...) times of Peace, to enable us to make an Impression on
the Enemy in the present Posture of the War, and to secure our selves against a
Prince, who is now at the Head of a powerful Army, and has not yet declared
himself.

In the last place, he answers by several Considerations those two Popular
Objections, That we furnish more toward the War than the rest of the Allies,
and that we are not able to contribute more than we do already.

These are the most material Heads of the following Essay, in which there are
many other subordinate Reflections that naturally grow out of so copious a
Subject.

THE PRESENT STATE OF THE WAR, AND THE NECESSITY OF AN Augmentation CONSIDERED.
THE French are certainly the most implacable, and the most dangerous Enemies of
the British Nation. Their Form of Government, their Religion, their Jealousy of
the British Power, as well as their Prosecutions of Commerce, and Pursuits of
Universal Monarchy, will fix them for ever in their Animosities and Aversions
toward us, and make them catch at all Opportunities of subverting our
Constitution, destroying our Religion, ruining our Trade, and sinking the
Figure which we make among the Nations of Europe: Not to mention the particular
Ties of Honor that lie on their present King to impose on us a Prince, who
must prove fatal to our Country if he ever reigns over us.

As we are thus in a natural State of War, if I may so call it, with the French
Nation; it is our Misfortune, that they are not only the most inveterate, but
most formidable of our Enemies; and have the greatest Power, as well as the
strongest Inclination to ruin us. No other State equals them in the Force of
their Fleets and Armies, in the Nearness and Convenience of their Situation,
and in the Number of Friends and Wellwishers, which, it is to be feared, they
have among us.

For these Reasons our Wars with France have always affected us in our most
tender Interests, and concerned us more than those we have had with any other
Nation; but I may venture to say, This Kingdom was never yet engaged in a War
of so great consequence, as that which now lies upon our hands. Our All is at
stake, and irretrievably lost, if we fail of Success. At other times, if a War
ended in a dishonorable Peace, or with equal Loss, we could comfort our selves
with the hopes of a more favorable Juncture, that might set the Balance
right, or turn it to our Advantage. We had still the prospect of forming the
same Alliance, or perhaps strengthening it with new Confederacies, and by that
means of trying our Fortune a second time, in case the Injustice or Ambition of
the Enemy forced us into the Field. At present, if we make a Drawn Game of it,
or procure but Moderate advantages, we are in a Condition which every British
Heart must tremble at the thought of. There are no second Trials, no Wars in
reserve, no new Schemes of Alliance to which we can have recourse. Should the
French King be able to bear down such an united Force as now makes head against
him, at a time when Spain affords him no greater Assistance; what will he do
when the Trade of the Levant lies at his Mercy; when the whole Kingdom of Spain
is supplied with his Manufactures, and the Wealth of the Indies flows into his
Coffers; and what is yet worse, when this additional Strength must arise in all
its particulars from a proportionable Decay in the States that now make War
upon him? It is no wonder therefore that our late King of Glorious Memory, who
by the Confession of his greatest Enemies, was a Prince that perfectly
understood the Interests of Europe, should in his last Speech recommend to his
Parliament the declaring War against France in those memorable Words: You have
yet an Opportunity, by God's blessing, to secure to you and your Posterity the
quiet Enjoyment of your Religion and Liberties, if you are not wanting to your
selves, but will exert the ancient Vigor of the English Nation: but I tell you
plainly, my Opinion is, if you do not lay hold on this occasion, you have no
reason to hope for another.

We have already a dreadful Proof of the Increase of Power that accrues to
France from its Conjunction with Spain. So expensive a War as that which the
French Monarchy has been carrying on in so many and so remote Parts at once,
must long since have drained and exhausted all its Substance, had there not
been several secret Springs, that swelled their Treasury from time to time, in
proportion as the War has sunk it. The King's Coffers have been often reduced
to the lowest Ebb, but have still been seasonably refreshed by frequent and
unexpected Supplies from the Spanish America. We hear indeed of the Arrival but
of very few Ships from those Parts; but as in every Vessel there is Stowage for
immense Treasures, when the Cargo is pure Bullion, or Merchandise of as great a
Value; so we find by Experience they have had such prodigious Sums of Money
conveyed to them by these secret Channels, that they have been enabled to pay
more numerous Armies, than they ever had on foot before; and that at a time
when their Trade fails in all its other Branches, and is distressed by all the
Arts and Contrivances of their neighboring Nations. During the last four
Years, by a modest Computation there have been brought into Breast above six
Millions of Pounds Sterling in Bullion. What then shall we suppose would be the
effect of this Correspondence with America, might the Wealth of those Parts
come to them on Squadrons of Men of War, and Fleets of Galeons? If these little
Bycurrents, that creep into the Country by Stealth, have so great a Force, how
shall we stem the whole Torrent, when it breaks in upon us with its full
Violence? And this certainly will be our Case, unless we find a Means to
dissolve the Union between France and Spain. I have dwelt the longer on this
Consideration, because the present War has already furnished us with the
Experiment, and sensibly convinced us of the Increase of Power, which France
has received from its Intercourse with the Spanish West Indies.

As there are many who look upon every thing which they don't actually see and
feel as bare Probability and Speculation, I shall only touch on those other
Reasons of which we have already also had some Experience, for our preventing
this Coalition of Interests and Designs in the two Monarchies.

The Woollen Manufacture is the British Strength, the staple Commodity and
proper Growth of our Country; if this fails us, our Trade and Estates must sink
together, and all the Cash of the Nation be consumed on Foreign Merchandise.
The French at present gain very much upon us in this great Article of our
Trade, and since the Accession of the Spanish Monarchy, supply with Cloth of
their own making the very best Mart we had in Europe. And what a melancholy
Prospect have we, if ever a Peace gives them leave to enrich their Manufacture
with Mixtures of Spanish Wool to multiply the Hands employed in it, to improve
themselves in all the Niceties of the Art, and to vend their Wares in those
Places where was the greatest Consumption of our Woollen Works, and the most
considerable Gain for the British Merchant. Notwithstanding our many seasonable
Recruits from Portugal, and our Plantations, we already complain of our want of
Bullion; and must at last be reduced to the greatest Exigencies, if this great
Source be dried up, and our Traffic with Spain continue under its present
Discouragement.

The Trade of the Levant must likewise flourish or decay in our Hands, as we
are Friends or Enemies of the Spanish Monarchy. The late Conquest of Naples
will very little alter the case, though Sicily should follow the Fate of her
Sister Kingdom. The Streight's Mouth is the Key of the Levant, and will be
always in the Possession of those who are Kings of Spain. We may only add, that
the same Causes which streighten the British Commerce, will naturally enlarge
the French; and that the Naval Force of either Nation will thrive or languish
in the same degree as their Commerce gathers or loses Strength. And if so
powerful and populous a Nation as that of France become superior to us by Sea,
our whole is lost, and we are no more a People. The Consideration of so narrow
a Channel betwixt us, of such Numbers of regular Troops on the Enemy's side, of
so small a standing Force on our own, and that too in a Country destitute of
all such Forts and strong Places as might stop the Progress of a victorious
Army, has something in it so terrifying, that one does not care for setting it
in its proper Light. Let it not therefore enter into the Heart of any one that
has the least Zeal for his Religion, or Love of Liberty, that has any regard
either to the Honor or Safety of his Country, or a well Wish for his Friends
or Posterity, to think of a Peace with France, till the Spanish Monarchy be
entirely torn from it, and the House of Bourbon disabled from ever giving the
Law to Europe.

Let us suppose that the French King would grant us the most advantageous Terms
we can desire; without the Separation of the two Monarchies they must
infallibly end in our Destruction. Should he secure to us all our present
Acquisitions; should he add two or three Frontier-Towns to what we have already
in Flanders; should he join the Kingdoms of Sicily and Sardinia to Milan and
Naples; should he leave King Charles in the peaceable Possession of Catalonia;
should he make over to Great Britain the Town and Harbor of Cadis, as well as
that of Gibraltar, and at the same time resign his Conquests in Portugal; it
would all be of no effect toward the common Safety of Europe, while the Bulk
of the Spanish Continent, and the Riches of America remain in the Possession of
the Bourbon Family.

Boccalini when he weighs the States of Europe in his Political Balance, after
having laid France in one Scale, throws Spain into the other, which wanted but
very little of being a Counter-poise. The Spaniards upon this, says he, begun
to promise themselves the Honor of the Balance; reckoning that if Spain of it
self weighed so well, they could not fail of Success when the several Parts of
the Monarchy were lump'd in the same Scale. Their Surprise was very great when
upon the throwing in of Naples they saw the Scale rise, and was greater still
when they found that Milan and Flanders had the same effect. The truth of it
is, these parts of the Spanish Monarchy are rather for Ornament than Strength.
They furnish out Vice-royalties for the Grandees, and Posts of Honor for the
Noble Families; but in a time of War are Encumbrances to the main Body of the
Kingdom, and leave it naked and exposed by the great number of Hands they draw
from it to their Defense. Should we therefore continue in the Possession of
what we have already made our selves Masters, with such Additions as have been
mentioned, we should have little more than the Excrescencies of the Spanish
Monarchy. The Strength of it will still join it self to France, and grow the
closer to it by its Disunion from the rest. And in this case the Advantages
which must arise to that People from their intimate Alliance with the remaining
part of the Spanish Dominions, would in a very few Years not only repair all
the Damages they have sustained in the present War, but fill the Kingdom with
more Riches than it has yet had in its most flourishing Periods.

The French King has often entered on several expensive Projects, on purpose
to dissipate the Wealth that is continually gathering in his Coffers in times
of Peace. He has employed immense Sums on Architecture, Gardening,
Waterworks, Painting, Statuary, and the like, to distribute his Treasures
among his People, as well as to humor his Pleasures and his Ambition: But if
he once engrosses the Commerce of the Spanish Indies, whatever Quantities of
Gold and Silver stagnate in his private Coffers, there will be still enough to
carry on the Circulation among his Subjects. By this means in a short space of
time he may heap up greater Wealth than all the Princes of Europe joined
together; and in the present Constitution of the World, Wealth and Power are
but different Names for the same thing. Let us therefore suppose that after
eight or ten Years of Peace, he has a mind to infringe any of his Treaties, or
invade a neighboring State; to revive the Pretensions of Spain upon Portugal,
or attempt the taking those Places which were granted us for our Security; what
Resistance, what Opposition can we make to so formidable an Enemy? Should the
same Alliance rise against him that is now in War with him, what could we hope
for from it, at a time when the States engaged in it will be comparatively
weakened, and the Enemy who is now able to keep them at a stand, will have
received so many new Accessions of Strength.

But I think it is not to be imagined that in such a Conjuncture as we here
suppose, the same Confederates, or any other of equal Force could be prevailed
upon to join their Arms and endeavor at the pulling down so exorbitant a
Power. Some might be bought into his Interests by Money, others drawn over by
Fear, and those that are liable to neither of these Impressions, might not
think their own Interest so much concerned as in the present War; or if any
appeared in a disposition to enter into such a Confederacy, they might be
crushed separately before they could concert Measures for their mutual Defense.

The keeping together of the present Alliance can be ascribed to nothing else
but the clear and evident Conviction which every Member of it is under, that if
it should once break without having had its effect, they can never hope for
another Opportunity of reuniting, or of prevailing by all the joint Efforts of
such an Union. Let us therefore agree on this as a fixed Rule, and an inviolable
Maxim, never to lay down our Arms against France, till we have utterly
disjoined her from the Spanish Monarchy. Let this be the first Step of a
public Treaty, the Basis of a general Peace.

Had the present War indeed run against us, and all our Attacks upon the Enemy
been vain, it might look like a degree of Frenzy, or a Mixture of Obstinacy and
Despair, to be determined on so impracticable an Undertaking. But on the
contrary, we have already done a great part of our Work, and are come within
view of the End that we have been so long driving at. We remain victorious in
all the Seats of War. In Flanders we have got into our hands several open
Countries, rich Towns, and fortified Places. We have driven the Enemy out of
all his Alliances, dispossessed him of his Strong Holds, and ruined his Allies in
Germany. We have not only recovered what the Beginning of the War had taken
from us, but possessed ourselves of the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy of Milan,
and an Avenue of France in Italy. The Spanish War has given us a Haven for our
Ships, and the most populous and wealthy Province of that Kingdom. In short, we
have taken all the outlying parts of the Spanish Monarchy, and made Impressions
upon the very Heart of it. We have beaten the French from all their advanced
Posts in Europe, and driven them into their last Entrenchments. One vigorous
Push on all sides, one general Assault will force the Enemy to cry out for
Quarter, and surrender themselves at discretion. Another Blenheim or Ramillies
will make the Confederates Masters of their own Terms, and Arbitrators of a
Peace.

But notwithstanding the Advantages already gained are very considerable if we
pursue them, they will be of no effect unless we improve them toward the
carrying of our main point. The Enemy staggers; if you follow your Blow, he
falls at your Feet; but if you allow him respite, he will recover his Strength,
and come upon you with greater Fury. We have given him several repeated Wounds
that have enfeebl'd him, and brought him low; but they are such as time will
heal, unless you take advantage from his present Weakness to redouble your
Attacks upon him. It was a celebrated part in Caesar's Character, and what
comes home to our present purpose, that he thought nothing at all was done,
while any thing remained undone. In short, we have been tugging a great while
against the Stream, and have almost weathered our point; a Stretch or two more
will do the Work; but if instead of that we slacken our Arms, and drop our
Oars, we shall be hurried back in a moment to the place from whence we first
set out.

After having seen the Neecessity of an entire Separation of the Kingdoms of
France and Spain, our Subject naturally leads us into the Consideration of the
most proper means for effecting it.

We have a great while flattered ourselves with the prospect of reducing France
to our own Terms by the want of Money among the People, and the Exigencies of
the public Treasury; but have been still disappointed by the great Sums
imported from America, and the many new Expedients which the Court has found
out for its Relief. A long consumptive War is more likely to break the Grand
Alliance, than disable France from maintaining sufficient Armies to oppose it.
An arbitrary Government will never want Money; so long as the People have it;
and so active a People will always have it, whilst they can send what
Merchandises they please to Mexico and Peru. The French since their Alliance
with Spain keep thirty Ships in constant Motion between the Western Ports of
France and the South Seas of America. The King himself is an Adventurer in this
Traffic, and besides the Share that he receives out of the Gains of his
Subjects, has immense Sums that come directly from it into his own Hands.

We may further consider, that the French since their abandoning Bavaria and
Italy have very much retrenched the Expense of the War, and lay out among
themselves all the Money that is consumed in it.

Many are of Opinion, that the most probable way of bringing France to Reason
would be by the making an Attempt upon the Spanish West Indies, and by that
means to cut off all Communication with this great Source of Riches, or turn
the Current of it into our own Country. This I must confess carries so
promising an appearance, that I would by no means discourage the Attempt: But
at the same time I think it should be a collateral Project, rather than our
principal Design. Such an Undertaking (if well concerted, and put into good
Hands) would be of infinite Advantage to the Common Cause: but certainly an
Enterprise that carries in it the Fate of Europe, should not turn upon the
Uncertainty of Winds and Waves, and be liable to all the Accidents that may
befall a Naval Expedition.

Others there are that have long deceived themselves with the hopes of an
Insurrection in France, and are therefore for laying out all our Strength on a
Descent. These, I think, do not enough consider the natural Love which the
gross of Mankind have for the Constitution of their Fathers. A Man that is not
enlightened by Travail or Reflection, grows as fond of Arbitrary Power, to which
he has been used from his Infancy, as of cold Climates or barren Countries, in
which he has been born and bred. Besides, there is a kind of sluggish
Resignation, as well as poorness and degeneracy of Spirit, in a state of
Slavery, that we meet with but very few who will be at the pains or danger of
recovering themselves out of it; as we find in History Instances of Persons who
after their Prisons have been flung open, and their Fetters struck off, have
chosen rather to languish in their Dungeons, than stake their miserable Lives
and Fortunes upon the Success of a Revolution. I need not instance the general
Fate of Descents, the Difficulty of supplying Men and Provisions by Sea against
an Enemy that has both at hand, and without which it is impossible to secure
those Conquests that are often made in the first Onsets of an Invasion. For
these and other Reasons I can never approve the nursing up Commotions and
Insurrections in the Enemy's Country, which for want of the necessary Support
are likely to end in the Massacre of our Friends and the Ruin of their Families.

The only means therefore for bringing France to our Conditions, and what
appears to me, in all human probability, a sure and infallible Expedient, is to
throw in Multitudes upon 'em, and overpower 'em with Numbers, Would the
Confederacy exert it self as much to annoy the Enemy, as they themselves for
their Defense, we might bear them down with the weight of our Armies, and in
one Summer overset the whole Power of France.

The French Monarchy is already exhausted of its best and bravest Subjects. The
Flower of the Nation is consumed in its Wars: The Strength of their Armies
consists at present of such as have saved themselves by flight from some or
other of the victorious Confederates; and the only proper Persons to recruit
them are but the Refuse of those who have been already picked out for the
Service. Marshall de Vauban, though infinitely partial in his Calculations of
the Power of France, reckons that the Number of its Inhabitants was two
Millions less at the Peace of Ryswick, than in the beginning of the War that
was there concluded: And though that War continued Nine Years, and this has as
yet lasted but Six, yet considering that their Armies are more strong and
numerous; that there has been much more Action in the present War; and that
their Losses sustained in it have been very extraordinary; we may, by a
moderate Computation, suppose that the present War has not been less
prejudicial than the foregoing one in the Ravage which it has made aamong the
People. There is in France so great a disproportion between the number of Males
and Females; and among the former, between those who are capable of bearing
Arms, and such as are too young, sickly, or decrepit for the Service; and at
the same time such vast numbers of Ecclesiastics, Secular and Religious, who
live upon the Labors of others, that when the several Trades and Professions
are supplied, you will find most of those that are proper for War absolutely
necessary for filling up the laborious part of Life, and carrying on the
Underwork of the Nation. They have already contributed all their superfluous
Hands, and every new Levy they make must be at the Expense of their Farms and
Vineyards, their Manufactures and Commerce.

On the contrary, the Grand Alliance have innumerable Sources of Recruits, not
only in Britain and Ireland, the United Provinces, and Flanders; but in all the
populous parts of Germany that have little Trade or Manufactures, in proportion
to the number of their Inhabitants. We may add, that the French have only
Switzerland, besides their own Country, to recruit in; and we know the
Difficulties they meet with in getting thence a single Regiment: Whereas the
Allies have not only the same Ressource, but may be supplied for Money from
Denmark and other Neutral States. In short, the Confederates may bring to the
Field what Forces they please, if they will be at the charge of 'em: but
France, let her Wealth be what it will, must content herself with the Product
of her own Country.

The French are still in greater streights for Supplies of Horse than Men. The
Breed of their Country is neither so good nor numerous as what are to be found
in most of the Countries of the Allies. They had last Summer about Threescore
Thousand in their several Armies, and could not perhaps bring into the Field
30000 more, if they were disposed to make such an Augmentation.

The French Horse are not only few, but weak in comparison of ours. Their
Cavalry in the Battle of Blenheim could not sustain the Shock of the British
Horse. For this reason our late way of attacking their Troops Sword in Hand is
very much to the Advantage of our Nation, as our Men are more robust, and our
Horses of a stronger Make than the French; and in such Attacks it is the Weight
of the Forces, supposing equal Courage and Conduct, that will always carry it.
The English Strength turned very much to account in our Wars against the French
of old, when we used to gall them with our long Bows, at a greater Distance
than they could shoot their Arrows: This Advantage we lost upon the Invention
of Firearms, but by the present Method our Strength as well as Bravery may
again be of use to us in the Day of Battle.

We have very great Encouragement to send what Numbers we are able into the
Field, because our Generals at present are such as are likely to make the best
use of them, without throwing them away on any Rash Attempts or ill-concerted
Projects. The Confederate Armies have the Happiness of being commanded by
Persons who are esteemed the greatest Leaders of the present Age, and are
perhaps equal to any that have preceded them. There is a sort of Resemblance in
their Characters; A particular Sedateness in their Conversation and Behavior,
that qualifies them for Council, with a great Intrepidity and Resolution that
fits them for Action. They are all of them Men of concealed Fire, that does not
break out with Noise and Heat in the ordinary Circumstances of Life; but shows
it self sufficiently in all great Enterprises that require it. It Is true, the
General upon the Rhine has not had the same Occasions as the others to
signalize himself; but if we consider the great Vigilance, Activity and
Courage, with the consummate Prudence, and the nice sense of Honor which
appears in that Prince's Character, we have great reason to hope, that as he
purchased the first Success in the present War, by forcing into the Service of
the Confederates an Army that was raised against them in the very Heart of the
Empire, he will give one of the finishing Strokes to it, and help to conclude
the great Work which he so happily begun. The sudden Check that he gave to the
French Army the last Campaign, and the good Order he established in that of the
Germans, look like happy Presages of what we may expect from his Conduct. I
shall not pretend to give any Character of the Generals on the Enemy's side;
but I think we may say this, that in the Eyes of their own Nation they are
inferior to several that have formerly commanded the French Armies. If then we
have greater Numbers than the French, and at the same time better Generals, it
must be our own Fault if we will not reap the Fruit of such Advantages.

It would be loss of Time to explain any further our Superiority to the Enemy
in Numbers of Men and Horse. We see plainly that we have the Means in our
Hands, and that nothing but the Application of them is wanting. Let us only
consider what use the Enemy would make of the Advantage we have mentioned if it
fell on their side; and is it not very strange that we shou d not be as active
and industrious for our Security, as they would certainly be for our
Destruction? But before we consider more distinctly the Method we ought to take
in the Prosecution of the War, under this particular View, let us reflect a
little upon those we have already taken in the Course of it for these six Years
past.

The Allies after a successful Summer are too apt upon the Strength of it to
neglect their Preparations for the ensuing Campaign, while the French leave no
Art nor Stratagem untried to fill up the empty Spaces of their Armies, and
swell 'em to an equal Bulk with those of the Confederates. By this means our
Advantage is lost, and the Fate of Europe brought to a second Decision. It is
now become an Observation that we are to expect a very indifferent Year after a
very successful one. Blenheim was followed by a Summer that makes no noise in
the War. Ramillies, Turin, and Barcelona, were the Parents of our last
Campaign. So many dreadful Blows alarmed the Enemy, and raised their whole
Country up in Arms. Had we on our side made proportionable Preparations, the
War by this time had been brought to a happy Issue. If after having gained the
great Victories of Blenheim and Ramillies we had made the same Efforts as we
should have done had we lost them, the Power of France could not have withstood
us.

In the beginning of the Winter we usually get what Intelligence we can of the
Force which the Enemy intends to employ in the Campaigns of the succeeding
Year, and immediately cast about for a sufficient number of Troops to face them
in the Field of Battle. This, I must confess, would be a good Method if we were
engaged in a Defensive War. We might maintain our Ground with an equal Number
of Forces; but our Business is not only to secure what we are already in
Possession of; we are to wrest the whole Spanish Monarchy out of the Hands of
the Enemy; and in order to it, to work our Way into the Heart of his Country by
dint of Arms. We should therefore put forth all our Strength, and without
having any Eye to his Preparations, make the greatest Push that we are able on
our own side. We are told that the Enemy at present thinks of raising
Threescore Thousand Men for the next Summer; if we regulate our Levies in that
View, we do nothing; let us perform our utmost, as they do, and we shall
overwhelm 'em with our Multitudes. We have it in our Power at least to be four
times as strong as the French, but if Ten Men are in War with Forty, and the
latter detatch only an equal Number to the Engagement, what Benefit do they
receive from their Superiority?

It seems therefore to be the Business of the Confederates to turn to their
Advantage their apparent Odds in Men and Horse; and by that means to out-number
the Enemy in all Rencounters and Engagements. For the same Reason it must be
for the Interest of the Allies to seek all Opportunities of Battle, because all
Losses on the opposite side are made up with infinitely more Difficulty than on
ours; besides that the French do their Business by lying still, and have no
other Concern in the War than to hold fast what they have already got into
their Hands.

The Miscarriage of the noblest Project that ever was formed in Europe, can be
ascribed to nothing else but our want of Numbers in the several Quarters of the
War. If our Armies on all sides had begun to busy and insult the Enemy, at the
same time that the Forces marched out of Piemont, Toulon had been at present in
the Hands of the Duke of Savoy. But could that Prince ever have imagined that
the French would have been at liberty to detatch whole Armies against him? Or
will it appear credible to Posterity, that in a War carried on by the joint
Force of so many populous and powerful Nations, France could send so great a
part of its Troops to one Seat of the War, without suffering in any of the
rest? Whereas it is well known, that if the Duke of Savoy had continued before
Toulon eight Days longer, he had been attacked by an Army of Sixty Thousand
Men, which was more than double the Number of his own; and yet the Enemy was
strong enough every where else to prevent the Confederates from making any
Impression upon them. However, let us fall into the right Measures, and we may
hope that the Stroke is only deferred. The Duke of Savoy has secured a Passage
into Dauphiny, and if the Allies make such Efforts in all Parts, as we may
reasonably expect from them, that Prince may still make himself Master of the
French Dominions on the other side of the Rhone.

There is another part of our Conduct which may perhaps deserve to be
considered. As soon as we have agreed with the States General upon any
Augmentation of our Forces, we immediately negotiate with some or other of the
German Princes, who are in the same Confederacy, to furnish out our Quota in
Mercenaries. This may be doubly prejudicial to the Alliance; First, as it may
have an ill Influence on the Resolutions of those Princes in the Diet of the
Empire, who may be willing to settle as small a Quota as they can for
themselves, that they may have more Troops to hire out; and in the next place,
as it may hinder them from contributing the whole Quota which they have
settled. This actually happened in the last Campaign, when we are told the
Germans excused themselves for their want of Troops upon the Rhine, as having
already put most of their Forces into the British and Dutch Service. Such an
Excuse, indeed, is very unjust, but it would be better to give them no occasion
of making it; and on such Occasions to consider what Men are apt to do, as well
as what they may do with Reason.

It might therefore be for our Advantage that all the Foreign Troops in the
British Pay should be raised in Neutral Countries. Switzerland in particular,
if timely applied to, might be of great use to us; not only in respect of the
Reinforcements which we might draw from thence, but because such a Draught of
Forces would lessen the Number of those that might otherwise be employed in the
French Service. The Bulk of our Levies should nevertheless be raised in our own
Country, it being impossible for the Neutral States to furnish both the British
and Dutch with a sufficient Number of effective Men; besides that the British
Soldiers will be more at the Disposal of their General, and act with greater
Vigor under the Conduct of one for whom they have so just a Value, and whom
they do not consider only as their Leader, but as their Countryman. We may
likewise suppose that the Soldiers of a Neutral State, who are not animated by
any National Interest, cannot fight for Pay with the same Ardour and Alacrity,
as Men that fight for their Prince and Country, their Wives and Children.

It may likewise be worth while to consider whether the Military Genius of the
English Nation may not fall by degrees, and become inferior to that of our
neighboring States, if it has no occasion to exert it self. Minds that are
altogether set on Trade and Profit, often contract a certain Narrowness of
Temper, and at length become incapable of great and generous Resolutions.
Should the French ever make an unexpected Descent upon us, we might want
Soldiers of our own Growth to rise up in our Defense; and might not have time
to draw a sufficient Number of Troops to our Relief from the remote Corners of
Germany. It is generally said, that if King Charles II. had made War upon
France in the beginning of his Reign, he might have conquered it by the many
Veterans which were scattered up and down this Kingdom, and had been inured to
Service in the Civil Wars. It is to be hoped we shall never have such another
Nursery of Soldiers; but if the present War gives a more Military Turn to all
other Nations of Europe, than to our own, it is to be feared we may lose in
Strength, what we gain in Number. We may apply the same Consideration nearer
home. If all our Levies are made in Scotland or Ireland, may not those two
Parts of the British Monarchy, after the disbanding of the present Army, be too
powerful for the rest, in case of a Revolt, though, God be thanked, we are not in
any danger of one at present. However, as these Considerations don't concern
the more essential part of our Design, it is sufficient have mentioned them.

The sparing of our selves in so important a Conjuncture, when we have but this
single Opportunity left for the preserving every thing that is precious amongst
us, is the worst sort of Management that we can possibly fall into. The good
Husbandry of one Age may intail an endless Expense upon all Posterity. We must
venture the sacrificing a part of our Lives and Fortunes at present, if we will
effectually secure both for the future. The British Kingdom is so well stocked
with People, and so much abounds in Horse, that we have Power enough in our own
Hands, did we make our utmost use of it, to humble France, and in a Campaign or
two to put an end to the War.

There is not a more disagreeable Thought to the People of Great Britain than
that of a standing Army. But if a Peace be made before the Disunion of France
and Spain, there are few, perhaps, that will not think the maintaining a
settled Body of numerous Forces indispensable for the Safety of our Country. We
have it therefore in our Choice to raise such a strong Reinforcement of Troops
as at present may be sufficient in Conjunction with those of the Allies, for
breaking the Strength of the Enemy; or when the Peace is concluded, to keep on
Foot such an Army as will be necessary for preventing his Attempts upon us.

It is to be hoped that those who would be the most zealous against keeping up
a constant Body of Regular Troops after a General Peace, will the most
distinguish themselves for the promoting an Augmentation of those which are now
on Foot; and by that means take care that we shall not stand in need of such an
Expedient.

We are indeed obliged by the present Situation of our Affairs to bring more
Troops into the Field than we have yet done. As the French are retired within
their Lines, and have collected all their Strength into a narrow Compass, we
must have greater Numbers to charge them in their Entrenchments, and force them
to a Battle. We saw the last Campaign that an Army of Fourscore Thousand of the
best Troops in Europe, with the Duke of Marlborough at the Head of them, could
do nothing against an Enemy that were too numerous to be assaulted in their
Camps, or attacked in their Strong Holds.

There is another Consideration which deserves our utmost Attention. We know
very well, that there is a Prince at the Head of a powerful Army, who may give
a turn to the War, in which we are engaged, if he thinks fit to side with
either Party. I cannot presume to guess how far our Ministers may be informed
of his Designs: But unless they have very strong Assurances of his falling in
with the Grand Alliance, or not opposing it; they cannot be too circumspect and
speedy in taking their Precautions against any contrary Resolution. We shall be
unpardonable, if after such an Expense of Blood and Treasure, we leave it in
the power of any single Prince to command a Peace, and make us accept what
Conditions he thinks fit. It is certain, according to the Posture of our
Affairs in the last Campaign, this Prince could have turned the Balance on
either side; but it is to be hoped the Liberties of Europe will not depend any
more on the Determination of one Man's Will. I don't speak this because I think
there is any Appearance of that Prince's uniting himself to France. On the
contrary, as he has an extraordinary Zeal for the Reformed Religion, and great
Sentiments of Honor, I think it is not improbable we should draw him over to
the Confederacy, if we press him to it by proper Motives. His Love for
Religion, and his Sense of Glory, will both have their effect on a Prince who
has already distinguished himself by being a Patron of Protestants, and
Guarantee of the Westphalian Treaty. And if his Interest has any part in his
Actions, the Allies may make him greater Offers than the French King can do in
the present Conjuncture. There are large Extents of Dominion in the forfeited
Principalities of the Empire; doubtful Successions to which the King of Sweden
seems to have very just Pretensions; and at the same time a great Title not yet
disposed of, and a Seat of War on the Moselle, where none of our Generals have
signalized themselves. It would be Presumption to be particular in any
Proposals on such an Occasion; it is enough to have shown in general, that
there are fair Opportunies, of which the Wisdom of the Confederates may make
use.

Common Sense will direct us, when we see so warlike a Prince at the Head of so
great an Army hovering on the Borders of our Confederates, either to obtain his
Friendship, or secure ourselves against the Force of his Arms. We are sure,
whatever numbers of Troops we raise, we shall have no Hands but what will turn
to account. Nay, we are certain, that extraordinary Funds and Augmentations for
one or two Campaigns may spare us the Expense of many Years, and put an end to
Taxes and Levies for a whole Age; whereas a long parcimonious War will drain us
of more Men and Money, and in the end may prove ineffectual.

There is still a great Popular Objection, which will be made to every thing
that can be urged on this Subject. And indeed it is such a one as falls so much
in with the Prejudices and little Passions of the Multitude, that when it is
turned and set off to advantage by ill-designing Men, it throws a Damp on the
public Spirit of the Nation, and gives a check to all generous Resolutions for
its Honor and Safety. In short, we are to be told, that England contributes
much more than any other of the Allies, and that therefore it is not reasonable
she should make any Addition to her present Efforts. If this were true in Fact,
I don't see any tolerable color for such a Conclusion. Supposing among a
Multitude embarked in the same Vessel there are several that in the fury of a
Tempest will rather perish than work for their Preservation; would it not be
Madness in the rest to stand idle, and rather choose to sink together than do
more than comes to their share? Since we are engaged in a Work so absolutely
necessary for our Welfare, the Remisness of our Allies should be an Argument
for us to redouble our Endeavors rather than slacken them. If we must govern
our selves by Example, let us rather imitate the Vigilance and Activity of the
Common Enemy, than the Supineness and Negligence of our Friends.

We have indeed a much greater share in the War than any other part of the
Confederacy. The French King makes at us directly, keeps a King by him to set
over us, and has very lately augmented the Salary of his Court, to let us see
how much he has that Design at heart. Few of the Nations in War with him,
should they ever fall into his hands, would lose their Religion or Form of
Government, or interfere at present with him in matters of Commerce. The Dutch,
who are likely to be the greatest Losers after the Britains, have but little
Trade to the Levant in comparison with ours, have no considerable Plantations
or Commerce in the West Indies, or any Woollen-Manufactures for Spain; not to
mention the strong Barrier they have already purchased between France and their
own Country.

But after all, every Nation in the Confederacy makes the same Complaint, and
fancys itself the greatest Sufferer by the War. Indeed in so common a Pressure,
let the Weight be never so equally distributed, every one will be most sensible
of that part which lies on his own Shoulders. We furnish, without dispute, more
than any other Branch of the Alliance: but the question is, whether others do
not exert themselves in proportion according to their respective Strength. The
Emperor, the King of Prussia, the Elector of Hannover, as well as the States of
Holland and the Duke of Savoy, seem at least to come up to us. The greatest
Powers in Germany are borrowing Money where they can get it, in order to
maintain their stated Quota's, and go thorough their part of the Expense: and f
any of the Circles have been negligent, they have paid for it much more in
their late Contributions, than what would have furnished out their Share in the
common Charges of the War.

There are others who will object the Poverty of the Nation, and the
Difficulties it would find in furnishing greater Supplies to the War than it
does at present. To this we might answer, that if the Nation were really as
poor as this Objection makes it, it should be an Argument for enforcing rather
than diminishing our present Efforts against France. The sinking our Taxes for
a few Years would be only a temporary Relief, and in a little time occasion far
greater Impositions, than those which are now laid upon us. Whereas the
seasonable Expense of part of our Riches, will not only preserve the rest; but
by the right use of them procure vast Additions to our present Stock. It may be
necessary for a Person languishing under an ill Habit of Body to lose several
Ounces of Blood, notwithstanding it will weaken him for a time, in order to put
a new Ferment into the remaining Mass, and draw into it fresh Supplies.

But we can by no means make this Concession, to those who so industriously
publish the Nation's Poverty. Our Country is not only rich, but abounds in
Wealth much more than any other of the same Extent in Europe-France,
notwithstanding the Goodness of its Climate, the Fertility of its Soil, the
Multitude of its Inhabitants, its convenient Harbors, both for the Ocean and
Mediterranean, and its present Correspondence with the West Indies, is not to
compare with Great Britain in this particular. I shall transcribe word for word
the Passage of a late celebrated French Author, which will lay this Matter in
its full light; and leave the Reader to make the counter-part of the Parallel
between the two Nations.

"According to all the Inquiries that I have been able to make during several
Years, in which I have applied my self to this sort of Remarks, I have
observed, that about a Tenth part of the People of this Kingdom are reduced to
Beggary, and are actual Beggars. That among the Nine other parts, Five are not
in a condition to give Alms or Relief to those aforementioned, being very near
reduced themselves to the same miserable Condition. Of the Four other remaining
Parts, Three are very uneasy in their Circumstances, and embarass'd with Debts
and Lawsuits. In the Tenth part, I reckon the Soldiers, Lawyers,
Ecclesiastics, Merchants and substantial Citizens, which cannot make up more
than a Hundred Thousand Families. And I believe I should not be mistaken, if I
should say, that there are not above Ten Thousand of these Families, who are
very much at their ease: and if out of these Ten Thousand we should take the
Men that are employed in Public Business, with their Dependents and Adherents,
as also those whom the King supports by his Bounty, with a few Merchants, the
number of those who remain will be surprisingly little." Dixme Royale.

What a dreadful Account is this of Nineteen Millions of People; for so many
the Author reckons in that Kingdom. How can we see such a Multitude of Souls
cast under so many Subdivisions of Misery, without reflecting on the Absurdity
of a Form of Government that sacrifices the Ease and Happiness of so many
reasonable Beings to the Glory of one of their Fellow Creatures. But this is
not our Affair at present.

If we run over the other Nations of Europe that have any part in the present
War, we shall only pass through so many different Scenes of Poverty. Spain,
Portugal, and Savoy are reduced to great Extremities. Germany is exhausted to
the last degree in many parts of it, and in others plundered of all she had
left. Holland indeed flourishes above the rest in Wealth and Plenty: But if we
consider the infinite Industry and Penuriousness of that People, the Coarseness
of their Food and Raiment, their little Indulgences of Pleasure and Excess, it
is no wonder that notwithstanding they furnish as great Taxes as their
Neighbors, they make a better figure under them. In a Commonwealth there are
not so many overgrown Estates as in Monarchies, the Wealth of the Country is so
equally distributed, that most of the Community are at their Ease, though few
are placed in extraordinary Points of Splendor and Magnificence. But
notwithstanding these Circumcumstances may very much contribute to the seeming
Prosperity of the United Provinces, we know they are indebted many Millions
more than their whole Republic is worth, and if we consider the variety of
Taxes and Impositions they groan under at a time when their private Dissensions
run high, and some of the wealthiest parts of the Government refuse to bear
their share in the public Expense, we shall not think the Condition of that
People so much to be envied as some amongst us would willingly represent it.

Nor is Great Britain only rich as she stands in comparison with other States,
but is really so in her own intrinsic Wealth. She had never more Ships at Sea,
greater quantities of Merchandise in her Warehouses, larger Receipts of
Customs, or more numerous Commodities rising out of her Manufactures than she
has at present. In short, she sits in the midst of a mighty Affluence of all
the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life. If our Silver and Gold diminishes,
our public Credit continues unimpair'd, and if we are in want of Bullion, it
lies in our own power to supply our selves. The old Roman General, when he
heard his Army complain of Thirst, showed 'em the Springs and Rivers that lay
behind the Enemy's Camp. It is our own case: The Rout of a Spanish Army would
make us Masters of the Indies.

If Prince Eugene takes upon him the Command of the Confederate Forces in
Catalonia, and meets with that Support from the Alliance which they are capable
of giving him, we have a fair Prospect of reducing Spain to the entire
Obedience of the House of Austria. The Silesian Fund (to the immortal
Reputation of those generous Patriots who were concerned in it) enabled that
Prince to make a Conquest of Italy, at a time when our Affairs were more
desperate there, than they are at present in the Kingdom of Spain.

When our Parliament has done their utmost, another public spirited Project of
the same nature, which the Common Enemy could not foresee nor prepare against,
might in all probability set King Charles upon the Throne for which he has so
long contended. One pitched Battle would determine the Fate of the Spanish
Continent.

Let us therefore exert the united Strength of our whole Island, and by that
means put a new Life and Spirit into the Confederates, who have their Eyes fixed
upon us, and will abate or increase their Preparations according to the Example
that is set them. We see the Necessity of an Augmentation if we intend to bring
the Enemy to Reason, or rescue our Country from the Miseries that may befall it;
and we find our selves in a condition of making such an Augmentation as, by the
Blessing of God, cannot but prove effectual. If we carry it on vigorously we
shall gain for our selves and our Posterity a long a glorious and a lasting
Peace; but if we neglect so fair an Opportunity, we may be willing to employ
all our Hands, and all our Treasures when it will be too late, and shall be
tormented with one of the most melancholy Reflections of an afflicted Heart,
That it was once in our Power to have made our selves and our Children happy.

FINIS.

