THE SPOILED CHILD; IN TWO ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, SMOKE-ALLEY.

DUBLIN: M,DCC,XCII. PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Little Pickle, Mrs JORDAN. Pickle, Mr INETT. Tagg, Mr R. PALMER. John, Mr
BURTON. Thomas, Mr LIONS.
WOMEN.
Miss Pickle, Mrs HOPKIN. Maria, Miss HEARD. Margery, Mrs BOOTH. Susan,
(Cook-maid) Mrs EDWARD.
THE SPOILED CHILD;
ACT I.
SCENE. -- A Dining Parlour, Enter MISS PICKLE and PICKLE. Pickle. WELL, well,
Sister, have a little patience and these holidays will be over; and the boy
then goes back to school and all will be quiet.


Miss P. Yes, till the next breaking up, no, no, brother, unless he is severely
punished for what he has already done, depend upon it, this vicious humor will
be confirmed into habit, and his follies increase in proportion with his years.


Pick. Now would not any one think to hear you talk, that my son had actually
some vice in him? for my part I own there is something so whimsical in all his
tricks that I cannot in my heart but forgive him, aye and for aught I know love
him the better into the bargain.


Miss P. Yes truly -- because you have never been a sufferer by them -- had you
been rendered rediculous as I have been by his tricks as you call 'em, you
would have been the first to complain and to punish.


Pick. Nay, as to that, he hasn't spared even his father, is there a day passes
I do not break my shins over stumbling blocks he lays in my way? -- why there
is not a door in the house but is armed with a basin of water on top, and left
just a jarr -- so that I cannot walk over my own house without running the
hazard of a shower bath, or being wet through.


Miss P. Aye, no wonder the child's spoiled -- since you will superintend his
education yourself, you indeed.


Pick. Sister, sister -- don't provoke me, at any rate, I have wit enough to
conceal my ignorance -- I don't pretend to write verses and nonsense, as some
folks do.


Miss P. Now would you rail at me for the disposition I was born with? can I
help it if the Gods have made me poetical as the divine bard says.


Pick. Made you Poetical indeed, 'Sblood if you had been born in a street near
a college, or even next door to a day school, I shou'dn't have been surprised;
but damn it madam, what had you to do with poetry and stuff.


Miss P. Provoking ignorance!


Pick. Hav'n't you rendered yourself the sneer of all your acquaintance by your
refined and poetical intercourse with Mr Tagg the author, a fellow that strolls
about the country spouting and acting in every barn he comes to -- and was not
he found concealed in your closet to the utter scandal of my house and the ruin
of your reputation?


Miss P. If you had the smallest spark of taste you would admire the effusions
of Mr Tagg's pen, and be enchanted with his admirable acting as much as I am --
but as to this story it may serve as another sample of my nephew's sweet
disposition, to coin base falsehoods against his aunt's character.


Pick. Do you tell me I cannot educate my own child? and make a Lord Chancellor
of him or an archbishop of Canterbury -- which ever I like? just as I please?


During the last speech Pickle leans on the table which is drawn away by a
string and he falls. Miss P. I Will lay my life that is another trick of that
little mischievous wretch.


Pick. (getting up.) An ungrateful little rascal! to serve me such a trick just
as I had made an Archbishop of Canterbury of him -- but as he cannot be far off
I Will immediately correct him -- here Thomas (going meets Thomas who enters with
table covered two plates, knives, and forks, roasted fowl, castors, butter
boat, etc. -- places table between chairs and Exit.)


Pick. But odso here is dinner -- well I Will defer my resentment till that is over
-- but if I don't remember this trick one while, say my name is not Pickle.
(cuts up the fowl) Sister, this is the first pheasant we have had this season
-- it looks well -- shall I help you? they say anger makes people dry -- mine
has made me hungry I think -- come here is a wing for you, and some of the
breast.


Enter SUSAN, running. Su. O dear Sir! O dear ma'am! my young master ma'am! the
parrot ma'am -- O dear!


Pick. Parrot and young master -- what the deuce does the girl mean!


Miss P. Mean! why as sure as I live that vile boy has been hurting my poor
dear bird.


Su. Hurting ma'am! no ma'am indeed -- besides I Am morally certain it was the
strange cat killed it this morning.


Miss P. How! killed it, say you! but go on let us hear the whole.


Su. Why ma'am the truth is, I did but just step out of the kitchen for a
moment, but in comes my young Master, whips the pheasant, that was roasting for
dinner off the spit, and claps down your ladyship's parrot ready picked and
trussed in its place.


Pick. The parrot! the devil!


Su. I kept basting and basting, and never thought I was basting the parrot --
till just now I found the pheasant and all the parrot's feathers hid in the
kitchen cupboard.


Miss P. O my sweet, my beautiful young bird, I had but just learned it to talk
too.


Pick. You taught it to talk -- it taught you to talk you mean -- I Am sure
'twas old enough -- why 'twas hatched in the hard frost.


Miss P. Well, brother, what excuse now? but run Susan, do you hear take John,
and --

Enter JOHN slowly, and lame, his face bound. O John here is a fine piece of
business!


John. Aye, ma'am sure enough. -- What you have heard I see, business indeed --
the poor thing will never recover.


Miss P. What John, is it a mistake of Susan's, is it still alive? but where?
where is it John?


John. Safe in the stable an it were as sound, a made a hot mash -- would not
touch it -- so crippled, will never have a leg to put on ground again.


Pick. No, I Will swear to that -- for here is one of them. holding it up on the
fork.


Miss P. What does the fool mean? what, what is in the stable? what are you
talking of?


John. Master's favorite mare Daisey, ma'am, poor thing.


Pick. What? how! any thing the matter with Daisey -- would not part with her
for --


John. Aye, aye, quite done up -- will not fetch five pounds at next fair.


Miss P. This dunce's ignorance distracts me -- come along Susan. Exit with
Susan.


Pick. Why what can it be? what the devil ails her.


John. Why Sir, the long and the short of the affair is as how -- he has cut me
all across the face -- mercy I did not lose my eye.


Pick. This cursed fellow will drive me mad, the mare, the mare, you scoundrel
the mare.


John. Yes Sir, the mare -- then too my shins -- Master Salve the surgeon says
I must 'noint 'emwi --


Pick. Plague of your shins you dog, what is the matter with the mare?


John. Why, Sir, as I was coming home this morning over Black Down, what does I
see but young Master tearing over the turf upon Daisey, so I calls to him to
stop, thof I knew your honor had forbid him to ride her -- but what does he
me, but smacks his whip full in my face, and dash over the gate into Stoney
Lane.


Pick. Stoney Lane; well and what?


John. Farmer Flail met 'em, and had but just time to hide himself in the hedge
before down comes mare and Master over a stone heap -- and what is worse -- when
I rated him about it, he snatches up Tom Carter's long whip, and lays me so
over the legs, and before I could catch hold of him he whips out of the stable
and was off like a shot.


Pick. Well, if ever I forgive him this -- no -- I Will send him this moment back
to school -- school! Zounds I Will send him to sea.


Enter MISS PICKLE. Miss P. Well brother, yonder comes your precious child --
he is muttering all the way up stairs to himself some fresh mischief I warrant.


Pick. Aye, here he comes, stand back let us watch him -- though I can never
contain my passion long. ( they retire.)


Enter LITTLE PICKLE with a kite at his back. Little P. Well, so far all goes
on rarely -- dinner must be near ready -- Old Poll will taste well I dare say
-- Parrot and bread sauce, ha, ha, ha! they suppose they are going to have a
nice young pheasant, an old parrot is a greater rarity I Am sure, I cannot help
thinking how devilish tough the drumsticks will be -- a fine piece of work aunt
will make when it is found out, ecod for ought I know, that may be better fun
than the other -- no doubt Sukey will tell and John too about the mare, a parcel
of sneaking fellows, always, tell, tell, tell, I only wish I could catch 'em at
school once -- that is all -- I Would pay 'em well sor't I Would be bound -- O here they
are, and as I live my father and aunt -- to be sure I Am not got into a pretty
scrape now -- I almost wish I was safe back at school again. ( puts down the
kite, they come forward.) O Sir, how do you do? I was just coming to --


Pick. Come, come, no fooling, now how dare you look me in the face after the
mischief you have done?


Little P. Mischief Sir! what mischief have I done?


Pick. This impudence provokes me beyond all, you know the value I set upon
that mare you have spoiled for ever.


Little P. But Sir -- hear me -- indeed I was not so much to blame Sir, not so
very much.


Miss P. Don't aggravate your faults by pretending to excuse them, your father
is too kind to you.


Little P. Dear Sir, I own I was unfortunate, but I heard you often complain
how wild and vicious Daisey was, and so, Sir, sooner than you should suffer, I
was resolved to venture my own neck and try to tame her for you, that is all
Sir; -- and so I was no sooner mounted but off she set -- I could not help that
you know Sir -- and so this misfortune happened -- but indeed Sir --


Pick. Could I be sure this was your motive, that it was merely love and regard
for your old father makes you thus teize and torment him -- perhaps I might be
inclined --


John. Yes, Sir, but 'twas no love and regard for I made him beat me so.


Little P. John, you know, you were to blame -- indeed Sir the truth is John
was scolding me for it, and when I told him as I have told you why I did it,
and that it was to hinder your being hurt, he said that was no business of
mine, and if your neck was broke 'twas no such great matter.


Pick. What! no great matter to have my neck broke.


Little P. No Sir, so he said; and I was vexed to hear him speak so of you --
and I believe I might take up the whip and give him a cut or two on the legs --
it could not hurt him much.


Pick. Well child, I believe I must forgive you and so shall John too -- but I
had forgot poor Poll; what did you roast the parrot for, you young dog you?


Little P. Why Sir, I knew you and my aunt were both so fond of it -- I thought
she would like to see it well dressed -- but dear aunt ( to Miss Pickle) I know you
must be angry with me, and you think with reason.


Miss P. Don't speak to me -- I Am not so weak as your father, whatever you may
fancy.


Little P. But indeed aunt you must hear me, had I not loved you as I do, I
shou'dn't have thus offended you -- but 'twas merely my regard for your
character.


Pick. Character!


John. Character! -- O Lord -- O Lord.


Pick. Get about your business you scoundrel.


Exit John. Little P. Why dear aunt, I had heard that no ladies kept parrots,
or lap dogs, till they were no longer able to keep lovers, and when at school I
told 'em you kept a parrot, the boys said, then you must be a foolish old maid.


Miss P. Indeed! impudent young wretches.


Little P. Yes aunt, and so I resolved you should no longer be thought so --
for I think you're a great deal too handsome for an old maid. ( kisses her hand)


Pick. Come Sister, faith you must forgive him -- no female heart can withstand
that.


Miss P. Brother I can forgive where I see occasion, but though these faults
are thus excused, how will you answer to a charge of scandal and ill nature.


Little P. Ill Nature ma'am -- I Am sure nobody can accuse me of that.


Miss P. How will you justify the report you spread of my being locked up in my
closet with Mr Tagg the author -- can you defend so vile an attempt to injure
my dear reputation.


Pick. What! that too I suppose was from your care of her character -- and so
to hinder your aunt from being thought an old maid; you locked her up in her
closet with this author as he is called?


Little P. Nay indeed dear ma'am -- I beseech you 'twas no such thing -- all I
said was, you were amusing yourself in your closet with a favorite author.


Miss P. I amuse myself, in my closet with a favorite author! worse and worse.


Pick. Sister, have patience -- hear --


Miss P. I am ashamed to see you support your boy in such insolence -- I
indeed! who am scrupulous to a fault -- but no longer will I remain subject to
such impertinence, I quit your house Sir, and you shall quit all claim to my
fortune -- this moment I Will alter my will, and leave my money to a stranger
sooner than to your family. Exit.


Pick. Her money to a stranger! O the three per cents consols -- O the India
Stock -- go child -- fly, throw yourself at your aunt's feet, say any thing to
please her -- I shall run distracted -- O those consols!


Little P. I Am gone Sir, shall I say she may die as soon as she pleases, but
she must not leave her money to a stranger.


Pick. Aye, aye, there is a good boy; say any thing to please her, that will do
very well; say she may die as soon as she pleases, but she must not leave her
money to a stranger.

Exit. Little Pickle Well never man was so tormented. I thought when my poor
dear wife Mrs Pickle died, and left me a disconsolate widower, I had some
chance of being a happy man -- but I know not how it is -- I could bear the
vexations of my wife's bad temper, better than this woman's -- all my married
friends were as miserable as myself, that was some relief, but now -- faith
here she comes, and in a fine humor no doubt.


Enter MISS PICKLE. Miss P. Brother I have given directions for my immediate
departure, and I am now to tell you, I will persist in my design, unless you
this moment adopt the scheme I yesterday laid down for my nephew's amendment.


Pick. Why my dear sister you know there is nothing I would not readily do to
satisfy and appease you, but to abandon my only child and take a beggar's brat
into my arms -- impossible!


Miss P. ( going.) Very well Sir, then I Am gone.


Pick. But Sister stay -- was ever man so used -- how long is this scheme of
yours to last? how long am I to be deprived of him?


Miss P. How long! why till he is brought duly to reflect on his bad behavior,
which nothing will induce him to do sooner than thinking he is no longer your
son, but the child of poor parents -- I yesterday spoke to Margaret our old
nurse, and she fully comprehends the whole affair.


Pick. But why in addition to the quitting my own child, am I to have the
torment of receiving here is -- wont the sending him away be sufficient.


Miss P. Unless the plot's managed my way, I Will have nothing to say to it, but
begone, cannot you tell that his distress at losing his situation, will be
augmented, by seeing it in possession of another? come, come, Brother, a week's
purgatory will reform him, depend on it.


Pick. Why to be sure as you say, it will reform him and as we shall have an
eye upon him all the while, and Margaret was his own nurse-


Miss P. You may be sure she will take care of him. Well since this is settled,
the sooner it is done the better. Thomas! ( Enter Thomas.) send your young
master here.


Exit Thomas. Pick. I see you're finally resolved and no other way will content
you -- well heaven protect my poor child.


Miss P. Brother you are so blinded by your foolish fondness, that you cease to
perceive what is for his benefit, it is happy for you there is a person to
direct you of my superior discernment.


Enter LITTLE PICKLE. Little P. Did you send for me aunt?


Pick. Child come hither, I have a secret to disclose to you, at which you will
be surprs'd.


Little P. A secret Sir!


Miss P. Yes, and one that requires your utmost courage to bear, you are no
longer to consider that person as your father -- he is not so -- Margaret who
nursed you has confessed -- and the thing is sufficiently proved, that you are
not his son but here is -- She exchanged you when an infant for my real nephew,
and her conscience at last compelled her to make the discovery.


Little P. I another person's child? impossible! -- Ah you are only joking with
me now to see whether I love you or not -- but indeed I am yours -- my heart
tells me I am only, only yours. ( to Pickle.)


Pick. You deceive yourself -- there can be no doubt of the truth of Margaret's
account.


Little P. Good heavens! dear Sir don't say so -- I will not believe it -- it
can never be? -- must I then give up all I respect and love to the possession
of another? believe Sir 'tisn't the splendour of riches I repine at quitting,
it is the happiness I never till now felt of calling you father -- aunt.


Pick. Assure yourself of our protection, but no longer can you remain in this
house -- I must not do an injury to my own child -- you belong to others -- to
them you must now go.


Little P. Yet Sir, for an instant hear me -- pity me dear aunt, if yet I dare
to call you so, intercede in my behalf -- heaven! she knows me not. Ah! then
too sure I know I am not your child -- or would that distress, which draws
tears of pity from them, fail to move nature in you -- farewell I must away --
but at least forgive me -- pardon the faults I have committed -- you cannot
sure in pity deny me that --

SONG. -- Tune " Je suis Lindor" ( voice alone.)
Since then I Am doomed this sad reverse to prove,
To quit each object of my infant care,
Torn from an honored Parent's tender love,
And driven the keenest storms of fate to bear.
Ah but forgive me! pitied let me part,
Your frowns too sure would break my sinking heart.
II.
Wherever I go, whatever my lowly state,
Yet grateful memory still shall linger here,
And hap'ly musing over my cruel fate,
You still may greet me with a tender tear.
Ah! then forgive me, etc. etc.
Exeunt.


END OF ACT FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE. -- A Parlour. Enter MISS PICKLE and MARGERY, Margery. AND so as I was
telling your ladyship, poor little master does so take it to heart -- and so
weep and wail, it almost makes me cry to hear him.


Miss P. Well, well, since he begins already to repent his punishment shall be
but short -- but have you brought your boy with you?


Marg. Aye, have I -- poor Tommy -- he came from aboard of ship but now -- and
is so grown and altered -- sure enough he believes every word I have told him
as your honor ordered me -- and I warrant is so sheepish and shamefaced -- O
here comes my master -- he has heard it all already -- Enter PICKLE. but my
lady, shall I fetch my poor Tommy to you? -- he is waiting without.


Pick. What that ill looking young rascal in the hall? he with the jacket and
trowsers?


Marg. Aye, your honor, then you have seen him?


Pick. Seen him! -- aye and felt him too -- the booby met me bolt at the corner
-- run his cursed carrotty poll in my face and has loosened every tooth in my
head I believe.


Marg. Poor lad -- he is a sailor and but awkward as yet and so shy I warrant --
but will you your honor be kind to him --


Pick. Kind to him -- why I Am to pass for his father, a'n't I?


Marg. Aye, I wish your honor had been poor Tommy's father -- but no such luck
for me, as I say to my husband.


Pick. Indeed? -- your husband must be very much oblige to you, and so am I --


Marg. But do, your honor, once let me see my Tommy dressed in his fine smart
Clothes.


Pick. Damme! I don't half like that Tommy.


Miss P. Yes, yes, you shall -- but now go and fetch him here to us -- I should
like much to see him.


Marg. Do you now madam, speak kindly to him, for poor boy he is quite dashed.


Pick. Dashed! -- yes and he has dashed some of my teeth out, plague on him.


Miss P. Now Mr. Pickle I insist upon your observing a proper behavior and
decorum toward this poor lad -- observe the condescension of my deportment --
methinks I feel a strange inclination already in his favor -- perhaps I may
advance him by and by to be my page, shall I brother? -- here he comes -- and I
declare as prepossessing a countenance as I ever beheld.


Enter MARGERY and LITTLE PICKLE, as a Sailor -- red hair. Miss P. Come hither,
child, was there ever such an engaging air.


Marg. Go, Tommy, do as you're bid, that is a good boy, thank his honor for his
goodness to you.


Little P. Be you the old fellow that is just come to be my father?


Pick. ( aside.) Old fellow? -- he is devilish dashed to be sure -- yes I am the
old fellow as you call it -- will you be a good child?


Little P. Aye, but what will you gi' me? -- must I be good for nothing?


Pick. Good for nothing! nay, that I Will swear you are already, well, and how
long have you been come from Sea, eh? how do you like a sailor's life? eh?

SONG. -- Melton Oysters.
LITTLE PICKLE. I am a brisk and sprightly lad,
Just come home from sea, Sir,
Of all the lives I ever led,
A sailor's life for me, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo! yeo, yeo, yeo!
While the boatswain pipes all hands
With a yeo, yeo, yeo, Sir.
What girl but loves the merry tar
That over the Ocean roam, Sir,
In every clime we find a Port
In every Port a home, Sir, Yeo, yeo, etc.
But when our, country's foes are nigh
Each hastens to his gun, Sir,
We make the boasting Frenchman fly,
And bang the haughty don, Sir, Yeo, yeo, etc.
Our foes subdued, once more on shore,
We spend our cash with glee, Sir,
And when all is gone we drown our care,
And out again to sea, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo! yeo, yeo, yeo!
And when all is gone again to Sea,
With a yeo, yeo, yeo, Sir.




Pick. So, this is the way I Am to be entertained in future with forecastle
jokes and tarpaulin songs --


Miss P. Brother, don't speak so harshly to the poor lad -- come to me, my
pretty boy, I Will be your friend.


Little P. Friend! Oh what your my Grandmother -- ( to Miss P.) father mustn't
I call her Granne?


Pick. What, he wants encouragement, Sister, he is found out one relation
however -- this boy's assurance diverts me, I like him --


( aside.) Little P. Granne's mortal cross and frumpish -- la, father! what
makes your mother there so plaguey foul weathered.


Miss P. Mother, indeed!


Pick. O nothing at all, my dear, she is the best humored person in the world
-- go, throw yourself at her feet and ask her blessing -- perhaps she may "gi'
ye something."


( mimics.) Little P. A blessing! -- I shall not be much richer for that, neither,
perhaps she may give me half a crown -- I Will throw myself at her feet and ask
for a guinea -- ( knetls) dear granne, gi' me that pretty picture


( catches at it.) Miss P. Stand off, wretch -- am I to be robbed as well as
insulted.


Marg. Fie! child! learn to behave yourself better.


Little P. Behave myself -- learn you to behave yourself -- I shou'dn't have
thought of you indeed -- get you gone -- I Am a young gemman now, and mustn't
remember old acquaintances -- get out, I say.


drives her off and follows. Pick. Well, Sister -- this plan of yours I hope
succeeds to your satisfaction -- he will make a mighty pretty Page, sister, what
an engaging air he has, Sister, -- this is some revenge for her treatment of my
poor boy.


Aside. Miss P. I perceive this to be all a contrivance -- and this boy is
taught to insult me thus -- but ere long, you may repent this unparalleled
treatment of unprotected innocence. Exit.


Pick. What she means to go off with her lover the player man, I suppose -- but
I Will watch her and her consols too -- and if I catch him in my house, it shall
be his last appearance this Season -- Exit.


Re-enter LITTLE PICKLE. Little P. There they go -- ha, ha, ha! my scheme has
gone on rarely -- rather better than their's I think -- blessings on the old
nurse for consenting to it. -- I Will teach 'em to turn people out of doors --
let me see -- what trick shall I play em now -- suppose I set the house on fire
-- no, no, its too soon for that -- that will do very well by and by -- let me
see -- I wish I could see my sister -- I Will discover myself to her, and then we
might contrive something together nicely -- that staircase leads to her room --
I Will try and call her -- ( goes and listens) there is nobody in the way -- hist,
hist! Maria, Maria! -- she hears me -- she is coming this way -- ( runs and
hides himself.)


Enter MARIA. Mar. Sure somebody called me -- no, there is nobody here, heigho!
I Have almost cried myself blind about my poor brother -- for so I shall always
call him -- aye, and love him too -- ( going)


Little P. Maria! -- Sister! -- stop an instant,

Mar. My Brother! Charles! impossible!


Little P. It Is even so, faith -- 'twas all a trick about the nurse and child
-- I coax'd the old woman to confess the whole to me -- so borrowing this dress
as you see -- returned to plague 'em a little more, that is all -- now you and I
must consult together how to revenge ourselves -- let me see -- how shall we
vex 'em -- I Will let 'em see who is best at plotting -- what shall it be -- you
cannot contrive to kill yourself for the loss of me, can you -- that would have
a fine effect -- is there nothing I can think of -- suppose you pretend to fall
in love with me and we may run away together!


Mar. That will do admirably, and you may depend on my playing my part with a
good will, for I owe them some revenge for their treatment of you -- besides
you know I can refuse you nothing.


Enter PICKLE behind. Little P. Thank you a thousand times, my dear Maria --
thus we'll contrive it


( Seeing Pickle they pretend to whisper.) Pick. What! -- how is this! -- "Dear
Maria," and "I Will refuse you nothing." Death and the devil! my daughter has
fallen in love with that young rascal and his yeo, yeo, yeo -- see too, they
embrace ( comes forward) mighty well, young madam, mighty well, but come, you
shall be locked up immediately, and you, young rascal, be whipped out of the
house --


Little P. You will not be so heard-hearted sure -- we will not part -- here is my
anchor fixed -- here am I moored for ever --


(Pickle endeavors to take Maria from him -- She resists -- And Little P.
detains her by the hand.) Mar. ( romantically) No -- we'll never, never part --
O cruel, cruel fate!


Pick. He has infected her with his assurance already -- what you young minx,
do you own you love him?


Mar. Love him! Sir, I adore him, and spite of your utmost opposition ever,
ever shall.


Pick. O ruined! undone! what a wretched old man am I -- but Maria! child!


Mar. Think not to dissuade me, Sir, vain attempt! no, Sir, my affections are
fixed, never to be recalled.


Pick. O dear, what shall I do! what will become of me -- Oh! a plague on my
plot, I have lost my daughter, and for ought I know, my son too -- Why child,
he is a beggar -- he is not worth a sixpence.


Mar. My soul abhors so low a thought -- I despise wealth -- know, Sir, I
cherish nobler sentiments -- "The generous youth shall own,
"I love him for himself alone."



Pick. What, poetry too! nay then it is time to prevent further mischief -- (
pulls her) Go to your room -- a good key shall ensure your safety, and that
young rascal may go back to sea, with his yeo, yeo, yeo, if he will.


Mar. I obey your harsh command Sir, and am gone -- but alas I leave my heart
behind.


Exit, Pickle locks her in. Pick. Now Sir, for you -- don't look so audacious
you young villain, don't fancy you belong to me -- I utterly disclaim you.


Little P. ( laughing) But that is rather too late now, old one, you have
publicly said I was your son, and damme I Will make you stand to it.


Pick. The devil! here is an affair -- here John! Thomas! William!

Enter JOHN, THOMAS and SUSAN. Take that fellow, and turn him out of doors
immediately.


Tho. Fellow! who, Sir?


Pick. Who! why zounds! him there, don't you see him.


John. What! my new young master! no, Sir, I Have turned out one already -- I Will
turn out no more --


Pick. He Is not your young master -- he is no son of mine -- away with him I say.


Su. No, Sir -- we know our young master too well for all that -- why he is as
like your honor as one pea is like another.


John. Aye, heaven bless him! -- and may he shortly succeed your honor in your
estate and fortune. --


Pick. Rogues! villians! I Am abused, robbed -- ( drives Servants off) there is a
conspiracy formed against me -- and this little Pirate is at the head of the
gang --

Enter Thomas, gives Pickle a letter and Exit. Odso! here is a letter from my
poor boy -- this is a comfort indeed -- well, I Will send for him home without
further delay -- ( reads) Honored Sir -- I heartily repent of having so far
abused your goodness while blessed with your protection -- but as I fear no
penitence will restore me to your favor have resolved to put it out of my
power again to offend you -- by bidding adieu to my country for ever -- here
John! go, run directly to Margery's fetch home my Son, and --


Little P. You may save yourself the trouble -- it is too late -- you will never
bring him too, now -- make as many signals, and fire as many guns as you please.


Pick. What do you mean --

Little P. Mean -- why he and I have changed births that is all.


Pick. Changed births!


Little P. Aye, I Am got into his hammock and he is got into mine, that is all,
he is some leagues off at sea by this time -- the tide serves, the wind's fair,
and Botany Bay's the word my old boy.


Pick. Botany Bay -- then my misery is complete -- unhappy Pickle -- but I Will
instantly see about this myself -- and if its true -- I Will come back just to
blow out your brains -- and so be either hanged, or sent to Botany Bay after
him. Exeunt.


SCENE. -- A Garden. Enter MISS PICKLE. Miss P. This is the hour of my
appointment with Mr Tagg -- and my brother's absence is favorable indeed --
well after such treatment, can he be surprised if I throw myself into the arms
of so passionate an admirer -- my fluttering little heart tells me this is an
important crisis in my happiness -- how much these vile men have to answer for
in thus bewitching us silly girls --


Tagg. ( behind) "The heavy hours are almost past
"That part my love and me."
Enters. "My longing eyes may hope at last,
"Their only joy to see."
Thus most charming of your sex, let me prostrate myself at the shrine of
beauty.


( kneels) Miss P. Mr Tagg, I fear I never can be yours.


Tagg. Adorable, lovely, the most beautified Ophelia "beautified is a vile
phrase" --


Miss P. Indeed, Mr Tagg, you make me blush with your compliments.


Tagg. Compliments! -- O call not by that hacknied name the voice of truth --
lovely nymph O deign to hear me -- I Will teach you what it is to love.


Miss P. Love! Mr Tagg! -- O moderate your transports be advised -- think no
more of this fatal passion.


Tagg. Think no more of it! -- can love be controlled by advice? -- will Cupid
our mother obey? -- O then consent my angel to join our hands in one -- or give
me my death in a frown.


Miss P. Can I refuse any thing to such a lover -- but my dear friend -- were I
to consent to our tender union -- how could we contrive our escape -- my
brother's vigilence would overtake us -- and you might have some cause to
repent of his anger.


LITTLE PICKLE Enters, sees them and runs off unperceived. Tagg. O he is a Goth,
a mere Vandyke, my love! -- but fear makes the danger seem double -- say Hymen
what mischief and trouble, say what men will, wedlock's a Pill -- bitter to
swallow and hard of digestion -- I Have contrived the plot and every scene of the
elopement -- here in this shady blessed retreat will I unfold it all -- reaches
chairs) lets sit down like Jessica and the fair Lorenzo here --

( they sit.) "Would you taste the moon tied hair,
"To yon flagrant bower repair,
"Where mixing with the poplar bough,
"The bantling fine shall shelter you.
"Since music is the food of love
"We'll to the nightingale's complacent notes
"Tune our distresses and record our Woes."

During the above speech, Little Pickle steals on behind them, sews their
clothos together and runs off unseen. Miss P. O I could listen thus for ever to
the charms of love and harmony -- but how are we to plan our escape?


Tagg. In a low and mean attire muffled up in a great cloak will I await you in
this happy spot -- but why, my soul, why not this instant fly -- thus let me
seize my tender bit of lamb -- there I think I had her as dead as mutton


( aside.) Miss P. No, I Am not yet equipped for an elopement, and what is of
more consequence still, I hav'n't got with me a casket of jewels I have
prepared, rather too valuable to be left behind.


Tagg ( aside.) That is of some consequence indeed to me -- "my diamond, my
pearl," then be a good girl until I come to thee again --


Miss P. Come back again in the disguise immediately -- and if fortune favors
faithful lovers vows I will contrive to slip out to you --


Tagg. Dispose of me, lovely creature as you please -- but don't forget the
casket.


Enter LITTLE PICKLE, running. Little P. Granne! granne!


Miss P. What rude interuption's this?


Little P. O nothing at all -- only father's coming -- that is all --


Tagg. The devil! what a catastrophe!


( both rise) Miss P. One last adieu! ( they embrace) think you we shall ever
meet again --


they find themselves fastened together and struggle. Tagg. Damme if I think we
shall ever part --


Miss P. Don't detain me -- wont you let me go --


Tagg. Go! zounds! I wish you was gone.


Miss Pickle runs off with the lap of Tagg' s coat, which tears off -- Tagg
Exit -- Little Pickle runs off laughing. Enter PICKLE. Pick. Well, all is not so
bad as I feared -- he is not yet gone to sea, and Margery assures me I shall see
him again soon, quite another thing from what he was -- but now let me look
after my Sister -- though she let me play the fool, I Will take care to prevent her
-- I mustn't give up the consols too -- but odso I haven't yet seen my
daughter, -- I Will to her first, lest young yeo, yeo, should really get her
shipped off -- and when I Have secured fifteen, I Will look after fifty -- but who is
coming here? I Will conceal myself and watch -- ( goes into the arbor.)


Enter MISS PICKLE, with a casket. Miss P. Mr Tagg -- Mr Tagg -- I hope he is
returned -- how I tremble -- kind Cupid aid your vot'ry's feeble steps --


Enter LITTLE PICKLE, disguised in a long cloak. Miss P. ( mistaking him for
Tagg) O my dear Mr Tagg -- take the casket, and let us make haste that we may
escape before my brother comes back --


Little P. ( Kissing her hand) This way -- this way --


as they are going Old Pickle comes from the arbor and stops 'em. Pick. Your
most obedient, humble servant, madam -- well said fifty egad! -- your most
obsequious, Mr Alexander ( collars Little Pickle) what John! William! Thomas!
you sha'n't want attendants, mighty Prince -- ( Enter Servants) or may hap you
had rather sleep in a castle, great Hero, we have a convenient jail close by,
where you will be very safe, most illustrious chief --


Miss P. A jail! O heavens! poor dear Mr Tagg -- a victim to his love for me --
O let us implore his forgiveness and entreat him to release you.


Little Pick. kneels -- throws off his disguise and appears in his own hair,
though still in the Sailor's dress. Little P. Thus then let me implore for
pardon, and believe that a repentance so sincere as mine will never suffer my
heart again to wander from its duty toward him.


Pick. What Is this, my son, ( embraces him) odds my heart I Am glad to see him
once more -- O you dear little fellow -- but you wicked scoundrel, how dare you
play me such tricks?


Little P. Tricks! O Sir, recollect you have kindly pardoned them already, and
now you must intercede for me with my aunt, that I may have her forgiveness
too, for preventing her from eloping with her tender swain, Mr Tagg.


Pick. Mr Tagg! odso! there the consols were sinking apace, but you have raised
them once more. ( embraces)


Little P. And do you then indeed, Sir, sincerely forgive me and forget all my
past follies.


Pick. Forget them -- ah, had you vexed me as much again I should have been
more than repaid by the happiness of this moment.


Little P. Kind Sir, my joy is then complete, and I will never more offend.

( Comes forward.) And yet would these our fair and gracious spectators
condescend to own they have been amused by my tricks, (and if I can judge of
looks, or am skilled in the language of eyes, they deign to smile assent) I
shall be tempted again to transgress.


FINIS.

