

THE TRAGEDY OF Chrononhotonthologos: BEING The most Tragical Tragedy, that
ever was Tragediz'd by any Company of TRAGEDIANS.

Written by BENJAMIN BOUNCE, Esquire

Qui capit ille facit. LONDON: Printed for J. Shuckburgh, and L. Gilliver, in
Fleet Street, J. Jackson, in Pall Mall; and sold by A. Dodd, without
Temple Bar, and F. Nutt, at the Royal Exchange. [Price Six Pence.]

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. W. MILLS. TO Night our comic MUSE the Buskin wears,
And gives her self no small Romantic Airs;
Struts in Heroics, and in pompous Verse,
Does the minutest Incidents rehearse;
In Ridicule's strict Retrospect displays,
The Poetasters of these modern Days:
When the big bellowing Bombast rends our Ears,
Which stripped of Sound, quite void of Sense appears:
Or when the Fiddle Faddle Numbers flow,
Serenely dull, Elaborately low:
Either Extreme, when vain Pretenders take,
The Actor suffers for the Author's sake.
The quite tired Audience lose whole Hours, yet pay
To go un-pleas'd and un-improv'd away:
This being our Scheme, we hope you will excuse
The wild Excursion of the wanton Muse;
Who out of Frolic wears a mimic Mask,
And sets herself so whimsical a Task:
It Is meant to please, but if it should offend,
It Is very short, and soon will have an End.
Dramatis Personae.
Chrononhotonthologos, King of Queerumania, Mr. Winstone. Bombardinion, his
General, Mr. Ridout. Aldiborontiphoscophornio, Courtier. Mr. Cross. Rigdum
Funnidos, Courtier. Mr. Oats. Captain of the Guards, Mr. Woodburn. Doctor, Mr.
Gray. Cook, Mr. H. Tench. King of the Fiddlers, Mr. Davis. King of the
Antipodes, Mr. Jannot. Dumb, Master of the Ceremonies, Mr. Gray. Signor
Scacciatinello, Master. Arne. Signora Sicarina, Miss Jones.
Eadladinida, Queen of Queerumania, Mrs. Shireburne. Tatlanthe, her Favorite,
Mrs. Charke. Two Ladies of the Court, Miss Oats. Miss Dancy.
Venus, Mrs. Clark. Cupid, Master. Arne.
SCENE Queerumania. The Tunes of ye Songs.
See Venus does attend thee.
(My Dilding my Dolding.)
^ Take this Magic Wand in Hand.
(Dance over the Lady Lee.)
^ Are you a Widow or are you a Wife.
(Gilly flower Gentle Rosemary.)
^ Marriage may become a Curse.
(Swedes March.)
^ THE TRAGEDY OF Chrononhotonthologos, etc.
SCENE, An Antichamber in the Palace. Enter RIGDUM-FUNNIDOS, and
Aldiborontiphoscophornio. Rigdum-Funnidos. ALdiborontiphoscophornio!
Where left you Chrononhotonthologos?

Aldiborontiphoscophornio. Fatigued with the tremendous Toils of War,
Within his Tent, on downy Couch succumbent,
Himself he unfatigues with gentle Slumbers;
Lulled by the cheerful Trumpets gladsome Clangor,
The Noise of Drums and Thunder of Artillery,
He sleeps Supine amidst the Din of War:
And yet it is not definitively Sleep;
Rather a kind of Doze, a waking Slumber,
That sheds a Stupefaction over his Senses;
For now He nods and snores; anon he starts,
Then nods and snores again: If this be Sleep,
Tell me, ye Gods! what mortal Man's awake!
What says my Friend to this?

Rigdum-Funnidos. -- Say! I say he sleeps Dog-sleep, what a Plague would you
have me say?


Aldiboronti. O impious Thought! O cursed Insinuation!
As if great Chrononhotonthologos
To Animals detestable and vile,
Had ought the least Similitude!

Rigdum. My dear Friend! you entirely misapprehend me; I did not call the King,
Dog by Craft, I was only going to tell you the Soldiers have just received
their Pay, and are all as drunk as so many Swabbers.


Aldiboronti. Give Orders instantly, that no more Money
Be issued to the Troops: Mean time, my Friend!
Let all the Baths be filled with Seas of Coffee,
To stupify their Souls into Sobriety.

Rigdum. I fancy you had better banish the Sutlers, and blow the Geneva Casks
to the Devil.


(...) Have burst the solid Entrails of the Earth.
Gushing such Cataracts of Forces forth,
This World is too incopious to contain 'em:
Armies, on Armies, march in Form stupendous;
Not like our Earthly Legions, Rank by Rank,
(...) Teer over Teer, high pil'd from Earth to Heaven:
(...) lazing Bullet, Bigger than the Sun,
(...) from a huge and monstrous Culverin,
Has laid your Royal Citadel in Ashes.

King. Peace Coward! were they wedged like Golden Ingots,
(...) pent so close, as to admit no Vacuum.
One look from Chrononhotonthologos
Shall scare them into Nothing. Rigdum Funnidos,
Bid Bombardinion draw his Legions forth,
And meet us in the Plains of Queerumania.
This very now ourselves shall there conjoin him;
Mean Time, bid all the Priests prepare their Temples
For Rites of Triumph: Let the Singing Singers.
With vocal Voices, most Vociferous,
In sweet Vociferation, out vociferize
Even Sound itself; So be it as we have ordered.
Exeunt.
SCENE a magnificent Apartment. Enter Queen Fadladinida, Tatlanthe, and two
Ladies. Queen. -- Day's Curtain drawn, the Morn begins to rise,
And waking Nature rubs her sleepy Eyes.
The pretty little fleecy bleating Flocks,
In Baa'as harmonious warble through the Rocks:
Night gathers up her Shades in sable Shrouds,
And whispering Oziers rattle to the Clouds.
What think you, Ladies, if (...) we kill,
At Basset, Ombre, Pi^quet or Quadrille.

Titlanthe -- Your Majesty was pleased to order Tea.

Queen. -- My Mind is altered Bring some Ratafia.
They are served round with a Dram. I have a famous Fiddler sent from France,
Bid him come in, What think ye of a Dance?

Enter King of the Fiddlers. -- Thus to your Majesty says the suppliant Muse:
Would you a Solo, or Sonata choose
Or bold Concerto, or soft Siciliana,
Alla Francese overo in Gusto Romano?
When you Command, it is done as soon as spoke.

Queen. A civil Fellow! -- play us the Black Joak.
Queen and Ladies Dance the Black Joak, So much for Dancing; now lets rest a
while.
Bring in the Tea-Things, does the Kettle boil?

Tatlanthe. -- The Water bubbles and the Tea-Cups skip.
Through eager Hope to kiss your Royal Lip.
Tea brought in.
Queen. -- Come Ladies, will you please to choose your Tea;
Or Green Imperial, or Pekoe Bohea?

1st Lady. -- Never, no, never sure on Earth was seen,
So gracious, sweet and affable a Queen.

2d Lady. -- She is an Angel.

1st Lady. -- She Is a Goddess rather.

Tatlanthe. She Is Angel, Queen, and Goddess altogether.

Queen. -- Away! you Flatter me.

1st Lady. -- We don't indeed,
Your Merit does our Praise by far exceed.

Queen. -- You make me blush: Pray help me to a Fan.

1st Lady. -- That Blush becomes you.

Tatlanthe. -- Would I were a Man.

Queen. ^'ll hear no more of this as I Am a Sinner.
Enter Dumb Master of the Ceremonies, makes Signs of Eating. Dear me! that is
true, I never thought of Dinner:
But 'twill be over Ladies very soon,
Mean time, my Friend, play the other little Tune.
Music plays, they all Dance off.
SCENE Another Apartment. Enter Rigdum Funnidos and Aldiboronti, etc. Rigdum --
'Egad we are in the wrong Box! Who the Devil would have thought that this same
Chrononhotonthologos should beat that mortal sight of Tippodeans; why, there is
not a Mother's Child of 'em to be seen. 'Egad they footed it away as fast as
their Hands could carry 'em; but they have left their King behind 'em, we have
him safe, that is one Comfort.


Aldibo. -- Would he were still at amplest Liberty.
For, O! my dearest Rigdum Funnidos,
I have a Riddle to unriddle to thee,
Shall make thee stare thy self into a Statue.
Our Queen's in Love with this Antipodean.

Rigdum Fun. -- The Devil she his? Well, I see Mischie is going forward with a
Vengeance.


Aldibo. But lo! the Conqueror comes all crowned with Conquest.
A solemn Triumph graces his Return:
Let Us grasp the Forelock of this apt Occasion.
To greet the Victor, is his Flow of Glory.

A Grand Triumph. Enter King in Triumph, etc. met by Rigdum and Aldiboronti.
Aldiboronti. -- All hail! to Chrononhotonthologos,
Thrice trebly welcome to your Loyal Subjects
My self and faithful Rigdum Funnidos
(...) in a Labyrinth of Love and Loyalty,
Entreat you to inspect our inmost Souls,
And read in them what Tongue can never utter.

King. -- Aldiborontiphoscophornio,
To thee and gentle Rigdum Funnidos;
Our Gratulations flow in Streams unbounded:
Our bounty's Debtor to your Loyalty,
Which shall with Interest be repaid, ever long,
But where is our Queen? where is Fadladinida;
She should be foremost in this gladsome Train,
To grace our Triumph; but I see she slights me,
This haughty Queen shall be no longer mine,
I Will have a sweet and gentle Concubine.

Rigdum, (aside.) -- Now my dear sweet Phoscophorny, for a swinging Lie to
bring the Queen off: and I Will run with it this Minute to her, that we may be
all in a Story.

(They whisper importantly, and Rigdum Funnidos goes out.)
Aldiboronti. -- Speak not, great Chrononhotonthologos,
In Accents so injuriously severe
Of Fadladinida, your faithful Queen:
By me she sends an Embassy of Love,
Sweet Blandishments and kind Congratulations;
But, cannot, O! she cannot come Her self.

King. -- Our Rage is turned to Fear: What ails the Queen?

Aldiboronti. A sudden Diarrhaea's rapid Force,
So stimulates the Peristtaltic Motion,
That all conclude her Royal Life in danger.

King. Bid the Physicians of the Earth assemble,
In Consultation solemn and sedate:
More to corroborate their sage Resolves,
Call from their Graves the Learned Men of old:
Galen, Hipocrates, and Paracelsus;
Doctors, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Chemists,
All! all! attend and see they bring their Medicines,
Whole Magazines of gallipotted Nostrums.
Materializ'd in Pharmaceutic Order.
The Man that cures our Queen shall have our Empire.
(Exeunt Omnes.)
Enter Talanthe, and Queen. Queen. -- Hey ho! my Heart.

Tatlanthe. -- What ails my gracious Queen?

Queen. -- O would to Venus I had never seen

Tatlanthe. -- Seen what, my Royal Mistress!

Queen. -- Too! too much.

Tatlanthe. -- Did it affright you,

Queen. -- No, it is nothing such.

Tatlanthe. -- What was it, Madam?

Queen. -- Really I don't know.

Tatlanthe. -- It must be something!

Queen. -- No;

Tatlanthe. -- Or, nothing;

Queen. -- No.
-- O, my Tatlanthe, have you never seen?

Tatlanthe. -- Can I guess what, unless you tell? my Queen!

Queen. -- The King I mean.

Tatlanthe. -- Just now returned from War:
He rides like Mars in his Triumphal Car.
Conquest precedes with Laurels in his Hand,
Behind him Fame does on her Tripos stand
Her Golden Trump shrill through the Air she sounds,
Which rends the Earth, and thence to Heaven rebounds.
Trophies and Spoils innumerable grace,
This Triumph which all Triumphs does deface:
Haste then, great Qucen! your Hero thus to meet,
Who longs to lay His Laurels at your Feet.

Queen. -- Art mad, Tatlanthe, I meant no such thing,
Your Talk's distasteful.

Tatlanthe. -- Didn't you name the King?

Queen. -- I did, Tatlanthe, but it was not thine,
The charming King, I mean, is only mine.

Tatlanthe. -- Who else, who else, but such a charming Fair
In Chrononhotonthologos should share:
The Queen of Beauty, and the God of Arms,
In him and you united blend their Charms.
Oh! had you seen him, how he dealt out Death,
And at one stroke robbed Thousands of their Breath.
While on the Slaughtered Heaps himself did rise,
In Pyramids of Conquest to the Skies;
The Gods all hailed, and fain would have him stay;
But your bright Charms have called him thence aaway.

Queen. -- This does my utmost Indignation raise,
You are too pertly Lavish in his Praise;
Leave me for ever!

Tatlanthe. (Kneeling.) -- O what shall I say?
Do not, great Queen, your Anger thus display,
O frown me dead, let me not live to hear
My gracious Queen, and Mistress so severe;
I Have made some horrible Mistake, no doubt,
Oh! tell me what it is!

Queen. No, find it out.

Tatlanthe. -- No, I will never leave you, here I Will grow,
'Till you some Token of Forgiveness show:
O all ye Powers above, come down, come down!
And from her Brow dispel that angry Frown.

Queen. -- Tatlanthe rise, you have prevailed at last,
Offend no more, and I Will excuse what is past.

Tatlanthe, (aside.) Why what a Fool was I not to perceive her Passion for the
topsy turvy King, the Gentleman that carries his Head where his Pocket should
be; but I must tack about I see.

To the Queen. Excuse me, gracious Madam! if my Heart
Bears Sympathy with yours in every Part;
With you alike, I sorrow, and rejoice,
Approve your Passion, and commend your Choice,
The Captive King.

Queen. -- That Is he! that is he! that is he!
I Would die ten Thousand Deaths to set him free:
Oh! my Tatlanthe! have you seen his Face:
His Air, his Shape, his Mein, with what a Grace;
Quite upside down, in a new way he stands,
How prettily he foots it with his Hands!
Well, I must have him if I Live or die,
To Prison, and his Charming Arms I sly.
(Exeunt.)
SCENE a Prison. The King of the Antipodes discovered sleeping on a Couch.
Enter Queen. Is this a Place, Oh! all ye Gods above,
This a Reception for the Man I love?
See in what charming Attitude he sleeps,
While Nature's Self at his Confinement weeps.
Rise, Lovely Monarch! see your Friend appear,
No Chrononhotonthologos is here;
Command your Freedom, by this sacred Ring,
Then command me; what says my charming King.

She puts the Ring in his Mouth; he makes an odd Kind of Noise. Ah! wretched
Queen! how hapless is thy Lot,
To love a Man that understands thee not!
O lovely Venus, Goddess all Divine;
And gentle Cupid, that sweet Son of thine.
Assist, assist me, with your sacred Art,
And teach me to obtain this Stranger's Heart.

Venus descends in her Chariot with Cupid, and Sings. See Venus does attend thee
My Dilding, my Dolding,
Love's Goddess will befriend thee,
Lilly bright and shinee.
With Pity and Compassion,
My Dilding, my Dolding,
She sees thy tender Passion,
Lilly, etc.
Da Capo.
Air Changes. To thee I yield my Power divine,
Dance over the Lady Lee,
Demand what ever thou will, it is thine,
My gay Lady.
Take this magic Wand in Hand,
Dance, etc.
All the World's at thy Command,
My gay, etc.
Da Capo.
Cupid sings. Are you a Widow, or are you a Wife,
Gilly Flower, gentle Rosemary.
Or are you a Maiden, so fair and so bright,
As the Dew that flies over the Mulberry Tree.
Queen. Would I were a Widow, as I am a Wife,
Gilly Flower, etc.
For I Am to my Sorrow a Maiden as bright,
As the Dew, etc.
Cupid. You shall be a Widow before it is Night,
Gilly Flower, etc.
No longer a Maiden, so fair and so bright,
As the Dew, etc.
Two jolly Young Husbands your Person shall share,
Gilly Flower, etc.
And twenty fine Babies your Body shall bear,
As the Dew, etc.
Queen. O thanks Mr. Cupid! for this your good News,
Gilly Flower, etc.
What Woman alive would such Offers refuse,
While the Dew, etc.
Venus and Cupid re-ascend.
SCENE Bombardinions Tent. King, and Bombardinion at a Banquet. Bomb. This
Honor, Royal Sir! so royalizes
The Royalty of your most Royal Actions,
The Dumb can only utter forth your Praise,
For we who speak, want Words to tell our Meaning.
Here! fill the Goblet with Phalernian Wine,
And while our Monarch drinks, bid the shrill Trumpet
Tell all the Gods that we propine their Healths.
Trumpets sound.
King. -- Hold Bombardinion, I esteem it fit,
With so much Wine, to eat a little Bit.

Bomb. ^ee that the Table instantly be spread,
^ith all that Art and Nature can produce.
^raverse from Pole to Pole; sail round the World,
^ring every Eatable that can be eat:
^he King shall eat, though all Mankind be starved.

Cook. And it please your Honor, there is some cold ^^rk in the Pantry, I Will
hash it for his Majesty (...) a Minute. Exit in a Hurry.


King. Hash'd Pork! shall Chrononhotonthologos
Be fed with Swine's Flesh, and at second Hand?
Now, by the Gods! Thou do insult us, General!

Bomb. The Gods can witness, that I little thought
Your Majesty, to Pork, had such aversion.

King Away thou Traitor! Do thou mock thy Master? Strikes him.

Bomb. A Blow! Shall Bombardinion take a Blow?
Blush! Blush thou Sun! start back thou rapid Ocean:
Hills! Vales! Seas! Mountains! all commixing crumble,
And into Chaos pulverize the World:
For Bombardinion has received a Blow,
And Chrononhotonthologos shall Die. Draws.

King. What means the Traitor? Draws.

Bomb. -- Traitor in thy Teeth,
Thus I defy Thee!
They fight, he kills the King Ha! What have I done?
Go, call a Coach, and let a Coach be called,
And let the Man that calls it be the Caller;
And, in his calling, let him nothing call,
But Coach! Coach! Coach! O for a Coach-ye Gods!
Exit Raving. Returns with a Doctor. -- How fares your Majesty?

Doctor. My Lord he is Dead.

Bomb. Ha! Dead! impossible! it cannot be;
I Would not believe it though himself should Swear it.
Go join his Body to his Soul again,
Or, by this Hand, thy Soul shall quit thy Body.

Doctor. My Lord, he is past the power of Physic,
His Soul has left this World.

Bomb. Then go to to'ther World and fetch it back.
Kills him. And if I find thou triflest with me there,
I Will chase thy Shade through Myriads of Orbs,
And drive thee far beyond the Verge of Nature.
Ha! -- Call'st thou Chrononhotonthologos?
I come! your Faithful Bombardinion comes:
He comes in Worlds unknown to make new Wars
And gain thee Empires, numerous as the Stars.
Kills himself.
Enter Queen and others. Aldiboron. -- O horrid! horrible, and horrid'st horror!
Our King, our General: Our Doctor dead.
All dead! Stone dead, irrecoverably dead!
Oh! -- All Groan a Tragedy Groan.

Queen. My Husband dead! Ye Gods, what is it you mean,
To make a Widow of a Virgin Queen?
For, to my great Misfortune, he, poor King,
Has left me so, and that is a wretched Thing.
To Tatlanthe
Tatlanthe. Why then, dear Madam! make no farther Pother,
Were I your Majesty, I Would try another.

Queen. I think it is best to follow thy Advice. Simp'ring.

Tatlanthe. I Will fit you with a Husband in a Trice:
Here Is Ridgum Funnidos, a proper Man,
If any one can please a Queen, he can.

Rigdum. Fun. Ay, that I can, and please your Majesty; so Ceremonies apart.
Let Us proceed to Business. Kisses the Queen.


Queen. Oh! but the Mourning takes up all my Care:
I Am at a Loss what colored Weeds to wear.

Rigdum Fun. Never talk of Mourning, Madam,
One Ounce of Mirth is worth a Pound of Sorrow,
Let Us bed to Night and then we'll wed to Morrow.
I Will make thee a great Man, my little Phoscophony. To Aldi. aside.

Aldibo. I scorn thy Bounty, I Will be King, or nothing.
Draw Miscreant! Draw!
Rigdum runs behind the Queen.
Queen. Well, Gentlemen, to make the Matter easy,
I Will have you both, and that, I hope, will please ye. Takes each by the Hand.
And now, Tatlanthe thou art all my care:
Where shall I find thee such another Pair.
Pity, that one has served so long, so well,
Should die a Virgin, and lead Apes in Hell.
Choose for your self, dear Girl, our Empire round,
Your Portion is Twelve Hundred Thousand Pound.

Tatlanthe. Thanks to your Majesty, give me the Money,
Let me alone to find myself a Honey.
Tatlanthe Sings. Marriage may become a Curse,
Husbands may but teaze me;
So, for better or for worse,
No Man ever shall seize me.
Changing, Ranging at my Pleasure,
Men in Plenty for my Treasure.
I myself, will keep the Purse,
And pay them as they please me.

Queen Sings. Troth, my Girl, you are in the Right,
And thy Scheme I Will borrow;
It Is a Thought that is new and bright,
Wedlock brings but Sorrow.
To Aldi. and Rigd. Gentlemen! I Am not for Marriage,
But, according to your Carriage,
As you both behave to Night,
You shall be paid to Morrow.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs SHIREBURNE. CUSTOM commands that I should something say
In Favor of the Poet, and the Play:
Critics! on you, our Author does depend,
Be you his Champions, and his Cause defend;
You know his Drift, if wrongheads should misplace it;
I Am bid to say, Qui capit ille facit.
Whatever you please to censure or correct,
We shall amend with Pleasure and Respect:
But to our Failings, some Indulgence give,
And with one generous Plaudit, bid us live.

