THE Nature of Inoculation EXPLAINED, AND Its MERITS Stated; IN An ESSAY,
intended to supply what appeared still wanting to clear up that Subject.

AND WHEREIN The Nature of the Difference, between Inoculation and the Natural
Smallpox, is fully shown; all Extremes in Opinion or Practice are avoided; and
the true Use and best Manner of Preparation, from a Knowledge and Experience
therein, of an earlier Date than what any, who have written on the Subject,
pretend to, are declared; with a View to the general Good.

To which is added, AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING Some Thoughts on the first
Appearance of the SMALLPOX in the World, and an ADDRESS to INOCULATORS and
Others.

Quamvis, Scaeva, satis per te tibi consulis, and scis,
--
Disce docendus adhuc, quae censet amiculus: ut si
Caecus iter monstrare velit, tamen aspice, si quid
Et nos, quod cures proprium fecisse, loquamur.
HOR. LONDON: Printed for B. LAW, in Ave-mary-Lane; and JOHN DALE, at Coleshill.

M DCC LXIX.

PREFACE.
AS burlesque writing has of late taken place of sober enquiry, on the subject
of inoculation; I doubt not its merits are so fully ascertained and
established, in the opinion of some, as not to stand in need of farther
examination. Some there are however who think otherwise. If I perchance should
be of that number, may I be suffered a little in my folly; especially if, at
the same time, I declare my sentiments heartily and honestly, and endeavor to
explain its nature more fully, than I find is already done to my hands, by any
author. And let the gentlemen of wit take this friendly caution with them, To
take care that, in the use of talents, allowed at best to be but dangerous,
they do not unwarily stumble upon subjects, too important for their
application. Let it be also considered, that it is but a mean and illiberal
employment, to be the retailers of low jests. Can any thing equal the native
beauty and dignity of truth, in her most simple dress? she is, in fact, a most
delicate mistress, that must be wooed in her own way, and will not bear being
laughed at and jeered to her face. For a while then raillery apart from
disquisitions in physic, for that is a part of truth.

The weakness and depravity of human judgment is in nothing more conspicuous,
than the tendency it has of running into erroneous extremes. The bad effects of
this unhappy propensity of carrying our prejudices, for favorite opinions and
practice, too far, physic, in common with other subjects, has often felt; and
it appears plainly to me, that the short-sightedness, whereby we examine only
things present, and which is a grand cause of error in general, contributes not
a little to our forming an erroneous judgment, in the matter before us.
However, in enquiries after truth, a subject which disclaims all imperfect
notions, or partial representations, it is necessary the mind, under safe
guidance, should take into its view, if possible, the whole that relates to a
subject, and examine every thing with the deepest and most fixed attention.

Though several sensible and judicious writers seem to entertain very sanguine
hopes, concerning the present method of inoculation, to whom, and to whose
writings, I wish to pay all due deference; though, I hope, I also wish well to
all methods, which truly conduce to the health and preservation of mankind, as
well as have long known the importance of proper preparation, both before the
natural, and inoculated smallpox: yet sorry I am to say, I am obliged to
consider the present reigning mode, on the whole; as one of those dangerous
extremes, which will be productive of bad consequences, to the health of this,
and succeeding generations. I must also, upon the principles and experience,
hereafter to be laid down, go yet farther, and declare I am far from being so
well fatisfied about inoculation in general, as not to be aware, that it is a
subject, which has never been well cleared up; that, though it is become pretty
universal in England, it still wants the concurrence of many of the eminent in
the profession, and of more of those abroad; the unprejudiced opinion of any of
which, if happily such are to be found, I think, deserves to be attended to.

There is somewhat of original rectitude, or its contrary, in most things,
which discovers itself, to an impartial observer, at first sight. This
testimony inoculation apparently wants, in an eminent degree; or it had become
long since universal. And though the main argument, its present success, be
strong in its favor; it is not infallible upon the principles and experience
laid down in the following pages. I heartily wish I may be mistaken in my
opinion, and that inoculation really may be that useful and salutary practice,
I believe, many eminent in the profession, and others out of it, judge it to
be. However, as that opinion is founded on observation and experience, and a
long and close attention to the reason of things; till inoculation shall
happily stand upon a better foundation, than present, perhaps transient
success, I cannot help retaining it.

I am, at the same time, fully sensible, how ill such sentiments agree, with
the notions entertained by the patrons of inoculation; especially by the warmer
advocates for the present method. Nothing therefore should have induced me
publicly to declare them, but the strongest persuasion of their truth; and an
opinion, that it is the duty of a writer to declare truth, or the best
apprehensions he has of it. I have therefore herein delivered my sentiments to
the consideration of those, who, being persons of due temper, will coolly hear
reason, on every side of an argument; and who, having also ability to trace
back effects to causes, and to investigate diseases in their very principles
and source, are the only persons qualified to judge; who, being endued with
assiduity and application, will diligently observe not only present effects,
but remoter consequences; and who, being also men of integrity and candor,
will faithfully communicate such observations. By such, and such only, can the
jarring opinions, relative to this subject, be at length determined. For my own
part, my observations have been very unfavourable to it, at least in the light
I have considered them. As it appears undeniably clear to me, that if
inoculation, or any other cause, is capable of increasing hereditary or
acquired scurvy, when also conjoined with the use of violent doses of
mercurials, the present too common and pernicious use of warm relaxing liquors,
or any species of intemperance which enfeebles the body; they will not fail to
promote a decay, and a falling off, in this and each succeeding generation,
from the pristine health and vigor of their ancestors.

THE NATURE of INOCULATION EXPLAINED, etc.
SECTION I.
Of the nature of variolous matter, its seat in, and effects on the blood.
VARIOLOUS matter is a pestilential virus Though this is a matter apparently
beyond doubt, from the very nature of the disease, and especially its effects
in the confluent kind; it is surprising to find that few writers have been of
this opinion, except Rhazes, the late Dr. Mead, and the present Dr. Ruston.
sui generis, that, upon reception into the body, takes its seat in, and
contaminates, that heterogeneous I am sorry I cannot agree with Dr. Ruston, in
opinion, that the variolous matter is apt to infect perfectly assimilated
juices; as then the heat and irritation, occasioned by mercurial medicines,
would be pernicious. Their action upon heterogeneous matter, better accounts
for the good effects of preparation thereby; as they are known to discharge
such matter from the body. Besides, were the more perfect juices in general
tainted, nature would have no resource left, whereby to separate the diseased
humors from the body.
part of the blood and juices, which is viscid; especially that which, by
reason of taking unwholesome, or too much animal food, or any kind of high
living, or by being retained long in the vessels, without being assimilated
into a good and perfect state, is become putrescent; or tenacious and
acrimonious, and therefore strictly scorbutieal.

This taint in the humors may be either hereditary or acquired, and, it may be
safely said, is almost always both. It serves for a nidus, wherein the
variolous matter rests; and which it by degrees heats and corrupts, in the
manner other putrid effluviae do; but has not power of the more pure, globular,
and perfect part of the blood and juices, if the other heterogeneous corrupted
part does not very much abound, and the constitution is capable of expelling it.

When the above described matter is so corrupted by the variolous virus, and,
as it were, changed into its own nature; the subtle effluviae arising therefrom
stimulate the nerves, and rouse up that system, in proportion to the strength
it has, or as the peccant matter may more or less abound, to endeavor at its
expulsion.

When the matter then to be expelled, either by reason of natural health,
temperance, or the power of preparation, is small, the disease is of the
distinct kind; when large, of the confluent. And these, together with the
effect a too rigid, relaxed, or due tone of the fibers, and the reigning
constitution of the air, or the climate, may have, seem to be the real causes,
which occasion the variety in this disease; which does not arise from any
difference in the variolous matter itself; as is abundantly proved by
numberless instances, of persons receiving the most favorable smallpox, from
the worst kinds thereof.

The above well accounts, why some persons are not liable, to take the
smallpox, at all times; if it happens there is no heterogeneous corruptible
matter in the body, at the time, for the effluviae to lodge in. As to the
reason, why persons have the smallpox, or any such pestilential disorder but
once; it is at present only resolvable, into the will of that merciful
Providence, who presides over us. The cause of which will probably ever remain
among those wonderful arcana, which human penetration may admire at a distance,
but cannot search into.

SECT. II.
Of the process of the disease in the natural smallpox, and its frequent
beneficial effects, in those who recover.
WHEN the morbid effluviae from the corrupted matter above described, begin to
be predominant, they irritate and distend the nerves, and bring on the known
symptoms of the disease; pain in the head and back, sickness at the stomach,
and an universal languor, etc. All the powers of the body rise to expel this
dreadful enemy, and a fever commences: whereby the morbid matter is in some
measure attenuated; but great part of it being still incapable of being
secreted, by the general outlets of the body, and in particular by
perspiration; yet withal too irritating and dangerous, to be retained any
longer within; is determined however that way, viz. to the surface of the skin
It may be here observed, that miliary fevers arise from the same state of the
humors without infection, and the same incapacity in nature to discharge them;
wherefore antimonials and calomel, in such cases, lay the basis of a cure.
by one general and powerful effort. When therefore the matter to be so
expelled is not abundant, nature performs this with more ease, and by a more
gradual expulsion; when it predominates, if the strength is good, the attempt
is more violent. Hence arises, some cases, depending on extraordinary weakness
of the nerves, and viscidity of the juices, excepted, that usual difference in
the period of eruption, which is a general criterion, whereby to judge of the
mildness, or malignity of the disease.

When the eruption is completed, nature still carries on her work, by a
farther gra^ual attenuation and determination, of any remaining matter in the
blood, to the pustules; bringing on hereby their maturation, which, when fully
completed, is the crisis of the disease. And the pustules, having attained
that degree of perfection, by degrees harden and fall off, which terminates it.

In the natural smallpox then, the variolous effluviae having taken full
effect on the viscid, scorbutic, putrescent matter above described, as not
having been drawn off by any partial discharge beforehand, nor its
determination changed, the efforts of the constitution in expelling it, are
powerful, uniform and regular, at least in good habits; and above all, natural:
and, whatever we may pretend, nature is most perfect in her operations, when
the obstacles to be surmounted are not very great; and all good physic depends
upon a knowledge, and observance of her laws.

The good effects, attending the natural smallpox, are those of greatly
lessening, nay, often of eradicating, not only acquired, but hereditary scurvy,
transmitted through preceding generations. An affair of great consequence to
the health and well-being of succeeding ones! and this by a method, whereby
alone it can be discharged. It is often got to such a degree of tenacity, as to
be incapable of being secreted, by the emunctories of the body; not even by the
action of a fever. In this disease it is determined to the surface of the body,
and, in a peculiar manner, eliminated and discharged. Health succeeds, and that
often to a degree inexperienced before.

Hereby nature has a chance of being restored to a state of perfection, in some
measure adequate to its first state, with respect to purity of the blood. The
consequence of which, with regard to the beneficial effects of health, to the
persons themselves, and their posterity, I leave to the judicious to determine.

It cannot indeed be denied, that this disease sometimes makes dreadful havoc,
in those bodies, in whom, the beforementioned viscid, putrescent, scorbutic
matter predominates, especially in hot climates, and in constitutions of the
air productive of putrid disorders; when, by reason of abounding untoward
matter and the putrescence thereby occasioned, or when, on account of great
weakness, nature cannot bring about, her main work, the maturation of the
pustules. Nor that, when the disease does not prove fatal, there are wanting
instances of imperfect recovery, where she does thus meet with such obstacles,
that she cannot surmount. These are however no contradiction of the original
rectitude of those laws, whereby the disease acts. And wise indeed must he be,
who can find out any, respecting the reception and expulsion of diseases,
superior, on the whole, to those which are original.

SECT. III.
Of the process of the disease by inoculation, the imperfect depuration
generally attending it, and the effects and diseases that frequently follow.
IN this method, the matter is indeed absorbed into the blood, by a wound made
in the skin; but undoubtedly it is soon after also received in, by the breath
likewise. For how is it possible, the effluviae of matter so contagious, which
is also again discharged by the wound, and by which, the disease may, in the
same manner, be communicated to others, should not be received in by the breath
of the person, out of whose arm it issues?

Be that as it may; the effort of nature, in expelling it, is here twofold. A
determination is made of the matter, toward the wound, whereat it was
received, and also to the skin. Hereby is perverted that powerful and uniform
determination of the matter of the disease, after one manner only, as in the
natural smallpox. And certainly, the apparent difference, of inoculation, from
the natural disease, consists in reducing the expulsive fever in the former,
under that which would take place in the latter, in the same body, with the
same quantity of heterogeneous, unhealthful matter, to be discharged; whether
it arises, from thus baffling the effort of nature, by the double determination
abovementioned, the inflammation and discharge attending the wound beforehand,
or any other cause.

The general consequence is imperfect depuration, even though the pustules that
appear maturate kindly; which, notwithstanding the person recovers, is
productive of many bad consequences.

If there is any tolerable strength in the person, and the juices are not
extraordinarily viscid, the first and most usual are imposthumations; or a
tendency of diseased serous and lymphatic humors to the skin I am far from
thinking with some gentlemen, who practice inoculation, that it is good to
avoid either of these consequences, in cases where it happens that nature has
not properly relieved herself, by the preceding disease.
, which often degenerates into a most obstinate scorbutic disorder there.

If nature is not able to relieve herself in this way, scorbutic opthalmics
ensue, which often endanger the sight; or the matter falls upon the lungs, and
occasions obstructions in the glands of that organ, which by degrees end in a
tabes; especially toward that critical term of life, when diseases of that
kind are apt to take place, in young persons. In others a spitting of blood
comes on, from the increased heat and rarefaction occasioned therein, or
erosions of the vessels brought on, by diseased, acrimonious humors, never
properly discharged.

In women obstruction of the menses happens from the same cause, and strumous
tumors in the glands of the breast are occasioned, which degenerate into
cancers, at a certain period. These happen, where the matter described is apt
to lie dormant, as it is generally inclined to do in weak, relaxed
constitutions; and therefore, in children, I have known the king's evil
succeed: for let it be remembered, that though relaxation of the glands be now
considered, as the chief cause of that dreadful malady; viscidity is often a
predisposing cause to relaxation, and always co-operates with it.

Now, though I am most ready to acknowledge, that inoculation is not to be
considered as the sole cause of many of the disorders, which I have known soon
consequent, or could reasonably trace, therefrom; yet, I cannot, without flying
in the face of my reason, but remark, that it must at least be considered as
instrumental, by preventing the beneficial effects of a disease, so salutary in
its nature in general, to those who recover from it.

These objections therefore lie against inoculation; even though the patients may
have been treated after the most judicious manner. I have known these
consequences happen, in those, who have been under the treatment of persons, of
great reputed skill in this branch, as well as in my own patients. And so
sensible I am of the bad effects of imperfect depuration of tenacious acrid
matter, and especially that which is transmitted, that I will venture to
declare, any disorder may arise therefrom, even, from a simple eruption on the
skin, to the king's evil, cancers, consumption of the lungs, or the slow
nervous fever and atrophy; in which the subtle diseased effluviae attack and
prey upon the first principles of life.

Sorry I am to say it, and I wish I may be mistaken; but these appear to me to
be the consequences of disturbing and perverting the order of nature in her
operations, and aiming at a knowledge and power superior to that of the great
Disposer of things; who does not view things in that partial, contracted light
we do; but looks forward, and has, I am of opinion, ordered every disease, in
regard to the manner of its reception and expulsion, so as to be best on the
whole, and for the benefit of his creatures.

SECT. IV.
How far inoculation may be considered, as a succedaneum necessary to prevent
the mortality of the smallpox; and what methods will bring it nearest to the
standard of nature, in the natural disease of the distinct kind.
THOUGH I cannot approve of inoculation in the manner I could wish; it shall
not be said I am not willing to lend assistance, from what knowledge I have
therein, to bring it toward the best state, it is capable of attaining.

The best that can be said of inoculation is, that it is a means of preventing
the mortality of the smallpox, which appears to be a very good plea for its
use, when, on account of an unfavourable state of the air, we see numbers
falling, on all sides of us, a sacrifice to its most fatal effects. But that it
can be equal, in its beneficial effects, to the natural disease, in those who
recover, unless it possibly may, in some cases, take a more natural turn, is, I
apprehend, in its own nature, impossible. The laws of diseases were given with
them, and the nearer we keep to those laws, on the safer ground do we tread.

Inoculation will be brought nearest, in its good effects, to the natural
disease, by so preparing the body, by diet and medicine, as to overcome, in a
good measure, the predisposing cause, viz. tenacious, acrid matter, to the bad
effects the disease may have, without impairing the strength, or the least that
is possible. This is dividing the two extremes of no preparation at all, or of
one which has but little efficacy; and of another, which brings down the
strength.

By a gradual, proper, alterative preparation, the blood will be reduced into
such a state, by lessening and attenuating any tenacious humors therein, that
the matter of the disease will be more easily separated from it; and by
preserving also the strength, the effort of expulsion will be more lively and
effectual.

No preparation, or one that is inefficacious, are often bad, as they leave the
humors too viscid, and the body too oppressed, for the morbid matter to be
well separated from the blood. Which disposition, if it should not occasion any
bad symptoms, during the disease, will be in great danger of showing itself
afterward, in the bad consequences beforementioned.

Too much preparation, and violent doses of mercurials, are bad on the other
hand, as thereby the strength is impaired, which is the chief instrument in
expelling the disease. To which cause, with the heavy clog upon nature from the
use of too much viscid diet, and the repulsion of the matter of the disease by
cold air, are to be attributed the agues and putrid fevers, I have frequently
observed consequent upon the modern method.

In the matter of preparation therefore, regard is to be had to the
constitution of the person, both in respect of the solids and fluids; that the
latter be not too tenacious, and thereby hinder the separation from the blood;
and that the former may be in state sufficient, to give a lively and effectual
impulse to the morbid matter, and to support the patient in the ensuing disease.

SECT. V.
Of the best method of preparation, both before the natural and inoculated
smallpox.
CALOMEL, according to the prediction of the great Boerhaave, is the grand
corrector, not of the variolous virus, but of that predisposing cause, which
occasions its most dreadful effects, and the basis of the medicines now in use.

This, were it not now almost universally known, I might have some right to
determine; having seen the extraordinary effects of it, in a practice
commencing so early as the year 1739, a period perhaps not many have a pretense
to date from. I am therefore clear, that Dr. Ruston is right, in his
experimental observations on Sutton's medicines; which is however, I believe,
in general, not doubted.

The method was at first tried on three young persons, who afterward received
the smallpox, in the natural way, and had a favorable distinct kind,
succeeded by an uninterrupted state of health, for several years after recovery.

It was afterward confined within the narrow limits of the persons own friends
and patients, who first made use of it, and became the more confined, for want
of that enterprizing and daring spirit, which characterizes the modern race of
inoculators. It was however communicated to several not long after.

Calomel and calx of antimony, joined with cream of tartar and purgatives of
the brisker kind, as jalap and scammony, were given as an alterative, in very
small doses every morning, so as to move the bowels once daily, for a fortnight
or three weeks before the natural disease; abstaining, at the same time, from
flesh, and fermented, and other strong liquors; and going out daily, except in
bad weather.

This method I have seen attended with very great success. It was made use of
in preparation before the natural smallpox, in which it scarce ever failed of
giving a distinct sort, when the regimen prescribed with it was regularly
persisted in.

Its beneficial effects before inoculation, are also extraordinary, and I still
think it one of the best that can be used for children, and young persons; but
that small doses of calomel joined with emetic tartar, or a preparation of
antimony like James's powder, taken two or three nights together, and then
purged off with Glauber salt, repeating it at due distances, is preferable for
adults; especially those of a robust constitution, and in the warmer seasons of
the year This perfectly answers to Boerhaave's notion of the medicine, likely
to correct, as he apprehended, the variolous virus.
.

In patients to be inoculated, I never continued the method longer than to the
time of inoculation; which I thought most eligible, as it gave nature time to
recruit, before the appearance of the disease, and for the heat and
disturbance, occasioned by the mercurials, to subside. The original method
however was to continue the medicines to the time of seizure; which may be in
some cases necessary, when persons are not so strict, in the observance of
regimen, as they ought to be.

Let it be here observed, that, as on the one hand, by this and other
testimonies, it cannot be justly said, that mercurials have not an
extraordinary use in preparation; and, as on the other, it has been objected,
very justly, by Mr. Bromfield, that by the present use of them, in large doses,
attended with a very lowering regimen, without sufficient regard paid to the
constitution of the patient, the strength is often too much depressed, and
nature rendered unable to expel the disease, and perfect the maturation; that
this method is a medium between both: and that a distinct pox by inoculation,
expelled with ease, and coming kindly to maturation, as in the natural disease,
is the almost infallible consequence of the use of it.

SECT. VI.
Of the general necessity of physical helps after inoculation, and which are
the best of that kind.
NOtwithstanding the favorable appearances above described, and the coming of
the pustules kindly to maturity, yet from consequences which have followed, I
am fully assured, that the work is not generally so well done, as in the
natural way; and that though the enemy should lie dormant, and seem quiet for a
while; yet that, if he is not thoroughly conquered, he will certainly rise
again, and commit dreadful havoc and devastation.

Let it be here remembered, that transmitted and acquired scurvy, when joined
to hereditary and acquired weakness, is to the body, what original sin is to
the soul, and will not fail sooner or later to destroy it.

Means may be used to keep off and ward the blow. In the present case, issues
continued in the inoculated parts, according to the old method, above all
things will assist nature, and drain off any remaining matter, which is unfit
for secretion, and has probably received an increase of acrimony, from the
variolous virus. To these should be joined, the alterative method used in
preparation for a short time; or crude antimony or some of its preparations
with Aethiops mineral, and a course of purging mineral waters; at least in such
cases, as give reason to suspect, that there is any scorbutical taint remaining
behind.

SECT. VII.
Of the good and bad effects of cold air, and other antiseptics, and the
reasonable manner of using them; with some remarks on the present prevailing
and peculiar method.
IT must be allowed, that air is one of the greatest preservatives of the blood
and juices from putrescence, while life subsists; but does it thence follow,
that the promiscuous use of it, in so free a manner, in all cases, in all
seasons, and in all periods of this disease, is therefore advisable? Air has a
repellent action upon the surface of the body, as well as is endued with a
preservative power. Therefore such indiscriminate and extraordinary use of it,
as is too common with some, savours but too strongly of empiricism, to say no
worse of it.

Is there nothing to be done, but, after a slight fever, to check nature in the
beginning of her work, by cold air and antiseptics, and set aside maturation,
her second intention, as a matter of no consequence? or is it possible mankind
should be arrived at such total darkness of the understanding, in this, as is
apprehended, most enlightened age, as to suppose they can trifle with and
oppose original laws, without smarting severely for it? -- This is not copying
after the great father of physic, nor agreeable to his rules. For though it is
the proper business of physic, to relieve nature, when oppressed, and lessen
her efforts, when too violent; I do ask all who pretend to lay the least claim
to medical erudition, if any thing can be substituted with equal propriety, in
the place of those known crises, whereby diseases are terminated?

The seeming recovery from the smallpox, is by no means a proof sufficient;
unless it can be likewise proved, that there is no other disease that can be
fatal. I have myself known putrid purgings, putrid fevers with sore throats,
with inflammation of the lungs, and obstinate intermittents, following hard
upon the heels of a celebrated method: Arising, I have the weakness to
apprehend, from the rarefied, putrid matter of the smallpox, unexpelled by
maturation; the oppressive load upon nature, from viscid diet, joined with the
relaxation brought on by large doses of mercurials.

I hope Dr. Dimsdale will not take it amiss, if I say, that the case he has so
heartily related, in his treatise on the smallpox, page 137, of the man who
died of an apoplexy, upon recovery from inoculation, most probably arose from
matter unexpelled, determined to and affecting the head; though under a
treatment more judicious, than what I have above recited.

The public is greatly indebted to that gentleman, for communicating the good
effects air and mercurial purges may have, in repressing the first fever of the
confluent smallpox, in violent and dangerous cases. They undoubtedly lessen
the putridity consequent in the following stages; and may, under judicious
management, be a great means of preserving life.

The necessity also of circulating air through the chambers of the sick, in all
stages of the disease, as well as of taking them, at times, out of bed,
according to Sydenham's method; of even letting inoculated persons walk about
the house in the warm season of the year; and indeed all methods of using air,
agreeable to right reason and experience, are also abundantly apparent. But
surely the indiscrimate use of it, in such degree, as is common, in all cases,
in all stages of the disease, and in all seasons of the year, in this climate,
is an extreme, which may be too justly styled the madness and enthusiasm of
modern physic! and to its account may be fairly set, those consequences before
enumerated, as attendant on imperfect depuration of the blood.

THE APPENDIX.
IT is pretty universally agreed, that the smallpox did not make its
appearance very early in the world, as neither Hippocrates nor Celsus take any
notice of it. If this is the case, and most probable it appears; as I will not
allow that things of that kind happen in the world by chance, I cannot help
forming this inference; that, at the time of its first appearance, there was a
real necessity for it, either in a physical or moral sense, and most probably
in both.

The former necessity could be occasioned by nothing else, than the increasing
corruption of transmitted or acquired scurvy or impurity of the blood, and its
mischievous effects, arising from intemperance; and the latter, by degeneracy
of manners.

In regard to the former, it is humbly conceived, that the most wise and
merciful Disposer of things, would not have laid this severe scourge upon
intemperance, without having still farther therein a merciful view, in the
restoration and preservation of the human system to future ages, in that state
of perfection, it is still seen, in a wonderful manner, capable of attaining in
many instances; considering the many removes which have happened from that
purity of blood, and that strength which were original.

That the smallpox, among other causes, has had a great share in this
miraculous preservation and restoration, whereby the humam system has been
capable, like the phoenix, of often rising again, as it were, out of its own
ashes, is not to be doubted. To this end, providence has appointed laws of an
infallible propriety, respecting the manner of the reception and expulsion of
diseases; wherewith, so far as men cooperate, they proceed right; as they
resist, wrong. In the foregoing pages, I have already considered the matter of
hereditary and acquired impurity of the blood, and what the smallpox has to do
with it; at least, in the natural way.

The latter is perhaps a subject of too delicate a nature to touch upon, and
may also appear foreign to the present purpose. Suffice it therefore to say,
that, though it is certainly right to alleviate and take off any of the severe
effects of diseases, so far at least as we can do it to good purpose; it is
undoubtedly a great error, that the smallpox is now considered, as the only
bugbear in the whole list of diseases, which, if people can but get over, they
think they are safe. Whereas the mortality, attending the smallpox, makes but
a small part in the general devastation occasioned by diseases. It is certainly
wrong to instill into and encourage such notions, in young minds. Temperance is
the surest guard against the bad effects of diseases in general, and of this in
particular; for without regimen, preparation itself would avail but little.

Permit me now to address some very peculiar inoculators.

Let it be laid down as a fundamental rule for all honest men to proceed by,
never to persuade any one into the use of inoculation. For, as the consequence
is to them and theirs, it ought to be their own act, and they should be
satisfied in their own minds, that what they are doing is right. This will be a
sure means of avoiding reflections afterward, and prevent that uneasiness I
have been witness to, even where a celebrated method has been succeeded by
disagreeable consequences.

Much less let any presume to declare, there is no danger attending even the
best methods, as long as they would claim a pretense to believe, that we are in
the hands of providence. It also well deserves serious consideration, how far
it may be right and humane, to turn patients loose, and thereby drive all
people into the use of a method, in a manner, whether they will or not.

Let me also join with Mr. Bromfield in desiring, that if they have, at any
time, found their method wrong, they would take the hint, alter it, and have
regard not only to present, but future consequences. For, whether it is allowed
or no, the following of putrid fevers, etc. on the heels of any method, is a
shrewd sign of its insufficiency and inefficacy. It, in fact, requires more
judgment, than some are perhaps aware of, so to order things unnatural, as to
answer the great purposes of the Author of nature.

If any thing herein written shall appear too harsh, or seem too hard to be
digested by our frail nature; let it be attributed to that honest and generous
warmth, which is due to subjects of an important kind. Let it also be
remembered, that, out of regard to the lives of my fellow creatures, I have
allowed of inoculation, as a succedaneum to prevent the mortality of the
smallpox, under proper restrictions, good management, and a respect to future
consequences; though, I declare, I am not clear in my own mind, that it will be
attended with good in general. For, if lingering evils be of all evils the
worst, the point is nice to decide on, and of weighty concern. That I have
communicated a method, which, notwithstanding the basis of it is now pretty
universally known, has a peculiarity belonging to it, in the manner of
administration, that brings the effects of inoculation, nearest to those of the
distinct natural kind, of any thing yet made known; and injures the stamina
less, than the common method of administering mercurials.

As I plead a long and pretty considerable experience, though not so extensive
as that of some others, as well as a strict attention paid to the subject, and
a faithful relation of facts; let these pages be turned over and again, before
any one rashly declares against what is therein contained. If people are
determined to stick to their own shortsighted views, had any one the knowledge
of the whole truth of this subject, it would not avail.

For my own part, having long revolved in my mind the sentiments, arising from
reason and experience, herein contained, it would be just neither to myself or
others, totally to suppress them. Therefore, as the time now is of thoroughly
examining this important subject, I have with fidelity declared them. And I
heartily wish that method may take place, which will most conduce to the
general good; which undoubtedly will be the case, if men will proceed upon firm
and stable principles.

FINIS.

