THE SHE GALLANT: OR, SQUARE-TOES Outwitted.

A NEW COMEDY OF TWO ACTS.

As now performing, with great Applause, At the THEATER in Smock-Alley, Dublin.

LONDON, Printed for T. LOWNDES, and J. WILLIAMS, both in Fleet Street.

MDCCLXVII.

(Price One Shilling.)

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Anthony Woodville, Mr. HOLLOCOMBE. Sir Geofry Gingle, Mr. WAKER. Delamour,
By the AUTHOR. Young Woodville, Mr. JACKSON. Thady Mac Brogue, Mr. JONES.
Constable, Mr. REMINGTON. Watchmen, Mr. WARD, Mr. TAILOR, etc.
WOMEN.
Florimel, Mrs. JEPFERYS. Emily, Miss VANDERMERE. Betty, Miss EATON.
SCENE, LONDON.

THE SHE GALLANT: OR, SQUARE-TOES Outwitted.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A street. Enter Delamour and Thady in traveling dresses, meeting Young
Woodville. Young Woodville. HA! Delamour! welcome from Paris, my dear friend
(embrace;) and honest Thady, how do do?


Tha. Je vous remercies; I am bravely, sir, thank your axing.


Del. The sight of my dear Woodville, in good health, gives me infinite
pleasure. I am well, you see; but my heart, ah, Woodville, not all the
sparkling beauties of the Louvre have had power to efface my charming Emily's
dear, dear idea. But how does the lovely girl? -- say, is she in town, that I
may fly -- ha! what?


Y. Wood. I am extremely sorry that I am obliged, like your evil genius, to
meet you with ill news on your arrival; but all the consolation I can afford my
dear friend, is an assurance of my sister's constancy -- To keep you no longer
in suspense -- my father has promised her hand to Sir Geofry Ginkle --


Del. Cursed, infernal avarice! What motive else could have induced, the
hitherto kindest parent, to make a sacrifice of his darling, his blooming
Emily, to such an old -- By Heaven I Will go this instant, and --


Tha. Arrah sir, sir, your putting yourself into passions, and flurries, is
mighty silly -- might silly; upon my soul -- Couggar -- I Will be bound to put
you in a way, that you may have your own game with him. I Will tell you, do you
see, I Will watch this Mr. Gingle, if it is Gingle you call him, and
Manumshandoul, if I don't put the speak out of him, -- and then, when the old
divil is quiet in his grave, you may cuckold him as fast as you please. Eh,
sir, (turning to Woodville,) would not there be some fun in that? (All this
while Delamour walks about in great disorder.)


Y. Wood. What, Thady, sure you would not commit murder.


Tha. Murder, arrah fat, murder, an old son of a whore that has one leg
already in the grave, and if I trip the other after it, is that murder? Oh the
devil a murder in that, sure.


Y. Wood. Come, come, Delamour, don't be so uneasy, your case is not desperate,
the indissoluble knot is yet to be tied.


Del. Happy Woodville, happy in being conscious you possess my sister's heart
unrivaled, free from the harsh injunctions of an obdurate parent to thwart
your loves -- but I --


Y. Wood. Ah, Delamour, I am no object to be envied, and far from having an
assurance of Florimel's affections; happy, then, indeed should I be; but she is
still the same gay, unthinking, lovely, witty rogue; if in the most unfeigned
rapture I breathe my love, the return is a loud laugh, an opera tune, or a
ridiculous simile, which, faith, sometimes makes me look very silly; indeed, in
her more serious moments, which are but few, she, perhaps, gives me an hearing,
when all at once a crowd of gayer thoughts rush on, and kill at once the hopes
wherewith I was elated a few minutes before.


Del. You shall find me a powerful advocate in your cause, but excuse me for
deviating from the maxims of our modern professors of the law; my proceedings
in your favor, will not be wholly disinterested; you must give me all the
assistance in your power, to break the measures of your father and Sir Geofry;
but how such a notion entered into his doting brain, is to me amazing. I Have
often heard him express the utmost abhorrence to matrimony; but then, when I
reflect upon my Emily's beauty, I cannot wonder at his being caught; old goat --


Y. Wood. Love is far from being the sole motive of Sir Geofry's addresses to
Emily; the vain hopes of having an heir of his own begetting, to inherit his
estate, (which, you know, is considerable,) and to mortify his nephew; these
are the spurs which prick him on, in the road which has hitherto appeared so
dreadful to him. I dare say, you know this nephew; as Sir Geofry had no
children of his own, and intended never to marry, he bred him up under his own
care, placed his chief felicity in having him receive those accomplishments,
proper for a person, who (as he was to inherit Sir Geofry's estate after his
decease) probably might make a figure in the great world; these
accomplishments, joined to a natural fine genius, a graceful person, and a
beneficent courteous disposition, gained him the esteem of all who knew him --
He was the darling of his uncle. But in this happy state, he, following the
dictates of love before those of his interest, unknown to his uncle, espoused a
young lady whose only want was a fortune sufficient to render her a match
suitable for the heir of Sir Geofry.


Tha. Upon my word I commend his notion.


Y. Wood. This imprudence of the young gentleman so exasperated the old knight,
that, when he heard of it, he swore he should never be a shilling the better
for him; refused to see him; and now this unfortunate couple are obliged to
subsist upon a small patrimony, left him by his father, in a remote part of
Cornwall.


Del. By your account, I really pity them, and wish with my soul, for their
sake as well as my own, the current of his affections could be turned to its
former channel.


Y. Wood. Oh it is the most inflexible, positive Curmudgeon; you might as soon
persuade a Jewish Rabbi to turn Jesuit.


Tha. A Rabbit turn Jeshit -- upon my soul a comical change. Howsomever,
they have very pretty boroughs; where we were they call 'em Colleges.


Y. Wood. He Is so fixed on the completion of this marriage, that, to make sure
of my father's consent, he has offered to take Emily without a portion; there
he touched the vein; my father, at first, shocked at such an odd proposition,
gave his old friend very little encouragement; but the mention of no fortune,
together with Sir Geofry's great estate, stifled all parental tenderness, and
he now exerts all his authority, to oblige poor Emily to name the day, and,
till then, to look upon Sir Geofry as a gentleman, whom his prudence has
destined her for a husband. You may judge the distress these commands gave her,
and the conflict she suffers, between her aversion to Sir Geofry, and the
consequence of her acquiescence to her father's will.


Del. Poor dear girl! But could I not get a sight of her?


Wood. Oh, by no means, if my father knew of your arrival, 'twould bar all
access to your future happiness, as he would oblige her to marry Sir Geofry
immediately; as yet, I Will not inform Emily you're in town; I Will meet you this
evening at Fynmore's in Pall Mall, where, I hope, we'll think of some
expedients, for our mutual advantages; adieu, dear Delamour.


Del. Farewell, you will not fail. Come Thady:

Exit Delamour.
Tha. Sir, Sir -- Sir, I Have one favor to beg of your Honor.


Wood. Well, Thady let me hear; if it is in my power to do you one, you may
command me.


Tha. I want to know, sir -- you will, pardon my boldness -- But -- Sir, are you
sure she is not --


Wood. Am I sure she is not; who is not -- what, or who do you mean?


Tha. Betty, Sir, little Betty, madam Emily's maid.


Wood. But am I sure she is not, what?


Tha. Married, sir.


Y. Wood. Oh -- Thady, I understand you; why Thady you're very far gone in
love; and is little Betty so happy as to be the object of your flame?


Tha. Burn me, sur, but I Am in a flame, sure enough; but, sur, may be some old
crab-jaw'd fellow or other, with a long purse, has laid a claw over her, as
well as her mistress -- Ogn, I am very fond of Betty.


Wood. Well, Thady, to comfort you, I believe Mrs. Betty has kept both heart
and hand for you.


Tha. Oh, upon my word, she loves me well enough; oh, that the poor devil does.


Y. Wood. Farewell, honest Thady -- But you must not think of seeing your little
Betty, as 'twould be contrary to your master's interest, for any of our family
to know he is in town.


Tha. Oh, never fear, sur; I Will be bound she shall not know I Am in London; no, no;
but, sur, if you would give your kind love, and surreverance to her for me, I Would --


Y. Wood. Ha, ha, why Thady, that would be letting her know I had seen you.


Tha. Aarah now aghra -- Oh, upon my soul so it would, sure enough; oh what a
goose I am.


Y. Wood. Farewell, Thady.


Tha. Sur, I Am your most humble and obsquese.

Exeunt at several doors.
SCENE II.
A Chamber in Sir Anthony's, House, Emily is discovered sitting melancholy.
Emily. How cruel is it for fathers to assume so unjust a prerogative, as to
oblige children to marry who they please. -- Because they are the means of
bringing us into the world, they think to be ever after the sole disposers, and
masters of our inclinations, and will make us happy, or miserable, according to
their capricious tempers. Ah, unkind Delamour! after repeated vows of
inviolable constancy, to leave me to the perils I now suffer -- on the eve of
being torn from you for ever. -- But here comes my father and my wrinkled
Strephon -- Heigh ho --


Enter Old Woodville and Sir Geofry Ginkle. Sir Ant. Why, how now child, --
Milly, -- what, still melancholy. Milly -- what the plague, you will make me
angry at last. -- Come, receive Sir Geofry as you ought.


Emi. But, dear sir, consider.


Sir Ant. I tell you I Will consider nothing, only -- Sir Geofry, I beg your
pardon; I was talking with my daughter, about some affairs relative to the
marriage. -- I must step to the Bedford Coffee-house for half an hour, or so --
to meet a gentleman -- Sir Geofry, as you will eat a bit of dinner with us; I
hope to find you here when I come back; bye, bye, Milly -- Servant, Sir Geofry.


Sir Geo. Ay, ay, Sir Anthony; here, in the sun of my Emilia's presence, will I
bask till thy return.


Sir Ant. Ah, ha! well said, Sir Geofry; show me a young dog of them a more
ardent lover; ah, ha!

Exit.
Emil. I would, sir, that sun had sufficient power to melt you into pity. (I
must summon all my little rhetoric, to turn this persecution from me, aside.)
Think, sir, the violence you are doing me, in separating me for ever from the
man I love; affinity in years, sentiment, circumstances, with him, all, all
conspire to render me unhappy, in marrying you; if so, you shall have my hand
alone; as my heart is the property of another, you cannot expect it. --


Sir Geo. Zounds! at that rate she would think nothing of giving the possession of
her whole body to him that has her heart, if she would a good opportunity; one
comfort, he is in Paris; would to heaven some testy Monsieur would run him
through the body.

Aside.
Emil. What, sir, am I not worthy of an answer?


Sir Geo. Madam, I hope you will pardon me. But I was considering, whether I
should be married in a suit of brocade, (which, I assure you, is a very elegant
suit,) or a suit of white and silver: Oh! the white and silver is very pretty,
very pretty, indeed! Now, Madam, I Would consult your taste, which I know is
exquisite; which do you think most proper?


Emi. Aside. The monster mocks me; well, I Will serve him in his turn. -- Oh,
sir, white and silver, by all means, (I Will pluck up my spirit;) how unfortunate
am I, to be prepossiess'd in favor of another; numbers of ladies of beauty and
rank would be rejoiced, and with ecstasy accept of the honor of being lady
Ginkle; setting your fine person, your graceful figure, your polite address,
your --


Sir Geo. Dear madam, where are you going? (Ay, the girl's in love with me,
that is poz, though she will not own it, or how could she find out my perfections?
She Is a fine girl!)

He struts about with an air.
Emi. I say, sir, setting aside these irresistible perfections, your vast
estate might captivate some gambling Dowager of threescore. Ha, ha, ha! since I
cannot bring him to reason, I Will give him a furfeit of my company; I wish
Florimel were here to help me out. (Florimel sings without). Thank heaven, my
wish is accomplished.


Sir Geo. Ah, zounds! I wish I was out of the house; now will they cut me up;
they will have no more mercy upon me, than an alderman would have upon a Turtle,
at a city feast.


Enter Florimel; she stops short at the sight of Sir Geofry, with seeming
amazement walks round him. Flo. Oh, bless me -- Emily -- where got you this
figure? Oh, at the sale at Spring-gardens, I suppose; it is very pretty, quite
antique, moves admirably; by clockwork, to be sure; the nose, for all the
world, like a bunch of Grapes. --


Sir Geo. Zounds! my nose like a bunch of Grapes, what the devil is she at? --
Hem -- Madam -- I --


Flo. As I live and breathe, Sir Geofry Ginkle; my dear knight, pardon me; I
heard that Williams, the Chinaman, had imported some new figures as large as
life, and as I knew Emily was, there yesterday, I protest, I took your worship
for a purchase she had made; your head went admirably (mimicks) better than any
Mandarin, though you look more like an odious, old fashioned British Druid; no,
no, you do not neither, for sweet simplicity sits on each contracted feature of
that reverend visage; I Will tell you; stand you two together, as I live, you put
me in mind of Chaucer's Tale of January and May.


(Emi. and Flo. laugh, he looks confused.) Sir Geo. Ay, ay, it is what I
expected, (bows low.) Hem, ladies, I Am obliged to mortify myself, by a little
absence from this amiable presence.


Flo. Oh, my dear sir, I protest you shall not leave us, (sings,)

Thy presence could ease me,
When nothing, etc.

Emi. What, sir Geofry, is it thus you will forsake me; inconstant, cruel sir
Geofry; and is all your boasted love no more than this?

(affects to weep.)
Sir Geo. Ah, poor thing! she loves me, that is poz; my dear little Emily, don't
cry, you know I love you.

She bursts out laughing in his face.
Sir Geo. Very well, madam, very well; I see I Am duped by my good nature, but,
by the la, I Will --


Emi. Oh, heaven! he will beat us, -- you will stay till my father comes, sir
Geofry.


Sir Geo. Madam, you will excuse me; I hear your new gardener is come to town;
I Have a curiosity to see his taste in laying out the tulip parterre, by the
laurel walk.


Flor. Sir Geofry -- a word; beware of going nigh the pond; oh, these ponds
have been often fatal to despairing lovers --


Sir. Geo. I wish to the lord, you were heels over head, to the apron string,
in it. I Will marry Emily for mere spite, that I will --


Flor. Sir Geofry -- I Have something else to say to you --


Sir Geo. Ay, -- I must decamp.

[Florimel goes to hold him, he breaks from her, and runs away. They laugh.]
Emi. I believe, really, Florimel, you envy my happiness, in having such an
accomplished swain to sigh at my feet; for whenever you come, you chase him
away; but seriously, how to avert the danger that threatens me, I know not -- I
wish, with all my soul, your brother were in London --


Flor. I must not let her know he is come home, 'twou'd hinder her ever
consenting to my scheme. [Aside.] Emily, don't make yourself uneasy for that,
accept my service by way of proxy for him; but Emily, I Will give up my
commission, when I Have gone as far as a woman can go; the remainder I Will leave
to himself --


Emi. Oh, my dear, mad girl, let me hear what project has entered into that
fertile brain of thine, to serve me --


Flor. Project! I have, indeed, a project; but before you know it, I must have
your promise of compliance to my directions --


Emi. Oh, with pleasure, for I Am sure, it must be for my good; let me hear, my
dear Sibyl --


Flor. Not so fast; act as I instruct you, and I Will lay my life sir Geofry
shall be as eager for breaking off the match, as ever he was to forward it --


Emi. Well, well, I Am all attention --


Flor. Well, then, how would you like a gallant? Would you take that gallant to
your arms, to your bed --


Emi. Fie, fie, Florimel, insult not the afflictions of your friend? --


Flor. Remember your promise; a gallant you must have; but I Will turn traitor to
you, and bring your father and sir Geofry; to a thorough conviction of the
freedoms between this spark and you.


Emi. Sure, my dear Florimel's not in earnest --


Flor. Oh, I see, madam, you have no occasion for my advice, or assistance; I
wish your ladyship a good morning --


Emi. Oh! I Will submit to whatever you propose for my freedom.


Flo. Ha, ha, ha! I see, Emily, you have not such an aversion to a youthful
sprightly gallant; but faith you will be deceived, for, behold that gay young
fellow before you; what, my dear, would you be afraid to venture between a pair
of sheets with me; you will find me as harmless a bedfellow as Sir Geofry himself
--


Emi. Dear romantic girl, but what can all this tend to? --


Flor. Can you trust your maid Betty? if so, she will be necessary --


Emi. With my life --


Flor. Well, then, you had better call her, to receive her instructions --


Emi. Who Is there? [ Enter Footman] Send Betty here.


Flor. Now, pray don't interrupt me. Sir. Geofry, notwithstanding his devoirs
to you, has an aversion to the sex, which, by the flattering hopes of an ample
revenge upon his nephew, and your beauty, (curtsies,) has been greatly abated:
Now, I think our only way is, to revive that aversion, by some very flagrant
proofs of your levity. (Enter Betty.) How do you do, Mrs. Betty? --


Bet. At your ladyship's service, me'm --


Flor. Now, if our petticoat triumvirate does not counterplot, and defeat, the
prudent schemes of our brace of wise gray beards, may my doom be to die an old
maid; but to business. -- I Will immediately write an anonymous letter to Sir
Geofry, as it were from an unknown friend -- I Will let him know, that the person
he designs for his wife, is unworthy of that honor, by having, criminal
connection with a certain gentleman; -- To corroborate this, I Will appoint a
time, when he may have ocular demonstration of her dishonor; he will immediately
fall into his old opinions, and, receiving this as orthodox, fly to the place
of appointment. Now I Have two or three suits of Delamour's clothes -- one suit
remarkably rich -- these will I put on, and at the time appointed, which may be
some very unseasonable hour, will come, and be let in by Betty -- Then you
shall see me, en cavalier; and you must own a figure less agreeable would
create a jealousy, in one more proof against deception, than your old lover.


Emi. Oh, my dear Florimel, the first thing he will do, is certainly to tell my
father, and I dread the effects of his rage. -- In his first transports of
fury, he will turn me out of doors, then my imaginary shame will be public. No,
I could not bear to be esteemed what I most abhor. -- Ah, Florimel, you have my
sincere thanks, but I must not, cannot think of putting your scheme into
execution.


Flor. Come, come, I must use you as a kind nurse would a froward child, force
you to what is for your good. -- You must, can, and shall carry this inimitable
scheme into execution. -- Faith, like a poor poet, I must praise the
productions of my own brain, since I can get no other to do it. -- Eh, Mrs.
Betty what do you think?


Bet. Indeed, ma'am, I think your scheme is unlimitable, as your ladyship says;
and I thinks as how, if my lady knows what is what, she would stop at nothing to
give sir Geofry a gust to her --


Emi. A disgust, you mean.


Bet. Yes, ma'am; and when the truth is afterward known, it will resound to
your ladysihp's credit, and will not hurt your character; no, not in the least.


Flor. Oh! Emily, 'twould be a precious husband, (Coughs, and mimicks Sir
Geofry,) with his flannel night cap and drawers -- "Oh, this damned gout -- I Am
almost tipsy with all the Port I Have drank -- yet no ease. -- Mily, come to bed,
dear;" then, says you, "You know, sir, I Am engaged to my lady Cheatwell's
rout." (Coughs) "Pshaw, pox on her rout; come, come; you will find the good
effects in the morning. Lay my ptisan by the bedside -- Oh, lord! oh, lord! I
was forgetting my swanskin wrapper. -- Hand it to me, lovey. -- Help it on --
there -- there -- Zounds, my dear, take care of my toes. -- Oh! this confounded
rheumatism." --


Emi. Well done, Florimel; you have frightened me so much, by your picture of the
connubial state with Sir Geofry, that I Will submit to whatever you will have me.


Flor. That Is a good child. Now to my charms, and to my wily trains, of power
to cheat the eye, with blear illusion, and offer false presentiments.

(Heroically.)
Emil. Well said, my dear enchantress.


Flor. I Will go strait about my letter. Farewell, Emily, and pray for my success.


Emil. With all my heart. Come, Betty.

[Exeunt omnes.]
SCENE, a Street.
Sir Geofry solus. A mad wench, that Florimel! she never fails to make me look
ridiculous before my wife, that is to be; which, when she is, I Will take care
she shall have little of her conversation. -- How the young fellows will steer
at my marriage; but my ungracious nephew -- how he will take it. Zounds! I wish
she was pregnant this moment -- I Will soon do it; aye, aye, I don't fear -- yes,
'twill be a boy, [Enter a Porter, who eyes him with great circumspection.] What
does that fellow look at me so earnestly for -- Now, if I was married, I should
think he smoked my horns. Well, sir rascal, how do you like me? -- eh --


Port. Aye, aye, it is he -- this letter for your honor.


Sir Geo. Let Us see -- thirty years ago I should think this came from some lady
that eyed me from a window -- Where Is my spectacles; -- hem -- it is meet I put
them on. Now, sir, for our letter. (Reeds; while he is reading, the Porter track
off.) ' Sir,' (very well,) Though by the manner you raceive this, you might
doubt the truths which it contains, yet, let your care to prove them convince
you, 'twas dictated by a disinterested friendship. -- (I Am very much obliged to
my friend -- Here, you sir -- who sent you with this letter? -- He -- speak
boldly, man -- (Takes off his spectacles, and looks about.) The rascal's run
away -- Well, to proceed -- (Reads.) Know, sir, the lady you intend to take as
a partner to your bed and fortune, has lavishly bestowed her honor on a
certain young gentleman; who he is, you may probably find out. -- Start not,
sir, at this information, as I Will put you in a way, with, your eyes to be a
witness of her same. (The devil you will) At the hour of two exactly, this
night, wait disguised at her father's door, and you will see this gentleman let
in by Betty the maid. (Ah! the devil take Betty the maid, the bawd, you mean,
my good friend.) He, on these occasions, is let out in the same manner at six
in the morning; that by proving this, you may avoid a match so much to your
dishonor, is the sincere wish, of, sir, Your unknown friend, ANONYMOUS.

I Am your most obedient humble servant, my good friend, ANONYMOUS -- Very fine,
this -- What a noose have I escaped? Oh, lord! -- No, it is all a damned lie,
and I don't believe a word of it -- But zounds, am I not told the time, the
place, each circumstance! -- An't it at my own election to prove it -- ha! ha!
I believe I Will catch 'em; they thought I would not get out of my warm bed at
midnight -- There they reckoned without their host -- Zounds! I wish the hour
was come -- Well, till then, I Will suspend my judgment -- But, hold -- for a
disguise -- let me see -- a livery; no -- that would be too remarkable -- A
great coat like a watchman, and a pale in my hand -- ay, that is good -- my real
person would spoil sport.

Exit.
ACT II.
SCENE, the Street before Sir Anthony' s House.
Enter Sir Geofry in his disguise. Sir Geofry. IT IS pretty dark. Stay, which is
the house? Aye, this is it; now for our amorous spark -- I believe it is nigh
the hour -- I Will draw as close to the door as possible; if I could get a sight
of his face -- It Is well I Have this disguise; if some of the collectors should
find me in propria persona, they would have a booty -- Hush! who is that? eh, a man!
no, its only a post; pox on it -- I think I hear a door open; no, its the
creaking of that damned sign. [The clock strikes two, and the window opens.]
Zounds! the window opens -- at the nick.


Bet. (at the window.) Sir, sir, are you there? No; it is a dark night.


Sir Geo. Not so dark, but I can see your iniquity.


Bet. I wish he were come -- I hope my mistress will have such good
opportunities when she is married to Sir Geofry.


Sir Geo. The devil doubt you.


Bet. Oh, yes, I Will warrant the old stupid cuckold will be snoring fast at
these hours. Certainly, Sir Geofry's an ugly old devil; faugh! I loath the
thoughts of him.

Spits out.
Sir Geo. Zounds! the jade has spit upon my nose; I wish I had a charged
pistol, I Would: blow her off her perch.


Bet. I wish with all my heart he were come.


Sir Geo. Ay, ay, he is come so often, he is cloyed.


Bet. It Is a fine still night -- I Will divert myself with a song.

Sings.
Sir Geo. Damn your song -- There Is a jade! there is a Siren. [ Enter Florimel
dressed in men's clothes, and a backney coachman; pays the coachman.] Zounds!
he is here -- Oh, my trusty friend, ANONYMOUS -- Stay, I Have a good mind to give
him a knock on the powdered pate with my pole.

[Florimel, as accidentally, drops a paper; Betty comes down and lets her in.]
Sir Geo. Ha! a letter; this may inform me something. No, there is no name.
Shall I alarm the family? No; I Will go after this coachman, and enquire the name
of his fare.

Exit.
Enter Thady. Tha. Well, upon my soul, this is comical enough -- I could take
my oath upon the Bible Evangelist, that it was my master I seen going to the
hackney -- coach. I could swear to the clothes; the very grand suit he brought
from Venice -- Well, the directions he gave the coachman, was to drive like, a
devil to Sir Anthony Woodville's, in Bruton Street -- Arrah, what can he be
about. Well, well, leave me alone for a good guess -- Upon my word, I think if
he diverts himself an hour or so with madam Emilia, I Have a good right to do the
same with Betty the maid -- Stay, I believe this is the house; ay, ay, I Am
right enough. He Is got in, I see the coach drive at a devil of a rate. I wish
I Would got up behind it -- Upon my soul, he would be a little surprised to see Thady
-- By this time they have taken their first sleep. If I could see Betty. [Peeps
through the keyhole.] Betty! Betty! -- Stay, I believe she remembers my voice --
I Will sing a bit of a song -- troth, and Betty herself sings a good song.

He sings.
After the Song, enter Sir Geofry, very dirty, and out of breath. Sir Geo. What
-- what a confounded fall I Have got; that rascally coachman drove like Jehu. --
I wish I had overtaken him; then I Would find out who this youth is.


Tha. Betty -- Betty -- aye, Betty's gone to bed; upon my soul I wish I was
with her; she is a boogoorah little creature.


Sir Geo. Eh! who the devil's that? Another, going to take his turn.


Tha. Arrah, who is that? Oh -- ay, it is a watchman -- Your servant, Mr.
Watchman -- Arrah, did you see my master going into Sir Anthony's here?


Sir Geo. Zounds! this is that bogtrotting Irish son of a whore, Delamour's man
-- Oh, ho, so then he is come to London -- Oh, then the riddle's expounded. --
Why, friend, who are you? or who is your master?


Tha. Who am I? and who is my master? How inquisitive these old people are
always -- Why, friend, my master is Mr. Delamour, who is just after coming from
Paris, and thought to be married to Madam Emilia, Sir Anthony Woodville's
daughter, only for an old son of a whore, one Sir Geofry Gingle --
Monumshandoul, but the first place I catch him, I Will clapper-claw him; but my
master's doing his business for him; you know my master's leavings is good
enough for such an old rotten bell-weather -- Now you know about my master, you
must know I Am his servant, and my name is Thady Macbrogue.


Sir Geo. If my pole holds out, I Will break some of this fellow's bones -- that
will be some satisfaction -- Hearkee, I believe you're a rogue.


Tha. How! I Will tell you what, I believe you're an old fool, if you don't go
and cry your hour, Mr. Watchman.


Sir Geo. So, friend, you're pimping for your master; well, I Will reward you a
little for your trouble; when you go to Dublin, remember that, and that.


Tha. Ha, I see you want a thrashing, and, upon my soul, you shall have it.


Sir Geofry strikes him twice with the pole. Thady closes with him, trips up
his heels, wrests the pole out of his hand, and is going to strike, but stops
his hand. Tha. There, you old wrangling son of a whore; are you easy? -- No --
I Would scorn to strike you, and you down -- Get up, you rascal you --


Sir Geo. Help -- Murder -- Murder -- Thieves!


Tha. Oh, ho!

Exit Thady.
Enter Constable and Watch. Con. Peace, in the King's name; what is the matter?
-- Hold the lanthorn; what have we here? -- Eh, a watchman -- No, I don't know
his face; some rogue in disguise --


Sir Geo. You lie, you rascal, I Am a knight.


Con. Ay, ay, I believe you are, a knight of the pad.


Sir Geo. Take care of me, you rogues.


Con. Ay, we'll take care of you, I Will warrant it.


1st Watch. What, no dress would serve the rogue, but a watchman's -- All the
robberies this fellow has done tonight would be left on one of us -- I Am glad
we have caught him.


2d Watch. Such a scandal to the honorable profession of watchman! -- I must
give him a bang for that.


Con. Come, bring him away to the Roundhouse; there we'll search him -- Take
care of his hands; to be sure he has pistols -- If he comes down handsomely,
I Will let him go -- Bring him away.

Exeunt omnes.
SCENE, A Chamber.
Enter Emily and Betty. Emi. Is Florimel gone?


Bet. Yes, Me'em; she looked amazingly handsome -- Oh, Madam, does she not make
a very pretty man? The very model of her brother, Mr. Delamour.


Emi. Oh, Betty, don't trouble me with idle discourse -- what to do I know not
-- How shall I abide my father's anger!


Bet. Why, to be sure, me'm, Sir Geofry will make a dreadful story to my
master; I shall come in for my share.

A knocking is heard at the door.
Emi. I am afraid that is Sir Geofry; Betty, run and see. [ Exit Betty.] Oh,
Florimel! I fear no good will come of this plot of thine. [ Enter Betty.] Well,
Betty.


Bet. Set your heart at rest, madam, for it is Sir Geofry all in a fume; I heard
him desiring James to tell his master he is here.


Emi. Betty, do you go, and find some mean to listen to them, and bring me word
how my father takes it; I Will be in my own room. What shall I do?

Exeunt severally.
Enter Sir Geofry and Footman. Foot. Sir, my master will wait on you
immediately.


Sir Geo. Very well. -- [Exit Footman.] Let me think now of all the different
disasters which I suffered last night; first, after putting myself in a good
sweat, by limping after an hackney coach, and to no effect, I must cool myself,
by tumbling over head and heels, in a filthy kennel, by way of a Somerset; then
I was in danger of suffocating, and the breaking of my neck; next, I that was
never over valiant, must make a trial of my prowess, on Irishman, a fellow
(...), firm as his country oak; but, (...) must do him the justice to own, that
(...) some of the generosity of an Irish^^^ (...) pounding me to mummy, when he
(...) down, which I cannot deny but I deserved; then to be lugg'd to the
Round-house, like a thief, where I was almost stifled with tobacco -- Well,
that expelled vlier scents, with which, I suppose, the plce abounded, among
cutthroats, pick-pockets -- Oh, hers comes Sir Anthony.


Enter Sir Anthony. Sir Ant. Ha! Sir Geofry, a good morning; you're a brisk
lover; a-dod, you're resolved your mistress shall not forget you --


Sir Geo. I don't know how to open the matter him -- [Aside.] Sir Anthony, I
thank you, but it gives me infinite concern, as I should be proud of our
alliance, that I must be obliged to forget her -- But --


Sir Ant. But what? what?


Sir Geo. Though for reasons which, perhaps, you may find out hereafter, I must
stop all further proceedings, with regard to my marriage with your daughter --


Sir Ant. How!


Sir Geo. Yes, sir, with your daughter; yet, I hope it will not break the
friendship so long subsisting between you and I --


Sir Ant. How! stop the proceedings of the marriage! What Is the meaning of all
this? Stop the proceedings of the marriage!


Sir Geo. Yes, sir, upon cool and proper reflection, I Have considered 'twould be
a very imprudent thing for a person of my age, in the wane of life, to espouse
a lady so young, and possessed of so much beauty, as Miss Emily.


Sir Ant. Sir Geofry, Sir Geofry, is this a time for your cool, and your proper
reflections? -- Very well, sir, very well. -- Sir, sir, let me tell you, you have
used me ill, in the tenderest point, sir, and don't think it shall pass with
impunity -- But, sir, I see, I see through the shallow gloss you have given it; I
see your mean, fordid reason for recanting, your repentance of the offer you
made me of taking my child without a portion; there, sir, is your reason. Fie!
fie! fie!


Sir Geo. Ungenetous man! to put such an evil construction upon and concealing
that, which you shall know to your confusion; since I Have no other means of
justification, know, sir, your daughter's a prostitute; now, sir; you know my
reason, Delamour's the man who has dishonored her; I saw him let into this
house at two o'clock this morning; there is the mandate he obeyed; there, sir,
read that, perhaps you know your daughter's hand; Delamour accidentally dropped
it out of his pocket, and I picked it up; besides, I heard it all from his
servant.


Sir Ant. [Reads] Come this night, exactly at two o'clock, and Betty will
conduct you to the longing arms of Emily. -- Oh, unhappy girl! wretched,
wretched father! -- My friend, forgive me --


Sir Geo. From my soul. -- I knew the effect the knowledge of this unfortunate
affair would have on you, therefore I intended you should never know a syllable
of it from me.


Sir Ant. Here, [Going to the wing,] here, who is there? I Will turn the
ungracious wretch out of my doors this instant, to meet the infamy she deserves
-- what, to make my house a brothel -- As for her seducer, I Will --


Sir Geo. No, no, hear reason, get the better of your choler; your exposing her
in that manner would be wrong, quite wrong. Give me leave to advise you -- Keep
the whole a secret, even from your servants; as for Betty, she has been her
confidant; send immediately to Delamour, found him about a marriage with Emily
-- I know his circumstances perfectly, as some of his land borders upon mine.
He has a very pretty estate, but a little encumbered, owing to some
extravagancies incident to young men of his volatile disposition. The fortune
which I refused with Emily, will help to clear his estate, and pay off his
sister Florimel's fortune; these considerations, joined to an innate principle
of honor, which I never knew him deviate from till now, perhaps may influence
him to accept of your offer; but don't you mention the least knowledge of their
intercourse -- What think ye?


Sir Ant. Why, I don't know, my dear friend, you're too good, too good, indeed;
and so should I be to follow your advice -- But though she has gone astray, yet
she is still my child. -- Were I sure he would cover her shame by marriage, with
pleasure I Would double her portion -- But it is most amazing -- I did not think
Delamour was returned from France -- Oh, sure, if I knew he was in the same
kingdom, I should have taken better care of her; but, however, I Will send for
him immediately -- But it is to no purpose -- a likely thing, a young fellow,
like him, would tie himself for life to one he has gained upon such easy terms;
and as for trusting to his honor, the young fellows of this age use the bare
word as an instrument of deception on the weaker sex; the practice to them is a
mere jest: Indeed her fortune, I don't know what that may do; I will not see her
till I try my success with him, which is so much the better for her, for I
don't think but I should dash her brains out, were I to see her. I Will instantly
send to him.

Exit.
Sir Geo. Do. Well, my friend Sir Anthony, I cannot say but you're rightly
served, for preferring the love of your pelf, to the future peace and happiness
of your child. Zounds! what an old, blind fool I must be, to think of marrying
a girl of eighteen, as if I did not know the sex perfectly -- I, that am now --
let me see, how old am I now? -- eh -- adod, I Am upwards of threescore; aye, I
shall be sixty-two the eighteenth of next -- aye, September -- I Am greatly
afraid that young dog Delamour will not marry the girl -- I wish he would -- I
pity her, from my soul -- Well, well, I Will send to Cornwall for my poor nephew
and my pretty niece, and reinstate him in my favor -- Poor Ned was always a
good lad, and how can I blame him for doing a thing I was upon the point of
doing myself; more excusable in him, because of his youth -- Farewell matrimony
-- Well, if ever I marry, may this foolish sconce of mine be adorned with a
pair of horns, each as long as a barber's pole.

Exit.
SCENE, Delamour's apartments.
Enter Delamour, and Young Woodville. Del. There Is a Card, I received this
instant from your father.


Y. Wood. From my father! [Reads] Sir Anthony Woodville's compliments, and
congratulations of safe arrival, wait on Mr. Delamour. If Mr. Delamour's
disengaged, Sir Anthony requests the honor of seeing him immediately.


Del. What do you think of that?


Y. Wood. Upon my soul, I don't know what to think; perhaps the wheel has
turned; like enough; but Sir Geofry and he has had some pique; go to him
directly --


Del. I will, if 'twas no more than to get a sight of my Emily. I Will go dress
myself, and be with him immediately.

Exeunt.
SCENE, the street before Sir Anthony's house.
Enter Delamour and Thady, Delamour with the same suit of clothes which
Florimel wore. Del. So, Thady, you will persuade me I came to this house this
morning at two o'clock, in a hackney-coach.


Tha. Musha, upon my soul you did; I saw either you, or your fetch, as sure as
you are standing there.


Del. You blundering blockhead, you were drunk, and mistook some other person
for me -- Rap at the door --


Tha. Sir!


Del. Rap at the door, what does the oaf stare at?


Tha. [Knocks at the door.] Oh, yes, to be sure I mistook you for somebody
else; yes, I, indeed -- ah roquer a braquough.

Emilia. looks out of the window.
Emi. Oh, heavens, Mr. Delamour!

A servant opens the door.
Del. Is Sir Anthony at home?


Tha. Oh -- now I Will see little Betty.


Ser. Yes, sir.

They both go in.
SCENE, a chamber.
Enter Delamour. Del. Now I shall be blessed with the sight of my lovely Emily.


Enter Sir Anthony, they salute respectfully. Sir Ant. Mr. Delamour I am glad
to see you --


Del. I should think myself extremely happy in the good wishes of friendship of
Sir Anthony Woodville -- But as things have happened, since my leaving England,
I protest I cannot account a reason for having the honor of seeing him by him
own command --


Sir Ant. Why, Mr. Delamour, to wave all superfluous ceremony, I Have a proposal
to make to you, which, as I Will make it entirely your interest to accept, you
will not refuse.


Del. Sir, I Am attention.


Sir Ant. Well, then, Mr. Delamour, if none of the Parisian girls has your
heart in keeping, what would you think of a wife of your own country, a plain
English girl, with a good fortune? I say, what think you of my Emily; you were
once fond of her?


Del. Oh, heavens, sir, your Emily! -- I have always, and do still think of
her, as the supreme object at which all my hopes of future felicity are pointed
--


Sir Ant. Very well, sir; the fortune I intended to have given with Emily, if
married with my consent, was six thousand pounds; now, sir, as I am conscious
of your extraordinary merit, whereby I think you are not indifferent to her, if
you love her well enough to marry her, I Will double that sum; what say you, sir?


Del. This happiness so unexpected --


Sir Ant. Oh, sir, then you will not --


Del. With the most unfeigned joy, with rapture, sir, I accept your offer, free
from a lucrative view; and my future study shall be to convince you your
goodness was not ill-plac'd --


Sir Ant. I take you at your word; and now, Delamour, as I see you're a man of
honor, I forgive you what is past. Ah, Delamour! be kind to my poor child, use
her well -- Oh happy change! -- Here, Betty, call your mistress --


Del. Forgive me what is past! I don't understand him; however, as I know the
caprice of his temper, I Will make no enquiries.

Aside.
Enter Emily. Sir Ant. Come hither, Emily; there is your husband. [ He presents
her to Delamour, who takes her in his arms.]


Del. My life -- my dearest Emily!


Emil. Oh, Delamour!


Del. [They both kneel.] And now, sir, on my knees, I thank you for this
precious gem, which to my heart I Will ever hold most dear.


Enter Sir Geofry, who starts back at seeing them on their kness. Sir Ant.
Heaven bless my children, and confirm my forgiveness. [ To Sir Geofry.] Come,
my friend, with me joy, which I owe to your advice --


Sir Geo. Ha, this, indeed, is joyful! Adod, I Am glad of it; 'twas more than I
expected.


Enter Florimel and Young Woodville, hand in hand, followed by Thady and Betty,
in the same manner -- The two former kneel to Sir Anthony. Y. Wood. Dearest
father, extend to us your blessing, that we may participate in the general joy
--


Sir Ant. How! since it is so, if your father's blessing makes you happy, my
children be so.


Sir Geo. Rare doings! --


Tha. Ohono, since you're sharing the blessing, I hope my spouse and I Will come
in for snacks --


Sir Geo. Oh, ho, are you there?


Del. So, Thady, you have got a mate: Well, I Will do something more than wish you
joy --


Sir Geo. I cannot comprehend the meaning of all this rightly; aded, I cannot
fathom it -- Ah, there is a great deal of the profound in it. --


Flor. Then, sir, since your sagacity's not of a sufficient length to reach the
bottom, I must give you a line to eke it out, and to right my innocent friend,
who has suffered so much in your opinions. Now, Sir Geofry, and you, Sir
Anthony, look upon Emily in a different light than what you have lately done --
She had a gallant, it is true, and here he stands, in the circumference of this
simple petticoat, to hinder a preposterous match between Sir Geofry and my dear
Emily, which would render her inevitably miserable. I wrote you, Sir Geofry,
that anonymous letter, to which you gave so much credit; and in that suit of
clothes, which now my brother wears, I personated your imaginary rival, dropped
the billet of assignation, which you found and showed Sir Anthony. These
machinations of mine having had such happy effects, and as my real motive for
deceiving you both, proceeded from my eagerness to serve my dear Emily, -- I
hope you will both forgive me.


Sir Geo. And is this all orthodox?


Bet. I don't know what dox it is, but indeed, sir, it is true.


Sir Geo. Ay, ay, you were a party concerned: Well, I forgive you.


Sir Ant. So, 'twas a Female Gallant.


Tha. Upon my soul, and Square-Toes outwitted.


Del. I Am as much amazed at this, as any one here; for upon my honor, till
now, I was entirely ignorant of every single particular.


Sir Geo. And so, you mad wench, you were the Cuckold-maker I so much dreaded,
and you have bilk'd me of my wife. -- Delamour, with yonr leave, I Will salute your
intended -- [Kisses.] Ah, you are a happy dog! -- Mind your duty; for, by the
la, I Will settle a thousand pounds upon the first boy.


Flor. And you, wise father, when you would compel your child to wed against
her will, 'twere well To thwart your schemes, you meet a Florimel. Exeunt
omnes. FINIS.

