blazon or coat of arms DIEU ET MON DROIT


GEORGE R.
GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved BERNARD LINTOTT of our City of London,
Bookseller, has humbly represented unto Us that he is now printing a
Translation of the ILIAD of HOMER from the Greek in Six Volumes in Folio by
ALEXANDER POPE Gent. with large Notes upon each Book: And whereas the said
BERNARD LINTOTT has informed Us that he has been at a great Expense in carrying
on the said Work: and that the sole Right and Title of the Copy of the said
Work is vested in the said BERNARD LINTOTT. He has therefore humbly besought Us
to grant him Our Royal Privilege and License for the sole printing and
publishing thereof for the Term of fourteen Years. WE being graciously pleased
to encourage so Useful a Work, are pleased to condescend to his Request, and do
therefore give and grant unto the said BERNARD LINTOTT Our Royal License and
Privilege for the sole printing and publishing the said Six Volvmes of the
ILIAD of HOMER translated by the said ALEXANDER POPE, for and during the Term
of fourteen Years, to be computed from the Day of the Date hereof, strictly
charging and prohibiting all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms and Dominions to
reprint or abridge the same either in the like or any other Volume or Volumes
whatsoever, or to import, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies of the same
or any part thereof reprinted beyond the Seas within the said Term of fourteen
Years, without the Consent and Approbation of the said BERNARD LINTOTT, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals
first had and obtained, as they and every of them offending herein will answer
the contrary at their Perils, and such other Penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm may be inflicted: Whereof the Master, Wardens and
Company of Stationers of Our City of London, Commissioners and other Officers
of Our Customs, and all other Our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern,
are to take Notice that due Obedience be given to Our Pleasure herein signified
Given at Our Court at St. James's the sixth Day of May, 1715. in the first
Year. of our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command, JAMES STANHOPE.

THE ILIAD OF HOMER.

Translated by Mr. POPE.

VOL. III.

-- Det primos versibus annos
Moeoniumque bibat foelici pectore fontem.
PETR. LONDON: Printed by W. BOWYER, for BERNARD LINTOTT between the
Temple-Gates. 1717.

THE NINTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Embassy to Achilles.
AGamemnon after the last Day's Defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit the
Siege, and return to their Country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor seconds
him, praising his Wisdom and Resolution. He orders the Guard to be
strengthened, and a Council summoned to deliberate what Measures were to be
followed in this Emergency. Agamemnon pursues this Advice, and Nestor farther
prevails upon him to send Ambassadors to Achilles, in order to move him to a
Reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of, who are accompanied by old
Phoenix. They make, each of them, very moving and pressing Speeches, but are
rejected with Roughness by Achilles, who notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his
Tent. The Ambassadors return unsuccessfully to the Camp, and the Troops betake
themselves to sleep.

This Book, and the next following, take up the Space of one Night, which is
the twenty seventh from the beginning of the Poem. The Scene lies on the
Seashore, the Station of the Grecian Ships.

THE NINTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THUS joyful Troy maintained the Watch of Night,
While Fear, pale Comrade of inglorious Flight,
And heav'n-bred Horror, on the Grecian part,
Sat on each Face, and sadden'd every heart.
As from its cloudy Dungeon issuing forth,
A double Tempest of the West and North
Swells over the Sea, from Thracia's frozen Shore,
Heaps Waves on Waves, and bids the Aegean roar;
This way and that, the boiling Deeps are tossed;
Such various Passions urged the troubled Host.
Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
Superior Sorrows swelled his Royal Breast;
Himself his Orders to the Heralds bears,
To bid to Council all the Grecian Peers,
But bid in Whispers: These surround their Chief,
In solemn Sadness, and majestic Grief.
The King amidst the mournful Circle rose;
Down his wan Cheek a briny Torrent flows;
So silent Fountains, from a Rock's tall Head,
In sable Streams soft-trickling Waters shed.
With more than vulgar Grief he stood oppressed;
Words, mixed with Sighs, thus bursting from his Breast.
Ye Sons of Greece! partake your Leader's Care,
Fellows in Arms, and Princes of the War!
Of partial Jove too justly we complain,
And heavenly Oracles believed in vain;
A safe Return was promised to our toils,
With Conquest honored, and enriched with Spoils:
Now shameful flight alone can save the Host;
Our Wealth, our People, and our Glory lost.
So Jove decrees, Almighty Lord of all!
Jove, at whose Nod whole Empires rise or fall,
Who shakes the feeble Props of human Trust,
And Towers and Armies humbles to the Dust.
Haste then, for ever quit these fatal Fields,
Haste to the Joys our native Country yields;
Spread all your Canvas, all your Oars employ,
Nor hope the Fall of heav'n-defended Troy.
He said; deep Silence held the Grecian Band,
Silent, unmoved, in dire Dismay they stand,
A pensive Scene! 'till Tydeus' warlike Son
Rolled on the King his Eyes, and thus begun.
When Kings advise us to renounce our Fame,
First let him speak, who first has suffered Shame.
If I oppose thee, Prince! thy Wrath withold,
The Laws of Council bid my Tongue be bold.
Thou first, and thou alone, in Fields of Fight,
Durst brand my courage, and defame my might;
Nor from a Friend the unkind Reproach appeared,
The Greeks stood witness, all our Army heard.
The Gods, O Chief! from whom our honors spring,
The Gods have made thee but by halves a King;
They gave thee Scepters, and a wide Command,
They gave Dominion over the Seas and Land,
The noblest Power that might the World control
They gave thee not -- a brave and virtuous Soul.
Is this a Gen'ral's Voice, that would suggest
Fears like his own to every Grecian Breast?
Confiding in our want of Worth, he stands,
And if we fly, it is what our King commands.
Go thou inglorious! from the embattel'd Plain;
Ships thou have store, and nearest to the Main,
A nobler Care the Grecians shall employ,
To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
Here Greece shall stay; or if all Greece retire,
My self will stay, till Troy or I expire;
My self, and Sthenelus, will fight for Fame;
God bad us fight, and 'twas with God we came.
He ceased: the Greeks loud Acclamations raise,
And Voice to Voice resounds Tydides' Praise.
Wise Nestor then his Reverend Figure reared;
He spoke: the Host in still Attention heard.
O truly great! in whom the Gods have joined
Such Strength of Body, with such Force of Mind;
In Conduct, as in Courage, you excel,
Still first to act what you advise so well.
Those wholesome Counsels which thy Wisdom moves,
Applauding Greece with common Voice approves.
Kings thou can blame; a bold, but prudent Youth;
And blame even Kings with Praise, because with Truth.
And yet those Years that since thy Birth have run,
Would hardly style thee Nestor's youngest Son.
Then let me add what yet remains behind,
A Thought unfinished in that generous Mind;
Age bids me speak; nor shall The Advice I bring
Distaste the People, or offend the King.
Cursed is the Man, and void of Law and Right,
Unworthy Property, unworthy Light,
Unfit for public Rule, or private Care;
That Wretch, that Monster, who delights in War:
Whose Lust is Murder, and whose horrid Joy,
To tear his Country, and his Kind destroy!
This Night, refresh and fortify thy Train;
Between the Trench and Wall, let Guards remain:
Be that the Duty of the young and bold;
But thou, O King, to Council call the old:
Great is thy Sway, and weighty are thy Cares;
Thy high Commands must spirit all our Wars.
With Thracian Wines recruit thy honored Guests,
For happy Counsels flow from sober Feasts.
Wise, weighty Counsels aid a State distressed,
And such a Monarch as can choose the best.
See! what a Blaze from hostile Tents aspires,
How near our Fleet approach the Trojan Fires?
Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful Light,
What Eye beholds 'em, and can close to night?
This dreadful Interval determines all;
To morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall.
Thus spoke the hoary Sage: the rest obey;
Swift through the Gates the Guards direct their way.
His Son was first to pass the lofty Mound,
The generous Thrasymed, in Arms renowned:
Next him Ascalaphus, Iaalmen, stood,
The double Offspring of the Warrior-God.
Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
And Lycomed, of Creon's noble Line.
Sev'n were the Leaders of the nightly Bands,
And each bold Chief a hundred Spears commands.
The Fires they light, to short Repasts they fall,
Some line the Trench, and others man the Wall.
The King of Men, on public Counsels bent,
Convened the Princes in his ample Tent;
Each seized a Portion of the Kingly Feast,
But stayed his Hand when Thirst and Hunger ceast.
Then Nestor spoke, for Wisdom long approved,
And slowly rising, thus the Council moved.
Monarch of Nations! whose superior Sway
Assembled States, and Lords of Earth obey,
The Laws and Scepters to thy Hand are given,
And Millions own the Care of thee and Heaven.
O King! the Counsels of my Age attend;
With thee my Cares begin, in thee must end;
Thee, Prince! it fits alike to speak and hear,
Pronounce with Judgment, with Regard give ear,
To see no wholesome Motion be withstood,
And ratify the best, for public Good.
Nor, though a meaner give Advice, repine,
But follow it, and make the Wisdom thine.
Hear then a Thought, not now conceived in have,
At once my present Judgment, and my past;
When from Pelides' Tent you forced the Maid,
I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
But bold of Soul, when headlong Fury fired,
You wronged the Man, by Men and Gods admired:
Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
With Prayers to move him, or with Gifts to bend.
To whom the King. With Justice have thou shown
A Prince's Faults, and I with Reason own.
That happy Man whom Jove still honors most,
Is more than Armies, and himself an Host.
Blessed in his Love, this wondrous Hero stands;
Heaven fights his War, and humbles all our Bands.
Fain would my Heart, which erred through frantic Rage,
The wrathful Chief and angry Gods assuage.
If Gifts immense his mighty Soul can bow,
Hear all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
Ten weighty Talents of the purest Gold,
And twice ten Vases of refulgent Mold;
Sev'n sacred Tripods, whose unfully'd Frame
Yet knows no Office, nor has felt the Flame:
Twelve Steeds unmatched in Fleetness and in Force,
And still victorious in the dusty Course:
(Rich were the Man, whose ample Stores exceed
The Prizes purchased by their winged Speed)
Sev'n lovely Captives of the Lesbian Line,
Skilled in each Art, unmatched in Form divine,
The same I chose for more than vulgar Charms,
When Lesbos sunk beneath the Hero's Arms.
All these, to buy his Friendship, shall be paid,
And joined with these, the long contested Maid;
With all her Charms, Briseis I resign,
And solemn swear those Charms were never mine;
Untouched she stayed, uninjur'd she removes,
Pure from my Arms, and guiltless of my Loves,
These instant shall be his; and if the Powers
Give to our Arms proud Ilion's hostile Towers,
Then shall he store (when Greece the Spoil divides)
With Gold and Brass his loaded Navy's sides.
Besides full twenty Nymphs of Trojan Race,
With copious Love shall crown his warm Embrace;
Such as himself will choose; who yield to none,
Or yield to Helen's heavenly Charms alone.
Yet hear me farther: When our Wars are over,
If safe we land on Argos fruitful Shore,
There shall he live my Son, our Honors share,
And with Orestes' self divide my Care.
Yet more -- three Daughters in my Court are bred,
And each well worthy of a Royal Bed;
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
And bright Chrysothemis with golden Hair;
Her let him choose, whom most his Eyes approve,
I ask no Presents, no Reward for Love.
My self will give the Dower; so vast a Store,
As never Father gave a Child before.
Sev'n ample Cities shall confess his Sway,
Him Enope, and Phaerae him obey,
Cardamyle with ample Turrets crowned,
And sacred Pedasus, for Vines renowned;
Aepea fair, the Pastures Hyra yields,
And rich Antheia with her flowery Fields:
The whole Extent to Pylos' sandy Plain
Along the verdant Margin of the Main.
There Heifers graze, and laboring Oxen toil;
Bold are the Men, and generous is the Soil;
There shall he reign with Power and Justice crowned,
And rule the tributary Realms around.
All this I give, his Vengeance to control,
And sure all this may move his mighty Soul.
Pluto, the grizly God who never spares,
Who feels no Mercy, and who hears no Prayers,
Lives dark and dreadful in deep Hell's Abodes,
And Mortals hate him, as the worst of Gods.
Great though he be, it fits him to obey;
Since more than his my Years, and more my Sway.
The Monarch thus: the Reverend Nestor then:
Great Agamemnon! glorious King of Men!
Such are thy Offers as a Prince may take,
And such as fits a generous King to make.
Let chosen Delegates this Hour be sent,
(My self will name them) to Pelides' Tent:
Let Phaenix lead, revered for hoary Age,
Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
Yet more to sanctify the Word you send,
Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
Pray, in deep Silence, and with purest Hands.
He said, and all approved. The Heralds bring
The cleansing Water from the living Spring.
The Youth with Wine the sacred Goblets crowned,
And large Libations drenched the Sands around.
The Rite performed, the Chiefs their Thirst allay,
Then from the Royal Tent they took their way;
Wise Nestor turns on each his careful Eye,
Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply:
Much he advised them all, Ulysses most,
To deprecate the Chief, and save the Host.
Through the still Night they march, and hear the roar
Of murmuring Billows on the sounding Shore.
To Neptune, Ruler of the Seas profound,
Whose liquid Arms the mighty Globe surround,
They pour forth Vows their Embassy to bless,
And calm the Rage of stern Aeacides.
And now arrived, where, on the sandy Bay
The Myrmidonian Tents and Vessels lay;
Amused at Ease, the godlike Man they found,
Pleased with the solemn Harp's harmonious Sound.
(The well-wrought Harp from conquered Thebae came,
Of polished Silver was its costly Frame)
With this he sooths his angry Soul, and sings
The immortal Deeds of Heroes and of Kings.
Patroclus only of the Royal Train,
Placed in his Tent, attends the lofty Strain:
Full opposite he sat, and listened long,
In Silence waiting till he ceased the Song.
Unseen the Grecian Embassy proceeds
To his high Tent; the great Ulysses leads.
Achilles, starting as the Chiefs he spied,
Leaped from his Seat, and laid the Harp aside.
With like Surprise arose Menaetius' Son:
Pelides grasped their Hands, and thus begun.
Princes all hail! whatever brought ye here,
Or strong Necessity, or urgent Fear:
Welcome, though Greeks! for not as Foes ye came;
To me more dear than all that bear the Name.
With that, the Chiefs beneath his Roof he led,
And placed in Seats with purple Carpets spread.
Then thus -- Patroclus; crown a larger Bowl,
Mix purer Wine, and open every Soul.
Of all the Warriors yonder Host can send,
Thy Friend most honors these, and these thy Friend.
He said; Patroclus over the blazing Fire
Heaps in a Brazen Vase three Chines entire:
The Brazen Vase Automedon sustains,
Which Flesh of Porker, Sheep, and Goat contains:
Achilles at the genial Feast presides,
The Parts transfixes, and with Skill divides.
Mean while Patroclus sweats the Fire to raise;
The Tent is brightned with the rising Blaze:
Then, when the languid Flames at length subside,
He strows a Bed of glowing Embers wide,
Above the Coals the smoking Fragments turns,
And sprinkles sacred Salt from lifted Urns;
With Bread the glittering Canisters they load,
Which round the Board Menaetius' Son bestowed;
Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
Each Portion parts, and orders every Rite.
The first fat Offerings, to The Immortals due,
Amidst the greedy Flames Patroclus threw;
Then each, indulging in the social Feast,
His Thirst and Hunger soberly represt.
That done, to Phaenix Ajax gave the Sign;
Not unperceived; Ulysses crowned with Wine
The foaming Bowl, and instant thus began,
His Speech addressing to the Godlike Man.
Health to Achilles! happy are thy Guests!
Not those more honored whom Atrides feasts:
Though generous Plenty crown thy loaded Boards,
That, Agamemnon's regal Tent affords;
But greater Cares sit heavy on our Souls,
Not eased by Banquets or by flowing Bowls.
What Scenes of Slaughter in yon Fields appear!
The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
Greece on the Brink of Fate all doubtful stands,
And owns no Help but from thy saving Hands:
Troy and her Aids for ready Vengeance call;
Their threatening Tents already shade our Wall,
Hear how with Shouts their Conquest they proclaim,
And point at every Ship their vengeful Flame!
For them, the Father of the Gods declares,
Theirs are his Omens, and his Thunder theirs.
See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
See! Heaven and Earth the raging Chief defies;
What Fury in his Breast, what Lightning in his Eyes!
He waits but for the Morn, to sink in Flame
The Ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian Name.
Heavens! how my Country's Woes distract my Mind
Lest Fate accomplish all his Rage designed.
And must we, Gods! our Heads inglorious lay
In Trojan Dust, and this the fatal Day?
Return, Achilles! oh return, though late,
To save thy Greeks, and stop the Course of Fate;
If in that Heart, or Grief, or Courage lies,
Rise to redeem; ah yet, to conquer, rise!
The Day may come, when all our Warriors slain,
That Heart shall melt, that Courage rise in vain.
Regard in time, O Prince divinely brave!
Those wholesome Counsels which thy Father gave.
When Peleus in his aged Arms embraced
His parting Son, these Accents were his last.
My Child! with Strength, with Glory and Success,
Thy Arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
Trust that to Heaven -- but thou, thy Cares engage
To calm thy Passions, and subdue thy Rage:
From gentler Manners let thy Glory grow,
And shun Contention, the sure Source of Woe;
That young and old may in thy Praise combine,
The Virtues of Humanity be thine --
This, now despised Advice, thy Father gave;
Ah! check thy Anger, and be truly brave,
If thou will yield to great Atrides' Prayers,
Gifts worthy thee, his Royal Hand prepares;
If not -- but hear me, while I number over
The proffered Presents, an exhaustless Store.
Ten weighty Talents of the purest Gold,
And twice ten Vases of refulgent Mold;
Sev'n sacred Tripods, whose unsullied Frame
Yet knows no Office, nor has felt the Flame:
Twelve Steeds unmatched in Fleetness and in Force,
And still victorious in the dusty Course:
(Rich were the Man, whose ample Stores exceed
The Prizes purchased by their winged Speed)
Sev'n lovely Captives of the Lesbian Line,
Skilled in each Art, unmatched in Form divine,
The same he chose for more than vulgar Charms,
When Lesbos sunk beneath thy conquering Arms.
All these, to buy thy Friendship, shall be paid,
And joined with these, the long contested Maid;
With all her Charms, Briseis he will resign,
And solemn swear those Charms were only thine;
Untouched she stayed, uninjur'd she removes,
Pure from his Arms, and guiltless of his Loves.
These instant shall be thine; and if the Powers
Give to our Arms proud Ilion's hostile Towers,
Then shall thou store (when Greece the Spoil divides)
With Gold and Brass thy loaded Navy's sides.
Besides full twenty Nymphs of Trojan Race,
With copious Love shall crown thy warm Embrace;
Such as thy self shall choose; who yield to none,
Or yield to Helen's heavenly Charms alone.
Yet hear me farther: When our Wars are over,
If safe we land on Argos fruitful Shore,
There shall thou live his Son, his Honors share,
And with Orestes' self divide his Care.
Yet more -- three Daughters in his Court are bred,
And each well worthy of a Royal Bed;
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
And bright Chrysothemis with golden Hair;
Her shall thou wed whom most thy Eyes approve,
He asks no Presents, no Reward for Love.
Himself will give the Dower; so vast a Store,
As never Father gave a Child before.
Sev'n ample Cities shall confess thy Sway,
Thee Enope, and Phaerae thee obey,
Cardamyle with ample Turrets crowned,
And sacred Pedasus, for Vines renowned;
Aepea fair, the Pastures Hyra yields,
And rich Antheia with her flowery Fields:
The whole Extent to Pylos' sandy Plain
Along the verdant Margin of the Main.
There Heifers graze, and laboring Oxen toil;
Bold are the Men, and generous is the Soil;
There shall thou reign with Power and Justice crowned,
And rule the tributary Realms around.
Such are the Proffers which this Day we bring,
Such the Repentance of a suppliant King.
But if all this relentless thou disdain,
If Honor, and if Interest plead in vain;
Yet some Redress to suppliant Greece afford,
And be, amongst her guardian Gods, adored.
If no Regard thy suffering Country claim,
Hear thy own Glory, and the Voice of Fame:
For now that Chief, whose unresisted Ire,
Made Nations tremble, and whole Hosts retire,
Proud Hector, now, the unequal Fight demands,
And only triumphs to deserve thy Hands.
Then thus the Goddess-born. Ulysses, hear
A faithful Speech, that knows nor Art, nor Fear;
What in my secret Soul is understood,
My Tongue shall utter, and my Deeds make good.
Let Greece then know, my Purpose I retain,
Nor with new Treaties vex my Peace in vain.
Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
My Heart detests him as the Gates of Hell.
Then thus in short my fixed Resolves attend,
Which nor Atrides, nor his Greeks can bend;
Long Toils, long Perils in their Cause I bore,
But now the unfruitful Glories charm no more.
Fight or not fight, a like Reward we claim,
The Wretch and Hero find their Prize the same;
Alike regretted in the Dust he lies,
Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
Of all my Dangers, all my glorious Pains,
A Life of Labors, lo! what Fruit remains.
As the bold Bird her helpless Young attends,
From Danger guards them, and from Want defends;
In Search of Prey she wings the spacious Air,
And with the untasted Food supplies her Care:
For thankless Greece such Hardships have I braved,
Her Wives, her Infants by my Labors saved;
Long sleepless Nights in heavy Arms I stood,
And sweat laborious Days in Dust and Blood.
I sacked twelve ample Cities on the Main,
And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan Plain:
Then at Atrides' haughty Feet were laid
The Wealth I gathered, and the Spoils I made.
Your mighty Monarch these in Peace possessed;
Some few my Soldiers had, himself the rest.
Some Present too to every Prince was paid;
And every Prince enjoys the Gift he made;
I only must refund, of all his Train;
See what Pre-eminence our Merits gain!
My Spoil alone his greedy Soul delights;
My Spouse alone must bless his lustful Nights:
The Woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
But what is the Quarrel then of Greece to Troy?
What to these Shores the assembled Nations draws,
What calls for Vengeance but a Woman's Cause?
Are fair Endowments and a beauteous Face
Beloved by none but those of Atreus' Race?
The Wife whom Choice and Passion both approve,
Sure every wise and worthy Man will love.
Nor did my fair one less Distinction claim;
Slave as she was, my Soul adored the Dame.
Wronged in my Love, all Proffers I disdain;
Deceived for once, I trust not Kings again.
Ye have my Answer -- what remains to do,
Your King, Ulysses, may consult with you.
What needs he the Defense this Arm can make?
Has he not Walls no human Force can shake?
Has he not fenced his guarded Navy round,
With Piles, with Ramparts, and a Trench profound?
And will not these (the Wonders he has done)
Repel the Rage of Priam's single Son?
There was a time ('it was when for Greece I fought)
When Hector's Prowess no such Wonders wrought;
He kept the Verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
Achilles' Fury at the Scaean Gate;
He tried it once, and scarce was saved by Fate.
But now those ancient Enmities are over;
To morrow we the favoring Gods implore,
Then shall you see our parting Vessels crowned,
And hear with Oars the Hellespont resound.
The third Day hence, shall Pthia greet our Sails,
If mighty Neptune send propitious Gales;
Pthia to her Achilles shall restore
The Wealth he left for this detested Shore:
Thither the Spoils of this long War shall pass,
The ruddy Gold, the Steel, and shining Brass;
My beauteous Captives thither I Will convey,
And all that rests of my unravish'd Prey.
One only valued Gift your Tyrant gave,
And that resumed; the fair Lyrnessian Slave.
Then tell him; loud, that all the Greeks may hear,
And learn to scorn the Wretch they basely fear.
(For armed in Impudence, Mankind he braves,
And meditates new Cheats on all his Slaves:
Though shameless as he is, to face these Eyes
Is what he dares not; if he dares, he dies)
Tell him, all Terms, all Commerce I decline,
Nor share his Council, nor his Battle join;
For once deceived, was his; but twice, were mine.
No -- let the stupid Prince, whom Jove deprives
Of Sense and Justice, run where Frenzy drives;
His Gifts are hateful: Kings of such a Kind
Stand but as Slaves before a noble Mind.
Not though he proffered all himself possessed;
And all his Rapine could from others wrest;
Not all the golden Tides of Wealth that crown
The many-peopled Orchomenian Town;
Not all proud Thebes' unrivaled Walls contain,
The World's great Empress on the Egyptian Plain,
(That spreads her Conquests over a thousand States,
And pours her Heroes through a hundred Gates,
Two hundred Horsemen, and two hundred Cars
From each wide Portal issuing to the Wars)
Though Bribes were heaped on Bribes, in Number more
Than Dust in Fields, or Sands along the Shore;
Should all these Offers for my Friendship call;
It Is he that offers, and I scorn them all.
Atrides' Daughter never shall be led
(An ill-match'd Consort) to Achilles' Bed;
Like golden Venus though she charmed the Heart,
And vy'd with Pallas in the Works of Art.
Some greater Greek let those high Nuptials grace,
I hate Alliance with a Tyrant's Race.
If Heaven restore me to my Realms with Life,
The reverend Peleus shall elect my Wife;
Thessalian Nymphs there are, of Form divine,
And Kings that sue to mix their Blood with mine.
Blessed in kind Love, my Years shall glide away,
Content with just hereditary Sway;
There deaf for ever to the martial Strife,
Enjoy the dear Prerogative of Life.
Life is not to be bought with Heaps of Gold;
Not all Apollo's Pythian Treasures hold,
Or Troy once held, in Peace and Pride of Sway,
Can bribe the poor Possession of a Day!
Lost Herds and Treasures, we by Arms regain,
And Steeds unrivaled on the dusty Plain;
But from our Lips the vital Spirit fled,
Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
My Fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
And each alternate, Life or Fame proposed:
Here, if I stay, before the Trojan Town,
Short is my Date, but deathless my Renown;
If I return, I quit immortal Praise
For Years on Years, and long-extended Days.
Convinced, though late, I find my fond Mistake,
And warn the Greeks the wiser Choice to make:
To quit these Shores, their native Seats enjoy,
Nor hope the Fall of Heav'n-defended Troy.
Jove's Arm, displayed, asserts her from the Skies;
Her Hearts are strengthened, and her Glories rise.
Go then, to Greece report our fixed Design;
Bid all your Counsels, all your Armies join,
Let all your Forces, all your Arts conspire,
To save the Ships, the Troops, the Chiefs from Fire.
One Stratagem has failed, and others will:
Ye find, Achilles is unconquered still.
Go then -- digest my Message as ye may --
But here this Night let reverend Phaenix stay:
His tedious Toils, and hoary Hairs demand
A peaceful Death in Pthia's friendly Land.
But whether he remain, or sail with me,
His Age be sacred, and his Will be free.
The Son of Peleus ceased: The Chiefs around
In Silence wrapped, in Consternation drowned,
Attend the stern Reply. Then Phaenix rose;
(Down his white Beard a Stream of Sorrow flows)
And while the Fate of suffering Greece he mourned,
With Accents weak these tender Words returned.
Divine Achilles! will thou then retire,
And leave our Hosts in Blood, our Fleets on Fire?
If Wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless Mind,
How shall thy Friend, thy Phaenix, stay behind?
The Royal Peleus, when from Pthia's Coast
He sent thee early to the Achaian Host;
Thy Youth as then in sage Debates unskilled,
And new to Perils of the direful Field:
He bade me teach thee all the ways of War.
To shine in Councils, and in Camps to dare.
Never, ah never let me leave thy side!
No Time shall part us, and no Fate divide.
Not though the God that breathed my Life, restore
The Bloom I boasted, and the Port I bore,
When Greece of old beheld my youthful Flames,
(Delightful Greece, the Land of lovely Dames.)
My Father, faithless to my Mother's Arms,
Old as he was, adored a Stranger's Charms.
I tried what Youth could do (at her Desire)
To win the Damsel, and prevent my Sire.
My Sire with Curses loads my hated Head,
And cries, Ye Furies! barren be his Bed.
Infernal Jove, the vengeful Fiends below,
And ruthless Proserpine, confirmed his Vow.
Despair and Grief distract my laboring Mind;
Gods! what a Crime my impious Heart designed?
I thought (but some kind God that Thought suppressed)
To plunge the Poniard in my Father's Breast:
Then meditate my Flight; my Friends in vain
With Prayers entreat me, and with Force detain.
On fat of Rams, black Bulls, and brawny Swine,
They daily feast, with Draughts of fragrant Wine.
Strong Guards they placed, and watched nine Nights entire;
The Roofs and Porches flamed with constant Fire.
The tenth, I forced the Gates, unseen of all;
And favored by the Night, over leaped the Wall.
My Travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
In Pthia's Court at last my Labors end.
Your Sire received me, as his Son caressed,
With Gifts enriched, and with Possessions blessed.
The strong Dolopians thenceforth owned my Reign,
And all the Coast that runs along the Main.
By Love to thee his Bounties I repaid,
And early Wisdom to thy Soul conveyed:
Great as thou art, my Lessons made thee brave,
A Child I took thee, but a Hero gave.
Thy Infant Breast a like Affection showed;
Still in my Arms (an ever-pleasing Load)
Or at my Knee, by Phoenix would thou stand;
No Food was grateful but from Phoenix' Hand.
I pass my Watchings over thy helpless Years,
The tender Labors, the compliant Cares;
The Gods (I thought) reversed their hard Decree,
And Phoenix felt a Father's Joys in thee:
Thy growing Virtues justified my Cares,
And promised Comfort to my silver Hairs.
Now by thy Rage, thy fatal Rage, resigned;
A cruel Heart ill suits a manly Mind:
The Gods (the only great, and only wise)
Are moved by Offerings, Vows, and Sacrifice;
Offending Man their high Compassion wins,
And daily Prayers atone for daily Sins.
Prayers are Jove's Daughters, of celestial Race,
Lame are their Feet, and wrinkled is their Face;
With humble Mien, and with dejected Eyes,
Constant they follow where Injustice flies:
Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,
Sweeps the wide Earth, and tramples over Mankind,
While Prayers, to heal her Wrongs, move slow behind.
Who hears these Daughters of Almighty Jove,
For him they mediate to the Throne above:
When Man rejects the humble Suit they make,
The Sire revenges for the Daughter's sake,
From Jove commissioned fierce Injustice then
Descends, to punish unrelenting Men.
Oh let not headlong Passion bear the Sway;
These reconciling Goddesses obey:
Due Honors to the Seed of Jove belong;
Due Honors calm the fierce, and bend the strong.
Were these not paid thee by the Terms we bring,
Were Rage still harbored in the haughty King,
Nor Greece, nor all her Fortunes, should engage
Thy Friend to plead against so just a Rage.
But since what Honor asks, the General sends,
And sends by those whom most thy Heart commends,
The best and noblest of the Grecian Train;
Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!
Let me (my Son) an ancient Fact unfold,
A great Example drawn from Times of old;
Hear what our Fathers were, and what their Praise,
Who conquered their Revenge in former Days.
Where Calydon on rocky Mountains stands,
Once fought the Aetolian and Curetian Bands;
To guard it those, to conquer, these advance;
And mutual Deaths were dealt with mutual Chance.
The silver Cynthia bade Contention rise,
In Vengeance of neglected Sacrifice;
On Oeneus' Fields she sent a monstrous Boar,
That levelled Harvests, and whole Forests tore:
This Beast (when many a Chief his Tusks had slain)
Great Meleager stretched along the Plain.
Then, for his Spoils, a new Debate arose,
The Neighbor Nations thence commencing Foes.
Strong as they were, the bold Curetes failed,
While Meleager's thundering Arm prevailed:
Till Rage at length inflamed his lofty Breast,
(For Rage invades the wisest and the best.)
Cursed by Althaea, to his Wrath he yields,
And in his Wife's Embrace forgets the Fields.
"(She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair,
"And matchless Idas, more than Man in War;
"The God of Day adored the Mother's Charms;
"Against the God the Father bent his Arms:
"The afflicted Pair, their Sorrows to proclaim,
"From Cleopatra changed this Daughter's Name,
"And called Alcyone; a Name to show
"The Father's Grief, the mourning Mother's Woe.)
To her the Chief retired from stern Debate,
But found no Peace from fierce Althaea's Hate:
Althaea's Hate the unhappy Warrior drew,
Whose luckless Hand his Royal Uncle slew;
She beat the Ground, and called the Powers beneath
On her own Son to wreak her Brother's Death:
Hell heard her Curses from the Realms profound,
And the red Fiends that walk the nightly Round.
In vain Aetolia her Deliv'rer waits,
War shakes her Walls, and thunders at her Gates.
She sent Ambassadors, a chosen Band,
Priests of the Gods, and Elders of the Land;
Besought the Chief to save the sinking State;
Their Prayers were urgent, and their Proffers great:
(Full fifty Acres of the richest Ground,
Half Pasture green, and half with Vin'yards crowned.)
His suppliant Father, aged Oeneus, came;
His Sisters followed; even the vengeful Dame,
Althaea sues; His Friends before him fall:
He stands relentless, and rejects 'em all.
Mean while the Victor's Shouts ascend the Skies;
The Walls are scaled; the rolling Flames arise;
At length his Wife (a Form divine) appears,
With piercing Cries, and supplicating Tears:
She paints the Horrors of a conquered Town,
The Heroes slain, the Palaces overthrown,
The Matrons ravished, the whole Race enslaved:
The Warrior heard, he vanquished, and he saved.
The Aetolians, long disdained, now took their turn,
And left the Chief their broken Faith to mourn.
Learn hence, betimes to curb pernicious Ire,
Nor stay, till yonder Fleets ascend in Fire:
Accept the Presents; draw thy conquering Sword;
And be amongst our guardian Gods adored.
Thus he: The stern Achilles thus replied.
My second Father, and my reverend Guide!
Thy Friend, believe me, no such Gifts demands,
And asks no Honors from a Mortal's Hands:
Jove honors me, and favors my Designs;
His Pleasure guides me, and his Will confines:
And here I stay, (if such his high Behest)
While Life's warm Spirit beats within my Breast.
Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy Heart,
No more molest me on Atrides' Part:
Is it for him these Tears are taught to flow,
For him these Sorrows? for my mortal Foe?
A generous Friendship no cold Medium knows,
Burns with one Love, with one Resentment glows;
One should our Interests, and our Passions be;
My Friend must hate the Man that injures me.
Do this, my Phoenix, it is a generous Part,
And share my Realms, my Honors, and my Heart.
Let these return: Our Voyage, or our Stay,
Rest undetermined till the dawning Day.
He ceased; then ordered for the Sage's Bed
A warmer Couch with numerous Carpets spread.
With that, stern Ajax his long Silence broke,
And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke.
Hence, let us go -- why waste we Time in vain?
See what Effect our low Submissions gain!
Liked or not liked, his Words we must relate,
The Greeks expect them, and our Heroes wait.
Proud as he is, that Iron-heart retains
Its stubborn Purpose, and his Friends disdains.
Stern, and unpitying! if a Brother bleed,
On just Atonement, we remit the Deed;
A Sire the Slaughter of his Son forgives;
The Price of Blood discharged, the Murderer lives:
The haughtiest Hearts at length their Rage resign,
And Gifts can conquer every Soul but thine.
The Gods that unrelenting Breast have steeled,
And cursed thee with a Mind that cannot yield.
One Woman-Slave was ravished from thy Arms:
Lo, sev'n are offered, and of equal Charms.
Then hear, Achilles! be of better Mind;
Revere thy Roof, and to thy Guests be kind;
And know the Men, of all the Grecian Host,
Who honor Worth, and prize thy Valor most.
Oh Soul of Battles, and thy People's Guide!
(To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
Well have thou spoke; but at the Tyrant's Name,
My Rage rekindles, and my Soul's on flame,
It Is just Resentment, and becomes the brave;
Disgraced, dishonored, like the vilest Slave!
Return then Heroes! and our Answer bear,
The glorious Combat is no more my Care;
Not till amidst yon' sinking Navy slain,
The Blood of Greeks shall dye the sable Main;
Not till the Flames, by Hector's Fury thrown,
Consume your Vessels, and approach my own;
Just there, the impetuous Homicide shall stand,
There cease his Battle, and there feel our Hand.
This said, each Prince a double Goblet crowned,
And cast a large Libation on the Ground;
Then to their Vessels, through the gloomy Shades,
The Chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.
Meantime Achilles' Slaves prepared a Bed,
With Fleeces, Carpets, and soft Linen spread:
There, till the sacred Morn restored the Day,
In Slumbers sweet the reverend Phoenix lay.
But in his inner Tent, an ampler Space,
Achilles slept; and in his warm Embrace
Fair Diomede of the Lesbian Race.
Last, for Patroclus was the Couch prepared,
Whose nightly Joys the beauteous Iphis shared:
Achilles to his Friend consigned her Charms,
When Scyros fell before his conquering Arms.
And now the elected Chiefs whom Greece had sent,
Passed through the Hosts, and reached the Royal Tent.
Then rising all, with Goblets in their Hands,
The Peers and Leaders of the Achaian Bands
Hailed their Return: Atrides first begun.
Say what Success? divine Laertes Son!
Achilles' high Resolves declare to all;
Returns the Chief, or must our Navy fall?
Great King of Nations! ( Ithacus replied)
Fixed is his Wrath, unconquered is his Pride;
He slights thy Friendship, thy Proposals scorns,
And thus implored, with fiercer Fury burns.
To save our Army, and our Fleets to free,
Is not his Care; but left to Greece and thee.
Your Eyes shall view, when Morning paints the Sky,
Beneath his Oars the whitening Billows fly.
Us too he bids our Oars and Sails employ,
Nor hope the Fall of Heav'n-protected Troy;
For Jove o'ershades her with his Arm divine,
Inspires her War, and bids her Glory shine.
Such was his Word: What farther he declared,
These sacred Heralds and great Ajax heard.
But Phoenix in his Tent the Chief retains,
Safe to transport him to his native Plains,
When Morning dawns: if other he decree,
His Age is sacred, and his Choice is free.
Ulysses ceased: The great Achaian Host,
With Sorrow seized, in Consternation lost,
Attend the stern Reply. Tydides broke
The general Silence, and undaunted spoke.
Why should we Gifts to proud Achilles send,
Or strive with Prayers his haughty Soul to bend?
His Country's Woes he glories to deride,
And Prayers will burst that swelling Heart with Pride.
Be the fierce Impulse of his Rage obeyed;
Our Battles let him, or desert, or aid;
Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit;
That, to his Madness, or to Heaven commit.
What for our selves we can, is always ours;
This Night, let due Repast refresh our Powers;
(For Strength consists in Spirits and in Blood,
And those are owed to generous Wine and Food)
But when the rosy Messenger of Day
Strikes the blue Mountains with her golden Ray,
Ranged at the Ships let all our Squadrons shine,
In flaming Arms, a long-extended Line:
In the dread Front let great Atrides stand,
The first in Danger, as in high Command.
Shouts of Acclaim the listening Heroes raise,
Then each to Heaven the due Libations pays;
Till Sleep descending over the Tents, bestows
The grateful Blessings of desired Repose.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Ninth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE NINTH BOOK.
I.
WE have here a new Scene of Action opened; the Poet has hitherto given us an
Account of what happened by Day only: the two following Books relate the
Adventures of the Night.

It may be thought that Homer has crowded a great many Actions into a very
short Time. In the ninth Book a Council is convened, an Embassy sent, a
considerable Time passes in the Speeches and Replies of the Ambassadors and
Achilles: In the tenth Book a second Council is called, after this a Debate is
held, Dolon is intercepted, Diomed and Ulysses enter into the Enemy's Camp,
kill Rhesus, and bring away his Horses: And all this done in the narrow Compass
of one Night.

It must therefore be remembered that the ninth Book takes up the first Part of
the Night only; that after the first Council was dissolved, there passed some
time before the second was summoned, as appears by the Leaders being awakened
by Menelaus. So that it was almost Morning before Diomed and Ulysses set out
upon their Design, which is very evident from the Words of Ulysses, Book. 10..
251. (...)
So that although a great many Incidents are introduced, yet every thing might
easily have been performed in the allotted Time.

II.
VERSE 7. From Thracia 's Shore.] Homer has been supposed by Eratosthenes and
others, to have been guilty of an Error, in saying that Zephyrus or the West
Wind blows from Thrace, whereas in Truth it blows toward it. But the Poet
speaks so either because it is fabled to be the Rendezvous of all the Winds; or
with respect to the particular Situation of Troy and the Aegean Sea. Either of
these Replies are sufficient to solve that Objection.

The particular Parts of this Comparison agree admirably with the Design of
Homer, to express the Distraction of the Greeks: the two Winds representing the
different Opinions of the Armies, one Part of which were inclined to return,
the other to stay. Eustathius.

III.
VERSE 15. But bid in Silence.] The Reason why Agamemnon commands his Heralds
to summon the Leaders in Silence, is for fear the Enemy should discover their
Consternation, by reason of their Nearness, or perceive what their Designs were
in this Extremity. Eustathius.

IV.
VERSE 23. Agamemnon 's Speech.] The Critics are divided in their Opinion
whether this Speech, which is word for word the same with that he makes in Lib.
2. be only a Feint to try the Army, as it is there, or the real Sentiments of
the General. Dionysius of Halicarnassus explains it as the former, with whom
Madam Dacier concurs; she thinks they must be both counterfeit, because they
are both the same, and believes Homer would have varied them, had the Design
been different. She takes no notice that Eustathius is of the contrary Opinion;
as is also Monsieur de la Motte, who argues as if he had read him. " Agamemnon
(says he) in the second Iliad thought himself assured of Victory from the Dream
which Jupiter had sent to him, and in that Confidence was desirous to bring the
Greeks to a Battle: But in the ninth Book his Circumstances are changed, he is
in the utmost Distress and Despair upon his Defeat, and therefore his Proposal
to raise the Siege is in all Probability sincere. If Homer had intended we
should think otherwise, he would have told us so, as he did on the former
Occasion; and some of the Officers would have suspected a Feint the rather,
because they had been imposed upon by the same Speech before. But none of them
suspect him at all. Diomed thinks him so much in earnest as to reproach his
Cowardice, Nestor applauds Diomed's Liberty, and Agamemnon makes not the least
Defense for himself.

Dacier answers, that Homer had no Occasion to tell us this was counterfeit,
because the Officers could not but remember it to have been so before; and as
for the Answers of Diomed and Nestor, they only carry on the same Feint, as
Dionysius has proved, whose Reasons may be seen in the following Note.

I do not pretend to decide upon this Point; but which way soever it be, I
think Agamemnon's Design was equally answered by repeating the same Speech: So
that the Repetition at least is not to be blamed in Homer. What obliged
Agamemnon to that Feint in the second Book was the Hatred he had incurred in
the Army by being the Cause of Achilles's Departure; this made it but a
necessary Precaution in him to try, before he came to a Battle, whether the
Greeks were disposed to it? And it was equally necessary, in case the Event
should prove unsuccessful, to free himself from the Odium of being the occasion
of it. Therefore when they were now actually defeated, to repeat the same
Words, was the readiest way to put them in mind that he had proposed the same
Advice to them before the Battle; and to make it appear unjust that their ill
Fortune should be charged upon him. See the 5 th and 8 th Notes on the second
Iliad.

V.
VERSE 43. The Speech of Diomed.] I shall here translate the Criticism of
Dionysius on this Passage. He asks, "What can be the Drift of Diomed, when he
insults Agamemnon in his Griefs and Distresses? For what Diomed here says seems
not only very ill timed, but inconsistent with his own Opinion, and with the
Respect he had shown in the beginning of this very Speech. If I upbraid thee,
Prince, thy Wrath withold,
The Laws of Council bid my Tongue be bold.
This is the Introduction of a Man in Temper, who is willing to soften and
Excuse the Liberty of what is to follow, and what Necessity only obliges him to
utter. But he subjoins a Resentment of the Reproach the King had formerly
thrown upon him, and tells him that Jupiter had given him Power and Dominion
without Courage and Virtue. These are things which agree but ill together, that
Diomed should upbraid Agamemnon in his Adversity with past Injuries, after he
had endured his Reproaches with so much Moderation, and had reproved Sthenelus
so warmly for the contrary Practice in the fourth Book. If any one answer, that
Diomed was warranted in this Freedom by the Bravery of his warlike Behavior
since that Reproach, he supposes this Hero very ignorant how to demean himself
in Prosperity. The Truth is, this whole Accusation of Diomed's is only a Feint
to serve the Designs of Agamemnon. For being desirous to persuade the Greeks
against their Departure, he effects that Design by this counterfeited Anger,
and License of Speech: And seeming to resent, that Agamemnon should be capable
of imagining the Army would return to Greece, he artificially makes use of
these Reproaches to cover his Argument. This is farther confirmed by what
follows, when he bids Agamemnon return, if he pleases, and affirms that the
Grecians will stay without him. Nay he carries the Matter so far, as to boast,
that if all the rest should depart, himself and Sthenelus alone would continue
the War, which would be extremely childish and absurd in any other View than
this.

VI.
VERSE 73. The Speech of Nestor.] " Nestor (continues Dionysius) seconds the
Oration of Diomed: We shall perceive the Artifice of his Discourse, if we
reflect to how little Purpose it would be without this Design. He praises
Diomed for what he has said, but does it not without declaring, that he had not
spoken fully to the Purpose, and fallen short in some Points, which he ascribes
to his Youth, and promises to supply them. Then after a long Preamble, when he
has turned himself several ways, as if he was sporting in a new and uncommon
Vein of Oratory, he concludes by ordering the Watch to their Stations, and
advising Agamemnon to invite the Elders of the Army to a Supper, there, out of
many Counsels, to choose the best. All this at first Sight appears absurd: But
we must know that Nestor too speaks in Figure. Diomed seems to quarrel with
Agamemnon, purely to gratify him; but Nestor praises his Liberty of Speech, as
it were to vindicate a real Quarrel with the King. The End of all this is only
to move Agamemnon to supplicate Achilles; and to that End he so much commends
the young Man's Freedom. In proposing to call a Council only of the eldest, he
consults the Dignity of Agamemnon, that he might not be exposed to make this
Condescension before the younger Officers. And he concludes by an artful
Inference of the absolute Necessity of applying to Achilles from the present
Posture of their Affairs. See what a Blaze from hostile Tents aspires,
How near our Fleets approach the Trojan Fires!
This is all Nestor says at this time before the general Assembly of the Greeks;
but in his next Speech, when the Elders only are present, he explains the whole
Matter at large, and openly declares that they must have Recourse to Achilles.
Dion. Hal. (...), p. 2.

Plutarch de and. Poetis, takes notice of this Piece of Decorum in Nestor, who
when he intended to move for a Mediation with Achilles, chose not to do it in
public, but proposed a private Meeting of the Chiefs to that End. If what
these two great Authors have said be considered, there will be no room for the
trivial Objection some Moderns have made to this Proposal of Nestor's, as if in
the present Distress he did no more than impertinently advise them to go to
Supper.

VII.
VERSE 53. They gave thee Sceptres, etc.] This is the Language of a brave Man,
to affirm and say boldly, that Courage is above Scepters and Crowns. Scepters
and Crowns were indeed in former Times not hereditary, but the Recompense of
Valor. With what Art and Haughtiness Diomed sets himself indirectly above
Agamemnon? Eustathius.

VIII.
VERSE 62. And nearest to the Main.] There is a secret Stroke of Satyr in these
Words: Diomed tells the King that his Squadron lies next the Sea, insinuating
that they were the most distant from the Battle, and readiest for Flight.
Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 68. God bade us fight, and 'twas with God we came.] This is literal from
the Greek, and therein may be seen the Style of holy Scripture, where it is said
that they come with God, or that they are not come without God, meaning that
they did not come without his Order: Numquid sine Domino ascendi in terram
istam? says Rabshekah to Hezekiah in Isaiah 36.. 8. This Passage seems to be
very beautiful. Homer adds it to show that the Valor of Diomed, which puts him
upon remaining alone with Sthenelus, when all the Greeks were gone, is not a
Rash and mad Boldness, but a reasonable one, and founded on the Promises of God
himself, who cannot lie. Dacier.

X.
VERSE 73. Oh truly great.] Nestor could do no less than commend Diomed's
Valor, he had lately been a Witness of it when he was preserved from falling
into the Enemy's Hands till he was rescued by Diomed. Eustathius.

XI.
VERSE 87. Cursed is the Man.] Nestor, says the same Author, very artfully
brings in these Words as a general Maxim, in order to dispose Agamemnon to a
Reconciliation with Achilles: He delivers it in general Terms, and leaves the
King to make the Application. This Passage is translated with Liberty, for the
Original comprizes a great deal in a very few Words, (...), (...), (...); it
will be proper to give a particular Explication of each of these; (...), says
Eustathius, signifies one who is a Vagabond or Foreigner. The Athenians kept a
Register, in which all that were born were enrolled, whence it easily appeared
who were Citizens, or not; (...) therefore signifies one who is deprived of the
Privilege of a Citizen. (...) is one that had forfeited all Title to be
protected by the Laws of his Country. (...), one that has no Habitation, or
rather one that was not permitted to partake of any Family Sacrifice. For (...)
is a Family Goddess; and Jupiter sometimes is called (...).

There is a sort of Gradation in these Words. (...) signifies a Man that has
lost the Privileges of his Country; (...) those of his own Tribe, and (...)
those of his own Family.

XII.
VERSE 94. Between the Trench and Wall.] It is almost impossible to make such
Particularities as these appear with any tolerable Elegance in Poetry: And as
they cannot be raised, so neither must they be omitted. This particular Space
here mentioned between the Trench and Wall, is what we must carry in our Mind
through this and the following Book: Otherwise we shall be at a loss to know the
exact Scene of the Actions and Councils that follow.

XIII.
VERSE 119. The Fires they light.] They lighted up a Fire that they might not
seem to be under any Consternation, but to be upon their Guard against any
Alarm. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 124. When Thirst and Hunger ceast.] The Conduct of Homer in this Place
is very remarkable; he does not fall into a long Description of the
Entertainment, but complies with the Exigence of Affairs, and passes on to the
Consultation. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 138. And make the Wisdom thine.] Eustathius thought that Homer said
this, because in Councils, as in the Army, all is attributed to the Princes,
and the whole Honor ascribed to them: but this is by no means Homer's Thought.
What he here says, is a Maxim drawn from profoundest Philosophy. That which
often does Men the most harm, is Envy, and the Shame of yielding to Advice,
which proceeds from others. There is more Greatness and Capacity in following
good Advice, than in proposing it; by executing it, we render it our own, and
we ravish even the Property of it from its Author; and Eustathius seems to
incline to this Thought, when he afterward says, Homer makes him that follows
good Advice, equal to him that gives it; but he has not fully expressed
himself. Dacier.

XVI.
VERSE 140. At once my present Judgment and my past.] Nestor here by the word
(...), means the Advice he gave at the time of the Quarrel in the first Book:
He says, as it was his Opinion then that Agamemnon ought not to disgrace
Achilles, so after the maturest Deliberation, he finds no Reason to alter it.
Nestor here launches out into the Praises of Achilles, which is a secret
Argument to induce Agamemnon to regain his Friendship, by showing the
Importance of it. Eustathius.

XVII.
VERSE 151. This wondrous Hero.] It is remarkable that Agamemnon here never
uses the Name of Achilles: though he is resolved to court his Friendship, yet he
cannot bear the mention of his Name. The Impression which the Dissension made,
is not yet worn off, though he expatiates in Commendation of his Valor.
Eustathius.

XVIII.
VERSE 155. If Gifts immense his mighty Soul can bow.] The Poet, says
Eustathius, makes a wise Choice of the Gifts that are to be proffered to
Achilles. Had he been ambitious of Wealth, there are golden Tripods, and ten
Talents of Gold to bribe his Resentment. If he had been addicted to the Fair
Sex, there was a King's Daughter and seven fair Captives to win his Favor. Or
if he had been ambitious of Greatness, there were seven wealthy Cities and a
Kingly Power to court him to a Reconciliation: But he takes this way to show us
that his Anger was stronger than all his other Passions. It is farther
observable, that Agamemnon promises these Presents at three different times;
first, at this Instant; secondly, on the taking of Troy; and lastly, after
their Return to Greece. This Division in some degree multiplies them. Dacier.

XIX.
VERSE 157. Ten weighty Talents.] The ancient Critics have blamed one of the
Verses in the Enumeration of these Presents, as not sufficiently flowing and
harmonious, the Pause is ill placed, and one word does not fall easily into the
other. This will appear very plain if we compare it with a more numerous Verse.
(...)
(...)
The Ear immediately perceives the Music of the former Line, every Syllable
glides smoothly away, without offending the Ear with any such Roughness, as is
found in the second. The first runs as swiftly as the Wind which it describes;
but the latter is a broken interrupted uneven Verse. But it is certainly
pardonable in this Place, where the Music of Poetry is not necessary; the Mind
is entirely taken up in learning what Presents Agamemnon intended to make
Achilles: and is not at leisure to regard the Ornaments of Versification; and
even those Pauses are not without their Beauties, as they would of Necessity
cause a Stop in the Delivery, and so give time for each Particular to sink into
the Mind of Achilles. Eustathius.

XX.
VERSE 159. Sev'n sacred Tripods.] There were two kinds of Tripods: in the one
they used to boil Water, the other was entirely for Show, to mix Wine and Water
in, says Athenaeus: the first were called (...), or Cauldrons, for common Use,
and made to bear the Fire; the other were (...), and made chiefly for Ornament.
It may be asked why this could be a proper Present for Achilles, who was a
martial Man, and regarded nothing but Arms? It may be answered, that these
Presents were very well suited to the Person to whom they were sent, as Tripods
in ancient Days were the usual Prizes in Games, and they were given by Achilles
himself in those which he exhibited in Honor of Patroclus: the same may be
said of the female Captives, which are also among the Prizes in the Games of
Patroclus. Eustathius.

XXI.
VERSE 161. Twelve Steeds unmatched.] From hence it is evident that Games used
to be celebrated in the Grecian Army during the Time of War; perhaps in Honor
of the deceased Heroes. For had Agamemnon sent Achilles Horses that had been
victorious before the beginning of the Trojan War, they would by this time have
been too old to be of any Value. Eustathius.

XXII
VERSE 189. Laodice and Iphigenia, etc.] These are the Names of Agamemnon's
Daughters, among which we do not find Electra. But some affirm, says
Eustathius, that Laodice and Electra are the same, (as Iphianassa is the same
with Iphigenia) and she was called so, either by way of Surname, or by reason
of her Complexion, which was (...), flava; or by way of Derision (...) quasi
(...), because she was an old Maid, as appears from Euripides, who says that
she remained long a Virgin. (...)
And in Sophocles she says of herself, (...), I wander a disconsolate unmarry'd
Virgin, which shows that it was ever looked upon as a Disgrace to continue long
so.

XXIII.
VERSE 192. I ask no Presents -- My self will give the Dower.] For in Greece
the Bridegroom, before he married, was obliged to make two Presents, one to his
betrothed Wife, and the other to his Father in Law. This Custom is very
ancient; it was practiced by the Hebrews in the time of the Patriarchs.
Abraham's Servant gave Necklaces and Earrings to Rebecca, whom he demanded for
Isaac. Genesis 24. 22. Shechem Son of Hamor says to Jacob and his Sons, whose
Sister he was desirous to espouse, "Ask me never so much Dowry and Gifts.
Genesis 34. 12. For the Dowry was for the Daughter. This Present served for her
Dowry, and the other Presents were for the Father. In the first Book of Samuel
18. 25. Saul makes them say to David, who by reason of his Poverty said he
could not be Son in Law to the King: "The King desires not any Dowry. And in
the two last Passages, we see the Presents were commonly regulated by the
Father of the Bride. There is no mention in Homer of any Present made to the
Father, but only of that which was given to the married Daughter, which was
called (...). The Dowry which the Father gave to his Daughter was called (...):
Wherefore Agamemnon says here (...). Dacier.

XXIV.
VERSE 209. Pluto, the grizly God, who never spares.] The meaning of this may
be gathered from Aeschylus, cited here by Eustathius. (...)
(...)
(...)
Death is the only God who is not moved by Offerings, whom you cannot conquer
by Sacrifices and Oblations, and therefore he is the only God to whom no Altar
is erected, and no Hymns are sung.

XXV.
VERSE 221. Let Phoenix lead.] How comes it to pass that Phoenix is in the
Grecian Camp: when undoubtedly he retired with his Pupil Achilles? Eustathius
says the Ancients conjectured that he came to the Camp to see the last Battle:
and indeed nothing is more natural to imagine, than that Achilles would be
impatient to know the Event of the Day, when he was himself absent from the
Fight: and as his Revenge and Glory were to be satisfied by the ill Success of
the Grecians, It is highly probable that he sent Phoenix to enquire after it.
Eustathius farther observes, Phoenix was not an Ambassador, but only the
Conductor of the Embassy. This is evident from the Words themselves, which are
all along delivered in the dual Number; and farther from Achilles's requiring
Phoenix to stay with him when the other two departed.

XXVI.
VERSE 222. Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.] The Choice of these Persons
is made with a great deal of Judgment. Achilles could not but reverence the
venerable Phoenix his Guardian and Tutor. Ajax and Ulysses had been disgraced
in the first Book, Line 145, as well as he, and were therefore Instances of
that Forgiveness they came to ask: besides it was the greatest Honor that
could be done to Achilles to send the most worthy Personages in the Army to
him. Ulysses was inferior to none in Eloquence but to Nestor. Ajax was second
to none in Valor but to Achilles.

Ajax might have an Influence over him as a Relation, by Descent from Aeacus,
Ulysses as an Orator: To these are joined Hodius and Eurybates, two Heralds,
which tho it were not customary, yet was necessary in this Place, both to
certify Achilles that this Embassage was the Act of Agamemnon himself, and also
to make these Persons who had been Witnesses before God and Man of the Wrong
done to Achilles in respect to Briseis, Witnesses also of the Satisfaction
given him. Eustathius.

XXVII.
VERSE 235. Much he advised them all, Ulysses most.] There is a great Propriety
in representing Nestor as so particularly applying himself on this Occasion to
Ulysses. Though he of all Men had the least need of his Instructions; yet it is
highly natural for one wise Man to talk most to another.

XXVIII.
VERSE 246. Pleased with the solemn Harp's harmonious Sound.] " Homer (says
Plutarch) to prove what an excellent Use may be made of Music, feigned
Achilles to compose by this means the Wrath he had conceived against Agamemnon.
He sung to his Harp the noble Actions of the Valiant, and the Achievements of
Heroes and Demigods, a Subject worthy of Achilles. Homer moreover teaches us in
this Fiction the proper Season for Music, when a Man is at leisure and
unemploy'd in greater Affairs. For Achilles, so valorous as he was, had retired
from Action through his Displeasure to Agamemnon. And nothing was better suited
to the martial Disposition of this Hero, than these heroic Songs, that
prepared him for the Deeds and Toils he afterward undertook, by the
Celebration of the like in those who had gone before him. Such was the ancient
Music, and to such Purposes it was applied. Plut. of Music. The same Author
relates in the Life of Alexander, that when the Lyre of Paris was offered to
that Prince, he made answer, "He had little Value for it, but much desired that
of Achilles, on which he sung the Actions of Heroes in former Times.

XXIX.
VERSE 261. Princes all hail!] This short Speech is wonderfully proper to the
Occasion, and to the Temper of the Speaker. One is under a great Expectation of
what Achilles will say at the Sight of these Heroes, and I know nothing in
Nature that could satisfy it, but the very thing he here accosts them with.

XXX.
VERSE 268. Mix purer Wine.] The Meaning of this word (...) is very dubious;
some say it signifies warm Wine, from (...), ferveo: According to Aristotle, it
is an Adverb, and implies to mix Wine quickly. And others think it signifies
pure Wine. In this last Sense Herodotus uses it. (...). Which in English is
thus: "When the Spartans have an Inclination to drink their Wine pure and not
diluted, they propose to drink after the Manner of the Scythians; some of whom
coming Ambassadors to Sparta, taught Cleomenes to drink his Wine unmixed. I
think this Sense of the Word is most natural, and Achilles might give this
particular Order not to dilute the Wine so much as usually, because the
Ambassadors who were brave Men, might be supposed to be much fatigued in the
late Battle, and to want a more than usual Refreshment. Eustathius. See
Plutarch Symp. l. 4. c. 5.

XXXI.
VERSE 271. Patroclus over the blazing Fire, etc.] The Reader must not expect
to find much Beauty in such Descriptions as these: they give us an exact
Account of the Simplicity of that Age, which for all we know might be a Part of
Homer's Design; there being, no doubt, a considerable Change of Customs in
Greece from the Time of the Trojan War to those wherein our Author lived; and
it seemed demanded of him to omit nothing that might give the Greeks an Idea of
the Manners of their Predecessors. But however that Matter stood, it should
methinks be a Pleasure to a modern Reader to see how such mighty Men, whose
Actions have survived their Persons three thousand Years, lived in the earliest
Ages of the World. The Ambassadors found this Hero, says Eustathius, without
any Attendants, he had no Ushers or Waiters to introduce them, no servile
Parasites about him: The latter Ages degenerated into these Pieces of State and
Pageantry.

The Supper also is described with an equal Simplicity: three Princes are
busied in preparing it, and they who made the greatest Figure in the Field of
Battle, thought it no Disparagement to prepare their own Repast. The Objections
some have made that Homer's Gods and Heroes do every thing for themselves, as
if several of those Offices were unworthy of them, proceeds from the corrupt
Idea of modern Luxury and Grandeur: Whereas in truth it is rather a Weakness
and Imperfection to stand in need of the Assistance and Ministry of others. But
however it be, methinks those of the nicest Taste might relish this
Entertainment of Homer's, when they consider these great Men as Soldiers in a
Camp, in whom the least Appearance of Luxury would have been a Crime.

XXXII.
VERSE 271. Patroclus over the blazing Fire.] Madam Dacier's general Note on
this Passage deserves to be transcribed. " Homer, says she, is in the right not
to avoid these Descriptions, because nothing can properly be called vulgar
which is drawn from the Manner and Usages of Persons of the first Dignity; and
also because in his Tongue even the Terms of Cookery are so noble, and of so
agreeable a Sound, and he likewise knows how to place them so well, as to
extract a perfect Harmony from them: So that he may be said to be as excellent
a Poet, when he describes these small Matters, as when he treats of the
greatest Subjects. It Is not so either with our Manners, or our Language.
Cookery is left to Servants, and all its Terms so low and disagreeable, even in
the Sound, that nothing can be made of them, that has not some Taint of their
Meanness. This great Disadvantage made me at first think of abridging this
Preparation of the Repast; but when I had well considered it, I was resolved to
preserve and give Homer as he is, without retrenching any thing from the
Simplicity of the heroic Manners. I do not write to enter the List against
Homer, I will dispute nothing with him; my Design is only to give an Idea of
him, and to make him be understood: The Reader will therefore forgive me if
this Description has none of its original Graces.

XXXIII.
VERSE 272. In a Brazen Vase.] The word (...) signifies the Vessel, and not the
Meat itself, as Euphorion conjectured, giving it as a Reason that Homer makes
no mention of boiled Meat: But this does not hinder but that the Meat might be
parboiled in the Vessel to make it roast the sooner. This, with some other
Notes on the Particulars of this Passage, belong to Eustathius, and Madam
Dacier ought not to have taken to herself the Merit of his Explanations.

XXXIV.
VERSE 282. And sprinkles sacred Salt.] Many Reasons are given why Salt is
called sacred or divine, but the best is because it preserves things incorrupt,
and keeps them from Dissolution. "So Thunder (says Plutarch Sympos. l. 5. qu.
10.) is called divine, because Bodies struck with Thunder will not putrify;
besides Generation is divine, because God is the Principle of all things, and
Salt is most operative in Generation. Lycophron calls it (...): For this Reason
Venus was feigned by the Poets to spring from the Sea.

XXXV.
VERSE 291. To Phoenix Ajax gave the Sign.] Ajax who was a rough Soldier and no
Orator, is impatient to have the Business over: He makes a Sign to Phoenix to
begin, but Ulysses prevents him. Perhaps Ulysses might flatter himself that his
Oratory would prevail upon Achilles, and so obtain the Honor of making the
Reconciliation himself: Or if he were repulsed, there yet remained a second and
third Resource in Ajax and Phoenix, who might renew the Attempt, and endeavor
to shake his Resolution: There would still be some hopes of Success, as one of
these was his Guardian, the other his Relation. One may farther add to these
Reasons of Eustathius, that it would have been improper for Phoenix to have
spoken first, since he was not an Ambassador; and therefore Ulysses was the
fitter Person, as being empowered by that Function to make an Offer of the
Presents in the Name of the King.

XXXVI.
VERSE 295. Health to Achilles.] There are no Discourses in the Iliad better
placed, better timed, or that give a greater Idea of Homer's Genius, than these
of the Ambassadors to Achilles. These Speeches are not only necessarily
demanded by the Occasion, but disposed with Art, and in such an Order, as
raises more and more the Pleasure of the Reader. Ulysses speaks the first, the
Character of whose Discourse is a well-address'd Eloquence; so the Mind is
agreeably engaged by the Choice of his Reasons and Applications: Achilles
replies with a magnanimous Freedom, whereby the Mind is elevated with the
Sentiments of the Hero: Phoenix discourses in a manner touching and pathetick,
whereby the Heart is moved: and Ajax concludes with a generous Disdain, that
leaves the Soul of the Reader inflamed. This Order undoubtedly denotes a great
Poet, who knows how to command Attention as he pleases by the Arrangement of
his Matter; and I believe it it not possible to propose a better Model for the
happy Disposition of a Subject. These Words are Monsieur de la Motte's, and no
Testimony can be more glorious to Homer than this, which comes from the Mouth
of an Enemy.

XXXVII.
VERSE 296. Not those more honored whom Atrides feasts.] I must just mention
Dacier's Observation: With what Cunning Ulysses here slides in the odious Name
of Agamemnon, as he praises Achilles, that the Ear of this impetuous Man might
be familiariz'd to that Name.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 314. He waits but for the Morn, to sink in Flame The Ships, the Greeks,
etc.] There is a Circumstance in the Original which I have omitted, for fear of
being too particular in an Oration of this Warmth and Importance; but as it
preserves a Piece of Antiquity I must not forget it here. He says that Hector
will not only fire the Fleet, but bear off the Statues of the Gods, which were
carved on the Prows of the Vessels. These were hung up in the Temples, as a
Monument of Victory, according to the Custom of those Times.

XXXIX.
VERSE 342. But hear me, while I number over The proffered Presents.] Monsieur
de la Motte finds fault with Homer for making Ulysses in this Place repeat all
the Offers of Agamemnon to Achilles. Not to answer that it was but necessary to
make known to Achilles all the Proposals, or that this distinct Enumeration
served the more to move him, I think one may appeal to any Person of common
Taste whether the solemn Recital of these Circumstances does not please him
more, than the simple Narration could have done, which Monsieur de la Motte
would have put in its stead. Ulysses made all the Offers Agamemnon had
commissioned him.

XL.
VERSE 406. Achilles 's Speech.] Nothing is more remarkable than the Conduct of
Homer in this Speech of Achilles. He begins with some degree of Coolness, as in
respect to the Ambassadors whose Persons he esteemed, yet even there his Temper
just shows itself in the Insinuation that Ulysses had dealt artfully with him,
which in two Periods rises into an open Detestation of all Artifice. He then
falls into a sullen Declaration of his Resolves, and a more sedate
Representation of his past Services; but warms as he goes on, and every Minute
he but names his Wrongs, flies out into Extravagance. His Rage awakened by that
Injury, is like a Fire blown by a Wind, that sinks and rises by fits, but keeps
continually burning, and blazes but the more for those Intermissions.

XLI.
VERSE 424. As the bold Bird, etc.] This Simile (says La Motte) must be allowed
to be just, but was not fit to be spoken in a Passion. One may answer, that the
Tenderness of the Comparison renders it no way the less proper to a Man in a
Passion, it being natural enough, the more one is disgusted at present, the
more to recollect the Kindness we have formerly shown to those who are
ungrateful. Eustathius observes, that so soft as the Simile seems, it has
nevertheless its fierte; for Achilles herein expresses his Contempt for the
Greeks, as a weak defenseless People, who must have perished if he had not
preserved them. And indeed if we consider what is said in the preceding Note,
it will appear that the Passion of Achilles ought not as yet to be at the
Height.

XLII.
VERSE 432. I sacked twelve ample Cities.] Eustathius says, that the Anger of
Achilles not only throws him into Tautology, but also into Ambiguity: For, says
he, these Words may either signify that he destroyed twelve Cities with his
Ships, or barely Cities with twelve Ships. But Eustathius in this Place is like
many other Commentators, who can see a Meaning in a Sentence that never entered
into the Thoughts of an Author. It is not easy to conceive how Achilles could
have expressed himself more clearly. There is no doubt but (...) agrees with
the same word that (...) does, in the following Line, which is certainly (...):
and there is a manifest Enumeration of the Places he had conquered, by Sea, and
by Land.

XLIII.
VERSE 450. The Wife whom Choice and Passion both approve, Sure every wise and
worthy Man will love.] The Argument of Achilles in this Place is very a-propos
with Reference to the Case of Agamemnon. If I translated it verbatim, I must
say in plain English, Every honest Man loves his Wife. Thus Homer has made this
rash, this fiery Soldier, governed by his Passions, and in the Rage of Youth,
bear Testimony to his own Respect for the Ladies. But it seems Poltis King of
Thrace was of another Opinion, who would have parted with two Wives, out of
pure Goodnature to two mere Strangers; as I have met with the Story somewhere
in Plutarch. When the Greeks were raising Forces against Troy, they sent
Ambassadors to this Poltis to desire his Assistance. He inquired the Cause of
the War, and was told it was the Injury Paris had done Menelaus in taking his
Wife from him. "If that be all, said the good King, let me accomodate the
Difference: Indeed it is not just the Greek Prince should lose a Wife, and on
the other side it is pity the Trojan should want one. Now I have two Wives, and
to prevent all this Mischief, I Will send one of them to Menelaus, and the other
to Paris. It is a shame this Story is so little known, and that poor Poltis yet
remains uncelebrated: I cannot but recommend him to the modern Poets.

XLIV.
VERSE 457. Your King, Ulysses, may consult with you.] Achilles still remembers
what Agamemnon said to him when they quarreled, Other brave Warriors will be
left behind to follow me in Battle, as we have seen in the first Book. He
answers here without either sparing Ajax or Ulysses; as much his Friends as
they are, they have their Share in this Stroke of Raillery. Eustathius.

XLV.
VERSE 459. Has he not Walls?] This is a bitter Satyr (says Eustathius) against
Agamemnon, as if his only Deeds were the making of this Wall, this Ditch, these
Pallisades, to defend himself against those whom he came to besiege: There was
no need of these Retrenchments, whilst Achilles fought. But (as Dacier
observes) this Satyr does not affect Agamemnon only, but Nestor too, who had
advised the making of these Retrenchments, and who had said in the second Book,
If there are a few who separate themselves from the rest of the Army, let them
stay and perish,. 346. Probably this had been reported to Achilles, and that
Hero revenges himself here by mocking these Retrenchments.

XLVI.
VERSE 473. Pthia the third Day hence, etc.] Monsieur de la Motte thinks the
mention of these minute Circumstances not to agree with the passionate
Character of the Speaker; that he shall arrive at Pthia in three Days, that he
shall find there all the Riches he left when he came to the Siege, and that he
shall carry other Treasures home. Dacier answers, that we need only consider
the present Situation of Achilles, and his Cause of Complaint against
Agamemnon, and we shall be satisfied here is nothing but what is exactly
agreeable to the Occasion. To convince the Ambassadors that he will return
home, he instances the Easiness of doing it, in the Space of three Days.
Agamemnon had injured him in the Point of Booty, he therefore declares he had
sufficient Treasures at home, and that he will carry off Spoils enough, and
Women enough, to make amends for those that Prince had ravished from him. Every
one of these Particulars marks his Passion and Resentment.

XLVII.
VERSE 481. One only valued Gift your Tyrant gave.] The Injury which Agamemnon
offered to Achilles is still uppermost in his Thoughts, he has but just
dismissed it, and now returns to it again. These Repetitions are far from being
Faults in Achilles's Wrath, whose Anger is perpetually breaking out upon the
same Injury.

XLVIII.
VERSE 494. Kings of such a kind Stand but as Slaves before a noble Mind.] The
Words in the Greek are, I despise him as a Carian. The Carians were People of
Boeotia, the first that sold their Valor, and were ready to fight for any that
gave them their Pay. This was looked upon as the vilest of Actions in those
heroical Ages. I think there is at present but one Nation in the World
distinguished for this Practice, who are ready to prostitute their Hands to
kill for the highest Bidder.

Eustathius endeavors to give many other Solutions of this Place, as that
(...) may be mistaken for (...) from (...), pediculus; but this is too mean and
trivial to be Homer's Sentiment. There is more Probability that it comes from
(...), (...), and so (...) by the Change of the Eta into Alpha; and then the
Meaning will be, that Achilles hates him as much as Hell or Death, agreeable to
what he had said a little before. (...)


VERSE 500. Not all proud Thebes, etc.] These several Circumstances concerning
Thebes are thought by some not to suit with that Emotion with which Achilles
here is supposed to speak: but the contrary will appear true, if we reflect
that nothing is more usual for Persons transported with Anger, than to insist,
and return to such Particulars as most touch them; and that Exaggeration is a
Figure extremely natural in Passion. Achilles therefore, by showing the
Greatness of Thebes, its Wealth, and Extent, does in Effect but show the
Greatness of his own Soul, and of that insuperable Resentment which renders all
these Riches (though the greatest in the World) contemptible in his Sight, when
he compares them with the Indignity his Honor has received.

L.
VERSE 500. Proud Thebes' unrivaled Walls, etc.] "The City which the Greeks
call Thebes, the Egyptians Heliopolis (says Diodorus lib. 1. part. 2.) was in
Circuit a hundred and forty Stadia, adorned with stately Buildings, magnificent
Temples, and rich Donations. It was not only the most beautiful and noble City
of Egypt, but of the whole World. The Fame of its Wealth and Grandeur was so
celebrated in all Parts, that the Poet took notice of it in these Words. --
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Though others affirm it had not a hundred Gates, but several vast Porches to the
Temples; from whence the City was called the Hundred-gated, only as having many
Gates. Yet it is certain it furnished twenty thousand Chariots of War; for
there were a hundred Stables along the River, from Memphis to Thebes toward
Lybia, each of which contained two hundred Horses, the Ruins whereof are shown
at this Day. The Princes from time to time made it their care to beautify and
enlarge this City, to which none under the Sun was equal in the many and
magnificent Treasures of Gold, Silver, and Ivory; with innumerable Colossus's,
and Obelisques of one entire Stone. There were four Temples admirable in Beauty
and Greatness, the most ancient of which was in Circuit thirteen Stadia, and
five and forty Cubits in Height, with a Wall of four and twenty Foot broad.
The Ornaments and Offerings within were agreeable to this Magnificence, both in
Value and Workmanship. The Fabric is yet remaining, but the Gold, Silver,
Ivory, and precious Stones were ransacked by the Persians when Cambyses burned
the Temples of Egypt. There were found in the Rubbish above three hundred
Talents of Gold, and no less than two thousand three hundred of Silver. The
same Author proceeds to give many Instances of the Magnificence of this great
City. The Description of the Sepulchers of their Kings, and particularly that
of Osymanduas, is perfectly astonishing, to which I refer the Reader.

Strabo farther informs us, that the Kings of Thebes extended their Conquests
as far as Scythia, Bactria, and India.

LI.
VERSE 525. Not all Apollo 's Pythian Treasures.] The Temple of Apollo at
Delphos was the richest Temple in the World, by the Offerings which were
brought to it from all Parts; there were Statues of massy Gold of a human Size,
Figures of Animals in Gold, and several other Treasures. A great Sign of its
Wealth is, that the Phocians pillaged it in the Time of Philip the Son of
Amyntas, which gave Occasion to the holy War. It Is said to have been pillaged
before, and that the great Riches of which Homer speaks, had been carried away.
Eustathius.

LII.
VERSE 530. The vital Spirit bled, Returns no more.] Nothing sure could be
better imagined, or more strongly paint Achilles's Resentment, than this
Commendation which Homer puts into his Mouth of a long and peaceable Life. That
Hero whose very Soul was possessed with Love of Glory, and who preferred it to
Life itself, lets his Anger prevail over this his darling Passion: He despises
even Glory, when he cannot obtain that, and enjoy his Revenge at the same time;
and rather than lay this aside, becomes the very Reverse of himself.

LIII.
VERSE 532. My Fates long since by Thetis were disclosed.] It was very
necessary for Homer to put the Reader more than once in mind of this Piece of
Achilles's Story: There is a Remark of Monsieur de la Motte which deserves to
be transcribed entire on this Occasion.

"The Generality of People who do not know Achilles by the Iliad, and who upon
a most noted Fable conceive him invulnerable all but in the Heel, find it
ridiculous that he should be placed at the Head of Heroes; so true it is, that
the Idea of Valor implies it always from Danger.

"Should a Giant, well armed, fight against a Legion of Children, whatever
Slaughter he should make, the Pity any one would have for them would not turn
at all to any Admiration of him, and the more he should applaud his own
Courage, the more one would be offended at his Pride.

" Achilles had been in this Case, if Homer, besides all the Superiority of
Strength he has given him, had not found the Art of putting likewise his
Greatness of Soul out of all Suspicion.

"He has perfectly well succeeded, in feigning that Achilles before his setting
out to the Trojan War, was sure of meeting his Death. The Destinies had
proposed to him by the Mouth of Thetis, the Alternative of a long and happy,
but obscure Life, if he stayed in his own State; or of a short but glorious
one, if he embraced the Vengeance of the Greeks. He wishes for Glory in
Contempt of Death; and thus all his Actions, all his Motions are so many Proofs
of his Courage; he runs, in hastening his Exploits, to a Death which he knows
infallibly attends him; what does it avail him, that he routs every thing
almost without Resistance? It is still true, that he every Moment encounters
and faces the Sentence of his Destiny, and that he devotes himself generously
for Glory. Homer was so sensible that this Idea must force a Concern for Hero,
that he scatters it throughout his Poem, to the end that the Reader having it
always in view, may esteem Achilles even for what he performs without the least
Danger.



LIVE.
VERSE 565. How shall thy Friend, thy Phoenix stay behind.] This is a strong
Argument to persuade Achilles to stay, but dressed up in the utmost Tenderness:
the venerable old Man rises with Tears in his Eyes, and speaks the Language of
Affection. He tells him that he would not be left behind him, though the Gods
would free him from the Burden of old Age, and restore him to his Youth: But
in the midst of so much Fondness, he couches a powerful Argument to persuade
him not to return home, by adding that his Father sent him to be his Guide and
Guardian, Phoenix ought not therefore to follow the Inclinations of Achilles,
but Achilles the Directions of Phoenix. Eustathius.

"The Art of this Speech of Phoenix (says Dionysius (...), lib. 1.) consists in
his seeming to agree with all that Achilles had said: Achilles, he sees, will
depart; and he must go along with him; but in assigning the Reasons why he must
go with him, he proves that Achilles ought not to depart. And thus while he
seems only to show his Love to his Pupil in his Inability to stay behind him,
he indeed challenges the other's Gratitude for the Benefits he had conferred
upon him in his Infancy and Education. At the same time that he moves Achilles,
he gratifies Agamemnon; and that this was the real Design which he disguised in
that manner, we are informed by Achilles himself in the Reply he makes: For
Homer, and all the Authors that treat of this Figure, generally contrive it so,
that the Answers made to these kind of Speeches; discover all the Art and
Structure of them. Achilles therefore asks him, Is it for him these Tears are
taught to flow,
For him these Sorrows, for my mortal Foe?
You see the Scholar reveals the Art and Dissimulation of his Master; and as
Phoenix had recounted the Benefits done him, he takes off that Expostulation by
promising to divide his Empire with him, as may be seen in the same Answer.

LV.
VERSE 567. He sent thee early to the Achaian Host.] Achilles (says Eustathius)
according to some of the Ancients, was but twelve Years old when he went to the
Wars of Troy; ((...)) and it may be gathered from what the Poet here relates of
the Education of Achilles under Phoenix, that the Fable of his being tutored by
Chiron was the Invention of latter Ages, and unknown to Homer.

Mr. Bail in his Article of Achilles, has very well proved this. He might
indeed as he grew up, have learned Music and Physic of Chiron, without having
him formally as his Tutor; for it is plain from this Speech that he was put
under the Direction of Phoenix as his Governor in Morality, when his Father
sent him along with him to the Siege of Troy.

LVI.
VERSE 576. My Father, faithless to my Mother's Arms, etc.] Homer has been
blamed for introducing two long Stories into this Speech of Phoenix; this
concerning himself is said not to be in the proper Place, and what Achilles
must needs have heard over and over: It also gives (say they) a very ill
Impression of Phoenix himself, and makes him appear a very unfit Person to be a
Teacher of Morality to the young Hero. It is answered, that though Achilles might
have known the Story before in general, it is proboble Phoenix had not till now
so pressing an Occasion to make him discover the Excess his Fury had
transported him to, in attempting the Life of his own Father: The whole Story
tends to represent the dreadful Effects of Passion; and I cannot but think the
Example is the more forcible, as it is drawn from his own Experience.

LVII.
VERSE 579. To win the Damsel.] The Counsel that this Mother gives to her Son
Phoenix is the same that Achitophel gave to Absalom, to hinder him from ever
being reconciled to David. Et ait Achitophel ad Absalom: ingredere ad
concubinos patris tui, quas dimisit ad custodiendam domum, ut cum audierit
omnis Israel quod foedaveris patrem tuum, roborentur tecum manus eorum. 2 Samuel
14. 20. Dacier.

LVIII.
VERSE 579. Prevent my Sire.] This Decency of Homer is worthy Observation, who
to remove all the disagreeable Ideas which might proceed from this Intrigue of
Phoenix with his Father's Mistress, took care to give us to understand in one
single word, that Amyntor had no share in her Affections, which makes the
Action of Phoenix the more excusable. He does it only in Obedience to his
Mother, in order to reclaim his Father, and oblige him to live like her
Husband: Besides, his Father had yet no Commerce with this Mistress to whose
Love he pretended. Had it been otherwise, and had Phoenix committed this sort
of Incest, Homer would neither have presented this Image to his Reader, nor
Peleus chosen Phoenix to be Governor to Achilles. Dacier.

LIX.
VERSE 584. Infernal Jove.] The Greek is (...). The Ancients gave the Name of
Jupiter not only to the God of Heaven, but likewise to the God of Hell, as is
seen here, and to the God of the Sea, as appears from Aeschylus. They thereby
meant to show that one sole Deity governed the World; and it was to teach the
same Truth, that the ancient Statuaries made Statues of Jupiter, which had
three Eyes. Priam had one of them in that manner in the Court of his Palace,
which was there in Laomedon's Time: After the taking of Troy, when the Greeks
shared the Booty, it fell to Sthenelus's Lot, who carried it into Greece.
Dacier.

LX.
VERSE 586. Despair and Grief distract, etc.] I have taken the Liberty to
replace here four Verses which Aristarchus had cut out, because of the Horror
which the Idea gave him of a Son who is going to kill his Father; but perhaps
Aristarchus's Niceness was too great. These Verses seem to me necessary, and
have a very good Effect; for Phoenix's Aim is to show Achilles, that unless we
overcome our Wrath, we are exposed to commit the greatest Crimes: He was going
to kill his own Father. Achilles in the same manner is going to let his Father
Phoenix and all the Greeks perish, if he does not appease his Wrath. Plutarch
relates these four Verses in his Treatise of reading the Poets; and adds, "
Aristarchus frightened at this horrible Crime, cut out these Verses; but they do
very well in this Place, and on this Occasion, Phoenix intending to show
Achilles what Wrath is, and to what abominable Excesses it hurries Men who do
not obey Reason, and who refuse to follow the Counsels of those that advise
them. These sort of Curtailings from Homer, often contrary to all Reason, gave
room to Lucian to feign that being in the fortunate Islands, he asked Homer a
great many Questions. Among other things (says he in his second Book of his
true History) "I asked him whether he had made all the Verses which had been
rejected in his Poem? He assured me they were all his own, which made me laugh
at the impertinent and bold Criticisms of Zenodorus and Aristarchus, who had
retrenched them. Dacier.

LXI.
VERSE 612. I pass my Watchings over thy helpless Years.] In the Original of
this Place Phoenix tells Achilles, that as he placed him in his Infancy on his
Lap, he has often cast up the Wine he had drank upon his Clothes. I wish I had
any Authority to say these Verses were foisted into the Text: For though the Idea
be indeed natural, it must be granted to be so very gross as to be utterly
unworthy of Homer; nor do I see any Color to soften the Meanness of it: such
Images in any Age or Country, must have been too nauseous to be described.

LXII.
VERSE 625. Prayers are Jove 's Daughters.] Nothing can be more beautiful,
noble, or religious, than this divine Allegory. We have here Goddesses of
Homer's Creation, he sets before us their Pictures in lively Colors, and gives
these fancied Beings all the Features that resemble Mankind who offer Injuries,
or have Recourse to Prayers.

Prayers are said to be the Daughters of Jove, because it is he who teaches Man
to pray. They are lame, because the Posture of a Suppliant is with his Knee on
the Ground. They are wrinkled, because those that pray have a Countenance of
Dejection and Sorrow. Their Eyes are turned aside, because through an awful
Regard to Heaven they dare not lift them thither. They follow Ate or Injury,
because nothing but Prayers can atone for the Wrongs that are offered by the
injurious. Ate is said to be strong and swift of Foot, etc. because injurious
Men are swift to do Mischief. This is the Explanation of Eustathius, with whom
Dacier agrees, but when she allows the Circumstance of Lameness to intimate the
Custom of kneeling in Prayer, she forgets that this contradicts her own
Assertion in one of the Remarks on Iliad 7. where she affirms that no such
Custom was used by the Greeks. And indeed the contrary seems inferred in
several Places of Homer, particularly where Achilles says in the 608 th Verse
of the eleventh Book, The Greeks shall stand round his Knees supplicating to
him. The Phrases in that Language that signify praying, are derived from the
Knee, only as it was usual to lay hold on the Knee of the Person to whom they
supplicated.

A modern Author imagines Ate to signify divine Justice, a Notion in which he
is single, and repugnant to all the Mythologists. Besides, the whole Context in
this Place, and the very Application of the Allegory to the present Case of
Achilles, whom he exhorts to be moved by Prayers notwithstanding the Injustice
done him by Agamemnon, makes the contrary evident.

LXIII.
VERSE 643. Not Greece, nor all her Fortunes.] Plato in the third Book of his
Republic condemns this Passage, and thinks it very wrong, that Phoenix should
say to Achilles that if they did not offer him great Presents, he would not
advise him to be appeased; but I think there is some Injustice in this Censure,
and that Plato has not rightly entered into the Sense of Phoenix, who does not
look upon these Presents on the side of Interest, but Honor, as a Mark of
Agamemnon's Repentance, and of the Satisfaction he is ready to make: wherefore
he says, that Honor has a mighty Power over great Spirits. Dacier.

LXIV.
VERSE 648. Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain.] In the Original it is --
(...). -- I am pretty confident there is not any manner of speaking like this
used throughout all Homer; nor two Substantives so odly coupled to a Verb, as
(...) and (...) in this Place. We may indeed meet with such little Affectations
in Ovid, -- Aurigam puriter animaque, rotisque, Expulit -- and the like; but
the Taste of the Ancients in general was too good for these Fooleries. I must
have leave to think the Verse (...), etc. an Interpolation; the Sense is
complete without it, and the latter part of the Line, (...), seems but a
Tautology, after what is said in the six Verses preceding.

LXV.
VERSE 649. Let me, my Son, an ancient Fact unfold.] Phoenix, says Eustathius,
lays down, as the Foundation of his Story, that great Men in former Ages were
always appeased by Presents and Entreaties, and to confirm this Position, he
brings Meleager as an Instance; but it may be objected, that Meleager was an
ill chosen Instance, being a Person whom no Entreaties could move: The
Superstructure of this Story seems not to agree with the Foundation. Eustathius
solves the Difficulty thus. Homer did not intend to give an Instance of a
Hero's Compliance with the Entreaties of his Friends, but to show that they who
did not comply were Sufferers themselves in the End. So that the Connection of
the Story is thus; The Heroes of former Times were used always to be won by
Presents and Entreaties; Meleager only was obstinate, and suffered because he
was so.

The Length of this Narration cannot be taxed as unseasonable; it was at full
Leisure in the Tent, and in the Night, a time of no Action. Yet I cannot answer
but the Tale may be tedious to a modern Reader. I have translated it therefore
with all possible Shortness, as will appear upon a Comparison. The Piece itself
is very valuable, as it preserves to us a Part of ancient History that had
otherwise been entirely lost, as Quintilian has remarked. The same great
Critic commends Homer's manner of relating it: Narrare quis significantius
potest, quam qui Curetum Aetolorumque praelia exponit, lib. 10. c. 1.

LXVI.
VERSE 677. Alcyone, a Name to show, etc.] It appears (says Madam Dacier) by
this Passage, and by others already observed, that the Greeks often gave Names,
as did the Hebrews, not only with respect to the Circumstances, but likewise to
the Accidents which happened to the Fathers and Mothers of those they named:
Thus Cleopatra is called Alcyone, from the Lamentations of her Mother. I cannot
but think this Digression concerning Idas and Marpessa too long, and not very
much to the Purpose.

LXVII.
VERSE 708. She paints the Horrors of a conquered Town,
The Heroes slain, the Palaces overthrown,
The Matrons ravished, the whole Race enslaved.]
It is remarkakable with what Art Homer here in a few Words sums up the Miseries
of a City taken by Assault.

It had been unpardonable for Cleopatra to have made a long Representation to
Meleager of these Miseries, when every Moment that kept him from the Battle
could not be spared. It is also to be observed how perfectly the Features of
Meleager resemble Achilles, they are both brave Men, ambitious of Glory, both
of them described as giving Victory to their several Armies while they fought,
and both of them implacable in their Resentment. Eustathius.

LXVIII.
VERSE 718. Achilles 's Answer to Phoenix.] The Character of Achilles is
excellently sustained in all his Speeches: To Ulysses he returns a flat Denial,
and threatens to leave the Trojan Shores in the Morning: To Phoenix he gives a
much gentler Answer, and begins to mention Agamemnon with less Disrespect
(...): After Ajax had spoken, he seems determined not to depart, but yet
refuses to bear Arms, till it is to defend his own Squadron. Thus Achilles's
Character is every where of a Piece: He begins to yield, and not to have done
so, would not have spoke him a Man; to have made him perfectly inexorable had
shown him a Monster. Thus the Poet draws the Heat of his Passion cooling by
slow Degrees, which is very natural: To have done otherwise, had not been
agreeable to Achilles's Temper, nor the Reader's Expectation, to whom it would
have been shocking to have seen him passing from the greatest Storm of Anger to
a quiet Calmness. Eustathius.

LXIX.
VERSE 725. While Life's warm Spirit beats within my Breast.] Eustathius
observes here with a great deal of Penetration, that these Words of Achilles
include a sort of Oracle, which he does not understand: For it sometimes
happens that Men full of their Objects say things, which besides the Sense
natural and plain to every Body, include another supernatural, which they
themselves do not understand, and which is understood by those only who have
Penetration enough to see through the Obscurity of it. Thus Oedipus often speaks
in Sophocles; and holy Scripture furnishes us with great Examples of
Enthusiastic Speeches, which have a double Sense. Here we manifestly see that
Achilles in speaking a very simple and common thing, foretells without thinking
of it, that his Abode on that fatal Shore will equal the Course of his Life,
and consequently that he shall die there: and this double Meaning gives a
sensible Pleasure to the Reader. Dacier.

LXX.
VERSE 742. The Speech of Ajax.] I have before spoken of this short
Soldier-like Speech of Ajax; Dionysius of Halicarnassus says of it, "that the
Person who entreats most, and with most Liberty, who supplicates most, and
presses most, is Ajax. It is probable that Ajax rises up when he speaks the
word, Let us go. He does not vouchsafe to address himself to Achilles, but
turns himself to Ulysses, and speaks with a martial Eloquence.

LXXI.
VERSE 751. The Price of Blood discharged.] It was the Custom for the Murderer
to go into Banishment one Year, but if the Relations of the Person murdered
were willing, the Criminal by paying them a certain Fine, might buy off the
Exile, and remain at home. (It may not be amiss to observe, that (...), quasi
(...), properly signifies a Mulct paid for Murder.) Ajax sums up this Argument
with a great deal of Strength: We see, says he, a Brother forgive the Murder of
his Brother, a Father that of his Son. But Achilles will not forgive the Injury
offered him by taking away one captive Woman. Eustathius.

LXXII.
VERSE 757. Revere the Roof, and to thy Guests be kind.] Eustathius says there
is some Difficulty in the Original of this Place. Why should Ajax draw an
Argument to influence Achilles, by putting him in mind to reverence his own
Habitation? The latter Part of the Verse explains the former: We, says Ajax,
are under your Roof, and let that protect us from any ill Usage; send us not
away from your House with Contempt, who came hither as Friends, as Supplicants,
as Ambassadors.

LXXIII.
VERSE 762. Well have thon spoke, but at the Tyrant's Name My Rage rekindles.]
We have here the true Picture of an angry Man, and nothing can be better
imagined to heighten Achilles's Wrath; he owns that Reason would induce him to
a Reconciliation, but his Anger is too great to listen to Reason. He speaks
with respect to them, but upon mentioning Agamemnon, he flies into Rage: Anger
is in nothing more like Madness, than that Madmen will talk sensibly enough
upon any indifferent Matter; but upon the mention of the Subject that caused
their Disorder, they fly out into their usual Extravagance.

LXXIV.
VERSE 811. Such was his Word.] It may be asked here why Ulysses speaks only of
the Answer which Achilles made him at first, and says nothing of the
Disposition to which the Discourses of Phoenix and Ajax had brought him. The
Question is easily answered; it is because Achilles is obstinate in his
Resentment; and that, if at length a little moved by Phoenix, and shaken by
Ajax, he seemed disposed to take Arms; it is not out of regard to the Greeks,
but only to save his own Squadron, when Hector after having put the Greeks to
the Sword, shall come to insult it. Thus this inflexible Man abates nothing of
his Rage. It is therefore prudent in Ulysses to make this Report to Agamemnon,
to the End that being put out of hopes of the Aid with which he flattered
himself, he may concert with the Leaders of the Army the Measures necessary to
save his Fleet and Troops. Eustathius.

LXXV.
VERSE 821. Why should we Gifts, etc.] This Speech is admirably adapted to the
Character of Diomed, every word is animated with a martial Courage, and worthy
to be delivered by a gallant Soldier. He advised fighting in the beginning of
the Book, and continues still in that Opinion; and he is no more concerned at
the Speech of Achilles now, than he was at that of Agamemnon before.

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Night-Adventure of Diomed and Ulysses.
UPON the Refusal of Achilles to return to the Army; the Distress of Agamemnon
is described in the most lively manner. He takes no Rest that Night, but passes
through the Camp, awaking the Leaders, and contriving all possible Methods for
the public Safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses and Diomed are employed in
raising the rest of the Captains. They call a Council of War, and determine to
send Scouts into the Enemy's Camp to learn their Posture and discover their
Intentions. Diomed undertakes this hazardous Enterprise, and makes choice of
Ulysses for his Companion. In their Passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector
had sent on a like Design to the Camp of the Grecians. From him they are
informed of the Situation of the Trojan and Auxiliary Forces, and particularly
of Rhesus and the Thracians who were lately arrived. They pass on with Success,
kill Rhesus, with several of his Officers, and seize the famous Horses of that
Prince with which they return in Triumph to the Camp.

The same Night continues; the Scene lies in the two Camps.

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
ALL Night the Chiefs before their Vessels lay,
And lost in Sleep the Labors of the Day:
All but the King; with various Thoughts oppressed,
His Country's Cares lay rolling in his Breast.
As when by Lightenings Jove's Aetherial Power
Foretells the rattling Hail, or weighty Shower,
Or sends soft Snows to whiten all the Shore,
Or bids the brazen Throat of War to roar;
By fits one Flash succeeds, as one expires,
And Heaven flames thick with momentary Fires.
So bursting frequent from Atrides' Breast,
Sighs following Sighs his inward Fears confessed.
Now over the Fields, dejected, he surveys
From thousand Trojan Fires the mounting Blaze;
Hears in the passing Wind their Music blow,
And marks distinct the Voices of the Foe.
Now looking backwards to the Fleet and Coast,
Anxious he sorrows for the endangered Host.
He rends his Hairs, in sacrifice to Jove,
And sues to Him that ever lives above:
Inly he groans; while Glory and Despair
Divide his Heart, and wage a doubtful War.
A thousand Cares his laboring Breast revolves;
To seek sage Nestor now the Chief resolves,
With him, in wholesome Counsels, to debate
What yet remains to save the afflicted State.
He rose, and first he cast his Mantle round,
Next on his Feet the shining Sandals bound;
A Lion's yellow Spoils his Back concealed;
His warlike Hand a pointed Javelin held.
Meanwhile his Brother, pressed with equal Woes,
Alike denied the Gifts of soft Repose,
Laments for Greece; that in his Cause before
So much had suffered, and must suffer more.
A Leopard's spotted Hide his Shoulders spread;
A brazen Helmet glittered on his Head:
Thus (with a Javelin in his Hand) he went,
To wake Atrides in the Royal Tent.
Already waked, Atrides he descried,
His Armor buckling at his Vessel's side.
Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun:
Why puts my Brother his bright Armor on?
Sends he some Spy, amidst these silent Hours,
To try yon' Camp, and watch the Trojan Powers?
But say, what Hero shall sustain that Task?
Such bold Exploits uncommon Courage ask,
Guideless, alone, through Night's dark Shade to go,
And 'midst a hostile Camp explore the Foe?
To whom the King. In such Distress we stand,
No vulgar Counsels our Affairs demand;
Greece to preserve, is now no easy part,
But asks high Wisdom, deep Design, and Art.
For Jove, averse, our humble Vows denies,
And bows his Head to Hector's Sacrifice.
What Eye has witnessed, or what Ear believed,
In one great Day, by one great Arm achieved,
Such wondrous Deeds as Hector's Hand has done,
And we beheld, the last revolving Sun?
What Honors the beloved of Jove adorn!
Sprung from no God, and of no Goddess born,
Yet such his Acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,
And curse the Battle where their Fathers fell.
Now speed thy hasty Course along the Fleet,
There call great Ajax, and the Prince of Creet.
Our self to hoary Nestor will repair;
To keep the Guards on Duty, be his Care;
(For Nestor's Influence best that Quarter guides;
Whose Son, with Merion, over the Watch presides.)
To whom the Spartan: These thy Orders born,
Say shall I stay, or with Dispatch return?
There shall thou stay (the King of Men replied)
Else may we miss to meet, without a Guide,
The Paths so many, and the Camp so wide.
Still, with your Voice, the sloathful Soldiers raise,
Urge by their Father's Fame, their future Praise.
Forget we now our State and lofty Birth;
Not Titles here, but Works, must prove our Worth.
To labor is the Lot of Man below;
And when Jove gave us Life, he gave us Woe.
This said, each parted to his several Cares;
The King to Nestor's sable Ship repairs;
The sage Protector of the Greeks he found
Stretched in his Bed, with all his Arms around;
The various-colour'd Scarf, the Shield he rears,
The shining Helmet, and the pointed Spears:
The dreadful Weapons of the Warrior's Rage,
That old in Arms, disdained the Peace of Age.
Then leaning on his Hand his watchful Head,
The hoary Monarch raised his Eyes, and said.
What art thou, speak, that on Designs unknown
While others sleep, thus range the Camp alone?
Seek'st thou some Friend, or nightly Sentinel?
Stand off, approach not, but thy Purpose tell.
O Son of Neleus (thus the King rejoined)
Pride of the Greeks, and Glory of thy Kind!
Lo here the wretched Agamemnon stands,
The unhappy General of the Grecian Bands;
Whom Jove decrees with daily Cares to bend,
And Woes, that only with his Life shall end!
Scarce can my Knees these trembling Limbs sustain,
And scarce my Heart support its Load of Pain.
No Taste of Sleep these heavy Eyes have known;
Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone,
With Fears distracted, with no fixed Design;
And all my People's Miseries are mine.
If ought of use thy waking Thoughts suggest,
(Since Cares, like mine, deprive thy Soul of Rest)
Impart thy Counsel, and assist thy Friend:
Now let us jointly to the Trench descend,
At every Gate the fainting Guard excite,
Tired with the Toils of Day, and Watch of Night:
Else may the sudden Foe our Works invade,
So near, and favored by the gloomy Shade.
To him thus Nestor. Trust the Powers above,
Nor think proud Hector's Hopes confirmed by Jove:
How ill agrees the Views of vain Mankind,
And the wise Counsels of the eternal Mind?
Audacious Hector, if the Gods ordain
That great Achilles rise and rage again,
What Toils attend thee, and what Woes remain?
Lo faithful Nestor thy Command obeys;
The Care is next our other Chiefs to raise:
Ulysses, Diomed we chiefly need;
Mages for Strength, Oileus famed for Speed.
Some other be dispatched, of nimbler Feet,
To those tall Ships, remotest of the Fleet,
Where lie great Ajax and the King of Crete.
To rouse the Spartan I my self decree;
Dear as he is to us, and dear to thee,
Yet must I tax his Sloth, that claims no share
With his great Brother in this martial Care:
Him it behooved to every Chief to sue,
Preventing every Part performed by you;
For strong Necessity our Toils demands,
Claims all our Hearts, and urges all our Hands.
To whom the King: With Reverence we allow
Thy just Rebukes, yet learn to spare them now.
My generous Brother is of gentle kind,
He seems remiss, but bears a valiant Mind;
Through too much Def'rence to our Sovereign Sway,
Content to follow when we lead the way.
But now our Ills industrious to prevent,
Long ever the rest, he rose, and sought my Tent.
The Chiefs you named, already, at his Call,
Prepare to meet us near the Navy-wall;
Assembling there, between the Trench and Gates,
Near the Night-Guards, our chosen Council waits.
Then none (said Nestor) shall his Rule withstand,
For great Examples justify Command.
With that, the venerable Warrior rose;
The shining Greaves his manly Legs enclose;
His purple Mantle golden Buckles joined,
Warm with the softest Wool, and doubly lined.
Then rushing from his Tent, he snatched in have
His steely Lance, that lightened as he past.
The Camp he traversed through the sleeping Crowd,
Stopped at Ulysses' Tent, and called aloud.
Ulysses, sudden as the Voice was sent,
Awakes, starts up, and issues from his Tent.
What new Distress, what sudden Cause of Fright
Thus leads you wandering in the silent Night?
O prudent Chief! (the Pylian Sage replied)
Wise as thou art, be now thy Wisdom tried:
Whatever means of Safety can be sought,
Whatever Counsels can inspire our Thought,
Whatever Methods, or to fly, or fight;
All, all depend on this important Night!
He heard, returned, and took his painted Shield:
Then joined the Chiefs, and followed through the Field.
Without his Tent, bold Diomed they found,
All sheathed in Arms; his brave Companions round:
Each sunk in Sleep, extended on the Field,
His Head reclining on his bossy Shield.
A Wood of Spears stood by, that fixed upright,
Shot from their flashing Points a quivering Light.
A Bull's black Hide composed the Hero's Bed;
A splendid Carpet rolled beneath his Head.
Then, with his Foot, old Nestor gently shakes
The slumbering Chief, and in these Words awakes.
Rise, Son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong
Rest seems inglorious, and the Night too long.
But sleep'st thou now? when from yon' Hills the Foe
Hangs over the Fleet, and shades our Walls below?
At this, soft Slumber from his Eyelids fled;
The Warrior saw the hoary Chief, and said.
Wondrous old Man! whose Soul no Respite knows,
Though Years and Honors bid thee seek Repose.
Let younger Greeks our sleeping Warriors wake;
Ill fits thy Age these Toils to undertake.
My Friend, (he answered) generous is thy Care,
These Toils, my Subjects and my Sons might bear,
Their loyal Thoughts and pious Loves conspire
To ease a Sovereign, and relieve a Sire.
But now the last Despair surrounds our Host;
No Hour must pass, no Moment must be lost;
Each single Greek, in this conclusive Strife,
Stands on the sharpest Edge of Death or Life:
Yet if my Years thy kind Regard engage,
Employ thy Youth as I employ my Age;
Succeed to these my Cares, and rouse the rest;
He serves me most, who serves his Country best.
This said, the Hero over his Shoulders slung
A Lion's Spoils, that to his Ankles hung;
Then seized his ponderous Lance, and strode along.
Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed,
The Warrior roused, and to the Entrenchments led.
And now the Chiefs approach the nightly Guard;
A wakeful Squadron, each in Arms prepared:
The unwearied Watch their listening Leaders keep,
And couching close, repel invading Sleep.
So faithful Dogs their fleecy Charge maintain,
With Toil protected from the prowling Train;
When the gaunt Lioness, with Hunger bold,
Springs from the Mountains towered the guarded Fold:
Thro'breaking Woods her rust'ling Course they hear;
Loud, and more loud, the Clamours strike their Ear
Of Hounds and Men; they start, they gaze around;
Watch every Side, and turn to every Sound.
Thus watched the Grecians, cautious of Surprise,
Each Voice, each Motion, drew their Ears and Eyes;
Each Step of passing Feet increased th'Affright;
And hostile Troy was ever full in Sight.
Nestor with Joy the wakeful Band surveyed,
And thus accosted through the gloomy Shade.
It Is well, my Sons, your nightly Cares employ,
Else must our Host become the Scorn of Troy.
Watch thus, and Greece shall live -- The Hero said;
Then over the Trench the following Chieftains led.
His Son, and godlike Merion marched behind,
(For these the Princes to their Council joined)
The Trenches past, the assembled Kings around
In silent State the Consistory crowned.
A Place there was, yet undefiled with Gore,
The Spot, where Hector stopped his Rage before,
When Night descending, from his vengeful Hand
Reprieved the Relics of the Grecian Band:
(The Plain beside with mangled Corpse was spread,
And all his Progress marked by Heaps of dead.)
There sat the mournful Kings: when Neleus' Son,
The Council opening, in these Words begun.
Is there (he said) a Chief so greatly brave,
His Life to hazard, and his Country save?
Lives there a Man, who singly dares to go
To yonder Camp, or seize some straggling Foe?
Or favored by the Night, approach so near,
Their Speech, their Counsels, and Designs to hear?
If to besiege our Navies they prepare,
Or Troy once more must be the Seat of War?
This could he learn, and to our Peers recite,
And pass unharm'd the Dangers of the Night;
What Fame were his through all succeeding Days,
While Phoebus shines, or Men have tongues to praise?
What Gifts his grateful Country would bestow?
What must not Greece to her Deliv'rer owe?
A sable Ewe each Leader should provide,
With each a sable Lambkin by her side;
At every Rite his Share should be increased,
And his the foremost Honors of the Feast.
Fear held them mute: Alone, untaught to fear,
Tydides spoke -- The Man you seek, is here.
Through yon' black Camps to bend my dangerous way,
Some God within commands, and I obey.
But let some other chosen Warrior join,
To raise my Hopes, and second my Design.
By mutual Confidence, and mutual Aid,
Great Deeds are done, and great Discov'ries made;
The Wise new Prudence from the Wise acquire,
And one brave Hero fans another's Fire.
Contending Leaders at the Word arose;
Each generous Breast with Emulation glows:
So brave a Task each Ajax strove to share,
Bold Merion strove, and Nestor's valiant Heir;
The Spartan wished the second Place to gain,
And great Ulysses wished, nor wished in vain.
Then thus the King of Men the Contest ends:
Thou first of Warriors, and thou best of Friends,
Undaunted Diomed! what Chief to join
In this great Enterprise, is only thine.
Just be thy Choice, without Affection made,
To Birth, or Office, no respect be paid;
Let Worth determine here. The Monarch spoke,
And inly trembled for his Brother's sake.
Then thus (the Godlike Diomed rejoined)
My Choice declares the Impulse of my Mind.
How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands
To lend his Counsels, and assist our Hands?
A Chief, whose Safety is Minerva's Care;
So famed, so dreadful, in the Works of War?
Blessed in his Conduct, I no Aid require,
Wisdom like his might pass through Flames of Fire.
It fits thee not, before these Chiefs of Fame,
(Replied the Sage) to praise me, or to blame:
Praise from a Friend, or Censure from a Foe,
Are lost on Hearers that our Merits know.
But let us haste -- Night rolls the Hours away,
The red'ning Orient shows the coming Day,
The Stars shine fainter on th'Aetherial Plains,
And of Night's Empire but a third remains.
Thus having spoke, with generous Ardour pressed,
In Arms Terrific their huge Limbs they dressed.
A two-edged Faulchion Thrasymed the brave,
And ample Buckler, to Tydides gave:
Then in a leathern Helm he cased his Head,
Short of its Crest, and with no Plume overspread;
(Such as by Youths unused to Arms, are worn;
No Spoils enrich it, and no Studs adorn.)
Next him Ulysses took a shining Sword,
A Bow and Quiver, with bright Arrows stored:
A well-prov'd Casque with Leather Braces bound
(Thy Gift, Meriones) his Temples crowned;
Soft Wool within; without, in order spread,
A Boar's white Teeth grinn'd horrid over his Head.
This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus' Son,
Autolychus by fraudful Rapine won,
And gave Amphydamas; from him the Prize
Molus received, the Pledge of social Ties;
The Helmet next by Merion was possessed,
And now Ulysses' thoughtful Temples pressed.
Thus sheathed in Arms, the Council they forsake,
And dark through Paths oblique their Progress take.
Just then, in sign she favored their Intent,
A long-wing'd Heron great Minerva sent;
This, though surrounding Shades obscured their View,
By the shrill Clang and whistling Wings, they knew.
As from the Right she soared, Ulysses prayed,
Hailed the glad Omen, and addressed the Maid.
O Daughter of that God, whose Arm can wield
The avenging Bolt, and shake the dreadful Shield.
O thou! for ever present in my way,
Who, all my Motions, all my Toils survey!
Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy Shade,
Safe by thy Succor to our Ships conveyed;
And let some Deed this signal Night adorn,
To claim the Tears of Trojans yet unborn.
Then Godlike Diomed preferred his Prayer:
Daughter of Jove, unconquered Pallas! hear.
Great Queen of Arms, whose Favor Tydeus won,
As thou defend'st the Sire, defend the Son.
When on Aesopus' Banks the banded Powers
Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban Towers,
Peace was his Charge; received with peaceful Show,
He went a Legate, but returned a Foe:
Then helped by thee, and covered by thy Shield,
He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.
So now be present, Oh celestial Maid!
So still continue to the Race thine Aid!
A youthful Steer shall fall beneath the Stroke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling Yoke,
With ample Forehead, and with spreading Horns,
Whose taper tops refulgent Gold adorns.
The Heroes prayed, and Pallas from the Skies,
Accords their Vow, succeeds their Enterprise.
Now, like two Lions panting for the Prey,
With deathful Thoughts they trace the dreary way,
Through the black Horrors of the ensanguin'd Plain,
Through Dust, through Blood, over Arms, and Hills of Slain.
Nor less bold Hector, and the Sons of Troy,
On high Designs the wakeful Hours employ;
The assembled Peers their lofty Chief enclosed;
Who thus the Counsels of his Breast proposed.
What glorious Man, for high Attempts prepared,
Dares greatly venture for a rich Reward?
Of yonder Fleet a bold Discov'ry make,
What Watch they keep, and what Resolves they take:
If now subdued they meditate their Flight,
And spent with Toil neglect the Watch of Night?
His be the Chariot that shall please him most,
Of all the Plunder of the vanquished Host;
His the fair Steeds that all the rest excel,
And his the Glory to have served so well.
A Youth there was among the Tribes of Troy,
Dolon his Name, Eumedes' only Boy,
(Five Girls beside the reverend Herald told)
Rich was the Son in Brass, and rich in Gold;
Not blessed by Nature with the Charms of Face,
But swift of Foot, and matchless in the Race.
Hector! (he said) my Courage bids me meet
This high Achievement, and explore the Fleet:
But first exalt thy Scepter to the Skies,
And swear to grant me the demanded Prize;
The immortal Courses, and the glittering Car,
That bear Pelides through the Ranks of War.
Encouraged thus, no idle Scout I go,
Fulfill thy Wish, their whole Intention know,
Even to the Royal Tent pursue my way,
And all their Counsels, all their Aims betray.
The Chief then heaved the golden Scepter high,
Attesting thus the Monarch of the Sky.
Be witness thou! immortal Lord of all!
Whose Thunder shakes the dark aerial Hall.
By none but Dolon shall this Prize be born,
And him alone the immortal Steeds adorn.
Thus Hector swore: the Gods were called in vain;
But the rash Youth prepares to scour the Plain:
Across his Back the bended Bow he flung,
A Wolf's gray Hide around his Shoulders hung.
A Ferret's downy Fur his Helmet lined,
And in his Hand a pointed Javelin shined.
Then (never to return) he sought the Shore,
And trod the Path his Feet must tread no more.
Scarce had he passed the Steeds and Trojan Throng,
(Still bending forward as he cours'd along)
When, on the hollow way, the approaching Tread
Ulysses marked, and thus to Diomed.
O Friend! I hear some Step of hostile Feet,
Moving this way, or hastening to the Fleet;
Some Spy perhaps, to lurk beside the Main;
Or nightly Pillager that strips the slain.
Yet let him pass, and win a little Space;
Then rush behind him, and prevent his Pace.
But if too swift of Foot he flies before,
Confine his Course along the Fleet and Shore,
Betwixt the Camp and him our Spears employ,
And intercept his hoped return to Troy.
With that, they stepped aside, and stooped their head,
(As Dolon passed) behind a Heap of dead:
Along the Path the Spy unwary flew;
Soft, at just distance, both the Chiefs pursue.
So distant they, and such the Space between,
As when two Teams of Mules divide the Green,
(To whom the Hind like Shares of Land allows)
When now few Furrows part the approaching Ploughs.
Now Dolon listening, heard them as they past;
Hector (he thought) had sent, and checked his have,
Till scarce at distance of a Javelin's throw,
No Voice succeeding, he perceived the Foe.
As when two skilful Hounds the Lev'ret wind,
Or chase through Woods obscure the trembling Hind;
Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way,
And from the Herd still turn the flying Prey:
So fast, and with such Fears, the Trojan flew;
So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue.
Now almost on the Fleet the Dastard falls,
And mingles with the Guards that watch the Walls;
When brave Tydides stopped; a generous Thought
(Inspired by Pallas) in his Bosom wrought,
Lest on the Foe some forward Greek advance,
And snatch the Glory from his lifted Lance.
Then thus aloud: Whoever thou art, remain;
This Javelin else shall fix thee to the Plain.
He said, and high in Air the Weapon cast,
Which wilful erred, and over his Shoulder past;
Then fixed in Earth. Against the trembling Wood
The Wretch stood prop'd, and quiver'd as he stood;
A sudden Palsy seized his turning Head;
His loose Teeth chatter'd, and his Color fled:
The panting Warriors seize him as He stands,
And with unmanly Tears his Life demands.
O spare my Youth, and for the Breath I owe,
Large Gifts of Price my Father shall bestow:
Vast Heaps of Brass shall in your Ships be told,
And Steel well tempered, and refulgent Gold.
To whom Ulysses made this wise Reply;
Whoever thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.
What moves thee, say, when Sleep has closed the Sight,
To roam the silent Fields in dead of Night?
Came thou the Secrets of our Camp to find,
By Hector prompted, or thy daring Mind,
Or art some Wretch by hopes of Plunder led,
Through Heaps of Carnage to despoil the dead?
Then thus pale Dolon with a fearful Look,
(Still, as he spoke, his Limbs with Horror shook)
Hither I came, by Hector's Words deceived;
Much did he promise, rashly I believed:
No less a Bribe than great Achilles' Car,
And those swift Steeds that sweep the Ranks of War,
Urged me, unwilling, this Attempt to make;
To learn what Counsels, what Resolves you take,
If now subdued, you fix your Hopes on Flight,
And tired with Toils, neglect the Watch of Night?
Bold was thy Aim, and glorious was the Prize,
( Ulysses, with a scornful Smile, replies)
Far other Rulers those proud Steeds demand,
And scorn the Guidance of a vulgar Hand;
Even great Achilles scarce their Rage can tame,
Achilles sprung from an immortal Dame.
But say, be faithful, and the Truth recite!
Where lies encamped the Trojan Chief to Night?
Where stand his Coursers? In what Quarter sleep
Their other Princes? tell what Watch they keep?
Say, since this Conquest, what their Counsels are?
Or here to combat, from their City far,
Or back to Ilion's Walls transfer the War?
Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedes' Son:
What Dolon knows, his faithful Tongue shall own.
Hector, the Peers assembling in his Tent,
A Council holds at Ilus' Monument.
No certain Guards the nightly Watch partake;
Where ever yon' Fires ascend, the Trojans wake:
Anxious for Troy, the Guard the Natives keep;
Safe in their Cares, the auxiliar Forces sleep,
Whose Wives and Infants, from the Danger far,
Discharge their Souls of half the Fears of War.
Then sleep those Aids among the Trojan Train,
(Inquired the Chief) or scattered over the Plain?
To whom the Spy: Their Powers they thus dispose:
The Paeons, dreadful with their bended Bows,
The Carians, Caucons, the Pelasgian Host,
And Leleges, encamp along the Coast.
Not distant far, lie higher on the Land
The Lycian, Mysian, and Maeonian Band,
And Phrygia's Horse, by Thymbras' ancient Wall;
The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.
These Troy but lately to her Succor won,
Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneus' Son:
I saw his Coursers in proud Triumph go,
Swift as the Wind, and white as Winter-Snow:
Rich silver Plates his shining Car infold;
His solid Arms, refulgent, flame with Gold;
No mortal Shoulders suit the glorious Load,
Celestial Panoply, to grace a God!
Let me, unhappy, to your Fleet be born,
Or leave me here, a Captive's Fate to mourn,
In cruel Chains; till your Return reveal
The Truth or Falsehood of the News I tell.
To this Tydides, with a gloomy Frown:
Think not to live, though all the Truth be shown:
Shall we dismiss thee, in some future Strife
To risk more bravely thy now forfeit Life?
Or that again our Camps thou may explore?
No -- once a Traitor, thou betray'st no more.
Sternly he spoke, and as the Wretch prepared
With humble Blandishment to stroke his Beard,
Like Lightning swift the wrathful Faulchion flew,
Divides the Neck, and cuts the Nerves in two;
One Instant snatched his trembling Soul to Hell,
The Head, yet speaking, muttered as it fell.
The furry Helmet from his Brow they tear,
The Wolf's gray Hide, th'unbended Bow and Spear;
These great Ulysses lifting to the Skies,
To favoring Pallas dedicates the Prize.
Great Queen of Arms! receive this hostile Spoil,
And let the Thracian Steeds reward our Toil:
Thee first of all the heavenly Host we praise;
Oh speed our Labors, and direct our ways!
This said, the Spoils with dropping Gore defaced,
High on a spreading Tamarisk he placed;
Then heaped with Reeds and gathered Boughs the Plain,
To guide their Footsteps to the Place again.
Through the still Night they cross the devious Fields,
Slippery with Blood, over Arms and Heaps of Shields.
Arriving where the Thracian Squadrons lay,
And eased in Sleep the Labors of the Day,
Ranged in three Lines they view the prostrate Band;
The Horses yoked beside each Warrior stand.
Their Arms in order on the Ground reclined,
Through the brown Shade the fulgid Weapons shined.
Amidst, lay Rhesus, stretched in Sleep profound,
And the white Steeds behind his Chariot bound.
The welcome Sight Ulysses first descries,
And points to Diomed the tempting Prize.
The Man, the Coursers, and the Car behold!
Described by Dolon, with the Arms of Gold.
Now, brave Tydides! now thy Courage try,
Approach the Chariot, and the Steeds untye;
Or if thy Soul aspire to fiercer Deeds,
Urge thou the Slaughter, while I seize the Steeds.
Pallas (this said) her Hero's Bosom warms,
Breathed in his Heart, and strung his nervous Arms;
Where ever he passed, a purple Stream pursued;
His thirsty Faulchion, fat with hostile Blood,
Bathed all his Footsteps, died the Fields with Gore,
And a low Groan remurmur'd through the Shore.
So the grim Lion, from his nightly Den,
O'erleaps the Fences, and invades the Pen;
On Sheep or Goats, resistless in his way,
He falls, and foaming rends the guardless Prey.
Nor stopped the Fury of his vengeful Hand,
Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian Band.
Ulysses following, as his Part'ner slew,
Back by the Foot each slaughtered Warrior drew;
The milk-white Coursers studious to convey
Safe to the Ships, he wisely cleared the way,
Lest the fierce Steeds, not yet to Battles bred,
Should start, and tremble at the Heaps of dead.
Now twelve dispatched, the Monarch last they found;
Tydides' Faulchion fixed him to the Ground.
Just then a deathful Dream Minerva sent;
A warlike Form appeared before his Tent,
Whose visionary Steel his Bosom tore:
So dreamed the Monarch, and awaked no more.
Ulysses now the snowy Steeds detains,
And leads them, fastened by the silver Reins;
These, with his Bow unbent, he lashed along;
(The Scourge forgot, on Rhesus Chariot hung.)
Then gave his Friend the Signal to retire;
But him, new Dangers, new Achievements fire:
Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking Blade
To send more Heroes to the infernal Shade,
Drag off the Car where Rhesus Armor lay,
Or heave with manly Force, and lift away.
While unresolved the Son of Tydeus stands,
Pallas appears, and thus her Chief commands.
Enough, my Son, from farther Slaughter cease,
Regard thy Safety, and depart in Peace;
Haste to the Ships, the gotten Spoils enjoy,
Nor tempt too far the hostile Gods of Troy.
The Voice divine confessed the martial Maid;
In haste he mounted, and her Word obeyed;
The Coursers fly before Ulysses' Bow,
Swift as the Wind, and white as Winter-Snow.
Not unobserved they passed: the God of Light
Had watched his Troy, and marked Minerva's Flight;
Saw Tydeus' Son with heavenly Succor blessed,
And vengeful Anger filled his sacred Breast.
Swift to the Trojan Camp descends the Power,
And wakes Hippocoon in the Morning-Hour,
(On Rhesus' side accustomed to attend,
A faithful Kinsman, and instructive Friend.)
He rose, and saw the Field deformed with Blood,
An empty Space where late the Coursers stood,
The yet-warm Thracians panting on the Coast;
For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:
Now while on Rhesus' Name he calls in vain,
The gathering Tumult spreads over all the Plain;
On Heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,
And wondering view the Slaughters of the Night.
Mean while the Chiefs, arriving at the Shade
Where late the Spoils of Hector's Spy were laid,
Ulysses stopped; to him Tydides bore
The Trophee, dropping yet with Dolon's Gore:
Then mounts again; again their nimble Feet
The Coursers ply, and thunder toward the Fleet.
Old Nestor first perceived the approaching Sound,
Bespeaking thus the Grecian Peers around.
Methinks the Noise of tramp'ling Steeds I hear
Thick'ning this way, and gathering on my Ear;
Perhaps some Horses of the Trojan Breed
(So may, ye Gods! my pious Hopes succeed)
The great Tydides and Ulysses bear,
Returned triumphant with this Prize of War.
Yet much I fear (ah may that Fear be vain)
The Chiefs out-number'd by the Trojan Train:
Perhaps, even now pursued, they seek the Shore;
Or oh! perhaps those Heroes are no more.
Scarce had he spoke, when lo! the Chiefs appear,
And spring to Earth: the Greeks dismiss their Fear:
With Words of Friendship and extended Hands
They greet the Kings; and Nestor first demands:
Say thou, whose Praises all our Host proclaim,
Thou living Glory of the Grecian Name!
Say whence these Coursers? by what Chance bestowed,
The Spoil of Foes, or Present of a God?
Not those fair Steeds so radiant and so gay,
That draw the burning Chariot of the Day.
Old as I am, to Age I scorn to yield,
And daily mingle in the martial Field;
But sure till now no Coursers struck my Sight
Like these, conspicuous through the Ranks of Fight.
Some God, I deem, conferred the glorious Prize,
Blessed as ye are, and favorites of the Skies;
The Care of him who bids the Thunder roar,
And Minerva.
her, whose Fury bathes the World with Gore.
Father! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoined)
The Gifts of Heaven are of a nobler kind.
Of Thracian Lineage are the Steeds ye view,
Whose hostile King the brave Tydides slew;
Sleeping he died, with all his Guards around,
And twelve beside lay gasping on the Ground.
These other Spoils from conquered Dolon came,
A Wretch, whose Swiftness was his only Fame,
By Hector sent our Forces to explore,
He now lies headless on the sandy Shore.
Then over the Trench the bounding Coursers flew;
The joyful Greeks with loud Acclaim pursue.
Strait to Tydides' high Pavilion born,
The matchless Steeds his ample Stalls adorn:
The neighing Coursers their new Fellows greet,
And the full Racks are heaped with generous Wheat.
But Dolon's Armor, to his Ships conveyed,
High on the painted Stern Ulysses laid,
A Trophy destined to the blue-ey'd Maid.
Now from nocturnal Sweat, and sanguine Stain,
They cleanse their Bodies in the neighboring Main:
Then in the polished Bath, refreshed from Toil,
Their Joints they supple with dissolving Oil,
In due Repast indulge the genial Hour,
And first to Pallas the Libations pour:
They sit, rejoicing in her Aid divine,
And the crowned Goblet foams with Floods of Wine.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Tenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TENTH BOOK.
I.
IT is observable, says Eustathius, that the Poet very artfully repairs the
Loss of the last Day by this nocturnal Stratagem; and it is plain that such a
Contrivance was necessary: The Army was dispirited and Achilles inflexible; but
by the Success of this Adventure the Scale is turned in favor of the Grecians.

II.
VERSE 3. All but the King, etc.] Homer here with a very small Alteration
repeats the Verses which begin the second Book: He introduces Agamemnon with
the same Pomp as he did Jupiter; he ascribes to him the same Watchfulness over
Men, as he exercised over the Gods, and Jove and Agamemnon are the only Persons
awake, while Heaven and Earth are asleep. Eustathius.

III.
VERSE 7. Or sends soft Snows.] Scaliger's Criticism against this passage, that
it never lightens and snows at the same time, is sufficiently refuted by
Experience. See Bossu of the Epic Poem lib. 3. c. 7. and Barnes's Note on this
Place.

IV.
VERSE 8. Or bids the brazen Throat of War to roar.] There is something very
noble and sublime in this Image: The vast Jaws of War is an Expression that
very poetically represents the Voraciousness of War, and gives us a lively Idea
of an insatiate Monster. Eustathius.

V.
VERSE 9. By fits one Flash succeeds, etc.] It requires some Skill in Homer to
take the chief Point of his Similitudes; he has often been misunderstood in
that respect, and his Comparisons have frequently been strained to comply with
the Fancies of Commentators. This Comparison which is brought to illustrate the
Frequency of Agamemnon's Sighs, has been usually thought to represent in
general the Groans of the King, whereas what Homer had in his view was only the
quick Succession of them.

VI.
VERSE 13. Now over the Fields, etc.] Aristotle answers a Criticism of some
Censurers of Homer on this Place. They asked how it was that Agamemnon, shut up
in his Tent in the Night, could see the Trojan Camp at one view, and the Fleet
at another, as the Poet represents it? It is (says Aristotle) only a
metaphorical manner of Speech; To cast one's Eye, means but to reflect upon, or
to revolve in one's Mind: and that employed Agamemnon's Thoughts in his Tent,
which had been the chief Object of his Eyes the Day before.

VII.
VERSE 19. He rends his Hairs in sacrifice to Jove.] I know this Action of
Agamemnon has been taken only as a common Expression of Grief, and so indeed it
was rendered by Accius, as cited by Tully, Tusc. quaest. l. 3. Scindens dolor
identidem intonsam comam. But whoever reads the Context will, I believe, be of
Opinion, that Jupiter is mentioned here on no other Account than as he was
applied to in the offering of these Hairs, in an humble Supplication to the
offended Deity who had so lately manifested his Anger.

VIII.
VERSE 27. He rose, and first he cast his Mantle round.] I fancy it will be
entertaining to the Reader to observe how well the Poet at all times suits the
Descriptions to the Circumstances of the Persons: We must remember that this
Book continues the Actions of one Night; the whole Army is now asleep, and the
Poet takes this Opportunity to give us a Description of several of his Heroes
suitable to their proper Characters. Agamemnon who is every where described as
anxious for the Good of his People, is kept awake by a fatherly Care for their
Preservation. Menelaus, for whose sake the Greeks had suffered so greatly,
shares all their Misfortunes, and is restless while they are in danger. Nestor,
a provident, wise old Man, sacrifices his Rest even in the Extremity of Age, to
his Love for his Country. Ulysses, a Person next to Nestor in Wisdom, is ready
at the first Summons; he finds it hard, while the Greeks suffer, to compose
himself to Sleep, but is easily awaked to march to its Defense: But Diomed, who
is every where described as a daring Warrior, sleeps unconcerned at the
Nearness of the Enemy, and is not awaked without some Violence: He is said to
be asleep, but he sleeps like a Soldier in complete Arms.

I could not pass over one Circumstance in this Place in Relation to Nestor. It
is a Pleasure to see what Care the Poet takes of his favorite Councellor: He
describes him lying in a soft Bed, wraps him up in a warm Cloak, to preserve
his Age from the Coldness of the Night; but Diomed, a gallant young Hero,
sleeps upon the Ground in open Air; and indeed every Warrior is dressed in Arms
peculiar to that Season: The Hide of a Lion or Leopard is what they all put on,
being not to engage an Enemy, but to meet their Friends in Council. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 43. Sends he some Spy? etc.] Menelaus in this Place starts a Design
which is afterward proposed by Nestor in Council; the Poet knew that the
Project would come with greater Weight from the Age of the one, than from the
Youth of the other: and that the Valiant would be ready to execute a Design,
which so venerable a Counselor had formed. Eustathius.

X.
VERSE 57. Such wondrous Deeds as Hector 's Hand, etc.] We hear Agamemnon in
this Place launching into the Praises of a gallant Enemy; but if any one think
that he raises the Actions of Hector too high, and sets him above Achilles
himself, this Objection will vanish if he considers that he commends him as the
bravest of mere Men, but still he is not equal to Achilles who was descended
from a Goddess. Agamemnon undoubtedly had Achilles in his Thoughts when he
says, Sprung from no God, etc.
But his Anger will not let him even name the Man whom he thus obliquely
praises.

Eustathius proceeds to observe, that the Poet ascribes the gallant Exploits of
Hector to his Piety; and had he not been favored by Jove, he had not been thus
victorious.

He also remarks that there is a double Tautology in this Speech of Agamemnon,
as (...), and (...). This proceeds from the Wonder which the King endeavors to
express at the Greatness of Hector's Actions: He labors to make his Words
answer the great Idea he had conceived of them, and while his Mind dwells upon
the same Object, he falls into the same manner of expressing it. This is very
natural to a Person in his Circumstances, whose Thoughts are as it were pent
up, and struggle for an Utterance.

XI.
VERSE 73. The Paths so many, etc.] It Is plain from this Verse, as well as from
many others, that the Art of Fortification was in some degree of Perfection in
Homer's Days: Here are Lines drawn that traverse the Camp every way; the Ships
are drawn up in the manner of a Rampart, and sally Ports made at proper
Distances, that they might without Difficulty either retire or issue out, as
the Occasion should require. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 92. Seek'st thou some Friend or nightly Sentinel?] It has been thought
that Nestor asks this Question upon the Account of his Son Thrasymedes, who
commanded the Guard that Night. He seems to be under some Apprehension lest he
should have remitted the Watch. And it may also be gathered from this Passage,
that in those Times the Use of the Watchword was unknown; because Nestor is
obliged to crowd several Questions together, before he can learn whether
Agamemnon be a Friend or an Enemy. The Shortness of the Questions agrees
admirably with the Occasion upon which they were made; it being necessary that
Nestor should be immediately informed who he was who passed along the Camp: If
a Spy, that he might stand upon his Guard; if a Friend, that he might not cause
an Alarm to be given to the Army, by multiplying Questions. Eustathius.

XIII.
VERSE 96. Lo here the wretched Agamemnon stands.] Eustathius observes, that
Agamemnon here paints his Distress in a very pathetical manner: while the
meanest Soldier is at rest, the General wanders about disconsolate, and is
superior now in nothing so much as in Sorrow; but this Sorrow proceeds not from
a base abject Spirit, but from a generous Disposition; he is not anxious for
the Loss of his own Glory, but for the Sufferings of his People: It is a noble
Sorrow, and springs from a commendable Tenderness and Humanity.

XIV.
VERSE 138. My generous Brother is of gentle Kind.] Agamemnon is every where
represented as the greatest Example of brotherly Affection; and he at all times
defends Menelaus, but never with more Address than now: Nestor had accused
Menelaus of Sloth; the King is his Advocate, but pleads his Excuse only in
part: He does not entirely acquit him, because he would not contradict so wise
a Man as Nestor; nor does he condemn him, because his Brother at this time was
not guilty; but he very artfully turns the Imputation of Nestor, to the Praise
of Menelaus; and affirms, that what might seem to be Remissness in his
Character was only a Deference to his Authority, and that his seeming
Inactivity was but an Unwillingness to act without Command. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 174. A Wood of Spears stood by, etc.] The Picture here given us of
Diomed sleeping in his Arms, with his Soldiers about him, and the Spears
sticking upright in the Earth, has a near Resemblance to that in the first Book
of Samuel, Chapter 26.. 7. Saul lay sleeping within the Trench, and his Spear stuck
in the Ground at his Bolster, but Abner and the People lay round about him.

XVI.
VERSE 182. From yon' Hill the Foe, etc.] It is necessary, if we would form an
exact Idea of the Battles of Homer, to carry in our Minds the Place where each
Action was fought. It will therefore be proper to enquire where that Eminence
stood, upon which the Trojans encamped this Night. Eustathius is inclinable to
believe it was Callicolone, (the Situation of which you will find in the Map of
Homer's Battles) but it will appear from what Dolon says,. 415. (of Hector's
being encamped at the Monument of Ilus) that this Eminence must be the Tumulus
on which that Monument was situate, and so the old Scholiast rightly explains
it.

XVII.
VERSE 194. But now the last Despair surrounds our Host.] The different
Behavior of Nestor upon the same Occasion, to different Persons, is worthy
Observation: Agamemnon was under a Concern and Dejection of Spirit from the
Danger of his Army: To raise his Courage, Nestor gave him hopes of Success, and
represented the State of Affairs in the most favorable view. But he applies
himself to Diomed, who is at all times enterprizing and incapable of Despair,
in a far different manner: He turns the darkest side to him, and gives the
worst Prospect of their Condition. This Conduct (says Eustathius) shows a great
deal of Prudence: it is the Province of Wisdom to encourage the disheartened
with hopes, and to qualify the forward Courage of the daring with Fears; that
the Valor of the one may not sink through Despair, nor that of the other fly out
into Rashness.

XVIII.
VERSE 207. And now the Chiefs approach the nightly Guard.] It is usual in
Poetry to pass over little Circumstances, and carry on the greater. Menelaus in
this Book was sent to call some of the Leaders; the Poet has too much Judgment
to dwell upon the trivial Particulars of his performing his Message, but lets
us know by the Sequel that he had performed it. It would have clogged the
poetical Narration to have told us how Menelaus waked the Heroes to whom he was
dispatched, and had been but a Repetition of what the Poet had fully described
before: He therefore (says the same Author) drops these Particularities, and
leaves them to be supplied by the Imagination of the Reader. It Is so in
Painting, the Painter does not always draw at the full length, but leaves what
is wanting to be added by the Fancy of the Beholder.

XIX.
VERSE 211. So faithful Dogs, etc.] This Simile is in all its Parts just to the
Description it is meant to illustrate. The Dogs represent the Watch, the Flock
the Greeks, the Fold their Camp, and the wild Beast that invades them, Hector.
The Place, Posture, and Circumstance, are painted with the utmost Life and
Nature.

Eustathius takes notice of one Particular in this Description, which shows the
manner in which their Sentinels kept the Guard. The Poet tells us, that they
sat down with their Arms in their Hands. I think that this was not so prudent
a Method as is now used; it being almost impossible for a Man that stands, to
drop asleep, whereas one that is seated may easily be overpowered by the
Fatigue of a long Watch. Eustathius.

XX.
VERSE 228. Then over the Trench the following Princes led] The Reason why
Nestor did not open the Council within the Trenches, was with a design to
encourage the Guards, and those whom he intended to send to enter the Trojan
Camp. It would have appeared unreasonable to send others over the Entrenchments
upon a hazardous Enterprise, and not to have dared himself to set a Foot beyond
them. This also could not fail of inflaming the Courage of the Grecian Spies,
who would know themselves not to be far from Assistance, while so many of the
Princes were passed over the Ditch as well as they. Eustathius.

XXI.
VERSE 241. Is there (he said) a Chief so greatly brave?] Nestor proposes his
Design of sending Spies into the Trojan Army with a great deal of Address: He
begins with a general Sentence, and will not choose any one Hero, for fear of
disgusting the rest: Had Nestor named the Person, he would have paid him a
Complement that was sure to be attended with the Hazard of his Life; and that
Person might have believed that Nestor exposed him to a Danger, which his
Honor would not let him decline; while the rest might have resented such a
Partiality, which would have seemed to give the Preference to another before
them. It therefore was Wisdom in Nestor to propose the Design in general Terms,
whereby all the gallant Men that offered themselves satisfied their Honor, by
being willing to share the Danger with Diomed; and it was no Disgrace to be
left behind, after they had offered to hazard their Lives for their Country.
Eustathius.

XXII.
VERSE 244. Or seize some straggling Foe?] It is worthy Observation with how
much Caution Nestor opens this Design, and with how much Courage Diomed accepts
it. Nestor forms it with Coolness, but Diomed embraces it with Warmth and
Resolution. Nestor only proposes that some Man would approach the Enemy and
intercept some straggling Trojan, but Diomed offers to penetrate the very Camp.
Nestor was afraid lest no one should undertake it: Diomed overlooks the Danger,
and presents himself, as willing to march against the whole Army of Troy.
Eustathius.

XXIII.
VERSE 280. To Birth or Office no respect be paid.] Eustathius remarks that
Agamemnon artfully steals away his Brother from Danger; the Foundness he bears
to him makes him think him unequal to so bold an Enterprise, and prefer his
Safety to his Glory. He farther adds, that the Poet intended to condemn that
faulty Modesty which makes one sometimes prefer a Nobleman before a Person of
more real Worth. To be greatly born is an Happiness, but no Merit; whereas
personal Virtues show a Man worthy of that Greatness to which he is not born.

It appears from hence, how honorable it was of old to go upon these Parties
by Night, or undertake those Offices which are now only the Task of common
Soldiers. Gideon in the Book of Judges (as Dacier observes) goes as a Spy into
the Camp of Midian, though he was at that time General of the Israelites.

XXIV.
VERSE 288. Blessed in his Conduct.] There required some Address in Diomed to
make his Choice without offending the Grecian Princes; each of them might think
it an Indignity to be refused such a Place of Honor. Diomed therefore chooses
Ulysses not because he is braver than the rest, but because he is wiser. This
part of his Character was allowed by all the Leaders of the Army; and none of
them thought it a Disparagement to themselves as they were Men of Valor, to
see the first Place given to Ulysses in Point of Wisdom. No doubt but the Poet
by causing Diomed to make this Choice, intended to insinuate that Valor ought
always to be tempered with Wisdom; to the end that what is designed with
Prudence, may be executed with Resolution. Eustathius.

XXV.
VERSE 290. It fits thee not to praise me or to blame.] The Modesty of Ulysses
in this Passage is very remarkable; though undoubtedly he deserved to be praised,
yet he interrupts Diomed rather than he would be a Hearer of his own
Commendation. What Diomed spoke in Praise of Ulysses, was uttered to justify
his Choice of him to the Leaders of the Army; otherwise the Praise he had given
him, would have been no better than Flattery. Eustathius.

XXVI.
VERSE 294. -- Night rolls the Hours away,
The Stars shine fainter on the Aetherial Plains,
And of Night's Empire but a third remains.]
It has been objected that Ulysses is guilty of a threefold Tautology, when
every word he uttered shows the Necessity of being concise: If the Night was
nigh spent, there was the less time to lose in Tautologies. But this is so far
from being a fault, that it is a Beauty: Ulysses dwells upon the Shortness of
the time before the Day appears, in order to urge Diomed to the greater Speed
in prosecuting the Design. Eustathius.

XXVII.
VERSE 297. But a third remains.] One ought to take notice with how much
Exactness Homer proportions his Incidents to the time of Action: These two
Books take up no more than the Compass of one Night; and this Design could not
have been executed in any other Part of it. The Poet had before told us, that
all the Plain was enlightened by the Fires of Troy, and consequently no Spy
could pass over to their Camp, till they were almost sunk and extinguished,
which could not be till near the Morning.

It Is observable that the Poet divides the Night into three Parts, from whence
we may gather, that the Grecians had three Watches during the Night: The first
and second of which were over, when Diomed and Ulysses set out to enter the
Enemy's Camp. Eustathius.

XXVIII.
VERSE 300. A two-edged Faulchion Thrasymed the brave, etc.] It is a very
impertinent Remark of Scaliger, that Diomed should not have gone from his Tent
without a Sword. The Expedition he now goes upon could not be foreseen by him
at the time he rose: He was awaked of a sudden, and sent in haste to call some
of the Princes: Besides, he went but to Council, and even then carried his
Spear with him, as Homer had already informed us. I think if one were to study
the Art of cavilling, there would be more occasion to blame Virgil for what
Scaliger praises him, giving a Sword to Euryalus when he had one before, Aen.
9.. 303.

XXIX.
VERSE 302. Then in a Leathern Helm.] It may not be improper to observe how
conformably to the Design the Poet arms these two Heroes: Ulysses has a Bow and
Arrows, that he might be able to wound the Enemy at a distance, and so retard
his Flight till he could overtake him; and for fear of a Discovery, Diomed is
armed with an Helmet of Leather, that the glittering of it might not betray
him. Eustathius.

There is some Resemblance in this whole Story to that of Nisus and Euryalus in
Virgil: and as the Heroes are here successful, and in Virgil unfortunate, it
was perhaps as great an Instance of Virgil's Judgment to describe the unhappy
Youth in a glittering Helmet, which occasioned his Discovery, as it was in
Homer to arm his successful one in the contrary manner.

XXX.
VERSE 309. A well-prov'd Casque.] Mr. Barnes has a pretty Remark on this
Place, that it was probably from this Description, (...), that the ancient
Painters and Tragic Poets constantly represented Ulysses with the Pileus on his
Head; but this Particularity could not be preserved with any Grace in the
Translation.

XXXI.
VERSE 312. This from Amyntor, etc.] The Succession of this Helmet descending
from one Hero to another, is imitated by Virgil in the Story of Nisus and
Euryalus.. Euryalus phaleras Rhamnetis, and aurea bullis
Cingula, Tiburti Remulo ditissimus olim
Quae mittit dona, hospitio cum jungeret absens
Caedicus, ille suo moriens dat habere nepoti.
Post mortem bello Rutuli pugnamque potiti.
It was anciently a Custom to make these military Presents to brave
Adventurers. So Jonathan in the first Book of Samuel, stripped himself of the
Robe that was upon him, and gave it to David; and his Garments, even to his
Sword, and his Bow, and his Girdle. Chapter 18.. 4.

XXXII.
VERSE 325. Ulysses hailed the glad Omen.] This Passage sufficiently justifies
Diomed for his Choice of Ulysses: Diomed, who was most renowned for Valor,
might have given a wrong Interpretation to this Omen, and so have been
discouraged from proceeding in the Attempt. For though it really signified, that
as the Bird was not seen, but only heard by the Sound of its Wings, so they
should not be discovered by the Trojans, but perform Actions which all Troy
should hear with Sorrow; yet on the other hand it might imply, that as they
discovered the Bird by the Noise of its Wings, so they should be betrayed by
the Noise they should make in the Trojan Army. The Reason why Pallas does not
send the Bird that is sacred to her self, but the Heron, is because it is a
Bird of Prey, and denoted that they should spoil the Trojans. Eustathius.

XXXIII.
VERSE 355. Through Dust, through Blood, etc.] Zenophon has imitated this Passage;
but what the Poet gives us in one Line, the Historian portracts into several
Sentences. (...), etc. "When the Battle was over, one might behold the Ground
died red with Blood, and covered with the Dead; Spears broken, and drawn
Swords, some on the Ground, some in the Bodies of the slain. Eustathius.

XXXIV.
VERSE 356. Nor less bold Hector, etc.] It is the Remark of Eustathius, that
Homer sends out the Trojan Spy in this Place in a very different manner from
the Grecian ones before. Having been very particular in describing the Counsel
of the Greeks, he avoids tiring the Reader here with parallel Circumstances,
and passes it in general Terms. In the first, a wise old Man proposes the
Adventure with an Air of Deference; in the second, a brave young Man with an
Air of Authority. The one promises a small Gift, but very honorable and
certain; the other a great one, but uncertain and less honorable, because it is
given as a Reward. So that Diomed and Ulysses are inspired with the Love of
Glory, Dolon is possessed with a Thirst of Gain: They proceed with a sage and
circumspect Valor, he with Rashness and Vanity; they go in Conjunction, he
alone; they cross the Fields out of the Road, he follows the common Track. In
all this there is a Contraste that is admirable, and a Moral that strikes every
Reader at first Sight.

XXXV.
VERSE 370. Dolon his Name.] It Is scarce to be conceived with what Conciseness
the Poet has here given us the Name, the Fortunes, the Pedigree, the Office,
the Shape, the Swiftness of Dolon. He seems to have been eminent for nothing so
much as for his Wealth, though undoubtedly he was by Place one of the first Rank
in Troy: Hector summons him to this Assembly amongst the Chiefs of Troy; nor
was he unknown to the Greeks, for Diomed immediately after he had seized him,
calls him by his Name. Perhaps being an Herald, he had frequently passed
between the Armies in the Execution of his Office.

The Ancients observed upon this Place, that it was the Office of Dolon which
made him offer himself to Hector. The Sacred Character gave him hopes that they
would not violate his Person, should he happen to be taken; and his Riches he
knew were sufficient to purchase his Liberty; besides all which Advantages, he
had hopes from his Swiftness to escape any Pursuers. Eustathius.

XXXVI.
VERSE 374. Not blessed by Nature with the Charms of Face.] The Original is, (...)
Which some ancient Critics thought to include a Contradiction, because the
Man who is ill-shap'd can hardly be swift in running; taking the word (...) as
applied in general to the Air of the whole Person. But Aristotle acquaints us
that word was as proper in regard to the Face only, and that it was usual with
the Cretans to call a Man with a handsome Face, (...). So that Dolon might want
a good Face, and yet be well-shap'd enough to make an excellent Racer. Poet. c.
26.

XXXVII.
VERSE 379. Swear to grant me, etc.] It is evident from this whole Narration,
that Dolon as a Man of no Worth or Courage; his Covetousness seems to be the
sole Motive of his undertaking this Exploit: and whereas Diomed neither desired
any Reward, nor when promised, required any Assurance of it; Dolon demands an
Oath, and will not trust the Promise of Hector; he every where discovers a base
Spirit, and by the Sequel it will appear, that this vain Boaster instead of
discovering the Army of the Enemy, becomes a Traitor to his own. Eustathius.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 380. The immortal Coursers, and the glittering Car.] Hector in the
foregoing Speech promises the best Horses in the Grecian Army, as a Reward to
any one who would undertake what he proposed. Dolon immediately demands those
of Achilles, and confines the general Promise of Hector to the particular
Horses of that brave Hero.

There is something very extraordinary in Hector's taking a solemn Oath, that
he will give the Chariots and Steeds of Achilles to Dolon. The Ancients, says
Eustathius, knew not whose Vanity most to wonder at, that of Dolon, or Hector;
the one for demanding this, or the other for promising it. Though we may take
notice, that Virgil liked this Extravagance so well as to imitate it, where
Ascanius (without being asked) promises the Horses and Armor of Turnus to
Nisus, on his undertaking a like Enterprise. Vidisti, quo Turnus equo, quibus
ibat in armis,
Aureus; ipsum illum, clypeum cristasque rubentes
Excipiam sorti, jam nunc tua praemia, Nise.
Unless one should think the Rashness of such a Promise better agreed with the
Ardour of this youthful Prince, than with the Character of an experienced
Warrior like Hector.

XXXIX.
VERSE 420. -- Such the Space between As when two Teams of Mules, etc.] I
wonder Eustathius takes no notice of the manner of Ploughing used by the
Ancients, which is described in these Verses, and of which we have the best
Account from Dacier. She is not satisfied with the Explanation given by
Didymus, that Homer meant the Space which Mules by their Swiftness gain upon
Oxen that plow in the same Field. "The Grecians (says she) did not plow in the
manner now in use. They first broke up the Ground with Oxen, and then plowed it
more lightly with Mules. When they employed two Plows in a Field, they measured
the Space they could Plow in a Day, and set their Plows at the two ends of that
Space, and those Plows proceeded toward each other. This intermediate Space was
constantly fixed, but less in Proportion for two Plows of Oxen than for two of
Mules; because Oxen are slower and toil more in a Field that has not been yet
turned up, whereas Mules are naturally swifter, and make greater speed in a
Ground that has already had the first Plowing. I therefore believe that what
Homer calls (...), is the Space left by the Husbandmen between two Plows of
Mules which till the same Field: And as this Space was so much the greater in a
Field already plowed by Oxen, he adds what he says of Mules, that they are
swifter and fitter to give the second Plowing than Oxen, and therefore
distinguishes the Field so plowed by the Epithet of deep, (...): For that Space
was certain, of so many Acres or Perches, and always larger than in a Field as
yet untilled, which being heavier and more difficult, required the Interval to
be so much the less between two Plows of Oxen, because they could not dispatch
so much Work. Homer could not have served himself of a juster Comparison for a
thing that passed in the Fields; at the same time he shows his Experience in
the Art of Agriculture, and gives his Verses a most agreeable Ornament, as
indeed all the Images drawn from this Art are peculiarly entertaining.

This manner of measuring a Space of Ground by a Comparison from Plowing, seems
to have been customary in those times, from that Passage in the first Book of
Samuel, Chapter 14.. 14. And the first Slaughter which Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer made, was about twenty Men, within as it were half a Furrow of an
Acre of Land, which a Yoke of Oxen might plow.

XL.
VERSE 444. Quiver'd as he stood, etc.] The Poet here gives us a very lively
Picture of a Person in the utmost Agonies of Fear: Dolon's Swiftness forsakes
him, and he stands shackled by his Cowardice. The very Words express the thing
he describes by the broken Turn of the Greek Verses. And something like it is
aimed at in the English. -- (...)
(...)
(...) --


XLI.
VERSE 454. Be bold, nor fear to die.] It Is observable what Caution the Poet
here uses in reference to Dolon: Ulysses does not make him any Promises of
Life, but only bids him very artfully not to think of dying: So that when
Diomed kills him, he was not guilty of a Breach of Promise, and the Spy was
deceived rather by the Art and Subtlety of Ulysses, than by his Falsehood.
Dolon's Understanding seems entirely to be disturbed by his Fears; he was so
cautious as not to believe a Friend just before without an Oath, but here he
trusts an Enemy without so much as a Promise. Eustathius.

XLII.
VERSE 467. Urged me unwilling.] It Is observable that the Cowardice of Dolon
here betrays him into a Falsehood: Though Eustathius is of Opinion that the word
in the Original means no more than contrary to my Judgment.

XLIII.
VERSE 477. Where lies encamped.] The Night was now very far advanced, the
Morning approached, and the two Heroes had their whole Design still to execute:
Ulysses therefore complies with the Necessity of the Time, and makes his
Questions very short, though at the same time very full. In the like manner when
Ulysses comes to show Diomed the Chariot of Rhesus, he uses a sudden Transition
without the usual Form of speaking.

XLIV.
VERSE 488. No certain Guards.] Homer to give an Air of Probability to this
Narration, lets us understand that the Trojan Camp might easily be entered
without a Discovery, because there were no Sentinels to guard it. This might
happen partly through the Security which their late Success had thrown them into,
and partly through the Fatigues of the former Day. Besides which, Homer gives us
another very natural Reason, the Negligence of the auxiliar Forces, who being
Foreigners, had nothing to lose by the Fall of Troy.

XLV.
VERSE 489. Where ever yon Fires ascend.] This is not to be understood of those
Fires which Hector commanded to be kindled at the beginning of this Night, but
only of the household Fires of the Trojans, distinct from the Auxiliars. The
Expression in the Original is somewhat remarkable; but implies those People
that were Natives of Troy; (...) and (...) signifying the same thing. So that
(...) and (...) mean to have Houses or Hearths in Troy. Eustathius.

XLVI.
VERSE 525. Divides the Neck.] It may seem a Piece of Barbarity in Diomed to
kill Dolon thus, in the very Act of supplicating for Mercy. Eustathius answers,
that it was very necessary that it should be so, for fear, if he had deferred
his Death, he might have cried out to the Trojans, who hearing his Voice, would
have been upon their guard.

XLVII.
VERSE 578. Just then a deathful Dream Minerva sent.] All the Circumstances of
this Action, the Night, Rhesus buried in a profound Sleep, and Diomed with the
Sword in his Hand hanging over the Head of that Prince, furnished Homer with
the Idea of this Fiction, which represents Rhesus dying fast asleep, and as it
were beholding his Enemy in a Dream plunging a Sword into his Bosom. This Image
is very natural, for a Man in this Condition awakes no farther than to see
confusedly what environs him, and to think it not a Reality, but a Vision.
Eustathius, Dacier.

XLVIII.
VERSE 607. And wakes Hippocoon.] Apollo's waking the Trojans is only an
Allegory to imply that the Light of the Morning awakened them. Eustathius.

XLIX.
VERSE 624. Old Nestor first perceived, etc.] It may with an Appearance of
Reason be asked, whence it could be that Nestor, whose Sense of hearing might
be supposed to be impaired by his great Age, should be the first Person among
so many youthful Warriors who hears the Tread of the Horse's Feet at a
distance? Eustathius answers, that Nestor had a particular Concern for the
Safety of Diomed and Ulysses on this Occasion, as he was the Person who, by
proposing the Undertaking, had exposed them to a very signal Danger: and
consequently his extraordinary Care for their Preservation, did more than
supply the Disadvantage of his Age. This agrees very well with what immediately
follows; for the old Man breaks out into a Transport at the Sight of them, and
in a wild sort of Joy asks some Questions, which could not have proceeded from
him, but while he was under that happy Surprise. Eustathius.

L.
VERSE 656. Of Thracian Lineage, etc.] It is observable, says Eustathius, that
Homer in this Place unravels the Series of this Night's Exploits, and inverts
the Order of the former Narration. This is partly occasioned by a Necessity of
Nestor's Enquiries, and partly to relate the same thing in a diffeway, that he
might not tire the Reader with an exact Repetition of what he knew before.

LI.
VERSE 659. And twelve beside, etc.] How comes it to pass that the Poet should
here call Dolon the thirteenth that was slain, whereas he had already numbered
up thirteen besides him? Eustathius answers, that he mentions Rhesus by
himself, by way of Eminence. Then coming to recount the Thracians, he reckons
twelve of 'em; so that taking Rhesus separately, Dolon will make the thirteenth.

LII.
VERSE 674. They cleanse their Bodies in the Main, etc.] We have here a Regimen
very agreeable to the Simplicity and Austerity of the old heroic Times. These
Warriors plunge into the Sea to wash themselves; for the salt Water is not only
more purifying than any other, but more corroborates the Nerves. They
afterward enter into a Bath, and rub their Bodies with Oil, which by softening
and moistening the Flesh prevents too great a Dissipation, and restores the
natural Strength. Eustathius.

LIII.
VERSE 677. In due Repast, etc.] It appears from hence with what Preciseness
Homer distinguishes the Time of these Actions. It Is evident from this Passage,
that immediately after their Return, it was Daylight; that being the Time of
taking such a Repast as is here described.

LIVE.
I cannot conclude the Notes to this Book without observing, that what seems
the principal Beauty of it, and what distinguishes it among all the others, is
the Liveliness of its Paintings: The Reader sees the most natural Night-Scene
in the World; he is led step by step with the Adventurers, and made the
Companion of all their Expectations, and Uncertainties. We see the very Color
of the Sky, know the Time to a Minute, are impatient while the Heroes are
arming, our Imagination steals out after them, becomes privy to all their
Doubts, and even to the secret Wishes of their Hearts sent up to Minerva. We
are alarmed at the Approach of Dolon, hear his very Footsteps, assist the two
Chiefs in pursuing him, and stop just with the Spear that arrests him. We are
perfectly acquainted with the Situation of all the Forces, with the Figure in
which they lie, with the Disposition of Rhesus and the Thracians, with the
Posture of his Chariot and Horses. The marshy Spot of Ground where Dolon is
killed, the Tamarisk, or aquatic Plants upon which they hang his Spoils, and
the Reeds that are heaped together to mark the Place, are Circumstances the
most Picturesque imaginable. And though it must be owned, that the human Figures
in this Piece are excellent, and disposed in the properest Actions; I cannot
but confess my Opinion, that the chief Beauty of it is in the Prospect, a finer
than which was never drawn by any Pencil.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The third Battle, and the Acts of Agamemnon.
AGamemnon having armed himself, leads the Grecians to Battle: Hector prepares
the Trojans to receive them; while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva give the Signals
of War. Agamemnon bears all before him; and Hector is commanded by Jupiter (who
sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the Engagement, till the King shall be
wounded and retire from the Field. He then makes a great Slaughter of the
Enemy; Ulysses and Diomed put a stop to him for a while; but the latter being
wounded by Paris is obliged to desert his Companion, who is encompassed by the
Trojans, wounded, and in the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him.
Hector comes against Ajax, but that Hero alone opposes Multitudes, and rallies
the Greeks. In the mean time Machaon, in the other Wing of the Army, is pierced
with an Arrow by Paris, and carried from the Fight in Nestor's Chariot.
Achilles (who overlooked the Action from his Ship) sends Patroclus to enquire
which of the Greeks was wounded in that manner? Nestor entertains him in his
Tent with an Account of the Accidents of the Day, and a long Recital of some
former Wars which he remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon persuading
Achilles to fight for his Countrymen, or at least to permit him to do it, clad
in Achilles's Armor. Patroclus in his Return meets Eurypilus also wounded, and
assists him in that Distress.

This Book opens with the eight and twentieth Day of the Poem; and the same
Day, with its various Actions and Adventures, is extended through the twelfth,
thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and part of the
eighteenth, Books. The Scene lies in the Field near the Monument of Ilus.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THE Saffron Morn, with early Blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' Bed;
With newborn Day to gladden mortal Sight,
And gild the Courts of Heaven with sacred Light.
When baleful Eris, sent by Jove's Command,
The Torch of Discord blazing in her Hand,
Through the red Skies her bloody Sign extends,
And, wrapped in Tempests, over the Fleets descends.
High on Ulysses' Bark her horrid Stand
She took, and thundered through the Seas and Land.
Even Ajax and Achilles heard the Sound,
Whose Ships remote the guarded Navy bound.
Thence the black Fury through the Grecian Throng
With Horror sounds the loud Orthian Song:
The Navy shakes, and at the dire Alarms
Each Bosom boils, each Warrior starts to Arms.
No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
But breathe Revenge, and for the Combat burn.
The King of Men his hardy Host inspires
With loud Command, with great Example fires;
Himself first rose, himself before the rest
His mighty Limbs in radiant Armor dressed.
And first he cased his manly Legs around
In shining Greaves, with silver Buckles bound:
The beaming Cuirass next adorned his Breast,
The same which once King Cinyras possessed:
(The Fame of Greece and her assembled Host
Had reached that Monarch on the Cyprian Coast;
'Twas then, the Friendship of the Chief to gain,
This glorious Gift he sent, nor sent in vain.)
Ten Rows of azure Steel the Work infold,
Twice ten of Tin, and twelve of ductile Gold;
Three glittering Dragons to the Gorget rise,
Whose imitated Scales against the Skies
Reflected various Light, and arching bowed,
Like colored Rainbows over a show'ry Cloud:
( Jove's wondrous Bow, of three celestial Dies,
Placed as a Sign to Man amid the Skies.)
A radiant Baldrick, over his Shoulder tied,
Sustained the Sword that glittered at his side:
Gold was the Hilt, a silver Sheath encas'd
The shining Blade, and golden Hangers graced.
His Buckler's mighty Orb was next displayed,
That round the Warrior cast a dreadful Shade;
Ten Zones of Brass its ample Brims surround,
And twice ten Bosses the bright Unequal crowned;
Tremendous Gorgon frowned upon its Field,
And circling Terrors filled the expressive Shield:
Within its Concave hung a silver Thong,
On which a mimic Serpent creeps along,
His azure Length in easy Waves extends,
Till in three Heads the embroidered Monster ends.
Last over his Brows his fourfold Helm he placed,
With nodding Horse-hair formidably graced;
And in his Hands two steely Javelins wields,
That blaze to Heaven, and lighten all the Fields.
That instant, Juno and the martial Maid
In happy Thunders promised Greece their Aid;
High over the Chief they clash'd their Arms in Air,
And leaning from the Clouds, expect the War.
Close to the Limits of the Trench and Mound,
The fiery Coursers to their Chariots bound
The Squires restrained: The Foot, with those who wield
The lighter Arms, rushed forward to the Field.
To second these, in close Array combined,
The Squadrons spread their sable Wings behind.
Now Shouts and Tumults wake the tardy Sun,
As with the Light the Warriors Toils begun.
Even Jove, whose Thunder spoke his Wrath, distilled
Red Drops of Blood over all the fatal Field;
The Woes of Men unwilling to survey,
And all the Slaughters that must stain the Day.
Near Ilus' Tomb, in Order ranged around,
The Trojan Lines possessed the rising Ground.
There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;
Aeneas, honored as a guardian God;
Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;
The Brother-Warriors of Antenor's Line;
With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous Face
And fair Proportion matched the etherial Race.
Great Hector, covered with his spacious Shield,
Plies all the Troops, and orders all the Field.
As the red Star now shows his sanguine Fires
Through the dark Clouds, and now in Night retires;
Thus through the Ranks appeared the Godlike Man,
Plunged in the Rear, or blazing in the Van;
While streamy Sparkles, restless as he flies,
Flash from his Arms as Lightning from the Skies.
As sweating Reapers in some wealthy Field,
Ranged in two Bands, their crooked Weapons wield,
Bear down the Furrows, till their Labors meet;
Thick fall the heapy Harvests at their Feet.
So Greece and Troy the Field of War divide,
And falling Ranks are strow'd on every side.
None stooped a Thought to base inglorious Flight;
But Horse to Horse, and Man to Man they fight.
Not rabid Wolves more fierce contest their Prey;
Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the Day.
Discord with Joy the Scene of Death descries,
And drinks large Slaughter at her sanguin Eyes:
Discord alone, of all the immortal Train,
Swells the red Horrors of this direful Plain:
The Gods in peace their golden Mansions fill,
Ranged in bright Order on the Olympian Hill;
But general Murmurs told their Griefs above,
And each accused the partial Will of Jove.
Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone,
The eternal Monarch, on his awful Throne,
Wrapped in the Blaze of boundless Glory sat;
And fixed, fulfilled the just Decrees of Fate.
On Earth he turned his all-consid'ring Eyes,
And marked the Spot where Ilion's Towers arise;
The Sea with Ships, the Fields with Armies spread,
The Victor's Rage, the dying, and the dead.
Thus while the Morning-Beams increasing bright
Over Heavens pure Azure spread the growing Light,
Commutual Death the Fate of War confounds,
Each adverse Battle goar'd with equal Wounds.
But now (what time in some sequestered Vale
The weary Wood-man spreads his sparing Meal,
When his tired Arms refuse the Axe to rear,
And claim a Respite from the Sylvan War;
But not till half the prostrate Forests lay
Stretched in long Ruin, and exposed to Day)
Then, nor till then, the Greeks impulsive Might
Pierced the black Phalanx, and let in the Light.
Great Agamemnon then the Slaughter led,
And slew Bienor at his People's Head:
Whose Squire Oileus, with a sudden spring,
Leaped from the Chariot to revenge his King,
But in his Front he felt the fatal Wound,
Which pierced his Brain, and stretched him on the Ground:
Atrides spoiled, and left them on the Plain;
Vain was their Youth, their glittering Armor vain:
Now soiled with Dust, and naked to the Sky,
Their snowy Limbs and beauteous Bodies lie.
Two Sons of Priam next to Battle move,
The Product one of Marriage, one of Love;
In the same Car the Brother-Warriors ride,
This took the charge to combat, that to guide:
Far other Task! than when they wont to keep
On Ida's Tops, their Father's fleecy Sheep.
These on the Mountains once Achilles found,
And captive led, with pliant Osiers bound;
Then to their Sire for ample Sums restored;
But now to perish by Atrides' Sword:
Pierced in the Breast the base-born Isus bleeds;
Cleft through the Head, his Brother's Fate succeeds.
Swift to the Spoil the hasty Victor falls,
And stripped, their Features to his Mind recalls.
The Trojans see the Youths untimely die,
But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
So when a Lion, ranging over the Lawns,
Finds, on some grassy Lare, the couching Fawns,
Their Bones he cracks, their reeking Vitals draws,
And grinds the quivering Flesh with bloody Jaws;
The frighted Hind beholds, and dares not stay,
But swift through rustling Thickets bursts her way;
All drowned in Sweat the panting Mother flies,
And the big Tears roll trickling from her Eyes.
Amidst the Tumult of the routed Train,
The Sons of false Antimachus were slain;
He, who for Bribes his faithless Counsels sold,
And voted Helen's Stay, for Paris' Gold.
Atrides marked as these their Safety sought,
And slew the Children for the Father's Fault;
Their headstrong Horse unable to restrain,
They shook with Fear, and dropped the silken Rein;
Then in their Chariot, on their Knees they fall,
And thus with lifted Hands for Mercy call.
Oh spare our Youth, and for the Life we owe,
Antimachus shall copious Gifts bestow;
Soon as he hears, that not in Battle slain,
The Grecian Ships his captive Sons detain,
Large Heaps of Brass in Ransom shall be told,
And Steel well-tempered, and persuasive Gold.
These Words, attended with a Flood of Tears,
The Youths addressed to unrelenting Ears:
The vengeful Monarch gave this stern Reply;
If from Antimachus ye spring, ye die:
The daring Wretch who once in Council stood
To shed Ulysses' and my Brother's Blood,
For proffered Peace! And sues his Seed for Grace?
No, die, and pay the Forfeit of your Race.
This said, Pisander from the Car he cast,
And pierced his Breast: supine he breathed his last.
His Brother leaped to Earth; but as he lay,
The trenchant Faulchion lopped his Hands away;
His severed Head was tossed among the Throng,
And rolling, drew a bloody Trail along.
Then, where the thickest fought, the Victor flew;
The King's Example all his Greeks pursue.
Now by the Foot the flying Foot were slain,
Horse trod by Horse, lay foaming on the Plain.
From the dry Fields thick Clouds of Dust arise,
Shade the black Host, and intercept the Skies.
The brass-hoof'd Steeds tumultuous plunge and bound,
And the thick Thunder beats the laboring Ground.
Still slaught'ring on, the King of Men proceeds;
The distanc'd Army wonders at his Deeds.
As when the Winds with raging Flames conspire,
And over the Forests roll the Flood of Fire,
In blazing heaps the Grove's old Honors fall,
And one refulgent Ruin levells all.
Before Atrides' Rage so sinks the Foe,
Whole Squadrons vanish, and proud Heads lie low.
The Steeds fly trembling from his waving Sword;
And many a Car, now lighted of its Lord,
Wide over the Field with guideless Fury rolls,
Breaking their Ranks, and crushing out their Souls;
While his keen Faulchion drinks the Warriors Lives;
More grateful, now, to Vulturs than their Wives!
Perhaps great Hector then had found his Fate,
But Jove and Destiny prolonged his Date.
Safe from the Darts, the Care of Heaven he stood,
Amidst Alarms, and Deaths, and Dust, and Blood.
Now past the Tomb where ancient Ilus lay,
Through the mid Field the routed urge their way.
Where the wild Figs the adjoining Summit crown,
That Path they take, and speed to reach the Town.
As swift Atrides, with loud Shouts pursued,
Hot with his Toil, and bathed in hostile Blood.
Now near the Beech-tree, and the Scaean Gates,
The Hero haults, and his Associates waits.
Meanwhile on every side, around the Plain,
Dispersed, disordered, fly the Trojan Train.
So flies a Herd of Beeves, that hear dismayed
The Lion's roaring through the midnight Shade;
On Heaps they tumble with successless haste;
The Savage seizes, draws, and rends the last:
Not with less Fury stern Atrides flew,
Still pressed the Rout, and still the hindmost slew;
Hurled from their Cars the bravest Chiefs are killed,
And Rage, and Death, and Carnage, load the Field.
Now storms the Victor at the Trojan Wall;
Surveys the Towers, and meditates their Fall.
But Jove descending shook the Idaean Hills,
And down their Summits poured a hundred Rills:
The unkindled Lightning in his Hand he took,
And thus the many-colour'd Maid bespoke.
Iris, with haste thy golden Wings display,
To God-like Hector this our Word convey.
While Agamemnon wastes the Ranks around,
Fights in the Front, and bathes with Blood the Ground,
Bid him give way; but issue forth Commands,
And trust the War to less important Hands:
But when, or wounded by the Spear, or Dart,
That Chief shall mount his Chariot, and depart;
Then Jove shull string his Arm, and fire his Breast,
Then to her Ships shall flying Greece be pressed,
Till to the Main the burning Sun descend,
And sacred Night her awful Shade extend.
He spoke, and Iris at his Word obeyed;
On Wings of Winds descends the various Maid.
The Chief she found amidst the Ranks of War,
Close to the Bulwarks, on his glittering Car.
The Goddess then: O Son of Priam hear!
From Jove I come, and his high Mandate bear.
While Agamemnon wastes the Ranks around,
Fights in the Front, and bathes with Blood the Ground,
Abstain from Fight; yet issue forth Commands,
And trust the War to less important Hands.
But when, or wounded by the Spear, or Dart,
The Chief shall mount his Chariot, and depart;
Then Jove shall string thy Arm, and fire thy Breast,
Then to her Ships shall flying Greece be pressed,
Till to the Main the burning Sun descend,
And sacred Night her awful Shade extend.
She said, and vanished: Hector, with a Bound,
Vaults from his Chariot on the trembling Ground,
In clanging Arms: He grasps in either Hand
A pointed Lance, and speeds from Band to Band;
Revives their Ardour, turns their Steps from flight,
And wakes anew the dying Flames of Fight.
They stand to Arms: the Greeks their Onset dare,
Condense their Powers, and wait the coming War.
New Force, new Spirit to each Breast returns;
The Fight renewed with fiercer Fury burns:
The King leads on; all fix on him their Eye,
And learn from him, to conquer, or to die.
Ye sacred Nine, Celestial Muses! tell,
Who faced him first, and by his Prowess fell?
The great Iphidamas, the bold and young;
From sage Antenor and Theano sprung;
Whom from his Youth his Grandsire Cisseus bred,
And nursed in Thrace where snowy Flocks are fed.
Scarce did the Down his rosy Cheeks invest,
And early Honor warm his generous Breast,
When the kind Sire consigned his Daughter's Charms
( Theano's Sister) to his youthful Arms.
But called by Glory to the Wars of Troy,
He leaves untasted the first Fruits of Joy;
From his loved Bride departs with melting Eyes,
And swift to aid his dearer Country flies.
With twelve black Ships he reached Percope's Strand,
Thence took the long, laborious March by Land.
Now fierce for Fame, before the Ranks he springs,
Towering in Arms, and braves the King of Kings.
Atrides first discharged the missive Spear;
The Trojan stooped, the Javelin passed in Air.
Then near the Corselet, at the Monarch's Heart,
With all his Strength the Youth directs his Dart;
But the broad Belt, with Plates of Silver bound,
The Point rebated, and repelled the Wound.
Encumbered with the Dart, Atrides stands,
Till grasped with Force, he wrench'd it from his Hands.
At once, his weighty Sword discharged a Wound
Full on his Neck, that felled him to the Ground.
Stretched in the Dust the unhappy Warrior lies,
And Sleep eternal seals his swimming Eyes.
Oh worthy better Fate! oh early slain!
Thy Country's Friend; and virtuous, though in vain!
No more the Youth shall join his Consort's side,
At once a Virgin, and at once a Bride!
No more with Presents her Embraces meet,
Or lay the Spoils of Conquest at her Feet,
On whom his Passion, lavish of his Store,
Bestowed so much, and vainly promised more!
Unwept, uncovered, on the Plain he lay,
While the proud Victor bore his Arms away.
Coon, Antenor's eldest Hope, was nigh:
Tears, at the Sight, came starting from his Eye,
While pierced with Grief the much-loved Youth he viewed,
And the pale Features now deformed with Blood.
Then with his Spear, unseen, his Time he took,
Aimed at the King, and near his Elbow struck.
The thrilling Steel transpierc'd the brawny Part,
And through his Arm stood forth the barbed Dart.
Surpised the Monarch feels, yet void of Fear
On Coon rushes with his lifted Spear:
His Brother's Corpse the pious Trojan draws,
And calls his Country to assert his Cause,
Defends him breathless on the smoking Field,
And over the Body spreads his ample Shield.
Atrides, marking an unguarded Part,
Transfixed the Warrior with his brazen Dart;
Prone on his Brother's bleeding Breast he lay,
The Monarch's Faulchion lopped his Head away:
The social Shades the same dark Journey go,
And join each other in the Realms below.
The vengeful Victor rages round the Fields
With every Weapon, Art or Fury yields:
By the long Lance, the Sword, or ponderous Stone,
Whole Ranks are broken, and whole Troops overthrown.
This, while yet warm, distilled the purple Flood;
But when the Wound grew stiff with clotted Blood,
Then grinding Tortures his strong Bosom rend,
Less keen those Darts the fierce Ilythiae send,
(The Powers that cause the teeming Matron's Throes,
Sad Mothers of unutterable Woes!)
Stung with the Smart, all panting with the Pain,
He mounts the Car, and gives his Squire the Rein:
Then with a Voice which Fury made more strong,
And Pain augmented, thus exhorts the Throng.
O Friends! O Greeks! assert your Honors won;
Proceed, and finish what this Arm begun:
Lo! angry Jove forbids your Chief to stay,
And envies half the Glories of the Day.
He said; the Driver whirls his lengthful Thong;
The Horses fly; the Chariot smoaks along.
Clouds from their Nostrils the fierce Coursers blow,
And from their Sides the Foam descends in Snow;
Shot through the Battle in a Moment's Space,
The wounded Monarch at his Tent they place.
No sooner Hector saw the King retired,
But thus his Trojans and his Aids he fired.
Hear all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian Race!
Famed in close Fight, and dreadful Face to Face;
Now call to Mind your ancient Trophies won,
Your great Forefathers Virtues, and your own.
Behold, the General flies! deserts his Powers!
Lo Jove himself declares the Conquest ours!
Now on yon' Ranks impell your foaming Steeds;
And, sure of Glory, dare immortal Deeds.
With Words like these the fiery Chief alarms
His fainting Host, and every Bosom warms.
As the bold Hunter chears his Hounds to tear
The brindled Lion, or the tusky Bear,
With Voice and Hand provokes their doubting Heart,
And springs the foremost with his lifted Dart:
So God-like Hector prompts his Troops to dare,
Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the War.
On the black Body of the Foes he pours:
As from the Cloud's deep Bosom swelled with Showers,
A sudden Storm the purple Ocean sweeps,
Drives the wild Waves, and tosses all the Deeps.
Say Muse! when Jove the Trojan's Glory crowned,
Beneath his Arm what Heroes bit the Ground?
Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,
Opites next was added to their side,
Then brave Hipponous famed in many a Fight,
Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless Night,
Aesymnus, Agelaus; all Chiefs of Name;
The rest were vulgar Deaths, unknown to Fame.
As when a western Whirlwind, charged with Storms,
Dispells the gathered Clouds that Notus forms;
The Gust continued, violent, and strong,
Rolls sable Clouds in Heaps on Heaps along;
Now to the Skies the foaming Billows rears,
Now breaks the Surge, and wide the bottom bares.
Thus raging Hector, with resistless Hands,
O'erturns, confounds, and scatters all their Bands.
Now the last Ruin the whole Host appalls;
Now Greece had trembled in her wooden Walls;
But wise Ulysses called Tydides forth,
His Soul rekindled, and awaked his Worth.
And stand we deedless, O eternal Shame!
Till Hector's Arm involve the Ships in Flame?
Haste, let us join, and combat side by side.
The Warrior thus, and thus the Friend replied.
No martial Toil I shun, no Danger fear;
Let Hector come; I wait his Fury here.
But Jove with Conquest crowns the Trojan Train;
And, Jove our Foe, all human Force is vain.
He sighed; but sighing, raised his vengeful Steel,
And from his Car the proud Thymbraeus fell:
Molion, the Charioteer, pursued his Lord,
His Death ennobled by Ulysses' Sword.
There slain, they left them in eternal Night;
Then plunged amidst the thickest Ranks of Fight.
So two wild Boars outstrip the foll'owing Hounds,
Then swift revert, and Wounds return for Wounds.
Stern Hector's Conquests in the middle Plain
Stood checked a while, and Greece respir'd again.
The Sons of Merops shone amidst the War;
Towering they rode in one refulgent Car:
In deep Prophetic Arts their Father skilled,
Had warned his Children from the Trojan Field;
Fate urged them on; the Father warned in vain,
They rushed to Fight, and perished on the Plain!
Their Breasts no more the vital Spirit warms;
The stern Tydides strips their shining Arms.
Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies,
And rich Hippodamus becomes his Prize.
Great Jove from I Would with Slaughter fills his Sight,
And level hangs the doubtful Scale of Fight.
By Tydeus' Lance Agastrophus was slain,
The far-fam'd Hero of Paeonian Strain;
Winged with his Fears, on Foot he strove to fly,
His Steeds too distant, and the Foe too nigh;
Through broken Orders, swifter than the Wind,
He fled, but flying, left his Life behind.
This Hector sees, as his experienced Eyes
Traverse the Files, and to the Rescue flies;
Shouts, as he past, the crystal Regions rend,
And moving Armies on his March attend.
Great Diomed himself was seized with Fear,
And thus bespoke his Brother of the War.
Mark how this way yon' bending Squadrons yield!
The Storm rolls on, and Hector rules the Field:
Here stand his utmost Force -- The Warrior said;
Swift at the Word, his pondrous Javelin fled;
Nor missed its Aim, but where the Plumage danced,
Razed the smooth Cone, and thence obliquely glanced.
Safe in his Helm (the Gift of Phoebus' Hands)
Without a Wound the Trojan Hero stands;
But yet so stunned, that stagg'ring on the Plain,
His Arm and Knee his sinking Bulk sustain;
Over his dim Sight the misty Vapors rise,
And a short Darkness shades his swimming Eyes.
Tydides followed to regain his Lance;
While Hector rose, recovered from the Trance,
Remounts his Car, and herds amidst the Crowd;
The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud.
Once more thank Phoebus for thy forfeit Breath,
Or thank that Swiftness which outstrips the Death.
Well by Apollo are thy Prayers repaid,
And often that partial Power has lent his Aid.
Thou shall not long the Death deserved withstand,
If any God assist Tydides' Hand.
Fly then, inglorious! but thy Flight, this Day,
Whole Hecatombs of Trojan Ghosts shall pay.
Him, while he triumphed, Paris eyed from far,
(The Spouse of Helen, the fair Cause of War)
Around the Field his feathered Shafts he sent,
From ancient Ilus' ruined Monument;
Behind the Column placed, he bent his Bow,
And winged an Arrow at the unwary Foe;
Just as he stooped, Agastrophus's Crest
To seize, and drew the Corselet from his Breast.
The Bow-string twang'd; nor flew the Shaft in vain,
But pierced his Foot, and nailed it to the Plain.
The laughing Trojan, with a joyful Spring
Leaps from his Ambush, and insults the King.
He bleeds! (he cries) some God has sped my Dart;
Would the same God had fixed it in his Heart!
So Troy relieved from that wide-wasting Hand
Shall breathe from Slaughter, and in combat stand,
Whose Sons now tremble at his darted Spear,
As scattered Lambs the rushing Lion fear.
He, dauntless, thus: Thou Conqu'ror of the Fair,
Thou Woman-warrior with the curling Hair;
Vain Archer! trusting to the distant Dart,
Unskilled in Arms to act a manly Part!
Thou have but done what Boys or Women can;
Such Hands may wound, but not incense a Man.
Nor boast the Scratch thy feeble Arrow gave,
A Coward's Weapon never hurts the Brave.
Not so this Dart, which thou may one Day feel;
Fate wings its Flight, and Death is on the Steel,
Where this but lights, some noble Life expires,
Its Touch makes Orphans, bathes the cheeks of Sires,
Steeps Earth in purple, gluts the Birds of Air,
And leaves such Objects as distract the Fair.
Ulysses hastens with a trembling Heart,
Before him steps, and bending draws the Dart:
Forth flows the Blood; an eager Pang succeeds;
Tydides mounts, and to the Navy speeds.
Now on the Field Ulysses stands alone,
The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on:
But stands collected in himself and whole,
And questions thus his own unconquered Soul.
What farther Subterfuge, what Hopes remain?
What Shame, inglorious if I quit the Plain;
What Danger, singly if I stand the Ground,
My Friends all scattered, all the Foes around?
Yet wherefore doubtful? Let this Truth suffice;
The Brave meets Danger, and the Coward flies:
To die, or conquer, proves a Hero's Heart;
And knowing this, I know a Soldier's Part.
Such Thoughts revolving in his careful Breast,
Near, and more near, the shady Cohorts pressed;
These, in the Warrior, their own Fate enclose;
And round him deep the steely Circle grows.
So fares a Boar, whom all the Troop surrounds
Of shouting Huntsmen and of clamorous Hounds;
He grinds his Ivory Tusks; he foams with Ire;
His sanguine Eyeballs glare with living Fire;
By these, by those, on every Part is plied;
And the red Slaughter spreads on every side.
Pierced through the Shoulder, first Deiopis fell;
Next Ennomus and Thoon sunk to Hell;
Chersidamas, beneath the Navel thrust,
Supinely falls, and grasps the bloody Dust.
Charops, the Son of Hippasus, was near;
Ulysses reached him with the fatal Spear;
But to his Aid his Brother Socus flies,
Socus, the brave, the generous, and the wise:
Near as he drew, the Warrior thus began.
O great Ulysses, much-enduring Man!
Not deeper skilled in every martial Slight,
Than worn to Toils, and active in the Fight!
This Day, two Brothers shall thy Conquest grace,
And end at once the great Hippasian Race,
Or thou beneath this Lance must press the Field --
He said, and forceful pierced his spacious Shield;
Through the strong Brass the ringing Javelin thrown,
Plowed half his side, and barred it to the Bone.
By Pallas' Care, the Spear, though deep infix'd,
Stopped short of Life, nor with his Entrails mixed.
The Wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,
Then furious thus, (but first some Steps withdrew.)
Unhappy Man! whose Death our Hand shall grace!
Fate calls thee hence, and finished is thy Race.
No longer check my Conquests on the Foe;
But pierced by this, to endless Darkness go,
And add one Spectre to the Realms below!
He spoke, while Socus seized with sudden Fright,
Trembling gave way, and turned his Back to Flight,
Between his Shoulders pierced the following Dart,
And held its Passage through the panting Heart.
Wide in his Breast appeared the grizly Wound;
He falls; his Armor rings against the Ground.
Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the Slain.
Famed Son of Hippasus! there press the Plain;
There ends thy narrow Span assigned by Fate,
Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer Date.
Ah Wretch! no Father shall thy Corpse compose,
Thy dying Eyes no tender Mother close,
But hungry Birds shall tear those Balls away,
And hovering Vulturs scream around their Prey.
Me Greece shall honor, when I meet my Doom,
With solemn Fun'rals and a lasting Tomb.
Then raging with intolerable Smart,
He writhes his Body, and extracts the Dart.
The Dart a Tide of spouting Gore pursued,
And gladden'd Troy with Sight of hostile Blood.
Now Troops on Troops the fainting Chief invade,
Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for Aid.
Thrice to its pitch his lofty Voice he rears;
The well-known Voice thrice Menelaus hears:
Alarmed, to Ajax Telamon he cried,
Who shares his Labors, and defends his side.
O Friend! Ulysses' Shouts invade my Ear;
Distressed he seems, and no Assistance near:
Strong as he is; yet, one opposed to all,
Oppressed by Multitudes, the best may fall.
Greece, robbed of him, must bid her Hosts despair,
And feel a Loss not Ages can repair.
Then, where the Cry directs, his Course he bends;
Great Ajax, like the God of War, attends.
The prudent Chief in sore Distress they found,
With Bands of furious Trojans compassed round.
As when some Huntsman with a flying Spear,
From the blind Thicket wounds a stately Deer;
Down his cleft Side while fresh the Blood distills,
He bounds aloft, and scuds from Hills to Hills:
Till Life's warm Vapor issuing through the Wound,
Wild Mountain-Wolves the fainting Beast surround;
Just as their Jaws his prostrate Limbs invade,
The Lion rushes through the woodland Shade,
The Wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away;
The Lordly Savage vindicates his Prey.
Ulysses thus, unconquered by his Pains,
A single Warrior, half an Host sustains:
But soon as Ajax heaves his Tow'r-like Shield,
The scattered Crowds fly frighted over the Field;
Atrides' Arm the sinking Hero stays,
And saved from Numbers, to his Car conveys.
Victorious Ajax plies the routed Crew;
And first Doryclus, Priam's Son, he slew,
On strong Pandocus next inflicts a Wound,
And lays Lysander bleeding on the Ground.
As when a Torrent, swelled with wintry Rains,
Pours from the Mountains over the deluged Plains,
And Pines and Oaks, from their Foundations torn,
A Country's Ruins! to the Seas are born:
Fierce Ajax thus o'erwhelms the yielding Throng,
Men, Steeds, and Chariots, roll in Heaps along.
But Hector, from this Scene of Slaughter far,
Raged on the left, and ruled the Tide of War:
Loud Groans proclaim his Progress through the Plain,
And deep Scamander swells with Heaps of Slain.
There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose
The Warrior's Fury, there the Battle glows;
There fierce on Foot, or from the Chariot's Height,
His Sword deforms the beauteous Ranks of Fight.
The Spouse of Helen dealing Darts around,
Had pierced Machaon with a distant Wound:
In his right Shoulder the broad Shaft appeared,
And trembling Greece for her Physician feared.
To Nestor then Idomeneus begun;
Glory of Greece, old Neleus' valiant Son!
Ascend thy Chariot, haste with speed away,
And great Machaon to the Ships convey.
A wise Physician, skilled our Wounds to heal,
Is more than Armies to the public Weal.
Old Nestor mounts the Seat: Beside him rode
The wounded Offspring of the healing God.
He lends the Lash; the Steeds with sounding Feet
Shake the dry Field, and thunder towered the Fleet.
But now Cebriones, from Hector's Car,
Surveyed the various Fortune of the War.
While here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain;
Trojans on Trojans yonder load the Plain.
Before great Ajax, see the mingled Throng
Of Men and Chariots driven in Heaps along!
I know him well, distinguished over the Field
By the broad glittering of the sev'nfold Shield.
Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy Steeds;
There Danger calls, and there the Combat bleeds,
There Horse and Foot in mingled Deaths unite,
And Groans of Slaughter mix with Shouts of Fight.
Thus having spoke, the Driver's Lash resounds;
Swift through the Ranks the rapid Chariot bounds;
Stung by the Stroke, the Coursers scour the Fields
Over Heaps of Carcasses, and Hills of Shields.
The Horses Hoofs are bathed in Heroes Gore,
And dashing purple all the Car before,
The groaning Axle sable Drops distills,
And mangled Carnage clogs the rapid Wheels.
Here Hector plunging through the thickest Fight
Broke the dark Phalanx, and let in the Light.
(By the long Lance, the Sword, or pondrous Stone,
The Ranks lie scattered, and the Troops overthrown)
Ajax he shuns, through all the dire Debate,
And fears that Arm whose Force he felt so late.
But partial Jove, espousing Hector's Part,
Shot heav'n-bred Horror through the Grecian's Heart;
Confused, unnerv'd in Hector's Presence grown,
Amazed he stood, with Terrors not his own.
Over his broad Back his moony Shield he threw,
And glaring round, by tardy Steps withdrew.
Thus the grim Lion his Retreat maintains,
Beset with watchful Dogs, and shouting Swains,
Repulsed by Numbers from the nightly Stalls,
Though Rage impells him, and though Hunger calls,
Long stands the show'ring Darts, and missile Fires;
Then sow'rly slow the indignant Beast retires.
So turned stern Ajax, by whole Hosts repelled,
While his swollen Heart at every Step rebelled.
As the slow Beast with heavy Strength indu'd,
In some wide Field by Troops of Boys pursued,
Though round his Sides a wooden Tempest rain,
Crops the tall Harvest, and lays waste the Plain;
Thick on his Hide the hollow Blows resound,
The patient Animal maintains his Ground,
Scarce from the Field with all their Efforts chased,
And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last.
On Ajax thus a Weight of Trojans hung,
The Strokes redoubled on his Buckler rung;
Confiding now in bulky Strength he stands,
Now turns, and backward bears the yielding Bands;
Now stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly,
And threats his Followers with retorted Eye.
Fixed as the Bar between two warring Powers,
While hissing Darts descend in Iron Showers:
In his broad Buckler many a Weapon stood,
Its Surface bristled with a quivering Wood;
And many a Javelin, guiltless on the Plain,
Drinks the dry Dust, and thirsts for Blood in vain.
But bold Eurypylus his Aid imparts,
And dauntless springs beneath a Cloud of Darts;
Whose eager Javelin launched against the Foe,
Great Apisaon felt the fatal Blow;
From his torn Liver the red Current flowed,
And his slack Knees desert their dying Load.
The Victor rushing to despoil the Dead,
From Paris' Bow a vengeful Arrow fled.
Fixed in his nervous Thigh the Weapon stood,
Fixed was the Point, but broken was the Wood.
Back to the Lines the wounded Greek retired,
Yet thus, retreating, his Associates fired.
What God, O Grecians! has your Hearts dismayed?
Oh, turn to Arms; it is Ajax claims your Aid.
This Hour he stands the Mark of hostile Rage,
And this the last brave Battle he shall wage:
Haste, join your Forces; from the gloomy Grave
The Warrior rescue, and your Country save.
Thus urged the Chief; a generous Troop appears,
Who spread their Bucklers, and advance their Spears,
To guard their wounded Friend: While thus they stand
With pious Care, great Ajax joins the Band:
Each takes new Courage at the Hero's Sight;
The Hero rallies, and renews the Fight.
Thus raged both Armies like conflicting Fires,
While Nestor's Chariot far from Fight retires:
His Coursers steeped in Sweat, and stained with Gore,
The Greeks Preserver, great Machaon bore.
That Hour, Achilles from the topmost Height
Of his proud Fleet, o'erlook'd the Fields of Fight;
His feasted Eyes beheld around the Plain
The Grecian Rout, the slaying, and the slain.
His Friend Machaon singled from the rest,
A transient Pity touched his vengeful Breast.
Strait to Maenetius' much-loved Son he sent;
Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his Tent,
(In evil Hour! Then Fate decreed his Doom;
And fixed the Date of all his Woes to come!)
Why calls my Friend? thy loved Injunctions lay,
Whatever thy Will, Patroclus shall obey.
O first of Friends! ( Pelides thus replied)
Still at my Heart, and ever at my Side!
The Time is come, when yon' despairing Host
Shall learn the Value of the Man they lost:
Now at my Knees the Greeks shall pour their Moan,
And proud Atrides tremble on his Throne.
Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
What wounded Warrior late his Chariot brought?
For seen at distance, and but seen behind,
His Form recalled Machaon to my Mind;
Nor could I, through yon' Cloud, discern his Face,
The Coursers past me with so swift a Pace.
The Hero said. His Friend obeyed with haste,
Through intermingled Ships and Tents, he past;
The Chiefs descending from their Car he found;
The panting Steeds Eurymedon unbound.
The Warriors standing on the breezy Shore,
To dry their Sweat, and wash away the Gore,
Here paused a moment, while the gentle Gale
Conveyed that Freshness the cool Seas exhale;
Then to consult on farther Methods went,
And took their Seats beneath the shady Tent.
The Draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares,
Arsinous' Daughter, graced with golden Hairs:
(Whom to his aged Arms, a Royal Slave,
Greece, as the Prize of Nestor's Wisdom, gave)
A Table first with azure Feet she placed;
Whose ample Orb a brazen Charger graced:
Honey new-press'd, the sacred Flower of Wheat,
And wholesome Garlic crowned the sav'ry Treat.
Next her white Hand an antique Goblet brings,
A Goblet sacred to the Pylian Kings,
From eldest Times: embossed with Studs of Gold,
Two Feet support it, and four Handles hold;
On each bright Handle, bending over the Brink,
In sculptured Gold two Turtles seem to drink:
A massy Weight; yet heaved with ease by him.
When the brisk Nectar overlooked the Brim.
Tempered in this, the Nymph of Form divine
Pours a large Potion of the Pramnian Wine;
With Goat's-milk Cheese a flav'rous Taste bestows,
And last with Flour the smiling Surface strows.
This for the wounded Prince the Dame prepares;
The cordial Bev'rage reverend Nestor shares:
Salubrious Draughts the Warrior's Thirst allay,
And pleasing Conference beguiles the Day.
Mean time Patroclus, by Achilles sent,
Unheard approached, and stood before the Tent.
Old Nestor rising then, the Hero led
To his high Seat; the Chief refused, and said.
It Is now no Season for these kind Delays;
The great Achilles with Impatience stays.
To great Achilles this Respect I owe;
Who asks what Hero, wounded by the Foe,
Was born from combat by thy foaming Steeds?
With Grief I see the great Machaon bleeds.
This to report, my hasty Course I bend;
Thou know the fiery Temper of my Friend.
Can then the Sons of Greece (the Sage rejoined)
Excite Compassion in Achilles' Mind?
Seeks he the Sorrows of our Host to know?
This is not half the Story of our Woe.
Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone,
Our bravest Heroes in the Navy groan,
Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,
And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
But ah! what flattering Hopes I entertain?
Achilles heeds not, but derides our Pain;
Even till the Flames consume our Fleet, he stays,
And waits the rising of the fatal Blaze.
Chief after Chief the raging Foe destroys;
Calm he looks on, and every Death enjoys.
Now the slow Course of all-impairing Time
Unstrings my Nerves, and ends my manly Prime;
Oh! had I still that Strength my Youth possessed,
When this bold Arm the Epeian Powers oppressed,
The Bulls of Elis in glad Triumph led,
And stretched the great Itymonaeus dead!
Then, from my Fury fled the trembling Swains,
And ours was all the Plunder of the Plains:
Fifty white Flocks, full fifty Herds of Swine,
As many Goats, as many lowing Kine;
And thrice the Number of unrivaled Steeds,
All teeming Females, and of generous Breeds.
These, as my first Essay of Arms, I won;
Old Neleus gloried in his conquering Son.
Thus Elis forced, her long Arrears restored,
And Shares were parted to each Pylian Lord.
The State of Pyle was sunk to last Despair,
When the proud Elians first commenced the War.
For Neleus' Sons Alcides' Rage had slain;
Of twelve bold Brothers, I alone remain!
Oppressed, we armed; and now, this Conquest gained,
My Sire three hundred chosen Sheep obtained.
(That large Reprizal he might justly claim,
For Prize defrauded, and insulted Fame,
When Elis' Monarch in the public Course
Detained his Chariot and victorious Horse.)
The rest the People shared; my self surveyed
The just Partition, and due Victims paid.
Three Days were past, when Elis rose to War,
With many a Courser, and with many a Car;
The Sons of Actor at their Army's Head
(Young as they were) the vengeful Squadrons led.
High on a Rock fair Thryoessa stands,
Our utmost Frontier on the Pylian Lands;
Not far the Streams of famed Alphaeus flow;
The Stream they passed, and pitched their Tents below.
Pallas, descending in the Shades of Night,
Alarms the Pylians, and commands the Fight.
Each burns for Fame, and swells with martial Pride:
My self the foremost; but my Sire denied;
Feared for my Youth exposed to stern Alarms;
And stopped my Chariot, and detained my Arms.
My Sire denied in vain: On foot I fled
Amidst our Chariots: For the Goddess led.
Along fair Arene's delightful Plain,
Soft Minyas rolls his Waters to the Main.
There, Horse and Foot, the Pylian Troops unite,
And sheathed in Arms, expect the dawning Light.
Thence, ever the Sun advanced his noonday Flame,
To great Alphaeus' sacred Source we came.
There first to Jove our solemn Rites were paid;
An untamed Heifer pleased the blue-ey'd Maid,
A Bull Alphaeus; and a Bull was slain
To the blue Monarch of the watery Main.
In Arms we slept, beside the winding Flood,
While round the Town the fierce Epeians stood.
Soon as the Sun, with all-revealing Ray,
Flamed in the Front of Heaven, and gave the Day;
Bright Scenes of Arms, and Works of War appear;
The Nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here.
The first who fell, beneath my Javelin bled;
King Augias' Son, and Spouse of Agamede:
(She that all Simple's healing Virtues knew,
And every Herb that drinks the Morning Dew.)
I seized his Car, the Van of Battle led;
The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
The Foe dispersed, their bravest Warrior killed,
Fierce as a Whirlwind now I swept the Field:
Full fifty captive Chariots graced my Train;
Two Chiefs from each, fell breathless to the Plain.
Then Actor's Sons had died, but Neptune shrouds
The youthful Heroes in a Veil of Clouds.
Over heapy Shields, and over the prostrate Throng,
Collecting Spoils, and slaught'ring all along,
Through wide Buprasian Fields we forced the Foes,
Where over the Vales the Olenian Rocks arose;
Till Pallas stopped us where Alisium flows.
Even there, the hindmost of their Rear I slay,
And the same Arm that led, concludes the Day;
Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
There to high Jove were public Thanks assigned
As first of Gods, to Nestor, of Mankind.
Such then I was, impelled by youthful Blood;
So proved my Valor for my Country's Good.
Achilles with unactive Fury glows,
And gives to Passion what to Greece he owes.
How shall he grieve, when to the eternal Shade
Her Hosts shall sink, nor his the Power to aid?
O Friend! my Memory recalls the Day,
When gathering Aids along the Grecian Sea,
I, and Ulysses, touched at Pthia's Port,
And entered Peleus' hospitable Court.
A Bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice,
And poured Libations on the flaming Thighs.
Thy self, Achilles, and thy reverend Sire
Menoetius, turned the Fragments on the Fire.
Achilles sees us, to the Feast invites;
Social we sit, and share the genial Rites.
We then explained the Cause on which we came,
Urged you to Arms, and found you fierce for Fame.
Your ancient Fathers generous Precepts gave;
Peleus said only this, -- "My Son! be brave.
Menoetius thus; "Though great Achilles shine
"In Strength superior, and of Race divine,
"Yet cooler Thoughts thy elder Years attend;
"Let thy just Counsels aid, and rule thy Friend.
Thus spoke your Father at Thessalia's Court;
Words now forgot, though now of vast Import.
Ah! try the utmost that a Friend can say,
Such gentle Force the fiercest Minds obey;
Some favoring God Achilles' Heart may move;
Though deaf to Glory, he may yield to Love.
If some dire Oracle his Breast alarm,
If ought from Heaven withold his saving Arm;
Some Beam of Comfort yet on Greece may shine,
If thou but lead the Myrmidonian Line;
Clad in Achilles' Arms, if thou appear,
Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from War;
Pressed by fresh Forces her o'er-labour'd Train
Shall seek their Walls, and Greece respire again.
This touched his generous Heart, and from the Tent
Along the Shore with hasty Strides he went;
Soon as he came, where, on the crowded Strand,
The public Mart and Courts of Justice stand,
Where the tall Fleet of great Ulysses lies,
And Altars to the guardian Gods arife:
There sad he met the brave Evaemon's Son,
Large painful Drops from all his Members run,
An Arrow's Head yet rooted in his Wound,
The fable Blood in Circles marked the Ground.
As faintly reeling he confessed the Smart;
Weak was his Pace, but dauntless was his Heart.
Divine Compassion touched Patroclus' Breast,
Who sighing, thus his bleeding Friend addressed.
Ah hapless Leaders of the Grecian Host!
Thus must ye perish on a barbarous Coast?
Is this your Fate, to glut the Dogs with Gore,
Far from your Friends, and from your native Shore!
Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
Resists she yet the raging Hector's Hand!
Or are her Heroes doomed to die with Shame,
And this the Period of our Wars and Fame?
Eurypylus replies: No more (my Friend)
Greece is no more! this Day her Glories end.
Even to the Ships victorious Troy pursues,
Her Force increasing, as her Toil renews.
Those Chiefs, that used her utmost Rage to meet,
Lie pierced with Wounds and bleeding in the Fleet.
But thou, Patroclus! act a friendly Part,
Lead to my Ships, and draw this deadly Dart;
With lukewarm Water wash the Gore away,
With healing Balms the raging Smart allay,
Such as sage Chiron, Sire of Pharmacy,
Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
Of two famed Surgeons, Podalirius stands
This Hour surrounded by the Trojan Bands;
And great Machaon, wounded in his Tent,
Now wants that Succor which so often he lent.
To him the Chief. What then remains to do?
The Event of Things the Gods alone can view.
Charged by Achilles' great Command I fly,
And bear with haste the Pylian King's Reply:
But thy Distress this Instant claims Relief.
He said, and in his Arms upheld the Chief.
The Slaves their Master's slow Approach surveyed,
And Hides of Oxen on the Floor displayed:
There stretched at length the wounded Hero lay,
Patroclus cut the forky Steel away.
Then in his Hands a bitter Root he bruised;
The Wound he washed, the Styptick Juice infused.
The closing Flesh that Instant ceased to glow,
The Wound to torture, and the Blood to flow.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Eleventh Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
I.
AS Homer's Invention is in nothing more wonderful than in the great Variety of
Characters with which his Poems are diversified, so his Judgment appears in
nothing more exact, than in that Propriety with which each Character is
maintained. But this Exactness must be collected by a diligent Attention to his
Conduct through the whole: and when the Particulars of each Character are laid
together, we shall find them all proceeding from the same Temper and
Disposition of the Person. If this Observation be neglected, the Poet's Conduct
will lose much of its true Beauty and Harmony.

I fancy it will not be unpleasant to the Reader, to consider the Picture of
Agamemnon drawn by so masterly an Hand as that of Homer in its full length,
after having seen him in several Views and Lights since the beginning of the
Poem.

He is a Master of Policy and Stratagem, and maintains a good Understanding
with his Council; which was but necessary considering how many different and
independent Nations and Interests he had to manage: He seems fully conscious of
his own superior Authority, and always knows the time when to exert it: He is
personally very valiant, but not without some Mixture of Fierceness: Highly
resentful of the Injuries done his Family, even more than Menelaus himself:
Warm both in his Passions and Affections, particularly in the Love he bears his
Brother. In short, he is (as Homer himself in another Place describes him) both
a good King, and a great Warrior. (...)
It is very observable how this Hero rises in the Eye and Esteem of the Reader
as the Poem advances: It opens with many Circumstances very much to the
Disadvantage of his Character; he insults the Priest of Apollo, and outrages
Achilles: but in the second Book he grows sensible of the Effects of his
Rashness, and takes the Fault entirely upon himself: In the fourth he shows
himself a skilful Commander, by exhorting, reproving and performing all the
Offices of a good General: In the eighth he is deeply touched by the Sufferings
of his Army, and makes all the Peoples Calamities his own: In the ninth he
endeavors to reconcile himself to Achilles, and condescends to be the
Petitioner, because it is for the public Good: In the tenth, finding those
Endeavors ineffectual, his Concern keeps him the whole Night awake, in
contriving all possible Methods to assist them: And now in the eleventh as it
were resolving himself to supply the want of Achilles, he grows prodigiously in
his Valor, and performs Wonders in his single Person.

Thus we see Agamemnon continually winning upon our Esteem, as we grow
acquainted with him; so that he seems to be like that Goddess the Poet
describes, who was low at the first, but rising by degrees, at last reaches the
very Heavens.

II.
VERSE 5. When baleful Eris, etc.] With what a wonderful Sublimity does the
Poet begin this Book? He awakens the Reader's Curiosity, and sounds an Alarm to
the approaching Battle. With what Magnificence does he usher in the Deeds of
Agamemnon: He seems for a while to have lost all view of the main Battle, and
lets the whole Action of the Po'em stand still, to attend the Motions of this
single Hero. Instead of an Herald, he brings down a Goddess to inflame the
Army; instead of a Trumpet or such warlike Music, Juno and Minerva thunder
over the Field of Battle: Jove rains down Drops of Blood, and averts his Eyes
from such a Scene of Horrors.

By the Goddess Eris is meant that Ardour and Impatience for the Battle which
now inspired the Grecian Army: They who just before were almost in Despair, now
burn for the Fight, and breath nothing but War. Eustathius.

III.
VERSE 14. Orthian Song.] This is a kind of an Odaic Song, invented and sung on
purpose to fire the Soul to noble Deeds in War. Such was that of Timotheus
before Alexander the Great, which had such an Influence upon him, that he
leaped from his Seat and laid hold on his Arms. Eustathius.

IV.
VERSE 26. King Cinyras.] It Is probable this Passage of Cinyras King of Cyprus
alludes to a true History; and what makes it the more so, is that this Island
was famous for its Mines of several Metals. Eustathius.

V.
VERSE 35. Arching bowed, etc.] Eustathius observes, that the Poet intended to
represent the bending Figure of these Serpents, as well as their Color, by
comparing them to Rainbows. Dacier observes here how close a Parallel this
Passage of Homer bears to that in Genesis, where God tells Noah, I have set my
Bow in the Clouds, that it may be for a Sign of the Covenant between me and the
Earth.

VI.
VERSE 63. The Foot, and those who wield The lighter Arms, rush forward.] Here
we see the Order of Battle is inverted, and opposite to that which Nestor
proposed in the fourth Book: For it is the Cavalry which is there sustained by
the Infantry; here the Infantry by the Cavalry. But to deliver my Opinion, I
believe it was the Nearness of the Enemy that obliged Agamemnon to change the
Disposition of the Battle: He would break their Battalions with his Infantry,
and complete their Defeat by his Cavalry, which should fall upon the Flyers.
Dacier.

VII.
VERSE 70. Red Drops of Blood.] These Prodigies with which Homer embellishes
his Poetry, are the same with those which History relates not as Ornaments, but
as Truths. Nothing is more common in History than Showers of Blood, and
Philosophy gives us the Reason of them: The two Battles which had been fought
on the Plains of Troy, had so drenched them with Blood, that a great Quantity
of it might be exhaled in Vapors and carried into the Air, and being there
condensed, fall down again in Dews and Drops of the same Color. Eustathius.

VIII.
VERSE 83. As the red Star.] We have just seen at full length the Picture of
the General of the Greeks: Here we see Hector beautifully drawn in Miniature.
This proceeded from the great Judgment of the Poet: 'twas necessary to speak
fully of Agamemnon, who was to be the chief Hero of this Battle, and briefly of
Hector, who had so often been spoken of at large before. This is an Instance
that the Poet well knew when to be concise, and when to be copious. It is
impossible that any thing should be more happily imagined than this Similitude:
It is so lively, that we see Hector sometimes shining in Arms at the Head of
his Troops: and then immediately lose Sight of him, while he retires in the
Ranks of the Army. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 89. As sweating Reapers.] 'Twill be necessary for the understanding of
this Similitude, to explain the Method of Mowing in Homer's Days: They mowed in
the same manner as they plowed, beginning at the Extremes of the Field, which
was equally divided, and proceeding till they met in the middle of it. By this
means they raised an Emulation between both Parties, which should finish their
Share first. If we consider this Custom, we shall find it a very happy
Comparison to the two Armies advancing against each other, together with an
exact Resemblance in every Circumstance the Poet intended to illustrate.

X.
VERSE 119. What time in some sequestered Vale The weary Woodman, etc.] One may
gather from hence, that in Homer's Time they did not measure the Day by Hours,
but by the Progression of the Sun; and distinguished the Parts of it by the
most noted Employments; as in the 12 of the Odysseis,. 439. from the rising of
the Judges, and here from the dining of the Labourer.

It may perhaps be entertaining to the Reader to see a general Account of the
Mensuration of Time among the Ancients, which I shall take from Spondanus. At
the beginning of the World it is certain there was no Distinction of Time but
by the Light and Darkness, and the whole Day was included in the general Terms
of the Evening and the Morning. Munster makes a pretty Observation upon this
Custom: Our longliv'd Forefathers (says he) had not so much occasion to be
exact Observers how the Day passed, as their frailer Sons, whose Shortness of
Life makes it necessary to distinguish every Part of Time, and suffer none of
it to slip away without their Observation.

It is not improbable but that the Chaldaeans, many Ages after the Flood, were
the first who divided the Day into Hours; they being the first who applied
themselves with any Success to Astrology. The most ancient Sun-dial we read of
is that of Achaz, mentioned in the second Book of Kings, Chapter 20. about the Time
of the building of Rome: But as these were of no use on clouded Days and in the
Night; there was another Invention of measuring the Parts of Time by Water; but
that not being sufficiently exact, they laid it aside for another by Sand.

It Is certain the Use of Dials was earlier among the Greeks than the Romans;
'twas above three hundred Years after the building of Rome before they knew any
thing of them: But yet they had divided the Day and Night into twenty four
Hours, as appears from Varro and Macrobius, though they did not count the Hours
as we do, numerically, but from Midnight to Midnight, and distinguished them by
particular Names, as by the Cock crowing, the Dawn, the Midday, etc. The first
Sun-dial we read of among the Romans which divided the Day into Hours, is
mentioned by Pliny, lib. 1. cap. 20. fixed upon the Temple of Quirinus by L.
Papyrius the Censor, about the 12 th Year of the Wars with Pyrrhus. But the
first that was of any Use to the Public was set up near the Rostra in the
Forum by Valerius Messala the Consul, after the taking of Catana in Sicily;
from whence it was brought thirty Years after the first had been set up by
Papyrius; but this was still an imperfect one, the Lines of it not exactly
corresponding with the several Hours. Yet they made use of it many Years, till
Q. Marcius Philippus placed another by it greatly improved: but these had still
one common Defect of being useless in the Night, and when the Skies were
overcast. All these Inventions being thus ineffectual, Scipio Nasica some Years
afterward measured the Day and Night into Hours from the dropping of Water.

Yet near this time, it may be gathered that Sun-dials were very frequent in
Rome, from a Fragment preserved by Aulus Gellius and ascribed to Plautus: The
Lines are so beautiful, that I cannot deny the Reader the Satisfaction of
seeing them. They are supposed to be spoken by an hungry Parasite, upon a Sight
of one of these Dials. Ut illum Dii perdant, primus qui horas repperit;
Quique adeo primus statuit heic solarium:
Qui mihi comminuit misero, articulatim, diem!
Nam me puero uterus hic erat solarium,
Multo omnium istorum optimum and verissumum,
Ubi iste monebat esse, nisi cum nihil erat.
Nunc etiam quod est, non est, nisi Soli lubet:
Itaque adeo jam oppletum est oppidum solariis,
Major pars populi aridi reptant fame.
We find frequent mention of the Hours in the Course of this Poem; but to
prevent any Mistake, it may not be improper to take notice, that they must
always be understood to mean the Seasons, and not the Division of the Day by
Hours.

XI.
VERSE 125. The Greeks impulsive Might.] We had just before seen that all the
Gods were withdrawn from the Battle; that Jupiter was resolved even against the
Inclinations of them all to honor the Trojans. Yet we here see the Greeks
breaking through them: The Love the Poet bears to his Countrymen makes him
aggrandize their Valor, and overruled even the Decrees of Fate. To vary his
Battles, he supposes the Gods to be absent this Day; and they are no sooner
gone, but the Courage of the Greeks prevails, even against the Determination of
Jupiter. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 135. Naked to the Sky.] Eustathius refines upon this Place, and believes
that Homer intended, by particularizing the Whiteness of the Limbs, to ridicule
the effeminate Education of these unhappy Youths. But as such an Interpretation
may be thought below the Majesty of an Epic Poem, and a kind of Barbarity to
insult the unfortunate, I thought it better to give the Passage an Air of
Compassion. As the Words are equally capable of either meaning, I imagined the
Reader would be more pleased with the Humanity of the one, than with the Satyr
of the other.

XIII.
VERSE 143. These on the Mountains once Achilles found.] Homer, says
Eustathius, never lets any Opportunity pass of mentioning the Hero of his Poem,
Achilles: He gives here an Instance of his former Resentment, and at once
varies his Poetry, and exalts his Character. Nor does he mention him cursorily;
he seems unwilling to leave him; and when he pursues the Thread of the Story in
a few Lines, takes occasion to speak again of him. This is a very artful
Conduct, by mentioning him so frequently, he takes care that the Reader should
not forget him, and shows the Importance of that Hero, whose Anger is the
Subject of his Poem. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 182. Antimachus, who once in Council stood
To shed Ulysses and my Brother's Blood.]
It Is observable that Homer with a great deal of Art interweaves the true
History of the Trojan War in his Poem: He here gives a Circumstance that
carries us back from the tenth Year of the War to the very beginning of it. So
that although the Action of the Poem takes up but a small Part of the last Year
of the War, yet by such Incidents as these we are taught a great many
Particulars that happen through the whole Series of it. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 188. Lopped his Hands away.] I think one cannot but compassionate the
Fate of these Brothers, who suffer for the Sins of their Father,
notwithstanding the Justice which the Commentators find in this Action of
Agamemnon. And I can much less imagine that his cutting off their Hands was
meant for an express Example against Bribery, in Revenge for the Gold which
Antimachus had received from Paris. Eustathius is very refining upon this
Point; but the grave Spondanus out-does them all, who has found there was an
excellent Conceit in cutting off the Hands and Head of the Son; the first,
because the Father had been for laying Hands on the Grecian Ambassadors; and
the second, because it was from his Head that the Advice proceeded of detaining
Helena.

XVI.
VERSE 193. Now by the Foot the flying Foot, etc.] After Homer with a poetical
Justice has punished the Sons of Antimachus for the Crimes of the Father; he
carries on the Narration, and presents all the Terrors of the Battle to our
view: We see in the lively Description the Men and Chariots overthrown, and
hear the Tramplings of the Horses Feet. Thus the Poet very artfully by such
sudden Alarms awakens the Attention of the Reader, that is apt to be tired and
grow remiss by a plain and more cool Narration.

XVII.
VERSE 197. The Brass-hoof'd Steeds.] Eustathius observes that the Custom of
shoeing Horses was in use in Homer's Time, and calls the Shoes (...), from the
Figure of an Half Moon.

XVIII.
VERSE 212. More grateful, now, to Vulturs than their Wives.] This is a
Reflection of the Poet, and such an one as arises from a Sentiment of
Compassion; and indeed there is nothing more moving than to see those Heroes,
who were the Love and Delight of their Spouses, reduced suddenly to such a
Condition of Horror, that their very Wives dare not look upon them. I was very
much surprised to find a Remark of Eustathius upon this, which seems very wrong
and unjust: He would have it that there is in this Place an Ellipsis, "For,
says he, which comprehends a severe Raillery: Homer would imply that those dead
Warriors were now more agreeable to Vulturs, than they had ever been in all
their Days to their Wives. This is very ridiculous; to suppose that these
unhappy Women did not love their Husbands, is to insult them barbarously in
their Affliction; and every Body can see that such a Thought in this Place
would have appeared mean, frigid, and out of Season. Homer always endeavors to
excite Compassion by the Grief of the Wives, whose Husbands are killed in the
Battle. Dacier.

XIX.
VERSE 217. Now past the Tomb where ancient Ilus lay.] By the Exactness of
Homer's Description we see as in a Landscape the very Place where this Battle
was fought. Agamemnon drives the Trojans from the Tomb of Ilus, where they
encamped all the Night; that Tomb stood in the middle of the Plain: From thence
he pursues them by the wild Fig Tree to the Beech-Tree, and from thence to the
very Scaean Gate. Thus the Scene of Action is fixed, and we see the very Rout
through which the one retreats and the other advances. Eustathius.

XX.
VERSE 241. Iris with haste thy golden Wings display.] It Is evident that some
such Contrivance as this was necessary; The Trojans, we learn from the
beginning of this Book, were to be victorious this Day: But if Jupiter had not
now interposed, they had been driven even within the Walls of Troy. By this
means also the Poet consults both for the Honor of Hector and that of
Agamemnon. Agamemnon has time enough to show the Greatness of his Valor, and
it is no Disgrace to Hector not to encounter him when Jupiter interposes.

Eustathius observes, that the Poet gives us here a Sketch of what is drawn out
at large in the Story of this whole Book: This he does to raise the Curiosity
of the Reader, and make him impatient to hear those great Actions which must be
performed before Agamemnon can retire, and Hector be victorious.

XXI.
VERSE 281. Ye sacred Nine!] The Poet to win the Attention of the Reader, and
seeming himself to be struck with the Exploits of Agamemnon while he recites
them, (who when the Battle was rekindled, rushes out to engage his Enemies)
invokes not one Muse as he did in the beginning of the Poem; but as if he
intended to warn us that he was about to relate something surprising, he
invokes the whole Nine; and then as if he had received their Inspiration, goes
on to deliver what they suggested to him. By means of this Apostrophe, the
Imagination of the Reader is so filled, that he seems not only present, but
active in the Scene to which the Skill of the Poet has transported him.
Eustathius.

XXII.
VERSE 283. Iphidamas the bold and young.] Homer here gives us the History of
this Iphidamas, his Parentage, the Place of his Birth, and many Circumstances
of his private Life. This he does to diversify his Poetry, and to soften with
some amiable Embellishments the continual Horrors that must of Necessity strike
the Imagination in an uninterrupted Narration of Blood and Slaughter.
Eustathius.

XXIII.
VERSE 290. Theano 's Sister.] That the Reader may not be shocked at the
Marriage of Iphidamas with his Mother's Sister, it may not be amiss to observe
from Eustathius, that Consanguinity was no Impediment in Greece in the Days of
Homer: Nor is Iphidamas singular in this kind of Marriage, for Diomed was
married to his own Aunt as well as he.

XXIV.
VERSE 349. The fierce Ilythiae.] These Ilythiae are the Goddesses that Homer
supposes to preside over Childbirth: He arms their Hands with a kind of an
Instrument, from which a pointed Dart is shot into the distressed Mother, as an
Arrow is from a Bow: So that as Eris has her Torch and Jupiter his Thunder,
these Goddesses have their Darts which they shoot into Women in Travail. He
calls them the Daughters of Juno, because she presides over the Marriage Bed.
Eustathius. Here (says Dacier) we find the Style of the holy Scripture, which
to express a severe Pain, usually compares it to that of Women in Labor. Thus
David, Pain came upon them as upon a Woman in Travail; and Isaiah, They shall
grieve as a Woman in Travail; and all the Prophets are full of the like
Expressions.

XXV.
VERSE 358. Lo angry Jove forbids your Chief to stay.] Eustathius remarks upon
the Behavior of Agamemnon in his present Distress: Homer describes him as
racked with almost intolerable Pains, yet he does not complain of the Anguish
he suffers, but that he is obliged to retire from the Fight.

This indeed as it proved his undaunted Spirit, so did it likewise his Wisdom:
Had he showed any unmanly Dejection, it would have dispirited the Army; but his
Intrepidity makes them believe his Wound less dangerous, and renders them not
so highly concerned for the Absence of their General.

XXVI.
VERSE 388. Say, Muse, when Jove the Trojan 's Glory crowned.] The Poet just
before has given us an Invocation of the Muses, to make us attentive to the
great Exploits of Agamemnon. Here we have one with regard to Hector, but this
last may perhaps be more easily accounted for than the other. For in that,
after so solemn an Invocation, we might reasonably have expected Wonders from
the Hero: whereas in Reality he kills but one Man before he himself is wounded;
and what he does afterward seems to proceed from a frantic Valor, arising
from the Smart of the Wound: We do not find by the Text that he kills one Man,
but overthrows several in his Fury, and then retreats: So that one would
imagine he invoked the Muses only to describe his Retreat.

But upon a nearer view, we shall find that Homer shows a commendable
Partiality to his own Countryman and Hero Agamemnon: He seems to detract from
the Greatness of Hector's Actions, by ascribing them to Jupiter; whereas
Agamemnon conquers by the Dint of Bravery: And that this is a just Observation,
will appear by what follows. Those Greeks that fall by the Sword of Hector, he
passes over as if they were all vulgar Men: He says nothing of them but that
they died; and only briefly mentions their Names, as if he endeavored to
conceal the Overthrow of the Greeks. But when he speaks of his favorite
General Agamemnon, he expatiates and dwells upon his Actions; and shows us,
that those that fell by his Hand were all Men of Distinction, such as were the
Sons of Priam, of Antenor, and Antimachus. It Is true, Hector killed as many
Leaders of the Greeks as Agamemnon of the Trojans, and more of the common
Soldiers; but by particularizing the Deaths of the Chiefs of Troy, he sets the
Deeds of Agamemnon in the strongest Point of Light, and by his Silence in
respect to the Leaders whom Hector slew, he casts a Shade over the Greatness of
the Action, and consequently it appears less conspicuous.

XXVII.
VERSE 406. But wise Ulysses called Tydides forth.] There is something
instructive in the most seemingly common Passages of Homer, who by making the
wise Ulysses direct the brave Diomed in all the Enterprises of the last Book,
and by maintaining the same Conduct in this, intended to show this Moral, that
Valor should always be under the Guidance of Wisdom: Thus in the eighth Book
when Diomed could scarce be restrained by the Thunder of Jupiter, Nestor is at
hand to moderate his Courage; and this Hero seems to have made a very good use
of those Instructions; his Valor no longer runs out into Rashness, though he is
too brave to decline the Fight, yet he is too wise to fight against Jupiter.

XXVIII.
VERSE 448. Great Diomed himself was seized with Fear.] There seems to be some
Difficulty in these Words: This brave Warrior, who has frequently met Hector in
the Battle, and offered himself for the single Combat, is here said to be
seized with Fear at the very Sight of him: This may be thought not to agree
with his usual Behavior, and to derogate from the general Character of his
Intrepidity: But we must remember, that Diomed himself has but just told us,
that Jupiter fought against the Grecians; and that all the Endeavors of
himself and Ulysses would be in vain: This Fear therefore of Diomed is far from
being dishonorable: it is not Hector, but Jupiter of whom he is afraid.
Eustathius.

XXIX.
VERSE 477. Ilus' Monument.] I thought it necessary just to put the Reader in
mind that the Battle still continues near the Tomb of Ilus: By a just
Observation of that, we may with Pleasure see the various Turns of the Fight,
and how every Step of Ground is won or lost as the Armies are repulsed or
victorious.

XXX.
VERSE 480. Just as he stooped, Agastrophus 's Crest
To seize, and draw the Corselet from his Breast.]
One would think that the Poet at all times endeavored to condemn the Practice
of stripping the Dead, during the Heat of Action: He frequently describes the
Victor wounded, while he is so employed about the Bodies of the slain: Thus in
the present Book we see Agamemnon, Diomed, Ulysses, Elephenor, and Eurypylus,
all suffer as they strip the Men they slew; and in the sixth Book he brings in
the wise Nestor directly forbidding it. Eustathius.

XXXI.
VERSE 483. But pierced his Foot.] It cannot but be a Satisfaction to the
Reader to see the Poet smitten with the Love of his Country, and at all times
consulting its Honor: This Day was to be glorious to Troy, but Homer takes
care to remove with Honor most of the bravest Greeks from the Field of Battle,
before the Trojans can conquer. Thus Agamemnon, Diomed, and Ulysses must bleed,
before the Poet can allow his Countrymen to retreat. Eustathius.

XXXII.
VERSE 484. The laughing Trojan.] Eustathius is of Opinion that the Poet
intended to satyrize in this Place the unwarlike Behavior of Paris: Such an
effeminate Laugh and Gesture is unbecoming a brave Warrior, but agrees very
well with the Character of Paris: He is before said to be more delighted with
the soft amorous Lyre, than with the warlike Sound of the Battle: Nor do I
remember that in the whole Iliad any one Person is described in such an
indecent Transport, though upon a much more glorious or successful Action. He
concludes his ludicrous Insult with a Circumstance very much to the Honor of
Diomed, and very much to the Disadvantage of his own Character, who reveals to
an Enemy the Fears of Troy, and compares the Greeks to Lions, and the Trojans
to Sheep. Diomed is the very reverse of him; he despises and lessens the Wound
he received, and in the midst of his Pain, would not gratify his Enemy with the
little Joy he might give him by letting him know it.

XXXIII.
VERSE 513. And questions thus his own unconquered Soul.] This is a Passage
which very much strikes me: We have here a brave Hero making a noble Soliloquy,
or rather calling a Council within himself, when he was singly to encounter an
Army: It Is impossible for the Reader not to be in Pain for so gallant a Man in
such an imminent Danger; he must be impatient for the Event, and his whole
Curiosity must be awakened till he knows the Fate of Ulysses, who scorned to
fly, though encompassed by an Army.

XXXIV.
VERSE 550. By Pallas' Care.] It is a just Observation, that there is no Moral
so evident, or so constantly carried on through the Iliad, as the Necessity
Mankind at all times has of divine Assistance. Nothing is performed with
Success, without particular mention of this; Hector is not saved from a Dart
without Apollo, or Ulysses without Minerva. Homer is perpetually acknowledging
the Hand of God in all Events, and ascribing to that only all the Victories,
Triumphs, Rewards, or Punishments of Men. Thus the grand Moral he laid down at
the Entrance of his Poem, (...), The Will of God was fulfilled, runs through his
whole Work, and is with a most remarkable Care and Conduct put into the Mouths
of his greatest and wisest Persons on every Occasion.

Homer generally makes some peculiar God attend on each Hero: For the Ancients
believed that every Man had his particular Tutelary Deity; these in succeeding
Times were called Demons or Genii, who (as they thought) were given to Men at
the Hour of their Birth, and directed the whole Course of their Lives. See
Cebes's Tablet. Menander, as he is cited by Ammianus Marcellinus, styles them
(...), the invisible Guides of Life.

XXXV.
VERSE 566. Famed Son of Hippasus.] Homer has been blamed by some late
Censurers for making his Heroes address Discourses to the Dead. Passion (says
Dacier) dictates these Speeches, and it is generally to the dying, not to the
dead, that they are addressed. However, one may say, that they are often rather
Reflections than Insults. Were it otherwise, Homer deserves not to be censured
for feigning what Histories have reported as Truth. We find in Plutarch that
Mark Antony upon Sight of the dead Body of Brutus, stopped and reproached him
with the Death of his Brother Caius, whom Brutus had killed in Macedonia in
Revenge for the Murder of Cicero. I must confess I am not altogether pleased
with the Railleries he sometimes uses to a vanquished Warrior, which
Inhumanities if spoken to the dying, would I think be yet worse than after they
were dead.

XXXVI.
VERSE 572. And hovering Vulturs scream around their Prey.] This is not
literally translated, what the Poet says gives us the most lively Picture
imaginable of the Vulturs in the Act of tearing their Prey with their Bills:
They beat the Body with their Wings as they rend it, which is a very natural
Circumstance, but scarce possible to be copied by a Translator without losing
the Beauty of it.

XXXVII.
VERSE 573. Me Greece shall honor when I meet my Doom, With solemn Funerals.
-- ] We may see from such Passages as these that Honors paid to the Ashes of
the dead have been greatly valued in all Ages: This posthumous Honor was paid
as a public Acknowledgment that the Person deceased had deserved well of his
Country, and consequently was an Incitement to the living to imitate his
Actions: In this view there is no Man but would be ambitious of them, not as
they are Testimonies of Titles or Riches, but of distinguished Merit.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 592. Great Ajax like the God of War attends.] The Silence of other
Heroes on many Occasions is very beautiful in Homer, but peculiarly so in Ajax,
who is a gallant rough Soldier, and readier to act than to speak: The present
Necessity of Ulysses required such a Behavior, for the least Delay might have
been fatal to him: Ajax therefore complying both with his own Inclinations, and
the urgent Condition of Ulysses, makes no Reply to Menelaus, but immediately
hastens to his Relief. The Reader will observe how justly the Poet maintains
this Character of Ajax throughout the whole Iliad, who is often silent when he
has an Opportunity to speak, and when he speaks, it is like a Soldier, with a
martial Air, and always with Brevity. Eustathius.

XXXIX.
VERSE 637. A wise Physician.] The Poet passes a very signal Commendation upon
Physicians: The Army had seen several of the bravest of their Heroes wounded,
yet were not so much dispirited for them all, as they were at the single Danger
of Machaon: But the Person whom he calls a Physician, seems rather to be a
Surgeon. The cutting out of Arrows, and applying Anodynes being the Province of
the latter: However (as Eustathius says) we must conclude that Machaon was both
a Physician and Surgeon, and that those two Professions were practiced by one
Person.

It is reasonable to think from the Frequency of their Wars, that the
Profession in those Days was chiefly Chirurgical: Celsus says expressly that
the Diaetetic was long after invented; but that Botany was in great Esteem and
Practice, appears from the Stories of Medea, Circe, etc. We often find mention
among the most ancient Writers, of Women eminent in that Art; as of Agamede in
this very Book,. 740. who is said (like Solomon) to have known the Virtues of
every Plant that grew on the Earth, and of Polydamne in the fourth Book of the
Odysseis,. 227, etc.

Homer, I believe, knew all that was known in his Time of the Practice of these
Arts. His Methods of extracting of Arrows, stanching of Blood by the bitter
Root, fomenting of Wounds with warm Water, applying proper Bandages and
Remedies, are all according to the true Precepts of Art. There are likewise
several Passages in his Works that show his Knowledge of the Virtues of Plants,
even of those Qualities which are commonly (tho 'perhaps erroneously) ascribed
to them, as of the Moly against Enchantments, the Willow which causes
Barrenness, the Nepenthe, etc.

XL.
VERSE 669. But partial Jove, etc.] The Address of Homer in bringing off Ajax
with Decency is admirable: He makes Hector afraid to approach him: He brings
down Jupiter himself to terrify him; so that he retreats not from a Mortal, but
a God.

This whole Passage is inimitably just and beautiful, we see Ajax drawn in the
most bold and strong Colors, and in a manner alive in the Description. We see
him slowly and sullenly retreat between two Armies, and even with a Look
repulsing the one, and protecting the other: There is not one Line but what
resembles Ajax; the Character of a stubborn but undaunted Warrior is perfectly
maintained, and must strike the Reader at the first view. He compares him first
to the Lion for his Undauntedness in Fighting, and then to the Ass for his
stubborn Slowness in retreating; though in the latter Comparison there are many
other Points of Likeness that enliven the Image: The Havoc he makes in the
Field is represented by the tearing and trampling down the Harvests; and we see
the Bulk, Strength, and Obstinacy of the Hero, when the Trojans in respect to
him are compared but to Troops of Boys that impotently endeavor to drive him
away.

Eustathius is silent as to those Objections which have been raised against
this last Simile, for a pretended Want of Delicacy: This alone is Conviction to
me that they are all of a later Date: For else he would not have failed to have
vindicated his favorite Poet in a Passage that had been applauded many
hundreds of Years, and stood the Test of Ages.

But Monsieur Dacier has done it very well in his Remarks upon Aristotle. "In
the time of Homer (says that Author) an Ass was not in such Circumstances of
Contempt as in ours: The Name of that Animal was not then converted into a Term
of Reproach, but it was a Beast upon which Kings and Princes might be seen with
Dignity. And it will not be very discreet to ridicule this Comparison, which
the holy Scripture has put into the Mouth of Jacob, who says in the Benediction
of his Children, Issachar shall be as a strong Ass. Monsieur de la Motte gives
up this Point, and excuses Homer for his Choice of this Animal, but is
unhappily disgusted at the Circumstance of the Boys, and the obstinate Gluttony
of the Ass, which he says are Images too mean to represent the determined
Valor of Ajax, and the Fury of his Enemies. It is answered by Madam Dacier,
that what Homer here images is not the Gluttony; but the Patience, the
Obstinacy, and Strength of the Ass (as Eustathius had before observed.) To
judge rightly of Comparisons, we are not to examine if the Subject from whence
they are derived be great or little, noble or familiar; but we are principally
to consider if the Image produced be clear and lively, if the Poet has the
Skill to dignify it by poetical Words, and if it perfectly paints the thing it
is intended to represent. A Company of Boys whipping a Top is very far from a
great and noble Subject, yet Virgil has not scrupled to draw from it a
Similitude which admirably expresses a Princess in the Violence of her Passion.
Ceu quondam torto volitans sub verbere turbo,
Quem pueri magno in gyro vacua atria circum
Intenti ludo exercent; ille actus habena
Curvatis fertur spatiis: stupet inscia supra
Impubesque manus, mirata volubile buxum:
Dant animos plagae -- etc.
Aen. lib. 7. However, upon the whole, a Translator owes so much to the Taste
of the Age in which he lives, as not to make too great a Complement to a
former; and this induced me to omit the mention of the word Ass in the
Translation. I believe the Reader will pardon me, if on this Occasion I
transcribe a Passage from Mr. Boileau's Notes on Longinus.

"There is nothing (says he) that more disgraces a Composition than the Use of
mean and vulgar Words; insomuch that (generally speaking) a mean Thought
expressed in noble Terms, is more tolerable than a noble Thought expressed in
mean ones. The Reason whereof is, that all the World are not capable to judge
of the Justness and Force of a Thought; but there is scarce any Man who cannot,
especially in a living Language, perceive the least Meanness of Words.
Nevertheless very few Writers are free from this Vice: Longinus accuses
Herodotus, the most polite of all the Greek Historians, of this Defect; and
Livy, Salust, and Virgil have not escaped the same Censure. Is it not then very
surprising, that no Reproach on this Account has been ever cast upon Homer?
though he has composed two Poems each more voluminous than the Aeneid; and though
no Author whatever has descended more frequently than he into a Detail of
little Particularities. Yet he never uses Terms which are not noble, or if he
uses humble Words or Phrases, it is with so much Art and Industry, that, as
Dionysius observes, they become noble and harmonious. Undoubtedly if there had
been any Cause to charge him with this Fault, Longinus had spared him no more
than Herodotus. We may learn from hence the Ignorance of those modern Critics,
who resolving to judge of the Greek without the Knowledge of it, and never
reading Homer but in low and inelegant Translations, impute the Meannesses of
his Translators to the Poet himself; and ridiculously blame a Man who spoke in
one Language, for speaking what is not elegant in another. They ought to know
that the Words of different Languages are not always exactly correspondent; and
it may often happen that a Word which is very noble in Greek, cannot be
rendered in another Tongue but by one which is very mean. Thus the word Asinus
in Latin, and Ass in English, are the vilest imaginable, but that which
signifies the same Animal in Greek and Hebrew, is of Dignity enough to be
employed on the most magnificent Occasions. In like manner the Terms of a
Hogherd and Cowkeeper in our Language are insufferable, but those which answer
to them in Greek, (...) and (...), are graceful and harmonious: and Virgil who
in his own Tongue entitled his Eclogs Bucolica, would have been ashamed to have
called them in ours, the Dialogues of Cowkeepers.

XLI.
VERSE 713. Back to the Lines the wounded Greek retires.] We see here almost
all the Chiefs of the Grecian Army withdrawn: Nestor and Ulysses, the two great
Counselors; Agamemnon, Diomed, and Eurypylus, the bravest Warriors; all
retreated: So that now in this Necessity of the Greeks, there was occasion for
the Poet to open a new Scene of Action, or else the Trojans had been
victorious, and the Grecians driven from the Shores of Troy. To show the
Distress of the Greeks at this Period, from which the Poem takes a new Turn,
'twill be convenient to cast a View on the Posture of their Affairs: All human
Aid is cut off by the Wounds of their Heroes, and all Assistance from the Gods
forbid by Jupiter: Whereas the Trojans see their General at their Head, and
Jupiter himself fights on their side. Upon this Hinge turns the whole Poem; the
Distress of the Greeks occasions first the Assistance of Patroclus, and then
the Death of that Hero draws on the Return of Achilles. It is with great Art
that the Poet conducts all these Incidents: He lets Achilles have the Pleasure
of seeing that the Greeks were no longer able to carry on the War without his
Assistance: and upon this depends the great Catastrophe of the Poem. Eustathius.

XLII.
VERSE 731. That Hour Achilles, etc.] Though the Resentment of Achilles would not
permit him to be an Actor in the Battle, yet his Love of War inclines him to be
a Spectator: And as the Poet did not intend to draw the Character of a perfect
Man in Achilles, he makes him delighted with the Destruction of the Greeks,
because it conspired with his Revenge: That Resentment which is the Subject of
the Poem, still prevails over all his other Passions, even the Love of his
Country; for though he begins now to pity his Countrymen, yet his Anger stifles
those tender Emotions, and he seems pleased with their Distress, because he
judges it will contribute to his Glory. Eustathius.

XLIII.
VERSE 735. His Friend Machaon, etc.] It may be asked why Machaon is the only
Person whom Achilles pities? Eustathius answers, that it was either because he
was his Countryman, a Thessalian; or because Aesculapius, the Father of
Machaon, presided over Physic, the Profession of his Preceptor Chiron. But
perhaps it may be a better Reason to say that a Physician is a public Good,
and was valued by the whole Army; and it is not improbable but he might have
cured Achilles of a Wound during the Course of the Trojan Wars.

XLIV.
VERSE 747. Now at my Knees the Greeks shall pour their Moan.] The Poet by
putting these Words into the Mouth of Achilles, leaves room for a second
Embassy, and (since Achilles himself mentions it) one may think it would not
have been unsuccessful: But the Poet, by a more happy Management, makes his
Friend Patroclus the Advocate of the Greeks, and by that means his Return
becomes his own Choice. This Conduct admirably maintains the Character of
Achilles, who does not assist the Greeks through his Kindness to them, but from a
Desire of Revenge upon the Trojans: His present Anger for the Death of his
Friend, blots out the former one for the Injury of Agamemnon; and as he
separated from the Army in a Rage, so he joins it again in the like
Disposition. Eustathius.

XLV.
VERSE 764. And took their Seats beneath the shady Tent.] The Poet here steals
away the Reader from the Battle, and relieves him by the Description of
Nestor's Entertainment. I hope to be pardoned for having more than once
repeated this Observation, which extends to several Passages of Homer. Without
this Piece of Conduct, the Frequency and Length of his Battles might fatigue
the Reader, who could not so long be delighted with continued Scenes of Blood.

XLVI.
VERSE 774. A Goblet sacred to the Pylian Kings.] There are some who can find
out a Mystery in the plainest things; they can see what the Author never meant,
and explain him into the greatest Obscurities. Eustathius here gives us a very
extraordinary Instance of this Nature: The Bowl by an Allegory figures the
World; the spherical Form of it represents its Roundness; the Greek word which
signifies the Doves being spelled almost like the Pleiades, is said to mean
that Constellation; and because the Poet tells us the Bowl was studded with
Gold, those Studs must needs imply the Stars.

XLVII.
VERSE 779. Yet heaved with ease by him.] There has ever been a great Dispute
about this Passage; nor is it apparent for what Reason the Poet should tell us
that Nestor even in his old Age could more easily lift this Bowl than any other
Man. This has drawn a great deal of Raillery upon the old Man, as if he had
learnt to lift it by frequent Use, an Insinuation that Nestor was no Enemy to
Wine. Others with more Justice to his Character have put another Construction
upon the Words, which solves the Improbability very naturally. According to
this Opinion the word which is usually supposed to signify another Man, is
rendered another old Man, meaning Machaon, whose Wound made him incapable to
lift it. This would have taken away the Difficulty without any Violence to the
Construction. But Eustathius tells us, the Propriety of Speech would require
the word to be, not (...) but (...), when spoken but of two. But why then may
it not signify any other old Men?

XLVIII.
VERSE 782. Pours a large Potion.] The Potion which Hecamede here prepares for
Machaon, has been thought a very extraordinary one in the Case of a wounded
Person, and by some Critics held in the same Degree of Repute with the Balsam
of Fierabras in Don Quizot. But it is rightly observed by the Commentators,
that Machaon was not so dangerously hurt, as to be obliged to a different
Regimen from what he might use at another time. Homer had just told us that he
stayed on the Seaside to refresh himself, and he now enters into a long
Conversation with Nestor; neither of which would have been done by a Man in any
great Pain or Danger: His Loss of Blood and Spirits might make him not so much
in fear of a Fever, as in want of a Cordial; and accordingly this Potion is
rather alimentary than medicinal. If it had been directly improper in this
Case, I cannot help fancying that Homer would not have failed to tell us of
Machaon's rejecting it. Yet after all, some Answer may be made even to the
grand Objection, that Wine was too inflammatory for a wounded Man. Hippocrates
allows Wine in acute Cases, and even without Water in Cases of Indigestion. He
says indeed in his Book of ancient Medicine, that the Ancients were ignorant
both of the good and bad Qualities of Wine: and yet the Potion here prescribed
will not be allowed by Physicians to be an Instance that they were so; for Wine
might be proper for Machaon not only as a Cordial, but as an Opiate.
Asclepiades, a Physician who flourished at Rome in the Time of Pompey,
prescribed Wine in Fevers, and even in Phrenzies to cause Sleep. Caelius
Aurelianus, lib. 4. c. 14.

XLIX.
VERSE 801. Can then the Sons of Greece, etc.] It is customary with those who
translate or comment on an Author, to use him as they do their Mistress; they
can see no Faults, or rather convert his very Faults into Beauties; but I
cannot be so partial to Homer, as to imagine that this Speech of Nestor's is
not greatly blameable for being too long: He crowds Incident upon Incident, and
when he speaks of himself, he expatiates upon his own great Actions, very
naturally indeed to old Age, but unseasonably in the present Juncture. When he
comes to speak of his killing the Son of Augeas, he is so pleased with himself,
that he forgets the Distress of the Army, and cannot leave his favorite
Subject till he has given us the Pedigree of his Relations, his Wife's Name,
her Excellence, the Command he bore, and the Fury with which he assaulted him.
These and many other Circumstances, as they have no visible Allusion to the
Design of the Speech, seem to be unfortunately introduced. In short, I think
they are not so valuable upon any other Account, as because they preserve a
Piece of ancient History, which had otherwise been lost.

What tends yet farther to make this Story seem absurd, is what Patroclus said
at the beginning of the Speech, that he had not leisure even to sit down; so
that Nestor detains him in the Tent standing, during the whole Narration.

They that are of the contrary Opinion observe, that there is a great deal of
Art in some Branches of the Discourse; that when Nestor tells Patroclus how he
had himself disobeyed his Father's Commands for the sake of his Country, he
says it to make Achilles reflect that he disobeys his Father by the contrary
Behavior: That what he did himself was to retaliate a small Injury, but
Achilles by fighting may save the Grecian Army. He mentions the Wound of
Agamemnon at the very beginning, with an Intent to give Achilles a little
Revenge, and that he may know how much his greatest Enemy has suffered by his
Absence. There are many other Arguments brought in the Defense of particular
Parts; and it may not be from the Purpose to observe, that Nestor might
designedly protract the Speech, that Patroclus might himself behold the
Distress of the Army: Thus every Moment he detained him, enforced his
Arguments, by the growing Misfortunes of the Greeks. Whether this was the
Intention or not, it must be allowed that the Stay of Patroclus was very happy
for the Greeks; for by this means he met Eurypylus wounded, who confirmed him
into a Certainty that their Affairs were desperate, without Achilles's Aid.

As for Nestor's second Story, it is much easier to be defended; it tends
directly to the Matter in hand, and is told in such a manner as to affect both
Patroclus and Achilles; the Circumstances are well adapted to the Person to
whom they are spoken, and by repeating their Father's Instructions, he as it
were brings them in, seconding his Admonitions.

L.
VERSE 819. The Bulls of Elis in glad Triumph led.] Elis is the whole Southern
Part of Peloponnesus, between Achaia and Messenia; it was originally divided
into several Districts or Principalities, afterward it was reduced to two; the
one of the Elians, who were the same with the Epeians, the other of Nestor.
This Remark is necessary for the understanding what follows. In Homer's Time
the City Elis was not built. Dacier.

LI.
VERSE 839. At the public Course Detained his Chariot.] It Is said that these
were particular Games, which Augeas had established in his own State; and that
the Olympic Games cannot be here understood, because Hercules did not institute
them till he had killed this King, and delivered his Kingdom to Phyleus, whom
his Father Augeas had banished. The Prizes of these Games of Augeas were Prizes
of Wealth, as golden Tripods, etc. whereas the Prizes of the Olympic Games were
only plain Chaplets of Leaves or Branches: Besides, it is probable Homer knew
nothing of these Chaplets given at the Games, nor of the triumphal Crowns, nor
of the Garlands wore at Feasts; if he had, he would some where or other have
mentioned them. Eustathius.

LII.
VERSE 845. The Sons of Actor.] These are the same whom Homer calls the two
Molions, namely, Eurytus and Cteatus. Thryoessa in the Lines following is the
same Town which he calls Thryon in the Catalogue. The River Minyas is the same
with Anygrus, about half way between Pylos and Thryoessa, called Minyas from
the Minyans who lived on the Banks of it. It appears from what the Poet says of
the Time of their March, that it is half a Day's March between Pylos and
Thryoessa. Eustathius. Strabo, lib. 8.

LIII.
VERSE 895. There to high Jove were public Thanks assigned
As first of Gods, to Nestor, of Mankind.]
There is a Resemblance between this Passage and one in the sacred Scripture,
where all the Congregation blessed the Lord God of their Fathers, and bowed
down their Heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the King. 1 Chronicles. 29. 20.

LIVE.
VERSE 916. Peleus said only this, -- "My Son, be brave.] The Conciseness of
this Advice is very beautiful; Achilles being hasty, active, and young, might
not have burdened his Memory with a long Discourse: Therefore Peleus
comprehends all his Instructions in one Sentence. But Menoetius speaks more
largely to Patroclus, he being more advanced in Years, and mature in Judgment;
and we see by the manner of the Expression, that he was sent with Achilles, not
only as a Companion but as a Monitor, of which Nestor puts him in mind, to show
that it is rather his Duty to give good Advice to Achilles, than to follow his
Caprice, and espouse his Resentment. Eustathius.

LV.
VERSE 923. Ah try the utmost, etc.] It may not be ungrateful to the Reader to
see at one view the Aim and Design of Nestor's Speech. By putting Patroclus in
mind of his Father's Injunctions, he provokes him to obey him by a like Zeal
for his Country: By the mention of the Sacrifice, he reprimands him for a
Breach of those Engagements to which the Gods were Witnesses: By saying that
the very Arms of Achilles would restore the Fortunes of Greece, he makes a high
Complement to that Hero, and offers a powerful Insinuation to Patroclus at the
same time, by giving him to understand, that he may personate Achilles.
Eustathius.

LVI.
VERSE 928. If ought from Heaven withold his saving Arm.] Nestor says this
upon account of what Achilles himself spoke in the ninth Book; and it is very
much to the Purpose, for nothing could sooner move Achilles than to make him
think it was the general Report in the Army, that he shut himself up in his
Tent for no other reason, but to escape Death, with which his Mother had
threatened him in discovering to him the Decrees of the Destinies. Dacier.

LVII.
VERSE 969. Of two famed Surgeons.] Though Podalirius is mentioned first for the
sake of the Verse, both here and in the Catalogue, Machaon seems to be the
Person of the greatest Character upon many Accounts: Besides, it is to him that
Homer attributes the Cure of Philoctetes, who was lame by having let an Arrow
dipped in the Gall of the Hydra of Lerna fall upon his Foot; a plain Mark that
Machaon was an abler Physician than Chiron the Centaure, who could not cure
himself of such a Wound. Podalirius had a Son named Hypolochus, from whom the
famous Hippocrates was descended.

LVIII.
VERSE 977. But this Distress this Instant claims Relief.] Eustathius remarks,
that Homer draws a great Advantage for the Conduct of his Poem from this
Incident of the Stay of Patroclus; for while he is employed in the friendly
Task of taking Care of Eurypylus, he becomes an Eyewitness of the Attack upon
the Entrenchments, and finds the Necessity of using his utmost Efforts to move
Achilles.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Battle at the Grecian Wall.
THE Greeks being retired into their Entrenchments, Hector attempts to force
them; but it proving impossible to pass the Ditch, Polydamas advises to quit
their Chariots, and manage the Attack on Foot. The Trojans follow his Counsel,
and having divided their Army into five Bodies of Foot, begin the Assault. But
upon the Signal of an Eagle with a Serpent in his Talons, which appeared on the
left Hand of the Trojans, Polydamas endeavors to withdraw them again. This
Hector opposes, and continues the Attack; in which, after many Actions,
Sarpedon makes the first Breach in the Wall: Hector also casting a Stone of a
vast Size, forces open one of the Gates, and enters at the Head of his Troops,
who victoriously pursue the Grecians even to their Ships.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
WHile thus the Hero's pious Cares attend
The Cure and Safety of his wounded Friend,
Trojans and Greeks with clashing Shields engage,
And mutual Deaths are dealt with mutual Rage.
Nor long the Trench or lofty Walls oppose;
With Gods averse the ill-fated Works arose;
Their Powers neglected and no Victim slain,
The Walls were raised, the Trenches sunk in vain.
Without the Gods, how short a Period stands
The proudest Monument of mortal Hands!
This stood, while Hector and Achilles raged,
While sacred Troy the warring Hosts engaged;
But when her Sons were slain, her City burned,
And what survived of Greece to Greece returned;
Then Neptune and Apollo shook the Shore,
Then Ida's Summits poured their watery Store;
Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their Rills,
Caresus roaring down the stony Hills,
Aesepus, Granicus, with mingled Force,
And Zanthus foaming from his fruitful Source;
And gulphy Simois, rolling to the Main
Helmets, and Shields, and God-like Heroes slain:
These, turned by Phoebus from their wonted ways,
Deluged the Rampire nine continual Days;
The Weight of Waters saps the yielding Wall,
And to the Sea the floating Bulwarks fall.
Incessant Cataracts the Thund'rer pours,
And half the Skies descend in sluicy Showers.
The God of Ocean, marching stern before,
With his huge Trident wounds the trembling Shore,
Vast Stones and Piles from their Foundation heaves,
And whelms the smoaky Ruin in the Waves.
Now smoothed with Sand, and levelled by the Flood,
No Fragment tells where once the Wonder stood;
In their old Bounds the Rivers roll again,
Shine 'twixt the Hills, or wander over the Plain.
But this the Gods in later Times perform;
As yet the Bulwark stood, and braved the Storm;
The Strokes yet echoed of contending Powers;
War thundered at the Gates, and Blood distained the Towers.
Smote by the Arm of Jove, with dire Dismay,
Close by their hollow Ships the Grecians lay;
Hector's Approach in every Wind they hear,
And Hector's Fury every moment fear.
He, like a Whirlwind, tossed the scattering Throng,
Mingled the Troops, and drove the Field along.
So 'midst the Dogs and Hunter's daring Bands,
Fierce of his Might, a Boar or Lion stands;
Armed Foes around a dreadful Circle form,
And hissing Javelins rain an Iron Storm:
His Powers untamed their bold Assault defy,
And where he turns, the Rout disperse, or die:
He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all,
And if he falls, his Courage makes him fall.
With equal Rage encompassed Hector glows;
Exhorts his Armies, and the Trenches shows.
The panting Steeds impatient Fury breathe,
But snort and tremble at the Gulf beneath;
Just on the Brink, they neigh, and paw the Ground,
And the Turf trembles, and the Skies resound.
Eager they viewed the Prospect dark and deep,
Vast was the Leap, and headlong hung the Steep;
The bottom bare, (a formidable Show!)
And bristled thick with sharpened Stakes below.
The Foot alone this strong Defense could force,
And try the Pass impervious to the Horse.
This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,
Restrained great Hector, and this Counsel gave.
Oh thou! brave Leader of our Trojan Bands,
And you, confed'rate Chiefs from foreign Lands!
What Entrance here can cumb'rous Chariots find,
The Stakes beneath, the Grecian Walls behind?
No Pass through those, without a thousand Wounds,
No Space for Combat in yon' narrow Bounds.
Proud of the Favors mighty Jove has shown,
On certain Dangers we too rashly run:
If it is his Will our haughty Foes to tame,
Oh may this Instant end the Grecian Name!
Here, far from Argos, let their Heroes fall,
And one great Day destroy, and bury all!
But should they turn, and here oppress our Train,
What Hopes, what Methods of Retreat remain?
Wedged in the Trench, by our own Troops confused,
In one promiscuous Carnage crushed and bruised,
All Troy must perish, if their Arms prevail,
Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the Tale.
Hear then ye Warriors! and obey with speed;
Back from the Trenches let your Steeds be led;
Then all alighting, wedged in firm Array,
Proceed on Foot, and Hector lead the way.
So Greece shall stoop before our conquering Power,
And this (if Jove consent) her fatal Hour.
This Counsel pleased: the God-like Hector sprung
Swift from his Seat; his clanging Armor rung.
The Chief's Example followed by his Train,
Each quits his Car, and issues on the Plain.
By Orders strict the Charioteers enjoined,
Compel the Coursers to their Ranks behind.
The Forces part in five distinguished Bands,
And all obey their several Chief's Commands.
The best and bravest in the first conspire,
Pant for the Fight, and threat the Fleet with Fire:
Great Hector glories in the Van of these,
Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.
Before the next the graceful Paris shines,
And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.
The Sons of Priam with the third appear,
Deiphobus, and Helenus the Seer:
In Arms with these the mighty Asius stood,
Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble Blood,
And whom Arisba's yellow Coursers bore,
The Coursers fed on Selle's winding Shore.
Antenor's Sons the fourth Battalion guide,
And great Aeneas, born on fount-full I Would.
Divine Sarpedon the last Band obeyed,
Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid,
Next him, the bravest at their Army's Head,
But he more brave than all the Hosts he led.
Now with compacted Shields, in close Array,
The moving Legions speed their headlong way:
Already in their Hopes they fire the Fleet,
And see the Grecians gasping at their Feet.
While every Trojan thus, and every Aid,
The Advice of wise Polydamas obeyed;
Asius alone, confiding in his Car,
His vaunted Coursers urged to meet the War.
Unhappy Hero! and advised in vain!
Those Wheels returning never shall mark the Plain;
No more those Coursers with triumphant Joy
Restore their Master to the Gates of Troy!
Black Death attends behind the Grecian Wall,
And great Idomeneus shall boast thy Fall!
Fierce to the left he drives, where from the Plain
The flying Grecians strove their Ships to gain;
Swift through the Wall their Horse and Chariots past,
The Gates half-open'd to receive the last.
Thither, exulting in his Force, he flies;
His following Host with Clamours rend the Skies:
To plunge the Grecians headlong in the Main,
Such their proud Hopes, but all their Hopes were vain!
To guard the Gates, two mighty Chiefs attend,
Who from the Lapiths warlike Race descend;
This Polypaetes, great Perithous' Heir,
And that Leonteus, like the God of War.
As two tall Oaks, before the Wall they rise;
Their Roots in Earth, their Heads amidst the Skies,
Whose spreading Arms with leafy Honors crowned,
Forbid the Tempest, and protect the Ground;
High on the Hills appears their stately Form,
And their deep Roots for ever brave the Storm.
So graceful these, and so the Shock they stand
Of raging Asius, and his furious Band.
Orestes, Acamas in Front appear,
And Oenomaus and Thoon close the Rear;
In vain their Clamours shake the ambient Fields,
In vain around them beat their hollow Shields;
The fearless Brothers on the Grecians call,
To guard their Navies, and defend the Wall.
Even when they saw Troy's sable Troops impend,
And Greece tumultuous from her Towers descend,
Forth from the Portals rushed the intrepid Pair,
Opposed their Breasts, and stood themselves the War.
So two wild Boars spring furious from their Den,
Roused with the Cries of Dogs, and Voice of Men;
On every side the crackling Trees they tear,
And root the Shrubs, and lay the Forest bare;
They gnash their Tusks, with Fire their Eye Balls roll,
Till some wide Wound lets out their mighty Soul.
Around their Heads the whistling Javelins sung;
With sounding Strokes their brazen Targets rung:
Fierce was the Fight, while yet the Grecian Powers
Maintained the Walls and manned the lofty Towers:
To save their Fleet, the last Efforts they try,
And Stones and Darts in mingled Tempests fly.
As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings
The dreary Winter on his frozen Wings;
Beneath the low-hung Clouds the Sheets of Snow
Descend, and whiten all the Fields below.
So fast the Darts on either Army pour,
So down the Rampires rolls the rocky Shower;
Heavy, and thick, resound the battered Shields,
And the deaf Echo rattles round the Fields.
With Shame repulsed, with Grief and Fury driven,
The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven.
In Powers immortal who shall now believe?
Can those too flatter, and can Jove deceive?
What Man could doubt but Troy's victorious Power
Should humble Greece, and this her fatal Hour?
But look how Wasps from hollow Crannies drive,
To guard the Entrance of their common Hive,
Dark'ning the Rock, while with unwearied Wings
They strike th'Assailants, and infix their Stings;
A Race determined, that to Death contend:
So fierce, these Greeks their last Retreats defend.
Gods! shall two Warriors only guard their Gates,
Repel an Army, and defraud the Fates?
These empty Accents mingled with the Wind,
Nor moved great Jove's unalterable Mind;
To God-like Hector and his matchless Might
Was owed the Glory of the destined Fight.
Like Deeds of Arms through all the Forts were tried,
And all the Gates sustained an equal Tide;
Through the long Walls the stony Showers were heard,
The Blaze of Flames, the Flash of Arms appeared.
The Spirit of a God my Breast inspire,
To raise each Act to Life, and sing with Fire!
While Greece unconquered kept alive the War,
Secure of Death, confiding in Despair;
And all her guardian Gods in deep Dismay,
With unassisting Arms deplored the Day.
Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain
The dreadful Pass, and round them heap the slain.
First Damasus, by Polypoetes' Steel,
Pierced through his Helmet's brazen Vizor, fell;
The Weapon drank the mingled Brains and Gore;
The Warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their Breath:
Nor less Leonteus strows the Field with Death;
First through the Belt Hippomachus he goar'd,
Then sudden waved his unresisted Sword;
Antiphates, as through the Ranks he broke,
The Faulchion struck, and Fate pursued the Stroke;
Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled;
And round him rose a Monument of Dead.
Mean-time the bravest of the the Trojan Crew
Bold Hector and Polydamas pursue;
Fierce with Impatience on the Works to fall,
And wrap in rolling Flames the Fleet and Wall.
These on the farther Bank now stood and gazed,
By Heaven alarmed, by Prodigies amazed:
A signal Omen stopped the passing Host,
Their martial Fury in their Wonder lost.
Jove's Bird on sounding Pinions beat the Skies;
A bleeding Serpent, of enormous Size,
His Talons trussed; alive, and curling round,
He stung the Bird, whose Throat received the Wound:
Mad with the Smart, he drops the fatal Prey,
In airy Circles wings his painful way,
Floats on the Winds, and rends the Heavens with Cries:
Amidst the Host the fallen Serpent lies:
They, pale with Terror, mark its Spires unroll'd,
And Jove's Portent with beating Hearts behold.
Then first Polydamas the Silence broke,
Long weighed the Signal, and to Hector spoke.
How often, my Brother, thy Reproach I bear,
For Words well meant, and Sentiments sincere?
True to those Counsels which I judge the best,
I tell the faithful Dictates of my Breast.
To speak his Thought, is every Freeman's Right,
In Peace and War, in Council, and in Fight;
And all I move, deferring to thy Sway,
But tends to raise that Power which I obey.
Then hear my Words, nor may my Words be vain:
Seek not, this Day, the Grecian Ships to gain;
For sure to warn us Jove his Omen sent,
And thus my Mind explains its clear Event.
The Victor Eagle, whose sinister Flight
Retards our Host, and fills our Hearts with Fright,
Dismissed his Conquest in the middle Skies,
Allowed to seize, but not possess the Prize;
Thus though we gird with Fires the Grecian Fleet,
Though these proud Bulwarks tumble at our Feet,
Toils unforeseen, and fiercer, are decreed;
More Woes shall follow, and more Heroes bleed.
So bodes my Soul, and bids me thus advise;
For thus a skilful Seer would read the Skies.
To him then Hector with Disdain returned;
(Fierce as he spoke, his Eyes with Fury burned)
Are these the faithful Counsels of thy Tongue?
Thy Will is partial, not thy Reason wrong:
Or if the Purpose of thy Heart thou vent,
Sure Heaven resumes the little Sense it lent.
What coward Counsels would thy Madness move,
Against the Word, the Will revealed of Jove?
The leading Sign, the irrevocable Nod,
And happy Thunders of the favoring God,
These shall I slight? and guide my wavering Mind
By wandering Birds, that flit with every Wind?
Ye Vagrants of the Sky! your Wings extend,
Or where the Suns arise, or where descend;
To right, to left, unheeded take your way,
While I the Dictates of high Heaven obey.
Without a Sign, his Sword the brave Man draws,
And asks no Omen but his Country's Cause.
But why should thou suspect the War's Success?
None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
Though all our Chiefs amid yon' Ships expire,
Trust thy own Cowardice to 'scape their Fire.
Troy and her Sons may find a general Grave,
But thou can live, for thou can be a Slave.
Yet should the Fears that wary Mind suggests
Spread their cold Poison through our Soldier's Breasts,
My Javelin can revenge so base a Part,
And free the Soul that quivers in thy Heart.
Furious he spoke, and rushing to the Wall,
Calls on his Host; his Host obey the Call;
With Ardour follow where their Leader flies:
Redoubling Clamours thunder in the Skies.
Jove breaths a Whirlwind from the Hills of I Would,
And Drifts of Dust the clouded Navy hide:
He fills the Greeks with Terror and Dismay,
And gives great Hector the predestined Day.
Strong in themselves, but stronger in his Aid,
Close to the Works their rigid Siege they laid.
In vain the Mounds and massy Beams defend,
While these they undermine, and those they rend;
Upheave the Piles that prop the solid Wall;
And Heaps on Heaps the smoaky Ruins fall.
Greece on her Ramparts stands the fierce Alarms;
The crowded Bulwarks blaze with waving Arms,
Shield touching Shield, a long-refulgent Row;
Whence hissing Darts, incessant, rain below.
The bold Ajaces fly from Tower to Tower,
And rouse, with Flame divine, the Grecian Power.
The generous Impulse every Greek obeys;
Threats urge the fearful, and the valiant, Praise.
Fellows in Arms! whose Deeds are known to Fame,
And you whose Ardour hopes an equal Name!
Since not alike endu'd with Force or Art,
Behold a Day when each may act his Part!
A Day to fire the brave, and warm the cold,
To gain new Glories, or augment the old.
Urge those who stand, and those who faint excite;
Drown Hector's Vaunts in loud Exhorts of Fight;
Conquest, not Safety, fill the Thoughts of all;
Seek not your Fleet, but sally from the Wall;
So Jove once more may drive their routed Train,
And Troy lie trembling in her Walls again.
Their Ardour kindles all the Grecian Powers;
And now the Stones descend in heavier Showers.
As when high Jove his sharp Artill'ry forms,
And opes his cloudy Magazine of Storms;
In Winter's bleak, uncomfortable Reign,
A Snowy Inundation hides the Plain;
He stills the Winds, and bids the Skies to sleep;
Then pours the silent Tempest, thick, and deep:
And first the Mountain Tops are covered over,
Then the green Fields, and then the sandy Shore;
Bent with the Weight the nodding Woods are seen,
And one bright Waste hides all the Works of Men:
The circling Seas alone absorbing all,
Drink the dissolving Fleeces as they fall.
So from each side increased the stony Rain,
And the white Ruin rises over the Plain.
Thus God-like Hector and his Troops contend
To force the Ramparts, and the Gates to rend;
Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield,
Till great Sarpedon tow'r'd amid the Field;
For mighty Jove inspired with martial Flame
His matchless Son, and urged him on to Fame.
In Arms he shines, conspicuous from afar,
And bears aloft his ample Shield in Air;
Within whose Orb the thick Bull-Hides were rolled,
Ponderous with Brass, and bound with ductile Gold:
And while two pointed Javelins arm his Hands,
Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian Bands.
So pressed with Hunger, from the Mountain's Brow
Descends a Lion on the Flocks below;
So stalks the lordly Savage over the Plain,
In sullen Majesty, and stern Disdain:
In vain loud Mastives bay him from from afar,
And Shepherds gaul him with an Iron War;
Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;
He foams, he roars, he rends the panting Prey.
Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows
With generous Rage that drives him on the Foes.
He views the Towers, and meditates their Fall,
To sure Destruction dooms the aspiring Wall;
Then casting on his Friend an ardent Look,
Fired with the Thirst of Glory, thus he spoke.
Why boast we, Glaucus! our extended Reign,
Where Xanthus' Streams enrich the Lycian Plain,
Our numerous Herds that range the fruitful Field,
And Hills where Vines their purple Harvest yield,
Our foaming Bowls with purer Nectar crowned,
Our Feasts enhanc'd with Music's sprightly Sound?
Why on those Shores are we with Joy surveyed,
Admired as Heroes, and as Gods obeyed?
Unless great Acts superior Merit prove,
And vindicate the bount'ous Powers above.
It Is ours, the Dignity they give, to grace;
The first in Valor, as the first in Place.
That when with wondering Eyes our martial Bands
Behold our Deeds transcending our Commands,
Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign State,
Whom those that envy, dare not imitate!
Could all our Care elude the gloomy Grave,
Which claims no less the fearful than the brave,
For Lust of Fame I should not vainly dare
In fighting Fields, nor urge thy Soul to War.
But since, alas! ignoble Age must come,
Disease, and Death's inexorable Doom;
The Life which others pay, let us bestow,
And give to Fame what we to Nature owe;
Brave though we fall, and honored if we live,
Or let us Glory gain, or Glory give!
He said; his Words the listening Chief inspire
With equal Warmth, and rouse the Warrior's Fire;
The Troops pursue their Leaders with Delight,
Rush to the Foe, and claim the promised Fight.
Menestheus from on high the Storm beheld,
Threatening the Fort, and black'ning in the Field;
Around the Walls he gazed, to view from far
What Aid appeared t'avert the approaching War,
And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,
Of Fight insatiate, prodigal of Blood.
In vain he calls; the Din of Helms and Shields
Rings to the Skies, and ecchos through the Fields,
The brazen Hinges fly, the Walls resound,
Heaven trembles, roar the Mountains, thunders all the Ground.
Then thus to Thoos; -- hence with speed, (he said)
And urge the bold Ajaces to our Aid;
Their Strength, united, best may help to bear
The bloody Labors of the doubtful War:
Hither the Lycian Princes bend their Course,
The best and bravest of the hostile Force.
But if too fiercely there the Foes contend,
Let Telamon, at least, our Towers defend,
And Teucer haste with his unerring Bow,
To share the Danger, and repel the Foe.
Swift as the Word, the Herald speeds along
The lofty Ramparts, through the martial Throng;
And finds the Heroes, bathed in Sweat and Gore,
Opposed in Combat on the dusty Shore.
Ye valiant Leaders of our warlike Bands!
Your Aid (said Thoos) Peteus' Son demands,
Your Strength, united, best may help to bear
The bloody Labors of the doubtful War:
Thither the Lycian Princes bend their Course,
The best and bravest of the hostile Force.
But if too fiercely, here, the Foes contend,
At least, let Telamon those Towers defend,
And Teucer haste, with his unerring Bow,
To share the Danger, and repel the Foe.
Strait to the Fort great Ajax turned his Care,
And thus bespoke his Brothers of the War.
Now valiant Lycomede! exert your Might,
And brave Oileus, prove your Force in Fight:
To you I trust the Fortune of the Field,
Till by this Arm the Foe shall be repelled;
That done, expect me to complete the Day --
Then, with his sev'nfold Shield, he strode away.
With equal Steps bold Teucer pressed the Shore,
Whose fatal Bow the strong Pandion bore.
High on the Walls appeared the Lycian Powers,
Like some black Tempest gathering round the Towers;
The Greeks, oppressed, their utmost Force unite,
Prepared to labor in the unequal Fight;
The War renews, mixed Shouts and Groans arise;
Tumultuous Clamor mounts, and thickens in the Skies.
Fierce Ajax first the advancing Host invades,
And sends the brave Epicles to the Shades;
Sarpedon's Friend; Across the Warrior's way,
Rent from the Walls a rocky Fragment lay;
In modern Ages not the strongest Swain
Could heave the unwieldy Burden from the Plain.
He poised, and swung it round; then tossed on high,
It flew with Force, and labored up the Sky;
Full on the Lycian's Helmet thundering down,
The ponderous Ruin crushed his battered Crown.
As skilful Diverse, from some airy Steep,
Headlong descend, and shoot into the Deep,
So falls Epicles; then in Groans expires,
And murmuring to the Shades the Soul retires.
While to the Ramparts daring Glaucus drew,
From Teucer's Hand a winged Arrow flew;
The bearded Shaft the destined Passage found,
And on his naked Arm inflicts a Wound.
The Chief, who feared some Foe's insulting Boast
Might stop the Progress of his warlike Host,
Concealed the Wound, and leaping from his Height,
Retired reluctant from the unfinished Fight.
Divine Sarpedon with Regret beheld
Disabl'd Glaucus slowly quit the Field;
His beating Breast with generous Ardour glows,
He springs to Fight, and flies upon the Foes.
Alcmaon first was doomed his Force to feel;
Deep in his Breast he plunged the pointed Steel;
Then, from the yawning Wound with Fury tore
The Spear, pursued by gushing Streams of Gore;
Down sinks the Warrior with a thundering Sound,
His brazen Armor rings against the Ground.
Swift to the Battlement the Victor flies,
Tugs with full force, and every Nerve applies;
It shakes; the ponderous Stones disjointed yield;
The rolling Ruins smoke along the Field.
A mighty Breach appears; the Walls lie bare;
And, like a Deluge, rushes in the War.
At once bold Toucer draws the twanging Bow,
And Ajax sends his Javelin at the Foe;
Fixed in his Belt the feathered Weapon stood,
And through his Buckler drove the trembling Wood;
But Jove was present in the dire Debate,
To shield his Offspring, and avert his Fate.
The Prince gave back, not meditating Flight
But urging Vengeance, and severer Fight;
Then raised with Hopes, and fired with Glory's Charms,
His fainting Squadrons to new Fury warms.
O where, ye' Lycians! is the Strength you boast?
Your former Fame, and ancient Virtue lost!
The Breach lies open, but your Chief in vain
Attempts alone the guarded Pass to gain:
Unite, and soon that hostile Fleet shall fall;
The Force of powerful Union conquers all.
This just Rebuke inflamed the Lycian Crew,
They join, they thicken, and the Assault renew;
Unmoved the embodied Greeks their Fury dare,
And fixed support the Weight of all the War:
Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian Powers,
Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian Towers.
As on the Confines of adjoining Grounds,
Two stubborn Swains with Blows dispute their Bounds;
They tugg, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
One Foot, one Inch, of the contended Field:
Thus obstinate to Death, they fight, they fall;
Nor these can keep, nor those can win the Wall.
Their manly Breasts are pierced with many a Wound,
Loud Strokes are heard, and rattling Arms resound,
The copious Slaughter covers all the Shore,
And the high Ramparts drop with human Gore.
As when two Scales are charged with doubtful Loads,
From side to side the trembling Balance nods,
(While some laborious Matron, just and poor,
With nice Exactness weighs her woolly Store)
Till poised aloft, the resting Beam suspends
Each equal Weight; nor this, nor that, descends.
So stood the War, till Hector's matchless Might
With Fates prevailing, turned the Scale of Fight.
Fierce as a Whirlwind up the Walls he flies,
And fires his Host with loud repeated Cries.
Advance ye Trojans! lend your valiant Hands,
Have to the Fleet, and toss the blazing Brands!
They hear, they run, and gathering at his Call,
Raise scaling Engines, and ascend the Wall:
Around the Works a Wood of glittering Spears
Shoots up, and all the rising Host appears.
A ponderous Stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
Not two strong Men the enormous Weight could raise,
Such Men as live in these degenerate Days.
Yet this, as easy as a Swain could bear
The snowy Fleece, he tossed, and shook in Air:
For Jove upheld, and lightened of its Load
The unweildy Rock, the Labor of a God.
Thus armed, before the folded Gates he came,
Of massy Substance and stupendous Frame;
With Iron Bars and Brazen Hinges strong,
On lofty Beams of solid Timber hung.
Then thundering through the Planks, with forceful Sway,
Drives the sharp Rock; the solid Beams give way,
The Folds are shattered; from the crackling Door
Leap the resounding Bars, the flying Hinges roar.
Now rushing in the furious Chief appears,
Gloomy as Night! and shakes two shining Spears:
A dreadful Gleam from his bright Armor came,
And from his Eye Balls flashed the living Flame;
He moves a God, resistless in his Course,
And seems a Match for more than mortal Force.
Then pouring after through the gaping Space,
A Tide of Trojans flows, and fills the Place;
The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
The Shore is heaped with Death, and Tumult rends the Sky.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Twelfth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TWELFTH BOOK.
I.
IT may be proper here to take a general View of the Conduct of the Iliad: The
whole Design turns upon the Wrath of Achilles: that Wrath is not to be appeased
but by the Calamities of the Greeks, who are taught by their frequent Defeats
the Importance of this Hero: For in Epic, as in Tragic Poetry, there ought to
be some evident and necessary Incident at the winding up of the Catastrophe,
and that should be founded upon some visible Distress. This Conduct has an
admirable Effect, not only as it gives an Air of Probability to the Relation,
by allowing Leisure to the Wrath of Achilles to cool and die away by degrees,
(who is every where described as a Person of a stubborn Resentment, and
consequently ought not to be easily reconciled) but also as it highly
contributes to the Honor of Achilles, which was to be fully satisfied, before
he could relent.

II.
VERSE 9. Without the Gods how short a Period, etc.] Homer here teaches a Truth
conformable to sacred Scripture, and almost in the very Words of the Psalmist;
Unless the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build it.

III.
VERSE 15. Then Neptune and Apollo, etc.] This whole Episode of the Destruction
of the Wall is spoken as a kind of Prophecy, where Homer in a poetical
Enthusiasm relates what was to happen in future Ages. It has been conjectured
from hence that our Author flourished not long after the Trojan War; for had he
lived at a greater Distance, there had been no occasion to have Recourse to
such extraordinary means to destroy a Wall, which would have been lost and worn
away by Time alone. Homer (says Aristotle) foresaw the Question might be asked,
how it came to pass that no Ruins remained of so great a Work? and therefore
contrived to give his Fiction the nearest Resemblance to Truth. Inundations and
Earthquakes are sufficient to abolish the strongest Works of Man, so as not to
leave the least Remains where they stood. But we are told this in a manner
wonderfully noble and poetical: We see Apollo turning the Course of the Rivers
against the Wall, Jupiter opening the Cataracts of Heaven, and Neptune rending
the Foundations with his Trident: That is, the Sun exhales the Vapors, which
descend in Rain from the Air or Ether, this Rain causes an Inundation, and
that Inundation overturns the Wall. Thus the Poetry of Homer, like Magic,
first raises a stupendous Object, and then immediately causes it to vanish.

What farther strengthens the Opinion, that Homer was particularly careful to
avoid the Objection which those of his own Age might raise against the
Probability of this Fiction, is, that the Verses which contain this Account of
the Destruction of the Wall seem to be added and interpolated after the first
writing of the Iliad, by Homer himself. I believe the Reader will incline to my
Opinion, if he considers the manner in which they are introduced, both here,
and in the seventh Book, where first this Wall is mentioned. There, describing
how it was made, he ends with this Line, (...)
After which is inserted the Debate of the Gods concerning the Method of its
Destruction, at the Conclusion whereof immediately follows a Verse that seems
exactly to connect with the former, (...)
In like manner in the present Book, after the fourth Verse, (...)
That which is now the thirty sixth, seems originally to have followed. (...),
etc.
And all the Lines between (which break the Course of the Narration, and are
introduced in a manner not usual in Homer) seem to have been added for the
Reason abovesaid. I do not insist much upon this Observation, but I doubt not
several will agree to it upon a Review of the Passages.

IV.
VERSE 24. Nine continual Days.] Some of the Ancients thought it incredible
that a Wall which was built in one Day by the Greeks, should resist the joint
Efforts of three Deities nine Days: To solve this Difficulty, Crates the
Mallesian was of Opinion, that it should be writ, (...), one day. But there is
no occasion to have Recourse to so forced a Solution; it being sufficient to
observe, that nothing but such an extraordinary Power could have so entirely
ruined the Wall, that not the least Remains of it should appear; but such a one
(as we have before said) Homer stood in need of. Eustathius.

V.
VERSE 99. The Forces part in five distinguished Bands.] The Trojan Army is
divided into five Parts, perhaps because there were five Gates in the Wall, so
that an Attack might be made upon every Gate at the same Instant: By this means
the Greeks would be obliged to disunite, and form themselves into as many
Bodies, to guard five Places at the same time.

The Poet here breaks the Thread of his Narration, and stops to give us the
Names of the Leaders of every Battalion: By this Conduct he prepares us for an
Action entirely new, and different from any other in the Poem. Eustathius.

VI.
VERSE 125. Asius alone confiding in his Car.] It appears from hence that the
three Captains who commanded each Battalion, were not subordinate one to the
other, but commanded separately, each being empowered to order his own Troop as
he thought fit: For otherwise Asius had not been permitted to keep his Chariot
when the rest were on Foot. One may observe from hence, that Homer does not
attribute the same regular Discipline in War to the barbarous Nations, which he
had given to his Grecians; and he makes some use too of this Defect, to cast
the more Variety over this part of the Description. Dacier.

VII.
VERSE 127. Unhappy Hero! etc.] Homer observes a poetical Justice in Relation
to Asius; he punishes his Folly and Impiety with Death, and shows the Danger of
despising wise Counsel, and blaspheming the Gods. In Pursuance of this
Prophecy, Asius is killed in the thirteenth Book by Idomeneus.

VIII.
VERSE 143. This Polypoetes -- And that Leonteus, etc.] These Heroes are the
Originals of Pandarus and Bitias in Virgil. We see two gallant Officers
exhorting their Soldiers to act bravely; but being deserted by them, they
execute their own Commands, and maintain the Pass against the united Force of
the Battalions of Asius: Nor does the Poet transgress the Bounds of Probability
in the Story: The Greeks from above beat off some of the Trojans with Stones,
and the Gate-way being narrow, it was easy to be defended. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 185. The Speech of Asius.] This Speech of Asius is very extravagant: He
exclaims against Jupiter for a Breach of Promise, not because he had broken his
Word, but because he had not fulfilled his own vain Imaginations. This Conduct,
though very blameable in Asius, is very natural to Persons under a
Disappointment, who are ever ready to blame Heaven, and turn their Misfortunes
into a Crime. Eustathius.

X.
VERSE 233. Jove 's Bird on sounding Pinions, etc.] Virgil has imitated this
Passage in the eleventh Aeneid,. 751. Utque volans alte raptum cum fulva
draconem
Fert aquila, implicuitque pedes, atque unguibus haesit;
Saucius at serpens sinuosa volumina versat,
Arrectisque horret squamis, and sibilat ore
Arduus insurgens; illa haud minus urget obunco
Luctantem rostro; simul aethera verberat alis.
Which Macrobius compares with this of Homer, and gives the Preference to the
Original, on account of Virgil's having neglected to specify the Omen. His
praetermissis, (quod sinistra veniens vincentium prohibebat accessum, and
accepto a serpente morsu praedam dolor dejecit; factoque Tripudio solistimo,
cum clamore dolorem testante, praetervolat) quae animam Parabolae dabant, velut
exanime in latinis versibus corpus remansit. Sat. l. 5. c. 14. But methinks
this Criticism might have been spared, had he considered that Virgil had no
Design, or occasion, to make an Omen of it; but took it only as a natural
Image, to paint the Posture of two Warriors struggling with each other.

XI.
VERSE 245. The Speech of Polydamas.] The Address of of Polydamas to Hector in
this Speech is admirable: He knew that the daring Spirit of that Hero would not
suffer him to listen to any mention of a Retreat: He had already stormed the
Walls in Imagination, and consequently the Advice of Polydamas was sure to meet
with a bad Reception. He therefore softens every Expression, and endeavors to
flatter Hector into an Assent; and though he is assured he gives a true
Interpretation of the Prodigy, he seems to be diffident; but that his
personated Distrust may not prejudice the Interpretation, he concludes with a
plain Declaration of his Opinion, and tells him that what he delivers is not
Conjecture, but Science, and appeals for the Truth of it to the Augurs of the
Army. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 267. The Speech of Hector.] This Speech of Hector's is full of Spirit:
His Valor is greater than the Skill of Polydamas, and he is not to be argued
into a Retreat. There is something very heroic in that Line, -- His Sword the
brave Man draws,
And asks no Omen but his Country's Cause.
And if any thing can add to the Beauty of it, it is in being so well adapted
to the Character of him who speaks it, who is every where described as a great
Lover of his Country.

It may seem at the first View that Hector uses Polydamas with too much
Severity in the Conclusion of his Speech: But he will be sufficiently
justified, if we consider that the Interpretation of the Omen given by
Polydamas might have discouraged the Army; and this makes it necessary for him
to decry the Prediction, and insinuate that the Advice proceeded not from his
Skill but his Cowardice. Eustathius.

XIII.
VERSE 281. To right, to left, unheeded take your way.] Eustathius has found
out four Meanings in these two Lines, and tells us that the Words may signify
East, West, North, and South. This is writ in the true Spirit of a Critic, who
can find out a Mystery in the plainest Words, and is ever learnedly obscure:
For my part, I cannot imagine how any thing can be more clearly expressed; I
care not, says Hector, whether the Eagle flew on the right, toward the
Sunrising, which was propitious, or on the left toward his setting, which was
unlucky.

XIV.
VERSE 299. Jove raised a Whirlwind.] It is worth our Notice to observe how the
least Circumstance grows in the Hand of a great Poet. In this Battle it is to
be supposed that the Trojans had got the Advantage of the Wind of the Grecians,
so that a Cloud of Dust was blown upon their Army: This gave room for this
Fiction of Homer, which supposes that Jove, or the Air, raised the Dust, and
drove it in the Face of the Grecians. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 348. Till great Sarpedon, etc.] The Poet here ushers in Sarpedon with
Abundance of Pomp: He forces him upon the Observation of the Reader by the
Greatness of the Description, and raises our Expectations of him, intending to
make him perform many remarkable Actions in the Sequel of the Poem, and become
worthy to fall by the Hand of Patroclus. Eustathius.

XVI.
VERSE 357. So pressed with Hunger, from the Mountain's Brow, Descends a Lion.]
This Comparison very much resembles that of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 31.. 4.
where God himself is compared to a Lion: Like as the Lion, and the young Lion
roaring on his Prey, when a Multitude of Shepherds is called forth against him,
he will not be afraid of their Voice, nor abase himself for the Noise of them:
So shall the Lord of Hosts come down that he may fight upon Mount Sion. Dacier.

XVII.
VERSE 371. The Speech of Sarpedon to Glaucus.] In former Times Kings were
looked upon as the Generals of Armies, who to return the Honors that were done
them, were obliged to expose themselves first in the Battle, and be an Example
to their Soldiers. Upon this Sarpedon grounds his Discourse, which is full of
Generosity and Nobleness. We are, says he, honored like Gods; and what can be
more unjust, than not to behave our selves like Men? he ought to be superior in
Virtue, who is superior in Dignity; What Strength is there, and what Greatness
in that Thought? it includes Justice, Gratitude, and Magnanimity; Justice, in
that he scorns to enjoy what he does not merit; Gratitude, because he would
endeavor to recompense his Obligations to his Subjects; and Magnanimity, in
that he despises Death, and thinks of nothing but Glory. Eustathius. Dacier.

XVIII.
VERSE 387. Could all our Care, etc.] There is not a more forcible Argument
than this, to make Men contemn Dangers, and seek Glory by brave Actions.
Immortality with eternal Youth, is certainly preferable to Glory purchased with
the Loss of Life; but Glory is certainly better than an ignominious Life; which
at last, though perhaps late, must end. It is ordained that all Men shall die,
nor can our escaping from Danger secure us Immortality; it can only give us a
longer Continuance in Disgrace, and even that Continuance will be but short,
though the Infamy everlasting. This is incontestable, and whoever weighs his
Actions in these Scales, can never hesitate in his Choice: But what is most
worthy of Remark is, that Homer does not put this in the Mouth of an ordinary
Person, but ascribes it to the Son of Jupiter. Eustathius. Dacier.

XIX.
VERSE 444. Whose fatal Bow the strong Pandion bore.] It is remarkable that
Teucer who is excellent for his Skill in Archery, does not carry his own Bow,
but has it born after him by Pandion: I thought it not improper to take notice
of this, by reason of its Unusualness. It may be supposed that Teucer had
changed his Arms in this Fight, and complied with the Exigence of the Battle
which was about the Wall: He might judge that some other Weapon might be more
necessary upon this Occasion, and therefore committed his Bow to the Care of
Pandion. Eustathius.

XX.
VERSE 454. A Rocky Fragment, etc.] In this Book both Ajax and Hector are
described throwing Stones of a prodigious Size. But the Poet who loves to give
the Preference to his Countrymen, relates the Action much to the Advantage of
Ajax: Ajax by his natural Strength performs what Hector could not do without
the Assistance of Jupiter. Eustathius.

XXI.
VERSE 455. Not two strong Men.] The Difference which our Author makes between
the Heroes of his Poem, and the Men of his Age, is so great, that some have
made use of it as an Argument that Homer lived many Ages after the War of Troy:
But this Argument does not seem to be of any Weight; for supposing Homer to
have writ two hundred and fifty or two hundred and sixty Years after the
Destruction of Troy, this Space is long enough to make such a Change as he
speaks of; Peace, Luxury, or Effeminacy would do it in a much less Time. Dacier.

XXII.
VERSE 483. Swift to the Battlement the Victor flies.] From what Sarpedon here
performs, we may gather that this Wall of the Greeks was not higher than a tall
Man: From the great Depth and Breadth of it, as it is described just before,
one might have concluded that it had been much higher: But it appears to be
otherwise from this Passage; and consequently the Thickness of the Wall was
answerable to the Wideness of the Ditch. Eustathius.

XXIII.
VERSE 511. As on the Confines of adjoining Ground.] This Simile, says
Eustathius, is wonderfully proper; it has one Circumstance that is seldom to be
found in Homer's Allusions; it corresponds in every Point with the Subject it
was intended to illustrate: The Measures of the two Neighbors represent the
Spears of the Combatants: The Confines of the Fields, shows that they engaged
hand to hand; and the Wall which divides the Armies, gives us a lively Idea of
the large Stones that were fixed to determine the Bounds of adjoining Fields.

XXIV.
VERSE 521. As when two Scales, etc.] This Comparison is excellent on account
of its Justness; for there is nothing better represents an exact Equality than
a Balance: But Homer was particularly exact, in having neither described a
Woman of Wealth and Condition, for such a one is never very exact, not valuing
a small Inequality; nor a Slave, for such a one is ever regardless of a
Master's Interest: But he speaks of a poor Woman that gains her Livelihood by
her Labor, who is at the same time just and honest; for she will neither
defraud others, nor be defrauded her self. She therefore takes care that the
Scales be exactly of the same Weight.

It was an ancient Tradition, (and is countenanced by the Author of Homer's
Life ascribed to Herodotus) that the Poet drew this Comparison from his own
Family; being himself the Son of a Woman who maintained her self by her own
Industry: He therefore to extol her Honesty, (a Qualification very rare in
Poverty) gives her a Place in his Poem. Eustathius.

FINIS.
blazon or coat of arms DIEU ET MON DROIT


GEORGE R.
GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved BERNARD LINTOTT of Our City of London,
Bookseller, has humbly represented unto Us that he is now printing a
Translation of the ILIAD of HOMER from the Greek in Six Volumes in Folio by
ALEXANDER POPE Gent. with large Notes upon each Book: And whereas the said
BERNARD LINTOTT has informed Us that he has been at a great Expense in carrying
on the said Work: and that the sole Right and Title of the Copy of the said
Work is vested in the said BERNARD LINTOTT. He has therefore humbly besought Us
to grant him Our Royal Privilege and License for the sole printing and
publishing thereof for the Term of fourteen Years. WE being graciously pleased
to encourage so useful a Work, are pleased to condescend to his Request, and do
therefore give and grant unto the said BERNARD LINTOTT Our Royal License and
Privilege for the sole printing and publishing the said Six Volumes of the
ILIAD of HOMER translated by the said ALEXANDER POPE, for and during the Term
of fourteen Years, to be computed from the Day of the Date hereof; strictly
charging and prohibiting all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms and Dominions to
reprint or abridge the same either in the like or any other Volume or Volumes
whatsoever, or to import, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies of the same
or any part thereof reprinted beyond the Seas within the said Term of fourteen
Years, without the Consent and Approbation of the said BERNARD LINTOTT, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals
first had and obtained, as they and every of them offending herein will answer
the contrary at their Perils, and such other Penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this our Realm may be inflicted: Whereof the Master, Wardens and
Company of Stationers of our City of London, Commissioners and other Officers
of Our Customs, and all other our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern,
are to take Notice that due Obedience be given to Our Pleasure herein
signified. Given at Our Court at St. James's the sixth Day of May, 1715. in the
first Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, JAMES STANHOPE.


