CHARLES AND CHARLOTTE.

VOL. II.

CHARLES AND CHARLOTTE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.



Heaven first taught Letters for some Wretches aid. POPE'S ELOISA. LONDON:
Printed for WILLIAM LANE, Leadenhall-Street, M.DCC.LXXVII.

CHARLES AND CHARLOTTE.
LETTER LXV. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
DR. Melbank acquaints me you have hurt your wrist, and that it gives you great
pain: I feel a sincere affliction upon two accounts arising from this accident;
first, because it occasions uneasiness to you, and, secondly, because it
prevents your making use of the pen. However, I charge you not to venture too
soon to exert it. Rather let me be two or three days without your agreeable
favors, than with them at the cost of your inconvenience: I will endeavor to
support the loss of your correspondence, in the hope that your health may be
the sooner restored: and as I myself get better every hour, I will do my best
to entertain you with a double portion of packets.

Am I not grown a great philosopher? do I not at last acquiesce in your own
system? do I not obey your inhibitions with even a scrupulous ceremony? and am
I not a mere correspondent? am I not the cold creature you wish me?

Yes Charlotte, I will yield to your punctilious principles. I will not murmur,
nor will attempt again to invade your repose by desiring a personal interview,
till the way to it is smoothed by providence. That this will be the case, I am
certain. In the mean time I will endeavor to be contented with this remote,
yet endearing intercourse, though Melbank has been laboring to persuade me it
would be more for the health of my mind and body that I dropped the pleasures of
the pen. Of this he can never convince me; though I have received from him the
tenderest treatment, and find him to be an able surgeon, and an amiable man.

I this morning had a penny post letter from him, which, that I may do him
justice, and give your gentle heart satisfaction, I enclose.

Adieu, Charles.

LETTER LXVI. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLES. (Enclosed in the above.)
WHAT a pity it is that many of those articles of conduct, which are merely
points of equity, should, in the opinion of the greater part of the world, be
considered as obligations: happy, however, it is for the tranquillity of
delicate minds, when the balance of favors between man and man is even,
because then no irksome sensation of superiority remains to distress either;
and the interchange is honorable, exact, and mutual. This, Sir, is the state
of the case between you and I. I am almost ready to confess myself indebted to
the accident that brought us together. The wounds, in which I have been an
happy instrument of cure, have been, the means of making known to me a man of
eminent abilities, and excellent qualities. In the midst of torture and cross
circumstances, how have I been entertained by his remarks! above all other
parts of his character, I admire the liberality of his sentiments: at least
they are to be admired in the theory. How shall I rejoice to find them equal in
the practice! to slide again into the first person, and speak plainly; have
you, my dear Sir, generosity enough to receive the enclosed, and to use it till
I may have occasion to re-demand it? and will you do me the justice to believe
I have had so much move pleasure than trouble in visiting you, that, unless you
are so good as to set down my attention to the score of friendship, I shall be
compelled to think myself too heavily indebted, and so despair of your
intimacy; though I propose seeing you in the course of the day, yet this is a
subject I hate to talk of, and therefore I have sent yon a post letter, that
the foolish blush of confusion may be spared to both of us; and therefore I beg
we may not mention this trifling point when we meet. Your attention to this
request will very particularly oblige

E. MELBANK.

LETTER LXVII. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
MR. Templeton has transmitted to me a little rural poem, written by a literary
friend of his: there is a novelty in the story, and a simplicity in the
sentiment, that particularly recommends it to persons of feeling. For this
reason I am going to transcribe it for your perusal.

I am always happier while I am employed either in thinking of you, or in any
degree contributing to your entertainment. Were it not for bending my mind
assiduously to these little epistolary engagements, and by these means soothing
my hopes, and lulling my cares, I should not, I fear, be able to keep my
promise, or withstand the impulses of my heart, which would carry me perforce
into the apartment of Charlotte. I hope by tomorrow you will be able to take
up the pen, and give me your opinion of the poem. A single line from your own
hand, will agreeably convince me that you have again recovered the perfect use
of it. Mr. Melbank is still anxious to have me suspend our correspondence: if
he persists in this advice, I shall hate him in spite of his generosity. He is
a great admirer of yours.

CHARLES.
SILVANA, The HIGHLAND SHEPHERDESS.
'TWAS in December's drear, and darksome days
When the cold north sends forth his cutting blast:
'Twas when portentous clouds denoting storm,
Their sable horrors rolled around the heavens:
'Twas when, by force of hurricanoes vast
The towering fir even to his root was riven,
Till all of feather, or of fleece, forsook
The Highland hill, to shelter in the vale:
Then 'twas that poor Silvana to her grief
A prey, and reckless of the raving sky,
Sat on the perilous ridge of the rude rock,
That frowns upon the dizzy precipice.
Lonely she sat, and never did sorrow seize
A form more delicate, a soul more kind.
Care, from her tender cheek, now woeful wan
The rose had torn, and in its stead the tear
Like dew-drops on the lily, settled there.
Five fleecy friends were to Silvana dear,
And more than five moons wasted had they fed
On the scant relics of Silvana's store.
The prickly furze, the weed-entangled grass,
The thistly blade, the heavy hemlock's ^eaf,
The bitter mallow, and the flowery fern,
Her sheep never cropped, but herbs of sweeter taste,
The vernal pasturage of voluptuous meads,
The richest grazings of the daintiest dell,
The velvet verdure of the violet vale;
The honied clover, and the fragrant blade.
Her daily journey to the fertile farms
Was for the purchase of the day's repast.
But now her eye was fixed, her bosom bare,
Irregularly throbbing with its woe;
Wild to the pitiless winds her scattered locks
Luxurious floated; half her shoulder spread,
And half in deep disorder streamed in air:
Uplift to heaven her snowy arms were raised
In passion, or in prayer; at last a sigh
Heaved from her hapless heart, and thus she sung.
I.
'Twill soon be over -- No more despair,
Silvana's eyes shall soon be dry,
Man, feeble man, was born to bear;
"To look about him, and to die."
II.
Then soft awhile, and gentle death,
Silvana's passing bell shall toll,
Her sheep shall catch her wandering breath,
And heaven shall watch the flying soul.
III.
This fluttering spirit shall be free:
My sheep, mean-time, demand my care;
They browze, and bound round yonder tree,
But ah! -- their shepherd is not there.
IV.
Yet cease awhile -- I Will not despair.
I see my shepherd in the sky,
Though man's frail race were born to bear
The wedded soul shall never die.


LETTER LXVIII. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLOTTE.
I FEEL myself to blame. I have interdicted a correspondence, that gives both
you and Charles pleasure, and I am much afraid the health of my patient was not
the only motive that led me to this. The real motive I dare not discover. Be it
some atonement, that I acquaint you Charles's health is not likely to be hurt,
or his cure retarded, by the letters of Charlotte. I am in a very awkward
situation, and beg to be excused for dropping the subject.

E. MELBANK.

LETTER LXIX. From the same to HAMLET TEMPLETON, Esquire
WHAT must I do, Mr. Templeton? I am under an embarrassment, from the pains of
which I can by no means disengage myself? Will you, who are in some degree a
party concerned, give me your advice. To cut short the idle formalities of
ceremonious introduction, I must open to you the nature of my dilemma at once.
Would you believe it, Mr. Templeton; while I have been attempting to cure
Charles, I have been myself wounded by Charlotte: yes, Sir, widower as I am,
again am I caught in the nets of beauty and merit, and am vainly trying every
possible effort to forget the form that undid my repose." I have already been
led into meannesses by this clandestine passion: it has urged me to desire
Charlotte to forbear writing, under pretense of its interfering with my
endeavors to restore Charles's health. I have visited this lovely woman
several times, and have had the mortification to hear her heave a thousand
sighs, and to see her shed a thousand tears; although she still remains sixth in
her resolution of never again uniting herself to him, I have not had the
courage to hint at my partiality; and to tell you the truth, Sir, I am witheld
from such declarations from various motives. I have conceived a tender esteem
for Charles, and I am unwilling to give him pain. I consider myself as standing
in a very delicate light, and I know not how I can reconcile the different
characters of a surgeon, a friend, and a lover. I fairly confess to you, I
never saw any woman so formed to please, as Charlotte: as to her having been
connected with another, were not that other Charles, I should make that no
objection to offer her at once my heart, hand, and fortune. My profession is
merely an object of my choice, not of necessity, and I have an income that
could support the woman of my affections affluently. Were it not for the
appearance of duplicity, which I cannot bear, I should certainly make such
overtures to Charlotte, as might put both my love and my principles out of
dispute. Such a woman, Sir, would grace the arms, and bless the heart, of a
monarch; and I should rejoice to lead her by the hand into the embraces of all
my family, and all my friends.

At the same time, what can I do? would not such advances, coming thus suddenly
from me, look like taking advantages of sickness, and separation? Charles's
tenderness is too palpable! Charlotte's love is by no means worn off. I see
them both every day, and I every day find in both fresh excellencies which it
would be inhuman to injure. Who knows what may happen! Cleora may die; many
events, may, under the direction of an indulgent god, auspiciously concur to
bring Charles and Charlotte once more into the arms of each other. I may be
looked upon as an usurper, as a supplanter of affection: and what makes the
matter still worse, is, that I have very lately done myself the pleasure of
accommodating Charles with what the world considers an important favor. I have
lent him money; it is therefore the worst time in the world to make proposals.
The poor lad's nerves too, are at present all on the tremble; his strength is
but just returning; his heart is greatly agitated; he cannot get out of his
chamber -- what, can be done Mr. Templeton? as a friend to all parties, tell me
-- I am truly wretched myself, and yet I should be ashamed, if I wanted
fortitude to prevent the wretchedness of others; particularly those, whom I
have had the honor to oblige.

I am, your obedient servant, E. MELBANK.

LETTER LXX. HAMLET TEMPLETON, Esquire to Dr. MELBANK.
YOUR letter brought one of the greatest surprises I ever felt since I came
into the world: nor can I possibly give my sentiments upon a point so
particularly delicate. For aught I see, you are all to be pitied; and you all
deserve, and have my unavailing sympathy. Heaven direct you all into such
measures as may ultimately be for the general felicity! at present, I can only
remain anxious and wretched, till I hear that the wishes of each are granted;
and this, believe me, Sir, will be the first prayer of my heart.

H. T.

LETTER LXXI. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
NOT a word yet? if you were better, I should have had a written testimony of
it; and therefore I have the painful certainty to know you are worse --
perhaps, Charlotte, you have deceived me: a sprain'd wrist may be a pretense to
conceal an accident infinitely more alarming; you may, for aught I know, be at
this moment on the bed of sickness -- you may be in the agonies of a sore
distemper -- you may have broken a limb. I have questioned Dr. Melbank, who it
seems attends you, pretty closely on this subject; and I do not half like his
answers. He stammers; he offers me a feeble excuse; he equivocates; and he
abruptly goes away blushing, because he cannot disguise the truth, in the veil
of a better apology. My imagination represents you in a condition, at which my
heart achs; perhaps you are fainting, and I am not by to catch you in my arms:
you are perhaps sick, and I am not present to administer the cordials of
recovery -- you are weeping, and I am too distant to kiss away the tear -- the
point is plain; and this is the truth of the whole matter; if you do not, with
your own hand, answer this hasty letter, which I dispatch by a porter, I shall
draw the natural conclusions -- I shall judge the horrors of your situation,
and, weak as I am, venture abroad to offer my assistance.

CHARLES.

LETTER LXXII. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
IT is with a sincere pleasure I find myself again able to address my valuable
correspondent; and I use this first moment of resuming the pen to thank him for
his letters, and the poem: all which, I read with great satisfaction. It is
very true that I have been some time in your debt, but you wall now receive a
receipt in full; for this epistle will certainly compensate for all that is
due, and make the balances even. Since the correspondence on my side has been
necessarily suspended, Dr. Melbank has favored me with a friendly call or two,
and, in his last visit finding me much dispirited, he entertained me by
reciting the principal passages in his own life. I was saying how hard it was
to lose a friend, at the time one is most thoroughly sensible of his merit:
upon this he sighed -- pressed his hand upon his heart, and wiping a tear from
his eyes, said, it was indeed hard; "I have experienced it most severely,
Madam, said he, and, notwithstanding my present flow of fortune, and fullness of
practice, I dare say I have undergone more than you would wish an enemy to
suffer. As you seem to think your own situation deplorable, although your
friend is still alive, if you have half an hour to spare, I will run over some
scenes that may serve to make you contented with your own state, by comparing
it with that of others.

But on looking a second time at your letter, I perceive your messenger is
waiting an answer, upon which account I must reserve the sketch of our friend's
history till my next letter.

I send this, merely to show you the desired hand writing of

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER LXXIII. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
"IF I were now to die, 'twere now to be most happy." The written evidence of
your recovery, and the manifest marks of health I can trace in your letter, are
all such circumstances of sincere joy to me, that I could suffer without
complaining, and would, at any time pay for your felicity, the price of my own.
Poor Melbank! he has been these two or three days unusually pensive, and I
suppose it proceeds from having related past scenes of anxiety. I know enough
of him to admire his character: I have had several fine assurances of his being
in possession of a noble heart. He shook me by the hand this morning, and, as
he went out of the door, he turned his face, and discovered a tear. If he has
had any tender disappointments, heaven knows I pity him. You have made me sigh
for his story.

Adieu, CHARLES.

LETTER LXXIV. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
"MY adventures, Madam," said Dr. Melbank, "shall be related as briefly as the
intricacy and variety of them will admit -- I was born under all the smiles of
fortune, having a man of sense and property for my father, a woman of beauty
and honor for my mother, and no other relations whatever alive, that were
likely to dispute with me, the right of succession. But alas! Madam, from my
first birthday to the seventh year of my age, it seemed to be the contrivance
of fortune to enrich me: for m father engaged in a business that ruined his
constitution and estate in the same instant. He extended his trade till he
became involved in a thousand hopeless calamities -- He carried his ambitious
schemes of merchandise, till he rashly run into all the extravagance of giving
credit: he trusted to an agent, who, as is common enough, turned out a rascal,
and being at last obliged to attend vigilantly to his own affairs, he embarked
for the east, where he had considerable dealings, to gather in desperate debts
to a great amount -- there he caught a fever in the passage -- lingered for
some days -- wrote a letter to my mother during his sickness, and absolutely
died at last, a martyr to that ambition, which induces a man to give up,
according to the common phrase -- a certainty for an uncertainty. True it is,
that I was his only heir; but had there been fifty competitors, not one would
have long felt the spirit of litigation rising within them: for, when matters
came to be examined, the poor man's ambition for becoming the man of business,
had buried his real estate in the ruins of an imaginary property: and all that
he left behind him descended into the hands of a merciless crew of creditors,
who verified at least, one passage of scripture, by taking care, in all such
cases, that the sins of the father shall be visited on the children."

"My mother, Madam, loved her husband so much better than her own life, that in
the phrenzy of affection, she was frequently prevented from making a sacrifice
to his ashes, of that beautiful form on which he had doated: time, however,
brought her usual lenitive, and the widow began at length to think it her duty
to share the poverty and misfortunes that was by this event, entailed upon her
child. Her constitution was always delicate, and this sore stroke gave
additional force to a disorder which was hereditary to the female side of our
family. She had the asthma in all its violence, and, in a few months, it
reduced her to a shadow. As this excellent woman had been too affectionate to
secure to herself an original marriage-settlement, and the claimants were
therefore generous enough to allow a few suits of half-worn apparel, which
properly belonged to her own person; and after this, it was not easy to find a
poorer pair than now exhibited themselves in Mrs. Melbank, and her fatherless
son."

"Maternal love, nevertheless, increased, in proportion to the necessity there
was to exert it. For some little time she tried the feelings of those who had
been the companions of her prosperity, but that soon failing, she applied to a
resource, which may generally be depended on; i. e. provided the application be
earnest: in a word, Madam, she withdrew from the smiling apologies, and civil
evasions of friendship, to her own industry. Being educated in all the
accomplishments of her sex, and particularly skilful at her needle, she
cheerfully undertook to assist ladies in those very decorations which she was a
short time before entitled to wear herself -- Nay -- such. was her humility,
she condescended to manage the work of those very women, whom in the lifetime
of her late husband, she visited upon terms of equality and intimacy; but
fortune, you know, Madam, elevates and degrades, sometimes in the same hour."

"From these efforts, I mean out of her work, she not only accommodated me with
food, but instruction, paying regularly for my schooling, and providing for me
every comfort of mind and body."

"In this manner, with very few helps, were, we subsisted for several years,
till at length her disorder grew, so bad, that she was totally unable to
proceed in the business -- a business, Madam, which want had urged her to
undertake. As I was deficient neither in gratitude, nor filial feelings, and
was by this time arrived at the age of distinguishing, judge the state of my
mind, at perceiving the dear person to whom I had been so long indebted,
declining away in silent and wasting agony, under my eye: her physician
recommended change of air; and I therefore removed her a few miles distant, to
a little village contiguous to the Thames. Still, Madam, the cruel distemper
gained upon all our endeavors, and neither sunshine, verdure, nor rural
breezes, could restore her. Sixteen days did she lay panting in the extremity,
at the end of which time, we had exhausted all the little savings that the
exactest economy had hoarded up against a rainy day, after the necessary
expenses of our subsistence were answered."

"For my own part, bred as I was to no employment, and but just raw from
school, I knew neither the value of talents, nor the means of getting money, by
art, or by diligence; but our affairs were now come to the crisis. My poor
mother lay speechless: the woman with whom we lodged, pitied her extremely,
and, as an instance of it, began to tell us how inconvenient it was for folks
like she and her husband, who had a small house, to let lodgings. The husband
spoke first obliquely, and then directly, of a cousin, that was upon the road,
to stay with them during the fair time; and, in the progress of their
observations, they made very pertinent comments on those excellent places of
resource for poor wretches -- the public hospitals -- Assylums, said they,
where those who want diet and doctors, and yet have no method to procure
either, may get both for nothing -- In this exigence, Madam, upon the edge of
every thing dreadful, famine on the one hand, and despair on the other, I
sallied out of the house, resolved not to come back with an empty pocket --
Accordingly, in the distraction of my mind, and in the simplicity of my head, I
opened my case to the very first person I saw. The first person I saw, happened
to be such a one, as, I fear, "take him for all in all, I shall not look upon
his like again." He was on horseback, not resident in the town, but merely
passing through it. Without scarce knowing what I was about, I told him the
incoherent story, but told it to the heart -- and never -- no, Madam -- by my
soul, never shall I forget the anxious air, and melting tone with which he said
-- Talk no more, poor youth, talk no more, but quickly lead me to your mother.
What a tear did he shed on my hand as he dismounted from his horse -- O God!
Madam, my only surviving parent was breathing her last as we entered. She had
not strength to speak -- she could resist the attacks of her fate, but faintly
-- it was just allowed her to say, faulteringly -- kiss me, my son; and even as
I was stooping to obey her, the lip quivered in death -- in the next moment she
was an angel."

"This worthy stranger buried my mother with all the attention, and sacred
decency, due to a parent of his own; and, for a long time afterward, he
supplied me with every thing that could sooth the mind, or comfort the body.
But, alas! this refuge was soon taken from me; the gentleman died suddenly, and
I was once more left upon the wide world, an orphan, without a friend. I was
now reduced to seek for subsistence in the capacity of a servant, and had the
good fortune to be taken in by a nneighbouring apothecary for the menial
purpose of carrying out his drugs. It was at his house, Madam, that I first saw
the exact resemblance of yourself -- similar in sense -- similar in beauty. I
shall not, however, trouble you with the annals of my courtship: the apothecary
took a particular liking to me, and after I had been his servant two years,
exalted me to the dignity of being his son, destitute as I was, and gave me his
only daughter, intending, that I should continue with him, and learn his
business. He died, however, in less than six weeks, and continued his
partiality, by bequeathing to me and his beloved Maria -- so was my wife called
-- his whole fortune, amounting to near three hundred pounds a year in landed
property, besides a good house: as an honest man, I must tell you, Madam, that
the apothecary had a nephew, which, having disobliged him, he never had seen
for many years, and though he was once to have been the chief heir, was not so
much as mentioned in his last sentiments."

"Of this, indeed, I did not hear, till I had spent the whole fortune; for
Maria had never seen the young man, and his uncle never spoke of him to her.
Since I have known the fact, I have vainly endeavored to find the youth, that
I might make him amends; but my researches have not been yet rewarded, and the
apothecary's old friends tell me they believe he is dead."

"A foolish ambition is, I believe, hereditary to my family. I had no sooner
got a competence, than I left the country -- sold my house there; and, thinking
that my observation had qualified me for the apothecary business, I opened, in
an absurd hurry, a shop of my own. I laid out a large sum, to the worst
advantage, with a druggist, and finding myself without connections, I
advertised for custom. During this period I was surely possessed, for, contrary
to the entreaties of my wife, whom I adored, even while I contradicted, I
resolved to go on: nay, not to have any reserve with you, I was so plunged in
this medical madness, that I purchased all the pompous paraphernalia of the
doctor, and, in the shop of an apothecary, had all the tremendous apparatus of
a surgeon. I give you leave to laugh at me, when I tell you, that I cropped close
to my ears, a fine flowing head of hair, to surround my lunatic pate by a set
of enormous curls, rising, in formidable exactness, tier above tier, in all the
majesty of a physician. I became perfect in the pat on the snuff box, the
management of the graver muscles, and the swing of the cane: I knew the several
uses of the watch. I affected to abridge my Latin, and to sign the initials of
my name as unintelligibly and obliquely as possible; and, to sum up the whole,
I should certainly have ventured upon an equipage -- that most necessary of all
pompous appendages -- had not my poor girl, with streaming eyes told me, (what
really was but too probable) that all those accomplishments would be of no sort
of service, and that she verily feared, neither chariots, nor chirurgical
instruments, nor drugs, nor gallipots, would be of any consequence, till I
could prove to the faculty, and to my friends, that I understood something of
the profession, beyond its pomps and vanities. I began to think there was some
truth in my wife's remark, for I could neither get any mortal to tell me he was
sick; nor any man that wished me well, who did not tell me that he was sorry.
One day, however, fortune was determined to throw a job in my way. It happened
that a man was thrown from a ladder as he was repairing a house, and, in his
fall, broke his leg, at the threshold of my door -- God forgive me, Madam, but
judging it to be a simple fracture, I blessed heaven for the accident. I first
scribbled a prescription, in the capacity of a physician, then made it as an
apothecary, and lastly, I began to feel the part, as a surgeon. I began at last
to bandage the leg, and to bleed the arm: but the agitation I was in, put me
into such a trembling, that, (as I held the lancet unsteadily) I rambled from
the vein, and fairly cut a slice from the brawny part of the arm: the patient,
who was a stout fellow, started up enraged, and, swearing that I knew no more
how to bleed a man than his trowel, hopp'd out of the shop in search of an
abler operator -- notwithstanding these ignominious testimonies of my
ignorance, I was obstinate enough to persist, till partly by pomp, and partly
by vanity, I exhausted poor Maria's whole fortune: from this time I involved my
dear contented girl in the effects of my folly, and we were both, for a long
time, the dupes of caprice, and the slaves of apology. Reflection, and the
remorse attending it, threw me upon the bed of sickness, and then it was that
Maria hired a nurse to wait upon me, while she made application, and wrote
circular appeals to the most opulent of her acquaintance. She undertook this
most irksome of all human engagements unknown to me; and it was not till after
I got much better in my health, that she informed me of her miscarriage. Though
I should have thought it impossible to turn the deaf ear to such a creature's
request, yet she succeeded, as people of both sexes generally do upon the like
occasions. Curious, although common, were the evasions made use of: one, had
unluckily just parted from all his money -- a second, had taken an oath that he
never would lend a farthing more to his own brother; and the reason was, he had
already suffered by his goodnature -- a third, was excessively- grieved for me
-- a fourth, was excessively grieved for Maria -- a fifth, was excessively glad
to see folly, extravagance, and vanity, rewarded in this world -- a sixth, told
my wife that he made it a maxim never to give money, but that, as one good turn
deserved another, he was ready to be even-handed with her, and give favor for
favor -- a seventh, said he had a sum to make up -- and, in short, Madam,
every one had an excuse; so that poor Maria returned convinced, that indigence
professed, is the only state that must find desertion and deafness attend its
petitions."

"By this time I felt my folly in all the bitterness of consciousness; and in
the midst of all these calamities my wife was far advanced in her pregnancy,
when she fell down stairs, hurried on a premature labor, and died in my arms
in the evening of the ninth day -- I was many times tempted to deeds of impiety
and despair; and, having my affairs in the utmost disorder, I went on board a
tender, and, with very little money in my pocket more than would pay my passage
(and even that obtained by the sale of my drugs -- for alas! my estate was long
since gone) -- I landed in Jamaica."

"As if fortune was once more resolved to befriend me, I was in the very ship
with, a man of the first eminence as a surgeon, and of very considerable
property, who had been to England to take possession of that property. His
humanity was equal to his ingenuity: my history endeared me to him: he offered
me his pity; and before we had arrived at the island, an accident happened that
changed that pity into the tenderest friendship."

"He was one evening walking by moonlight upon the quarter deck, when, by a
sudden swell of the sea, (it being then a calm) he was thrown from his center,
and fell overboard. As our ship was rolling, on he was soon at the stern, and
I, who was the only person that saw his misfortune, ran to the boatswain,
alarmed the company, and ordered out a boat with all dispatch: mean-time I
threw a large rope from the poop, and he had the good luck to swim near enough
to reach it -- By some means or other the boat was entangled, and could not be
easily extricated -- I drew the gentleman by the rope to the ship's side -- the
calm was now quick dead, and little or no swell. I brought him within half a
yard of the gunnel, and then, stooping till I was even with the water, I dipped
in my arms, while another man had girt a rope round my middle, and by clasping
the poor exhausted surgeon in my arms with all my violence, the man above,
fastened the rope to a pully, and, at the risque of almost cutting me in two,
for I was resolved not to let go my hold, drew us both up together. -- From
henceforward this gentleman and I were as brothers: for near five years, and a
half he in every respect treated me as such: I studied with the utmost
diligence under his tuition in the art of anatomy -- I attended him over all
the islands in every case, and to every patient, and in the end I became a
tolerable proficient. In the mean time an opportunity of marrying to the utmost
advantage, offered itself. -- The idea of Maria prevented all such connections.
Never was application more intense, nor perhaps better rewarded -- and I owed
every thing to my friend whose name was Williamson. Had Maria lived to see this
reverse of fortune, what could have been added unto me -- At length, however,
Dr. Williamson (who had not a relation alive that was known to him) died of a
fever, then epidemical, in Jamaica -- He made his will in my favor, and left
me every thing he could call his own upon earth, except the portrait of a lady
that hung round his neck, and which, in the same condition, was buried with
him. The doctor's fortune was large, and it has given me affluence, but not
joy, for I had much rather my friend, and my wife had lived to share them. -- "

"Here, Charles, the doctor ended, and giving a heavy sigh, took me kindly by
the hand, and wished me a good night. What a multitude of revolutions, crowd
into the petty span of human existence!"

Adieu. CHARLOTTE.

LETTER LXXV. H. TEMPLETON, Esquire to CHARLES.
I HAVE a strange piece of news to communicate to my dear Charles: an old
friend of mine has just written to me on a curious subject. He has, it seems,
lately seen Charlotte, and is over head and ears in love with her: he has a
large fortune, and is smitten so smartly, that he writes me word he intends to
make serious proposals of marriage; and only wants me to assure him the
connection betwixt you and her is actually dissolved. I really believe he is in
earnest, and he is a man of good sense, great connections, and splendid
circumstances, besides being in one of the genteelest professions. What the
deuce am I to say to him on this point? He presses for an answer, and I am
utterly unprepared for it. For your part, I suppose you would not give your
consent to her being the wife of an emperor; and yet, if this spark should make
honorable advances, and offer such terms as are extremely flattering and
advantageous, how would you act in that case? would you oppose, or would you
promote, or would you stand neuter upon the occasion? shall I not do right, if
I tell my friend the subject is too nice to be spoken to -- or shall I -- but
you must direct me. I will not send a slip of paper till you give me full
instructions: and so, pray write to me immediately.

H. T.

LETTER LXXVI. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
I HAVE resolved to venture into the country for the benefit of the air, and,
therefore, you must not expect to hear from me again for some days. For a short
time therefore, adieu to

CHARLES.

LETTER LXXVII. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLOTTE.
HAVE you seen Charles? he has left his lodgings, and yet has taken nothing
with him. His landlady informs me he went out with two-well-dress'd men in a
coach, although it was evidently very difficult for him to get in the carriage.
If you have not heard from, or seen him, I shall be exceedingly uneasy. I had
written the enclosed letter to you ever since yesterday morning, and kept it in
my pocket, nor do I now send it without being doubtful whether it ought not to
be suppressed. At all events, I beseech you not to break it open, or pay it the
least attention till you are perfectly satisfied of the safety of Charles.

E. MELBANK.
TO CHARLOTTE. (Being the letter enclosed.)
I FEEL myself in the greatest confusion, as I take up the pen to address you:
my design, however, is laudable, and my wishes innocent. There is a person of
my acquaintance who is lately become tenderly sensible of your merit, and he is
extremely anxious for me to endeavor to interest your sentiments on the
subjects. At present, however, he will only dare to trouble you with a single
question -- Could any thing incline you to enter into the marriage state with
any other person than Charles -- in other words -- could the utmost assiduity,
attention, and ample fortunes, all at your disposal, prevail with you to accept
the hand, and suffer any other object to cultivate your esteem, and lead you to
the foot of the altar? I will take care that your reply to this shall be
decisive; it shall inspire encouragement, or extinguish it for ever -- not the
passion -- at least the declaration of it.

I am, your obedient servant, E. MELBANK.




LETTER LXXVIII. CHARLOTTE to Dr. MELBANK.
I HAD a billet from my friend Charles, a few minutes before I received your
favor, and though I am afraid, he ventures out too soon, yet I am acquainted
with the design of his excursion, which is only to get a little fresh air; and
I suppose he has taken a couple of friends with him to look out a pleasant and
wholesome spot. After he is fixed, we shall certainly hear from him.

In relation, sir, to your enclosure, I should esteem myself unworthy the
compliment intended me, if I did not instantly reply to a point of such
consequence. Sensible as I am, sir, of the honor -- greatly as I venerate the
sacred rites to which you allude, it is clearly my duty to tell you, that I can
never conceive myself justified in giving my hand to any person, while Charles
is living. There are certain circustances between us which make this
resolution, a matter of conscience; and though it is highly probable, I shall
never be more than that gentleman's correspondent, yet, during his life, I am
solemnly determined never to admit, or even think of the addresses of any other
man upon earth. In my unlucky situation, this may sound affectedly, but indeed,
sir, it is pure principle; and you cannot give me so elegant an instance of
your friendship, as your interceding instantly with your acquaintance to
forbear the revival of a matter, that must be unsuccessful.

I am, your obedient servant, CHARLOTTE.

LETTER LXXIX. CHARLES to H. T. Esquire
I WRITE this letter to you in a place of confinement, to which I was carried,
just as I was preparing to walk abroad for the first time since my illness. The
shock has returned upon me a violent fever; by some means or other I fainted
away in the coach, from surprise and weakness; and, I now find the dressing has
left my wound, and I am in a great deal of misery. This is the more
unfortunate, as I am resolved not to let either Melbank or Charlotte know a
syllable about my situation: I have been already too much obliged by the one,
and I cannot bear to be for ever racking the generosity of the other. How any
of my creditors could possibly detect my retreat, sequestered as it was, and
apart from all my former connections, I cannot guess: evident enough it is, I
am in prison, and for a debt of all others the least recollected, because I do
not now suffer for myself, but for having made myself foolishly answerable for
the extravagance of another: yet the creditor is a very humane man, and some
cruel tamperings must have been used with him, before he could be brought to
this measure. To enquire, however, into these points is absurd. I am a most
unfortunate man, and the hand of adversity is eternally upon me.

Since I came hither, I read your letter upon the subject of Charlotte's
marriage. Ah! Mr. Templeton, how does self-love stand armed against the welfare
of social? But sickness, and acute distress, has, perhaps, mended both my
heart and my ideas. I can now cooly consider myself as I really am; a man
marked out from community to be eminently miserable: a young creature, whose
own family have long confederated against him, even till the wishes, which
could only be satisfied with his destruction, are completed. Yes, dear
Templeton, I now behold myself with an impartial eye -- as a triumph to my
enemies, as an anguish to my friends -- as a distress to those who have ever
connected themselves with me. I blush to examine this picture of the truth, and
the only atonement I can make, is to make a decent retreat from conscious error
at once. In the first place, Templeton, let me endeavor, though very late, to
do justice to Charlotte. A friend of yours, with all the advantages of birth,
fortune, virtues, and a genteel profession, will marry her -- will lead her by
the hand, you say, and offer her terms of tenderness and honor. It is enough
Templeton. I see plainly my duty, and I am inspired by the prospect of it.
Fully convinced as you are of the gentleman's merit and circumstances, I shall
rely upon your judgment, and enquire no more -- Pray present my compliments to
him, and after you have read, and put a wafer under the enclosed letter,
deliver it to him from

CHARLES.
To -- (Being the enclosure.)
SIR,
YOUR friend, Mr. Templeton, has written to me upon a very delicate occasion,
and made known to me the wishes of your heart. Ah! sir, should those wishes be
gratified, what a happiness will you enjoy? I need not, I presume, point out to
you the merits of the object whose affections you design to solicit, although
it is impossible you should, at present, be so intimately acquainted with them
as I am: notwithstanding this, sir, I have now so full a sense of what ought,
and what, therefore, shall be done on my part, that you may rest satisfied of
meeting no interruption from the writer of this letter: he advises you on the
contrary, to make advances to the heart and hand of the loveliest of women: he
is convinced how much it is for your felicity, and her reputation: his own
selfish wishes he sacrifices to such considerations, and he declares solemnly,
that the husband of Charlotte shall have the veneration of

CHARLES.




LETTER LXXX. CHARLES to Dr. MELBANK.
FINDING myself perfectly stout, and my wound free from any pain, I have been
bold enough to make an excursion into the country, just within reach of the
penny-post, through whose medium I send this, and shall send my future letters
to you, and to Charlotte. I hope, by this time, your good sense and good nature
have recommended you to that lady's attention: I even wish your sentiments may
have weight with her, because, in that case, you may be of service in a matter
wherein her fortunes are nearly concerned. To speak plain, Dr. Melbank, an
opportunity invites, which should not be neglected: a gentleman of great
property, and many amiable qualities, is struck, I find (as indeed he well
might be) with the beautiful form of Charlotte. His views are noble: he is well
acquainted with her late connection, and yet his ambition is to make her his
lawful wife. Judge how thoroughly I must be convinced of the importance of her
inclining to this offer, when I can bring myself to desire you will deliver a
letter to her upon the subject; a letter, Mr. Melbank, urging her by all the
arguments that arise out of the case, fully contemplated, to accept the hand of
another admirer: nay, more; I enjoin you, sir, as you value the the character
of this charming, but injured woman, to second my eloquence by yours, and to
suggest every thing that may incline her to a measure so auspicious to her, in
every respect. I send my letter under cover to you, and sealed, that you may
first run your eye over it, and see the motives of the now resigned,

CHARLES.
TO CHARLOTTE. (Enclosed.)
THE lessons of Charlotte, have at length brought Charles to a real sense of
right and wrong: he has deliberated upon his duty several solitary hours, and
the result of the whole is a plain conviction, that his continuing to
correspond with her, is highly culpable. His weakness is constantly urging him
to mix with his sentiments, the expressions of love, all which serve to fan a
fire, that might otherwise be consumed. Charles is at last certain, that he is
doing his fair friend an injury by this conduct. He is persuading her to
cherish a hopless passion, and must consequently make her very unhappy. Were
she left to the drift of her own prudence and wisdom, they would soon conquer a
fatal flame, which is perhaps acquiring fresh force from being thus indirectly
cherished. She is by these means also, kept out of those elegant circles which
are so innocent, so advantageous, and so agreeable to female youth. Perhaps, if
she were to go more into the world, she might meet the man whom she might yet
like -- whom she might honor with the name and privileges of a husband. The
curse that attends Charles, may not attend another, and the advantages of
marriage, though, in real fact, they may not, in particular cases, contribute
much to purity of heart, contribute infinitely to worldly reputation. Charles
is become sensible of what Charlotte ought to do, should she receive advances
of this honorable nature. As it is impossible she should act unkindly to any
man, so, if any man of fortune, good temper, and good sense, should address
her, it is the most serious advice of Charles, that she could indulge him with
encouragement. Blinded no longer by the mists of passion, he can now see the
train of desirable consequences attendant upon such a step. He sees the
amiable Charlotte caressed by those who before had the insolence to sneer.

He observes the beautiful martyr embraced by those who lately kept aloof: the
very virtue and excellence, over which affected state and haughty chastity
before triumphed, is now congratulated, complimented, and applauded.

She will, therefore, weigh these important articles, and whenever they present
themselves to her acceptance, it is the hope of Charles, that she will not
refuse them. That she may be tortured with no more improper sentiments, but lay
such as these to her heart -- is the last intruding prayer of

CHARLES.




LETTER LXXXI. H. T. Esquire to Dr. MELBANK. ( Sent without a signature, in a
feigned hand.)
THERE is a friend of yours in great distress at the -- prison. He is ill, and
your assistance, as a surgeon, would perhaps be desirable.

I am, your humble servant.

LETTER LXXXII. CHARLES to H. T. Esquire
READ the enclosed, and pity

CHARLES.
CLEORA to CHARLES. (Enclosed.)
YOU are not to attribute your present confinement to the malice of the
creditor, at whose suit you were arrested. It was at the instance of Mrs. P.
your mother, who takes that method of bringing you to a sense of religion, and
your duty. She considers a jail as the school of virtue, and apprehends you
will now have something more important to employ yourself than in scribbling
love letters. Be assured, however, Sir, I had no hand in bringing upon you this
trouble, and have but just heard it from the mouth of your creditor. Charlotte
has, no doubt, by this time been to comfort you, and with her, I suppose, you
think all situations equal.

CLEORA.
P. S. Your reversionary annuity is likely to be swallowed up in the expenses
of the law suit.






LETTER LXXXIII. CHARLES to MRS. P.
Madam.
SINCE the most fortunate circumstance that ever befell you, next to the
marriage with my father, ('twere necessary to say that I mean his death) I have
been sitting down many times, to write to you; sometimes in the ardour of an
honest resentment, and sometimes, as a pleading, neglected child: but I have
remained silent, even yet, an left you uncontrouled to the luxury of your good
success, and of my anxieties. But your conscience now seems quite brought over
to your side, and I can no longer suffer you to triumph, either in the benefit
of my inheritance, or in the warm and wicked comforts of a wealthy widowhood --
(oh! what a robe of mourning has yours been madam) without trying upon you, the
force of truth, and remonstrance: -- without exerting one desperate experiment
upon a heart, which habit and nature seem impregnantly to have fortified (as if
it were the citadel of cruelty) against all the artillery of the parent, and of
the woman!

The artifice and complottings, by which my destruction has been effected, are
not unknown to me -- How is it, Mrs. P. that you are able to reconcile to
yourself, at the foreboding age of sixty-three, actions, of a color so
atrocious, that the penitence of your youth upwards were scarce sufficient to
wipe away? by what casuistry have you pacified every private monition; and how
skilful must have been that sophistry, by the magic of which, you are capable
of sitting composed, at the head of a table, which you have stolen from your
child? but why do I interrogate? it is a maxim in morality, that a bad woman has
no limit to her crimes. You are gone too far to recede; and I have no hope that
you will mend in the progression, but expect that you must gather guilt, as you
go onward to the grave, till it shall be the pleasure of providence (in mercy
to me and mankind) to confine you there.

You accuse me to your acquaintance, of wildness, and profusion! It Is the
wretched, pitiful, pretense of guilt, of private guilt, laboring for a public
apology! To lay some error to my charge, was necessary to save you from the
assaults of your sex; to palliate a conduct like yours, it was indespensible,
to allege something against me; since, to have tormented a child in such a
manner, without some shadow of occasion, would have argued a temper too
monstrous to have been ranked among women; and the very boys would, in mere
vengeance, have stoned the inhuman mother. But depend upon it, the sick pillow,
will be to you a pillow of plagues: your bed, a bed of torture; and every
feather there, will prove a thorn to torment you! Is this the language of
lunacy? is it the violence of phrenzy? No, madam: faithful to the injuries of
its master, this vindictive hand has hitherto confined itself to sentiments of
the most frigid moderation. From this moment, I cut you away from the insulted
sensibilities of affection: when nature discards you, what claim can you have
upon the heart of a son? and yet, do not think, I mean to forget you so far as
to leave you to yourself. Believe me, madam, the day of such voluptuousness is
past; and although you have robbed me of every right which should at least have
divided with you the comforts of the world, I will henceforward take care, that
you shall no more enjoy them, without the heaviest tax of indignant reprobation.

Your argument with my poor father was always in the same style: "I should
spend his fortune." With what parental piety have you provided against this!
but even granting it had been so: had I not on my side the claims of nature and
of blood? and what were your claims, madam? The claims of a gay, needy woman,
who after having been long setting in vain, the matrimonial trap, caught in it,
at last, a gentleman of property: and, by these ingenious measures, rose from
the indigence of your widowhood, to the dignity of a wife, and, by surviving
the second husband -- enjoyed widowhood again with all its most favorable
perquisites. Consider your shattered fortunes, at the time of your
matriculation into my father's family. Did you bring sixpence into that
family, which you have thus iniquitously plundered? are you not scorned by the
very people, whom the maxims of sordid courtesy oblige to receive the hated
guest into company? nay, have not many of these openly discovered their
indignation? has not your brother, the good Mr. S --, often spoke warmly and
disdainfully against the cruelties, which, at once mark and stain the character
of sister and of christian? has not your usage to the unhappy writer of this
letter, even in the soft moment of unoffending infancy, been the remonstrance
of the rich, and the proverb of the poor? did not your inhumanity "grow with my
growth, and strengthen with my strength," till I was three times compelled to
find resource from the unkindness of a mother, in the wanderings of the world,
and in getting a meal in whatever part of that world I could obtain it? is
there a pang, a sorrow, a disaster, or an agony, which, either your artifice,
or open malignancy, has not inflicted upon me? have you not been the topic and
the ridicule of the very man -- Mr. W --, whom you ordered to exert the tyranny
of the rod over me, at an age, when the birch ought to have been retorted on
his own posteriors? did not this very man, I say, point at you from the public
pulpit in the the presence of the Deity; and did not your conscience take
alarm, till it extorted from you a paltry half crown, almost the largest
liberality, I ever had from you? have I not stated facts? have I stated more? I
appeal to an indignant county; I appeal to a large, attesting, congregation;
was it not also amongst your schemes, to ship me away for the torrid terrors of
Senegal? and was not the very captain -- a sea captain, madam, who had passed
his life on the rugged bosom of the ocean -- too tender, to acquiesce in a
stratagem, at which (though a woman projected it) the pity of a panther, and
the bowels of a bear, might have revolted?

You often say in your conversation, that "I have lost my character:" oh! hard
of heart! I have so: thanks to my own mother. I have not only lost that, but my
health, happiness, and patrimony! The latter of which you now riot in. What a
pity, that you are in the wane! what a pity, that there should be one, who must
soon plunder the plunderer! what a pity, that death must in a very few years,
defraud the defrauder? these, however, I know, are thoughts, you pretend to
indulge; you are among those magnanimous characters, that, with Roman
fortitude, can bear pain, combat inconvenience, and smile at dissolution: this
kind of stoicism I have heard you boast; and it must be confessed, you are,
when in perfect health, a notable heroine. How well you can support poverty
with a full purse! how much more independent and stationary you are, than your
wicked Son: with a well furnished house, and affluent income at command? my
house, madam; my fortune! but pray enjoy them: by the laws of Rapine, they are
yours. I can earn the bread of fatigue, while yours is already provided (by
your own impiety provided) and much good may such provision do you!

You are, I find, as you ever was, seconded by that infamous attorney, Mr. J.
--, and I dare say you have made your story good, among such of your friends,
as live at a distance from the great scene of your stratagems: with them, you
are, alas! the best, but most unfortunate of parents; a desolate widow-woman,
forsooth, who equally mourns, the loss of her lord, and the wanderings of her
child! Oh! force of feminine fraud! execrable, execrable delusion! where,
where, madam, must I look for a parallel to you? not in man, surely; not in any
one of your own sex, I hope, to heaven! for the Countess of Macclesfield
herself, whose infamy, you know, is published, was merciful and maternal to
you. I fear we must quit the bounds of this world, in search of the simile,
and, descending into another, find your resemblance, in the father of finesse.
It is recorded, you know, madam, of him, and of him only, that he could for his
purposes, assume all shapes and characters; "make the worse, appear the better
cause," and sometimes rose even a minister of light to determine precisely,
whether he was in reality, an angel, or a fiend. There is, however, a
uniformity in your character, not unworthy of you: to be complete in crime, is
at least, more ingenious, than a half-witted, bungling villainy. You are above
being content with your mere victory, in the Court of Chancery; and as the
magistrate did not take care to compel you to preserve, my poor pittance in
reversion, after you are gone to account, you seem resolved to delay the sale
of the estate; and had rather, I perceive, pay away all the hopes I have in the
world, in the interest of creditor's demands, than deposit the annuity in the
funds; lest, it might be possible for your persecution to die with yourself.
But you are determined, I find, to be consistent; and are, therefore, taking
the only measures, which will enable your barbarity to survive the grave.

My exhausted paper warns me to quit you for the present; and I shall leave
you, madam, to sup "with what appetite you may," though I am confident your
relish to it would be keener, were you to know that I have no supper to enjoy.
In this important particular, however, I must disappoint you. My senses are
still sufficient to the purposes of common life, even though liberty is taken
from me. I have frequently heard you wish, that I could neither read nor write.
Preresolved as you were, to drive me to a dependence on the efforts of writing
and reading, I see nothing preposterous in the wish. I suppose then, it would
give the total finish to your exultation, if it should please the omnipotent to
touch the brain. The loss of my senses would, indeed, be joy to you; and I know
not whether your heart would not open wide enough to purchase for me the bells,
the whip, and strait waistcoat, could you at the same time purchase the
delirium, which would make such dreadful furniture necessary. But, perhaps,
this may never be crowded into the catologue of my calamities: he, who feeds
the ravens, rewards, at least with bread, the efforts of an injured child.
Providence will protect those, whom the parent has neglected: when the
thoughtless ostrich leaves her egg under the sand, it is rescued from the
violence of the wave, and is called into being, by the sun beam. The allusion
is striking, madam. May God give you (though late in life) a soul to feel it.
Farewell; I will write again soon. Your.

CHARLES.
P. S. I find, I am to enroll among the catalogue of your maternal
indulgencies, my present confinement in the place from which this letter is
dated. Had not this last stroke of barbarity been added to the rest, I had not
even now taken up the retaliating pen: but I have been too long passive -- you
triumph in the severity with which I meet the attacks of calamity, and you have
at length extorted from me a reply.



LETTER LXXXIV. Mrs. P. to CHARLES.
YOU have written a very long letter, to a very short purpose, since it only
induces me to exhaust a very few sentences upon you, in order to show, with
what a sincerity I despise you. Let them laugh, who win: let those who lose,
rave: I have got the estate, and see no reason why I should interrupt the
composure and luxury it produces, by putting myself in a passion.

I am, the victorious, E. P.

LETTER LXXXV. CHARLES to Mrs. P.
I THANK you, madam, for this last blow at my sensibility. May it be as
effectual as you could possibly wish it! and may the hand that has smitten,
have no future opportunity to be uplifted, against the bleeding heart of

CHARLES.

LETTER LXXXVI. CHARLOTTE to H. T. ESQUIRE;
OH! God of heaven, Mr. Templeton, what am I to do now? All that I felt before,
was lenity to the misery in which I am at this minute involved. Poor Charles is
in a prison, without money, without health, without a friend! He has sent a
letter to Mr. Melbank, and another to me, disguising his situation, and
advising me to accept the hand of some other man, whom he ^s given to
understand has addressed me. It was from Cleora, that I learned his calamity,
and that it is occasioned by the malice, and unnatural schemes of the restless
Mrs. P. his mother. I have not seen Dr. Melbank since I received this killing
intelligence; and when I do see him, there is a certain circumstance which
makes it highly improper, that I should apply to him, of all the men in the
world, for relief. How, Mr. Templeton, how dreadfully is this excellent youth
reduced? what a soul must he possess to write such generous letters at a crisis
so deplorable? Perhaps he has had a return of his fever -- perhaps -- indeed,
sir, I am almost distracted. I dare not go to him, nor can I stay away from
him. Oh! these cruel debts, that are pulling perpetually at his heart strings!
Oh, sir, what step can I possibly take! Almighty God direct me!

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER LXXXVII. From the same to the same.
TO what accumulated indignities, does the want of a fortune expose me? Soon
after I had sealed my last letter to you, I hurried on my things, and walked
out into the Park, to meditate on the steps I should take in this dilemma. I
had not gone more than half the length of the place, before a gentleman
accosted me by my name, and enquired into the cause of that uneasiness, which
was but too apparent. In the disorder of my heart, I told him the whole story:
I soon recollected in this gentleman, one of the many who caressed Charles for
his brilliant sense; and, as he had lately come to ample fortunes, I began to
hope I had met the person who would assist in the necessary business. The debt,
said I, is but an hundred guineas: what say you? will you condecend to serve a
good man, whom you admire? will you exalt yourself by entering a place of
confinement? if so, go to him: conceal from him by what means you heard of his
misfortune, and may the power that sees the generosity, reward it.

He pencil'd down my address, in order, as he said, to acquaint me what he had
done, took me kindly by the hand, and bidding me be more cheerful, left me. How
happy was I, to see him walk briskly down the park! and, when out of sight, I
was ready to drop upon my knee in gratitude to the God, who raised up to my
poor Charles, so able and so amiable a protector.

I cheerfully went home; where I had not arrived half an hour, before a
servant, in a livery I recollected, brought me the following card. Oh! Mr.
Templeton, why should I be thus insulted? yet, never tell Charles of it, if you
have the least regard to the most uphappy

CHARLOTTE.
To CHARLOTTE.
YOU want an hundred guineas to serve your friend. I enclose you an hundred and
fifty pounds. As it may not always be convenient for a lady to pay one way, she
has, luckily for her, the choice of paying it another. Let Charles remain where
he is at present -- compliment me with the use of his pillow for this evening,
and let the enclosed, pay for my lodging, with which, you may take him out
tomorrow. I trust to your honor.


To -- From CHARLOTTE.
WITHOUT pretending to any virtue, I may be allowed at least, pride enough to
tell you, that you are too contemptible a being to be made an object of
Charles's resentment; and, therefore, you have the satisfaction of playing the
poltroon with impunity. Your bribe I re-inclose, safely sealed up. May
Charles's misfortunes never sink him so low, as to receive redress from the
hand of infamy: he is a nobler object in his prison, than it is ever possible
such a wretch as you should be in a palace.

CHARLOTTE.




LETTER LXXXVIII. CHARLOTTE to H. T. ESQUIRE;
I HAVE not yet either heard from, or seen Dr. Melbank; and the inflexible
Charles ceases to correspond. Though personally divided from this worthy man, I
must even consider myself as his nearest and dearest friend. What then must I
suffer, to see myself unable to do the least service for him, in the greatest
exigence. I have been to five of those men, who advertise to lend money on
annuities: my poor pittance is so strangely bequeathed, that I cannot possibly
dispose of it. I fully know your circumscribed situation; I have sent every
thing of value I could possibly collect to be pledged, and the utmost I can
raise is fifty-two pounds. Cleora refuses to tell me the name and address of
the creditor, or else, I might, perhaps, compromise the debt -- oh! heavens,
Mr. Templeton, I am this moment struck with a thought which may prove
propitious. I will put it instantly in practice.

Adieu. CHARLOTTE.

LETTER LXXXIX. CHARLOTTE to CLEORA.
MADAM,
MONEY, which Charles lent, is very unexpectedly paid into my hands by the
borrower, and I enclose a note to the amount of it. Charles's present situation
may perhaps be greatly alleviated by so trifling a sum as fifty pounds; at
least he will be glad to find, one of the many people he has obliged, turns out
grateful: but, I am persuaded, he would receive this supply with double
pleasure at the hand of Cleora. There are certain disguises which are really
virtuous, upon account of their motives: ah! that I could prevail upon Cleora
to pay Charles an immediate visit, and offer him the fifty pounds, as so much
raised upon her by the security of her marriage settlement: in such a delusion
there could be no criminality; for he does not yet look for the payment: at the
same time, it might have such an affect upon Charles's heart, that a perfect
reconciliation might be the consequence. Let this be as it will, I seal up the
sum, and leave the method of conveyance to your direction.

I am, MADAM, Your obedient servant, CHARLOTTE.

LETTER XC. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES. (After Cleora declined to send the money from
motives of not interfering.)
CRUEL as you are with your concealments, I have heard of your misfortune. In
prosperity, Charles, I could forgive you for deserting me, but to drop my
correspendence in your distress -- how could you be so inhuman? -- Though I
flatter myself you are still a lover of justice, and, if so, you will not
scruple to receive what accompanies this letter, which is at present of no
service to me, and may be of some to you. You will recollect, Charles, that I
did not refuse your address, on a similar subject, and I have, therefore, a
right to expect you will not refuse mine. -- Ah! Charles, do not at such a time
reject my friendship: -- do not despise and cast off my attentions, when they
ought to be ten times doubled. Remember what I say to you, and farewell,

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER XCI. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
OH! my dear, dear friend, I am oppressed -- I labor -- I am bowed to the very
earth with with the weight of various obligations -- I am almost ready to
execrate the destiny that makes it necessary for for me to receive them -- had
my hard-hearted mother permitted my father to follow the feelings, which nature
generally annexes to the paternal character, I had then been able to confer
benefits, instead of receiving them. I might then have sought out merit,
diffidence, and undistinguished virtue, from the barren vale of obscurity.
Instead of which, I am condemned to be myself the object of benevolence: --
how, madam, -- how is a soul like mine to support the burden of perpetual
favors? that they are delicately bestowed, is an aggravation. I feel them,
Charlotte -- I am conscious of them, and they enter into my soul.

This is the preamble to a transaction, of which I ought, perhaps, to blush. I
am at liberty -- I am free -- my debt is wholly discharged -- your letter was
delivered to me on the outside of the prison door -- I was just stepping into
the coach that carried me to my old apartemnts; -- my protector was leaning
upon my arm.

Ah! Charlotte -- such a friend -- Whom do you think capable of such things? to
whom is Charles indebted for his liberty? it is not to be conjectured -- Know
then that he who so lately saved my life by his skill, has now saved my
freedom by his generosity -- Let the name of Melbank be carried upon the rosy
wing of gratitude, to the heaven of heavens. I fold up his letter upon the
subject: give it your tears, Charlotte -- give the author of it your adoration
-- but pity, I charge you to pity, the insignificance of

CHARLES.

LETTER XCII. Dr. MELBANK's letter to CHARLES.
A FRIEND of mine, of the tribe of Israel, has offered to lend you a sum of
five hundred pounds upon the reversion. He has been with me this morning, and
upon terms, (moderate enough for a Jew) agrees to furnish the money. As this
kind of brokerage business is generally kept a secret, I think you had better
not mention it to any unconcerned person: by which means the matter may be
privately managed, and nobody the wiser.

Adieu. E. MELBANK.

LETTER XCIII. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
THE matter of raising money on my reversion is all finesse. It is all a trick
of the unparalelled Melbank's, who wanted to deceive me into a notion, that I
was making use of my own property. I wish to heaven we could all meet over a
dish of tea, and that you would both give me an opportunity to prostrate myself
in the presence of each other. Let me deliver your bank-bill with my own hand
--

Adieu, CHARLES.

LETTER XCIV. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
MELBANK, is too great for the compliment of common language. He dines with me
tomorrow -- are you disengaged --? dare you trust your heart --? Dr. Melbank
says there is no fear -- The dinner will be ready at three o'clock.

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER XCV. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
I AM to be trusted -- Love yields the laurel to gratitude.

CHARLES.

LETTER XCVI. CHARLOTTE to Dr. MELBANK.
I HAVE written the invitation you desired, with a trembling hand. -- He will
come!

It Is within a few hours of the appointment. -- The clock is now striking
twelve: every stroke vibrates on my heart -- every stroke is more than a second
nearer to the time. Gracious God! Cleora is this minute passing by my window --
she kisses her hand in compliment -- I have not the courage to call her up. --
She goes on. -- She is out of sight.

I will this instant forbid him. -- He shall not, Dr. Melbank -- he must not
come. -- I am feelingly persuaded of the consequences, and I -- must -- prevent
them.

Adieu.

To the same, in continuation.
I CANNOT turn the apology to my mind. -- I have written, and blotted, and
rejected, three different cards -- I shall be too abrupt -- I wish you were
with me, that my excuses might be delicate. -- Heavens, Sir, it is past one. --
I will forbid him at once. -- And yet -- Dr. Melbank -- as he is so very calm
-- as he can view me with the moderation of friendship -- as we shall talk upon
ordinary subjects -- methinks -- perhaps -- I should suppose -- oh, what shall
I do -- let me dispatch this letter to you, and let your immediate answer direct

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER XCVII. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLOTTE.
I AM not very well, and yet I will be with you in ten minutes. You have
nothing to apprehend: all will be as it should be.

E. MELBANK.

LETTER XCVIII. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
SOMETHING has happened, that prevents me the pleasure of dining with you; I
am, therefore, obliged to send that in a letter, which I at first designed to
deliver personally. I expect the favor of a visit from Dr. Melbank in the
evening.

Adieu. CHARLES.

LETTER XCIX. H. T. Esquire to CHARLES. (Received before the above letter was sent.)
AFTER having congratulated you on the recovery of your liberty, and on the
acquisition of Dr. M -- 's friendship, I must inform you, that you are more
obliged to that gentleman, than you can at present imagine. It is a duty I owe
both to him and to you, to inform you of what I know concerning the matter. Dr.
Melbank, Charles, is the very man, who applied to me on the subject of
Charlotte's marriage -- Dr. Melbank it is, who would lay himself, and his
fortunes at her feet, before the altar: he it is, who can stifle his own
passion, in pity to yours: he it is, who can serve the man that stands in the
way of his tenderest wishes.

Now, Charles -- now is your time. -- Are you equal to an exalted action? --
have you an ambition that scorns to be vanquished? -- can you really practice
the precepts, and the sentiments, expressed in the letter you desired me to
deliver to the gentleman who courted Charlotte upon terms of honor? if you can
do all these great things, this is the critical moment: this is the golden
opportunity. -- You know what would exalt your character -- you know what will
sink the scale of obligations, disagreeable to the dignity of Charles's
ambition. Conscious of your virtue, I will never speak or write another line on
the affair, but will leave the noble heart to its natural operations.

H. T.

LETTER C. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLES.
DEAR CHARLES.
IN compliance with your whim, we have dined without you; but our tea will want
its social flavor, and be totally insipid, if not inspirited by your company.
The kettle is boiling with expectation.

E. MELBANK.

LETTER CI. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
WHY, why did you suffer me to see you -- why, after I had sent an apology, did
you throw the temptation a second time in my way? -- I saw you at the tea-table
-- you trembled as I came into the room! -- what a vermilion covered your face!
-- by what a death-like paleness was it succeeded -- how unlucky was Melbank's
departure! -- how fatal the illness that occasioned it! -- Why were we left
alone? -- why, after such an absence, were we permitted to be in the same
chamber together? You were cruel enough not to draw away your hand as I took it
-- your resistance, was a more than half invitation -- I carried it to the
bosom, against which the heart was violently beating, and you did but faintly
frown -- the arm that I clasped round your neck, brought me within reach of
your lips, and instead of throwing me away from the pressure, you permitted me
to kiss them twice. Had not I at that moment brought Templeton's letter out of
my pocket -- what might have been the consequence? I bow reverently to the
guardian Deity that saved us both.

Charlotte, we must meet no more -- I give you to the only man in the world
that deserves you. You say, he cannot speak upon the subject. -- No matter for
that -- His delicacy should emulate ours. Every principle that ought to actuate
man and woman, demands that we should make the sacrifice to his happiness,
mutually. He loves you unboundedly. -- His honor only, can exceed his passion.
-- He has thrown our generosity beyond all distance. There is but one way upon
earth to get again within sight of him. Severe, I perceive, will be the
martyrdom on both sides. -- Ah, Charlotte, we have deceived ourselves. -- Our
affection is more tenderly animated than it ever was -- it was in yesterday's
interview more palpable, than at any former period? -- it glowed in our cheeks
-- it shone in our eyes -- it streamed in our tears -- it panted in our hearts
-- what of that? -- the duty is proportioned to the danger: were we ten times
dearer -- if alas! that were possible, I am perfectly satisfied, we ought to
submit. Who saved the life of Charles, but Melbank? who brought him by the hand
out of a prison, but Melbank? what does he require in exchange for all this? he
requires nothing: but, if circumstances favored, he would make Charlotte the
wife of his heart, his hand, and his fortune -- what benefits would result from
that connection? all that we ought to desire: the felicity of the noblest
character of God -- an honest man; with riches, splendour, fashion, elegance in
the train. You cannot love him -- admit it: he cannot expect it at present. But
still, you esteem, you venerate, you admire. His passion preys upon his health
-- I see it in his sudden paleness -- I see it in his counterfeited spirits --
I am so abundantly obliged, Charlotte, that I shall die -- I shall die with
confusion, if I am not by some means able to make a return. One great
opportunity courts me. I can yield to him the object of my adoration -- I can
yield her in the bloom of beauty -- in the warmest ardours of my affection.
Yes, Charlotte, I can, in this case resign you, though I were to expire in the
effort. God knows how my heart will bear it, but Charlotte -- I will bear it,
and have even still intrepidity enough to bid you imitate

CHARLES.

LETTER CII. From the same to H. T. Esquire
WERE I not fully resolved to do justice to the advice of of your letter, I
should want the courage to answer it. But, cost what it will, you may depend
upon the gratitude of

CHARLES.

LETTER CIII. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
I AM a very wretched woman, Charles, and know not to what fate I am reserved!
never sure, was any one in so intricate an embarrassment. Upon one condition,
however, I will make the sacrifice you desire, even though the loss of my
senses should ensue. Ah! my friend, what an ^gonizing trial do you put me to!
still I repeat it to you, if Charles will make one great offering to
generosity, another shall immediately be made by

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER CIV. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
SENSIBLY touched as I now am, there can be no condition with which I shall not
acquiesce, to to promote the honor of Charlotte, and the happiness of Mr.
Melbank, who manifestly avoids me, lest his tenderness for you, and friendship
for me, should betray him into an explanation. Make your own terms: they shall
be adopted by

CHARLES.

LETTER CV. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
GIVE your hand to her, who has lawfully a right to it, and I will present mine
to Mr. Melbank when he solicits it.

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER CVI. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
CAN nothing less than such a circumstance satisfy you? however, to show you
how far I can go to perform what is dictated by conscience, I comply.

CHARLES.

LETTER CVII. CHARLES to CLEORA.
SUPPOSING all past actions obliviated, have you any partiality for

CHARLES.

LETTER CVIII. CLEORA to CHARLES.
I THANK you, sir, more for the hundred pounds you desired Dr. Melbank to pay
me, than for the offer of your hand, which for many delicate reasons, is not
acceptable to

CLEORA.

LETTER CIX. Dr. MELBANK to H. T. Esquire
YES, Mr. Templeton, I will go through what I have begun, or perish in the
attempt. -- I am not, however, boaster enough, to pretend that my heart is
serene. Oh, Sir, it is torn almost to pieces. I feel my affection for
Charlotte, and my admiration for Charles, increase upon me every hour. I have
seen them both together, in the same room, and the struggles they had, to
conceal their agitation from a third person, broke through all disguises. --
Never did I behold such a scene -- I could not support it, but withdrew, and
left the lovers to themselves. Wretched as I am, I deplore the misfortune that
keeps them asunder, and, though it may sound like romance, I would do much to
promote their happiness. Nay, I will do every thing within my power. It Is, in
my opinion, a base action to divide them -- should Charlotte even yield to my
proposals, upon a re-application of them, what would be the consequence? I
should possess a woman's hand without all her heart. I should greatly add to
the miseries of a man, already too much opressed. -- I cannot bear the thought
-- I shudder at it, Mr. Templeton. No, Sir, -- let me not take an undue
advantage of the calamity that called me into the family. -- It cannot be -- I
foresee the horrors it will heap upon two pre-possessed hearts. -- They labor
at indifference, and they discover attachment. -- I will avoid both. -- Some
would smile at a man, on the wrong side of thirty, being thus conquered, by a
tenderness, they would pardon only in eighteen. But frigid tempers, are no
proper judges of more soft and pathetic constitutions. -- That I do love
Charlotte, is, alas, too fatally true! but my affection shall not seduce me
into a meanness, unworthy of

E. MELBANK.

LETTER CX. CHARLES to Dr. MELBANK.
VERY long, and very anxiously, have I waited for you: I want to consult you
upon a point, not to be trusted to paper, or the post -- but, what will, I
know, weigh more with you than all the rest. I want to lay myself under another
obligation to you.

CHARLES.

LETTER CXI. The same to the same.
I AM sorry to inform you, dear Dr. Melbank, the wound in my breast is broke
out again, and demands your immediate assistance.

CHARLES.

LETTER CXII. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLES.
TOO generous, too amiable, Charles, how could you invent a stratagem, that you
knew I could not suspect, or resist yielding to, in order to betray me into the
interview, I had, with so cautious an officiousness, avoided. 'Twas a virtue
that verged upon barbarity. Every one of your arguments, however, convince me,
that I ought not to proceed -- Charlotte, you say, will make me happy -- she
will conciliate the general joy, by submitting to my wishes. How, Charles, can
that be called a general joy, which would produce general infelicity? -- she
would submit -- it may be so -- the more angel she -- But who could, under such
circumstances, be base enough to suffer the submission? it can never be. I see
my duty, and cannot suffer even the most eloquent passion -- not the
persuasive, all-subduing voice of love -- to lead me from it.

I will give my young man proper instructions as to your wound,

and am, yours, E. MELBANK.

LETTER CXIII. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
HOW much am I restored to my serenity, by the receipt of a letter, which I
enclose, from the noble-minded Dr. Melbank. With regard to Cleora's refusal of
your hand, I have only to observe, that I have done my duty, and you have done
yours: let that, my dear friend, be a great satisfaction to us both. The worst
is past; Dr. Melbank is satisfied -- Cleora is supplied with money -- Charles
is at liberty, and Charlotte will soon acquire sufficient serenity to write to
him -- but you shall no longer be detained from the letter which has put me in
spirits --

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER CXIV. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLOTTE. (Enclosed to Charles.)
IF you can forgive me for having tried, by a splendid proposal, to wean you
from the affection you bear, and ever ought to bear to Charles, I may still
expect your friendship, though I tell you that I would not now marry you for
the uniting Indies; you have given my heart some pangs, and I have richly
deserved them; for I should have held sacred the friendship betwixt you and
Charles. -- In my more serious opinion, formed as it now is, on deliberation, I
think you should not go to the altar with a monarch. The scenes, which I find
you have both been engaged in, must have established a tenderness not to be
conquered. If fortune ever favors, you will sanctify your mutual passion, by a
public testimony: if it should not, I can scarce think either of you at
liberty, conscientiously speaking, to enter into other engagements. I am
leaving London for some weeks, but at my return I shall certainly enquire after
the amiable correspondents. Mean time,

I am your most obedient servant, E. MELBANK.

LETTER CXV. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
MELBANK, is like one of those glorious phoenomena which awes us weaker, and
more imperfect mortals, into silence. He reaches the resolution of Charlotte,
and throws out of sight the fortitude and dignity of Charles. As the poet
therefore says of the deity, I say of Dr. Melbank. I lose Myself, in him!
Come then, expressive silence! muse his praise.


He is too great to talk about; let us content ourselves with thinking of him.

I find Charlotte, we must not indulge ourselves in any more interviews -- they
are treacherous -- they betray us. Let us endeavor to be contented with our
usual pleasures of corresponding: let us follow strictly the advice of our
friend. I am weak enough to confess to you, that I am more rejoiced at Dr. M --
's noble conquest over himself, than at any thing I ever felt since my
existence. Had he married you -- had he doubled my obstacles -- had he taken
you for ever from me -- or had the cruel certainty of your being wife to
another attended me -- God knows, how I should have supported it.

All his generosity -- even though he had thrown his whole fortune into my lap
-- would have shrunk before me; and such is the inconsistence of a tender heart
-- although I was myself the proposer and promoter of the union, had it been
carried into execution, I believe I should have hated him, and hanged myself.
But as it is, I could build churches, and erect monuments to his memory: he has
saved me from desperation: he has made me able to bear Charlotte's absence.
While I know that she is not connected with another, I can bear to live without
her society. I am happy to hear constantly that she is well, that she attends
to her intellectual improvements -- that she will often read my letters, and
employ herself in the innocent task of writing answers. All these things were,
I own, very lately, considered as too little -- but adversity brings us to a
proper sense of rational blessings; and the prospect of everlastingly losing
the tenderness of Charlotte, has made me satisfied with that, which at present
ought to satisfy me. My situation indeed, appears, upon reflection, to be much
more supportable, than I at first imagined! how much severer might it have been
rendered, by either your marriage or your death! let me endeavor to procure
comfort from comparison. We are both happier than thousands -- I have at this
minute an instance in my eye to justify this, and, as I am sure it will serve
to make us both more reconciled, I will, in my next letter, communicate it to
you,

Adieu, CHARLES.

LETTER CXVI. From the same to the same.
WHILE I was at the house of the sheriffs officer, Charlotte, an adventure
struck me so forcibly that it would be barbarous to refuse (to so tender a
heart as yours) the recital of it; especially as it will show you, that there
are agonies in life, compared to which, ours are transient and trifling. In
mourning our own calamities and disappointments, let us not too selfishly
forget the calamity of others; but where (as in the following case) we see
wretchedness exceeding our own, let us remember, that, not to be the most
miserable, is at least one source of contentment; and instead of murmuring, we
ought to sympathize.

Soon after I was arrested by Mr. Trap, and conveyed to his house, I beheld a
young man sitting in a very pensive posture, resting his cheek upon one hand,
and holding a pen in the other. He was not at all disconcerted at my being
brought in, but smothered the sighs as well as he was able, and began to write.
"There Is more stuff in the office, master, said a fellow that now entered the
room -- there is two or three more of the roe and do family come to visit you
-- it is a sad thing to be sure, but, howsomdever, you shall not go over the
water tonight; you are every inch a Gemmun, I will say that, and you spend
your money like a prince. No, no, God forbid I should carry any Gemmun out of
my house while he behaves as such; so sit still, for you shall not go to jail till
tomorrow."

Upon this Charlotte, the poor young man looked up, discovered his eyes
swimming in tears, drew a handkerchief out of his pocket, and put it over his
face.

Having a little recovered himself, he took up the pen again, and just as he
was applying it to the paper, his features assumed something of consolation:
but this again, was presently dashed by the appearance of the bailiff's wife,
although, to do her justice, she was a very obliging woman.

There are some messages, you know, so displeasing in their own nature, or at
least rendered so by the peculiar circumstances which introduce them, that they
would seem disgusting, though they were to be delivered by the lips of the
graces.

Mrs. Trap therefore, was as gracious as it is possible for any one to be, who
presents a bill that requires to be discharged on the spot. Her harangue was to
the following effect.

She was very sorry to trouble him, but it was a rule. It made all things, on
all sides easy: -- scores, were scores; short reckonings made long friendships
-- gentlemen were here today, and gone tomorrow; and therefore she hoped he
would not be offended at the customs of the house.

Here, Charlotte, the prisoner took his hand from his pocket, from whence flew
one solitary guinea, and he protested to God, that if the fiftieth part of that
sum more, would purchase him a passport to paradise, he could not raise it.

I was, soon after this declaration, left alone with my fellow prisoner, who,
still preserving an air of dejection, addressed me, as you will find it recited
in my next letter.

Adieu, CHARLES.

LETTER CXVII. From the same to the same.
WHY should you despair, sir, said I? because, replied Mr. Reynolds, my
condition is on all sides desperate: besides that I have no money, I have no
friends to procure it, nor any means or health to acquire it by: you, sir, are,
no doubt, brought here by some misfortune, but God forbid you should match in
misery the most unhappy man that is now speaking.

Poor as I was Charlotte, and destitute both of fortune and happiness, I put my
hand into my purse, which being perceived by Reynolds, he waved his hand in
token of disapprobation, and, with swimming eyes, exclaimed, pray take your
hand from your purse, sir -- I beseech you to take it away -- I am resigned --
I bow me to the burden of my fortunes -- money cannot, you know, Sir, medicine
to a mind diseased -- not the fortune of the East collected, could restore me
to my tranquillity.

I beg, Mr. Reynolds, said I, that we may pass the remainder of our evening
together without interruption: as we are united by a similar misfortune let us
make it a social one. My fate, like yours, is not to be alleviated by money,
yet let us, for this one night, live in the hope that the morning may bring
comfort on her wings.

You are very polite, and propose what would be extremely agreeable, Sir, said
Mr. Reynolds -- but really -- really -- I -- I -- I --.

Here Charlotte, he began to reexamine, and shake his pockets.

Oh fie, fie Sir, said I.

I went out, and ordered (agreeble to the slender state of my finances, and
with a prudent recollection of the charges of the house) a comfortable supper.
At my return, poor Mr. Reynolds was weeping over a letter, that, by the
evidence of several places much worn, and a variety of foldings, appeared to
have been the frequent subject of dear and solitary meditation. After he had
read it, he pressed it to his heart, and kissed it; he looked steadily at me,
and, thinking the sentiments would speak best for themselves, put it into my
hand, without uttering a syllable.

As I know, my lovely correspondent Charlotte, does not possess a heart like
that invulnerable piece of rock which lies putrefying in the bosom of Mr.
Timothy Trap; as I know, on the contrary, she can pity the sorrows that even
surpass her own, I will oblige her with a transcript of of the contents of the
letter, which the prisoner trusted to my perusal.

(The enclosed Letter.) Written on a Deathbed.
Most dear JAMES,
I Want the spirit to write, what I have not the strength to speak. As I have
persuaded you to leave my bedside for a short time, I will employ that
interval, as well as I am able, in imparting to you some sentiments that you
ought to know.

Your late miseries, oh my dear James, went too near my heart, and the day that
your furniture and even our bed was last seized, I had the rashness to take
poison -- a poison my husband, which, though very slow, is certain in its
operations. My doctor has discovered the occasion of my illness long ago, but
in compliance with my entreaties, has hitherto concealed it from you.

How, James, can I sustain the sense of my guilt? instead of dying, I should
have lived, on purpose to make your life supportable! in what a condition do I
leave you. Oh my soul whither art thou going! Oh James -- James -- pity me save
me -- protect me from -- fro -- farewell -- farewell I can no more.

LUCIA REYNOLDS.


I shed, my Charlotte, over this epistle, the tears of sensibility: it was
written in a faint hand, the words scarce legible, and every syllable spoke the
disorder of the unfortunate writer. When I returned it to Mr. Reynolds he
kissed it as before, folded it up as a miser would have folded a bank bill of a
thousand pounds, surveyed it on all sides with the greatest tenderness, and
then deposited it in a little box of ebony.

So heaven befriend me Sir, said he, as he put up the box, I would not part
with this to be restored to all the fortune I had a right to inherit. No
barbarous mother! no, inhuman parent, this you cannot take from me: of this
inestimable relic you cannot rob me: this is a treasure your child can call
his own, in defiance of all your artifices. I thank the great and good God, for
the blessing -- oh that I could find an honest man who would lay it upon my
bosom when I enter the grave, for which I have long most pathetically
petitioned.

Mr. Reynolds, said I, you see that friend now before, you, should I survive,
and if not, I would recommend that office to a dear and faithful woman who
would not neglect it.

I had scarce finished this promise, before Reynolds was upon his knees, and
gave me, as he rose, with his hands clasping mine, such a look of
acknowledgment, that I felt enter into my heart.

And is there then, said I, is there another Mrs. P. -- and was there ever
another Charlotte? did Mr. Reynolds call the one his wife, and and the other
his mother? if so -- you have still reason to be contented Mr. Reynolds: the
blessed society of such a wife, is more than a balance for the curses, keen as
they are, of such a mother.

Blessed society, returned Mr. Reynolds, yes, Sir, here is was a blessed society:
horrible as was the death she died, the life she lived might atone even for the
crime of self destruction. She was eleven years Sir by my side, during which
time we were never in prosperity, and yet -- such was the charm that mutually
bound us -- we threw adversity into despair -- she was my wife upon earth --
she is an angel in heaven. If you Sir have got the counterpart of her, do not
talk of pains, or prisons, or penalties -- if there is not something wrong in
your heart -- it must be happy.

Upon this, Charlotte, I ran over the heads of my history, at which even with
the softness of a Desdemona, he wept particularly at such parts as related to
my mother's barbarity, and my Charlotte's kindness -- (I did not mention Cleora
by name) and, after I He gave me for my pains a world of sighs had ended, he
promised to reward me with a scene or two from his own disasterous volume.

But the recital of this must be reserved to a future opportunity. I am this
instant summoned upon indispensible business. Pity Reynolds, and pray for

CHARLES.

LETTER CXXVII. Dr. MELBANK to H. T. Esquire
TEN days have I taken to compose an agitated, and, I had almost said,
infatuated mind. I have engaged myself with unusual assiduity in the business
of my profession -- I have read -- I have written -- I have idled, I have
toiled. -- Alas, Mr. Templeton, I am ashamed at my progress, or rather at my
having made no progress at all.

I am still a slave to my passions -- this charming woman, pre-engaged as she
is, still crowds on my imagination -- I have banished myself from her sight,
and yet I see her: I have pretended an absence from town on purpose to avoid
all formal communication, -- yet, notwithstanding all this, I blush to tell
you, I am a very miserable man. My friends perceive the effect in my looks,
without knowing the cause -- the cause I dare not mention, lest I deservedly
become the object of ridicule. You have, dear Mr. Templeton, a gentle heart,
and it is some pleasure to correspond with you: Charlotte passed the other
morning by my door, as it is usual with her, in her way to the park, and she
called to know of my servant (supposing me to be out of town) whether I was
well, when she last heard from me, and when I was expected to return. Happy was
it for me that I had pre-instructed my servant in case of enquiry. An interview
at such a crisis, would have certainly, destroyed all my better resolutions:
and yet as she went from the door, as I was in the street parlour, I could not
avoid going to the window: the blinds favored me. I saw her depart -- she was
dressed by the hand of Hebe, and, in my opinion, more beautiful than ever. I
heard her sweet and tuneful voice leave her best compliments for Dr. Melbank:
the sound thrilled my soul. I was strongly inclined to open the door that led
to the entry where she stood. I got up -- took hold of the door handle -- drew
it -- set it on the jar -- every word she uttered was more distinct -- "She
cordially hoped I was quite well -- should be exceedingly glad to see me upon
my return to town -- and desired her most affectionate compliments might be
transmitted."

Oh Mr. Templeton, had she staid another minute, I should have discovered
myself and my infirmity.

Adieu: Pray for the returning reason of your

E. MELBANK.

LETTER CXXVIII. Mrs. P. -- to CLEORA.
CHARLES, I find, is out of prison, chiefly through the means of Charlotte, who
has contrived to raise him up a friend in the extravagance of one Dr. Melbank.
No doubt the woman buys this man's friendship, at a pretty dear rate: however,
Charles is mean enough to accept of a favor by whatever means it is procured;
and as you have nothing to expect from his generosity, I would advise you to
threaten him with putting some other of his creditors in pursuit of him; thus,
perhaps, you may extort through fears, what yout cannot obtain through a sense
of duty.

Your Mother, E. P.

LETTER CXXIX. The answer from Cleora.
I Can never adopt the measures you advise, to oppress Charles, it would only
put it more out of his power to befriend me in point of money matters. He gives
me from time to time as much as his circumstances admit, though I am not sure,
if the presents be not chiefly made at the instance of Charlotte. I perceive it
is a vain endeavor to disunite them. They still love, and still correspond.

Your obedient servant, CLEORA.

LETTER CXXX. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
LONG as it is, I make no apology, Charlotte, but expect many thanks for giving
you, as related by himself,

The continuation of Mr. Reynolds's History.
I Will tell you only such other of my adventures Sir, as more immediately led
me to my present situation, and that I may not unnecessarily increase your
melancholy, I will relate the story with as much life and humor -- for I have
been engaged in whimsical scenes -- as my poor exhausted spirits will permit.

Mr. Reynold's sat down, and began. The continuation of his narrative ran thus.

I shall begin this part of my history at the day I obtained, after various
delightful difficulties, the hand of my beloved Lucia, who, being only a
farmer's daughter, was considered by my mother (who can match yours for
cruelty) as an intruder in the family, and therefore took every opportunity to
insult her. This contemptuous treatment made us resolve to leave her house, and
rather earn our bread by daily labor, than be indebted for it to one who was
constantly upbraiding us for the bounty. As I was not bred to any business, I
was obliged to seek for such an employment, as depended rather on the
application and versatility of genius, than any thing else. Having a well
grounded classical education, and a sprightly vein for undetached compositions,
I was advised, by a young friend who knew the town, to apply to the
booksellers, and endeavor to get a livelihood from the pursuits of the press;
while my poor Lucia was to throw in her mite, by attending to the needle. With
these views, and only three guineas and a half in our pockets, we left this
cruel mother's house one evening pretty late, (taking advantage of her absence
from home) and set out to a neighboring town, from whence we embarked in a
wagon for London. Upon our arrival there, we called on our young metropolitan
friend, who agreed the next morning to attend me to a printer of his
acquaintance: we soon, through his assistance, produced a lodging, and, for the
sake of literary convenience, it was in a small court, that led into
Paternoster-row.

Upon going into the printer's shop the master surveyed me critically, and
without any previous, or delicate ceremony, asked (as soon as he understood my
business --) what I could do? whether I had any specimens about me? whether I
was a verse-man, or a prose-man? whether I had ever dabbled, in those doings,
or was only going to throw my ink about the world?

My friend answered for me, that, I was a young man of genius who could turn my
hand to any thing, that I would enter into immediate employ; and that my
diligence might be depended on.

As authorship was thus early the necessary means of eating and drinking, it
was not to be supposed I had much time to bestow upon the elegancies of
composition; upon polishing my periods, arranging my arguments, or decorating
my sentiments: good, or good for nothing, so many pages were to produce so many
pence, and therefore the main point was, to have the pen almost always in my
hand, and scribble away, for the supplies of the day. Generally speaking,
however, my taskmasters, the booksellers, cut out my business, and told me
what, and how much would be wanting that night.

If, as it is asserted, there be universal charms in variety; never ought man
to be more contented, or think himself more entertained than myself; for I have
often wrote round the whole circle of the sciences in twenty four hours. -- I
purchased my breakfast by a page of politics -- my dinner by a sheet of
biography -- my tea by history -- my supper by a poem on the pleasures of the
spring, and my lodging (which I shifted nearly as often as my subjects, and
much oftener than my linen) by divinity. The next day came into play for the
morning, a slice of mathematics -- for noon, a plate of translation, and for
the evening, a dish of indexes. My employers, sir, notwithstanding this labor
of Hercules, made woeful complaints that my works did not sell, that they did
not pay for paper and print -- that I was not known: that unless I could get a
popular writer to lend me his name, they must decrease the copy-money.

About this time poor Lucia's wardrobe began to decline, though her lovely face
was ever dressed in smiles of congratulation, or in tears of sympathy -- my own
apparel began to be truly literary, and I recollected to have often seen one of
my booksellers, whose name was Meadows, slide about his shop in the mornings,
till after hair dressing time, in a green frock. We were both of a size, and I
made formal proposals -- this very frock Sir cost me a whole octavo volume of
sermons, which were printed the following month* under the taking title of
sermons, by a late right reverend prelate, warranted originals, and to be seen
by the curious in his lordship's own hand writing. While I was laboring for
the coat, I had no other wages till I had earned that, than what I could get by
working after stated hours: and yet it was absolutely necessary for me and my
wife to subsist in the interim: accordingly I sat up for two nights together,
and wrote a large poem of the 1s. 6d. size, on conjugal tenderness, entitled
the faithful pair. I hurried away with this the next morning to a new
purchaser, who said if I would leave it ten days or a fortnight, he would give
me his answer. This proposal, not suiting the situation of affairs at home, I
went to a second dealer in these wares, who having looked at the title said, he
had made an oath never to burn his fingers against the blaze of poetry any
more; a third observed, that he would sell me a parcel of poems by the pound --
and a fourth hinted, that if I would take the opposite side of the subject, and
write in support of conjugal infidelity, he would treat with me.

Chagrined, wounded, desolate, and disgusted, I went into a pawnbroker's shop,
and pledged a pocket-piece of silver, upon which -- the value being four
shillings -- they lent me two and twenty pence; with this modicum I bought a
few necessaries, and ran to offer them to the half-starved, but still
uncomplaining Lucia. In her dear company I forgot every indignity, and every
care, and we passed the whole evening over a mutton chop, and a pot of porter,
with joy, content, and tenderness inexpressible.

The next morning, an hour before the time of going to work, I thought
something agreeable might happen from trying the heart of Mr. Meadows; and
setting myself seriously down to the task, while Lucia was asleep, I thus
addressed the feelings of a Bookseller.

To Mr. MEADOWS, Bookseller, Paternoster-Row.
SIR,
MY wants are extreme: the opportunities of supplying them, are few. The
greatest part of those wants have been brought about by misfortune: I have this
day a bill coming due for house rent; or I should rather have said room-rent.
Will you this once advance a single guinea, to prevent, the unhappy
consequences.

I am your most grateful servant, I. R.
Mr. Meadows returned by the bearer, this short and laconic reply.

To Mr. REYNOLDS.
SIR,
WERE your principles equal to your understanding, there might be some
encouragement; but while I admire you for the one, common honesty requires that
I should despise you for the other.

J. MEADOWS.


Upon the receipt of this audacious letter, I thought my reason would have left
me. I threatened vengeance on the barbarous writer. Oh Sir, hear the
circumstances that attended it. I had many misfortunes, and many debts upon me.
I dared not venture abroad till the shades of the night befriended me. I sold
the labors of my pen to this fellow, on his own terms, and I had entrusted him
with the knowledge of my abode that I might correct what are called the proof
sheets, as they come from the press: the wretch knew at what an advantage he
took me, and that he might say almost any thing with impunity. But, oh Sir,
what villainy could exceed his insult at such a time -- by a fellow too with
whom I had scrupulously fulfilled every engagement, and who knew not a syllable
of me or of my affairs, but from the vague breath of partial or vulgar report.

I did not however, answer his impudent letter, but crushed it in my hand, and
to prevent its being seen by the too cruel and sympathizing Lucia, threw it
into the fire.

Disdaining to work any more in the service of Meadows, I sought out a new
talk-master; I left the management of the remainder of the two and twenty pence
to Lucia, and began my search. I at length made myself known to one, little
celebrated, but very busy, and was directly to begin a new family bible, by a
certain Dean and a society of clergymen -- my new master had just dined, and as
the cloth was removing, I suppose he saw me look somewhat wishingly. He was
very much addicted to wit, and thus facetiously began to interrogate.

"What, I warrant me now, you eat as well as I -- that is, begging your pardon,
you would if you could! ten to one but you drink too -- eh? what a pity it is
you scribere-cum-dasho gentry should be pestered with those plaguey passions,
and hankerings after meat, drink and clothing. Zounds! if I was an author -- I
would live like the Meaning, very likely the Cameleon.
camel on my own idearers. Oh d -- m -- e you you a'n't half an author yet --
well, come, since thee have such curses upon thee, thee can not help 'em --
so, here, Susan, Susan, (he went to the door of the kitchen stairs) bring up
the beef bones, here is one of my authors a hungry, as usual -- bring up also
Susan, the suety pudding that was too little boiled a sunday, and the broth
that your mistress said tasted of the copper, and all the bits of broken bread
that you can find, and make haste. Damme master author, I am better than a
father to you, even before you have written a single syllable.

Better than a mother Sir, said I, you assuredly are; and then the tears sprang
into my foolish eyes, as I compared the delicate dinner that I supposed she
then might be eating, to the bare bones, stale pudding, coppery broth, and
broken bread, that Susan was now going to place before me. However, as I was
never quite so hungry since I was born, and as I knew my ever dear Lucia had
sufficient for a frugal meal, I never eat a more hearty meal, or blessed heaven
with more sincerity, that a meal (though coarse) was bestowed at all.

When Mr. Reynolds had finished the last sentence, Charlotte, the bailiff's
servant brought in the supper, and his history was suspended. You must
therefore suspend your curiosity, till I can recollect the remainder of this
most interesting narrative.

Mean while I am yours CHARLES.



LETTER CXXI. From the same to the same. The history of Mr. Reynolds concluded.
WHEN supper was over, and I had persuaded Mr. Reynolds to drink a glass of
wine, he proceeded in this manner.

In the midst of this literary labor and indigence, a relation of Lucia's
died, and bequeathed her the sum of two hundred pounds. This was a delicious
windfall, and I received it in bank bills a month after the persons decease:
violent, and immediate transitions however, are undesirable and dangerous: the
leap, from poverty to plenty is truly alarming, and many a man's head turns
giddy in making it. Such was the present case. I had no sooner got this
precious treasure in my hands, than I gave a loose to imagination. As it was
Lucia's money, I could not bear the idea of using it for my purposes. I
considered the poor hut in which that excellent creature resided, as unworthy
such an inhabitant, and therefore, immediately, and unknown to her, I took two
little neat apartments, and furnished them to -- what I knew to be her taste --
I reflected upon the forlorn state of her wardrobe, and I repaired it by silks,
laces, linens, etc. to the amount of almost one of the hundred pounds -- with
these purchases, which I made from time to time in the course of the first
week, I, at a proper period, made Lucia acquainted, and the dear creature Sir
was almost ready to faint at the tidings. She saw the conjugal delicacy and
disinterestedness of my intentions, but she saw also the imprudence of laying
out all our little property, in finery, that was wholly inconsistent with our
embarrassed state, and our future expectation. Luckily, however, my furniture
was second hand, and I had eighteen guineas still in my possession: we
therefore agreed to manage this with the utmost frugality, till I could supply
myself by writing some work, that, by taking time and pains with it, might be
likely to establish my reputation as an author; after which, according to the
trite expression, a man may lie a bed. In pursuance of these oeconomical
resolutions, I had fixed upon my subject, sketched out the plan of my design,
entered upon the introductory parts, and began to kindle in the progress; when,
lo! I had not, with all my foresight, provided against certain demands which
various trades-people had on their books against me, for former necessaries.

One evening, after I had laid aside the pen, in order to enjoy the sweets of a
conversation never tedious, and always tender; just as Lucia began to entertain
me with a favorite song, a man came into our apartment and presented a bill
for thirty-seven pounds, which had been owing him, and collecting to that size,
for upwards of two years. Startled as I was, I hardly knew, how to stammer
forth an apology, and the creditor perceiving my confusion took it as a token
of my distress, and was therefore resolved to have his money on the spot. I
equivocated. He left me abruptly, and, with the authority of a creditor, slapt
to my dining room door with a show of indignation. Our song, and all our
harmony, you may be sure, was now broken, and we were left to many sorrowful
reflections.

Our affection, however Sir, was of so delicate a nature, that all the ardours
of romance were realized in my conduct, and even pastoral sentiments scarce did
justice, to the tenderness of my passion.

Nature had formed her for eminence, and such was her mind, that she bore with
me the burden of anxiety, and doubled the sense of better fortune, at the time
that she shared it. But the great charm which endeared and distinguished her,
was, that fervid fortitude, that gave her strength (even after the bed was torn
from under her) to go through the most piercing inconvenience, and the hardest
trials. The insults I sustained however, were too much for her, and she grew
quite melancholy, and would sometimes pass whole days without being able to
utter a word -- at last the hour approached when all the miseries of my
existence were to be collected to a point -- when fortune, piqued at my former
defiance of her, by one decisive blow -- the moment at last came -- which --
which -- you know the rest, Sir -- spare -- spare -- oh spare me the repetition
-- Lucia is in her grave -- excuse -- excuse me --

Mr. Reynolds, my dear Charlotte, broke off abruptly -- so must Charles.

P. S. My tears will give me leave, in pity to you, to inform you, that I this
very day am to have Mr. Reynolds's company at dinner, which may serve to show
that he is no longer in a house of confinement. Adieu.



LETTER CXXII. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
HOW truly do I pity the unforfortunate Reynolds! -- how much am I obliged to
Charles for the narrative -- but how infinitely do I honor him for the
sentiment and intelligence of the postscript -- and so you have restored the
prisoner, to freedom -- what a fate was his Lucia's -- ah Charles, how many
tears did I sacrifice to her deathbed letter -- merciless creditors -- what a
woman -- what a wife did ye destroy! how will Templeton rejoice -- how will the
good Melbank, who is arrived, congratulate Charles on the service he has
rendered such a character as Mr. Reynolds! -- in a jail, only for twenty-five
pounds! -- a man of his brilliance -- good God! -- but he is now at large, and
through my Charles's means -- oh my friend, bring us all together -- what have
I said? -- no Charles -- no -- adieu to visits -- fatal indulgencies! -- and
yet -- surely -- when we think of Reynolds -- when his harder, much harder
fortunes are considered -- we may be well satisfied -- cannot we cherish the
most tender and innocent friendship, without once cherishing a guilty thought!
how unreasonable! oh Charles, let us be above it -- we will assuredly all have
one happy meeting -- I will put confidence in you, because I know I can now
safely trust myself. Farewell. You shall soon hear again from

CHARLOTTE

LETTER CXXIII. CHARLOTTE to Dr. MELBANK.
CHARLOTTE, hears of her good doctor's return to town with great pleasure,
particularly, as she wants both his advice and company on Wednesday, to meet
Charles, and an agreeable stranger.

LETTER CXXIV. Dr. MELBANK to CHARLOTTE.
IT is impossible to resist your invitation. I shall attend it -- and yet, is
there not a little tincture of -- of -- of -- pshaw, nonsense, into what idle
stuff am I rambling! you may depend upon me.

E. MELBANK.

LETTER CXXV. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
MR. Reynolds will not be the only visitor you may expect on Wednesday: you
will see another of your friends on that day, besides Dr. Melbank, the
incomparable, and the unchangeable

CHARLES.

LETTER CXXVI. CHARLES to CLEORA.
I Find that the base-minded Mrs. P. refuses any longer to provide for the
child, and that she who has pillaged all the father's effects, and the son's
property, has the impudence to plead, poverty -- what pangs Cleora are in store
for that woman! what a sickness is she preparing for her soul! as to the child,
since no entreaties can prevail with you to trust it into my arms, pray send
for it directly into yours; and as my affairs are now likely to mend a little,
I shall be able to accommodate both you and your little companion.

CHARLES.

LETTER CXXVII. Dr. MELBANK to H. T. Esquire
NOW Sir, indeed, my misery is completed -- I have had another interview with
Charlotte, in the presence of Charles -- a stranger was there -- oh, Mr.
Templeton, such a stranger: upon his coming into the room, I was greatly struck
with the resemblance of features which I shall never forget. At dinner, Charles
drank to his health, under the name of Mr. Reynolds -- I no sooner heard the
sound, than my heart ceased to beat -- I felt a mixture of inexpressible
misery, and fell back in my chair. They officiously recovered me to greater
misery -- whom do you think sat opposite to me, Sir? -- the only man in the
world that I had injured -- the nephew of that very Mr. Reynolds, who was the
father of my Maria, and who, but for some petty offense -- some partial
misrepresentations, was to have heired the fortunes that were given to me.
Reynolds, Sir, said I -- are those features, the exact image of Mr. Stokes, the
property of Mr. Reynolds -- of the very person who is now before me? Mr.
Stokes, Sir, replied he, was my uncle, the brother of my mother -- but I was,
when very young, most falsely painted to him, and never saw him afterward: he
had a daughter then at a boarding school.

He had so, Sir, said I, almost sobbing, and that daughter's name was --

Maria Stokes, said he --

And that Maria Stokes, rejoined I, was my wife -- and she is --

Where said Mr. Reynolds?

With the God that made her -- but is it possible, resumed I, that you should
be this very Mr. Reynolds, -- where have you been: by what means have you
eluded my most industrious enquiries -- I have been buried, Sir, he returned,
amongst the booksellers -- I have been condemned under fifty names, to conceal
from the gripe of the creditor a wretched body not worth the fatigue of a
single search -- I have never shown my face -- or applied by letters to those
who basely deserted me -- I have hid myself in the thickness of a thousand
disguises -- and, in short Sir, my kind benefactor who sits next to me will
explain the rest.

Upon this Mr. Templeton, Charles withdrew a moment with Charlotte, and on
their return, put a packet of letters into my hand, containing -- what do you
think Sir? -- nothing less than the history of Mr. Reynold's. -- I have
borrowed these letters, Sir, and now send them in franks for your reading --
look into them Sir with an eye of compassion. --

When I had finished this perusal of them, I made use of the little strength I
had left, to fall upon my knee -- I took Mr. Reynolds's hand; and so Sir, said
I -- I have at last found out the unhappy gentleman, whose natural expectations
I have despoiled -- why did you not leave some clue to your residence, before
the death of your uncle, -- I was only a servant in his family -- I did not
even know, at that time, that he had a nephew in being -- I -- I -- in a word
Sir, as this lady has furnished me with your narrative -- she will be so kind
to give you a sketch of mine -- in the mean while let me retire into another
room -- I cannot support it any longer without relief.

I went Mr. Templeton, into a small book closet -- flung myself on a sopha
which was there, and burst into tears.

I must make a pause --

LETTER CXXVIII. The same to the same.
CHARLES and Charlotte, after an hour's absence, (in which I will not attempt
to describe what I felt) came to me: each of them took a hand, and led me into
the apartment again -- Mr. Reynolds advanced and began to address me.

"We have both had our misfortunes, Sir, said he -- but I can see no trace of
guilt in your conduct. As to my uncle, I had long buried my expectations of
receiving any benefit from him, nor did I ever see him but five times in my
life: my mother turned his heart and his passions against me; and I am now
rejoiced to hear she has not been the better or the richer upon that account.
My indulging friend Charles has, since you were out of the room, trusted to me
a paper (sent him by this lady) which relates all I could desire to know -- nay
more than I could desire -- for I find my cousin is dead -- you have lost your
wife -- Alas! alas! Sir and I -- I have lost mine."

He wept, Mr. Templeton, and I had but too many reasons to sympathize.

The delicacy of Charles and Charlotte during this surprising interview is not
to be imagined, their passion seemed to be now quite extinguished, and they
attended only to us.

I had a thousand things to say, and yet I was obliged to go away, with a full
heart, without saying any thing to the purpose.

I am, Your unhappy E. MELBANK.

LETTER CXXIX. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
WHAT a scene -- what a party was yesterday's! I have not heard from either Dr.
Melbank, or Mr. Reynolds. Consider my impatience, and all that you know,
communicate to

CHARLOTTE.
P. S. Your care of my sister was noble, I receive her at your hands with many
tender thanks.



LETTER CXXX.
Dr. MELBANK to CHARLES.
PRAY, my dear Charles, forward the enclosed to Mr. Reynolds, and let illness
excuse my making this letter to you so abrupt.

E. MELBANK.
(The Enclosed.) To Mr. REYNOLDS.
I Dreamed last night that I was the murderer of your wife -- I saw her in my
visions -- the figure of your cousin too, arose close by the side of her, to
reproach me. -- I have certainly been the unknown instrument of mischief to
many -- pray come to me that I may quiet my conscience -- to have been even the
innocenct cause of anguish, is too much for a delicate heart -- how intricate
are the mazes of providence -- I charge you to come.

E. MELBANK.




LETTER CXXXI. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
I Have only time to fold up Dr. Melbank's note, and to scribble a hasty copy
of his letter to Mr. Reynolds -- that gentleman and I are this moment going to
the house of that noble character.

Adieu, CHARLES.

LETTER CXXXII. CLEORA to CHARLOTTE.
MADAM,
I Have at length brought myself to be really sorry, you and Charles, cannot be
properly reunited. As I now see that the circumstances which happened prior
to, and since our separation, would render a reunion intolerably imperfect;
and as you are evidently the woman of his choice, I am willing to enter into
articles of mutual release, and try how far it is possible for your return to
Charles to be put upon a moral footing -- I thank you madam, for the papers
that have past between you, giving an account of your whole intercourse. I am
at least glad to see that Charles does not dwell on the vile report that was
promulgated against my reputation.

In regard to any difference in our tempers, and disagreement in other
respects, we have both smarted for them sufficiently, without dragging into the
account the most barbarous report that ever was invented to destroy the fame of
a woman. I confess to you the impossibility, (as things have fallen out) of my
ever being happy with Charles -- whatever he may think -- I should now scorn as
much the advances to so unprofitable a reconciliation as himself -- we were
never comfortable -- at least we were never fond after the first month -- I was
dupe enough to listen to a love-tale made by a man upon the bachelor's ramble,
under a fictitious name -- every step we both took was romantic; and had I not
been as much besotted with a wild, mad-headed scheme as himself, I might have
seen prudence, without going to Charles and Cleora were married in that Kingdom
Scotland for repentance. But the deed is done, and I wish with all my heart it
were undone. How can you madam, believe Charles a constant man? -- can it be
possible he should have such a principle in his nature? ingenuity -- wit --
address -- elegance I am ready to grant him -- but fidelity to any one
favorite, whether wife or not, is surely out of the list of things
practicable. You say, he will, after he has come to some terms with his
creditors, contribute to my genteeler support. He writes me word he will also
assist me in a proper provision for the child. --

If he fulfills these promises, heaven knows, I never desire a closer
intercourse with him, and I have resolved in my mind to mark this as the last
letter he shall ever see, or Charlotte ever receive on the subject: for, to
tell you the truth I do not see that I have divided you from him, to any good
purpose. I do not pray for his death, or my own, but never did a matrimonial
prisoner pray oftener, or more earnestly for liberty, and an honorable escape
from bondage.

I am Madam, In conclusion of our correspondence, your humble servant, CLEORA.
P. S. I hear that Charles's, mother frets and laughs, alternately, at the
receipt of his retaliating letter. She says she will, persecute him for it
without mercy. I should hope she would not put her threats in execution, but I
have friendship enough for his safety, to beg you will put him upon his guard.



LETTER CXXIII. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
ALAS Charlotte, I have been witness to another scene more tender, even than
the first: Reynolds and Melbank were an hour together, without the intrusions
of a third person; and when I joined them, they were tenderly locked in
embraces: the poor doctor is exceedingly ill, and we both sat by his bedside
all night. About twelve o'clock this morning he fell into a short slumber, and
Reynolds went to bed. I begin, indeed, now Charlotte, to consider our pangs of
separation as trifling, in opposition to what I have lately heard, and lately
seen. Dr. M -- mentioned you several times in the course of the night with the
greatest marks of respect -- kissed the picture of the deceased Maria -- wept
again over the fate of Lucia -- pitied Charles -- and bathed the hands of Mr.
Reynolds in tears. -- I shall return to him again, as soon as I have put a
wafer under this, for the satisfaction of the sympathizing Charlotte.

CHARLES.

LETTER CXXIV. Dr. MELBANK to H. T. ESQUIRE;
I Am held up in my bed -- and I have past the night in a fever -- do not think
me superstitious if I say -- if I prophecy -- that this will be the last time
you will receive a letter from me. Poor Reynolds's situation teras me one way,
and my affection for Charlotte another -- I love her yet Sir -- yes Mr.
Templeton, guilty as I know myself -- God knows I love her yet -- I have the
killing circumstances too, of having Charles constantly before me, and exerting
himself more indefatigably than my nurse -- his hand is often in mine -- he
smoothes my bed-cloaths -- he offers me medicines -- he keeps a death-like
silence in the room -- he most tenderly avoids speaking of Charlotte -- I am
afraid he still suspects my lurking passion. What can possibly have made me
thus weak! I am a child -- I am a child Mr. Templeton -- may God bless you.

E. MELBANK.

LETTER CXXV. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE. Twelve o'Clock at Night.
THE doctor is quite delirious, Charlotte -- he cries out by fits -- and
enquires for Mr. Reynolds -- Mr. Reynolds appears, and he bids him avoid his
presence. Before his fever had reduced him to this state, he sat up in his
night gown, and ordered the lawyer to come to his bedside -- he waved us out
of the room smilingly -- the servants were called as witnesses -- a will was
made -- we re-entered, and he placed us both on different sides of his bed. "I
am afraid, dear friends, said he, I have suffered from visiting lately a poor
woman in the Fleet prison -- I have reason to think the fever she has since
idied of is of the contagious kind -- ^ll as I was, I visited her on the very
evening after I had found the long lost Mr. Reynolds -- my spirits were then
very bad. -- "

"I desire you will take the bare possibility of it for granted -- I must not
suffer you to enter my chamber again my friends, till I am better -- when I am
certain as to the nature of my disorder, you shall be again with joy admitted:
till then -- farewell -- farewell."

The doctor pressed our hands very softly -- desired us to wash the fingers in
hungary water -- and then threw the sheet over his face. Touched at the
solemnly affecting manner, in which he spoke, Reynolds and I withdrew, and have
not dared to enter against his express inhibitions since.

CHARLES.

LETTER CXXVI. JAMES SPEDMAN to CHARLES.
SIR,
MY poor dear master orders me to tell you that his physician has pronounced
his disorder to be catching, and requests you will on no account come near the
house, and that you will not suffer Mr. Reynolds to leave London.

Your humble servant, J. SPEDMAN.

LETTER CXXVII. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
AFFECTION has I fear hurried me into danger -- I past the best part of the
last night in the bedchamber of Dr. Melbank -- no fear of his discovering me
-- he knows no one.

His situation cannot possibly be described -- still does he lie, Charlotte, in
the struggles of death -- his lips silent his eye closed -- and the sigh
breaking laboriously from his bosom -- I kissed his hand -- I could not help it
Charlotte -- it was the hand that saved me from destruction. -- He loves
Charlotte too -- some veneration is due to him for that. --

A loose paper lay on his pillow -- I have pillaged it -- and the theft has
been repaid by an almost brokn heart.

Read it Charlotte -- what a character is this to the last. Pray assiduously
for his recovery. --

CHARLES.
The Paper. To CHARLES -- CHARLOTTE, and Mr. REYNOLDS.
LET those to whom this loose sheet, written at different snatches, is
addressed, religiously observe the sentiments it contains.

Be the friendship of Charles and Charlotte ever inviolate -- when they die, it
is desired they will order themselves to be placed in my family vault at -- let
Mr. Reynolds write a line of forgiveness, on my tombstone: it will soothe me
-- -- Mr. Templeton is requested to attend my funeral -- Charlotte is
pathetically invited to put on mourning. --

Alas, alas -- where am I wandering? -- foolish -- foolish Melbank -- I have
quite lost myself -- let me then, while sense is returning, use the precious
interval to desire my will may be opened, and the articles performed the day
after my death. --

E. MELBANK.




LETTER CXXVIII. CHARLOTTE to CHARLES.
DEEPLY as I am affected for the amiable Dr. Melbank, I cannot excuse your
rashness in going to him, after interdiction -- and running the hazard of
losing another valuable life. Take some advice upon the matter, I conjure you,
and let me know by constant messages, how the good doctor, and my best friend
go on. Surely -- surely such esteemed characters, will be yet restored, in pity
to their admirers, and for the service of mankind.

CHARLOTTE.

LETTER CXXIX. CHARLES to CHARLOTTE.
OUR best friend is no more. I have power only to write the sentence, and wrap
up into a cover the letter that brought the news. How will the tears stream
from your dear eyes at the tidings.

CHARLES.
(The Enclosed.) JAMES SPEDMAN to CHARLES.
SIR,
MY excellent master is amongst the angels: he departed this life in the forest
miseries of a putrid fever, this morning a little after day break. He was
sensible to every thing, and knew every body about him, about two hours before
he left the world. The names of Charles, Mr. Reynolds, and one or two more,
were several times repeated: he clasped his hands together, and employed his
last breath in blessing you all. After this he turned upon his pillow, and
(though he exhibited the greatest signs of pain) remained speechless till he
expired.

I was with him all the time -- I am not afraid of catching any bad sickness in
performing my duty to the best man, and the best master that ever lived -- God
Almighty knows best, in such cases what to do: but I am sure he could not be
pleased if I like the rest of the servants, had neglected so worthy a gentleman
in such a situation; and I shall ever honor you Sir, for the courage your
friendship gave you to come and look at the good doctor, when other people run
away from him. I have been nineteen years his servant, Sir, on and off, and he
has many times saved my life -- I certainly shall not now leave him, while he
is upon the earth; and yet the physician says he must be put into the ground
directly.

I am Sir, your most humble servant, JAMES SPEDMAN.




LETTER CXXX. CHARLES to H. T. Esquire
THE large packet of letters that I send you, will at once apologize and
account for my long silence. Neither, Charlotte, Mr. Reynolds, or your friend,
have of late been able to take up the pen. It was this day month, that the body
of our most worthy benefactor was committed to the earth -- I do most truly
assure you, that the affluence in which his unequalled generosity has left me,
by no means compensate the pleasure I had in his society, and the satisfaction
I received from his life.

He has divided the bulk of his fortunes amongst three persons, my Templeton,
who certainly could form no possible expectation of his bounty. Here follows a
faithful extract from his will.

-- " Item, To my beloved friend Charles, I bequeath my dwelling house in St.
James's-street, with all its furniture, plate, etc. etc."

" Item, I bequeath to Charlotte, in testimony of my esteem for her virtue, and
reverence for her misfortunes, the sum of two thousand five hundred pounds, to
be paid immediately on my decease, or as soon afterward as the said sum can be
conveniently drawn from the funds, where lie certain moneys mentioned in other
parts of this my last testiment."

" Item, I give and bequeath, to my servant James Spedman one hundred pounds
sterling."

" Item, To Charles, Esquire I bequeath one thousand pounds, for the use of Cleora,
to be paid out of my cash, now lying, and being in the funds."

" Item, I bequeath to the said Charles, Esquire my Sussex estate, subjected to the
yearly rent of two hun-pounds, to be paid into the hands of J. Reynolds, Esquire
which is a debt due to the said J. Reynolds, Esquire for many years."

" Item, To the aforesaid J. Reynolds, Esquire in consideration of interest on the
said debt, my houses, lands, and properties, whatsoever, and wheresoever, lying
and being in the island of Jamaica."

" Item, I bequeath to Charlotte all my pictures in my library, with all my
books, paintings, and the miniature of my dear wife Maria, hanging over the
library chimney piece."

" Item, I charge the said Sussex estate, given to Charles, Esquire with the annual
deduction of one hundred pounds, to be paid to Charlotte during her natural
life, on every eighteenth day of August, being the anniversary of that lady's
birth."

" Item, I give and bequeath to H. Templeton, Esquire one hundred guineas for a
mourning ring, and any other testimonies of friendship that he may choose to
employ it in."

" Item, I give and bequeath, to Charlotte, the watch, and some trinkets lying
in a little gold box in my front parlour drawers, also my old and favorite dog
Pompey, with an annuity of five pounds during his natural life, to be paid out
of the Sussex estate, over and above the annuity of one hundred pounds."

Can any words, oh my dear Templeton, be adequate to such circumstances -- and
yet there is not a single person concerned who would not rather enjoy the dear
company of the testator, than the splendid evidences of his tenderness and
attention.

And then to die, as he did, in the meridian of life -- in a situation so
pathetic, at a time so delicately critical! Blessed, for ever blessed be his
memory upon earth -- Rich and abundant be his rewards in Heaven. Never did I
see such genuine, unaffected grief and gratitude that mix themselves in the
sympathy of Charlotte and Mr. Reynolds. --

Cleora's letter also upon the subject, does her honor. --

Reynolds and I, live at present in the good doctor's house; and we are so
often reminded of his image, and his goodness, in every thing about us, that it
is not in the power of gold to charm our grief --

That I have still a sigh for Charlotte, is but too certain, and I would most
willingly reject all that I am now worth, and, after all deductions, that will,
I find, be a considerable fortune -- Yes, Templeton, I would yield up every
shilling -- be again involved -- again a prisoner -- again liable to all the
insults of an unfortunate man -- and depend for the remainder of my days upon
the precarious efforts of my own hands -- had I this minute the privilege of of
leading her by the hand to the foot of the altar --

I conjure you to come to town, and let us, in the first place do justice to
our benefactor, by erecting to his memory a suitable monument; and let us
inscribe on it such sentiments, as express our grief and our gratitude in the
most lively manner.

CHARLES.

FINIS.

