A SHORT HISTORY OF DRUGS, etc.

LIKEWISE CHINA and LACQUERED WARE The PRODUCE of the EAST INDIES.

Published for the sole DIRECTION of the COMMANDERS and OFFICERS in that
Service.

Who are allowed Private-Trade, Homeward Bound: To which will be added the last
Market Price, showing the clear Value to the Owner, After the KING's Duties and
Charges are deducted therefrom.

LONDON: Printed for H. ADAMS, Lincoln's End.

M,DCC,LXXIX.

PREFACE.
THIS Book is as concise as possible, taking care that a sufficient knowledge,
with Attention to it, may be obtained to make it useful, at or before
purchasing any Article in India.

It is hoped that by giving a proper State of the Market Price, with the King's
Duties and Company's Charges deducted therefrom, the Remainder being the neat
Value, which the Proprietor can expect for his Goods (as will be seen) they
will be enabled no^ to Purchase without some probable advantage is likely to be
got by it, and also prevent them from giving twice the Value of some Articles,
from an ignorant Notion, that they will sell so high at the Candle, and
afterward find the Mistake of so small a Balance due to them from the Company.

For Instance, refined Borax, sold last Sale, for the pompous Price of L 28 0 0
per cwt.

King's Duty 18 13 4 Company 7 Disc. 6 per cent 3 15 8 Remained only for the
Proprietor 5 11 0 L 28 0 0

N. B. Several other Articles are under the same Circumstances.

The Reasons for leaving the blank Spaces under the printed, are to be filled
up just before sailing; for as the Markets are so fluctuating, sometimes an
Article is in very little Demand, and perhaps in a Week or a Month after, it
may advance 10 or 20 per Cent. Also the contrary may happen, that if this Book
was made up two or three Months before sailing, an Article might Drop
considerably, and then he takes too high a Price to India.

His CALCULATIONS will be,

First, The Market Price,

Second the King's Duties

Third, the Company's, viz. 5 per Cent. Custom.

Third, the Company's, viz. 2 Ditto Warehouse Room.

Third, the Company's, viz. 6 Ditto Discount.

Company's Charges in all 13 per Cent. according to the Price at the Candle --
Also the additional 15 per Cent. on staple Articles.

Fourth, The clear Value after the above Charges are deducted.

All Goods brought to this Marker, ought to be the best of the Kind that can be
got, for the midling and bad are charged with the same King's Duties as the
best. A Cwt. is 112 Pounds Averdupoise.


A SHORT HISTORY OF DRUGS, etc.
ALLOES CICOTRINA, commonly called SUCCOTRINA.
IS the inspissated Juice of a Plant of that Name; the best grows in the Island
of Succotre, which if dry and when broke in the Middle appears of a dark green
glassey substance, and when reduced to Powder is of a fine yellow Saffron
Color.

If any Dirt, Stones, or other Rubbish is in the Package, which very often
happens to the very best, the Value is uncertain; therefore, what you buy, let
it be fine and clear; and if it be not so, sort it in the Country, taking it
out of the Skins, and freeing it from Stones, Dirt and Rubbish; for which, if
you import it, you must pay the Duty, which is very high, and the Buyers will
calculate the Loss in Skins, etc. at double the real Disadvantage. It will sell
to much greater Advantage in Chests or Casks, from one to two hundred Weight,
than in large ones, which will be above the Reach of midling Buyers. -- Please
to grease the Inside of the Package, to prevent its sticking to it.

ALLOES HEPACTIA, or EPATICA:
Is of the same Species with the Cicotrina: but instead of being of a dark
green, and almost transparent when shivered into thin Pieces, is of the Color
of the Liver of an Animal; and it frequently happens that there is a Mixture of
Cicotrina in the Epatic, as well as a Mixture of Epatic in the Cicotrina, which
ought to be separated in the Country. Stones, Dirt, etc. should be equally
guarded against in this Article as in the Cicotrina, and the Buyer should guard
against its being wet; very good Epatic Alloes having been brought home from
India almost Liquid, which the Buyers were obliged to keep till it became dry
and fit to be broke into small Pieces, and capable of being reduced to Powder

GUM AMMONIACUM:
Is a concrete gummy substance in small Drops or Tears; it is of a nauseous
bitter Taste, but when dissolved in any liquid but Spirits, or rubbed in a
Mortar with Water, resembles Milk; it must be free from Dross, Stones, etc. and
if brown will not (though it may be as good as when it is almost white) fetch
half the Price.

GUM ASSAFAETIDA.
Is a concrete gummy substance, of a strong faetid smell, resembling Onions, or
rather Shallots, in small Drops or Tears; but when packt forms a massy lump.
Observe, that when first broke it appears quite white within, and changes soon
after to a red or purple Color; the brown, dingy, or dirty is of little Value:
it is often mixed with Stones; some sorts are moist, with Tears, which if clean
is very good.

GUM BENJAMIN, or BENZOIN.
Is a concrete rosinous Gum, of a sweet aromatic Taste; it is generally brought
here in large Masses, according to the shape of the package, therefore before
you buy break well into it, and see that it is full of white marble Drops. If
that Sort is not to be had, the next best is the light brown sort, which breaks
smooth, and is free from dross, and almost transparent; the drossy Sort is of
little Value, and the King's Duty is as high upon that as the very finest.

BEZOAR.
The true East India sort are smooth black-shining stones, about the size of
small Hazel-Nuts, found in the Stomach of certain Animals in the East Indies,
said to be something resembling the Goat Kind; when it is broke appears of a
shining, dark, green or olive Color, and composed of Coats or Shells one above
another, so closely connected as to form a solid stone; some prefer the Sort
that goes by the Name of Porcupine Bezoar, but as it has been found of little
or no efficacy in Medicine is but seldom used, the Lapis Contrayerva being used
in its stead.

BORAX.
Is a white christaline Salt, made from Tincal in several Parts of India; the
best generally comes from China in large transparent lumps: if brown,
discolored or mealy, reduces the Value considerably; the more it resembles
white Sugar Candy the better.

CAMBOGE, or CAMBOGIUM.
Is a solid concrete Juice; the best is of a deep yellow or Orange Color,
breaks shining and free from Dross: if dull, red or crusty, reduces the Value.
Choose that which is in small Cakes or Rolls, which sells best here.

CAMPHIRE, or CAMPHOR unrefined.
Is a solid volatile concrete Gum, extracted from a Shrub growing in several
Parts of the East Indies. The best Sort that will do for this Market must be
quite white, clean, and in small transparent Grains, about the size of coarse
Sand, run together; for, if it is white, transparent, and in large lumps, and
of a firm substance without Grains, it may be charged with the refined Duty. --
The best Package to bring it home is Iron-bound Casks, and well pressed in; and
if the Casks were lined with Turenague, it would prevent its getting into the
Wood and evaporating, it being of an exceeding subtle volatile Nature.

CAMPHIRE refined.
Is a Sublimation of the unrefined, and formed into Loaves or Cakes; but the
Difference of the Duties and Charges, and the easy Method of refining the rough
Camphor here, will prevent its being brought to Advantage.

CASSIA LIGNEA.
Is the Bark of the bastard Cinnamon Tree, There are several Sorts, but the
best brought home lately was from China, which was small long round Sticks,
nearly of the Color and Flavor of real Cinnamon, and is used in its stead. It
cannot be too thin, for if the Bark is thick, though it be equally strong and
pungent on the Palate, it will only do for distilling, and therefore not near
so valuable.

The second Sort of Cassia Lignea is generally got at Batavia and Ben. oclen,
and is of two Sorts, one a very small Twig, about a Foot long, of a stronger
pungent Flavor than Cinnamon, and sold from L15 to L20 per Cwt. The other Sort
is in thick long Sticks, and nearly as pungent; but the shape and color makes
it not so valuable, and only sells from L5 to L8 per Cwt.

The way to discover the true Cinnamon Sort is to chew it, when, if it is
musilaginous or slimy in the mouth, it is not near so valuable, though it is
often stronger than real Cinnamon, but will foul the Cinnamon Water made from
it. There is also Cassia Lignea that is of a very bright Color and good Shape,
which has little or no smell or Taste; the breaking a handful of Sticks will
ascertain the Quality almost as well as tasting, for where there is a fine
Smell, there is always a strong Taste.

The third Sort got at the Coast and Bengal, having very little Taste and
Shape, like unto Cinnamon, but is slat, woody and shaffy, will scarce fell for
the Duty and Charges; the King's Duty is L2 6 s. 8 d, per Cwt. equally on the
worst as the best, and the Company's and Discount 13 and half per Cent. on the
Price it sells for.

CASSIA BUDS.
Appears to be the Fruit or Berries of the Cassia Tree, and resembles in some
Degree a Clove, but is smaller, of a fine rich Cinnamon Flavor when fresh;
they have been but very lately introduced into Europe, and chiefly brought from
China: choose them fresh and found, free from Stalks and Dirt.

CARDAMON SEEDS.
Those produced on the Coast of Malabar are the best, which are contained in a
three-square Pod, or Husk, rather larger than a large Pea; very little Judgment
is required in choosing them, provided they are fresh, sound, well filled Husks
and of a palish Color, and of a very grateful Smell, resembling Camphor. Care
should be taken to pack them in strong sound Chests, for the least damp will
turn the Husk, not only moldy but musty, and greatly reduce its Value.

COCULUS INDIA.
A round blackisk Berry, generally brought from Bombay. Observe they are sound,
dry and clean; they are extremely light, being quite hollow.

CUBEBS.
Is a kind of Pepper, with this Difference, that it has a Tail or Stalk to each
Berry, and is much more aromatic than Pepper, resembling Jamaica Pepper, called
by the common People All-spice; it is generally bought on the Malabar Coast,
and should be dry, sound and clean.

DRAGONS BLOOD.
A red rosinous Gum, sometimes brought in oval lumps, about the Size of a
Chestnut or a Pullet's Egg, and sometimes in a large Mass, composed of small
Grains or Tears, and if good, appears of a deep shining red color, and when
reduced to Powder changes into elegant bright Crimson: if you meet with any
different from the above Account, as mixed with Dross, Dirt, or worse color,
must not give much for it, there being Dragons Blood from less than L.10 to L40
per Cwt. that in Tears is the safest to buy, if it breaks as clear as Glass,
and is when powdered of a fine Crimson red, which is the only Excellence, it
being used much more in Japaniary than in physic.

GALBANUM.
Is a soft tenacious yellowish Gum, of a warm bitterish Taste; the best Sort is
in Masses, and when broke or cut appears composed of white small dry Tears or
Drops. Choose as above, for if you meet with it mixed with Dirt, Sticks, Bits of
Cane, or other Rubbish, it will reduce the Value; the more Aromatic it smells
the better: that which is fine, has Tears in it, like other East India Gums.

GUM ARABIC.
Prefer the large red lumps, for the pale yellow does not sell well. Observe
that it be clean and kept from Wet or Dampness; the best Packages is strong
iron-bound Casks: there is sometimes a fine transparent Sort, almost white,
which will sell very well.

LAC, called SHELLACK.
Is thought to be a Preparation from Sticklack, and formed into thin Flakes or
Shells, appears of a clear transparent deep yellow or red color; if specky,
drossy, black, or of a Liver color, or any ways dull and cloudy, and not
transparent, it will be of little Value at this Market.

LACK, called STICKLACK.
Is supposed to be a kind of rosinous Wax collected by Insects, and deposited
by them on round small Sticks, in such form as is commonly imported; the best
for Sale here is composed of a very deep red Gum, intermixed with Cells,
(formed by the Insects) in which the color is contained, and when put into
Water gives a red Tincture, which is the Sort most in Esteem for dying red
Morocco Leather. -- Choose the deep Red, which is here called Black, and the
fewer Sticks the better; if when chewed it does not make your Spittle of a fine
red or crimson color it is not the right Sort, and not half so valuable.

SEEDLACK.
Appears to be the little Lumps or Seeds that fall from the Sticklack, or some
other artificial Preparation.

The Consumption is very trifling in Europe; choose as large red clean Seeds as
possible: there is a Sort of a very bright yellow, and very transparent,
resembling Amber, which is used in Varnish or Lacquer, and will, if clean, bear
an high Price.

LACK, called CAKE, or LUMPLACK.
Is the fine deep aqueous Gum separated from Sticks, and formed into Masses;
the more it resembles Sticklack the better, and ought to be free from Sticks,
Dirt, etc.

MOTHER OF PEARL SHELLS, ROUGH.
Ought to be at least eight or nine Inches broad, and have a shining silver
Color on the Inside and the Outside free from Blotches or Scabs, otherwise
they are of little Value.

LONG PEPPER.
Is the Fruit of a certain Plant of the Pepper kind, growing in the East
Indies; it differs very little from the other, except in Shape, from whence it
takes its Name, being of a long round Form, of about an Inch, about the Size of
a Goose Quill, and composed of a great Number of Seeds, set close together,
about the Size of a small Pin's Head. It must be sound, clean and dry, and of a
dark Ash Color; there sometimes comes a shorter and smaller, which is not near
so valuable, and the Duties are alike on both Kinds. If any Salt Water gets to
it, there is no such thing as drying it, and will soon become wormy and rotten.

MUSK.
Appears to be a Substance like greasy clotted Blood, contained in a hairy
small Bag or Pod, resembling the Cod of an Animal, weighing about an Ounce, and
supposed to be found on a certain Animal in China. Choose thin-skinned Pods that
have not been cut open, for the Smell of the Musk is so powerful, that Pieces
of Liver or any thing else may be mixed with it, and sometimes Lead Shot to
make it heavy. It cannot be too dry, and if the Cods have been cut open, the
Palp or Grain ought to be of a dark reddish brown Color.

MYRRH.
Is a concrete gummy rosinous Juice, of various Colors and Sizes, the Produce
of Persia, of a fine aromatic Smell, and bitter aromatic Taste; the best that
has been brought home for ten Years past was in solid lumps, from the Size of a
Nutmeg to that of a Pigeon's Egg, of a palish yellow Color, and when broke
appeared in the Inside of a whitish mealy Substance; though where it breaks of
a deep Orange-colour, and of a firmer Texture, and shining, it is much more
preferable.

There is also a brown sort, which appears of the same mealy Substance, and
sells near as well

The second Sort has the same Color, Taste, and Smell; but the Inside appears
more glassy and solid, and generally in less Lumps.

The third Sort is in brown, red, dirty, small, and frequently mixed with
ordinary inferior Gum, which, by being mixed with it, will contract the Smell
and Flavor of the true Gum. The very best is sometimes mixed with Pieces that
are very drossy and light, and often with very small Gum and Dust; which,
though ever so genuine, will not sell for near the Price that the large will.

OLIBANUM.
Is a rosinous Gum, mostly brought from Turkey, and sometimes from the East
Indies, in small round Drops or Tears, of a pale yellowish Color, and very
rarely transparent, being in general hardly pellucid, as it is a Species of
Frankincense; it has an aromatic Smell, but rather a disagreeable acrid
astringent Taste, and when chewed will be of a milky Color. If it is run into
a Mass with but few Tears in it, and mixed with Dirt or Rubbish, it will not do
for this Market.

OPOPONAX.
A concrete gummy rosinous Juice, the Produce of Persia; the best brought home,
by the way of the East Indies, is in reddish or Orange-coloured Drops or Tears,
and when broke the Inside appears of a pale yellow, intermixed with white
Specks; it has a very fragrant Smell, something like Sellery Roots, and a
pleasant bitter acrid Taste. It is sometimes very light and kecksey, mixed with
small Bits of Canes and Sticks, but that always sells low, in Proportion to the
Quantity of Gum.

RHUBARB.
The Root of a Plant growing in China, of our English Dock kind, but
considerably larger. The Natives cut the Root into round Pieces, about three or
four Inches long, and dry it for Sale, which is well known in Europe by the
Name of round Rhubarb; and sometimes they cut it down the middle of the Root,
and afterward into four or five Inch long Pieces, which drys the better, and
when fit for Sale appears flat. For these four or five Years past the flat Kind
has sold L25 per Cent. better than the round of the same goodness.

Observe what you buy has the rough discolored outside Coat pared off, which
it attracts in drying, and that it is quite dry and not the least Dampness or
Greeness left in it; the Outside to be of a pale yellow, and the Inside of a
pale red Nutmeg Color: and it cannot smell too fresh, and must be free from
Worm Holes. To avoid being cheated, break several Pieces through the Middle, it
being frequently of a very good Color on the Outside, but quite green, and
often black, and almost rotten in the middle.

SAGO.
Is generally thought to be the Pith of a Tree and manufactured into small
round Grains, and brought from China or other Parts of India, though the
Mallaca is the principal Market, and the best Sago; what is most preferable
here is of a red Bloom Color, and dissolves very easily in warm or hot Water,
and makes a very fine Jelly; that which boils red is always preferred: that
which is brown is not near so good, and it ought also to be free from Dust.
Care should be taken of the Package, which is best in Oak Casks; the least damp
will render it Musty, and good for nothing.

SAL AMMONIAC.
Is a manufactured Salt, said to be prepared from Camel's or other Animal's
Urine, or Dung, in the hot Climates, about Persia and Arabia. The Sort
generally brought here is in large round unequal Cakes, or conical Loaves, in
some Degree resembling a Sugar Loaf, about six or eight Pounds Weight each.
Very little Judgment is required in choosing it: the Taste ought to be sharp and
penetrating, its Color white and clear; sometimes Soot or Sticks is in it, but
the less the better.

TINCAL, or unrefined BORAX.
In the Manner we have it brought home appears to be a natural Salt, produced
in the Province of Bengal, being mixed with Sand and Earth; the best is in
large Pieces, of the Size of a Hasel-Nut, and sometimes, though very seldom,
larger, and of a clear and almost transparent Color, when broke resembling
Alum, though seldom so clear, but generally mixed with Dirt, Sand, etc.

Another Sort has been imported, about the Size of a Grain of Wheat, of a
yellowish Color, resembling brown Sugar Candy, when broke into small Pieces,
which was very good; but the worst is what is mixed with Sand, Dirt, and other
Rubbish. They have a wrong Notion in Madrass and Bengal to mix it with Oil and
Butter-Milk, when tight Casks would bring it home better, and save the Expense
of paying Duty on Water, etc. which in the refining must be all evaporated, as
refined Borax must be dry enough to be reduced to a fine Powder.

TURMERICK.
A Root growing in China and Bengal, brought home in Pieces, about an Inch
long, of a warm aromatic Taste, much resembling Ginger. The China Sort sells
the best, being about the Thickness of a Man's little Finger; smooth yellow
Surface, and fine pale red, or rather Orange-colour, and the more rosinous the
better, when broke. The Bengal Sort is not yellow on the Outside as the China
Sort is, but when broke is almost of as good a color, but very often breaks
black, which renders it of less Value: Turmerick is also very subject to be
Worm-eaten, which will greatly reduce its Value; and the least wet or damp will
spoil it for Use, on which account tight Casks is far preferable to Bags, in
which it is too often imported.

Drugs not much in Demand, or the Produce of other Parts, as well as India.
AMBERGREASE.
Is a bituminous Substance, almost as solid as Fullers-earth, chiefly found
floating on the Sea, or on Shores; it is a fine Perfume, of a greyish or
Ash Color, which is the best, and of great Value; the black or dirty is
ordinary, and if it is adulterated with Rosin, etc. a red hot Knitting Needle
or Wire will discover it, as true Ambergrease will not melt by Heat: it chiefly
comes from North America.

BALM, or BALSAM of GILEAD.
Is generally supposed to be the Produce of Arabia, and sometimes has been
imported from the East Indies. The true has a surprising odoriferous fragrant
Smell, a pungent but very agreeable bitter astringent Taste, and of a turbid
thickish Consistence, of a yellowish color; but so little has come these many
Years, that a stranger must be very cautious how he buys it, as every Species
of Turpentine will mix with it.

CANTHARIDES.
Are Flies as large as Bees, of a very fine green and gold Color, and are
chiefly imported from Spain and Italy; though there are some in India, but the
length of the Voyage prevents their being brought to Advantage; though if
packed in Chests, lined with Tutenague as Tea is, and very fresh when brought,
might answer.

CASSIA MUNIAR.
Is a bulbous Root of the Zedoary kind, but more resembling in shape Turmerick;
it breaks of a fine Orange-colour, of a fragrant Smell, and aromatic Taste.

CASSIA FISTULA.
Is a long blackish Pod or Fruit, an Inch diameter, and from one to two Feet
long, containing a sweetish Pulp, which is the only valuable Part of it, and
comes very fresh from the West India Islands; if the East India Sort were
better, the Pulp would dry up in the Voyage.

CHINA ROOT.
There are two Sorts, the East and West India; the East India is hard, knotty,
and rosinous, of a very pale red Color, but of very little Use.

CINNABAR, or VERMILLION.
The only Sort to be brought from the East Indies is the Native Cinnabar;
which, by being strongly impregnated with Quicksilver, is very heavy, and
generally comes in small lumps, seldom so large as a Pea; it is of a bright
shining color, and when powdered of a fine red, which is its principal
Quality, it being chiefly used in Painting.

CIVET.
A soft unctious Substance, generally of a dusky white, or rather brown Color,
supposed to be found in a Pod or Bag growing on the lower Part of the Belly of
the Civet Cat; it is a Perfume of a strong and rather disagreeable Smell in
Substance; but the Perfumers know how to render it very grateful, by using it
in very small Quantities.

COLOGUINTIDA.
Is a dried Fruit, as large as an Apple, and very like one that has been pared;
it comes from Turkey, is very light, and extremely bitter, and full of Seeds;
which, though bitterer than the Pulp, are of no Value.

CORAL.
The best is got in Italy or Turkey, and large Quantities of the fine Sort
yearly carried to India. It grows at the bottom of the Sea, and is both white
and red; the red is the most valuable, is as solid as Stone, and will bear a
fine Polish; the larger the more valuable: the small Sort is used in Medicine.

DIAGREDIUM, or SCAMONY.
Is the inspissated Juice of a Plant reduced to a Consistence not unlike
Spanish Juice, of a brownish Color, and of a purgative Quality, and chiefly
comes from Turkey; but so much adulteratep, that the oldest Druggists can
scarcely ascertain its real Qualities.

FOLIUM INDIA, or MALABATHRUM.
Is the Leaf of a Plant or Tree, resembling the Leaf of a Bay Tree, but much
larger, and differs from that and most other Leaves, by having three Stems, or
strong Fibers, running from the Stalk to the Top of the Leaf.

COSTUS DULCIS
Is an aromatic firm Root, resembling Spikenard in Smell, but of little use.

JUNEUS ODORATUS, or SWEET CANE.
Is a small aromatic Reed, of a Straw Color, but little in use.

GALLINGALS.
Are generally brought home in short knotty Pieces, about an inch and half
long, about the Size of Turmerick, of a pale red Color, bitter Taste, and
aromatic Smell.

GREEN, or PRESERVED GINGER.
The Root boiled when just taken out of the Ground with Water and Sugar, to
such a Consistence and Time that the Syrup enters into the Pores of the Ginger,
and will preserve the Flavor for several Years. The best comes in small lumps
of a pale yellow, and almost transparent; the ordinary appears dark and brown,
and when broke has small Strings or Fibers.

The Barbados Sort sells for more than double the Price that India does, which
is owing to the Root being taken out of the Ground before it is full grown, and
has contracted the stringy Quality ( West India Ginger, when dry, being full of
Strings and Fibers) and the Syrup made with white Sugar, and often Sells at 3
s. 6 d. to 5 s. per Pound, when India seldom sells higher than 2 s. and often
much lower.

GOA STONES.
A factitious Preparation of mineral Substances, mixed with Perfume, in a round
or oval Shape, and gilt; it is, (where the Gilding is rubbed off) brownish, but
the Inside is of a Straw Color: it is of very little Demand.

GUM ANIMI, or COPAL GUM ELIMI; come very cheap from America.
But if any fine Gum Animi can be procured in India, it will sell for a great
Price; it should be of a fine pale yellow, and as transparent as Glass, and
must dissolve in Spirits of Wine, and is not much harder than Rosin, and
resembles transparent Amber so much, that Cane Heads have been made of it, and
sold for Amber.

GUM SAGAPENUM, GUM SARCOCOLLA, GUM TRAGACANTH; come cheap from Turkey.
But if any Sagapenum can be procured in India, it will fetch a good Price; it
in some Measure resembles Assafaetida, but is in less Tears, and smells like
Garlic instead of Onions which Assasaetida does.

LAPIS TUTIAE:
The sublimate Part collected by Means of Sticks, on the uppermost Part of
Furnaces when a certain Metal in the East Indies is fluxed, by which Means it
receives a tubelated Form, and generally appears of a Mouse Color; it is of
little Use, and made in England the Copper Works, and therefore not worth
importing.

LIGNUM ALOES, or ALOES WOOD.
What is brought to Europe is in little hard ponderous Pieces, or Chips; when
burnt, or reduced to Powder, has a bitterish aromatic Taste, and fragrant
Smell, but little in Use; but a small Quantity of the true would fetch a high
Price; a Ton would over-do the Market.

MASTICK WHITE, MASTICK RED; brought from Turkey.
Lump Mastick has been brought from India, but sold for a poor Price; it ought
to be in Tears, of the Size of a small Pea, and as transparent as Amber, but a
paler Color.

MIRABOLANES.
Are a dried Fruit, resembling a Plumb; there were formerly five Sorts, but
never in any Demand, though they are said to be used as Efficacious in Madness:
there are very few in London, and a small Quantity of fresh (for there have
been some a hundred Years old) might sell well.

OIL of CINNAMON.
Very nice Judgment is required to distinguish the genuine from the Cassia, or
adulterated Sort; the true will sink in Water, and so it will if loaded with
Loaf Sugar; the more it resembles Cinnamon the better, and if true will be very
hot upon the Tongue.

OIL of NUTMEGS, OIL of CLOVES, OIL of MACE.
Should all resemble the Spices from whence they are drawn, the Oil of Cloves
and Nutmegs, which we import from Holland, are liquid; but the Oil of Mace is
in square Cakes, and resembles the Substance of Butter, only rather firmer and
perhaps none of them are true, as all those Spices are so powerful as to bear a
great Mixture.

OPIUM.
The concrete Juice of the Poppy; it chiefly comes from Turkey, where they
prepare it much better than what comes from India, which is much softer and
fouler than the Turkey, which sometimes come dry enough to break like Spanish
Liquorish, though the East India Climate, even without the help of Fire, might
evaporate the Moisture.

SEED, or RAGGED PEARL.
Is found in the Pearl Fish, of an uneven Shape, seldom so large as a small
Pea, and the only Sort in Use.

SENNA LEAVES.
Come cheap from Turkey, and much brighter and cleaner than any that have been
brought from India, which generally are foul and full of Stalks, and of a
darker color, and not near so fresh.

SPIKENARD.
Is a small Root, from which issue several very small Fibers, resembling a
Bunch or Brush, about an Inch long, and very light in weight, of a darkish
brown Color; it has an aromatic but rather disagreeable Smell: be careful that
it is free from Dust or Earth.

STORAX CALAMITA, or STORAX in TEARS.
Is a fine odoriferous Gum, sometimes in small Drops or Tears, and often
brought home in Masses, with Saw-dust, Sand, etc. It generally comes from
Turkey or Italy; the fine greatly resembles fine Gum Benjamin, but is generally
moisiter.

TAMARINDS.
The long Pod or Fruit of the Tamarind Tree, which grows in Pods as large as
ripe Beans; it is taken out of the Shell, and preserved in Sugar, the less of
which the better, provided there is enough to keep the Pulp moist: the West
India is red; there is red, brown and black, brought from ihe East Indies, but
the black is the most valuable, and the more Pulp and sewer Stones the better;
they are of a very fine acid, more pleasant than the Juice of Lemons, and make
much wholesomer Punch.

JAPAN EARTH.
Improperly so called, as by Experiments it appears to be the Juice of some
vegetable Fruit boiled to a hard consistence, like Spanish Juice, in hard
Lumps, which ought to break of a brown shining Color, and of an astringent
Taste; it was formerly, when Bohea Tea was more esteemed than green, used in
dying green Tea, and other Leaves of a Bohea Color. Two or three Tons would
sell very well, but more would render it of little Value, the Consumption being
small.

WORMSEED.
Is a small chaffy Seed, of a light yellow Color, of a fragrant Smell, and a
sine bitter Taste, and in all Probability the Seed of Wormwood. What we have
had from India was so small, dusty, chaffy, and full of Stalks, that it did not
sell for a third of the Price of that imported from Turkey.

YELEOW SAUNDERS.
A pale yellowish Wood, of a pleasant Smell, bitterish aromatic Taste, which
leaves an agreeable kind of Pungency; it is generally brought in large thick
Logs, and Care should be taken that it is quite sound and solid. There is a
Sort of white Saunders, which perhaps is nothing more than the yellow with the
Sap on it, and should be avoided, as Rosewood, notwithstanding its being of a
dark Color, is in some Measure white on the Outside, but that Part will
produce no Oli.

OIL of RHODIUM, or ROSEWOOD.
Though never imported from India, might be extracted from the Chips of large
Pieces, which are made into Tea Chests, etc. and the small Branches of the
Tree, in the same Manner as the Oil of Cinnamon, etc. are; the Wood would not
answer importing, but the Oil may, as the Chemists and Perfumers sell it at 14
s. an Ounce.

ZEDOARY ROOT.
There are two Sorts brought from India, the yellow and the white, both of them
generally cut into small Pieces of different Shapes, though it appears by the
Shape of them, that the Root is originally round or oval, and only cut for the
Convenience of drying them better; the yellow has the Appearance of large
Turmerick, but a more agreeable aromatic Taste; the white is more rosinous on
the Inside, and of a pale dusky white Color, and more valuable. Observe that
it is sound, and free from Worms, or Rottenness, and the larger and heavier, if
dry, the better.

Various Articles.
ARRACK.
Is a fine Cane Spirit, supposed to be distilled from Rice, formerly of great
Esteem in England, but the high Duties has lessened the Demand so, that fifty
or sixty Leagers are sufficient for a Year's Consumption. What you intend for
Sale must be full Proof, clean, and have no bad Smell.

ARRANGOES,
Are made from the rough Cornelian Stone, or something of that kind, and formed
into different Shapes, and bored through the Middle in India: the chief Demand
for them here are to send to Africa, where they are much used on Strings as
Ornaments.

The round-barrel Shape, from two to three Inches long, which they cut their
best Stones into, which were very clear, pale, and variably stroked with deeper
Colors, the Polish good, and pretty free from Flaws.

The second Sort from one to two, but not of so good a Quality, nor so well cut
and polished.

The third Sort were the refuse Stones, about half an Inch to one Inch long,
very irregular, flawed, and very dull Color.

The fourth Sort are round Beads, of different Sizes and Qualities as the
above, but at present not much in Demand.

CINNAMON.
As the Dutch have monopolized this Article, as well as Nutmegs, Mace and
Cloves, it is hazardous for any one to buy of them in India, the real genuine
Sorts. Several have attempted but they never turned to advantage.

LEOPARD SKINS Tanned, or Dressed in the Hair.


NUTMEGS Canded, or preserved in Syrup.


PEPPER.


RICE.


SAPAN WOOD.
A well known Wood, brought home in Logs, about the Size of a Man's Thigh.
Observe that it is sound, and a deep red within.

SUCCADES, or mixed Sweetmeats.


SEAHORSE TEETH.
Of very little Consumption.

TIGER SKINS Tanned, or Dressed in the Hair.


ROSE WOOD.
Is a fine hard Wood, of a light purple Color

TUTENAGUE.
A white Metal, formed into Blocks, about 20 lb. each. Regard must be had that
no Dross is mixed with it.

MOTHER of PEARL FISH and COUNTERS.


CANES, called WALKING-CANES.
Three Particulars ought to be well taken Notice of to form a proper Judgment
in purchasing. First, to be sound and heavy, not light and kicksey. -- Second,
taper shape, and if clouded the more valuable. -- Third, length of the Joint.
All under 28 Inches long in the Joint are now of very little Value; from 28 to
32 may sell for L4 or L5 per 100, according to Quality; from 32 to 36 for L6 or
L8; from 36 and upwards are most, in Demand, and generally sell well. The
King's Duty is only 37 s.. 6 d. per 1000, not a Halfpenny per Cane.

CANES called RATTANS.
Have been brought so plentifully into Europe, lately, that you must be very
careful what you buy to turn to Advantage. In the first Place, they ought to be
well glazed, full four Yards long, not smaller than a Man's little Finger, of a
pale yellow Color, and quite sound. -- In the second Place, which ought to be
well considered, the Company sells them for you, by Weight of 280lb. to a Draft
for 1000, and the King's Officers charges you 17 s. 6 d. for every 1000 in
Tale; so your greatest Care ought to be, that every 1000 weigh at least 280lb.
for sometimes they have been brought not above two Yards long, and also so
small that 2000 have been weighed to a Drast; consequently the Proprietor has
been charged, and paid 35 s. instead of 17 s 6 d which always will happen by
small or short Rattans.

CANES, called DRAGONS-BLOODS.
Are a dwarf small Walking Cane: the best ought to be taper and supple, and the
middle Joint about thirty-six Inches long, and the top and bottom about eight
or ten Inches more; the best Color is a dark brown; short, light, spungy, and
damaged, will sell for very little.

CANES, called JAPANS or WANGEES.
Are full of Knots, something resembling our Cabbage Stalks; the best are quite
round, taper, and the Knots at regular Distances, a little pliable and tough,
and for Size, from the Thickness of the little Finger to the Thumb.

CARMENIA WOOL, or GOATS-HAIR.
Is a kind of Fur, or fine soft Wool, supposed to be got from the East-Indian
Goat, of a pale brownish Color. Be careful it is dry, and free from Dirt.

CARPETS of PERSIA.
King's Duty per square is Yard L1 2s. which makes them come so dear, that they
are very seldom brought.

COFFEE.
A well known Berry; the best got at Mocho. Take care to choose sound, full
grown, and of a bluish Color.

COTTON YARN.


COWRIES.
Small Sea Shells, commonly called here Blackamoors Teeth, made Use of as small
Money, or Change in several Parts of India, and frequently sent from Europe to
the Coast of Africa, where they are used for the same Purpose. Observe the
smaller they are, the more valuable, being also sound and clean.

ELEPHANTS TEETH.
The Value here are according to Size and soundness.

The best should weigh 50lb each The next -- 40 The 3d -- 30 The 4th -- 20
Those of a smaller Size are of very little Value.

EBONY WOOD.
Is black, heavy, and ought to be sound.

GARNETS.
A precious Stone, so well known, as not to need any Description, cut or rough;
so many have been brought home, that the Market is over-stocked for several
Years to come.

HURSE SKINS.
The Skin of a Fish, brought from the East Indies, something like the Dog Fish
Skin, has a hard rough Coat; chiefly used in Europe to cover small Pocket
Cases, something like the Shagreen.

INDIGO.
A Manufacture from a Plant, and well known to be used in dying blue Colors;
the Dutch bring home yearly great Quantities to Advantage from Java, which they
sell from 1 d. to 6 s. per lb. but there ought to be as much Judgment to know
the Difference in buying it, as there is from one Penny to six Shillings in the
Pound; the Quality and Purity are as various.

LAPIS LAZULAE.
A Stone of a pale bluish Color, mixed with Streaks of Gold, of very little
Use now.

CHINA WARE
L. s. d. Suppose 100 Cups sell at 5 d 2 1 8 L 57 7 per Cent. Duty and is
remains only 1 4 0 L 0 17 8

Leaves clear very little above 2 d. each, all other China Ware sold at the
House must be calculated in the same Manner.

LACQUERED WARE.
Suppose a Teaboard sells for 8 s. 45 Kings 15 Co. and Dir. 60 per Cent. is 0 4
9 L 0 3 3

All others calculate it the same Manner.

INDEX.
A
ALOES Cicotrina Page 1 Hepatica Page 3 Ammoniacum (Gum) Page 4 Ambergrease
Page 35 Arrack Page 52 Arrangoes Page 53 Assafaetida Page 5
B
Balm of Gilead Page 35 Benjamin Page 6 Bezoar Page 7 Borax Page 8
C
Candid Nutmegs Page 55 Candid Ginger Page 42 Canes Page 57 Camboge Page 9
Camphire Page 10 Ditto Refined Page 11 Cantharides Page 36 Carmenia Wool Page
60 Carpets Page 60 Cassia Lignea Page 12 Ditto Bud Page 14 Cardemoms Page 15
Cassia Fistulae Page 37 Cassia Munair Page 56 China Root Page 37 Cinnabar
Native Page 38 Civet Page 38 Cinnamon, Mace and Cloves Page 54 Cocc. India Page
16 Colloquintida Page 39 Coral Page 39 Coffee Page 60 Cotton Yard Page 61
Cowr^^s Page 62 Costus Dulcis Page 41 Cubebs Page 16
D
Diagredium Page 40 Dragons Blood Page 17 Dragons Blood Canes Page 59
E
Ebony Wood Page 63 Elephants Teeth Page 62
F
Folium Malebrathum Page 40
G
Garnets Page 63 Galbanum Page 18 Gallangalls Page 41 Goa Stones Page 42 Green
Ginger Page 42 Gum Animi Page 43 Arabic Page 19 Copall Page 43 Elemy ibid
Sagapenum ibid Sarcocolla ibid Tragacanth ibid
H
Hurse Skins Page 63
I
Indico Page 64 Japan Canes Page 59 Japan Earth Page 50 Junctus Odoratus Page
41
L
Lapis Tutiae Page 44 Lazula Page 64 Lignum Alloes Page 44 Long Pepper Page 25
Lump Lack Page 23
M
Mace Page 54 Mastic Page 45 Mirabalanes Page 45 Musk Page 26 Mother Pearl
Shells Page 24 Myrrh Page 27
N
Nutmegs Candid Page 55 Nux Vomica Page 21
O
Oil of Cinnamon Page 46 Cloves ibid Mace ibid Nutmegs ibid Rhodium Page 51
Olibanum Page 28 Opium Page 47 Opoponax Page 29
P
Pepper Page 55
R
Rattans Page 58 Rice Page 55 Rhubarb Page 30 Ros e Wood Page 56
S
Sag^ Page 31 Sapan Wood Page 55 Sea Horse Teeth Page 56 Sal Ammoniac Page 32
Scamony Page 40 Seed Lack Page 22 Seed Pearl Page 47 Senna Page 48 Shellack
Page 20 Spikenard Page 48 Sticklack Page 21 Storax Page 49
T
Tamarinds Page 49 Tincall Page 33 Tutenague Page 56 Turmerick Page 34
W
Wormseed Page 50
Y
Yellow Saunders Page 51
Z
Zedoary Page 52
KINGs Duties on EAST INDIA Goods, calculated according to the Method they are
sold at the Companys Candle, and deducted in the Private Trade Account.
L s d Arrack, per Gallon -- Custom 0 0 8 Ditto ditto -- Excise 0 6 8 Alloes
Cicotrin, per out. 7 0 0 Epatic 2 16 0 Assa Faetida 2 12 0 Balm of Gilead, per
lb. 0 2 6 Bdelliam, per out. 3 10 0 Bezoar, per oz. 0 15 0 Borax refined per
out. 18 13 4 Ditto unrefined, or Tincal 4 13 4 Cambogium, per out. 4 13 4
Camphire, refined 7 0 0 Ditto, unrefined 3 10 0 Cantharides, per lb. 0 1 3
Cardemoms, ditto 0 0 9 Cassia Fistulae, per out. 2 2 0 Lignea, ditto 2 6 8
China Root, ditto 9 6 4 Civet, per oz. Troy 0 10 0 Cinnabrium Native, per lb. 0
2 6 Coculus India, per out. 2 16 0 Collocynth, ditto 2 16 0 Cornelian Stones,
rough, 25 per cent. Costi Dulcis, per out. 2 6 8 Cubebs, ditto 1 17 6 Cummin
Seeds, ditto 0 18 4 Canes for Walking, per 1000 1 17 6 Ditto, called Dragons
Bloods, per 1000 1 17 6 Ditto, called Japans, per 1000 1 17 6 Carmenia Wool, or
Goats Hair. per lb. 0 0 7 Carpets of Persia, per square Yard 1 2 0 Coffee, per
out. 1 15 0 Cotton Yarn, per lb. 0 0 6 Diagredium, or Scamony, per lb. 0 5 0
Dragons Blood, per out. 4 13 4 Elephants Teeth, per out: 1 8 0 Ebony Wood, per
out. 0 10 0 Folium India, per lb. 0 1 3 Gallangalls, per out. 2 2 0 Galbanum,
ditto 2 2 0 Green, or preserved Ginger, per out. 2 16 0 Gum Animi, per out, 1 8
0 Arabic, ditto 0 0 6 Ammoniacum, ditto 1 8 0 Copal, ditto 1 3 4 G. Elmi, per
lb. 0 0 2 Lac, called Shellack, per out. 1 8 0 Seedlack, ditto 1 8 0 Cakelack,
ditto 0 10 0 Sticklack, free Opoponax, per out. 9 6 4 Sagapenum, ditto 2 2 0
Sarcocolla, ditto 2 2 0 Tragacath, ditto 1 8 0 Garnets cut, per lb. 1 10 0
Ditto rough, ditto 0 5 0 Ginger of East India, per out. 5 12 0 Hurse Skins, per
Skin 0 0 1 Indigo, free Lapis Hematatis, or Blood Stone, per out. 1 8 0 But if
larger than what is commonly imported for physical Use, per lb. 0 3 9 Lapis
Lazulu, per lb. 0 2 6 Tutiae, per out. 1 8 0 Lign. Alloes, ditto 14 0 0
Asphaltum, ditto 1 8 0 Rhodium, or Rosewood, ditto 0 2 6 Mastic red, per out. 1
8 0 White, ditto 4 13 4 Mirabolans, per out. 1 8 0 Mother of Pearl Shells,
rough, 25 per cent. Musk. per oz. Troy 0 10 0 and more for every Dozen Pods 0
10 0 Myrrh, per out. 4 4 0 Nutmegs, per lb. 0 1 9 Ditt^ c^^ded, per lb. 0 1 0
Nux Vomica, per out. 0 18 8 Olibanum, per ditto 1 5 0 Opium, per lb. 0 2 6
Orpiment, or Auri Pigmentum, per out. 0 10 0 Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace and
Nutmegs, per Cent. 32 11 8 Panther Skins, each 0 5 0 Pepper, black or white,
per lb. 0 0 0 Pepper long, per cwt: 1 8 0 Radix Cassimunan, per Cent. 9 11 8
Rattans, per 1000 0 17 6 Rhubarb, per lb. 0 5 0 Salop, per Cent. 2 11 8
Saunders, yellow, per cwt. 2 16 0 Ditto, white, ditto 1 1 0 Ditto, red, free
Sago, per Cent. 32 11 8 Sal Ammoniac, free Saltpetre, rough, per cwt. 0 7 0
Spikenard, per lb. 0 1 8 Seed, or ragged Pearl, per oz. Troy 0 10 0 Senna, per
lb. 0 0 7 Storax Calamita, per lb. 0 1 3 Succades, wet or dry, ditto 0 1 4
Sugar Candy, brown, per cwt. 4 7 6 Ditto, white, ditto 6 11 3 Sugar, brown,
ditto 1 0 0 Sea Horse Teeth, per lb. 0 0 9 Silk, raw, per lb. 0 1 3 Ditto,
wrought, per lb. 0 1 2 Silver, wrought, per oz. Tamarinds, per cwt. 1 3 4 Terra
Japan Tea, per Cent. 24 11 8 Tincall, per cwt. 4 13 4 Turmerick, ditto 1 8 0
Tutenague, per Cent. 24 11 8 Wormseed, per lb. 0 0 10 Zedoary, per cwt. 4 13 4

Sundry Articles unrated, which pays Duty according to the Price they are sold
for at the Candle; very necessary for every one to consult, especially those of
Furniture or Presents.
Arrangoes, Small, Barrels and Beads Aggates in Lumps and Shapes Bamboe Achar
Birds Nests Cane Blinds, Mats and Shapes China Ink Cheronge China Paper Copper,
enamelled and wrought Fans and Fan Sticks Fire Works Kittisols Oil of Camphire
Mangoes Mother Pearl Counters Looking Glasses, painted, etc. Ivory Toys Paper
Prints Rice Flowers Rosewood Tables and Chairs Soy Straw Boxes Jonquin Baskets
Varnished Tubs Wrought Gold
The above pays King's Duty, for every L 100 Value, L 32 13 8

L s. d. China Ware 40 17 4 per Cent. Lacquered Ware 45 0 0 per Cent. Tea 24 11
8 per Cent.

CLEARING STORES, or a List of the Indulgence of sundry Articles generally
granted and delivered to the several Officers, without the KING or COMPANY's
Duties being charged on them, provided they are claimed by the Proprietor soon
after the Ship is discharged.
The first column denotes Goods; the 2d Captain; the 3d 1 st Mate; the 4th 2d
Mate; the 5th 3d Mate, Purser and Doctor; the 6th 4th, 5th and 6th Mates,
Steward, Surgeon's Mate, Cooks, Boatswain, Carpenter and Gunner; the 7th.
Midshipman, Quarter Masters and Petty Officers, and the 8th, Servants.

No. 1. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 China Bowls 36 12 12 12 6 4 2 Basins pint and half pint
48 36 24 2^ 24 8 4 Sauceboats 12 6 4 4 2 2 1 Cups and Saucers 36 36 36 36 24 24
12 Tea Sets 43 each 4 3 2 2 1 1 Cisterns 2 1 1 1 Candlesticks 12 6 6 6 2 Dishes
72 36 30 24 12 6 Fruit Dishes 24 Guglets and Basins 12 6 4 3 2 Jars, large or
small 12 6 6 6 6 Ditto, Sweetmeats 6 4 4 4 2 Clay Figures 48 24 24 18 12 6 Mugs
24 18 12 9 6 3 2 Ornamentals 36 24 24 12 12 Plates 300 120 84 72 48 24 12
Garden Pots 6 Coffee Pots 4 2 2 2 2 Tea ditto 12 8 6 6 4 2 1 Chamber ditto 12 6
6 4 2 Salts 12 6 6 6 4 Tureens and Stands 6 4 3 2 2 Bread Baskets enameled 6 2
1 1 1 Tea Kettles and Stands 2 1 1 1 1 Lacquer'd Tea Boards 12 6 6 4 2 1 1
Dressing B. xes 2 2 1 1 Patch Boxes 12 10 10 6 4 2 Tea Chest 1 1 1 1 1 Hand
Escrutore 1 Waiters 12 6 6 6 4 2 Screen 1 Paintings on Glass 12 4 3 3 3 Ivory
Rosewood Chest 1 Paper Prints 72 48 36 24 18 6 Fans 36 24 24 24 12 6 4 M^ngo^s,
Gallons 20 10 10 10 10 6 Sugar Candy, lb. 60 30 20 2^ 20 10 Sago. lb. 40 20 20
20 20 20 Sweatmea's, Gallons 6 3 3 3 3 Soy, Gallons 15 6 6 6 5 2 Tama^inds 100
40 4 40 30 Wine, Doxen 20 6 6 3 3 Wax Candles, lb. 00 20 15 10 10 10 Lacquer'd
Ca^ine^s 2 1 1 1 1 Tea T^ les 2 1 1 1 1


