AN ESSAY ON The Usefulness of MATHEMATICAL LEARNING.

AN ESSAY ON The Usefulness of MATHEMATICAL LEARNING, IN A Letter from a
Gentleman in the CITY to his Friend in OXFORD.



Printed at the THEATER in Oxford for Anth. Peisley Bookseller, 1701.

Imprimatur,

TO. MANDER,
Vice-Can. Oxon. January 28. 1700./1701.
AN ESSAY ON The Usefulness of MATHEMATICAL LEARNING, etc.
SIR,
I AM glad to hear from you, that the study of the Mathematics is Promoted and
Encouraged among the Youth of your University. The great influence, which these
Sciences have on Philosophy and all useful Learning, as well as the Concerns of
the Public, may sufficiently recommend them to your choice and consideration:
and the particular advantages, which You of that place enjoy, give Us just
reason to expect from You a suitable improvement in them. I have here sent you
some short reflections upon the Usefulness of Mathematical Learning, which may
serve as an argument to incite you to a closer and more vigorous pursuit of it.

In all Ages and Countries, where Learning has prevailed, the Mathematical
Sciences have been looked upon as the most considerable branch of it. The very
name (...) implies no less; by which they were called either for their
excellency, or because of all the Sciences they were first taught, or because
they were judged to comprehend (...). And amongst those, that are commonly
reckoned to be the seven Liberal Arts, four are Mathematical, to wit,
Arithmetic, Music, Geometry, and Astronomy.

But notwithstanding their Excellency and Reputation, they have not been taught
nor studied so universally, as some of the rest; which I take to have proceeded
from the following causes: The aversion of the greatest part of Mankind to
serious attention and close arguing; Their not comprehending sufficiently the
necessity or great usefulness of these in other parts of Learning; An Opinion
that this study requires a particular Genius and turn of Head, which few are so
happy as to be Born with; And the want of Public Encouragement, and able
Masters. For these, and perhaps some other reasons, this study has been
generally neglected, and regarded only by some few persons, whose happy Genius
and Curiosity have prompted them to it, or who have been forced upon it by its
immediate subserviency to some particular Art or Office.

Therefore I think I cannot do better service to Learning, Youth, and the
Nation in general, than by showing, That the Mathematics of all parts of
humane knowledge, for the improvement of the Mind, for their subserviency to
other Arts, and their usefulness to the Commonwealth, deserve most to be
encouraged. I know a discourse of this nature will be offensive to some, who,
while they are ignorant of Mathematics, yet think themselves Masters of all
valuable Learning: but their displeasure must not deterr me from delivering an
useful truth.

The advantages, which accrue to the Mind by Mathematical studies, consist
chiefly in these things: 1st. In accustoming it to attention. 2dly. In giving
it a habit of close and demonstrative reasoning. 3dly. In freeing it from
prejudice, credulity, and superstition.

First, the Mathematics make the Mind attentive to the objects, which it
considers. This they do by entertaining it with a great variety of truths,
which are delightful and evident, but not obvious. Truth is the same thing to
the understanding, as Music to the ear, and Beauty to the eye. The pursuit of
it does really as much gratify a natural faculty implanted in us by our wise
Creator, as the pleasing of our Senses: only in the former case, as the Object
and Faculty are more Spiritual, the delight is the more pure, free from the
regret, turpitude, lassitude, and intemperance, that commonly attend sensual
pleasures. The most part of other Sciences consisting only of probable
reasonings, the Mind has not where to fix; and wanting sufficient principles to
pursue its searches upon, gives them over as impossible. Again, as in
Mathematical investigations truth may be found, so it is not always obvious:
This spurs the Mind, and makes it diligent and attentive. In Geometria says
Quinctilian, (lib. I. cap. 10.) partem fatentur esse utilem teneris aetatibus:
agitari namque animos, atque acui ingenia, and celeritatem percipiendi venire
inde concedunt. And Plato (in Repub. lib. VII.) observes, that the Youth, who
are furnished with Mathematical knowledge, are prompt and quick at all other
Sciences, (...). Therefore he calls it (...). And indeed Youth is generally so
much more delighted with Mathematical studies, than with the unpleasant tasks,
that are some times imposed upon them, that I have known some reclaimed by them
from idleness and neglect of learning, and acquire in time a habit of thinking,
diligence, and attention; qualities, which we ought to study by all means to
beget in their desultory and roving Minds.

The second advantage, which the Mind reaps from Mathematical knowledge, is a
habit of clear, demonstrative, and methodical Reasoning. We are contrived by
Nature to learn by Imitation more than by Precept: And I believe in that
respect Reasoning is much like other inferior Arts (as Dancing, Singing, etc.)
acquired by practice. By accustoming our selves to Reason closely about
quantity, we acquire a habit of doing so in other things. It is surprising to
see, what superficial, inconsequential Reasonings, satisfy the most part of
Mankind. A piece of wit, a jest, a simile, or a quotation of an Author, passes
for a mighty Argument: with such things as these are the most part of Authors
stuffed: and from these weighty premises they infer their conclusions. This
weakness and effeminacy of Mankind in being persuaded where they are delighted,
have made them the sport of Orators, Poets, and Men of wit. Those lumina
Orationis are indeed very good diversion for the Fancy, but are not the proper
business of the Understanding; and where a Man pretends to write on abstract
subjects in a Scientifical method, he ought not to debauch in them. Logical
precepts are more useful, nay, they are absolutely necessary for a rule of
formal arguing in public disputations, and confounding an obstinate and
perverse adversary, and exposing him to the audience, or readers. But in the
search of truth, an imitation of the method of the Geometers will carry a Man
further than all the Dialectical rules. Their Analysis is the proper model we
ought to form our selves upon, and imitate in the regular disposition and
gradual progress of our enquiries; and even he, who is ignorant of the nature
of Mathematical Analysis, uses a method somewhat Analogous to it. The
Composition of the Geometers, or their method of demonstrating truths already
found out, viz. by Definitions of words agreed upon, by Self-evident truths,
and Propositions that have been already demonstrated, is practicable in other
subjects, though not to the same perfection, the natural want of evidence in the
things themselves not allowing it; but it is imitable to a considerable degree.
I dare appeal to some writings of our own Age and Nation, the Authors of which
have been Mathematically inclined. I shall add no more on this head, but that
one, who is accustomed to the methodical Systems of truths, which the Geometers
have reared up in the several branches of those Sciences, which they have
cultivated, will hardly bear with the confusion and disorder of other Sciences,
but endeavor as far as he can to reform them.

Thirdly, Mathematical knowledge adds a manly vigor to the Mind, frees it from
prejudice, credulity, and superstition. This it does two ways, 1st. by
accustoming us to examine, and not to take things upon trust. 2dly. By giving
us a clear and extensive knowledge of the System of the World; which, as it
creates in us the most profound reverence of the Almighty and wise Creator; so
it frees us from the mean and narrow thoughts, which ignorance and superstition
are apt to beget. How great an enemy Mathematics are to superstition, appears
from this, That in those Countries, where Romish Priests exercise their
barbarous Tyranny over the minds of Men, Astronomers, who are fully persuaded
of the motion of the Earth, dare not speak out: But tho the Inquisition may
extort a Recantation, the Pope and a general Council too will not find
themselves able to persuade to the contrary Opinion. Perhaps, this may have
given occasion to a calumnious suggestion, as if Mathematics were an enemy to
Religion, which is a scandal thrown both on the one and the other; for truth
can never be an enemy to true Religion, which appears always to the best
advantage, when it is most examined. -- Si propius stes,
Te capiet magis. --


On the contrary, the Mathematics are friends to Religion; inasmuch as they
charm the passions, restrain the impetuosity of imagination, and purge the Mind
from error and prejudice. Vice is error, confusion and false Reasoning; and all
truth is more or less opposite to it. Besides, Mathematical studies may serve
for a pleasant entertainment for those hours, which young Men are apt to throw
away upon their Vices; the delightfulness of them being such, as to make
solitude not only easy, but desirable.

What I have said may serve to recommend Mathematics for acquiring a vigorous
Constitution of Mind; for which purpose they are as useful, as exercise is for
procuring Health and Strength to the Body. I proceed now to show their vast
extent and Usefulness in other parts of knowledge. And here it might suffice to
tell you, that Mathematics is the Science of quantity, or the Art of Reasoning
about things that are capable of more and less, and that the most part of the
objects of our knowledge are such: as matter, space, number, time, motion,
gravity, etc. We have but imperfect ideas of things without quantity, and as
imperfect a one of quantity it self without the help of Mathematics. All the
visible works of God Almighty are made in number, weight, and measure;
therefore to consider them, we ought to understand Arithmetic, Geometry, and
Staticks: and the greater advances we make in those Arts, the more capable we
are of considering such things, as are the ordinary objects of our Conceptions.
But this will farther appear from particulars.

And first, if we consider, to what perfection we now know the Courses,
Periods, Order, Distances, and Proportions of the several great Bodies of the
Universe, at least such as fall within our view; we shall have cause to admire
the Sagacity and Industry of the Mathematicians, and the power of Numbers and
Geometry well applied. Let us cast our Eyes backward, and consider Astronomy in
its Infancy: or rather let us suppose it still to begin; for instance, a Colony
of Rude Country people, transplanted into an Island remote from the commerce of
all Mankind, without so much as the knowledge of the Calendar, and the Periods
of the Seasons, without Instruments to make Observations, or any the least
notion of Observations or Instruments. When is it, we could expect any of their
posterity should arrive at the Art of predicting an Eclipse? Not only so, but
the Art of reckoning all Eclipses that are past or to come, for any number of
Years? When is it, we could suppose, that one of those Islanders transported to
any other place of the Earth, should be able by the inspection of the Heavens
to find how much he were South or North, East or West of his own Island, and to
conduct his Ship back thither? For my part, though I know this may be, and is
daily done, by what is known in Astronomy; yet when I consider the vast
Industry, Sagacity, multitude of Observations, and other extrinsick things
necessary for such a sublime piece of knowledge, I should be apt to pronounce
it impossible, and never to be hoped for. Now we are let so much into the
knowledge of the Machine of the Universe, and motion of its parts by the Rules
of this Science, perhaps the invention may seem easy. But when we reflect, what
Penetration and Contrivance were necessary to lay the foundations of so great
and extensive an Art, we cannot but admire its first Inventors: as Thales
Milesius, who, as Diogenes Laertius and Pliny say, first predicted Eclipses;
and his Scholar Anaximander Milesius, who found out the Globous Figure of the
Earth, the Aequinoctial Points, the Obliquity of the Ecliptic, the principles
of Gnomonicks, and made the first Sphere or Image of the Heavens; and
Pythagoras, to whom we owe the discovery of the true System of the World, and
order of the Planets. Though it may be, they were assisted by the Egyptians and
Chaldeans. But whoever they were, that first made these bold steps in this
Noble Art, they deserve the praise and admiration of all future Ages. Felices
animae, quibus haec cognoscere primis,
Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit.
Credibile est illos pariter vitiisque jocisque
Altius humanis exseruisse caput.
Non Venus and vinum sublimia pectora fregit,
Officiumque fori, militiaeque labor.
Non levis ambitio, perfusaque gloria fuco,
Magnarumque fames sollicitavit opum.
Admovere oculis distantia sidera nostris,
Aetheraque ingenio supposuere suo.
Ovid. in Io. Fast.

But though the industry of former Ages had discovered the Periods of the great
Bodies of the Universe, and the true System and Order of them, and their Orbits
pretty near; yet was there one thing still reserved for the glory of this Age,
and the honor of the English Nation, The grand secret of the whole Machine;
which, now it is discovered, proves to be (like the other contrivances of
Infinite Wisdom) simple and natural, depending upon the most known and most
common property of matter, viz. gravity. From this the incomparable Mr. Newton
has demonstrated the Theories of all the Bodies of the Solar System, of all the
primary Planets and their secondaries, and among others, the Moon, which seemed
most averse to numbers: And not only of the Planets, the slowest of which
compleats its Period in less than half the Age of a Man, but likewise of the
Comets, some of which its probable spend more than 2000. years in one
Revolution about the Sun; for whose Theory he has laid such a foundation, that
after Ages assisted with more Observations, may be able to Calculate their
returns. In a word, the precession of the Aequinoctial Points, the Tides, the
unequal Vibration of Pendulous Bodies in different Latitudes, etc. are no more
a question to those, that have Geometry enough to understand, what he has
delivered on those Subjects: A perfection in Philosophy, that the boldest
thinker durst hardly have hoped for; and, unless Mankind turn barbarous, will
continue the Reputation of this Nation, as long as the Fabric of Nature shall
endure. After this, what is it, we may not expect from Geometry joined to
Observations and Experiments?

The next considerable object of Natural knowledge, I take to be Light. How
unsuccessful enquiries are about this Glorious Body without the help of
Geometry, may appear from the empty and frivolous discourses and disputations
of a sort of Men, that call themselves Philosophers; whom nothing will serve
forsooth, but the knowledge of the very Nature, and intimate Causes of every
thing: while on the other hand, the Geometers not troubling themselves with
those fruitless enquiries about the Nature of Light, have discovered two
remarkable properties of it, in the reflection and refraction of its beams: and
from those, and their streightness in other cases, have invented the noble Arts
of Optics, Catoptricks, and Dioptricks; teaching us to manage this subtle
Body for the improvement of our knowledge, and useful purposes of Life. They
have likewise demonstrated the causes of several Celestial appearances, that
arise from the inflection of its Beams, both in the Heavenly Bodies themselves
and other Phoenomena, as Parhelia, the Iris, etc. and by a late Experiment they
have discovered the celerity of its motion. And we shall know yet more
surprising properties of Light, when Mr. Newton shall be pleased to gratify
the World with his Book of Light and Colors.

The Fluids which involve our Earth, viz. Air and Water, are the next great and
conspicuous Bodies, that Nature presents to our view: And I think we know
little of either, but what is owing to Mechanics and Geometry. The two
chiefest properties of Air, its Gravity and Elastick force, have been
discovered by Mechanical Experiments. From thence the decrease of the Air's
density according to the increase of the distance of the Earth has been
demonstrated by Geometers, and confirmed by Experiments of the subsidence of
the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment. From this likewise, by assistance
of Geometry, they have determined the height of the Atmosphere, as far as it
has any sensible density; which agrees exactly with another Observation of the
duration of the Twilight. Air and Water make up the object of the
Hydrostaticks, though denominated only from the latter, of which the principles
were long since settled and demonstrated by Archimedes, in his Book (...),
where are demonstrated the causes of several surprising Phoenomena of Nature,
depending only on the Aequilibrium of Fluids, the relative Gravities of these
Fluids, and of Solids swimming or sinking therein. Here also the Mathematicians
consider the different Pressures, Resistances, and Celerities of Solids moved
in Fluids: from whence they explain a great many appearances of Nature,
unintelligible to those who are ignorant of Geometry.

Next, if we descend to the Animal Kingdom, there we may see the brightest
strokes of Divine Mechanics. And whither we consider first the Animal Economy
in general, either in the internal motion and circulation of the Juices forced
through the several Canals by the motion of the Heart, or their external
motions, and the Instruments wherewith these are performed, we must reduce them
to Mechanical Rules, and confess the necessity of the knowledge of Mechanics
to understand them, or explain them to others. Borelli in his excellent
Treatise de motu Animalium, Steno in his admirable Myologiae specimen, and
other Mathematical Men on the one hand, and the nonsensical, unintelligible
stuff that the common Writers on these Subjects have filled their Books with on
the other, are sufficient instances to show, how necessary Geometry is in such
speculations. The only Organ of an Animal Body, whose structure and manner of
operation is fully understood, has been the only one, which the Geometers have
taken to their share to consider. It Is incredible, how sillily the greatest and
ablest Physicians talked of the parts of the Eye and their use, and of the
modus visionis, before Kepler by his Geometry found it out, and put it past
dispute, though they applied themselves particularly to this, and valued
themselves on it: and Galen pretended a particular Divine Commission to treat
of it. Nay, notwithstanding the full discovery of it, some go on in copying
their Predecessors, and talk as Vngeometrically as ever. It Is true, we cannot
reason so clearly of the internal motions of an Animal Body, as of the
external, wanting sufficient data and decisive Experiments: But what relates to
the latter (as the Articulation, Structure, Insertion, and Vires of the
Muscles) is as subject to strict Mathematical disquisition, as any thing
whatsoever; and even in the Theory of Diseases and their Cures, those, who talk
Mechanically, talk most intelligibly. Which may be the reason for the Opinion
of the ancient Physicians, that Mathematics are necessary for the study of
Medicine it self, for which I could bring long quotations out of their works.
Among the Letters that are ascribed to Hippocrates, there is one to his Son
Thessalus, recommending to him the study of Arithmetic and Geometry, as
necessary to Medicine. Galen in his Book entitled (...), begins, (...) (...).
If one of the reasons of the Ancients for this be now somewhat unfashionable,
to wit, because they thought a Physician should be able to know the situation
and aspects of the Stars, which they believed had influence upon Men and their
Diseases, (and positively to deny it, and say, that they have none at all, is
the effect of want of Observation) we have a much better and undoubted one in
its room; viz. That Mathematics are found to be the best Instrument of
promoting natural knowledge. 2dly. If we consider, not only the Animal Economy
in general, but likewise the wonderful structure of the different sorts of
Animals, according to the different purposes for which they were designed, the
various Elements they inhabit, the several ways of procuring their nourishment,
and propagating their kind, the different enemies they have, and accidents they
are subject to, here is still a greater need of Geometry. It is pity, that the
qualities of an expert Anatomist and skillful Geometer have seldom met in the
same person. When such a one shall appear, there is a whole Terra incognita of
delightful knowledge to employ his time, and reward his industry.

As for the other two Kingdoms; Borelli and other Mathematical Men, seem to
have talked very clearly of Vegetation: and Steno another Mathematician, in his
excellent Treatise de Solido intra Solidum naturaliter contento, has applied
this part of learning very handsomely to Fossils and some other parts of
Natural History. I shall add only one thing more, That if we consider motion it
self, the great Instrument of the Actions of Bodies upon one another, the
Theory of it is entirely owing to the Geometers; who have demonstrated its Laws
both in hard and elastick Bodies; showed how to measure it is quantity, how to
compound and resolve the several forces, by which Bodies are agitated, and to
determine the Lines, which those compound forces make them describe: of such
forces gravity, being the most constant and uniform, affords a great variety of
useful knowledge, in considering several motions that happen upon the Earth;
viz. As to the free descent of heavy Bodies; The curve of projectiles; The
descent and weight of heavy Bodies when they lie on inclined plains; The Theory
of the motion of Pendulous Bodies, etc.

From what I have said, I shall draw but one Corollary, That a natural
Philosopher without Mathematics is a very odd sort of a person, that reasons
about things that have Bulk, Figure, Motion, Number, Weight, etc. without
Arithmetic, Geometry, Mechanics, Staticks, etc. I must needs say, I have the
last contempt for those Gentlemen, that pretend to explain how the Earth was
framed, and yet can hardly measure an Acre of Ground upon the surface of it:
And as the Philosopher speaks, Qui repent pedibus illotis ad Philosophos
divertunt, non hoc est satis, quod sint omnino (...) sed legem etiam dant, qua
Philosophari discant.

The usefulness of Mathematics in several other Arts and Sciences is fully as
plain. They were looked upon by the ancient Philosophers as the key to all
knowledge. Therefore Plato wrote upon his School, (...), Let none unskilled in
Geometry enter; and Xenocrates told one ignorant in Mathematics, who desired
to be his Scholar, that he was fitter to Card Wool, (...), you want the handle
of Philosophy, viz. Geometry. There is no understanding the works of the
ancient Philosophers without it. Theo Smyrnoeus has wrote a Book entitled, An
explanation of those things in Mathematics, that are necessary for the reading
of Plato: Aristotle illustrates his precepts and other thoughts by Mathematical
examples, and that not only in Logic, etc. but even in Ethics, where he makes
use of Geometrical and Arithmetical proportion, to explain commutative and
distributive justice.

Every body knows, that Chronology and Geography are indispensable preparations
for History: a relation of matter of fact being a very lifeless insipid thing
without the circumstances of time and place. Nor is it sufficient for one, that
would understand things thoroughly, that he knows the Topography, that is, the
name of the Country, where such a place lies, with those of the near adjacent
places, and how these lie in respect of one another; but it will become him
likewise to understand the Scientifical principles of the Art: that is, to have
a true Idea of a place, we ought to know the relation it has to any other
place, as to the distance and bearing, its Climate, Heat, Cold, length of days,
etc. which things do much enliven the Readers notion of the very action it
self. Just so, it is necessary to know the Technical or Doctrinal part of
Chronology, if a Man would be thoroughly skilled in History, it being impossible
without it, to unravel the confusion of Historians. I remember Mr. Hally has
determined the day and hour of Julius Coesar's Landing in Britain, from the
circumstances of his relation. And every body knows, how great use our
incomparable Historian Mr. Dodwell has made of the Calculated times of
Eclipses, for settling the times of great Events, which before were as to this
essential circumstance almost fabulous. Both Chronology and Geography, and also
the knowledge of the Sun's and Moon's motions, so far as they relate to the
constitution of the Calendar and Year, are necessary to a Divine, and how sadly
some otherwise Eminent have blunder'd, when they meddled with things that
relate to these, and border on them, is too apparent.

No body, I think, will question the interest, that Mathematics have in
Painting, Music, and Architecture, which are all founded on numbers.
Perspective and the Rules of Light and Shadows are owing to Geometry and
Optics: And I think those two comprehend pretty near the whole Art of
Painting, except decorum and ordinance; which are only a due observance of the
History and Circumstances of the subject, you represent. For by Perspective,
may be understood the Art of designing the outlines of your solid, whether that
be a Building, Landscape, or Animal: and the draught of a Man is really as much
the Perspective of a Man, as the draught of a Building is of a Building; though
for particular reasons, as because it consists of more crooked lines, etc. it
is hard to reduce the Perspective of the former, to the ordinary established
Rules.

If Mathematics had not reduced Music to a regular System, by contriving its
Scales, it had been no Art, but Enthusiastic Rapture, left to the roving fancy
of every Practitioner. This appears by the extraordinary pains, which the
Ancients have taken to fit numbers to three sorts of Music, the Diatonick,
Chromatick, and Enharmonick: which if we consider with their nicety in
distinguishing their several Modes, we shall be apt to judge, they had
something very fine in their Music, at least for moving the passions with
single Instruments and Voices. But Music had been imperfect still, had not
Arithmetic stepped in once more, and Guido Aretinus by inventing the
temperament, making the Fifth false by a certain determined quantity, taught us
to Tune our Organs, and intermix all the three kinds of the Ancients; to which
we owe all the Regular and Noble Harmony of our modern Music.

As for Civil Architecture (of Military I shall speak afterward) there is
hardly any part of Mathematics, but is some way subservient to it. Geometry
and Arithmetic for the due measure of the several parts of a Building, the
Plans, Models, computation of Materials, time and charges: for ordering right
its Arches and Vaults, that they may be both firm and beautiful: Mechanics for
its strength and firmness, transporting and raising materials: and Optics for
the Symmetry and Beauty. And I would not have any assume the character of an
Architect without a competent skill in all of these. You see that Vitruvius
requires these and many more for making a complete Architect. I must own, that
should any one set up to practice in any of the forementioned Arts, furnished
only with his Mathematical Rules, he would produce but very clumsy pieces. He,
that should pretend to draw by the Geometrical Rules of Perspective, or Compose
Music merely by his skill in Harmonical numbers, would show but awkward
performances. In those Composed Subjects, besides the stiff Rules, there must
be Fancy, Genius, and Habit. Yet nevertheless these Arts owe their being to
Mathematics, as laying the foundation of their Theory, and affording them
Precepts, which being once invented, are securely relied upon by Practitioners.
Thus many design, that know not a ^ittle of the reason of the Rules, they
practice b^ and many no better quality ^ in their way Compose Music, better
perhaps than he could have done, that invented the Scale, and the Numbers upon
which their Harmony is founded. As Mathematics laid the foundation of these
Arts, so they must improve them: and he, that would invent, must be skilled in
Numbers. Besides it is fit a Man should know the true grounds and reasons of
what he studies: and he that does so, will certainly practice in his Art with
greater judgment and variety, where the ordinary Rules fail him.

I proceed now to show the more immediate usefulness of Mathematics in Civil
Affairs. To begin with Arithmetic, it were an endless task to relate its
several uses in public and private business. The regulation and quick dispatch
of both, seem entirely owing to it. The Nations, that want it, are altogether
barbarous, as some Americans, who can hardly reckon above twenty. And I believe
it would go near to ruin the Trade of the Nation, were the easy practice of
Arithmetic abolished: for example, were the Merchants and Tradesmen obliged to
make use of no other than the Roman way of notation by Letters, instead of our
present. And if we should feel the want of our Arithmetic in the easiest
Calculations, how much more in those, that are some thing harder; as Interest
simple and compound, Annuities, etc. in which, it is incredible, how much the
ordinary Rules and Tables influence the dispatch of business. Arithmetic is
not only the great Instrument of private Commerce, but by it are (or ought to
be) kept the public Accounts of a Nation: I mean those, that regard the whole
State of a Commonwealth, as to the number, fructification of its people,
increase of Stock, improvement of Lands and Manufactures, Balance of Trade,
Public Revenues, Coynage, Military power by Sea and Land, etc. Those, that
would judge or reason truly about the State of any Nation, must go that way to
work, subjecting all the forementioned particulars to Calculation. This is the
true Political knowledge. In this respect the affairs of a Commonwealth differ
from those of a private Family, only in the greatness and multitude of
particulars, that make up the accounts. Machiavel goes this way to work in his
account of different Estates. What Sir William Petty and several others of our
Countrymen have wrote in Political Arithmetic, does abundantly show the
pleasure and usefulness of such Speculations. It is true, for want of good
information, their Calculations some times proceed upon erroneous suppositions:
but that is not the fault of the Art. But what is it, the Government could not
perform in this way, who have the command of all public Records?

Lastly, Numbers are applicable even to such things, as seem to be governed by
no rule, I mean such as depend on Chance: The quantity of probability and
proportion of it in any two proposed cases being subject to Calculation as much
as any thing else. Upon this depend the principles of Game. We find Sharpers
know enough of this, to cheat some men that would take it very ill to be
thought Bubbles: And one Gamester exceeds another, as he has a greater sagacity
and readiness in Calculating his probability to win or lose in any proposed
case. To understand the Theory of Chance thoroughly, requires a great knowledge
of Numbers, and a pretty competent one of Algebra.

The several uses of Geometry are not much fewer than those of Arithmetic. It
is necessary for ascertaining of property both in Plains and Solids, or in
Surveying and Guaging. By it Land is sold by the measure as well as Cloth:
Workmen are paid the due price of their labor, according to the superficial
or solid measure of their work: and the quantity of liquors determined for a
due regulation of their price and duty. All which do wonderfully conduce to the
easy dispatch of business, and the preventing of frauds and controversies. I
need not mention the Measuring distances, laying down of Plans and Maps of
Countries, in which we have daily Experience of its usefulness. These are some
familiar instances of things, to which Geometry is ordinarily applied: of its
use in Civil, Military, and Naval Architecture we shall speak afterward.

From Astronomy we have the regular disposition of our time, in a due
succession of years, which are kept within their limits as to the return of the
Seasons, and the motion of the Sun. This is no small advantage for the due
repetition of the same work, Labor and Actions. For many of our Public,
Private, Military, and Country Affairs, Appointments, etc. depending on the
products of the Ground, and they on the Seasons; It is necessary, that the
returns of them be adjusted pretty near to the motion of the Sun: and we should
quickly find the inconveniency of a vague undetermined year, if we used that of
the Mahumetans, whose beginning and every month wanders through all the days of
ours or the Solar year, which shows the Seasons. Beside, the adjusting of the
Moon's motion to the Sun's is required for the decent Observation and
Celebration of the Church-Feasts and Fasts according to the Ancient Custom and
Primitive Institution; and likewise for the knowing of the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Tides, the Spring and Neap Tides, Currents, etc. So that whatever some
people may think of an Almanac where all these are set down, it is oftentimes
the most useful paper that is published the same year with it: Nay, the Nation
could better spare all the Voluminous Authors in the Term-Catalogue, than that
single sheet. Besides, without a regular Chronology, there can be no certain
History; which appears by the confusion amongst Historians before the right
disposition of the year, and at present among the Turks, who have the same
confusion in their History as in their Calendar. Therefore a matter of such
importance might well deserve the care of the Great Emperor, to whom we owe
our present Calendar; who was himself a great proficient in Astronomy. Pliny
has quoted several things from his Books of the Rising and Setting of the
Stars, Lib. XVIII. cap. 25, 26, etc. and Lucan makes him say, -- Media inter
praelia semper
Stellarum, Coelique plagis, superisque vacavi.


The Mechanics have produced so many useful Engines, subservient to
convenience, that it would be a task too great to relate the several sorts of
them: some of them keep Life it self from being a burden. If we consider such,
as are invented for raising weights, and are employed in Building and other
great works, in which no impediment is too great for them; or Hydraulick
Engines for raising of Water, serving for great use and comfort to Mankind,
where they have no other way to be supplied readily with that necessary
Element; or such as, by making Wind and Water work for us, save Animal force
and great charges, and perform those actions, which require a vast multitude of
hands, and without which every Man's time would be too little to prepare his
own Aliment and other necessaries; or those Machines, that have been invented
by Mankind for delight and curiosity, imitating the motions of Animals, or
other works of Nature; we shall have reason to admire and extol so excellent
an Art. What shall we say of the several Instruments, which are contrived to
measure time? We should quickly find the value of them, if we were reduced to
the condition of those barbarous Nations, that want them. The Pendulum-Clock
invented and completed by that famous Mathematician Monsieur Hugens is an
useful invention. Is there any thing more wonderful than several Planetary
Machines, which have been invented to show the motions of the Heavenly Bodies,
and their places at any time? Of which the most Ingenious, according to the
exactest Numbers and true System, was made by the same M. Hugens: to which we
may very justly apply Claudian's noble Verses upon that of Archimedes. Jupiter
in parvo cum cerneret Aethera vitro,
Risit, and ad superos talia dicta dedit:
Huttine mortalis progressa potentia curae?
Jam meus in fragili luditur or be labor.
Jura poli, rerumque fidem, legesque Deorum
Ecce Syracusais transtulit art senex.
Inclusus variis famulatur spiritus astris,
Et vioum certis motibus urget opus.
Percurrit proprium mentitus signifer annum,
Et simulata novo Cynthia mense redit.
Jamque suum volvens audax industria mundum
Gaudet, and humana sidera mente regit.
Quid falso insontem tonitru Salmonea miror?
Aemula naturae parva reperta manus.


Here I ought to mention the Sciatherical Instruments, for want of which there
was a time, when the Grecians themselves were forced to measure the Shadow, in
order to know the Hour; and as Pliny ( cap. ult. lib. VII.) tells us, the
Romans made use of an erroneous Sun-dial for ninety nine years, till Q. Marcius
Philippus their Censor set up a better; which no doubt at that time was thought
a Jewel. And at last, that famous Pyramid was set up in the Campus Martius, to
serve for a Gnomon to a Dial marked on the street. To this sort of Engines
ought to be referred Spheres, Globes, Astrolabes, Projections of the Sphere,
etc. These are such useful and necessary things, that alone may recommend the
Art, by which they are made. For by these we are able in our Closet to judge of
the Celestial motions, and to visit the most distant places of the Earth,
without the fatigue and danger of Voyages; to determine concerning their
distance, Situation, Climate, Nature of the Seasons, length of their days, and
their relation to the Celestial Bodies, as much as if we were Inhabitants. To
all these I might add those Instruments, which the Mathematicians have invented
to execute their own precepts, for making Observations either at Sea or Land,
Surveying, Gauging, etc.

The Catoptricks and Dioptricks furnish us with variety of useful inventions,
both for the promoting of knowledge, and the conveniences of Life; whereby
Sight, the great Instrument of our perception, is so much improved, that
neither the distance, nor the minuteness of the Object are any more impediments
to it. The Telescope is of so vast use, that, besides the delightful and useful
purposes it is applied to here below, as the descrying Ships, and Men, and
Armies at a distance, we have by its means discovered new parts of the
Creation, fresh instances of the surprising Wisdom of the Adorable Creator. We
have by it discovered the Satellites of Jupiter, the Satellites and Ring of
Saturn, the Rotation of the Planets about their own Axes; besides other
appearances, whereby the System of the World is made plain to sense, as it was
before to reason. The Telescope has also improved the manner of Astronomical
Observations, and made them much more accurate, than it was possible for them
to be before. And these improvements in Astronomy, have brought along with them
(as ever) correspondent improvements in Geography. From the Observation of
Jupiter's Satellites, we have a ready way to determine the Longitude of places
on the Earth. On the other hand, the Microscope has not been less useful in
helping us to the sight of such Objects, as by their minuteness escape our
naked eye. By it Men have pursued Nature into its most retired recesses; so
that now it can hardly any more hide its greatest Mysteries from us. How much
have we learned by the help of the Microscope of the contrivance and structure
of Animal and Vegetable Bodies, and the composition of Fluids and Solids? But
if these Sciences had never gone further, than by their single Specula and
Lentes to give those surprising appearances of Objects and their Images, and to
produce heat unimitable by our hottest Furnaces, and to furnish infallible,
easy, cheap, and safe remedies for the decay of our Sight arising commonly from
old Age, and for purblindness; they had merited the greatest esteem, and
invited to the closest study: especially if we consider, that such as naturally
are almost blind, and either know not their nearest acquaintance at the
distance of a rooms breadth, or cannot read in order to pass their time
pleasantly, are by Glasses adapted to the defect of their Eyes set on a level
again with those that enjoy their Eyesight best, and that without danger,
pain, or charge.

Again, Mathematics are highly serviceable to a Nation in Military Affairs. I
believe this will be readily acknowledged by every body. The Affairs of War
take in Number, Space, Force, Distance, Time, etc. (things of Mathematical
consideration) in all its parts, in Tacticks, Castrametation, Fortifying,
Attacquing, and Defending. The Ancients had more occasion for Mechanics in the
Art of War than we have: Gunpowder readily producing a force far exceeding all
the Engines, they had contrived for Battery. And this I reckon has lost us a
good occasion of improving our Mechanics: the cunning of Mankind never
exerting it self so much, as in their Arts of destroying one another. But, as
Gunpowder has made Mechanics less serviceable to War; it has made Geometry
more necessary: There being a force or resistance in the due measures and
proportions of the Lines and Angles of a Fortification, which contribute much
toward its strength. This Art of Fortification has been much studied of late,
but I dare not affirm, that it has attained its utmost perfection. And though,
where the ground is regular, it admits but of small variety, the measures being
pretty well determined by Geometry and Experience, yet where the ground is made
up of natural Strengths and Weaknesses, it affords some scope for thinking and
contrivance. But there is another much harder piece of Geometry, which
Gunpowder has given us occasion to improve, and that is the doctrine of
Projectiles; whereon the Art of Gunnery is founded. Here the Geometers have
invented a beautiful Theory, and Rules and Instruments, which have reduced the
casting of Bombs to great exactness. As for Tacticks and Castrametation,
Mathematics retain the same place in them as ever. And some tolerable skill in
these are necessary for Officers, as well as for Engineers. An Officer, that
understands Fortification, will caeteris paribus much better defend his post,
as knowing, wherein its strength consists, or make use of his advantage to his
Enemy's Ruin, than he that does not. He knows, when he leads never so small a
party, what his advantages and disadvantages in Defending and Attacquing are,
how to make the best of his Ground etc. And hereby can do truly more service
than another of as much Courage, who, for want of such knowledge, it may be,
throws away himself and a number of brave Fellows under his Command: and it is
well, if the mischief reaches no further. As for a competent skill in Numbers,
it is so necessary to Officers, that no Man can be safely trusted with a
Company, that has it not. All the business is not to fire Muskets; the
managing of Affairs, the dealing with Agents, etc. happen more frequently. And
the higher the Command is, the more skill in all the aforesaid things is
required. And I dare appeal to all the Nations in Europe, whether caeteris
paribus Officers are not advanced in proportion to their skill in Mathematical
Learning; except, that some times Great Names and Quality carry it; but still
so, as that the Prince depends upon a Man of Mathematical Learning, that is put
as director to the Quality, when that Learning is wanting in it.

Lastly, Navigation which is made up of Astronomy and Geometry, is so noble an
Art, and to which Mankind owes so many advantages, that upon this single
account those Excellent Sciences deserve most of all to be studied, and merit
the greatest encouragement from a Nation, that owes to it both its Riches and
Security. And not only does the Common Art of Navigation depend on
Mathematics, but whatever improvements shall be made in the Architectura
Navalis or Building of Ships, whether they are designed for Merchant-Ships, or
Ships of War, whether swift running, or bearing a great sail, or lying near the
wind be desired, these must all be the improvements of Geometry.
Ship-Carpenters indeed are very industrious; but in these things they
acknowledge their inability, confess that their best productions are the
effects of chance, and implore the Geometers help. Nor will common Geometry do
the business; it requires the most abstruse to determine the different sections
of a Ship, according as it is designed for any of the foresaid ends. A French
Mathematician P. Le Host has lately endeavored some thing in this way: and
though it is not free from errors, as requiring a fuller knowledge in Geometry;
yet is the Author much to be commended for this, as having bravely designed,
and paved the way for other Mathematicians; and also for the former and bigger
part of his Book, wherein he brings to a system, the working of Ships, and the
Naval Tacticks, or the regular disposition of a Fleet in Attacquing, Fighting
and Retreating, according to the different circumstances of Wind, Tides, etc.

The great objection, that is made against the necessity of Mathematics, in
the forementioned great Affairs of Navigation, the Art Military, etc. is, that
we see those Affairs are carried on and managed by such, as are not great
Mathematicians; as Seamen, Engineers, Surveyers, Gaugers, Clock-makers,
Glassgrinders, etc. and that the Mathematicians are commonly Speculative,
Retired, Studious Men, that are not for an active Life and business, but
content themselves to sit in their Studies, and pore over a Scheme or a
Calculation. To which there is this plain and easy answer: The Mathematicians
have not only invented and ordered all the Arts abovementioned, by which those
grand Affairs are managed; but have laid down Precepts, contrived Instruments
and Abridgements so plainly, that common Artificers are capable of practicing
by them, though they understand not a tittle of the grounds, on which the
Precepts are built. And in this they have consulted the good and necessities of
Mankind. Those Affairs demand so great a number of people to manage them, that
it is impossible to breed so many good or even tolerable Mathematicians. The
only thing then to be done was to make their Precepts so plain, that they might
be understood and practiced by a multitude of Men. This will best appear by
examples. Nothing is more ordinary than dispatch of business by common
Arithmetic, by the Tables of simple and compound Interest, Annuities etc. Yet
how few Men of business understand the reasons of common Arithmetic, or the
contrivance of those Tables, now they are made; but securely rely on them as
true. They were the good and the Thorough-Mathematicians, that made those
Precepts so plain, and Calculated those Tables, that facilitate the practice so
much. Nothing is more universally necessary, than the measuring of Plains and
Solids: And it is impossible to breed so many good Mathematicians, as that
there may be one, that understands all the Geometry requisite for Surveying,
and measuring of Prisms and Pyramids, and their parts, and measuring Frustums
of Conoids and Spheroids, in every Market Town, where such work is necessary:
the Mathematicians have therefore inscribed such Lines on their common Rulers,
and Slipping Rulers, and adapted so plain Precepts to them, that every
Country-Carpenter, and Gauger, can do the business accurately enough; though he
knows no more of those Instruments, Tables, and Precepts he makes use of, than
a Hobbyhorse. So in Navigation, it is impossible to breed so many good
Mathematicians, as would be necessary to sail the hundredth part of the Ships
of the Nation. But the Mathematicians have laid down so plain and distinct
Precepts, Calculated necessary Tables, and contrived convenient Instruments, so
that a Seaman, that knows not the truths, on which his Precepts and Tables
depend, may practice safely by them. They resolve Triangules every day, that
know not the reason of any one of their Operations. Seamen in their
Calculations make use of artificial Numbers or Logarithmes, that know nothing
of their contrivance: and indeed all those great inventions of the most famous
Mathematicians had been almost useless for those common and great Affairs, had
not the practice of them been made easy to those who cannot understand them.
From hence it is plain, that it is to those Speculative Retired Men, we owe the
Rules, the Instruments, the Precepts for using them, and the Tables which
facilitate the dispatch of so many great Affairs, and supply Mankind with so
many conveniences of Life. They were the Men, that taught the World to apply
Arithmetic, Astronomy, and Geometry to Sailing, without which the needle would
be still useless. Just the same way in the other parts of Mathematics, the
Precepts that are practiced by multitudes, without being understood, were
contrived by some few great Mathematicians.

Since then it has been shown, how much Mathematics improve the Mind, how
subservient they are to other Arts, and how immediately useful to the
Commonwealth, there needs no other arguments or motives to a Government, to
encourage them. This is the natural conclusion from these premises. Plato in
his Republic ( lib. VII.) takes care, That, whoever is to be Educated for
Magistracy, or any considerable Post in the Commonwealth, may be instructed
first in Arithmetic, then in Geometry, and thirdly in Astronomy. And however
necessary those Arts were in Plato's time, they are much more so now: The Arts
of War and Trade requiring much more the assistance of those Sciences now, than
they did then; as being brought to a greater height and perfection. And
accordingly we see, these Sciences are the particular care of Princes, that
design to raise the Force and Power of their Countries. It is well known, that
this is none of the least Arts, whereby the French King has brought his
subjects to make that Figure at Sea, which they at this time do; I mean, the
care He takes for Educating those appointed for Sea-service in Mathematical
Learning. For in the Ordonnance Marine Title VIII. 'He orders, that there be
Professors to teach Navigation publicly in all the Seaport Towns, who must
know designing, and teach it to their Scholars, in order to lay down the
appearances of Coasts, etc. They are to keep their Schools open, and read four
times a week to the Seamen, where they must have Charts, Globes, Spheres,
Compasses, Quadrants, Astrolabes, and all Books and Instruments necessary to
teach their Art. The directors of Hospitals are obliged to send thither yearly
two or three of their boys to be taught, and to furnish them with Books and
Instruments. Those Professors are obliged to examine the Journals deposited in
the Office of Admiralty, in the place of their establishment; to correct the
errors in presence of the Seamen, and to restore them within a month, etc.'
King Charles the second, who well understood the importance of Establishments
of this nature, founded one such School in Christ's Hospital London; which, I
believe, is inferior to none of the French: but it is to be wished there were
many more such. His present Majesty, during the time of the late War,
Established a Mathematical Lecture to breed up Engineers and Officers, as
knowing very well the importance thereof. And this continued some time after
the Peace. And it is worthy the consideration of the Wisdom of the Nation,
whether the restoring and continuing this, even in Peace, be not expedient for
the breeding of Engineers, who are so useful and valuable, and so difficult to
be had in time of War, and so little dangerous in times of Peace.

Besides the crowd of Merchants, Seamen, Surveyors, Engineers,
Ship-carpenters, Artisans, etc. that are to be instructed in the practice of
such parts of Mathematics, as are necessary to their own business
respectively, a competent number of able Mathematicians ought to be
entertained, in order to apply themselves to the practice; not only to instruct
the former sort, but likewise to remove those obstacles, which such, as do not
think beyond their common Rules, cannot overcome. And no doubt it is no small
impediment to the advancement of Arts, that Speculative Men and good
Mathematicians are unacquainted with their particular defects, and the several
circumstances in them, that render things practicable or impracticable. But if
there were public encouragement, we should have skilful Mathematicians
employed in those Arts, who would certainly find out and remedy the
imperfections of them. The present Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
knowing, that there are still two great Desiderata in Navigation, to wit, The
Theory of the variation of the magnetical Needle, and a method of finding out
the Longitude of any place, that may be practicable at Sea by Seamen, and
being sensible, of what importance it would be to find out either of them, have
employed a very fit person, the ingenious Mr. Hally, who has joined an entire
acquaintance in the practice, to a full and thorough knowledge of the more
abstruse parts of Mathematics. And now that he is returned, it is not doubted,
but he will satisfy those, that sent him, and in due time the World too with
his discoveries in both those particulars, and in many other, that he has had
occasion to make. And where a long series of Observations and Experiments is
necessary, he has no doubt laid such a foundation, as that After-Observers may
gradually perfect them. If it were not for more than the correcting the
situation of the Coasts, where he touched, and by them others, whose relation
to the former is known, the Nation is more then triply paid; and those, who
sent him, have by this Mission secured to themselves more true Honor and
lasting Fame, than by Actions, that at first view appear more Magnificent.

The next thing, that is necessary for the improvement of Mathematical
Learning, is, That Mathematics be more generally studied at our Universities
than hitherto they have been. From those Seminaries the State justly expects
and demands those, who are acquainted both with the Speculation and Practice.
In those are all the encouragements to them imaginable, Leisure and Assistance.
There are still at hand Books and Instruments, as also other Scholars that have
made equal progress, and may be Comrades in study, and the direction of the
Professors. There are also in perfection all the incitements to this study, and
especially an acquaintance with the works of the Ancients, where this Learning
is so much recommended: There other Faculties are studied, to which it is
subservient. There also are the Nobility and Gentry bred, who, in due time must
be called to their share in the Government of the Fleets, Army, Treasury, and
other Public Employments, where Mathematical Learning is absolutely necessary,
and without which, they, though of never so great Natural parts, must be at the
mercy and discretion of their Servants and Deputies; who will first cheat them,
and then laugh at them. And not only Public Employments, but their Private
Concerns demand Mathematical knowledge. If their Fortunes lie in Woods, Coal,
Salt, Manufactures, etc. the necessity of this knowledge is open and known: and
even in Land-Estates, no undertaking for improvement can be securely relied
upon without it. It not only makes a Man of Quality and Estate his whole Life
more Illustrious, and more useful for all Affairs, (as Hippocrates says, (...)
etc;) but in particular, it is the best Companion for a Country Life. Were this
once become a fashionable study (and the Mode exercises its Empire over
Learning as well as other things) it is hard to tell, how far it might
influence the Morals of our Nobility and Gentry, in rendering them Serious,
Diligent, Curious, taking them off from the more fruitless and airy exercises
of the Fancy, which they are apt to run into.

The only Objection, I can think of, that is brought against these studies, is,
that Mathematics require a particular turn of Head, and a happy Genius that
few people are Masters of, without which all the pains bestowed upon the study
of them are in vain: They imagine that a Man must be Born a Mathematician. I
answer, that this Exception is common to Mathematics and other Arts. That
there are persons, that have a particular capacity and fitness to one more than
another, every body owns: And from experience I dare say, it is not in any
higher degree true concerning Mathematics than the others. A Man of good sense
and application is the person, that is by nature fitted for them: especially if
he begins betimes; And if his circumstances have been such, that this did not
happen, by prudent direction the defect may be supplied as much as in any Art
whatsoever. The only advantage this Objection has, is, that it is on the side
of softness and idleness, those powerful Allies.

There is nothing further remains, Sir, but that I give you my thoughts in
general concerning the Order and Method of studying Mathematics; which I shall
do very shortly, as knowing that you are already acquainted with the best
methods, and others with you may have them easily from the best and ablest
hands.

First then, I lay down for a principle, that no body at an University is to be
taught the practice of any rule without the true and solid reason and
demonstration of the same. Rules without demonstration must and ought to be
taught to Seamen, Artisans, etc. as I have already said; and Schools for such
people are fit in Seaports and Trading-Towns; but it is far below the dignity
of an University, which is designed for solid and true Learning, to do this. It
is from the Universities, that they must come, who are able to remedy the
defects of the Arts: and therefore nothing must be taken on trust there.
Seamen and Surveyors, etc. remember their Rules, because they are perpetually
practicing them: But Scholars, who are not thus employed, if they know not the
demonstration of them, presently forget them.

Secondly, no part of Mathematics ought to be taught by Compendiums. This
follows from the former. Compendiums are fit to give a general and superficial
knowledge, not a thorough one. It Is time, and not the bulk of Books, we ought
to be sparing of: And I appeal to any person of Experience, whether solid
knowledge is not acquired in shorter time by Books treating fully of their
subjects, than by Compendiums and Abridgements.

From hence it follows, that the Elements of Arithmetic and Geometry are to be
taught. Euclid in his thirteen Books of Elements gives us both: but our present
way of Notation supersedes some of those of Arithmetic, as demonstrating the
Rules from the Operations themselves. There remain then the first six Books for
the Geometry of Plains, and the last three for Stereometry. The rest ought to
be read in their own place for the perfection of Arithmetic. In teaching
these, care ought to be taken to make use of such Examples, as suit with the
condition of the Scholar. For instance, Merchants Accounts and Affairs for
Examples of the Operations of Arithmetic, to one that is afterward to have a
concern that way; whereas to a Man of the first Quality, examples from the
increase and decrease of the people, or from Land or Sea-Force, and from the
Tacticks ought to be proposed. For it is certain, nothing makes one tired
sooner, than the frivolous and trifling examples, that are commonly brought for
the exercise of the Rules of Arithmetic and Geometry: though this is common to
them with the other Arts, as Grammar, Logic, etc.

The manner of Writing of the Mathematicians of this and the former Age makes
Trigonometry, with the manner of constructing its Tables, etc. almost
Elementary; and the practical Geometry commonly so called, is very fit to come
next, as an elegant application of the Elements of Geometry to Business, as
Surveying, Gauging, etc.

After the Elements of Sphericks, which are perfectly well handled by
Theodosius, a full insight into the principles of Astronomy will be necessary.

Mechanics come next to be read, which are the Ground of a great part of
Natural Learning: and afterward Optics, Catoptricks and Dioptricks.

But none of these except the Elements can be fully understood until one is
pretty well skilled in Conick-sections: And all these are made more easy by
some tolerable skill in Algebra, and its application to Geometry.

These foundations being laid, any one may with great ease pursue the study of
the Mathematics, as his occasions require: either in its abstract parts, and
the more recondite Geometry, and its application to Natural knowledge; or in
Mechanics, by prosecuting the Staticks, Hydrostaticks, Ballisticks, etc; or in
Astronomy, by its application to Geography, Navigation, Gnomonicks, Astrolabes,
etc. But in most of these a particular order is not necessary. Any one may take
that first, which he is most inclined to.

I shall not offer you any advice concerning the choice of Books, but refer you
(if you want any) to the direction of those, who are Eminent among you in this
part of Learning. I ask your pardon for the omission of Ceremony in these
papers, having followed rather the ordinary way of Essay than Letter: and
wishing you good success in your studies, I am,

Sir, Your Friend and Servant.
25. November. 1700.
FINIS.

