

A DESCRIPTION OF THE CITY, COLLEGE, AND CATHEDRAL of WINCHESTER. EXHIBITING A
complete and comprehensive Detail OF THEIR ANTIQUITIES and PRESENT STATE.

The whole illustrated with Several curious and authentic Particulars,
collected from a Manuscript of ANTHONY WOOD, preserved in the Ashmolean Museum
at Oxford; the COLLEGE and CATHEDRAL REGISTERS, and other Original Authorities,
never before published.

-- Capiturque locis, et singuloe loetus
Exquiritque auditque VIRUM MONUMENTA PRIORUM.
VIRG. viii. 311. LONDON, Printed for R. BALDWIN, in Paternoster Row: Sold by
T. BURDON, in Winchester; B. COLLINS, in Salisbury; and by the Booksellers of
OXFORD, and CAMBRIDGE. [Price One Shilling.]

PREFACE.
THE pious Designs, and the magnificent Works, of our Ancestors are Themes, on
which every Reader of a liberal Curiosity receives Information with Pleasure.
But the following Work is more immediately calculated for the peculiar
Convenience of the Traveller; and is principally designed as a local Guide to
Strangers, who may be tempted to visit the curious and entertaining Particulars
which it professes to describe and illustrate.

For the Satisfaction of the Reader it may be necessary still further to
premise, that our Account is compiled from the best private Information, from
an attentive Examination on the Spot, and from a Variety of Materials relating
to the Subject, incidentally dispersed in different Books, which have been
carefully collected, and succinctly digested. To reader our Detail still more
complete and authentic, we have consulted two Folio Volumes written on Vellum,
belonging to the Cathedral Church of Winchester, containing the Acts of the
Pontificate of William of Wykeham, whose Benefactions make so conspicuous a
Figure in the History of Winchester. It is called Registrum Wykeham, and begins
with the Year mccclxvii. But our principal Assistance has been derived from a
valuable Manuscript of Anthony Wood, never before printed, and preserved in the
Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, D 4. 56, 8518. page 308. 4to. It is dated,
Febru^^^, 1684, and consists of the following Articles. 1. The Church of the
Hospital of St. Cross, with it Epitaphs. 2. Winchester College, with the
monumental Inscriptions, painted Windows, Memorials of Arms, and other
Particulars in the Chapel, Cloisters, and Library. 3. The Obits of several of
the Fellows of the said College, as (...) in the Register of the College from
A.D. 1397. to A.D. 1668. None of which appear to have been buried in the Chapel
or Cloisters. 4. Catalogue of the Masters of St. Cross Hospital, A.D. 1382. to
A.D. 1619. 5. Extracts from a Register of Benefactions to Winchester College.
Beginning with "A Missal given to Winchester College by Mag. Thomas Nevil, Prior
of the Cathedral Church of Winchester:" And ending with, " John White, Bishop
of Winton, gave to the College at Winton, by Will, his Mitre and Cro^^-Staff, a
Tankard silver-gilt, a Basin, and Yeure of Silver, and a Turkey Carpet." --
Besides these, we have been favored with the Perusal of several original
Evidences, and authentic Papers.

THE CITY.
WINCHESTER appears to have been a City of considerable Note among the ancient
Britons, by whom it was called Caer Guen, or the White City, from its Situation
upon a chalky Soil. Many reputable Historians report, that it was founded by
Ludor Rous Hudibras, 892 Years before the Birth of Christ. It afterward became
a Roman Station, and probably one of their Cities, as appears from the
Discovery of a Pavement of Brick, and Coins of Constantine the Great, found in
digging the Foundat^on of the Royal Palace of Charles II. Camden But. p. 1
(...) Ed. Cib.
tells us, that during the Saxon Heptarchy the West Saxon Kings resided in this
City; who adorned it with magnificent Churches, and an Episcopal See. King
Ethelstan established here six Mints for the Coinage of Money. The Dome-boc of
Alfred was reposited in the Cathedral of this City, thence called Codex
Wintoniensis; as was afterward the present Domesday book of the Conqueror
Kennet's Paroch. Ant. page 63.
. From its first Foundation to the last mentioned Period, it was three Times
destroyed by Fire. In the Civil Wars between King Stephen and Maud the Empress,
this Place was almost totally desolated; but the Misfortune was amply repaired
by Edward III. who fixed here a Staple Leland acquaints us, that the Staple
Houses "lay from the West Gate in a back Way to the North Gate." Itiner. vol.
iii. page 86, ed. 2.


for Wool, and Woollen Manufactures Camden, ubi supra.
.

It is said to have been first fortified with Walls by Guidorius, Anno Dom.
179. The present Walls are reported to have been erected by Moleutius Dunwallo,
Anno Dom. 341. On the South and East Sides, for some Distance, they remain
entire, and many Fragments of them are continued to a considerable Extent on
the North and West, particularly to the Westward, on which is to be seen a
Bastion, called the Hermit's Tower. Their Circumference is one Mile and an
Half. There were formerly six City Gates, the four principal of which still
subsist, as does one of the Posterns called the King's Gate Leland says that
St. Michael's Gate is spoken of by ancient Writers, and conjectures that King's
Gate was sometimes so called, on account of St. Michael's Church standing near
it. Itinerar. vol. iii. page 86.
; the sixth Gate Leland, ut supra, page 87. says it was called B^rne-gate, and
that it led to a small Suburb.
, which stood between the North and East Gate, is utterly destroyed. On the
West, and on Part of the North and South Sides, is a Fosse of prodigious Breadth
and Depth, but to the Meadows, which were easily floated by the River, such a
Defense was thought unnecessary. The vacant Spaces within the Walls, now formed
into Gardens, demonstrate that the Town has been greatly depopulated.

Near the West Gate we survey the Ruins of a strong and stately Castle, which
according to Tradition was built by King Arthur Anno Dom. 523; and was a Place
of remarkable Defense in the Reign of King Stephen, against whose Attacks it
was bravely maintained by Maud the Empress for a considerable Time. By a Plan
of it drawn Anno Dom. 1630, it appears to have been a quadrangular Structure,
with a Tower at each Angle: And by a small Sketch in Speed, Anno Dom. 1614, we
discover, that the Entrance from the West was over a Bridge thrown across the
Western Fosse, leading to a Gate-way contiguous to the South West Angle of the
Building. It appears by the same Sketch, to have had some Outworks, with
Towers, to the South. Heylin inform us, that "it was a gallant, but not great
Castle, bravely mounted on a Hill, for Defense, and Prospect Cosmograph. page
312. edit. 1666.
." The West Saxon Kings, and many of our Princes after the Conquest, resided in
this Castle, some of whom were born, and others crowned William Rufus was
crowned here every Christmas. Angl. sacr. vol. i. page 259. Our Kings often
kept their Christmas and Easter here.
here. In later It appears to have been in the Crown in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, who allows 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. to the Constable of Winchester Castle.
Peck's Desid. Curios. vol. i. l. 2. p. 19.
Times, it was inhabited as a Dwelling House by Sir William Waller and his
Family near one hundred Years before the Grand Rebellion, in which it was
demolished about Anno Dom. 1642. During the Troubles the King had seized and
garrisoned this Fortress; from whose Forces it was afterward taken by Sir
William Waller its original Owner, who was one of Cromwell's Generals. The
Chapel of the Castle, which was, as at present, originally a detached Building,
is still entire, and is a magnificent Edifice, consisting of three Isles, 110
Feet in Length and 55 in Breadth. In this Chapel a famous Cause concerning the
Superiority of the Sea of Canterbury over that of York was tried Anno Dom.
1072, before Hubert the Pope's Legate, King William, and all the Bishops and
Abbots in England Wharton's Angl. Sacr. vol. ii. page 635.
. A Chantry formerly belonged to this Chape, as appears by its Dissolution at
the Reformation Willis's Mitr. Abb. vol. ii. p. 209. a Pension of 6 l. is
allowed to Nicholas Hill, late Incumbent, Anno Dom. 1553.
.

The Assizes for the County of Hants were originally kept in this Castle; at
least as early as the Year 1272, as we learn from the Winchester Annalist, who
frequently remarks that the Royal Family quitted their Residence at this Place
to make Room for the Judges; but at present the Chapel, of which I have been
just speaking, is appropriated to this Purpose. At the End hangs what is
commonly called King Arthur's Round Table, which is 18 Feet in Diameter. It
would be needless to multiply Authorities for a Proof that this Table is of
modern Date. However it is of higher Antiquity than it is commonly supposed to
be: For Paulus Jovius Descript, Region.
, who wrote above two hundred Years ago, relates, that it was shown to the
Emperor Charles V. and that at that Time many Marks of its Antiquity had been
destroyed, the Names of the Knights having been then just written afresh, and
the whole Table, with its Ornaments, newly repaired. Tournaments being often
held at Winchester before the Court and Parliament, this Table might probably
have been used, on those Occasions, for entertaining the Combatants; which, on
that Account, was properly inscribed with the Names of Arthur's twenty-four
Knights; either in Commemoration of that Prince, who was the reputed Founder
and Patron of Tilts and Tournaments; or because he was supposed to have
established these martial Sports at Winchester. In later Times these Exercises
were called Mensa Rotunda Thom. Walsing. edit. i. page 49. See also Seldom, De
Duello, page 64. Works, Fol. vol. iii.
. The Names of the Knights inscribed on the Table are much the same as those we
find in an old Romance concerning King Arthur Called Morte Arthur, etc. printed
by Caxton, 1484.
, viz. Sir Lancelot du Lake, Sir Tristram, Sir Pelleas, Sir Gawain, Sir
Garethe, etc.

On or near the Site of this Castle Charles II. Anno Dom. 1683, laid the
Foundation of a magnificent Royal Palace, only the Shell of which was finished.
A Cupola was designed 30 Feet higher than the Roof, which would have been seen
at Sea; and a Street was intended leading from the West End of the Cathedral to
the Center of the Front. The Length of the whole is 328 Feet. A Park was also
projected ten Miles in Circumserence: but the Death of the King prevented the
Progress and Execution of this noble Plan. The Palace is at present converted
into a commodious Prison for French Prisoners of War.

The City of Winchester contains eight Parish Churches. It had formerly 45, or
more, many of which were suppressed by Bishop Fox in the Reign of Henry VII. as
insufficient to maintain their respective Incumbents Leland, ut supra, page 85.
.

In a Meadow, called Denemrch ^ead, between Hyde Abbey and the City Wall, Guy
Earl of Warwick is said to have encountered and conquered Colbrand the Danish
Giant. The Battle-Ax with which he achieved this memorable Exploit was kept in
the Treasury of St. Swythun's Cathedral till the Reformation, and was called
Colbrandis Axe See Rudbourne apud Wharton, vol. i. page 211.
. Eastward of the Town, on a Hill called St. Giles's Hill, where stood a Chapel
dedicated to St. Giles, Waldawus a Saxon, Earl of Northumberland, was beheaded
by Command of the Conqueror Leland, ut supra, page 86. but Camden says Waltheof
Earl of Huntingdon, page 143. edit. Gib. vol. i.
.

On the opposite Hill, called Catharine Hill, Leland acquaints us, there was a
fair Chapel dedicated to that Saint. It was endowed with Lands, and suppressed
by Cardinal Wolsey Ut supra, page 87.
.

The Prospect from either of these Hills is very delightful. The City,
interspersed with Trees and Gardens, magnificent Structures and venerable
Ruins, and the Country consisting of watered winding Valleys, bordered by
Declivities of a prodigious Height, gradually rising into extensive Downs
bounded by distant Woods, must charm every Lover of romantic or rural beauty.

St. John's House is appointed for the public Meetings of the Mayor and
Aldermen. It has an Hospital annexed, and is said to have been founded by
William Lamb, Esquire 1554. In Leland's Time it was an Hospital for the Sick, and
in the Chapel was a Statute of St. Bristan Bishop of Winchester, who probably
was the Founder Ut supra, page 85.
. He died A.D. 932. On the West Side of the Close-Wall is a commodious Hospital
founded by William Symonds, Gent. A.D. 1607, for six old Men, one Woman, and
four Boys. On the North Side of the Cathedral is a decent College founded by
Bishop Morley, A.D. 1672, for ten Widows of Clergymen.

The County Hospital in this City is a magnificent Edifice, the Front of which
is 224 Feet in Length. It was opened for Patients at Michaelmas, A.D. 1759.
This Institution was the first of the Kind in England, and was begun, but not
in the present Building, A.D. 1736.

The Market Cross, about the Middle of the High Street, is an elegant Gothic
Structure, 43 Feet high, and, as I conjecture, of the Age of Henry VI.

Besides the College and Cathedral, which will be separately described, there
have been several religious Foundations in this City. The most eminent was
Hyde-Abby for Benedictines, which stood for 200 Years within the Precincts of
St. Swythun's, and on a Quarrel between the two Societies was removed to a
Suburb called Hyde. It was established at Hyde by Henry I. and W. Giffard
Bishop of Winchester. A.D. 1121. and at the Dissolution, A.D. 1538, was valued
at 865l. 18s. Tanner Not. Mon. page 155, 156. Fol.
. It Is Abbots had a Seat in Parliament. The Church almost fills a large Meadow
with it is Ruins, and appears to have consisted of three Isles, and to have been
at least 240 Feet long. It was built with Flint cased with Stone. Of the
Monastery nothing remains except some Out-buildings toward the Street; and one
Gateway, the Mouldings of which exhibit, on each Side, the Head of a King. The
same Head occurs on a Wall toward the South. Great Part of the Precinct-Wall
is still standing. In this Abbey many Saxon Kings and Princes were sumptuously
buried. The Church now called Hyde Church "In Atrio Hydae," MSS. Coll. Wint.


, originally stood within the Precincts, as did many Parish Churches in other
Places As at Winchecombe, Co. Gloucester, Cirencester, ibid. Evesham, Co.
Worcester, etc.
. The Tower of Hyde Church was probably built with the Stone collected from the
Ruins of the Abbey.

Next to this, in Point of Eminence, was a Benedictine Nunnery, called St.
Mary's Abbey, founded by Alswithe the Wife of King Alfred, A.D. 900. It was
situated near the House of George Pescod, Esquire and is now reduced to a small
Heap of Stones. It consisted of an Abbess and 21 Nuns, and was valued at the
Dissolution at 175 l. 7 s. 2 d. Tanner, ibid.


From this Nunnery Henry I. took his Wife Maud, Daughter of Malcolm King of
Scots, by which Marriage the Royal Families of the Saxons and Normans were
united. Camden acquaints us, that the Ruins of this Monastery showed it to have
been a stately Fabric Brit. vol. i. Gib. edit. page 143.
. Besides these there were the following Monasteries See Tanner, Not. Mon. in
Hampshire.
, or religious Foundations.

The Hospital of the Almonry of the Church of St. Swythun, commonly called the
Sustern Spytal, maintained by St. Swythun's Convent, adjoined to the present
College on the West.

The College of St. Elisabeth, founded by John de Pontisora, Bishop of
Winchester, A.D. 1300, for one Provost, six Chaplain Priests, six Clerks, and
six Choristers, was valued at the Dissolution at 112 l. 17 s. 4 d. The Provost
had six Marks, and the Chaplains 40 s. per Annum, besides Commons. It stood in
a Meadow, called St. Stephen's, near the present College on the East. Leland
thus describes it is Site. "The College of St. Elisabeth of Hungorie lyith
strait Est upon the New-College [Winchester-College]: and there is but a little
narrow Causey betwixt them. The main Arm and The same Writer observes, that
"Blak Bridge, made of Wood, is betwixt Elisabeth and Est Bridge." Ibid. page
89. East Bridge is, I suppose, the Bridge just without the East Gate.


Stream of Alsford-Water, divided a little above the College [Elizabeth
College] into two Arms, runnith on each Side Leland, ut supra. page 85.
." Afterward he adds, "within these twoArms, not far from the College Church
of St. Elisabeth, is a Chapel of St. Stephen." The Bishop in his Statutes sets
forth, that he founds this College before the Gates of Wolvesey Castle in a
certain Meadow called St. Stephen's Meadow, containing six Acres, in which also
stands an ancient Chapel of St. Stephen Dugdal. Mon. vol. iii. Eccles. Coll.
page 49.
.

On the North Side of the Churchyard of St. Mary's Abbey, described above,
stood the Chapel of the Holy Trinity, consisting of a Warden and several
Priests.

Here was a Convent of each of the four Orders of Mendicant Friars. The
Augustine Friars were just without the South Gate on the left in the Road to
Southampton. The Gray Friars, or Minors, on the right just with the East Gate.
The Dominicans, on the North, within the City.

To these we may add the Prior and Brethren of St. Peter in the Church of St.
Maurice, and the Church of St. Mary Calendar.

We shall close our Account of the City with a Description of the Hospital of
St. Cross, which stands about half a Mile Southward of the Town.

This From Lowth's Life of Wykeham, edit. 1. page 72. Tanner's Account varies
in one or two Circumstances. Ut supra, page 161.
Hospital was founded by Henry de Blois, Bishop of Winchester, and Brother of
King Stephen, about the Year 1136, for the Maintenance of thirteen poor Men:
who likewise ordained, that one hundred other poor Persons should be
entertained here every Day at Dinner, in a Place appointed for that Purpose,
called Hundred-Mennes-Hall. Of these there were always thirteen of the poorer
Scholars of the great Grammar School of Winchester. But this Institution of
daily feeding the one hundred Poor was not of long Continuance; for it was
abrogated before the Reign of Richard II. and instead of it, an Establishment
was substituted of four Priests, thirteen secular Clerks, and four Choristers.
In the Year 1444, Cardinal Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, made ample Additions
to the Hospital, for the Maintenance of two Priests, thirtyfive Brethren, and
three Sisters, besides those of the original Foundation. He gave his new
Constitution the Name of The Alms House of Noble Poverty; by which it appears,
that he designed the House for the Relief of decayed Gentlemen. This Hospital,
though considerably diminished in it is Revenues, still subsists on the Remains
of both Endowments.

The Building consists of one extensive, irregular Court. The Church, which was
built in the Reign of King Stephen, by the first Founder, is a curious Remain
of Saxon Architecture "We have some Examples of the ancient SAXON Manner; which
was with Peers or round Pillars, much stronger than Tuscan; round-headed
Arches, and Windows. Such was Winchester-Cathedral of old; and such, at this
Day, the Royal Chapel, in the White Tower at London: The Chapel of St. Crosses;
the Chapel [the Cathedral] of Christ-Church in Oxford, formerly an old
Monastery: and diverse others, I need not name, before the Conquest." Life of
Sir Chapter Wren. PARENTALIA; or Memoirs, etc. page 296, from a Letter of Sir C.
Wren, etc.




: It is in the Form of a Cross, and the Body consists of three Isles with a
Transept. From the Altar to the West Door it is 150 Feet in Length; and the
Transept 120. The Roof is remarkably lofty. On each Side of the Altar are
handsome Screens of Spire Work in Stone. The Names of all the Officers
belonging to the Hospital about A.D. 1575, are carved on a Desk in the Chancel,
among which we find those of a Chanter, and singing Men; but at present there
is no Provision for a Choir.

The great West Window, the Construction of which is in a more ornamental Style
than any of the rest, was probably altered to it is present Form, by the second
Founder, Cardinal Beaufort. It has some Remains of painted Glass, with an
Inscription, nothing of which is legible, or at least intelligible, at present,
except the Words Nicholas Bedford. In a South Window of the cross I Will, are
these Arms, viz. Gules three Lions Heads passant, Fl. de Lis reversed, or three
Eagles quartering Barry, and a Chief. In an East Window of the North Transept
we find an Ave Maria, with some Fragments of painted Glass, under which is
Orate pro anima Ricardi de Buteshall; if I am right in the Name, which is the
most imperfect Part. He was Master of the Hospital, A. D, 1346.

On the Roof of the Nave are two Cheverons, the Arms of Wykeham, between three
Roses; also the Arms of France and England quartered. The Coat between these
two is defaced.

In this Church are the following ancient Epitaphs.

On a Stone of gray Marble, placed within an Arch in the North I Will, is this
Inscription in Saxon Characters. "Hic jacet Magister Petrus He is mentioned in
Catal. Willis, Magist. Circ. 1292. Mitr. Abb. vol. i. p. 344.
de Sancta Maria quondam Custos hujus Domus."

On a Brass Plate on the Ground, "Here lies Elizabeth Wroughton, Gentlewoman,
who departed the xxiii Day of May, in the Year of our Lord 1551. whose Soul
Jesu pardon."

On another "Hic jacet Johes Knight, qui quondam erat frater istius loci novae
fundationis editae per Henricum epum Winton et Cardinalem Angliae. Cujus anime,
etc."

On another, " -- rward Richard Harwood, or Harward, Magist. 1489. Willis ut
supra, p. 345. et Mss. Wood.
decretorum Doctoris ac nuper hujus -- die Aprilis Anno Domini Mcccc nonages.
tertio."

On another, "Hic jacet Johes Turk, qui quondam erat frater -- as before in
Knyght's Epitaph.

On another. "The Year of our Lord Mccc^ and two, upon the eleventh Day of the
Month of Feberere the Soul of John Newles the Body passed from a Brother of
this Place restyng under this Stone here born in Be^^ Squire and Servant more
than xxx Year unto Harry Beauford Bishop and Cardinal whose Soulys God convey
to his Mother dear unto the blys of Heaven that is eternal Amen."

In the Middle of the Nave, on a large flat Stone is the Figure of a Man on a
Brass Plate with two Labels over his Head, "Jesu cum veneris justificare noli
me condemnare -- qui servasti me miserere mei." Under the the Figure is, "Hic
jacet Johes de Camden Circ. 1383. Willis, ibid. He was also Canon of Southwell,
and a Benefactor to Winchester College. Regist. Coll. Winton.
quondam Custos istius Hospitalis, cujus animae, etc." Round the Verge, "Credo
quod redemptor meus, etc."

On a Brass Plate. "Hic jacet donus Johes Berton quondam Vicarius sci Johis in
Soca Winton."

In the Southern Transept, on the Ground "Hic jacet Johes Prews quondam Rector
ecclesiae de Mechelmersh qui obiit 13 Die Mensis Aprilis, A.D. 1418. Cujus
Animae, etc."

On another, Orate pro anima dni Willi Saunders quondam Cappellani novae
fundationis hujus Collegii qui obiit 29 Die Nov. Ann. Dom. 1464. Cujus Anime,
etc."

On another, "Under this Stone rests Alexander Swart late Brother of this
place who departed this transitory Life to Almighty God the xvii Day of July,
1569."

In a Chapel on the South Side of the Choir, or Chancel, "Hic jacet Johannes
Wait filius Johis Wait Armigeri, et Agathae Uxoris ejus, qui quidem Johes
Wait filius obiit ult. Die October. An. Dom. 1502. Cujus Animae, etc."

On the North Side of the Court is the Refectory, in the Windows of which we
find these Arms, viz. Arg. A Cross pat. S. Quart. Fr. and England. a board.
Gobon. The same are over the Gate. I suppose for Cardinal Beaufort. The
Lodgings of the Master, contiguous to the Refectory, are spacious and decent.
On the East Side of the Court is this Inscription. "Henricus Compton
Episcopus." He was Master here, and promoted A.D. 1674 to the Sea of Oxford,
and afterward to that of London. We likewise find his Initials on the Stables,
H.C. with the Year 1675. In the Eastern Gallery, and in other Places, we
frequently read "Dilexi sapientiam R.S. 1503." This is the Memorial of Roger,
or Robert Sherborn, Master of the Hospital, and from hence preferred to the
Bishopric of St. David's. He was afterward Bishop of Chichester, and founded
in that Cathedral Church four Prebends, for which those alone are qualified who
are, or have been, Fellows of New College in Oxford. The Gateway of the
Hospital is formed in a square stately Tower, on one Side of which is the
Statue of the Cardinal praying to another Figure, now destroyed. This Tower was
probably built by the Cardinal.

About the Year 1370 Lowth, ut supra.
the Revenues of this ample Foundation were valued at 400 l. per Ann. at which
Time the yearly Salary of the Master was estimated at 7 l. 4 s. 6 d. Its second
Founder Cardinal Beaufort added to the former Endowment an annual Augmentation
of 500 l. besides several Impropriations.

THE COLLEGE.
THE College of St. Mary of Winchester, commonly called Winchester College, is
situated to the South East of the Cathedral, just without the City Wall. The
Front is extended to the Length of 249 Feet, and consists of Offices on the
West Side of the Gateway, and of a Part of the Warden's Lodgings on the East.
Under the Gateway, the Tower of which is adorned with a Statue of the Virgin
Mary, we enter the first Court. On the left are the Warden's Lodgings, which
are commodious and ample. That Part of them which fronts the Garden was erected
at the Expense of Warden Nicholas ^. the Year 1692. That Part which faces the
Street, was raised in the Wardenship of Dr. John Harmar, as appears by the
Initials, J.H. and the Date 1597. The North Front of the second Quadrangle
loses much of its intended Effect by Means of another Part of these Lodgings,
built A.D. 1613. which runs at right Angles against it on the left.

We enter the second Quadrangle under a stately Tower, called the Middle Gate,
adorned with the Statues of the Founder, the Virgin Mary, and an Angel. This
Court is 96 Feet over. The lower Rooms, on either Side of the Gateway, and of
the whole Eastern Side of this Court, are the Lodging Rooms of the Scholars;
over which are the Apartments of the Fellows. The Stair Case adjoining to the
North West Angle, leads to the Apartments of the Schoolmaster, which are
spacious, and elegantly furnished. On the West is the Kitchen, and a convenient
Conduit.

The whole South Side is magnificently formed by the Chapel and Hall. The
latter is a noble Gothic Room 63 Feet in Length, and 33 in Breadth; in which
the Scholars dine at Twelve, and sup at Six. In the uppermost Window, on the
North Side, are the Arms of England, and of the Marquis of Winchester.

The Chapel is equal to most, and superior to many, in our Universities;
whether we regard its Dimensions, its Furniture, and the Solemnity which
strikes us at our Entrance. It is 102 Feet long, and 33 broad. The Screen,
Stalls, and Altar-piece, which is of the Ionic Order, were executed in the
Wardenship of Dr. Nicholas abovementioned. The Altar is adorned with a
beautiful Salutation Piece, painted by Le Moine, and given by the Reverend Dr.
Burton, the present public-spirited, and learned Head Master. The Branches are
the Gift of the Reverend Mr. Christopher Air, formerly Usher. The East Window
is painted with the Genealogy of Christ, and has been celebrated in an elegant
Poem written by the Reverend Dr. Lowth, Prebendary of Durham, which is printed
in an admired Collection of English Poems, entitled The UNION Printed for R.
Baldwin in Paternoster Row.
. The rest of the Windows are decorated with the Pourtraits of Saints, with
their Names underwritten: Together with the following Inscription, which is in
many Places at present destroyed. " Orate pro anima Wilhelmi de Wykeham
Fundatoris istius Collegii." On the North Side stands the Organ. The Roof is
covered with a Cieling of Wood in Imitation of arched Stone Work, without
which, the Height would be too great, as it is at New College Chapel in Oxford,
where such a Cieling was, probably, originally intended. At least, the present
Rafter Work of that noble Chapel is by no Means equal to the Magnificence of
the rest. This Cieling seems to have been finished about the Time of that which
covers the Presbytery in the Cathedral, as it is exactly of the same
Workmanship.

In this Chapel, Choir Service is performed at Eight and Five, on Sundays and
Holidays, and at Five on their preceding Eves. The Choir consists of three
Chaplains, three Clerks, one Organist, and sixteen Choristers.

In the Ante Chapel is a Recess to the South, over Part of which stands the
Tower, containing five Bells. This Addition, which exhibits a more modern Style
of Architecture, seems to have been erected in the Reign of Henry VI. together
with the Tower, by William of Wainfleet, Bishop of Winchester, whose Arms are
cut in the Roof, together with the following Arms and Rebuses.

Two Cheverons between three Roses. WYKEHAM. Lions passant quartering a Fret.
Giron. of 12, in Fess, a Rose. Three Sugar Loaves, over it a Doctor's Cap. Arms
of the Sea of Winton. Lions Ramp. in chief four Keys; two and two endorsed.
Three Pheons in Base, three Bucks Heads cabossed in chief. Or Fess, a Mitre in
Fess. Four Lozenges impaling a Fess between two Cheverons. R.T. for Robert
Thurborne, Warden, A.D. 1413. The Device a Rose composed of Rays of the Sun. A
large T. charged with Tapers in Saltire, for Thomas Chandler, Warden A.D. 1450.
A Beacon with Arrows, and a Tun, for Thomas Beckington, Bishop of Bath and
Wells, a liberal Benefactor to the College, about the Time of the last
mentioned Warden.
Besides these there are Letters interwoven for Ciphers, which by Length of
Time are rendered unintelligible.

One of the Windows belonging to this Recess has been lately closed up, and the
other is greatly defaced; but the Paintings and Inscriptions of both having
been fortunately preserved by Anthony Wood, the Oxford Antiquary, who visited
this College in February 1684, I shall insert them from his original MSS. which
has never yet been printed. The curious Observer will easily supply the Defects
of the remaining Window, by the Assistance of the following Description. Arms.

Girony of 12, Or and Bl. a Rose in Fess, Point G. A Mitre in chief, between
three Bucks Heads, cabossed in chief, and three Pheons in Base. Arg. two Chev.
S. between three Bucks Heads, cabossed in chief, and Pheons in Base. Arg. two
Chev. S. between three Roses G. Two Chev. Or, between three Roses Arg.
In one Compartment is the Pourtraiture of a Bishop in his Habit, supported by
another Bishop, and an Archbishop, as appears by the Cross, placing the Mitre
on his Head. Under him are two Chaplains praying: This was most probably to
represent the Consecration of William of Wykeham. Underneath the whole Length
of the Window is this Inscription.

-- Hulyn, A.M. -- Schola Grammaticali hujus Collegii et pro animabus parentum
et amicorum eorundem.

In another Compartment is this Inscription.

Orate pro anima Magistri Willi Densford quondam Socii perpetui hujus Collegii,
qui obiit Octavo Die December. Ann. Dni. 1476. Cujus animae, etc.

In another Compartment is the Figure of a Saint. Beneath it is a Man praying,
with the following Scroll from his Mouth.

Felix precatrix mihi sis precor auxiliatrix. In another Compartment St. Anne
is represented teaching her Daughter, the blessed Virgin. Under these is a
Woman praying, with the following Label.

O mihi per natum vitam precor Anna beatum. In another Compartment is a
Painting of God the Father, with our Savior in his Arms. Beneath are two Men
praying at a Table; at their Mouths are two Scrolls; in the one,

Per mortem nati qui mundum vivificasti. In the other,

Simus salvati-petimus quos ipse creasti. At the Bottom is the Name " Agnetis
Uxoris ejus," probably for Agnes Champnewys, the Founder's Sister, and Mother
of Alicia Perrot See the Founder's Pedigree in Lowth's Wykeham, Append. No. 1.


Round the Ante Chapel are placed the Stalls originally belonging to the Choir,
or Inner Chapel. The Brass Plates on the Floor were removed hither from the
Choir, when it was paved with black and white Marble in the memorable
Wardenship of Dr. Nicholas, before mentioned.

Many of the Epitaphs on the Brass Plates are obliterated, and many others have
been destroyed, or removed. The following Account is taken from Wood's
Manuscript, which has been carefully compared with what now remains.

An Urn of white Marble, set upon an Altar Stone raised upon three Steps; on
the three Sides of it are these Inscriptions.

On the Front.

Humph May hujus Collii socii, quia rarum virtutis Exemplar posterorum interest
non extingui haec urna. D.

On the other Side.

HM Natus Rawmeriae in Agro Sussex Call. Apr. An. Sal. mdcxiii. 1613.

On the other Side.

HM Denatus Wintoniae in Coll. B. Mariae pride. Call.
On a Brass.

Orate pro aia Mri Willi Exule in Decretis bacalarii, Coll. B Marie Wintonie in
Oxonia quonda Socii, et Epi Wintoniensis Capellani, qui obiit An. dni mvcxxi,
mensis vero Martii die xvi. Cujus aie.

On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Mri Johis Beckynton quondam Socii istius Collegii, qi obiit ix
die feb. An. D. mcccclxxiii, cujus aie etc.

On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Johis Barrat in Artibus bacala rii, quonda socii hujus Collii,
qui obiit xiv di Maii an. mvcxxiii. Cujus aie.

On another Brass.

Hic jacet Henricus Kesewyk Specialis amicus hujus Collii qui obiit penultim.
die Marcii An. Dom. mccccix, cujus aie.

On another.

Orate pro aia Johanne nuper Uxoris Johis Bedell que obiit xiiii die Mensis
Feb. An. mcccclxxxxvii, cujus aie, etc.

On another.

Orate pro aia Mri Johannis Wight quondam Socii hujus Coll. qui obiit po die
Men's. Januar. An. do. mcccclxxxxiiii. Cujus aie etc.

On a Scroll from his Mouth -- per tua quinque vulnera succurre mihi omni hora.

On another.

Orate pro aia Dni Thome Lyripin olim Socii istius Coll qi ob. xxxdie Men's.
Marcii, An. Dom. mcccccix. cujus aie etc.

On another.

Orate pro aia Mri Thome Ashburn quonda Socii hujus Collii qi Obiit decimo die
Januarii An. do. mvcxvi, cujus etc.

On a Brass in the West Wall, near the S. Side.

Epit. Thom. Basset. soc. et Vicecust. defunct. xxiii Aug. an. mdlv.

Hic Bassete jaces nullo memorandus in aevo
Si tua in haeredes gratia sola foret.
Nunc quia me gratis Vicecustos esse Scholarem
Jusseris, hoc gratis praesto tibi officium.
Teque legent alii uttua (quanquam o) facta sequantur,
Et moniti dicant: optime vive Deo.
C. Johnson posuit MDLX. On a Brass on the Ground under the Arch.

Epitaphium Johis Leffe in jure Civili Doctoris. Nominis hic quid habet
(Lector) si forte requiras,
A folii ductum nomine nomen habet.
Wintoniae studuit simul Oxoniae, ut tulit aetas,
Doctorem haec vidit, discipulum ille habuit.
Sede in utraque fuit verae pietatis Amator,
Sede alia pretium nunc pietatis habet.
Judicium si forte Deus suspenderit, ut sit
Judex propitius, Lector, habeto preces.
Obiit anno aetatis suae 66, an dni 1557 Augusti 19^ On another Brass on the
Ground.

D. O. M. S. Hic positus est Nicholaus Love SS. Theol. Doctor, Collegii ad
Ventam Wichamici primo^ informator, postea Custos, docuit An. xi, praefuit
xvii, sta ut aedibus hisce providentia sua statum optumum, dignitate honorem
conciliaret. Eruditionis magnum testimonium accepit quod Jacobo Regum doctiss.
a Sacris fuerit. Mira res potuisse in unum hominem coire molestiam cum
faelicitate, gravitatem cum comitate, cum judicio ingenium, prudentiam cum
Eloquentia, ita ut omnia Summa Essent. Haec qui citra invidiam legis abi faelix
et Collegio optuma quaeq. precare, hoc est Custodes huic similes.

At tu jam felix et diis conjunctior umbra,
Hunc tumulum, hos titulos, et breve carmen habe.
At pudet: at quae homines virtuti reddimus haec sunt
Praemia: nil ultra Wickamus ipse tulit.
Nic. Love haeres patris B. M. maerens posuit.
On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Mri Johis Wyllynghall quondam Socii istius Collii, qi obiit
quinto die Men's. Febr. an. dni mccccxxxii. cujus aie, etc.

On another Brass.

Amice Sacer, hic Sepultus est, teque (ut ut feras) pulverem satagit, paulisper
sibi immorari, huic subsunt marmori, quas Naturae cl. Johes Harris debuit,
Exuviae, qui per annos 28 hujus Collii Custos, in difficili Saeculi illius
Aestuario per varias tempestates navim cui praeficiebatur, cum deo rexit et
sospitavit, nec tamen Saecula quibus usus est coluit, sed saeculorum deum.

Natus Hardwichiae in Agro Bucks. patre presb. Eccles. rectore, matri Academiae
Oxon dulce Decus, procurator sagax et providus, reverendus in S. Th. Doctor,
Graecae linguae professor regius, in Cathedral. Ventae ecclia aliquando
praebendarius, Meonstochiae rector pius et concionator frequens, fide,
innocentia, pietate, prudentia STOPG, liberalitate, virtute denique omni per
dei gratiam APISTEYON, cui advolavit men's quem pulvis hic et testa
APOKAPADOKEI. obiit 11 die Augusti An. Dom. 1658 aetat suae lxx.

On another Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Johis Bedell nuper majoris Civitatis Winton, quondam Scholaris
hujus Collii, qi obiit penultimo die mensis Julii an. dni mcccclxxxxviii --
Cujus etc.

On another.

This round the Verge of a large Stone.

- - - - - qui vero mala egerunt in resurrectionem judicii.. Johanes.. quinto
reposita est haec spes...... millesimo quingentesimo....... Cujus aie -- At
each Corner his Arms viz. a Mullet betw. 3 fountains.

Under the Figure this Inscription.

Hic tegor, hic post fata John White adm. Warden. 1541. Willis, ut supra.
Whitus propono jacere,
Scriptor Johanes Carminis ipse mei.
Sin alibi sors est putrescere, qui meus esset
Tunc patior tumulus fiat ut alterius.
Ne sine honor tenax sine nomine linqueret here is
Id timui, exemplis turbor et inde novis.
Ingrati heredes! phas nil sperare sepulto
Ore tenus, putei Spes in Amicitia.
Nec mihi fama tamen de marmore quaeritur...
Sed spes magna piis ponitur in precibus.
Hoc custode avet hic, hoc preceptore avet ille.
Hocque puer puero (dixerit alter) eram.
Parce deus socio, custodi parce magistro,
Hic avet, ille avet hoc, hoc etiam alter avet.
Septem annos docui, que lux postrema docendo
Stata preessendi munere prima fuit.
Mutavit mihi non minuit fortuna Labores,
Curaque non modicis rebus adaucta mihi.
Nunc subeat lector quia sancta est atque salubris
Res pro defuncto fratre rogare deum A more correct Copy could not be given,
Halt the Inscription being covered with a Pew.
.
On the North Side of the outer Chapel an Effigies engraven on Brass, I suppose
of a Warden, the Inscription torn off, at his Mouth a Scroll. Thus.

Cum non possitis fratres evadere mortem, me... On another near the former
under an Effigies.

Hic jacet Magister Johes Morys The first, after the Foundation was entirely
settled. Willis, page 333, ut supra.
primus custos istius Collii qui obiit die undecim millia Virginum, anno dni
millesimo ccccxiii, et anno regni regis Henrici quinti primo, litera dominical
A. Cujus etc.

On a Brass on the Ground.

Hic jacet Dnus Johes Cleir quondam Socius istius Collii qi obiit xi die Mensis
Julii anno millesimo ccccxxi. cujus aie etc.

On another this.

Orate pro aia Dni Nicholai North quondam socii istius Collii qui obiit xii die
Mensis October. An. Dni mccccxlv, cujus aie etc.

Against the North Wall on a Table of black Marble.

Marmor Henrici Madgwick Pullatum metrosis
Frustra Lacrymis plangentes lavamus.
Pretium viri integerrimi, perliterati concionatoris,
Seduli, utilis, carendo didicimus.
Triplex de corpore quieto certamen Collegii, Gregis,
Allingtonii, Nativi Dumer Initur.
Solus Sapiens deus Arbiter aequissimus
Corpus ab omnibus humo Condens, sibi Animam
Ille tandem sibi Creditum thesaurum,
Omnibus aeque participandum perpetuo
Cum ab omni oculo Vixit ab Anno Salutis mdxc Sep. 21.
On another Marble Table near it.

M S. Manta Viator nec parum ut scias refert, quis propter hic sepultus est
Gulielmus Wither natus in parochia de Dummer Comitatus Hantoniae australis, cui
parochus postea invigilavit annos ultra xxx, ubi consilio, Charitate, doctrina,
exeplo singulis profuit. Denatus in hoc juxta Wintoniam Coll. ubi puer
humanioribus literis Educatus donec in Coll. Nov. Oxon promotus tandemque in
Collegii hujus societatem ascitus Evangelium praedicando, pueros Catechizando,
Bursarii, caeteraque Colli Munia obeundo, annos itidem absumpsit ultra xxx.
quibus omibus exequendis, prudentiam, probitatem, fidem adhibuit egregiam,
opes, scientias, virtutem, pietatem, habuit, et (quod vix credas) sine Fuco,
Fraud, Vanitate habuit, Pacis semper eximius Cultor, In pace obiit ano aerae
Christianae mdclvi aetatis suae lxiiii.

Epit "These following, which were on Brass Plates, were torn off long since,
and their Brasses are preserved." Wood's Note. Some of them do not at present
appear.


T. Vole olim socii. Ut Volus in Montem dni volat ore volenti,
Christo funde preces Christum quicunque precaris.
Obiit x die Augusti an. 1558. W. Walynford olim socii hujus Collii qui...
cccxxxix, cujus etc.

Hic jacet Magister Joh. Bouke, quondam custos Collii B. Mariae Wynton in Oxon
tertius, qi obiit secundo die mensis Martii an. dom. mccccxlii litera
Dominicali G. Et anno regni regis Henrici Sexti xx, cujus etc.

Thomae Wood, Ath. vol. i. 244. and fast. 79. ob. 9 Feb. 1580. Willis, ibid.
Stempe Custodis in hoc Collegio undecimi, LL Dris et sacre theologiae
musicesque Laud Clarissimi, Epitaphium.

Qui jacet hic Custos viginti quatuor annos
Praefuit, et qui sit si legis ista, scies.
Voce manuque modo didicit formare canoros.
Addidit huic Linguas Rhetoricamque puer.
Grandior ad leges civiles ibat, in illis
Doctor, et huic judex non sine laud fuit.
Presbyter in Sacris Scripturis plurimus haesit,
Quas populo acceptas plausibil Esquire debit.
Quid memorem vita quam se constanter in omni
Praestitit, et fluxas quam prope sprevit opes.
Obiit nono die Feb. 1581. Custos Admiss. Custos 10 Dec. 1413. A.M.
Robertus Thurbern cognomine dictus,
En morior certus cui non parcit necis ictus,
Spes mea vera quies, bone Jesu suscipe gratum
Quem tricena dies rapit Octobris vere stratum
Anno milleno domini C quater sociato
Et quinquageno morior, bone Christ juvato,
Deprecor oratis pro me custode secundo,
Discas lege pari custos non credere mundo.
On four round Pieces of Brass at the Corners of some old Monuments.

On one, St. Michael.

Satrapa Caelorum Michael Custos paradisi
Sortem justorum Custodi da Michaeli Sc. Michael Cleeve, admit. Ward. 1487.
.
Round another with the Picture of St. John,

More volans Aquilae scrutansque abscondita verbi
Coelestis patriae requiem confer Michaeli.
On a third, whereon are Arrows,

Cui Sebaste dedit nomen confosse Sagittis
Praesta perpetue Michaeli gaudia lucis.
On the fourth, one praying to the V. Mary.

Virgo facta parens dum consentis Gabrieli
Servo Sancta tuo Natum placa Michaeli.
Orate pro anima dni Johis Fraunces quondam Socii istius Collii, qui obiit xxii
die Mensis Maii An. dom. mccccxlv. Cujus etc.

Against the Walls on elegant Marbles.

H. S. E. Cui muneri per ac duod. ita totus incubuit, ut nihil Ob. Nov. 25.
Anno Dom: 1724 Aetat: 48.

Sarah, Vidua illius superstes, H. S. E. Id pro virili et graviter expedire
posset. Obiit 4to. die Octobris, anno Dni 1724 Aetat: 72

Thomas Cheyney M: S: Wiccamus magnifice fundavit, Testantur quibuscunque
innotuit, Boni omnes et Cordati: Before the Chapel Door is the following
Inscription.

Orate pro anima Magistri Willhelmi Nyghtyngale quondam socii hujus Collegii
qui ob. xxiv. Die Mensis Junii Ann. Dom. 1467.

From hence, turning on the Left, we pass into the Cloisters, near the Entrance
of which we perceive, in the Eastern Wall, a Door Way, now closed up, by which
the Society formerly passed from the Chapel, through a corresponding one in the
opposite Wall, for celebrating the Procession called the Circum, in which they
every Morning circuited the College.

The Cloisters constitute a Square of 132 Feet. In the Center of the Area
stands an elegant Gothic Edifice erected in the Reign of Henry VI. by John
Beckington, Bishop of Bath and Wells, was his Executor. This Bishop had been
Fellow of New College, in Oxford, and was a Benefactor to both Wykeham's
Societies. He gave to New College the Manor of Newton Longueville, Bucks: A
Silver Cup weighing ten Pounds: The Bible written on Vellum, finely
illuminated, in four Volumes: a Silver Cup weighing ten Pounds, besides
Vestments for the Choir of that College, A.D. 1465. To Winchester College he
bequeathed a Silver Cup gilt, weighing ten Pounds nine Ounces: two Silver
Candlesticks of the same Weight, and Vestments for the Chapel.
John Fromond, and intended by him for a Chapel: He likewise appointed a
Chaplain John Clyffe was the first Chaplain, buried in the Cloisters, ut inf.
to officiate in it; for whom he also added spacious Lodgings to the West End
of the North Side of the first Court. This Chaplain was removed at the
Reformation. The same Benefactor also ordained Liveries or Gowns, annually, for
the Choristers; and his Wife Maud gave two Cups to the College, on one of which
was the following Inscription:

He shall have Crystes blessing to his dele
Whosoever of me drinks well Regist. Coll.
.
This Chapel was converted into a Library, Ann. Dom. 1629, by Robert Pink,
Warden Ex Albo Bibliothee.
.

Fess fleury, between five Martlets. Saltier between three de lis. Quart.
France and Eng. Label. Quart. fr. and Eng. a bordure. Quart. fr. and Eng.
Quart. fra. and Eng. gobony; over it a Cardinal's Hat. Two Chev. between three
Roses. WYKEHAM. Cross fleury.
The following Paintings in the Windows, de^^ribed by Wood, in the MS.
abovementioned, are now entirely destroyed.

In one Window the Picture of a Bishop writing in a Book; under him....... S.
Epus.....

In another Window, a Bishop writing as before, "with Robertus Lincolniensis."

In another Window two Doctors writing; under them....... Doctor....... Under
the whole, Matilda quondam Uxor Johannis Fromond legavit Collegio Winton Cyphum
I suppose, ornamented. Dame Catharine Read of Borstall, Bucks, by Will, dat.
1489, leaves among other Things, "a Girdle of Tysshew harnessed." Kennet's
Paroch. Ant. p. 678. In an Invento^ of the Vestments and Furniture of St.
George's Chapel at Windsor, we find "duo Baculi harnizati cum berillo." Dugd.
Mon. vol. 3. Eccles. Coll. p. 85.


harnesiatum cum argento deauratum vocatum....

In the Cloisters, surrounding this Library, are the following Epitaphs.

In the West Cloister.

On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Willi Laus quondam Socii istius Collii, qui obiit die jovis in
Vigilia Sti Georgii An dni mccccxvii, Cujus aie, etc.

On a blue Stone engraven.

Hic jacet Johes Marshall istius Collii Socius qui aiam Deo efflavit 25 Aug. An
Dni 1670. Aet. suae 47.

On a Brass in the Wall.

Epi. mi Jo. Dol. Socii defunct. Claustri pro foribus Dolberum cerne Sepultum
Umbrarum assessor janitor ille loci est.
Non Malus; ille ^uit qi verba novissima dixit
O bone Christ precor te miserere Mei.
Sanctorum Assessor vel coeli janitor ut sit
Funde pias Christo lector amice preces.
On a Brass in the Wall.

Edmunde Hodson Clerk and Fellow of this Colleg died the vii of August 1580.

Who so thou art, with loving heart,
Stand, read and think on me,
For as I was, so now thou art,
And as I am so shall thou be.
On another Brass in the Wall.

Epit. Will. Adkins in Artibus Magistri et socii ^stius Collegii.

Nolle tuum nihil est ad Magni velle tonantis,
Jnvitusque licet nunc Gulielme jaces.
Ingenio tam laetus eras quam Corpore obesus,
Commodus, et multa, non sine test, fide.
Nunc te Christus habet, habeasque o xte precamur
Nec tibi qui Moritur desinat esse tuus.
Obiit xviii die Deceb Ao mdlxiiii. Cujus aie etc. On a Brass in the Ground.

Hic jacet R. Dene Mag. in Art, et quondam informator Scholarium hujus Coll.
qui ob. 28 D. Maii, A.D. mcccclxxxiiii. Cujus, etc.

On another.

Orate pro aia mri Thome Beche juris Canonici bacalaurei quondam hujus Collii
Socii, qui obiit mvxxxi. die vero Mensis Julii vii, Cujus aie etc.

On a blue Stone is engraven this.

Thomas Colnet LLB. bujus Coll. Socius Obiit

On a Brass in the Wall.

Thomas Emes hujus Collegii Capellanus post Annos tres et triginta Sacris hic
impensos obiit 24 die Sept. An dni 1629 Aetatis suae Climacterico.

Innocuus multos Emuaeus vixerat Annos
Jamque Senex moriens hac requiescit humo.
Nec dives nec inops qui paucos inter Amicos
Quaesitasque bona fruge reliquit Opes.
In the Wall.

Epitaph Joh. Boles Art. Mag. Olim hujus Wicchamicae cui cura domus, cui cura
peculi,
Cui fuit in studiis irrequieta quies,
Cui corpus sanum, cui meus validissima, velox
Ingenium, Et multus sed sine fell Lepos,
A Cura et Studiis nolens requiescere vivus,
Mortuus hoc tumulo quo requiescat habet.
On a Brass on the Side.

Orate pro aia Mri Edw. Tacham quonda Soc^ hujus Collegii, qui obiit xvii die
Marcii Anno D^ mccccxxiii, Cujus aie etc. "Ed. Tacham, or Thacham, Vic. de
Writtle, Com. Essex." W. Ms. N.




On another Brass.

Orate pro aia Mri Willi Ball quondam Socii hujus Collegii qui obiit iiii die
Maii An Dni mcccclxxi. Cujus aie etc.

Engraven on the Pavement.

Gulielmus Emes hujus Collii Organista, Obiit 7 Aprilis an dni 1637.

On a Brass in the Wall.

Tho Davison Obiit 20 Julii 1586. Hic nunc deinque Davisone putres,
Triginta Socius perennis Annos,
Vivens ipse tibi nimis severus,
Expirans Aliis satis profusus.
On a Brass on the Ground.

Pray for the Soul of Edward.........

On a Brass on the Wall.

Epitaphium Thomae Geffres sacrae Theologiae Baccalaur. olim hujus Collii Socii
qui obiit 21 Aug. 1605.

Quem Chamus puerum, juvenem aula, virumque recepit
Venta Senem, quem Mors hunc rapit iste locus.
Talis erat qualis cui quaeque fuere minuta,
Pectoris Exceptis ingeniique honis.
Musaeo vixit, musaeo mortem pereptus
Conveniens vitae mors fuit illa suae.
On a Brass on the Side.

Orate pro aia Dni Willi Clysse primi Capellani istius Capelle, qui obiit
xxiiii die Mensis Marcii an. Dni mccccxxxiii. Cujus aie, etc.

"Istius Capellae" means the Chapel in the Middle of the Cloisters, now the
Library.

On a Stone on the Ground.

H. S. E. Antonius Rous A.M. hujus Collii et socius et Luctus ppetuus, qui
prudens facilis ingenuus omnibus, Amicis fidelis, Omnibus dignus, Nullius, Nifi
minus vivendo, Spem fefellit.

Obiit an. Sal. mdclxxxi. On a Brass in the Wall.

Epitaphium Thomae Jones in legibus Baccalaurei quondam hujus Colli Socii.

Hic jaceo juvenis primum Civilia jura
Qui didici, qui idem sacra sequntus eram.
Qui vitam Morbis variis gravibusque peregi
Tandem per te (Mors) hoc requiesco loco.
Jura mihi multum, plus pagina sacra placebat,
Namque fuit morbis haec medicina meis.
Dum Vixit hoc Saepe in ore habuit, satis On a Marble against the Wall.

Deposit. Josephi Cox LL Baccalaurei, hujus Collii Socii, Optime meriti, quem
media Aetate floridum importuna febris Amicis maerentibus abripuit. Obiit 18
die Octobris An. Dni 1680.

Over all these Arms, viz. a Chev. betw. three Stags attired.

On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Thome Ryve quondam istius Collii Scholaris qui obiit ix die
October. an Dni mcccccxxiii. Cujus aie, etc.

In the South Cloister.

Against the Wall is this on a black Marble in Golden Letters.

H. S. E. Joan. Chalkhill A M. hujus Collii Annos 46 Socius, vir quoad vixit
solitudine et silentio, temperantia et Castitate orationibus et Eleemosynis,
Contemplatione et Sanctimonia Ascetis vel primitivis par: qui cum a parvulo in
regnum coelorum viam secisset Octogenarius tandem rapuit 20 die Maii 1679.

On a Stone on the Ground.

Hic jacet Corpus Xtophori Badger filii Ricci Badger Londin. hujus Collii olim
Scholaris, qi obiit 26 mar. an dni 1635.

On a Brass.

Hic jacet Mauritius Morrys quondam clericus Capellae hujus Collii, qui obiit
xxiii Jun. an. dni mcccccxxiii. cujus aie etc.

On another.

Orate pro aia dni Richardi Cole qunodam Conductitii hujus Collii, qui Obiit
xxiii. die Deceb. an. dni mvcxix, cujus aie etc.

Engraven on a Stone on the Ground.

Mariott Stopes hujus Collii alumnus filius Jacobi Stopes S. T. B. Vicarii de
Haddenham in Com. Bucks, qi Obiit et Abiit ad dnum die dominico Maii 4 An. dom
1673.

On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Dni Johis Hopkyns quondam Conductitii hujus Collii, qi Obiit xvi
die Mensis Augusti an. dni mvcxiv. Cujus Aie, etc.

On another.

Hic jacet Dnus Johes Curtoys quondam socius hujus Collii qi Obiit penultimo
die Januarii An. Dni. m. Quingentessimo Nono, cujus aie etc.

On another.

Orate pro aia Johis Fylde, qi Obiit xxiiii die Mensis Febr. An. Dom. Mill.
cccccvii, cujus aie etc.

Engraven on a Stone.

Orate pro aia Henrici Hendyg quondam Socii hujus Collii, cujus aie etc.

[He died 2 Jan. 11 Hen. 6.] MS. W. N.

On a Stone on the Ground.

H. S. E. Joshua Cook A.M. hujus Collii Capellani qui obiit 8 die Febr. an.
Sal. 1678 aet. 44.

On a Stone engraven.

Hic sub marmore sepultus est Thomas Welsted quem calculi icti mors prostravit.
in hac schola primus erat, nec ut speramus in Caelo Ultimus est, quod pro
Oxonio adiit xiii die Januarii An. Dni 1676 aet. suae 18.

On a black oval Wall against the Wall.

Siste viator. Qui Lethi Calcas viam quisquis es ex spartanorum Choro hic
Choragus est tuus Stephanus Cook L L. Baccalaureus et hujus Collii Socius, qui
tantum aetatis vixit juvenis moriendo, quantum alii non degunt senes, obiit
November. 12,

Anno Sal. mdclxvi Aetat. xxxiv. Insequere nunc ad patriam et morere viator.

On another like the former.

H. S. E. Jonathan Cook LLB et hujus Collii socius frater Stephani Cook juxta
Sepult, quorum uterque circa unius lustri spatium hoc in Coll. socii
transegerunt, felices in hoc ambo quod in tam brevi vitae locique ambitu tantum
amoris laudis et honoris apud omnes passim fibi conciliarint. Obiit October. 5
an. sal. mdclxxiv. aetatis suae. 32.

On a Stone on the Ground.

Depositum Henrici Banks LL Bac. hujus Coll. socii in quo ad hominem
absolvendum omnibus Elogiis dignum nihil desiderari potuit praeter vitam
diuturniorem, quam tamen pro sempiterna feliciter comutavit, October. 11. an
1672, aetat. suae 32.

Over all his Arms in a Cross ingr. betw. 4 de lis.

On a white Marble Mon. against the Wall.

H. S. E. Audoenus Philips AM. hujus Coll. Hostiarius, de Clever. pepp. in
Comitat. Wilts Oriundus, qui cum et pietatem et doctrinam quibus ipse excelluit
apud wiccamicos sex et quod excurrit lustra uberrime transfudisset, remque
publicam et ecclesiam numerofissima prole literaria locupletasset, ingens in
Omnibus bonis desiderium sui x die Maii an dni 1654 aet. 54 suae moriens
reliquit.

Over all his Arms Arg. a Lion ramp. sab. chained, Or.

In the East Cloister "Here was a Brass for Rich. Bowrman, once Fellow, where
now the School Boys learn in the Summer Time." He died 1464. Ms. W. N.


.

On a Brass against the Wall.

Gulielmus Turner hujus Coll. Clericus obiit 14 die Martii an dni 1644.

Olim Cantica, musicae peritus,
Dulci voce dedisti, et art multa;
At nunc (long anima polis fruente)
Edis dulcius haec peritiusque.
On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Mri Johis Dear Artium Mri quondam socii istius Collii, qui obiit
secundo die Mensis Maii an dni mvcxxxii, cujus aie etc.

On three Brasses on the Ground near and like one another.

Orate pro aia Dni Ricardi Skynnir olim socii istius Collii qui obiit penultimo
die Mensis Julii an dni mvcxiiii. cujus aie etc.

Orate pro aia Dni Johis Grewaker olim socii istius Coll. qui ob. penultimo die
Mensis Julii an dni mvcxiiii. cujus aie etc. "This Man is often written in the
Register of this College Grewaker Capellanus Conductitius."Ms. W. N.


.

Orate pro aia dni Johis Gilbert olim socii istius Coll. qui obiit xvi Mensis
Julii an dni mvcxiiii. cujus etc.

On a Brass on the Wall.

Epita. Mri To. Watton socii hujus Coll. defunct 13 Jan. 1596.

Postquam transegi centum vel circiter annos
Longa mihi sed non curva senecta fuit.
Languor inexhaustos quassans paralyticus artus
Hinc animam Caelo, tradidit ossa solo.
On a Brass on the Ground.

Orate pro aia Dni Johis Taknell quondam socii perpetui hujus Collii, qui obiit
vicesimo viii die Januarii an. dni mcccclxxxxiiii. Cujus etc.

On a Brass on the Wall.

Epitaphium Mri Thomae Lark nup. socii istius Coll. ob. 16. Maii 1582.

Qui premor hoc tumulo dicor praenomine Thomas,
Cognomen secit dulcis alauda mihi.
Bis septem Menses, ter septem presbyter annos,
Hic colui, cujus nunc sruor, ore deum.
In the North Cloisters.

Against the Wall at the End, this on a Brass Plate.

A front hujus monum. fitum est Corpus Philippi Devereux presbyteri nup.
istius Coll. Capellani Conductitii, viri tum in Coll. quam in pauperes vere
benefici atque pii. Obiit ix die Mensis Febr. An. 1578.

Engraven on a Stone on the Ground.

Robertus Beely hujus Collii socius, obiit 21 Dec. An. Dom. 1634. aet. 69 "He
was born at Glossop in Derbyshire. and admitted perpetual Fellow of New College
in 1586." Wood's Ms. N.


.

On a Brass on the Wall.

Epita. Georgii Flower in Artibus Magistri. Ecce Georgius hoc Florus sub
Marmore dormit,
Floruerat, sed flos ille caducus erat,
Bis septem socius vix hic transegerat annos
Mors pede cum pulsat Florus ut hinc abeat.
Obiit 18. Nov. an. 1578. On another Brass in the Wall.

Positum ob memoriam Jo. Scotte presbyteri nup. socii istius Collii, Cujus
corpus prope hoc monumentum lapide sub Marmoreo humatum conditur, obiit vi die
Menfis December. an. dom 1575.

On a Brass on the Ground.

John Gray obiit 6. October. 16.......... On another Stone engraven

Lancelotus White Art. Mag. hujus Coll. socius, obiit Apr. 17. an, dom. 1642.
aetat. suae 40.

Lector candide stetur ad Sepulcrum,
Albus nomine mentis albioris
Orator vigil atq. pastor, ista est
Artis nescia vita pulcrioris.
Defunctus jacet hac repostus urna,
Sanctorumque simul repostus albo.
On a Brass in the Wall,

Epita. Johes Clerk. Clausus Johanes jacet hic sub Marmore Clerkus,
Qui fuit hic quondam presbyter et socius,
In terra roseos solitus stillare liquores,
In Coelo vivis nunc quoque gaudet aquis.
Obiit x die Mensis Julii 1571. On a little oval Marble against the Wall,

H. S. E. Georgius King hujus Collii Organista, qui obiit x die Mensis Maii an
dni 1665 Aetatis suae 79.

Arms are. -- --

Hic jacet Gulielmus Windham, Gulielmi Windham Equitis Aurati de Orchard
Windham in Comitatu Somset. filius tertius, qui Vicesimo Octavo die Novembris
in hoc Collegio occubuit 1678.

On a blue Stone on the Ground,

L.R -- Arms are Chev. betw. 3 fl. delis: the Crest a fl. de lis with a Serpent
about it.

On another blue Stone on the Ground,

Hic jacet Thomas Harris hujus Collii nup. Socius,
Obiit 10 die Apr. an. Dom. 1662 Aetatis suae 32.
Over all, a Chev. betw. three Hedge-Hogs.

On another blue Stone on the Ground,

Gulielmus Terry hujus Collii Socius obiit 19 Dec. 1657. These Cloisters appear
not to have been comprehended in the Founder's original Plan; as in the
Commission he gives for the Consecration of his Chapel, he calls the Place
where they now stand "Locum in cimiterio in dicto Collegio ordinatum While he
was indisposed at Farnham Castle in Surrey, he directs another Bishop "Capellam
Collegii nostri prope Winton. Necnon Altaria in eodem erecta, et locum in
cimiterio [cimiterium] dicti Collegii ordinatum, et lapides pro supraaltaribus
ordinatos dedicate et consecrare." Regist. Wyk. part. 3. b. fol. 136. A.D.
1395. As he specifies every Particular so minutely, he certainly would have
mentioned the Cloisters distinctly by their proper Name, had they existed, or
even been intended.


." This likewise appears from the outside Buttresses which finish one Side of
the Chapel; to which the Cloisters are contiguous.

Westward of the Cloisters, on one Side of a small Area, stands the School.
Over the Entrance is a Statue of the Founder, with the following Inscription.

M. S. This Room is finely proportioned, and elegantly finished. The Roof is
adorned with beautiful Stucco, of a bold Relief; in which are introduced the
Arms of many of the Benefactors. It is ninety Feet long, and thirty-six broad.
On the West End are inscribed the following Laws, to be observed by the
Scholars, etc.

TABULA LEGUM PAEDAGOGICARUM.
In TEMPLO. Deus colitor. Preces cum devoto animi affectu peraguntor. Oculi non
vagantor. Silentium esto. Nihil profanum legitor. IN SCHOLA. Diligentia quisque
utitor. Submisse loquitor secum. Clare ad Praeceptorem nemini molestus esto.
Orthographice scribito. Arma Scholastica in promptu semper habeto. In AULA. Qui
mensam consecrat clare pronunciato. Caeteri respondento. Recti omnes stanto.
RECITATIONES. Intelligenter and apt distinguntor. In mensa quies esto. In
atrio, oppido, ad montes, sociati omnes incedunto. Modestia ac obviis
honestioribus genua flectuntor. Capita aperiuntor. Vultus, gestus, incessus
componuntor. In CUBICULIS. Noctu dormitor. Interdiu studetor. Solum cubiculorum
verritor. Sternuntor lectuli. Munda omnia sunto. Per fenestras nemo in atrium
prospicito. Contra qui faxit piaculum esto. In omni loco and tempore qui
plebeius est praefectis obtemperato. Qui praefectus est, Legitime imperato.
Uterque a mendaciis, ostentationibus, jurgiis, pugnis, and furtis, abstineto.
Togam, caeteramque vestem, nec dissuito nec lacerato. Patrium sermonem fugito.
Latinum exerceto. -- Haec, aut his similia, siquando deferantur, judicium
damus.
On the opposite End, with proper Decorations, is inscribed

Aut disce, aut discede, manet sors tertia caedi. The Foundation of this superb
and elegant Edifice was laid in September, A.D. 1683, and it was finished June
11, 1687. We have here annexed, from the College Register, a List of the
Benefactors who contributed to raise this Structure.

George Morley, Bishop of Winton, gave 10l. and forty Oaks 80 0 0 Francis
Turner, Bishop of Ely, formerly Fellow of New College 20 0 0 Thomas Kenn, Bp.
of Bath and Wells, formerly Fellow of the College 30 0 0 William Pierpoint,
Earl of Kingston, formerly Commoner of the College 100 0 0 Charles Pawlet, Earl
of Wiltshire, eldest Son to the Marquis of Winchester, formerly Commoner of the
College 502 0 0 Wriothesley Baptist Noel, Viscount Campden, only Son to the
Earl of Gainsborough, formerly Commoner 30 0 0 John Nicholas, Knight of the
Bath 3 4 6 Henry Beeston, L.L.D. Warden of New College 50 0 0 Richard Trafles,
Fellow of New College, and Charles Trafles his Brother 50 0 0 Edwin Sandys,
Fellows of New College, 5 0 0 Thomas Lee, 3 4 6 Robert Swester, 2 3 0 Thomas
Monday, 2 3 0 William Hughes, 2 0 0 Thomas Roberts, 2 0 0 David Wickham, 2 3 0
Charles Ford, 2 3 0 George Thomas, 4 6 0 John Ballard, 2 10 0 William Musgrave,
2 3 0 Samuel Palmer, 3 4 6 Robert Woodward, Canc. Ecc. Sarum. 20 0 0 Edward
Spencer, Steward of New Coll. 5 0 0 Sir Edward Law, formerly Fellow of New
College 20 0 0 Edward Masters, formerly Fellow of New College, Chancel. of
Exeter 10 15 0 Robert Sharrock, formerly Fellow of New College, Prebendary 10 0
0 Dr. Bouchier, L.L.D. Regius Professor of Oxon, formerly Child of this Col. 5
7 6 William Oldys, L.L.D. formerly Fellow of New College 5 0 0 Nicholas
Stanley, M.D. formerly Fellow of New College 5 0 0 Stephen Penton, Principal of
Hartford Hall, formerly Fellow of New Coll. 5 7 6 Thomas Harris, Esquire of Colern,
formerly Fellow of New College 10 0 0 John Herseat, formerly Fell. of N. C. 10
0 0 Richard Glyde, formerly Fell. of N. C. 2 0 0 Thomas Penruddocke, formerly
Child of this College 5 7 6 Tho. Oxenbridge, Esquire formerly Child of this College
5 0 0 John Bloodworth, formerly Commoner of this College 5 0 0 John Franklyn,
Master of Chancery, formerly Child of this College 10 15 0 George Reynel,
S.T.P. formerly Child of this College 2 3 0 Richard Pocock, formerly Child 1 0
0 Ambrose Philips, Esquire Sergeant at Law, formerly Fellow of New College 20 0 0
Henry Wallop, Hujus Coll. Commensales, 10 15 0 John Wallop, 5 7 6 Thomas Brown,
10 0 0 Robert Hyde, 10 0 0 Brian Turner, 5 0 0 Richard Harris, 5 0 0 William
Beech, 5 0 0 Richard Brown, 1 1 6 James Batten, 5 7 6 Roger Jones, Steward of
the College, formerly Child 100 0 0 Allen Garway 10 0 0 Henry Parker 10 0 0
Matthew Hatton 10 0 0 Charles Cutts 10 0 0 Godson Penton, of Winchester City 5
7 6 Maria Brideoake, Widow of the Bishop of Chichester 20 0 0 Elizabeth
Mompeson, the Warden's Sister 5 7 6 Susan Daniel, the Warden's Sister 5 0 0
Jane Harris, the Schoolmaster's Mother 5 0 0 Eleonora Rawlinson 50 0 0 Richard
Osgood, Fellows of this College. 20 0 0 William Emmes, 10 0 0 Seth Ward, 20 0 0
Pharamus Fiennes, 20 0 0 Peregrine Thistlethwaite, 10 0 0 Edward Young, Dean of
Sarum, 10 0 0 Thomas Cheney, 10 0 0 George Beaumont, 10 0 0 Thomas Peachman 10
0 0 Robert Air, 10 0 0 William Harris, Schoolmaster 100 0 0 Johannes Nicholas,
Collegii Beatae Mariae Winton, Custos, quibus instituta sua perfecit, dedit
1477 11 9 Summa totius Operis 2599 18 9 Cui det Deus Aeternitatem. Amen.

The original School, specified as such by the Founder in his Statutes, was the
Room which is now called the Seventh Chamber. He calls it magna illa Domus,
situated under the Hall.

From the School Area we pass into the College Meadow; in the Middle of which
stands an Infirmary, built for the Use of the Scholars by Warden Harris in the
Reign of Charles I. Part of this Meadow originally belonged to St. Elizabeth's
College At the Dissolution of this House, Thomas Lord Wriothesley sold it to
Winchester College for 360l. on Condition that the Warden and Fellows wouid
either convert it into a Grammar School for twenty Scholars, or pull it down
before Whitsuntide 1547. The College chose the latter. Regist. Coll. Winton.
, which stood in an adjacent Meadow to the East; in Remembrance of which are
the following Inscriptions on the Eastern Wall.

Solum Ecclesiae In Occiden On the Western Wall are these Inscriptions.

In: Occidentali Super: Tene 46 Pedes: in On the Right of these we find the
Date 1554, being the Year in which that Part of the Wall was built which
includes the Additions from the Meadow, in which stood the College of St.
Elizabeth.

From this Meadow we have a Prospect of Catharine Hill abovementioned, on the
Top of which is a Danish Circumvallation. To this Hill the Scholars are
permitted to make Excursions on Holidays.

Ah happy Hills! ah pleasing Shade!
Ah Fields beloved in vain!
Where once my careless Childhood strayed,
A Stranger yet to Pain!
I feel the Gales that from ye blow,
A momentary Bliss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing;
And redolent of Joy and Youth,
My weary Soul they seem to sooth,
And breathe a second Spring!
GRAY. Contiguous to the College, on the West, is a spacious quadrangular
Building, in which the young Gentlemen not on the Foundation, who are called
Commoners, live in a Collegiate Manner, under the Care of the second Master or
Usher; a Situation which must be acknowledged to be far more convenient sor the
Purposes of Learning, and good Discipline, than the usual Custom of our great
Schools, where the Youth are boarded in the Town, and are at a Distance from
the constant and immediate Inspection of their proper Governors. On one Side of
the Area of this Structure is a commodious Cloister. There is also a noble
Hall, 50 Feet in Length, and 30 in Breadth, in which the Commoners dine, and,
when absent from the School, pursue their private Studies.

This College was founded by that magnificent Prelate William of Wykeham,
Bishop of Winchester, for one Warden, ten Fellows, one Schoolmaster, one Usher,
three Chaplains, seventy Scholars, three Clerks, and sixteen Choristers.

The first Stone was laid March the 26, 1387, at Nine o'Clock in the Morning,
near a School in which Wykeham when a Boy was educated. The Building being
completed on the 28th of March, A.D. 1393, the Warden and Scholars made their
solemn Entrance, at Nine in the Morning, chaunting in Procession. It should be
observed, that the Founder, by his first Charter, established only a Warden and
seventy Scholars, which was the whole Society who took formal Possession of the
College, as abovementioned; and who, before the Building was finished, were
provided with Lodgings in the Parish of St. John upon the Hill. The Founder
obtained a second Charter for the Establishment of the ten Fellows, and
Officers of the Choir See the Charters in Dugd. Mon. vol. iii. Eccl. Coll. page
106. 133.
.

THE CATHEDRAL.
SOME Writers report, that a Monastery was founded in this City by King Lucius,
A.D. 169, which was destroyed in the Persecution of Dioclesian, A.D. 266 Tho.
Rudborne Hist. Maj. Wint. Ang. Sacr. tom. i. page 182, 183.
. This, it is said, was afterward restored, and underwent various Revolutions;
till Kyngelise, the first Christian King of the West Saxons, began a Cathedral
Church, A.D. 611. which was probably finished by his Successor Kenwalch, and
replenished with Religious by Birinus, the Bishop and Apostle of the West
Saxons, A.D. 646. Soon afterward, viz. A.D. 660, the Sea of Dorchester, now in
Oxfordshire, was removed hither, and Wina was appointed the first Bishop. But
before this new Constitution commenced, Birinus and Agilbertus were the two
first Bishops of Winchester.

The Chapter of this Foundation, who were Seculars, continued about 300 Years,
and were at length removed by the Persuasion of Bishop Ethelwold Hist. Maj. ut
supr. page 218.
, in the Reign of King Edgar, about A.D. 963, who substituted a Convent of
Benedictines, which remained till the Reformation.

About the Year 1079 Bishop Walkelyne See Annal. Ec. Wint. ut supr. page 294,
295.
began the present Edifice, and finished the Tower, the Choir, the Transept,
and probably the West End Rudborne, ibid. 271.
. Accordingly the Monks, in the Presence of almost all the Bishops and Abbots
of England, passed with much State and Triumph from the old Monastery to the
new one, A.D. 1093, on the Feast of their Patron St. Swythin; and in a most
solemn Procession translated the Shrine of that Saint to the new Church. The
next Day Walkelyne commanded the old Monastery to be demolished; which was
effected the same Year, one Porch and the high Altar excepted Ut infra.
. The whole being nobly improved by William of Wykeham, was at lenth finished,
as it now appears, by Fox; of whose respective Benefactions and Alterations I
shall find a proper Occasion hereafter to speak more particularly.

Notwithstanding the positive Assertions above, concerning Walkelyne's entire
Demolition of the old Church, I am persuaded that the low-built Isles at the
East End of the Choir, existed before the Time of Walkelyne, and are a Part of
the old Church erected by the Saxon Kings. This appears from several
demonstrative Proofs: For, they are in a more simple and confined Style of
Architecture, than any Part of Walkelyne's new Work; and, admitting that
Walkelyne demolished great Part of the old Church, it seems probable that he
should leave that Part of it standing in which many of the Saxon Kings, and
Bishops his Predecessors, are confessedly buried. Another Evidence of this
Hypothesis are the Crypts on which these low Isles stand to this day; and which,
as appears from a Latin Epistle in Verse of Wolstan Apud Leland. Collecta^.
vol. i. page 151.
, Precentor of the Church, to Aelphege, Bishop of Winchester, A.D. 946, were
constructed by Ethelwold in the Reign of King Edgar. He is speaking of
Ethelwold's rebuilding the Church.

Insuper occultas studuistis and addere cryptas. These Crypts, now remaining,
if they do not prove the Antiquity of the Building they support, yet at least
they point out the original Situation of the Church; and invalidate those
Testimonies which assert that Walkelyne entirely demolished the old Church, and
chose a new Ground-plot for his new Structure.

There is another Circumstance mentioned by Rudbourne Page 270, 271, apud
Whart. Angl. Sacr. vol. i.
, which still further corroborates my Supposition. He observes that William
Rufus was buried in the Choir under a Tower, which fell down a few Years
afterward, and that in the Place of it Walkelyn erected the present Tower. He
adds, that Walkelyn did not build this Tower in his Lifetime, but committed
the Care of it to his Executors, who finished it after his Death.

The Writer of the Epistle abovementioned, who lived A.D. 946, tells us that
Ethelwold introduced a Watercourse into the Priory, now corruptly called the
Log-Pond.

-- Hucque
Dulcia piscosae flumina traxit aquae.
Secessusque Sic.
Laci penetrant secreta domorum,
Mundantes F. Mu^centes.
totum murmr coenobium.
This Watercourse is formed in a large Piece of subterraneous arched
Stone-work. The ancient Course of it is thus described in a Passage faithfully
translated from Wykeham's Register Part 2. fol. 178. seq.
, "And because there is a certain Watercourse, running from within the City of
Winton into the aforesaid Priory of St. Swythun, through the Middle of the
Dormitory, Cloisters, Buttery Celerariae.
, Malt-house, Kitchen, and the Middle of the Court, or Quadrangle, of the said
Priory; which Course of Water is called Lourte-borne, in which, and by which,
Rubbish, Offalls, etc. [are carried through the Priory to Wolvesy House.] It is
agreed that the Prior and Convent shall place a strong and sufficient Grate of
Iron, in the outward Southern Wall Now called the Close-Wall.
of the said Priory, to prevent, etc." In the same Instrument Mention is made
of the Course of the River now running through the Gardens of the Prebendaries
on the East. "And because the said Prior and Convent have agreed to maintain
Half the Bridge at le Floudestoke in the Soke of Winchester over the River
which runs from within the Priory of St. Swythun toward the South, and passes
directly by the College there, commonly called Seinte Marie College of
Wynchestre, and it is Close on the East Side; also by the College and Close of
St. Elisabeth, and its Meadow called St. Stephen's Mede, on the West Side, into
the large and deep River which runs from the said College of St. Elisabeth
toward the Hospital of St. Cross: And the Bridge, near the great Northern Gate
of the Sisterhood of the Hospital of St. Swythun's, but on the East Side of the
said Gate, etc."


-- "From the Chapter House within the Priory of the Church of Winton, A.D.
1398."

After this eminent Convent, which consisted of a Prior and They were
originally sixty. About A.D. 1404, forty-two. Ledger B. of Church Winton, No. 1.
fol. 20. citat, apud Lowth's Wykeham, p. 215. edit. 2d. At a Visitation of the
Convent 1505, they are reported to be thirty-five. Success. Priorum Eccl.
Winton. apud Wharton, Angl. S. 1. 325; and again in Lowth's Wykeham, forty-six,
page 69. In the Catalogue specified in the next No^^, Mention is made of
forty-two Copes of Tissue.
forty-two Monks, had flourished in the Splendour of its The curious Reader may
find an Account of them in Strype's Cranmer, Append. No. 16. page 24. Also in
S^^vens's Monastic. b. i. page 222. with an Inventory of the Furniture of the
Prior's, and Sub-prior's House, etc.
Ornaments, the Magnificence of its Buildings, and the Extent of its
Possessions, for near 900 Years, it was dissolved by Henry VIII. Nov. 15, A.D.
1539; who within less than five Months afterward, viz. on March 28, A.D. 1540,
instituted a new Foundation, consisting of one Dean, twelve Prebendaries, six
Minor Canons, ten Lay Clerks, or Singing Men, eight Choristers, and other
Members, which he dedicated to the holy and undivided Trinity. The Revenues at
the Dissolution were valued at 1507 l. 17 s. 2 d. the greatest Part, if not
all, of which, was It appears likewise by the Episcopal Registers before the
Reformation, that most of the Livings, formerly presented to by the Convent,
are now in the Patronage of the Dean and Chapter.
appropriated, by the King, to the new Dean and Chapter Willis Mitr. Abb. vol.
i. page 301. Tanner, Not. Monast. edit. fol. page 152.
. The last Prior was William Basyng, alias Kyngesmell, who was made the first
Dean, and died A.D. 1548.

Of the Conventual Buildings, which were transferred with the Revenues, nothing
considerable at present remains. Some, we may reasonably suppose, were
demolished in the Reign of Henry VIII. or soon afterward, as useless to the
new Foundation; and others have given Way to modern Improvements. The principal
Part, now standing, is the Dean's, formerly the Prior's, Hall. It was very
losty with a Roof of Rafter-Work still to be traced, and was 65 Feet long, and
22 broad. But as the whole is subdivided into several Apartments, its Height,
Length, and Breadth, are at present lost to the Eye. Five Windows on the West
Side of it remain, with its End-Window on the South. The Traces of two Windows,
remarkably long and narrow, discernible in the East End of the Prebendal House,
now belonging to the Reverend Mr. Letchmere, and of three Arches on the North
Side of the same, indicate one End of the Resectory: And the House itself,
which has several Apartments with arched Stone-Roofs, seems to be made up of
the Kitchen, Buttery, Cellars, and other Offices. The Cloisters formed an Area
on the Southern Churchyard, and were built This, with the Addition of other
Circumstances, appears from a Precept in the Register of Wykeham's Episcopate,
to prohibit the Inhabitants of Winton, or others, from claiming a public Way,
or Passage, through the Cloisters, or Court, of the Monastery. Registr.
Wykeham. page 2. sol. 180. penes Episcopi Winton. Officiar.
against the South Side of the Church, which on that Account is not furnished
with Buttresses and Pinnacles as is the North Side. The opposite Wall retains
the Vestiges of Arches, and of a large Gateway, which probably led from the
Cloisters to the Refectory before mentioned; or perhaps was the public Entrance
from the Monastery into the Cloisters, and from thence to the Church. Through
an ancient Portico on the Eastern Square of these Cloisters, near the Deanery,
they passed into the Chapter House, which is destroyed, and makes a Part of the
Dean's Garden. It was extended under the End of the Southern Transept to the
Length of ninety Feet, against which the Heads of Arches, with some of their
Pillars still appear; and prove from their Style, that it was built with the
Transept by Walkelyne. Some of the Priors were interred in it; particularly
Godfrey, a famous Scholar in his Time, A.D. 1107, toward the East End T.
Rudborne, Ang. f. vol. i. page 285.
. That Side of the Cloisters which was contiguous to the Church appears to have
been terminated, on the West, where the rough End of a Wall forming the Outside
of the Western Square, appears against the Church; beyond which, the Cloister
cea^ing, the Remainder of this Side of the Church is finished with a Window
lower than the rest, and of enlarged Dimensions: Under it is a lofty Gateway,
which was an Entrance into the Church on the Outside of the Cloisters.

It is conjectured by Camden Britannia, edit. Gibs. vol. i. page 139. See
Burton on Antonin. page 221.
, that the ruinous Walls of Flint, near the West End of the Church, are Part of
a College, the Foundation and Dissolution of which are equally obscure, where
Constans the Monk, Son of Constantine, who usurped the Empire against Honorius,
A.D. 408, was educated. But it seems more probable that these are the Remains
of the most ancient Part of the Convent in Question, erected by some of the
Saxon Kings; that Part, perhaps, which, as Rudborne already quoted, relates,
was demolished by Walkelyne. The Height of the Ground hereabouts demonstrates
the Demolition of some considerable Pile. It appears also, that there was a
Garden with several Houses within the Cemetery, under the West End of the
Church, an Encroachment which arose after the Reformation, and which by
Archbishop Laud's Injunctions was ordered to be removed, A.D. 1635 Wilkins's
Council. vol. iv. page 517.
. Leland observes that there was a Chapel with a Carnary, at the West End of
the Cathedral Itin. vol. iii. page 85. ed. 2.
.

But the conventual Buildings seem to have been for the most Part Heylin's
Hist. of Presbyt. page 540. edit. 1670.
destroyed by the Presbyterians in the Civil Wars; who A.D. 1646, demolished
more than Half of the Deanery and eight Prebendal Houses, together with the
magnificent Episcopal Palace of Wolvesey, and afterward sold the Materials.
Most of the present Prebendal Houses, and Part of the Deanery, were rebuilt
after the Restoration. The Library, at the South End of the Southern Transept,
was reduced to it is present Form, and replenished with a valuable Collection of
Books, A.D. 1686, by Bishop Morley. But it was evidently a Room belonging to
the Convent, as appears by the initial Letters of Prior Silkestede's, Name cut
in a Moulding of the East Window, answering to the Arms of the Sea in the
opposite Moulding. The present Chapter House, being the Western I Will of the
South Transept, was appropriated to that Purpose, A.D. 1621 Inscribed over the
Chimney, with J.Y.D. Joh. Young Decanus. His Arms are over a modern Doorway in
the North Transept with the Date 1630. The Church received many Improvements
during his Government. His Arms are also on the Roof of the Choir, and in a
Window of a Chapel in the South Transept.
. The ancient one abovementioned was totally demolished, as I conjecture, with
the adjacent Deanery, though long before decayed and disused.

The principal Repairs of the Devastations committed by fanatic Enthusiasm and
Ignorance, were made about A.D. 1663, soon after the Return of the Dean and
Chapter; who having been suppressed and expelled, during Cromwell's Usurpation,
retook Possession of the Cathedral, Aug. 19, 1660 Walker's Sufferings, part 2,
page 77. -- The King was proclaimed in May preceding. "At Winchester the Mayor
and Aldermen in their scarlet Gowns met at the Market Cross, and went down to
the Cathedral, where they heard a very loyal and eloquent Sermon from Mr.
Complyn, Minister of Avington near Winchester. Marching thence into the
Highstreet, the Mayor with the rest of the Corporation ascended a Scaffold,
covered with red Cloth, and there solemnly proclaimed King Charles. The which
ended, the Musketeers gave a gallant Volley; then, Silence being commanded, the
remaining Part of the Cathedral Singing Men, whereof Mr. Burt, a Gentleman of
eighty Years of Age, was one, with the Master of the Choristers, and other
musical Gentlemen, sung a solemn Anthem, in a Room built on Purpose somewhat
above the Mayor's Scaffold. The Words, O Lord, make thy Servant Charles our
gracious King to rejoice in thy Strength, etc." Kennet's Register and Chronic.
Land. 1728. page 144. See also Mercur. Publ. 4to. No. 21.


.

The Arms of England, painted on the Windows of the Dean's Hall, were put up in
Honor of James I. A.D. 1621, who was entertained at the Deanery; during which
Time he planted a Fig Tree in the Dean's Garden, which still remains, with an
Inscription on the Wall behind it. In the same Window is another Coat for King
Charles I. and his Queen Mary; with the Inscription C. M. viz. Carolus, Maria,
as in the Roof of the Choir of the Church.

In the Windows of the Dean's Library, which is 28 Yards long, built soon after
the Restoration, are some ancient Pieces of stained Glass, which originally
belonged to the Prior's, now the Dean's House; viz. three Saints, the Arms of
King The same Arms, on the Presbytery Partition Wall of the Choir, are
inscribed EDWARDUS REX. But Edgar was properly the Founder of the Convent. See
Dugd. Mon. vol. i. 37, 38, and page 981, 982. Also Wilkins's Conc. vol i. page
244. In Speed's Hist. Eng. page 368. edit. 1614, Edward's Arms are only the
Cross. But Edgar's, ibid. page 369, The Cross with the Birds, as in this
Window, and the Partition Wall abovementioned. Edgar was the first who added
the Birds.
Edgar or of Edward the Elder, of the Sea, and of William Kyngesmil, the first
Dean. Among the Fragments is the Name of Thomas Silkestede, who was a Prior of
the Church, and probably was a Benefactor to the Buildings of the Deanery. At
least it appears that he added the Stone-building with round-headed Windows, at
the South Entrance of the Deanery, as his Initials T.S. connected with his
usual Device of a Skain of Silk, still remain in the uppermost Windows. He died
A.D. 1524. The Entrance, or arched Gateway, under this Building, is however
evidently much older than the Superstructure.

The Precincts of the Church, called the Close, are surrounded, on the South
and West Sides, by a losty Wall of Flint, originally belonging to the Convent,
Part of which also remains on the North East. The Communication between the
Episcopal Palace, called Wolvesey-House, and the Church See Wykeham's Registr.
supr. citat. part 2. fell. 181.
, was through a Gate still remaining, Eastward of the Church, on which the Arms
and Name of Bishop Fox appear. On the Gate beyond is inscribed "Georgius Morley
Epus, 1670." The Dean's Garden, and those of the Prebendaries, on the South
East Side of the Close, are extremely delightful; being watered by a Branch of
the River Itchin, remarkably clear and rapid, disposed in an elegant Taste, and
opened on the East to a Prospect of the magnificent and extensive Ruins of
Wolvesey-House, and other striking Objects.

The Ruins just mentioned, are the Remains of a noble Palace belonging to the
Bishops of Winchester, built A.D. 1138, by Henry De Bloys, Bishop of
Winchester, Nephew to Henry I. and Brother to King Stephen Hist. maj. Winton.
Angl. Sacr. vol. i. p. 284.
. This Palace being demolished by the Presbyterians, Bishop Morley erected near
it a convenient House for his Successors, over the Gate of which appears his
Name, with the Date 1684. But it afterward received considerable Improvements
from Bishop Trelawney. The Chapel still remaining is undoubtedly ancient, and
belonged to the old Palace; but is much more modern than De Bloys's Building.
The Residence of the Saxon Kings is by some conjectured to have been on this
Spot; and the Name Wolvesey is supposed to be formed from the Wulphian Kings,
and Eye, which signifies a Nook of a Meadow Heylin's Cosmograph. page 312. ed.
1666.
. Leland says of this Palace, that the Castle or Palace of Wolvesey is "well
touirrid, and for the most Part waterid about Itinerar. vol. iii. page 84. ed.
2.
." And Camden observes, that, in his Time, it was very spacious, and surrounded
with several Towers Britann. edit. sec. page 142. 70l. i.
.

After this introductory Detail, I proceed to a distinct Description of the
Church itself.

The Length of this magnificent Fabric, from East to West, is 545 Feet: Of,
these, our Lady's Chapel includes 54 Feet, and the Choir 136. The Length from
the Iron Door, near the Entrance of the Choir, to the Porch at the West End, is
351 Feet. The Length of the Transepts is 186 Feet. The Breadth of the Body,
below the Transepts, is 87 Feet; and of the Choir 40. The Vaulting in the
Inside is 76 Feet high Willis Mitr. Abb. vol. ii. page 207 and 296; and vol. i.
page 295 and 70. in addend.
. The exact Height of the Tower, which is an oblong Square, and contains ten
Bells, is 138 Feet and an Half, and its Breadth 50 Feet by 48 Willis, ibid.
vol. ii. 207. Gale's Mensuration is imperfect and erroneous, page 25.
.

The Prospect from the West End of the middle I Will, to the East Window beyond
the Choir, must strike every Mind which is susceptible of those aweful Feelings
that arise from the Contemplation of that Greatness and Extent which are
peculiar to the Proportions of Gothic Architecture. A judicious and
entertaining Passage from Lowth's Life of Wykeham will here be properly
introduced.

"This I Will was originally of the Saxon Architecture not greatly differing from
the Roman; with round Pillars much stronger than Doric or Tuscan, or square
Piers, adorned with small Pillars; round-headed Arches and Windows; and plain
Walls on the Outside without Buttresses; as appears by the Cross-ile and Tower
which remain of it to this Day. The Nave of the Church had been for some Time
in a bad Condition: Bishop Edyngdon undertook to repair it in the latter Part
of his Time, and by his Will ordered his Executors to finish what he had begun.
And whether in Pursuance of his Design and by his Benefaction, or otherwise, it
appears, that in the Year 1371, some Work of this Kind was carrying on at a
great Expense. However, Wykeham, upon due Consideration and Survey, found it
either so decayed and infirm, or else so mean in its Appearance, and so much
below the Dignity of one of the first Episcopal Sees in the Kingdom, that he
determined to take down the whole from the Tower westward, and to rebuild it
both in a stronger and more magnificent Manner. This great Work he undertook in
the Year 1394, and entered upon it the Beginning of the next Year, upon the
following Conditions stipulated between him and the Prior and Convent, who
acquit the Bishop of all Obligation to it, and acknowledge it as proceeding
from his mere Liberality, and Zeal for the Honor of God: They agree to find
the whole Scaffolding necessary for the Work; they give the Bishop free Leave
to dig and to carry away Chalk and Sand from any of their Lands, as he shall
think most convenient and useful for the same Purpose; and they allow the whole
Materials of the old Building to be applied to the Use of the new. He employed
William Winford as Architect: Simon Membury was appointed Surveyor of the Work
on the Bishop's Part, and John Wait, one of the Monks, Controller on the Part
of the Convent. As the Church of Winchester is situated in low Ground, which,
without great Precaution and Expense, affords no very sure Foundation for so
weighty a Structure, Wykeham thought it safest to confine himself to the Plan
of the former Building, and to make Use of a Foundation already tried, and
subject to no Hazard. He even chose to apply to his Purpose some Part of the
lower Order of Pillars of the old Church, though his Design was in a different
Style of Architecture; that which we commonly call Gothic, with pointed Arches
and Windows, without Keystones, and Pillars consisting of an Assemblage of many
small ones closely connected together; but which is more properly Saracen, for
such was its Origin: The Crusades gave us an Idea of this Form of Architecture,
which afterward prevailed throughout Europe. The Pillars or Piers of the old
Building, which he made Use of, were about sixteen Feet in Height; of the same
Form with those in the East Side of the Northern Cross-ile: These he carried up
higher, according to the new Design, altering their Form, but retaining their
Strength, and adopting them as a firm Basis for his own Work. The new Pillars
are nearly equal in Bulk to the old ones; and the Intercolumniation remains
much the same. These Circumstances, in which Stability and Security were very
wisely in the first Place consulted, have been attended however with some
Inconvenience, as it seems owing to them, that this Building has not that
Lightness and Freedom, and that Elegance of Proportion, which might have been
expected from Wykeham's known Taste in Architecture, and from the Style and
Manner of his other Works in this Kind; of which we have evident Examples in
the Chapels of both his Colleges, especially in the Western Part of that of New
College in Oxford, which is remarkably beautiful. To the further Disadvantage
of its present Appearance, an Alteration which could not then be foreseen has
since happened. At that Time the Buildings of the Monastery covered the whole
South Side of the Church, so that it seemed needless to be at a great Expense
upon Ornaments in that Part which was like to be for ever concealed. By the
Demolition of the Monastery this Side is now laid open, and discovers a Defect
of Buttresses and Pinnacles, with which the North Side, which was then the only
one in View, is properly ^urnished. Another Alteration of the same Kind has
been made in Inside, and with the like Effect: Immediately before the Entrance
of the Choir stood the Vestry, which extending from Side to Side of the Nave,
prevented the entire Conformation of those Pillars against which it rested to
the new Design, but at the same Time concealed the Irregularity: In the Time of
Charles the First this was pulled down, and the present beautiful Skreen, the
Work of Inigo Jones, was erected; but no Care was taken, by an easy and obvious
Alteration, to correct a Deformity, which was then uncovered, and still
continues to disgrace the Building, in a Part which, of all others, is the most
frequently exposed to Observation. However, with its Defects, which appear thus
to be owing partly to an accidental and unforeseen Change of Circumstances,
partly to the Care of avoiding greater Inconveniences, there is no Fabric of
its Kind in England, after those of York and Lincoln, which excells this Part
of the Cathedral Church of Winchester, in Greatness, Stateliness, and Majesty.
This great Pile took up about ten Years in erecting, and was but just finished
when the Bishop died. He had provided in his Will for the entire Completion of
his Design by his Executors, in Case of his Death; and allotted 2500 Marks for
what then remained to be done, besides 500 Marks for the Glass Windows: This
was about a Year and Half before it was finished; by which some Sort of
Estimate may be made of the whole Expense Lowth's Life of Wykeham, page 208.
."

From this I Will, by a stately Flight of eight Steps, we approach the Choir. The
Screen abovementioned is of the Composite Order, and adorned on the Right Hand
with a Statue of James I. and on the Left of Charles I. They are both of Brass,
and were given, together with the Screen itself, by the latter of these
Monarchs. During the Civil Wars, the Pressbyterians, among other Outrages,
barbarously defaced and abused both these Statues, but particularly that of
Charles; at tempting to break off the Crown, and declaring with much malicious
Triumph, that they would bring him back to the Parliament Dugdale, ubi infr.
.

The Stalls are of Norway Oak, and are a masterly Piece of Gothic Spire Work,
being at once elegant and majestic. They were erected by Prior Silkestede, as
appears by his Name out on the Pulpit The Stone-Pulpit in the Body of the
Church was probably used for preaching before the Reformation, as it was for
many Years after. "Wykeham buildid the great Body of the Church of St.
Swithun's, where now the Sermons are made, and where (...) ^odie is enter^ed, a
very princely Work." Stowe's Annals, by Howes, page 351. ed. 1615. This is now
entirely disused.


, with which they are terminated on the North Side. He died A.D. 1524. On the
same Side stands the Organ, which was removed thither by the Command of Charles
I. from the old Screen, where it was justly supposed to intercept the View from
the West to the East End. The Stalls on the South Side are bounded by the
Bishop's Throne, erected by Bishop Trelawney, translated from Exeter, A.D.
1706. The Pediment, which is embellished with a Mitre and the Arms of the Sea
impaling those of his Family, is supported by fluted Columns of the Corinthian
Order. The Vaulting of the Roof of the Choir was executed in the Reign of
Charles I. there being, before this, an Opening from the Choir into the first
Story or Room of the Tower; on which Account the Side Arches of this first
Story, being intended to be seen from below, are wrought and ornamented. We
find the same Opening in the Tower of St. Cross, built about the same Time. It
was undoubtedly looked upon as a Beauty in the Architecture; and had, in some
Measure, the same Effect, as the Louvre, or open Lantern formerly used in great
Halls. Height of Roof in the Inside was also a favorite Circumstance in
Structure of this Sort, which was produced from this Expedient in a very
striking Degree. The Arms and Initials of the King, with those of his Queen
Mary, and of John Young, Dean at that Time, are introduced among the Ornaments
of the Vaulting, which is of Wood. The two Branches are the Gift of the late
Dean, Dr. Cheney; who has left, by Will, 220 l. for paving the Choir with
Marble.

In the Pannels below the Stalls, under the Organ, and on the opposite Side are
some Memorials of the new Foundation of Henry VIII. viz. the Date 1540, in
which the new Establishment commenced: The King's Arms with H.R. Henricus Rex:
The Arms of the Church, given by the said King Vid. Sigill. Eccles. A Church,
in the Gate of which is the Image of the Trinity.
: The Portcullis, and the Arms of William Kyngesmill, the first Dean, with W.K.
The Arms of a Bishop of Winchester As appears by the Garter, and a Mitre, with
the initial S, and another Letter doubtful.
. These, I suppose, were put up at the Alteration of the House.

In the Area leading to the high Altar, is a plain raised Monument, of a
greyish Stone, without any Inscription, under which, William Rufus, who was
killed in the neighboring new Forest, A.D. 1000, is buried. This Tomb was
opened by the Rebels in the Civil Wars, who stole from thence the Remains of a
Cloth of Gold, a Ring set with Rubies, said to be worth 500 l. and a small
Silver Chalice.

With this Area the Presbytery begins, which is ornamented with a Roof highly
finished in a different Taste from that of the Tower, and is separated, on each
Side, from the North and South Isles, by a well-executed Partition Wall of open
Work. On the Top of either Wall are placed three Shrines, or Chests,
beautifully carved, painted, and gilded, with a Crown on each, in which are
enclosed the Bones of several of the West Saxon Kings, Bishops, and some later
Princes, who had been originally buried behind the Altar or in different Parts
of the Church. These Remains were thus no less piously than carefully collected
and deposited, by Bishop Fox, A.D. 1525. Their Names, etc. are inscribed on
every Chest, which the Reader will find among the Tombs and Monumental
Inscriptions.

The Ascent to, and Area of, the high Altar, is paved with Marble, by the
Benefaction of Dr. William Harris, Prebendary, and Schoolmaster of Winchester
College, who dying, A.D. 1700, bequeathed 800 l. for ornamenting the Altar. The
Wood Work about the Altar was erected by Bishop Fox: But the Canopy, with its
Festoons, and other Ornaments, were added, about the Time when the new Screen
of Inigo Jones, at the Choir-Entrance, was built, as I conjecture from C R in
the Cornice.

The two Doors or Entrances on each Side still remain, through which the Priest
approached the Altar from the Sanctum Sanctorum. The Tops of three Niches are
likewise remaining over the Altar, which probably contained three Images
representing the Trinity. A good Piece of Painting would be a noble and proper
Improvement of this superb Altarpiece. Behind is a a very lofty Screen, or
Partition of Stone, charged with most exquisite Embellishments of Gothic
Workmanship, and infinitely superior, in Point of finishing, to another of the
same Sort in St. Alban's Abbey Church. The Niches, before the Reformation, were
filled with Statues; but are at present supplied with Urns, which by some are
thought inconsistent Decorations. These were the Gift of Dr. William Harris
abovementioned From his Epitaph.
.

The Screen, Side Partition-Walls, Roof of the Presbytery, and of the adjoining
Side Isles, with their Walls and Windows, were finished at the Expense, or by
the Interest, of Bishop Fox, A.D. 1525, as appears by his Name and Arms carved
in many Places. The same liberal Benefactor new glazed, with painted Glass, as
he had new made, the Windows of this Part of the Church; that is, the Choir
Windows, and those of the parallel Isles. He likewise fronted the Boundary of
the Choir, on the Outside, with two beautiful Pinnacles, and other ornamental
Architecture, among which his Statue is placed, clothed in the Episcopal
Habit. He probably intended to complete the Remainder of the East End in the
same Style He seems to have reduced the Windows in the West Side of the
Northern Transept to their present Form.
.

It is said, and from good Authority, that the Bishop was assisted in this Work
by Prior Silkestede Willis's Mitr. Ab. vol. i. page 301.
. This Prior, at least, co-operated with Fox in improving the Church by
building the Stalls, and a Chapel, about the Time when Fox began these
Alterations See Wood's Hist. Univ. Oxon. L. ii. p. 230.
. His Initials T.S. are in the Roof of Fox's Presbytery. It should seem that
Cardinal Henry Beaufort left some Money for this Purpose, as H.B. appears on
the Outside of the South Partition Wall, and over its Entrance. He died not
many Years before Fox was advanced to the Bishopric.

In the Grand Rebellion, the Altar-Screen, just mentioned, was artfully
protected from the Violence of the Presbyterians, by Means of an extemporaneous
Wall, or Partition, erected in a parallel Line just before it, so as entirely
to conceal its Beauties from the Observation of the sacrilegious Intruders.
Other Parts of the Church did not however escape the mistaken Zeal of these
Enemies to all that was graceful or majestic. On the 16th of December, 1642,
the Soldiers of Sir William Waller entered the Church, where they broke in
Pieces the carved Work of the Choir, containing the Story of the Old and New
Testament in admirable Imagery, destroyed the Organ One of their Friends has
recorded a most extraordinary Anecdote, that in the Houses of the Prebendaries
"they found great Store of Popish Books, Pictures, and Crucifixes," which after
a mock Procession were burnt, with the Organ-pipes, in the Streets. John
Vicars's God in the Mount, or England's Parliamentarie Chronicle, etc. 4to.
London, 1644, p. 229.


, seized the rich Tapestry, Cushions, and Vestments of the Choir, with the
Vessels of the Altar, threw down the Communion Table, and carrying off the
Rails, which enclosed it, burnt them in their Quarters. After this, they
defaced many of the Monuments; and pulling down some of the Chests which
contained the Remains of the Saxon Kings, they threw their Bones against the
painted Glass, which they thus destroyed throughout the Church Heylin H.st. of
Presbyt. page 450. edit. 1670. Dugdale's Short View, etc. page 558.
. But the beautiful Window over the Altar, exhibiting the Pourtraits of several
Saints and Bishops of this Church, being more out of their Reach, and less
exposed than the rest, is still preserved entire, together with a few Figures
on the Windows contiguous. The grand West Window seems to be made up of the
dispersed Fragments, which, imperfect as it is, has a fine Effect, and leaves
the pensive Imagination to supply that religious Light which was diffused over
all the Church, when every Window retained its original Splendour.

The East End of the Church is terminated by three Chapels. That on the South
is adorned with a Monument of Thomas Langton, Bishop of Winchester, who died
A.D. 1500. The Rood-Loft consists of elegant Gothic Carving in Wood; and both
the Sides are finished in the same Taste. But the Work has been much damaged.
Under the Window are several Niches for Statues. The Bishop is said to have
built this Chapel Leland, Collectan. vol. i. page 116.
. The Roof is painted with a Hen on a Tun, being a Rebus on Henton, the Place
of his Nativity, and partly on his Name. The Inscription " Laus tibi Christ."

The Chapel in the Center, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, was erected by Prior
Silkestede before mentioned, and is used at present for early Prayers. His Name
is on the Roof; and on the Sides, which are adorned with ancient Painting, are
embossed the Arms of England, of Silkestede, of the Sea, a Rebus on T. Langton,
viz. T.L. with a Tun, as in his Chapel just described, and who was Bishop in
the former Part of Silkestede's Priorate, for whom also a Tun is introduced on
the Cieling. The Inscriptions, " ad gloriam dei." The same Embossments appear
on the Outside of the Building in the Churchyard. In this Chapel Queen Mary
was married to King Philip, and the Chair in which she was seated, during the
Ceremony, still remains near the Altar. It is a Mistake Willis Mitr. Abb. vol.
i. page 301.
that this Prior built the Chapel in the South I Will, called Silkestede's Chapel.
Probably he might use it as a private Oratory, or perhaps might be interred in
it. He seems to have born some Relation to it, for opposite to it are the
Remains of a Canopy, under which the Presses for the Ch^^ Vestments are placed,
which formerly seems to have been the Covering of Stalls, and still preserves
in the Cornice the initial Letters of Silkestede's Name often repeated. These I
suppose belonged originally to the opposite Chapel. It is not unlikely that
Silkestede altered the Windows on this Side of the Transept; for on the Library
Window, contiguous to them on the Outside, is carved T.S. for Thomas
Silkestede, as I have before observed. The elegant Screen of this little Chapel
was at least erected by this Prior; for on it is carved in large ornamented
Gothic Capitals,

C HD MA S S On the North Side of the Virgin Mary's Chapel, is a small Chapel
perhaps dedicated to S. Michael, as the Pourtraiture of that Angel appears in
many Parts of the Roof.

About the Middle of the great Western I Will stands an ancient Font. It is a
square massy Block of jet-coloured Marble, in which a circular Basin is formed
for the Water. It is three Feet three Inches over, and supported by a plain
Pedestal of Stone. The Sides of the Square are embellished with rude Bass
Relievos, which seem to represent the Miracles of some Saint belonging to this
Church. If we may judge from the Style of the Architecture introduced in the
Carving on the South Side, this singular Monument of Antiquity was the
Workmanship of the Saxon Times.

In the Northern Transept are some imperfect Traces of ancient Painting,
supposed to represent the Combat of Guy Earl of Warwick, with the Danish
Champion before mentioned Mention is made of a Painting in the Queen's Chapel
at Winchester. "The King to the Sheriff of Hants." -- "Cause to be painted in
the Queen's Chapel at Winchester, upon the Gable-End toward the West, the
Image of St. Christopher, who holds in his Arms our Blessed Savior." From a
Latin Record in the Court of Liveries, 32 Henry III. m. 7. citat. apud
Stukeley, Palaeograph. Brit. No. 1. page 36. I presume this was some Chapel in
the Castle of Winchester, where the Royal Family resided.


.

By Way of recapitulating what has been said concerning the building this
Church, I shall observe, that it contains three Styles of Architecture,
agreeable to the Taste of the three different Ages, in the Progress of which it
grew to the present Perfection. The first is the Saxon, of which is the Tower,
the Transept, and the Eastern Isles, for the most Part built, or begun, by
Walkelyne. The second is the Gothic, simply so called, of which are the Western
Isles and West Front, erected by Wykeham. The third is the ornamental or
improved Gothic, which began about the Reign of Henry VI. and of which the
Presbytery, Side Isles, and outward East End of the Choir, by Fox, as well as
our Lady's Chapel, by Silkestede, are elegant Specimens.

TOMBS AND MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTIONS.

On the South Partition Wall of the Presbytery, the first Chest from the Altar
has this Inscription.

Edredus Rex, obiit Anno 955. Hic pius in tumulo Rex Edredus requiescit
Qui has Britonum terras rexerat egregie.
On the second is inscribed:

Edmundus Rex obiit...... Quem theca haec retinet Edmundum suscipe Christ
Qui vivente Patre Regia sceptra tulit.
The third Chest formerly contained the Bones of Canutus, and of William Rufus,
who was interred below. This Chest had once this Inscription.

Hic jacent Ossa Cnutonis et Willelmi Rufi. The present Inscription is this.

In hac et altera e regione cista Reliquiae sunt Ossium Canuti et Rufi Regum;
Emmae Reginae, Winae et Alwini Episcoporum.

On the first Chest on the Outside of the North Partition Wall.

Rex Kingilsus obiit 641. On the Choir Side of the Chest.

Adulphus Rex obiit 857. On the Outside.

Kingulsti in cista hac simul offa jacent et Adulphi
Alter Fundator hic Benefactor erat.
On the second Chest.

Adulphus Rex obiit 754. On the Outside of the same.

Egbertus obiit 837. Hic Rex Egbertus pausat cum Rege Kenulpho
Nobis egregie munera uterque tulit.
The third Chest formerly contained the Bones of Bishop Wina.

Hic jacent ossa Winac Episcopi. With Bishop Wina's were enclosed the Bones of
Stigand, at first Bishop of Winchester; afterward translated to the Sea of
Canterbury, A.D. 1052: and on the North Side of the Coffin was this Inscription.

Hic jacet Stigandus Archiepiscopus. But at present this Inscription is placed
thereon.

In hac cista, A.D. 1661, promiscue recondita sunt Ossa Principum et
Praelatorum sacrilega barbary dispersa, A.D. 1642.

Under the second Chest, on the South Wall, we read the following Inscription.

Intus est Corpus Ricardi, Willielmi Conquestoris Filii, et Beorniae Ducis.

Under the same Wall, under the second Chest, is entombed the Heart of
Ethelmarus, Bishop of Winchester, with this Inscription.

Obiit Anno 1261. Corpus Ethelmari, cujus cor nunc tenet istud
Saxum, Parisiis morte datur tumulo.
Near the Choir Entrance in the same Wall is this Inscription.

Intus est cor Nicolai olim Wintoniensis Episcopi cujus corpus est apud Waverly.

On the North Side of the Wall formerly stood a fourth Chest, containing the
Bones of the Bishops Elmstan and Kynulphus, with this Inscription.

Pontifices haec capsa duos duos tenet incineratos,
Primus Elmstanus, huic successorque Kynulphus.
The Monument of Bishop Alfimus was on the same Wall, Eastward from Bishop
Elmston's, with this Inscription.

Alfymus plumbo praesul requiescit in isto. Under Kingulstus's Chest, in the
same Wall, is this Inscription.

Qui jacet hic Regni Sceptrum tulit Hardicanutus
Emmae Cnutonis gnatus et ipse fuit.
Obiit A.D. IIIIo. In the same Wall.

Alwinus Obiit 1047. Hic jacet Alwini corpus, qui munera nobis
Contuli^ Egregia, parcito Christ pio.
In the same Wall, within the Choir, is this Inscription for Queen Emma.

Hic Emmam cista Reginam continet ista,
Duxit Etheldredus Rex hanc, et postea Cnutus;
Edwardum parit haec, ac Hardicanutum
Quatuor hos Reges haec vidit Sceptra tenentes;
Anglorum Regum fuit haec sic Matter et Uxor.
Under the Monument of Bishop Alfimus, we read this Inscription.

Defuncti Corpus tumulus tenet iste Johannis
Points Sometimes called John De Pontissara, who built St. Elisabeth's
College, mentioned supr. page 15.
, Wintoniae praesulis eximii.
Obiit Anno 1304. In the Wall on the same Side, under the Chest of Wina, is the
Monument of Bishop Toclive, with this Inscription.

Praefulis egregii pausant his membra Ricardi
Toclive, cui summi gaudia sunto poli.
Obiit Anno 1189. At the East End of the Southern Partition lies the Body of
Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester, the pious Founder of Corpus Christi College
in Oxford, under a Shrine, which is a most finished Specimen of the improved
ornamental Gothic. Adjoining to the Shrine is a small private Oratory, built
with the rest, which he usually frequented for his Devotion, and which is still
called Bishop Fox's Study. He died A.D. 1528.

At the East End of the Northern Partition Wall is interred Stephen Gardener,
Bishop of this See, under a Shrine of plain Architecture. He died A.D. 1555.
The recumbent Figure of the Bishop was much injured in the Civil Wars.

Behind the Sanctum Sanctorum is a traverse Wall, at the Bottom of which we
discern the Entrance into the Vault, where the Saxon Kings already mentioned
were first buried. Over it is this Inscription.

Sancta Maria et Dominus Jesus. Over the Entrance from End to End are these
Names.

Kyngulstus Rex. Kinewaldus Rex. Adulphus Rex. Edwardus Rex Senior. S. Birinus
Episcopus. Egbertus Rex. Aluredus Rex filius ejus. Athelstanus Rex filius ejus.

Edredus Rex. Edgar Rex. Emma Regina. Alwinus Episcopus. Etheldredus Rex. S.
Edwardus Rex filius ejus. Canutus Rex. Hardi-Canutus filius ejus.

Over each Name is a well ornamented Niche and Pedestal. Under the whole is
this Inscription.

Corpora Sanctorum sunt hic in pace sepulta
Ex meritis quorum fulgent miracula multa.
The Niches abovementioned seem to have made, or ornamented, by Fox. The Arms
above are of Charles I.

In the Area, on the East Side of this Wall, is a sumptuous and stately
Monument, to the Memory of Henry Beaufort, Cardinal of St. Eusebius, and Bishop
of Winchester. His Effigies is represented in the Cardinal's Habit. The
Inscription is now totally lost, this being all, according to Godwyn, that
remained legible near two hundred Years ago.

Tribularer si nescirem misericordias tuas. He was a liberal Benefactor to the
Hospital of St. Cross, near this City, as I have before observed, and died A.D.
1447.

Opposite to it, and designed in evident Imitation of it, is the magnificent
Shrine and Monument of William Wainfleet, Bishop of Winchester, the munificent
Founder of Magdalen College in Oxford. He is represented on the Tomb in his
Episcopal Habit, grasping his Heart between his Hands. The Roof and Spire Work
of the Shrine is perhaps superior, in Exuberance of Ornament, and Height of
finishing, to any Structure of the same Kind. It was gratefully repaired by
Magdalen College A.D. 1741. Hedied A.D. 1486.

Westward of this are the Traces of the Effigies of a Bishop, said to be St.
Swythun.

Near these is a Monument, raised somewhat higher than the Pavement, said to be
that of Lucius the first Christian King. It has no Inscription to illustrate
this improbable Conjecture.

At the Bottom of the Steps, on the South Side of the Choir, are two very
ancient Monuments; one of which has no Inscription, the other belongs to a
Prior of the Convent, who died A.D. 1295, and is thus inscribed.

Hic jacet Williemus de Basing, quondam Prior istius Ecclesiae, cujus animae
propitietur Deus, and qui pro anima ejus oraverit, tres annos and quinquaginta
dies Indulgentiae percipiet.

His Predecessor may with equal Probability be the Prior here interred, whose
Name was likewise William de Basynge, and who died A.D. 1284.

Near the Stone Pulpit in the Body of the Church, we read the following Epitaph
to the first Dean of this Cathedral.

Wilhelmus Kingsmell prior ultimus, Decanus
Almost contiguous is the following Inscription.

Robertus Horn Theologiae Doctoreximius, quondam Christi caufa exul, deinde
Episcopus Winton. pie obiit in Domino Jun. 1. 1580. Episcopatus sui Anno 19.

Opposite to the former, upon another Marble, this Inscription appears.

D. Johannes Watson hujus Ecclesiae Winton. Praebendarius, Decanus ac Deinde
Episcopus, Prudentissimus Pater, Vir optimus, praecipue erga inopes mis^^icors.
Obiit in Domino Januar. 23. Anno Aetatis suae 63, Episcopatus 4. 1583.

Nearer the Choir is the Tomb of William of Edingdon, Bishop of Winchester,
with this Epitaph.

Edyndon natus Wilhelmus hic est tumulatus,
Praesul praegratus, in Wintonia Cathedratus,
Qui pertranfitis, ejus memorare velitis,
Providus and mitis, anfit cum mill peritis,
Pervigil Anglorum fuit adjutor populorum,
Dulcis egenorum Pater, and Protector eorum,
M.C. tribus junctum, post LXV fit I punctum
Octava Sanctum notat hunc Octobris inunctum.
1366. Not far from the little South Door is the superb Tomb and Shrine of
WILLIAM of WYKEHAM, Bishop of Winchester, the munificent Founder of Winchester
College, and of New College in Oxford, who died A.D. 1404. His nobler Shrine is
the magnificent I Will, under which he lies entombed, and which was erected at his
Expense. The Figure of the Bishop is remarkably fresh, and well preserved: But
the Shrine was much injured by the Presbyterians. This grand Mausoleum is
placed on the very Spot on which an Altar stood, where Wykeham, when a Boy,
constantly frequented a Mass called Pekismass Lowth's Wykeham, page 278.
. At the Feet of the Bishop are three small Figures of Benedictine Monks; and
at his Head two Angels. This Epitaph encompasses the Tomb.

Wilhelmus dictus Wickham jacet hic nece victus,
Istius Ecclesiae praesul reparavit, eamque,
Largus erat, dapifer, probat hoc cum divite pauper,
Consiliis pariter Regni fuerat been dexter.
Hunc docet esse pium fundatio Collegiorum
Oxoniae primum stat, Wintoniaeque secundum.
Jugiter oretis, Tumulum quicunqque videtis
Pro tantis meritis quod sit sibi vita perenni^.
Near the Choir is the Figure of a martial Personage, which is much defaced. We
learn his Name from the following Inscription.

Hic jacet Willielmus Comes de Insula Besides the Saxon Kings already recited,
Ethelwulf, Edsed and Edwin were interred in this Church; together with some of
its more ancient Bishops not yet mentioned, viz. Denewulf, E^^^wold, Brithwald,
Walkelyne, It is ^^^d that he was buried before the high Altar, A.D. 1171. But
T^^^^^, among his many curious manuscript Insertions in Le (...)'s FAST. [
Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. In Museola Bibliothecarii.] acquaints us, that he was buried
at Ivinghoe, Co. Bucks, a Manor belonging to the Bishop of Winchester, where he
founded a Nunnery. There is a Statue in that Church, which the Inhabitants
suppose to be his. See Mon. Angl. T. 1. page 490. Ivinghoe was, or is, in the
Patronage of the Bishop of Winchester.
Henry de Bloys, etc.

The more modern Monuments and Inscripscriptions of this Church, which are very
numerous, are here purposely omitted, (...) a formal and entire Recital of them
would have exceeded the Limits of our Plan, and extended our Work to a tedious,
and perhaps unnecessary, Prolixity. Those I have described are most likely to
engage the Attention of curious Observers, and their Inscriptions are such as
are not immediately obvious to every Spectator.

From this Survey of the Inside of the Church we would conduct the Spectator to
the West End, which is a striking Specimen of the massy Gothic Manner. It is
finished with two small Side Spires and a central Pinnacle, with a Niche
containing an Episcopal Statue of WILLIAM of WYKEHAM, from whose ample
Beneficence this venerable Pile derives its principal Magnificence and Beauty.

FINIS.

