AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS Against the Rebels, and other Prisoners, Tried
before the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies, and other Judges in the West of
England, in 1685. for taking Arms under the Duke of Monmouth.

With a complete List of all the Persons that suffered, the Counties they
suffered in, the Crimes they were tried for, and the Punishments inflicted on
them.

Also an Account of what was done against those in Scotland, who took Arms
there under the Earl of Argyle, etc. and against the Protestants in Ireland, by
the late King James, and his Deputy Tyrconnel.

Published from an Original Manuscript.

To which is prefixed, The Duke of Monmouth's, the Earl of Argyle's, and the
Pretender's Declarations, that the Reader may the better judge of the Cause of
the several Rebellions.

With what Measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2. The
Third Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Andrew Bell, at the Cross Keys and Bible in Cornhill, near
Stock's Market; and J Baker, and Tho. Warner, at the Black Boy in
Paternoster Row. 1716. Price One Shilling.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Faction now having lost all Hopes of Success by their unnatural Rebellion,
they apply themselves with the utmost Industry and Malice to cry down the
Proceedings of Justice against the Rebels who are taken, as Barbarous and
cruel, and having no Precedent in History. This Clamor is so very ill founded,
and so remote from Truth, that it might be justly thought needless to give it
any Answer; but since it is made use of by the Party farther to incense the
ignorant Mob against the Government, it cannot be thought amiss to convict our
Adversaries of Falsehood, by putting them in mind of the barbarous Cruelty of
the late King James II. against those who took Arms under the Duke of Monmouth,
and the Earl of Argyle in Scotland; and likewise of that Prince's Barbarity to
the Protestants in Ireland, after the Revolution.

These Things are still remembered by Thousands of Eyewitnesses, and therefore
can admit of no Contradiction, but from such as have bid Defiance to Truth,
because they know the Interest of Tyranny and Popery, which they espouse, can
never be supported by any other Methods than Cruelty and Falsehood.

I shall begin with the Proceedings in that King's Reign against those who took
Arms in the West of England under the Duke of Monmouth. The Lists of those who
were executed, or otherwise punished on that Account, are in the following
Treatise, and more large and exact than what has yet been published; so that I
shall say nothing of them here, but proceed to give some Account of the
Difference betwixt that and the present Rebellion.

Every one knows, that those who joined the Duke of Monmouth did not do it till
after King James II. had declared himself a Papist, and contrary to Law
encouraged those of his own Persuasion to set up their Worship publicly; and
he had likewise in an arbitrary and tyrannical Manner invaded our Civil
Liberties, as may be seen by the Duke of Monmouth's Declaration, and that of
the Earl of Argyle.

The DECLARATION of James Duke of Monmouth, and the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
others, now in Arms for the Defense and Vindication of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws, Rights, and Privileges of England.
' AS Government was originally instituted by God, and this or that Form of it
chosen and submitted to by Men, for the Peace, Happiness, and Security of the
Governed, and not for the private Interest, and personal Greatness of those
that rule; so that Government has always been esteemed the best, where the
Supreme Magistrates have been invested with all the Power and Prerogatives that
might capacitate them, not only to preserve the People from Violence and
Oppression, but to promote their Prosperity; and yet, where nothing was to
belong to them by the Rules of the Constitution, that might enable them to
injure and oppress them. And it has been the Glory of England, above most
other Nations, that the Prince had all entrusted with him that was necessary,
either for the advancing the Welfare of the People, or for his own Protection
in the Discharge of the Office; and withal stood so limited and restrained by
the Fundamental Terms of the Constitution, that without a Violation of his own
Oath, as well as the Rules and Measures of the Government, he could do them no
Hurt, nor exercise any Act of Authority, but through the Administration of such
Hands as stood obnoxious to be punished in case they transgressed: So that
according to the primitive Frame of the Government, the Prerogatives of the
Crown, and the Privileges of the Subject, are so far from jostling one another,
that the Rights reserved unto the People tended to render the King Honorable
and Great, and the Prerogatives settled on the Prince were in order to the
Subjects Protection and Safety. But all Human Things being subject to
Perversion, as well as Decay, it has been the Fate of the English Government
to be often changed, and wrested from what it was in the first Settlement and
Institution. And we are particularly compelled to say, that all the Boundaries
of the Government have of late been broken, and nothing less unattempted for
turning our limited Monarchy into an absolute Tyranny: For such has been the
Transaction of Affairs within this Nation for several Years last past, that
though the Protestant Religion and Liberties of the People were fenced and
hedged about by as many Laws, as the Wisdom of Man can devise for their
Preservation against Popery and Arbitrary Power, our Religion has been all
along countermined by popish Counsels, and our Privileges ravished from us by
Fraud and Violence. And more especially the whole Course and Series of the Life
of the D. of Y. has been but one continued Conspiracy against the Reformed
Religion, and the Rights of the Nation: For, whoever considers his contriving
the burning of London, his instigating a Confederacy with France, and a War
with Holland, fomenting the Popish Plot, and encouraging the Murder of Sir Ed.
Godfrey, his charging Treason against Protestants, suborning Witnesses to swear
the Patriots of our Religion and Liberties out of their Lives; his hiring
execrable Villains to assassinate the late Earl of Essex, and causing those
others to be clandestinely cut off in Hopes to conceal it; his advising and
procuring the Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliaments, in order to prevent
their looking into his Crimes, and that he might escape the Justice of the
Nation; such can imagine nothing so black and horrid in it self, or so ruinous
and destructive to Religion and the Kingdom, which we may not expect from him.'

' The very Tyrannies which he has exercised since he snatched the Crown from
his Brother's Head, do leave none under a Possibility of flattering themselves
with Hopes of Safety, either in their Consciences, Persons, or Estates: For, in
Defiance of all the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, made for the Security of
the Reformed Protestant Religion, he not only began his Reign with a barefaced
Avowing himself of the Romish Religion, but called in Multitudes of Priests and
Jesuits, for whom the Law makes it Treason to come into this Kingdom; and has
empowered them to exercise Idolatries: And besides his being daily present at
the Worship of the Mass, he has publicly assisted at the greatest Fopperies
of their Superstition. Neither has he been more tender in trampling upon the
Laws which concern our Properties, seeing in two Proclamations, whereof the one
requires the collecting of the Customs, and the other the continuing that part
of the Excise which was to expire at the late King's Death; he has violently,
and against all the Law of the Land, broken in upon our Estates. Neither is it
any Extenuation of his Tyranny, that he is countenanced in it by an
extrajudicial Opinion of seven or eight suborned and forsworn Judges; but
rather declaring the Greatness and Extent of the Conspiracy against our Rights;
and that there is no Means left for our Relief, but by Force of Arms: For,
advancing those to the Bench that were the Scandal of the Bar; and constituting
those very Men to declare the Laws, who are accused and branded in Parliament
for perverting them, we were precluded all Hopes of Justice in
Westminster Hall: And by packing Juries together by false Returns, new illegal
Charters, and other corrupt Means, he does at once deprive us of all
Expectations of Succor where our Ancestors were wont to find it; and hopes to
render that which ought to be the People's Fences against Tyranny, and the
Conservator of their Liberties, the Means of subverting all our Laws, and of
establishing of his Arbitrariness, and confirming our Thraldom. So that unless
we could be contented to see the Reformed Protestant Religion, and such as
profess it, extirpated, Popish Superstition and Idolatry established, the Laws
of the Land trampled under Foot, the Liberties and Rights of the English People
subverted, and all that is Sacred and Civil, or of Regard amongst Men of Virtue
or Piety, violated; and unless we could be willing to be Slaves as well as
Papists, and forget the Example of our Noble and Generous Ancestors, who
conveyed our Privileges to us at the Expense of their Blood and Treasure; and
withal, be unmindful of our Duty to God, our Country and Posterity; deaf to the
Cries and Groans of our oppressed Friends, and be satisfied not only to see
them and our selves imprisoned, robbed, and murdered, but the Protestant
Interest throughout the whole World, betrayed to France and Rome; we are bound,
as Men and Christians, and that in Discharge of our Duty to God, and our
Country, and for the Satisfaction of the Protestant Nations round about us, to
betake our selves to Arms; which we take Heaven and Earth to witness, we should
not have done, had not the Malice of our Enemies deprived us of all other Means
of Redress; and were not the Miseries that we already feel, and those which do
further threaten us, worse than the Calamities of War. And it is not for any
personal Injuries, or private Discontents, nor in pursuance of any corrupt
Interest, that we take our Swords in our Hands; but for vindicating our
Religion, Laws and Rights, and rescuing our Country from Ruin and Destruction,
and for the preserving our selves, Wives and Children, from Bondage and
Idolatry. Wherefore, before God, Angels and Men, we stand acquitted from, and
do charge upon our Enemies, all the Slaughter and Devastations that unavoidably
accompany intestine War.'

' Now, therefore, we do hereby solemnly declare and proclaim War against J. D.
of Y. as a Murderer, and an Assassin of innocent Men, a Traitor to the Nation,
and a Tyrant over the People: And we would have none that appear under his
Banner to flatter themselves with Expectation of Forgiveness, it being our firm
Resolution to prosecute him, and his Adherents, without giving Way to Treaties
and Accommodations, until we have brought him and them to undergo what the Rule
of the Constitution, and the Statutes of the Realm, as well as the Laws of
Nature, Scripture, and Nations, adjudge to be Punishment due to the Enemies of
God, Mankind, their Country, and all Things that are Honorable, Virtuous, and
Good.'

' And though we cannot avoid being sensible that too many have, from
Cowardice, Covetousness and Ambition, co-operated to the subverting of our
Religion, and enslaving their Country; yet we would have none, from a Despair
of finding Mercy, persevere in their Crimes, nor continue the Ruin of the
Kingdom: For we exclude none from the Benefit of Repentance, that will join
with us in retrieving that they have been accessory to the Loss of: Nor do we
design Revenge upon any, but the obstinate, and such as shall be found at this
Juncture yielding Aid and Assistance to the said J. D. of Y.'

' And that we may both govern our selves in the Pursuit of this glorious Cause
wherein we are engaged, and give Encouragement to all that shall assist us in
so righteous and necessary an Undertaking, we do, in the Presence of the Lord,
who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and is the Avenger of Deceit and
Falsehood, proclaim and publish what we aim at; and for the obtaining whereof,
we have both determined to venture, and are ready to lay down our Lives. And
though we are not come into the Field to introduce Anarchy and Confusion, or
for laying aside any Part of the Old English Government, yet our Purposes and
Resolutions are, to reduce Things to that Temperament and Balance, that future
Rulers may remain able to do all the Good that can be either desired or
expected from them: and that it may not be in their Power to invade the Rights,
and infringe the Liberties of the People.'

' And whereas our Religion, the most valuable thing we lay claim unto, has
been shaken by unjust Laws, undermined by Popish Counsels, and is now in Danger
to be subverted, we are therefore resolved to spend our Blood for preserving it
to our selves and Posterity: Nor will we lay down our Arms till we see it
established and secured beyond all Probability of being supplanted and
overthrown, and until all the Penal Laws against all Protestant Dissenters be
repealed, and legal Provision made against their being disturbed, by reason of
their Consciences, and for their enjoying an equal Liberty with other
Protestants.'

' And that the Meekness and Purity of our Principles, and the Moderation and
Righteousness of our End may appear unto all Men, we do declare, That we will
not make War upon or destroy any for their Religion, how false and erroneous
soever: So that the very Papists, provided they withdraw from the Tents of our
Enemies, and be not found Guilty of conspiring our Destruction, or Abettors of
them that seek it, have nothing to fear or apprehend from us, except what may
hinder their altering our Laws, and endangering our Persons in the Profession
of the Reformed Doctrine, and Exercise of our Christian Worship.'

' Our Resolution in the next Place is, To maintain all the just Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and to have Parliaments annually chosen and held, and
not prorogued, dissolved, or discontinued within the Year, before Petitions be
first answered, and Grievances redressed.'

' And seeing many of the Miseries under which the Nation does groan, arise
from displacing such out of the Number of Judges as would not, for the
promoting Popish and Arbitrary Designs, wrest and misapply the Laws, and from
constituting Corrupt and Mercenary Men in their Rooms, on purpose to stretch
the Laws beyond the Reason and Intention of them; and to declare that for Law
which is not; we can neither with Silence pass over the mentioning of them; nor
should we have Peace in our selves, if we did not endeavor to prevent the like
Mischief in Time to come. For by Reason of ill Men's being advanced to the
Bench, and holding their Places only durante been placito, many Persons have
been condemned in exorbitant Fines for no Crimes, or for very small ones: Many
Statutes made for the Safety of the Subject, particularly the Habeas Corpus
Act, have been wickedly eluded, to the Oppression of the Innocent and Loyal
Men. The Popish Lords that were impeached in Parliament for a most hellish
Conspiracy, have, to the subverting the Rights of the House of Lords, been
discharged, and set free. The imposing a Mayor and Sheriffs upon the City of
London, by Fraud and Violence, have been justified, and those who in discharge
of their Duty opposed it, illegally prosecuted, and arbitrarily punished.
London, and other Cities and Corporations, have been robbed of their Charters,
upon unrighteous Judgments of pretended Forfeitures. Sir Thomas Armstrong
executed without being allowed the Benefit of a Trial. Colonel Algernoon Sidney
condemned to die upon the Deposition of one scandalous Witness. And that Loyal
and Excellent Person, the late William Lord Russel, murdered for alleged
Crimes; in reference to which, if all had been true which was sworn against
him, yet there was nothing which according to Law could have reached his Life.
Upon the Considerations aforesaid, we further declare, that we will have Care
taken for the future, for the debarring ignorant, scandalous, and mercenary Men
from the Administration of Justice; and that the Judges shall hold their Places
by the ancient Tenure of quam diu se been gesserint; and to leave it to the
Wisdom of a Parliament, to settle some Way and Method for the Approbation of
such as shall be advanced to the Degree and Dignity of Judges.'

' And forasmuch as the Invasion made on the Right of Cities, Buroughs, and
Towns Corporate; the Seizure of their Charters, whether by Surrender, or upon
pretense of Forfeiture, have been wholly arbitrary and illegal; we likewise
therefore declare, we will, to our utmost, endeavor to see them repossessed in
what they formerly had, and could legally lay claim to; and that we do esteem
all Judgments given against them, and all Surrenders made by a corrupt and
perjured Party amongst them, null and void in Law; and do hold and declare
their old Charters, notwithstanding the new ones lately granted, to be good and
valid: And accordingly we do invite and encourage all honest Burgesses and
Freemen to reassume the Rights and Privileges, which by Virtue of the said
old Charters, belonged to their several and respective Corporations; and to
deliver themselves from those late Parasites, and Instruments of Tyranny set up
to oppress them.'

' Moreover, for the restoring the Kingdom to its Primitive Condition of
Freedom and Safety, we will have the Corporation and Militia Acts repealed: And
all Outlawries of Treason against any Person whatsoever, upon the late
pretended Portestant Plot, reversed; and also, all other Outlawries,
Banishments, Warrants, Judgments, Imprisonments, and injurious Proceedings
against any other Persons, upon any of the Penal Statutes made against
Protestant Dissenters, made null and void. And we will have new Laws enacted
for placing the Election of Sheriffs in the Freeholders of the several
Countries, for settling the Militia in the several Shires, and for preventing
all Military standing Forces, except what shall be raised and kept up by
Authority and Consent of Parliament.'

' And whereas several Gentlemen and others, who have been worthy and zealous
Assertors of the Protestant Interest, and Laws of the Kingdom, are now in
Custody in diverse Places within the Realm, upon most unjust Accusations,
Pretenses, Proceedings and Judgments; we do hereby further declare the said
Imprisonments to be illegal; and that in case any Violence shall be offered to
them, or any of them, we will revenge it to the utmost upon such of our Enemies
as shall fall into our Hands.'

' And whereas the said J. D. of Y. in order to the expenditing the Idolatrous
and Bloody Designs of the Papists, the gratifying his own boundless Ambition
after a Crown, and to hinder Enquiry into the Assassination of Arthur Earl of
Essex, has poisoned the late King, and thereby manifested his Ingratitude, as
well as Cruelty to the World, in murdering a Brother who had almost ruined
himself to preserve and protect him from Punishment; We do therefore further
declare, That for the aforesaid villainous and unnatural Crime, and other his
Crimes before mentioned, and in pursuance of the Resolution of both House of
Parliament, who voted to revenge the King's Death, in case he came to an
untimely End, we will prosecute the said J. D. of Y. till we have brought him
to suffer what the Law adjudged to be the Punishment of so execrable a Fact.'

' And in a more particular manner, His Grace the Duke of Manmouth, being
sensible of the barbarous and horried Parricide committed upon his Father, does
resolve to pursue the said J. D. of Y. as a mortal and bloody Enemy; and will
endeavor, as well with his own Hand, as by the Assistance of his Friends, and
the Law, to have Justice executed upon him.'

' And the said James Duke of Monmouth, the now Head and Captain General of the
Protestant Forces in this Kingdom, assembled for the End aforesaid, from the
Generousness of his own Nature, and the Love he bears to these Nations, whose
Welfare and Settlement he infinitely prefers to whatsoever concerns himself,
does not at present insist upon his Title, but leaves the Determination thereof
to the Wisdom, Justice, and Authority of a Parliament legally chosen, and
acting with Freedom; and in the mean time does profess and declare, by all that
is sacred, That he will, in Conjunction with the People of England, employ all
the Abilities bestowed upon him by God and Nature, for the Re-establishment and
Preservation of the Protestant Reformed Religion in these Kingdoms, and for
restoring the Subjects of the same to a free Exercise thereof, in Opposition to
Popery, and the Consequences of it, Tyranny and Slavery. To the obtaining of
which End, he does hereby Promise and Oblige himself to the People of England,
to consent unto, and promote the passing into Laws all the Methods aforesaid;
that it may never more be in the Power of any single Person on the Throne, to
deprive their Subjects of their Rights, and to subvert the Fundamental Laws of
the Government designed for their Preservation.'

' And whereas the Nobility and Gentry, and Commons of Scotland, are now in
Arms upon the like Motives and Inducements that we are, and in Prosecution of
Ends agreeable with ours, we do therefore approve the Justice of their Cause,
commend their Zeal and Courage, expecting their, and promising our Assistance,
for carrying on that Glorious Work we are jointly engaged in; being obliged,
avoiding Tediousness, to omit the recounting many Oppressions under which that
Kingdom has groaned, and the giving a Deduction of the several Steps that have
been taken for introducing of Popery and Tyranny. We think fit, therefore, to
signify both to our Countrymen and Foreigners, that we intend a larger
Testimony and Remonstrance of the Grievances, Persecutions, Cruelties and
Tyrannies, we have of late lain under; and therein a full and more particular
Account of the unparalled Crimes of the D. of Y. And we make our Appeal unto
GOD, and all Protestant Kings, Princes, States, and People, concerning the
Justice of our Cause, and the Necessity we are reduced unto of having our
Recourse to Arms. And as we do beseech, require and adjure all sincere
Protestants, and true English Men, to be assisting to us against the Enemies of
the Gospel, Rights of the Nation, and Liberties of Mankind; so we are confident
of obtaining the utmost Aid and Succor which they can yield us with their
Prayers, Persons, and Estates, for the dethroning the said Tyrant, etc. Nor do
we doubt being justified, countenanced, and assisted by all Protestant Kings,
Princes, and Commonwealths, who either regard the Gospel of Jesus Christ, or
their own Interest. And above all, our Dependence and Trust is upon the Lord of
Hosts, in whose Name we go forth, and to whom we commit our Cause, and refer
the Decision betwixt us and our Enemies in the Day of Battle. Now let us play
the Men for our People, and for the Cities of our GOD; and the Lord do that
which seems good unto him.'

A DECLARATION of Archibald, Earl of Argyle, Lord Kintyre, Cowall, Campbell and
Lorn, Heritable Sheriff, and Lieutenant of the Shires of Argyle and Tarbette,
and Heritable Justice General of the said Shires.
' I Shall not publish my Case published already in Print, in Latin, and in
Dutch, and more largely in English; nor mean I to repeat the printed
Declaration emitted by several Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others of both Nations
now in Arms, because the Sufferings of me and my Family, are therein mentioned.
I have thought it fit for me to declare for my self, that as I go to Arms with
those who have appointed me to conduct them, for no private and personal End,
only for those contained in the said Declaration, which I have concerted with
them, and approved of; so I do claim no Interest, but what I had before the
Pretended Forfeiture of my Family, and have a sufficient Right to.'

' And that I do freely (and as a Christian) forgive all personal Injuries
against my Person and Family, to all that shall not oppose, but join and concur
with us in our present Undertaking, for the Ends mentioned in the said
Declaration; and hereby I oblige my self never to pursue them in Judgment, nor
out of Judgment. And I do further declare, That obtaining the quiet and
peaceable Possession of what belonged to my Father and my self, before our
pretended Forfeitures, I shall satisfy all Debts due by my Father and my self,
as any Heir or Debtor can be obliged.'

' And as my Faithfulness to his late Majesty, and his Government; has
sufficiently appeared to all unbyassed Persons, void of Malice, so I do with
Grief acknowledge my Fault in too much complying with, and conniving at the
Methods that have been taken to bring us to the sad Condition we are now in,
though God knows never concurring in the Design.'

' I have now with God's Strength suffered patiently my unjust Sentence and
Banishment 3 Years and half, and have never offered to make any Uproar, or
Defense by Arms, to disturb the Peace upon my private Concern; but the King
being now dead, and the Duke of York having taken off his Mask, and abandoned
and invaded our Religion and Liberties, resolving to enter into the Government,
and exercising it contrary to Law, I think it not only just, but my Duty to God
and my Country, to use my utmost Endeavors to oppose and redress his
Usurpations and Tyranny.'

' And therefore being assisted and furnished very nobly by several good
Protestants, and invited and accompanied by several of both Nations to lead
them, I resolve, as God shall enable me, to use their Assistance of all Kinds,
toward the Ends expressed in the said Declaration.'

' And I do hereby earnestly Invite and Obtest all honest Protestants, and
particularly all my Friends, and Blood Relations, to concur with us in the said
Declaration; and as I have written several Letters, so having no other Way
fully to intimate my Mind otherwise, I do hereby require all my Vassals any
where, and all within my several Jurisdictions, with their fencible Men within
their Command, to go to Arms, and to join and concur with us according to the
said Declaration, as they shall be answerable at their Peril; and that they
obey the particular Orders they shall receive from me, from Time to come.'

By these it is plain that those unfortunate Lords, and others who joined them,
took up Arms in Defense of our Religion and Liberties, which were then invaded,
and as it afterward appeared, were designed to be totally subverted.

But the present Rebellion is raised in Opposition to our Laws for maintaining
the Protestant Succession, and British Liberties, which James II. had destroyed
as far as he could, and would in all Probability have completed the Ruin of
them, had not God by a wonderful Turn of Providence spirited the Nations to
call in the Prince of Orange to their Rescue. Nor would the Pretender have
failed to prosecute the same wicked Designs which had been set on Foot by his
supposed Father; as will appear by his Declaration published at Perth, as
follows;

The Pretender's Declaration.
' JAmes VIII. by the Grace of God, of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
to all Our Loving Subjects, of what Degree or Quality soever, Greeting.
As we are firmly resolved never to lose any Opportunity of asserting Our
undoubted Title to the Imperial Crown of these Realms, and of endeavoring to
get the Possession of that Right which is devolved upon Us by the Laws of God
and Man; so must We, in Justice to the Sentiments of Our own Heart, declare,
That nothing in the World can give Us so great Satisfaction, as to owe to the
Endeavors of Our Loyal Subjects both Our own and their Restoration to that
happy Settlement which can alone deliver this Church and Nation from the
Calamities which they lie at present under, and from these future Miseries
which must be the Consequences of the present Usurpation. During the Life of
Our dear Sister, of Glorious Memory, the Happiness which our People enjoyed,
softened, in some Degree, the Hardship of our own Fate; and we must further
confess that when we reflected on the Goodness of her Nature, and her
Inclination to Justice, We could not but persuade Our self, that she intended
to establish and perpetuate the Peace which she had given to these Kingdoms, by
destroying for ever all Competition to the Succession of the Crown, and by
consenting to us, at last, the Enjoyment of that Inheritance out of which we
had been so long kept, which her Conscience must inform Her was our Due, and
which her Principles must lead her to desire, that We might obtain. But since
the Time, it pleased God to put a Period to her Life, and not to suffer Us to
throw Our self, as We then firmly purposed to have done, upon Our People; We
have not been able to look upon the present Condition of Our Kingdoms, or to
consider their future Prospect, without all the Horror and Indignation which
ought to fill the Breast of every Scotsman. We have beheld a Foreign Family,
Aliens to our Country, distant in Blood, and Strangers even to our Language,
ascend the Throne. We have seen the Reins of Government put into the Hands of a
Faction, and that Authority which was designed for the Protection of all,
exercised by a few of the worst, to the Oppression of the best and greatest
Number of Our Subjects. Our Sister has not been left at Rest in her Grave, her
Name has been scurrilously abused, her Glory, as far as in these People lay,
insolently defaced, and her faithful Servants inhumanly persecuted. A
Parliament has been procured by the most unwarrantable Influences, and by the
grossest Corruptions to serve the vilest Ends, and they, who ought to be the
Guardians of the Liberties of the People, are become the Instruments of
Tyranny: Whilst the principal Powers engaged in the late Wars, do enjoy the
Blessings of Peace, and are attentive to discharge their Debts, and ease their
People; Great Britain, in the midst of Peace, feels all the Load of War. New
Debts are contracted, new Armies are raised at Home, Dutch Forces are brought
into these Kingdoms, and by taking Possession of the Duchy of Bremen, in
Violation of the Public Faith, a Door is opened by the Usurper, to let in an
Inundation of Foreigners from abroad, and to reduce these Nations to the State
of a Province, to one of the most inconsiderable Provinces of the Empire.'

' These are some few of the many real Evils into which these Kingdoms have
been betrayed, under Pretense of being rescued and secured from Dangers purely
imaginary; and these are such Consequences of abandoning the old Constitution,
as we persuade Our selves very many of those who promoted the present unjust
and illegal Settlement never intended.'

' We observe, with the utmost Satisfaction, that the Generality of Our
Subjects are awakened with a just Sense of their Danger, and that they show
themselves resolved to take such Measures as may effectually rescue them from
that Bondage which has, by the Artifice of a few designing Men, and the
Concurrence of many unhappy Causes, been brought upon them.'

' We adore the Wisdom of Divine Providence, which has opened a Way to our
Restoration, by the Success of those very Measures that were laid to disappoint
Us for ever: And We must earnestly conjure all Our Loving Subjects, not to
suffer that Spirit to faint or die away, which has been so miraculously raised
in all Parts of our Kingdom; but to pursue, with all the Vigor and Hopes of
Success, which so Just and Righteous a Cause ought to inspire, those Methods,
which the Finger of God seems to point out to them.'

' We are coming to take Our Part in all the Dangers and Difficulties to which
any of Our Subjects, from the Greatest down to the Meanest, may be exposed, on
this important Occasion, to relieve our Subjects in Scotland from the Hardships
they groan under, on account of the late unhappy Union; and to restore the
Kingdom to its Ancient, Free, and Independent State. We have before our Eyes
the Example of Our Royal Grandfather, who sell a Sacrifice to Rebellion; and of
Our Royal Uncle, who, by a Train of Miracles, escaped the Rage of Barbarous and
Blood-thirsty Rebels, and lived to exercise his Clemency toward those who had
waged War against his Father and himself; who had driven him to seek Shelter in
Foreign Lands, and who had even set a Price upon his Head.'

' We see the same Instances of Cruelty renewed against Us, by Men of the same
Principles, without any other Reason, than the Consciousness of their own
Guilt, and the implacable Malice of their own Hearts: For in the Account of
such Men, it is a Crime sufficient to be their King; but God forbid that we
should tread in these Steps, or that the Cause of a Lawsul Prince, and an
Injuried People, should be carried on like that of Tyranny and Usurpation, and
owe its Support to Assassins. We shall copy after the Patterns abovementioned,
and be ready with the former of Our Royal Ancestors, to Seal the Cause of our
Country, if such be the Will of Heaven, with Our Blood: But we hope for better
Things, we hope for the latter, to see our just Rights, and those of the Church
and People of Scotland, once more settled in a Free and Independent Scots
Parliament, on their ancient Foundation; to such a Parliament, which we will
immediately call, shall we entirely refer Our, and their Interests, being
sensible that these Interests rightly understood, are always the same: Let the
Civil, as well as Religious Rights of all our Subjects, receive a Confirmation
in such a Parliament; let Consciences truly tender be indulged; let Property of
every Kind be better than ever secured; let an Act of General Grace and
Amnesty, extinguish the Faults, even of the most Guilty; if possible, let the
very Remembrance of all which have preceeded this happy Moment, be utterly
blotted out, that our Subjects may be united to Us, and to each other, in the
strictest Bonds of Affection, as well as Interest.'

' And that nothing may be omitted, which is in Our Power to contribute to this
desirable End; we do, by these Presents, absolutely and effectually, for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, Pardon, Remit and Discharge all Crimes of
High Treason, Misprision of Treason, and all other Crimes and Offenses
whatsoever done or committed against Us, or Our Royal Father of blessed Memory,
by any of Our Subjects, of what Degree or Quality soever, who shall, at, or
after Our Landing, and before they engage in any Action against Us, or Our
Forces, from that Time, lay hold on Mercy, and return to that Duty and
Allegiance they owe to Us, their only Rightful and Lawful Sovereign.'

' By the joint Endeavors of Us and Our Parliament, urged by these Motives,
and directed to these Views, we may hope to see the Peace and Flourishing
Estate of this Kingdom, in a short Time restored; and we shall be equally
forward to concert with our Parliament such further Measures as may be thought
necessary for leaving the same to future Generations.'

' And we hereby require all Sheriffs of Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, and
their Deputies, and Magistrates of Burghs, to publish this Our Declaration,
immediately after it shall come to their Hands, in the usual Place and Manner,
under the Pain of being proceeded against for Failure thereof, and forfeiting
the Benefit of our General Pardon.'

Given under Our Sign-Manual and Privy-Signet at Our Court at Commercy, the
25th Day of October, in the 15th Year of Our Reign.
It is to be observed, That the Declarations by the Duke of Monmouth, and the
Earl of Argyle, insist on such Acts of Tyranny committed by James II. as all
the World knew to be true, whereas the Pretender, and those who have now
rebelled for the Support of his Claim, have no such Thing to charge upon King
GEORGE, but traitorously misrepresent the legal Methods which he has taken,
with Consent of Parliament, for the Defense of our Religion and Liberties, and
retrieving the Honor of the Nation, on purpose to inflame the High-Church Mob.

It also deserves a Remark, that though the Duke of Monmouth was so weak as to be
prevailed on by the Importunity of those who joined him, to take the Title of
King, yet he did not positively assert this Title to the Crown in his
Declaration, but left it to be Determined by Parliament; whereas King James II.
never offered to submit the Examination of the Pretender's Birth to a
Parliament, to whom the Prince of Orange referred it, but on the contrary,
abandoned the Kingdom, with his Queen, the Pretender, and all the material
Witnesses, as if he had been conscious to himself, that such an Examination
would have fully discovered the Cheat. Nor has the Pretender offered to make
any Proof of his Legitimacy, or even to give such a feigned Security for our
Religion and Liberties as James II. did, but on the contrary did absolutely
refuse the Scots Coronation Oath that was in Force before the Union of the
Crowns, because it obliged him to maintain the Protestant Religion, as
established in that Nation in the Reign of Mary Queen of Scots, and confirmed
by her Son James VI. of Scotland, and the First of Great Britain.

This is enough to show the Difference betwixt the Causes of the Rebellion
against King James II. and that against King GEORGE; and though the latter has
been much more universal and formidable than the other, it will appear by the
following Accounts, that the Proceedings against the present Rebels, have been
kept within the due Bounds of Law, and tempered with great Clemency, whereas
those against the Rebels in the Time of James II. did not only exceed Law, but
were carred on with such Barbarity as is shocking to Human Nature.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS Against the Rebels, and other Prisoners, IN THE
WEST.
Southampton, ss.
ALice Lisle, Widow, indicted for harboring John Hicks, a Rebel, etc. tried,
found Guilty, and executed.
Wilts, ss.
For High Treason none Indicted.
Convicted for speaking seditious Words, severally fined and whipped. RIchard
White, William Ingram, Stephen Moore, John Palmer, Morris Morgan, Benjamin
Buckler,

Dorset, ss.
Prisoners executed for High Treason. In all Seventy four.
SAmuel Hilliard Matthew Bragg Benjamin Gray Thomas Smith Henry Ford John Game
Joseph Speed George Seaward Joh. Foane, alias Fawn Phillip Levermore Robert
Pinney John Wills Thomas Welsh Abraham Holmes Josias Ascue William Hewling
Leonard Jackson John Haves John Kidd John Marders Sampson Lark Christoph.
Bettescombe Samuel Glisson Henry Watts Robert Bull John Bull Benjamin Sandford
John Lee William Quintin Thomas Clapp (...) Cook George Collyer John Beaumont,
sen. Thomas Forte John Beavis Tristram Elliott Robert Slade William Lancaster
John Burridge John Hartley George Smith George Willmott John Robins Edward
Leggatt Roger Satchell William Heart John Leggatt Francis Skinner William
Alston George Puckeridge Benjamin Temple Thomas Tyler Robert Machell Henry Row
John Lawrence Michael Abbott Richard Hall John Savage Robert Whorwood William
Dilling Andrew Tozer William Hardiman Thomas Jenkins Robert Salter Samuel
Waldron John Pulling Andrew Ellis, alias Cossens Josias Restorick William
Martin Nicholas Hoare Samuel Robins William Cox, sen. John Holloway Adam Hawley
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners convicted for High Treason, to be delivered to Sir William Booth, to
be Transported, being in all One Hundred.
EDward Luther John Down Benjamin Crow Thomas Bennett John Fisher John Manning
Robert Lumbard William Wadford Richard Keech George Plumley Thomas Allen John
Reason John Spearing Matthew Porter Robert Spurway John Edwards John Hardyman
Bernard Bryant John Minifie John White James Pomeroy Robert Shale Thomas Hoar
Peter Row John Loveridge Elias Stephens John Bridle Thomas Parsons Nicholas
Palmer Thomas Williams Matthew Hutchins Nicholas Smith Emanuel Collins Roger
Hobbs John Gay Joseph Hallett Nathaniel Webber Edward Morton James Salter
William Loveridge Ambrose Ashford Roger French Nicholas Warren William Wills
John Pryor William Tucker William Brown Samuel Lawrence John Hutchins William
Clarke John Brown Robert Burridge Henry Tutcher Thomas Burridge John
Allambridge Thomas Cornelius Humfrey Molton Edward Willmott William Williams
Thomas Marshall Richard Paull Joseph Paull Hugh Willmott John Johnson Richard
Allens John Pitts Stephen Gammage Andrew Rapson William Cossens Jasper Diamond
Thomas Gregory John Allen Robert Hellyer Thomas Allen Thomas Best Thomas
Hellyer John Long William Bennett John Marks John Mitchell John Madders Thomas
Hallett John Alston George Macey John Pinney Charles Strong William Feade
William Saunders James Spence John Wilson Edward Adams John Adams Arthur Lush
John Hutchins Thomas Townsend Thomas Bovett John Truren James Fowler John White
Francis Langbridge
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners to be transported, to be delivered to Jerome Nipho, in all 62.
JOhn Mogridge Thomas Quick Nicholas Salter Francis Smith Richard Green
William Marthers John Facey William Greenway Richard Daniel Peter Kent
Christopher Jewel Abraham Thomas John Baker Samuel Prison Robert Clarke George
Ebdon Samuel Dolbeare Benjamin Whicker John Whicker John Hitchcock Thomas
Forcey William Giles Joseph Gage Robert Mullins Robert Bryant, alias Hooper
Charles Broughton Richard Parker John Hayne John Connet Bernard Lowman John
Heathfield Edward Ven Richard Pyne Thomas Pester John Sam Henry Symes William
Deal William Haynes Thomas Francklyn William Gappy Mallachy Mallack, reprieved
Azariah Pinney John Bovett Robert Sandy Thomas Dolling Edward Marsh John
Eastmont John Vincent Allen England Robert Vater John Piew Oliver Hobbs Phillip
Cox Peter Ticken William Clarke Walter Osborne, repr. Richard Hoare Robert
Fawn Bartholomew Barge Daniel Parker Edward Wale Peter Bagwell
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners to be delivered to Sir Christopher Musgrave for Transportation, etc.
16.
THomas England Francis Pucket William Combden John Lock John Gardener William
Lush John Sturrick Samuel Paull Robert White John Woodward William Sellwood
John Shinler Matthew Elliott John James, alias Jeane John Sprake John Bagwell
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners who had Certificates allowed pursuant to his Majesty's Gracious
Proclamation, 27.
RIchard Dammer John Butcher, junior Seth Gough Phillip Andrews John Bowditch
John Burridge William Knight Jacob Baker Samuel Stoodley George Rickman Richard
Burridge James Pitts Nicholas Hellyer William Hardy Thomas Calway William White
Samuel Cossens Nicholas Bartlett John Butcher, senior Daniel Butter John
Perkins Adam Clarke Robert Halston Richard Stone David Gardener William Rooper
John Rooper
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners humbly proposed for his Majesty's gracious Pardon, 25.
THomas Gammidge Stephen Cook Nathaniel Swasfield Reginold Clotworthy Abel
Pinnell John Beaumont, junior John Glover John Trottle Joseph Phelpes Zachary
Drower George Stuckey Amos Lacey Robert Dale Edward Towills Edward Lane Andrew
Billing Thomas Cookeney Henry Beasley Thomas Moore Thomas Greenway, junior John
Skinner John Hippesley Humfrey Phelpes Thomas Berry John Minifie
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners remaining in Custody, 6.
EDward Wale Bartholom. Barge Thomas Lawrence William Cox, junior Richard Cox
William Hawkins
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners convicted for speaking scandalous Words, and for other Misdemeanors,
fined, and had corporal Punishment.
RIchard Hollyday, for conducting the Lord Gray from Gillingham to Ringwood,
after the Fight at Weston, to be whipped twice, fined a Mark, and to find
Sureties for the good Behavior for a Year. Hugh Green, for publishing Monmouth
's Declaration, fined 1000 l. and committed till paid, and to find Sureties for
the good Behavior during Life. William Wiseman, for publishing a seditious
Libel, to be whipped at Dorchester, and at every Market Town in the Country. For
speaking seditious Words, severally fined and whipped. Edward Jervis, William
Holman, Henry Allen, Thomas Pitts, John Dober, Richard Moors,

Dorset, ss.
Prisoners discharged for want of Evidence.
GAbriel Wise Robert Boulstone Richard Strong John Strong Francis Greenfield
James Carter George Turner Thomas Loveridge Edward Staple John Mitchell William
Burt William Bennett Nicholas Clotworthy John Mitchell Hugh Critchell
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners continued in Goal not indicted.
WIlliam Jenkins Richard Platt William Platt Robert Orchard Thomas Parberv
Lionel Whiffen John Davy John Heart William Davys
Devon, ss.
Prisoners executed at Exeter for High Treason, 14 in all.
JOhn Foweracres Thomas Hobbs John Oliver Henry Knight Samuel Potts John
Knowles William Parsons Thomas Quinten Thomas Broughton John Gosling John
Sprake William Clegg John Rosse Tim. Dunkin, reprieved
Devon, ss.
Prisoners to be transported for High Treason, for whom a Warrant is delivered
to Jerome Nipho, 7 in all.
ABraham Hunt Christ. Cooper Edmond Bovett John Follett Peter Bird John Kemplin
Walter Teape, repr.
Devon, ss.
Prisoners convicted remaining in Custody.
RObert Drower, reprieved William Siller, junior Elias Holman, reprieved Thomas
Connett
Humbly proposed for His Majesty's Gracious Pardon.
JAmes Cox
Devon, ss.
Prisoners fined at Exeter for Words, and other Misdemeanors, 13.
For speaking seditious Words severally fined, and whipped. LEwis James, William
Andrigge, Samuel Staple, William Fisher, William Hadder Stephen Borough,
William Curtis, Henry Abbott, John Holmes Humfrey Bidgood, Robert Crane, Giles
Gardener, John Smalridge,

Somerset, ss. Taunton
Prisoners to be executed for High Treason, who were convicted at Taunton, 145.
SImon Hamlyn William Cooper William Gatchell John D^yer James Gale Henry Edney
Hugh Ashley John Herring William Gillett Thomas Lissant John Sharp William
Pocock Pearce Morren Christopher Stephens George Condick Robert Allen John
Fricker Robert Hill Richard Bovett John Hucker Nicholas Adams Richard Stephens
Robert Halsewell John Bussell Thomas Blackmore WIlliam Lashley John Walrond
John Masters David Langwell Osmond Barrett Matthew Cross Edmond Burford John
Mortimore John Stephens Richard Culverwell Robert Townsend Humfrey Mitchell
Merrick Thomas Nicholas Collins, senior Edmond Fort Jos. Bellamy, reprieved
Francis Foxwell George Pitcher Barnaby Devericks Francis Priest Barnard
Thatcher William Johnson Thomas England Thomas Hurford John Savage William
Davison John Williams Edmond Gillard Jonathan England Oliver Powell Charles
Chapel Richard Bowdon Roger Prance John Pattrum William Watkins John Spore
Roger Burnell William Pether Joseph Kellaway Benjamin Hewling William Jenkins
Henry Lisle John Winter Andrew Rownsell John Phildrey Robert Perratt Abraham
Annesley Arthur Mathews Robert Fawn Weston Hillary John Burgen Philip Bovett
Peter Warren James Whetham William Ruscombe Cornelius Hurford John Parsons
Thomas Davys William Satchell Humfrey Pierce Nicholas Venting Thomas Pierce
Robert Read John Sellwood Robert Comb John Jeanes William Sully John Basely
John Lloyd Henry Thompson George Gillard John Lockston Arthur Williams Rob.
Janes, alias Evans Hugh Stark Francis Bartlett John Trecky Simon Hawkins
Robert Hyne Archibald Johnson James Maxwell Richard Ingram John Trott Roger
Guppy John Knight Isaiah Davvs William Williams John Jervis Richard Sweet
Richard Ash Samuel Garnish William Mogridge John Hurman Hugh Rooper, reprieved
Richard Harris Nicholas Stodgell Henry Luckwell Humfrey Hitchcocke William
Godfrey Abraham Pill William Davy Henry Eastabrooke James Every James Durnett
Edward Warren Simon Cross Stephen Newman Robert Luckis William Rock Thomas
Barnard William Wellen John Parsons Joh. Glover, alias Tucker Thomas Trock
Lewis Harris Edward Halsewell John Evans Howell Thomas George Baddy Henry
Lawrence
Somerset, ss.
Prisoners to be delivered to Sir Christopher Musgrave for Transportation, 84.
William Edwards James Combs John Hooper John Smith Bernard Periam Robert
Shoesmith John Trimmore Jacob King John Pope Thomas Whittye William Hayes
Josias Heart Walter Blew John Gardener Robert Barge Edward Lugg John Furber John
Lyde Thomas Cutler William Hooper Henry Hooper Elisha Davys Richard Lang Thomas
Bray Thomas Adams William Goodland Alexander Townsend John Hensley Samuel
Hensley Isaac Kingston William Row Hugh Gill James Glanvill Henry Wrentmore
Thomas Cross John Hoare Tobias Dryer William Bailey Richard Masters John Gibbs
William Spreate William Croft John Hacker, jun. Robert Bradbeare Joseph Lacey
Nathaniel Musgrave Thomas Curtis William Page Robert Mead Samuel Saxbee John
Fowler, sen. John Fowler, jun. Richard Perkins Humfrey Slade William Venting
William Tapscott Benjamin Spark Bartholomew Davy Robert Brooks William Norman
Andrew Boyte John Grace James Soper Thomas Howell Peter Shorland George Ley
Humfrey Saunders John Butfeild Samuel Tottell Edward Eves Thomas Debnam Thomas
Hendy Giles Crane Walter Phillips Richard Drake Matthew Pottle George Robertson
John Metyard Henry Hamett James Gollop William Bull Andrew Nabrick George Smith
Thomas Marks
Prisoners to be delivered to the Queen's Order for Transportation, 100.
DAniel Rutter Jeremiah Poole John Baker Robert Pearce Leonard Staple Edward
Kent Charles Bennett John Parsons John Gibbs John Bryor Thomas Gould John
Hartey William Pitts James Webb Nicholas Collins, jun. Richard King Emanuel
Merchant William Merchant John Slade Samuel Bond John Rogers Barnard Loveridge
Percival Nowis William Saunders William Verryard Henry Chambers Thomas
Rowsewell John Crane Charles Burridge William Leigh John Robins Luke Porter
Thomas Priest Cornelius Radford Phillip Cheek Robert Earl John Mogridge Henry
Randall James Maynard John Culverwell George Trubbs Silvester Lyde Matthew
Cook William Phelpes Elias Lockbeare Silvester Poole Thomas Moore Lawrence
Priest William Gould Henry Priest Enoch Gould John Bennett John Baker Samuel
Mountstephen Thomas Buglar Stephen Jeffreyes John Morse William Scurrier John
England Jacob Powell John Godsall John Andrews Samuel Sweeting George Rowsell
Edward Bellamy William Cross Jonas Brown John Cross Christopher Knight
Thomas Meade John Needs Thomas Pit Robert Richards Christopher Row Matthew
Craft, jun. Richard Peircy John Miller George Snow Samuel Collins John Cockram
James Cockram Christopher Holbyn John Marwood John Timothy Thomas Austin Moses
Osborne Walter Hacker Randal Babington John Knight Job Hunt William Woodcock
John Adams Thomas Pomfrett James Patten Thomas Bambury James Clift John
Chamberlyn Humfrey Justin Isaac Dyer Richard Symons
Dorset, ss.
Prisoners at Taunton convicted of High Treason, to be transported by Sir
William Booth, 100.
RIchard Stephens Richard Edgar Charles Lucas George Gray John Bartlett John
Stoodley Robert Paull Robert Mitchell John Gale Bartholomew Randall John Rogers
William Hayne William Barnard Thomas Matthews Henry Meyor John Bressett Richard
Allen John Poole John Burges John Farmer Richard Bickham Henry Gibbons John
Busson George Nowell Morris Furse, alias Vosse Humfrey Trump John Warren George
Warren Humfrey Pope Osmond Read Henry Quant William Buroughs William Daw
William Parker Robert Sease Thomas Middleton James Helman John Bray Ambrose
Winter Lawrence Hussy Robert Seaman Edward Lyde John Chapel Robert Easton
John Walter Thomas Brock George Mullens Daniel Pomeroy Jeremiah Atkins Samuel
Proone John Edwards George Mihill William Drew Thomas Dennis John Avoake
William Tiverton Joseph Vinicott John Seymore John Leaker Simon Poole John Wall
Richard Wadham Stephen Rodway Francis Came Michael Powell John Kerle Thomas
Galhampton George Carrow Abraham Pollard John Budge William Harvey William Hall
William Phippen John Chilcot Robert Coward John Cantlebury William Woolridge
William Smith John Smith William Meade George Keell Edward Council Joseph
Wickham John Harris Justinian Guppy William Comb James Baker Thomas Gammage
William Walter Robert Teap Timothy Hawker William Smith Jos. Newberry,
reprieved John Smith John Cloade Jonas Cross John Bragg William Hutchins John
Mitchell Edward Vildey
Somerset, ss. Taunton.
Prisoners (who had Certificates pursuant to his Majesty's Proclamation, which
were allowed) to be pardoned, 20.
RAymond Quire Joseph Quire Richard Irish, jun. Joseph Sminney Richard Gill
John brown John Irish Robert Dunne George Lumbard Thomas Lumbard Thomas
Sminney Joseph Irish Francis Deane Samuel Newberry James Norman John Hagley
Osmond Burbidge Richard Gornelius John Sminney, jun. John Prickman
Somerset, ss. Taunton.
Prisoners humbly proposed to his Majejesty for his Gracious Pardon, 23.
RObert Fulford William Farmer William Coleburne Daniel Norcott Thomas Reeves
Benjamin Not Henry Reeves Thomas Worrall William Court Abraham Hull William
Saunders Henry Hodges Francis Jervis Thomas Crew Thomas Gooding William
Moggeridge John Dutch John Keell Robert Dyer Richard Reynolds Thomas Bartlett
John Gray William Reeves
Somerset, ss. Taunton.
Prisoners in Goal omitted in the Warrant for Execution, although designed to be
executed, 15.
JOseph Cooper John Bates Samuel Dare George Miller James Smith Edward Way John
Chapple John Rossiter Gideon Dare John Satchell John Pacey William Sherborne
Henry Webb Thomas Redwood Alegen Leversedge
Taunton.
Prisoners remaining in Goal till further Order, 33.
GEorge Wells Samuel Harvey Robert Clarke John Ham James Indoe Samuel Adams
John Turle James Turle John Northam Thomas Bagley Stephen Hellman James Ferring
John G^^ing Moses Waggstaffe Robert Hampton Richard Edghill Francis Gardener
Robert Jenkins Tobias Hacker Thomas Clarke Daniel Hallett Thomas Parsons Lewis
Hagley William Martyn James Edmonds William Searle John Bisse Roger Caswell
William Baker Humfrey Gillard Thomas Cornish William Reives John Mead
Prisoners bailed at Taunton.
RIchard Tirrill William Whaites
Somerset ss. Wells.
Prisoners to be executed for High Treason, 100.
WAlter Baker Henry Body Jerrard Bryant Thomas Collins Thomas Clotworthy John
Carter Robert Cook Edward Cruse John Caswell Thomas Heyward John Hellyer
Edward Keare Henry Partridge George Petter Thomas Pierce John Richards John
Staple John Smith Francis Smith Samuel Vill, alias Vile Thomas War Phillip
Usher Richard Evans John Tincknell Robert Beamont Hugh Goodenough John Humfreys
George Hussy Robert Man William Mangell Thomas Paul John Scarr Lawrence Lot
Thomas Lot James Field, sen. Humfrey Peadon Richard Bole Robert Francis John
Howell Richard Harvey John Tucker William Holland Hugh Holland Thomas Bowden
Richard Chynn William Cruise Thomas Pavier John Holdesworth John Ashwood,
reprieved Thomas Smith John Dorchester, sen. John Comb John Greaves Arthur
Sallaway George Adams Henry Russell George Knight Robert Wine William Cheek,
alias Chick Preston Beavis Richard Finnier Roger Cornelius Humfrey Edmonds
Richard Pierce Joseph Smith John Gilham, jun. Giles Bramble Alexander Key
William Mead Glover David Boyce Joshua French Samuel Cox Charles Speak William
Plumley Jacob Tripp James Pyes William Mead John Broom, reprieved William
Somerton Thomas Duston John Sheppard Abraham Bond Edward Tippett Thomas Burrell
Thomas Hillary John Gill, sen. John Hicks Thomas Monday John Butcher Richard
Pierce Israel Bryant Roger Hoare, reprieved Phillip Cambridge William Duston
William Clement Tristram Clarke Thomas Coade Robert Doleman Robert Thatcher.
Somerset ss. Wells.
Prisoners to be transported, and delivered to Sir William Stapleton, 102.
RIchard Allwood Jacob Adams Samuel Blackmore John Brown James Broughton
Charles Baker Thomas Brigwood John Bright William Bush Thomas Brown Francis
Bagwell John Brown John Bartlett James Bickley Robert Court John Classey John
Couche Samuel Clarke John Clarke John Collins John Coleman Henry Collins John
Cox Nicholas Connings Robert Clarke Benjamin Keeble Richard Chaplin Joseph
Cowes John Coleburne William Coals Thomas Churchhouse Peter Drayton James Dew
William Dew Simon Dyer Thomas Daniell Richard Denham Richard Dyer Francis
Dunning John Denning Phillip England William England Richard Easton Richard
Edghill James Ellford Cornelius Elliot John Ervin Thomas Ferris Edward Ford
Samuel Farmer Arthur Ford Walter Freston Richard Foweracres John Fowler John
Foster William Fear Francis Gamling Joseph Gale James Jerman Thomas Gamlin
Nehemiah Goffe William Guppy Edward Goodman Peter Goodgroome John Holmes John
Henson Thomas Hooper Thomas Herring Thomas Hutchins Humfrey Hodge Robert Hannam
Richard Howells Edward Harris Andrew Howard John Hull Moses Higwell Thomas
Humfreys Francis Hales William Higden George Halfeyard Josias Howard James
Harman Thomas Hill William Jackson Joseph Jermyn John Jones Richard Jacob
Charles Jones William Johnson Samuel Knight Phillip Keeping William Key John
Lewis John Larkham John Lock John Lawrence William Lock John Langford Paul
Morse Henry Quick Samuel Farmer Arthur Ford
Somerset, ss. Wells.
Prisoners delivered to Sir Philip Howard for Transportation, 200.
GAbriel Smart Henry Cook Isaac Pryor William Eyres James Pain Nicholas
Kelford John Butcher Christopher Candy John Bennet Thomas Orchard Nathaniel
Dennick Humfrey Davyes Henry Syms Jonathan Drew John Jones Robert Millerd
Robert Stuckey Pasche Stuckey James Field, junior Israel Balster John Hussy
Andrew Staley John Reynolls Arthur Everard Robert Reeves Robert Norton Edmond
Hurd Thomas Hurd Thomas Lawrence George Hallet Giles Whittle John Heart John
Lawrence James Aims Samuel Ellworthy John Holloway James Hurd John Field John
Weech William Staunton Thomas Salisbury * Thomas Andersey, reprieved James
Heal Robert Beaton Simon Chynn John Portnell James Pullman Thomas Mills Joshua
Salley Ambrose Vineing Peter Durden Joseph Hawker Thomas Snook Henry Snook
George Harding William Chynn Nicholas Davidge John Hanning James Moore Henry
Miles James Wake John Attwood William Lacey Adam Smith Robert Beale * Richard
Hoare, reprieved Christopher Gray John Woodrow Anthony Woodrow Roger Cole
Edward Vile Philip Lacey William Best Edward Willmott William Prowse
Christopher Masters William Lane John Crowder Thomas Rodbeard James Best Robert
Best John Stower Thomas Laver John Baker Edward Vagg Robert Clarke Joseph
Robins Thomas Pittard Timothy Toleman James Sheppard James Ellford John Harwood
Roger Channing Thomas Channing * James Baker, reprieved Charles Paple John Webb
George Allen John Palmer Robert Burridge John Morley Humfrey Maundry James
Moody Thomas Mitchell Ralph Middleton William Merrick Edward Mitchell John
Muttlebury Joseph Mullens Roger Mortimor Nathaniel Weal Baldwin Parker William
Priest Andrew Palmer Silus Phillipps John Popes Francis Plomer James Parker
James Pierce John Palmer George Russell Christopher Richards Henry Rookes
William Read Alexander Robinson Argentine Rust Robert Smith Robert Sly William
Sheppard William Smith William Sherry John Simon Francis Savage William Self
George Searle John Saunders Jonathan Sutton * James Smith, reprieved John Say
Jonas Say Richard Spiller Richard Sellwood Richard Syms John Skiff Thomas
Tuckey Richard Tapper Richard Turner John Tilley Lewis Tricks Peter Wellis
Robert Wilkins Richard Willcox John Williams, senior John Williams, junior John
Worrall Joseph Warren Thomas Walter William Warren Richard West Robert Willis
John Watts Stephen Walsh Richard Young Matthew Woodland Thomas Waggott Edward
Kemp Hugh Banton William Cotworthy Thomas Carden Edward Gilbert William
Greenland Thomas Goodson Richard Hooper Henry Hunt William Harris Robert
Jennings Richard Line William Lyneing John Lush Charles Mason Richard Miller
Thomas Norton James Norvill John Stone Henry Roper Francis Carter John Fathers
John Laver Shadreck Morley Matthew Pryor Nicholas Gill John Hurl John Lease,
alias Gamlin Samuel Denham John Oram Robert Heyward John Helps John Peircy
Richard Willmott Thomas Speed * Robert Drower, Elias Holman, in Exeter Goal;
John Rosseter, Allegen Leversedge, in Taunton Goal; to be transported for
Thomas Andersey, Richard Hoare, James Smith, James Baker.
Prisoners delivered for Transportation to Jeremy Nipho, 33.
JOhn Jolliffe Robert Pierce John Dodds Henry Pittman Nathaniel Beaton Peter
Cordelion William Biggs William Pittman John Cook John Harcombe John Collins
Nathaniel Standerwick Richard Dyke John De^^^m, reprieved Abraham Gooden John
Mead, reprieved John Brice Andrew Holcombe John Hooper Thomas Venner Lawrence
Caswell Thomas Chinn, reprieved Samuel Weaver Robert Batt John Gould John
Hooper John Cook John Johnson John Wills Rich. Nash, alias Lissant John Foot
John Reeves John Gill, junior Thomas Body, James Price, Samuel Davison, to be
transported in the place of John Denham, John Mead, Thomas Chinn.
Somerset, ss. Wells.
Prisoners delivered to Captain John Price for Transportation, 50.
EDward Rawbone Thomas Nashion Richard Wiseman Thomas Eglin Richard Snook
Thomas Lockyer Moses Moore Samuel Ruddle John Parsons Robert Mudford, alias
Mumford John Bishopp John Sprake Thomas Viles David Thomas William Powell
William Prowse Robert Sweet, junior Edward Hody John Wythyman, jun. Joseph
Witherell William Sweet Josiah Gillham John Partridge John Bramble James
Bramble George Butcher Edward Abbott Matthew Goodman Benjamin Trask Henry Noon
John Key Philip Smith John Westlake William Redbeard John Dumett John Quick
Thomas Saunders William Chilcott Thomas Vile Thomas Doleman Robert Carter
Edward Halsey William Broadbear Edward Chedsey John Hill Thomas Trott William
Collier John Parsons John Rotherton John Arnold
Somerset, ss. Wells.
Prisoners who had Certificates allowed pursuant to his Majesty's gracious
Declaration, 6.
JOhn Willey William Gauler William Buckler Richard Fisher John Pit John
Denham
Somerset, ss. Wells.
Prisoners humbly proposed for his Majesty's Gracious Pardon, 26.
STephen Benchfield George Blanchflower Richard Beadon Christopher Bray John
Cotterell Edward Day Robert Harris Simon Hussy John Moore Thomas Napper James
Standard John Woolnington William Hellyer John Patten John Bishopp William
Ashford, jun. John Dorchester, jun. Henry Grange Robert Upcott John Crocker
John Commer Richard Napper James Pitts, junior John Brock Christopher Wernell
Henry Norton
Somerset, ss. Wells.
Prisoners designed for Execution, yet omitted in the Warrant for Execution, 5.
JOhn Bird Edward Merrick William Oustler, senior James Price Thomas Body
Wells, ss.
Prisoners remaining in Custody, etc.
EDward Hamond, alias Hamwood John Willey Richard Adams James Norman Robert Daw
William Russell George Bisse Samuel Davison William Aplin
Prisoners remaining in Custody for want of Evidence.
WIlliam Phippett Richard Bray Thomas Bishopp Alexander Pinney Richard Millward
James Russell William Eades
Wells, ss.
Prisoners convict for Misdemeanors, fined and imprisoned, and who had corporal
Punishment.
Severally fined 13 s. 4 d. for speaking treasonable Words. Ordered to be
whipped at five several Market Towns. JAmes Oasyn, William Williams, Thomas
Austey, Samuel Vyney, Leonard Gosse,
Henry Gatchell, for the like fined 100 l.
Witnesses for the King left in Custody.
WIlliam Wiltshire David Tole John Keeping Christopher Rossiter William Pussey
Thomas Dare Simon Long John Jones Thomas Sexton, alias Randall Furnivall Joseph
Strong Samuel Storey John Smith William Williams Richard Tanner
Prisoners bound each for the other, for their Appearances at the next Assizes,
and for the good Behavior in 100 l. each.
WIlliam Okey John Rogers Thomas Wilkins Samuel Trent Francis Malo Roger Gray
Henry Woodford James Norvile John Blackley Walter Fidoe David Cole Abraham King
Stephen Hellyer Ralph Smith Robert Portlock William Dymock John Brewer John
Cole Thomas Far James Westcott Anthony Manning John Townsend Thomas Davyes
Thomas Williams William Heyward John Norman James Pownell Phillip Brown Henry
Turner John Balston William Tar William Shinler John Watts Thomas Gilling
Matthew Tucker Benjamin Short John Thompson John Patten William White Richard
Badge Andrew Tapper Walter Thomas, alias Bisse James Rowsell Henry Bedlar
Richard Cornelius Roger Baker Peter Brewer John Swinney John Moor Arthur Lowdam
John Melldrome Robert Raw Edward Bishopp Daniel Wooton John Pucker Robert
Seagard Thomas Carpenter Henry Virgin Rowland Oakely James Cole Thomas Satchell
Jeoffry Castland Thomas Tailor David Tucker Thomas Ashford John Tailor Henry
Satchell William Cannaday Francis Phippen Francis Jennings Arthur Jeoffrys
Richard Skinner William Old William Cole John Mitchell Robert Wantsey Thomas
Forster William Griffen William Bragg John Bowring John York Thomas Ollvard
John Marks Edward Baker John Spender William Oustler Nicholas Forward Peter
White James Pitts William Comb Joseph Simkins William Channing Mathias
Channing William Saunders John Patten John Rowsell Thomas Brown Jedediah Hurd
William Pryor Francis Hellier William Lush John Hewlett Richard Steer
Christopher Osmond John Shinler Thomas Jolliffe Richard Tanner John Mead
Lancellot Cox James Thomas Stephen Thompson Henry Buckle Samuel Pack Richard
Smithyer Richard Walters William Walters Jeoffrey Phippet John Doeling Samuel
Dwelley George Parsons Thomas Ellis John Andrews Nathaniel Lockyer Edward
Craydon Thomas Busterell Robert Sands William Hewlett Andrew Ousely John Sheire
Samuel Prowse Nicholas Gandry Richard Gibbs Samuel Sheppard Robert Game John
Lyde William Raymond George Raymond Thomas Lockyer George Smith William Cossens
(...) Account of what was done against those in Scotland, who took Arms there
under the Earl of Argyle, etc. and against the Protestants in Ireland, by the
late King James, and his Deputy Tyrconnel.
IT is proper in the next Place, to give a brief Account how the Scots, who
took Arms in their own Country against the Tyranny of King Charles and King
James II. were treated. There were several Insurrections there, occasioned by
the barbarous Oppression of the Presbyterians, for not conforming to the
Tyranny in Church and State then set up, which they protested they could not in
Conscience do, since that Government was not only contrary to the Fundamental
Laws of the Nation, but to their Principles, and the solemn Obligations which
the King and Kingdom lay under by Oaths against it; and that it was attended by
such an unlimited Prerogative given the King by a packed Parliament, as
empowered him by Virtue of his Supremacy, which they called an inherent Right
to the Crown, ' That he and his Successors might settle, enact, and emit such
Constitutions, Acts, and Orders, concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same, and concerning
all Ecclesiastical Meetings, and Matters to be proposed and determined therein,
as they in their Royal Wisdom should think fit.' These are the very Words of
the first Act of the 2d Sessions of the first Parliament of Charles II. and of
the first Act of the second Parliament.

To force a Conformity to this sort of Government in Church and State, which
King Charles II. had solemnly abjured at his taking the Crown of Scotland upon
him, High Commission Courts were not only set up by the Prerogative, which
acted contrary to Law, but Soldiers were employed to oppress, pillage, harrass,
imprison, fine, and confine, beat and bind like Beasts, those who refused it.
Sir James Turner, a bloody and atheistical Man, commanded in three such
Expeditions against the Western Shires of Scotland, in 1663, 1665, and 1666.
where he and his Troops exacted from the poor People of Galloway and Nithsdale,
for their Nonconformity, betwixt 4 and 5000 l. Sterling, besides the great
Charge they were at by giving free Quarters, and Money, to the Soldiers, to
forbear the Barbarities which they practiced on their Persons and Families.
There was also levied by way of Fine, without any Crime alleged, from 132
Gentlemen, and others, near 7000 l. Sterling, besides free Quarters to the
Soldiers sent to levy it, which amounted to as much; and notwithstanding the
Money which was paid to those barbarous Troops to make them forbear Cruelties,
it was their common Custom to destroy all the Provisions and Substance of those
they quartered upon, and to fill the Bellies of their Servants and Dogs, before
they would suffer the poor Families to eat any of their own Provisions; nor did
they behave themselves thus only to those who did not conform, but to many
Gentlemen and others who did; it being plainly the Design of the Court to ruin
the West of Scotland; because that Part of the Kingdom had always, from the
Time of the Reformation, signalized their Zeal for their Religion and Liberty.
It was usual with them after they had ruined the Tenants to quarter upon their
Landlords; and thus they harrass'd and plundered that Part of the Country three
Times successively in the Years abovementioned: And besides the Money thus
exacted, they forced People to give Bonds for such other Sums as they thought
fit, by which they beggared abundance of Families. And when any complained to
the commanding Officer of those Inhumanities, they were commonly beaten, or
otherwise barbarously treated. The Soldiers did likewise behave themselves so
atheistically, that they publicly mocked at all Religion, uttered most
horrible Curses and Oaths, ravished Women, and in short, their Behavior was
more like Savages and Pagans than civilized Men and Christians: and after they
had thus ruined the Country, they extorted Certificates from the People, That
they had been civilly used, on purpose to prevent their making Application to
the Government for Redress; and when they had nothing left to pay what the
Soldiers demanded, they were barbarously used in their Persons, and carried to
Prisons, tied Hand and Foot, like Beasts. After the Country had been 7 Months
thus oppressed in Sir James's third Expedition, three Countrymen met four of
his Soldiers carrying a poor old Man, one of their Neighbors, in that Manner
to Dumfries; they begged the Soldiers to unty him, who, instead of doing it,
attacked the Countrymen with their Swords, but were worsted in the Scuffle, one
of them wounded, and the other three threw down their Arms. This encouraged
these Men, with some others, to attack 10 or 12 more of the Soldiers, who were
in like manner oppressing the People in that same Parish, and these they also
disarmed, having killed one that made an obstinate Resistance. The
Neighborhood knowing that Sir James would take a terrible Revenge upon them,
about 54 of them took Horse, and with a few Footmen marched to Dumfries, where
they took Sir James, and disarmed his Men. Having done this, they marched to
the West, where the People were oppressed in the like Manner, and being joined
by others, came at last to be 7 or 800. Upon this Lieutenant General Dalzeel
was ordered to march against them with the regular Troops, they were declared
Rebels, and ordered to lay down their Arms within 24 Hours after the
Proclamation was published, without the least Assurance of Pardon, and all the
Subjects were ordered to assist the General, on pain of Rebellion. This poor
Handful being thus made desperate, they marched within two Miles of Edinburgh,
and a Cessation was agreed between the General and them for one Night, until
their Grievances and Petition might be presented by him to the Council. This
made them secure, and the General, contrary to Agreement, surpised them just
at the Time when his Messenger was delivering their Petition to the Council.
They made a stout Resistance, and repulsed his advanced Troops three Times, but
being vastly inferior in Number, and fatigued with long Marches, Hunger, Rain
and Cold, they were defeated on the 28th of November, 1666. 40 of 'em killed,
and above 130 of them taken, many of whom were executed with the greatest
Cruelty and Barbarity, and some of them tortured by an Engine called a Boot, to
make them discover others, and such as had given them any Assistance or Relief.
Besides, it was made Treason for any one to harbor such of them as had
escaped. This was the first Insurrection in Scotland, known by the Name of
Pentland-Hills, which was the Place where they fought.

These Barbarities served only to incense the Country, and to make the People
of the Western Shires more averse to Conformity than before. This occasioned
many severe Laws to force them to a Compliance, which not having the designed
Effect, an Army of barbarous Highlanders was twice brought down upon the
Country, which they plunder's, treated the People with all sort of Inhumanity,
garrisoned Gentlemen's Houses contrary to Law, imposed Bonds and Oaths upon the
People without Authority of Parliament, and committed such other Outrages, as
if they had been in an Enemies Country. But all this not prevailing with the
People to conform, or to abstain from Worship in the Fields, when they could
not do it in Houses, Troops were employed to attack the People wherever they
were assembled, which obliged them frequently to stand on their Defense, and
all that did so being made Guilty of Death, this brought on the second
Insurrection at Bothwell-bridge, in 1679. where the poor oppressed People being
vastly out-number'd by the King's Army, under the Command of the Duke of
Monmouth, about 300 of 'em, after a stout Resistance, were killed, the rest put
to flight, and above 1000 taken, and carried to Edinburgh, where they were a
long time kept in an open Churchyard without any Shelter from Cold or Rain;
several Ministers and others were executed, and about 1700 taken there, and at
other Places before, sold for Slaves to America, and other Parts, 200 of which
were cast away near Orkney, through the Barbarity of the Captain of the Ship, who
ordered them to be kept under Hatches, when his Ship struck, otherwise they
might have escaped as well as he, and his Men, and about 50 others of their
Fellow Prisoners.

The Country was made a perfect Scene of Horror and Cruelty, by the Pursuits
which were made after those who escaped from the Field, and the proscribing, or
putting to Death such as were found to give them any Relief, though their
nearest Relations. And Acts were made to make it Death for any Presbyterian
Ministers to preach, or People to hear them, in House or Field.

These barbarous Oppressions made a Part of the People so mad, that some of
them thought themselves absolved from giving any further Obedience to King
Charles II. or those commissioned under him; and therefore took upon them to
declare, That he had forfeited his Crown by his Perjury and Tyranny, and that
they would no more own him as their Sovereign. Though this was known to be
contrary to the declared Principles of the Presbyterians, and perfectly
inconsistent with what they held themselves to be obliged to by the Solemn
League and Covenant, which bound them to maintain the King's just Prerogative,
and the Authority of Parliaments, from whom their Kings derived their
Authority, and without whose Consent they held they could not be deprived of
it; yet the Practice of those few desperate Men was made a Handle to oppress
all the Presbyterians, and to impose new Oaths and Bonds upon them. In the mean
time that Handful of Men who had thus thrown off the King's Authority, were
pursued from Place to Place, and killed without any Trial, wherever they were
found; and the Soldiers had an illegal Power given them by the Council to
tender a Bond or Oath, to all that they pleased, to disown the Declaration of
those Men; and if they refused it, they were presently to kill them; and thus
they murdered, without any Trial, about 78 People, in several Parts of the
Country, and in such a barbarous Manner, that they would not allow those poor
People Time to recommend themselves to God, before they were shot or stabbed,
but answered them with this atheistical Sarcasm, What the Devil have you been
doing so many Years? Have Not you had Time enough to pray in the Caves and
Mountains!

The murmuring Faction cannot pretend that the present Rebels were forced by
any such Extremities as these, to take Arms, nor have they any Ground to
complain of any such Inquisitorlike Proceedings against their Friends; and it is
well for them it is so; otherwise there had been such a Havoc long ever now
among the HighChurch Party, that few or none of them would have been left to
belch out Lies and Treason every Day against the Government.

I come now to the last Insurrection in Scotland, before the Revolution, which
was that under the Earl of Argyle, already mentioned: The Causes of it are to
be seen in his Declaration, as above, so that there is little more to be said of
it, but that his Lordship not being able to raise above 2000 Men, because of
the Precautions which the Government had taken against him upon the early
Notice they had of his Design, he only wandered about for 6 or 7 Weeks, in the
Western Highlands, where being blocked up by the King's Men of War, and
straightened for Provisions, abundance of his Men deserted; and coming at last
toward Dumbarton and Glasgow, he was intercepted by a numerous Army; and his
Men perceiving that the Enemy was ten times their Number, and being also
wearied out with long Marches, want of Provisions, and Sleep, most of them
withdrew in the Night, and the few that kept together, were, after some
Skirmishes with a Party of the Enemy, whom they defeated, obliged likewise to
disperse; the Earl himself, with a few more, were taken, and executed at
Edinburgh, as about 20 of his Men were at his Seat at Innerary in the
Highlands; and many others taken up afterward on Suspicion, or otherwise, were
banished to America.

It Is observable, That the Earl was not executed upon the Account of this
Rebellion; but because of an Explanation which he offered of the Test that had
been made, for all those in Places of Power and Trust, when the Parliament of
Scotland settled the Succession upon the Duke of York: This was so much the
more extraordinary, that several of the Episcopal Party had been allowed to
take it with such Explanations, because it was contradictory in it self, and
were never called in question for it: But the Reason why the Earl was picked
out to be a Sacrifice, was the Greatness of his Quality and Power, which the
Court knew would make it difficult for them to (...) their P^^ish and
Tyrannical Designs (...) Scotland, so long as a person of his Weight and
Interest in the ^^^^try was left in being.

After his (...), James II. thought he might do what (...) would in Scotland:
He persecuted the Presbyterians with the Height of Barbarity, and overturned
the Constitution by an arbitrary Proclamation, Feb. 12. 168^. wherein he
granted an unlimited Toleration by his Sovereign Authority, Prerog^tive Royal,
and Absolute Power, which he alleged all his Subjects ought to obey without
Reserve: This, with other things mentioned in the (...) Declaration of Rights,
brought on the Revolution there, as appears by the 13th Act of their
Convention, Apr. 11. 1689, wherein they charge him with having invaded the
Fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom; That he altered it from a legal
limited Monarchy to an arbitrary despotick Power; and in a public
Proclamation asserted an absolute Power to annul all the Laws, and particularly
arraigned those which established the Protestant Religion.

I come next to take a View of King James II's Administration in Ireland. Soon
after his Accession to the British Throne, he sent that bigoted Papist and
Tyrant, the Earl of Tyrconnel, to be Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, at the
Request of the Popish Clergy there, who, in their letter to the King, of July,
1625. said, ' That Tyrconnel was the Person that did first espouse, and chiefly
maintain their Cause for the last 25 Years, and was the only Man on whose
Fortitude and Popularity they durst with Cheerfulness own their Lovalty, and
assert his Majesty's interest: Therefore they prayed, That his Majesty would be
pleased to lodge his Authority in his Hands, to the Terror of the Faction,
meaning the Protestants.'

Tyrconnel fully answered their Expectations, and in a little Time cashiered
the Protestant Army in Ireland, which consisted of about 7000 Men, and formed
another of Papists, most of whom were the Descendants, or near Relations of
those that had been attainted for the Rebellion and Massacre in 1641, or had
signalized themselves by notorious Villainies, and implacable Hatred to the
English, and Protestant Interest in that Nation.

In the next Place he set up Judges there, who were engaged by Interest and
Inclination to destroy the Protestant Religion; and one of them, called Rice, a
prosligate Papist, who was advanced to be Lord Chief Baron, had the Impudence
to declare, he would draw a Coach and six Horses through the Act of Settlement,
which was the Chief Security the Protestants had in that Kingdom. Sir Alexander
Fitton, who had been convicted of Forgery at Westminster Hall, and Chester, and
fined for it by the Lords in Parliament, was taken out of Goal, and made Lord
High Chancellor of Ireland, because he turned Papist; and was so zealous to
show himself a true Convert, that he several times declared with the Height of
Impudence from the Bench, That the Irish Protestants were all Rogues, and that
there was not one among 40000 of 'em, but was a Traitor, Rebel and Villain.

The Privy Council in Ireland was composed of a Majority of Papisis; so that
the Protestants named as Members of it, declined to act; because they were
sensible that they could do their Religion and the English Interest no manner
of Service.

There wanted nothing else but to model a House of Commons to the Designs of
the Court, and in order to that the Charters of all Corporations were seized by
Quo Warranto's, without any Cause or Shadow of Law; so that the Magistracies of
Corporations were filled up with Papists, and Men of desperate, or no Fortunes;
and the new Charters had a Clause by which the chief Governor was empowered to
turn out and put in whom he pleased, without showing a Reason.

The Protestant Clergy were oppressed by Tyrconnel, and the Popish Priests did
openly demand the Tithes belonging to them, and forbad their People to pay the
Tithes to the Protestant Incumbents, on Pain of Damnation. This passed
afterward into an Act, by which the Papists were to pay their Tithes only to
their own Priests; and afterward, as any Protestant Bishop or Clergyman died,
Papists were put into their Places by the King's Privy Signet, or Sign Manual.

In the next Place Tyrconnel stopped the Salaries of the University of Dublin,
because they would not, contrary to the Laws and their Oaths, admit a vicious
ignorant Papist into a vacant Fellowship; and when King James arrived there
after the Revolution, the Protestant Vice President, Fellows and Scholars, were
all turned out, their Furniture, Library, Communion Plate, and every thing
belonging to the College was taken away, the House made a Garrison, and their
Chambers made Prisons for Protestants; though King James had promised to preserve
their Liberties and Properties, and rather augment than diminish the Privileges
which had been granted them by his Predecessors. At last most of the Churches
in and about Dublin, were seized on by the Government, and an Order was issued,
forbidding more than 5 Protestants to meet, under Pain of Death, so that all
religious Assemblies through the whole Kingdom, were prohibited to Protestants.

To complete their Ruin, an Act of Attainder was passed in Parliament, in order
to which, every Member of the House of Commons returned the Names of all such
Protestant Gentlemen as lived near them, or in the County or Borough for which
he served; or if he was a Stranger to any of them, he sent to the Country for
Information about them. When the Bill was presented to the King for his Assent,
the Speaker told him, That many were attainted in that Act upon such Evidence
as satisfied the House, and the rest upon Common Fame.

In this Act, no fewer were attainted than two Archbishops, one Duke, 17 Earls,
7 Countesses, 28 Viscounts, 2 Viscountesses, 7 Bishops, 18 Barons, 33 Baronets,
51 Knights, 83 Clergymen, 2182 Esquires and Gentlemen, and all of 'em unheard,
declared and adjudged Traitors, convicted and attainted of High Treason, and
adjudged to suffer the Pains of Death and Forseiture. The famous Proscription
of Rome during the last Triumvirate, came not up in some Respects to the Horror
of this; for there were condemned in this little Kingdom more than double the
Number that were proscribed through the vast Bounds of the Roman Empire. And to
make this of Ireland yet the more terrible, and to put the Persons attainted
out of a Possibility of escaping, the Act it self was concealed, and no
Protestant allowed a Copy of it, till four Months after it was past: Whereas in
that of Rome, the Names of the Persons proscribed were affixed upon all the
public Places of the City, and the very Day the Proscription was concerted;
and thereby Opportunity was given to many of the noblest Families in Rome, to
preserve themselves by a speedy Flight for better Times.

The Conclusion.
LET our Murmerers speak from their Consciences, if they have any: Can the most
abandoned of them have the Face to say, That there is not a very great
Difference betwixt the Cause of those who took Arms against Tyranny and Popery
in the three Nations, during the Reigns of King Charles and King James II. and
of such as have taken Arms to set up an Impostor, and to bring in Tyranny and
Popery in the Reign of King G E O R G E. Is there not a very great Difference
betwixt those who ventured their Lives and Fortunes to save Us from the Slavery
of France, and Idolatry of Rome, and those who would have delivered us up in
Chains to both.

And as the Difference betwixt the Causes is remarkable, the Difference betwixt
the Conduct of the Parties is no less so. Can Envy and Malice charge the Whigs
in those Reigns to have joined with Papists in pulling down Places of
Protestant Worship, whilst Mass-Houses passed untouched? Can they be charged to
have joined with Papists to insult Prince and Parliament, in order to interrupt
the Course of Justice against an Incendiary, for preaching Sedition and
Treason? Can they be charged with a Rebellion to screen a Ministry from
Justice, who had betrayed their Religion, their Liberty, their Country, their
Trade, their Sovereign, and all Europe, into the Hands of France? Can they be
charged with taking Arms for Ministers who had persuaded their Sovereign to
break Oaths and Leagues, to betray our Allies in Council and Cam^ and to utter
the grossest Contradictions and ^alshoods from the Throne? Can they be charged
with concurring in a Design to defeat a Protestant Succession, and set a Papist
on the Throne by execrable Tricks and Perjuries, and particularly by taking
Oaths to the Government, on purpose to undermine it. Or can they be charged,
when in Arms, with burning and plundering their Native Country, or to have
joined with Domestic and Foreign Papists, to set up a Popish Pretender, and
murder and dethrone a Protestant King, and his whole Royal Family.

The Faction, though Case-harden'd to the greatest Degree, cannot charge such
Things upon those who took Arms against the Male-Administrations of King
Charles II. and King James II.

Then, as to the Difference betwixt the Treatment of those who took Arms
against those Princes, and our present Rebels, can the Faction have the
Impudence to say, That our Generals have treated the present Rebels, as Kirk
did those who took Arms under the Duke of Monmouth, when he ordered 90 of the
poor wounded Prisoners to be immediately hanged at Taunton, without allowing
their poor Wives and Children to speak to them, and at the same time made his
Pipes to play, his Drums to beat, and his Trumpets to found, that the People
might not hear what they said at the Place of Execution; after which he ordered
their Quarters to be boiled in Pitch, and set up in several Parts of the Town;
for which, when he was afterward questioned, he pleaded the Orders of the King
and his General.

Can they say that our Judges have hectored Juries to bring in any of the
Rebels Guilty, after they had three times acquitted them: as Jefferies did in
the Case of the Lady Lisle?

Can they say that our Judges have trapanned any of the Rebels to confess
themselves Guilty, in Hopes of Pardon, as Jefferies did, and then hang them up
afterward by Scores, without allowing them Time to prepare for Death?

Can they say that our Judges have extorted any Sums from the Rebels for
procuring them Pardons, or much less that they have extorted 14500 l. from any
Rebel of Note for a Pardon, as he did in order to purchase himself an Estate?

Can they say that our Judges have condemned above 500 Persons upon very
slight, or no Evidence, as he did at Taunton and Wells, where above 239 were
executed, and their Quarters dispersed in the principal Places and Roads of the
Country?

Can they say that our Judges have prosecuted Girls of 8 or 9 Years old for
High Treason, because they presented a few Colors to the Rebels, as Jefferies
did, and forced their Parents to pay as much for their Pardon as would have
made them handsome Fortunes?

Let them look upon the Lists above, and compare them with the Lists of those
tried lately at Liverpoole, and published in the Flying-Post of Feb. 14. and
then tell us, whether the Clemency of King James II. or that of King GEORGE is
the greatest.

Let them turn their Eyes to the abovementioned Accounts of the Proceedings
against the Rebels in Scotland, in the Reigns of the two Brothers, and see if
they can find such Barbarities now as were practiced there at that Time.

Have any of the present Rebels been tortured with Boots and Thumbkins to make
them discover the rest, and who gave them any Relief or Encouragement?

Can they tell us of any that have been proscribed, or put to Death for
entertaining the present Rebels, though their nearest Relations?

Let them tell us, if they can, where any of the present Rebels have been
drowned on purpose, under the Pretense of being transported to Foreign
Plantations.

Can they give us any Instances that the present Rebels have been examined upon
captious Questions by Privy-Councils and Judges, and hanged for not answering
such Questions, as was practiced in Scotland?

Can they tell us of any Parties of Soldiers sent out to murder those whom they
met in the Fields and Roads, that would not disown the Pretender's Declaration
or Title. And let them tell us if they can, whether Innkeepers and Hostlers
are empowered to examine their Guests and Travelers upon such Questions; and
of Magistrates being empowered to hang such Persons immediately, as had not
Certificates of their having disowned the Pretender and his Title, or would not
do it when brought before them?

Have the present Rebels, taken in the Act, been exposed without Cover to the
Rigor of the Season by Hundreds together, and left to strave, as those that
were taken at Bothwell-Bridge in Scotland?

Let them next take a Tour to Ireland, and find out Instances there, where the
Pretender's Friends have been attainted in Parliament upon Common Fame, and the
Act concealed that they might have no Opportunity to make their Escape.

A great deal more might be said of the Inhuman and Barbarous Proceedings of
those Reigns; but this is more than enough to convict our Murmurers of
Falsehood, who cry out against the gentle Methods of Justice now made use of to
punish such as have raised the most unnatural and ill-grounded Rebellion that
was ever heard of upon Earth.

I shall conclude with one Rebuke to the Jacobite Females, who take upon them
to make Treason their ordinary Tattle, that it is well for them that they don't
live under such an Administration, as that of Charles and James II. in
Scotland, when poor Country Girls were hanged without Mercy, for saying that
Charles had forfeited his Title to the Crown by breaking the Original Contract,
or Covenant, on which he took it, and that James being a professed Papist, had
no Right to the Crown, because it was coutrary to the Fundamental Laws of the
Nation, and particularly that of King James VI. which obliged al^ their Princes
to swear at their Coronation that they were Protestants, would maintain that
Religion, as then established, and abolish all false Religion, Idolatry, and
Heresy. I would also advise those Jacobite Ladies who make so bold with the
present Government at their Tea-Tables, etc. and discover so much Inclination
to favor the Rebels, to remember what the Lady Lisle, and Mrs. Gaunt suffered,
for Crimes of a far less Nature in the Eye of the Law, as it then stood, or
rather was wrested.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Andrew Bell, in Cornhill; and J. Baker in Paternoster Row.
THE Athenian Oracle; or, A collection of all the most valuable Questions and
Answers in the Old Athenian Mercuries, intermixed with many Cases in Divinity,
History, Poetry, Philosophy, Mathematics, etc. in 4 Volumes. Price 1 l. 4 s.
The Arabian Nights Entertainments, consisting of 1001 Stories told by the
Sultaness of the Indies, to divert the Sultan from the Execution of a bloody
Vow he had made to marry a Lady every Day, and have her cut off next Morning,
to avenge himself of the Disloyalty of his first Sultaness, etc. in 8 Volumes.
Price II s. The Diseases of Women with Child, and in Childbed: As also, The
best Means of helping them in Natural and Unnatural Labors: With fit Remedies
for the several Indispositions of new born Babes. To which is prefixed an exact
Description of the Parts of Generation in Women. A Work much more perfect than
any now extant, and very necessary for all, especially Midwives, and Men
practicing that Art. The Fifth Edition corrected, and augmented with several
new Figures, and with the Description of an excellent Instrument to bring a
Child that comes right; all correctly engraven in Copper. Written in French by
Francis Mauriceau, and translated by Hugh Chamberlen, M. D. The History of the
Wars of his present Majesty Charles XII. King of Sweeden, from his first
landing in Denmark to his Return from Turkey to Pomerania, by a Scots Gentleman
in the Sweeds Service. Price 5 s. A Description of the Western Islands of
Scotland; containing A full Account of their Situation, Extent, Soil, Product,
Harbors, Bays, Tides, Anchoring-places, and Fisheries. The Ancient and Modern
Government, Religion, and Customs of the Inhabitants; particularly of their
Druids, Heathen Temples, Monasteries, Churches, Chapels, Antiquities,
Monuments, Forts, Caves, and other Curiosities of Art and Nature: Of their
Admirable and Expeditious Way of Curing most Diseases by Simples of their own
Product. A particular Account of the Second Sight, or Faculty of foreseeing
Things to come, by way of Vision, so common among them. A brief Hint of Methods
to improve Trade in that Country, both by Sea and Land. With a New Map of the
whole, describing the Harbors, Anchoring Places, and dangerous Rocks, for the
Benefit of Sailors. To which is added, A brief Description of the Isles of
Orkney and Schetland. By M. Martin, Gent. The Second Edition, very much
corrected. Price 6. s. Remarks on the Speeches of William Paul, Clerk, and John
Hall, of Otterburn, Esquire executed at Tyburn for Rebellion, the 13th of July,
1716. In which the Government and Administration both in Church and State, as
founded upon the Revolution, are vindicated from the Treasonable Reflections and
false Aspersions thrown upon them in those Speeches, which are inserted at
length, as they were delivered to the Sheriffs. Price 6 d. Matter of Fact,
being a short but true Account of the Birth, Education, and Ordination, of
William Paul, Clergyman, containing several Original Letters concerning his
Trial and Condemnation; with his Petition to his Majesty King GEORGE, and the
Lord Chief Justice, for his Life. By one that knew him before and at the Time
of his Confinement in Newgate. With an Appendix. The Second Edition. Price 4 d.

