THE CHAPLET.

A Musical Entertainment.

As it is Performed by His MAJESTY's Company of Comedians AT THE Theater Royal
in Drury Lane.

The MUSIC Composed by Dr. BOYCE.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by M. Cooper in Paternoster Row, and J. Clark at
the Bible in Drury Lane near Long-Acre.

MDCCLIII. [Price Six Pence.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
DAMON, Mr. Beard. PALAEMON, Master Mattocks. LAURA, Miss Norris. PASTORA, Mrs.
Clive.
SCENE A GROVE.

THE CHAPLET. A Musical Entertainment.
PART I.
SCENE I.
DAMON, LAURA. LAURA. UNgrateful Damon! Is it come to this?
Are these the happy Scenes of promised Bliss?
Never hope, vain Laura, future Peace to prove;
Content never harbors with neglected Love.

DAMON. Consider, Fair, the ever-restless Power
Shifts with the Breeze, and changes with the Hour:
Above Restraint he scorns a fixed Abode,
And on his silken Plumes flies forth the rambling God.
AIR.
You say at your Feet that I wept in Despair,
And vowed that no Angel was ever so fair;
How could you believe all the Nonsense I spoke?
What know we of Angels -- I meant it in joke.
I next stand indicted for swearing to love,
And nothing but Death should my Passion remove;
I have liked you a Twelvemonth, a Calendar Year,
And not yet contented -- have Conscience, my Dear.
RECITATIVE.
To Day Damaetas gave a rural Treat,
And I once more my chosen Friends must meet.
Farewell, sweet Damsel, and remember this,
Dull Repetition deadens all our Bliss. Exit.

SCENE II.
LAURA. Where baleful Cypress forms a gloomy Shade,
And yelling Specter haunt the dreary Glade;
Unknown to all, my lonesome Steps I Will bend;
There weep my Sufferings, and my Fate attend.
AIR.
Vain is every fond Endeavor,
To resist the tender Dart;
For Examples move us never,
We must feel to know the Smart.
When the Shepherd swears he is dying,
And our Beauties sets to view;
Vanity her Aid supplying,
Bids us think it is all our Due.
Softer than the vernal Breezes,
Is the mild, deceitful Strain;
Frowning Truth our Sex displeases,
Flattery never sues in vain.
Soon, too soon, the happy Lover
Does our tenderest Hopes deceive;
Man was formed to be a Rover,
Foolish Woman to believe. Exit.

SCENE III.
DAMON and several Shepherds drinking DAMON. In Mirth and Pastime every Hour
employ,
Lost is the Day that is not spent in Joy;
Here strew your Roses, here your Chaplets bring,
And listen, Neighbors, to the Truths I sing.
AIR.
Push about the brisk Bowl, 'twill enliven the Heart;
While thus we sit round on the Grass,
The Lover who talks of his Sufferings and Smart,
Deserves to be reckoned an Ass.
The Wretch who sits watching his ill-gotten Pelf,
And wishes to add to the Mass;
Whatever the Curmudgeon may think of himself,
Deserves to be reckoned an Ass.
The Beau, who so smart with his well-powder'd Hair,
An Angel beholds in his Glass,
And thinks with Grimace to subdue all the Fair,
May justly be reckoned an Ass.
The Merchant from Climate to Climate will roam,
Of Croesus the Wealth to surpass;
And often while he is wandering, my Lady at home
Claps the Horns of an Ox on an Ass.
The Lawyer so grave when he puts in his Plea,
With Forehead well covered with Brass;
Though he talk to no purpose he pockets your Fee;
There you, my good Friend, are the Ass.
The formal Physician, who knows every Ill,
Shall last be produced in this Class;
The sick Man awhile may confide in his Skill,
But Death proves the Doctor an Ass.
Then let us Companions be jovial and gay,
By turns take the Bottle and Lass;
For he who his Pleasures puts off for a Day,
Deserves to be reckoned an Ass. Exeunt.

SCENE IV.
PASTORA, PALAEMON. PALAEMON. Indeed, Pastora, spite of all you say,
I must this very Instant haste away;
You think my Flame's extinguished quite, I know;
And other Objects strike me -- may be so.

PASTORA. Perfidious Boy! I know it is Sylvia's Charms
That tear Palaemon from these circling Arms;
But soon perhaps some other wiser Youth,
May learn to set due Value on my Truth.

PALAEMON. Whoever the Youth may be, who claims my Part,
He has my full Consent with all my Heart.
AIR.
Farewell, my Pastora, no longer your Swain,
Quite sick of his Bondage, can suffer his Chain:
Nay arm not your Brow with such haughty Disdain,
My Heart leaps with Joy to be free once again.
Sing tol derol.
I Will live like the Birds, those sweet Tenants of May,
Who always are sportful, who always are gay:
How sweetly their Sonnets they carol all Day;
Their Love is but Frolic, their Courtship but Play.
Sing tol derol.
If struck by a Beauty they never saw before,
In chirping soft Notes they her Pity implore;
She yields to Entreaty; and when the Fit's over,
It Is an Hundred to Ten that they never meet more.
Sing tol derol. Exit.

PASTORA. Insulting Boy! I Will tear him from my Mind;
Ah! would my Fortune could a Husband find:
And just in time young Damon comes this Way,
A handsome Youth he is, and rich they say.

SCENE V.
DAMON, PASTORA. DAMON. Vouchsafe, sweet Maid, to hear a wretched Swain,
Who, lost in Wonder, hugs the pleasing Chain;
For you in Sighs I hail the rising Day;
To you at Eve I sing the lovesick ^ay;
Then take, my Love, my Homage as your Due.
The Devil's in her if all this will not do. Aside.
AIR.
DAMON. Beauteous Maid, reward my Passion;
Crown with Hopes my fierce Desire,

SHE. Soon to yield is not the Fashion,
Maids some Courtship should require.

HE. Tedious Courtship damps all Pleasure,
By this melting Kiss I swear.

SHE. Now you're rude beyond all Measure;
Kiss again, Sir, if you dare.

HE. Where yon Bank the Willows cover,
We will shun the Heat of Day:

SHE. You're in too much haste, young Lover,
For the Priest must lead the Way.

HE. We can do without him better,
None but Fools would marry now;
Priests the freeborn Mind would fetter,
We will meet without a Vow.


PASTORA. Away, false Man, no more your Tale I Will hear:
The black Attempt offends my rigid Ear:
The Joys I taste shall be without a Crime;
I Will never be fooled by Man -- a second Time. Aside.

DAMON. If so, farewell, I Will other Regions try;
My generous Mind disdains the slavish Tie;
Lovers, like Warriors, often Repulses meet;
Yet both undaunted their Attacks repeat.
AIR.
HE. From Flower to Flower, his Joy to change,
Flits yonder wanton Be;
From Fair to Fair thus will I range,
And I Will be ever free.

SHE. Yon little Birds attentive view,
That hop from Tree to Tree;
I Will copy them, I Will copy you,
For I Will be ever free.

HE. While Tempests shake the nodding Grove,
And plough the foaming Sea;
While Hawks pursue the flying Dove,
So long will I be free.

SHE. 'Till on the Bush the Lily grows,
'Till Flocks forsake the Lea,
'Till from the Rock bursts forth the Rose,
You Will find me blithe and free.

BOTH. Then let us divide to East and West,
Since we shall never agree;
And try who keeps their Promise best,
And who is the longest free. Exeunt.


THE CHAPLET. A Musical Entertainment.
PART II.
SCENE I.
LAURA. AIR.
WHAT Medicine can soften the Bosom's keen Smart?
What Lethe can banish the Pain?
What Cure can be met with to sooth the fond Heart,
That Is broke by a faithless young Swain!
In hopes to forget him how vainly I try,
The Sports of the Wake, and the Green;
When Colin is dancing, I say with a Sigh,
'Twas here first my Damon was seen.
When to the pale Moon the soft Nightingales moan
In Accents so piercing and clear;
You sing not so sweetly, I cry with a Groan,
As when my dear Damon was here.
A Garland of Willow my Temples shall shade,
And pluck it, ye Nymphs, from yon Grove;
For there to her Cost was poor Laura betrayed,
And Damon pretended to love. Exit.

SCENE II.
DAMON. A charming Consort would have filled these Arms,
Had I but yielded to Pastora's Charms;
How blessed would then have been my future Life,
Palaemon's Mistress turned to Damon's Wife;
Yet in her Coin the wily Nymph I Will pay,
And all her Schemes of Vanity betray.
Then haste to Laura, that much injured Fair,
And snatch her from the Jaws of black Despair.

Exit SCENE III.
PASTORA. AIR.
In vain I try my every Art,
Nor can I fix a single Heart,
Yet I Am not old or ugly;
Let me consult my faithful Glass,
A Face much worse than this might pass,
Methinks I look full smuggly.
Yet blessed with all these powerful Charms,
The young Palaemon fled these Arms,
That wild unthinking Rover;
Hope, silly Maids, as soon to bind
The rolling Stream, the flying Wind,
As fix a rambling Lover.
But hampered in the Marriage Noose,
In vain they struggle to get loose,
And makes a mighty Riot;
Like Madmen how they rave, and stare,
A while they shake their Chains and swear,
And then lie down in quiet.

SCENE IV.
To her DAMON. Once more I come to hear what you decree;
Yet ere you pass your Sentence, list to me.
AIR.
Declare, my pretty Maid,
Must my fond Suit Miscarry?
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play,
But hang me if I marry.
Then speak your Mind at once,
Nor let me longer tarry;
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play,
But hang me if I marry.
Though Charms and Wit assail,
The Stroke I well can parry;
I love to kiss, and toy and play,
But do not choose to marry.
Young Molly of the Dale
Makes a mere Slave of Harry;
Because when they had toy'd and kissed,
The foolish Swain would marry.
These fixed Resolves, my Dear,
I to the Grave will carry;
With you I Will toy, and kiss and play,
But hang me if I marry.
PASTORA. Dare you avow, false Youth, your lawless Flame!
Think not to tempt me to a Deed of Shame,

DAMON. Say, have you asked your never-conquer'd Heart,
How many Years it may resist the Dart?
For long Attacks the strongest Fortress waste,
And Troy stood ten Years Siege, but fell at last.

PASTORA. Vainly you hope my virtuous Heart to move;
I know your vile Intent, and scorn your Love.

DAMON Turn, turn your Eyes to yonder conscious Shade;
There a young Shepherd met a haughty Maid;
The pines that hang over yonder dusky Dell,
The babbling Pine, a Tale of Scandal tell;
And tattling Willows to the Plains proclaim,
Palaemon was the happy Lover's Name.
Ha! do you start -- Pastora, famed for Truth
And rigid Virtue, clasped a blooming Youth;
And laying every sterner Thought aside,
Indulged her Pleasure, and forgot her Pride.

PASTORA. Disastrous Fate! how could he hear the Tale?
Aside. You Have lost all Hopes, and now begin to rail.

SCENE V.
To them LAURA. AIR.
How unhappy's the Nymph
Who weeps to the Wind,
And dotes with Despair
On a Swain that is unkind.
DAMON. I see the Fates determine I shall wed;
Two Nymphs are ready to partake my Bed;
Which shall I choose? Pastora's wondrous fair,
And Laura sparkles like the Morning Star.

PASTORA, aside. Come, there are Hopes, now, Venus, lend each Grace,
And with bewitching Beauties arm my Face.

DAMON. AIR.
Three Goddesses standing together,
Thus puzzled young Paris one Day:
Can I judge the Value of either,
Where both bear so equal a Sway?
PASTORA. Consider my Wit and Condition,
Consider my Person likewise;
I never was used to petition,
But pr'ythee make use of your Eyes.

LAURA. No Merit I plead but my Passion,
'Twere needless to mention your Vow;
Reflect with a little Compassion,
On what this poor Bosom feels now.

DAMON. Some Genius direct me, or Demon,
Or else I may chance to choose wrong --
After some Pause. You're Part of the Goods of Palaemon,
I give you to whom you belong.


PASTORA, Aside. Misjudging Wretch, with Rage my Bosom glows;
Can he prefer a Nettle to a Rose?
AIR.
I know that my Person is charming,
Beyond what a Clown can discover:
That Dowdy your Senses alarming,
Proves what a blind Thing is a Lover.
I Will quit the dull Plains for the City,
Where Beauty is followed by Merit;
Your Taste, simple Damon, I pity;
Your Wit, who would wish to inherit?
Perhaps you may think you perplex me,
And that I my Anger would smother;
The Loss of one Lover cannot vex me,
My Charms will procure me another.
I never was more pleased, I assure you;
How odious they look, I cannot bear 'em:
I wish you much joy of your Fury,
My Rage into pieces could tear them. Exit.

SCENE the last.
DAMON. To thee, kind Nymph, as to offended Heaven,
I own my Faults, and sue to be forgiven;
Then, gentle Laura, clear my past Offense,
Repentance is allied to Innocence.

LAURA. Think not a rigid Judge your Faults arraigns,
My tender Bosom feels for all your Pains;
In those sad Hours, when to the secret Grove
I told my Pangs of inauspicious Love,
My only Prayer was once again to see
The lovely Author of my Misery!
Again to clasp him to my beating Breast,
The Gods have heard my Vows, and Laura's blessed.
AIR.
DAMON. Contented all Day, I will sit at your Side,
Where Poplars far stretching o'er-arch the cool Tide,
And while the clear River runs purling along,
The Thrush and the Linnet contend in their Song.

LAURA. While you are but by me no Danger I fear,
Ye Lambs rest in Safety, my Damon is near;
Bound on, ye blithe Kids, now your Gambols may please,
For my Shepherd is kind, and my Heart is at Ease.

DAMON. Ye Virgins of Britain, bright Rivals of Day,
The Wish of each Heart, and the Theme of each Lay;
Never yield to the Swain, till he make you a Wife,
For he who loves truly, will take you for Life.

LAURA. Ye Youths, who fear naught but the Frowns of the Fair,
It Is yours to relieve, not to add to their Care;
Then scorn to their Ruin Assistance to lend,
Nor betray the sweet Creatures you're born to defend.

BOTH. For their Honor and Faith be our Virgins renowned;
Nor false to his Vows one young Shepherd be found;
Be their Moments all guided by Virtue and Truth,
To preserve in their Age what they gained in their Youth.


The END.

