A VIEW Of the real Dangers of the SUCCESSION, FROM The Peace with FRANCE:
BEING A sober Enquiry into the SECURITIES proposed in the Articles of PEACE,
AND Whether they are such as the Nation ought to be satisfied with or no.

London: Printed for J. Baker, at the Black-Boy in Paternoster Row, 1713.
Price Sixpence.

A VIEW Of the real Dangers of the SUCCESSION, FROM The Peace with France, etc.
THE Protestant Succession is a Thing of that Consequence to this Nation, and
upon which the Peace and Prosperity of the People does so entirely depend, as
from its Nature and Consequences very much justifies the Anxieties of our Minds
about it; this is the reason of most of that Uneasiness in the several public
Transactions, which many People express, for fear lest that Security for this
Succession, which we have so much depended upon, should Suffer, be Lessened,
Invaded, or any way made Precarious.

These Fears have been very much increased among us, and the common People
rendered very Jealous, by the public Reports so frequent, and so warmly spread
among us, of the Increase of the Pretender's Interest; the Concert between the
Friends of the Pretender at Home, and their Confederates Abroad; particularly
the terrible Accounts of the French Power, which are now represented to us, not
only as Formidable, but as also firmly Engaged to Assist and Reinstate the
Interest, and Title, and Person, of the Pretender.

Those have been the Reasons why many People have been so warm against the
Treaty of Peace with France: And indeed, whatever may have been objected by the
Friends of the Ministry against those Fears, and Uneasinesses of the People
about the Peace, this must be owned, that if all that has been said on the
other Side be true, those Fears and Uneasinessess may be very rational. No one
can reasonably blame People for dislikeing the Peace, if that Peace is
calculated for bringing in the Pretender, and by Consequence for over-throwing
our Protestant Settlement, on which our Religion, Properties, Liberties, Trade,
and General Peace do entirely depend.

As the Discontents on one Hand have been fomented, or increased, upon those
Suppositions as abovesaid, viz. that the Peace was ill Made; that there was no
Security in it for the Protestant Succession; that the French King was
Strengthened by it to such a Degree, as to make him more Dangerous than ever;
and, that he was not discouraged by it from the Jacobite Interest; so, on the
other Hand, it was Confronted at first by little or nothing of Argument founded
upon Fact. But in general assuring the People, that it was not so; that the
Succession was confirmed; the Power of France reduced; the Pretender banished;
the Succession recognized, and the like: But nothing appearing on either Side,
the People remained fluctuating between various Uncertainties. Influenced as to
Hopes and Fears, as their Parties, their Instructers, or rather Deceivers, on
both Sides, prevailed; and as the Insinuations they offered worked upon their
Passions. In this unfix'd Posture of Men's Minds, it is no wonder if the
Generallity of the People fall into the worst; for Fear of Evil is so easily
capable to prevail above the Hope of Good, having natural Propensity always
ready to fall into the Scale with it, that it is not to be wondered at, if the
Reasoning part was overcome, and we began Universally to distrust, that the
Pretender was hid in the Secret of the Peace, and that the Treaty was but a
French Mask to deceive the People.

While the Treaty remained an Embrio, Imperfect, and Unfinished, it could not
be expected that this Uncertainty on both Sides could be Mastered, or that
Satisfactory Arguments could be given, either by one Party or other, to confirm
what they had alleged before, and gain the People one Way or other.

That Difficulty is now over; the Treaty is finished; the Peace made; the
Ratifications exchanged; and the Articles made public: It has been the
received Opinion, that the End and Design of Publications in such Cases is
allowed to be in order to general Satisfaction; and we are thereby tacitly
admitted to Reason upon, Debate, and Explain to one another the Substance and
Meaning of the Treaty, that we may know what it is we have obtained by the War;
what Confirmed, Gained, and Established by the Peace; and upon what Foundation
of Security our Liberties, Religion, and Estates stand for the time to come. To
do this Calmly, and Impartially, is the Design of this Work; and the End is the
more just, in that two Things of great Consequence are proposed to be included
in the Design of doing it. 1. If any Difficulties should offer, as private
By-standing Judgments may sometimes give hints to public Transactions, which
even the Persons acting, however Wise, might not foresee, it may not be too
late to obtain such Provision against them, or against the Consequences of
them, as may make up the Deficiencies, if any such were, in the first Part of
the Conduct; that so the Evil may be anticipated, and the Dissatisfactions
which attend such Things prevented. 2. That if there are no Difficulties, but
that all Things are provided for, sufficiently established, and the Peace,
Liberty, and Religion of the Nation secured by all the needful and due
Provision which was possible, being made for the Safety and Certainty of the
Protestant Succession, People may be made duly Sensible of it; their Doubts,
Fears, Jealousies, and Apprehensions be removed, and the real Securities of
their State placed in such a true Light, that they may no more be capable of
being made uneasy by Misrepresentations, and Suggestions of Persons wickedly
disposed.


There are diverse other good Ends and Purposes contained in a Design so useful
as this, of Discusing the Articles of Peace; which, perhaps, may, in the
following Work, be hinted at, particularly the Stating and Examining into the
real Power and Capacity of the French King to impose upon Europe, after this
Peace; the Validity of the Renunciations of the Spanish King, and the
Probability which there is, or is not before us, that these Treaties shall be
kept sacred by the French, as they are like to be by us. In brief, the great
question of the Validity of a Treaty as such with the French, may be Examined
as it respects not his Honor and Faith only, which some People, in Matters of
Peace and War, have been very free with; but as it respects the Power and
Influence the British Court may hereafter have in the World, to enforce the
Treaty, and to do the Nation Justice on the Agressors in any Contraventions
that may happen.

In doing this an entire Impartiallity is necessary, neither on the one Hand
adhering too warmly to those Opinions, who give up the Securities of this
Treaty as entirely Void, and Insignificant, with respect to the Faith and
Honor of the Parties we have Treated with; and run down as Ridiculous and
Absurd, the Notion of Britain's holding the Balance, or being able to enforce
the Performance in time to come: And on the other Hand, not altogether
supposing that there is nothing of Danger, either in the Will or Abillity of
the French Court to make unjust Improvements, and Advantages, in breach of the
Treaty hereafter.

In order to come directly to the Case, it is necessary to give the Reader an
Abstract of what Provisions are really made in the Treaty with France, for the
Security of the Protestant Succession in Great Britain; for that many who may,
perhaps, see this Tract, may not have seen the Treaty itself, or may not have
the Articles by them to refer to.

I Will take no Advantage here of what, however, I do really believe, viz. That
the Treaty is very surprising to some People; who, having been made to believe
that there was no Care taken in it for the Protestant Succession, did not
expect to find two such Articles as the Fourth and Fifth to be incerted in it,
and that they should be Worded in such a Manner. And therefore, before we
proceed to Animadvert on that Opinion, or to Examine, whether that Surprise is
just, or, whether the Objections others make against the Security of those
Articles are sufficient to continue the general Dissatisfactions, it will be
necessary to place the Articles themselves in View as follows: IV. Furthermore
for adding a greater Strength to the Peace which is restored, and to the
faithful Friendship which is never to be violated, and for cutting off all
Occasions of distrust, which might at any time arise from the established Right
and Order of the Hereditary Succession to the Crown of Great Britain, and the
Limitation thereof by the Laws of Great Britain (made and enacted in the Reigns
of the late King William the Third, of glorious Memory, and of the present
Queen) to the Issue of the abovesaid Queen, and in default thereof, to the most
Serene Princess Sophia, Dowager of Brunswick-Hanover, and her Heirs in the
Protestant Line of Hanover. That therefore the said Succession may remain safe
and secure, the most Christian King sincerely and solemnly acknowledges the
abovesaid Limitation of the Succession to the Kingdom of Great Britain, and on
the Faith and Word of a King, on the Pledge of His own and His Successors
Honor, He does declare and engage, That He accepts and approves the same, and
that His Heirs and Successors do and shall accept and approve the same for
ever. And under the same Obligation of the Word and Honor of a King, the most
Christian King promises, That NO ONE besides the Queen Her Self, and Her
Successors, according to the Series of the said Limitation, shall ever by Him,
or by His Heirs or Successors, be acknowledged, or reputed to be King or Queen
of Great Britain. And for adding more ample Credit to the said Acknowledgment
and Promises, the most Christian King does engage, That whereas the Person who,
in the Lifetime of the late King James the Second, did take upon him the Title
of Prince of Wales, and since his Decease, that of King of Great Britain, is
lately gone, of his own accord, out of the Kingdom of France, to reside in some
other place, He the aforesaid most Christian King, His Heirs and Successors,
will take all possible Care, that he shall not at any time hereafter, or under
any pretense whatsoever, return into the Kingdom of France, or any the
Dominions thereof.

V. Moreover the most Christian King promises, as well in His own name, as in
that of His Heirs and Successors, That they will at no time whatever Disturb,
or give any Molestation to the Queen of Great Britain, Her Heirs and
Successors, descended from the aforesaid Protestant Line, who possess the Crown
of Great Britain, and the Dominions belonging thereunto. Neither will the
aforesaid most Christian King, or any one of His Heirs, give at any time any
Aid, Succor, Favor, or Council, directly or indirectly, by Land, or by Sea,
in Money, Arms, Ammunition, Warlike Provision, Ships, Soldiers, Seamen, or any
other way, to any Person or Persons, whosoever they be, who for any Cause, or
under any Pretext whatsoever, should hereafter, endeavor to oppose the said
Succession, either by open War, or by fomenting Seditions, and forming
Conspiracies against such Prince or Princes who are in Possession of the Throne
of Great Britain, by Virtue of the Acts of Parliament aforementioned, or
against that Prince or Princess, to whom the Succession to the Crown of Great
Britain shall be open according to the said Acts of Parliament.



Immediately after these Two Articles follows the formal Renunciations of the
King of Spain, which, as they are not within the Compass of our present
Considerations, so it will be needless to repeat them here; neither will the
narrow Compass of this Tract admit of it. But it may not, nevertheless, be
amiss to set down a few Words of the Introduction to those Renunciations, as
they seem to lay down the Foundation upon which the whole Treaty stands, and
upon which much of the present Peace, and Security of Europe depends. The Words
are these: VI. Whereas the most destructive Flame of War, which is to be
extinguished by this Peace, arose chiefly from thence, That the Security and
Liberties of Europe could by no means bear the Union of the Kingdoms of France
and Spain under one and the same King; And whereas it has at length been
brought to pass by the Assistance of the Divine Power, upon the most earnest
Instances of Her Sacred Royal Majesty of Great Britain, and with the Consent
both of the most Christian, and of the Catholic King, that this Evil should in
all times to come be obviated, by means of Renunciations drawn in the most
effectual Form, and executed in the most solemn Manner.

But to begin with the Protestant Succession, as the main thing upon which our
Eyes are fixed in this Treaty, and without which the whole is of very little
Consequence to us: And here it is necessary to lay down a short View of the
Reasons, and Foundation of the War, which, without doubt, are to be also some
part of the Reason and Foundation of the Peace, or else the War will be no more
to be justified than the Peace, or the Peace to be thought adequate to the
Necessity of the War. The Reasons and Foundation of the War are abundantly
expressed in the several Declarations made as well by the Queen, and the late
King William, as by the several Princes and States, their Confederates; in
which, if the Safety of the Protestant Interest is laid down, as the Thing most
at Heart among the Confederates, the same ought to be also the main Design, or
at least most Regarded in the making a Peace; for no Peace can be supposed to
be effectual, but such as answers the Ends of the War; such as are squared to
the Purposes, which in the said Declarations of the War, are laid down to be
the just Reason for the Breach at the Beginning.

In the Declaration of War against France, Published in England by King William
and Queen Mary, May the 7th, 1689, among diverse other Reasons for the same, it
is expressed in these Words: And, lastly, as the said King of France has, for
diverse Years past, endeavored, by Insinuations, and Promises of Assistance, to
Overthrow the Government of England. And in the Preamble to the said
Declaration it is thus expressed: To the utmost to promote the Welfare of our
People, by preventing the Miseries which threaten them from Abroad.

In the second Declaration of War against France, entered into by Her Present
Majesty, and published May the 4th 1702. The Reasons and Causes of the War are
thus enumerated. 1. The Exorbitant Power of France, which must be reduced. 2.
The Alliances which Great Britain stands engaged in, particularly the Grand
Alliance, and that those Allies ought to have reasonable satisfaction. 3. And
especially the following Particulars, The French King has not only proceeded to
farther Violence, but has added thereunto a great Affront and Indignity to us
and our Kingdoms, in taking upon him to declare the pretended Prince of Wales
King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and has also Influenced Spain to concur
in the same Affront and Indignity, as well as in other Oppressions: Wherafore
we find our selves obliged for maintaining the public Faith, for Vindication
of the Honor of our Crown, and to prevent the Mischiefs which all Europe is
threatened with, to declare War, etc. Vide the Declaration.


These being the proposed Reasons, and the just Occasions of the present War,
there seems several Arguments to occur here, which I shall mention previous to
the ensuing Discourse. 1. If the French King's owning and receiving the Prince
of Wales as King of England, etc. was a just Ground of the War; the revoking
that Acknowledgment; disowning him as such; recognizing Her Majesty's Rightful
and Lawful Title to the Crown, and securing as much as could be required of him
that Title, and Her Majesty's quiet Possession thereof, ought to be a Capital
Consideration of the Peace; otherwise the End for which the War was begun was
not sufficiently answered; the Repose of Europe not atall obtained by the
Treaty; the Queen's Honor sufficiently repaired, or the Affront given made
amends for. 2. If the French King's bare Owning and Receiving the Pretender as
King of Great Britain, was made a sufficient Foundation of the War; though he
had then made no Effort for his Establishment, or had any way attempted to
place him on the Throne; then the said French King retracting the said Owning
and Recieving, etc. and promising, as by the Treaty of Peace, Article the 4th
he does, on the Faith and Word of a King, etc. Never to Receive him again, or
any way to Aid or Assist him, etc. in Disturbing Her Majesty, or Her Successors
in the Line of Hanover, is as much Security as could be asked of the French
King, and may be taken in full Satisfaction of that Particular, till France
makes some visible Infraction of that Engagement.


For the first of these that the King of France Revoking, etc. the
Acknowledgment he had made of the Pretender, and Recognizing, etc. the Queen
and the Succession ought to be a Capital Consideration of the Peace; there
seems to be no occasion to enter into any Debate about it; especially since the
King of France has yielded to the Justice of it in Expressions so full, and to
the utmost Extent of all that could be desired, as appears by the Fourth
Article: But it is chiefly mentioned here as matter of Wonder, that any among
us should object against the Measures taken at the Beginning, and indeed through
the Progress of this Treaty, as if the most solemn Recognitions of Her
Majesty's Title to the Crown, and of the Established Succession in the
Protestant Line of Hanover could be forgotten.

And first the Objection, as it was formerly made against the Six Proposals of
France, called (however mistakenly) Preliminaries, viz. That the French King
did not sufficiently Acknowledge the Queen's Rightful and Lawful Title to the
Crown. This I think ought to be answered in the same manner that the Germans at
this time reply to the Proposals of Peace made by France to the Emperor; where
the French King offers it as an Article, that he will acknowledge the Emperor
as such: I say, it ought to be answered in the same Manner, viz. with Contempt
signifying, That the Imperial Crown having not the least dependence upon the
Vote Suffrage, or Acknowledgment of the King of France, they can by no means
make his Acknowledging, or not Acknowledging the Election of the Person of his
Imperial Majesty to that Crown to be an Article of a Treaty; or accept of such
his Acknowledgment as any Condition of Peace. But that his bare Treating of
Peace with his Imperial Majesty, as it is necessarily attended with such
Acknowledgment, so his Imperial Majesty cannot be Treated with, under any other
Title, Figure, or Denomination: For Example; that it would be absurd to treat
with an Archduke of Austria in the Affairs and Properties of the Imperial
Crown, or with the Empire, in the Matter of the Rights and Succession of the
House of Austria.

Thus, in the Case of Her Majesty's Rightful Possession of the Regal Titles,
and Sovereign Authority of Great Britain, there was no need to Capitulate with
the French King to acknowledge Her Majesty in the usual Forms; for that the
Crowns of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Succession of Her Majesty, having
no manner of Dependence upon the French King, or the French Government, or upon
any Vote Suffrage, or Recognition, on the part of France to be made. It would
derogate from the Honor of the British Nation, from the Personal Right of Her
Majesty, and the Authority of Parliament, to accept of any such Recognition of
the Queen's Title from the King of France, as any Condition, Article, or
Preliminary to an Article, in any Treaty whatsoever. But that, in the very Act
of Treating, such Recognition is so effectually supplied and contained, that
nothing can be more complete; since the French King cannot commence any Treaty,
but in the Name of Her Majesty, and with Her Majesty in Person, as represented
by Her Plenipotentiaries, Clothed with all the Royal Style and Dignity, Titles,
and Appellations which attend the Persons of the Kings and Queens of Great
Britain; which Names, Style, Titles, Appellations, and Dignities are of mere
Course, and by the Usage and Custom of all Treaties, always expressed in the
very first Powers produced by the Ministers and Ambassadors of each Prince, or
Sovereign, so Treating; and accepted by the other; and after that, are again
necessarily repeated in the very Title and Introduction to such Treaty, or
Agreement, which shall afterward be made, and as is for Example in the several
Treaties as well of Peace as of Commerce, now under Consideration; in these
Words in Latin and in English. Tractatus Pacis and Amicitiae inter Serenissimam
ac Potentissimam, Principem Annam, Dei Gratia, magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae, Reginam. In Inglish thus: A Treaty of Peace and Friendship between
the most Serene and most Potent Princess Anne, by the Grace of God, Queen of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland.

Mark, the King of France here owns Her Majesty to be Queen of Great Britain,
etc. and that She is so by the GRACE OF GOD; not atall supposing Her Title
depended upon his Recognition, or received any confirmation thereby.

Having then acknowledged Her Majesty to be Rightful and Lawful Queen of Great
Britain, the French King could make no Scruple of coming into the rest, viz. to
acknowledge the Succession of the House of Hanover, which is a Consequence of
the Revolution; upon which, as the Occasion, Her present Majesty's Right of
Possession is built, and which is settled upon the Basis of Parliamentary
Limitation; which Parliamentary Authority is the Rightful and Lawful Power,
among others, from which Her Majesty's Right of Claim immediately proceeds.

Having also acknowledged the Protestant Succession, recognized the Authority
that Established it, and owned the Protestant Race of Hanover to be the only
Rightful and Lawful Heir to the British Crown, the rest fell in as natural
Consequences, viz. First, That he should Expunge, Disown, and Banish from his
Dominions, the Person of the Pretender, engaging never to admit him to come
again into his Kingdoms. And, Secondly, That he should, in the solemnest Manner
possible, engage never to Aid or Assist him, or any one for him, directly, or
indirectly, in making any Claim to the Crown of Great Britain, or in offering
any Disturbance, either to Her Majesty's Possession, or to the Hanover
Succession, as it is Established by the British Parliament.

Let us then enquire how this is done, and in what manner expressed, that the
great Question may afterward come to be clearly Discussed, viz. What Security
this is to the Protestant Succession?

The Words of the Article are as strongly expressed, and as full as can be
devised: And I hear many People express themselves with an agreeable Surprise
that it is so; for though all that is alleged of the Perfidy and Disingenuous
Principles of the French King, were to be acknowledged; yet, since Verbal
Assurances are sometimes to be taken; and, perhaps, no other can be obtained in
some things, of which this is one; it is as satisfactory as the Nature of the
Thing will allow, that those Verbal Assurances be full and complete.

The Nature of Treaties is now such, and the Conduct of Princes Abroad is
allowed such a Latitude, that, in some respect, it may be said of all Treaties,
nothing is to be Depended on but what either you have Power to Enforce, or the
other gives sufficient Security to Perform.

Thus, where Security could be obtained in this Affair of the Treaty, Her
Majesty made a demand of such Security that she might be in a Condition to
Enforce the Execution: As for Example, The French King Offers, on a Peace, to
Demolish Dunkirk. How shall I be sure of that? says Her Majesty. Will you put
it into my Hands immediately, that I may have Power to see that Promise put in
Execution? The French King Consents, so that now the Queen of Great Britain
demolishes Dunkirk, not the French King; that is, She holds it in Possession
till it is done, and Her Forces are to Encamp in the Neighborhood to see the
Execution.

It is but too well known a Truth, that there are some People, besides the
Jacobites, who are surpised, and ill-pleased to see this Affair so remarkably
settled by the Treaty, and that the French King has thereby stooped to such
Declarations and Protestations against the Interest of the Pretender: And these
are those who, for other Ends, had much rather have been furnished from the
Articles themselves with sufficient Grounds of Complaint, that the Protestant
Succession had been neglected; and the Interest of the Pretender had not been
sufficiently Weakened, and Discouraged. Such a Complaint being in its Nature
very Essential to the Public Good, and to the Establishment of Things in this
Nation, would have been very Popular, and would have been capable of many ways
of Improvement, to the Advantage of those who study to keep the People uneasy,
and distempered, about the Public Management of Affairs, and to whom nothing
has contributed so much, as the Notion of the Danger of the Pretender.

The Complaints of these People have been so loud, that no one could have
thought but that they really knew what France was acting in this Affair; and
that, even in the Articles themselves, there had appeared more Foundation for
their Dissatisfactions; it was no more questioned by those who supposed all
those Complaints were well Grounded; I say, it was no more questioned, but that
when the Articles came to be made Public, it would appear, that the Succession
of Hanover was very slightly taken Notice of, and that room was left for the
Interest of the Pretender to be carried on; so that the French King might at
any time, after the Queen was Deceased, concern himself in that Matter, without
any damage to his Honor and Faith; and any Branch of his Treaty with the
Queen to the contrary, in anywise notwithstanding.

But I do not find, upon a serious Revising the Articles, but that these
People, the first movers of those Complaints only excepted, are under very
great Disappointments upon the Articles first appearing in Public; nay, the
most Angry have not yet been able to find the least Fault in the Recognitions
and Provisions made, either on the Part of the French, or on Our Part, for the
Security of the House of Hanover; or, to say what they could have demanded of
the French King more than is Granted by the Treaty, with respect to that
Particular. The Truth of the Case being this, that the French King was not able
to do more; or was it Honorable for the British Plenipotentiaries to ask more
of him in that Particular.

It might be thought some Testimonial to the Validity of these Articles, That
the Jacobites in Great Britain are so universally Thunderstruck with them,
that there is so profound a Silence through the whole Nation among them; nothing
is heard from them of the usual Boasts they have, for some time, made of their
Growing Interest, and of the great Assistance their Prince should receive, upon
any Occasion, for the Establishing him on the Throne of Great Britain. Whereas
now nothing is heard among them but very secret and private Reproaches, and
Reflections upon the French King, for suffering himself to yield to such severe
Conditions, and so effectually to bind himself against the Interest of their
Prince, as they call him, as never to Assist him after the Queen's Death, and
never to admit him to return into France again.

These Complaints, I say, are very secretly and softly expressed among them
too; for they cannot, without manifest Ingratitude, complain of any one Step
the French King has taken; they cannot deny, without the Reproaches of the
whole World, but that the French King has gone a greater Length for the
Propagation of the Jacobite Interest in Great Britain, than any Prince in the
World could have done; and has done more for them than all the Popish Powers in
the World would have done. The hazard of a Ruinous War, undertaken for the
Restoring King James II. and carried with no other View, through innumerable
Disasters to the Peace of Ryswick; the Undertaking this second War under that
disadvantageous Step to France, of Acknowledging the present Pretender as King
of Great Britain, which justly Enflamed and Provoked this Nation to such a
Degree, as to make all the Parts of the Island Address the late King William to
renew the War, which otherwise the Nation, at that time, were not much inclined
to. These things, attempted by the King of France, for the Jacobite Interest,
leave the Friends of the Pretender no room to Exclaim against him, as otherwise
they would have done, as a Man abandoning his Friend.

On the contrary, to reckon the diverse Attempts, Hazards, Losses, and Expense
the French King has been at, in Behalf of the Pretender, and of King James II.
would be to Write the greatest Panegyric upon the Friendship, Constancy, and
Generosity of the King of France that could possibly be Written: In which the
Armies sent into Ireland to his Relief; the Loss of his Fleet at La Hogue; the
Attempt upon Scotland; the constant Expense of Supporting the Court of St.
Germans, and all its Hangers on, and Dependencies, for above Twenty Four Years,
must come to be reckoned up; all which being considered, it is but in silent
Murmurs that the Jacobites can complain of the French King, for giving up the
Cause of the Pretender as he has done.

On the other Hand, his own Circumstances tell them plainly, that he has
espoused their Cause as long as he was able to support himself; and that his
Affairs were reduced to that Extremity, that he could no longer carry on the
War with safety; nor could he make any Peace without relinquishing, entirely, a
Prince, and an Interest which he was not able to support.

These things stop their Mouths, I say as to Complaint, and therefore they
testify their Surprise and Despair, by a profound Silence; which Silence also
tacitly acknowledges, that they look upon the Acknowledgments and Recognitions
made by the French King, of the Hanover Succession to be too effectual a Blow
to their Interest in Britain, which, on the other Hand, is an Argument to us to
look upon it as some Security to the said Succession.

With the Silence of the Jacobites Party, and as a Consequence thereof, the
Fears and Apprehensions of Honest and Well-minded People abate also; I mean of
such People who, being guided by no Party-Interest, kept their Eyes only upon
the Public Good, yet were made uneasy, and alarmed by the continued
Suggestions of others, that the Ministry, and even the Queen Herself, were in
the Interest of the Pretender. It might take up some room here to Convince you
that such People were made Uneasy, and by what Method, on what Account, by
Whom, and for what Reason. But I am willing to forget those Things; the
remembrance whereof serve only to promote that which will help to Divide us,
and to make us yet Uneasy to one another.

That many good People were alarmed with the Notion of the Pretender being at
hand; and possessed with a belief that the Ministry and the French King were in
Concert for the Restoring him in these Kingdoms. This is what needs no
Evidence; the very Insolence of the Jacobites as it was given for a Reason of
their Apprehensions, so it was a Confirmation of the Arguments others had used
for the raising those Jealousies and Apprehensions in the People.

They were told, that the Ministry encouraged and employed none but Jacobites;
that the professed Friends of the Pretender had distinguishing Marks of Favor
showed them; that even the Dialect spoken at Court was different from what used
to be the Language in the Case of the Succession; that Addresses were
presented, in which not only the House of Hanover was not mentioned, but in
which the Interest of the Pretender was expresslly recommended; and, that yet
such Addresses were equally accepted, and received equally Graciously with
others; that the greatest Insolences of several Persons upon the Name of
Hanover, and the Protestant Succession, were left Unpunished, and the like.

The Business of the Hanover Memorial was in the next Place mentioned, and the
Resentments expressed by the Queen and Ministry at the Publication thereof,
with several other Things which were called to mind, to confirm the Suspicions,
and to persuade the People here, that the same Affection which promoted the
Settlement of the Crown upon that House was not now to be found among us, etc.

While the Treaty of Peace was in Agitation, these Suspicions increased; and it
was expected by some, that the Interest of the Pretender was in immediate
agitation; that the French Influence having a Governing Power among us, would
not fail to attempt that by Treaty which they had so often, and so long
attempted in the Field by the Sword.

It was a happy surprise then to such People as these, to find the aforesaid
Articles Incerted in the Treaty of Peace, where the most they could expect in
favor of the Succession was, that nothing expressly, on the other Side, should
be incerted; and that the French King should be prevailed with to leave the
Pretender to his own Fortunes, and to say nothing of him; nay, some People
would have thought this a great deal, and would even have compounded with us
for such a Thing as a Favor to the Succession of Hanover, which they had
scarce reason to expect.

What then could such People say, when they found the utmost Care taken, and
the strongest Engagements entered into with the French King, for the Protestant
Succession, and the Recognizing, upon all Occasions, the House of Hanover as
the Rightful and Lawful Successor to the Crown.

What could they say, but acknowledge themselves Surpised, Satisfied, and
Pleased; as also, that they had been imposed upon before: When they found the
French King brought to Compliment the Queen of Great Britain, with the solemn
and declared Expulsion of the Person of the Pretender from, not the Succession
of Britain only, but even from the Dominions of France; and engaging to make
that Expulsion Perpetual, and that he shall never be admitted to set his Foot
within the Kingdom of France again.

Would any Man have thought that the King of France, who had formerly acted so
avowedly in the Interest of the Pretender, and had voluntarily brought down
upon his Kingdom so heavy a War, by the mere declaring him by the Titles of
Britain; who had made such Efforts for him, and had Promised never to forsake
his Interest till he had established him on the Throne, would be brought so
entirely to give him up, so effectually to relinquish his Interest and
Concerns, as to engage never to Own him again by those Titles, which he himself
had before acknowledged to him.

These Things having been so openly declared against before, by the French
King, it was the more Rational to expect, that the Party here might have been
prevailed upon, and Influenced by the French to have Countenanced that
Interest, or at least to have contented themselves with very moderate
Provisions against him; and till the contrary appeared, there was too much
force in their Reasoning the other way, not to take with the People whose Minds
were already prejudiced as abovesaid.

But when the Articles appear, these People seemed surpised; began to exclaim
at the Injustice done the present Ministry, and to approve of what was done in
behalf of the Hanover Succession; till they met with new Scruples and
Suggestions, in order to keep up the Temper of Complaint, and to bring the
Notions of the Danger of the Pretender into play again; and these were the ill
Opinions which Common Fame had deeply Imprinted in the Minds of the People, of
the French King being to the last Degree Perfidious; that he made no Scruple of
breaking in upon the most sacred Engagement when ever his Ambition, Avarice,
Superstition, of especially Thirst of Glory, prompted; that he made no farther
Use of Treaties and Postulations, Articles and solemn Conventions, than to
amuse and separate the Conjunction and Confederacies of his Enemies; and made
it his constant avowed Practice, or Maxim, to keep the most sacred Engagements
of Treaties no longer than till he had the Opportunity to break them to his
Advantage, and much more to this Purpose.

From these Things they ask us now, what signify all the Treaties and
Engagements which the French King has made in the Affair of the Protestant
Succession; and what Dependence can we, or ought we to have upon them?

Now it is a Mistake if any Reader expects to find this Tract attempting to
take off any of the above Reproaches cast upon the Honor and Character of the
French King, his regard to his Word, or holding sacred the Engagements he has
entered into. -- Not at all: This shall be no part of my Task; let it go; let
it be taken all for granted, if they please; or not taken for granted, as you
shall please. But the two Questions to be asked here, and which contains the
whole of the Case, are these. 1. What more could be done by the French King to
secure us against him, or give us Satisfaction in his future Conduct, with
relation to the Pretender? 2. How, with safety to the Honor and Reputation of
our Arms, could we aledge, that our Safety against the Pretender was not
sufficiently secured by this? 1. What more could be done by the French King to
secure us against him, or give us Satisfaction in his future Conduct, with
relation to the Pretender.


This Question has been asked before now, and so many abrupt and absurd Answers
have been given to it, that even the Persons who have given those Answers,
desire not to have the Question repeated; and are willing to hear as little of
it as they can. Some have answered, the French King should have delivered him
up to us: But this is liable to many Exceptions; and to speak in general only,
the best Friends of the House of Hanover have declared, they did not desire to
have that Method taken as a dangerous Experiment for many Reasons, some of them
fitter to be guessed at than expressed. Some have suggested, That the French
King should have caused him to be made away privately, rather than to have
suffered himself to be brought to so Dishonorable a Submission, as to Forsake,
and Abandon a Person who had, from his Infancy, been sheltered under his
Protection. But this was too Barbarous and Unhospitable, for even the worst
Enemies of the Pretender, if they were Christians, to approve of; and no one
could maintain it without Horror, even at the same time that they were for
entirely Expelling him from hence. Others suggested, That we should have
procured him to be Confined in the Pierre Encise in France, where Prisoners for
Life are generally sent, near Lions; and that he should be suffered there to
end his Days quietly: But this was liable to the same Objections of the French
King's breaking his Word, that the present Articles are liable too; since he
might cause the Gates to be Opened when ever he thought fit, and might let him
out from thence with the same Ease that he may now Recall him into his
Dominions.

What, then, can we propose that the King of France could have done, in respect
to the Disposing the Person of the Pretender, more than first having caused
him, or desired him ( call it as you please) Voluntarily to withdraw out of his
Dominions; to engage, in the solemnest manner, not to admit him to Return
thither any more; and no more to own him for ever hereafter under the Titles of
King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, King of Great Britain, or, in short,
any of Her Majesty's Titles and Royal Style, as he did before.

It is true, The French King may break his Word, may renounce the Faith and
Honor of a King, pledged to Her Majesty, and the Faith and Honor of the very
Throne of France, which he has engaged, as far as in him lies, in the Name of
all his Successors; and there is no helping this: But I do not see what farther
could be done; what more could have been asked of the King of France; or what
more he could have granted, to have made us more safe.

Pledges of Towns, Possession of Frontiers, and Cautionary Garrisons, could be
of no signification here; neither did ever any one of the other Opinion say
what Town or City they would accept as a sufficient Caution, or Pledge, for the
Security of his Performance: Nor, indeed, could any thing the French King
possesses have given us the least Security in such a Case. On the contrary, had
any of the Possessions of the Kingdom of France been made over in a way of
Security, or as a Preliminary for the performance of this Negative, and to
assure us, That he never would Assist, or Entertain this Pretender again: This
would, even itself, have been a most forcible Motive to the French King to have
broke that very Engagement, and to have made the Attempt, that having set him
up here, and obtained the Possession of the English, or British Crown for him,
He, the Pretender, should clear him, the French King, of those Engagements, and
restore to him those Pledges.

Nor in such a Case would there have lain so much of the Charge of a breach of
Honor, or a Charge of Perfidiousness, since he that takes Security is supposed
not to depend upon the Promise, or Engagement, but relinquishing the Honor of
the Person takes the Equivalent, viz. the Pledge for his Satisfaction.

What then, any Ambassador, or Plenipotentiaries, could have asked more than
the present Treaty has taken: Or, indeed, what could have been proposed farther
to the French King to have done for our Security and Satisfaction in this Case,
remains for any to set down that knows, for I do not pretend to it.

2. How, with safety to the Honor and Reputation of our Arms, could we aledge,
that our Safety against the Pretender was not sufficiently secured by this?
The Safety of Britain must be esteemed by us to be very weakly Defended, and
our Establishment to be in a very precarious Condition, if we may suppose it to
depend so entirely upon the French King's performance of his Engagements, as
that without it we are given up, and lost to the Pretender. Those who are thus
Phlegmatic in the Case of the Protestant Succession, very much Dishonor their
own Country, and the Confidence they have either in the Power or Unanimity of
the People of Great Britain; that they should think we should be so much at the
Mercy of the French King, that when ever he pleases to break his Engagements,
we are to be subdued to the Interest of the Pretender.

It is true, The Interest of the Pretender, backed by the Power of the French
King, is not to be despised; nor the Danger of it to be made light of; and
therefore, every thing that is reasonable and practicable ought to be done, to
keep that Apprehension off: And the Treaty has made so much Provision, that
whether it be sufficient or no, it seems to be all that the Nature of the Case
would admit of; and all that was really practicable in the Thing: To be
Phlegmatic and Dismayed now, would suggest to us, that our own Power is of no
weight in this Case; that we must depend entirely upon the Conduct of the
French King to preserve the Succession; and, that we are to be Happy or
Miserable, just as he is, or is not pleased to be faithful to his Engagement.

This, I must acknowledge, I think is Complimenting the French King too much at
our own Expense, and placing the British Strength at so low an Ebb, as no
reason can be given for.

Britain, or the People of Britain, no doubt, were we Hearty and Unanimous in
the Interest of the Nation, are able to keep up the Resolutions already taken
in the Affair of the Succession, and are able to Support our own Laws and
Constitution against the whole World: And though it is highly reasonable that, on
a Treaty, the French King should engage, as he has done, to relinquish the
Pretender, and acknowledge the Successor, yet our Safety is very far from
depending entirely on the Performance of that Engagement; and we ought to be in
very little Concern, whether the French King will perform his Promises or not.

The Question, therefore, does not so much rest upon this Point, whether the
French King will perform the Treaty he has made or no; but whether any thing
farther could have been done for our Security or no in a Treaty, whether with
the French King, or anybody else; what the French King could have granted
farther, or what we could Honorably to our selves have demanded farther, that
we may see if the People that mady the Treaty have been faithful or no.

I shall readily grant, that if our Security depends upon the French King's
performance of his Promises and Engagements, the Protestant Succession may be a
very precarious Thing. The Faith and Honor of the best Princes in the World
being too weak a Basis to build a Thing of that Consequence upon, especially
while, according to the present Practices, the Faith and Honor of Treaties are
always Interpreted by Princes their own way, when they have any Pretensions to
make, or find it for their Convenience to break in upon their Word given.

And for this Reason those People who lay so great a stress upon our Treaty
with France, and place so much weight there, as if the whole, and only Security
of our Protestant Settlement depended upon this Treaty; not only Dishonor our
own Nation, but really Weaken the Succession itself. Do such People know, or
consider, that the Protestant Succession is our Fundamental Security for the
Peace, Prosperity, Liberty, Property, Religion, Posterity of this Nation, and
all that is, or can be dear to us, or them, now and for ever? What a Condition
should we be all in, if these Things, of so much Consequence to us, depended
for their Safety, upon the Veracity, Faith, and Honor of the French King; aye,
or any King upon Earth? Such People have too mean an Opinion of our
Constitution, and of our Power to maintain it. It is, no doubt, convenient and
safe for us to tie up the Hands of those who are Enemies to the Succession as
far as possible: And it seems to be as much done that way as it was possible
could be done in the Treaty. But when all that is over, we hope the Security of
our Establishment has better Foundations than any that could be furnished from
Foreign Contracts, or provided in a Treaty with France.

As far as Treaty could provide, as far as could either be offered by the
French King, or proposed by us in a Treaty, seems to be Obtained and Settled by
this Treaty; and it is yet unknown what those People who complain of the
Insufficiency of this Treaty, do propose; either as what might have been done,
or as what would have been sufficient if it had been done in the Treaty, I mean
as it relates to the Protestant Succession.

If then, nothing can be thought of farther for the Security of the Protestant
Succession, which either was in the Power of the French King to grant, or which
we ought to have accepted from him, or proposed to him, then the present Treaty
is as sufficient a Security to the Succession as it was possible to make it be,
or as a Treaty could admit.

The same Thing might be said in the Case of the Spanish Renunciations, which
lay it down as a Foundation, that France and Spain ought to be joined together
in the same Person; since then the Possessor King Philip was not driven Out;
and that yet it appeared necessary to make a Treaty of Peace on all Sides.
Nothing more effectual could be devised, or proposed than those Renunciations:
And however Invalid Renunciations have been, in like Cases, through the Accidents
that may have happened, yet upon a due Examination, it will appear that such
Formal Proceedings are not esteemed so very Insufficient as we now make them,
or so appointed to be broken, as that they cannot be kept; and in the
Prosecution of this Argument there shall be shown in due time. 1. That the
present Renunciations are of a different kind from all that ever were proposed
in an Affair of the like Nature, as far as History can instruct us in the Case.
2. That there is something in the Nature of the Thing, that makes these Valid;
and that though all the former Contracts of the like Nature in the World have, or
had proved ineffectual, yet that these cannot do so. 3 That King William
accepted of Renunciations, in Cases of like Nature, as the only Method to bind
Princes, in Cases where other Obligations could not be taken or given.


But these Things are reserved to a Treatise of the Renunciations, which may be
Published by itself.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. Baker, at the Black-Boy in Paternoster Row.
AN Essay on the Treaty of Commerce with France: With necessary Expositions.
Price Six Pence. Considerations upon the Eighth and Ninth Articles of the
Treaty of Commerce and Navigation: Now published by Authority. With some
Enquiries into the Damages that may accrue to the English Trade from them.
Price Six Pence. The Trade with France, Italy, Spain, and Portugal, Considered:
With some Observations on the Treaty of Commerce between Great Britain and
France. The Fifth Edition. Price 6 d. A certain Information of a certain
Discourse. That happened at a certain Gentleman's House, in a certain County.
Written by a certain Person then present, to a certain Friend now at London.
From whence you may Collect the great certainty of the Account. The Third
Edition. Price One Shilling. Whigs truly Christians. Occasioned by a Sermon,
Entitled Whigs no Christians, Preached at Putney, in Surry, on Jan. 30 th,
1712. In which their Opinions as to Matters of Government are fully justified
by Scripture and Reason. Price Six Pence. Union and no Union; being an Enquiry
into the Grievances of the Scots, and how far they are right or wrong, who
allege, that the Union is dissolved. The History of Treaties: Containing all
those that have been concluded from the Peace of Munster, inclusive to this
time. The several Infringements or Encroachments alleged on all Sides,
particularly (...) against France; and the Pretensions which have been the
Occasion of Breaches. The memorable Actions and Events of the Wars that have
ensued from time to time. The whole being a Series of the most signal
Occurrences, for above 60 Years, throughout all Christendom, of singular Use
for the Understanding of the Nature of Treaties; the Grounds on which the
present Negotiations are carried on; and the Contests now on Foot between the
opposite Parties. Price Three Shillings. Memoirs of the Chevalier de St.
George: With some private Passages of the Life of the late King James II. Never
before Published. Price 1 s. The Life of Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, Lord
General of the Realm. With some Parallel Instances to the Case of John Duke of
M -- h, late Great Favorite of England. With the sudden Fall of that
predominant Statesman, John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, with the Opinion of
the Judges in the point of altering the Succession, as settled by Act of
Parliament. Price Six Pence. A Demonstration of the Existence, Wisdom and
Omnipotence of GOD, drawn from the Knowledge of Nature, particularly of Man,
and fitted to the meanest Capacity. By the Archbishop of Cambray, Author of
Telemachus; and translated from the French, by the same Hand that Englished
that excellent Piece. The Lives of the two Illustrious Generals, John Duke of
Marlborough, and Francis Eugene, Prince of Savoy. With both their Effigies,
Engraved by Mr. Vandergucht. A Collection of Speeches, Prefaces, Letters, etc.
With a Description of Geneva and Holland: By Gilbert, Lord Bishop of Sarum. To
which is added, His Citation to answer in Scotland for High Treason: Together
with his Answer, and three Letters writ by him upon that Subject to the Earl of
Middletcune. Price 1 s. 6 d. An Answer to a Question that no body thinks of,
viz. But what if the Queen should Die? Price Six Pence. Les Soupirs de la Grand
Britaigne: Or, the Groans of Great Britain, being the Second Part to the Groans
of Europe. Price 1 s. Four Letters which passed between the Right Reverend the
Lord Bishop of Sarum and Mr. Henry Dodwell. Price 6 d. Charnock's Remains: Or,
S -- l his Coronation. A Satyr: Being a Parody upon Dryden's Mack Fleckno.
Price 3 d. The Doctor no Changeling: Or, Sacheverell still Sacheverell. Being
Observations on a Sermon Preached at St. Savior's in Southwark, on
Palm Sunday, 1713. By Henry Sacheverell, D.D. The Second Edition. Price 3 d.
And what if the Pretender should come? Or some Considerations of the
Advantages, real Consequences of the Pretender's possessing the Crown of Great
Britain. Price 6 d. The Tories Defeated: Or, the Doctor almost turned
Christian. Illustrated from several Passages in the Act of Grace he passed upon
his Enemies upon the 29th of March, at St. Saviors. Price Three Pence. A
farther Discourse of Free-Thinking: In a Letter to a Clergyman. With some
Considerations on Mr. Pycroft's Treatise upon the same Subject. Price 6 d.
Honor retrieved from Faction? In a Dialogue between Smith and Johnson. Price 6
d. Her Majesty and Her Royal Father Vindicated. In Answer to a Preface to the
Volume of Sermons, etc. Now published by the Bishop of Sarum. In a Letter to
his Lordship. Price 3 d. More Memoirs: Or the Pretender what he really pretends
to be: Some Explications of his Birth revived: And Reasons for questioning his
Title set aside In a Letter to a Right Reverend L --. Price 6 d. England's
Interest considered, in the Increase of the Trade of this Kingdom: In which is
an Account of our Commerce with the several Nations in Europe; as also the
Advantages and Disadvantages we receive from each Nation. Price Six Pence.
Reflections upon Sach -- el's Thanksgiving-day, and the Solemnities of that
great Festival. In a Letter to a Friend in the Country. Price Three Pence. A
Diswasive from Jacobitism: Showing in general what the Nation is to expect from
a Popish King; and in particular, from the Pretender. Price 6 d. Mr. Addison
turned Tory: Or, the Scene Inverted, wherein it is made appear, that the Whigs
have misunderstood that celebrated Author in his applauded Tragedy called Cato,
and that the Duke of M -- 's Character, in endeavoring to be a General for
Life, bears a much greater resemblance to that of Caesar and Syphax, than the
Hero of his Play. To which are added, some Cursory Remarks upon the Play
itself. By a Gentleman of Oxford. Price 6 d. The Female Advocates: Or, the
Frantic Stock Jobber. A Comedy. A Collection of all Her Majesty's and King
William's Speeches and Messages, etc. Price Six Pence. A Collection of all the
Lords and Commons Addresses, Representations, etc. Price 1 s. The History of
the Dutch Usurpations: Their Maxims and Politics in Point of Government: And
their remarkable Ingratitude to England, etc. Price 6 d.

