ON ILLICIT LOVE.

ON ILLICIT LOVE.

Written among the Ruins of GODSTOW NUNNERY, near Oxford.

-- Pulchra gaudet Latona Diana.
Sed vetat optari faciem Lucretia, qualem
Ipsa habuit. --
Rara est adeo concordia Formae
Atque Pudicitiae.
JUVENAL. By JOHN BRAND, A. B. Of LINCOLN COLLEGE, Oxford.



NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE: Printed by T. SAINT, for J. WILKIE, No. 71, St Paul's
Churchyard, London; J. FLETCHER, Oxford; and W. CHARNLEY, Newcastle.

MDCCLXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
GODSTOW is at present a Ruin on the Margin of the Isis, at a small distance
from Oxford. It was formerly a House of Nuns, famous perhaps on no account so
much as for having been the Burial-place of Rosamond, daughter of Lord
Clifford, the beautiful Paramour of Henry the Second. This Monarch is said to
have built a Labyrinth at Woodstock to conceal her from his jealous Queen, who,
during his Absence, when he was called away by an unnatural Rebellion of his
Sons, at the supposed Instigation of their Mother, found means to get Access to
her, and compelled her to swallow Poison. Frequent Walks in this delightful
Recess, sacred to the Moments of Contemplation, suggested the following
Thoughts, for the Publication of which, let the alarming Progress of Lewdness,
and consequently of Licentiousness of Manners, which indeed threatens the
Dissolution of our State, be accepted as an Apology.

ON ILLICIT LOVE.
(...). MUSAEUS.
THE moral Muse, from yon monastic shade,
Where frown the Towers by envious Time decayed,
Invites my footsteps from the flowery plain,
And calls from Folly's rout to Fancy's train.
O hallowed Haunts! where Genius loves to stray,
Where silver ISIS winds her murmuring way:
Whence seen from far, aspiring to the skies,
The awful Fanes of BRITISH ATHENS rise:
Where, through her reeds, a path as we explore,
Some startled Halcyon seeks the farther shore:
And all her woods, and winding groves among
The lonely Philomela swells her song:
Around; thy verdant olives, PEACE! arise;
Thy radiance, LEARNING! shines to distant skies!
O sacred scenes! Remembrance shall renew,
And Fancy's eye with frantic bliss review!
Soon shall I cease to linger with delight,
And 'mid your willows meet a noonday night;
Doomed on thy banks, commercial Tyne! to roam,
Where lev'ling PHRENZY finds her favorite home;
Where crossed AMBITION, cursing all she hates,
(Ah dark Disturber of the peace of states!)
Misleads with lies an undesigning train,
And drags THE MANY in her magic chain.
Where PARTY rages, with her Gothic powers,
Nor spares the Muse's shade, nor Sion's bowers;
Her rankling spleen some vilest Trash betrays,
That, meant for malice, proves the highest praise:
Her lewdest Libels court the public shame!
Her base Assassins wound each envied name!
Pleased I renew my walks by Isis' stream,
Indulging Fancy's sweet extatic dream:
In learned ease with devious steps I stray,
Where lonely CONTEMPLATION points my way:
The sedgy margin often her step retains,
When sober Evening frees the servile swains;
A softened smile unbends her brow austere,
Serenely grave, and pleasingly severe!
Retarded now 'mid GODSTOW's walls she stands;
Walls famed of yore! the work of pious hands!
Of ages past each distant deed appears,
And rise the scenes of long elapsed years
In her revolving mind. Tears fill her eyes,
While Henry's woes and Rosamund's arise:
Woes! that still warn us from this Wreck of Time;
A frailty famed and far-renowned Crime!
Ah hapless Maid! the aetherial Power began,
(While pensive sadness through my bosom ran!)
What moved thee first thy Fathers to disgrace?
The boast and brand of Clifford's noble race!
Could icy Age thy youthful breast inspire,
Or ever gray hairs enkindle green desire?
Love's living smile Ambition's frowns devour,
And Pleasure flies the rude embrace of Power.
Could Henry's Crown a charm so powerful prove,
To blanch the negro front of lawless love?
Too justly blamed! to blast whose fame conspire
A Lover old, wronged Queen, and injured Sire!
I see the Father tear his hoary hairs,
And beat a bosom, racked with hopeless cares;
Invoke high Heaven on Henry's head to shower
The vengeful lightenings of incensed Power:
Bare the red arm against the adult'rous flame,
And hide in dust a darling daughter's shame!
The pray'r's preferred -- Nor ever move in vain
The holy lips of Age, incensed by pain.
War's stern alarms their infant loves annoy,
And black remorse succeeds the blaze of joy.
In vain has Woodstock reared her haughty towers,
In vain immured thee in meand'ring bowers:
Eludes no lab'rinth Guilt's intrusive eyes,
And CONSCIENCE follows wheresoe'er she flies!
How changed by absence This alludes to the wars in Normandy, which called
Henry away, soon after the commencement of this unhappy amor.
every Haunt remains!
The scene of pleasures past, of present pains!
There mourn, frail Maid! till over the murky gloom,
Repentance shine to mitigate thy doom:
By Man unheard, unwept, and unforgiv'n,
The mercy Earth denies, draw down from Heaven!
The dark retreats stern Jealousy explores,
Fate's clue conducting through the mazy doors!
See Guilt at once and injured Love arraign,
While Pity pleads and Mercy moves in vain!
Nor sighs, nor prayers, nor tears in torrents shed,
Avert the doom from her devoted head,
Till Poison's spumy bowl avenged the spotted bed!
Here paused the Power! and having gleaned her store
From ages past, to future framed her lore.
Be warned ye Fair! (she cried) by Clifford's fate,
What vengeful woes on lawless love await!
The phantoms, Fairy Pleasure raised, shall fall,
And soon her luscious sweets be dashed with gall!
Still Pleasure flies from Guilt on flitting wings,
And 'mid her flowers the serpent Sorrow stings!
Transcribe the Tale The History of Rosamond inscribed on the wall of the
chapel, which is now converted into a stable.
, that on this wall is wrought,
The Tablet hangs a Toilette for your thought!
Here look, -- nor to those flattering mirrors fly,
Where souls are poisoned by the pleasur'd eye;
Nor vainly wish, to future fortunes blind,
Lucretia's face, without her fairer mind!
Think then! and from the crime let thought restrain,
For transient joys, what lasting ills remain!
The fall in vain from Honor's height you mourn;
In vain with tears to ruthless Man you turn:
As soon the streams that down the valleys stray,
Shall backwards to their fountains force a way!
Sooner shall Frost its freezing powers forego,
And Afric's soot be changed to Europe's snow,
Than blasted Beauty shall its bloom regain,
Or female Honor soiled, remove the stain!
O think! as over the insidious Glass you lie,
When conscious Pleasure sparkles in the eye!
When Caution sleeps, and to the unguarded mind,
Conceit and Pride an easy entrance find!
How Sense shall surfeit over the fairest face,
If Minds too mix not in the warm embrace!
How soon the vivid flush of Beauty flies!
Though Blossoms please us, it is the Fruit we prize!
With care, O cultivate in earliest youth,
Perennial charms, Faith, Modesty, and Truth!
Charms! that surviving Beauty's boasted claim,
Rise phoenix-like from the funereal flame!
Of equal worth, no earthly good is told;
Golconda's gems, nor all Peruvia's gold!
Still BRITAIN boast, by circling waves embraced,
Her young men valiant, and her maidens chaste!
No more on Fashion's frothy Tide be borne,
But stem the Torrent you alone can turn:
No more with smiles the Rake's lewd wishes fan,
Refuse of stews and relics of the man!
With coy reserve the insidious Villain view;
False to himself, can he have faith to you?
The Fopling's fond impertinence despise,
And blast his hopes with your disdainful eyes:
To him in vain your rival charms are shown;
Narcissus-like he loves himself alone!
Against Vice in vain Religion still inveighs,
While Passion sleeps nor heeds the unmoving lays:
From BEAUTY's lips the living lore would charm,
And coldest Unbelief with Ardor warm;
Her chast'ning power the Scorner's pride would own,
And Atheists tremble at her angel frown:
Through Error's maze a Leader she would prove,
And light the Lamp of pure celestial Love?
On Thule's heathy heights see VIRTUE stand,
With lingering looks, prepared to leave the Land!
To waste in northern night the lonely hour,
And mourn 'mid Hecla's caves her ravished power:
See fond Affection warn her ever she flies,
And turn to you her supplicating eyes;
Where Hope still struggles through each crystal Tear,
That watery shines, and streaks the gloom of Fear!
Recall her with your smiles, confirm her reign,
The traitorous Rival of her empire slain!
For yours, for Albion's sake retard her flight;
When Virtue sets, it is Beauty's blackest night.
In vain you will mourn the absence of her ray,
To ruthless Lust an unresisting Prey!
Find civil Order to Confusion hurled,
And mental Darkness overwhelm the world!
Again from Lust War's fatal flame shall blaze,
And other HELENS future Troys shall raze;
Soon sickening Nature find the abortive grave,
And sink like Sodom in Perdition's wave!
Nor thou, fond Youth! with boiling blood elate,
Ah! heedless of the gathering storms of Fate!
With sophist fuel heap the blazing fire,
Nor plead the ungoverned rage of rapt Desire!
Desire, newborn in the impassioned breast,
By Reason's sacred power is soon suppressed;
But fanned by Sloth, by Reason unrestrained;
The headlong heights of frantic Lewdness gained!
Their Mounds in vain preventive Laws oppose;
In vain her Lash shall angry Power disclose:
Pow'r's lash is spurned, and Law's eluded care;
Nor yields the Fury but to fell Despair!
O could the Muse, in Virtue's interests warm,
Thy softened soul from siren pleasures charm!
She would conjure thee by the Chains that bind
The social Frame, and rivet mind to mind:
By all the sacred Charities of life,
And dearest Ties of daughter! sister! wife!
If fervid Honor ever fired thy soul,
Or Passion stooped to Reason's chaste control;
If ever Religion, watchful in thy breast,
Each wanton thought in embryo suppressed,
Some Father's fairest hopes from ruin save,
Nor give his hoary honors to the grave!
No more the fort of female Virtue prove,
With artful vows; the artillery of Love!
Of feigned Love! -- that, tempting to foul Sin,
Assails without, and undermines within.
For Pity's sake the friendless Orphan spare,
Nor lure the wretched to thy lustful Snare.
Ah hapless Maid! to hardest trials born,
When Fortune lours upon her opening morn,
The dangerous boon of tempting Charms bestows,
And gives without its guardian Thorn, the Rose!
Soon must the short-lived Flower its sweets forego,
And ruffian Lust shall crop them ere they blow!
When Falshood's wiles the unwary Maid betray,
(Ah meanest conquest over unguarded prey!)
Soon must the sad alternative be tried,
When Vice has vanquished Shame, and Pleasure, Pride,
In Prostitution's public shrine to bleed,
Till poignant pains to fleeting joys succeed;
Till every evil tried, Intemp'rance knows,
Wished Death cut short the varied line of woes!
Or scorch Love's fruit by fell Abortion's flame,
And blast by Murder the firstborn of Shame!
Who but must shrink from the sad Scene distressed,
And mourn the mischief from his inmost breast!
Who but would bind in Vengeance' penal chain
The base Betrayers of the virgin train!
Yet know, ye prowling Wolves! to Pity blind,
That spare no Lambkins of the female kind!
Who Love perverts, with Nature wages strife,
Love! the great second cause in worlds of life!
As Sages say Attraction's secret chain
In worlds of matter binds the starry train;
A cement thus of souls Affections prove,
And living Nature's all upborne by Love!
Who lewdly blind this Passion points astray,
And gives to govern what Heaven bid obey;
Too late shall find, when frantic Lust enslaves,
That Giant-like it is Heaven itself he braves!
Hail holy flame! aetherial pure Desire!
Enlivening Man as erst Prometheus' Fire!
All Nature kindles at thy bursting beam,
And Lands with Life and Ocean's waters teem!
Thy ray on Greenland's icy mountains glows,
And keener burns 'mid Zembla's frozen snows!
To Glory's heavenly heights how do thou lead,
The sacred Source of every daring deed!
By thee the Soldier's dauntless bosom's steeled,
When danger braves him in the embattled field:
Love points the Falchion, speeds the scythed Car,
And Beauty's spoils repay the wounds of war!
For thee the Statesman plans his deep design,
And by thy light the Court's gay circles shine.
Thy power even palled Ambition's vot'ries prove,
And Care finds respite in the arms of Love!
For thee the Scholar spends his midnight oil;
A purer passion animates his toil
Than Fame; -- that, faint as Echo's faintest breath,
Nor lives in life, nor can be heard in death:
Supremely blessed if laboring long he find
The laurel wreath with Lover's myrtle twined!
For thee the Sailor every storm outbraves,
And Lucy's smile o'erpays the frowning waves.
At eve, slow plodding from the labored plain,
Mild Phillis' kiss revives her fainting Swain:
How high reward, when Toil his task foregoes,
To find on Beauty's bosom soft repose!
Search then all life, each state, condition prove!
The purest pleasure flows from virtuous Love.
O Bliss sincere! if Bliss sincere can be,
In the dull sphere of dark Mortality:
When Sense and Soul conspire to feed a flame!
That burns through age, unchangeably the same.
Even brighter burns and brighter still the fire
That Virtue lighted up and pure Desire;
Nor Time, whose envious Rage would all remove,
Can clip the wings of chaste connubial Love!
Frail Man! no more of mental ills complain,
Nor mourn the progress of corporeal pain!
Pandora's deadly dole, whence Evil rose,
The fated source of never-ceasing woes!
One good that every ill o'erpay'd, confined,
And Woman was the Hope still left behind!
O Woman! Source of every dear delight,
That draws the enamored soul, and charms the sight!
In whom concenters each attractive grace,
That decks the mind, and deifies the face!
Your rubied lips distill Aurora's dew,
Your breath has sweets that Hybla never knew:
Your eyes outshine the silver orbs of night;
Serenely gay, and mild with softened light!
O may the Guardian of so great a prize,
Hesperian HONOR, watch with Argus' eyes!
Breasts so serene no ruder passions tear,
Nor poison lurk in Flowers so passing fair!
So shall your arms an Amulet still prove,
To ward off withering Care, the bane of Love!
For ah! in vain your beauties Heaven bestowed,
If vicious Passion foul their fair abode!
Vice draws her deadliest bane from Beauty's power,
The rankest poison from the richest Flower!
Nor greater Lure's her magic charms among;
Not Circe's potion, nor the Siren's song!
Precarious Blessing! to best ends designed,
But proved too often the bane of woman kind!
Who drink the poison of thy treacherous eye,
With Circe stabling in the swinish sty!
More than deform their Maker's choicest grace,
And mar the mintage of the fairest face!
The Cherub Beauty changed, foregoes her light,
Like rebel Angels plunged in rayless night:
From highest heights to lowest depths declined,
And fallen Woman's an infernal kind!
But chiefly Ye, over Honor's bounds that fly,
By Lust unloos'd from Hymen's holy tie!
Ye, joined in hand, though ill your heart accords,
Who fail of fealty to your lawful Lords!
Yet shall the Muse, indignant of your charms,
Against female falsehood wield her dreaded arms.
Though lavish Nature every grace bestows,
And blends the Lilly with the vermeil Rose;
The faultless form, with the celestial face,
Attemper'd to Proportion's sweetest grace:
Charms, that intense as Cleopatra's prove,
And flinty Valor fuse in flames of Love!
Abhor alike with guilty Gr -- r's name,
And damn with D -- h -- ff, to undying shame!
FINIS.

