THE HISTORY OF Jack Connor, Now Conyers.

VOLUME II.

THE SECOND EDITION, Corrected.

But not to treat my Subject as in Jest,
(Yet may not Truth in laughing Guise be dressed?
As Masters fondly sooth the Boys to read,
With Cakes and Sweetmeats) let us now proceed
With graver Air, our serious Theme pursue,
And yet preserve our Moral full in View.
FRANCIS'S HORACE. LONDON: Printed for W. JOHNSTON, at the Golden Ball, in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

MDCCLIII.

THE HISTORY OF Jack Connor, now Conyers.
CHAP. I.
He parted frowning from me, as if Ruin
Leaped from his Eyes.
SHAKESPEARE.
SOME few Days passed in the common Way, when Mr. Sangfroid entered, and with
Pleasure told Conyers, he had provided him a good Place. -- My Lord Bishop of
--, said he, wants just such an one as you to transcribe his Works, and keep
some Accounts. -- Conyers, without Hesitation, accepted the Offer, and next
Morning was presented to the Bishop, and immediately entered on his Office.

HIS Lordship was a great Writer; but his Works were intended for the Use of
Posterity, having never published but a Thanksgiving Sermon, and one on the
30th of January by Order of the House of Lords. His Tracts were very
voluminous, but all essential, and of the utmost Consequence to Mankind. His
Treatise on the Use and Abuse of Surplices and Lawn Sleeves was filled with the
profoundest Erudition. -- His Discourse on Pews, Cushions, and Mats, in
Churches, was extremely well handled; but the Postscript on the Crime of
sleeping in those Places, was so artfully worded, that you felt an Example in
yourself. -- His Letter to the Inhabitants of the Parish of -- clearly
demonstrated the Absurdity of a Steeple without Bells. -- His Apology and
Vindication of Murder, Adultery, and Fornication, proving, mathematically, that
the Nature and Name of these Crimes were entirely changed by Circumstance,
Time, and Place, was a most learned and elaborate Performance; but his
favorite Work was his History and Doctrine of Tithes, which he demonstrated to
be an Essential of True Religion.

HIS Lordship, at different Times, was so good as fully to explain these
Subjects to Conyers, who in three Months had transcribed the Treatise on
Surplices, and had just began the last-mentioned Work. He had full Employment,
but was not extremely pleased with the Nature of it, for his Taste was so
vitiated, that he found no Charms in what he did not understand.

THE Bishop kept a plentiful Table, where his Clergy were welcome, except the
poorer Sort, to whom he made ample Amends for the Distinction by small Presents
and large Promises. He was a Man of Virtue, and religiously kept his Word, when
his Memory, which was none of the best, failed him not. So weak was he in that
Quarter, that he remembered and forgot his Promise to a poor Curate ten
different Times, and as often was angry with himself. On these Occasions he
used to say, Well, God help me! I find I am grown old; my Faculties cannot last
for ever; -- The Lord gave, and the Lord takes away. -- Sometimes indeed his
Memory was very sharp, for if one, or ten of his Clergy, were sick, he never
failed a daily Enquiry after their Health; and when any died, he never suffered
the Living to lapse. He could not bear Contradiction, and no Doubt his
Dependants were careful not to offend in that Article. -- He did not like
Money, but he passionately loved it.

JACK did not much approve of his Situation. He lived well, but he plainly saw
he had no great Prospect of a future Fortune, and looked on himself as Gil Blas
when with the Archbishop, which determined him to be soon convinced of what he
had to depend on. He had Thoughts of writing a modest and moving Letter to his
Lordship; but then he remembered, That ' a Verse may catch him, who a Sermon
flies; so resolved to write a Stanza or two, and leave it on my Lord's Desk
next Morning. Accordingly he sat down and wrote, Though every Virtue fills my
Heart,
Though Modesty o'er-spreads my Face,
What are their Worth, except some Art
Can raise these Virtues into Place.
Yet though I cannot myself commend,
Kind Fate may still relieve my Want,
And, as dull Sermons always end,
Heaven of it is gracious Mercy grant!


MY LORD mounted to his Study as usual, and found the Scrowl, which he
carefully read, and as carefully put into his Pocket. -- Family Prayers and
Breakfast being ended, Jack was ordered to attend him. -- Good Morrow, Mr.
Conyers, said his Lordship, I am extremely concerned that my Understanding did
not discover your Worth and Genius before this Morning. They are so uncommon,
they ought to be rewarded. -- Jack applauded himself for his lucky Thought, but
my Lord proceeded -- I have a Paper in my Hand, on which you will permit my
making a few Remarks. I believe it is intended for Poetry, which at the best,
is an idle unprofitable Study; I shall not speak of the Rhyme, but of the
Subject. -- Your first Line is false, for as you want Prudence, you cannot have
every Virtue. -- Your second is not Fact, for I never saw you blush in my Life.
-- Oh -- I ask your Pardon, you blush now indeed. -- As to the Worth of your
Virtues and Modesty, I am afraid you will find it of little or no Value, and
your Art must be extraordinary, if you think to impose on me. -- But it seems
you want a Place. -- I shall soon put you into the High-road to Preferment. --
Your Second Stanza is most admirable. -- You cannot Praise yourself, poor
Gentleman! although you tell us of your Virtue and Modesty. -- This indeed is
the Height of Modesty! Then, like a true Heathen, you believe in Fate. -- If
so, pray Mr. John take care of your Fate. -- Here you complain bitterly of
Want. Can any Man be said to want, who has three good Meals a Day? -- Now comes
the best of all. -- You are one of those fine Gentlemen who cannot play the Fool
but they must bring in the Church. You abuse Sermons. -- Who make Sermons but
the Clergy? -- and the Clergy make the Church. These Matters, Mr. John, ought
to be held in Reverence by all Men, much more by such as you.' -- 'I most
humbly beseech your Lordship, said Jack, to -- ' 'Pray Sir, spare me, said my
Lord, for I have but a few Words more to say. -- You were so good as to give me
a Bit of Poetry, and, in Return, permit me to give you a Bit of Prose. -- He
then rung his Bell, and giving him a Paper proceeded. -- Here is, Mr. John
Conyers, some of my own Composition, and to show you it is of some Value, pray
tack these ten Guineas to it. -- So now, Mr. John Conyers, you are a Freeman,
and have my Consent to get what Place you please. -- My Lord's Gentleman then
entered the Chamber. -- Lewis, said my Lord, here is Mr. John, who has given me
such a Lecture on his Modesty, that convinces me is the most impudent Fellow
breathing: So, bid the Porter open the Door and let him out. Such Modesty ought
to be seen in the World. -- Jack was extremely mortified, and attempted to
speak, but Lewis shouldered him out of the Room. Finding he could have no
Remedy, he bundled up his little Effects, quitted the House, and soon visited
Mr. Sangfroid, to whom he told his Story.

THIS Accident, said his Friend, gives me little Concern, for I believe his
Lordship would never have provided for you as you deserve; but, if you will
wear a Livery, I can get you into Sir Peter Shallow's Service Tomorrow. He is
a Member of Parliament, and perhaps, in Time, may procure you an Employment.'
-- 'It is worth the Trial, said Conyers, and a Livery shall be no Objection. --
Next Day Jack attended Sir Peter, and received the Badge of Office; but, by the
Advice of his Friend, he took the Name of Constant.

CHAP. II.
There, Affectation, with a sickly Mein,
Shows in her Cheeks the Roses of Eighteen,
Practiced to lisp, and hang the Head aside,
Faints into Airs and languishes with Pride,
On the rich Quilt sinks with becoming Woe,
Wrapped in a Gown, for sickness, and for show.
The Fair-ones feel such Maladies as these,
When each new Night-dress gives a new Disease.
POPE'S Rape of the Lock.
SIR PETER SHALLOW was a Gentleman of large Fortune, but more remarkable for
his easy, quiet Temper, than strong Judgment. His Lady had somewhat of the
opposite Character, and, as her Understanding informed her Sir Peter had but a
small Share, she took the accustomed Privilege of, sometimes, imposing on it,
and indeed his great Fondness gave her frequent Opportunities. -- Her Ladyship
had a very delicate Constitution, and was afflicted with the Spleen and Vapors
to such a Degree, that she has sometimes been silent for ten Minutes, then has
burst out into Lamentations and Tears, then into violent Laughter, and end in a
Swoon. -- Doctor Nostrum constantly attended; but one Evening when he had
finished above, Sir John, got him to taste some Cape Wine, and give some
Account of her Ladyship's Disorder. -- Sir John, said the Doctor, who was a dry
Joker, here is my Service to you. -- Upon my Word very good Wine -- very good
Wine indeed, Sir. But -- you were saying something of that there Disorder. --
Why -- to be sure, your Hypochondriac and Hysteric Disorders are troublesome,
-- very troublesome, and tedious, but seem, I may say, to be more so to the
Husband or Wife, or Attendants, than to the Patient and Physician. I think I
have had these Disorders, in a peculiar Manner under my Care, for these Thirty
or Thirty-two Years last past; and I think I may say, that I understand them;
that is, I know how to treat them properly. -- There is no certain Rule to go
by, for, -- for as a skilful Mariner must find out the Trim of his Ship; so I
say a skilful Physician must find out the Temper of his Patient. -- If I
prescribe a China Jarr, when the Malady is fixed on a Japan Cabinet, I shall do
Wrong, -- be all out, and perchance may double the Disorder upon me.

I OWN, Doctor, said Sir Peter, I am no Judge of these Matters, but for my
Blood, I cannot conceive what Jarrs or Cabinets have to do in the Affair' -- O
Lord, Sir Peter, cried the Doctor -- but here is my best Respects. -- In Truth
it has a charming Flavor! -- but, as you were saying, -- or -- as I was
saying. -- To explain this Phoenomenon, I shall not call in the Ancients, for
they were ignorant, very ignorant of sundry modern Ailments, but account, that
is, Reason upon them, on the Principles of the modern Philosophy. -- Hem -- hem
-- The Disorder is of the Feminine Gender. -- When it attacks a Masculine
Figure, it then becomes of the doubtful. -- It is termed, by Pre-eminence,
Vapor, from its ascending Quality; for it rises (you will please to observe,
Sir) in the Heart by the too quick Viberation of the Blood, and mounts directly
to the Brain. -- Thus -- when an Object is placed before a Lady in such a Point
of Light, that the Rays of her Eyes center, and form a Focus upon it, the
Effect is surprising. -- The Object indeed remains sound and entire, but her
Heart burns for it. -- When the Heart Strings are untuned, no Wonder that the
Voice is all Discord. -- A Diamond Solitair -- A Gilt Chariot -- Fine Dresden
China -- An Indian Skreen -- and the like, cause such a Fluttering of the
animal Spirits, and raise such a longing for possessing them, that clearly
demonstrates Sir Isaac's Doctrine of Attraction and Vision. -- Contrary
Principles will sometimes produce the same dreadful Effects -- When a Lady
delights in the innocent Amusement of PLAY, and has what they call, an ill Run,
it undoubtedly will over-heat the Blood, and sour the Temper, -- but I say --
when she is not in a Condition to discharge such honorable Debts, the whole
Mass is on a Ferment, and frequently produces Consequences very fatal to the
Repose of the Family.

WOULD to Heaven, said Sir Peter, it was the Case of my dear Creature, I then
could soon apply the Remedy.' -- Why truly, Sir Peter, replied the Doctor, two
or three hundred Guineas make wonderful Alterations. I would advise you, Sir
Peter, to see how my Prescriptions will operate for a Day or two. -- If the
Disorder don't take a Turn in that Time, why, apply yours. -- But, here is my
good Lady's better Health. -- I profess it is a most delicious Cordial! -- It
warms my Heart.' -- 'I fancy, Doctor, said Sir Peter, this Wine would be very
proper for my dear Girl. -- It would raise her Spirits. -- 'Raise her Spirits,
cried the Doctor, why, it is their being too high that causes the Disorder. --
Besides -- Besides -- All dulciferous Fluids are bad. -- Acid is her proper
Regimen, and though it is true, there is an Acidity in all Sweets; it is not of
the right Sort -- Your right genuine Sour, is the surest Remedy. -- I have
ordered the Juice of the Crab Apple to be taken internally, and the fungous
Matter to be applied, Plaister-ways, to the Shoulders and Back, with great
Success. -- I was once sent for to a rich Carpenter's in Southwark, whose Wife
was suddenly seized with the Vapors. -- The poor Woman was as extremely ill as
any Lady of the first Quality. -- So, Sir, -- as I was saying, -- I was going
to order her the Apples, but the Season not affording any, and her Case being
very desperate, I directed her Husband to take a slender Twig of that there
Tree of about three Foot long, and apply the same in so smart a Manner to the
Shoulders, that the Part might be thoroughly warmed, and the Pores so opened,
as at once to draw, and suffer the malignant Effluvia to evaporate with Ease.
-- Next Morning, Sir, I visited my Patient, but, to my very great Surprise, I
found her cheerfully sitting by the Kitchen Fire, darning her Husband's
Stockings. -- The Fellow was an ungrateful Dog -- for he never employed me
since. -- I shall not, Sir Peter, take up more of your Time at present, but
refer you to a small Folio on that Subject, which I have now ready for the
Press, -- This one Glass and no more. -- Amongst a Variety of Observations, one
is pretty general. -- In all the Practice and Experience I have had, I never
knew a Lady subject to Spleen or Vapors, who was blessed with a surly
ill-natured Husband. -- In Russia the Disorder is unknown, otherwise the Great
Klincosky, and the celebrated Baroniwisky, would have taken some Notice of it;
but you frequently meet with the Use and Efficacy of the Crab Tree, and find it
in most of their Prescriptions, which, perhaps, is given by way of Prevention.
-- But my Hour is come for a Consultation, -- so -- Sir Peter, your most
obedient and most faithful humble Servant. --

POOR Sir Peter was greatly edified by the Doctor's learned Dissertation, but
had not Judgment enough to take his Advice; for, with the Impatience of a
Lover, he flew to my Lady's Apartment, and finding her somewhat composed, though
extremely feeble, he ventured to mention, That perhaps she might want some
little Necessaries he was unacquainted of, and entreated her Acceptance of
Three Hundred Guineas. -- He threw the Money on the Table; but it was
astonishing to observe, how quickly the Remedy operated. -- Her Face glowed,
Vermillion spread her Cheeks, she smiled heavenly, and, at last, most tenderly
embracing her dear Sir Peter, she sunk into his Arms, and every Symptom of the
Malady vanished.

CHAP. III.
For as a Pythagorean Soul
Runs through all Beasts, and Fish and Fowl,
And has a Smack of every one;
So Love does, and has ever done;
And therefore, though it is never so fond,
Takes strangely to the Vagabond:
It Is but an Ague that is reverst,
Whose hot-Fit takes the Patient first;
That after burns with Cold as much
As Ice in Greenland does the Touch.
HUDIBRAS.
THE Servants had persuaded Jack to be a Member, and pay Quarteridge to a
Society of Footmen, which they called a Parliament. This Convocation regulated
diverse weighty Matters, and raised a Fund for the Maintenance of their
Brethren out of Place. The Members took the Titles of their respective Masters,
and spoke and acted so near their Characters, that it might be termed a
Saturnalia. Jack was but too punctual a Visiter. If he improved not in his
Manners by such Company, he thought, at least, that he was well diverted.

THE Constitution of this motly Synod, with their Conduct and Resolutions, must
be postponed to another Chapter, that the Chain of this History may not be
broken.

WAS our Hero entitled to an Estate, his Age would permit him to enjoy it. --
His Complexion, his Manner, his Voice, but above all, his generous
good-humoured Disposition, could not escape the piercing Eyes of Mrs. Susanna
Pinup. This Lady acted in the humble Station of Waiting Woman to Lady Shallow.
From her Knowledge of sundry domestic Secrets, she had great Power in the
Family, and, as the Servants phrase it, had feathered her Nest. Her great
Sagacity not only discovered Charms in the Person of Mr. John Constant, but
that he had Money likewise. The Union of such Perfections, merited her
tenderest Regard, to which, she thought, if her own were added, the System of
Happiness would be complete.

WITH these Views Mrs. Pinup began to notice our Jack in a particular Manner.
She showed him every Civility; she honored him frequently with her
Conversation, and was so intimate and gracious, that he often drank Tea in her
Chamber. Such a manifest Partiality drew on her the Resentment and scandalous
Tongues of the other Servants; but, from her exalted Seat, she looked down with
Contempt on the vulgar Wretches. -- Mr. Buffett, the Butler, seemed most
concerned, and, with a jaundic'd Eye, beheld this growing Passion, so fatal to
his Hopes. This Gentleman had long sighed for Mrs. Pinup, and made sundry
Libations of Pints of Sack, and other choice Wines, on the Shrine of her
Beauty. His Project was as extensive as it was ambitious. He judged, that could
he obtain the Heart of this Lady, the cheating the Family in every Branch, from
the Cellar, upwards, would center in his own Pocket. This was a Loss his
Philosophy was not Proof against, and made him meditate dire Revenge.

Mrs. PINUP was so fond of Jack, and so secure of her darling Scheme, that she
omitted some Essentials in bringing it to bear; for one Evening, when
Protestations and Vows were plentifully bestowed on each other, and fervent
Kisses and Embraces given, and returned with mutual Ardour, the World and all
its idle Ceremonies, were forgotten, and equal Happiness cemented their Hearts
without the Assistance of any Priest, except that of Love.

MATTERS were thus conducted for some Time; but Mrs. Pinup had praised Jack so
much to Miss Shallow, that she longed to converse with him, and Pinup's Chamber
gave her frequent Opportunities. Miss Shallow was Sister to Sir Peter, and had
a Fortune of Ten Thousand Pounds. Her Education had been none of the best, and
her Person was of that Sort, that a Man passes by without noticing. However,
Jack's Vanity was strangely up, and Ten Thousand Pounds put a Million of
Schemes into his Head, and his waking and sleeping Dreams were filled with
Equipage and Splendour. -- With some Difficulty and weighty Reasons, he
persuaded Pinup to assist him, and Miss Shallow seemed no-ways averse to his
Caresses and Proposal, though the was actually engaged to 'Squire Hunt, and the
Marriage Writings drawn. In short, nothing was wanting to complete this Affair
but a convenient Opportunity, which would soon have happened, had not adverse
Fate, in the Shape of Mr. Buffett, maliciously interposed.

JEALOUSY, Envy, Interest and Revenge, are powerful separate, but make strange
Havoc when united. Buffett had them all. He had never ceased watching the
Motions of Mrs. Pinup; and his Discoveries were such, that they added to his
Pain; but, when he found Miss Shallow was of the Party, Revenge opened an ample
Field.

SIR Peter, as I Have before observed, was not the brightest Genius in England;
but, in Recompense, Nature had indulged him with a large Share of Pride, (that
Vice of little Minds!) with which he sometimes imposed himself on the World as
a Man of Consequence and great Importance. -- Mr. Buffett knew his ruling
Passion, and applied to it. On the first Notice, the Knight stormed and swelled
with Rage; but the Butler moderated his Anger, and persuaded him into Patience,
until he should convince him of the Truth. -- Next Evening the Lovers met; but
the artful Buffett had so contrived, that Sir Peter abruptly entered, and
caught the unguarded Pair in their innocent Embraces, and Mrs. Pinup in the
Midst of a Discourse on Constancy. -- Fine Doings in my House, cried Sir Peter,
-- But I Will spoil your Sport, you impudent Son of a W -- re. -- He ran directly
at Jack, but Love and Miss Shallow averted the Blow, and gave him an
Opportunity of slipping out of the Room. His Retreat was so precipitate, that
he did not observe the Butler listening on the Stair-head, but drove against
his Breast with such Force, that poor Mr. Buffett was hurried down a little
improperly, for his Head went foremost. He fell with a mighty Noise, and the
Alarm was general through the Family. -- Had there been Earth or Air-quakes in
those Days, no Doubt they had all ran to Prayers, and laughed at themselves for
so doing, when the Danger was over. -- Sir Peter thundered -- Miss screamed,
and Pinup wept so loud, that my Lady with her Company, and almost all the
Servants, filled the Room in an Instant.

THE Knight thought he acted very cunningly, by not telling the Whole of this
Affair before so many; but as he dropped some Words about Miss, and insisted that
Pinup and Jack should be immediately discharged, he left them all Room enough
to think the worst, though, perhaps, their Charity and Goodnature wanted not his
Help. -- My Lady pleaded strongly for poor Pinup; yet at last she was obliged
to consent, but with a Proviso, that the Butler should make a Third. Sir Peter
gave him up very readily, so that in less than an Hour, the ill-fated Mr.
Buffett lost his Cellar. -- The unhappy Pinup lost all her Lover's Promises. --
The unfortunate Jack lost Ten Thousand Pounds, and -- next Day Miss Shallow
lost her Reputation, but luckily she found it on the Third, in the Arms of
'Squire Hunt.

I FORGOT to mention, that Mr. Sangfroid had been lately obliged to accompany a
Nobleman to Lisbon; so that Jack lost this Asylum, with his Advice and
Friendship. -- When he had packed up his Goods, and resigned his Livery, he
found Mrs. Pinup waiting for him in the Hall, because, as she said, One Coach
might serve both. -- They mounted, but where to drive was not determined; but
at last they stopped in Southampton-street. Jack alighted, and soon found a
convenient Lodging, where the happy Pair acted the Part of Man and Wife, with
great Harmony for about a Fortnight. Pinup often boasted her Riches, and
tempted him, by showing Thirty Guineas in hard Gold, besides Linens and
Woollens, and sundry Gowns and Petticoats. -- Jack was Proof against all Tears
and Entreaties. -- 'Psha, said he, I Have more than that myself. Marry! -- we
should be pretty Devils truly! No, no, Child, keep your Money, and I Will keep
your Secret.' -- 'I don't understand, said she, what you mean by Secrets. -- If
I have any, I believe it will not be a Secret long. -- I wish your Money was no
more a Secret than mine.' -- 'So much for Secrets, replied Jack, now for the
Proof. Do you see that large Trunk, my Dear? It Is the faithful Repository of
fifty Guineas.' Ay, ay, said she, I see both your Trunks, but for the Money,
seeing's believing.' 'You have no more Faith, cried Jack, than an Ebrew Jew;
but I shall convince you in a Moment. -- The large Trunk had not been opened,
by him, these six Months, and he found the Lock rusty, and more difficult than
it used to be. At last he got the better, but was surprised at seeing some of
his Effects out of order. In a little Flutter, he searched for his Purse, but
not readily finding it, his Hurry increased, and he pulled out an old Great
Coat, and some tattered Shirts artfully mingled with some of his Things of
little Value. -- In a Word, his Money and his best Effects were vanished. -- He
flew in an Instant to the small Trunk, which contained his ordinary wear, and
in which he had very oddly placed the small Box his old Friend Mr. Kindly had
given him, and most of Mr. Villeneuf's and his own Papers. Finding this safe
and untouched, he sat down in Silence, though greatly perplexed.

BLESS me, said Mrs. Pinup, what ails the Man? -- Sure, you haven't lost your
Money? -- Yes, said Jack, it is gone, -- every Shilling gone! but how, or which
Way, Heaven knows! -- Heaven knows! said she, I believe Heaven knows very well
you had no such Thing, but that you have betrayed and cheated a poor innocent
Woman; but since I find these are your Tricks, I shall take Care of myself, I
assure you. -- Very well, replied Jack, pray proceed, for I am in a Temper to
provoke a Saint; for I sha'n't answer. -- As she had nothing to fear, she
saluted him with bitter Terms, and many stinging Reproaches, till Tears
intervened, and gave him a Recess. -- Since, said he, you are so good to be
silent, because you have no more to say, pray let me be heard. -- I have my
Quarter's Wages in my Pocket, which will more than pay the Lodging. Let me have
a little Repose this Night, and Tomorrow you may dispose of yourself how and
which way you please, for, by the Lord, this shall be the last. -- Pinup
attempted a Reply, but he swore in so peremptory a Manner, as frightened the
poor Woman into Silence. They retired to Bed, but Love and Repose had forsaken
it, and Hatred and Disquietude took their Place. The dawning Day roused Jack
from his Pillow, and Pinup unwillingly followed. He generously paid all
Charges, and putting his Trunks on a Bier, parted with this Lady, telling her,
before the Land-lady, that she might follow at her Leisure, but, as he
intended, so, he never saw her after.

CHAP. IV.
EXAMPLE is a living Law, whose Sway
Men more than all the written Laws obey.
SEDLEY.
AS the dropping Water will, in Time, impress even Marble, so low and mean
Company will communicate their Sentiments and infect even an Heart of
Understanding and Virtue. Jack now ceased to be the agreeable and the polite.
He swore much, and sometimes drank. He had contracted a saucy impertinent Air,
and instead of that humble, modest Deportment that drew on him the Love and
Esteem of the World, his Looks and Actions seemed to demand them as his Right,
and as due to his Person and superior Merit. He forgot all the Lessons and
Instructions of his Friends, and thought his own Experience and great Knowledge
were sufficient to conduct him, without the Assistance of pedantick Rules, or
the musty Gravity of old Philosophers.

HOWEVER, this last Stroke of Fortune had altered his Thermometer, and Pride
sunk down to extreme Humility. In this Temper he applied to Mr. Edge, a Barber,
to whom he made known his Situation. Honest Edge was sorry to find him in such
Distress, and provided him a Room for two Shillings a Week, but for his Diet,
he was to manage the best Way he could. He had still three Guineas and some
Silver remaining, and waited, with great Anxiety, for a Turn of Fortune.

AS our Hero, like other Heroes, has found a Time for Idleness and Inaction, it
furnishes me an Opportunity of examining the Memoirs of the Parliament of
Footmen, and making such Extracts as I judge of public Use and Benefit.

THIS noble Order held their Assemblies at sundry Beer-Houses, but all united
in the main View of giving Laws to, and providing a Maintenance for the
Brethren who came within their Rules. The Chamber our Friend frequented was
filled with the Servants of Dukes, Lords, Bishops, Knights and Squires, and
made up a subscribing Body of about two hundred, of which forty or fifty were
commonly present at each weekly Assembly. As these great Men, followed the
Example of their great Superiors, they were less clamorous than might be
expected. An old Gentleman filled the Chair as Speaker, and kept Matters in
most excellent order.

THE following are a few of their principal Resolutions; for by the Advice of
Friends, I shall speedily publish, by Subscription, a full and impartial
History of this noble Order, in seven Volumes Octavo, in which will be included
all their Speeches on the most interesting Subjects, and a complete System of
Wisdom and Prudence. The Resolutions necessary in this Place are as follow.

RESOLVED, That each Member, when out of Place, shall receive two Shillings
each Week, for the Term of six Months, but no longer. On his getting a new
Livery to pay fresh Entrance.

RESOLVED, That each Member pay five Shillings on his Admittance, and two
Shillings and Sixpence each Quarter.

RESOLVED, That no Member, when accompanying his Master or Mistress in their
Visits, shall attempt to open or hold the Coach Door, or afford them any the
least Assistance, but leave them to the Care of the Servants of the Family
visited.

RESOLVED, That the Hats, Swords or Canes of Gentlemen visiting our respective
Masters, shall be seized upon, and kept in safe Custody, until the said
Gentlemen depart. Should any of the said Gentlemen refuse or neglect to pay the
usual Compliment, it shall and may be lawful to change his said Hat, etc. or
have them mislaid or lost, and, as Occasion serves, to give him Water when he
calls for Wine; small Beer when he desires Bread; and, if he be an obstinate
Offender, entirely to disregard and affront him.

RESOLVED, That as we look on the Tables of our Masters as Ordinaries, so we
expect to be paid in Proportion to their Rank, from half a Crown to half a
Guinea.

RESOLVED, That no Persons paying a Morning Visit to our respective Masters,
and particularly Trades-People with Bills, shall be permitted to see them,
except on Payment of the usual and accustomed Fee, but on their Compliance,
then our said Masters to be made visible, notwithstanding any Orders to the
contrary.

RESOLVED, That all Tradesmen shall be obliged to pay at the Rate of Five
Pounds by the Hundred, for every Commodity sold to our respective Masters; and
the said Tradesmen are hereby empowered to make an extraordinary Charge of ten
Pounds by the Hundred.

RESOLVED, That in attending our Masters or Mistresses to the Playhouse, or
any other public Spectacle where we are admitted, we will endeavor to imitate
their Conduct, by doing our utmost to disturb the Audience. This will
demonstrate our Power, and show the Use of exalting us.

RESOLVED, That no Member shall be entitled to the Benefit of this Society, who
shall live more than three Months in any Family who do not play Cards five
Nights in the Week, Sunday Night included; neither shall he receive any
Benefit, if it can be proved that he has suffered any Diminution to his
Authority and legal Privileges.

RESOLVED, And it is hereby most solemnly agreed, by the Honor and Dignity of
our Cloth, that should any Member of this Society marry the Relict of his
Master, or the Daughter of his Master or Mistress, that he shall pay into the
Hands of our Treasurer, Ten Shillings for every Hundred Pounds obtained by such
Marriage.

RESOLVED, That any Member, guilty of Robbery or Theft, shall be expelled this
Society. Nevertheless, this is not understood to extend to Breach of Trust,
Embezzlement of Goods, and the necessary Frauds in Bread, Coals, Candles, Oats,
etc. which we regard as Privileges annexed to our Posts, and Part of our just
Perquisites.

RESOLVED, That each Member be as careful as possible of all his Apparel,
except the Livery, and that he practices all lawful Ways and Means to wear out
his Master's Shirts, Shoes, Stockings, etc.

THEY had many more, equally wholesome Laws, not made, like some others, to be
broken or despised, for I apprehend they kept strictly to each.

CHAP. V.
Endure and conquer; Jove will soon dispose
To future Good our past and present Woes:
An Hour will come with Pleasure to relate
Your Sorrows past, as Benefits of Fate.
DRYDEN'S VIRGIL.
JACK remained at the Barber's about three Weeks; and though he received his
Parliamentary Pension very punctually, yet his Money diminished apace.

HE saw no Appearance of Advancement, and gloomy melancholy Thoughts racked his
Brain. With a View of alleviating his Sorrows, he frequently took a Dram, and
innocently amused himself with one or two very low Amors. This made his Purse
feel a very sensible Decay, for it now contained but a very few Shillings. --
Mad and wild at the Cruelty of his Fate, a thousand Projects filled his Head,
and at last ended in the noble Resolution of spending the Little he had in
Pleasure, and then to resign a Life that became burdensome to him. He brought
many weighty Reasons to vindicate the Action, and called, to his Mind the
Example of sundry great Men who accounted it meritorious. -- Why are we, said
he, brought into the World but to enjoy the few Pleasures of it with Ease and
Content. -- What Ease have I? -- What Content? -- If the Reasons of Being
cease, it is but just we should cease to Be -- Besides, What are all the
Pleasures of this World, even in the highest Gratification, but idle stupid
Repetitions of the same stupid Amusements? -- Come, gentle Thames, and peaceful
Grave now come, for Conyers is aweary of this World, and longs to lay his
troubled Head in Dust!

HE was now in St. James's Park. His Steps were slow; his Arms were folded; his
Head reclined, and a fixed Melancholy was seated on his Brow. -- In the Midst
of these Reflections, two of his quondam Brethren passed him by; but one,
turning about, cried, -- Z -- ns, Jack Constant! -- Such a Man alive! Where the
Devil have you hid yourself these thousand Years? -- These Sort of Greetings
finished, they entered into Particulars. I suppose, said Tom Smart, you are now
one of those poor dastardly Scoundrels, who starve in a rich World.' -- 'Let
him starve, cried Jack Brazen, if he has not Spirit enough to fish in troubled
Waters.' 'Come, come, said Smart, do you really want Money?' -- 'Not much,
replied our Friend, for I believe I have a Shilling; but where to get another,
the Lord knows.' -- 'Here's a Guinea, my Boy, said Smart, you see I don't want
Money, nor need you, if you will take our Advice; but let us dine together, and
talk that Matter over.

THEY dined, and a Bottle of Port was opened, as well as the Conversation.
Smart dwelt long on the partial Distribution of the good Things of this World,
and on the Necessity of correcting the Scheme. -- Is it just, said he, that
Numbers of good-for-nothing worthless Animals shall wallow in Plenty and
Abundance, whilst such young Fellows as us may want the common Conveniences of
Life?' -- Very just, said Brazen, provided they will permit our using some of
their Superfluities.' -- D -- me, said Jack, but I am all in the Dark. I wish
you would speak a little plainer, or not speak at all. You may depend on my
Secrecy, for I am almost already in the Grave. Now, Gentlemen, if you have a Mind
to bring me to Life, come to the Point directly, and a thousand to one but I Will
join in your Scheme.' -- 'Well said, honest Jack, cried Smart, then to the
Point. -- You must know, that Brazen and I were turned a-drift together from my
Lord's. We wore out our Shoes and the Pavement, but could get no Employment;
and something told us, that Eating was necessary, so, my dear Constant, we
padded it about the Fields for some Time, and, by our Industry, have risen to
Horse. We are at this Time Commissioners of the Highways, and collect those
Duties omitted in the Acts of Parliament.' -- 'I understand you, said Jack; but
does it answer? Is it not dangerous?' -- 'It answers, said Smart, extremely
well, though, to be sure, it is a little hazardous; but where is the Employment
without it? -- Don't the Merchant venture for Lucre, and the Soldier and Sailor
risk their Lives for Sixpence a Day? -- Some risk their Reputation, and most
People risk their Souls. -- Believe me, Jack, the whole World is a Game of
Hazard, and (showing his Pistols) here are my Dice. -- Will you set?

OUR Hero paused, and a violent Conflict arose in his Breast between Virtue and
Necessity. -- At last, Brazen clapped him on the Shoulder, and cried, -- What
says my dear Boy? -- Will you make a Third, and then our Party is complete? --
Gentlemen, said Jack, give me your Hands. Now I am a Brother. -- Command and
lead me where you please.

That Night they conducted him to their Lodging, and gave him a Horse for the
Morning Expedition, and three Guineas more. They rose very early, and Jack put
on a Pair of Spatterdashes, examined his Saddle and Pistols, and found all
Things in tolerable Order.

THE Plan of Operation was settled by Smart, but, providentially, Jack made a
small Alteration. No, Gentlemen, said he, let us not set out together, or keep
Company on the Road, as it may cause Suspicion; let us rather divide, and ride
on to Stains, but join on Hounslow-heath precisely at Eleven o'Clock, when we
cannot fail of meeting the Coach we look for. -- Besides, when separate, we may
each pick up a single Traveller to amuse us before the principal Action.' --
'Very right, said Smart, then I Will advance first, Brazen will follow in half an
Hour, and you will bring up the Rear in another; so, Gentlemen, Good Morrow,
Success attend us. -- He rode off, and Brazen but rested his proper Time.

WHEN alone, Jack began to consider this Affair more circumspectly, but not
with a Design of breaking his Engagement. The Fellow, who took Care of the
Horses, was no Stranger to the Expedition, and congratulated his new Master, on
the Prospect of making his Fortune. Tim, said Jack, I have a Thought that will
surprise my Friends; if you will assist me I Will give your a Crown for your
Trouble.' -- That I will, Master, answered Tim, and be true and faithful too.'
-- 'Well, then, said Jack, take my Horse, and ride a little beyond the Church
at Hounslow, and wait for me; you may depend I shall not keep you long. When you
deliver me the Horse, go directly across the Heath. -- Tim promised to obey his
Orders, and set forwards.

TWO odd Circumstances happened to Jack. He very fortunately knew the Name of a
Family that lived just by Hounslow, of which he intended to make a proper Use;
and the Old Great Coat which he found in his Trunk, he had made into a Surtout,
and was then on his Back. This Coat was of that Sort of Cloth that is one Side
Scarlet, and the other Blue; it was single, and not lined. This Day the Blue
was outside, and the Sleeves turned up, made Scarlet Cuffs. Thus dressed, he
walked to Piccadilly, and took a Post-Chaise to Hounslow, where he arrived at
Ten o'Clock. With great Civility he enquired of Mrs. Day about the Family he
said he was going to visit. He called for a Gill of Wine, and the good Woman
answered all his Questions, which were such, as made her imagine he was a
Relation of the Family, and had just come from Abroad. He hinted, that perhaps
he might stay there a Week, or return in an Hour, when he would be glad of a
Post-Chaise ready for London. Mrs. Day assuring him he should have one at a
Moment's Warning, he walked forward though with a troubled Mind, and soon found
his Horse. When Tim had marched off, he turned his Surtout, and was now in
Scarlet, with Blue Sleeves.

HE rode on about three Miles, and met with his Friends, who began to be in
some Pain about him.

Z -- ds, said Smart, what the Devil kept you so long? -- but we have no Time
to talk, for the Coach is at Hand. You are to keep the Postillion and Coachman
in Awe; Brazen will do the same with the Servants, and let me alone for
conversing with the Passengers. When the Jobb's over, let us separate, and meet
at our Lodging.

THEY had no Time for further Deliberation, for the Coach drew near. --
Courage! cried Smart, and all rode briskly forward. -- Jack did his Duty with
the Postillion; -- The Servants, making a Resistance, received a Fire from
Brazen, which did no Harm; but the Compliment was instantly returned, and poor
Brazen fell from his Horse. Whilst this was doing, Smart attacked the Coach,
but a Gentleman in it, with great Resolution, so nimbly, and with such
Strength, turned his Wrist, that the Pistol went off in the Air, and
immediately one of the Servants rode up, and knocked him down.

JACK, finding two Wings of his Army taken Prisoners, was determined to save
the Remainder by a speedy Flight. The Gentlemen and Servants were so busy about
Smart and Brazen, that he was not pursued, but got near Hounslow in a short
Time. -- His former Caution had now its Use; for tying his Horse to a Tree, a
little out of the Road, he once more turned his Coat, and walked leisurely on
to the Inn. With a tolerable Coolness of Temper, he desired a Post-Chaise; but
accidentally a Horse was wanting, which obliged him to wait a full half Hour,
which, no doubt, he thought was half an Age. He summoned all his Resolution to
avoid Suspicion, and talked to Mrs. Day about the Family he had visited. His
Chaise was just ready when Mr. Day entered. -- There, now, said he, is two fine
Gentlemen that have made a noble Kettle of Fish of it this Morning.' -- 'Bless
me, my Dear, said Mrs. Day, what is the Matter? -- Not much, replied her
Husband, only a Coach was stopped on the Heath by three High-waymen, and two of
'em is taken, and now at next Inn.' -- 'Dear Sirs, said Mrs. Day, it is the most
preposteroustest Thing in Life, that Gentlefolks will not travel in Post
Chaiseses, and then they are always safe from these Fellows.' -- 'Well, well,
said her Husband, I must send after the Third who escaped; I Will engage to find
out his Scarlet Coat before Night.' -- Were it not, said Mrs. Day, that these
poor Creatures pay for being Taken, I am sure and certain my Husband would
never trouble his Head about them; because, you know, Sir, one of the Gang will
peach, and then the others hang of Course.

WHAT were the Emotions of Jack's Soul, cannot be expressed. He felt Agonies
that all his former Distresses had never plunged him into; but, recollecting
his Situation, he chim'd in with Mrs. Day, and spoke greatly against the
Disturbers of the Public. -- At last, he took his Leave of Mrs. Day, mounted
his Chaise, and got safe to London, but often thought the Horses were very bad.

CHAP. VI.
To he Good, is to be Happy: Angels
Are happier than Men, because they are better.
Guilt is the Source of Sorrow; it is the Fiend,
The avenging Fiend, that follows us behind
With Whips and Stings. The Blessed know none of this,
But rest in everlasting Peace of Mind,
And find the Height of all their Heaven in Goodness.
ROW.
GUILT is a Fiend, that seizing the Conscience, becomes a Tyrant over every
Idea of Man. Remorse is his Companion, and Suspicion and Fear constantly pursue
his Steps. Disquietude engrosses every Thought, and even his sleeping
Imagination is filled with Dread and Horror. -- Our poor Hero is now an Object
of the greatest Compassion. -- He knew not whom to trust, where to fly for
Safety, or how to live; and he had now discovered that he was very unfit to
die. -- He got to his Lodging, and telling the Barber that he was engaged to a
Gentleman at Hampstead, he paid a Week's Rent, called a Coach, and drove, with
his Effects, to an Inn in South-wark.

NOT secure in so public a Place, he found out a poor Widow in a neighboring
Village, with whom he agreed for Diet and Lodging. Here he was safe and quiet,
had his anxious Thoughts permitted him any Repose. A Fortnight passed, and he
paid the poor Woman very punctually. She began to conceive a very great Opinion
of Mr. Conyers, as his whole Deportment was very regular and decent. His Mind
now grew somewhat more calm, and his Sleep was less disturbed, for he most
sincerely repented of his Folly and Wickedness, and with great Fervency and
Devotion, confessed his manifold Transgressions, and humbly prayed for Mercy
and Forgiveness.

HIS Purse was extremely low. He had Thoughts of applying to some People he
knew, but durst not venture to London; and his Landlady was so poor, she could
not afford to give him Credit. -- He almost determined to break his Promise to
Mr. Johnston, and write to Lord Truegood, or Mr. Kindly; but as he knew not
what Apology to make for deferring it so long, or how to account for his
Conduct, he was obliged to lay the Thought aside, at least for the present. --
He frequently wept most bitterly, and bewailed his wretched Condition. The
Agitation of his Mind affected his Health, and threw him into a dangerous
Fever. The poor Woman was extremely tender and careful of him, but his Soul
wanting as salutary Remedies as his Body, he begged that a Clergyman might be
sent for; and Doctor St. Amor, Minister of the Parish, attended on the first
Notice. This Gentleman was one of those who reproach many of his Profession,
for he was pious without Moroseness, and charitable without Ostentation. Jack,
though extremely weak, politely thanked the Doctor for his Condescension in
visiting so poor, so wretched, so miserable a Being. -- The good Man, with an
easy Countenance, replied. -- If your Situation, Sir, is so bad, I think you
require, and have a natural Right to my more immediate and particular Attention.

THE Doctor prayed by him in the true Spirit of Devotion. His Exhortations were
so filled with Christian Eloquence, as warmed and cheered the Heart of Conyers,
and insensibly lightened his Burdens. -- The Fever still continued, and the
Doctor never failed his Morning and Evening Visits. -- Jack was so charmed,
that he opened his whole Soul to this good Man, and hid not the minutest Part
of all his Affairs since his Return from France. -- The Gentleman flattered not
his Sins, neither did he attempt to affright him with the dismal Prospect of
endless Misery. He skilfully probed and cleansed his Wounds, and then poured in
the Balsam of Peace, Comfort, and Hopes of Pardon by Repentance, and a Newness
of Life. -- Had Mr. Dryden been acquainted with one Man of Dr. St. Amour's
Character, I apprehend he would not have said, that Religion and Roguery go
together.

IN one of these Conversations, Jack took an Opportunity of mentioning the
Promise he made to Mr. Kindly when he gave him the small Box, as spoken of in a
former Chapter. -- I am now, Sir, said he, so poor, so indigent, that I think I
may safely open the Present; but I am so feeble, that I must beg your
Assistance. The Doctor found the Box in the Trunk, and opened it by the
Bedside. -- He pulled out a Quantity of Straw, and, at last, a Sheet of Paper
which he read, and contained these Words.

My Dear Jack, Bounty Hall, 1732.
IF you have kept your Promise with regard to this Box, you must certainly be
miserable when you read this. I have a sincere and most affectionate Regard for
you, and weep at the Situation I must suppose you are in.

Should the Will of the Almighty afflict you with Sickness or Misfortunes,
patiently resign yourself into his Hands, who alone knows your Necessities, and
who suffers not a Sparrow to fall to the Ground without his Orders. Wait his
good Time without repining, and firmly rely on his Bounty.

But, should your Calamities spring from Wickedness, Folly, and Extravagance.
Oh my Child! turn to the Father of Mercies, and with a pure and upright Heart
confess your Crimes; repent of your Faults, read his Word, and practice his
Divine Precept. You will then know the Blessing of Righteousness, the Joys of
Virtue, and the real Felicity of conscious Innocence. But, be not good only for
a Time; Beware of relapsing into mistaken Pleasures. Ruin and Reprobacy will
follow, and Soul and Body be at Stake.

Oh Jack! If your Heart be not hardened in Iniquity: If any Spark remains of a
virtuous Education: If Gratitude be not dead in your Breast, think, ere it is
too late. Think on your own Happiness, and think on your assured Friend,

JOHN KINDLY.
POSTSCRIPT. Under this Paper you will find a Proof of my Love.




AS the Doctor read, Jack wept. The good Man could not avoid sympathizing, and
with streaming Eyes, pursued the Directions of the Postscript; but when he
opened a Paper nicely rolled, and threw Twenty Guineas on the Table, poor Jack
attempted to speak, but his Tongue faultering, he fainted on his Pillow. With
some Difficulty he recovered, and a violent Fit of Crying ensued. -- Yes, cried
he, I will obey my Father, my Friend, and my Guardian Angel! Oh Sir! What has
not this most worthy Man done for me! -- He saved me when an Infant, and
preserves me when a Man. Good God! Can I be ungrateful to his Hopes? -- Can I
disregard his charitable Instructions? -- No! If Heaven prolongs my Days, they
shall be employed in Virtue and Honor.' Your Resolution, said Dr. St. Amor,
is truly just, and I pray God to keep you firm in it, but this present Mark of
his Bounty, is not the only one you have lately received. -- His Providence has
preserved you from the shameful, infamous Death that your Hounslow Companions
suffered last Week. I have inquired particularly into that Affair, and find you
have nothing to dread. A third Person was indeed spoken of at the Trial, but
the Name of Constant or Conyers was never mentioned. Let this suffice to ease
your Mind. -- Follow Mr. Kindly's Advice, and be happy!

WHEN alone, he shudder'd and wept at the Fate of Smart and Brazen. He
reflected on the dreadful Consequences of lawless Pursuits. He traced back his
own Life and wicked Conduct, and found, that one Vice generates another; that
as they grow in Strength; they corrupt the Heart by Degrees, until the whole
Man is swallowed up in Debauchery, and his Name and Nature eraz'd out of the
Volume of the World. -- How fatal, continued he, is the Beginning of Evil! and
who can foresee the End? -- We go on from Step to Step regardless of Danger. We
walk on Fire covered with Ashes. No Thought, no Prudence guides. We dream of
Pleasure and Delight, but, too often, awake in the Gulf of Sorrow and
Perdition! -- How few, like me, have proved an almost miraculous Escape, and
what Thanks, what Gratitude do I not owe for my Deliverance! -- His Reflections
were very just and moving, and he promised to himself an entire Change of
Conduct.

HIS Spirits began to revive, and in a few Days the Fever left him. He thanked
the Apothecary, and desired his Bill, but the good Doctor St. Amor had been
beforehand with him. So generous was this Gentleman, that he would not permit
him to mention that, or any other Obligation he lay under. -- All I now want,
said the Doctor, is to see you quite recovered, and then we shall think of
somewhat for your Service. -- In a Week he was perfectly well, though a little
Pale, and when neatly dressed, the Doctor was surprised at his comely
Appearance. -- At last he proposed an Employment to Jack, which, he said, he
knew he could discharge extremely well. -- Sir John Curious, continued he,
wants a young Man, like you, to read to him, and keep his private Accounts. I
have satisfied him as to your Abilities, and he is willing to give you thirty
Pounds a Year. He is very old, rich and gouty, and sometimes peevish, but a Man
must bear with the Infirmities of Superiors. He then proceeded in a very useful
Lecture on a moral and political Conduct. -- Conyers returned him many
Acknowledgements, and in two Days he took a grateful Adieu of the good Widow,
and fixed in London with the Family of Sir John Curious.

CHAP. VII.
You cannot Love, nor Pleasure take or give;
But Life begin, when it is too late to live:
On a tired Courser you pursue Delight;
Let slip your Morning, and set out at Night.
DRYDEN.
NEVER Man began an Employment with more Pleasure. He seemed as if returned
again into Life, and was determined to spare no Pains in enjoying it. -- His
first Care was a particular Attention to his Duty, and his next was to find out
the Family Economy, that he might adapt himself to their different Tempers.

SIR JOHN CURIOUS was Sixty-seven Years of Age, very corpulent, and extremely
infirm. When his Gout was not violent, he dined with his Company, and was very
cheerful. From Seven to Nine at Night, Jack read to him; at Ten he went to Bed,
but never rose till about Eleven next Morning. Two Servants attended him, and
about One o'Clock, all his Flannels were removed, and in an old embroidered
Coat and great Wig, he sat in his Arm-Chair, and Jack did the Duty of his
Office till Three o'Clock. -- He did SIR ROBERT WALPOLE the Honor of being his
Enemy, and looked on the Craftsman, equal, if not superior to Holy Writ,
consequently these Papers were every Moment quoted. In this Choice of Books he
had great Judgment, and to show it fully, he delighted in the Works of TAILOR
the Water Poet; in an old and only Translation of DUBARTUS; in huge Folios of
Heraldry; and when inclined to Sleep, in the modern Pamphlets and weekly Papers.

HIS House-Steward had a good Salary, and a certain Quarterly Sum for providing
all Things for the Family. This Sum was accounted for, but could not be
exceeded. To examine, and checque these Accounts, was part of Jack's Duty.

SIR JOHN had always maintained the Character of A fine Gentleman. His Dress
was gay, and his Manner such, that supported the Dignity he assumed. It was a
Question, whether Pride or Avarice had the Superiority in his Constitution, but
it is certain, they frequently acted in concert. Pride obliged him to a
Punctuality in paying his Debts, but Avarice prevented his going a Step beyond
it. -- Pride made him extremely Courteous, Complaisant and Ceremonious, because
he loved to be so treated himself, but Avarice stopped his Ears against the
Cries of the Poor, expelled every Sentiment of Charity and Benevolence, and
contracted and abridg'd some of his Vices, even when he had the Power of being
Vicious. In a Word, Sir John had a Negative Character, and acquired the Title
of a good Sort of Man; that is, his Vices were not many, but he had not a
single Virtue.

HE had seen enough of one Part of the World to convince him that there was no
such Thing as a modest Woman. This happy Imagination kept him a Bachelor,
till, at the Age of Sixty-three, Love, or some other Monosyllable, stumbled
into his Head. -- The Charms of Miss Bridoon, his Sadler's Daughter, made him
so generous as to propose a Marriage and relinquish a Fortune. Whilst this
Treaty was on Foot, his Relations interposed, and some of his most intimate
Friends spoke pretty freely about it. They said, It was highly prudent in him
to marry, but begged he would consider his Age and the Infirmities growing on
him. That a Girl of Eighteen was quite out of the Rule of Proportion. That a
Mechanick's Daughter was unworthy his Rank and Fortune, and an Indignity to his
Family. That no one could answer for the Conduct of a young Girl, especially
one of low Education, and begged him to turn his Eyes on some Lady, whose Years
would Guarantee her Virtue, and make him happy in a faithful Companion.

OONS, cried the Knight, what the Plague would you be at? I tell you, my Age is
no Impediment, for I find myself as vigorous as at Twenty. If Children, not my
own, inherit my Name and Estate, is it not the Practice of every Day? Is it not
much better than the Heathen Scheme of Adoption? -- The Honor of my Family,
which my virtuous Sister makes such a Noise about, is a Farce, and I suppose
she thought so, when she ran away with my Father's Footman. Does she imagine,
that the Son of such a Scoundrel shall enjoy my Fortune? -- Then as to a
virtuous Wife, I know the World too well to expect such a one, but I likewise
know, that I had rather have a Part in a young Wench, than the Whole of any old
Woman breathing. -- In short, Sir John was resolute, or rather, positive. Miss
Bridoon was advanced to his Bed, and Consummatum est, rang through the Parish.

LADY CURIOUS was extremely pretty. Her Eyes spoke, and her great Vivacity and
Sprightliness had attractive Qualities. -- An House magnificently furnished. --
A Number of Servants, with Coach, Chariot, etc. were so infinitely beyond her
Hopes, that her little Head began to turn. Her Constitution and Soil were so
good, that the seeds of Example grew up surprizingly fast, and afforded a
plentiful Crop of the most fashionable Follies. In a short Time, she had
contracted a Variety of Acquaintance, and vastly improved in modern Politeness.
-- Plays, Operas and Visits, went a constant Round, and Drums, Routs and
Assemblies employed her Time, at Home and Abroad. She had a Passion for Play,
and played very deep. Here, indeed, her low Birth was conspicuous, for, not
being educated from her Childhood, like other Ladies of Quality, in the true
Principles of Gaming, she made but a small Progress in that Science, and played
so ill, and lost so much Money, that her charming Company was greatly courted
and admired.

SIR JOHN was very indifferent about these Matters. He allowed her two hundred
Pounds a Year as Pin-Money, but was so rigid and exact, that no Art, nor all
her Ladyship's Contrivances, could extract a Shilling more. -- Conyers knew of
large Sums lost at Cards, and was surprised how her Ladyship could answer so
many Demands; but at last he discovered, that her Play-Purse was inexhaustible.
-- Notwithstanding the Multitude of Affairs, and the Variety of Employments on
her Hands, she found a Time to present to Sir John a Brace of fine Boys. Her
Ladyship was Happy, the old Knight was Content, and Family Affairs went on with
great Harmony.

IN about three Months Conyers picked out this Information from the Steward,
and Mrs. Sieve, her Ladyship's Woman. This last threw in some Nods, Winks, and
Innuendos, but the Honor of her Lady was always sacred. Mrs. Sieve conceived a
good Opinion of Jack, and on many Occasions gave him Proofs of her Esteem. --
He had felt the fatal Effects of such Friendship, and was determined to avoid
every Temptation. -- He shunned her Presence as much as possible, and even
slighted her Favors. -- His Conduct was such an Affront to her Pride and
Beauty, that she shifted Sides, and became an implacable Enemy.

THIS kind Creature had laid many Schemes to prepossess her Lady against Jack.
She insinuated, that his Impudence had not only dared to make Attempts on her
Virtue, but had even muttered Reflections on her Ladyship. -- Fired at his
Insolence, my Lady determined to have him immediately kicked out, but the
artful Sieve begged of her Ladyship not to disparage herself so much as to
speak of such an Affair, but to worm the the Fellow out by Degrees.

THE Resolution being taken, my Lady never ceased teizing Sir John till he grew
peevish. -- Mrs. Sieve affronted Jack openly, and the Steward treated him with
great Impertinence. Conyers found a very visible Change in the Countenances of
the whole Family, and was made very uneasy in his Duty, but knew not what to
ascribe it to. -- One Evening, Sir John used him a little harshly, but the
Humility of Jack spoke much in his Favor, and obliged the Knight, with some
good Humor, to ask him, What he had done to my Lady and her Woman? -- I
protest, Sir, said Jack, I have done nothing. -- Nothing! cried Sir John, Nay
then I know your Crime; you can never be forgiven. -- Oons! a Handsome Fellow
of your Age in such a Family as this, and do Nothing! -- Thou art a silly
Blockhead, and I am sorry for it, but, Travel you must; however, I Am determined
you shall stay till I get you another Service, and have one in your Place.

JACK had been so accustomed to Disappointments, that he bore this with great
Temper and Resignation. He informed his Friend Dr. St. Amor of this
Revolution, and told him what was the Occasion of it, which he had learned from
the House-Maid. The good Man lifted up his Eyes, begged of him to have
Patience, and promised to look out for a more agreeable Employment.

SOME Days after, Conyers was busy with Sir John when Mr. Sampson entered. The
Knight had a great Regard for this Gentleman, and was extremely Civil to him.
Well, Friend Sampson, said he, Time was, when we used to meet oftener, but this
plaguey Gout makes me perform a tedious Quarentine you see.' -- 'Ah, Sir John,
replied Mr. Sampson, you are at Anchor in a safe Harbor, but I have all your
Ailments, and am buffetted about in stormy Winds. -- 'Not so, not so, answered
the Knight, I hope my old Friend and Acquaintance is in no Danger of Shipwreck.
-- No Misfortunes I hope.' -- None, said Mr. Sampson, but what my Temper can
bear. -- I have lost my only Child, just such a Youth as that, (pointing to
Jack.) I have lost the best Part of my Substance by the War, and I have found
old Age and Infirmities. -- But, is it not just, I should resign with Patience
what I enjoyed and held but at the Will of the Donor?

MR. SAMPSON, said Sir John, you were always a Philosopher, but I am really
concerned at your Misfortunes. Perhaps some Money, at this Time, may have its
Use, and I wish it was in my Power to assist you, but, really my Family is so
expensive, that I am quite poor at present. I wish I had seen you last Week,
for, it is but two Days ago since I parted with all my ready Money on a
Mortgage. -- Truly I am angry at your not acquainting me with your Distresses
-- Indeed I am -- and you know the Pleasure I take in assisting my worthy
Friends.' -- 'You are extremely good, replied Mr. Sampson, but, thank God, I am
in no want. When my Debts are collected, which are very numerous, I shall have
more than sufficient to maintain my dear Wife and I, in a comfortable Manner.
Indeed I am ill able to attend my Friends, and much want an honest young Fellow
to assist me.' -- 'I believe, said Sir John, I am pretty deep in your Books. --
The last Christening consumed a deal of Wine; but if you have the Bill, I shall
see and discharge it. -- Mr. Sampson thanked the Knight, and received one
hundred and forty Pounds, for which Jack drew a Receipt for him to sign. -- I
protest, Sir, said the Merchant, your young Man writes a charming Hand, and I
dare say understands Accounts.' -- That he does, answered Sir John, and
extremely well. He is honest, sober, and diligent, and I heartily wish you had
his Equal. What will you give me, Mr. Sampson, if I assign him over to you,
provided he consents? -- I shall give you, answered the other, my sincere
Thanks, and the young Man the best Usage in my Power.' -- 'In two Words,
replied the Knight, I know of no Fault he has, but being too virtuous and
modest for my good Family. My Lady's Maid has set my Lady against him. I know
their Tricks, but I don't mind them.

SOME Questions passed, and in less than half an Hour the Affair was concluded
on. -- Jack received fifteen Pounds for six Months Wages, and wishing Sir John
all Happiness, once more shifted his Station.

CHAP. VIII.
A genealogical Table, true or false, of illustrious Ancestors: a large Estate:
a numerous Equipage, and considerable Employments, are what we generally call
Noble. But Virtue judges in a different Manner. She takes the Great from amidst
the Grandour which surrounds him: Undresses him of the Vanity that disguises
him, and rates the Value of the Man by the Man himself. Under the Appearance of
Nobility she may find a Fool, a Villain, or a Coward; and in a Plebeian
Obscurity discover real Greatness and Probity of Manners. As right Reason is of
all Countries, the Wise in all Ages have spoken on this Subject in one uniform,
constant Manner.

SANADON'S Note on 6th S. of 1st B. of Horace.
OUR Hero is now brought to that Time of Life, when Sense and Judgment are to
be expected, or never. He has been happy. -- He has been in Trouble. -- He has
been (for him) rich. -- He has been poor, and in the utmost Affliction. These
are the Pages of the Book of Nature, and those who read them not carefully,
must have very imperfect Ideas of the System of the Universe.

HE was once more happy. He had a Pleasure from the Countenance of Mr. Sampson,
which was open and free, with every Indication of an honest and tender Heart.
Mrs. Sampson could not refrain a few Tears at the Sight of Conyers, for it
happened that he much resembled her deceased Son. She viewed him with Pleasure,
but it was mixed with Anxiety. She regarded him as a Child, and he respected
her as a Parent.

IN his Employment he was extremely assiduous and careful, and went on very
successfully in collecting Mr. Sampson's Debts, and settling his Accounts. The
good Man was happy; for Conyers, as much as possible, made all Things easy to
him. In a short Time he acquired their Favor and Confidence, and was perfectly
familiar. -- The Boy, the very young Man was quite over. His Thoughts were
serious, but he acted with Vigor. His Deportment was decent, and his
Conversation cheerful and agreeable. His Duty was his Pleasure, and the Love
and Respect of the Family was his Reward, which they could not avoid showing
before all their Friends.

MRS. Sampson and her Sister had been Coheiresses, and had each an Estate in
*******, of about Five hundred Pounds a Year. The Sister had been married to
Mr. Gold, a Turkey Merchant, who died about four Years since, and added Fifteen
thousand Pounds to her Fortune. Mrs. Gold was near Thirty-seven Years of Age,
of a noble Presence, with great good Nature and Prudence. She continued a Widow
in Spite of many Solicitations, and so affectionately loved her Sister, that
she removed her Habitation to be nearer to her. When Mr. Sampson was in
Distress with his Creditors, Mrs. Gold advanced him Six thousand Pounds on his
and her Sister's Security.

THE Sisters were almost constantly with each other, and Conyers was always of
the Party. -- Mrs. Gold had read, and had an excellent Understanding. Mrs.
Sampson was a cheerful and agreeable Companion. -- Her Husband had solid Sense,
and great good Humor; and Conyers enlivened the Conversation by a thousand
pleasant Circumstances, but with such natural Elegance and Beauty, that greatly
pleased, improved and diverted.

SOMETIMES their Entertainment was of a serious Nature, and fell on the Follies
of the World; -- The mad Extravagance of some, and the equally mad Penury of
others. -- On Justice, Virtue, Charity, and the like. -- Mrs. Gold spoke on
these Heads with great Strength of Reason, and Mr. Conyers enforced her
Arguments by sundry historical Passages, and by Accidents to which he had been
Witness. He was a Master of the Subject, and, at different Times, went through
the moral and social Duties, with such Spirit and Force, that they were charmed
with his Knowledge, and edified by his Words.

HAPPY would it be, said Mrs. Gold, if all Mankind thought like Mr. Conyers.'
-- And still more so, replied her Sister, if they acted like him, for I verily
believe he practices his own Doctrine.' -- 'Madam, answered Conyers, I am
extremely happy in your good Opinion; but permit me to say, though I endeavor,
and I hope, do my Duty as I ought, yet I have greatly erred. I have been idle;
I have been extravagant, and, I speak it to my Shame, I have been vicious; but
the Goodness of this Family strengthens my Resolution, and confirms me in my
honest Purposes of Amendment.' -- 'If, replied Mrs. Gold, you have been
criminal, your Confession and Repentance increases your Worth.' -- 'Who has not
been criminal? said Mr. Sampson. -- To commit a Fault is bad, but to persevere
is infamous. For aught I know, Vice has its Use, as it sets off and heightens
the Beauties of Virtue to such a Degree, that Common Sense, and even Ignorance,
must be charmed with it. -- 'Mr. Conyers, said Mrs. Gold, has one Virtue which
I wish was a little more general. Though he has been so good, agreeably to
entertain us with Persons and Things, yet has he never dropped an harsh
Expression against Particulars, nor has he given Matters an ill natured
Construction.

SCANDAL, Madam, said Conyers, let it inhabit where it will, is a mean and
vulgar Vice. It is a poor and vile Attempt to raise our own Reputation on the
Ruins of another. When some condemn the Actions of a Man, and paint his Conduct
in odious Colors, do they not at the same Time modestly intimate, that They
are incapable of such Errors? -- Pride speaks; not their Pity. To compassionate
the Frailties and Weaknesses of a Man, is the Duty of a Man. It is his Office
to set him Right by Tenderness and Humanity, and not by Reproach and Slander to
lead him more astray. Should he continue in his Folly, the wisest Maxim is, to
commiserate his Infirmities, and avoid an Imitation.

SOME Evenings they passed their Time at Cards, and sometimes the Ladies went
to a Play, attended by Conyers. This gave Rise to a Variety of pleasant Chat,
where Jack showed his Memory and good Taste, but it was a considerable Time
before they discovered he had an excellent Voice. Mrs. Gold was fond of Music,
and he humming a favorite Air, -- Bless me, said she, I protest you have it
quite perfect, -- we must insist on your Singing it out. -- He made a few
Apologies but obeyed. -- This was what the Family did not expect, and increased
their Surprise and Pleasure. -- By degrees he showed his Skill in the French
Language, -- that he was no Stranger to Latin and Greek, and that he understood
Dancing, Fencing and Horsemanship. In a Word, he showed them what a Gentleman
ought to be.

THE Behavior of Conyers puzzled Mrs. Gold. -- She could not conceive how a
Man in his Station could acquire so many genteel Accomplishments. She thought
there was a Mystery in it, and when she had just determined to find it out,
Lord bless me, said she, why should I trouble myself about what is not my
Concern? At that Instant she felt a prodigious Flushing in her Face, and some
Sensations she had not been lately accustomed to. She began to suspect the
Cause, and with great Caution, sat down to examine her Heart, and reason with
herself, -- that is -- to find out Reasons to correspond with her Inclinations.
The Truth is, she discovered so many, that Interest and the Pride of Family,
were fairly routed, and Prudence and Esteem got the better. She would not call
it Love, as she thought it a too sensual Term for one of her Years. She owned
she regarded the Virtues and Qualifications of Mr. Conyers, but the Comeliness
of his Person was merely accidental, and quite out of the Question. However,
that Contingent and his Youth had certainly some Weight.

BE this as it will, her Resolution was taken, but determined not to proceed
too rashly. On a certain Day, when she knew her Sister would not stir out, she
wrote her a Card, and begged Mr. Conyers might be sent to take care of her to
the Play, where she was engaged with some Company. Jack dressed himself
properly, and waited on Mrs. Gold. He had no Schemes in View, so his Actions
were Free, and without Reserve. He had a great Regard for the Widow, which made
him fond of every Opportunity of obliging her. Perhaps she had observed this,
and gave it a flattering Construction. He found her most neatly dressed, and,
for the first Time, particularly remarked her Charms.

I AM quite ashamed, said she, to give Mr. Conyers so much Trouble for nothing.
Our Party is broke, but rather than miss the Conscious Lovers, I was determined
to beg your Company alone, had not Mrs. Talkative and her Daughter sent Word,
they would drink Tea with me. -- Conyers said, he was sorry she was disappointed,
but rejoiced at every Occasion that could show his Readiness in obeying her
Commands. A few Words passed, and he attempted to take his Leave, which she
would not permit. After all, said she, we can be as well at Home, and my
Brother will not expect you till after the Play. A Conversation then began on
the Comedy, and many Remarks were made on the odd Situation of Indiana, and the
noble Constancy of Bevil. A loud Rap at the Door spoke the Arrival of Mrs. and
Miss Talkative, and stopped their Proceedings.

A NEW Field now opened. In a short Time all the Tittle-tattle of the Parish
was displayed. Lord, Mrs. Gold, you surprise me. -- Not hear of this before!
Not I indeed, Madam. Dear Madam, I purtest I Have forgot most of the Particlers,
for the Story is four Days old. Very strange indeed! Why, my dear, they were
actually caught, but Matrimony salves all. This Sort of rational Entertainment
lasted till Tea was produced, which a little eased the Thoughts of Conyers. He
seemed to bend his Eyes and Regard on Miss Talkative, who was very pretty, and
had began a Sort of Conversation. Mrs. Gold observed it; which added not to her
Repose. She was so absent, that her Tea-Cup slipped from her Hand, and broke to
Pieces, which broke off their Chat. Tea finished, she put on a grave Air, and
the Ladies put on their Capuchins, to complete their Evening Visits.

CONYERS, unwittingly, had like to have spoiled all, but Mrs. Gold's hinting,
One must be civil to such Sort of People, gave him an Opportunity of saying, He
wondered of what Use they were in the World. The Daughter, said he, is pretty,
but the eternal Clatter of her little Tongue will give some poor Man a great
deal of Vexation.' 'And yet, said Mrs. Gold, her Fortune will get her a
Husband. You Men are all alike, and, I dare say, you would snap at her in an
Instant, if you could.' 'I shall not, said Jack, affirm or deny a Thing I have
not thought about, for I neither know the Lady or her Fortune; but really,
Madam, I think I ought to have been exempted in your general Censure. Were I
capable of marrying merely for Money, the Situation I am in, and my Poverty,
would excuse me to the World, but who would excuse me to my Conscience? Who
would give me Joy of an Equipage, when compelled to take Pride, Affectation,
Folly, and Nonsense to my Arms? I may be ambitious, but, I assure you, Madam,
poor as I am, I have not the least Ambition of being miserable.

MRS. GOLD was not displeased at his Sentiments, and the Conversation turned on
more diverting Subjects, though she, at last, very dexterously contrived to bring
Matrimony once more on the Carpet. I own my Surprise, said she, that a young
Man of your Understanding has not found out one Woman capable of making you
happy and easy. Such there are, but you are either too indolent or indifferent,
or else your Heart is engaged to some distant Fair One. -- Come, Mr. Conyers,
be sincere, and indulge a Curiosity our Sex is subject to, and recite your
Adventures, for I am apt to believe they must be somewhat extraordinary. -- 'In
Truth, Madam, said Conyers, they are not worth your Notice; but since you
command, it is my Duty to obey.

HE then began a Narrative of his Life, and painted his Sufferings in a very
moving Manner. He artfully avoided the Place of his Birth, or the least Hint of
Ireland, as it might occasion Scandal. He carried her to the Weaver's in
Spittlefields; conducted her to France, and brought her back to London. His
Amors were very delicately handled, but his Hounslow Expedition was quite
expunged. He dwelt long on Mr. Kindly's Instructions and Letter, and the Misery
he was in in Surry. His History was long, and sometimes so affecting, that Mrs.
Gold was obliged to make frequent Use of her Handkerchief. She pitied him
because he was unfortunate, and he began to love her, because he saw she pitied
him. -- When he had ended, a profound Silence ensued.

SINCE, said she, at last, your Heart is free, perhaps I may assist in setting
your Mind at Ease. -- I thing I know a Lady who has Power, and Inclination
equal to it. Will you give me Leave to try my Skill? Permit me, Madam, said
Jack, to return my most humble Acknowledgements for your Goodness; but as you
have required my Sincerity, I shall still continue it, and with that honest
Freedom your good Sense will excuse. I have no Objections, Madam, to Matrimony,
and have a certain Constancy in my Nature, that might make me a good Husband;
but I cannot answer for my Temper, if I did not most affectionately love my
Wife. To have that Love, I must know her, I must converse with her; I must
first admire her Virtues, and esteem her Understanding. This, Madam, is not the
Work of a Week, or a Month; and to marry otherwise, there is a Possibility of
being happy, but the Chances are infinitely against me. True, I may be made
rich, but an hundred to one I may be made wretched.

YOUR Reasons, said Mrs. Gold, are very just; yet I believe you will allow
there are some Exceptions, neither do I want any personal Compliment when I ask
you, if a Woman of Fortune, and every-way like me, could please you? -- Madam,
-- said Jack, -- I -- I -- really know not how or what to answer. She saw him
confused, and added, -- I shall make it plainer. Suppose for Argument-Sake, I
should have such a Notion in my Head, -- Do you think you could truly and
sincerely regard me?' Regard you, Madam, replied Conyers, -- 'Yes, on my Soul,
I should for ever regard, love and adore you! -- But, dear Madam, why do you
take Pleasure in tormenting so poor an Animal? -- Why do you question me like a
Prisoner on the Rack, and make me confess, what my Safety obliges me to hide?
-- 'But I have done, and can scarcely hope your Pardon, for what I Have already
said.' -- 'Mr. Conyers, said she, with a bashful Air, I not only pardon, but
shall endeavor to mitigate your Anxieties. I have seen and examined your
Conduct; I have viewed your Actions; I have read your Heart, and, I think, have
discovered in you a Soul incapable of Meanness or Falsehood. -- Though you have
no Fortune, I have often thought you deserved one. -- I speak to your
Understanding, and am not afraid of being censured by it. Let the lucrative
World run after Wealth. It has pleased Heaven to indulge me with enough to make
too rational Creatures happy. Should you be of the same Opinion, the little
Share I can give, is freely at your Service.

SHE hung down her Head, and impatiently waited a Reply. -- Conyers gazed --
his Eyes were fixed, and his Mouth could only seem to speak. At length he rose
up, and throwing aside all Consideration, embraced Mrs. Gold in so tender, so
ardent a Manner, that convinced her of his Sincerity, beyond the Utterance of a
thousand Words, and vain Speeches. Confess, said she, that I have acted like a
Woman of Courage, by making the first Attack; I wish my Prudence be not more
suspected.' Though, said Conyers, the World will talk, yet, believe me, I shall
give them such a Subject, that our Love and Harmony shall be rather envied than
imitated. -- Give me Leave to call you my dearest Life, and to assure you,
without Vanity, that you entirely possess an Heart free from Flattery, Art, or
Deceit. Oh! make me once more happy, and say you will be mine.' Mr. Conyers,
said she, there is my Hand. My Heart you have already. But, no more. You have
my Promise, and rely on it.' 'Dear Madam, said Conyers, let me not seem too
impatient, by asking when?' 'Be satisfied, said she, it shall not be long, for
I hope soon to bring my Brother and Sister into my Scheme; but I beg your
Silence till then.

CONYERS promised to be directed by her; and Supper being served, a different
Conversation began. However it was once more renewed, and many tender and
affectionate Expressions, the Eloquence of undisguis'd Passion, were mutually
given and received, till Time, with hasty Steps approached the Hour of Twelve.
-- With some Difficulty they parted. -- He soon retired to Bed, but not to
Rest, for Mrs. Gold had murdered Sleep.

'TWOULD be tedious to mention the Method she took to open this Affair to her
Sister. She was her own Mistress, but still wanted a Sanction. No doubt the
Reader will imagine the Surprise of the Family, and he must likewise imagine
the many Arguments on both Sides, before Mrs. Sampson, and her Husband,
consented, which at last they did. The Truth is, Mrs. Gold, like most of the
World, asked Advice, but was determined to follow her own. There was no
Necessity for a Settlement, but a small Writing was drawn in Favor of
Children, on Failure of which, the longest Liver took all, except Five thousand
Pounds, which each had a Power to bequeath by Will.

THUS all Matters being adjusted, the Day was fixed, and Doctor St. Amor
acquainted with it, who provided a proper Place at Putney, where he met the
Company. The good Man loaded Jack with Caresses and Compliments, and
felicitated Mrs. Gold on her happy Choice. I must, Madam, said he, admire, and
shall for ever admire your Judgment and Understanding, that could discover
Virtue and Honor under the Cloud of Poverty; dispel the Mist, and take it to
your Arms. -- He made a very pathetick Discourse, but his Conclusion was
infinitely pleasing to Mr. Conyers, and, perhaps, not less so to Mrs. Gold, for
he joined their Hands, and, ending his Part of the Ceremony, blessed the Happy
Pair, and left them to finish the Remainder.

CHAP. IX.
Grant me the social Joys of Life
In easy, Converse, free from Strife;
Not wrangling for an empty Name,
But raising Virtue into Fame.
Not, with vile Breath, abuse the Great,
And prate, because I dare to prate;
But, hear Instruction, or to give,
And Learn, or Teach, each Day I live.
ANONIMOUS.
THE Generality of the World regard the Actions of Men, but according to the
Event. A prosperous Villain may be internally despised, though his Wealth and
Grandeur will be outwardly admired, and even envied. -- Praise is sacrificed to
poor and indigent Virtue, but every other Reward is too frequently neglected.
The wise Man of Old tells us, That Time and Chance happens unto all Men. --
When Misfortunes and Calamities attack us, the World is so good to pity, but at
the same Time, impute the Unhappiness to a Want of proper Conduct, and to a
Multitude of Errors. -- When Affluence pours in, and Plenty surrounds us, they
admire the Judgment, and applaud the Understanding. -- Thus, the Wretched and
Miserable tax Providence with Partiality, but the Happy and Successful,
attribute all to their own Prudence and superior Merit.

OUR Friend Mr. Conyers could not avoid some few Compliments to his Person and
Abilities, as they were the Motives of his Advancement; but when he reflected
on the Goodness of his Wife in noticing and rewarding them so amply, he
discovered, that they proceeded from a superior Cause, which, as it reached
above his Comprehension, he could only wonder at, and, by praising the Giver,
make Returns of Love and Gratitude to the Instrument. -- By reasoning thus, and
lowering his own Value as much as he heightened the Goodness of Providence, his
Mind became more calm, and his Heart less liable to Vanity. He was not too
elate, or puffed up; for, by regarding his Wife more than her Fortune, the
World was compelled to believe he deserved both. -- Never was Woman more happy
than Mrs. Conyers, and never could a Husband take more Pains to oblige a Wife.
ENVY saw this, but hid her Head. -- MALICE, with squinting Eye, and jibing
Tongue, looked and spoke in vain. JEALOUSY and vile INSINUATION found their
Arrows blunted, or sticking in the Shield of right Understanding. The Fabric
was so firmly fixed on Honor and Good Sense, that the Decay of Nature could
alone sap the Foundation.

MR. CONYERS still assisted his Brother Sampson, and having got in most of his
Debts, and settled all his Affairs, proposed, at the Request of his Wife, to
retire to the Country. They agreed to live in a small Town near their Estate,
and having provided every Household Necessary, and a good Collection of Books,
they quitted the noisy City, for the Peace, Tranquillity and Joys of a Rural
Life. He now found himself possessed of above Twelve Hundred Pounds a Year,
and, calling to his Memory the Conduct of Lord Truegood, resolved, as near as
possible, to follow the Example of so worthy a Nobleman. Like a prudent
General, he planned out his Operations; he collected his Forces, and assigned
to each Part a just Proportion. His Distribution was exact; but Mrs. Conyers
changed it a little, by making him sensible, that his Scheme had not provided
for Sickness, and many other Accidents they were liable to. Let us, my Dear,
said she, live as genteely as you please; But where is the absolute Necessity
of spending our whole Income? My Advice is, to save at least Three hundred
Pounds a Year, to answer Contingencies, and assist a worthy Friend on Occasion;
neither do I see how we can well lay out the Remainder. My Life, said Jack; you
are quite in the Right; then be it so: It is but striking out these two
extraordinary Horses, a Servant, one Dish a Day, something from the Wine, and a
little from the Allowance of Clothes and pleasurable Expenses, and the Affair
is just as you desire.

THE Behavior of this Family soon acquired the Esteem and Respect of the
neighboring Gentlemen and Ladies. Particular Friendships were formed, and a
charming Society enlivened every Amusement. -- Some Gentlemen met twice a Week
at the best Inn in the Town, to benefit the House, and keep up a proper
Interest, and our Friend was soon invited to be of the Number. It will not be
amiss to mention some of this good Company.

SIR John Dobson, and old Colonel Manly, were the principal. The Knight had
been Member for the County in three Parliaments, as the Colonel had been for
the Town for almost Forty Years. Mr. Leatherhead, Mr. Ash, Doctor Grace, who
was Minister of the Parish, and Mr. Conyers, made six constant Companions. Our
Ladies were happy with Mrs. Grace and Family, and with Miss Lucy Manly the
Daughter of the Colonel, now a most amiable Girl of Seventeen Years of Age. Her
Wit and Understanding, with her tender and compassionate Heart, made her the
Joy of her Friends. No Wonder the Colonel was extremely fond, for she was the
Child of his Age, and his only one. He spoke with Pleasure of the vast Fortune
he intended to leave her, and often said, he almost envied the happy Man to
whose Lot she fell.

WITH great Care and Attention have I examined the original Memoirs of this
History, but unfortunately found not the least Hint of Amors, or, as it is
called, the Gallantry of Mr. Conyers, during his Residence in the Country. This
must certainly be a tedious Time to a Reader of Genius, who expects at every
Page, a well or ill-contrived Intrigue, or somewhat wonderful or surprising to
raise his Imagination, and keep up his Attention. -- Though I cannot answer these
valuable Ends, I cannot pass in Silence this Space, as my Materials are large,
but must supply the Want of extraordinary Adventures in this seeming State of
Inactivity, with the Substance of the most interesting Subjects, that made
their Evenings pass usefully and agreeably away.

IN doing this I shall stick to my usual Brevity, and trespass as little as
possible on the Patience of the Good-natured. I shall not summon them to every
Assembly, but vary the Subject by an Asterism, (*) and avoid that Sort of
Connection that might pin me down to Form and Ceremonies.

* * *

IN our last Argument, said Mr. Conyers, Sir John gave us a long Dissertation
on the Liberty of the Press. I think we all agreed to the Usefulness of it in
general, and to the Danger of suppressing any Part; yet I cannot help thinking
it a little hard, that a Person shall have it in his Power to make a Man
ridiculous whenever he pleases to imagine he does Wrong. What are most of our
Pamphlets and News Papers stuffed with, but Encomiums on those out of Place,
and scurrilous Reflections on those in? -- Were we to shift the Scene, would
not the new Ministry be abused like the former, and perhaps, by the same
Writers? I do not pretend to be a Politician, but believe, many who do are just
as ignorant as I am. Every Man who spells, may write Satyr, that is, may write
maliciously, as it requires little or no Genius; but to write with Truth,
Candor, and Impartiality, to have Judgment sufficient to point out real
Errors, but Humanity and Goodnature not to strike at Persons and Characters,
is not given to every Man.

I GRANT you, said Sir John, some make an ill Use of Liberty, and leap beyond
the Bounds; if they go too far, the Law is open, and to the Law we must leave
them. It Is very true, said Mr. Conyers, but they have found out a jesuitical
Way of evading even the best Law. Here are a Parcel of Pamphlets and
Newspapers (which he threw on the Table) filled with initial Letters, Dashes,
and Stars. Though we clearly see the Insolence and Treason, what Jury, as the Law
now stands, can properly condemn the Author or Printer to lose his Ears?' --
'Well, well, said Sir John, no Matter, let them scribble on, provided they do
not oblige me to believe all their Impertinence.' -- Men of Sense, Sir John,
answered Conyers, will always think in that Manner, but how many honest
well-meaning Gentlemen suffer themselves to be imposed on, merely for Want of
due Attention. Perhaps some must write thus, or starve. In that Case, I
sincerely pity them, yet I hope Mankind have not such vitiated Tastes, as to be
delighted only with Scandal. Would a Writer fix on a Plan of Instruction. --
Would he inculcate the Fear of God, and Honor to the King -- Would he
endeavor to make us better Parents, better Children, and better Friends to
Society -- Would he employ his Time and Learning to persuade us to Unanimity,
and not Discord and Confusion. Who amongst us -- what honest Man, but would
praise and applaud him? But to write from Principles of Envy and Ill Nature,
and to sow those pestilent Seeds in the Minds of the Unwary, is certainly a
Conduct that even Vice will condemn. To him who writes fluently and well, but
with such Intentions, I shall only say what a noble Lord did of the Earl of
Stafford, That God had given him Talents, but the Devil the Application.

WERE it possible, said the Doctor, to restrain the Liberty of the Press
without endangering the Liberty of the People, I am convinced we should be much
happier and much more free from Squabbles and idle Disputes; but the Experiment
is of too tender and delicate a Nature, to wish seeing it attempted, though I
verily believe News-Writers and Pamphleteers are the Collectors of the fifth
great Tax in the Kingdom.

* * *

-- WHATEVER the Equity may be, said Sir John, I hope never to see a new
Valuation for a Land Tax. Our Acres are pretty well charged already, so let
them look elsewhere, if they want to raise more Money. -- Yet, replied Mr.
Conyers, all Taxes must at last center on Land.' I must beg Leave, replied the
Doctor, to differ from you. -- For Example: Suppose that a Duty was laid on the
Exportation of our Nobility and Gentry, according to their Titles. How could
such a Tax affect the Land?' -- They travel for Health or Pleasure, and I think
ought to pay Fifty or an Hundred Pounds to their own Country, for Permission to
spend the Remainder of their Fortunes in another. Upon my Word, said Squire
Ash, a very notable and reasonable Scheme! Then, continued the Doctor, if every
Man, who accepted an Employment of One hundred Pounds a Year, was obliged to
pay a Year's Salary to the State, and a proportionable Tax on the Commissioners
of Land and Sea-Officers, would it not raise a large Sum, and how would it
affect our Lands? -- In Holland they have what is called a Collateral Tax, that
is, the Inheriter of a Fortune in Land or Money, not descending to him in a
direct Line, pays 2 per Cent. to the State. When they sell Lands or Tenements,
the Seller and Purchaser pay two or three per Cent. of the Value to the
Government. -- Thus, Gentlemen, it is plain, there are many Ways of raising
Money, where Taxes, so far from raising our Manufactures, might be so managed,
as to go infinitely cheaper to Foreign Markets.

I ASSURE you, cried Colonel Manly, I never thought my Friend Doctor Grace, had
so calculating an Head, and I dare say, were the Ministry acquainted with his
Genius, he would soon have Lawn Sleeves. I am so pleased with his Money
Projects, that I must add one, which I wonder he forgot. For Example: Suppose
all the Livings of the Clergy of England were to be new valued, and the Clergy
who succeed, after a certain Day, were obliged to pay to the Government one
Year of that Valuation by four equal Payments in four Years. Would not this
likewise make a large Fund? And how would it affect our Lands? Permit me to
explain my Scheme by Figures.

'Doctor Grace has Church-Preferments to above 500 l. a Year. I shall only
charge 450 l.

Out of this I shall deduct, 'Full Land Tax at 4 s. 90 'Two Curates -- at most
60 'Remainder clear to the Doctor, besides Marriage, Christening, and Burial
Fees, 300 l. 450

Now, I would value these Livings but at Two Hundred Pounds a Year in the
King's New Books, and where would be the mighty Injustice to oblige his
Successor to pay that Sum in four Years? And how would it affect our Lands?'
Were this Chamber, replied the Doctor, a Chamber of Parliament, I should vastly
disappoint the Colonel, by heartily concurring in such a Scheme, properly
regulated, but I should certainly Vote for exempting the poor Clergy. Agreed,
said the Colonel, so let it be resolved, that no Clergyman shall be liable to
this New Duty, who has not One Hundred Pounds a Year clear of all Deductions.'
'Raillery apart, said Mr. Conyers, I sincerely think, somewhat of this Nature
ought to be done, and the Clergy of France have set us very good Examples. The
Wisdom of Government is best seen in the just Partition of Taxes. To charge
them who are rich in this World, is true Policy, and to ease the poor Labourer,
is equal to it. To lessen the Tax on the Consumption of the Poor, is, in Fact,
an Advantage to the Rich, as all Manufactures and Workmanship must lessen in
Proportion.

THE Doctor mentioned, said Sir John, something of poor Clergy. I am really
ashamed to see so many, in such a Country as England, who appear like Objects
of Charity, and thought, that when QUEEN ANNE gave up her first Fruits to buy
Glebe and Impropriated Tithes, they would all have comfortable Livings; but I
am vastly disappointed, nor can I conceive why they are not in a better
Situation.' 'All I know, replied the Doctor, is, that the Trustees for that
useful Work have had the first Fruits and Tenths above Thirty Years. They have
purchased many Glebes, and, I dare say, from their great Virtues and high
Dignities, every Thing in their Power has been done for the Good of the CHURCH,
If they have not added more to the Livings of poor Clergy, I must suppose they
could get no more to purchase, or wanted a Fund.

FAR be it from me, said Mr. Conyers, to hint the least Reflection on the
Honor or Integrity of Gentlemen in such eminent Stations, but from what the
Doctor has said, and from what I have heard on this Subject, I must conclude,
that there has been no Misapplication of Money. On the contrary, I am informed
very little has been applied. If my Intelligence be true, a Capital, and the
Interest of a Capital, has been suffered to accumulate to so mighty a Sum, that
I am cautious to mention it. The Revenue is certainly large, and should the
Trustees not have found out Purchases, I see no Reason but that Twenty, Thirty,
or Forty Pounds in Money, should be given annually to many poor Clergymen,
which, I humbly apprehend, would fully answer the Intent of the charitable
Donor. Whether the Trustees have expended their whole Fund, or whether they are
enabled to support Twenty or Two Hundred Clergymen, I cannot positively assert;
but sure I am, that as the Wisdom of the Legislature would not be less
manifested by a fair and honest Enquiry into it; so I am equally satisfied,
that the Integrity and Honor of the Trustees would be thus clearly
demonstrated, and malevolent and clamorous Tongues silenced.

* * *

TRULY, Sir John, said the Doctor, I am sorry Matters were carried so far
Yesterday. We had warm Words, very warm Words. In the Name of Goodness, what
had They or We to do in the Affair? If the French prevail over us, I am sorry
for it, and pray God it may be otherwise. If we beat them, I rejoice and am
thankful. But to argue, that some Things ought to have been done, and that
others ought to have been undone, is certainly idle, for, I profess, I believe
we know nothing of the Matter.' 'Right, Right, said Sir John, but you know my
Rule is, never to contradict or dispute about what I do not understand,
especially when I am convinced that my Antagonist is equally ignorant.

SUCH Disputants, said the Colonel, are the Plague of Society. The more they
seem Gentlemen, the more Mischief they do, for, as they choose, and commonly
herd but with People of inferior Capacities, they pass current for vast
Geniuses, and are applauded for their mighty Understandings. I have often
laughed to hear a Company of honest Citizens, fighting over the very Battles I
had been in, and minutely mentioning a thousand Circumstances that never did or
could have happened, and have endeavored, and sometimes with Success, to put
my good Countrymen right. I remember when I was a young Man, and returned from
the Campaign of 1707, when the Duke of Marlborough did not fight the French, I
stroll'd into a City Coffee-house, where a young pert Soap-boiler was most
eloquently displaying his Talents, and diverting his Audience with the Blunders
and Misconduct of the Duke. -- I own I was foolish enough to be provoked, and
longed to chastize his Insolence. At last, the young Man to illustrate his
Subject, chalked out two Lines on the Table. -- Now, Gentlemen, said he, here
lay the French, -- and here the Allied Army, with this trifling River between
them. -- Now, (still pointing with his Finger) why the Devil the Duke did not
cross the River, and beat the French Scoundrels, is past my Comprehension." --
'He was proceeding, but I lost all Patience, for, stretching over my Cane, I
gave his Fingers a pretty severe Rebuke. -- He rose in Anger, and demanded a
Reason, when I very coolly replied. -- It was only to convince him, that in
passing a River, an Army might receive a Rap over the Knuckles. The Laugh of
the Company was on my Side, and the poor Soap-Boiler looked mighty silly.

WHY there it is, said Sir John, an honest innocent Man cannot speak his Mind
freely, but up comes a Red Coat, and knocks him down. -- The Colonel says, he
was then young and foolish, but how many have we of the same Stamp, at this
Day? -- God help us! when we are to be governed, or, rather, controlled by a
Standing Army! -- 'God help us, indeed, replied the Colonel, but for my Part, I
promise you I will never live to see that Day.' -- 'That may be, answered
'Squire Ash; but really I cannot help thinking, some People are making large
Strides toward it, and where it may end, Heaven knows! -- Is It not a plain
Case, they want to make us a military Government, by raising such an Army, and
employing them in a foolish War on the Continent, where, every News Paper will
tell you, we have not the least Business? -- If we must have a War, and be
blooded by Taxes, let us, a God's Name, give the Queen of Hungary her
Belly-full of Money, but let us spare the Blood of Old England.

WELL said, Mr. Ash, replied Sir John, you speak my Sentiments, and, I believe
the Sentiments of every honest Man in Great Britain; but I am afraid all this
mighty Hurry and Noise, and Expense of Blood and Treasure, is more on Account
of some G -- D --, than any Good intended to us. If they mean a real Advantage
to England, let them send forth her Wooden Walls and scour the Ocean. -- We may
do some Good there, and let Europe fight on the Continent to Eternity, provided
we keep them out of our own natural Territories; nay, the more they quarrel and
knock one another's Brains out Abroad, the better it is for us at Home. Read
our Annals, Colonel. They were glorious Times, when our honest Militia, headed
by Country Gentlemen, could step out and beat the French on their own Ground.'
'Pray, Sir, said the Colonel, what Business had these Country Gentlemen and
gallant Militia in France? -- 'Business! replied Sir John, -- why, they went to
conquer and keep the French at a Distance; and when they had conquered, to keep
their Conquests. Had we not NORMANDY, AQUITAIN, ANJOU, and almost Half of
France? Very true, answered the Colonel, and, as if it were done to show us our
Folly, a Woman drove this mighty Militia almost out of All.' 'Ay, said Mr.
Conyers, and we were full as Glorious when we burnt this poor Woman for a
Witch. Those, said the Doctor, were the Days of glorious Ignorance!' 'Had our
Ancestors conquered Part of France, or had Provinces descended by Right to our
Kings, they were mad to pretend to keep them for the Good of England. -- Had
they erected a Kingdom within that Kingdom, and given it an Head of Importance
and Weight, they would have done wisely.' -- 'Very well observed, cried Mr.
Conyers; I fear the Church Militant will be too hard for Country Gentlemen.

I MUST beg your Patience, said Colonel Manly, for I have a few Words to offer,
and hope I shall never be called on this Subject again.

THE Vicinity, said he, of Great Britain and France, and the Rivalship in Glory
and Trade, will ever make them natural Enemies to each other. The Views of
France are as unbounded as Ambition. Our's are more confined, and rather lead
us to checque the exorbitant Power of others, than to increase our own.

WHEN LEWIS the XIVth made War on the Dutch, and gave his GLORY for the Reason,
it was the Height of true Glory to resist and checque such an unchristian
Scheme; but unhappily, our CHARLES the Second was his Pensioner.

WHEN this mighty Lewis, contrary to Faith and solemn Treaties, gave SPAIN to
his Grandson, our Interest joined to frustrate the Project; but when Charles
our King of Spain became Head of the Empire, our Interest opposed his being
Master of two such Monarchies, though, perhaps, our Policy was unsound to suffer
Spain to fall to any Branch of the House of BOURBON.

IN the present War, when France, in Violation of the most solemn Engagements,
and in the Midst of profound Peace, attacked the Empire; -- when she had made
the QUEEN of HUNGARY a Fugitive, even to the Subjects she, or her Family, had
oppressed the most; -- when she had near overturned the great Weight that kept
her Ambition from trampling on the Neck of Europe, our Interest, our Happiness
and our Honor compelled us to join against her. -- If our little Army in
Flanders, was not so successful as we wished, they were led on with a noble
Spirit, they fought like themselves, and retired from Numbers, rather fatigued
than conquered. -- We now know the TRUTH. We now know the Value of HANOVERIAN
Troops, though Patriots, or rather Party, deprived us of 15,000, and made Lewis
Triumph. We know how near the Few of our small Army, who fought, were of
Routing the whole Strength of the Grand Monarch. -- We know our Troops
deserved, though they had not Victory. -- We now praise their Valor, but the
French do more. -- They dread it.

IN the Name of GOD, How can our Government, or our General act? -- If we had
not sent Troops to Flanders to convince the World we were hearty in the Cause,
and in some Measure, to persuade the Dutch into our Sentiments, what a Load of
Scandal would have issued from the Press.? -- If our General had tamely looked
on, and not attempted the Relief of TOURNAY, would not every scribbling Fellow
pour down from his Garret as much Abuse, as they now Honor him with for acting
otherwise? -- Oh! But we were repulsed at FONTENOY, and have lost Flanders. --
What then? -- If we argue from Consequences, we had best never Begin, because
we can never End. -- In War, as in Law, Trade, and every other human Project,
it suffices, that the Motive of Action was founded in Reason, Justice and
Honor; but as to the Consequences, we must submit to the Disposer of all
Things.

KING WILLIAM and Queen ANNE'S Wars had the same Rise. Perhaps that Glorious
Monarch deserved as much Praise in his Defeats, as the Great Marlborough
received for his Victories. The King did not escape Calumny: -- Marlborough had
his Share; -- was disgraced, and even exiled for Conquering!

LET us cast our Eyes round Europe, even in Times of Peace, and shall we not
find them all armed, and greatly armed; -- and shall we supinely rest content,
and pay no Regard to our Safety? -- Though some affect to call our Regiments a
Standing Army, though the Whole is little more than a French Grand Guard, yet
we dread from it the Loss of our Liberty. -- Thank God! I have a good Estate,
but were our Army double their Numbers, I would not sell my Land for a Shilling
less. -- All Europe think our Property, consequently our Liberty, quite secure;
otherwise they would never trust their Millions in our Funds. -- This is the
Touchstone of our Credit and Character Abroad. -- This is the Barometer of the
State. -- Whilst our Officers are Natives, whilst they are Men of Family and
Fortune, and have their Share in the common Blessing, I think I may positively
pronounce our Liberty is safe. -- Not to speak in too peremptory a Manner, I
will allow, that an Army, little or great, is a very useless, nay a dangerous
Thing, without Experience and the strictest Discipline; but God forbid they
should ever acquire that Experience in their own Country! -- Since Experience
is absolutely necessary, where ought they learn it but Abroad?

IN our private Capacities we must keep our Honor and preserve our Reputation,
even sometimes at the Hazard of our Lives; but who would not hazard more, if
possible, when his Property, his Family, and every Thing dear to him, are
trampled upon! -- A Nation, in this, is as a private Man. -- We ought to
acquire Reputation, but be careful to keep it. -- We must make ourselves
respected, but, by good Conduct, preserve that Dignity. -- We ought to love
Peace, but by a constant Readiness for War, be able to maintain the one with
Honor, or pursue the other with Justice and Glory.

A WORD more, and I have done. I know what Sir John means by German Dominions.
Without entering into what, perhaps, none of us rightly understands, I really
imagine that a Monarch has some small Title to the natural Liberty of other
Men, and may be allowed the same natural Inclinations. I am ashamed this
Argument is so often thrown out. -- Could I divest myself of the Duty I owe him
as my Sovereign, I should still respect and honor his Justice and Valor, were
he but a private Gentleman. Let us not, my Friends, foolishly and wantonly
condemn, but let us rather endeavor to make his Life Happy and Content, whilst
Heaven is pleased to spare him to us. Let us, as free Subjects, Love him, and
imitate those, over whom he is Absolute by the Laws, but over whose Hearts, his
Clemency and Uprightness has established a more absolute Sway.

SIR JOHN has given me the Text, but the Conclusion I must borrow from the
Doctor. -- From what has been said, God grant us a right Understanding, and
that we may think on, and practice it, in our Life and Conversation.

AMEN, cried the Doctor, with all my Heart. I think the Colonel has given us an
excellent Discourse, and very much opened my Eyes.' -- 'I must own, said Sir
John, we are a little too divided, and make great Drawbacks on our real
Happiness, yet, perhaps, this Sort of Conduct poises the Scale of Liberty, and
prevents Power and Ambition destroying the Equilibre.

* * *

MR. CONYERS examined the Plan of France, as laid down by Mr. Villeneuf, in
which he made many Alterations, and the next Evening's Conversation happening
to turn on the Subject of the last, -- I beg, said he, to be permitted to add a
Postscript to the Colonel's Lecture, and to carry you to the Fountainhead of,
what I imagine, the Liberty of England.

WHOEVER, continued he, considers the Dominions of France, will imagine they
ought not to think of enlarging their Boundaries beyond the Pyranees, the Alps,
and the Rhine, as such Conquests would be rather expensive than serviceable. --
Their Views, with regard to Commerce, have always been traversed by England and
Holland. -- The Forces they constantly keep up, prevent their being disturbed
by their Neighbors on the Continent. -- By the vast Sums they employ in
Foreign Courts, besides their known Subsidies, they fortify themselves with the
strongest Alliances. -- As they have nothing to fear at Home, they have but one
Thing to wish for Abroad, to accomplish all their Schemes. -- Could the
Austrian Netherland be annexed to France, the grand Project would execute
itself.

For this essential Conquest Treasures must be hoarded, Troops must be
maintained, and no Expense spared. When this finishing Blow can be once struck,
France need not desire Universal Monarchy. -- If she now maintains three
hundred thousand Men, she will then content herself with a Quarter of that
Number. -- When Mistress of the ten Provinces of Flanders, the Dutch must act
as she shall direct. -- When assured no War can disturb her Frontiers, what
Vessels will she not build! -- How many Thousands will then be employed at Sea!
and, who will she have to oppose her but England? -- Their whole Force will
then be centered on the Ocean. -- Cast your Eyes on the Map of Europe. -- Will
she not then have the whole Coast from Ostend to St. Jean de Luz, besides That
in the Mediterranean? -- She may then, without aiming at Universal Monarchy,
guide, direct, and give Laws to every State in Europe, free from the Trouble of
being Sovereign of it. -- What would her Glory be, to have MONARCHS for her
VASSALS!

IT is next to a mathematical Demonstration, that this is the favorite Project
of France. LEWIS the Fourteenth attempted it, and became formidable at Sea,
even to the United Fleets of England and Holland, Great and Mighty as they
were! -- In all human Probability, Lewis had seen the End of his Wishes, had
not KING WILLIAM and QUEEN ANNE gloriously interposed and saved Europe. They
cut him out such warm Work on the Continent, and obliged him so to waste the
Blood and Treasure of his People, that his Sinews at last relaxed, his darling
Marine was neglected, and his whole Force became little enough to defend the
Heart of his Kingdom.

IF what I have said be not critically the Views of France, they have certainly
Schemes of some Affinity to it. -- In the present War they practiced another
Method to arrive at the same End. -- They attacked the Empire. -- Could they
have cut off the Head, they knew the Limbs would fall of Course.

SUCH, Gentlemen, I apprehend, is the Fundamental Maxim of France. -- To
traverse and frustrate such a pernicious Project, Half our Blood and Treasure
would be a cheap Purchase. -- Our Annals are sanguin'd with the Blood of
Britons slaughtered by Brother Britains. -- They show the horrid Devastation of
Civil War. -- They point out the bloody Fields in England, Scotland and
Ireland! -- Wherefore all this, but to establish and preserve us in that
Liberty we so happily enjoy, but of which some make unworthy Use! -- If we have
fought with, dethroned, and put our own Monarchs to Death, for infringing on
our Liberties, What should we not do to avoid Servility being imposed on us by
Foreign Tyranny? ULTIMA RATIO REGUM is the Motto of French Cannon. -- If that
be the last Argument of the Most Christian Monarch, certainly it is our Duty
and Business, as perfectly to understand that Logic.

NOTHING is so dangerous as to contemn an Enemy, and nothing is so idle and
vain as to despise and abuse the French. -- On the contrary, we ought, and we
have Reason, to dread their Power, -- their Situation, and their Politics. --
If we mean to hand down to our Posterity, pure and undefiled, that sacred
Liberty purchased by our Ancestors, let us rouse our Spirits, let us unite, and
act like them! -- But, if we mean to suffer that holy Light to be extinguished
-- to perish with our own frail Bodies, let us not only disband our trivial
Land, but likewise our mighty naval Forces; for, except our utmost Strength be
collected, and the Designs of France rendered abortive, The ONE will be useless
at Home, and, I will venture to prophesy, The OTHER will soon be over-match'd
Abroad.

I SHALL conclude with the Words of King William, which ought to be engraven on
the Hearts of every True Englishman.' -- "Let me conjure you, said that
Glorious Monarch, to disappoint the only Hopes of our Enemies by your
Unanimity. I have shown, and will always show, how desirous I am to be the
Common Father of all my People; do you, in like Manner, lay aside Parties and
Divisions; let there be no other Distinction heard of amongst us for the
future, but of those who are for the PROTESTANT RELIGION, and the PRESENT
ESTABLISHMENT, and of those who mean a POPISH PRINCE, and a FRENCH GOVERNMENT.

IT is not easy to paint the serious Countenances of the Company. The Colonel
lifted up his Eyes; Sir John and 'Squire Ash shook their Heads, the Doctor
cried, Lord have Mercy upon us! but Mr. Leatherhead was so affected, that he
let fall his Pipe, and seemed to neglect his favorite Tankard.

* * *

THE Conversation was on various Subjects, and at last fell on the Laws of
England. -- The Colonel owned they were wise and wholesome; but declared, that
the vast Delay and Chicanerie of the Practitioners was the greatest Burden a
Nation could groan under. -- Speedy Justice, said Mr. Conyers, is the Spirit
and Essence of Laws both Civil and Criminal. A French Author of Humor
observes, "That the English are infinitely more tenacious of their Properties
than their Lives; for, says he, Life or Death is generally decided in
Twenty-four Hours; but Property, be it ever so trivial, may employ as many
Years.

MR. CONYERS was proceeding on the Subject, when the Terror of the Poor, in the
Shape of John Clinch the Constable, entered the Room. -- Please your Worships,
said he, an't please you, there is Moll Stevens has gotten her Belly up, and so,
an't please your Worships, as the Wench lays the Matter on Paddy Murphy the
Irish Drawer below Stairs, I thoughten best to bring her before your Worships
that she might swear it, for, please your Worships, that Irish Dog does a Power
of Mischief in the Parish.' -- 'Why, Friend, said the Colonel, we do not meet
here for Business, but, however, let her come up. -- When the Constable
withdrew, -- Give me Leave, Gentlemen, said the Doctor, to examine this Affair,
and to beg of you to do exactly like me, for I want to try an Experiment. --
They promised, and then entered the Constable, Moll Stevens, Paddy Murphy, the
Master and Mistress of the House, and most of the Servants.

THE Staff-Officer produced the Bible, and very learnedly began to open the
Cause; but the Doctor stopped him saying, Pray, Friend, hold your Peace: You
have nothing to say in the Affair, and I charge you all to keep Silence. --
Come hither, young Woman, said he, Don't tremble. -- We shall do you no Harm.
-- You are here to swear to the Person who has greatly injured you in your
Reputation, and brought you into some Disgrace. -- Do you know, Child, the
Nature of an Oath? -- Poor Molly Stevens, with downcast Looks, and faultering
Tongue, answered -- Yes -- Consider, young Woman, said the Doctor, that an Oath
is the only Security between Man and Man. -- Consider that an Oath is a solemn
Affirmation in the Presence of Almighty God, that what we speak is the Truth,
and stake our precious Souls on it. -- Consider the Situation you are now in,
and that you must, very speedily, be put to a Trial, where your Life will be in
Danger. -- To swear falsely, and, perhaps, in a few Days be called to Judgment,
is a Thought that should make every Creature tremble. -- Consider seriously, my
Child, that God will punish Sinners, therefore, be certain of the Truth, and do
not rashly risk your Soul, and add a Crime of the blackest Dye, to the Crime,
that, by Repentance, God Almighty may forgive. -- Be resolute, and say the
Truth. -- Tears flowed very plentifully down poor Molly's Cheeks; but the
Doctor, taking off his Hat, and kneeling down, all the Company did the same. --
In this Posture, he gave her the Book, and administered the Oath in the most
solemn Manner, and then rose up. -- Now, Child, said he, you are bound to
answer with Truth. -- Is this young Man, whose Name is Patrick Murphy, the
Father of the Child you now go with, or not?' -- With many Sobbs and Tears she,
at last, answered -- No -- Who then, said he, is the Father of it? -- She
hesitated for some Time, and with great Difficulty, answered -- John Clinch. --
Who was it, said the Doctor, that did advise, and would have persuaded you to
swear falsely against Patrick Murphy. She answered -- John Clinch. -- Very
well, said he, your Affair is finished -- But for you, Mr. Constable, it is my
Orders, that you find good Security by Tomorrow Morning, for the Maintenance
of the Child; and that you immediately pay One Guinea to Patrick Murphy, or I
will have you indicted for Subornation of Perjury.

THE Constable, though vastly confounded, had so much Wit that he paid his Fine,
and the extra Company withdrew, triumphing with Murphy, and applauding the
Wisdom of the Parson. -- Doctor, said the Colonel, I wish you Joy, for if
Perjury be a damning Sin, you have certainly, for this Bout, saved one poor
Soul.' -- 'I have often thought, replied the Doctor, that we have not only
multiplied Oaths, and made them familiar, but that our common Way of
administering them, is an Inlet to the greatest of Evils, and sincerely wish,
that all Justices of the Peace, and other Magistrates, would see it performed
in a more decent and Christian-like Manner. -- Well, well, said Mr.
Leatherhead, tho'ff John Clinch be to Father the Child, I believe Irish Paddy
has had a Finger in the Pie. -- The Son of a Wh -- re has a most swinging
Brogue, and the Girls begin with Laughing, but he makes some of them Cry for
all that. The Fellow makes Love to my Wife's Maid, and I Have a Letter of his'n
in my Pocket. -- Come, said the Colonel, now for an Irish Billet-doux.

My deer Sowl,
WHAT signifis making an Orasion and Palavar, for your one sweet Self no's how
despratly i am in Love with you. My poor I's karryd the Arrant oftin enuf, and
your one deer Fese was after givin me a sivil Anser, for you simpurd upon me,
and made my poor Heart gump for Joy. Now thees fuu Lines is to ashure my deer
charmin Sally, that if she pleses to let me have a small Confablation, I will ley
my Heart and Sowl at her Feet, and you may command me by Nite or by Dey for the
precent Time, or my hole Life. If you break my poor Heart I will love you; and
when I am in my cowld Greve, my Ghost will attind you, and do you all the Sarvis I
can. Ogh! my deer Sally, keep my Heart allive, and you will find it beter then
all the Gosts in England. No more at precent from your fethful and dyin

PATRICK MURPHY.


WELL said, Paddy! cried the Colonel, I assure you the young Rogue has got the
Laconick Style, and says a great deal in few Words. In spite of the Brogue on
his Pen, you find he comes to the Point, and very likely will carry it. -- That
he will not, replied Mr. Leatherhead, for the Girl hates him, and abuses him all
Day long.' -- And yet, said Sir John, she may love him all Night. -- There have
been such Tricks. -- 'I am in Love, said Mr. Conyers, with this Irish Epistle;
but I have one from a Shoemaker in London to my Farmer Tom Driver, whose Son is
his Apprentice. As it is a Sample of low Londonshire English, I beg Leave to
read it.

Dear Friend,
THESE few Lines is to acquaint you, that your Son Tom is in good Health at
this present Writing, and begins to handle his Hammer to some Tune, so that I
hopes he will be a clever Feller. He was in a strange Quandery at the many Fokes
in this City, but that Matter is now all off. I Will say that for him, he is the
most biggest Boy I ever see of's Age, and as strong as a Bruser: He fit Will.
Adz, the Cooper's Boy and soundly thrash'd his Jackett. He plays a rare Knife
and Fork, but cannot eat Weeal without Weeneger; but he is very fond of a few
Broth. The poor Lad had a Mishap last Week, for he fell out at Wynder, and
broke his Head against the Stone Postisses. I find he looks hard at the
Wenches, so I fears, he will not be a Batchelder at the End of's Time. Our Friend
Mr. Tabby, the Stay-Maker, is now a Wyder. No more from

your loving Friend, TOBY LIFT.


I DON'T see, said Mr. Leatherhead, why we should laugh at the Shoemaker
because he don't write so fine as a Parson; tho'ff he don't, he writes well
enough, and he is an Englishman; But what a Plague have we to do with a Parcel
of Irish, who take the Bread out of our Mouths, and debauch all our Women? Why
don't we transport 'em back to their Bogs and Potato's; I Am sure 'twould be
happy for us if Ireland was at the Bottom of the Sea.' -- 'No, no, said Sir
John, not that neither; but I think we ought to give them no Trade, and make
them pay some of our Taxes.' -- 'That's an odd Maxim, Sir John, said the
Colonel: -- Now I should think, that the best Way to make them pay some of our
Taxes, is to put them in a Condition to do it. -- Should we keep them Poor, we
may lay on Taxes, but how shall we collect them? -- Where shall we find the
Money? -- 'I shall not, said the Doctor, reason on the Prudence or Justice of
England, because, though Mr. Leatherhead forgets it, I was born in Ireland, and
might be suspected of Partiality, but Mr. Conyers has a Letter, with some
Account of that Kingdom, which, I own, gave me great Pleasure, because I
sincerely love Great Britain, and honor the King.' -- 'The Account, said Mr.
Conyers, that the Doctor has mentioned, is a Copy of a Letter from an English
Gentleman, to a noble Lord, which fell into my Hands by Accident. If you think
proper, it shall make Part of our Entertainment at next Meeting.

* * *

THE Reader will please to remember, that Mr. Villeneuf gave Jack a Paper
relating to Ireland. This Paper Mr. Conyers altered, and threw into the Shape
of the following Letter, which he read in his Place.

Dublin, 17 March, 1744. My Lord,
I HAVE now finished my Tour through this Kingdom. In my former Letters I gave
your Lordship some Account of Cities and Towns, but rather as a Journal of my
Travels, than a regular Description of the Country. I purpose now to speak of
the Kingdom in general, and hope I have so much conquered my former
unaccountable Prejudices, as to be able to give your Lordship a short but true
Idea of Ireland.

IT is of little Moment to argue, whether this Country is claimed by England as
a Conquest, or whether the Inhabitants threw themselves under its Protection?
-- That the Irish fought against Queen Elizabeth, and were often in Arms, till
entirely subdued by King William, is a Matter not to be wondered at, when we
consider their Religion. -- Erroneous as their Principles were, they certainly
acted agreeable to them. -- No doubt the Resistance they made, and the Blood
they shed, struck that Sort of Horror and Hatred in our Ancestors, that is
handed down to their Posterity, and makes, at this Day, Part of our Character.
-- When we speak of the People, we ought carefully to make a Distinction
between Irish and Irish, that is, we ought to regard the Protestants of Ireland
as ourselves, because, in Fact, they are our Brethren and our Children; and so
to manage the poor Natives, who are mostly Papists, that by Clemency and good
Usage we may wean them from ill Habits, and make them faithful and useful
Subjects.

THE Settlements of our Ancestors in this Kingdom, and the Number of English
that are daily fixing themselves in the Law, the Church, the Army, and in Civil
Employments, must in Time make it a Protestant Country, and of the highest
Importance to Great Britain. -- An Acquisition of Three Millions of Subjects,
and above Ten Millions of good Acres, is not so trivial an Affair as some
imagine. -- If we have conquered this Kingdom, Who enjoys the Conquest but the
Descendants of the English? -- If true Policy requires Lenity and Encouragement
to the Conquered, undoubtedly the Conquerors, who settled on the Spot, have at
least the same Title. -- Wherefore did we conquer but to establish our Laws,
our Religion, our Manners, and our Liberty, amongst a People who greatly wanted
all, and to add Strength and Luster, to the Throne of England? -- It is true,
my Lord, we are Masters of this Kingdom, but I am afraid we do not reap a Tenth
of the Advantages it might procure us!

OUR whole Conduct favors too much of Monopoly. We argue from wrong
Principles; for every Individual, regardless of every other, measures the
Happiness of the Kingdom but by his own private Interest. -- Thus, a Clothing
Town complains dreadfully of the Decay of its Trade, without considering how
much it increases in another. -- Bristol is much out of Humor that the African
and Slave Trade is so considerably fallen; but Bristol forgets to inform us,
how greatly it flourishes at Liverpool.

PROVIDED Trade exists, it is indifferent to us, as a Nation, where it fixes;
but I apprehend, the more Places it inhabits, the greater the Chance for its
Increasing. -- With regard to the Kingdom, I applaud our Wisdom in promoting
and encouraging their Linen Manufacture. -- Their Industry has brought this
Branch to infinite perfection, which alone enables them to pay so great a Tax
to England as Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year. -- Your Lordship will be
surprised at my Mentioning a Tax. -- If the express Letter will not allow of
the Term, the real Fact will justify it. -- The Pensions and Employments on
this Establishment, the large Fortunes spent in England, the great Importation
of English Commodities, with other Articles that are exactly computed, will
amount to that Sum, if not to more.

DID they want this Linen Trade, England, would want so much clear Profit, and
Silesia, Hamburgh and Holland, enjoy the Sweets. Your Lordship therefore
perceives, how much it is the Interest of England, to cherish and countenance
this Branch. Should we neglect or clog it by partial Views, or unseasonable
Parsimony, we should irrecoverably lose a Mine more valuable than that of Gold.
Whilst we favor Ireland in this, it is but Just and Right we would be equally
kind to our Brethren of Scotland. The Field is wide enough for both, and both
ought to be supported by every Bounty we can bestow.

WHAT Laws have we not made, what Expense have we not been at, to prevent the
Exportation of Irish Wool into Foreign Nations! -- Has it answered the End
proposed? -- I am sure it has not -- The natural Consequence of our Prohibition
is, that they send, it by Stealth into France, where they have a certain Vent.
-- Is this clandestine Trade practiced in England? -- I fear your Lordship
cannot answer in the Negative.

IRELAND could do extremely well without French Wines; but I know not the
Inconveniences France would be drove to, had she not their Beef, their Tallow,
Hides and Butter; but when we add Wool, the Irish have a Profit in that
Commodity; the French have a vast Gain, but the English are as certainly vast
Losers. -- Were your Lordship to examine strictly into the Truth, you would
find that the grand Contest is not so much between England and Ireland, but
between England and France. Your Lordship would then discover, that every Link
we throw out to bind Ireland, not only curtails their Profits but our own, and,
what is worse, transferring those Profits into the Arms of France. -- Was this
Matter seriously considered, and it is worth the Thoughts of the wisest amongst
us, Abbeville would soon be a Desert, and the French obliged to recur to the
old Method of buying our Stuffs.

AND here, my Lord, permit me to lay open a Piece of French Conduct, which is
not generally known. Abbeville is a Royal Manufacture: To support which, Wool
must be obtained from England and Ireland at any Price, but the Manufacturers
pay only the middle Price of England, and the King, that is, the Kingdom in
general, pays the Remainder. By this Method, and by the Cheapness of
Provisions, they are able to undersell us in foreign Markets.

AMONGST the many Schemes for restraining Irish Wool, I have met but with one
that in any Degree can answer the End. -- The Author proposes a large Bounty on
the Exportation of Corn from Ireland. -- This, says he, would certainly throw
the Inhabitants into Tillage, and soon convert their Sheep Walks into Corn
Fields, and all the People would be properly employed and supported.

WERE your Lordship to view the Southern and Western Coasts of this Kingdom,
you would be as much charmed with their Bays and Harbors, as astonished to
find them of such little Use. -- Little to themselves, but less to England. --
Were it possible to convince Gentlemen, that, let the Riches of Ireland be what
it will, Nine Tenths would certainly center in England, I imagine they could
not hesitate a Moment, but, by endeavoring to increase it, at the Expense of
our Enemies, enable them, at last, to bear a Proportion, and to contribute to
the Exigencies of the British Government.

THE common Opinion of the Laziness of the Irish, is not strictly Just. The
Negroes in America have certainly more comfortable Dwellings, and are better
fed than the poor Natives of this Country. They are Strangers to Property, as
well as Meat. With what Spirit would an English Plowman work under such
Circumstances? -- I fancy not much better than the Irish. -- If these poor
People are Slothful and Inactive, their Food will account for it, on the same
Principles that Sir William Temple accounts for the peculiar Courage of the
English. -- No doubt, my Lord, but good Nourishment, good Clothes, and decent
Habitations, greatly Influence the Constitution of a Man, and give a Labourer
that Vigor and Life so necessary to his Employment. -- Your Lordship may ask,
Why it is not so in Ireland? -- The Error, I think, lies in the Generality of
the Landlords. Here, a Man of large Fortune never sees his Estate, and will not
be troubled with a Multiplicity of Tenants. -- He lets the Whole to a few
Gentlemen. -- These, let their Parts to others, reserving a certain Revenue to
themselves. -- These again do the same in a lower Degree, till, by passing
through a Dozen, or Twenty Hands, it sinks the real Occupiers into downright
Misery and Wretchedness. -- As a Man of some Humanity and Tenderness for my
Fellow Creatures, I most heartily wish I could as easily Point out the Remedy,
as show the Disease.

NOTWITHSTANDING their own capital Errors, and many of ours, they seem to
struggle through Difficulties with great Resignation and Patience. They spare
no Pains to make it a Protestant Kingdom, and most vigorously follow the Plan
laid down, at a vast Expense, by Dr. HENRY MAUL, now Bishop of Mead, in
educating the Children of the Natives in Labor, Industry and true Religion.
Already have they reclaimed Thousands of unhappy Creatures, and added them to
the Stock of faithful Subjects. -- If the Romans granted a Civic Crown to him
who saved one Citizen, what Triumphs, what Statues does not this truly Right
Reverend Prelate deserve, for preserving such Multitudes! -- The Reward of this
World can be but Praise; the just Recompense can only be given in the other. --
I enclose to your Lordship a full Account of this most noble and useful
Charity, now founded on a Charter.

ONE rational Scheme produces others. -- Their liberal Subscriptions for
encouraging Husbandry, Arts, Manufactures, and, in short, every Branch of
Industry and useful Knowledge, betrays not an idle, inactive Spirit, and the
Consequence is visible throughout the whole Kingdom. -- I send your Lordship a
List of Premiums for the present Year. Add this to the Account of the Charter
Schools, and they give such a Proof of true Wisdom and Understanding, that I am
not able to cite any Thing that even looks like a Parallel.

YOUR Lordship will not expect Encomiums on the Papists of this Kingdom for
their firm Attachment to a Protestant Government. No, my Lord, but they are
quiet and amenable to it. As for the Protestants, I am convinced his Majesty
has not more loyal and faithful Subjects.

THE Ridicule on the Irish Tone, or Manner of Speaking, is rather more absurd
than barbarous. All Nations have that Folly. -- The Parisians make very free
with the Normans, Gascoigns, and other Provinces. -- The People of Rome banter
the common Venetian Dialect. -- The Saxons despise the Tone of other German
States. -- All Germany laugh at the Low Dutch, and the Hollanders laugh as
heartily at the Flemings. -- Each Country in England make themselves merry at
the Expense of another; but all England ridicule the Scotch, Welsh and Irish,
and these, I suppose, return the Compliment. -- Thus we have all the lucky
Faculty of finding Perfection in ourselves, and seeing the Contrary in our
Neighbors.

WHATEVER might have been the Reason for holding the Irish in Contempt, even to
Hatred, I can truly say, those Reasons must have long since ceased. They are
now Members, and very useful Members to our Body, and are capable of being made
infinitely more so. They are not, as some imagine, a Wen on the Neck of
England, that disgraces our Form, and sucks up our natural Juices. No, my Lord;
but as it certainly is in our Power to make them so, it is as certain that we
may and ought to render them a Strength and a Support to the British Government.

I CANNOT let slip an Opportunity of expressing my Gratitude for the many
Civilities I have received in this Country. Hospitality is their Character.
Indeed they a little exceed in the Article of Wine, especially in Brimmers, to
the Cause of Liberty and our happy Constitution. Their Zeal is so fervent, that
they forget that the Wine they drink is of that Country that would destroy both.

LET us, my Lord, avoid all invidious Names and Distinctions, and rank them
amongst the Errors of the Vulgar. Let us be just and faithful to each other.
Let us learn Truth, Wisdom and Honor. These are not confined to the Torrid or
Frigid Zone, neither can temperate Regions boast their peculiar Residence.

I am, with the greatest Respect, My Lord, etc.


CHAP. X.
Where, where, degenerate Countrymen -- how high,
Will your fond Folly and your Madness fly?
Are Scenes of Death, and servile Chains so dear
To sue for Blood and Bondage every Year,
Like Rebel Jews, with too much Freedom cursed,
To court a Change, -- though certain of the worst?
GARTH.
I AM afraid I have carried my Reader too far from the Subject Matter of this
History, and tried his Patience; but I assure him that my Indulgence has been
very great; for, at infinite Pains, I have curtailed the last Chapter at least
Sixty Pages. -- Few know the Difficulty of Bridling the Imagination, and
Reining back an hard-mouthed Pen. It sometimes gets ahead, and, in Spite of
all our Skill, runs away with us into Mire and Dirt; nay, this Minute I find my
Quill in a Humor to gallop, so shall stop him short in Time.

THUS we have seen the agreeable Manner Mr. Conyers passed away many Evenings;
and thus did he establish himself in the Affections of his Company, and in the
Love of the Inhabitants, by many Acts of generous Charity. Colonel Manly, in
particular, held him in great Esteem, and carried his Friendship so far, as to
promise his Interest with the Borough for a Seat in Parliament on the first
Vacancy.

MR. CONYERS had now experienced perfect Happiness for above a Year. -- He knew
the great Secret of enjoying the good Things of this World, so as not to abuse
them. -- His Fortune, his faithful and agreeable Companion, his Family, and the
Love and Respect of all, were the Rewards of his honest Intentions to all
Mankind. In a Word, the Elements in him were so mixed, that he deserved the
honorable Title of a Man. -- But this World is not made for permanent and
lasting Joys! -- His Happiness, Tranquillity, and every domestic Pleasure,
vanished in a Moment, and left him as awakened out of a Dream of Bliss. -- He
had a Prospect of an Increase to his Happiness, but the Disappointment added to
his Pains.

MRS. CONYERS was near Lying-in, but an ignorant Servant Maid telling her a
most frightful Story of the Rebellion, which had just then broke out, threw her
into a Fit and violent Tremor, which brought on an improper Labor. She was
delivered of a Boy, who died soon after, and in four Days the kind, the tender,
the affectionate and agreeable Mrs. Conyers, followed her Child.

THE Distraction and real Grief of the Family and their Friends is not to be
expressed. Mr. Conyers bore this dreadful Stroke like a Man, but he felt it
like a Man. His Exclamations were few, but his Sighs and the Throbbings of his
Heart were without Number. His inky Coat was not the only Sign of Sorrow. The
involuntary Tear, the Heavings of his Breast, and the Alteration of his
Countenance, gave visible Marks of sincere Affliction. -- Let me at once quit
the melancholy Subject, and bring my Friend to a State of Mind a little more
composed and resigned. -- He assured Mr. and Mrs. Sampson of his constant
Affection and Love, and that notwithstanding his dearest Wife had made no Will,
he knew her Intention, and would fulfill it. Accordingly, new Writings were
drawn, and he made them a Compliment of Three thousand Pounds.

HIS gloomy Countenance would have had a much longer Duration, had not the
Rebellion roused his Indignation. He thought his Duty to his Sovereign called
him from Inaction, and the Love of his Country seemed prior to every other
Regard. To bestow hard Names on Rebels, and supinely to sigh at intestine War,
he judged, was unmanly and imprudent. He had no Idea, that the Choice of
Liberty or Slavery required a Moment's Hesitation. Full of Freedom and Glory,
he unbosom'd his Thoughts to the Colonel. -- My dear Friend, said this
venerable but hearty old Gentleman, I must love you the more for this. -- Yes,
my dear Conyers, go -- fight for your Country, and God Almighty preserve and
give you Victory! -- Did my great Age permit, I would be your Companion, and
share in the Danger. -- I well remember, though then a Boy, the Insolence of a
Popish Government. I remember the Seven Bishops in the Tower. -- The Swarms of
Friars in St. James's Park. -- The Sham Liberty of Conscience, and a thousand
other Enormities. -- Young as I was, I followed my Father, and joined the
Prince of Orange. -- I fought and bled for him and Liberty at the Boyne. -- I
fought for Liberty and KING GEORGE at Dumblain, and what Man, who has a Soul,
and a Sense of our invaluable Blessings, but would venture, nay lay down his
Life for them? -- Now I am Old and Infirm, but my Heart is good, -- indeed it
is -- The poor Gentleman could proceed no farther, for Tears choked his Words.
Mr. Conyers was greatly affected, and said all in his Power to ease the
Colonel's Heart. -- You must forgive, said the Colonel, the Weakness of an old
Man. -- I cannot help it. -- But, when I think on Times past, -- On the Danger
our Constitution has, so often, been in, and the noble and successful Struggles
we have made to defend it. -- When I think on these Things, my Pulse forgets
its Age, and beats as strong as in Youth. -- Good God! -- What is it we want!
-- Is there a reasonable Blessing that we do not, or may not enjoy! -- Are we
blind to our own Happiness, and can some, who call themselves Protestants, even
think of a Popish King but with Horror? -- Can we be so stupid as not to see
the old, the stale Trick of France? And must some of us always fall into so
weak a Project? -- Poor deluded Men! But thank God, we have still Honor and
Wisdom sufficient to convince them of their Errors.

FROM my Soul I wish it, replied Mr. Conyers, neither have I the least Doubt.
-- For my Part, I am determined, and will immediately prepare for the Field. --
I believe, said the Colonel, I can assist you. -- Let me see -- Ay -- I have a
Tent, and every Camp-Necessary, in good Order, for I frequently visit them to
refresh my Memory. -- These are yours, with two excellent Baggage Horses, and
a Baw-Man that understands his Business. -- Dear Sir, said Mr. Conyers, you
have made me quite happy. -- I am already in the Field. -- Softly, softly,
answered the Colonel, perhaps I may do somewhat more. I would not have you go
with Irregulars, for it will not be so Satisfactory. -- A Noble Duke is about
raising a Regiment of HORSE. -- He does me the Honor to rank me with his
intimate Friends, and I will immediately send an Express, and write him such a
Letter, that, perhaps, shall put you in a Light of Honor, and enable you to be
really useful. -- Mr. Conyers returned him many Thanks, and he was exact to his
Promise.

WE must now, said the Colonel, think of engaging a few good Volunteers to
accompany you to the Regiment, in case you succeed. We must be busy, and go
roundly to work. -- In a few Days they fixed on twenty young Fellows, mostly
Sons of Tenants. -- In a short Time the Colonel received a most polite and
obliging Answer to his Letter. It concluded -- From the great Character you
give Mr. Conyers, he cannot fail of being extremely agreeable. I am sorry I
have but a Lieutenancy to offer him. Should this be accepted of, I beg an
Answer by Express, and that he would join the Regiment at ***** with all Speed,
with whatever good Men he can pick up.

LIEUTENANT Conyers, said the Colonel, I most heartily wish you Joy. -- Now
indeed Matters put on a better Face, and you are equipped as you ought to be.
-- But, Bustle, Bustle. -- Take Leave of the good People at Home; make your
Will, and -- To Horse and away.

TAKING Leave, was a Task he could wish to be excused, but it was impossible.
Mr. Sampson was struck Dumb at the News, but his good Wife lost all Patience.
She could not comprehend the Necessity of his going in Person, when he might by
Deputy. She quoted many Examples of Gentlemen, of Fortunes infinitely superior
to his, who contented themselves with paying a little Money, and drinking
Success to the Cause. -- Yes, yes, my Dear, said her Husband, they must be
special good Subjects, who are only warm in the Cause, by the Quantity of
Liquor they drink. I violently suspect such Sort of People, and am not sorry to
find my dear Brother of another Way of Thinking. I am only concerned that such
an unhappy Occasion should deprive us of his Company, and throw him into
Danger; but I trust in God, he will return in Safety and with Victory.' -- If
he must go, replied Mrs. Sampson, I pray God to protect and shield him. -- The
Conversation became more familiar, and by degrees he persuaded them to excuse
the Ceremony of Parting, which would give Pain, and make him miserable.

WITH all imaginable Diligence he prepared for his Departure. He sent forward
twenty-three Recruits under the Care of two of his Tenants. He left a Will with
Dr. Grace, and a Power with Mr. Sampson to receive his Rents, and remitted Five
Hundred Pounds to the Agent of the Regiment, that he might draw on him as
Occasions required. He concerted Matters with the Colonel, and his Horses and
Baggage filed off by Degrees to the next Town. He invited some Friends to
Dinner the next Day, which was Sunday; so the Family was sure of him for one
Meal more. However, whilst they were at Church, the Colonel called in his
Chariot and accompanied him, where the Horses attended. The old Gentleman gave
him a proper Letter to his Grace, and stayed with him that Night. In the
Morning he took a Soldier-like Farewell; saw him set out for the Regiment, and
returned in the Evening to give Mr. Sampson an Account of their Expedition.

CHAP. XI.
Since great Examples justify Command,
Let glorious Acts more glorious Acts inspire,
And catch, from Breast to Breast, the noble Fire.
POPE'S HOMER.
OUR Lieutenant soon arrived at the appointed Place, and found his Recruits in
good Order. He was received with great Politeness, and presented with his
Commission, and to all his Brother-Officers. The Regiment was near complete,
and only waited the General's Orders to march where the Service required. He
was extremely pleased with this New Society, as he found the Officers were not
only Gentlemen of Good Sense, but of considerable Fortunes. He readily joined
in every Expense that was proposed to make the Regiment live comfortably, and
do Honor to the Cause.

IN about three Weeks he received a Letter from Colonel Manly, with some Books.
The Letter is so concise, and so full of good Instruction, that I cannot avoid
giving it a Place verbatim.

My very dear Friend,
I TAKE this first Opportunity of fulfilling my Promise, by laying before you
what my Age and Experience judge necessary for your Well-doing.

YOU are a Man of Property, and now enlisted to fight the Cause of Freedom, and
of That MONARCH who has ever supported it. -- You are a Soldier. You are one of
those on whom, under God, the Life and Liberty of this Nation depend. --
Consider the Dignity of your Station. -- Consider the mighty Trust reposed in
you. Consider yourself, and it is scarcely possible you will err in your
Conduct.

I AM positive as to your personal Courage, for your Soul is humane and tender,
and your Tongue is not a Bragart; but as your Behavior in this new Scene of
Life is what I am not so certain of, your Goodnature will excuse a little
Advice, and attribute my Trite Maxims, more to the Warmth of my Friendship,
than to any Occasion you may have for them.

TO be an Officer, there is no Necessity of being inspired with supernatural
Talents. Common Sense, and the Deportment of a Gentleman are sufficient. The
Knowledge of your Duty, and the Military Art, will come with Time and
Experience; but a close Application to the Study is necessary.

THE Love of the Soldiers is the Happiness of an Officer; and to gain that
Love, the Method is short and easy. -- Pay and punish where due, but never
strike. -- Be free with your Men, but suffer them not to be too free with you.
An haughty, over-bearing Temper, may indeed inspire them with Fear, but never
with Affection. Treat them as Men, and they will respect you as their Officer;
but at the same Time, be careful that the Non-commission'd Officers act in the
same Manner, and support their proper Authority, on which all Duty and
Submission depends.

ENDEAVOR, as much as possible, to keep your Men clean and decent; it gives
Spirits, and prevents Drunkenness and Debauchery. -- Drop in at their Meals,
taste their Victuals, encourage them to keep good Messes, and reprove where you
find them remiss.

BE assiduous to learn the Exercise of a Soldier, and keep your Men diligent at
it, yet so as not to fatigue them unnecessarily. See that they punctually obey
your Commands, but be not too rigorous in trivial Matters. Believe me, the Men
soon find out the Genius of their Officers, and will never impose or play
Tricks, when they know they cannot do it with Impunity.

MAKE it a constant Rule to obey with Alacrity and Cheerfulness every Order of
your Superiors: Such a Conduct will add to your Reputation, and confirm your
Character.

SLANDER and Scandal sometimes insinuate themselves into Camps, and too
frequently attack the most Deserving. Let me beg of you to turn the deaf Ear to
evil Report, and not be speedily prejudiced against any Man, much less your
Commanders.

IF an Officer need not have all the Wisdom of a Privy-Counsellor, he ought, at
least, to have that Part that enjoins Secrecy. The Spanish Proverb is good: --
In a closed Mouth no Flies enter. -- Execute your Orders in Silence, and let
not the most distant Hint, of the Conduct of the Army, escape from your Lips or
your Pen. Should you know nothing particular, your Words must be mere
Conjecture, and, in all Probability, quite wrong. Should a material
Circumstance come to your Knowledge, what Infamy must follow your disclosing it!

COMPANY and Cheerfulness are absolutely necessary, but to drink to Excess is
inexcusable. The Lives of Thousands depend on the Sobriety of Officers. -- How
can a Drunkard guide Men truly, when his own Legs mutiny, and refuse his
Commands?

BE charitable; be generous according to your Power; but seldom give Money to a
Soldier. When you think proper to Reward or Encourage, there are other Ways
infinitely more useful to them.

RISE early, and examine your Command; keep them reasonably employed, and under
the strictest Discipline; but let your own Example keep Pace with your
Precepts. Have all your Affairs in so nice and exact an Order, as to be always
ready to march at a Moment's Warning. All Men ought to accustom themselves to
Regularity; but none requires it more than a Soldier.

YOUR natural good Temper will prevent your giving Offense to any One, and
perhaps incline you to bear patiently those offered to you; but have a Care,
and let what will be the Consequence, permit no Man to Taunt or Insult --
Should the least Particle of Contempt fall on you, quit a Service, where you
must do more Harm than Good.

WITH regard to your present Enemies, hold them not too cheap. -- Speak of them
as Men of an unhappy Education, led away by false Maxims, and prejudiced to
erroneous Principles: They are, or ought to be, our Brethren. -- Let your
Humanity extend to them as far as Safety and Prudence will permit. If absolute
and fatal Necessity compels you to strike, let the Sword fall from no other
Motive but the General Good. -- Let it be effectual, but instant. -- In that
unhappy Case drive every Womanish Weakness from your Heart, and consider, that
too much Lenity and Tenderness may be Cruelty to your Country. -- The Action,
or necessary Pursuit over, let Clemency and Compassion fill your Breast. --
Should you conquer, be all Mildness and Charity. -- Comfort the Prisoner;
assist the wretched Wounded; speak Peace to despairing Souls, and, if possible,
show them the Joys of Freedom and Liberty.

But I have done, and discharged the Office annexed to Love and Friendship. If
my Hints are useless to you, perhaps you may know those to whom they may be of
Service.

I SEND you my old faithful Companion Monsieur de Feuquiere. Read him
carefully, for he is able to instruct. I likewise send you Polibius, with the
Annotations of Monsieur de Follard.

YOU find I am an old Fellow by my long-winded Tale; but I shall appear more
so, when you consider I end, (where I ought to have begun) by recommending to
you the Service of God, and Obedience to his Ordinances. A Righteous and a
Godly Life is the best Preparative for Death. Though all ought, yet none should
be more ready to obey that Call than a Soldier. -- His Life is every Instant,
in a peculiar Manner, at Stake. -- Think on this frequently, and your Duty to
God and Man will certainly follow; and Man and the Almighty will reward you
with Peace, Content and Happiness. -- Into his Hands I resign you, and most
fervently pray him to crown your Cause with Victory, and to continue his Mercy
to this Land to latest Posterity.

I am, my dear Conyers, Your very affectionate and Very faithful Servant,
JOSIAH MANLY.


MR. CONYERS was greatly pleased at the Sincerity and Goodness of the Colonel.
He read his Letter many Times, and compared it with the Instructions of Mr.
Kindly, with a determined Resolution of adhering to both as far as he was able.
He read Feuquiere and Polibius with Pleasure, but Monsieur de la Colonie, and
the Maxims of Turenne, afforded equal Instruction and Delight.

CHAP. XII.
Whither, Oh! whither do you madly run,
The Sword unsheathed, and impious War begun?
What Land, what Wave of boundless Neptune's Flood
Has not been stained, alas! with British Blood;
Not that the Rival to the British Fame
Proud France, might tremble at the British Name,
Not that Iberia, though unskilled in War,
In Chains should follow our triumphal Car;
But that Rome's Pontiff should his Vow enjoy,
And Britain, Suicide! herself destroy.
FRANCIS'S 7th Epode of Horace, altered.
WHY should I take up the Time of the Reader, by going minutely into the
Conduct of the Rebels or our own. My Task is only relative to the private
Character of Jack Connor, or Mr. Conyers. A Lawyer only speaks from his Brief,
and in all those Pages on which this History is founded, I find little or no
Traces of the Actions of the Times. -- I own I met with a Paper, that I suppose
served as Memorandums and Hints to Mr. Conyers. It was dated like a Journal,
but gave me little Insight into Affairs. I find the Words -- They slipped by --
We marched to -- Missed again -- Slipped again -- Men much harrass'd -- Vastly
obliged to London Subscription -- The Inhabitants of ***** deserve
Encouragement, but the City of ***** to be burnt. -- Thank God we have got our
Troops from Flanders. -- The DUKE to command. -- Our People in great Spirits.
-- Victory or Death. -- Then followed in Capital Letters, CULLODEN 16th APRIL
1746. THEY WERE WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE, AND FOUND LIGHT.

WHEN he reflected on the happy Consequences of the Glorious Day. -- When he
considered, that Freedom, Liberty, Religion, and his Majesty's August Family
were more firmly established and confirmed to Great Britain. -- That a full
Period was put to Blood and Slaughter, and to that unnatural Monster, CIVIL
WAR, his Heart exulted, and his Joy was extreme. -- He very devoutly returned
his Acknowledgments to that Providence, which had so often and so signally
preserved our invaluable Privileges, and had protected him in the Midst of so
many Dangers.

HE wrote a particular Account of this Battle to Mr. Sampson and Colonel Manly.
He vastly extolled the Skill and Judgment of the General, and the Valor of the
Troops. In his Letter to the Colonel, he has these remarkable Words:

I THINK I see all England in a Joy next to Madness. All admire the Conduct and
Intrepidity of his Royal Highness. They cannot now find Words sufficient to
express their Praises. But of you, who know the National Infirmity, give me
Leave to ask, How long will this last? -- Will they not soon be equally eager
to strip him of his Laurels? -- Will not Envy, Malice, and Disaffection soon
endeavor to poison the Minds of the People, and blast the Reputation of Him,
who risqued his own to preserve their Lives and Properties? -- I fear he must
expect such Treatment. I doubt our Gratitude, and most heartily wish, for the
Honor of the Kingdom, that I may be deceived. This War, and the Danger of it
is over, consequently the Instruments of Safety, will soon be sacrificed to the
Parsimony of their Purse, and every disbanded Soldier exposed to the Insults of
every Peasant. -- For my own Part, I so much admire the Military Virtues of my
Leader, he shall command my Hand and my Heart, wherever and as long as he
judges proper.

HE greatly commiserated the unfortunate Prisoners, now subject to the injured
Laws of their Country. To avert the Punishment due to such Crimes, was not in
his Power; but to make them easy, and alleviate their Sorrows, was his daily
Employment. -- He laid no Stress on Victory, as it is an uncertain
Determination of Right or Wrong; but he argued in the gentlest Terms, and
endeavored to convince them, from History, Reason, and Experience, that their
Prejudices were ill founded. -- That, they were Dupes to the Politics of
France, and acted like Children who disobey the best of Parents. -- That as
Criminal as they were, his Majesty was clothed with Mercy, and advised an
immediate Application to his Clemency. -- He showed them the Goodness of the
late King in 1715, and very judiciously referred them to the Memoirs of Marchal
Villars, and many other French Books, for the opposite Conduct of Lewis the
Fourteenth to his Protestant Subjects in the Cevennes, who had taken Arms
merely to defend their Religion, not to dethrone their Monarch. -- Such a
Conduct made Mr. Conyers vastly beloved, and brought some, who were violent, to
think with more Moderation. He greatly pitied the poor Clans, as they were bred
up in a blind and implicit Obedience to their Chiefs. He lamented those
Gentlemen who acted from Conscience and Principle, but regarded those, as the
most wicked of human Beings, whose only Motive was to fish in Troubled Waters.

NOT content with this Sort of Behavior, he endeavored to remove our own
Prejudices, and take off that Acrimony and Ill Nature, which some of us are too
subject to. -- He proved the Injustice and Cruelty of Branding a whole Kingdom,
for the Faults of a Few. That, even those Few were fallen Brethren, and erred
in their Duty, but from their Zeal to mistaken Opinions. That most of them
deserved our Pity more than our Anger. That, so far from perpetuating
Animosity, all Encouragement and Regard should be shown to the Good, and every
Scheme set on Foot to convert the Bad. -- Time and proper Management, would
convince every Mortal, that, as a Union of Minds was our reciprocal Interest,
so Love and Friendship would soon make us, the affectionate Children of an
indulgent Parent.

HAPPY, thrice Happy should we be, if every Man reasoned like Mr. Conyers! --
Division and Envy and Malice and Madness would cease to distract and confound
the real Beauty and Harmony of our most excellent Constitution. -- Were our
Souls cemented by Love, Tenderness and Charity. -- Did we take half the Pains
to assist, as we do to destroy each other, what Joys would not this Land
afford! -- With what Respect would Foreign Nations behold us! -- What Terror to
our Enemies, and to the Disturbers of Europe!

CHAP. XIII.
Quoth Hudibras, the Case is clear,
As thou have proved it by their Practice,
No Argument like Matter of Fact is;
And we are best of all led to
Men's Principles by what they do.
HUDIBRAS.
CERTAINLY it is almost Time to proceed to the personal Account of Lieutenant
Conyers, but I must crave a little Indulgence for the following Chapter, and
shall then follow him more closely.

AMONGST the Manuscripts so often mentioned, I found one relative to the
unhappy Subject of last Chapter. I suppose Mr. Conyers had seen some of the
Declarations published by the Son of the Pretender, which induced him to form
one by way of Parody, and by taking off the Mask show the Picture in a full and
just Light. -- Whether this Piece was published or not, I cannot learn, but to
omit it in this its proper Place, would be unpardonable in a Faithful
Historian; to which honorable Title I hope I have a Right. -- The Paper runs
thus.

THE DECLARATION of --
By Command of our R -- l F --; the Divine Permission of his Holiness the Pope;
the Assistance of his Most Christian, and the good Wishes of his Most Catholic
Majesty, aided and supported by the Alms and Prayers of all true Sons of the
Church, we send this our Declaration to the People of England, Greeting.
You must be all convinced, that the unhappy Fate of our Grandfather King
James the Second, (of Glorious and Pious Memory) was owing to the Infidelity
and Cowardice of his Fleets and Armies.

AS your Cowardice and Infidelity were the Ruin and Subversion of our august
House, we trust hat the same Principles are capable of restoring us to the
Throne of our Ancestors.

TO obviate every Difficulty to these our just and laudable Purposes, we shall,
by the Authority aforesaid, convince this Nation, that our Rule will be
salutary, and extend to the Happiness of every Individual.

THE Riot and Habeas Corpus Acts are equally dangerous, and shall, with the
Advice of Friends, be abrogated or suspended, until a Regulation can be made,
and the Holy Inquisition introduced into the Kingdom.

AS the Grand and Petty Juries are the greatest Evils of Civil Government, they
shall be abolished, and the Judges, whom we shall think proper to appoint,
shall finally hear and determine all criminal Causes.

PROCESSES in Civil Affairs are most shamefully and abominably abused. The
Decision of Property, as now managed, is a Matter that greatly affects our
humane Heart, and until a proper Method can be fixed on for abridging the Laws,
we shall take the contested Lands or Property into our Care and Guardianship.

THE Insufficiency of the Statute and Common Law of England absolutely require
an Explaining and a Dispensing Power. We shall therefore, once more, establish
a Star Chamber-court in its fullest Extent.

THE many Evils arising from Clandestine Marriages is a Scandal to the Nation,
and Ruin to many Thousand Families. To remedy which, we shall immediately erect
a Court of Wards, as in the Days of our illustrious Ancestors.

THE Education of Youth is a Matter of the highest Importance. Our Vigilance
shall watch over those mighty Seminaries Oxford and Cambridge. Their Learning
is too crampt and confined, but by the Assistance of Mandamuses, we shall throw
in such Fellow Laborers from the Sorbonne and St. Omers, as will soon
inculcate our grand Design.

LIBERTY is the greatest Blessing Man can enjoy; but the Abuse of that Liberty
the greatest Curse: To avoid the latter, and yet keep strictly to the former,
it is our sincere and determined Resoluion, to indulge every Man in the
peaceable and quiet Liberty of THINKING. Nevertheless, though we would show our
great Moderation and Lenity, our true Intent and Meaning is, That should any
Person presume to do more than merely THINK, he shall not only incur our
highest Displeasure, but be delivered to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, over
whom we do not pretend to have any Power, consequently the Door of our natural
Clemency will be shut against him.

FROM our unbounded Charity to weak and tender Minds, and in Imitation of our
illustrious Grandfather, (of blessed Memory) it is our firm Resolution to grant
a plenary Indulgence and full Liberty of Conscience to all Sects and Religions
whatsoever; that they shall exercise and enjoy all their respective Rites and
Ceremonies in the amplest Manner, until the true and infallible Church has
taken Root, and spread its Branches, but no longer.

THE Liberty of the Press is an Abomination in the Sight of God and Man. Such
Power in the Hands of Unbelievers and Heretics, gave Rise to vile Writings and
Infinity of Blasphemies against the most Highest; nay, it has dared to open its
Mouth against the Majesty of Kings: -- To contemn and make odious that great
Bulwark of Monarchy, The ancient System of Divine, Hereditary and indefeasible
Right of Princes and Potentates; -- To stir up the Rabble against that mild and
peaceable Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience; -- To undermine all
the Ordinances of our Holy Mother Church; -- To reproach us with Idolatry,
Cruelty and Superstition; and above all, it has been so wicked, to set before
the Vulgar and Ignorant the whole Works of the Prophets and Apostles, without
the Aid of Hebrew or Greek, to the great Discouragement of Learning, and
Increase of Impiety. -- From a thorough Conviction of such horrid Practices we
shall, in due Time, commission Thirty of our most able Ecclesiastics to read
and examine all Manuscripts, and license such only to be printed, which they
shall judge for the Honor of God, or our own Benefit.

AS no true Son of the Church can with Patience hear of the Havoc and
Devastation the House of TUDOR made of her Lands and Revenues, nor of the many
Robberies and Impieties committed in those barbarous Times against the Holy
See, and the cloistered Saints whom God had so plentifully scattered over the
Land, our Pious Intention is, so soon as Affairs will permit, to reinstate our
Holy Mother Church into those Lands and Revenues granted her by the Charity of
good Christians. -- By the Account furnished us by our Holy Father, it is with
the greatest Joy we find, that we shall be enabled to present to the Laborers
in the Vineyard of God, a comfortable and reasonable Subsistence, though it but a
little exceeds Two Thirds of the Lands of the Kingdom.

IN fine, Let us conjure you by the Duty you owe God's Hereditary Vicegerent:
By the Love of Peace and Tranquillity, and by the Honor of our supreme and
infallible Judge, to hear and consider these our real and sincere Purposes,
stripped of any the least Disguise. -- Consider our Situation. -- Regard our
Sword! -- Consider, That the Most Christian King is our Support; the Most
Catholic our Helper; and those in the Mountains Assertors of our Right. -- Let
therefore no unsanctify'd Bishop preach you from your Duty, but remember the
Happiness, the mighty Happiness we intend to bestow upon you, and be assured on
the Faith of a Family who never forfeited their Word. -- On the Faith of a
Family, whose Virtues and Heroic Deeds are so fully recorded in your
Histories, that we shall not only strictly perform the several Articles in this
our gracious Declaration, but shall take all Occasions, and watch all
Opportunities of leading you more and more to a State of Perfection here on
Earth, and to a State of everlasting Bliss in the World to come. Given at --

CHAP. XIV.
Now, by the Foot, the flying Foot were slain;
Horse, trod by Horse, lay foaming on the Plain.
From the dry Fields, thick Clouds of Dust arise,
Shade the black Host, and intercept the Skies;
The brass-hoof'd Steeds tumultuous plunge and bound,
And the thick Thunder beats the laboring Ground. POPE'S Homer.

DOMESTIC Peace was once more established, and the late confused and
distracted Kingdom now more sensibly felt the Joys of public Tranquillity.

THE War with France still raged in Flanders, and required the Presence of
those Troops, which a Rebellion had compelled to withdraw from their Allies,
and the necessary Orders were dispatched for embarking sundry Corpse. Mr.
Conyers was presented to a Troop of Dragoons under these Orders. He now equipt
himself in a much better Manner, and was so employed, that he had not Time to
visit his Friends; but contented himself with tender Letters to Mr. Sampson,
Colonel Manly, and Doctor Grace. -- When the Regiments were completed, the
final Orders were given, and Captain Conyers attended his Duty.

HE certainly observed a profound Silence on the Military Operations, for I
only found some Orderly Books, written in his own Hand, which, undoubtedly,
every Officer ought to do.

FOR the Marches and Encampments of the Army, I must refer to the Gazettes of
the Time. -- As I ever consult the Ease of my Reader, he will not condemn my
Silence, when he considers I have no Lights to guide either Him or myself into
Affairs so much above our Knowledge. -- However I must follow the Glimmerings I
have, and pursue him through his Variety of Marches and foraging Parties, till
I find him encamped near Maestricht. I must attend him in crossing the Maese
with the Army, and encamping in the Vicinity of the French, but, even to the
Night before the last Battle, I have nothing particular to mention. -- This
Night, indeed, an Affair happened, which makes so material a Part of this
History, that compels a Recital, though with my usual Brevity.

THE Captain had been ordered, with Detachments from other Regiments, on a
Command to Venlo, for Forage. Disputes frequently happen on these Occasions,
which the Commanding Officer must be extremely careful to prevent. -- By an
Officer's insisting to be served out of his Tour, a Quarrel began: The Clamor
was great; but the Captain running to the Spot, exerted his Authority, and
directed the Forage in the proper Channel. The Officer whose Name was Thornton,
and a Lieutenant of Dragoons, was much out of Humor, and dropped some Words, as
much as to say -- Captain Conyers would not be always at the Head of a Command!

THE Foraging being over, they returned to Maestricht, where the Captain found
an Order, from the Adjutant-General, to join the Army as speedily as possible,
after the Men and Horses were refreshed. He communicated this Order to the
Officers of the Party, and directed them to join at the Port, precisely at Two
o'Clock in the Morning. These Orders were given to the Men, and he invited the
Officers to sup with him at the Helmet, and Lieutenant Thornton was of the
Party. This Gentleman was younger than Captain Conyers, but in his Size, and
many other Respects, extremely resembled him. He had a very good Character in
the Army, but was too apt to imagine an Affront where none was intended. As he
was well liked for many good Qualities, this Fault was imputed to his Youth,
and Want of Experience.

LIEUTENANT Thomas was likewise of the Company. He was an elderly, rough Sort
of a Man, who, from a low Station, had, by Accident, arrived to this Rank. He
was educated, and took his Degrees, in a Stable, and, forgetful of the Title he
was honored with by his Majesty's Commission, swore and talked as if still a
Dragoon. -- This Gentleman began the Affair of the Forage, and seemed to think
that Lieutenant Thornton had been injured. -- By the L -- d, said he, if any
Man had served me so, I Would have shown him the Difference. -- Sir, replied Mr.
Thornton, I know as well as any Man, when I am ill used, and shall take a
proper Time to explain myself.' -- 'Sir, said the Captain, who began to be
warm, I don't know the Meaning of all this; but should you imagine any ill
Treatment, I beg you will show the Manner, and you shall find me vastly ready
to give you every Satisfaction in my Power. -- 'Spoke, cried Thomas, like a
Gentleman, and a Man of Honor.' -- Sir, said Thornton, since I must speak, I
must tell you, I am a Gentleman of Family and Fortune, perhaps, superior to
your self! You insulted me at Venlo; you stopped my Men in their Duty, in a rude
and uncivil Manner. This, Sir, may injure my Character and Honor, and calls
for immediate Satisfaction.' -- 'That's right, said Thomas, the present Time is
always the best, therefore, my Advice is, to take a cool Turn on the Parade,
and decide the Matter like Friends and Men of Honor. -- Thornton rose up, as
did Captain Conyers. -- The rest of the Company interposed, and contrary to all
Mr. Thomas's Arguments, obliged them to sit down in Peace.

THE young Lieutenant was on fire, and the Captain almost as hot; but a little
Reflection brought him to his Reason. -- Gentlemen, said the Captain, I am
sorry for this Affair, and believe I can convince Mr. Thornton of a mistaken
Point of Honor. -- By the L -- d, said Thomas, your only best Way, is, by the
Point of the Sword. -- Sir! said the Captain, with a strong Emphasis, Did I
affront you, too? -- No, Sir, said Thomas, not me.' -- 'Then, Sir, replied the
other, let me advise you, as you regard your Commission, or your Safety, no
more to interfere in our Disputes. -- Thomas bit his Lips, but, prudently held
his Tongue. -- Conyers turned to Mr. Thornton, and said, -- You have desired
Satisfaction, Sir, and it is my Duty to give it, but permit me first to say, I
think you began at the wrong End. What Satisfaction could my Life have afforded
you, or your Death have given me, your Family or Friends? -- I hope we have had
Time to reflect on the Consequences of too precipitate a Resolution.' -- 'Sir,
replied Thornton, the Honor of an Officer is a tender Point.' -- 'I confess
it, said the Captain, and therefore ought to be tenderly used. -- No
Satisfaction, Sir, can equal a Conviction of being in an Error. -- Here, Sir,
are the Orders I received, and submit to the Gentlemen present, if I exceeded
them, or showed the least Partiality. -- The Company agreed, that he could not
avoid acting as he did; and he proceeded: -- As to your Family and Fortune,
they are in this Case, quite out of the Question. I own, Sir, I was in an Hurry
to prevent a Dispute; but if any Expressions of Rudeness or Incivility escaped
from me, I am sorry for it, and before these Gentlemen, most heartily ask your
Pardon. This, Sir, I hope, is the rational and just Satisfaction one Gentleman
ought to ask of another; if more is required, I must comply, though with
Reluctance.

ALL the Company, except Lieutenant Thomas, who was asleep, cried out, -- No
Gentleman can desire more, and greatly praised Captain Conyers. -- Mr. Thornton
confessed his Error, excused himself for his Rashness, and begged that no more
might be said about it. -- The Captain, affectionately embracing him, wished
for an Opportunity of showing his Regard and Friendship. -- What Pity it is,
said he, that trivial and insignificant Words should raise our Anger, to the
Destruction of our Peace and Happiness, and that Incendiaries are not more
severely punished. -- Had not this good Company been more prudent than Two of
us, and honester than a Third, One might, by this Time, have slept with his
Fathers, and perhaps both. -- But, come, Gentlemen, let us prepare for Duty
where real Honor calls. Let us fight with the common Enemy, but never amongst
ourselves. -- One Bottle more and then.' -- 'And then, said Mr. Thornton, have
at the French. -- They finished two Bottles with great Harmony, and often drank
Success to the DUKE, and precisely at the Time appointed, marched out of
Maestricht, and soon arrived at the Camp.

THIS proved a very busy Day, and made the small Village of LAWFELD Famous. --
Those who desire an Account of the Battle, must not apply to me, for my whole
Attention is taken up with Capt. Conyers. -- When our Dragoons were ordered to
Charge, the Captain did singular Service. He rescued his Major, and a
Lieutenant Colonel of another Regiment. -- He stopped several Parties who were
driving to their Ruin, and directed them where to turn their Swords. -- His
Head and his Hands were at Work, and in short, as the French Memoir Writers
phrase it, He performed Prodigies of Valor. -- In the Midst of this, he saw
Lieutenant Thornton, with the greatest Bravery, waging unequal War, for he was
surrounded by three Cavaliers. -- In an Instant, he flew to his Relief, and
effectually took Care of one. By this Time Mr. Thornton was wounded in many
Places, and on the Ground; the Captain received a violent Blow on his Head, and
two Wounds on his left Shoulder. His Horse was shot, but he manfully defended
the Body of his Friend on Foot. Finding the Foe increased, he desired Quarters,
and resigned his Sword to an Officer who had just come up. -- At first he
imagined Mr. Thornton was killed; but observing some Signs of Life, he
persuaded some of the French to carry him to a Place of Safety, and was
conducted along with him by the Officer, who was a Gentleman of great Humanity.
All possible Care was taken of both; and, the Action over, they were sent to
Tongres with other Prisoners.

THE Gentleman to whom he had surrendered, was the Marquis de Brissac, Colonel
of a Regiment of Dragoons. His Politeness and good Manners, corresponded with
his Quality. He daily visited the Captain, and procured him and Mr. Thornton
every Necessary. -- The Lieutenant had been severely treated, having no less
than seven Wounds in the Head, Shoulders, and Body. Two of them were dangerous,
but his Youth and good Constitution surmounted the Difficulty. In three Weeks
the Surgeons declared him in a fair Way of Recovery; but it would require great
Time.

THE Marquis was extremely pleased, and expressed himself very genteely on the
Occasion. He assured him, that assisting two such valiant Gentlemen was the
highest Proof of his good Fortune. -- Though I was not, said he, a Witness of
your Bravery, I am sure it must have been great, but the Courage of the Captain
in defending you, is what I shall ever esteem and admire him for. To his Valor
you really owe your Life, more than to my Endeavors to save it.

AS our two Prisoners recovered their Strength, the Marquis introduced them to
the Duke d'Ayen, with other Officers of Family and Distinction, and every
Politeness and Respect was paid them. -- They had now their own Servants and
Necessaries, and a Credit for Money. In two Months Capt. Conyers was in good
Health, but his Left Arm was useless. He got Permission, on his Parole, to go
to his Regiment, but promised his Friend to return soon, and, if possible, go
with him to Aix-la-Chapelle, which was necessary for both.

CAPTAIN Conyers was received with the greatest Joy by his Corpse, and highly
honored by his Superiors. He spoke of Mr. Thornton in so noble a Manner, that
the DUKE gave him a Troop of Dragoons, and Permission to both, to go to Aix, or
where they thought proper, to establish their Healths. Capt. Thornton was
extremely sensible of the Bounty and Goodness of his Royal Highness, and
affectionately embracing Conyers, called him his Father, Brother and Preserver,
and vowed a perpetual Friendship. Capt. Conyers was not behind Hand, and
promised to attend him, and, if possible, never to part.

AS soon as Capt. Thornton was able to travel, the Friends took their Leave of
the Marquis de Brissac, the Duke d'Ayen, and others, in the politest Terms, and
testified their Gratitude for all the Civilities received. Capt. Thornton could
not think of going to Aix till he had paid his Duty to the Duke, and kissed
that Hand which had so nobly rewarded his little Services. He met with a most
gracious Reception, and in a few Days left the Camp.

CAPT. Thornton was the Second Son of Sir Roger Thornton, a Gentleman of large
Fortune in Ireland and in Essex, and a Member of the House of Commons. He was
about Twenty-four Years of Age, spoke French and Italian perfectly well, and
understood Drawing, and those Branches of the Mathematics, so necessary to
every Officer who chooses to distinguish himself. Sir Roger allowed him Three
Hundred Pounds a Year, but on this Occasion he very liberally supplied him. He
wrote Capt. Conyers a most obliging Letter, for his Son had informed him of the
Obligations he lay under. The young Captain received many Letters from his
Uncle the Earl of Mountworth, in which Mr. Conyers was always honorably
mentioned.

CAPT. Thornton recovered very slowly, and Capt. Conyers's Arm proved much
worse than was at first imagined. They stayed a long Time at Aix-la-Chapelle
and Spa, and were determined to go to England; but the Peace being just signed,
they changed their Resolution, and set out for France.

CHAP. XV.
Of all the Virtues, Justice is the best;
Valor, without it, is a common Pest:
Pirates and Thieves, too often with Courage graced,
Show us how ill that Virtue may be placed:
It Is our Complexion makes us chaste or brave;
Justice from Reason, and from Heaven we have:
All other Virtues dwell but in the Blood;
That in the Soul, and gives the Name of Good.
WALLER.
ON their Arrival at Paris, they hired very grand Apartments in the best Hotel.
In a few Days they were prepared to visit the Marquis de Brissac and the Duke
d'Ayen, who received them with Marks of the greatest Respect and Esteem. They
were visited in Return, and soon made acquainted with the Families of the First
Distinction. The Marquis recommended the ablest Surgeon, and they went on very
successfully under his Care.

THEY had been about a Month at Paris, when one Day Capt. Conyers took it into
his Head to dress himself as formerly, and dine at the old Ordinary. The People
of the House immediately recollected him, and were much rejoiced at his Return
-- It seems Paris had greatly missed the English Guineas that so plentifully
rolled about before the War, and now promised themselves that my Lord Anglais
would soon pay the Expense of all their Fireworks and Illuminations. -- He
found none of his former Acquaintances at Table; but after Dinner he begged the
good Woman would accept of a Pot of Coffee, and enquired after them.

MONSIEUR Maquereau, said she, had very bad Fortune at Play, and was so
reduced, that for some Time he lived on the Women of the Town; but at last he
got Religion into his Head, and went into La Trappe. -- The Chevalier Fanfaron
was very unlucky, for about a Year ago he died of his Wounds.' -- I suppose,
said Conyers, the Chevalier had an Affair of Honor, and fell by it.' -- 'All I
know, said the Landlady, is, the Chevalier killed a Gentleman one Night on
Pont-Neuf, and was so unfortunate as to be taken and broke Alive on the Wheel,
at the Greve.' -- 'So much for the Chevalier, said the Captain, but you don't
tell me a Word of my good Friend Monsieur Pense. I hope no Accident has
happened to him.' -- 'Ah, poor Gentleman! said she, indeed, he is greatly to be
pitied. It Is now just two Years since the Archers got into his Lodgings, took
him out of Bed, seized all his Papers and Effects, and carried them to the
Bastile. God knows if he be dead or alive. Somebody said he was a Spy for the
English, and so the poor good Man was ruined.

THE Captain enquired for no more, but finished the Coffee, thanked the good
Woman, and went in a Hurry to his Lodgings. He was vastly moved at the Fate of
Pense, and determined to try his Interest to save him, if it was not too late.
-- He soon dressed, and followed Captain Thornton to the Marquis's, where he
had dined. The Company were informed of the Morning dishabille and imputed it,
and his long Stay, to some Affair of Gallantry, on which he was heartily
railly'd. He railly'd in his Turn, and the Conversation fell into the usual
Channel. The Duke d'Ayen came in soon after, and in a little Time the whole
Company went to the Opera.

CAPTAIN Conyers took Care to place himself next to the Duke, and at last found
an Opportunity of mentioning the Case of Pense. He concluded with assuring his
Lordship, that he held the Office of a Spy in the utmost Contempt: But, said
he, this unhappy Man has formerly rendered me more Services than I can ever
repay; therefore I hope your Lordship will consider the Gratitude I owe, and
grant a Favor to me, and not to him.' -- 'I protest, said the Duke, I never
heard of this Man, but all in my Power you may command. I shall speak to my
Father, (Marshal Noailles) and interest myself to the utmost. Should I succeed,
you shall soon hear of it, but my Silence will convince you of the
Impossibility.

CONYERS passed four Days in great Anxiety, but the fifth he had a Visit from
the Duke, who, after some Conversation, told him, his Friend was alive. --
Then, my Lord, said the Captain, so am I. This is a great Point gained; but I
hope more remains.' -- 'Yes, replied the Duke, I will not keep you longer in
Suspense. The Marshal with some Difficulty, undertook the Cause, and I have
brought you an Order to the Governor, to deliver Mr. Pense and all his Effects,
into your Hands, but with this Injunction, that he quits Paris in twenty-four
Hours, and France in a Week. -- The Captain took the Order, and most heartily
thanked the Duke. -- I know not, said this Nobleman, how Pense escaped, for he
has been a most notorious Offender; but his Art was great, and by little
Discoveries protracted his Time so long, that I believe, at last, they were
ashamed to hang him. -- But I see you are impatient to be the Messenger of good
News, and shall only add, that I expect you Tomorrow at Dinner. -- He was in
the highest Delight, and immediately drove to the Bastile, accompanied by Capt.
Thornton.

THE proper Compliments being paid to the Governor, the Captain mentioned Mr.
Pense, but was answered civilly, though in a cold unsatisfactory Manner. -- Sir,
said the Captain, I believe I have a Paper in my Hand, that will convince you I
am not here to ask impertinent Questions. -- When the Governor had read and
carefully examined the Order, he behaved quite in another Manner, and directed
a Servant to call Mr. Pense to him. -- He spoke much of the poor Man, but
seemed to hint, that all Things considered, he had surprising good Fortune. --
Pense was conducted into the Chamber, but his Countenance was so changed, that
his Friend scarcely knew him. -- He bowed and trembled. -- A small Silence
intervened, but, fixing his Eyes intently on Captain Conyers, and, at last,
crediting their Evidence, he cried out. -- It is he, and flew to his Arms. He
hung on his Neck. He had not Words to testify his Amazement. He clasped him,
and was in an Agony of Joy, till Tears moderated the Excess. He sobb'd, and
asked broken Questions, every Moment embracing his Friend. -- The Scene was
very moving, nor could the Captain refrain the manly honest Tribute of a Tear.

THE Governor told Mr. Pense, that he was at Liberty to go with the Gentlemen.
That his Papers were sealed up, as was the Value of his Effects in a Box, which
he might take with him; but gave him the Orders about quitting the Kingdom. --
Mr. Pense made many Compliments, but seemed to wish he was out of the Walls,
which Half an Hour saw done; and the Captain conducted him to his Lodgings.

AS his Time was to be short in Paris, they abridg'd a thousand Questions to
each other, and reserved them for a more favorable Opportunity, only the
Captain mentioned the Situation he was in, as to Rank and Fortune, which gave
the old Man a most sensible Pleasure. -- They now examined his Finances, and
found he had a Remainder of six hundred Pounds Sterling. They debated on the
Application of the Money, but found, that the mere Interest would by no Means
afford him a decent Maintenance. -- My dear Friend, said Pense, let me settle
this Affair. -- Take the Money, and allow me what you think proper, by way of
Pension, during my Life. -- Be it so, replied the Captain, and immediately he
drew up a little Instrument, and gave him a Letter to his Banker in London, to
honor his Bills for twenty-five Pounds for every three Months. -- Poor Pense
once more shed Tears, and could only add -- You are too good, and I am too
happy.

MANY Towns were proposed for his Residence, for to England he could not safely
go, and the Captain fixed on Brussels as a cheap and agreeable Place. Matters
being thus adjusted, they passed the Remainder of the Day to their mutual
Satisfaction; and next Morning Pense bid Adieu to his faithful Friend, and took
the Coach to Lisle, but not before the Captain had obliged him to accept of
Forty Pieces.

PERHAPS I ought to extol the Goodnature of Capt. Conyers: -- To paint his
Friendship in the brightest Colors, and to show the Amiableness and
Self-Satisfaction of a grateful Heart. -- By so doing, should I not deprive my
Reader of the Pleasure of doing it himself? -- When I consult my own Ease, it is
only with a View of indulging his Judgment.

CHAP. XVI.
-- His curdling Blood forgot to glide;
Confusion on his fainting Vitals hung,
And fault'ring Accents fluttered on his Tongue.
GARTH.
CAPT. Thornton was not yet quite cured; for his Wounds, by some little
Irregularities, had frequently opened. Capt. Conyers was perfectly recovered;
and as his Regiment had been for some Time in England, he began to consider
that his Duty required his Presence. Whilst he was preparing to attend it, he
received a Letter that gave him Pain and Pleasure. In short, the Regiment was
broke. He was now his own Master, and determined to stay with his Friend till
he was quite fit to Travel.

SINCE, said he, that I am now at full Liberty, and have an easy Fortune, ought
I not to think on those Friends to whom I owe my very Being? Perhaps that dear
good Man Mr. Kindly, or some of his Family may want my Assistance. -- Perhaps I
may be useful to the worthy Lord Truegood, or his charming Sons. Heavens! what
a Joy must I not feel at contributing to their Satisfaction! What Pleasure will
they not receive at seeing their little Jack completely happy! -- Ought I not
to think on my Mother? Ought I not to seek her out, and relieve her Distresses?
and have I not neglected these Duties too long? -- Such Thoughts made him glow
with alternate Shame and Pleasure, and determined him to visit Ireland as soon
as possible.

THE Captains passed their Time in Paris in the most agreeable Manner, and were
much respected by the Ladies. I find a few Hints that persuade me, they were
not without Amusements of a delicate Nature; but as the Papers are silent as to
the Particulars, so must I.

IT happened that Capt. Magragh of Lord Clare's Regiment, had lately taken
Apartments in the same Hotel. This Gentleman thought it his Duty to pay his
Respects to the two English Officers, and made them a very civil Visit. They
received him in a polite Manner, and in an Hour's Conversation found out his
Rank and his Character. He was of a lively Soldier-like Disposition, and very
communicative. His Father had quitted Ireland, and followed the Fortune of King
James the Second. He was born in France, but spoke English with a prodigious
Irish Accent, though he had never been in that Kingdom. He told them of the vast
Estate his Father lost in Ireland, and how near he was, the other Day, of
recovering it. He spoke of the War in Germany and in Flanders, and gave them a
History of his own Exploits. He mentioned the Valor of the Irish, and without
considering the French Policy, seemed to glory in their being sent foremost on
the most desperate Attacks. His Conversation, and the Oddity of his Language,
was agreeable enough, and made our Friends desire a further Acquaintance.

IN a few Days he invited them to a genteel Supper, with two other Officers of
the Irish Brigade. The Chat turned on War, and Capt. Magragh spoke very
eloquently on Sieges and Battles, for he could really speak on little else. --
One of the Officers, in a laughing Way, mentioned something of an unfortunate
Expedition into Spain, which obliged the Captain to enlarge upon it. Gentlemen,
said he, I must tell you my fatal Story. You must know, that my Father's
Brother, that is, my Uncle by the Father's Side, was a Merchant at Cadiz. He
was as rich as a thousand Jews, and always promised to make me his Son and
Heir, but -- the Devil fire all Priests! About seventeen or eighteen Years ago,
a Son of a Whore, one Father Kelly, came over from Ireland, and brought his
Sister with him. She was the Widow of one Squire Connor, and young and handsome
enough. What will you have of it, but my foolish Uncle got acquainted with this
Father Kelly and his Sister, and by my own Soul he married her. To be sure I
wrote to my Uncle, and towld him what a Fool he was, and what a Rogue he was to
cheat a Gentleman like me, and his own Flesh and Blood. The old Fellow was very
saucy, and by my own Soul I had a great Mind to go to Spain and beat his Coat.
Well, Gentlemen, about two Years agon I got a Letter from a Friend at Cadiz,
that my Uncle was growing sickly; so I took Post, thinking to make it up with
him, but by my Soul, I was late, for the old Teef hid himself under Ground.
Now, will you believe it? The Devil take me, and I swear by him that made me,
if the old Rogue left me a gray Groat. I spoke to Madam my Aunt, and towld her
of my Journey, and my great Expenses, and of the Wrong she did me, and the
like, and only begged her to let us fairly divide the Money betwixt us. The
Lady began to laugh, but said, she had some Commiseration on me, and made some
fine Speeches; but the Devil a Farthing would she give but four hundred
Pistoles. I took the Money, and giving her a hearty Curse, wished her and her
thirty thousand Pound at Hell.' -- 'You had hard Fortune, indeed, said Capt.
Thornton; but perhaps she may make you Amends some Time or other.' Sir, replied
Magragh, I shall never trouble her no more. I am now a Captain in the first
best Regiment in Europe; I have the Cross of St. Lewis, which the King gave me,
because I wouldn't be killed at Philipsbourg, and I have a Royal Donation of
three hundred Livres a Year; so, my Dear, what do I want? I love my Friends,
and my good Friends love me; and I vow to God, I am as happy as the King
himself, God bless him. I love my Countrymen the Irish, and I love the English
well enough, but Faith and Soul, they are too hard upon us.

CAPTAIN Thornton observed a peculiar Gravity in the Countenance of his Friend,
and thought, by changing the Current of Conversation, to remove it. He tried
many Ways, but Conyers seemed lost in Thought. His Silence gave a serious Turn
to the Company, and they broke up much sooner than was intended.

NEXT Morning Captain Thornton had a very early Visit from Mr. Conyers, for he
had not slept. -- My dear Thornton, said he, you must wonder at my Behavior,
but I insist on your Friendship, and beg you will not require an Explanation of
the only Thing I cannot divulge. -- Thornton imagined a Quarrel, and rose in a
Hurry to stop his going out of the Room. His Friend could not forbear laughing
at his serious Figure, but assuring him on his Honor, that a Quarrel was the
least in his Thoughts, the other was pacified and returned to his Bed. -- I am,
said Conyers, in the oddest Situation, perhaps, ever Man was in. I am far from
unhappy; but some Doubts and Anxieties so much torment me, that I cannot be at
Peace till they are satisfied.' 'Dear Conyers, said the other, I hope you will
indulge me with my Share of what gives you Uneasiness; I think I have a just
Claim to it. -- 'I believe, replied Conyers, your Friendship is sincere; but my
Case is of such a Nature, that as you cannot assist me, I must only desire your
Patience.

HE revolved a thousand Projects to bring about his Affair in the properest
Manner. He remembered Father Kelly, and called back every Circumstance of his
Childhood so clearly, that he had not the least Doubt but Mrs. Magragh was his
Mother. -- He reflected on her Features, and brought her Face familiar to his
Imagination. He owned she had not been the tenderest of Parents, but Nature
spoke, and threw her Faults into the most favorable Light. He ardently wished
to embrace her, and, as his filial Affection arose, the tender Tear fell down
his Cheeks. The good, the humane Heart, will not call this an unmanly Weakness.
-- The Sensations of his Soul were natural, and the result of an honest Mind.
At last he determined on a Journey to Cadiz, and went immediately to Mr.
Waters, his Banker, for proper Letters.

WHILST he was speaking to this Gentleman on the necessary Credit he might
want, he took an Opportunity of asking him if he knew Mr. Magragh, who had been
a Merchant at Cadiz. Yes, Sir, replied Mr. Waters, extremely well, for he was
my Correspondent many Years.' I hear, said the Captain, he has left a Widow,
and should be glad to know if she be alive.' 'She was so, very lately, answered
the Banker, for I have had Letters from her about some Effects remaining in my
Hands. I assure you, she is a very notable Woman, and vastly rich.' As for her
Riches, said Conyers, I have nothing to say; but you would much oblige me, by
recommending me to her Notice and good Offices, in a friendly Manner; and
likewise for another Letter, wherein you will please to mention me as her near
Relation. This last I shall only make Use of, in case I find her really so. Mr.
Waters very readily complied, and promised to be very secret in the Affair.

CAPTAIN Conyers was now much easier in his Mind, and the Alteration in his
Conduct, gave a very sensible Pleasure to his Friend, but it was of short
Duration, for he informed him, that he was obliged to set out immediately for
Madrid, where his Stay should be as short as possible. Captain Thornton was
obliged to acquiesce, and Preparations were made for his Journey. The Marquis
de Brissac was surpised at the Project of Mr. Conyers, but got him
Recommendatory Letters to the French Minister, and advised his traveling with
the King's Messenger, especially as he seemed in Haste. -- A Messenger was
dispatched the Week following, who had Orders to take particular Care of the
Captain. -- He took a Servant with him, and, with some Reluctance, bid adieu to
his Friends.

CHAP. XVII.
Now, by my Soul, and by these hoary Hairs,
I Am so overwhelmed with Pleasure, that I feel
A later Spring within my withered Limbs,
That shoots me out again.
DRYDEN'S Don. Seb.
AN Account of a Journey, Post, must be very unsatisfactory to a Reader, and
tire and fatigue him as much as the Traveller. I shall, therefore, avoid the
dry, insipid Relation, and beg of him to suppose, that no Accident happened on
the Road, and that our Captain got safe to Madrid in the usual Time. I shall
omit the Civilities showed by the French Minister, who advised him, in the best
Manner, for his further Journey to Cadiz. He was impatient to be there, and so
am I.

ON his Arrival, he waited on Mr. Fitzgerald, the Merchant, on whom he had a
Credit. This Gentleman received him in the most courteous Manner, and insisted
on his accepting an Apartment in his House. In a Day or two, Captain Conyers
made an Enquiry about Mrs. Magragh, and mentioned a Letter he had for her. The
Merchant told him, she was an intimate Friend, and offering to accompany him,
they immediately paid her a Visit. -- Judge, gentle Reader, the Emotions of his
Soul, when Mr. Fitzgerald presented him to his Mother, for such she really was.
-- Though he was determined in his Conduct, and had put on every Resolution, yet
he trembled and grew pale when he saluted her; but recovering himself, he
attributed his Tremor to the Fatigue of his Journey, which was easily credited.
Mrs. Magragh read the Letter, and with great Politeness, assured him of her
Respects, and Readiness to serve him. They dined that Day at Mr. Fitzgerald's,
and the Captain endeavored to make himself as agreeable as possible, and few
Men could be more so. He observed, that every Body paid Mrs. Magragh a
particular Respect; that she was vastly improved, and spoke with great Strength
of Reason and Sense, though in her former Tone of Voice. Time had added a few
Wrinkles to her Brow, but had taken away very little of the Beauty of her
Complexion. -- He frequently caught himself too earnestly looking at her, and
very often met her Eyes.

NEXT Day the Company dined at her House. Mirth and Good Humor abounded, and
each strove who should add most. Mrs. Magragh showed a more than common
Civility to the Captain, and often repeated, that he had much of the Air of a
Gentleman who had been a very dear Friend to her and her Family. In a Word, she
became familiar, which still made her more agreeable.

MR. FITZGERALD asked, when they got home, What he had done to the Widow? For,
said he, she told me in Spanish, that you had such a Face, and such a Voice,
she could scarce keep her Eyes off of you. Faith, Captain, continued he,
'twould be very unkind to snap up one of our greatest Fortunes at so short a
Warning, when she has held out half a Dozen regular Sieges. -- Mrs. Fitzgerald
a little raillied him, But I assure you, said she, without a Jest, I never saw
Mrs. Magragh so free, and so pleased with a Gentleman in all my Life. -- The
Captain laughed in his Turn, and each had somewhat to say.

HE thought Matters were pretty ripe for an Explanation, and as Mrs. Magragh
had given him a general Invitation, he determined on a Visit, and, if possible,
to open the Scene. Next Morning he went to Breakfast with her, and was very
kindly received. When the ordinary Chat was over, and her Maid had retired, he
began to put his Scheme in Practice, but not without many Hesitations. --
Madam, said he, I never thought to be so much beholden to my Friend Mr. Waters,
as I find I am, by being introduced to a Lady of your Merit, who has certainly
afforded me more Joy than ever I expected to receive.' -- 'This other Letter,
Madam, will a little help me in what I am to say.' -- 'She took the Letter, and
very attentively read it, and her Eyes seemed to examine him as carefully.' --
'This Letter, Sir, said she, informs me, that you are my Relation. I cannot say
the contrary, but I protest I am at a Loss how it can be. I own I have a very
particular Regard for you on account of my Friend's hearty Recommendation. -- I
confess my Esteem for your Person and Behavior, and as you appear a Gentleman,
I should be sorry to change my Conduct, by your going on any erroneous
Project.' -- 'Give me Leave, Madam, replied the Captain, to assure you on my
Honor, I have no Views, other than paying the greatest Respect and Duty where
I so naturally owe them.' -- 'I should think myself, said she, extremely happy
to have a Relation of your Character and Figure. Though I cannot imagine such a
Thing possible, yet I own there is something that makes me wish it, therefore,
I beg Sir, you will inform me, and doubt not but it will be to our mutual
Satisfaction.

IS it possible, Madam, said he, that twenty Years can have worn out all
Remembrance of my Face? -- Can you forget our wretched Situation on the Common
in Ireland? -- Can my poor blind Father -- 'Stop, Sir, cried she, for Heaven's
Sake! -- I know not what to think! Good God! -- Pray, have Patience, and let me
recover my Breath. -- Her Agony was extreme, and he was obliged to support her
to the Window for Air. -- Gracious Heaven, said she at last, I dare not hope
for such a Blessing, but let me beseech you, Sir, to pull down your right
Stocking. -- He instantly obeyed, and when she discovered a large Mole on his
Leg, (which he had never observed) Yes! cried she, 'It is my dearest, my
ill-us'd Son.' -- Oh, Jack! -- and clasping him in her Arms in Transport, was,
for some Moments deprived of every Sense. He embraced her with the sincerest
Affection, and, for a long While, neither could utter a Syllable.

ONCE more I must indulge the Imagination of the kind Reader, and permit him to
supply, from his own natural Stock, what mine is defective in. -- Let him call
forth every tender Idea. Let him think on the Affection of a Parent; on the
Love of a Child, and, if he can, let him conceive the mighty Joy at recovering
our long lost darling Hopes. Let him do this, and it is possible he may have
some faint Idea of what this poor Woman felt. But to paint convulsive Motions,
to mark the alternate Complexion, and to set down every dropping passionate
Word, is not in the Power of Mr. Le Sage, Crebillon, Fielding, or even a Ch --
t -- f -- d. -- When the good-natured Reader has finished his private
Reflections, I beg he will go one Step farther, and bring back the Mother and
Son to their wonted Sense and Understanding.

MY dearest Jack, said she, I have treated you barbarously. -- Indeed I have,
-- but I shall try to atone for all my Sins. God has been bountiful to you, and
most merciful to me! -- I have not merited his Goodness, but shall endeavor to
deserve his Favor. -- I hope I shall. -- But, my dear Jack, give me some
Account of yourself. Tell me of all your Accidents; how you arrived to the
honorable Station I see you in, and why your Name is Conyers. -- Tell me all,
my dear Child, and I shall most faithfully recount, though I blush for it, every
Part of my Life since we parted. -- Oh, my Son! Could you have known the
Trouble, my Usage to you has given me, you would pity an unhappy Woman. -- But,
tell me, my dear Jack, can you forgive me? -- I fear it is impossible.' -- 'My
Conduct, said he, shall convince my dearest Mother, that I have forgot all
Things, but my Duty and my Love.' -- Then, said she, I am happy, and my Love
shall reward you. -- But no more now. -- You must change your Quarters, and
live with me. -- Does Mr. Waters know you are my Son?' -- 'No, Madam, said the
Captain, he knows no more than what I desired him to mention in his Letter.' --
'That's well, said she, neither is it necessary he should. I must not own you
for my Son, as it would contradict what I have always reported, but you must be
my Nephew, the Son of my Sister, which will sufficiently warrant my Affection
for you.

THIS Matter being settled, they went together to Mr. Fitzgerald's. The Family
were greatly surprised and pleased when Mrs. Magragh presented her Nephew. She
told them the Method he took to discover himself, and all Compliments were made
suitable to the Occasion. That Night he returned to her House, and the whole
Town visited and congratulated them.

CHAP. XVIII.
An unseen Hand makes all our Moves:
And some are Great, and some are Small;
Some climb to Good, some from good Fortune fall;
Some wise Men, and some Fools we call;
Figures, alas! of Speech, for Destiny plays us all.
COWLEY.
NO doubt Mrs. Magragh was impatient to hear the Story of her Son, and begged
he would begin, and not omit the minutest Circumstances. He obeyed, and carried
her through every Scene of his Life, except a few Parts not so fit for her to
hear, and concluded, by his being a Captain of Dragoons; the Accident that
brought him to the Knowledge of her being alive, and how soon he determined to
pay his Duty. -- He did not mention his being on Half-Pay, lest she should have
insisted on his staying at Cadiz, which he by no Means intended to do. -- He
recited all his Adventures in a full and clear Manner, and so pathetically
worded his Sufferings, that she wept most bitterly, but, his good Fortune
succeeding, a visible Joy spread over her Countenance. -- She embraced him a
thousand Times, and blessed God for restoring to her a Son, and a Son of such
Prudence and so many Virtues.

Now, said she, my dear Jack, it is but just to recount my own History, and
inform you of some Things that you are a Stranger to.

SHE then began from her being a Servant at Sir Roger Thornton's. -- In this
Family, said she, I lived very happily. I was young, and tolerably handsome,
and it pleased Sir Roger to think me more so than perhaps I really was. He made
me Presents, seemed very fond of me, was a mighty fine comely Gentleman; and,
in short, overcome my foolish Weakness. I proved with Child, and he married me
to Jerry Connor. You came into the World with that Name, but my dear Jack, your
real Father was Sir Roger Thornton.' -- 'More Wonders! cried her Son, -- Is it
possible! -- She seemed surprised at his Exclamations, but he informed her of
his Intimacy with Captain Thornton, and of the Accident that brought on their
great Friendship. She was vastly delighted with this Incident, and charmed to
find Sir Roger was still alive.

THIS obliged her to begin a little more particularly, and she continued her
Account to the Death of Jerry Connor, and the Parting with her Son. -- As I
have placed all these Facts in the first Pages of this History, where I
imagined they naturally came in, I must refer my Reader to them, and take up
her Story where I dropped it.

THUS, said she, Father Kelly and I cohabited in a scandalous Manner; and the
Proofs against us were so strong and so many, that he could not live in the
Country. His Uncle the Bishop gave him a good Sum of Money, and a Letter to a
Prior of a rich Convent in this City. He persuaded me to go with him, (and I
had no Business to stay behind) but he would by no Means consent to my taking
you. I was in the utmost Trouble, and could not think of parting with my Child
for ever. At last he proposed sending you to his Brother's in the County of
Galway, who would take care of your Education, and, at a certain Age, send you
to Cadiz. -- The barbarous Wretch laid the Scheme, and exposed you to perish on
the Road. He was so cruel, that he never would give me the least Satisfaction,
or let me know what he had done with you. I was too much depending on him to
quarrel, and had no other Consolation but my frequent Tears.

WE embarked at Cork in a Ship loaded with Beef, Tallow, and Worsted Stuffs,
and arrived safe at this Place. It was agreed I should pass for his Sister, and
the Widow of one Mr. Connor of Clonmell. He went to the Convent, and delivered
his Letter to Father Purcell the Prior, where I believe he was well received,
for he returned vastly pleased. He was soon in the Habit of his Order, and
provided me a Lodging in a good Family, and made me dress in a very decent
Manner.

I KNOW not how he managed with the Prior, but he gave me to understand, that I
must call him my Uncle, and be extremely civil when he visited me, and next Day
I had that Honor. Father Purcell, or rather my Uncle, was a comely, grave Man,
of about Sixty, vastly polite, and courteous, and, seemingly, of a most
religious Deportment. However, my pious Brother soon hinted, that I was to be
more than merely civil to him, if I expected to be maintained. -- What could I
do? -- I was compelled to forfeit my Honor, that I might save my Reputation.
In short, I complied, and my Brother and Uncle constantly visited me, and were
mighty tender and affectionate Relations.

YOU see, my dearest Jack, I hide not from you, even my own Shame. -- How are
the best Institutions perverted! but let us not condemn the Whole for the
Wickedness of a Few. -- Thus I lived for about four or five Months, and was
visited by the best Families, and paid them in Return. I own I was not a fit
Companion for People of Fortune; but as I could not converse in their Manner, I
behaved with great Modesty and Silence. This procured me a general good
Character, and made me pass for what I did not merit.

I HAD a Mind to try the Temper of Father Purcell, and one Day very gravely
hinted an Apprehension of my being with Child. The old Man stared, and was in a
strange Dilemma, for he had no Notion but Father Kelly was my real Brother. --
He walked about the Room in a very pensive Manner, but at last -- Well, said
he, if my dear Widow be with Child, I must find a Father for it. -- Shall I get
you a Husband? -- 'I have no Objection, said I, provided he be a good one.' --
"Leave it to me, replied the Prior; but it must be done in a Hurry, and shall
instantly set about it; so put on your best Airs for a Visit Tomorrow
Evening." -- 'I took his Advice, but could not forbear laughing at the Oddity
of my Scheme, and wondered where it would end.

FATHER PURCELL kept his Word, and introduced Mr. Magragh. He seemed a plain
good Sort of a Man, of about Fifty-five. He was very ceremonious and
complaisant, but spoke little. In Half an Hour the Prior opened a more
interesting Conversation. -- "My dear Niece, said he, my good Friend Mr.
Magragh has often seen you, and has communicated his Sentiments to me. No Doubt
you are of Age to choose for yourself; but as I know his Integrity and Worth, I
think it my Duty, as a Parent, to advise you to receive his honorable
Addresses as you ought. -- It will be much better than returning to Ireland."
-- 'I blushed, and only replied, That I should always be guided by him.

"MADAM, said Mr. Magragh, I am a Man in Trade, of a good Character, and an
easy Fortune. His Reverence has told you my Heart, which, if you will be
pleased to accept, you shall command every Thing in my Power." Sir, said I, I
doubt not your Merit, and as my Uncle is your Friend, I am sure he means an
Happiness to us both, and shall submit myself to his Determination. -- This,
said the Prior, is making Love like People of Sense, and not like giddy
Children. Come, my dear Niece, since you leave it to me, give me your Hand. --
Here, my good Friend, I bestow you that inestimable Treasure, a good Wife. --
Take her, and I pray God to bless you both." -- Mr. Magragh embraced me very
tenderly, and I behaved as I ought.

"WELL, Madam, said the poor Man, when shall I be happy? -- When shall I call
you my own? -- Lord, Sir, said I, you are so pressing. -- I believe a Month or
two will be Time enough. -- "A Month, cried the Prior; nay, now you spoil all.
I hoped you would have mentioned Tomorrow." -- "And I, said Mr. Magragh, was
thinking on the present Minute; for my Maxim is, Never to put off till
Tomorrow, what I can do Today," -- "'It Is a most excellent Rule, replied the
Prior, and let us put it in Practice. What say you, my dear Neice? -- Shall I
perform the Holy Office?" -- I blushed, but made no Answer. -- "Silence, said
he, is a Consent, therefore let us go to Mr. Magragh's, send for a few Friends,
and finish the Business." -- "His Reverence, said my Lover, has been always my
Friend." -- With some Entreaties, I suffered myself to be conducted to his
House, where, in the Presence of my Brother and two more, my good Uncle
performed his Priestly Duty, and made me Mistress of this Habitation.

MR. MAGRAGH was really a good-natured inoffensive Man, and very affectionately
loved me. I kept very good Company, I read a good deal, and wrote, and assisted
him very much in his Business. By Degrees I grew very expert, and began to
think and talk in a quite different Manner. -- My poor Husband was extremely
delighted with my Diligence and Capacity, and only wanted a Child to complete
his Happiness; but none came, notwithstanding the frequent and fervent Prayers
of the holy Prior and my pious Brother.

THUS I lived for about five Years, with great seeming Happiness; but your
Image, and Father Kelly's Person, were too often present to make me really so.
I dreaded his more than Brotherly Love; for he sometimes visited at very
improper Seasons. I knew his Temper, and, as he began to be suspected on many
Accounts, particularly for some Intrigues with Spanish Ladies, I was in
continual Apprehensions of some fatal Accident. Nay, I much feared the Jealousy
of the Prior, for he gave me some Hints. At last I missed the Visits of my
Brother, and inquired after him from my Uncle. He shook his Head, but no
satisfactory Answer came. I cried for my Brother, but I never saw him since. --
He was either murdered, or carried to the Inquisition, and I violently
suspected the Prior. -- I was really sorry for his Misfortune, but not
displeased at the Loss of his Company. I was much more satisfied, when, in
three Months after, my holy Uncle, Father Purcell, departed this Life, and left
me to enjoy it with Peace and real Happiness.

THESE Impediments to the Tranquillity of my Mind being removed, I applied
myself more closely to the Study of every Thing that might give my Husband
Pleasure. I still improved, and arrived to such Perfection, that he confided
all to my Care and Management; and I aver to you, my dearest Jack, that I never
deceived him in any Shape, after the Death of the Prior.

HIS Fortune increased very largely, and we lived with great Harmony and
Content. The last two Years, his Infirmities made him extremely peevish; but I
bore all with Patience, and assisted and attended him with the Tenderness and
Duty of a good Wife. The Poor Man was sensible of my Regard, and, when he died,
I found his Will had made me absolute Mistress of his whole Fortune.

I HAVE resisted many Solicitations from People who called themselves Lovers.
I knew the World too well, to imagine a Woman of my Years had all the Charms
they pretended to find in me. I fancy I guessed right, that my thirty thousand
Pounds was my principal Beauty. -- Now, my dear Jack, forget the Injury I did
you, and forget my Faults, which I have most sincerely repented of, and you
shall be my Husband, nor will I ever have another. -- Though we are, unhappily,
of different Religions, yet, believe me, I am not so bigoted to mine, as to
desire a Change in yours. I have learnt by Experience, that the true End and
Use of Religion, is to make us good, virtuous, and charitable. -- Since your
Religion has taught you the Practice of those great Duties, Why should I wish
you to alter? No, my dear Jack, keep strictly to, and be faithful in it. -- My
Religion did not make me wicked; it was my Weakness and my Ignorance. Thank
God, I am now wiser. I find, my dear Child, that your Duty will soon call you
from me; but to convince you of the Sincerity of my Love, half my Fortune is
this Moment yours. When all my Affairs are settled, I will follow you to
England, and you shall command the Remainder, allowing me four hundred Pounds a
Year during my Life; which will be more than I shall have Occasion for. I hope
my dearest Jack is now convinced, that I make every Satisfaction in my Power,
and that I at last prove myself a tender and affectionate Mother.

THE Captain most ardently embraced her, and returned every Acknowledgement
that so much Goodness deserved. She set about her Promise immediately, and, in
a short Time, gave him Bills on London for fifteen thousand Pounds.

WHILST these Matters were transacting, he received a Letter from his Friend
Thornton, declaring his Unhappiness without him, and pressing his Return. He
likewise received Letters from Colonel Manly, and Doctor Grace. These gave him
great Concern, for they informed him of the Death of his old Master, good Mr.
Sampson. He had requested his Wife to settle the Fortune on Captain Conyers, at
her Death, and she had most generously executed the proper Deeds, reserving two
thousand Pounds to dispose of as she thought proper.

HE acquainted his Mother with these Matters, and how necessary his Presence
was, to take Care of his Estate, and his Military Post. She confessed the
Reasonableness of his Desires, and promising to part with him, with as little
Regret as possible, he prepared to set out, the first Opportunity, by Sea, to
Marseilles.

SHE gave him many useful Instructions, and advised him to Secrecy with Regard
to his Family, and the Obsurity of his Birth. -- Though, said she, you are in
Fact more Praiseworthy, by having made your Fortune with a fair Character,
than had it descended from your Father; yet the World is made of such envious
Stuff, they take Pleasure in lessening the Virtues of others; yet it is certain
he rises the Higher with the sensible Part of the World, the Lower he sprung
from.

YOUR Fortune, my dear Son, continued she, will be now very considerable, but
let me beg of you to believe, that no Fortune can stand long against bad
Management. Be an Oeconomist, and put your Affairs in so regular a Channel,
that, in an Instant, you may know your Income and your Expenses. Without
Regularity, all will be in Confusion. Let your Accounts and your Watch be wound
up punctually to a Time, or both will go wrong. -- Avoid a Number of idle and
superfluous Servants, that eat out an Estate; keep from expensive Schemes and
Projects; and trouble, or rather please, the Lawyers as little as possible. --
Determine to be happy, for you know the Means. -- One Word more, and I have
done. -- I guess at your Constitution by your Complexion, therefore I advise
you to marry, but submit the Manner to your own Prudence.

HE was often astonished how she came to reason, speak and write so correctly,
and could not avoid asking her the Question. -- It is not, said she, so
difficult a Matter as you imagine, though we must have some Assistance from
Nature. -- I very severely felt the Want of these Accomplishments, and
resolved, if possible, to acquire them. -- I told you I read much. I got good
Authors, and applied closely to them. They gave me Sentiments I was a Stranger
to. I improved considerably by the Help of Company, but my own Project vastly
shortened my Labor. I set myself a Task every Day, and carefully wrote out two
or three Pages of the Spectator, Guardian, and other sensible Works, so that in
a short Time I became Mistress of their Style and Manner, had always something
to say in Conversation, and spelt well, without the Assisstance of a Grammar.
Besides, the Accounts I kept, and the Numbers of Letters I wrote, made these
Matters familiar to me. -- This may serve to show you, That a little Pains and
Industry in the Beginning, prevents a vast Deal of Trouble and Labor in the
End.

IF Captain Conyers was pleased at finding his Mother, he was prodigiously more
so, at discovering in her all the Marks of good Sense and Prudence. -- He
remitted his Money to his Correspondent in London, but at the same Time
acquainted Colonel Manly of it, and added a Codicil to his Will. He wrote to
all his Friends, and promised to join them as soon as possible.

A GOOD Ship being now ready to sail, he paid his Respects to all his
Acquaintances at Cadiz, and made some genteel Presents, particularly to the
Family of Mr. Fitzgerald. -- All were concerned at losing so polite a
Companion, and he was loaded with Praises and Caresses. His Mother could not
bear it with that Resignation she at first thought; but however, she raised her
Spirits, and, with many Blessings, saw him set Sail.

THE Voyage was prosperous, and he arrived at Marseilles safe, and in good
Health. He took Post for Paris, and once more embraced his dear Friend Capt.
Thornton, after an Absence of eight Months.

CHAP. XIX.
Thou Brother of my Choice: A Band more sacred
Than Nature's brittle Tie. By holy Friendship,
Glory and Fame stood still for thy Arrival;
My Soul seemed wanting of its better Half,
And languish'd for thy Absence; like a Prophet
That waits the Inspiration of his God.
ROWE'S Tamerlane.
HE found Paris extremely crowded with English, and began to think, that the
Scheme of Doctor Grace, for a Duty on the Exportation of our Nobility and
Gentry, would yield a much larger Revenue than could be well imagined. -- Capt.
Thornton was quite recovered, and had waited a Month extraordinary. -- I assure
you, said he, I almost despaired of you, and was just preparing to set out with
my Cousin Lord Truegood.' -- 'Lord Truegood! cried Captain Conyers in a Hurry.'
-- 'Yes, replied the other, Lord Truegood, my Uncle, the Earl of Mountworth's
Son. -- Do you know him?' -- 'No, answered Conyers, but the Similitude of a
Name I have a great Respect for, certainly gave me a Flutter.' -- 'Now I think
of it, said Thornton, you could not know him, at least by this Title, for his
Father was created an Earl but since the Rebellion. -- I promise you, my Cousin
is well worth your Acquaintance. -- Just then Lord Truegood entered. -- My
Lord, said Thornton, give me Leave to present to you my dearest and most worthy
Friend Captain Conyers, and I insist on your loving him as well as I do.' --
'It always affords me, said my Lord, the highest Satisfaction to be known to
Gentlemen of your distinguished Worth and Merit, and wish I may deserve the
Honor of your Friendship.' -- 'If it be an Honor, said Conyers, what must
mine be, should your Lordship grant me your favorable Opinion and
Countenance?' -- 'A Truce with your Compliments, cried Thornton, let us be a
Triumvirate, and make the World stare at our Friendship.

BY Degrees, they dropped into the familiar Style, and each seemed happy in the
other two. -- Conyers very attentively examined the Features of my Lord, and
called to his Remembrance his much beloved Master Harry. -- His Heart felt an
unusual Pleasure; Joy sparkled in his Eyes, and added such Charms to his
Conversation, that his Friend protested, he believed the Gravity of the
Spaniards had only served to give him more Spirits. -- Perhaps, said my Lord,
they were so confined, when there, that now they rush out with greater Force;
but be it as it will, I am vastly pleased to find Wit and good Sense so
agreeably blended. -- Conyers made the proper Reply, but retired pretty soon,
for he wanted Repose.

NEXT Day they visited their Friends, and a Week was very cheerfully employed.
In this Time, Mr. Conyers received a Letter from his Correspondent in London,
That he had credited him with the Money remitted from Cadiz; That he had paid
three Bills drawn on him by Mr. Pense, of Brussels, amounting to Seventy-five
Pounds, and that his Correspondent of that City had advised him of the Death of
the said Mr. Pense. -- Captain Conyers was much concerned for the poor Man, but
his superior Joy soon got the better. He did not think on his Death, as so much
gained, but determined to employ Pense's Money to other Purposes than his own.

LORD TRUEGOOD had all the Softness and Delicacy of Behavior; that Tenderness
to Mankind; that Ease, and, at the same Time, that Dignity in his Deportment,
that distinguishes, or ought to distinguish the Nobleman. He was Generous
without Profuseness, Mild without Childishness, and Courteous to all; but
supported his Station. He had seen the different States with critical Eyes, and
observed the Faults and Perfections, with a View to the Good of his Country,
and his own Honor. This Gentleman conceived a most particular Esteem for
Captain Conyers, and every Day improved it. -- To be applauded and regarded by
Men of Sense and Knowledge, is the highest Honor a Man can receive. The
Captain had this from Lord Truegood, and was sensible of it.

A LITTLE more Time was spent in Paris, in Compliments on taking Leave,
particularly of the Marquis de Brissac, and the Duke d'Ayen. -- Those paid to
Ladies, I am as ignorant of, as the Reader. -- Every Thing being prepared, the
Three Friends took Post for Calais. The Packet soon landed them at Dover, and
each had a peculiar Satisfaction at arriving at London.

CHAP. XX.
The grateful Mind a Pleasure feels
Beyond what Vice and Passion yields;
The grateful Heart a Bliss bestows
Beyond what Vulgar-Cunning knows.
This noble Virtue in the Breast,
Of every Virtue we are possessed.
ANONIMOUS.
IT is not to be expressed, the hearty and affectionate Manner Sir Roger
Thornton and Lord Mountworth received Captain Conyers, neither is it possible
to describe the Joys He felt, when he embraced the Author of his Life, and the
Founder of his Happiness. Each insisted on his living with them, and contended
strongly about it, but Captain Conyers ended the kind Dispute by assuring them,
he had many Reasons for being in private Lodgings, but hoped they would indulge
him the Honor of visiting with Freedom. -- He was presented to each Family,
who could not enough admire the many excellent Qualifications they soon found
he possessed. His generous Valor was the Subject of each Day, particularly
with the Ladies. -- It is just They should peculiarly admire the Brave, when
They only are capable of rewarding them.

LADY MOUNTWORTH still preserved a large Residue of Beauty. The accustomed
Sweetness of her Temper, and her good Sense, remained; but all her Charms
seemed transplanted, and to blow a-fresh in her Daughter, Lady Harriot. She was
now about Twenty-four Years of Age; her Beauty was exquisite, and none could be
insensible of it; but the Rectitude of her Manners, the Integrity of her Soul,
and the Affability of her Behavior, could not fail of Numbers of Admirers.
Perhaps she was too delicate in the Choice of a Husband, and required more
Perfections in a Man, than a large Fortune and high Titles. She was so
whimsical and singular in her Notions, that she thought a rational, tender, and
faithful Companion, was infinitely more essential to a Scheme of Happiness,
than a Multitude of Servants, and the most brilliant Retinue. -- My Lord and
Lady often raillied this Temper; but as they knew her Understanding and
Judgment, they always left her Free.

CAPTAIN Conyers admired her Virtues. He was charmed at the easy Elegance of
her Conversation. He gazed on her Beauties, and his Heart insensibly stole from
him, and became her Property. -- Certain it is, Lady Harriot began to have
Sentiments much in his Favor, and some delicate Expressions, and the Conduct
of the Eyes, soon discovered what passed in their Souls.

THOUGH Lady Harriot possessed his Imagination, yet his private Affairs were
attended to. Lord Mountworth was an excellent Adviser in Money Affairs, as well
as other Matters. He therefore begged his Lordship's Assistance in the
Management of Twenty Thousand Pounds, which brought on a Conversation that
discovered the Circumstances of the Captain. -- His Money was soon disposed of
in the Funds, and he prepared to set out for his Estate. Whilst this was doing,
he remembered his Promise to himself, and sent Five hundred Pounds of Mr.
Pense's to the Correspondent Society in London, for promoting English
Protestant Schools in Ireland, but his Name was not mentioned.

HE likewise remembered his old Friend Mr. Sangfroid the Surgeon, and after
much Enquiry, found him in very obscure Lodgings. The Captain was dressed in
his Regimentals, and Sangfroid received him with very great Respect. -- Sir,
said he, I am sorry for your Accident. A slight Touch, I presume, but my Care
and Diligence, will soon make Matters easy to you, and you may depend on being
quite safe in my Hands. -- He was going on in the usual Style; but the Captain
with an hearty laugh, cried out, Bless me, Mr. Sangfroid! -- Have you really
forgot me? -- Sangfroid looked up, and staring at him for some Time, cried, --
Forget you! -- -- Eh! -- Oons! I believe it is honest Conyers -- Oh God! -- Come
to my Arms my dear Friend, said the Captain, and use me as such. -- They
embraced, and the Surgeon was quite confounded at his Appearance, and testified
his Surprise. -- We shall, said Conyers, have Time enough to talk of that, but
at present let us think on your Affairs, for you do not seem so happy as I
could wish. You have been my kind Benefactor, now try my Gratitude, and
honestly tell me your Wants, for I fear you have some.

POOR Sangfroid began a most melancholy Story. He told the Variety of
Misfortunes he had met with; -- he placed them all to the Account of his Folly
and Extravagance, and concluded by his being in a poor, wretched Condition. --
His Story was extremely moving, but it convinced the Captain of the Misery That
Man draws on himself, who chooses to be directed by Passions and Appetites,
rather than Prudence and Economy. -- However, he was determined to serve him,
and put Forty Guineas into his Hands. -- Now, said he, this is only for the
present; when you find a Surgeoncy to be bought, command my Purse most freely.'
-- 'Heavens! said Sangfroid, how ill they argue, that call this a bad World! --
You are in it! -- Ten such Men, atone for the Faults of Millions! -- My dear
Friend, continued he, with Tears in his Eyes, I believe some Relations would
advance Two Hundred Pounds, if I had the Remainder I could this Moment purchase
a Surgeoncy to a Regiment of Guards. -- But it is impossible to expect so much
Goodness.' -- Expect, said Conyers every Thing from me. Go about it, my Friend,
immediately, and in three Days I shall call and finish the Affair. -- The
Captain performed his Promise, and with the Assistance of L 600 Mr. Sangfroid
was made completely happy.

HIS next Enquiry was for Doctor St. Amor; but he had been lately made a
Bishop in Ireland. He visited his good Widow Landlady in Surry, whom he made
vastly happy, by a Present of Fifty Guineas, and an Annuity of Ten Pounds a
Year. -- He found out that his old Master Monsieur Champignon had been sometime
dead; and that Miss Tonton having the Guardianship of her own Person, had
wisely disposed of it to a Lifeguard Man. -- SIR PETER SHALLOW was still
alive, and of the same weak Importance. -- SIR JOHN CURIOUS was at Rest, but
his Lady was very busy with a second Husband, whom she married in her Weeds. --
Poor Mrs. CANNON had failed in some of her Annuities, and was obliged to retire
to Yorkshire for Cheapness. -- The BISHOP had long since been translated, and
his Works followed him. -- As to many others, whom he knew, he judged it not
proper to renew his Acquaintance, or even inquire after. In a Word, he
discharged all those Duties, that good Men recommend, and what few practice.

CAPTAIN Thornton had been so long absent from his Regiment, that he was
obliged to take Leave of his Friends, and join his Post in Scotland, and his
Father Sir Roger had been some Time in Berkshire on Business. This increased
the Intimacy of Captain Conyers with Lord Mountworth's Family, particularly
with Lord Truegood. -- He found out, by Degrees, the Situation of Affairs, and
that the young Lord's Brother Master William had taken a Fancy to the Sea
Service, and had distinguished himself on many late Occasions as a Captain of a
Man of War, and was then at his Station.

WHATEVER good Opinion the Family conceived of Capt. Conyers, an Affair
happened that did not lessen it. It seems Mr. Sangfroid had been at the
Captain's Lodgings, and was informed of his being at Lord Mountworth's. He
followed, and though the Captain was not there, yet the Servant conducted him
into the Chamber where sat my Lord and Lady with Lady Harriot. My Lord, with
his usual Politeness, ordered a Chair, and told him he expected the Captain
every Moment. A little Chat arose, which, at last, fell on his Friend. --
Sangfroid was silent as to former Times, but mentioned his having been in good
Circumstances, and had rendered some Services to Mr. Conyers. He then painted
out the last Action of his Friend, and his real Worth and Honor in such lively
Colors, that drew from my Lord and Lady, the highest Encomiums on the Captain.
Lady Harriot was silent, but Pleasure blushed in her Face. -- Sangfroid waited
for some Time, but at last took his Leave.

LADY HARRIOT now opened on the Charms of Gratitude and true Generosity. --
These, said she, are the masterly Touches of a finished Piece, and no Character
can be complete without them. -- They argue every humane Sentiment, and are an
Abstract of all Virtues.' -- 'Your Servant, Lady Harriot, said my Lord, and
bowed, -- I protest you would make an excellent Painter. But tell me, my
dearest Harriot, Which would you choose to trace, the Person, or the Mind of the
Captain? -- She blushed, but answered -- You know, my Lord, I always speak
Truth, and can ill disguise my Heart. -- I hope I shall not be thought
Criminal, when I assure your Lordship, I would choose both his Person and his
Mind.' -- 'And if I can, said my Lord, you shall have your Choice.' -- He then
most tenderly embraced her, and Lady Mountworth almost wept with Joy.

THE Captain was much pressed to return to the Country, particularly by Colonel
Manly, who mentioned something of the Borough. It happened that the Colonel and
Lord Mountworth were intimate Friends, so was easily persuaded to let his Son
Lord Truegood accompany the Captain, but not before he had acquainted him with
the Sentiments of his Sister, and his own Inclinations to such a Match. The
poor Captain scarcely knew how to bid Adieu to his dear Lady Harriot; but as he
had given some Hints to Lord Truegood, his Lordship eased him in so delicate an
Affair. -- Lady Harriot, said he, I must beg your Hand to help me to raise my
Friends for he is yours and you his. -- She saluted the Captain, and each
attempted to answer the other. -- These are broken Words, said my Lord, but we
shall piece them together on our Return. -- One Kiss more. -- Now adieu.

THEY went to my Lord and Lady, who, as soon as acquainted with this Affair,
embraced Mr. Conyers, and looked on him as a Son. -- Your Lordship, said the
Captain, is no Stranger to my Fortune, but this Paper contains an Abstract of
it, and I most cheerfully submit myself to your Lordship's Determination. -- A
few Compliments ensued, and Lord Truegood, with Capt. Conyers, stepped into
their post Chaise, and soon arrived to the End of their Journey.

CHAP. XXI.
Our Grandsire Adam, ere of Eve possessed,
Alone, and even in Paradise unblessed,
With mournful Looks the blissful Scenes surveyed,
And wandered in the solitary Shade:
The Maker saw, took Pity, and bestowed,
WOMAN, the last, the best Reserve of God.
POPE'S Jan. and May.
NEVER was Man received with more Affection, particularly by his Sister, the
Colonel, and Doctor Grace. -- It was a Jubilee in the Village. -- The
Remembrance of past, and the Enjoyment of present Happiness, occasioned many
Tears. -- He paid every Duty to Mrs. Sampson, and she regarded him as her
Brother and her Son. He recited every Circumstance since they parted, and did
not forget his Aunt Magragh at Cadiz, and proposed her living with her when she
arrived in England. -- Mrs Sampson was extremely pleased in his good Fortune;
but, as she imagined the Colonel wished an Alliance with him, she hinted, that,
perhaps, there was more in Store. -- Indeed, said she, I think you ought to
marry; nor do I know a Woman in the World I would sooner recommend to you than
Miss Manly. -- She is grown a Delightful Creature, and is so good, I am sure
she would make an excellent Wife. You know the Colonel has Fifteen hundred
Pounds a Year, and a great Deal of ready Money. If you will set about it, I'il
engage it shall be done.' -- 'My dear Sister, replied Conyers, I know not how
to thank you as I ought; but this Affair is impossible. -- I am no Stranger to
Miss Manly's Beauty and Merit; but we are not always Masters of our
Inclinations. -- He then told her the History of his Heart, and spoke so
tenderly on the Charms of Lady Harriot, that she entirely agreed with him.

COLONEL MANLY was still hearty, and tolerably well. He was vastly pleased at
the Figure and Behavior of Lord Truegood. He spoke with great Pleasure of his
Grandfather and the present Earl, and received him with the utmost Affection
and Regard. They frequently dined with the Colonel, and Miss did the Honors of
the Table in so polite and well-bred a Manner, that charmed all, but
particularly Lord Truegood. He was struck with her Beauty, but the Elegance of
her Conversation, firmly fixed every tender Thought. -- Conyers perceived his
Lordship's Anxiety, and guessing the Cause, hinted his Suspicion. -- True, said
my Lord, I own my Love, nor am I ashamed of it. An Object so infinitely worthy,
must engross my Heart. Dear Conyers, let me require your Friendship. Assist me
with the Colonel and his dearest Daughter, as I assisted you with Harriot. I am
certain of my Father's Consent, and I shall be the happiest of Men. -- The
Captain, who was rejoiced at this Incident, assured him of his Interest, and
the next Day, not only obtained the Colonel's Consent, but artfully found out
from Miss, that my Lord was far from being disagreeable to her. -- Lord
Truegood was in Raptures, and the Friendship of Conyers curtailed a long
Courtship, which of all People, Men of Sense and Sincerity are the least
capable of doing for themselves. The Way being now paved, the Affair went
smoothly on, and only wanted Lord and Lady Mountworth's Approbation.

The Captain resigned to the Colonel the Promise of his Interest for a Seat in
Parliament, and begged him to transfer it where, soon, it would be naturally
due. When his Family Affairs were settled, they all agreed on a Journey to
London; and, as the Colonel and Mrs. Sampson were infirm, they were obliged to
make easy Stages. His Lordship daily made fresh Discoveries of the
Understanding and good Nature of Miss Manly, and she found her Pleasure and
Satisfaction arise, the more she conversed with him. -- In short, it is not in
Nature to give more real Joy, than what this good Company felt.

ON their Arrival in London, Captain Conyers flew to Lady Harriot, and Lord
Truegood to his Father. One discovered his Soul more openly, and the other
mentioned, what Lord Mountworth and my Lady were charmed to hear.

MATTERS were in this Situation, when HONOR attacked the Captain with such
Force, as almost to unhinge his flattering Hopes. This busy Companion seemed to
hint, That he ought in Justice to make himself known to my Lord before the
Marriage; that it would heighten his Character, and prevent the Imputation of
an Impostor. -- He owned the Truth of this, but at the same Time, he looked on
his Person, Accomplishments and Fortune, as very far from Counterfeits. His
discovering himself, gave him no Uneasiness, but he dreaded, that his Love
might be injured by it; and, as he could by no Means think of putting it to the
Hazard, he determined still to be silent. -- I write the Fact, and will neither
approve or condemn this Conduct. The Truth is, he loved, and those who have
felt that Passion, perhaps will make Allowances for the Faults it occasions.

WHY should I take up the Time of my kind Reader? -- He will naturally suppose,
that Visits were paid and returned; -- That a Settlement was agreed on; -- That
the Lawyers were Fee'd, and all Necessaries done, to the finishing a Matter of
such Consequence, but without my Help he will not know that Lady Harriot's
Fortune was but Ten Thousand Pounds.

Two People, if not Four, imagined the Lawyers were very slow in their Motions,
and the Clerks very dilatory in their Busisiness. A few Guineas enlivened their
Pens, and the happy Day, at last came. The Bishop of -- joined all their Hands,
and established the Love and Affection of their Souls.

LORD MOUNTWWORTH would not too soon disturb the Pleasure of his Sons and
Daughters, but in six Weeks, he began to think of returning to Ireland, from
whence he had been absent three Years. As he found Captain Conyers and Lady
Harriot greatly inclined to go, he advised him to keep his Money Matters in
such a Readiness, that he might dispose of it the first convenient Opportunity.
-- Whatever, said my Lord, some may imagine, let me advise you to Purchase in
that Kingdom, but in one of those Counties the least improved. A Man of your
Turn of Mind, will soon discover the many Advantages. You will build convenient
Houses for the poor People, and set them a Spinning. You will almost compel
them to Industry and Labor. They will thrive under you, and your Fortune
increase in Proportion. -- His Lordship then gave him an Account of his own
Management, (as was formerly related) and assured him the People were all
content, though his annual Income was augmented almost One Thousand Pounds. -- --
If, continued he, a Man takes a Pleasure in viewing the Trees he planted, in
seeing them blossom, and in tasting their Fruit, what Joy, what a rational Joy
must he receive, who beholds a Colony of human Creatures, established by his
Care, flourishing by his Bounty, and Blessing his Soul, who blessed them? --
Believe me, my dear Son, no Earthly Happiness can equal this. -- The Captain
was too sensible of these Truths, not to agree with my Lord. -- His Spirit was
already in Ireland, and his Imagination planed out his future Conduct.

COLONEL MANLY grew impatient to return Home, there, as he said, to rest for
ever. Lady Truegood could not think of quitting her Father, and the young Lord
could not part from his dearest Wife, so that the old Gentleman was perfectly
happy, when they agreed to accompany him. -- He took a most tender Leave of all
his Friends; but, embracing Conyers with Tears of the truest Affection, called
him his Friend, his Soldier, -- but could utter no more than, Heaven bless and
protect you, and retired with Eyes full of the tender Passion, to which Lady
Mountworth and Lady Harriot most liberally subscribed.

THE Captain took a good House and Garden at Richmond for Mrs. Sampson, who
promised to be most careful of Mrs. Magragh when she arrived. He wrote to his
Mother of all his Transactions, and gave her full Instructions. Every Thing
being adjusted, this cheerful and happy Family quitted London, and set out for
Ireland.

CHAP. XXII.
The Wise new Prudence from the Wise acquire,
And one brave Hero sans another's Fire.
POPE'S Homer.
THE Journey was made less tedious by their sprightly and agreeable
Conversation. -- His Lordship often spoke of Ireland, but in such a Manner, as
to remove the Prejudices he supposed Mr. Conyers might have to it. -- The Face
of the Country, said he, is certainly charming, and the Soil, the Rivers, and
the Climate abundantly supply every Necessary for Life. It was formerly so
Woody, that the Exhalations of the Earth were confined, and the Air wanted a
Currency, consequently, it was very fatal to Strangers. Now indeed, you will
find the other Extreme, and a shameful Neglect of Trees; but, as they have
promised, so do they mend every Day. -- You will be surprised at their Herds of
Cattle. The City of Cork alone, slaughters for the West Indies above Eighty
Thousand every Year. No doubt, it is a profitable Branch, but so much Pasturage
depopulates a Country, and makes the common People extremely poor and
miserable. The Inhabitants seem now to have a Relish and a Taste for Industry,
and they feel the Sweets of it. In many Things, no People act Wiser, and in
others it is the Reverse, particularly in Corn. When a Scarcity happens, they
all run to the Plow. Next Year, Corn is a Drugg, the Dutch buy it at their own
Price, and the poor Farmers are undone. The following Year the Plow is
neglected, and Corn again rises to an exorbitant Price, and then the Dutch
return them their own.

I AM surprised, said Conyers, that their Experience has not convinced them of
the Necessity of Granaries.' -- 'They much want them, replied my Lord, but it
must be an Affair of Government, for private Persons would be ruined in their
Fortunes or Characters by such a Scheme.' -- By what I have heard, said
Conyers, it is a plentiful Country, and very Cheap.' -- 'True, answered Lady
Harriot, and yet it is made much Dearer than in England. If Provisions be a
Third Cheaper, and the Fashion of the Country obliges the Use of double
Quantities, must it not be more Expensive?' -- 'Well, well, said Lady
Mountworth, suppose it dearer, and that they are not so rich as in England,
they live well, they are a generous hospitable People, and have Spirits and
Cheerfulness, not to be purchased by mere Wealth. If they have Faults, show me
a Nation without them?' -- 'My Mistress said my Lord, is quite an Irish Woman.'
-- I believe, said she, my Dear means, I am quite unprejudiced; but, granting I
was otherwise, ought I not to regard that Kingdom that maintains us? I wish
every one did the same, and then their Poverty and Folly would not be so
conspicuous.

WE are told, said the Captain, that the English Charter Schools are in a very
flourishing Condition, and will, in Time, make it a Protestant Kingdom.' --
'Yes, replied my Lord, they are greatly, and very justly encouraged, but it
will take Time to complete so laudable a Work, and Donations are still wanting.
-- Though it is the King of all Charities, yet I think my Plan would much shorten
it. -- Suppose the Legislator vested One Hundred Thousand Pounds in the Hands
of a few Trustees of known Integrity and Judgment, to be applied in purchasing
Lands in some particular Counties, and letting those Lands in small Farms to
poor Protestant Swiss or Palatines, naturalized, and to Protestant Husbandmen
of our own Kingdoms. These Farms should be Rent Free for three Years; pay a
small Matter for three Years more, and raise it in such a Proportion, as should
be judged Equitable, till by Degrees the Lands paid the full Value, but not of
the Improved Rent. They should have Fee Farm Leases, but not suffered to sell
or alienate the Lands in any Shape, for a certain Number of Years, without the
Consent of the Trustees. -- Such a Scheme, properly executed, would certainly,
in the first Instance, be Expensive to the Government, but it would, as
certainly, soon fill the Country with Industrious and Faithful Subjects, and
return to that Government a Ten-fold Interest.

AS ENGLAND, said the Captain, has purchased that Kingdom by much Blood and
Treasure, perhaps they are too severe in their Conduct toward it. All confess
the Policy of France, and their constant Maxim is, to grant more Privileges to
their conquered Provinces and Towns, than they allow the Interior of the
Kingdom.' -- 'On this, said my Lord, I shall not argue, but, take Ireland in
General, and you will find them tolerably happy. If all the proper Use be not
made of so large a Kingdom, England will at last discover her Error, and
rectify it. I must say for the Honor of Ireland, that no Nation ever made, in
so short a Time, such wonderful Improvements; and I must add, that England has
been, in many Instances, extremely Generous, and England begins already to feel
and perceive the Utility of it.

AS to FRANCE, continued my Lord, I am convinced, that her great Strength lies
not in the vast Superiority of her Dominions. We are told that Great Britain
and Ireland are to France, as 100 to 107. Her chief Power consists in the equal
Distribution of Benefits to the Whole, and in her Scheme for making a formerly,
divided People, now Think and Act as one Man. -- Were we so True to our own
Interest; -- Were we so Industrious to procure to each other a reciprocal
Advantage; -- Did we manage every Inch of Territory for the Benefit of the
Whole Community, and not Sacrifice the Bounties of Nature to the private
Interest of a Few, GREAT BRITAIN, in Reality, would hold the Balance of Europe.
-- Lady Harriot smiled, and said, I cannot but wonder at the vast Pains my Lord
takes about Ireland, when, with all his Consideration, he cannot change the
Nature of Things, but must leave them, almost where he found them: If he could
persuade the Rulers of the State to think like him, then indeed I should have a
Chance of seeing Ireland planted like a Garden.

GIVE me Leave to tell you, replied my Lord, that I apprehend it the
indispensible Duty of every faithful Subject, to throw out such Information and
Hints to the Government, as he judges of general Use. Should he err in his
Conjectures, perhaps they may give Birth to somewhat really Beneficial. In any
Case, his good Intentions will at least deserve Praise. -- I am not such a
Windmill Fighter, as to pretend to amend the World, yet I hope your Ladyship
will indulge me an Attempt to amend my little Share of it, and show others a
good Example. -- According to my Notions, this is almost as essential a Part of
my Duty, as to Fear God and Honor the King, neither can it justly be said, I
do one or the other without it.

SUCH was the general Run of Conversation. -- They pleased and instructed each
other. -- They spoke of Things with Freedom, but of Persons with Goodnature.
-- They had no Conception of the Joys of turning all into Ridicule; -- of the
Pleasure of Sarcasm, nor of the Delight of finding out Faults, and magnifying
them. -- No. -- They had Souls above the vulgar Topic of Slander. -- They loved
Mankind, and Mankind loved them.

A YATCHT attended for my Lord and Family, and they arrived safe in Dublin the
16th of April, 1750. They stayed a short Time in that City, and then set out
for BOUNTY-HALL. His Lordship's Tenants met him on the Road, and their
unfeigned Joy is past Description.

AS soon as Conyers perceived the venerable Seat, wherein he had experienced so
much Humanity and so many Blessings, his Heart swelled with Gratitude. Every
tender Sensation rushed so violently on him, that he was scarce able to speak.
Lady Harriot observed his Countenance changed, and was dreadfully frightened,
as were my Lord and Lady. With some Difficulty he got into the House, and
begged to lie down a few Minutes, and all would be well, but no Persuasion
could remove Lady Harriot from his Bedside. He indulged his Tears, and
permitted them to flow in Silence, and unperceived by Lady Harriot. -- In two
Hours he was quite recovered, and joined the Family to their inexpressible Joy.

THOUGH he took Care not to enquire for particular Persons, yet he soon found,
that the Good, the Honest Mr. Kindly, had been dead above two Years. This was a
mortifying Blow, and cost him many Sighs. He had often figured to his Mind the
Joy the Old Man would receive when he discovered himself, which he intended to
do, by reclaiming his Old Waistcoat and tattered Breeches. -- All the Gratitude
he had resolved to show this Good Man, he now determined to transplant to his
Family. -- Mr. Cassock had been Minister of the Parish Eleven Years, and his
Wife was well, and had a fine Family of Children. These he fixed in his
Thoughts. -- The old Butler and Mrs. Mathews were dead. -- Mademoiselle Le
Meagre was old, but lived happily with Mrs. Cassock on a Pension from my Lord.
The Good-natured Groom was a favorite Coachman, and had a considerable Farm,
and was well married. Conyers determined in himself to do him Service. -- He
viewed the Land with the utmost Pleasure, but it was so changed, and the
Inhabitants and little Houses so altered and so decent, that all seemed
Enchantment. With Difficulty could he persuade himself, that Eighteen Years
could make such a wonderful Change. -- Such is the Power of good Management,
and such the Effect of Industry!

CAPTAIN CONYERS was in such vast Delight, that he feared he should discover
himself improperly, and determined to watch a convenient Opportunity of opening
his Heart to my Lord. -- Thus they lived for two Months, when an Addition was
made to the general Joy. In short, Lady Harriot could no longer hide a
Pregnancy which she had taken great Pains to conceal.

HE soon found out, that his Good Friend DOCTOR ST. AMOR, now Bishop of ****,
lived about Twenty Miles from Bounty-Hall, which determined him to make an
Excuse for visiting that Part of the Country. -- He waited on the Good Man,
from whose Character, it is easy to guess, how the Captain was received, for
Advancement had only made him, if possible, more Humble. -- Those who cannot
imagine the Beauty of Good-nautre, Tenderness, Love, and Gratitude, must be
very unhappy, and to attempt to describe what they do not understand, would be
as absurd as to do it to those who have that Blessing. -- Conyers told him his
Situation, and begged his Advice and Assistance in properly bringing about a
Discovery to Lord Mountworth. -- The Bishop took it on himself, but an Accident
turned it another Way.

A FEW Days after his Return, my Lord heard of an Estate to be sold in the next
County, and that the Proprietor was in Waterford. He knew the Lands and the
Owner, and so much wished to have his Son fixed there, that he proposed a
Journey to Waterford, as the shortest and surest Way of coming to an Agreement.
No doubt the Ladies were in some Trouble, particularly Lady Harriot, but his
Lordship raillied them out of such Whimsies, and in three Days set out on this
Expedition.

CHAP. XXIII.
Not He, of Wealth immense possessed,
Tasteless who piles his massy Gold,
Among the Number of the Blessed,
Should have his glorious Name enrolled;
He better claims the glorious Name, who knows
With Wisdom to enjoy what Heaven bestows.
FRANCIS'S HORACE.
ON their Arrival at Waterford, they were informed, that the Gentleman they
wanted was then at Clonmell, and next Morning they pursued their Journey to
that City. In the Evening, they traveled leisurely on, and my Lord was
diverting him with a merry Story of his Youth, when suddenly Mr. Conyers cried
out, Great God! and fainted in the Post-Chaise. -- His Lordship, in prodigious
Trouble, stopped the Chaise, and all were employed in recovering the Captain.
They took him out, and no House being at Hand, carried him to the Hut of a
Beggar. When his Senses weree recalled, what was his Astonishment at finding
himself actually placed in his first Habitation! -- He uttered some Words that
greatly affected his Lordship, who imagined a Lightness in the Brain, and made
him most ardently desire to be in a Place where proper Assistance could be had.
-- In a little Time his Spirits so much revived, that my Lord hurried him into
the Chaise, and the Beggar had Reason to be thankful for the Accident.

THE CAPTAIN was lost in Thought. The Idea of former Times was so strong, and
every childish Circumstance recurr'd so clearly to his Memory, that it might
have been fatal to him, had not his Eyes given Vent to the Throbbings of his
Heart. -- This lasted a considerable Time; but he was quite himself when he
arrived at Clonmell.

MY dear Conyers, said my Lord, you give me vast Pain; I perceive your Disorder
is not occasioned by Sickness, but by somewhat that oppresses your Mind. --
Relieve it, I beseech you, and confide in me, not merely as a Father, but as a
Friend. -- If my Power or Fortune can give you Ease, count it already done. Let
me entreat you not to stifle your Cares, if you have any, which must torture
your Imagination, and keep me on the Rack.

HEAVEN is my Witness, said Mr. Conyers, I mean not to give your Lordship the
least Uneasiness. But, my Lord, I have such a Tale of Wonder to unfold, that
overcomes my Reason. -- Can you believe, can your Lordship imagine, that the
Hovel I was just now in, was my Dwelling for Years? -- My Lord thought him
distracted, and advised him to forbear any further Relation, and go to Rest.

I SEE, said Mr. Conyers, your Lordship thinks my Mind is disturbed. -- It Is
true; but my Reason is clear. -- Oh, my Lord! I am not capable of injurious
Deceits, but that I have deceived you, is certain.' 'My dear Son, replied the
good Lord, I know your Honor, and your Virtue, but I know not of a Deceit.' --
Yes, my Lord, answered Conyers, you are my Father; -- your Bounty raised me; --
your Humanity supported my Infant Weakness; -- your Virtues formed my Soul; --
the Will of the Almighty has conducted my Steps, and now throws at your Feet,
the Poor, -- the Helpless, -- the Abandoned JACK CONNOR.

LORD MOUNTWORTH was all Amazement. -- He forgot Mr. Conyers was on his Knees,
but gazing, with Eyes of Astonishment, at last he raised him, and looked again.
-- When he had fully brought to his Memory the long unthought-of Features of
Jack Connor, he flew with Transport to his Arms. -- Gracious Heaven! cried he,
how unsearchable are thy Ways. -- Oh, my dear Jack, you have amply, -- amply
rewarded the Kindness I have shown you. -- You are now mine by every Tie.' --
If your Lordship, said Conyers, can pardon the only Fallacy I was ever guilty
of, you will, a second Time, give me Life and Being.' -- 'My dear Jack, replied
my Lord, you every Moment give me new Pleasure; -- I think you are now my son
more than ever: -- But, my Child, tell my impatient Ear how this Wonder has
happened; -- tell me how it is possible, when Mr. Johnston was so certain of
your being drowned, that I now find, now hold you in my Arms!' -- 'I shall,
answered Mr. Conyers, most faithfully inform your Lordship of every Part of my
Life, but the Hurry of my Spirits is so great, and my Imagination, so filled
with the Vicissitudes of my Fortune, that I am unable, at present to utter any
Part. -- All I can now say, is, most humbly to thank your Lordship, for your
Humanity and Bounty, to a Poor, Distressed, Helpless Infant, and to beseech
you, to believe, that nothing but Real Love, of my dearest Harriot, and the
dread of losing her, could have prevented a sooner Discovery. Forgive this
Crime, my Lord, if Love can be a a Crime; and your Lordship may be assured,
that my Duty, my Gratitude, and every Sentiment of an Honest Heart, shall for
ever wait on you, and on every Creature for whom you have the least Friendship
or Regard.

MY dear Son, said my Lord, I can easily judge of the pleasing Anxiety you are
in, but retire to Rest, and may gentle Sleep, restore your Peace and
Tranquillity; and may Heaven long continue it.

Next Morning, Lord Mountworth in the most affectionate Manner, embraced
Conyers, and called him his Son, -- his Friend. -- Permit me, said the Captain,
to ask your Lordship, if you can give me any Account of Mr. Johnston's Niece
Nannett?' -- 'To the best of my Memory, said my Lord, she married Mr. Lilly the
Usher, about the Time you left the School. Your old Master died Six Years ago,
and Mr. Lilly continues the former Plan of Tuition, with great Credit.

NOW I am satisfied, said Conyers; and now give me Leave to recount every
Circumstance of my Story, and your Lordship will observe the visible Hand of
Providence conducting and leading me to the Fruition of the most perfect
Happiness this World can afford. -- It has conducted me to the Arms of the
dearest and best of Wives, and to the Sight of the noblest and best of Men. --
Heaven, I beseech thee, make me most truly thankful.

HE then began the Narrative of his Life, which, if the Reader has forgot, he
has my Permission to read again, for I have not Time to Recapitulate.

EVERY Incident and Change of his Life, gave his Lordship fresh Matter for
Wonder; but what struck him the most, was his being the Son of Sir Roger
Thornton, who had married his Sister. -- I shall ever, said he, admire your
Prudence, in keeping your Affairs so secret, and I shall always Honor your
laudable Ambition and Gratitude. -- When our dear Harriot has blessed you with
a Child, both she and my dear Wife shall partake of the Joy your Story has
given me, and my Son Harry, must share in the Pleasure. -- As for Sir Roger, he
must know nothing of it, for he has a certain Pride in his Nature, that would
soon divulge it to the World, and, perhaps, not in its genuine Colors. -- For
my own Part, my dearest Jack, I am so far from being ashamed of your Alliance,
that I glory in it; yet, my Son, I would not choose to be the constant Theme of
the Ignorant. -- TITLES are but the Rewards of Merit, but Pride and Haughtiness
debase them. -- Distinctions, are only Incentives to Noble Deeds; and true
Nobility will ever encourage them. -- Charity and Tenderness, are the
Characteristicks of A MAN, and did Mankind love Truth and Honor, more than
Pride, Falsehood and Detraction, the Occurrences of your Life would strengthen
their Resolves, and convince ALL, -- That to be REALLY HAPPY, they must be
TRULY VIRTUOUS.

Gentle Reader,

RIGHT sorry is the Compiler of this Work, that his Materials can carry him no
further, and he is not permitted to to search into Futurity. Should our good
JACK CONNOR, or CAPTAIN CONYERS, live Thirty or Forty Years longer, perhaps he
will furnish Matter for a much abler Historian. The Work thou have now read,
has been little altered from the Original Papers, but some Observations, or
rather slight Hints, have been added, and are the Result of not a little
Experience of Sixty Years. -- If thou find Errors, reprove with Freedom, but
judge of the Intention. -- If thou applaudest any one Part of the Moral, thou will make the Compiler happy, as he will imagine thou will follow the Precept.
-- To the well-minded, to the honest Man, he says from Shakespeare's CORIOLANUS,

I have done, as you have done; That Is, what I can;
Induced, as you have been; That Is, for my Country;
He, that has but effected his Good Will,
Has overta'en mine Act.
FAREWELL.
FINIS.
Stultus versus Sapientem: IN THREE LETTERS TO THE FOOL.
Joculare tibi videtur: and sane loeve,
Dum nihil habemus majus, calamo ludimus.
Sed diligenter intuere has noenias;
Quantum sub illis utilitatem reperies!
PHAED.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
THE History of JACK CONNOR having met with so favorable a Reception in Great
Britain and Ireland, that my Interest obliged me to give this Second Edition,
though Books of Amusement, do not always meet the same Fate. No Pains has been
wanting, to make this Impression as complete, as the Nature of the Work would
admit of.

SOME Gentlemen have insisted on my rescuing the following Letters from
Oblivion, by adding them to this Volume; and I was the easier prevailed on, as
they bear some Analogy to the foregoing History.

I find these Letters were printed in London, in the Paper called the FOOL, at
a Time when it was under the Consideration of Parliament, whether they should,
or should not, continue the Bounty on the low-pric'd Linens of Ireland.

IF Irony merits your Attention or Regard, these Letters cannot fail of giving
you some Pleasure, which, I shall ever be happy, by contributing to.

LETTER I. To the FOOL.
Dear Cousin, LONDON, 1748.
HAD I sooner discovered the Honor I have of being nearly related to you,
sooner had I paid my Respects to the worthy Head of so illustrious a Family.

TO convince you of my sincere Love, untainted with Flattery, permit me
grievously to complain to you -- of yourself. The constant Maxim of our
glorious Ancestors, was, by their Writings, their Eloquence, and every other
lawful Means, to encourage, promote, and, if possible, make Universal the great
Doctrine of Folly; but, with an aching Heart I speak it, you seem to dwindle
from the fundamental Rule into downright Understanding and Sense.

CONSIDER, my dear Cousin, that whilst you are musing yourself with such
Trifles, your natural Enemies gain Ground; nay, a whole neighboring KINGDOM
have lately taken up Arms against Us, who for many Centuries were our firmest
Friends and Allies.

YOUR inherent Good-foolishness will naturally imagine I mean IRELAND. -- This
mighty Monarchy, for ages governed by Kings of our House! -- This extensive
Realm, famous for the Title of Isle of Saints, the indelible Character of our
noble Family! -- This State, peculiarly cherished and fed by our spiritual
Father the Pope! -- And yet, to our Shame be it spoken, this, so valuable a
Part of our Dominions is likely to be wrested from Us. -- Yes, Sir, we shall
soon lose our ancient Inheritance, except we exert all our Faculties, and by
vigorous, and antisalutary Schemes, prevent what must be so fatal to our
Interest.

LEST Truth should not have reached your Ears, (as what Monarch always hears
it) permit me to inform you of the present Conduct of this DEGENERATE NATION.
-- Your Foolishness will scarcely believe the melancholy Tidings I bring! --
You will not be able to conceive, that these, your old Friends, now hold your
Authority and Family in the utmost Contempt! -- That they have already trampled
down Numbers of your Altars and High Places, and that all Hands are employed to
finish the execrable Work! -- Believe me, Sir, this misguided People, are
totally employed in promoting Manufactures, Labor, and Industry! Strange
Revolution!

AS poor and deluded as they are, they have stumbled on a Project, that will
infallibly ruin our Credit. -- They have set the Axe to the Root, and the
mighty Tree, that yielded the plentiful and delicious Fruit of Pardons,
Indulgencies, and a thousand other Sorts, no less grateful to the Soul, must
fall, and with it all our Hopes! -- In short, Sir, the Wretches seem determined
to make it a PROTESTANT KINGDOM. -- I tremble at the Consequence!

BLIND ZEAL urges them on. They give their Money with Cheerfulness to promote
their Darling Scheme of ENGLISH PROTESTANT WORKING SCHOOLS. -- I beg Leave,
Sir, to set this Matter before you, in its true Light, that your Foolishness
may consider of Ways and Means to prevent their spreading.

I AM very well informed that this Kingdom from N. to S. is about 265 Miles,
and from E. to W. about 150, and contains about eighteen Millions of statute
Acres, with commodious Harbors, Bays, and Rivers. -- Henry the second stole it
from your Ancestors. -- Many Struggles were made by our good Friends to shake
off this Yoke, but in vain. -- At that Period, vulgarly called The Reformation,
your Friends held fast to Mother Church, but still PROTESTANTISM impudently
raised her Head and shamefully flourished. To such an Height she grew, that in
1641, when England was torn by Civil War, our natural Safety obliged, and our
Holy Catholic Church compelled Us, for the Sake of Salvation, to extirpate our
Enemies. The glorious Call was unhappily obeyed, but in Part; for their fell,
in that Night, but about ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND of them.

THAT Arch-Fiend OLIVER CROMWELL, greatly disturbed our Peace and holy
Ignorance. His enthusiastic Sword swept all before him. His Madness drove
Multitudes to America, and Numbers into one Corner of the Land, where still
your Name is in some Veneration. -- The total Ruin of your Empire was too
arduous a Task even for Oliver, for on mustering our Forces in 1683, we found
ourselves 37 to one.

AGAIN we struggled, and followed the Standard of your illustrious Godfather,
KING JAMES the Second. -- Though the PRINCE OF ORANGE was our most inveterate
Foe; though he had a little Courage, great Cunning, and a tolerable Army, our
Hopes were High, and we might have succeeded, had not that abominable filthy
Town and Neighborhood of ENNISKILLEN, raised a Regiment of HORSE, and one of
FOOT, of as rank PROTESTANTS as ever occupied Church Lands, and sent Them and
Their Hearts to the PRINCE. -- Oh fatal Hour! -- Our Enemies Triumph in it, and
preserve these Regiments, even until this very Day.

FROM that Time, these Miscreants have been but too careful in framing, and
what is worse, putting in Execution sundry Laws, destructive of our ancient
Rights. Thus have they proceeded for these sixty Years, without the least
Check; and have so artfully managed their Affairs, that, withal the
Machinations and Contrivances, of sundry Potentates, your Friends and Allies,
they never could be brought even to think of REBELLION in support of your
Foolishness, or Family, except with Horror. -- So averse were these Savages to
your gentle Sway, that, whilst Numbers of our Relations marched, even into the
Heart of England in your Cause: They, the Protestants, raised upwards of sixty
thousand Horse and Foot, well armed, regimented, and mostly uniformly clothed,
and effectually guarded IRELAND, in spite of your legal Prerogative, and
indefeasible Hereditary Right.

I HAD a Degree of Happiness, on being informed that in 1742, our Friends there
were about seven to one Enemy. -- But alas, Sir! on further Enquiry, I am, but
too well convinced, that in fifty Years, you, or your Posterity, will not have
a single Heart warm in your Cause. -- The Encouragement given to Husbandry,
Manufactures, Arts and Sciences, is monstrous! Even beyond what any other
Nation ever did! -- They have inverted the whole Order of Nature; they have
extracted Corn from our old venerable Boggs, and feed Millions of Sheep and
Oxen, on those Plains, anciently consecrated to holy and religious Uses. -- But
what will not Impiety do?

THEY have infatuated the native Irish to such a Decree, that they beg and pray
to have their Children admitted into these cursed Protestant Schools, now
erected in most Parts of the Kingdom, to the Number of 50. -- In these
Seminaries they are taught to read the Bible, and instructed in their Religion
for about two Hours every Day, and the Remainder of their Time, still more
infamously, employed in tilling the Land, spinning, weaving, or some other
manual Operations, unknown to their Forefathers.

THE FUND to answer this great Expense, arises, from what they call, THE
CHARITY OF WELL DISPOSED CHRISTIANS; and so prevalent is this specious Title,
that a KING, (whom your Foolishness never heard of,) even GEORGE THE SECOND,
has granted them a Charter, and set an Example to his Subjects, by a Donation
of ONE THOUSAND POUNDS a Year. -- An Example! but too well followed by Numbers
of weak Minds in this Kingdom.

I REALLY always imagined that these Contributors were of the lowest Order of
the People; but great was my Surprise to find, at a late Meeting, so many of
the first Fashion and Reputation in the Kingdom. As they are Men of dangerous
and turbulent Spirits, always plotting and contriving our Ruin, they must, by
some Means or other, be diverted from this Work.

YOUR Foolishness will certainly demand and say, -- Where are my holy Priests?
-- They are idle! -- They are idle! -- No, Sir, accuse them not; they are
there, and in Numbers, and at Work with all their Might; but these subtle
Protestants take from them the Tools they work with, by transplanting the
innocent Children many Miles distant from their native Parishes; by which
Contrivance, their Parents, or Priests, are prevented from frightening them
with Purgatory and Hell, or keeping them firm in the Cause of Indolence and
Rags. -- For now above 1500 of these little Reptiles Cloth themselves.

PERMIT me, Sir, in my next, to lay before you a few Remarks, and some Schemes
to render Useless the Machinations, of all your Enemies, being

Your true and most affectionate Kinsman, Thomas a Stupidius.

LETTER II. To the FOOL.
Dear Cousin, LONDON, 1748.
IN the last I had the Honor of writing to you, I traced out the Rise and
Progress of WISDOM in your ancient Kingdom of IRELAND. -- Permit me, a little,
to continue the Subject, and then I shall mention my Ways for making their
Wisdom abortive.

SOME of their Wise Heads have found out, that Ireland contains about two
Millions of Inhabitants, and they have likewise found out, that the Riches and
Prosperity of a Nation are in Proportion to their Inhabitants properly
employed. -- Such a Discovery was infinitely against the true Interest of our
Family. -- On this they built, and then computed the Value to the Government of
every industrious Individual, which, I think, they made amount to about ten
Pounds a Year.

THEY then proceeded by a Thing called Arithmetic. -- If ONE industrious
Subject -- be worth TEN POUNDS a Year to the State, -- what will be the Value
of TWO MILLIONS of such Subjects? -- And, such is the Power of Figures! They
made it plain that that Number was really worth TWENTY MILLIONS each Year.

IN order to acquire such Riches, the first Care of these avaritious Gentry was
to poison the Minds of their Tenants with Notions of Industry. -- No easy Task!
But as they knew, that the Popish Religion, -- their having such Swarms of
Priests to maintain, -- their Number of Holy Days, -- and their natural
Disposition to Sauntering, were so many Draw-backs to Wealth, Honesty, and
Cleanliness, it was thought necessary to change the Religion of the People, and
make them spurn at our holy Institutions. -- This cruel Blow has been but too
well followed; -- Their Labor and Industry have matched with such gigantick
Strides, that within these twenty Years, the whole Face of the Country is
changed. -- Now the Traveller journies on Roads the finest in Europe, and
reposes himself, not in Barns, or Hovels, but in good, clean, and commodious
Houses. -- He may in Time be entertained with all the Beauties of the Country,
heightened and improved by Art and Industry. -- He may behold useful and
ornamental Structures arise; and see Gardens and Plantations flourish. -- These
indeed would be shocking Sights!

IT IS amazing to observe, how the trivial Praemiums of a little Society in
DUBLIN have spurred on greedy Minds. -- Scarcely has any Branch of Manufacture,
or useful Art, escaped their Notice and Encouragement. -- Such low Creatures
are they, that they ransack even the Dunghills, and give Praemiums to the old
Women, who gather most Rags to make Paper. -- Should our Schemes oblige the
Rebels to return to your Obedience, I would except these Fellows out of the
general Pardon.

WHAT have we not to fear, should Industry, like other Novelties, become a
Fashion in Ireland. -- INDUSTRY! The Parent of every social Virtue; -- the
Founder of all real Honor; -- the Support of Government, and Preserver of true
Religion! -- PROPERTY is her constant Attendant, and LIBERTY gives her Spirits
freely to enjoy it. -- Virtue, Property, and Liberty, are not Concomitants of
our Constitution. They must be banished, or your Foolishness will be deposed.
Therefore, THE PROTESTANT WORKING SCHOOLS must be destroyed.

HITHERTO, Sir, I have considered this Matter in its worst Light; but be
assured your Foolishness has many and powerful Friends both Here and in
Ireland, who constantly espouse your Cause. These Forces, properly collected,
and well posted, must make a powerful Diversion, and greatly Retard the
Operations of the Enemy.

OUR Friends in the CONCLAVE and SORBONNE perfectly understand the noble
Doctrine, -- DIVIDE AND GOVERN. -- Through all the Labyrinths of Policy, from
Xenophon, and Tacitus, to Richlieu and Anti-Machiavel, this Maxim is the Soul
and Essence. -- When it fails, I know but of a Poniard or Poison that can
supply its Place.

RIGHTLY to divide, we must sub-divide Truth: Or, in other Words, we must
propagate Falsehoods. It Is certain, that Lying is a Sin the Vulgar only can
commit; for all the Princes of your House gloried in it; and your Foolishness
follows those bright Examples. -- Let it be privately hinted, That the whole
Affair is a Jobb, and a Contrivance to cousen the Weak. -- Assert possitively,
that every Donation to these scandalous Working Schools, centers in the Pockets
of particular Persons, -- or, where these Schools are really erected, it is but
with a View of augmenting the Estate of the Lord of the Manor, by having so
many Slaves to work for him gratis. Thanks be to Ignorance Thousands of your
Liege Subjects will subscribe to these Articles, with Implicit Faith.

THOUGH it happens, that GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND are governed by the same
Monarch, and the same Laws, and though the principal Inhabitants of the latter,
spring from the former, yet Nature, indulgent to your Interest, has divided
them by a little Sea. -- Be it therefore our peculiar Care to divide their
Minds, by encouraging Jealousy, and the salutary Seeds of Derision and
Animosity. -- By all Means, prevent the English from ever getting the better of
their Prejudices to the Irish, and keep the Irish in a perpetual envious
Disposition to the English. For, though we cannot prevent their being IN FACT
but one and the same People, this Conduct will give them two distinct Minds,
and make their UNION useless.

EVERY Instrument must be employed to keep up the general Opinion, that Ireland
must be bridled and curbed. -- Never permit them to discover, that it would be
unjust to make different Laws for the Isle of Wight, or, that the County of
Surry should have less Freedom than the County of Middlesex; because the Thames
divides them. -- How fatal had it been to our good Cause, and to our faithful
Friends, the Disturbers of Europe, had Ireland been joined to the narrow Part
of the Western Shore of England! -- They would then have been all Protestants.
-- This Kingdom would have been Two Thirds larger than it is, -- have had four
or five Millions more of Inhabitants, and a proportionable Increase of Taxes to
the Government; consequently the Government less in Debt, if at all; or, if in
Debt, better enabled to pay that Debt. -- France and Spain would have been
unsupplied with Irish Officers and Soldiers, who happen, though our Relations,
not to be the worst of the Profession.

THAT your Foolishness has many Friends of different Orders, cannot be denied;
but the Two most firm in your Interest, are those Gentlemen of England, who
regard the other Isle but with a certain Degree of Contempt, and view the
Inhabitants but as Aliens to the State: And those Gentlemen of Ireland, who
contemning her new-adopted Maxims, live out of her Pale, nor visit her, but by
their Proxies in the Form of Bills of Exchange. -- These are our true and
genuine Subjects, meriting every Honor your Foolishness can confer on them.

IT must be confessed, there are some poor and dastardly Spirits in this
Kingdom, who, afraid of exerting their Power over the other, have,
unaccountably, run into the opposite Extreme, and joined with all their Might
to promote their Linen Manufacture. Nay, their MONARCH, and most of his
Nobility, feel it every Day on their Tables, their Backs, and in their Beds. --
Too serious a Truth! -- I have been informed, that in 1681, their whole Export
of Linen Cloth amounted to about ten Thousand Pounds, but now, -- Can you
believe it? -- It Is swelled to above a Million. This has so enraged me, I am
not at present able to proceed; but permit me to refer your Foolishness to my
next, and always be assured of the utmost Sincerity of

Your most faithful and affectionate Kinsman, Thomas a Stupidius.

LETTER III. To the FOOL.
Dear Cousin, LONDON, 1748.
JOIN with me to curse the Memory of the old Wretch, who invented the Fable of
the Belly and Members. Certainly it contains more Wisdom than half the modern
Folios. From this Tale sprung every faint Endeavor to make these three
Kingdoms subservient to the Interest of each other, and BE in Reality one great
and mighty Empire. But their boasted TRIA JUNCTA in UNO is merely ideal; for
our Family have ever found Means, nor wanted Interest, to make ineffectual such
pernicious Schemes.

LINEN gave Rise to Industry in IRELAND. -- Industry soon showed her alluring
Charms, and diffused her baneful Influence over the Land. Ten Thousand odious
Beauties issued from her, and at last produced these horrid working Schools,
which must make it a Protestant Kingdom, and consequently enrich England, by an
Addition of some Millions of useful and faithful Subjects.

ENGLAND discovered this Benefit, and wisely encouraged the Irish Linen; but
particularly by the Bounty they allowed on its being exported to foreign
Countries. The Effects were soon felt in Ireland, and the Creatures expressed
their awkward Gratitude, by running in Crowds to the Hackle and Loom.

AS this is the Source of all our Misfortunes in Ireland, let all our Attention
be given to Ruin it; which, when once effected, believe me Sir, they will fly
with more Alacrity, to bend the Knee before you, than they did to rebel against
your Authority. -- Let us not tamely submit to see triumphant those Monsters,
Industry and Protestantism. -- Our Troops are still numerous, and in good
Order; but alas! of what Use, if not led to on Action.

Your Foolishness knows, that some of the Northern Provinces of this Kingdom
have embarked in this Branch of Business. -- A most lucky Incident! which, if
properly improved, all your Wishes will be accomplished. -- Let us magnify
their Performances. -- Let us invent plausible Tales of the Progress they have
made, and fee our Friend SOPHISTRY to demonstrate, that the Interest of England
requires their being greatly supported and encouraged, and then your faithful
Minister CUNNING may slyly insinuate, that Ireland can now stand alone, nor
needs the usual Bounty, which, by all true Policy, ought to bend its Course due
North.

I AM in Raptures at the Thought! -- Pursue it, Sir, in the Name of Ignorance;
and instantly you will see, all their mighty Fabric tumble to the Ground, and
your Fame will be exalted for ever! -- Ireland must then infallibly become a
Drain of Riches from England, and not a Source of Plenty. -- She may want
Assistance from England, but will never be able to return the Compliment. --
Thus enervated, no more can she support thirty seven Regiments of British
Subjects, always ready to obey their Monarch. -- She may indeed have an Army
quartered on her; but their Pay must issue from the same Fountain, which
supplies the Army in Scotland. -- Her present Absentees must then become
Resident; for, by Ruining this, her only Branch of valuable Commerce, she can
never send out the twentieth Part of the annual Million, she now bestows on
them.

IT IS impossible to mention the innumerable Advantages arising to us from such
a Project well executed. -- ROME would be glad, and France rejoice at it. --
Ignorance would triple her Number of Beads. Sloth would multiply her pleasant
Bogs, and Indolence live magnificently in Smoke, and Mudwalls! In fine, all our
Family, to the most distant Relation, would be properly and munificently
provided for, and your Throne established, as in the Days of Roderick O'Connor,
of gallant Memory.

IT IS in vain to attempt in England a thorough Reformation in our Favor; but
we can always throw in such Bars to their Happiness, and so weaken the Nerves
and Sinews of their Government, that all their Conquests over us shall avail
them little, or perhaps even become a Charge to them.

DULLNESS be praised, all Thoughts are now dropped of making Ireland a Corn
Country. I own, I am surprised their Clergy do not attempt it, as it would so
much increase their Tithes. They have talked of public Granaries, but it was
mere Talk; nor shall I remind them of it. -- Indeed an Attempt was once made to
encourage Tillage, by granting, as in England, a Bounty on Corn exported; but
your Foolishness nobly exerted yourself on that Occasion, and defeated the
Project. You rightly judged, that though Pasturage employed the Land, it was in
no Shape so prejudicial to your Interest as Ploughing, which fills a Country
with laborious Inhabitants.

WITHOUT Vanity I may say, I gave the first Hint of restraining Ireland, with
Regard to WOOL, and then, I dexterously contrived, that the English might
smuggle it as well as themselves. The happy Consequence is, that Thousands of
the French are amused in manufacturing of it, whilst as many of your Rebel
Subjects are starving at Home. -- To my great Joy, this cannot suddenly be
altered; for so long as the Irish love Mutton, and feed Millions of Sheep; and
so long as they have more Wool, than their home Consumption requires, so long
will they act on the Principles of their Neighbors, and sell it to the best
Bidder. -- Perhaps your Foolishness will be surprised, that so large a Kingdom
as France or Spain should want Irish or English Wool: But -- let me wisper in
your Ear. -- All their Wool cannot make one Piece of Serge. -- Why this is so,
LEEDS, and every Clothing Town in England can better explain than I. -- Should
they ever attempt a Change in this Matter, let us get a Borough or two to
petition against it, and order your Brother CLAMOR to attend. -- They are
truly, in this Respect, in the Way we wish them in; nor do I believe they will
alter, till they are convinced, That it is more eligible to encourage the
Subjects of Ireland in some certain Branches of Trade, than by a contrary
Conduct, drive those Branches into the Arms of the common Enemy.

THE general Rule, and the most successful is, eternally to play one Part of
the Monarchy against the other, and constantly to keep up that noble Spirit of
Grumbling, and turning every Act of their Government into Ridicule. What
MACHIAVEL says of a Prince, may well be applied to GREAT BRITAIN and Ireland.
They ought above all things carefully to avoid rendering themselves odious or
despicable; for such a Conduct protects them from every Danger. -- Could we
contrive, not only to make them odious and despicable in the Eyes of their
Neighbors, but likewise to each other, how happy should we be!

MAY our Endeavors prosper! and may your Foolishness once more shine on the
Throne of your Ancestors! -- May ENGLAND think hardly of SCOTLAND. -- May
SCOTLAND abuse IRELAND. -- And may IRELAND envy one, and reproach the other! --
May this regular Confusion have no End, until that Day, when your Foolishness,
in the Fullness of your Glory, shall say, Now indeed are ye all my Children.

SHOULD the Reverse happen, and their Wisdom prevail over us. -- Should the
PROTESTANT WORKING SCHOOLS in Ireland continue to be supported by the Charity
of England, without which they cannot subsist. -- Should the Linen Manufacture
of that Kingdom, instead of being ruined, become more powerfully protected and
encouraged by this. -- Should they fall on equitable Ways, to prevent exporting
Wool to France. In short, should they become Wise and Industrious, and by the
natural Union of the Members to the Head, assist and not destroy each other.
Should these come to pass, what must become of Us, and Our numerous Offspring!
-- Forbid it, all ye Gods of Error! -- O Misery! all that could remain for us,
would be to fly to ROME, AVIGNON, Boulogn, or St. Germains. -- There bemoan our
unhappy Fate, talk of our former Splendour, and live on the Bounty of our
Relations; for work we cannot, but to beg we are not ashamed. -- There with my
latest Breath I shall honor and revere your Name, and expire in a Wish for
your Restoration. I am with all Duty,

Your most faithful and Affectionate Kinsman, Thomas a Stupidius.

FINIS.
This Day is published, THE Practical SURVEYOR, OR, THE Art of Land-Measuring
made EASY.
Showing by plain and familiar Rules, how to Survey any Piece of Land
whatsoever, by the Plain-Table, Theodolite, or Circumferentor: or, by the Chain
only. And how to Protract, Cast up, Reduce and Divide the same. Likewise, an
easy Method of Protracting Observations made with the Meridian; and how to cast
up the Content of any Plot of Land, by reducing any Multangular Figure to one
Triangle. To which is added, an Appendix, Showing how to Draw Buildings, etc.
in Perspective: of Levelling; and also how to Measure standing Timber

By SAMUEL WYLD. The Third Edition; corrected and enlarged by a careful Hand;
and illustrated with several Copper Plates.

Printed for H. Lintot, and sold by W. Johnston, at the Golden-Ball in St.
Paul's Churchyard. Price Three Shillings.

This Day is published, Dedicated to the Right Honorable Philip Earl of
Chesterfield. The Second Edition of LES MOEURS; or, MANNERS.
Accurately Translated from the French. Wherein the Principles of Morality, or
Social Duties, viz. Piety, Wisdom, Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, Temperance,
Love, Friendship, Humanity, etc. etc. are described in all their Branches; the
Obligations of them shown to consist in our Nature, and the Enlargement of them
strongly enforced. Here Parents are taught, that, giving Birth to a Child,
scarcely entitles them to that honorable Name, without a strict Discharge of
Parental Duties; the Friend will find, there are a Thousand other Decorums,
besides the doing of a Favor, to entitle him to the tender Name of Friend; and
the Good-natured Man will find, he ought to extend that Quality beyond the
Bounds of his own Neighborhood or Party.

The Whole wrote in a Manner entirely New and Entertaining, and enlivened with
real Characters, drawn from Life, and fitted to instill the Principles of all
social Virtues into tender Minds.

Printed for W. Johnston at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Church Yard.

Be careful to ask for the MANNERS dedicated to the Earl of CHESTERFIELD.


