THE HISTORY OF Jack Connor.

VOLUME I.

THE SECOND EDITION, Corrected.

Whoever thinks a faultless Piece to see,
Thinks what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be.
In every Work, regard the Writer's End,
Since none can compass more than they intend;
And if the Means be Just, the Conduct True,
Applause, in Spite of trivial Faults, is due.
POPE. LONDON: Printed for W. JOHNSTON, at the Golden Ball, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCCLIII.

To the Right Honorable HENRY FOX, Esquire His MAJESTY'S Secretary at WAR.
SIR,
THE Generality of Dedications are drawn like Bills of Exchange for full Value
supposed to be given in Compliment and Encomium, but this Address expects no
pecuniary Indulgence; neither does it beg a Protection which no Man can give
from public Censure; neither does it seek your Favor to the Author, since he
is already honored therewith. The Performance which it introduces, is founded
on the Principles of INTEGRITY and HONOR, and naturally inclines to Him who
excells in those Virtues; and did I know a Person who enjoys a larger Portion,
you might probably have seen another Name at the Head of these Pages. If they
afford Matter of Amusement to you, and Matter of Improvement to those who want
it, they will answer every End that the Author proposes, while, by the
Concealment of his Name, as well from you as from the Public, he can, without
Suspicion of Partiality to your Person or Virtues, have the secret Pleasure of
declaring himself, with the justest Esteem and Regard,

Sir, Your most obliged, and most obedient humble Servant, W. C.
Ashburton, 1 July, 1751.
TO THE READER.
THE Historian is an absolute Stranger to most of the People of the present
Age, therefore can never pretend to the Honor of satyrizing any Man, or any
Body of Men.

HE has had a Bundle of Papers left him by a deceased Friend, who was
infinitely more capable of putting them in Form, than he can pretend to, though
the Recluseness of his Life afforded him abundant Leisure. These Papers
contained a Variety of Observations, which, he thought, might be useful to
Mankind. He has extended these Observations; he has, in some Measure, commented
on them; he has dressed them in the Garb of the Times; he has given them the
Air of Romance, and he gives to the Reader, the absolute Power of determining
whether he has done RIGHT or WRONG.

THE Historian has this Advantage over most others, and this only, That the
Trifle he now presents to the Public, has a fair Chance of being impartially
dealt with; for, as he is unknown, and will remain so, the critical Eye cannot
condemn his Person, whatever it may his Work. His Scribbling may be abused, but
he has taken Care to secure his Person from such Treatment, though he is not
conscious that he has ever merited it.

IRONY, well managed, has ever been a successful Way to fix the Attention; and
NOVEL and ROMANCE may be conducted to very laudable Purposes, and answer the
End of more learned Writings. The Moral of the following History may correspond
with an old physical Aphorism, which I apprehend may be found in the SCHOLA
SALERNI, wrote in the Days of WILLIAM the Conqueror.

Qui medicas arts exercet, noscere parts
Debet ad aegrotum dandi mistum been potum.
Nam varium est herbis genus: haec impletur acerbis,
Illa salutaris succis ditescit amaris.
Horum quodque datum per se, vomitum atque screatum
Excitet, ast istis inerit sua gratia mistis.
Expedit ergo cato medico studere palato,
Ne stomacho turbas det, cum dedit, inscius, herbas;
Effectum et perdat, dum, sic quod praecipitur, dat.
Expedit et caute praescribere, fallere laute;
Mollibus hoc verbis, hoc mitibus efficit herbis.
Has monitas tu res et praeceptas nisi cures,
Non Medici, Vir, te adpellem, sed nomine Agyrtae.
PURE and elegant Latin is not to be expected in Monkish Verses, and a
classical Nicety is too unreasonable a Request. Such as they are, they afford
me a Conjecture, that the learned DOCTOR MEAD is obliged to them, at least for
the Title of his new Book, Monita et Praecepta Medica. Be this at it will, I
shall only beg Leave to give, to the English Reader, their Meaning in his own
Language. A skilful Physician will consult the Constitution of his Patient, and
not madly pour down even the most salutary Medicines. Some Herbs are filled
with sour, and some with bitter Juices, too disagreeable to be given singly.
Physic, like good Counsel, must be administered with Caution, or the Stomach
will revolt. The Patient must be decoyed into a Cure, and the unpalatable Drug
must be conveyed in the most innocent Vehicle his Judgment can furnish. He who
acts otherwise, merits not the Title of a Physician, but of a Quack.

THE HISTORY OF Jack Connor.
CHAP. I.
The Rise, the Progress, of the human Heart,
The real Honor, the Disguise of Art;
The Wise, the Good, the Vicious; -- all I sing,
Oh Thou! from whom our every Actions spring,
Not the poor Author, but the World inspire,
If not the Style, the Moral to admire.
Learn from the Child, he places in your Sight,
To act with Justice, and to judge aright.
ANONIMOUS.
THE Actions of Monarchs, the Intrigues of Ministers, the History of Battles
and Slaughter, and the Revolutions of Kingdoms, are Subjects, that rather
surprise and astonish the Generality of Readers, than improve or amend the
Heart. A great, wicked, or virtuous Man, plunged into the utmost Distress, must
raise our Pity and Compassion: A Glorious and a Wise Prince, triumphing over
Foreign or Domestic Enemies, and fixing his Crown in the Affections of his
People, must warm the rational Mind, and give Delight and Pleasure; but what
have the Bulk of Mankind to do with their Greatness? Their Misfortunes or
Successes may make us cry out, It Is strange! -- It Is wondrous strange! But how
can we make the Application to ourselves? The wide Difference in our
Situations, almost renders it impossible, and, if by Chance, something like a
Parallel should arise, it must be stripped of all pompous Terms; -- the Rubbish
of State and Parade must be removed; and the Whole levelled to the Sphere we
act in.

PERHAPS, Reflections of this Nature, gave Rise to BIOGRAPHY. The Story of the
Calamities, or good Fortune of private Persons, must sensibly affect every
private Reader, and, as the Incidents are natural, and what every Man is
subject to, he with Ease applies the Inferences, and, in some Measure, may be
said to read himself.

THE Papers and Memorandums, committed to my Care, gave Rise to the following
Account of JOHN CONNOR. -- I will not affirm that I have acted impartially,
because I will not presume doing, what, I am afraid, no Historian ever did. If
I assure my Readers I am quite unbias'd, yet I hope to be indulged, like the
Rest of my Brethren, when I sometimes act otherwise. I cannot avoid saying, I
have consulted the Ease of my Reader as much as possible, by not swelling this
Work into Twenty Volumes. As a Proof of my Indulgence, I have shortened my
Prefatory Discourse and this Introduction above One Hundred Pages, and shall
proceed directly to the History.

JEREMIAH CONNOR, the Father of JOHN, whose Story I now write, had been a well
made, athletic Man, and a Soldier in King WILLIAM'S Army in the War in Ireland.
When that Matter was settled, he quitted that Sort of Life, and passing through
sundry Services, at last settled with Sir Roger Thornton, a Gentleman of great
Honor and Fortune, in the County of Limerick, in Ireland. Here he lived, and
his Warlike Scars of Credit, made him assume some Authority, and furnished a
large Fund for Conversation. He found the Happiness of being Virtuous in the
Cause of Liberty and Common-Sense. Though he was one of the famous
Enniskilliners that joined King William, yet his Reward, like other great Men,
was confined to the secret Pleasure of having done his Duty.

IN this Family lived DOLLY BRIGHT, who performed the Function of Landry-Maid;
she was young and handsome; and Jerry observing, she had a docile and tractable
Turn, he encouraged her in it. Being himself a Man of Learning, he took some
Pains to inculcate all his Knowledge, and taught her to Read and Write. The
Fame of her Erudition a little hightened her Vanity, especially when Sir Roger
examined her himself, and declaring her a very surprising Genius, gave her a
Kiss and two Guineas to buy a Gown and Linen. -- This unfortunate Present, and
a few more of the same Nature, at last alarmed Lady Thornton, and brought on
some Alteration, in which the Lady seemed in the Right. All Sir Roger's
Affirmations were of no Effect; my Lady most violently protested the impudent
Slut should quit the House, or she would --. Sir Roger knew the World, and
what is more, he knew himself and his Wife, which determined him to make all
this easy. He told Jerry Connor, that if he would marry Dolly Bright, he would
give him a Cabin and five Acres of Ground at a small Rent, and complete his
Happiness, who had been so careful of her Education.

LADY THORNTON objected to this, but finding Sir Roger grow warm and somewhat
peremptory, she acquiesced. -- Though Jerry Connor was thirty Years older than
Dolly, they willingly consented to the Match, and Peace was restored to the
Family.

THUS Jack's Parents were fixed in a Farm about twenty Miles from Thornton
Castle. Jerry was Fifty-five and Dolly Twenty-four Years of Age. To complete
their Joy, the Hero of this History stepped forth, and was ushered into the
World the 15th Day of December 1720, just seven Months after their Nuptials, a
fine healthy Boy, and the very Picture of Jerry Connor.

WHETHER it was from the frequent Visits Sir Roger paid them, or from some
other Motive, my Lady Thornton never rested till she had persuaded him to
remove his Family to England. This was a mighty Loss, and poor Connor felt it
more and more every Day. They were much in Arrear, and as the Steward could no
longer indulge them, they were put to vast Difficulties. This shagrin'd Mrs.
Connor, and her Husband was sometimes peevish. Every Misfortune was imputed to
one or the other, consequently many bitter Invectives passed between them, and
sometimes Blows. Mrs. Connor generally conquered, for an old Wound broke out in
his Knee and lamed him. The good Woman had always great Spirits, which raised
itself on certain Occasions, to that noble Ardour, which the Vulgar call
Termagant, in which her Neighbors and Husband gave her Opportunities to
improve.

AT last another Wound appeared in his Head, and obliged him to have Recourse
to the Surgeon of the next Town, though ill able to bear the Expense of, at
least, a Shilling a Day. However, the Surgeon was a skillful Man, and so
managed his Patient, that in a Month he brought a Humor into his Eyes, and in
six Weeks he was quite Blind. The Surgeon declared his Sorrow for the Accident,
but believed, that had it not providentially happened, it must have cost him
his Life. The Wound at last healed, but Connor thought, and his Wife saw, they
were ruined; which the Seizing their two remaining Cows, and a Barrel of
Potatoes, completely finished; and next Night the good Woman threw Jack on her
Back, took her blind Husband by the Hand, and marched off, with about six
Shillings, to seek better Fortune.

CHAP. II.
He tells us,
"When one Sense is suppressed,
"It but retires into the rest."
So Poverty, against the Will,
Gives Cunning to assuage the Ill.
ANONIMOUS.
SULLEN and silent were their Travels all that Night, but when Day appeared,
they determined to repose themselves at the first Inn that seemed proper to
entertain such Guests, mutually agreeing to postpone all Talk of Affairs, till
their Bodies were a little refreshed. At length a Cabin appeared, to which
they bended their Steps, and, by the Information of a Linen Rag over the Door,
and a Pipe stuck in the Thatch, they boldly entered and called for Milk and
Bread. Before this could be had, the Woman of the House demanded three
Halfpence, and Mrs. Connor pulling out a Piece of an old Glove, which
contained all her Treasure, paid for the approaching Breakfast.

AT this Repast the good Creature seemed very tender of Mrs. Connor, whose Eyes
were swelled with Crying. She asked many Questions, as, Where they came from,
and whither going; to which she received a melancholy Account of the past, but
not of what they intended to do, being ignorant of it themselves. The poor
Woman sympathiz'd with her Guest, who, by a Change of Fortune grew strangely
humble, and was now all Humility and Meekness. -- God Almighty help you, said
the Landlady, I Am sure you have Troubles enough; -- I pray the sweet Jesus to
comfort you, and send you safe in your Journey; -- but my dear Soul, added
she, rocking herself, you must not set Grief too much about your Heart, for my
poor dear Man in his Grave (God be with his Soul) left me the Mother of three
Children, and one in my Belly, and the Devil a Farthing to bless myself, but
three Shillings and Five-pence in Silver and Brass. To be sure it was the Holy
Virgin put it into my Head to speak to the Quality that traveled the Road, and
by my own Soul I got Pence enough, and bred my poor little Creturs to get
their Bread as well as myself; for Thady is a fine Boy, and a poor Scolard, and
speaks his Latin, and brings home many a Happeny; sweet Jesus bless him! and
send me once to hear him say Mass! for my dear Child will be nothing but a
Priest, and Father O'Sloughnesey will send him to France on his own Means;
God's Blessing on the sweet Man. -- Then my dear little Terence drives the Cows
out and home for Mr. Flaherty, and brings me broken Meat, and a Bottle of good
Ale when he finds it after the Servants; for the Rogue is as cunning as a Fox.
-- Pray Jesus I could see him a Priest too! -- And my Daughter Noragh, poor
Soul, is always busy enough, and minds the Hens and the Turf, and digs the
Potatoes, and serves the Carryers very well ever since Father O'Sloughnesey got
me this good House.

SHE was going on, but finding Mr. Connor was more inclined to Sleep than Hear,
she called to her Daughter Noragh to settle the Straw in the other Room, and
advised the Travelers to rest for a few Hours; assuring them, that the Cow and
the Pigs at one End of it, kept it pure and warm. Mrs. Connor conducted her
Husband to the Apartment, where, in Spite of every Calamity, Sleep attended and
diverted every anxious Thought.

'TWAS about Twelve o'Clock at Noon when they joined the Landlady. Mrs. Connor
was putting her Hand in her Pocket to pay for her Bed, but the kind Woman held
it fast and prevented her, swearing she would not take a Farthing, and ordered
Noragh to give them a large Bowl of Milk; then putting some boiled Potatoes
into her Apron, she fixed the Child on her Back, and, with a sweet Jesus be
with you, let them depart.

JERRY greatly praised the Tenderness of the poor Woman, and a Conversation
ensued on their present Circumstances. To be sure, said his Wife, since God
Almighty has made you stone blind, and given me this helpless Infant, you cannot
Work, nor can I go into Service, God help me; so, to be sure, myself cannot find
out a better Way than to speak to the Quality on the Road, as the Landlady did,
though to be sure none of my Kiff or Kin ever did so before; but you know,
Jerry, God's Will must be done, -- and then she cried heartily.

DON'T cry, said Connor, for what Good will that do us? -- Though we never
begged yet, it is a Trade soon learned, and God knows, our Poverty ought to make
us set up very soon. -- I formerly mimick'd an old blind Man for Sport, and now
I must do it in Reality for Profit. -- Take care of the Child Dolly, and don't
leave your poor Jerry, and I warrant we shall eat and drink well enough, --
and, what more can any body do?

THE Transition from an Irish Cottager to a Beggar, is very natural and common
in the Country. The many Examples of that Sort, enabled the poor Couple to
bear, and in some Measure lightened their Afflictions. -- They now seriously
determined to begin this new Occupation on the first proper Object, resolving
with themselves, not to touch the Capital Stock, but at the last Extremity.

THEY had marched about seven Miles without meeting any Passengers, but what
seemed as poor as themselves; at last she cried out, that a Gentleman in
Scarlet appeared, with two Servants well mounted. This put them into some
Confusion, but Jerry, boldly raising his Spirits, assisted his Voice, and in
the most pathetick Manner, begged a little Charity to a poor blind, old
Soldier, who once served most faithfully his King and Country. -- His Help-mate
was not Eloquent on this Occasion, but the Abundance of her Tears supplied her
want of Speech; and perhaps inclined the Gentleman to throw them a few
Halfpence, which he did in a hasty Manner; and riding smartly on, was followed
by a Million of Blessings: But how great was her Surprise and Joy, when she
picked up Three Halfpence, and a Shilling? -- She kissed the Silver a thousand
Times, and in her Transport as often kissed the Child and Jerry, who were now
squatted in the Ditch. She talked of Providence and the blessed Virgin; and in
Rapture concluded, that please God they would cheer their Hearts by a Pot of Ale,
at the first House. -- The poor Man objected to this, and begged of her only to
spend the Brass, but to put the Shilling in the Glove with the rest. -- After
much Dispute, and sundry Dissertations on Extravagance and Stinginess, she
consented. -- But, who can paint the Wildness of her Looks, and the frantic
Motion of her Limbs, nor describe her dreadful Shrieks and Exclamations, when
she neither found Glove nor Pocket? -- They were fairly cut off. -- Heaven, and
Hell, and Purgatory, and all Mankind, were in an Instant engaged in her
Quarrel, till fatigued and tired with the Violence of her Passion, she threw
herself on the Ground, and in a Torrent of Tears, assuaged the Storm in her
swelling Breast.

CONNOR bore this Misortune with great Patience, and comforted his Wife out of
the Proverbs. He gave her many on this Occasion; and concluded, that Solomon,
who was a wise Man, told us, that Riches made themselves Wings and flew away.
-- 'Don't tell me, Jerry, said she, of such Stuff. I say again and again, our
poor Matter of Money would have been safe enough in my Pocket, if we had not
slept at that cursed Inn; and as for your Wings, I Am sure they must have been
in the old B -- 's Fingers.' -- 'Or, said Jerry, in her Daughter's. -- But hang
it, it is gone -- What cannot be cured must be endured. -- A Pound of Sorrow
never paid an Ounce of Debt. -- I Have heard a wise Man say, that when the worst
has happened, we ought to be content, because we know the worst. -- Many a
cloudy Morning turns out a fine Day. -- We are now Beggars, Dolly, and 'twould
be a Sin to be Rich; for, sufficient to the Day is the Evil thereof, -- and St.
PAUL says -- Hold your foolish Tongue, cried Dolly, -- this is fine prating
indeed! -- Will your Solomon provide a Bed for us to Night? Or will St. PAUL
pay for our Supper? -- Not they by my Soul; -- They Will talk and make a fine
Story, but the Devil a bit will they give to fill a hungry Belly? -- Come,
come, said he, we have a Shilling still left; let us keep that and our Wits,
and my Life for it, we shall pick up a pretty Living.' -- So saying, Jack took
his Post on his Mother's Back, and got safe to the next Village. They finished
the Remainder of their Potatoes, had their Pint of Ale, and went to Rest pretty
much as in the former Manner.

CHAP. III.
Begging is not so vile a Trade
As some imagine -- some have made.
Vary the Style, or change the Dress,
You Will find it is what we all profess;
The Difference lies 'twixt Rich and Poor,
Some beg for little -- Others more.
HUDIBRASTICK.
THE good People continued their daily Travels, and wandered through many
Counties, and greatly improved in the Art and Mystery, that was to furnish them
with Bread; and indeed, every Day produced its Supply. Three Months past in
this Manner, till the old Man complained of the Fatigue, and most ardently
wished for a settled Habitation. They were now in the great Road, and within a
few Miles of Clonmel, on a pretty Eminence that commanded a good Prospect.
'Twas agreed to fix here, and lodge about a Quarter of a Mile from the Road;
where was an old Hut, which a few Boughs covered well enough for the present.

THE Venerableness of Jerry's Beard, which no Razor was suffered to visit, had
a very good Effect, and the tattered Condition of Dolly's Clothes; Her Hair
hanging about her Eyes, a dirty Clout on her Head, and Face and Hands almost of
the same Color, made her look near as old as her Husband, and procured the
Charity of well disposed Christians so amply, that they had no Reason to repent
of their Situation. -- In a short Time, the Hut was better covered; and they
provided themselves with two Cadows, a small Pot, two wooden Platters, two
Trenchers, one Knife, and two Horn Spoons. However, this Abode being so distant
from what they might call their Shop, made it very inconvenient, and lost them
many Customers. This determined them to double Diligence, and to save as much
as would build a Cabin by the Road Side, on the Common. A few Shillings
completed this Structure, and their Effects were soon removed.

THUS were they fixed in a more comfortable Manner than could be imagined, from
the Appearance of the Hovel. Business went on in a very prosperous Way; and, as
Money came in, they increased their Conveniences and Utensils; but every thing
was added externally that gave an Idea of Misery and Wretchedness. -- They
often drank Ale, eat Bread, and sometimes Meat, which most Cottagers in the
Kingdom are utter Strangers to. In short, they lived as happily as the
Impetuosity of Dolly's Temper would admit, which at some Seasons vented itself
on Jerry, in old Rogue and old Scoundrel, and such affectionate Epithets, which
he bore with the Calmness of a Philosopher, seldom answering but in Proverbs.

SCARCELY had they been settled three Months before some of their Neighbors
smoked a Pipe with blind Connor and poor Doll. Their great Knowledge surpised
them, particularly when they found She could both Read and Write. The Priest of
the Parish, who was a young Man, being at last made acquainted with this
Prodigy, determined to pay her a Visit. One Morning, when she was cleaner
dressed than usual, she was sweetly singing on the Ditch Side, and his
Reverence surpised her in the Act of giving Suck. As she knew him, she
blushed, and was going to cover her Neck, which the holy Man prevented with his
Hand, saying, God speed your Work, my dear Child. -- Don't be ashamed at what
God has given you. -- I Am well enough used to such Sights! -- Perhaps he was;
but Mrs. Connor had a Skin of such an wholesome Sanguineness, and Breasts so
prominent and firm, as puzzled his Reverence, and made his Blood rise in his
Face, and his Speech to faulter.

AS Mrs. Connor durst not disoblige the Priest, she made all the fine Speeches
in her Power, and told him almost as much as if she had been at Confession. His
Reverence spoke very compassionately on her unhappy Circumstances, and, in a
tender Manner, insinuated the hard Fortune, that so young and well-spoken a
Woman, should be reduced to ask a Favor of any Man; when if she had her due,
they ought to ask Favors of her. -- Not, my dear Child, said he, that I would
be after finding Fault with your Industry, or putting bad Thoughts in your
Head. No! no! God forbid! But as you are a sensible Woman, I may tell you, we
ought to know Good as well as Bad, that we may avoid the one and follow the
other: But when we make a Slip, as we are all frail Mortals, it must be great
Comfort to a good Catholic, to have a Holy Priest to pray for, and absolve us.
-- At this, he put on a Countenance of primitive Piety, or at least, so much of
it, as his Eyes would permit, which still sparkled, and being fixed on the
beautiful Part beforementioned, spoke a Language truly Catholic.

JACK'S Mother was quite confounded at all these fine Words; and not perfectly
understanding Logical Distinctions, was afraid the Holy Father was endeavoring
to make her Proof against good or bad Fortune, not against good or bad Morals.
Father Kelly soon solved her Doubts; for as the Child still continued at the
Breast, he praised its Beauty, patted its Cheeks, and uttered every infantine
Expression, which Mothers are so naturally fond to hear. -- The sweet little
Fellow, said he, it looks like an Angel, I must kiss it, were it but for the
Sake of the Nurse. -- He kept his Word; but guiding his Head a little more on
one Side, he feasted his Lips (as if by Accident) on those Charms his Eyes had
been Witness of for half an Hour.

HIS Reverence recovered himself at last, and -- I ask your Pardon, good Mrs.
Connor, said he, for by my own Conscience I had no Harm in my Thoughts; but God
forgive me! in troth I was going to the other Side, for fear it would be jealous;
though if I had, you know, there would be no Sin in it neither; for what is a
Breast but Flesh? and so is your Hand; and what Sin, my Dear, in touching a
Hand? -- This Reasoning was so strong that Conviction sat on Mrs. Connor's
Countenance; which the good Man perceiving, he very fervently transported his
Kisses from one Side to the other.

SOME Travelers appearing, and Jerry being summoned to his Post, the
charitable Priest slipped Sixpence into her Hand, and gave the old Man a Yard of
good Tobacco; so wishing them good Luck, added his Benediction, and promised to
call in his Walks.

IT would be endless to point out the Virtues of this good Man. He visited
frequently, and always left something behind him. He mentioned to Dolly the
most charitable Families in the Country; and taught Jerry how to tell the weary
Traveller the Hour of the Day. He repaired the first Hut, where she always
cooked the Victuals when he honored them with his Company. He put a Door to
it, and sent in good Store of Whiskey and Straw, with two Cadows. This served
his Reverence for a Country Retreat; and answered every End of a Confessional.
His Conversation was truly pious, and his Pains were great to convert Jerry to
the Bosom of that Church, out of which there is no Salvation. Sometimes,
indeed, his Zeal was rather too great; for when Mr. Connor made strong
Objections, he most charitably, and with a truly Christian Spirit, hurried poor
Jerry's Soul to the Devil and all his Angels; in which Journey his Wife always
added an hearty Amen.

ABOUT the Age of Five Years, JACK remembers his daily sitting on a Ditch with
his Father and Mother, industriously employed in that most ancient and most
noble Profession of Begging. The Situation was well contrived, and three Roads
terminated just at their Mansion, and, as it were, emptied themselves into the
great one. Besides the Beauty of the Prospect, I apprehend, his Parents had
some Regard and Love to Society; for no Traveller could pass, but were attacked
with all the Oratory in their Power. Without Vanity I may say, few People of
their Distinction enjoyed that Talent to greater Perfection, especially Mrs.
Connor. When she was determined to extract a Penny from a good Christian, she
mounted the Ditch, and with Eyes raised to Heaven, and uplifted Hands, she
bespoke his Favor: She saluted him with every tender, moving Expression. The
Tear was ready; and sometimes she pleaded a numerous Family of Orphans, and
sometimes an ancient helpless Husband. -- Did his hard Heart pass by untouched,
she followed him with her raised Voice, invoking every Saint to prosper his
Journey, and to commiserate her wretched Condition. -- Many a Time, and often,
has she compelled the most obdurate Lawyer or Parson to Rein-back, and fumble
for Farthings.

JERRY had his Excellence: He was really advanced in Years; was infirm and
blind. The Loss of Sight, so dreadful to many, was to them of infinite Use.
From this he drew the Pity of the Good-natured, and the Compassion of most
Travelers; but his being an old Soldier who had served by Sea and Land,
afforded an Addition to his Revenue; to which a red Coat contributed not a
little.

YOUNG as our Hero was, his Employment had its Use; for whilst his dear Parents
were solacing themselves in their Castle, and enjoying the Comforts of Ale,
Tobacco, and the Conversation of Friends, he was on the Watch for the Approach
of Passengers; when his Father or Mother, and sometimes both, sallied out, and
he always attended to join in the Cry and pick up the Copper that Humanity
threw them.

JACK now grew a sturdy Fellow, of Six Years old. As his Mother had been so
good to teach him to read, he was a great Comfort to his Father, and
entertained him out of The whole Duty of Man, which he took particular Care of,
ever since Mrs. Connor had sold his Bible. The Child read so frequently, that
at last he was very expert, and began to relish the Subject. One Day, he asked
his Father, If there was any more Books in the World, for he would read them
all. God bless you, poor Child, said Jerry, and give you Grace to learn, and
practice all good Things. -- Then, folding him in his Arms, with many Tears,
and uplifted Hands, beseech'd the Almighty to succor his helpless Age, and
guide his Steps, that he might live by Honesty and Labor. -- Though Jack knew
not what he meant, yet his Words made so great an Impression, that he cried
most heartily. -- In this Situation the Mother found them, which soon changed
the Scene: She stormed like a Fury, and swore he was sending the Boy to the
Devil, as well as himself; But, continued she, with all my Heart, an obstinate
Bastard as he is; but I Will take Care, I warrant, of your damned Book. -- She
then cursed herself most bitterly, for teaching Jack to read; and muttered
something of sending him far enough out of his Reach.

No, Dolly, said her Husband, you need not do that; for Father Kelly and You
will soon send me to my long Home! -- It Is too good News to be true, -- said
she. -- Well, well, replied Jerry, I shall not trouble you long; -- you may let me
have a little Peace whilst I live. -- Some Passengers interrupted this
Conversation; and the common Occurrences of the Day, gave Jerry some Respite
till Dinner. -- He said Grace as usual, but could not eat. At Supper 'twas the
same Way; and in the Night a Fever came on which opened his Wounds, and, for
Want of proper Care, a Mortification ensued, and the fourth Day he slept with
his Fathers. -- The pious Priest was determined to have the better of the
Argument at last, and make him a good Catholic, by performing the final Rites
of the Church, before the Body was quite cold.

ON this melancholy Occasion, it must be confessed, the poor Widow behaved as
the most fashionable of her Sex. -- She shrieked and wrung her Hands, and
called on Death to ease her Misery. -- She fainted, and fell into Fits; and the
Neighbors with great Difficulty brought her to herself. -- When recovered, she
bore her Fate with great Resignation, and gave Directions about the Funeral
with much Composure of Mind, except when more Friends dropped in, which renewed
her Sorrows; and then the whole Company sympathiz'd in the most doleful
Cadences.

THE Deceased being stripped and washed, was laid out on some Straw, covered
with a Sheet that was formerly white. On his Breast was a large Dish filled
with Salt, which undoubtedly had its Use. The good People, three Miles round,
flocked to blind Connor's Wake, with Loads of Whiskey and Tobacco; Pipers were
in Abundance; and sundry Gentlemen amused the Company with the sweet Harmony of
their Trumps or Jews-harps. -- When Father Kelly had declared that Jerry Connor
died a True Son of the Church, being by him converted almost by a Miracle, a
Buzz of Content ran through the whole Assembly, and he finished a few Prayers for
the Repose of his Soul.

THE common Irish are cheerful at a Wedding; but, at a Wake, their Joy and
Mirth is seemingly extravagant. Ill Nature, and the Want of Compassion and
Tenderness, are not placed amongst their natural Vices. If the Moral of this
ancient Custom be examined, and found to proceed from their Pleasure, in
believing that their Friend or Companion has quitted all human Infirmities, and
now enjoys a Fullness of Bliss, we cannot think the Practice irrational or
absurd.

MIRTH in every Shape abounded; but Jack seemed to drop all the romping
Sporters. He listened with great Attention to a Knot of Old Ladies, who
entertained each other with true Stories of Giants and Witches, and Spirits,
and Kings of Ireland. -- From these he went to another Cluster, who spoke of
the Deceased, like the Egyptian Priests. They magnified his supposed Virtues,
and gave him Vices, to which he was a Stranger. -- Scandal and Malice, and
Envy, were present! Some hinted, that Dolly was not his Wife; some called her
his Niece, and some his Daughter; but all agreed, in wondering, what he Devil
Father Kelly could see, to make him so civil to her. -- I much fear many grand
Societies are but humble Imitators of this equally polite Assembly.

AT last the Funeral set out, directing their Course to a ruined Monastery,
about Six Miles distant. The March was solemn; and ever and anon a Sacred Dirge
was raised, that shook the Hills, and echoed through the Vales. The Company
still increased from the neighboring Cabins, whose Inhabitants having walked
two or three Miles, and raised their Notes of Condolence with the rest; perhaps
would at last find Time to ask, who is dead?

THE necessary Rites being finished, Mr. Kelly, with some of the Company,
returned to the Hut, where Jack soon found he wanted a Father, and had not a
Mother.

CHAP. IV.
What by this Name, then, shall be understood?
What? but the glorious Lust of doing good?
The Heart that finds it Happiness to please,
Can feel another's Pain, and taste his Ease.
The Cheek that with another's Joy can glow,
Turn pale, and sicken, with another's Woe,
Free from Contempt and Envy, he who deems
Justly of Life's two opposite Extremes.
Who to make all, and each Man, truly blessed,
Does all he can, and wishes all the rest.
FIELDING on Good Nature.
I May with Truth affirm, that Jack's Parents, though Beggars, gave better
Education to their Son, than most of their Neighbors; witness his reading at
so tender an Age, when not one in a Thousand know a single Letter. His Dress
was pretty much the same with young Gentlemen of his Years, or rather with
almost all in the Parish. He had something on that resembled Breeches, and a
Remnant of a Rug very artfully hung over his Shoulders, and fastened round his
Waist by Pieces of Wood nicely carved, of the Size of a Packer's Needle. -- A
Shirt was an idle and uncomfortable Ornament; and Shoes and Stockings made
Youth too tender and delicate. This noble and manly Dress is most carefully
preserved; and scarcely has Novelty and Fashion found an Opportunity of making
any Variations. -- Though the Romans never visited Ireland, yet their Dress
certainly did. Were our Virtuosi seriously to consider this, they might save
the vast Expense they are at in purchasing a Piece of Leaden, or Marble, or
Copper Roman Figure and Drapery; when, by stepping to Ireland, they may see
Thousands, even at this Day, in the Original Habit, and whole Groups in the
ancient Manner, eating on the Ground.

PERHAPS I may be thought too free with so great a Name as LOCK, when I say I
imagine he borrows Part of his Treatise on Education from this People, to whom,
I Have been told, he was no Stranger. All the World knew that the common Romans
wore no Shoes; but Mr. Lock could not infer from thence, with all his more
than Human Understanding, that going without them, or having the Feet
constantly wet, was conducive to Health or Vigor, till he saw such numberless
Examples. -- But to return to the Family.

FATHER KELLY'S Visits to the Widow were more frequent than usual, as she stood
in Need of more frequent Consolation. From his pious Intentions the evil-minded
of the Parish drew Conclusions no-way favorable to either, especially as Mrs.
Connor dropped her former Occupation, and retired to the first Hut, where she
suffered herself to be visited but by a few select Friends; and was never
publicly seen but at Mass. -- How different! How changed in her Appearance!
Her Face was washed; -- her fine black Hair was combed, and nicely plaited; --
her Kercher was clean, which passing under her Chin, was neatly tied at the
back of her Neck; -- her brown Jacket with red Cuffs; -- her red Petticoat,
and, above all, her yellow Stockings and new Brogues drew the Eyes of the whole
Congregation; some to admire her real Comeliness, but more to whisper, They
wished she came honestly by them.

WHATEVER were their private Opinions, Father Kelly received many public Marks
of their Dis-esteem. The old Ladies, and the young, extremely resented this
open and particular Attachment, so injurious to their own Beauties and superior
Merit. They wrought on their Husbands, their Brothers and Sweethearts; and the
good and charitable Priest was condemned a Sacrifice to Malice and Envy.

WHETHER the People had just Cause to complain to the titular Archbishop of
Cashel, or whether Father Kelly and Mrs. Connor were conscious of Guilt; or,
whether they found the Current of Slander too strong to stem, I know not;
neither can I tell the Resolution they took on this Occasion, but certain it
is, they came to one very speedily.

MRS. CONNOR had converted the old red Coat into a Sort of Waistcoat for Jack,
who having a Pocket, never failed carrying his Book in it. One Morning she
called him up earlier than usual, and with more than common good Humor, washed
his Face and combed his Head, and having put on something like a Shirt, she
kissed him, saying, 'he was a charming pretty Boy.' In Reality he was so. --
Come, Jack, says she, now we'll walk to Town and see your Aunt. -- Poor Jack
was vastly pleased at going to Town, though he knew not where, and followed his
Mother with great Cheerfulness. They had not walked above a Mile or two, when a
Man overtook them, whom Mrs. Connor knew. Some Questions being asked, I am
going, said she, to leave Jack at my Sister's for a Day or two, and must be
back to Squire Disney's to Night. -- That Is too far, said the Man, to walk in
one Day; go you to the Squire's, and I shall take care of Jack. -- The Child
cried, but his Mother coax'd, and prevailed on him to go without Murmuring. She
kissed, and promising to see him Tomorrow, turned about, and Jack and the
Stranger marched on.

NOTHING remarkable happened in this Journey, but Jack complained that the Town
was a great ways off. -- That he wished he was there; -- that he was Hungry, or
Dry, or Sleepy, and some childish Talk of that Sort, to which the Man gave
Answers, and relieved all his Wants. -- Many Days passed in small Journeys,
till the Fellow found he was in the County of Mead. He fed the Child as well
as he could, and having got a Woman to wash his Rags and clean him, marched on
till he came to a large fine House. -- Now, Jack, said he, we shall soon see
your Aunt; stay here, my good Child, a little, and I Will be with you by and by;
but be sure don't go beyond that great Gate. (Pointing to the Gate of the
House.) The Man walked off, and Jack never saw him after.

THE poor Child waited a long Time for him with great Patience, till Hunger and
Night coming on, he cried till his little Heart was almost broke. -- At last he
ventured to walk to the Gate, and found it open. He went into a large
Courtyard, and finding a House, which was a deserted Dog-kennel, he boldly
entered; and what with his Fatigues, and little Sorrows, he lay down and slept
soundly 'till next Morning. -- One of the Grooms going by, heard the Cries of
the Boy, and relieved him from his Prison. -- He was asked many Questions, to
which he could give no Answers; except that a Man was going with him to his
Aunt's, and that his Name was Jack Connor. -- The Groom asked him if he was
hungry? Yes, said Jack, and very dry too, and my Feet are very sore. -- The
Servant was good natured, and taking him into one of the Stables, gave him a
Piece of Bread and some small Beer. He washed his little Feet with warm Brand
and Water, which was ready to be given to a sick Horse, and laid him on some
clean Straw. The poor Child went to Sleep, but wakened so refreshed, and so
happy, that, on seeing the Groom, he smiled, and uttered every Expression, that
showed the Gratitude of his Heart.

THUS was he fed for a Fortnight, and all Enquiry was made by the Servants
about him, but in vain. -- Jack grew quite well, and mightily pleased with his
Situation, for Providence had directed him to the House of LORD TRUEGOOD, a
Nobleman less remarkable for his large Fortune, than his Humanity, and
extensive Charity to all Mankind.

MR. KINDLY, his Lordship's Domestic Steward, had heard something of this
Story, and determined to see the Child. -- He watched when the Servants were
out, and stole privately into the Stable. -- Jack was mounted in one of the
Windows, with his Book in his Hand, but when he saw the Gentleman, he stuffed
it into his Pocket, and got on his Feet in an Instant. Mr. Kindly, with a Smile
of good Nature, cried out -- 'Who have we got here? -- Where did you come from,
Child?' -- 'Indeed, Sir, replied Jack, almost in Tears, I don't know.' --
'Don't cry, my Dear, said the good Steward, I shall do you no Harm; -- Have you
a Mother, and where is she gone to? -- I don't know indeed Sir, replied Jack,
but she gave me to a Man to see my Aunt, and he bid me stay at the Gate, and so
I did, and so he did not come for me.' -- 'That's my good Boy, said Kindly;
come, now tell me all the rest.' -- The poor Child was not at a Loss, but told
as much of his Affairs as he possibly could know, and in so innocent a Manner,
that greatly pleased the good Man. -- That Is my good Dear, said he; but what
Book was it, you put in your Pocket? Let me see it my Man. -- Jack delivered
it, telling him, his Father said it was a good Book, and would make every Body
good. -- Mr. Kindly looked at the Title, and was greatly surpised. -- 'Your
Father, said he, was a good Man, and you will be a very good Boy, when you can
read it.' -- Oh dear, said Jack, indeed, Sir, I can read it very well.' -- 'Can
you so, replied the Steward, let me see.' -- He opened the Book, where least
marked, and Jack began, and pretty distinctly read. -- So also for the
Calamities and Miseries that befall a Man, be it Want or Sickness, or whatever
else, these also come by the Providence of God, who raises up and puts
down, as seems good to him, and it belongs not to us to judge what are the
Motives to him to do so, as many do, who, upon any Affliction that befalls
another, are presently concluding, that sure it was some extraordinary Guilt,
which puts this upon him, though they have no particular to lay to his Charge.
-- As the Boy read, the Tenderness of the good Man mounted to his Eyes. --
That Is enough my Child, said he, -- God bless you. -- So quitting him in an
Instant, got into the Yard, and gave vent to a few Tears. -- Good God, cried
he, how infinitely is thy loving Kindness, who, out of the Mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, teaches us our Duty.

MR. KINDLY walked to the House, and having called Mrs. Mathews, an elderly
Servant, begged her to get him a Leg or a Wing of a Fowl, with a Piece of
Bread, and some small Beer. 'Lord, dear Sir, said Mrs. Mathews, may hap your
Morning's Walk has gotten you a Stomach; pray let me broil you a Pigeon, and
give you a Glass of white Wine.' -- 'Thank you heartily, good Mrs. Mathews,
replied the Steward, you know I seldom eat in a Morning, but I never drink.
What I want is for a poor Stranger.' -- Lord bless you, dear Sir, said Mrs.
Mathews, you are so good, all the Servants are bound to pray for you.' -- She
did not wait for a Reply, but ran to the Pantry, and soon returned, properly
loaded. -- 'Thank you, my dear Friend, said Mr. Kindly, now I have a great
Favor to beg of you; which is, to carry these to the farthest Stable, where
you will find a poor little Boy. See him eat his Dinner, and take him to John
Long's Wife.' -- 'Yes that I will, said she.' -- 'The Lord preserve your good
Heart. -- I Am sure you're always the poor Man's Friend. -- The Lord keep you
your Health, for you're too good for this World.' -- 'We must assist one
another, said Kindly, but pray go and help the Child, and I Will walk on to John
Long's.'

MRS. MATHEWS thought there was some Mystery in this Affair, but resolved to
hear and see, but say nothing. She determined to be as secret as could be
expected from her Sex and Station; so, wisely took Jenny the House Maid to the
Stable, to whom she communicated the Matter, with many notable Remarks. -- You
know, Jenny, said she, Mr. Kindly is a Man as well as another, and though he is
ancient or so, yet, let me tell you, it is an old Rat that will not eat Cheese. --
He Is a hearty Man, Jenny, and a good natured Man, and they say lives a Widower
for the Sake of his Children; now putting Things and Things together, who knows
what may have happened? -- But please God it shall go no farther for me;' --
nor for me neither, said Jenny, for I would not hurt a Hair of his Head, poor
dear Man.

THEY got to the Stable and found Jack with the Groom. -- So so, said Mrs.
Mathews, have I found you, young Spark. -- 'Come, sit down my little fellow,
and try how a bit will agree with you.' -- 'What Jenny, said the Groom, are you
come too? I Will say that for you, you have as good a Nose at finding out a pretty
Boy, as any Wench in the Parish; I suppose he is some Relation of yours, Eh,
Jenny? -- The Fellow's a Fool, said Mrs. Mathews, though may hap he may have as
good Relations as any here. -- Come, my brave Man, eat heartily, and much good
may do you. -- So -- you say your Name is Jack, -- 'Yes, Madam, said the Child,
my Name is Jack Connor. -- Very well, said the good Woman, very well; now come,
my dear, and take a Walk with me, we'll not go far, only to John Long's.' --
Then turning to the Groom, said, with a Wink, Mr. Kindly bid me fill his little
Belly, and carry him to John's Wife.

THE Groom was pleased, and the Ladies marched on. -- 'Jenny, said Mrs.
Mathews, look at the little Fellow, how sturdily he walks, and for all the
World, like good Mr. Kindly. 'Faith and troth, said Jenny, and so he does, and
his Name is Jack too.' 'Faith, said Mrs. Mathews, I forgot that, and then the
little Rogue has the very Smile of him. -- Now I think on it Jenny, I Will be
hanged but I knew the Mother of him. Do you remember Bryan Connor the Miller,
that lived at the Ford two Miles off.' -- 'Yes that I do, replied Jenny, and by
the same Token, he had four Daughters and three Sons.' -- Very true, said Mrs.
Methews, and all the Neighbors believed Mr. Kindly was a great Help to the
Family, for he went very often there. The old People died, and the Children
went up and down, I don't know what became of them all; but Molly Connor was a
pretty Hussy enough, but was no better than she should be, and about seven or
eight Years agon, she contrived to get her Belly up, and then went to Dublin.'
-- 'Goodness Sirs, said Jenny, how strangely Things comes about; so, to be sure
this is her Child.' Ay, ay, said Mathews, as sure as I Am in this Spot alive.
Murder will out, you know, but that is none of our Business, -- we are only
Servants, and must hold our Tongues; so, besure Jenny, said she, don't open
your Lips about it, for it shall not be computed to me, for I hate fending and
proving, and wou'd'nt be brought into a Primeiniron for all I Am worth in the
World.'

THE Steward and Mrs. Long were waiting at the Door till Jack arrived. --
There, Madam Long, said Mr. Kindly, There Is a Boy for you; don't you think him
very like me? Heaven knows, replied Mrs. Long, for the poor little Face of him
is so dirty, it is impossible to tell who he is like; but please God, I Will know
more of him by Tomorrow! Do so, said Kindly, and in a little Time I hope to
see him look as well as my own Son. -- Then turning to Mrs. Mathews, thanked
her for her Civilities, and promised her a Present of some good Bohea Tea.

THE Ladies made great haste Home, and by Mr. Kindly's Words, they were more
confirmed in their first Conjectures, and in the Necessity of being very
Secret. -- No doubt they were mighty cautious, but on Mr. Kindly's Return to
Bounty-Hall, he found a strange Alteration in the Countenances of the Servants.
-- When he spoke, he was answered with a Smile or a Grin. -- A general Titter
and Whisper ran through the Family, and on his Enquiry into the Cause of so
much Mirth, they vanished with a loud Laugh. -- Though a little surpised at
their Behavior, he knew there was no Mischief done, so was perfectly easy. He
always permitted them to be as cheerful as they pleased, for he thought an
Openness and Freedom of Manners, was an Indication of an honest Heart; but he
ever suspected a Servant of a gloomy or sullen Countenance.

CHAP. V.
There is a Lust in Man no Charm can tame,
Of loudly publishing his Neighbor's Shame:
On Eagles Wings immortal Scandals fly,
While virtuous Actions are but born and die.
HARVEY'S JUVENAL.
A SECRET, like many other Disorders, is Epidemical and Contagious, but in the
whole History of Physic, none is more Instant, or whose Quality is more
Diffusive. -- Every Part of human Matter is immediately affected, and the first
Symptom, most commonly appears on the Tongue. To curious Persons, this Malady
would afford an Infinity of Observations. -- Where a Secret takes its Rise from
Charity, Goodnature, Friendship, Benevolence, or other remarkable Virtues, be
assured the Disorder is not of long Continuance. It attacks us, and we must be
a little sensible of its Power, but it soon flies off by the Operation of the
Lips. -- Some have been cured by saying, I never thought him that Sort of Man.
-- He Is a great Cheat, if what you say be true. -- That may be, but to be sure,
he had his Ends in it. -- I find Miracles are not ceased. -- I Have a little of
the THOMAS in me -- and so on. -- Against this Sort of Pestilence, the Bishop
need never order public Prayers; for when it happens, it seldom goes beyond the
Neighborhood, but never marches to the next Parish.

ON the other Hand, when the Plague of Secrecy has its Source from Scandal,
Malice, Envy, and sometimes, mere Ignorance, the Effects are astonishing. Every
Breast is enflamed, and the Fire communicates itself like Electricity. The
Heart swells, and the Tongue, with loud Clamor, utters Millions of Falsehoods.
-- The farther the Contagion spreads, the Disorder increases its Force, nor
does it stop, till it encounters some new Frenzy or Secret.

THOUGH the learned Dr. Mead has been silent on this Article, yet it certainly
is of as subtle and poisonous a Nature, as any mentioned in his History. --
Indeed it seldom carries its baneful Influence to the Life of the Person
pointed at, but it violently attacks, and often destroys the Reputation, the
Bread, the Peace and Happiness of whole Families. The Doctor may cure
the enraged Mastiff's Bite; but who can heal the Wounds that Slanderers Tongues
have made? -- Dr. Monroe, is a Stranger to this Species of Madness, nor did I
ever hear that Mr. Ward has attempted to palliate it. If it is not in Physic to
relieve this dreadful Malady, what Prayers should we not offer up, to avert the
Evil!

DO thou therefore, kind Reader, give up thy Neighbor or thy Friend, who
labors under this Madness. -- Avoid him; -- his Breath is Infectious, and the
Saliva of his Tongue, will destroy thy Peace. -- Listen not to his Words,
neither repeat them. -- Be firm in Truth, and the Pest may escape thee, and
perhaps, in Time, the Name of the Malady may be lost.

BUT to return. -- The mighty Secret was now in the Possession of every
Servant, mounting by Degrees, till it arrived to Mrs. Betty Tittle, Lady
Truegood's Woman; who, like a good Christian, suffered not the Sun to go down,
till she imparted the valuable Discovery to her Ladyship. -- 'Tittle, said her
Ladyship, I cannot imagine what ails the Servants: Surely something must have
vastly pleased them, they seem so merry! -- Tittle put her Handkerchief to her
Face to hide her Blushes.' -- 'Pray, said my Lady, what is the Matter? -- I
suppose some Maid has got a Sweetheart, or stolen a Wedding, or some such
Thing.' -- 'No indeed, Mem, said Tittle, I assure your Laship, there is nothing
like a Wedding in the Case.' -- 'I hope, replied my Lady, there is nothing
worse, though you are all too apt to laugh at Mischief; but whatever it is, I
insist Mrs. Tittle, you will instantly tell me. -- Lord Mem, said Tittle, I don't
know how to speak of naughty Things, especially to your Laship; but all the
Servants knows as well as I, for Mrs. Mathews and Jenny told me of it, and they
went to see the Child.' -- Child! cried my Lady, greatly alarmed, what Child.'
-- I once more desire, and I lay my Commands on you, to tell me the whole Story
this Moment.' -- 'I hope, said Tittle, your Laship will not be angry with me; but
it is only, please your Laship, that Molly Connor, the Miller's Daughter, made
Mr. Kindly a Present of a fine Boy this Morning. The Nurse brought it Home,
because Mr. Kindly would not pay for its Keeping this four or five Years, so
the poor Man was forced to take the Child, and send it to John Long's; and
indeed, please your Laship, that is all, only they say, that the Boy is seven or
eight Years old, and as like Mr. Kindly as two Peace; but they say Mem. -- Hold
your impertinent Tongue, said my Lady, is this the Occasion of so much Giggle?
-- You are an ungrateful Pack. I am sure it is false, therefore I charge you
all, not to appear before me with such saucy Airs.' -- 'Indeed Mem, said
Tittle, if I Have said any thing to offend your Laship. -- Yes, Madam, said my
Lady, you have very greatly offended me, and so you have all; but hold your
scandalous Tongue, and leave me this Minute.'

POOR Mrs. Tittle was not only vastly disappointed, but greatly frightened, as
she had never heard her Ladyship speak in such a Manner, or seem in such a
Passion. -- She informed the rest, of the Reception she met with; and the Faces
of the Servants seemed more composed at Supper. They were quite surpised at
the Oddity of her Ladyship's Temper, and quoted many Examples diametrically
opposite.' -- I Am sure, said Mrs. Tittle, had I told as much to Squire Smart's
Lady, we should have laughed together about it, the whole live long Night! --
Ay, ay, said Mrs. Mathews, God bless the good Lady Malign. When I waited on her
in Yorkshire, many a Gown and Petticoat, and Smock, have I gotten for telling
her half as much; but to be sure some People think themselves wiser than all
the World.' -- 'Hold, hold, said Tom Blunt the Butler; 'Now do you see, if so be
that as how, my Lady is wrong, she will do you Right; and if my Lady is right,
how like Fools and Ninni-hammers will you all look? So do you see, take a Fool's
Advice, and go and sleep upon it. -- Tom went to Bed, and as he left them no
more to say, we may suppose they followed his Example.

MY Lord and Lady were now retired, when she revealed to him with an Air of
Concern and Emotion, what Mrs. Tittle had told her, every now and then asking
his Advice and Opinion. -- 'My dear Betty, replied my Lord, don't be uneasy;
I Have heard of this Affair pretty much in the same Manner. I Have privately
examined into it, and have great Reason to applaud Mr. Kindly's Conduct. As you
always judge right, I am not surpised at your checking the Tattling of
Servants, which, if once encouraged, as ignorant People too frequently do, it is
impossible to say where it may end: However, continued his Lordship, as
trifling as this Affair is, I hope to make it useful. When I bring it on the
Carpet; I must beg your Asistance.' -- 'My dear Harry, said my Lady, I shall
not fail; but come to Bed, and if you think proper, tell me then all the rest.'

THE Curtains were drawn, but, as nothing of the Conversation transpir'd, I
cannot draw this Chapter to a greater Length.

CHAP. VI.
Hail wedded Love! mysterious Law! true Source
Of Human Offspring! sole Propriety
In Paradise, of all Things common else!
By thee adult'rous Lust was driven from Man
Among the Bestial Herds to range: By thee,
Founded in Reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the Charities
Of Father, Son, and Brother, first were known!
MILTON.
AS the Reader must reside with Lord and Lady Truegood for some Time, perhaps
they will be pleased at being properly acquainted with them. To those who know
not their Persons, I can only introduce them to their Personal Conduct, and
Family Behavior. This may be as useful and entertaining, and rather less
tedious, than a Description of their Features, their Stature, or other visible
Marks of Elegance, Beauty, or Deformity.

HIS Lordship had about Five Thousand a Year in Ireland, and about Two Thousand
in England, all in his own Power. Her Ladyship was the Daughter of Sir William
Templeton, of Lancashire. She was Heiress to Two Thousand Pounds a Year in that
County; and his Lordship's Estate lay contiguous to it. Miss Templeton was
endowed with all those Charms that Men of Sense admire, because they know they
are lasting. Her Wit and Knowledge had that Sort of sprightly and solid Turn,
that enlivened, at the same Time, it pleased and improved her Hearers. Her many
Virtues were more admired than imitated; and her Person, though not a Beauty, was
so genteel and elegantly neat, that she raised Desire in every Breast, and
commanded more than common Respect. They had been well acquainted when
Children; and from the Intimacy of each Family, a Friendship, if not something
stronger, insensibly grew up with them. His Collegiate Studies being over, and
his Father dead, he was sent to finish the Accomplishments of a Gentleman by
Travel. In this Time he constantly corresponded with Miss Betty Templeton, and
the most agreeable and entertaining Letters passed, greatly to their
Satisfaction and mutual Improvement. Mr. Johnston, a Clergyman, and his
Lordship's Tutor and Companion, vastly encouraged these good Dispositions in
his Pupil, foreseeing the happy Consequences that might arise from it.

AT Twenty-four Years of Age, his Lordship returned from his Travels, a truly
polite, and well-bred Man. -- He found Miss Templeton, now about Nineteen Years
of Age, with every Qualification he could wish in a Wife. -- He spoke to her,
at some Distance, on that Head, and found her Answers sensible and just, and
no-ways against his Views. -- His Lordship, then, applied to Mrs. Jordon, a
Widow Lady, and Aunt to Miss, who had bred her from a Child, and supplied the
Loss of a Mother. The good Lady was overjoyed to put her dear Niece into the
Hands of a Nobleman of such Fortune; and whose great Goodnature, and many
Virtues, promised a Life of real Happiness and Content.

HIS Lordship now paid his Addresses publicly; every one agreeing, they were
born for each other. -- A Jointure was soon fixed on; but the Settling his
Estate was a Matter of some Difficulty, as his Notions on that Head were
uncommon. -- He always thought, that the Undutifulness of Children to their
Parents, especially of the Eldest Son, proceeded often from a Knowledge of the
Fortune they were entitled to, at their Father's Decease. -- His Lordship
convinced the young Lady of the Absurdity of placing Children out of the Power
of Parents, either to reward some for their Goodness, or chastise others for
their Misdeeds. At last he persuaded her Guardians, and Four Thousand Pounds a
Year was settled on the Issue of the Marriage, in such Proportion, as my Lord
thought proper to make by Will, or any future Deed or Gift, except an Estate of
Five Hundred Pounds a Year, which should follow the Title: Two Thousand Pounds
a Year, and Ten Thousand Pounds in Money, was settled on Miss Templeton; and my
Lord reserved the Remainder as a Settlement on any future Wife, or to be
disposed of, as he thought proper. -- The young Lady was so weak, that she
absolutely insisted, that Pin, or Alimony, should not be mentioned in any of
the Writings. -- All these Matters being regularly adjusted, the Day was fixed,
and Mr. Johnston joined their Hands, and completed the Happiness of this truly
affectionate Pair.

MY Lord and Lady stayed above Two Years in England; but finding his Presence
quite necessary in Ireland, to settle his Fortune, which had somewhat suffered
by the Death of his Father, and his own long Absence, he hastened over, and
determined chiefly to reside there. -- He took with him his two Sons, Henry and
William, with my Lady's Aunt, Mrs. Jordon, and a numerous Retinue of Servants.
-- Mr. Johnston had been already there Twelve Months, and settled in a good
Living, which my Lord had procured him.

BOUNTY-HALL, the Seat of Lord True-good, was a regular, well built House, though
not altogether in the Modern Taste. -- The Company, to congratulate my Lord and
Lady on their safe Arrival, was very numerous and very gay. They seemed free,
and of cheerful Dispositions, inviting my Lord and Family to their Houses, in
such an hearty sincere Manner, as quite pleased and surpised my Lady and Mrs.
Jordon, who were not a little prejudiced against the Irish. -- Mrs. Jordon
could not avoid telling my Lord, she liked them extremely, but wished they would
speak with another Tone of Voice. -- My Lord laughed, and said, I assure you,
one of the Ladies asked me, if all the English spoke in so strange a Manner as
Mrs. Jordon? But she added, she believed you were a very good Lady, for all
that. -- My Lady and her Aunt smiled, and took this tender Rebuke in the proper
Manner; acknowledging, that Infant Prejudices were difficult to remove, but
hoped, Time would get the better of some of them.

MRS. JORDON took great Pains to reform the Pronunciation of the People. She
made such Progress in transplanting the Lancashire Dialect, that on her Return
to that County, she was heartily laughed at, and by her Friends was constantly
called an Irish Bog-Trotter, -- a Brogue-a-neer, -- a Teague, and sundry other
endearing Names. -- But I must follow my Lord.

HIS first Care was to get out of the Hands of the Lawyers, for he had three
Chancery Suits: Two of them he soon finished in an amicable Manner, but the
Third was so glaring an Affront on his Understanding and his Right, that he
would hear of no Composition, lest he might be taxed with Weakness, and draw on
himself others. -- This determined him to prosecute the Suit with the utmost
Vigor; and the Expedition of the Law was such, that the Cause was ripe for an
Hearing, just as my Lord -- became a Grandfather.

WHILST his Law Affairs were put in a Channel, he at the same Time settled with
his different Receivers, two of whom he discharged, as likewise his Auditor,
taking that Branch into his own Management. He obliged his Receivers to return
him Monthly Abstracts of their Receipts and Payments, by which he was enabled
to settle each Tenant's Account, and at one View, knew their Arrear, and gave
Orders for Severity or Indulgence, as the Circumstances required.

As my Lord's chief Residence was in the Country, he saw, with real Uneasiness,
the wretched Condition of the poor Inhabitants. Their Idleness and Sloth, with
the Swarms of ignorant Priests, and the Treatment of some Landlords, kept them
in a constant miserable Situation, and even deprived them of sufficient Spirits
to wish a Change of Condition. My Lord clearly saw, that such Dispositions
could never improve the Face of the Country. He considered, that the People,
however poor and miserable, were by Nature, strong; and, when set on by Example
and Encouragement, were not the least Docile of all Nations. These Sort of
Reflections, as a faithful and good Subject, engrossed his whole Thoughts. He
knew, that the Strength of the Crown, was in the Number of faithful
Inhabitants; and, to reclaim those who were otherwise, was a Duty worthy the
Attention of every Man who loved the King or his own Happiness.

AT a Meeting of the Justices of the Peace for the County, his Lordship very
pathetically laid before them, what Popery was productive of, in a Protestant
Government; or, as it is elegantly expressed by the brightest Genius of the
Age, The EARL of CHESTERFIELD'S Speech to the PARLIAMENT of IRELAND.
That the speculative Errors (of POPERY) would only deserve Pity, if their
pernicious Influence upon CIVIL SOCIETY did not both REQUIRE and AUTHORIZE
Restraint. That the Laws against Papists, though severe in the Letter, and though
mostly taken from the Edicts of France against Hugonots, but greatly softened,
were connived at, and, in a great Measure, made useless. -- That the Condition
of the poorer Sort in Ireland, was a Scandal to a Nation who piqued themselves
at being Polite and Humane, and almost compelled the few Strangers who visited
the Country, to imagine they were rather with the Natives of the Cape of Good
Hope, than in a civilized Kingdom. -- That as natural Justice and Tenderness
obliged us to indulge them with a Priest in each Parish; yet Justice and
Tenderness to ourselves, ought to oblige us to prosecute every Interloper who
attempted to officiate. -- He added, that he was so convinced of the Necessity
of it, he was determined to begin in his own District, and wished every one
present would concur with him.

MANY Debates arose: but the chief Opposition was from tender Minds, who feared
such a Conduct would be called a Persecution. One of the Gentlemen answered, he
did not doubt, but Popery would blacken it with every odious Name. -- That
whatever was the Practice of other Nations, he was far from Oppressing or
Forcing the Wills or Consciences of Men in religious Matters. -- That the
present Debate was not so much levelled at their Religion, as the preventing
the Ignorant being deceived and impoverished by those who pretended to the Name
of it -- as in the Case of Gypsies and Fortune Tellers, who rob the Weak, where
a Justice of the Peace may, and ought, to send them to the House of Correction,
if not to the Plantations. -- That the Maxim was perfectly true, in Regard to
Ireland, that Ignorance was the Mother of Devotion; and that, were it possible
to give the poor Natives a little Learning, they would be Honester, more
Industrious, and in Time, find out how grossly they were deceived.

MUCH more was said on the Occasion, and all agreed to do their utmost for the
Relief of the Poor, in Respect to Supernumerary Priests, and in every other Way
for the General Good. -- A few Examples being made, obliged those Holy Nusances
to shift their Abode, and fly to a County in the West, where One or Two Hundred
extraordinary, were little regarded; and where Fryaries are common, and
Nunneries more open, than at Hammersmith near London.

THAT the poorer Sort might not want Examples of Industry to spur them on, my
Lord annually settled two or three poor Lancashire Families on the Home Estate.
He built them decent Dwellings, and let them proper Farms. The more Children
they had, his private Encouragement was the greater.

HIS happy Imagination suggested to him a Scheme, productive of more Good, than
was at first thought on. -- He gave out, that in Compassion to the Poor of the
Parish, he would take and maintain Ten Boys, not older than Twelve, or younger
than Seven Years of Age, and have them taught some Trade or Business, that they
might earn their Bread in an honest Way. The poor People pressed their Children
on him with such Eagerness, that he might have had an Hundred. His Number was
fixed for Boys; but he permitted my Lady to add Ten Girls to his Plan. For
these he built a convenient House; maintained, and uniformly clothed, and
fixed a Protestant Family from the North, to teach them two Hours a Day to
Read, and the Remainder, in such Branches of the Linen Manufacture, as their
Age would admit of.

MY Lord made Regulations as he saw convenient. The Progress they made gave him
vast Pleasure, and her Ladyship a rational Amusement, as she frequently visited
the Children, and heard them say their Prayers and Catechism, and encouraged
them in their Work. In a little Time they were able to join in the Psalms on
Sundays, and their Voices were a great Addition to the Service in a Country
Church. Some few Attempts were made to pervert the Children, and make them
return to their Parents, and consequently to Sloth, Ignorance and Filth, but
the Actors were soon obliged to quit the Country, and they were found to be
Popish Schoolmasters, who, generally speaking, are Priests in Disguise.

FROM this Hint, so self evidently advantageous to the Kingdom, and from the
Bounty and infinite Labors of a truly RIGHT REVEREND PRELATE, sprung those
Schools of Industry, now known by the Name of the Incoporated Society, for
promoting English Protestant Schools in Ireland. The Application of the first
Subscription had so good an Effect, that HIS MAJESTY supported the Scheme by a
Royal Charter; and encouraged the Spreading these Schools over Ireland, by a
Grant of One Thousand Pounds a Year. This, with the annual Bounties, and casual
Legacies from both Kingdoms, have enabled the Trustees to extend their Views,
and make the Charity more General. A Charity! where not a single Instance of
Misapplication can be given. A Charity unparalleled! and for which the next
Generation must Bless the Promoters, as they must feel the happy Consequences.

FOR fuller Particulars of this noble Charity, I must refer my kind Readers to
the annual Accounts published in Ireland, and by their Correspondent Society in
London. When they examine and seriously consider it, if they have Hearts, they
must rejoice.

BUT to return to my Lord. -- Though Part of his Time was given to the Public,
his private Affairs were not neglected. He employed the Poor, which is the best
Sort of Charity, in draining and making good Land of some Bogs. He planted
Trees of all Sorts. He mended and shortened the Roads; and, in a Word, he
contrived, and spared no Expense in executing, what he judged of Public
Utility.

CHAP. VII.
Children like tender Oziers, take the Bow,
And as they first are fashioned always grow:
For what we learn in Youth, to that alone
In Age we are by second Nature prone.
DRYDEN.
THOUGH his Lordship had began and forwarded these great Works, he attended the
British Parliament three Winters, as a Member of the House of Commons. He
thought himself ill used at a new Election, and declined engaging too far, lest
it might frustrate his future Views. In some Disgust at the Treatment he had
met with, he returned to Ireland.

His Son HENRY was now about Five, WILLIAM, Four, and his Daughter HARRIOT,
Three Years of Age. These began to demand his particular Attention. Her
Ladyship was an uncommon Mother, for she had not only taught them what their
Age was capable of; but had most prudently prevented their being taught sundry
bad Habits, which might never be thoroughly erased. Scarcely were any of her
Children able to walk, when she took Opportunities of sending them into the
next Room at Night without a Candle; and as they grew up, she found Reasons to
oblige them to go over the whole House in the same Manner, neither did she ever
permit a Servant to stay with them, or a Candle to burn in the Room, when they
were put to Bed. No Nurse or Domestic, durst venture to mention a single Word,
or idle Story that could inspire Fear into the Minds of the Children, except
they chose their immediate Discharge, which happened twice or thrice. -- By
this Method they had no Notion of imaginary Dangers, which saved them many
uneasy Hours in their Lives, which others feel for Want of such a Management.

THEIR little Learning was not inculcated by the common Means of Obligation and
Duty. If my Lord gave them Halfpence, and they listened to the Story of a poor
Person, and relieved him, he was in great Delight. -- When he had mentioned all
the Blessings attending a Charitable and Compassionate Temper; he would turn to my
Lady, and say, My Dear, the Children have been very good, and I desire you will
love and encourage them, and give them Leave to learn as much as they please.'
-- To this my Lady answered, 'Because they have so much Sense as to oblige you,
I will take that Trouble on myself.

ON the contrary, was any one of them guilty of a Fault, the highest Correction
was, being deprived of their Book, refused being taught their Lesson, and not
regarded in the usual Manner. On these Occasions, the poor Delinquent was
obliged to make his Peace, and enter into Grace, by Prayer, Repentance, and
double Diligence; yet still, this Matter was so contrived, that no Jealousy
could arise amongst them. The Good were suffered to pity the Faulty, and
intercede for them; and, after the necessary Difficulties, always succeeded.
Often have they requested, and even supplicated her Ladyship to teach them, and
she often refused, as what gave her too much Pain, or, having other Matters to
mind of more Consequence: However, she commonly suffered herself to be
prevailed on at last.

WHATEVER some may imagine, there is certainly an Activity or Impulse in the
Soul, that gives it a Desire and Longing for those Things that are attainable
but by Difficulty and Labor; and a Disregard, and sometimes, a Loathing even
of our real Happiness or Pleasure, when, in a Manner, they are forced on us, or
too cheaply purchased. Whether this arises from the Obstinacy or Perverseness
of our Nature; or, is given to convince us, that the Love of Freedom is
strongly implanted in our Breasts; or whether for the wise End of employing the
Mind, in searching after, and surmounting Difficulties, and to raise in us the
Spirit of Emulation and proper Ambition, so absolutely necessary to Mankind, I
shall not determine, as it is out of my Province; but I can safely say, that
whether this Principle springs from a Defect or Perfection in our Nature; these
Parents changed the strong Bias, if the First, and cultivated and greatly
improved it, if the Latter; -- if a Defect, their Manner is still more
Praiseworthy, as they made it answer all the Ends of a Perfection. -- The same
Scheme, varied in Proportion as Age opened their Minds, was constantly pursued
in their Education, and the Lessons and Customs that were sown, and had taken
Root in their Childhood, grew up insensibly into Habits with their Years, and
became Constitutional.

PRIDE, another Attendant on our Frame, was to be encountered and conquered by
my Lord. -- As the little ones were, what is commonly called, fine Children,
Care was taken to prevent their having too good an Opinion of their Persons. --
The Servants had particular Instructions on that Head; nor could they, without
greatly disobliging my Lord, praise a Child for its beautiful Face, Skin, or
the like. Even the Visitors were privately requested to avoid any Applause of
that Sort; but when some began to extol, my Lord or Lady always drew back the
Flattery, by assuring the Person, that all the Merit Harry had, was his being a
good Boy; did what he was bid, said his Prayers, and thanked God that he had
given him all his Limbs, and not made him crooked or deformed, like many poor
Children.

IF my Lady caught Miss looking too frequently in the Glass, and seemingly
admiring her Features, she ordered a beautiful China Figure to be brought, and
desiring her to observe its Complexion, its Eyes, its Teeth, etc. would add, --
Perhaps this fine Lady is as fond of her dear Person as other Folks, and indeed
I think, with as good Reason; for, do you know, my dear Harriot, what this
pretty Thing is made of? -- I assure you, it is of dirty Earth, just like you or
me; so you may well imagine this Lump of Clay has great Reason to value itself,
when in an Instant, if I think proper, I can brake it into a Thousand Pieces,
and make it Dirt again.' -- Here, said she to a Servant, 'take this Thing away,
it seems too much pleased with itself, to please me, or any body else. -- There
needed no more to persuade Miss Harriot to retire from the Mirror, ashamed of
herself and of the Comparison.

WHEN the Business of their Book, which was always a voluntary Duty, or rather
a Pleasure, was over, they were indulged in every Amusement, and not kept up in
warm Rooms, to weaken their Sinews and enfeeble their Constitutions. The Boys
were permitted to ramble in the Fields with a careful Servant or two, and use
as much Exercise as they pleased, and their being dirty or wet on those
Occasions, was never counted a Fault. -- Sometimes my Lord and Lady were vastly
amused, in entering into the Spirit of their Plays, and my Lord tumbled about
the Room and joined in their Mirth and Pastime. By this Means, the Children
were never happier than when with them. They seemed like Companions and Friends
to each other; and, as they had no Secrets to hide, their Behavior was
cheerful and without Restraint. If sometimes, they were timorous, it was the
Consequence of Love and Affection, and Fear of disobliging.

AT their Meals my Lord and Lady instructed them without their perceiving their
main Design; for they never directly applied to any one, or gave them
Directions or Advice to do this, or avoid that. -- Their Counsel was always
given obliquely, by praising such a Gentleman's Son, who was so extremely good;
that, though no more than Five Years old, he read exceedingly well, had all the
Psalms by heart, and wanted much to learn to Write. Then my Lord would add, I
have entreated his Father to indulge the Child, and have prevailed.' -- 'I told
you, replied my Lady, that that Boy would do well, for I have always found him
fond of his Book. -- Sometimes my Lord much pitied a Gentleman, who had spent a
great deal of Money on his Son's Education. 'The Boy, said he, was such a Fool
he would learn nothing, but was always with the Servants; so that now, the poor
Man is obliged to bind him Apprentice to a Captain of a dirty Ship.' -- 'I am
heartily sorry, replied my Lady, for the good Man, and for his silly Son; but
since the Boy would not be a Gentleman, I think his Father was in the Right to
oblige him to live in Dirt and Nastiness, especially since he loved it.'

NOT a Word of these Sort of Insinuations was lost to the Children. Their
little Thoughts were set to work, and they never failed making the Application.
They were very fond of Gay's Fables, and always applied to my Lord and Lady for
the just Meaning when in Doubt, and received Answers, not only satisfactory,
but pleasant and entertaining. On these and every other Occasion, they were
spoken to by their Parents and Tutor in proper and elegant English, and were
set right if their Answers were not in the best Terms.

A severe Reprimand was scarcely ever used, but when they were guilty of some
Act, that had the least Tendency to Cruelty or Ill Nature. -- The Torturing a
Fly or a Sparrow -- a pert Answer to a poor Person or a Servant, were Crimes,
that brought a Rebuke and a Lesson that ended in Tears, and an Acknowledgment
of the Fault; but if they told an Untruth, or prevaricated on any Examination,
no Interest, nor all the Promises they could make, were capable to prevent a
Chastisement that made the Guilty and Innocent tremble. The Maxim of my Lord
was, never to punish in a Passion, and as seldom as possible; but when really
necessary, to do it effectually; and not make it a mere Ceremony.

WITH regard to their Servants, they were looked on, almost in the Light of
Children, and had a natural Right to Protection and Advice. As Servants, they
were obliged to a Strictness in their Duty, but as Men, they were treated with
that Humanity and Tenderness every Creature is entitled to. They obeyed their
Orders with Alacrity and Cheerfulness, because they were never given with
Haughtiness, or in an angry Manner.

FOR a Nobleman, he had many uncommon and singular Notions. He had Prayers
every Morning and Night, and all the Family assisted with great Decency. His
Lordship thought, that the Duties of Religion, were of the utmost Consequence
to Society, and the only Security for the Faith and Confidence of Man to Man.
-- He was surprised, how People could, with Justice, complain of the Theft,
Drunkenness, and other Immoralities of their Servants, when they not only took
no Care to persuade them of the Odiousness of such Practices, by ordering them
to attend the Service of the Church, but too frequently gave Examples of these
Vices themselves.

THOUGH I have mentioned Theft amongst the Vices of Gentlemen, surely those who
run in Debt to Tradesmen, and suffer them to waste their Time in vain Enquiries
after there Property, commit a Robbery of the blackest Kind, and deserve equal
Punishment with those Wretches, who have openly ventured their Lives to
maintain their Extravagancies, and sometimes to satisfy their real Wants.

THIS Sort of Conduct was unknown in the Family, where, on the Delivery of any
Commodity, the Value was instantly paid. By this Means he was better served,
less imposed on, and bought cheaper than most of his Neighbors. Few Things
surpised him more, than how a Man can live and pretend to any Degree of
Comfort or Content, when indebted to Numbers, and for large Sums. -- He
imagined that the many Examples of the fatal Consequence of such absurd
Management, ought to persuade them into an opposite Behavior; but the Want of
Thought or proper Reflection, plunged them into Extravagance, then into
Mortgages, Lawsuits, and Discredit. -- If possible, they avail themselves of
an infamous and scandalous Practice, And fly from Bailiffs into Parliament.
Still the Evils accumulate, and often end in a Gaol, in the Ruin of their
Families, and the Families of many of their Creditors.

MY Lord was not only punctual and exact in his Dealings, but every one under
him was almost compelled to the like Conduct, for they knew his being a
Nobleman gave them no Authority to commit, nor would protect them from the
Punishment due to an illegal or unjust Action.

METHOD makes seeming Difficulties quite easy, and a prudent Conduct brings
that Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, which we term Happiness. His Lordship's
Felicity was not merely confined to the Prospect of his own regular Family; for
he had the Pleasure to observe, that many of his Neighbors adopted some of his
Rules, and that the poorer Sort began to practice a few. -- If my Lord and his
whole Family were constant at Church, the Gentry round, ceased to think it
ungenteel, and were as constant as they. -- If my Lord made Responses of the
Service, or sung Psalms with an audible Voice, and was really intent on the
Duties of the Place, the rest of the Congregation were brought to believe, that
their assembling was for other Purposes than showing their Finery, Gigling,
Laughing, Bowing, and the like. The Prevalency of Example, ought to oblige us
to a Rectitude of Conduct, for a bad one makes us, in some Measure, guilty of
the Faults of others, as a good one adds to their Virtues, and our own Merit.

AS my Lord and Lady were blessed with great Goodnature and Understanding, so
were they happy in a sincere and mutual Affection. The World was not convinced
of this from a foolish idle Fondness, when in Company; but by their
Cheerfulness, good Humor and Complacency to each other, and all present. -- MY
Lord knew of what Human Nature is compounded, and that, to keep up this
Harmony, so essential to their Happiness, a little Management was sometimes
necessary. He knew, that the most precious Cordials become insipid, if too
frequently used, and that Nothing contributed more to preserve the true Relish
of Conjugal Felicity, than a Decency, even to Delicacy. -- They rose early in
the Morning, and instantly retired to their own Apartments, and never appeared
to each other, but, if not as fine, at least as clean, as when going to Court.
They were so exact in this Point, that they had two Beds in their Chamber, and
frequently slept asunder. This gave a Relish and a Poignancy to their most
refined Joys, and brought with it that Sort of Pleasure that attends on
Novelty, without the Assistance of Variety.

WERE I to be minute on the whole Economy of the Family, this would rather be
the Memoirs of Lord TRUEGOOD, than the History of JACK CONNOR. -- The many
Methods he practiced to avoid Drinking to Excess himself, and preventing it in
others; -- His sundry Contrivances to convince the Poor of the Necessity of
Labor and Industry; His successful Arts to abolish profane Swearing in his
Family and Neighborhood, and the many Schemes made use of, to persuade the
Natives into Justice and Honesty, would fill a Volume. -- What has already been
said, are merely Sketches, and the Out-lines of the Picture: The nice Finishing
of the Features, with the Coloring and Drapery, I must leave to the Management
of the skilful Reader, whilst I pursue the Account of my little Friend.

CHAP. VIII.
From Thomas Thumb to Thomas Jones,
You Will find some Diamonds and some Stones.
Read where you will, and all remark,
Much will be Light, but more be Dark.
If Judgment guides not your Intention,
The Poet loses his Invention.
ANONIMOUS.
NEXT Morning Mr. Kindly found the Servants in the same merry Mood, and very
cheerfully agreed with them, but could by no Means guess the real Cause. He
forgot not however, to send Mrs. Mathews to John Long's, to enquire after
little Jack. She returned in Raptures. -- 'Lord, Mr. Kindly, said she, I never
saw so fine a Child in all my born Days; to be sure his Father was a healthy
Man, and a good natured Man, for the little Fellow is as strong as Herclus, and
his Complexion is as fine White and Red, as any King's Son in the Land; and he
laughs and smiles, and is as happy as any Thing. God bless it! -- Though I am a
Virgin, as I may say, yet I thinks I should not blush, if he was my own Son,
and I am sure you need not be ashamed of him, for it is no Harm for a Man.' --
'How, how, said Kindly, so, Mrs. Mathews, you would infer that the Child is
mine' -- 'Eh? Lord, Sir, said she, He Is so like' -- She would have said more,
but the Muscles of her Face took an involuntary Motion, and obliged her to run
off in a loud Laugh. -- I believe, said he, I have at last found out the Reason
of so much Diversion in the Family. How apt are People to think amiss, and
invent Scandal. They are happy, when they can indulge the Thought, that their
Superiors do wrong; because, in some Sort, it brings them down to their own
Level, and when we walk in the same Line, no wonder if our Authority is
diminished. -- I Am pleased however, they think no worse of me, for in this they
will soon find their Error. -- He was going on with many moral Reflections, and
considering how to proceed, when the Bell summoned him to Dinner.

AT Table, my Lady's Woman was a little merry, and gave such Hints about old
Men and young Girls, that my Lord's Gentleman could not forbear joining in the
Satyr. He declared, that if venerable Nestors practiced such Gambols in the
Parish, he, and all the young Fellows would be obliged to run away for Shame.
-- No, no, Mr. Sympson, cried Mrs. Tittle, You ought rather to stay, when you
are sure of finding an old Fellow to Father your Handiwork.' -- Very true
indeed, Madam, said Sympson; but you know they say, an old Cock treads sure. --
At this witty Stroke Mrs. Tittle laughed immoderately, and fixed her Eyes on
Mr. Kindly, but the Butler looked grave, and having emptied his Glass, said,
Why lookee, Madam, do you see, when I am in Company, I love to understand what
the Company say; so, do you see, because as how, I don't know what you and that
Gentleman laugh at, mayhap it is at me. If so, out with it a God's Name, for if
it be true, I Will own it, but if it be a Lie, as I suspect it is, keep it to
yourselves, for I cannot scold with a Gilflirt, and I have something else to do,
than knock down a Butterfly. -- Then clapping his Hand on Madam the Governant's
Shouder, who had not spoke a Word, cried, -- What say you, Madam, to all this?
You that know the very Marrow and Quintessence of good Manners. For my Part,
do you see, I am for letting every Tub stand on its own Bottom. -- That Is my Way,
Mamzell.

Mon Dieu, Monsieur de Butler, said Mademoiselle le Meagre, I protes I am quite
confus. Mademoiselle Tittel, she talk of de Men, and of de Girl, and laff so
mouch, dat I assure you is ver mouch contre de bien Seance. Monsieur Kindly say
noting, but Monsieur de Sympson he laff at one Monsieur Nestor and Monsieur
Oldcock, but say noting non plus, and Monsieur Butler, he look serieux, and
make a beau Discourse on de Gilfleur, de Papillon and a Tub. -- Bon Dieu! I
understand not one Syllabe.' -- 'I protest, Mademoiselle, said Mr. Kindly, you
are just on a Par with the Rest of the good Company; but People of Wit and fine
Teeth, are apt to show their Excellencies. -- In all Probability Mrs. Tittle
was going to make some very smart Answer, when a Servant entered, and told Mr.
Kindly, that my Lord desired the Favor of his Company, which broke up the
Party for this Time.

MR. CASSOCK, a young Clergyman, who was Tutor to the Children, constantly
dined with my Lord, where Mr. Kindly was often sent for, as his Lordship
particularly esteemed him; for he was most careful and diligent in his Duty, of
just Principles, and strong and nervous Understanding. Mr. Kindly found only my
Lord, my Lady and the Chaplain at Table. When two or three Glasses, and some
common Chat had gone round, my Lady asked him when he heard from his Sons? --
'Very lately, Madam, said Mr. Kindly, thank God, and this good Family, the Boys
are in a Way of advancing themselves; for they know that their Virtue and
Industry only can recommend them to his Lordship's Favor and Protection.' --
They shall not want that, replied my Lord, my last Letters mention your Son
Jack, as the most diligent Reader in the Temple. I was so pleased with the
Character they gave him, that I have wrote to my Friend and Relation, the Lord
Chancellor, in his Favor; so that, who knows but Councellor Kindly may be
imported into this Kingdom with the next Chancellor?' -- The good old Man could
not refrain from Tears of Joy. -- 'You have not mentioned, said my Lady, how my
Favorite Billy is; he was always fond of going to Church, and Reading Prayers;
so, of Course he must be a Parson.' -- 'Yes, Madam, said Kindly, he was so
inclined. -- Thank God, he is in good Health, and minds his Duty in the
College, but I fear he reads too much, for I Am informed he intends to sit for
the next Fellowship, unknown to his Friends.' -- Mr. Kindly, said my Lady, you
are very happy in your Sons, and I assure you, your Daughter Betty has her
Share of Merit. She is a very good Girl, and minds her Work with Mrs. Le Meagre
extremely well. In a Year or two she will be able to manage a House; so, Mr.
Kindly, you must open your Bags, and I shall try and get her a good Husband.'
-- 'I humbly thank your Ladyship, said Kindly; but a Child of Sixteen, bred up
so much under your Ladyship's good Instructions, I hope cannot entertain
Thoughts of that Sort.' -- 'Who, replied my Lord, can tell the Thoughts of
Girls! We must leave them to Time; but Mr. Kindly, since your three Children
are in some Measure provided for, I should be glad to know, if you have any
more, that I could assist you in.' -- More, my Lord, said Kindly, I protest I
don't rightly comprehend your Lordship.' -- 'Why, Mr. Kindly, said the
Chaplain, you blush, and that is a sure Sign of your comprehending; but since
your Memory is so bad, permit me to rub it up, by asking you a single
Question.' -- 'Sir, replied Kindly, you may ask as many as you please; but, as
I am ignorant of any particular Obligation, I shall certainly only give you
such Answers as I think proper.' -- 'Guilty, guilty, my Lord, cried the Parson,
it is plain by his Evasions. -- Come, come, old Gentleman, to the Point, answer
fairly, Have you not been Flesh and Blood? -- Did not Temptation appear in the
Shape of Molly Connor, the Miller's Daughter; -- And was not the Fruit of your
Labor a -- 'a Bastard, said Kindly, Is it not so you mean, Sir?' -- 'Just so,
indeed, Sir, replied the Chaplain, a fine chopping Boy.'

'SINCE, said Mr. Kindly, my Lord and Lady are present at the heavy Charge laid
on me by this very young Gentleman, I think myself bound in Duty to answer. --
Your Lordship knows me incapable of Falsehood, therefore I aver, in the most
solemn Manner, there is not the least Foundation for so malicious and
scandalous a Report. I am not ignorant of the Cause. and shall fully satisfy my
Lord and Lady, but not before this worthy Gentleman, to whom I hope to be
permitted to ask a Question or two, in my Turn.' -- 'Undoubtedly, said my Lady,
it is but fair and just.' -- 'Stand fast, Mr. Cassock, said my Lord, or Old
Kindly will be too many for you.' -- 'Oh, my Lord, answered Cassock, I fear no
one but an old Woman; if he will prove himself such, I shall run for it
immediately.' -- Very well, Sir, said Kindly, very well; will your Reverence
permit me to ask, How would you have behaved to me, if I vented on you the same
Wit and Slander you were just now so good to bestow so liberally upon me? -- I
hope, Sir, replied Cassock, the Dignity of my Function makes a wide Difference
between me, and People in your Sphere.' -- You mean, Sir, said Kindly, that it
ought to make a wide Difference; but as you seem to want that Knowledge, I
shall, with my Lord's Permission, tell you wherein the Dignity consists. --
When we, the poor Laity, who work for, and pay you, are Proud, Tyrannical,
Envious, and the like, your Function obliges you to Meekness, Modesty, Love,
and universal Charity, and Good Will to all Mankind, that we may see and admire
the Charms of such a Conduct, and be almost compelled to imitate it; it is then,
and then only, that a real Dignity is added to your Function; but when a Parson
busies himself only about his Tithes, is immoral, too low-minded, or too full
of Grandeur, to help or administer Comfort to his poor Parishioners; -- when he
notoriously follows God for the Loaves and the Fishes; -- when he performs the
Offices of the Church, with his Eyes wandering to every Object, and his Hand
adjusting a new-acquir'd Tippet, or displaying a Brilliant Ring; -- when he
forgets the Fervor of his Duty, and seems to Read with a slighting
Indifference; -- when he takes no Pains to reconcile the Divisions of his
Neighbors, but foments little Animosities, and adds Slander to Slander, it is
then, though his Function remains, his Dignity is lowered even below the
Sexton's. -- Now, Mr. Cassock, if you know any of your Brethren who act in this
Manner, though they preach like Angels, you may assure them, the ignorant Laity
will hold them, and their Dignity, in very great Contempt, -- at least I
promise you, John Kindly will.'

'WELL said, old Gentleman, cried my Lord, upon my Word a notable Discourse! --
Discouse, said my Lady, I really think it a most admirable Lesson. -- Why, Mr.
Cassock, continued she, Mr. Kindly has furnished you with Texts enough for twenty
Sermons.' -- Ay, ay, said my Lord, but I hope Mr. Cassock's good Sense will
rather incline him to apply the Moral, which will certainly add to my good
Opinion of him.'

'MR. CASSOCK blushed, but answered, I am not so vain as to believe myself
faultless; but perhaps I may be guilty of some, that I have not properly
attended to. To show your Lordship my Willingness to amend, I am extremely
pleased at Mr. Kindly's plain Dealing, and shall endeavor to take the Hint.'
-- 'And I am, said my Lord, as much pleased, you take his honest Freedom in the
true Light; for, believe me, it is less criminal to commit a Fault, than
impatiently to bear a gentle Admonition.' -- 'Sir, said Kindly to the Chaplain,
since you are so good to forgive me, I most heartily ask your Pardon, if I have
made Use of any unguarded Expressions.' -- 'Why, said my Lady, this Matter is
settled just as it ought to be; -- but about this Boy, for a Boy there
certainly is.' -- 'Madam, said Kindly, if you will permit me, I shall mention
all I know of this Affair.' -- 'We can spare you that Trouble, said my Lord,
for my Lady and I know it already; but let us send for the young Stranger, for
I long to see him.' -- 'I was, said my Lady, as impatient as you, and have sent
for him already.' -- She rung the Bell, and having inquired of the Servant, was
told, John Long's Wife had been in the Kitchen this half Hour. -- Then, said my
Lady, pray desire her, and her little Charge to come in. -- All the Servants
had been admiring poor Jack, and mounted with him and Mrs. Long, almost into
the Parlour. Mrs. Long made her profound Honors, and my Lady spoke very
tenderly to her, and of her Family. -- Mr. Kindly then presented Jack Connor,
saying, My Lord, this is my little Boy, who is much improved since Yesterday.

MRS. LONG had taken great Care to wash him well and clean, and comb his Head.
His fine light-brown Hair hung in natural Curls, and his Complexion was
remarkably good. He had clean Linen, and his own red Waistcoat and old
Breeches; but the good Woman had not yet given him a Coat, nor Shoes nor
Stockings.

MY Lord and Lady seemed charmed with his Countenance, though the poor Child was
in the utmost Confusion and Astonishment. -- My Lord's two Sons now came in,
and my Lady called them to her. -- 'My dear Harry, said she, here is a poor
little Boy that has lost his Father and Mother, and was stripped of all his
Clothes. I believe he is a very good Child; so, you know, 'twould be a Sin to
let him go quite naked, and starve.' -- 'O dear, said Harry, indeed I Will give
him my brown Coat and Breeches.' -- 'And indeed, Madam, said Billy, I Will give
him a Shirt and a Pair of Stockings.' -- 'And I Am sure, said Harry, my Shoes
will be large enough.' -- They saw my Lady's consenting Looks, and instantly
ran to perform their Promise. All were pleased at the Tenderness and
Goodnature of the Children; and whilst they were absent, Mr. Kindly asked
Jack, where was his Book? The Boy could just say, 'here, Sir,' and gave it him.
-- This Book, my Lord, said Kindly, has greatly prejudiced me in Favor of this
poor Child. I caught him reading in it, and I made him turn to another Part,
which he distinctly read; and, by Accident, it was this Paragraph. -- Mr.
Kindly gave the Book to Mr. Cassock, who read it, which affected my Lord, but
brought Tears into my Lady Eyes.

THERE seems to me, said my Lord, somewhat remarkable in the Story of this
Child; I Will try him a little. Then turning to Mrs. Long, told her to leave the
Boy with him. When Mrs. Long had retired, he took Jack between his Knees, and
with great Fondness and Good Humor, asked him many Questions, and received
short, but very proper Answers. He then showed him a Guinea and a Shilling, but
the Child knew not what they were. At last he produced an Halfpenny, and Jack
readily told the Name. -- 'Well, my Dear, said my Lord, what will you do with
that Halfpenny? -- I must, replied Jack, give it to my Mother, for I always
give it to her.' -- And which Way, said my Lord, do you get an Halfpenny?' --
'I run, said the Child, after every Body in the Road, and they give me an
Hapeny for the Love of God.' 'That's my good Child, said my Lord;' and turning
to Mr. Kindly, added, I can easily discover the Profession of his Parents, or
those he was with; but his Reading and his Accent, I own, surprise me. However,
since Providence has directed him to take Sanctuary in my House, I am
determined to take Care of him. -- I think, continued he, the saving an
Innocent from Perdition, and breeding him up in virtuous Principles, is in Fact
giving him a new Birth, and increasing our own Happiness, in the same Degree we
give it to others.' -- 'The Power, said my Lady, of doing Good, is certainly
the highest Gratification a rational Mind is capable of receiving.' -- 'True,
indeed Madam, said Kindly, your Power to do Good, is Great, but Heaven has
added another Blessing to you both, in giving you Hearts and Minds ready and
willing to exercise that Power on every proper Object. -- In the Name of this
poor tender Creature, I humbly thank your Lordship, and my good Lady; and I
pray God he may live to show his Gratitude to such bountiful Benefactors.'

THE two Boys, by this Time, had got the Clothes, and running with them into
the Parlour, were going immediately to strip poor Jack, but my Lord stopped
them, and kissing Harry, told him, 'He was so good and charitable, he would
give him the prettiest little Horse he could get, and a Bridle and Saddle.' --
'And because, said my Lady, my dear Billy followed his Brother's good Example,
I shall do as much for him.' -- The Children were quite happy, and Harry ran,
as my Lord bid him, for Mrs. Long. -- Here, Mrs. Long, said my Lord, take back
your little Fellow for this Night. Dress him in these Clothes, and be so good
to come with him Tomorrow, for we all intend to take some Care of Jack. -- His
Lordship then put the Boy and Half a Guinea into her Hand, and she blessed
their Honors, and retired. -- Before Mrs. Long quitted the House, Mr. Kindly
desired her to pack up all the old Rags belonging to Jack, and bring them to
him.

CHAP. IX.
What can our Judgment or our Prudence do
If Chains of Accidents concur not too?
One happy Accident, One lucky Hit,
Out-ballances our Wisdom and our Wit.
ANONIMOUS.
MRS. LONG found the Coat and other Things, fitted Jack very well, and had
dressed him with great Neatness. On his Arrival at my Lord's, the whole Family
admired his Strength and his exact Make, but he seemed more awkward than
before, and was very uneasy with his Shoes. Mr. Kindly provided him with some
Necessaries, and employed him in attending my Lord's Sons in their Amusements,
and in cleaning their Shoes, and brushing their Coats. At leisure Times he
heard him read in the Bible, or his own Book, and my Lord and Lady often did
the same.

IN six Months the Boy was quite changed. The cheerful and happy Disposition
indulged him by Nature, showed itself on a thousand Occasions; insomuch, that
he became a general Favorite, and was sensible of his Happiness. Mr. Kindly,
from Time to Time gave him such Lessons of Duty and Gratitude, as suited his
Age, and Mr. Cassock taught him his Prayers, Catechism, and other Matters,
equal with my Lord's Children.

ONE Day, as Mr. Kindly was writing in his Office, Jack approached him, and
blushing, but with a modest Smile, looked up, and seemed as if he had a Favor
to ask. -- 'Well Jack, said the good Man, do you want another Book.' -- 'No
indeed, Sir, replied the Child, I don't want a Book.' -- 'Why, you Rogue, said
Kindly, I hope you are not tired of Reading?' 'Yes indeed, Sir, said Jack.' 'O
ho, said the old Man, very well, since you will not read, and be a good Boy, I
shall get you a Leather Coat and Cap, and you shall be a Postillion, and lie
with the Horses.' Jack's Countenance changed, his Eyes swelled, and he burst
into a violent Fit of Crying. -- Mr. Kindly was a long Time before he could dry
his Tears, or get him to speak and explain what he wanted. -- Sir, said Jack at
last, indeed and indeed, I am not tired of Reading, for if you please, I would
be very good, and write as you do, if you would give me Pens and Paper. -- The
Tenderness of the old Gentleman was touched at the Child's Request. -- Yes,
said he, my dear Jack, you shall have Pens and Paper, and I will get you a
little Desk in the Office, and teach you to write myself. -- Jack was quite
delighted, and the Novelty of the Employment diverted and pleased Mr. Kindly,
particularly as his Pupil was so apt a Scholar, that in eighteen Months he
wrote a very good Hand, and perfectly understood the four first Rules of
Arithmetic.

HE was now about Ten Years of Age, and seemed to have a Faculty in learning
whatever he undertook. In the Plays of Children he was dexterous, and in the
little Occupations of the Family, he was Handdy and Neat. He had a certain
Manner of doing Things, that Nature alone can give, and what some can only
imitate, even by Labor and Pains. Another natural Gift began at this Time to
be remarkable, for he had a fine Voice, and greatly diverted the Maids with
Irish Songs. Some were of Humor, and required a proper Management of Voice and
Words to keep up the Drollery. This he was a perfect Master of.

The Boys were one Morning at Play in the Fields, and Mr. Cassock, who commonly
attended them, was, by Accident, at a good Distance. Master Harry and Jack had
some Words, and Harry gave him a Blow on the Face. Jack greatly resented this,
and told him, if he was not my Lord's Son, he would beat him heartily. Harry, fired
at the Rebuke and Menace, pulled off his Coat, and flew at him like a little
Tiger. Jack defended himself without returning a Stroke, though his Hair was
almost torn off his Head. At last he received a violent Cut which stunned him,
and made his Nose bleed. He then cried out most bitterly, and run directly
Home. The Tutor heard his Cries, and saw him running, and joining the Boys,
Master Billy told him the real Truth. As Jack was entering the House, my Lord
saw him from a Window in his Study, and ordered a Servant to bring him up. With
some Difficulty he got the Story out of him, and Mr. Cassock and the two Boys
entering with my Lady, my Lord was confirmed in the Truth of what he said, and
looking very serious, and in great Concern, sat down and took up his Book.

'I AM, said my Lady, quite surpised and astonished, that Harry could behave
in so brutal a Manner to a poor Boy that loves him. -- Come hither Jack, said
she, -- Do you think you could beat Harry, if you were to box and fight
fairly?' 'Yes indeed, please your Ladyship, said Jack, for Master Harry knows
I Am stronger than him.' -- 'Very well, replied my Lady, I believe what you say,
and now remember, you have my Lord's Leave and mine, to beat him soundly
whenever he strikes you again.' -- Then turning to a Servant, ordered Jack to
be taken down and cleaned. -- Poor Harry was in great Tribulation; but when my
Lady, very gravely, directed him to go to the Kitchen, and dine with the
Servants, he cried most dreadfully. -- Why, Sir, said my Lady, you are fit for
no other Company; for, when a young Gentlemen will fight with his Servant, does
he not make him his equal? But I suppose you think you may do what you please
with Jack; but to convince you, Sir, you are no better than him, except you
behave better, you shall wear his Clothes, and he yours, and then I believe
every Stranger will take him for Master Harry, and you for Jack Connor.

HARRY begged and entreated, and gave many Promises of never doing the like
again. -- You see, said my Lady, when one does a naughty Thing, nobody speaks
in our Favor. I cannot forgive you, except my Lord does. -- Then turning
about, 'Will your Lordship, said she, pardon Harry this one Fault, he promises,
and is penitent.' -- 'My Dear, said my Lord, what can I do in the Affair? If
Master Harry was a Gentleman, and had beaten a Servant of mine, I should
certainly resent the Affront, except he begged, and obtained my Servant's
Pardon.' -- That Is true indeed, said my Lady, so, my dear Billy, call up Jack,
and I am sure Harry will beg his Pardon very sincerely.' -- Mr. Cassock, who
knew his Time, began now to intercede for Master Harry, and assured my Lord he
never knew him do a Thing of that Sort, or put himself into so violent a
Passion before; that, as it was the first Fault, he begged my Lord to forgive
him, and could almost promise it would be the last.

MY Lord shak'd his Head, and the two Boys entering, my Lady spoke to Harry,
who immediately went and kissed Jack, and very heartily asked his Pardon. Jack
blushed, but with a Smile bowed, and kissed him again. -- Harry then went to my
Lord, and on his Knees begged his Forgiveness. My Lord raised him, saying, I
forgive you, my Dear, this Fault, since you are sorry for committing it, but
depend on your Honor, that you will keep your Word, and never vex your Papa
again. Now go and beg my Lady's Pardon, for you have greatly offended and
fretted her. -- My Lady took him in her Arms, and the Affair ended much to the
Satisfaction of all Parties.

TWO Days after, the three Boys, the Chaplain, and a Servant with a Gun, went
in the Morning to walk as usual. A small Rivulet run by one of the Fields,
which they generally crossed by the Help of large Stones, but an Abundance of
Rain having fallen, it was raised above four Feet, and very rapid. This stopped
their Progress; but, as they mounted the Brook to find another Passage, Harry
saw a Jack-daw in a Tree on the opposite Side, and the Boys begged the Servant
to fire at it, and they mounted the Ditch to see it fall. Jack went a little
lower to get a convenient Stand, but scarcely had he been there a Moment, when,
the Earth breaking under Harry's Feet, he fell into the River. -- His Brother
shrieked, but Jack instantly took Hold of a Bough of a Tree that fell near the
Water, and stretching out as far as he was able, caught Harry by the Hair, just
as he rose, having been carried by the Stream about ten Yards, and held him
fast. -- Billy roared and stamped, and the poor Parson and Servant were
frightened almost into Stupidity, till Jack called out here -- here. -- They
got to him just in Time, for his whole Weight resting on his left Arm, his
little Force was almost exhausted. -- Cassock and the Servant jumped in
directly, and rescued Harry; but, not immediately attending to the Care of
Jack, the poor Boy could not retire, but fell in between them. However, they
divided their Labor, and brought the Children safely out.

JACK had only got a Ducking, but Harry was some Time before he could speak,
but being laid on the Grass, he soon recovered. The Tenderness of the Boys is
not to be expressed; they kissed him a thousand Times, and even cried with Joy.
Mr. Cassock, fearing they might catch Cold, walked pretty smartly toward the
House, near which they met my Lord, looking over some Improvements. He was
greatly surpised at the Condition they were all in, but much more so, when the
Chaplain told him of the Accident, and particularly of Jack's ready Thought. My
Lord was much moved, and most affectionately embracing the Children, carried
them to my Lady, who waited their coming in to Breakfast. -- As my Lord told
her the Story, Love, Tenderness, Surprise and Fear, were visible in her
Countenance. Her Heart seemed ready to leap from its Habitation, and the whole
Mother rushing violently on her Spirits, she seized Harry in her Arms, and
would have fallen with him, had not my Lord and Mr. Cassock supported her to
her Chair, where she did not recover till her Tears were suffered to come to
her Assistance.

THE Boys were put in warm Beds, and the Chaplain was advised to change his
Clothes. My Lord and the Women stayed with my Lady, and indeed she had great
Occasion for them. -- Mr. Kindly had been absent on Business; but when he
returned, and heard of the Affair, he trembled excessively; but Joy succeeding,
he ran to my Lord, and Lady, then to the two Boys, whom he almost smothered
with Caresses, then to the Chaplain, and then to my Lord again. In a Word, the
poor Man could think and speak of Nothing else, and even of that not very
distinctly.

THE Hurry of the Family ceased by Degrees, and all Matters were set right by
Dinner Time, and Jack took his Place behind the Boys, whom he always waited on.
A Neighboring Gentleman hearing of the Accident, came to felicitate my Lord on
Master Harry's providential Escape. -- At Dinner it was the particular
Conversation, and Mr. Cassock was compelled to repeat the Morning Adventure
with all its Circumstances, which often obliged Jack to blush and hold down his
Head. -- My Lord bid him never to be ashamed at doing Good, and the Gentleman
was very lavish of his Praises. -- My Lady looked at Master Harry, and hinting
at the Quarrel, said, -- We may plainly see how much it is our Interest to be
Good and Friendly to, and avoid giving Offense to the poorest Creature, since
every Man, however low or mean, may, if he pleases, be of great Use, or do an
irreparable Injury to the Greatest. Let what will be our Situations, we are
born to help and assist each other, according to our Power and Abilities, and
he, who does it not, destroys the End of his Creation. -- This, said she, is a
plain Truth, and I hope you and your Brother will remember and practice it, as
long as you live.

THUS, out of every Accident, or the most common Occurences, did these wise
Parents inculcate Virtue and Humanity in the Minds of their Children, and gave
them a moral Certainty of their being hereafter happy in themselves, and of
making others happy.

IN the Evening the Gentleman took his Leave, and calling Jack, kissed him and
put a Crown in his Hand, which he immediately deposited with Mr. Kindly. My
Lord gave the Servant which had been with the Children, a Farm worth Ten Pounds
a Year. Many poor neighboring Families felt, on this Occasion, his Goodness
and Liberality, and he added ten Children more to the Charity Scheme
beforementioned. The Chaplain was not forgot in my Lord's Thoughts, and my
Lady ordered Jack new Clothes from Head to Foot.

AS the Family was extremely beloved, no Wonder if all the Gentlemen round
continued for some Time to visit and congratulate them on their good Fortune.
Scarcely one quitted Bounty-Hall, without a Mark of Regard for Jack. These he
always consigned to Mr. Kindly, so that his Riches at last amounted to the
mighty Sum of Ten Pounds.

CHAP. X.
The Reason why so few Marriages are happy, is, Because young Ladies spend
their Time in making Nets, and not in making Cages.

SWIFT'S MAXIMS.
PERHAPS my merry Readers are extremely angry at being so long detained in
Company with Boys, whilst others of a more serious Turn are pleased with the
Opening of the Heart, and the gradual Increase of Knowledge in the Minds of
Children. Others again, reading only as a mere Amusement, and to kill Time, are
in an actual State of Indifference, and provided the great End is answered, are
equally charmed with Clarissa, as Tom Jones. That these Classes may be
gratified, I shall beg Leave to introduce a young Lady, by way of Episode; and
because she is the Daughter of my good Friend Mr. Kindly.

MISS BETTY KINDLY, now turned of Twenty, was a most agreeable Girl, with good
Sense and good Humor. Mr. Cassock had a small paternal Fortune, a good
Allowance from my Lord, and forty Pounds a Year, for officiating for the
Minister of the Parish, who was about Fourscore Years of Age. This young
Gentleman was not insensible of the Charms of Miss Betty, and of her more
essential Qualifications; and knowing my Lord's Sons would soon be removed from
his Care, determined to take the Advantage of the general Joy, and solicit my
Lady's Interest. He suffered not the Time to elapse, but took the first
Opportunity when my Lady was alone. -- She rallied him a little at first, on
his being in Love, but assuring him of all her good Offices, added, -- I
believe a little of my Interest will go a great Way, for I much doubt if you
have not a powerful Friend already in the Garrison. -- Mr. Cassock blushed,
and, aukwardly thanking her Ladyship, retired. -- It seems Mademoiselle Le
Meagre had informed her of what passed in Miss Betty's Heart, which she was
convinced of, by some Observations on her late Conduct.

MY Lord was extremely pleased at this Discovery, and declared it was what he
had always wished. After Dinner he sent for Mr. Kindly, and the Chat at last
fell on Jack Connor. -- I wish, my Lord, said Mr. Kindly, you would permit my
instructing that poor Boy in the Duty of my Station. He is surprisingly
diligent, notable, and honest; and so expert at his Pen, that, young as he is,
he has often assisted me. -- I think I have been a faithful Servant to your
Lordship, and your truly noble Father, who bred me from a Child; and it would
give me the greatest Joy to have almost a Certainty of leaving as just a one to
succeed me. -- Age, my Lord, steals on, and should Heaven indulge me with a few
more Years of Strength and Abilities, I must then submit to our common Destiny.
-- My Lord winked at her Ladyship, and she at Mr. Cassock, who instantly
withdrew, and my Lady soon followed.

'JACK, said my Lord, has saved my Son; if I had no other Motive than that, you
may be assured he is greatly in my Thoughts; but I love the Boy for many
Reasons, having notic'd particularly his Behavior; but as I am determined to
send him with my Sons to Mr. Johnston's, where he may learn a little more, we
must postpone your Scheme till his Return. -- Since you think, continued my
Lord, so much of my Jack, give me Leave to think a little of your Betty. -- The
Girl is of Age, and you know young Wenches are Flesh and Blood. -- In two
Words, poor Cassock loves her; and, if my Intelligence be right, Betty is far
from disliking him; therefore, if you approve of the Match, the Parson must
have some Money to buy a new Gown, and a fresh Cargoe of Sermons.' -- 'Does
your Lordship approve of it, said Kindly? 'I do, said my Lord.' -- 'Then,
replied the old Man, I have no Will, but your Lordship's, and Tomorrow, Sir, I
shall put into your Hands the Value of three hundred Pounds, and submit my dear
Child to your Lordship's Judgment, thinking myself the happiest of Men, by the
Favor and Indulgence of the best of Masters.'

I thank you, said my Lord, for your Compliment, and to show you how much I
approve of this Union, and that your Daughter may be under your own Eye, I
intend to present Mr. Cassock to this Parish, on the Death of the present
Incumbent. You know it is worth two hundred Pounds a Year, and that Dr. Canter
is superannuated, and cannot last long. -- Kindly, with uplifted Hands, was
attempting to utter his Gratitude, but my Lord stopped him, saying, -- No more
of that, Mr. Kindly, I am now going to advance this Matter, And retiring, left
the happy old Man but the Power of thanking Providence, and admiring the
Goodness of my Lord.

IN a few Days Mr. Cassock was presented in Form to Miss Kindly. All the
Conversation of the Family was on the approaching Wedding, which was fixed at
no longer a Distance than a Week, and some neighboring Families were invited.

WERE I a French Memoir Writer, I should naturally embrace this Opportunity to
extol the Virgin Charms of the Bride, and describe the Beauty and Propriety of
every Part of her Dress without a slavish Regard to Truth. I should then have
said, -- Scarcely were the Curtains drawn which permitted the Sun's Appearance,
when Miss opened those Eyes, that alone could eclipse his Brightness. She
sighed, and sometimes wished, and sometimes trembled at the Approach of the
Time, when she was to be, -- she knew not what, -- she knew not where. Hope and
Fear engrossed her whole Imagination till the Hour arrived, when she bid an
eternal Adieu to that Bed, destined never more to embrace her Virgin Innocence.
Mademoiselle Le Meagre and Mrs. Tittle assisted in adjusting her Dress, and her
Ladyship deigned to give her Advice and Help. Her Tresses were of the finest
Brown, which hanging behind in small natural Ringlets, were nicely ordered to
crown her Forehead, and touch her Ears which were ornamented with Brilliants;
and, though of the first Water, her Charms added a particular Luster and
Refulgency to. Diamonds likewise sparkled round her lovely Neck, and, a little
above the heavenly Orbs, hung the glittering Cross, Which JEWS might kiss and
Infidels adore. Her Stays discovered a Shape the most exact and delicate, and
the Robe that closed on it, was of the finest white Silk of Padua. A Bunch of
Jasmin, Hyacinths and Roses, took their Place near her Neck, and seemed to envy
the Vicinity of a superior Fragrancy. She descended to the Apartment where the
Company, and her desiring Lover, impatiently attended, and where a most
magnificent and elegant Dinner was provided. The first Course consisted of -- I
hope the courteous Reader will excuse my not proceeding farther in mere Sound,
and permit me to say in plain English, that the Wedding Day at last came, and
that Miss Betty behaved as Girls naturally do on the Occasion. My Lady had made
her a Present of genteel plain Clothes; and her good Complexion Shape and Size,
made her a very desirable Object. Mr. Cassock looked, and seemed to think her a
Subject worth handling. -- When the Ceremony, and the usual Compliments were
over, my Lord declared his Intention of giving the Parish to Mr. Cassock, on
the Death of Doctor Canter. -- This was a Comment on the Text, that Mr. Cassock
had not known before; and, as it perfectly agreed with his Way of Thinking, he
looked on the Author as a very learned and wise Man. -- The Truth is, he was so
struck with my Lord's Bounty, that neither he nor his Bride could return their
Thank but by their humble Obeisances.

MY Lord had still in Reserve what was to complete the Reward of Mr. Kindly's
Fidelity. -- He first bestowed many Compliments on him before all the Company,
and then added, -- When my Boys are settled at Mr. Johnston's School, my Lady
and I purpose staying for some Time in England. You will then, Mr. Kindly, be
so good to audit the Accounts of my Receivers, and take the Charge and
Management of my Charity Children. You and the young Couple must keep this
House warm in my Absence; and, that the Roof may be always in good Order, and
to defray the Expenses attending your Increase of Business, I desire you will
charge me with one hundred Pounds a Year extraordinary; and now, Mr. Kindly,
give me Leave to regard you as my Companion and my Friend.

A PROFOUND Silence ensued, till the old Man, finding his Tongue, he poured out
whatever his grateful Heart suggested, and ending in most fervent Prayers,
retired in Haste, to give his Tears of Joy full Scope. -- At Dinner he was
pretty cheerful; and Mirth, Good Humor and Happiness admired Bounty-Hall, and
resided there.

As I am called another Way, it cannot be expected I should wait on this
Company the whole Evening, much less pretend to conduct Mr. Cassock and his
Bride to that Theater, where we are suffered to see the Actors, but by the
Reflection of Fancy. -- Let it suffice to say, that the young Lady was next
Morning Mrs. Cassock.

So much has been said of this noble Family, that I fear some will be apt to
suspect my Veracity. -- Envy will positively assert, that the Characters are
absurd, unnatural, and without a Precedent. -- Ill-naure will discover the
Sarcasm, in placing in full View, what the Nobility ought truly to be, in
Opposition to what some really are. -- The Thought of such scandalous
Insinuations, determines me to quit Bounty-Hall, and shift the Scene.

It Is necessary to inform my Readers, that Mr. Johnston, who I am now going to
visit, is the Clergyman that was a Companion to my Lord in his Travels. --
During their Stay at Paris, Mr. Johnston became acquainted with Madam Bonfoy,
the Widow of a Captain who had been killed in the Service. She had solicited
for a Pension; but, being known to be a Hugonot, could never obtain it. As she
had two thousand Livres a Year on the Townhouse of Paris, and the Interest of
some Money, she kept genteel Apartments, and lived in a very decent Manner with
her Niece, who was about four Years old.

THE Temper of Madam Bonfoy was so like Mr. Johnston's, an Inclination for each
other ensued, which ended, or rather increased, in Matrimony. -- My Lord got
him a good Living in the North of Ireland, but afterward advised him to
exchange for one of less Value near Portarlington, in the King's County,
inhabited mostly by French Protestants, and where little of any other Language
was spoken. My Lord gave him the Plan of a School, which, by Mr. and Mrs.
Johnston's good Management, could not fail of being extremely advantageous to
them. Mr. Johnston had now been in that Situation near four Years, and met with
great Approbation, as he had Talents peculiar to that Profession.

MASTER Harry was now twelve Years of Age, and all Things were preparing for
the Journey of the three Boys. Every one in the Family began to dread the Loss
of such Children, who, by a thousand little Pranks, were extremely dear to
them. Miss Harriot began to pine and cry, that she was to lose her Brothers,
and her Favorite little Jack. In short, it is impossible to express the silent
Grief that reigned in the House.

MR. KINDLY took up whole Days in preaching to Jack, and giving him good
Advice. -- Perhaps, my dear Child, said he, I may never see you again; if so,
mind my Words, and I shall be always present with you, and shield you from
those Evils the World is full of. If you despise and neglect them, depend upon
it, Calamity and Misfortunes will attend you. That my Counsel may not be
forgotten, I have wrote it down, and put it in your Trunk, that you may read,
and get it by Heart. They are the same Instructions I gave to my own Sons when
they went from me, and, in general, will answer your Purposes. I have likewise,
continued he, put up a good Store of Paper and Pens, and I insist on your
Writing frequently to me, with a particular Account how the young Gentlemen
behave, and how you employ your Time. -- Jack cried most heartily, and
faithfully promised to obey all his Commands, and be a good Boy. -- The
Children took Leave of the Neighbors, but Jack, in a very tender and
particular Manner, took his of Mrs. Long and the good-natured Groom.

THE Coach and Servants were prepared, and the young Travelers were to set out
next Morning with my Lord and Mr. Cassock. Her Ladyship being with Child,
prevented her being of the Party.

THE Morning came, and the Horses were ordered to be put too. -- Mr. Kindly
took Jack in his Hand to the Office, and, showing him his little Effects in a
small Trunk he had provided, put therein a Purse, saying, -- Jack, here is all
your Money, with some Interest, amounting to Fifteen Guineas. I know you will
take great Care and keep it, till you really want it. You are no Fool, my Dear,
and he must be the greatest Fool that spends his Money idly. -- Jack gave him
his Word, he should find it all when he came back. -- Yesterday, said Mr.
Kindly, I told you I might never see you more. I have, this small Box to give
you as my last Legacy. It contains a Book, that in Time you may read; but as I
know you love Truth, I must have your Promise never to open it, but at the Time
I direct. -- Jack fell on his Knees, and assured him, he would never open it,
if he ordered. -- Then, said the old Man, mind what I say: I lay my Commands on
you, never to open this Box, except you be reduced to the greatest Necessity,
and almost want Bread. -- So saying, he locked it in the Trunk, and gave Jack
the Key. -- Now said Mr. Kindly, I have but one Word more to say: -- If God
should prosper you in the World, and your Heart should swell with Pride and
Arrogance, remember that Drawer, and correct those Vices. -- Pray, Sir. said
Jack, what is in that Drawer? -- 'You shall see,' said Kindly, and, producing
his old red Waistcoat, tattered Shirt and Breeches, said, -- This, Jack, is
your Original, so judge if Pride and Haughtiness will agree with such a Dress.
-- The Boy blushed, and embracing Mr. Kindly's Waist, assured him, he would
always remember the Drawer and the Dog-Kennel.

THEY now joined the Children, whom they found in Tears, having just quitted
her Ladyship. Jack was sent in by my Lord, and on his Knees, most humbly
thanked her Ladyship for all her Goodness to him. -- The parting with her Sons
made her scarcely able to speak, but she bid him mind his Business, and serve
God. -- She could utter no more, but with a tender Embrace let him depart.

THE Servants had their Turn, and the Boys were almost hugged to Death. -- With
great Difficulty they quitted this moving Scene, and the Coach driving off,
were followed by the Prayers and Blessings of a thousand of the poor
Inhabitants.

CHAP. XI.
Seek you to train your favorite Boy?
Each Caution, every Care employ;
And ever you venture to confide,
Let his Preceptor's Heart be tried;
Weigh well his Manners, Life and Scope,
On these depends thy future Hope.
GAY.
THE Occurrences on the Road are not worth mentioning; but my Lord and Mr.
Cassock gave the Lads a good Impression of their new Master, and explained the
Rules and Customs of the School. Mr. Johnston was prepared for their Reception,
and thanked my Lord for the Honor he did him. After Supper, my Lord and Mr.
Cassock went to private Lodgings. The two Brothers had a Chamber to themselves,
and Jack had a small one near the Back-Stairs at the End of the Gallery.

BEFORE Eight next Morning, my Lord and Mr. Cassock went to Mr. Johnston's. All
the Scholars had not yet made their Appearance; but the Bell ringing, the rest
soon were in the School, where Mr. Johnston and the Family attended my Lord,
when all were seated, one of the Lads mounted a Desk, and with great Reverence
began the Morning Service of the Church; another read the Lessons of the Day;
Mr. Lilly, the Usher, raised the Psalm, and the first Boy finished the Prayers,
except the Blessing, which Mr. Johnston always pronounced. -- This over, an
Hour was employed in examining their Exercises, and giving others for the
following Day, and then they retired to Breakfast.

MY Lord was again conducted to School, when one of the most ingenious of the
Gentlemen ascended the Pulpit, and made a Latin Oration on the Rise of
Nobility. He very artfully insinuated, how happy some Families were, in always
leaving Heirs to their Virtues as well as their Titles; and, that he could
point out, even in these degenerate Days, a living Example of that Blessing,
were he at Liberty to speak, without being suspected of Flattery; and
concluded, that though many Patricians were a Scandal to their own and every
other Order, yet some were always found who added a Luster to the Dignity, as
their Lives were an Ornament to human Nature, and their Actions the Glory of
their Fellow-Citizens.

WHEN this Gentleman had finished, another mounted, and made a short Speech in
English, on the Happiness of a good Education, which he compared to a tender
Plant, under the Management of a skilful Gardener, who not only made it bear
exquisite Fruit, but gave the Branches such an elegant Turn, as added a Beauty
to the Place, and a Delight to the Eye.

HIS Lordship was extremely pleased with this Entertainment, but particularly
with the distinct, emphatical and graceful Manner in which they pronounced
their Words. He was not wanting in returning his Thanks to the young Gentlemen,
and, giving the Usher Ten Guineas, begged he would be so good to buy a Dozen
Bows and Arrows, and erect two Butts in the next Field, which would not only
agreeably entertain them, but be a most healthful Exercise.

HIS Lordship then gave some private Directions to Mr. Johnston, and
recommending the Boys to the Care of his Wife, took a most tender Leave, and
returned to Bounty-Hall.

I MUST continue at Portarlington-School above three Years. If my Reader
pleases, I shall indulge his residing with me, and making all the Remarks and
Applications his Understanding may suggest. Imagination must furnish him with
the many Pranks and Tricks Schoolboys are wont to play, as I am not at
Leisure, at present, to entertain him in that Manner. I shall confine myself to
the narrow Compass of hinting at the Conduct of this School, as there is
somewhat peculiar in it, and what I could wish every other had a Part of, if
not the Whole.

MR. JOHNSTON was a Gentleman of very extensive Knowledge, great Application
and Temper, cheerful and easy in Conversation, and, above all, knew Mankind and
the World perfectly well. As he had Talents peculiar for Instruction, and
delighted in it, so his Virtue and Understanding convinced him, that rearing up
good and useful Members of Society, was the most honorable Employment of Man.

HIS House could hold but twenty-five Youths, and each paid thirty Pounds a
Year. When his Conduct was known, it is not to be imagined what Interest was
made by Gentlemen, to have their Sons admitted, on a Vacancy.

HIS first Care was the inculcating into his Pupils, the Principles of true
Religion, as the surest Foundation on which to build the moral Virtues. His
next, was the inspiring into them, a certain Proportion of Ambition and
temporal Happiness, and demonstrating, that Learning, Honor, and Integrity
were the most probable, if not the only Way, to attain them. For these
Purposes, they constantly attended Divine Service at Church and at Home: He
made them read the Prayers alternately, and, as Occasions required, gave
historical Accounts to explain or illustrate some Passages in the Old or New
Testament. -- He always treated them, not as Children, but as Gentlemen, which
made them endeavor to act as such. If some were negligent of their Duty, he
seemed concerned at it, and pitied the unhappy Youth, that forgot himself so
much as to undo, by a voluntary Neglect, all that his Ancestors had acquired by
Knowledge and Industry.

HE took great Pains to give them an early Habit of Civility and Good Manners;
and, by his own Practice, convinced them how agreeable such a Conduct was to
every Man. He always spoke with a Bow, and Marks of Respect, and encouraged
them to act in the like Manner to each other. He showed them, by sundry serious
and comic Examples, the Use and Beauty of Politeness, and the Absurdity and bad
Consequences of a clownish and brutish Behavior.

THE Mornings were given to School Learning, in which, by his Skilfulness and
Assiduity, they made great Progress. As to fixed Holidays, they were Strangers;
but when all the Lads were perfect in their different Lessons, Mr. Johnston
always returned them Thanks, and then added, -- This is very clever. -- I find,
Gentlemen, you have taken more than ordinary Pains; but I am so far from
desiring too much Study, that, please God, if To morrow be a fine Day, we will
take the Diversion of Hunting or Fishing, -- just, Gentlemen, as you please. --
Thus they could always command a Day of Amusement; but that Lad passed his Time
very disagreeably, who, by his Idleness, had stopped the Pleasure of the rest.

THE Evenings, in some Degree, were their own, either to study in their
Chambers, or divert themselves in the large Yard or Field. If the Weather did
not permit the latter, Mr. Johnston used to say, -- Well, Gentlemen, how shall
we pass our Time? I have a great Notion Mr. Moore can pronounce one of Cicero's
Orations as well as Mr. Stevenson. -- Sometimes he pitched on one of
Atterbury's or Tillotson's Sermons; sometimes on Speeches in Tacitus or Livy;
sometimes on Parliamentary Debates, and sometimes on Milton, or on occasional
Pieces of Poetry, of Beauty and Elegance. -- The Reader always mounted the
Pulpit; but if he erred from the right Pronounciation and true Meaning of the
Author, or lessened the Sense by false Action or too languid a Delivery, Mr.
Johnston begged his Pardon, and desired to be permitted to show, wherein he
thought it might be uttered more to the Satisfaction of the Audience. -- He
then took his Place, and displayed the Orator. -- His determined and resolute
Voice, stirred their young Blood; but when he softened into Pity at some
Distress, it caught the Lads, and their Countenances showed it.

HE thought it absolutely necessary that a young Man should be acquainted with
the History of his own Country, at least as soon as that of Egypt, Greece, or
Rome. This was a fixed Entertainment twice a Week; and his Comments,
Observations and Reflections on the different Parts, were adapted to those he
made them to, and had always somewhat that showed the Value of Liberty, and the
Danger in not putting proper Bounds to it. -- The Effects of Tyranny and
Oppression; -- the Nature of Laws and Government; -- the Obligation of a King
to his Subjects, and his Subjects to him; -- the Happiness of a good Monarch,
with the Infamy and Punishment due to those, who wantonly attempt to disturb
the Peace of the Crown, and the Peace of the People.

OF a cheerful Evening Mr. Johnston has proposed the Repetition of a good
Comedy; but, as he did not conceive that acting a Play was of Use to Youth, he
placed them in their Seats, and assigned them their different Parts, which they
read from different Copies. The Comedies he generally chose were Steele's,
Farquhar's, and some of Cibber's, as they not only had Wit and Humor, but a
certain Moral in them, not to be found in Congreve, Wycherly, Dryden, or
Vanbrugh, but by wading through Obscenity. -- If the Gentlemen chose a Tragedy,
he made them carefully observe the Difference between a passionate Utterance,
and Ranting, and between the soft and tender Manner of Expression, and the
Whining, and gave them Examples himself.

BUT the most favorite Manner he had of entertaining them, because he had a
Scheme in it, was giving short and pleasing Accounts of the Lives of great Men
of all Nations. -- The Conqueror and Captive. -- The Tyrant, and the Father of
his People. -- The Law giver and the Incendiary. -- The Patriot, and the
Pretenders to Patriotism. -- The Orator and the Declaimer. -- The Divine. --
The Lawyer. -- The moral and experimental Philosopher. -- The Botanist. --
Physician, and the Merchant. -- The many Professions that spring from these
Fountains, were at different Times set in proper and clear Lights. -- Their
Virtues and Uses to Society, or the Abuses of Power and Knowledge were touched,
so as not to descend too deeply into the Sciences; but to fix the Attention of
the Lads, and give him an Opportunity of discovering the Bent of their
Inclinations and Geniuses.

SUCH a Conduct, he thought as necessary a Part of the Duty of a Master, as
teaching them Latin or Greek, and he never failed communicating his Discoveries
to their Parents.

HAPPY had it been for many Gentlemen, if their Genius had been properly
attended to in their Youth! -- The many Absurdities in the World would be
avoided, and each have the Rank the Law of Nature had assigned them. -- The
Martial Spirit would not be compelled to expose himself in a Pulpit. -- The
tender and meek Mind would not be drove to the Field of Bustle and Slaughter.
-- The Physician would not prescribe at the Bar, nor the Lawyer administer
Physic by Act of Parliament. -- Each would be in their just Point of View, and
each have a fair Opportunity of excelling.

AS Nature gives not equal Talents to all, this good Master made proper
Allowances: He was never displeased at one Gentleman's being less apt to learn
than another, provided he found him equally diligent: On the contrary, he
encouraged and indulged him, and frequently stole into his Room at Night, and
gave him half an Hour's private Instruction for the Business of next Day, but
insisted on its being kept secret from the rest.

SELDOM was their Book an Occasion of Chastisement, but they never were excused
for any vicious Act. When he found a Lad of an obstinate sullen Temper, who
despised Learning, good Advice, or Correction, he sent him home to his Friends.
-- On such Occasions he always made a pathetic Speech to the School, and placed
the unhappy Boy separate from the rest. -- When he was to depart, Mr. Johnston
walked with him to the Gate, and all the Gentlemen followed with profound
Silence. Here he embraced him and took his Leave, praying God that this gentle
Admonition might make him reflect in Time, and change his Conduct, so as to be
an Honor, and not a Discredit to Society. -- Then, in a ceremonious Manner,
all the rest took a melancholy Farewell.

AMONGST the many Advantages of this Seminary, Mrs. Johnston, and her Niece
Nannett contributed in improving the Boys in French; and, as all the
Inhabitants commonly spoke it, they acquired that Language with great Facility.
-- Some Evenings, when Mr. Johnston could not attend, his Wife has extremely
diverted and amused them by Molier's Comedies, Gil-Blas, Scaron, and other
Books of that Tendency.

THUS did this good Family look on themselves as Parents to the Children, and
the Children regarded them as such. -- Instruction and profitable Entertainment
were so agreeably and nicely blended, that the one was never suffered to become
tedious and irksome, nor the other to cloy or fill the Mind too much.

CHAP. XII.
Persuasive Folly has strong Charms,
T'allure the Feeble to her Arms.
Weakness and Vice go Hand in Hand,
And seem united by one Band.
Let Reason but assume her Seat,
Folly and Vice will soon retreat.
ANONIMOUS.
AS Jack Connor was not intended for a perfect Scholar, Mr. Johnston's Care on
that Account was not so exact as to other Lads; but what regarded the moral and
social Duties, he received in common with them. In the three Years at this
School, he had acquired a good Share of Latin and some Greek, but his chief
Pleasure was in Reading, and making Extracts of useful and entertaining
Passages from History, Voyages, Poetry, and the like, of which Mr. Johnston had
a good Collection always open to the Gentlemen. This improved him in Writing,
made strong Impressions on his Mind, and gave him a Falicity, and a genteel and
easy Turn of Language, that much better Scholars are Strangers to. He spoke
French with great Fluency, for Mademoiselle Nannett took some Pains to perfect
him in it, and as he had a charming Voice, she taught him many agreeable French
Songs.

HE was now in the Spring of Life, tall and well made. Health, Beauty, and
Sprightliness were always present with him, and Mirth and Joy danced in his
Eyes. These, and his little Accomplishments, made him caressed by all, and were
so remarkable, that even Madam Johnston has been frequently heard to say, Ma
Foy, c'est un beau Garcon! -- Voila de quoi fair un Joli Homme! -- If Nannett
was silent, she looked, and perhaps thought the more. -- The Dial spoke not,
but it made shrewd Signs.

THE Juice of the Grape is insipid, nor can yield a Spirit till fermented. In
this State, the Vessel must be pierced, and a Vent given to the jarring
Particles, or it will burst its Tenement. -- The Hand of Experience knows when
to stop this Chasm, -- to fine it down, and give it the proper Time to acquire
a Mellowness and Flavor that gladdens the Heart of Man, and adds Cheerfulness
and good Humor to every rational Company. -- If Ignorance interferes in the
Management, the Wine will become sour, and of little or no Value.

IS there not somewhat of a fermenting Quality in human Nature? Or rather, is
it not certain that there is? -- Without this Fermentation, which the Passions
only can give, Man would be but a moving Statue. It Is the Passions that open
his Understanding. -- They lay the Plan of all his Operations. -- They conduct
him first to Objects of Pleasure, and then branch out his Imagination to Glory
-- Honor -- Riches. They polish him, and raise a Desire of loving, and of
being loved. -- In a Word, they alone, when justly guided, can make him a
rational Creature. -- If unheeded, and suffered to take an unnatural Bent,
neither Fame nor Honor can result from them, and the Man becomes the Pest of
Society instead of the Pleasure.

OUR little Hero was not formed without these Passions. If from Inexperience,
they sometimes hurried him into imprudent Acts, and brought him into dangerous
Situations, he was the first to censure his own Conduct, and recur instantly to
the Principles imbibed in his Youth. -- Of what Use these Passions and these
Principles were to him, is too much a Part of this History, to be omitted in
their proper Place. -- Since, therefore, it is impossible for me to act the
impartial Historian, and omit the Consequences of these Passions, I hope the
candid Reader will excuse the seeming Levity of this Chapter. -- My Hero is not
a perfect Hero. -- He is young, and without Experience. He has the Seeds of Man
in him, and consequently is faulty. Besides, as his whole Life turns on this
Incident, I am compelled to insert it, but hope the Moral will excuse the Tale.

THE Time was now come when Jack was to be tempted, and unwarily to yield. When
he became criminal, he became unhappy. -- Of late he took a particular Pleasure
in Nannett's Company, and she, in Return, treated him with great Freedom, and
with somewhat more than mere Complaisance. His Years prevented his seeing the
secret Motives of her Kindness. He was happy, because she was fond of him; but
her Fondness arose from a different Principle. -- She loved.

How far this Passion will extend itself, few are unacquainted, and poor
Nannett practiced every female Wile to gain a Heart invincible to her Charms,
only from Ignorance. Often has she told him, he ought, at his Age, to avoid
blushing when he spoke to her, and be more a Man, than to tremble at touching
her Hand. -- These and many other forcible Expressions she has reiterated, and
sometimes even kissed him, but they only served to give him a secret uneasy
Pleasure, and a constant Desire of her Presence, without a Knowledge of the
Meaning. -- She remarked his confused Behavior, and found, she must either
renounce all Shame, by speaking in direct Terms, or absolutely avoid him. --
The Delicacy of her Sex as much forbid the one, as her violent Love did the
other.

HER Invention was on the Rack, but at ast she remembered a certain French
Book, where a Lady is placed exactly in her Situation. To this dear Volume she
turned, and determined to try the Experiment. She found Opportunities to oblige
Jack to read most Part of it to her, but deferred the Lecture of the interesting
Scene, till the first Day Mr. Johnston and the Lads went a Hunting. That Time
soon came, and the Evening before she whispered him, to avoid being of the
Party, and they would finish that charming Story. He with Eagerness consenting,
she told him how inconvenient it would be to read in his little Room, but, said
she, as soon as they are all gone, if you will promise to be very secret, and
make no Noise, you may come to my Chamber, and we can read at our Ease. -- He
promised, and this Conversation ended.

IT was now June, and being fine Weather, all were ready for the Sport of the
Field at Four in the Morning. Jack excused himself to Master Harry, on Account
of a Book he was to finish, and a Letter to write to Mr. Kindly; and, slily
slipping up into his Room, remained there till he saw them all at some
Distance. With cautious Steps he quietly mounted the Back-Stairs, and found
Nannett's Chamber Door on a Jarr ready to admit him. His Treading was not so
light, but her attentive Ear heard him, and putting the Curtain back, in a low
Voice she cried, -- Lord bless me, Jack! Who would have expected you so early?
-- I thought to have been up and dressed, and now you surprise a-body in Bed.
Indeed I am quite ashamed of myself, -- but -- shut the Door, and sit down
softly. -- She then opened the Curtain a little more, and Jack sat at some
Distance. A Silence ensued for some Minutes, till at last he ventured to say
something of the Book. -- Well, said Nannett, look for it under my Pillow, and
I Will read. -- Jack searched for some Time, but in vain; and, she calling him an
awkward Fellow, rose carelessly and soon found it. -- Undoubtedly she had no
Intention of exposing to his View her lovely Neck; for, no sooner had she
caught his Eyes fixed on that Part, and saw the Tumult it occasioned in him,
than with great Precipitation she covered it. -- Her Head was once more laid on
her Pillow, and the Book in her Hand. -- If, said she, you keep so far off, you
cannot hear me, and you had better come and sit on the Bedside. -- The poor
Boy, willing to oblige, carefully moved, but found her right Arm negligently
thrown out. This Impediment he gently removed, but not before he had frequently
kissed it. She called him a Fool, but her good Nature did not forbid this Sort
of Folly.

JACK'S Spirits were up in Arms, so we must presume he was going to sit down
improperly, otherwise she certainly would not have said -- Bless me! -- Why
sure you an't so mad as to lie on the Bed; -- But -- if you are afraid your
Shoes will make a Noise, and will absolutely do it, cannot you pull them off? --
His Shoes vanished in an Instant, and he placed himself where before he had no
Intention. --

COME, come, said Nannett, let me make an End of my Story, but if you attempt
to serve me, as Amyntor does his Phillis, positively I shall not endure you, --
but -- here is one Kiss more to keep you quiet. -- She then fixed on the Page
and began. -- Thus situated were this happy Pair. Silence and Secrecy reigned,
and no Eyes to witness their Joys, but those of laughing Cupids, who hovered
round the enchanting Bower. Amyntor was all Desire and Love, but his invincible
Modesty, obliged the equally enamored Phillis to supply by Management, what
her Tongue could not utter. She insensibly conducted him to the Beginning of
Charms, to which the Youth was an absolute Stranger. -- Nannett continued to
read, and, with great Judgment, laid the proper Emphasis on every Word; but at
every tender or delicate Period, as many such there were, Jack became an exact
Imitator, and frequently interrupted the Narration. She often wondered at his
Assurance, and declared her Anger, but her Countenance did not seem to imply
that Passion, and at last she was permitted to continue. -- Too pressing
Amyntor, too yielding Phillis! -- The Time, the Place, and every Opportunity
conspired with their mutual Inclinations. -- A thousand Dalliances intervened,
'till Prudence, -- Virtue, -- and Phillis were lost.

NANNETT would have proceeded, but Jack, still faithful to his Copy, prevented
it by acting Amyntor. -- I hope the Reader will not insist on too nice a
Description of this Scene, for I am permitted but to add, that at last, as
Reading was become useless, she closed the Book, and -- I must close this
Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
Ah thoughtless Mortals! ever blind to Fate!
Too soon dejected, and too soon elate!
Sudden these Honors shall be snatched away,
And cursed for ever this victorious Day.
DRYDEN'S VIRGIL.
THE Clock struck Seven, which roused them from their Dream of Happiness, to
think on their Safety. Nannett was unwilling to part; but Jack, now more
prudent, took an hasty Kiss or two, and got to his Room unperceived. He now
began to reflect on his Conduct, and he judged himself greatly criminal. He now
remembered Mr. Kindly's Precepts, which had for some Time been neglected, and
called to Mind his last Words of Calamity and Misfortunes, if he departed from
Virtue. These Thoughts gave him extreme Uneasiness, but he found himself
greatly relieved by resolving to be guilty no more, and to shun the Object. An
unusual Gravity attended him the whole Day, which greatly disturbed Nannett, as
he gave her no Opportunity of inquiring into the Reason.

HE was extremely pleased with this Conquest over himself, but alas! he little
knew his own Heart; and, as he was a Stranger to the Ways of Men, how could he
possibly know that of Women? -- Nannett, impatient to learn what passed in his
Soul, waited in her Chamber till Two in the Morning, not doubting but Jack
would find his Way there. The Disappointment extremely mortified her Pride;
however, she determined at all Events, to have her Doubts satisfied, and
resolutely ventured down, and got to his Bedside. She prevented a Noise on his
awaking, by telling her Name, and as she was undressed, without more Ceremony
slipped in, and took him in her Arms.

WHERE now were all his mighty Resolutions? -- Where were all Mr. Kindly's
moral Lessons? -- Vanished, -- Lost in the Obscurity of the Night, and in the
Arms of Youth and Beauty! -- She made him many tender Reproaches, but her Love
forgave all. -- His Reflections that Day were quite of another Complexion to
the former, and he even thought himself a Fool, for being more timorous than a
Girl. Besides, he argued the Impossibility of Danger, or being discovered; and,
that if it was a Crime, he at most, was answerable but for Half; but the
strongest Reason for continuing this Affair was, that he believed every Man
would do the same, had he the same Opportunity. -- Thus, his Understanding was
quite defeated by, what he thought, good Reason. -- How many are there, who, by
such fallacious Arguments, persuade, or endeavor to persuade themselves into
Evil, even contrary to their real Opinion? And how many are there, who are but
too successful in their Attempts to deceive themselves?

HIS Amor went charmingly on for about six Weeks, nor could there be, in his
Imagination, an happier Mortal. -- He insensibly dropped all boyish Amusements,
and was much less punctual and exact at School, than formerly. His Visage began
to change, and the Roses in his Cheeks to fade; insomuch, that Madam Johnston
really thought him out of Order, and very innocently directed Nannett to take
some Care of the poor Boy, and give him something warm, when he was in Bed.
Nannett most punctually obeyed her Commands, but Jack grew paler
notwithstanding.

MR. JOHNSTON, at last, observed an Alteration in Jack, and, for some Time, was
of his Wife's Opinion; but, as Nothing could escape his Penetration, he
perceived that the Boy's Eyes sparkl'd, and his Face had an uncommon Glow,
whenever Nannett entered the Room. He likewise remarked a peculiar Pleasure in
their Countenances, when they spoke to each other, and even when their Eyes
chanced to meet, which they frequently did. -- It Is a Question would puzzle
Monsieur de Moivre, Whether most Intrigues were began, or were discovered by
the Eyes? Certain it is, they are as apt to betray as seduce. If these
faithless Companions have a Language to persuade us into secret Deeds, they
have another to divulge it. -- What Pity it is, they are placed in so
conspicuous a Spot!

MR. JOHNSTON in his Youth was a Master of this Language, and read in their
Hearts, what gave him extreme Pain. He was tortured with suspecting the worst,
and reasoned himself into the Conduct he was to observe, should his Suspicions
be well grounded. -- He knew, should his Resentment vent itself in Words, the
Reputation of his Niece was lost, and the Character of his School would suffer
a severe Wound. -- To chastise the Boy, would answer but the same End. -- To
join them in Marriage was ridiculous, and, to suffer them to live peaceably in
Iniquity was impossible. -- For two Days was he thus agitated, before he could
fix on a Scheme to save all Appearances, but particularly those that could
affect his own Family. -- When he had revolved his Plan, and taken a
Resolution, his next Step was to satisfy his eager Doubts.

The third Morning, about Three o'Clock, he quietly stepped into Jack's Room.
He examined the Bed, which he founded unruffled and cold, and immediately
concluded Jack was in a warmer Place. He paused for a few Minutes to stifle his
Indignation, and let the Hurry of his Spirits subside, and then quietly mounted
to his Niece's Apartment. He gently opened the Curtain, and found the happy
criminal Pair locked in each other's Arms, bidding Defiance to all worldly
Cares, for they were fast asleep. -- For some Time he gazed with Astonishment,
and scarcely credited the Evidence of his Eyes. -- At last he stirred Nannett,
who wakened with a tender Expression to Jack; but when she perceived her Uncle,
she was just going to scream out, when he put his his Hand on her Mouth, and
conjured her to make no Noise, but lie still. -- Jack now opened his Eyes, but
the Moment he beheld the old Gentleman, he hid himself under the Clothes.

POOR Nannett put on a most supplicating Countenance, which her ready Tears
greatly assisted. Mr. Johnston, with as much Coolness as he could collect,
first desired her to pin her Tucker; and, Now, said he, Child, though you have
been very foolish, yet I promise you, if you will keep your own Counsel, I
shall do the same, and it shall for ever be a Secret, even from your Aunt. --
So much Goodness gave her new Life, and she promised never more to transgress,
and be all Obedience. -- Dry your Eyes, my Dear, said he, you see I am not
angry with you or Jack, so bid him get up and meet me in the Garden
immediately; where we will consult how to manage this silly Affair. -- When he
was gone, Jack ventured to peep out, and was quite overjoyed to find Mr.
Johnston in such good Humor, and much wondered at it. They were both extremely
pleased, and imagined they even had his Consent to continue their agreeable
Amusement. -- Jack soon dressed himself, and taking a tender Leave of his dear
Nannett, promised to meet earlier the following Night; but alas! that Meeting
never happened.

JACK got to the Garden as directed, but trembled at Mr. Johnston's Approach,
who, assuming a Smile, gave the Boy not a little Courage. -- 'Well, Sir, said
his Master, it seems you have lately passed your Time very cheerfully, and
turned over other Leaves besides Latin and Greek; however, I am not now here to
upbraid you with Ingratitude, or with the Breach of all Laws, Human and Divine;
neither shall I now correct you, or send you to Prison, and have you hanged, as
the Laws direct; but, as I shall always have it in my Power, so I shall
certainly put it in Practice, except you will give me your most sacred Promise,
to do whatever I shall order.' -- 'Sir, said Jack, with great Confusion, I
really don't know how to appear before God or you, after my Transgressions; but
I hope my sincere Repentance, with my most solemn Vow to obey all your
Directions, will atone for my Crimes' -- I know, replied Mr. Johnston, you
abhor a Lie, therefore I will trust you. The last Letters I received from my
Lord particularly mention you, about a Project I had of sending you to London,
of which he has approved. Now, Jack, if you will set out this Day, in the
Manner I shall direct, I will pardon all, and put you in a Way of making your
Fortune.' -- 'Sir, replied Jack, (who was fired at going to London) I have
already given you my Oath to obey, and, to convince you of my Readiness, I am
willing to set out this Minute.'

IN the first Place, said Mr. Johnston, I must insist on your not speaking a
Syllable to Nannett, on any Account whatever, nor to any Person in the Family
about what has happened. In the next Place, I desire you will press me this
Morning for Leave to visit Mr. Wilson's Family, who have so often invited you.
-- Go that Road about a Mile, and then turn back through the Fields, which you
know will, in about an Hour, lead you into the great Road to DUBLIN. On this
Side the Windmill you will find my Man John with a Carr, who will have
particular Orders to take Care of you, and you will follow his Directions. As I
know you will believe me, I give you my Word and Honor, that I intend only
your own Good; but it is absolutely necessary for your Peace and mine, that you
promise punctually to obey my Orders, and that on no Account you will ever
write yourself, or cause any other Person to write to my Lord, Mr. Kindly, or
me. These are the Conditions on which my Pardon is founded: If you transgress,
be assured my utmost Rensentment will follow.

JACK threw himself on his Knees, and most solemnly vowed, in the Presence of
God, religiously to observe all his Directions; and rising, asked his Master
what he intended to do with his Shirts, Books, and his other little Effects?
But being assured he should find them all safe in Dublin, was quite easy on
that Account. -- Now, said Mr. Johnston, I am satisfied, and I hope you will
have Reason to be content. Lest you may want Money on the Road, here is a
Guinea, and more will be given you in Town.

AS they walked toward the House, Mr. Johnston gave him many good Lessons for
his future Conduct. -- He very earnestly recommended a modest, sober, and
religious Life, as what only could give him true Joy and real Happiness. -- He
told him, that God sometimes permitted Good to come out of Evil and prayed it
might be so in the present Case; but, that no Man ought to depend that such a
Grace would at all Times be bestowed on us; -- that, as the Mercy of God was
great, so was his Jealousy; equally capable of forgiving young rash Sinners, as
of punishing obstinate and unrepenting Offenders.

MUCH more was said on this Subject, and in so tender a Manner, as greatly to
affect the Boy, and make a strong Impression on his Mind. Mr. Johnston
concluded, with saying, You have not much of the common Irish Manner of
speaking, but let me advise you to forget the little you have, and endeavor to
speak like the People you live with, which will prevent your being often
laughed at, and ridiculed by the Ignorant and Vulgar, and none other can do it.
-- Your Name is quite Irish, but I shall call you JOHN CONYERS, in my Letters,
and henceforward let that be your Name. And now, Mr. Conyers, I think we have
fully settled this Matter; therefore go in, and behave as usual; but remember
your Promise.

THEY got to the House before any of the Servants were up, so their Meeting was
a Secret. -- When Jack was alone, he began very seriously to reflect on his
Situation. He was conscious of deserving very severe Punishment, and thanked
God Mr. Johnston had treated him so well. -- On the other Hand, he regretted
parting with his dear Nannett, especially in the Manner he had promised, and
had a violent Inclination to take one tender Farewell, but his Vow prevented
him. The Injunctions laid on him, he thought very extraordinary; but the Dread
of Punishment and Shame, and the Anger of my Lord and Mr. Kindly, made him
acquiesce with Patience to these hard Terms. Besides, as he really had an
entire Confidence in, and a Love for Mr. Johnston, he doubted not but he had
good Reasons for what he ordered.

THOUGH his Effects were to meet him in Dublin, he had the wise Precaution of
putting on two Shirts, and taking his Purse, which now contained but eleven
Guineas. He likewise put in his Coat Pocket the little Box and Instructions
given him by Mr. Kindly, and all the little Manuscripts he had. Thus dressed,
and fixed in his Resolutions, he waited on Mr. Johnston, and begged his Leave
to visit Mr. Wilson, who lived about four Miles to the West. -- Mr. Johnston
hesitated for some Time, but his Wife interceding, she obtained Permission,
provided he promised to go Half a Mile round, and not cross the Ford which was
sometimes dangerous.

IT seems Mr. Johnston had given Orders to John to go that Morning with a Carr
to Dublin for an Hogshead of Wine; and, as he was an old faithful Servant, was
the only Person he trusted with the Secret. He gave him his Instructions, and a
Letter to his Brother, who was a Merchant of that City. -- John had set out
about Eight o'Clock, and Jack took a different Road about Nine. -- He went off
with tolerable Spirits; but, when he came to the appointed Turn, his Heart
swelled, and the Thoughts of parting with Nannett, Master Harry, Billy, and all
his dear Friends for ever, almost made him distracted, and obliged him to sit
down and give Way to a Torrent of Tears. -- At last the Thoughts of seeing
DUBLIN and LONDON, and the Hopes of making his Fortune, throwing his Situation
into a more favorable Light, he found Strength to proceed, and joined old John
about Eleven o'Clock. -- The Man was prepared for him; and, under the Pretense
of keeping him from the Sun, seated him on a Bundle of Straw on the Carr, and
covered him with a Sort of Awning, so close, that no Passengers could see him,
and then marched on to Dublin, where he was well received by the Merchant.

PERHAPS the good-natured Reader may be desirous of knowing what passed at
Portarlington when Jack was missed, and how Nannett and the Family behaved on
this melancholy Occasion; and sorry I am, that it is not in my Power to gratify
so reasonable a Curiosity. He may, if he pleases, suppose with me, that they
sent next Day to Mr. Wilson's, and that their Surprise was great, when informed
they had not seen or heard of him. No doubt, many were their Conjectures; some,
I imagine, thought he had run away; but I apprehend the most probable and
general Surmise was, that in crossing the Ford he was drowned.

BE this as it will, I must, though with some Regret, leave this good Family, and
follow my Friend JACK CONYERS through Scenes of a much different Nature. -- The
calm, tranquil Life he has hitherto led, must give Place to the Hurry and
Bustle of the World. -- Deceit, Craft, Flattery and Vice, must succeed to
Lessons of Honor, Probity and Virtue.

CHAP. XIV.
Take sound Advice proceeding from the Heart,
Sincerely yours and free from fraudful Art.
DRYDEN'S VIRGIL.
HAPPY that Being, who sometimes permits himself to think seriously; who
suffers his Imagination deliberately to reflect on external Objects, and
internally apply those Lessons of Morality, and Instruction that may be drawn
from every Action of Man -- Vice trails with it those Marks, that show us its
Odiousness, as some poisonous Animals carry their Antidote. -- Affluence and
Plenty are not generally productive of such Thoughts; for, in that Situation,
we are apt to look no farther than ourselves, nor conceive the Possibility of
being wretched and unhappy, till we have experienced some of its Bitters. --
There is a pleasing and a useful Sensation, in the Soul, at viewing and
commiserating the Distresses of the Unfortunate. The more we have pitied and
raised our Tenderness and Charity to others, the happier we find ourselves,
should Distress and Penury, visit us in its Rounds -- Independent of the
Christian Duty of Compassion, this Consideration alone, makes it good to have
been in Trouble.

JACK, though tenderly treated by the Merchant, and now in a large City where
Variety of unaccustomed Objects presented themselves to his View, yet
melancholy Ideas filled his Mind. To abandon and be abandoned by those Friends
he had so sincerely loved -- To live amongst Strangers in a distant Country,
and to begin to labor and work for the Bread he was to eat, were to him most
dreadful Vicissitudes of Fortune; and what he imagined, were peculiar to
himself. In these gloomy Reflections, he acknowledged his manifold Offenses,
and in his fervent Prayers, which had lately been neglected, most heartily
begged Forgiveness. He read Mr. Kindly's Instructions to his Son, over and
over, and made the properest Observations on them in his Power.

AS I have now some spare Time, it cannot be better employed, than laying
before my Reader the Instructions so often mentioned. -- Should he be wise
enough not to stand in Need of these Precepts, I beg he will pass them over,
and skip on to the mere Narration.

To my Son John Kindly.
Bounty Hall. My dear Child,
WHEN you reflect on the Relation I bare to you, and on my Tenderness and
Affection, you must be convinced that all my Care and Pains is to endeavor to
make, and perhaps see you an happy and a worthy Man. -- You are now to begin a
new Scene of Life, where, instead of the Guardianship of a fond Father you must
be guided and directed by so dangerous a Tutor as yourself -- Though you must be
far removed from my Presence, yet, I conjure you by every sacred Tie, to think
on your Father and the Advice he now gives you.

BE careful in observing every Duty of RELIGION. You will find it the surest,
and perhaps the only Way to keep Peace and Content in your Heart, and a
Serenity and Cheerfulness in your Countenance -- By being a Man, be not ashamed
of being a Christian.

CANDOR, Integrity and Gratitude, are some of the strongest Links that bind
Men to each other. When these are absent, Suspicion, Fraud and Deceit, will
fill each Breast, and make us rather Companions for the wild Inhabitants of the
Forest, than Associates to Animals, who boast superior Reason.

YOU are to live in the World. -- You are to study the large Volume of Mankind.
-- Whilst thus employed, forget not that Mankind are studying you. -- Nature
has given you an easy flexible Temper, therefore guard against the Charms of
Flattery. -- I know you will avoid the Profligate and Profane: Shun likewise
the Demure, the Precise, and the Very Godly. -- Experience demonstrates that
Hypocrisy, Cunning and Deceit, generally lurk under it, and that the Righteous
overmuch, have other Schemes to work out, besides their Salvation.

WITH Virtue, Truth and Justice, which I trust you will preserve, there are
Duties of Society that give Beauty and Harmony, and therefore must not be
neglected.

A TENDERNESS for our Fellow Creatures, a compassionate Turn for their
Misfortunes, and Pity for their Weaknesses, are what we owe ourselves and them.
-- By not paying this Debt, we renounce our Claim to Humanity.

POLITE Behavior and Complacency of Manners places every Action in the most
advantageous Light, and adds irresistible Grace to every Word and every Motion.
-- Be sincere in such a Conduct, and suffer not your Lips to give the Lie to
your Heart. -- There is a Medium to be followed even to Persons we have an ill
Opinion of.

AS a general good Behavior is necessary to, and required by all, you cannot
fail of being remarkably so to some particulars; but avoid making Friendships,
till by Time you are convinced they deserve yours. -- When you have found a
Friend, detest the old and false Maxim of living with him as though he may become
an Enemy.

GO not into the Way of Temptation; for, believe me, it will but too often fall
in yours. Resolution is strong; but the strongest is lodged in a frail Body,
therefore depend not too much upon it, but, rather owe your Safety to a timely
Flight.

IN your Dress, avoid as much as possible the Gaudy and Fluttering, but in the
Neat and Clean, endeavor to be remarkable. A Carefulness in properly setting
off the Person, is commendable and useful. It argues a Desire of pleasing, and
gratifies the Eye of every Beholder. A Propriety in Dress, and a certain
Sobriety of Deportment, free from Affectation and Formality, will always add
Weight to your Conversation, and make it sought after.

COMPANY and Cheerfulness are necessary, and of infinite Use; but a constant
Jollity and Mirth betrays such a Levity in the Mind, that your Presence will
never be desired but merely to divert others, whose Regard ceases the Instant
the Laughter is over. -- Should your Wit offend, be assured of an Enemy for
ever.

AS your Inclinations lead you to the Study of the Laws, you will soon perceive
the Strength of the Foundation on which the British Constitution is built. --
You will soon observe the Happiness of that Kingdom, where the different Ranks
of Men have their different Operations, all coinciding and centering in the
Preservation of the Whole. -- Let your Heart and your Hand be always ready to
support this Structure. -- It has often been in Danger, and suffered
mighty-Revolutions; but, as it is now fully repaired by a PROTESTANT ARCHITECT,
be it your Care, as much as in you lies, to defend it from every Foreign
Political, and from every Domestic wicked Attempt.

AMBITION and Pride are Crimes of the most dangerous Tendency, yet, like
Opiates, a small Quantity is sometimes necessary, as a large one gives the
Patient up to Frenzy and Madness, and, in the End, destroys him. -- To have
these in a just Degree, will raise a Desire of excelling, and prevent a
Meanness of Conduct.

A POET says, ' There is a Pleasure in being mad, which none but mad Men know.'
-- Be it so, but desire not to experience it. Rather try what Pleasure Common
Sense will afford. -- She will instruct you in Economy, and in that proper
Management of your Fortune, that will bid Defiance to a Goal, and make your
Sleep truly a Blessing. -- She will teach you the right Use of Learning, and
show the Folly of being impertinent with it. -- She will hold a Mirror to your
Person, and point out the Absurdity of being vain of it. -- She will advise,
direct, and show you the World in its true and genuine Colors, and give you
that Taste, which Ignorance, Pride and Folly, will ever be Strangers to.

LEARN, if possible, to be content with the Station Heaven has allotted you,
and endeavor to attain that Sort of Philosophy which gives Patience and
Resignation in all Sorts of Calamities. -- The happiest of Beings not only are
subject to them, but almost daily feel them in different Shapes. -- To be a
Master of this truly noble Science, believe me, the Heart must be unconscious
of Guilt, and a Rectitude of Thought must dwell in it. -- In a Word, let your
Intentions and your Schemes of Life be always founded in Virtue and Honor;
but, whilst human and prudential Means are pursued, submit the Issue, with all
Humility, unto that BEING, who is incapable of Error or Falsehood, and into
whose Hands I cheerfully submit you.

JOHN KINDLY.


AS often as Jack read over these Lessons, he found his Cares to lighten, and
received such Strength to support himself, as made him determine to pursue them
as exactly as he could. -- He had now been in Dublin about a Month, and had
received all the Effects he left in Portarlington. The Merchant having prepared
all Things for his Expedition, and equipped him tolerably well in Clothes, gave
him Five Guineas, and a Letter to his Correspondent Mr. Joshua Strong, of
Throgmorton-Street, and embarked him on board the Hibernia, bound for London.

I HOPE it will not be expected I should furnish my Readers with the Adventures
of this Voyage of ten Days, as there happened but the common Occurrences on
such Occasions; but I am strongly inclined to present them, according to the
Practice of other wise Authors, with a most extraordinary and surprising Dream
Jack had the first Night. -- He dreamed -- But I beg Pardon, for I find myself
at this Instant so drowsy, that I must request my kind Reader will follow my
Example, and by taking a Nap, dream the Remainder of this Chapter.

CHAP. XV.
When Pleasure stumbles in our Way,
Our best Resolves too often decay.
Frail Nature prompts, and giddy Youth
Falls into Crimes, in spite of Truth.
ANONIMOUS.
MR. STRONG had by Post received a full Account of Jack, and what he was
destined for, so that when he appeared with his Letter, he was received with a
Sort of Civility that gave him some Uneasiness. Mr. Strong, was at Dinner, and
having asked him a few trifling Questions, desired him to go to the Kitchen and
get some Victuals. He bore this Indignity tolerably well, for his Appetite did
not permit his quarrelling with Punctilios. In the Evening some more Questions
were put to him, and was told he should be taken next Morning where he was to
live. It seems Mr. Strong had had Time to prepare Matters.

THIS was not the pleasantest Night Jack passed in his Life, but the Morning at
last came that was to solve some Doubts. Mr. Strong took his Hat and Cane, and
desired Jack to follow him. As they walked he told him they were going to Mr.
Champignon's the Weaver in Spittle Fields, with whom he had agreed to bind him
Apprentice. You may, said Mr. Strong, stay seven or eight Months on Trial; but
I dare say you will like your Situation so well, that you will have Reason to
thank your Friends. -- Jack, though not quite pleased, was glad to find Matters
no worse, and with more Cheerfulness continued his March to the Weaver's.

MR. STRONG entering, cried, 'Well, Monsieur, here is the Boy I spoke to you
about; take him, and be sure don't keep him idle.' -- 'Ha hah, said Champignon,
Parbleau he be a ver pretty Garcon, and I sure you must work ver well, for be
gar si he no Travail he fall ave de ver good Soupe-maigre! -- 'That's right,
said Mr. Strong, no Work, no Meat; but I hope he will prove a good Boy, so,
Monsieur, your Servant, -- I Will call on you as I go by.' -- 'Serviteur,
Serviteur, Monsieur de Strange, cried Champignon, as you plese call en pessant.'
-- Jack eye'd his new Master, and could scarcely forbear laughing at the Oddity
of his Figure. He was about Sixty-five or Seventy Years of Age, tall and very
thin. His swarthy Skin did not seem to belong to what it covered, and his
Cheek-Bones, in particular, discovered a violent Inclination to escape through.
He had on an old greasy Stuff Gown, and a double milled Cap, that perhaps was
formerly Scarlet. In short, Jack thought he was bound Apprentice to a Skeleton,
but a certain good natured Smile, and an agreeable Vivacity in the old Man,
gave him some Prospect of being better than he imagined.

MONSIEUR Champignon, was one of the Million whom the Religious Wisdom of LEWIS
the Fourteenth compelled to visit England and other Protestant Countries, and
who brought with them many useful Arts and Manufactures. He was a Man of great
Application and Industry, which, with great Saving for a Course of Years, made
him worth about Twenty Thousand Pounds. He had a Gaiety in his Temper, and such
a Fund of natural good Understanding, that his Company was extremely agreeable
to many eminent Merchants. His Wife was a good Sort of old Woman; but his only
Child Mademoiselle TONTON, was a most lively and pretty Girl of Twenty-four
Years of Age. Her Complexion was not of the brightest, but her sparkling Eyes,
and her good Shape, made her a very desirable Object. Her Father, from the
Stinginess of his Temper, had disappointed her of two very good Matches, and
the scandalous Chronicle of the Neighborhood said, she had taken a proper
Revenge.

CHAMPIGNON was so whimsical, that he scarcely ever spoke French, and his
English was such a Medley, as to occasion frequent Laughter. When he was asked,
Why he spoke not better English, he always answered, -- De par tout les
Diables! -- How you ave me speak so better Englis? Sacre Chien! I ave live dans
Londres no more as Forty Year, but avec de Time, me sal ave de Conversation,
Piff -- Paff -- so well as Monsieur me lor Mere.

JACK was employed in the usual Business of a junior Apprentice, and in weaving
Ribbons, which he did tolerably well, but found he had not a natural Call to be
tied to a Loom.

IT would be impertinent to attempt to entertain the Reader with the many arch
Tricks Jack played his new Master, or with the Mirth Monsieur Champignon's
English afforded. He was extremely passionate, and often called Jack a Jean
Fou-re, an Irland son-ma-biche, and many other whimsical Names that always
excited Llaughter.

HE had now lived with Mr. Champignon above Twelve Months, and was pretty well
reconciled to the Family, whose Love he had got by Songs, and a thousand Irish
Stories. Miss, in particular, was greatly diverted with his agreeable Chat, and
he overheard her one Morning, tell her Maid; That considering Conyers was
Irish, he was the prettiest young Fellow she ever saw in her Life. -- Though
his Manner of speaking was greatly improved, yet there remained enough of his
Country to be severely banter'd by Miss Tonton. She often insisted on his
making Bulls and Blunders. She laughed at the Words, Unwell -- Big Coat, --
E're Yesterday, and the like. -- Jack, who was now become pretty free, asked
her, if she understood him when he spoke. -- 'Yes, said she, I comprehend your
Meaning well enough; but you have such unaccountable Phrases, one had need of
an Irish Expositor.' -- 'I'm glad, Madam, said Jack, you are pleased to allow I
speak so as to be comprehended, but a Gentleman, the other Day, in our
Warehouse cried out, "Did no body see any body take up never a Hat." -- 'I beg,
Madam, you will be so good to explain this English Phrase; for, upon my Sowl, I
cannot.' -- 'Upon my Sowl! said she, and laughed violently at his Tone, without
answering his Question.'

SUCH Sort of Conversation happened frequently, and was equally amusing, but as
he artfully suffered her to have the Superiority in every Argument, and even
asked her Advice and Instruction, she conceived a vast Opinion of his
uncultivated Genius, and his natural good Parts. -- These Sort of Beginnings,
generally lead to, and are but the Forerunners of Thoughts, not so proper to be
plainly set down. -- These impertinent Thoughts but too often occurred, -- Jack
had them not, -- Guess who then?

MISS TONTON was one Morning at her Toilet very judiciously adjusting her
Headdress before she fixed her Stays. Young Conyers, passing her Chamber, was
perceived by the Reflection of her Glass, and calling him in a great Hurry,
begged he would look down her back for a Flea that teased her immoderately. Jack,
very innocently, examined the Part, and declared he saw nothing. -- Lord, said
Tonton, you're such an unhandy Booby, you will let the Creature escape, but look
sharp, Jack, I beg of you. -- Jack looked, but his Imagination being warmed by
the Touch, his Understanding became the clearer. -- Now, cried he, I see it. --
There it hops, faith it is a Swinger. -- He then vigourously pursued the flying
Animal, which, traversing the whole Plain of her Back, took its Course to the
Eminencies in Front, where it afforded a most delightful Chase. It skip'd from
Hill to Hill, practiced all the Craft of the Hare, but Jack was so keen a
Sportsman, that he rested not till he had fairly caught it.

ASSOCIATES in Amusements become Intimates, and frequently form Friendships.
'Twas so in the present Case. Tonton began to be extremely fond of Jack's
Company, and found so many Opportunities to hunt, that one would imagine she
had collected all the Fleas in the Parish, to afford him Diversion. Her Maid
Bersheba, who was old and ugly, prevented many an Evening's Sport, so she was
obliged to make Use of her as a Whipper-in, or as a Groom to hold the Horses.
By this notable Contrivance, Jack was frequently introduced when the Family
were in Bed, and stayed till they were near rising, when he quietly retired
through the old Maid's Room, whose Hey-day of the Blood was not over, but
sometimes mutiny'd in the Matron's Bones. -- It seems poor Bersheba was
likewise subject to Fleas, and the Hunting them became not a little troublesome
to Jack. It chagreen'd him much, and made Tonton very uneasy. -- At last he
obtained a long Respite, but not in the Manner he chose, for he was taken
extremely ill, and a violent Fever ensued. No doubt he wanted not proper Care,
and in Six Weeks he began to return to his Senses, and a little to recover.

THE first Use he made of his Reason, was to confess the Justice of the
Punishment for his repeated Crimes. -- Bounty-Hall, Portarlington, his Friends,
and all their good Advice, now came rushing into his Thoughts with such Force,
that he relapsed, and had like never to have given me the Opportunity of
writing his History. His Youth and good Constitution at length prevailed, and
all Danger was over, except what might proceed from his extreme Weakness, or
falling into a Consumption. He recovered so slowly, that the Doctor, like his
Brethren, when they know not what else to do, advised a Change of Air for a
Month or two. Champignon was one of the few Frenchmen of Substance, who had not
a Country House, and to take Lodgings and maintain Jack, would be attended with
an Expense he by no means could bring himself to think of.

MR. VILLENEUF, a very eminent Merchant in Black-Fryars, was an intimate
Friend, and had frequently diverted himself with Jack, whose pertinent Answers
and good Understanding, made him a Sort of Favorite. -- 'Champignon, said he
one Day, Why don't you send poor Conyers to the Country? -- The Lad will die
here, and his Funeral will cost you more than a Month's Lodging.' -- 'Ha, Ha,
said Champignon, I do no such a-ting. -- Parbleu I send Jean to de Diable -- to
Monsieur de Strange. -- Dat Gentilman he never come say, Champignon, how Jean
Conyer do? -- Monsieur de Strange say noting, do noting -- Poor Champignon must
do tout. -- Ventrebleu! Je crois dat de Monde tink me diablement rich! -- I
tell you, Monsieur Villeneuf, poor Champignon sall dye, alors you will see,
you will regard all my pauvre Richesse.' -- 'A d'autres, said Villeneuf, I
know you better. Besides, if Mr. Strong be a Brute, I hope my Friend Champignon
is not? -- But I shall make this Matter easy, and honest Conyers shall not be
lost. -- Send him Tomorrow to my House at Greenwich, where he may be a
Companion for my sober melancholy Son, and perhaps do each other good.' --
Champignon was not averse to this Proposal, and Jack, with his Trunk, were put
into a Coach, and sent off next Day.

MR. VILLENEUF, the Son, was a Gentleman of Twenty-four Years of Age. He
passionately loved Reading and Retirement, was extremely good natured and
charitable; but had a Gloominess in his Temper, that made him averse to much
Company and Mirth. His Father, who had no other Child, was obliged to indulge
him in his Humor, and supply him liberally with Money to gratify his generous
Spirit. His large Fortune could very well afford this Expense.

JACK was as happy as his disturbed Thoughts would permit, which were ever
reflecting on his past Conduct, and upbraiding him with Actions of which he
dreaded the Consequence. -- Repentance, he thought, might avert a further
Punishment, and set himself seriously to think of it. -- He knew, that truly to
repent, he must lead a new Life, and avoid his former, and all other Crimes. --
But how difficult! what Struggles had he to forget Nannett and Tonton! he could
not avoid remembering the very Thing he wanted to be blotted from his Memory;
then how could he say he would forget them? -- No, but as he could not prevent
the Intrusion of Thought, he was determined to refrain from actual Evil. As
this was the utmost he could bring himself to, he rested satisfied that this
Resolution would hold firm.

THE first Week at Greenwich was not extremely pleasant, as young Mr.
Villeneuf, seldom spoke to, or seemed to regard him, but as the Apprentice of a
Weaver, for whom his Father had some Value. Jack perceived the Reason of this
Coolness, and by Degrees stole in a Latin Sentence; and some judicious
Observations, but in such Language and Accent (for he had quite lost the Irish
Tone) that surpised the young Gentleman, and made him desirous of a more
intimate Acquaintance. This he easily accomplished, and as Jack's Health and
Spirits increased, he made great Progress in the Affections of Mr. Villeneuf.

THE old Gentleman had determined to send his Son to Paris for a Year or two,
that by Travel, and a different Climate and Company, he might be brought
insensibly to act like other Men. He found his Son was much pleased with Jack,
and proposed his going with him as a kind of Servant, of whom he might at Times
make a Companion. The young Gentleman expressed his Satisfaction, and Conyers
was vastly delighted at seeing a little more of the World, and not be obliged
to return to the perpetual Motion of the Shuttle.

I MUST leave the Management of Monsieur Champignon to the old Gentleman, and
bid adieu to Spittle-Fields, Tonton and Bersheba, for in three Months Mr.
Villeneuf and Conyers found themselves in the Capital of France.

CHAP. XVI.
The Learned, full of inward Pride,
The Fops of Outward show Deride;
The Fop, with Learning at Defiance,
Scoffs at the Pedant, and the Science:
The Don, a formal, solemn Strutter,
Despises Monsieur's Airs and Flutter;
While Monsieur mocks the formal Fool
Who looks, and speaks, and walks by Rule.
Britain, a Medley of the Twain,
As pert as France, as grave as Spain,
In Fancy wiser than the Rest,
Laughs at them both, --
GAY.
JACK was now in his Ninteenth Year, of a good Stature, good Complexion, and,
when dressed, was a very genteel and handsome Fellow. His Eyes were black and
sprightly; he had a most agreeable Smile, and something so easy in his Manner,
that he prepossessed every one in his Favor, almost at first Sight. When he
spoke, it was with great Modesty, but his Learning and good Sense made him
heard with Pleasure. He had found out the grand Secret of Conversation, which
was to speak seldom, but to the Purpose, and he had likewise learned to get the
better in an Argument, by sometimes giving it up.

HIS fixed Allowance from Mr. Villeneuf was but small, but he equipped him with
decent Clothes, ruffled Shirts, and from Time to Time with Money sufficient to
dine at a good Ordinary, and be always clean and neat. Mr. Villeneuf generally
went out about Ten in the Morning, and returned to his Lodgings about Five in
the Evening, except he went to the Comedy, but never expected Conyers till
about Eight or Nine o'Clock. Jack always attended when he was dressing, but was
of little Use, as a French Footman performed all that Operation.

MR. VILLENEUF had a Fencing and a Dancing Master, rather because it was the
Fashion, and that his Father insisted on it, than for any Use they might be of
to him. The Gentlemen constantly attended, but Conyers principally received the
Benefit of their Instructions. He likewise was very diligent at a Neighboring
Academy for Riding. This was of infinite Advantage, as it strengthened his
Limbs, and gave him a Carriage that still added to the Gracefulness of his
Person. When his Curiosity was pretty much gratified, he applied closely to the
best French Authors, making their History and Language familiar to him. He
examined and enquired, as far as he was able, into their Laws, their Customs
and Manners; and made such Observations, that more learned Travelers need not
have been ashamed of. He had a Genius for Figures, and made himself a tolerable
Master of some Branches in Mathematics. In a Word, he took Care to be fully
employed.

HIS young Master, or rather his Friend, had Books enough, and in Conversation
gave him many Hints which he improved. One Night at Supper, Villeneuf told him,
he wondered at his staying so much in the House; and that he ought to go more
into the World! 'You are always said he, poring over Books, and advising me
against what you practice yourself.' -- 'I confess, Sir, said Conyers, it is
but too true. I am necessitated to act like the Gascoin; for, not having it in
my Power to read the Great, I must content myself with the small World, as I
find it in Books.' -- Pray, said Mr. Villeneuf, how did the Gascoin manage? --
'Why, Sir, replied Conyers, the Gascoin was just as poor a Fellow as I am, but
he took it into his Head to be industrious, and amuse himself with selling
Water in Paris. An old Friend met him and his Pitchers, and was vastly
surpised that a Gentleman of his Noble Blood, could so demean himself, as to
follow so low an Occupation. Lord! replied the Gascoin, you quite mistake the
Matter, for I am a Man of great Importance, and such a Favorite at Court, that
the King has granted me the Waters of the Sein, but, as I have not found a Chap
to buy the Whole at once, you see I am obliged to retail it. -- 'So, said
Villeneuf, the Moral of the Story is, that your Poverty prevents your following
my Advice; but henceforward, that shall be no Obstacle. My Appointment is more
than I possibly know how to spend, and must desire your Assistance in the
Management of Part of it. To begin, take these Fifty Pieces, and command more
when they are gone.' -- Sir, said Conyers, I own I meant to beg a little Money,
but could never imagine your Generosity and Goodness, extensive and great as
they are, could lead you into such an Act, that my poor Services can never
repay.'

CONYERS, like Numps in the Comedy, was quite another Creature with Money in
his Pocket, and so elate, that he could not avoid imparting his good Fortune to
Madam Commode, the Milliner where they lodged. She rejoiced exceedingly, and
extolled Mr. Villeneuf's Generosity to the Skies, but still insinuated, that
the Bounty was vastly lessened, when the Worth and Value of the Receiver was
considered. -- Many were the Compliments and Encomiums bestowed on him by the
good Woman and her fair Daughter, Mademoiselle MADELAIN. This young Lady was
blessed with peculiar Eloquence, and such a Fluency of Speech, that Conyers
pressed her Acceptance of a Couple of Lewis d'Ors, which, by some accidental
Words, he found she stood in Need of. With great Difficulty she consented, but
assured him, it was owing to his irresistible Politeness. -- He imagined
sometimes, she was troubled with Fleas, but he found those of Paris more nimble
than those he had before hunted; for, though he often attempted, yet he never
could catch one of Madelain's.

HE dined most commonly at a neighboring Hotel frequented by very good
Company, where he had the Honor of hearing the English pretty severely
handled, particularly by Monsieur MAQUEREAU, and the Chevalier FANFARON. -- 'I
cannot conceive, said Maquereau, how London maintains itself, for most of the
Inhabitants transport themselves to Paris.' -- 'True, cried Fanfaron, those
English of some Understanding, know they can never improve but by our Company.'
-- 'I cannot blame them, replied the other, for it shows some Glimmering of a
good Taste. The English, continued he, have that plodding Turn, and that Sort
of blunt Stupidity, that enables them to make Money, and as foolishly to throw
it away. Were it not for their Guineas, their Company would be insupportable.'
-- 'It must be confessed, said the Chevalier, that their Purse is the best
furnished Part about them. They are awkward and clumsey, and have not the least
Spark of French Politeness.' -- 'I'm sure, said Maquereau, (raising his
Shoulders) we take great Pains to make them reasonable Animals, by sending such
a constant Provision of Cooks, Milliners, Tailors, Footmen, Silks,
Embroideries, and a Million of other useful Ingredients in the Composition of a
fine Gentleman or Lady; and so ungrateful are the Creatures, that they send us
nothing in Return.' -- Fo -- re, cried the Chevalier, what the Devil have they
to send us? So Monsieur BALANCE comes in Person to return their Thanks.' --
Many more vain and impertinent Remarks passed between them; and the Chevalier
concluded, by saying, It must be allowed, France is the Nation in the World,
where People see good Manners and true Politeness.

CONYERS was very uneasy at this Conversation; but Monsieur DE PENSE, an
elderly Gentleman, took a Glass of Wine, and said to him, 'Mr. Englishman, I
have the Honor to drink your Health. It Is the English Fashion, and I love it
the better. I have great Obligations to the English, and regard them as a brave
and generous People. As for their Politeness, I swear they have more than what
you have seen this Day at Table.' -- 'Sir, said Conyers, I am very glad to find
so much in one Gentleman, and am disappointed at not discovering the same in
all.' -- How, Sir! cried the Chevalier, in an half Angry Tone. -- Sir, replied
Jack very briskly, you will be so good to indulge me two Words, before your
Warmth increases. Gentlemen, continued he, I am in Paris by Command; therefore,
am not one of those who come merely to learn Fashions. All Nations have Fools
in Abundance. -- English Fools go Abroad, because they have Money, and perhaps
the Fools of this Country stay at Home, because they have none. I frequently
meet them, and sometimes dine with them, and, if you will take their Words,
they are Men of Taste and Politeness; and, to convince you of it, they will
tell you the English are stupid and barbarous. They Will say the rudest
Expressions with the most respectful Bow, and call it Good Manners. I own,
Gentlemen, my Ignorance cannot comprehend the vast Politeness of such a
Conduct, but my little Experience has taught me not to judge of a whole Nation,
by a few recent bad Samples.' -- Fanfaron and Maquereau swelled with Choler,
but Pense, in a Sort of peremptory Manner, desired them to be easy, and added,
-- 'I am ashamed of all this. Every one here knew this young Gentleman was
English, and every one of us ought to strive who could most oblige him. If
Gentlemen will strike the Ball, they must expect it will rebound, and I doubt
not but the young Englishman is as capable of handling a Racket as either of
you; but by G -- he that offends him, by Design, offends me.' -- 'I offend the
Gentleman? cried the Chevalier, I hope I have more good Manners.' -- 'I am
truly sorry, said Maquereau, any Pleasantry of mine should offend a Stranger,
much more one of so respectable a Nation as England, and I hope the Gentleman
will be so good to grant me his Pardon.' -- 'Sir, said the Chevalier to Jack, I
ask the same with the utmost Sincerity, and flatter myself the Good Nature, so
peculiar to the English Nation, will demonstrate itself on this unhappy
Occasion; for, be assured, Sir, we had not the least Intention of affronting
you, or our dear Friend Monsieur de Pense.' -- Mutual Compliments having
passed, the Affair was finally adjusted, but Mr. Pense begged a further
Acquaintance with Conyers, for he was vastly satisfied with his Conduct.

AT Supper, Jack acquainted Mr. Villeneuf with his Adventure, who seemed
extremely pleased he had come off so well. -- 'That idle Partiality to our
Country, and the despising all others, said Mr. Villeneuf, gives Rise to a
thousand Quarrels. Do not our vulgar Countrymen most heartily abuse the French,
and all other Nations? And I believe many of our Great-ones do the same.' --
'In this, Sir, said Jack, you may very justly say, The Great Vulgar, and the
Small,
Differ in little, -- if at all.
The highest and lowest Class only vary in their Vices, by the Manner of
committing them. They have their Amors, and are equally gratified. -- One may
drink Champaign or Burgundy to Excess, and the other be as happily drunk with
Beer or Gin. -- One may game for a Thousand Pounds, and the others be as eager,
and cheat as much in Play for Twopence.' -- 'But, said Mr. Villeneuf, in
Swearing and Cursing, as their Capacities are equal, they are equal in every
Part.' -- 'In abusing the French, said Conyers, they may have a Shadow of
Reason, because they are always public or private Enemies; but what can be
said, Sir, when they abuse and insult a whole Kingdom, governed by the same
Monarch, the same Laws, and inhabited by the same People, as themselves?' -- 'I
suppose, said Villeneuf, you mean the People of IRELAND, for I know you have a
warm Side to it.' -- 'Sir, said Conyers, I shall not deny it, neither do I
think it a criminal Warmth; for he who wishes well to a Part of his Majesty's
faithful Subjects, ought to do so to the Remainder.' -- 'Not only so, replied
Villeneuf, but is bound in Duty to wish well, that is, to endeavor to convert
the bad ones. Your Observation on the Insults offered the Irish, is, I think,
rather too general, and holds true; but, with Regard to what you term the great
and small Vulgar, Gentlemen of a certain Education, think differently, and are
not Slaves to old Popular Errors and Prejudices. However, I believe you will
confess, that the infamous Practices of some of the Irish, don't much
contribute to remove the Partiality.' -- ''Tis too true, Sir, said Conyers, and
many pay for their Pranks with their Lives, and die suddenly in Tyburn Road. If
a poor Wretch has, or takes on himself a Name, something like the common Irish,
every News-Paper charges him to the Account of Ireland, when perhaps some other
Part was entitled to the Honor. This has often made me wish, that the
Hibernians had a Gallows erected for their own proper Use, as they have here
for the Normans; and, who knows, but a certain Shame might operate more
forcibly than the Severity of Laws.'

Well, well, cried Villeneuf, I am for the Ford, let it fit whom it will. As
for the Abuse and Banter bestowed in general on the Irish Tone, or Manner of
Speaking, I think it falls only on those who give it; but as you seem to
interest yourself about them, and I believe know little of the Conduct of
England, with Regard to that Kingdom, I shall give you, some Time or another, a
short Tract on that Subject, which I have chiefly collected from the
Observations of my Father. -- Conyers returned him many Thanks, and Mr.
Villeneuf desiring him to keep up his Acquaintance with Monsieur Pense, retired
to his Chamber.

CHAP. XVII.
Of all the Follies we can boast,
None, sure, can be so strong,
As pay a Fool to rule the Roast,
And guide our Children wrong.
What Man, who plows the fertile Soil,
And hopes Reward for Cares,
Will call the Crows to reap his Toil,
And be content with Tares?
ANONIMOUS.
NEXT Morning Conyers paid a Visit to Monsieur Pense, and was genteely
received. The usual Compliments being over, I doubt not, Sir, said he, but you
'were greatly shocked, Yesterday, at the Impertinencies of the two Scoundrels;
but, as you very justly said, that you would not brand a whole Nation for the
Faults of a few, I believe I can strengthen your good Sense, by informing you
who those Men are.' -- 'I am sure, Sir, said Conyers, they are Persons of low
Minds, which made my Resentment fall the lighter; but I must own my Obligations
to you, for extricating me from an Affair that might have been as troublesome
as necessary.' -- 'I promise you, said Pense, you owe me nothing, and you will
be convinced of it, when I have the Pleasure of being better known to you. At
present, permit me to give you a short Account of those Gentlemen who gave
themselves so many Airs.'

FANFARON was very early dubbed a Knight of the famous and ancient Order of
INDUSTRY. It is impossible to inform you of his many Exploits in France, Italy,
and in England, where I had the Honor of meeting him and Maquereau at a
Gaming-Table, and detected them of using loaded Dice: Fanfaron fell to my
Share, and Maquereau to a Friend. The Discipline of the Cane and Kicking lasted
a full half Hour, and was so entertaining, that they have ever since done me
the Honor of being extremely complaisant.

THE Chevalier got acquainted in London with Mrs. Smith, the Wife of an Italian
Merchant. She was a most charming Woman, and her Husband was extremely fond.
His Business calling him to Leghorn, he prudently settled his Affairs, and made
his dear Wife sole Executrix, and divided his Fortune between her and a Child.
Poor Mr. Smith went off, and his tender Consort would have been inconsolable,
had not the good-natured Fanfaron comforted her in her Afflictions.

AT last the Chevalier persuaded her into a Scheme to make their Joys more
complete, and not so liable to be interrupted by the Curiosity of a Husband. He
very dexterously forged a Letter from the Correspondent at Leghorn to Mrs.
Smith, full of kind Expressions and Friendship, and the great Difficulty he was
under, by being obliged to mention the Loss of so worthy and good a Man as Mr.
Smith, who took a Fever, and, in Spite of all Assistance, and the Skill of
Physicians, died in his Arms the Ninth Day, confirming a Testament made in
England.

MRS. SMITH was now a Widow, and acted that Part to such Perfection, that her
Relations thought she could not long survive.' -- 'Good Heaven! cried Conyers,
I shudder at the Consequences.' -- Well, Sir, said Pense, notwithstanding her
mighty Grief, her Weeds and Administering to the Will were not forgotten. In
fine, she called in the Debts, sold off the Stock in Trade, the House, and
every Thing belonging to it, and finding herself in Possession of Six Thousand
Pounds in Cash, very fairly bid Adieu to her Husband, her Child, her Father,
and all her Relations, and flew with her beloved Fanfaron to this famous City.

POOR Mr. Smith returned soon after to England. If his Pleasure was great at
the Thoughts of meeting his dearest Wife, what were the Torments he endured,
when he found he had not only lost her, but was reduced to Beggary? Words
cannot express his melancholy Situation, and the Manner of it afflicted him
more than had he been deprived of all, by any other Accident. His Friends did
all in their Power to assuage his Woes; and, as he had an extreme good
Character, and was really an honest Man, the Merchants of London acting like
themselves, supported his Credit abroad, advanced him Money, and set him so
fairly in the World, that I left him greatly recovered in his Spirits and
Fortune.

'DEAR Sir, said Conyers, you give me great Joy, but I am curious to know, if
possible, what became of Mrs. Smith.' -- Her Fate, replied Pense, was dreadful
enough. Fanfaron, for some Time, lived a gay and splendid Life. Constancy and
Humanity were not amongst his Virues or Vices; so that in about Twelve Months,
Madam was sent to Graze on the Common, till at last, having run through every
Scene of Misery, attended by a guilty Conscience, she finished her Days in the
Hospital of La Charity.'

TEARS stood in Conyers's Eyes; but when he a little recovered, 'poor Wretch,
said he, as the Hand of Providence is so visible, I shall not pretend to
arraign its Justice or Mercy. -- I presume, continued he, Monsieur Fanfaron
enjoys the Remainder of her Fortune with vast Comfort and Satisfaction, and
doubt not, but he will some Day or other, have the Honor of entertaining a
Crowd at the Greve;' -- 'and very likely, added Pense, attended by his Friend
Maquereau. -- This other fine Gentleman, continued he, was a Footman in Paris,
and went to London with an English Lord. Had he had common Honesty, he might
have made a Fortune, for he don't want Sense. He passed through many Services,
and was remarkably dextrous in the nice Conduct of an Affair, which in Italy is
managed by a Secretario de Amore, and what in England is termed Pimping. The
Money he got by this Branch of Business, was all laid out at the Gaming-Table.
However, I found him in Paris a few Years ago, with an Equipage; but by some
Circumstances that then happened, I have Reason to believe his last Master was
not the richer for him. -- But let us drop these Fellows, for they are not
worth our Thoughts, though we are compelled sometimes to dine with, and be civil
to them.'

'I OBSERVED, said Conyers, an Englishman, at Table Yesterday with a young Lad,
and what surpised me was, they never opened their Mouths, but to eat and
drink.' -- 'O, replied Pense with a Laugh, the Gentleman you mention, is a
BEAR-LEADER.' -- 'A BEAR-LEADER, cried Conyers,! In the Name of Wonder, what
Profession is that?' Why, Sir, answered Pense, A Bear-leader is a Man who
understands Latin and Greek, and is well paid by a rich Father, to take his
Child and expose him through every great Town in Europe.' -- 'I suppose, said
Conyers, you mean a Governor to a young Gentleman in his Travels.' -- 'You may
give it, replied the other, what Name you please in England, but I am sure they
here give it the proper Appellation; for the Boys that generally follow these
Leaders, may very justly be called Cubs.' -- Conyers smiled, and the
Conversation continued on various Subjects till they withdrew to Dinner.'

IN the Evening, Jack gave Mr. Villeneuf some Account of his Visit, and did not
forget the Description of a Bear-leader. -- Certain it is, said Villeneuf,
nothing improves the Mind of a young Man like prudent Travel. We are sensible
of this in England, but few know how to conduct it. -- We generally take a Lad
from the University, where, though he has acquired some Learning, yet he is as
ignorant of the World as his Bed-maker, and at once Case him up in fine
Clothes, and let him Run a Winter or two in London. He is then taken up and
saddled with a Governor, who Races him round Europe, and in two or three Years
he returns to his dear Parents loaded with the Bawbles and Vices of each
Country.' -- And is this, Sir, said Conyers, the mighty Uses of Traveling?' --
''Tis but too frequently so, replied Villeneuf, but when a Youth of Education,
improved by good Company, travels with a Gentleman of Sense for his Companion,
his Friends may expect the Harvest of a thorough Accomplishment. This Youth
will remark on the Strength and Weakness of different Countries; on the
Usefulness of different Manufactures, and endeavor to transplant those
Sciences that may advantage his Country, and improve it. This I call
traveling, and not riding Post; but to send a Boy of Sixteen or Seventeen
Years of Age, who knows nothing of his own Country, with a Pedant as ignorant
as himself, is truly, what your Friend calls exposing both to the Ridicule and
Imposition of Foreigners, and brings a Contempt on our Country. -- One will
improve by the good Customs and Manners, and the other as certainly catch the
Follies and Impertinences of every Nation they travel through; and every Nation
have some of one, and too much of the other.

'SIR, said Conyers, though I do not pretend to be a Traveller, yet I cannot help
observing, that the Courtesy of this Country is not of the right Breed. Their
Civilities, or, as they call it, their Politeness, seems to me rather an Habit,
and Jingle of Words, than to carry a Meaning significant of what they express.'
-- Sometimes, said Villeneuf, it is so; yet, when I find myself deceived, their
Manner of doing it, prevents my finding Fault, and even pleases. It Is this Sort
of Manner that makes a Stranger pass his Time, more agreeably in France, than
in most other Countries, and what I wish our People had a little more of.' -- I
believe, Sir, answered Conyers, if our English want that Manner, they make it
fully up by their Sincerity. -- So we say, replied Villeneuf, but suppose it
Fact, What have I to do with the Sincerity of a People with whom I mean to pass
but a short Time; to contract no particular Friendships; and to keep myself in
that neutral civil Style which every Man has a Title to? Believe me, Conyers,
Men of Fortune will be naturally drawn to that Place where they can purchase
most Pleasure, and receive most Honor. You may, if you please, call it
Flattery; but since we choose to swallow, they are in the Right to administer
the Dose.' -- 'I wonder, said Conyers, that so much of it don't turn the
Stomach.' -- Just the contrary, replied Villeneuf, for the Stomach is so
accustomed to it, that it becomes a real Nutriment, and a Nutriment, that many
Courts in Europe are so fond of, that they will purchase it, though their
Liberties may be the Price. -- I have often heard, said Conyers, that the
French have always aimed at Universal Monarchy, but I should imagine, that the
Fate of the Romans who fell by their own Weight, would deter them from such a
Project; but Ambition and Glory have no Bounds.' -- If, said Villeneuf, they
have such Notions, they may manage in another Manner. By the Conversation I
have frequently had with some Gentlemen of Understanding, I have laid down a
Plan of French Politics by Way of Hypothesis, and not as Truth, which is very
difficult to come at. If my Conjectures are right, their System is short, and
far from impracticable. -- But it is now late, so take it, and examine it at
your Leisure.'

WHEN both were retired, Conyers read, and copied, as he always did, the
Observations of Mr. Villeneuf. He now began, from the Study of Books, to
examine the Truth from the Study of Man, and compare them together. -- The
Reflections of Mr. Villeneuf, and the Additions made by Conyers, according to
the Time he had occasion to mention them, must be left to that Time to
discover; for he is now going to Bed, and so am I.

CHAP. XVIII.
It Is an Old Maxim in the Schools,
That Flattery is the Food of Fools;
Yet now and then your Men of Wit
Will condescend to take a Bit.
SWIFT.
CONYERS constantly visited Monsieur Pense and was much improved by his
Company. Mr. Villeneuf was so extremely pleased, that he supplied him very
liberally with Money; but whatever good Sense Jack possessed, he by no Means
understood the Uses of that Commodity. His Landlady and the fair Madelain were
determined to enjoy an equal Share of it, at the small Expense of a little
Flattery, and the nice tickling the String of Vanity and Self-Opinion, so
common in Youth, and what Age and Experience are not always Proof against.

THESE Ladies had engaged the Esteem of Conyers, by a thousand winning Ways;
but now, his Person and his vast Accomplishments were the Theme of every Hour.
When they spoke of him to Strangers, it was with Rapture, but they took Care
that he was within hearing. This Sort of Conduct not only produced frequent
Plays, Operas and Parties of Pleasure; but often extracted half a dozen Pieces
for some pretended Emergency, which were repaid by Madelain in Caresses, and by
every Freedom except the last.

THEY often wished that Conyers had a Fortune agreeable to his Merit, and
insinuated, that perhaps they might be of Service to him. -- 'It is not, said
Madame Commode, a New or Uncommon Thing for Ladies of Fortune to make
themselves Happy with a young Gentleman of your Figure and Understanding.' --
'And I know, said Madelain, a most beautiful Lady with half a Million of
Livres; that, I believe, sees Monsieur Conyer oftener then he imagines.' -- 'In
a Word, cried Madame, since my Girl has blabbed out so much, I must tell you a
little more. The Daughter of a rich Banker of Paris, has seen you, and is
actually in Love. Her Companion sups with me this Evening, and you must be of
the Party.' -- Lord, Madame, cried Madelain, what a charming Couple they will
be! how delightfully will they live! -- What a superbe Equipage, and
magnificent Hotel! Good God! What cannot Youth, Beauty, and Riches do
together.' -- 'Hold, hold, said her Mother, not so fast if you please. Fair and
softly: -- This must be a Work of some Time, and managed with great Address, or
we shall stumble on many Difficulties.' -- Conyers blushed, and gave many
Thanks for the good Opinion she was pleased to entertain of him -- that he
would study to deserve her Favor, and would be entirely guided by her. --
'Leave it to me, replied Madame, and I will engage to make something of it. --
I need not desire you to be cheerful and free with the Lady to Night, but don't
think of making her any Presents till you become a little more intimate, which
I hope will be about the third Visit. -- Presents must be made, but let them be
genteel and frequent. -- They pave the Way, and oil the Hinges, -- You
understand me.' -- Extremely well, replied Conyers, and as I know they are
absolutely necessary they shall not be wanting.'

CONYERS provided some excellent Burgundy and Champaign, and in the Evening was
presented, with great Form and Encomiums, to the amiable Companion of the Fair
unknown. At Supper he was extremely Gay and polite, and, at her Request, sung
several new Songs in an elegant Taste. -- Mademoiselle FARDE was highly
delighted with his agreeable Company, and gave many Proofs of it. -- Madame
Commode and Madelain were very lavish in their Praises, and the Night concluded
with mutual Marks of Esteem and Respect.

A SECOND and a Third Evening past pretty much like the First, except that
Mademoiselle Farde and Conyers were very intimate and free; Madame Commode, by
Accident showing some fine new fashioned Caps and Ruffles, Conyers embraced the
luckly Opportunity of presenting Mademoiselle Farde with what she seemed to
like most. The Gift was a Trifle of about Twelve Lewis d'Or's; and, with great
Entreaty, was accepted. That Night the good Lady of the House brought on the
proper Subject, and with some Hesitation Mademoiselle Farde acknowledged that
Monsieur Conyer was not indifferent to the Lady she had the Honor to live
with. -- Conyers bowed and assured her he was in Love with the Description of
that beautiful Angel, and with many Apologies, begged she would convey a small
Billet to her fair Hands. Mademoiselle Farde objected to such a Proceedure, and
would have absolutely refused it, had not Madame Commode and Madelain most
artfully pleaded his Cause. -- He had a Letter prepared, which he most
respectively gave her. -- She was equally ready, and, with a wink, slipped a
Note into his Hand.

WHEN all were retired he read his Billet which contained these Words, I have
my Reasons. Let me see you Tomorrow Evening at Six o'Clock in the Tuilleries.
Keep this a profound Secret. Adieu. -- Conyers was punctual, and Farde was
exact. -- She told him, 'twas impossible to meet so often at Madame Commode's
without being observed, and to take him to the Lady's House was impossible;
that to be of Service to both, she had taken a private Lodging, where they
could settle Matters, and where the Lady would certainly meet him, were it in
her Power. She then added, We may be observed even here, let us retire. --
Conyers attended, and was conducted to a little Lane, and a very indifferent
Chamber of which she had the Key. -- Here she informed him of many Particulars
with Regard to the young Lady, and gave him Hopes of bringing Matters to bear,
and promised her utmost Assistance. -- So much Goodness naturally claimed a
grateful Return, and at last she was prevailed on to accept Ten Pieces. His
Generosity charmed her, nor could she forbear answering his tender Embraces,
which by Degrees became more Fervent, so that -- you will permit a Continuance
of this History.

HE had now completely fixed Mademoiselle Farde on his Side, yet they met at
his Lodgings as usual, but more frequently in this. -- The young Lady answered
his Billets in a proper and polite Manner, and permitted him to Hope. He
replied as politely, and the Correspondence went on in the most agreeable
Manner, though he sometimes thought that the Postage was rather too expensive;
however, as he was sure of the Lady's Affections, he judged it well bestowed,
and waited for the Issue with great Patience for above Four Months.

ONE Morning as he was going out, he found a Letter to Madame Commode, which
had been dropped by Accident, and he read,

Dear Commode,
YOU have afforded me infinite Pleasure by the Company of the English Man. Were
he richer, our Profit would be greater; however, I shall do my Part to ease the
poor Devil of what he don't know the Value of. I send you back the embroidered
Petticoat, which the Fool gave me last Night, so give the Bearer Six Lewis
d'Or's. I shall call on you Tomorrow, and think I have a Scheme to keep the
silly Fellow's Hopes alive, at least three Months longer. Adieu.

FARDE.


No London Citizen looked so much Aghast,
At the dread Shock of first or second Earthquake;
Nor Broughton, famous Bruiser! felt such Pangs
When Slack, the Pupil of his Iron Hands,
Raised his tough Fists, and with a mighty Stroke
Buried those Eyes that saw to aim so well;
As looked and felt, the Poor, the bubbl'd Conyers.
He stared and read, but at last cried out, I am an English Man -- I am a poor
Devil, a Fool, and silly Fellow, but -- Art to Art,' -- and then he left the
Letter just where he found it.

HE recovered his usual Sprightliness, and went to find Mr. Pense, to whom he
communicated the Beginning of this Affair in a very serious Manner; but Pense
had no sooner heard Madame Commode named, than he bid him, have a Care. -- 'I
am surprised, said he, that a young Fellow of your Understanding, has not found
out that that Lady is but of the middling Order of Bawds. -- You are her Dupe,
her Cully, and give me but Permission, and I shall demonstrate it to you.' --
Permit me, said Conyers, to thank and save you the Trouble, for I know it
perfectly well, but my Knowledge is not Three Hours old.' -- He then told him
the Remainder of the Story, and begged his Advice, which Pense gave, with an
Addition of good Instructions.

CONYERS found Means to persuade Villeneuf to change Lodgings, and on various
Pretenses to borrow a few Louis from Madame Commode, and even from Mademoiselle
Farde. -- At last he contrived a Letter as from London to a Merchant in Paris,
wherein, among many Particulars, he expressed his Surprise, that Mr. Conyers
would choose to live in the Manner he did with Mr. Villeneuf, when a large
Estate waited his Orders, by the Death of his Father. A Gentleman delivered to
Mrs. Commode this Letter open with Directions where he lived, but that he would
have the Honor of waiting on Mr. Conyers, in a few Days.

IT IS not easy to conceive the Impression this Letter made on the Mother and
Daughter. They gave it to Conyers with prodigious Respect, and formed Projects
infinitely more extensive than the first. -- He told them he knew of this
before, therefore was not elate on any Advancement of Fortune; but he likewise
found a Time to persuade Madelain to accompany him to England, and share it
with him. -- As she consented to his generous Proposal, it is not surprising
that they sealed the Agreement in the most solemn Manner.

HE was now out of the House of Madame Commode, and constantly visited
Mademoiselle Farde. This good Creature was much more liberal of her Favors
than he expected; but Jack being of a free communicative Temper, Miss Madelain
shared in her Bounty. He soon was sensible of his Situation, and applied to his
Friend Pense, who, with a Smile, said, This Affair has ended with strict
poetical Justice, and let it there remain. Drop these fine Ladies, and make
your Court to a Surgeon.

POOR Conyers was greatly mortified. -- The Reflections of his Mind were not
lightened by the Pains of his Body. He found he had not only acted imprudently,
but wickedly; and, once more, began to repent, that is, to dread a sharper
Punishment; for he had that Sort of uneasy Fore-boding in the Soul, that many
feel, but what none can describe or account for.

HIS Intimacy with Pense, for almost two Years, had grown into a strict
Friendship. -- To this sensible Man, he discovered his present Situation, and
almost his whole Life, and received such Consolation and Comfort, that greatly
alleviated his Sorrow. -- They were now in the Tuilleries, and the Surprise of
Conyers was extreme, when Mr. Pense began to speak in very good English. --
It Is but just, my dear Conyers, said he, to repay your Confidence in me, by
giving you some Account of myself, which I shall fairly do, and in few Words.

I WAS born, continued he, in London, of French Protestant Parents, and my real
Name is Villars. My Father was a Mercer, and bred me to the Business; but it
seems, my idle Inclinations led me more to Plays, Gaming-Houses, and Horse
Races. -- My Father thought, that a prudent Wife would take off my Wildness,
and provided me with as good a one as ever Man was blessed with. -- We
commenced in Trade, and had tolerable Business; but Diversion, or what they
call innocent Recreation, was strong in my weak Head. I was often at the
Play Houses, and a constant Member of two or three notable Clubs. -- I
sometimes tried my Fortune at a Masquerade, where my Disguise saved my
Reputation, but not my Purse. -- I kept a Brace of good Geldings, and
frequently ventured Fifty or an Hundred Pieces at Epsom, Tunbridge, and other
Races. -- My poor dear Girl, with gentle Words, and Tears in her Eyes, has
remonstrated the Injury I did my Credit; -- That I lost not only my Money to
Sharpers, but my Youth and Time, which never could be recalled. -- I laughed at
her sober Follies, but she never replied, but, -- Well, well, I hope my dear
Tom will think before it is too late.

NOTWITHSTANDING my idle Extravagancies, my dear Wife managed the Shop so well,
that my Circumstances rather increased than diminished. -- The Folly of
appearing rich in the Eyes of the World, is a sure Way of being poor in
Reality. -- This Folly I had, and without considering my Force, I took a House
and Garden at Dulwich, kept my Chair and more Servants; and, according to
Custom, went there on Saturdays, and returned on Mondays; but to my Shame I
speak it, I did worse, much worse, for I kept a Whore. -- Oh, Mr. Conyers!
could my Example, could the Compunction of Mind I now feel be a Warning to
Mankind, I should have some Pleasure in being a Sacrifice for their Use! --
Well, Sir, these Matters took their natural Course. I began to think People
asked for their Money more frequently than they were wont. -- I was pestered
with Duns. -- I practiced all the low Arts, and Contrivances to silence their
Importunities. -- My Plate and Silks often visited the Pawnbrokers, and
sometimes I was privately arrested. -- My Mind was on the Rack. I suffered the
Torments of the damned; and all this, for Follies and Imprudencies, that, in
the highest Enjoyment, afforded but an insipid Pleasure. -- Good God! what
exquisite Misery! Though my Temper was soured, my dearest Girl bore my
Peevishness with a peculiar Sweetness of Manners. -- So far from reproaching my
Conduct, she had laid down a rational Plan for retrieving all. -- No doubt her
Trouble was great, but it was internal, and her delicate, tender Nature sunk
under the Weight, and she -- died in my Arms! -- Oh Conyers! -- Poor Pense
could utter no more, for his Heart swelled, and the round Drops chased one
another down his manly Cheeks. -- Conyers was much in the same Situation, but
at last he said from Shakespeare, 'Thy Heart is big, get thee apart and weep:
'Passion I see is catching; for my Eyes,
'Seeing those Beads of Sorrow stand in thine,
'Begin to water.'


They took two or three silent Turns in the Walks, and in about a Quarter of an
Hour Pense had so much recovered as to be able to proceed.

To the Loss of my Wife was added the Infidelity of my Servants, which my
Carelessness made an easy Matter. -- Finding the Impossibility of
re-establishing my Credit, I secreted to the Value of Five Hundred Pounds, and
leaving my Shop and Effects to the Mercy of my Creditors, took Shelter in
Paris. -- I had but one Comfort in all my Misfortunes, for I had no Child to
share the Afflictions of a guilty Father.

IN this City I have chiefly resided for Fifteen Years, and get a seeming
Livelihood by lending Money on Pledges, but the British Minister is my
principal Support. He has employed me on many Occasions, and to give him
Intelligence of every Occurrence these Ten Years past. Four Years ago I went to
London on his Affairs, where I met those two worthy Gentlemen, Fanfaron and
Maquereau. -- The French look on me as one of themselves. -- I live quietly,
and as a Gentleman, and believe I am not suspected. -- Conyers returned him
many Thanks for his candid Relation, and assured him of his inviolable '
Secrecy.

THEY were now talking of indifferent Matters, when Pense turned suddenly and
said, Pray what is the Motto to the Order of the Bath? -- Conyers, though
surpised at the Question, answered, 'TRIA JUNCTA IN UNO.' -- 'Then, replied
Pense, observe those three Gentlemen by yonder Tree in such earnest
Conversation, and then you will see the Motto in Reality. -- One, continued he,
is an English Non-Juring Parson; the other is a Irish Man of the Society of
Jesus, and the Third is a Scotch Man of the Episcopal Church. -- Those three,
and many others of the same Stamp, have Pensions here, and at different Times
reside in London, and divert themselves, and frighten the credulous People by
numberless Pamphlets and Paragraphs in Newspapers, full of the Decay of Trade.
-- The Weakness and Wickedness of the Ministry, be they whom it will. -- The
Danger of our Liberties by Pribery and Corruption. -- The dreadful Consequences
of a Standing Army, and many other popular Subjects. -- The Scotch Man is a
Master of his Trade, and keeps up the Credit of his Books by, very ingeniously,
answering them himself, which furnishes him an Opportunity of replying to
himself. -- They really are Men of Learning and strong Parts, and meet with
great Encouragement from the Enemies of England.'

I SHALL not, said Conyers, interrupt their pious Meditations, for I am called
to Mr. Villeneuf, who, I fear, waits, for my Appetite informs me it is near
Dinnertime. -- Few Ceremonies suffice amongst Friends, and they parted, but
promised to meet soon again.

CHAP. XIX.
If Dame Partial'ty but holds the Glass,
Full sure, in every Virtue we surpass.
Change but the Mirror, and let Prudence speak,
We'll blush at Error, and our fond Mistake.
ANONIMOUS.
FOR some Time past, Mr. Villeneuf had frequently made Conyers of his Party,
and was not disgraced by his Behavior. This Day a select Company dined at an
eminent Citizen's. -- Cheerfulness and good Humor added the true Relish to the
Entertainment; but when the Servants were withdrawn, the Conversation fell on
particular Subjects. -- As no Man, said Monsieur St. Martin, can judge so
impartially of his own Country as a Stranger of Understanding, I should be glad
Mr. Villeneuf would give us his Opinion of France, with Freedom, and his
accustomed Sincerity. -- Many Apologies were made, and Compliments returned,
till at last Mr. Villeneuf consented, provided that the Question was fairly
stated. -- 'I cannot suppose, said he, you mean to have my Opinion on what
regards State Affairs.' -- 'No, no, replied the other, we only beg your
Thoughts of the People, their Politeness, their Manners, their Dress and their
Happiness, or otherwise.' -- ''Tis a difficult Task you have assigned me, said
Villeneuf, and will require your Patience: But as great and little -- long and
short -- strong and weak, are made such, only by Comparison, I hope you will
permit an alternate Account of England, under the several Articles.' -- The
Company approved of his Method, and he began.

FEW People on Earth are blessed with such a Fund of Spirits and natural Gaiety
of Temper as the French; and yet few Nations are more crampt in the natural
Exercise of it. They laugh, they sing, they dance, and seem content. The
Public are constantly supplied with Amusements, and Policy has so contrived,
as to make Glory and War be thought a rational Recreation. All are disregarded
but those who serve the King in his Troops; his Majesty's Name is never
mentioned, but with the profoundest Respect. We never see his Portrait hung out
as a Sign, in Paris, because it would be treating the Monarch with too much
Freedom, but the Sign of the Holy Ghost, and all the Saints are dispersed
through every Street. A King is always the Head of the most childish Games, and
at Cards, the Best, is honored with that Title. -- Such Principles are
propagated with great Art, and the Religion of the Country admitting Auricular
Confession and Absolution, an Absolute Monarch can, with Ease, direct the
Current of Opinion. -- Men of Learning and Judgment must go with the Stream,
for it falls from too high a Fountain to be resisted, whatever their private
Sentiments may be. Besides, Two or Three Hundred Thousand Orators well armed,
will always carry Demonstration and Conviction. In England, where the
Constitution admits the full Enjoyment of Property, and where Property is
proportionably divided amongst all the Inhabitants, one would imagine they
should be more cheerful than the French, but the Fact is otherwise; for this
very Property, and the Liberty of employing it, has the contrary Effect. They
have the Blessing, but a Jealousy, and the perpetual Dread of losing it, throws
Thorns on their Pillows, and, like the Miser, they starve in the midst of
Plenty. They employ Watchmen for their Security, yet are in constant Fear of
being plundered by them. -- This is the Rise of all the Clamor against an
Handful of Troops. -- The Religion of England teaches Duty and Submission to
the King, and those in Authority under him, but some imagine, that the Liberty
of England gives the People a Right to abuse all; not considering, that by
lessening and ridiculing the just Power and Authority of their Governors, they
lessen their own Weight and Consequence in the World.

FRANCE has propagated the Notion of Military Honor to such a Degree, that
they are become a Nation of JANISARIES, and perhaps must be treated as such, --
that is, they must, Right or Wrong, be frequently employed. Commerce and
Traffic flourish in Peace. -- Riches and Plenty, Learning and Knowledge are
the Consequences, as well as Pride and Luxury. Men naturally become fond of
these Sweets, and will not quietly forego them. They will find out their own
Strength and Power. They will expect a Freedom of Action, as well as Thought,
and absolute Monarchy will fall before them. -- RICHELIEU knew this. -- He
broke and divided the Power of the Nobility, not like Henry the Seventh of
England, amongst the People, but added all to the Dignity and Power of the
Crown. -- MAZARIN did the same, and LOUVOIS, FOUQUET and COLBERT completed the
Project, and the long Reign and Ambition of LEWIS confirmed it. The King of
GREAT BRITAIN is the Fountain of Honor; but the Monarch of this Kingdom is not
only the Fountain of real, but the Creator of imaginary Honors. A trivial
Cross dangling at a Button-hole, gives a French Gentleman such a Spirit of
Honor, as to entreat a General to permit him to mount a Breach. In England, it
must be a valuable Consideration that can persuade most Men even to do their
Duty.

THE Fashions of the two Nations are on different Footings. Here, in whatever
Manner the King or those about him are pleased to wear their Swords, or dress
their Hair, it instantly becomes the Practice of all Paris. Every Man from the
Duke, to the Porter, has his Hat cocked and his Coat cut nearly in the same
Manner. London affords more Variety. -- There every Man dresses according to
his Fancy. Some have Coats below the Knees, and Breeches down to the Middle of
the Leg. Others mount their Breeches to the Thighs, and raise their Skirts to
their Waists. Some Shopkeepers dress like Privy Counselors, and some of high
Rank may be mistaken for Coach-men. -- I am ignorant who had the Honor of
inventing Weepers, when in Mourning, but I think I may venture to affirm our
Manner of wearing them answers the End of Ornament, and keeps the Shirt from
being blackened by the Coat. To wear them on the Top of the Sleeve, can answer
no End.

THE English Ladies rely on their native Charms, nor want the Assistance of
Paint to heighten their Complexions. Whether the French Ladies really stand in
Need of Art, I know not, but their Conduct seems to imply it. -- Whatever good
Sense the French are Masters of, this is certainly not the most glaring
Instance.

IN France, Politeness is not always good Manners, neither is the Bluntness of
an Englishman always a Mark of Sincerity. The Lie is more frequently given in
France, than is generally imagined, but the Pardon that is begged, and the
Excuse that is demanded, (Je demand Excuse; Pardonne moi) softens the Negative,
which, with the Addition of sundry significant Gestures, Custom has made That
genteel, which frequently is the Reverse. -- In England, these Customs are
accounted superfluous, and they deny or contradict in plain Terms, even without
the Assistance of the rude Monosyllable.

I HAVE been often told, "I must own." (Il faut avouer) 'I confess I do not
understand the Phrase. -- If I must believe, I am deprived of the Liberty of
thinking for myself, and my Arguments must cease, when I am pinned down to the
Reasons of my Antagonist. In England, the Freedom of judging is held more
sacred.

THE Theaters of the two Nations were different. The Tragedies and Plays of the
English Shakespeare gave Rise to those of France. His Imagination was not
confined by the Rules of Aristotle, as, perhaps, he thought he had as good a
Right to Alter, as the other had to Make. If the English, by following new
Models, are more regular in Unity, Time and Place, I am sorry to say, their
Fire is not so bright, nor will their Heat last so long. -- Monsieur de
Voltaire and l'Abbe le Blanc take great Pains to show the Absurdity of some of
our Authors, in transporting the Audience to different Kingdoms, and continuing
the Scenes of one Play for many Years, but they do not tell us, that in Tragedy
or Comedy, where we are to suppose an easy, natural Conversation, it is
unnatural to make the Parties speak in Rhyme. They insist, that the Action
should be confined to twenty-four Hours; if so, I apprehend it is unnatural to
have it represented in three. If twenty-four Hours Business can be shown in so
short a Time, we may as well have twenty-four Years. -- The Abbe complains of
our murdering on the Stage, and says, that a Man, not understanding our
Language, must take us for a barbarous People, delighting in Blood. Should a
Man, not understanding French, see the Stage in Tears, and in the utmost Agony
of Grief, must he not wonder what has occasioned it? The Truth is, neither of
the Stages are made for those who do not understand the Language, but I really
think every Stranger, or Frenchman of Sense, must be shocked at the unnatural
absurd Entertainment of a Speaking Harlequin with a patched Coat, and a black
Face.

THE English are full loose in their Morals, but I really think, Libertinism
reigns here in a much higher Degree. The French have a Way of varnishing their
Vices, and making them more dangerous and catching than our awkward Manner can
arrive at. -- When an Englishman swears by his Maker, it is shocking, but when
the French, with Eyes and Hands lifted up, cry out, Sacred God! (Sacre Dieu!)
it is little regarded, as it is the common Expression of every Ten Minutes. The
French have another Phrase, which is but too commonly used, even before Ladies,
and what some Ladies are as familiar with. This Phrase serves to show Pleasure
or Anger, according to the Tone or Manner of speaking. -- How often are the
Words, Fou-re, Fou-u, Bou-re, Bou-sse, pronounced in the politest Assemblies,
and passed over as if no Idea was annexed to them? -- I am ignorant of any
Rules that establish such Indecencies, except the strong Law of a bad Custom. I
am much pleased that Voltaire, and le Blanc, could not mark these amongst our
other Follies; but they totally forget them when they mention their own. The
Abbe very justly censures the Looseness and Ribaldry of some of our Comedies,
but he omits to inform us, that no Nation excels France in the Multitude of
abomiable and filthy Books.

INFORMERS against the Breach of the Laws, are absolutely necessary in every
civilized Government. The Informer, when his Motive springs from Conscience,
and the Good of his Country, is a most valuable Subject, and merits the Regard
of Mankind. But to be informed against, and hurried to the Bastile, or banished
in an Instant by a Letter de Cachet, without knowing the Accuser or the Crime,
may, for aught I know, be very good Policy, but I am sure it is not Justice. --
In England, let the Motives of Information be what they will, the Informer is,
not only, not skreen'd and sheltered from his Enemies, but is given up to the
Reproach and Invectives of an engrag'd Populace. Laws are made, and Punishments
assigned for Transgressors, but our Vox Populi decrees a severer Treatment to
the Discoverer, and saps the very Foundation of Laws.

WITH regard to the Happiness of the French or English, no Mortal can judge. It
must be left to their own Decision; that is, each will give the Preference to
themselves, for each have that natural Prejudice and Partiality to their own
Country, that persuades them into an Opinion of their peculiar Felicity. -- Did
not Mankind deceive themselves, by imagining an ideal Happiness, they would be
miserable in Reality. -- Deformed Persons have generally a large Share of
Vanity and Self-Opinion. They are infinitely happy, when their Mirror discovers
Beauty and Charms which the World do not find out. Such a Conduct is justified
by the wise Scheme of Providence, as it gives Ease and Comfort to their Lives,
which otherwise would be almost insupportable. -- Perhaps the same Argument may
be applied to Kingdoms.

Thus, Gentlemen, I have given short Hints of my private Opinion, taking Things
in a general Light, but I know there are many Exceptions. -- The Wise, the
Good, the Honest of both Nations, have equal Sentiments, and speak one common
Language. -- Both Nations have their peculiar Virtues as well as Vices. -- In a
Word, if the People of one were less a Dupe to Glory and arbitrary Power, and
the other less a Prey to extravagant Liberty, I apprehend, both would have more
Content. -- But to be perfectly happy, is not given to human Nature.

THE Company expressed much Satisfaction at Mr. Villeneuf's Discourse,
particularly at the Manner he conducted it. -- At last one of the Gentlemen
said, I know England, and some of their Laws. I know the Nature of their
Parliament, and the Power of the Crown. I know the vast Benefit of their
Juries, and the good Effects of their Habeas Corpus Act. My Knowledge but
increases my Astonishment, that a People, enjoying a Liberty and Freedom
unknown to all other Nations on Earth, should repine at their Situation, and
take Pains to imbitter the blessed Waters of Peace and Plenty. Since all
Things, as you say, rise or fall by Comparison, what Happiness would the
English enjoy, did they but turn their Eyes on the Miseries of other Kingdoms?'
As Frenchmen, replied another, we ought not to be angry at their Conduct; for,
were they truly sensible of their Happiness, and all united to their real
Interest, what Power could stand before them? No doubt, our Ministry know this
too well, to neglect any Opportunity of dividing them, nor is it a difficult
Task; for the Liberty of the Country, and the unbounded License of the Press,
easily furnishes Tools to work with.' -- 'I am afraid, Sir, said Villeneuf,
your Conjecture, is but too well founded, yet I must hope, Time will open our
Eyes, not by supressing the Press, but by despising the Invectives, the
Slander, and the vile Insinuations it too frequently throws out.

THE Conversation insensibly became more general, and their different Opinions
were given with Freedom and good Humor. Conyers had his Share, and made
himself very agreeable by sprightly and cheerful Turns. -- Come, come, said
Monsieur St. Martin, talk as you will, I think it is given up, that we live
with Gaiety, Mirth and Cheerfulness, and that is Living. The Want of this, I
believe, is the Reason that SUICIDE and MADNESS are much more common in England
than in France.' -- 'Pray, Sir, said Conyers, let me be permitted to take off a
little of the Imputation, and account for the seeming Difference from other
Reasons, than what Monsieur le Blanc, and other French Authors have given.

MANKIND, continued Conyers, are pretty much the same in every Clime. Our
frantic Disorders are conspicuous to the World. -- If France be equally liable
to them, the Nature of their Government casts a Veil over the Misfortune. --
With us, if a poor Wretch hangs or drowns himself, the News-writers immediately
give the Circumstances and his Name to the whole Kingdom. -- Such an Affair in
Paris is seldom known beyond the District he lived in. -- As to Madness, we
cannot insist on a Parity in Numbers. -- We have public and private Mad-houses
in Abundance, and many unhappy Creatures are exposed to public View. --
Perhaps France has less Need of these Edifices, when it is considered they have,
at least, an hundred Thousand of both Sexes in Monasteries and Convents. -- As
these Seminaries take in the several Degrees from the most Austere to a Life of
easy Inaction, may we not naturally suppose, that Numbers of the Inhabitants
take Shelter into those ORDERS, that have the nearest Affinity to the Degree of
Enthusiasm and Madness with which they are possessed? -- Of this, the many
thousand Volumes of Lives of Saints, many of whom never existed, but in the
Brains of Monks, is a convincing Proof. -- If we meet Numbers in different
Habits walking the Streets, and seemingly exercising the Function of right
Reason and Understanding, who can count those confined to their Cells, or to
the Limits of their Garden? I am not singular in my Conjecture, for the famous
Monsieur d' Aubigny, about the Year 1600, writes this Epigram.

HUGUENOTS, fascheux and Austeres,
Qui blamez tant les Monasteres,
A la Pareille, dites nous
Ou l'en pourroit loger les Fous?
Ill-natured CALVINISTS, who scold
At MONASTERIES, and what they hold;
Without their Aid, pray tell us plain,
Where could we all the MAD maintain?
THE Epigram furnished the Company with a good deal of laughing Chat, though
they did not deny but there was some Truth in the Question. -- Time puts an End
to all Things, as it did to this Conversation. -- The usual Compliments and
Bows being made on all Sides, each separated to their Places of Repose, which
affords me and my Reader an Opportunity of doing the like.

CHAP. XX.
What God, alas! will Caution be
For living Man's Security,
Or will insure his Vessel in this faithless Sea?
Where Fortune's Favors, and her Spite,
Roll with alternate Waves, like Day and Night.
COWLEY.
NEXT Morning Mr. Villeneuf found himself much out of Order, yet he could not
avoid mentioning what, with Design, he had omitted in the Conversation of
Yesterday. -- God forbid, said he, that persecuting Spirit should ever prevail
in England, yet I should imagine, Self-preservation ought at least to keep us
upon our Guard against the Encroachments of POPERY; for, though we are not
their Enemies, because they are Papists, yet they are certainly our's, because
we are Protestants. -- We suffer them in England to purchase Estates; and the
Influence Property carries with it, is sometimes too visible. -- They are
likewise permitted to sell their Estates, but the Hugonots in France may
purchase, but cannot sell. -- We allow our Subjects to attend the Romish
Chapels of Foreign Ministers, but what Frenchman dare visit our Ambassador's
Chapel at Paris? -- Without forcing the Consciences of Men, I think we might,
and ought to take some Example from our Neighbors. -- Sending Protestant
Youths of both Sexes, to be educated in the Colleges of Jesuits, or in the
Convents of Nuns, is such a monstrous, such an absurd Practice, that, as no
Name can be given, so no Punishment can be equal to the Crime.

THIS, Sir, replied Conyers, has often surprised me, but there is another
Matter, equally astonishing. -- I know what was formerly understood by a
Nonjuror. I know that a scrupulous Conscience might refuse the Oaths to King
WILLIAM, when he had before taken them to King JAMES, but I cannot conceive
what a Nonjuror is in these Days.' -- 'And you will, said Villeneuf, be more
amazed, when I tell you, he is one of those rank Weeds that the best Land is
most subject to. A Nonjuror is a Person that avails himself of that Liberty,
and Constitution of England, which his Principles, and the Study of his whole
Life, labors to destroy. -- He denies the Validity of the Foundation of our
Laws. -- He calls himself a Protestant, and yet acts on Popish Tenets. -- How
it is possible, such a Being can be suffered in our State, is past my
Comprehension. -- If he refuses the Oath of Allegiance, which I wish was more
frequently tendered, what Security has the Government for his Conduct? And
ought he not to be expelled a Society, to which he avows himself an Enemy? --
If he must be Resident, why is he not served like the Jews in Germany, and
obliged to wear a Badge of Distinction.

ON this Subject Mr. Villeneuf gave many Hints, but Conyers prevented his
enlarging too much; and, as he saw his Countenance frequently change, he
persuaded him to lie down. -- All the Morning he complained of a violent
Headache, and Pain in the Back. -- All Precautions were taken, and the best
Physicians employed, but all proved ineffectual, for this good, this valuable
young Gentleman died the fourteenth Day.

POOR Conyers was in the utmost Affliction, for he lost his Brother, his
Friend, his Master, and his whole Support. -- For some Time he was not able to
attend his own Interest; but the good Nature of Mr. Pense shared his Sorrows,
and directed his Conduct. -- By the Will of Mr. Villeneuf, he found himself
possessed of Sixty Pounds, with all the Books and wearing Apparel he had in
France. Pense advised the selling the Books and all the Clothes, except the
Shirts; which done, he had about One Hundred and Fifty Pounds to begin a new
Life. -- Pense knew perfectly his Situation, and many Projects were thought on
to put this Sum to a proper Use; but, as neither of them could contrive how he
might live on it, they passed them over without fixing, but Pense promised to
think for him.

WHILST their Imaginations were busily employed in forming Plans for his future
Conduct, an Accident happened which I am almost ashamed to mention. I once
intended to have suppressed this Accident, but my strict Adherence to Truth,
obliges me, though with Reluctance, to make it a Part of this History. Besides,
as all the Memoirs and Papers that served in compiling this great Work, are now
deposited in the Cotton Library, for the Perusal of the Curious, and to vouch
the Authenticity and Impartiality of this Performance, with what Face could I
omit or gloss over a material Circumstance, and make my Veracity doubtful to
the Public. If some have taken a contrary Method, I am determined to keep mine
Integrity.

CONYERS did not always dine at the same Hotel, for different Companies
afforded him different Remarks. At one of these Ordinaries, he had made a Sort
of Acquaintance with a genteel young Man, of about his own Age, without
inquiring into his Character. The Conversation happened to turn on the Folly
and Absurdity of Gaming, and this Gentleman laid open the Subject and the
Schemes of Sharpers, in so clear and convincing a Manner, that charmed Conyers.
-- After Dinner, they took a Walk together, and renewed the Subject. -- 'Few
Men, said the Stranger, understand Play better than I. Formerly I was a Bubble
to it, but when I became a Master, and might have won back the Money I had
lost, though I don't much want it, my Friends and Relations got round me, and
obliged me to renounce Gaming for myself. I now assist some Friends, and but
last Night I won two hundred Pieces for the Gentleman in Blue, with Gold
Brandenburghs, that dined with us. This I frequently do, and am of Use to some
honest Fellows.' -- 'I should imagine, said Conyers, that a Man who constantly
plays, must sometimes be liable to Quarrels, Disputes, and many other
Difficulties.' -- 'I grant you, replied the Gentleman, such Affairs happen in
poor low Company, but the Assemblies I frequent, are composed but of People of
Rank and Fortune. Most of them incog. so no one takes Notice, or seems to know
another, but all are on the same Footing.'

OUR Hero listened with great Attention, and, by his many Questions, seemed
desirous to venture a small Matter, which perchance might double his Fund. The
two hundred Pieces won last Night, ran strangely in his Head, and his
Imagination put him already in Possession of such a Sum. Like a Fish, he went
round and round, and often nibled at the Bait, till at length his eager Desires
surmounted his Fears, and he swallowed the Hook.

WHEN Conyers proposed visiting the Temple of Fortune, the other made some few
Difficulties, but was at last prevailed on to lend him his Skill. In Pursuance
to the Plan of Operation, Conyers gave him Forty Louis, and put Twenty more
into his own Pocket. It was too soon to begin the Project; and, to divert the
Time and raise their Spirits, the Gentleman proposed a Bottle of Champaign.
They finished two, and Conyers found himself extremely elate, and
prognosticated vast good Fortune. He was like Alnaschar the famous Glass Man,
for he had raised his Thoughts, and built the Edifice of Grandeur, but others
had the Honor of kicking it all down.

THEY arrived at the Temple, where the Priests were assembled, and very earnest
at their Devotions. -- Conyers was fixed at a Table with good Company, where he
won and lost, but much wondered his Friend did not appear and assist him. He
grew a little uneasy, but when he inquired, the Gentleman was not to be found,
neither did any one know his Name. Conyers was unwilling to suspect him, and
pursued his Fortune singly. -- As no Man knows his own Courage till he is
tried, so Conyers knew not his Passion for Play, until he was at a Gaming
Table. -- His twenty Pieces being near expired, he ventured to ask, If any
Gentleman would give him Credit till next Morning, in case he lost. With great
Politeness they all agreed, there was no Difficulty in confiding in a Gentleman
of his Appearance.

THE Play continued, and the Dice flew about with the usual Vehemence. -- The
fickle Goddess held the changing Balance, and joy'd to see such true, such
fervent Zeal in all her Votaries. -- The Rites and Ceremonies being finished,
Conyers began to examine the Mythology. He now discovered that the Doctrine was
extremely erroneous, for he had not only lost all his ready Money, but was
indebted above Fifty Louis d'Ors. -- The small Remains of the Night was not
employed in the most agreeable Reflections, neither was the Morning ushered in
with happier Thoughts, for the Crime of last Night star'd him full in the Face,
in the Shape of three Gentlemen with Demands of Money. Whilst employed in
discharging these Debts of Honor, Mr. Pense entered, which put him in the
utmost Confusion. Pense began to imagine that his Friend had taken up the
Business of lending Money on Pledges, but a little of their Conversation soon
convinced him of his Error.

WHEN the three Gentlemen had retired, our Friends stood silent, and gazed on
each other for some Time. -- Well Sir, said Pense, I find the Prudent, the
Wise, the Sagacious Mr. Conyers is beholden to Sharpers for making his Fortune,
and giving him Experience. -- Conyers blushed, and, with some Hesitation, told
his melancholy Tale; but concluded, with heartily cursing the Falsehood of the
French. -- Very fine, cried Pense, very fine, indeed. You have been bubbled by
Pickpockets, and you damn a whole Nation; but the Truth is, you ought to
quarrel with your own Folly and Imprudence, and I hope you will so effectually
do it, as for ever to banish them your Company. -- Gaming, continued Pense, is
the most ruinous of all Vices. It is --

AS an Historian, I must be extremely angry with one HENRY FIELDING, who has
wrote the Memoirs of a profligate Fellow, whom he calls TOM JONES. -- This Man
has done me great Injury, and I am apt to believe has seen the Materials of
this History; for in one of his Volumes, he has not only copied the very long
Discourse Mr. Pense made on Gaming, but has raked together all that the Wisest
have said, or could say on that Subject; so that he has very unfairly deprived
me of the Benefit of a Dozen or Twenty Pages, which I must strike out, or be
thought a Plagiary. -- This is not the only Place where the said FIELDING has
curtailed my Reputation and crampt my Genius. -- Without saying more on this
barbarous and ungentleman-like Usage, I must insist, that the good natured
Public will believe, I should have had more Reflections, and have been as
fertile in Wit and Humor as the said Fielding, had he not cruelly and
enviously forestalled my Invention.

CONYERS was all Attention to Mr. Pense's Harangue, and most faithfully
promised to shun Temptation and avaricious Thoughts. -- The Mischief is done,
said Pense, so I shall upbraid no more. I had a Scheme for your Service, but
doubt your consenting to it. I shall not flatter you, for, Why should the Poor
be flattered? But what I have to say is my sincere Opinion. -- You are,
continued he, a very handsome genteel young Fellow, you have Learning and
Understanding. You have cultivated your Talents by the Additions of polite
Accomplishments; and the Excellency of your Voice, and your good Nature, make
you beloved by all. My dear Conyers, it is no Crime to be conscious of our
Perfections, the Folly lies in being vain of, or over-rating them. -- With your
Endowments, and a prudent Management, you may make your Fortune, and be happy.
-- A Man must stoop, before we can justly say, he rises. In a Word, I wish you
would act the Part of a Servant. -- You will be maintained and clothed. By
your Address, I know you will acquire Esteem; and, as there are Secrets in all
Families, no doubt but some may pass through your Hands. Out of these, and
sundry Accidents that unavoidably happen, you may scheme some civil Employ, and
establish yourself in the World, as many worthy Men have done, not blessed with
half your Capacity.' -- Jack listened, but made no Reply. -- 'There is, said
Pense, another Argument in Favor of my Project, and a strong one, for I do not
see what else you can do. -- This last Reason got the Better of Pride, and
Conyers consented.

NOW, said his Friend, to convince you I have had you in my Thoughts, I can
promise you a Service with an English Lord, now returning to London; he is
rich, extremely good humored, but not the brightest Genius in the World. -- He
keeps an English Wench. -- I need not desire you to endeavor to have her
Favor.

AT Dinner they met again, when Pense informed him that my Lord Weakhead with
Pleasure consented, as he wanted one to take Care of his Wardrobe, and write
his Letters. -- I would not, continued he, have you always fixed to a
particular Service or Family; for, except your Judgment shows you a Probability
of succeeding in your chief Design, shift about, and try another Soil; but be
sure to take Care of the little Money you have left, lest you should be too
long unemploy'd.

NEXT Morning they waited on Lord Weakhead, who would not agree, until his
Dulcinea had approved. In some Time the Lady made her Appearance, and was so
good to say, she believed the Fellow would do well enough. His Lordship told
Conyers the Duty he expected from him, and the Lady added some for herself. --
He was to have thirty Pounds a Year, and some Perquisites, to enable him to be
decent.

IN three Days they set out for England. -- The Friends parted with great
Regret, and took a most tender Adieu. Pense gave a Hint, that in all Likelihood
a War would soon break out, and begged of Conyers never to write to him.

CHAP. XXI.
-- Fie, fie upon her!
There Is Language in her Eye, her Cheek, her Lip:
Nay, her Foot speaks; her wanton Spirits look out
At every Joint, and Motion of her Body:
Oh, these Encounterers! so glib of Tongue,
They give a coasting Welcome ere it comes;
And wide unclasp the Tables of their Thoughts
To every ticklish Redder: Set them down
For sluttish Spoils of Opportunity,
And Daughters of the Game.
SHAKESPEARE'S Troilus and Cressida.
JACK was soon settled in a Family-way in London, but found a mighty Difference
between his last and present Master. My Lord had a fine House, and a Number of
Servants were maintained at a vast Expense; yet the Whole was conducted in so
slovenly a Manner, that nothing was in Order, and something was always wanting
to complete the intended Elegance. -- Madam Haughty ruled all, and governed
with a Power as uncontrolled as it was extensive. She frequently schooled his
Lordship in such Terms, that made Conyers conceive an utter Aversion for her.
Some Times she had violent Fits of Jealousy, and on those Occasions my Lord was
never permitted to approach, neither could any Rhetoric, except that of a
Purse, persuade her into any tolerable Temper. -- Her male Acquaintances were
Singers, Fiddlers, young Fops, and a Couple of worn-out Sharpers. Her female
Friends were Milliners, Mantua-Makers of small Repute, and some Nymphs of her
own Order. For these a plentiful Table was kept, and the Incense of Praise was
constantly perfuming on the Altars of the Goddess Haughty. Though the House was
perpetually crowded, yet properly speaking, Lord Weakhead saw no Company.

MADAM HAUGHTY had a strong Levee almost every Morning; and, because she had
been in France, and heard something of the Conduct of their Ladies of Quality,
she frequently received their Visits in Bed. Conyers always made the Tea, and,
with a Footman, attended the Duty of the Table. One Morning, when the Company
were pretty numerous, Jack was busy employed in this Office, but happening to
go into the Lady's Dressing Room, he found a Bottle with a Label, on which was
wrote Mouth Water; and, as his Gums were swelled with a Cold, he innocently
used this Water as a Gargle. Whilst he was filling out the Tea, his Lips shrunk
up, and his Mouth almost closed. The Company could not forbear smiling at the
Oddity of his Face, which was quite distorted. Madam, at last perceived the
Queerness of his Phiz, and, with a Laugh, asked him, What was the Matter? When
he attempted to answer, his whole Face was in Convulsions; but, as he could not
articulate a Word, he ran to the Dressing Room, and produced the Bottle.
Haughty burst into a violent Laugh, and whispered a Lady near her, who
communicated the Secret to a Third, and in a Moment all present were in the
utmost Mirth; and a thousand Witticisms were thrown out, till Conyers was
obliged to quit his Station, and seek Refuge in his Chamber, where, with
Patience and warm Water, he brought his Features to their accustomed
Regularity; but it was not till some Years after, he found out what had
occasioned his Disorder, and the immoderate Banter he suffered.

MRS. HAUGHTY carried her Ridicule so far, that it raised his Resentment, and
determined him to watch her Motions more narrowly. In the mean Time he could
not avoid making some serious Reflections on the Conduct and Situation of Lord
Weakhead. He thought that the Life of a Man of Quality was to be employed in
showing good Examples to the World; and, with some Sighs, compared the
Behavior of his present Master to that of Lord True good. -- He was surpised
how a Peer could run from the Dignity his Ancestors had purchased, and act
below the Character of the meanest Mechanic. He was astonished that a Nobleman,
who might almost command the best Society, and a Lady of the first Family,
where good Sense and Honor would grace his Table, should renounce these
rational Comforts, and amuse himself with the Dregs of Mankind, and a Woman of
a most abandoned Life. He was at last convinced, that his poor Lord had all the
Plagues the worst Wife could give, without any one of those Pleasures she might
sometimes bestow.

THIS Lady has discovered, that Delicacy and Tenderness were not the Charms
most admired by my Lord in a Mistress, but that his Constitution was to be
governed only by absolute Power. The more she seemed to hate and despise him,
the fonder he grew. Her insolent Security was such, that she scarcely made a
Secret of her Infidelity, so that Conyers caught her one Morning beating Time
to the Music of a dirty Fiddler. She colored a little, at being so fairly
discovered; but, with a matchless Assurance, proposed his taking a Part in the
Concert. Conyers, with a Smile of Disdain, answered, He had too good a Taste,
to be charmed with a common vulgar Ballad. Her Rage is not to be expressed, she
swore like an old Dragoon; and in this Temper he quitted her in Contempt.

AMONGST the many who paid Court to my Lord and Madam Haughty, Mr. Sangfroid, a
young Surgeon of French Extraction, was pretty constant. He had a particular
Regard for Conyers, and was the only Person who found out his Value and Merit.
Sangfroid was a Man of Sense, and whose Conversation was seriously diverting,
and his speaking French extremely well, made Conyers fond of being often with
him. To this Gentleman he told his Story, and begged his Advice. I see, said
Sangfroid, you are not perfectly acquainted with this Part of the World. I have
sometimes interfered between a Gentleman and his Wife, and have made up mighty
Quarrels occasioned by Lap-Dogs, Parrots, and the like; but I never meddle
between a Gentleman and his Mistress. It is of too sacred and delicate a
Nature, neither can my Probe search to the Bottom of the Wound; and, as I
perceive that a Mortification must of Necessity ensue, why should I give my
Patient unnecessary Pain? However, continued he, don't repine at being
dismissed this Service, but live with me until I can provide you another.
Conyers returned him many Thanks, and that Evening accepted his kind
Invitation, for my Lord very gravely paid him three Months Wages, and gave him
a Discharge.

MR. SANGFROID received him with great Kindness, and apologiz'd for not having
it in his Power to be more constantly with him, but he never failed at Dinner,
and seldom in the Evenings. In these Conversations Conyers took Care to
ingratiate himself with his new Friend, and displayed his Learning and
Accomplishments in so agreeable a Manner, as not a little surprised the
Surgeon, who confessed he merited an happier Fate: But, continued he, it shall
not be my Fault, if something don't turn out to your Advantage.

CONYERS passed his Time in a very satisfactory Manner, for Sangfroid
entertained him with Histories of sundry Families, but with such Humor, as
created Abundance of Mirth and most useful Observations; which last, Jack
constantly added to his Collection.

CHAP. XXII.
Hail thou! who never as yet was sung
By any Bard, or old or young,
Enchanting Riot! God of Drink!
(Whatever ancient Poets think.)
Thou to the World, chief Foe or Friend,
Making some mount, and some descend,
Inspire my Verse.
ANONIMOUS.
ONE Evening our Friends had agreed to go to a favorite Play, where Mr.
Sangfroid met several of his Acquaintance. 'I see, said he to Conyers, a Knot
of choice Spirits in the third Row; should they ask me to a Tavern, I must
desire your Company; for, though it will be Time thrown away, it will not be
lost.' 'I cannot, replied Conyers, rightly understand your Distinction, but
command me.' 'That young Gentleman, continued the Surgeon, in a white Fustian
Frock, and checkered Flannel Waistcoat, with the Hat of a Stage Coachman, is
Sir Nicholas Royster of Yorkshire, who inherits good four thousand Pounds a
Year. He Is not yet of Age, but borrows Money enough, by insuring his Life. That
elderly Youth just by him, with a red Face, is Squire Morise, formerly of High
Hall in Gloucestershire. That fine Seat, and fifteen hundred a Year round it,
has been long purchased by Mr. Punctual, a Banker in the Strand, on which the
Squire has two hundred a Year Life-Rent. That genteel young Man on the other
Side, is one Mr. Fitz-Simons of Ireland, where, I imagine, he has a good
Fortune, for he is extremely generous. He has Chambers in the Middle Temple,
and for these three Years has studied very closely. A little beyond him you see
a portly fierce Gentleman in Scarlet, with a Point d' Espagne Hat so cocked,
that it frights the Orange Wenches. He is called Major Noisy, and, I have been
told, was formerly a Lieutenant in the Army, but was obliged to sell out and
retire on Ensign's Half-pay; but the Knight is his Friend.' -- 'I think, said
Conyers, you apply the Word fierce to the Major; now, as I apprehend, it is
derived from, the French Word fire, which means proud and saucy, I beg you will
give him some other Epithet, for I observe he is extremely familiar with the
Orange Ladies, who seem to attack him with equal Freedom.' -- Your Observation,
said Sangfroid, I believe is right, but really the Major is far from being
proud; but how fire may answer to saucy, I hope to convince you: However, they
are all my Friends and Customers; and the Plague of my Profession is, I must
not only keep them Company, but agree to every Thing they say, when in Company.'

THE Play was scarcely finished, when the Major gave a loud Hem, and having
fixed Sangfroid's Eyes, called out, -- The King's Arms, and received a Nod of
Consent. -- Sir Nicholas and his Company got first to the Tavern, having picked
up two special City Sparks. When Mr. Sangfroid and Conyers arrived, they found
the Major and the rest very loud at the Larder. With great Difficulty Supper
was ordered, and the Master, Mr. Ryan, conducted them into the Rose. -- As an
Historian, I am compelled to attend, but, courteous Reader, if you are not
charmed with Discord of harsh Sounds, -- If a Tavern Scene delights not thy
Heart, or, if thou find thyself not disposed for a Conversation with such
Company, go not thou in with me, but pass on to some other Part of this
delectable History.

THE Instant the Major entered the Rose, he cried out, Z -- ns! what a Room has
the Rascal put us into? -- Here -- You Son of a W -- re, show us into the
Rummer, this smokes like Hell! -- Ryan was all Obedience, and, as he conducted
them back, the Knight could not avoid saying, Ay, ay, let the old Soldier
alone; D -- me he will keep 'em all in Order. -- The usual Salutations began, and
Mr. Sangfroid introduced Conyers to each, by their Titles. -- Sir, said the
Major, give me your Hand. D -- n all these Compliments; you seem, Sir, to be a
Gentleman, and a Man of Honor, and D -- me but we are all obliged to Young
Bolus for your Company. -- Conyers just began to return the Compliment, but the
Major interrupted him, saying, -- 'Sir, You are a very pretty sensible
Gentleman, and (ringing the Bell as loud as he could) we'll take a hearty
Bottle together, and know me for your Friend. -- Here -- You Ostler -- D -- me,
where is the Wine.' -- Please your Honor, said the Waiter, the Wine your
Honor always chooses is on the Table.' -- 'D'ye prate, Puppy? said he, to
Kennel, down this Instant, -- Avaunt!' -- The Waiter retired with a Smile, and
then he began, Come, Boys, -- Come Lads, sit down and be D -- d, and take your
Wine in Peace and Quietness.

THE Company were moving to their Places, when Mr. Morise opened with an hoarse
Voice, -- D -- n that old Firelock, what a Clatter he makes; curse him, he will
never be a Conjurer, for he wan't born dumb. -- This witty Stroke occasioned a
prodigious Laugh, which lasted with many Additions, till all had taken their
Seats.

I HOPE it will not be expected I should set down minutely and in Order every
single Word and Repartee during the first half Hour's Conversation. The Task
would be too arduous even for the renowned Author of Pamela and Clarissa, whose
Patience nothing could equal, except that of his Readers. Old Bunyan would have
been at a Loss, and the celebrated Mr. Cleveland would have found it
impossible; how therefore can I, a weak, ignorant Modern, pretend to attempt
what such vast Geniuses must have omitted. All I am able to do, is to beg the
learned Reader to supply my Defects, by imagining, or, if he can, writing about
thirty Pages of the most fashionable Oaths, and refined Bawdy Jokes his Wit can
put together. Should his Thoughts not be sufficiently elevated for so sublime a
Subject, let him take the Memoirs of a Lady of Pleasure, whose Author, as he
undoubtedly merits, certainly ought to be preferred to the highest Post on
Hounslow, or some other convenient Heath.

WHILST the Supper was laying, Mr. Sangfroid whispered his Friend, that Sir
Nicholas had pawned his Honor they would have no Whores in Company that Night,
for I hope, added the Surgeon, to amuse you in a better Manner. -- Supper over,
they had just set down to fresh Bottles when Mr. Ryan entered. Please your
Honors, said he, here is the Gazette, and great News in it, will your Honor,
giving it to the Major, be pleased to read it, for it is bespoke in the next
Room. -- I read it! cried the Major, No, not I by G --, read it yourself and be
d -- d. -- Ryan began, and read of a powerful Squadron fitted out at Breast, and
that forty thousand French had Orders to march to Germany, and the like Number
to the Frontiers of Flanders. That the Queen of Hungary was levying a large
Army in Bohemia, which would be ready to take the Field early in the Spring. --
He was proceeding, when the Major jumped up, drew his Sword, and slapping it on
the Table, 'Now, cried he, we shall have a War, 'D -- n my Blood but we shall.
Now the Scoundrels will court me to show them the Way to Flanders, and the Prig
Officers who will hardly give me a Bow, shall come Cap in Hand, for they cannot
make me less than a Lieutenant Colonel. Z -- ds! How I long to be at it, and
then, Sir Nicholas, D -- me, Sir Nicholas, but you shall go with me, and be my
Ensign, and fight by my Side, D -- me if you shall not. -- Not so fast, said the
Knight, for, D -- me if I do. No, no, I know a Trick worth two of that, for, as
the Gentleman said to Night in the Play, I Have four thousand a Year of as good
fighting Land as any in Europe; so I suppose if we have a War I shall pay my
Club, and you and your Honor and Glory may go fight and be d -- d for Sir
Nicholas.' 'Then, cried the Hero, stay at home and be d -- d, and mind your
Hounds and your Horses. Z -- ds, when I was of your Age,' -- Why, said
Sangfroid, when you were of Sir Nicholas's Age, what mighty Matters did your
Honor do? Come, tell us, my dear Man of War.

I was, said the Major, the eighth Son of fourteen, for we were always a fine
Bucking Family. My Father, Justice Noisy, it is well known, had two thousand a
Year in Cornwall, and gave his Children as much Learning as they would take.
Your Latin and Greek was not my Turn, and the Fool my Master flogg'd me
damnably before he found it out, which happened by an odd Accident, for when I
was about Fifteen, the Son of a B -- h was at his old Tricks with his Birch,
but d -- me if I didn't take him such a Knock over the Noddle with the Poker,
that down dropped Old Ars in present, and the best of the Joke was, that the
Scoundrel was a Parson. The old Justice laughed heartily, and praised my
Spirit, so I thought I had him on. I wanted d -- ly to get to London, but my
Chap was as close fisted as the Devil, and not a Stiver would he part with to
buy me a Commission, which was all my Pride. The old Fool at last married a
young B -- h for Love, and used me like a Dog. D -- me thought I but I Will be
revenged, and you will split your Sides with laughing when I tell you how I
contrived it. -- D -- n my Blood if I didn't make Love to my Mother, and fairly
Cuckol'd Old Square-toes.' Bravo, Bravo, cried Sir Nicholas, and Bravo, cried
all the Rest. Well, said Sangfroid, so when you had Cuckol'd your Father you --
Z -- ns, Mr. Purge, cried the Major, sure I can tell my own Story. -- Why, when
I had done him that Jobb, D -- me, thought I, but I Will do you another; so one
Morning I made free with a Purse of Fifty Guineas, and, as the Devil would have
it, the same Day he found Madam and I fairly planting his Horns. -- Z -- ns!
how he stared, and swore and raged like any Freeman in Bedlam. I walked off,
my Dears, and left him that Bone to pick the best Way he could. -- Well, as I
was saying, I walked off, and took the Road to London. As I had Money in my
Purse, I thought I had all the World in a String. In a Week I got acquainted
with some fine Ladies, and very fond of me they were, for D -- me but I was as
fine a Lad as ever trod the Ground, and five Foot Seven in my Stocking Feet.
The dear B -- hes soon made me known to some Gentlemen of Quality, so that in
about a Month I knew Drury Lane and London as well as if I had been bred and
born in it; but D -- me if I know to this Day how it was, but in six Weeks I Would
but a single Guinea left. -- Now some Lads would have snivel'd and cried, and
begged Pardon, and so forth; not me by G -- d. I kept up my Heart like a Man,
and as I could not purchase a Red Rag, I bravely resolved to earn one with my
Sword, so I went to the Parade, and took on in the First Regiment of Guards. --
The Company greatly applauded his Courage and Resolution, and he proceeded -- A
Trifle, a Trifle, Gentlemen. Boys of Spirit will always, sooner or later,
strike out their own Fortunes. -- Well, this was in the Year 1711, which all
the World knows was about the Middle of that red hot War. -- To cut short my
Story, we landed near Lisle, which my Glorious Master the Duke of Marlborough
was Besieging, and the same Day I begged to mount the Trenches. -- Hot Work,
hot Work my Boys, for there was we exposed on the Top of a Ditch to the Fire of
the Enemy for four Hours Endways. -- Come, Gentlemen, drink about, Sorrow is
dry, and d -- me but I Am choking with Thirst. -- They drank, but whilst the
Knight and Mr. Morise were asking some Particulars of the Siege, Conyers found
Time to say to his Friend, -- This Fellow was never an Officer, and I verily
believe was never in any Army except as a Sutler's Servant. -- Just then the
Major's Voice was distinct. -- Lord, Lord, said he, why there it is. People
that stay at Home and see nothing, must have strange Notions. To be sure it is
terrible enough at first, D -- me if it is not, but when a Man is used to it for
four or five Campaigns as I was, it is a mere Flea-bite. -- Well, as I was
saying, having cut a Passage through the covered Way, and with fixed Bayonets
mastered the Half Moon of the first and second Parapets, and a Breach being
made in the Glacis by our Engineers, I boldly mounted, and the whole Army
following, the poor Devils of French surrendered the Town. -- The Gazette did
me Justice, and the Noble General made me an Ensign. At Blenheim the next
Campaign, I did my Duty, got a few Wounds and a Company, and the same Year a
Majority. -- You know the rest. My old Dad kicked up, and like an unnatural Son
of a Whore as he was, left me a Shilling. A d -- d Peace being made, and a Boy
put over my Head, I quitted the Service, and have been on Half-Pay ever since,
but now -- D -- n my Blood they shall beg and pray before they catch me in
Flanders. -- So drink about my Boys, I Am alive, D -- me.

THE Bottle and Wit went briskly round, till Sangfroid, clapping Sir Nicholas
on the Shoulder, 'There, said he, there is a Fellow of Mettle: I think I see him
routing a whole French Army; I wish he would write his Memoirs, they would sell d -- d
well. What would you give, Sir Knight, to be able to say as much as the Major?'
-- Give, replied Sir Nicholas, D -- me, I Would not give Sixpence. To be sure the
Fellow may have seen more, for he is old enough to be my Grandfather, but d -- n
my Blood, I Have done as much for my Time, as any He in Christendom.' --
Impossible, Impossible, said Sangfroid, -- Judgment, Judgment, cried the
Knight, and in a Quarter of an Hour, Silence was proclaimed, and he began.

WHY, lookee, Gentlemen, I was but Nineteen, as I may say, last Grass. My good
Father Sir Joseph, and my Lady Mother were very tender of my Youth, and gave me
all the Education a Gentleman of my Fortune required. At ten Years old I could
read, -- no body better, -- and the same Year I rode one of my Father's Horses,
poor Merry Pintle, and won the Sweep Stakes at Wakefield Races. D -- me if I
didn't. -- Z -- ns! I thought the old Gentleman would have leapt out of's Skin
for Joy. -- Next Day, my Bucks, I ran old Sly Boots against Squire Mason's Bay
Mare Miss Slammekin, a Bye Match for Fifty Guineas, Weight for Inches. Honest
Sly-boots had well nigh distanc'd the Mare, when he lost all Four, and canted
me twenty Yards over his Head. There I lay, and was taken up for dead, though I
only broke my left Arm and two of my Ribs. -- No more by G --. When I recovered
of my Wounds, all my Friends said that Young Nick was fairly entered. -- Come
Bucks, drink about. -- Well, next Year, D -- me if I didn't out-ride our
Huntsman in a Fox Chase, and made him hellishly Jealous; but in leaping a
double Ditch, I got a Tumble, and my Head fell foul of a d -- d Stump of a
Tree, and laid it open. See Gentlemen, see, (pulling off a little black Wig)
here it is, you may put your Fingers in it, but, D -- me, I soon horsed for all
that, and called out Jowler, -- Ringwood, -- Ho. -- Then he displayed all the
Eloquence of Field Language, and the Company joining in the Cry, the Guardian
of the Night forgot the Hour, and imagined himself in Epping Forest. -- At
Length Sir Nicholas found Time to proceed. -- All the Tenants was cock sure I Would
be a clever Fellow; but when I began to kill their Dogs, and break their Nets,
the Scoundrels complained to Sir Joseph, and my good Lady Mother gave me a
swinging Lecture about good Nature and Humanity, and such Stuff; but when I was
Sixteen, I showed them other Game, for D -- me if I didn't get their Daughters
with Child by Dozens, and at last I tipped the same Favor to her Ladyship's
Maid. Sir Joseph cursed and swore, and my Lady cried and prayed like Hell and
the Devil; but what did I care? -- I knew they could not swear or pray me out of
the Estate, do their worst; so because they would not let me take my Swing at
Home, I touched the Steward for a Brace of Hundreds, and wished 'em all a good
Night. -- My dear Father at last relented his hard Usage of me, and about four
Months ago he took a Leap in the Dark to Kingdom come; and so I Am in Mourning
for him, as you see. -- A loud Laugh ensued, and the Bottle took its Course,
and then he continued -- My Guardians, for I Have enough of 'em, will not allow me
to live like a Gentleman, but D -- me they are bit; I will not starve in a Cook's
Shop, not I, for, my Bucks, here I am safe, and by the Help of my Friend
yonder, pretty sound. Now, Gentlemen, I think I Have been in more Dangers than if
I had fought twenty Battles in Flanders, and D -- me I Will lay Fifty Guineas
I Have more Wounds than his Honor the Major.

EVERY Body agreed, and poor Noisy stood a whole Volly of Wit. -- 'Truce, Boys,
Truce, cried the Major, Why what the Devil, all upon Roger! -- Fitzsimons, do
dear Rogue, tell us some of your foolish Exploits, and keep Sir Nicholas in
Countenance.' -- 'I'd do as much for you, said Fitzsimons, with all my Heart,
but it seems you have no Occasion, for the Devil himself cannot put you out of
Countenance.' -- This increased the Laugh, till Sangfroid cried out, Well,
Gentlemen, I must own the Major has said a good Thing once in his Life, and I
second the Motion; to Order Gentlemen, to Order, Mr. Fitzsimons is up, -- hear
him, hear him. -- All the Cry now was hear him, so Fitzsimons was obliged to
comply, and he began.

'MY History, Gentlemen, is very short. -- My Family is pretty considerable in
Ireland, where my Father kept a good House, and lived in the true old
hospitable Manner, but still gave his five Sons such Accomplishments as the
Country afforded. We knew Latin and Greek, but Dancing and Fencing much better.
At last the good Man died, and I, as his eldest Son, took Possession of the
Estate, charged with my Mother's Jointure, and Portions for younger Children.
To do the best I could for a large Family, I entered the Temple, and stinted
myself to One Hundred Pounds a Year. I have many Relations in London, and some
of Fashion, who introduced me into the politest Company of both Sexes, where I
soon found I had a Genius for Play, and improved my Talent. -- But, Gentlemen,
the Ladies, the Ladies are kind, for I court them in such a Manner that few can
withstand my Rhetoric.' -- 'Z -- ns, cried the Knight, I Would give a Thousand
Pounds for that Secret.' -- 'You may have it much cheaper, replied Fitzsimons,
for when I am with a Lady I like, or whose Eyes speak a certain Language, I
watch the first Opportunity, and Usher the New Acquaintance, etc. D -- me,
cried the Major, If I know what you mean. I know well enough a Man may be
ushered to the King's Bench, or the Poultry, or the Round House, and the like,
where a Man may make new Acquaintances enough, but D -- me if ever I heard of
ushering a new Acquaintance to a Lady, but by a Pimp.' -- 'Why you old B -- h,
cried Sir Nicholas, don't you know that new Acquaintances are New Guineas, and
that little Fitz slily tipped the Lady half a Score? -- D -- me after all, it is
the only best Argument in the World.' -- 'Right, right, Sir Nicholas, said the
Surgeon, before Gad you have hit it.'

THE Knight is so sharp, said Fitzsimons, there is no hiding Things from him.
-- If the Lady accepts my little Rouleau I am sure of her immediately. If she
refuses, and afterward permits my Visits, I try her again, and seldom have
Occasion to repeat the Dose. From this I have the Advantage of being of her
Family, as often as I please; and if it increases not my Revenue, it at least
prevents a Decrease by another Channel. -- This, Gentlemen, is my Amusement,
but my grand Resources are the Chocolate Houses. -- When Salkeild, and Cook,
and Ventris, and Littleton, begin to grow dry and stupid, I turn about and
converse with my good Friend Monsieur de Moivre, on the Doctrines of Chances.
-- Perhaps, said Mr. Morise, that same Mr. De -- what do you call him, may be a
pretty Fellow; I don't know him; but for Salkeild and the rest, I Have seen 'em
drunk and sober enough, and by the L -- d they are stupid Mortals.' -- That may
be, said the Major, for D -- me if I know any of 'em; but, dear Morise, not to
interrupt you, I Have often heard some of your Tip-top People say that your
Littleton is a d -- d clever Fellow; -- but I beg Pardon, and, my dear Fitz,
don't let us talk of Religion; D -- n your Doctrine, and finish your Story.

WITH all my Heart, said Fitzsimons, for two Words will do it. -- In short,
Gentlemen, I am Master at Piquet, and could teach Whist to Mr. Hoyle. I care
not how the World goes, for one Lord pays for my Chariot, another keeps my
Servants and Horses, and many of different Titles contribute to my
Family-Expences. -- Thus, Gentlemen, I live, and live well, though the good old
Gentlewoman keeps her Jointure.

Z -- NS, cried Sir Nicholas, you're a happy Fellow, but I am the most unlucky
Dog in the World. -- There Is my Mother now, -- D -- me, she has no more Nature
in her than a Stone; for, if she loved her only Child, or my poor defunct
Father, to be sure she would have contrived some Way or other to have paid him a
Visit by this Time. -- But no Matter, for whether her Jointure falls in or not,
by G -- I Am determined next Bout to be Knight of the Shire, if it costs me
Twenty Thousand Pounds.

THE highest Encomiums were ready to fall on Sir Nicholas, when Mr. Morise rose
in an Extacy, crying out, 'D -- me I must kiss the dear Boy. -- Do, dear Sir
Nick, stand for the County, and here I am that will support you with all my
Interest, and be your Manager; for by the L -- d, no Man in Europe understands
that Matter better.' -- 'I thought, said Mr. Sangfroid, your Estate lay in
another County.' -- 'You thought, replied Morise, Psha, D -- it, why Man, all
the World knows I Have stood for Twenty Boroughs and Counties, and was a Member
too in the Queen's Time; but that D -- d new Ministry threw me out, and I Have
been fighting them ever since; but next P -- t, I think I have a Borough pretty
sure.' -- Ay, ay, Master Morise, said the Major, let it alone till then, and
then you may think on it, for that will be your Share.' -- Why, you dirty
Scoundrel, cried Morise, do you upbraid me in my Misfortunes, that has kept you
from starving?' -- Patience good Mr. Morise, said the Major, Starving! Ay, ay,
D -- me if you kept me like yourself, I should starve indeed.' -- Morise lost
all Temper, and whilst he discharged a thousand hard Names, and not a few
Glasses on the Major, the Warrior practiced his own Lesson of Patience, and
received them with great Meekness, still crying out, -- Mr. Morise, Mr. Morise,
-- don't rouse the angry Lion. -- Morise drew his Sword, but some held him, and
some the Major, whose Sword, by this Time, was unsheathed. -- The Storm was
violent. The Major's Voice was Thunder, and Morise's the Echo to it. -- Mr.
Ryan and the Waiters entered, which added not a little to the Harmony. -- Now
might be heard Oaths, Imprecations, Prayers and Entreaties rushing instantly
out; but no Mortal could distinguish or assign a Reason.

AT last the Noise of War seemed to subside, and gentle Peace began to spread
her Pinions. The mangled Limbs of slaughtered Bottles and Glasses were decently
interred, and the purple Stream, that covered Half the Plain, was now swallowed
up by the neighboring Sands. All Preliminaries being adjusted, Tranquillity
was proclaimed, and three Bottles called for, to sacrifice to Love and
Friendship. -- Bumpers went briskly round, and their Zeal was so fervent to
establish a right Understanding, that some of the Company began to lose their
own.

Z -- NS, cried the Knight, what Fools were we to quarrel amongst ourselves,
when the common Enemy is at Hand? -- D -- me, my Bucks, let us sally forth and
beat the Watch!' -- 'Glorious Thought! said the Major, and let us beat up the
Bawdy-Houses.' -- 'I'm with you, cried Morise, by the L -- d it is the most
finest Fun in the Universe. -- To pay -- a Bill this, Instant, and let us to
Business. -- All seemed to join, and whilst the Bill was preparing, Sir
Nicholas settled the Operations.

THE Reckoning was Three Pounds Eighteen Shillings, and each Man put his Hand
to his Pocket. -- The Major laughed, and swearing he had changed his Breeches
that Morning, and forgot to shift his Money, added, It Is no great Matter, for
my Servant is an honest Fellow; however, Sir Nick, tip me a Guinea till I see
you next. -- The Knight readily complied, and Mr. Conyers saying, It is just
our Half Guineas a-piece, threw one on the Table. -- Morise whispered somewhat
to Sir Nicholas, who immediately cried out, Z -- ns, that is true, D -- my B --
d if the Gentleman pays a Farthing in my Company. -- Conyers begged to be
excused; but the other insisting on paying the Whole, threw four Guineas to the
Waiter. Mr. Morise took the Half Guinea, entreating Mr. Conyers to put it up;
which he peremptorily refusing, Well, said Morise, it is only so much the more
for the Waiter; however, in a Mistake, he slipped it into his own Pocket.

'TWAS past three o'Clock, and the Quiet of the Neighborhood was to be
invaded, the Company in the Street, each encouraging the other in the
Expedition. -- But my Duty calls me another Way, for Mr. Conyers took the first
Chair, and got safe to his Lodgings, without sharing in the Honors or Danegrs
of this glorious Action, and his Friend very soon followed his Example.

CHAP. XXIII.
O that I had my Innocence again!
My untouched Honor! but I wish in vain:
The Fleece that has been by the Dyer stained,
Never again its native Whiteness gained.
WALLER.
SANGFROID was roused about Six that Morning, by a thundering Rap at the Door.
At Ten he returned, and gave Conyers the Sequel to the Evening's Entertainment.
-- There has been fine Work, said he, and our Heroes have furnished me
Employment. It seems they began their Attack on the Watchmen a little too
precipitately, so were instantly outnumber'd. The Battle lasted but a short
Time, and in the Hurry, the Major and Mr. Morise got off to a Bagnio, but most
miserably cut in the Head and Face. -- The Valor of the young Knight not
permitting him the proper Use of his Legs, he was taken Prisoner, and conducted
to the Citadel of the Parish, vulgarly termed the Round-House. He is tolerably
bruised, and has another honorable Mark planted just over his Eye. Some of the
Watch are slightly injured, but as they will make the most of it, this Affair,
perhaps, may be made up at the trivial Expense of an Hundred Guineas.

'BUT, said Conyers, what became of the other Gentleman? For methinks Mr.
Fitzsimons is a Man of more Understanding than to embarque in such an Exploit.'
-- 'He (answered the Surgeon) slipped off with me, and whispered, "He had no
Idea of Fighting, where nothing but the Reverse of Honor or Credit could
possibly be obtained." -- As for the City Blades, all I hear of them is, that
they played their Parts very well for some Time, but had so much Prudence as
not to be taken.'

'I AM heartily glad, said Conyers, that some have been properly punished; for
their Conduct is so absurd, that nothing can extenuate it, but imagining them
Lunatic.' -- 'In truth, said Sangfroid, the Watchmen treated them as such, and
blooded them severely. -- But what think you of their Humor? -- 'Humour!
replied Conyers, Faith I find none, but for Ribaldry, Folly, and Nonsense, I
thank my Stars, I never heard nor saw more in my whole Life. I was quite
silent, and bore all their Extravagancies with some Patience, except their
horrid Swearings, which really made me shudder.' -- 'And yet, said his Friend,
such is the general Run of Tavern-Conversation.' -- 'I am sorry for it,
answered Conyers; but wonder what Joy, what Pleasure Men can take, especially
old ones, in Riot and Excess! Company, and too much Wine, may sometimes lead
Men into a thousand odd Frolicks, but a cool, deliberate System of Ignorance,
Debauchery and Impiety, is what I can by no Means account for. Dean Swift,
indeed, was not so much astonished at seeing Men wicked, as at their not being
ashamed of it.' -- 'That, said Sangfroid, is really the most surprising
Circumstance; but of our Companions, I can only say, as Killigrew did of Lord
Wharton, "they would not swear at that abominable Rate, if they thought they
were doing God Honor.' Many Observations passed, till the Surgeon told him,
they would dine Tomorrow with a Lady on the Surry Side, where possibly he might
be more happily and more agreeably entertained.

NEXT Day they took Boat. The Lady, said Sangfroid, we are going to visit, was
formerly called POLLY GUN, but lately POLLY CANNON, and has been what the World
calls, One of Us. She has had her Share of Variety, but managed so cleverly, as
to have an Income of about Two Hundred Pounds a Year. She is now about
Forty-five Years of Age, preserves a Portion of Beauty, and has for these Four
last Years retired from the Town, and lives a most regular and modest Life. She
has been often in Keeping, but had always a Settlement by Way of Life-Annuity.
I transact all her Affairs, and am on such a Footing, that I hope to persuade
her to give you her History. You Will be pleased with her Conversation, for she
is extremely well-bred, and of a lively and cheerful Turn.

THEY rowed up the River about Six Miles, Conyers still enquiring into more
Particulars, which furnished Sangfroid with an Opportunity of describing her
Person, her Economy, her Happiness, and other Articles, till they landed. A
Quarter of an Hour brought them to her House: It was small, but most neatly
furnished, with a Garden in nice Order. The first Salutations over, Mrs. Cannon
fell into the easy and familiar Style. She very agreeably rallied the
Magnificence of her Palace, the Elegance of the Apartments, and the
Spaciousness of the Saloon. As she went through the few Rooms, she made very
merry Remarks. -- 'Now, Gentlemen, said she, this is my Bedchamber, and
contains somewhat scarcely to be found in any other.' -- 'I must own, Madam,
said Conyers, I never saw so truly a clean, neat, and charming an Apartment in
my Life, but the Bed strikes my Imagination the most. -- What Joy, what Content
must Repose and Slumber find in it!' -- 'Oh, very fine, said she; but though your
Guess is very true, permit me to set you Right in the Main. -- This Bed,
continued she, I made myself, and have for these Four Years constantly slept in
it as happily as I wish or desire; but few Beds can boast, like this, of being
never employed but merely to sleep in.' -- Sangfroid laughed, and Conyers
smiled. -- 'You may laugh, Gentlemen, said she, yet Faith it is Fact. -- But
now let us go to the Library.' She then conducted them into a pretty contrived
Closet, and showed about Three Hundred Volumes of History, Poetry, and Books of
Divinity.' -- I doubt not, said she, but some great Personages may have a
larger Collection, but perhaps they cannot say with me, that they have read all
their's more than once over. -- Yonder are the Classicks in good English. --
You may examine them, if you please; for, I assure you, they are not in Wood,
and designed for Ornament only. -- Conyers and the Surgeon found something to
say on every Volume, nor did she fail in very pertinent Replies.

SHE then led them to her Garden: -- 'Here, said she, is the fair Flower in its
Luster! What Pity to crop its growing Sweetness, then cast it like a loathsome
Weed away.' -- 'Pity, indeed, Madam, said Conyers; but to transplant, to
cherish it in your fair Garden, where the Sun always shines, has been your
careful Employment; but however, to let it wither and perish on the Stem,
without smelling its Fragrancy, is, perhaps, a Crime almost as bad. For my
Part, I should enjoy its Perfume, and endeavor to keep it in constant Blow.'
-- 'Yes, yes, said she, I never knew a young Fellow that did not imagine he would
make an excellent Gardener. -- But here comes my Maid, and I prophecy Dinner is
ready.' -- As they walked to the House, the Surgeon gave her a Whisper.

THE Repast was plain, but so neat, and enlivened by such Good Humor and
Cheerfulness, that Conyers declared he never had so high an Entertainment. --
Sangfroid put her in Mind of the Promise she made him. -- Since, said she, your
Friend Mr. Conyers is so curious, I shall give him a History, of which I make
no great Secret.

The STORY of POLLY GUN, OTHERWISE POLLY CANNON.
WHO, or what were my Parents, is of no Consequence, only I must say they were
People of Substance and Reputation, and most tenderly bred and educated me. I
grew up like other Wenches; and at Fourteen, the flattering World had talked me
into Beauty. Perhaps I really was so, but am sure I thought it. About this
Time, one Mr. Tarrier, and his Lady, took a furnished House in our
Neighborhood. The good Gentlewoman was mighty religious, and never failed at
the Parish Church. She took a great Liking to my Father's Pew, and, by many
little Civilities, was much regarded by our Family. She invited us to Supper,
and was invited in Return. In a Word, her Conversation was so pious and godly,
and she inveighed so much against the Wickedness and Vices of the present Age,
that my poor Parents became so fond of, and intimate with her, that they
entreated she would be so good to instruct their dear Polly. I own I was not
much pleased with my Tutoress, for she constantly trail'd me to Church twice
A Day. My good Mother thanked God she had found so good a Friend; but I soon
discovered that Madam Tarrier was not so outrageously rigid as I expected; for
she sometimes persuaded them to permit me to a Play. The pious Lady always
chose a Comedy, and in some Parts, where I was ignorant of the Joke, she very
kindly explained, perhaps more than the Author meant.

IN this Manner we lived for about Half a Year, and the good Woman had got such
an Ascendancy over my Mother, that I believe she would have trusted me with her
even to America. She frequently took me to visit her Uncle near
Grosvenor-Square. He was a very polite, rich old Gentleman, and so kind to me,
that I was always sure of some pretty Present, or a Guinea or two to buy
Ribbands. At one, and the last of these Visits, Madam Tarrier took the
Opportunity of leaving me with her Uncle, that she might attend her Devotions
at a neighboring Church. I thought she staid a little too long, and began to
be impatient. The old Gentleman endeavored to pass away the Time with a Chat
fitting my Years, but at last I could not refrain crying most bitterly. -- What
need I amuse you with unnecessary Particulars? -- The She Devil had left me
with an He one, and I was undone.

THE first Month of my Confinement, for I was constantly watched, was dreadful
to my Imagination. I most affectionately loved my Father and Mother, and felt
their Sufferings at the Loss of an only Child. I wept almost Day and Night, but
must say the old Gentleman was extremely tender and fond, and did all in his
Power to make my Life easy. He bought me Books, we read by Turns, and he gave
me that Sort of Taste and Relish for them, which I now find of infinite Use. I
played on the Harpsichord, and sung well; but he had a Master to perfect me and
amuse my leisure Hours. I insensibly began to be better pleased with my
Station, and in Twelve Months was quite reconciled to it.

WHAT an Animal is Man! -- As I grew happy and fond of the Wretch, his
Affections cooled, and he entirely changed his Conduct. At last he upbraided me
with Infidelity (which was impossible) and proved his Assertions by my injuring
his Health. He stormed and flew into a violent Passion; and calling his Man
Jenkins, "Here, said he, take this fair Lady, get her a Lodging and a Surgeon,
which I shall pay; but since she has found out a Trade, all she can expect of
me, is to set her up." -- Without giving me Time to reply, he stepped into his
Chariot and vanished. -- I was struck dumb; and though my Heart was ready to
burst, no friendly Tear assisted me. Poor Jenkins was in great Perplexity; but
one of the Maids having packed up all my Linen and Clothes, of which I had
Abundance, and very fine, he was obliged to execute the Orders of his Master,
and conducted me to the Door, where an Hackney Coach stood ready to receive me.

AS I was passing the Hall, I don't know what persuaded me to open the Parlour
Door; but what was my Astonishment, when I saw Mrs. Tarrier, and a charming
young Creature, in close Conversation! -- I stood motionless, but in Agony, and
with uplifted Eyes, I just uttered -- Infamous Woman! and fell in a Swoon. --
The Servants too charitably brought me to myself, and Jenkins rather carried,
than led me to the Coach.

WHEN we got to the Lodging he had provided for me, I flew to the Bed and
abandoned myself to Tears, Sighs, and the most melancholy Reflections. -- Good
God! said I, is there no Law, no Justice for the Injuries done me? Must I
suffer in Silence, and must triumphant Villainy go unpunished! -- Is the Nature
of Woman so hardened, and the Conscience of Man so steeled, as not to feel the
utmost Remorse for this worse than Rape? -- Bitter, very bitter were my Words,
and Jenkins tried all Means to assuage the Violence of my Passion. At length I
became more calm, and he promised to wait on me in the Morning. The Woman of
the House obliged me to eat a little, and was very civil and tender.

NEXT Day Jenkins came and brought a Surgeon. When alone he began to question
and examine me in the delicate Manner, and then declared I was injured in a
high Degree. -- 'Twould be tedious to mention all this Affair; let it suffice,
that I was perfectly recovered in two Months. -- As I could not accuse myself
of a real Crime, I resolved, if possible, to return to my Parents, not doubting
but they would receive me, and revenge my Wrongs. With proper Caution I
persuaded my Landlady to make some Enquiry after them; but, Good Heavens! What
were my Sufferings whilst she gave me the following Account? -- "I have done,
Madam, said she, what you have desired, and find that the Family I inquired
after, had a beautiful Daughter who was stolen from them about a Year ago by a
Bawd, who, as a Neighbor, got into their Favor, but decamped the Moment she
finished her horrid Work. The poor Mother was so grieved at the Loss of her
Child, that she fell into a Decay, and died in Half a Year. The Father, with
Difficulty, got the better of his Afflictions, but sold all his Effects, and
went Abroad, but where I could not learn. I assure you, Madam, that Family are
greatly pitied by all the Neighbors." -- 'My Situation is not to be described.
-- Now, said I, the worst has happened. -- My dear Mother is dead, -- My Father
gone, -- and I must be abandoned to the Fate of a Prostitute! -- But what
signifies what becomes of me?

JENKINS just then entered, and, after some Chat, told me my Lodgings and
Surgeon were paid; "and now, Polly, said he, your old Friend sends you these
Fifty Guineas, and advises you to take Care of yourself." -- I took the Money,
but vented on the old Villain every Name, and every Imprecation my Rage could
suggest. -- "Come, come, said Jenkins, of what Use is all this? You must now
think of providing a Maintenance; and if you will be advised by me, perhaps
Things may go better than you imagine. You are certainly a fine Girl, and some
Gentlemen would think themselves happy in your Acquaintance. If you will give me
leave, I Will engage you shall not want two or three very liberal Friends. -- You
understand me." -- I was really, in such a Temper of Mind, and thought my
Situation so desperate, that I did not reflect on the Misery I was going to
plunge my self into, but consented to be guided by him and fell into his
Project with a Sort of Stupidity that I never could account for.

JENKINS got me noble Lodgings properly situated and gave me his Instructions;
but, like other Dealers, I gave him a Sample of the Goods. He had the Benefit
of a Subscriber for Six Copies, by having the Seventh Gratis. He was a notable
Broker, and sent many good Customers to my Warehouse. -- In Six Months POLLY
GUN began to be famous, and my Lodgings were sometimes the Scene of Quarrels
and Noise, especially at Night. In short, Disgraces had knocked too frequently
at my Door, and the Neighborhood obliged me to shift my Quarters.

IN three Years I believe I had thirty different Apartments, good and bad, just
as the Balance of Trade was For or Against me. It Is an odd Sort of Fund, for
when Stock was low, I mounted to a Second or Third Story; when high, I
descended to the First Floor. I had not seen Jenkins for some Time, so presume
he was instructing other Wenches whom his Master had made as wretched as
myself. -- By this Time some of my Clothes were worn out, and many had visited
the Pawn-Brokers. -- I was frequented but by Lovers of the trifling Order. -- I
had not saved a Shilling, and wanted many Necessaries in my Profession, besides
being indebted a Month's Lodging. In this Distress my Maid persuaded me to be
acquainted with the Porters of two or three noted Taverns. -- To these Places I
was frequently sent for, and now took the Name of POLLY CANNON. The Novelty of
my Face, my Conversation, which was always decent, my Voice, and my Youth and
Compexion, furnished out a good or rather a bad Livelihood. The Porters were
fond to promote my Interest, as I greatly promoted theirs.

THESE Gentlemen always charged a Shilling for my Chair hire to the Tavern, and
another if I returned alone to my Lodgings, though I was obliged to walk. If I
got a Guinea, their Fee was a Crown, besides some other Dues, which I shall not
mention. In short, these Fellows make a vast Income out of the Industry of poor
young Ladies.

EVEN this Sort of Life at last failed me; for my Face grew too familiar, which
is an unpardonable Crime amongst Gentlemen; and my biting the Porters out of
their just Poundage, and refusing some certain Compliances which they regard as
their Prerogative, they left me to pick my Teeth in my Chamber, and never
invited poor Polly Cannon to a good Supper.

I COULD not starve. -- With some Interest, I was inlisted under the Banners of
a famous Lady near Covent Garden. Not to be too minute in my Relation, I shall
only say, I did tolerably well there for some Time; but a Quarrel between one
of the Nymphs and I, obliged me to shift the Scene, and make a Piece of the
Furniture of a Coffee-house. -- As abandoned as I was, I could never swear or
drink. The Want of this last Qualification, made me soon discharged the
Mansions of Drunkenness, and threw me, for Subsistence, into the Arms of the
Public.

WHY should I pretend to describe what no Mortal can exactly do? What Joy can
you receive in my speaking Variety of Wretchedness? Or in a Tale, whose
lightest Word would harrow up thy Soul! -- Cold, Famine and Pestilence were my
constant Companions. -- I breathed, but devoutly wished every Moment might be
my last. ROW justly paints my Misery.

To know no Thought of Rest; to have the Mind
Still ministering fresh Plagues, as in a Circle,
Where one Dishonor treads upon another:
What know the Fiends beyond it!
HEAVEN help the unhappy Creatures groaning under this fatal Necessity, and
forgive those who drove them to it!

ONE Night as I took my Rounds, I touched a young Gentleman, and in the usual
Phrase, asked for a Pint of Wine. He turned, and by the Assistance of a Lamp,
examined me a little, and consented. -- "Perhaps, Child, said he, you are more
Hungry than Dry." -- On my telling him he guessed right, he ordered a Supper.
-- Our Conversation became very diverting, and he was so good to say, I was
much above the Common. He desired my Story, and I gave it him very naturally,
but concluded, that as all poor Girls were fertile in Invention, I much doubted
if he credited my Tale. -- He looked serious, but from pitying he became
amorous, and pressed my going to a Bagnio. -- Wretched as I am, Sir, said I, I
cannot do a Wilful Injury. You are happy and in Health, but I am miserable
every Way. -- When he was convinced of the Truth of what I said, he took me in
his Arms, and vowed he would never forget my Generosity. -- Take, said he,
these Five Guineas, and meet me Tomorrow Morning in Somerset-Gardens.

YOU may be sure I was punctual, and indeed he was exact. In fine, he carried
me to the House of a Surgeon, where I remained until his Duty was over. My
Friend, whose Name was Loveit, conducted me to a private Family, where, in a
short Time, with good Living and tolerable Content of Mind, I recovered my
former Spirits, my Complexion, and every Sign of Youth, for I was not yet quite
One-and-Twenty. -- If ever I loved a Man it was this dear Friend, and he
merited all my Regard.

WITH this Gentleman I lived near three Years, and as happily as my Situation
could admit of. I recovered my Music and my Taste in Books, and greatly
improved in both. -- One Morning at Breakfast he walked about the Room, and
seemed very pensive. On my enquiring the Cause, he sat down by me and began
thus. -- "I hope, my dear Polly believes I love her as I ought, but all Things
must have an End. -- Don't be too much alarmed, said he, on seeing my my Tears,
-- I shall act with Honor, and to your Satisfaction. -- In two Words, Polly,
my Friends and my real Interest compel me to marry." -- Be happy, Sir, said I,
in the Choice of a Wife, and may every Blessing attend you.' -- 'What remains
for me but Despair, Anxiety and Madness. -- "Not so, my dear Polly, cried he,
for I hope a better Fate attends you. Here are One Hundred Guineas, and this
Paper intitles you to an Annuity of Forty Pounds a Year. Be careful of these
and be happy.

HIS Generosity charmed me, and by Degrees he calmed my troubled Spirits, and
brought me to talk of parting with more Coolness of Temper than I possibly
could have imagined. -- "Since we must separate, said he, take a little of my
Advice. My Cousin, Captain Mizen, of the Superb Man of War, has seen and likes
you. As he knows all my Affairs, he begs to be admitted to your good Graces.
The Captain is an Old Bluff Tar, and though not very polite and tender, yet he is
an hearty honest Fellow. If you consent, I will engage a Settlement of Thirty
Pounds, besides your living as you have hitherto done." -- Some Conversation
ensued, and at last I accepted the Proposal.

THE Evening was ushered in by a Visit from Captain Mizen, who was introduced
by Mr. Loveit. I received them with great Respect, and made many Compliments
for the Praises bestowed on me by my Friend. -- "S'blood, said the Captain,
what is all this Jawing for? I Have done as Coz desired, and o'has the Papers in's
Pocket. Now do you see, an it be too little, there is twenty Pieces more to turn
the Scale. -- Now, Mistress, how say you? shall we make the Bargain and seal
Lips." -- Loveit smiled, but I was mute. -- "Well, well, said he, Silence gives
Consent, so Mistress, by your Leave." -- He kissed most furiously, and then
turning to Loveit, said, -- S'blood Coz, she is a well built Sloop, and will
carry a huge deal of Cavas; I Am afraid I shall never be able to run her fairly
down.

WE had much of this Sort of Conversation, but Mr. Loveit came to the Point,
and his giving me another Annuity of Thirty Pounds, I own it prejudiced me
greatly in Favor of Captain Mizen. A few more Words finished this Affair, and
I became the Property of this Man of War, and parted with my Friend with Love
and Regret.

CAPTAIN Mizen visited constantly, but seldom before One or Two in the Morning,
and frequently Half Seas over, as he called it. 'Twas difficult to manage him
in this Trim; but when quite drunk, was very tame and obedient, so I took Care
to ply him with Port or Punch, and then he turned in with Ease. In the Morning
he always begged Pardon, not in Words, but in a pecuniary Manner, that carried
irresistible Persuasion. I certainly hated him, and the Resistance I always
made to his Caresses, served but to plague me the more with his Fondness. The
Creature loved, and no Caliban could show it more. I was his Pinnace, his
Frigate, and a Thousand tender Names, but on struggling he has cried out' --
"That Is right! -- Yard-arm and Yard-arm. -- S'blood Poll, an you blow me up, by
the World I Will clap the broad R on you.

AT last my true Love went to Sea, and gave me a Reprieve for six Months. The
Experience I had, made me find out the real Use of Money, and resolve to save
as much as I could. The Captain returned with a fresh Cargo of that Commodity
which his Love made less valuable. He was so generous, that I suffered his
Embraces with great Freedom, but discovered the lucky Secret, that this was the
only Chance I had of losing his valiant Heart. It seems he loved a smart
Engagement, and a Ship that would take a good Deal of Drubbing before she
struck. An easy Conquest was to him of no Value. With this Knowledge I
pretended extreme Fondness; I hung on his Neck; I kissed his Carbuncled Cheeks,
and almost cried when he left me. He seemed pleased enough with my Behavior,
but his Visits were less frequent, and in six Months he forfeited his Articles,
gave me the Good-bye, and left me like a Turtle all alone, to weep and mourn
the Absence of her Mate.

MY Landlady, Mrs. Wheedle, was a Woman who understood the World. In her
younger Days she had been of personal Use to a Nobleman, who married her to his
Footman, and procured him a very pretty Employ in the Revenue. Latterly, I
believe, she served his Lordship in another Capacity. With these People I
lived, and, all Things considered, was perfectly happy in the Friendship of
Mrs. Wheedle. We went to Church, to Play Houses, and were inseparable. In one
of our Walks, I took it in my Head to enquire for my Old Friend near Grosvenor
Square, of whom I had not heard for above six Years. Mrs. Wheedle went to the
House, but found it inhabited by another Family. With some Difficulty I was
informed, that the Old Gentleman's whole Fortune was swallowed up in the South
Sea. That his Distress was so great, that it turned his Head, and had been
supported by Charity in a Mad-house near Chelsea, where he died about a Year
ago. -- I had no great Reason to love his Memory, yet could I not help a few
Tears, but guarded against calling his Fate a just Judgment.

LORD, said Mrs. Wheedle, what signifies it. If the Gentleman was a Friend in a
Corner, thank God there be others in the World as good as he. Charity begins at
Home, my Dear, but nothing is to be got by Idleness. I love to see a young
Woman Industrious and Careful. It Is the most recommendablest Thing in Life.' --
'I am no Enemy, said I, to Industry, but sure you would not have me hawk about
my Goods, or stand at the Door and cry, -- Walk in Gentlemen! and behold the
wonderful Works of Nature! Alive -- Alive -- ho! -- "Certainly Polly, said she,
you're distracted! -- Did ever any Body hear such Nonsense? -- If you will be
industrious, I know a Friend will give you Employment." -- Ay marry, said I,
now you say something; but will he come down handsomely? for you know I hate a
Game that cannot afford paying the Cards. -- "Lord, Lord, Polly, said she,
you're strangely covetous! but I don't blame you neither. -- There Is 'Squire
CARELESS now, the most Charmingest and most Agreeablest Man in Life, mayhap he
may answer your Purpose. -- What say to that, Polly?" -- With all my Heart,
said I, the Squire shall be welcome, but you know the Conditions.

IN a few Days Mr. Careless paid me a Visit, and, with great Ease and
Familiarity, fell into a Chat of a Settlement, -- I Am so unlucky my Dear, said
he, to have my Estate so fixed by Law, that I cannot touch it. My Income I
spend like a Gentleman. Pleasure is my Religion, and the Ladies are the Idols I
adore. The Incense I burn is Money, and my Sacrifice is Love. Accept one and
the other, and the Priestess below Stairs shall have Reason to be content." --
I laughed at the Oddity of his Expressions, but as his Incense had a
sweet smelling Flavor, I was persuaded of the Sincerity of his Devotions, and
I became his Titular Saint.

HIS Visits were very irregular, but, though always cheerful, always
good-humored and generous, they seemed rather paid to dispose of, and kill
Time, than to see the Object of his Love. -- Mrs. Wheedle took Notice of this,
and insinuated, that vacant Hours might be employed to Advantage. -- "There is
Perquisites, said she, belonging to all Employments in Life, and since you keep
an Office, I see no Reason why you shou'dn't have 'em as well as others." -- If
I keep an Office, said I, it is an Office of Assurance, or rather, that of an
Underwriter; but where are the Perquisites you talk of? for I always admired
your Douceurs, or, as some call them, your Dowcers. -- "You're a Mad-cap, said
she, but let me alone to work for you,

THE good Woman was very skilful, and, at different Times, brought me
acquainted with two or three elderly Gentlemen, who made ample Amends for the
Roughness of their Beards, and their Stinking Breath. This Revenue was partly
appropriated to my Friend's private Recreation and mine, and the Remainder to
the Sinking Fund.

CARELESS sometimes met one of these Gentlemen in my Chamber, but seemed quite
indifferent about it. The Indolence of his Temper was such, that no jealous
Thoughts had Power to give him Uneasiness. I once made an Apology for having a
Stranger in my Apartment, and told him a well-contriv'd Lie. -- "Bless me,
Child, said he, why so many Words about a Trifle! -- I know you are a Woman,
and cannot help acting as such. -- I know you have been playing the Truant, but
why should I be angry at the constant Practice of your Sex? No, no, my Dear, I
am so happy, that no Woman can disappoint me. -- You have all the same Turn,
and a little Cheating, even at Cards, affords you infinite Delight. -- The
Pleasure of Deceiving has something exquisite in it, but I am so ill-natured as
to disappoint you, and freely indulge a Passion so natural to the Ladies.

I OWN he flung me more by his Indifference, than had he stormed and swore. I
said what was necessary on the Occasion, but he took the Standish and wrote. --
Here, my dear Polly, said he, are my Sentiments. Let Us say no more on the Head,
but love one another as well as we can." -- He then began a very merry
Conversation, and embracing me very tenderly, took his Leave. -- I longed to
read his Paper, and found these Words;

The Easy Lover.
Why should I pretend to have
Dear POLLY's Heart entire?
What in her Power to me she gave,
And fanned the amorous Fire.
Then tell me not, ill-natured Soul!
To others she is as kind;
Why should I her Bliss control,
Since others hit my Mind?
No; let us ramble, not repine,
Let both contented be;
Her Soul's her own, her Charms are mine,
And that is enough for me.
AT first I thought I had lost him for ever; but a Day or two convinced me to
the contrary. We kept up a tender Correspondence for about a Twelvemonth more;
and my Perquisites regularly came in. At last his Extravagancies, and the Want
of common Attention to his Affairs, drove him into such Difficulties, that he
was compelled to give up many Amusements, and Me amongst the rest. -- Mrs.
Wheedle's good Management prevented my too much regretting the Loss of
Careless. She soon furnished me with another and another, and the last Fool
still welcome as the first.

I MUST reserve for another Opportunity, my Travels to Ireland with a Lord of
that Country, and to France with a Scotch Nobleman. -- My living with a Jew, a
Methodist Preacher, and sundry others; and the many Tricks I played in a
Progress of fifteen Years, would make a large Folio, and perhaps be as useful
as MOLL FLANDERS.

IN a Word, I found myself possessed of about Two Hundred Pounds a Year well
paid, besides some ready Money and Jewels. -- Time began to gather my Roses,
and ruffle my smooth Brow. The few Charms that remained, I resolved to use
myself. I had seen the World, and found it a vain empty Nothing. -- I began to
call to my Memory the Days of Innocence and Happiness. -- I reflected on the
Charms of Religion and Virtue, for their Beauties had not quite forsaken me. --
I tried their Power, and they have conducted me to this Mansion of Peace and
Tranquillity.

WHY are miserable Creatures called Women of Pleasure? -- Poor Wretches! they
know of none! -- In their happiest Days, and in the highest Keeping, whom do
they converse with? -- In the Midst of Gaiety, they are in Darkness and
Obscurity. -- They walk with self-condemned and suspicious Looks, and just live
like a Rat in the Wainscot. -- When stripped of their Finery, when discarded the
fertile Paddock, and sent to graze on the Common. What Horrors! -- What
Vileness!

I DO not pretend to be a Judge of the Charms of Matrimony, neither can I have
a just Idea of the Pleasure Parents take in their Children, as I never was in
either Situation; but this I can positively affirm from my own Experience, that
in the Midst of every Joy I was capable of receiving, as I certainly was of
some, I had Reflections which I could not account for, but which gave me
infinite Anxiety. -- To be necessitated to be fond where I was quite
indifferent. -- To caress him whom I despised. -- To seem to love, and be all
Tenderness, where I hated, and even loathed. -- In short, to live, if I may so
call it, a MARTYR to my Reason and Understanding, is a Situation the most
deplorable human Nature can be reduced to. -- As Light follow Shade, so Trouble
and Remorse pursue the Vicious. -- Who can fathom the Deep, or measure infinite
Space! But Oh! who can describe the Joy, when the Father of infinite Mercy
speaks Peace and Comfort to the contrite Heart!

She ceased. -- Sangfroid praised the Steadiness of her Resolution, but Conyers
was lost in Thought. -- If, Madam, said he at last, your whole Life was shown
to the World, with the proper Observation of a skilful Hand, how useful, how
instructive would it be! -- You would serve as a fixed Star to direct the
Unwary in the Voyage through Life; or, should Storms or Tempests drive them
into Error, to guide and pilot them into an Harbor of Safety. -- Vice has its
Charms, but place Virtue in Contrast, How is it possible our Sense should
stray?' -- 'Your Remark, Sir, said she, is just; but FRAILTY! thy Name is
Woman, or rather, it is the common Name of all Mankind. -- The whole World
struggle and strive and fight for, what they call Happiness; but they neglect
and despise the sure, the only Way of attaining it, which Religion and Virtue,
free from Enthusiastic Cant, or Hypocritical Demureness, can alone point out.
-- The Remainder of the Conversation was very serious; but Night coming on,
they were obliged, unwillingly, to separate.

As they returned, Conyers could speak of Nothing but Mrs. Cannon. He admired
her good Sense, her easy Turn of Mind, and her Moral and Religious Sentiments;
but thought she still led but a melancholy Life. -- Quite otherwise, said
Sangfroid, she has a sensible Servant for her constant Companion: She has her
Books, her Music, and her Garden; which give her a rational Delight and
Amusement: Besides, though her former Life is well known in the Village, her
Sincerity and Virtue are so well vouched by her Conduct, that some of the best
Families have lately visited her, and she them. She told me the other Day, that
to keep Company, and be ranked with modest Women, was such a Pleasure, as
almost made her distracted.

The End of the First Volume.
This Day is published, With His Majesty's Royal Privilege and License, In One
Large Volume Octavo, (Price Bound 6 s.)

The SECOND EDITION, With very great Additions and Improvements, and the
Addition of a New Plate, of A New GEOGRAPHICAL and HISTORICAL GRAMMAR: Wherein
the Geographical Part is truly Modern, and the Present State of the several
Kingdoms of the World, is so interspersed, as to render the Study of Geography
both entertaining and instructive.

Containing, I. A Description of the Figure and Motion of the Earth. II.
Geographical Definitions and Problems, being a necessary Introduction to this
Study. III. A general Division of the Globe into Land and Water. IV. The
Situation and Extent of the several Countries contained in each Quarter of the
World; their Cities, Chief Towns, History, Present State, respective Forms of
Government, Forces, Revenues, Taxes, Revolutions and memorable Events.


Together with An Account of the Air, Soil, Produce, Traffic, Curiosities,
Arms, Religion, Language, Universities, Bishoprics, Manners, Customs, Habits,
and Coins, in Use in the several Kingdoms and States described.

By Mr. SALMON, Author of The Universal Traveller.

Illustrated with a Set of Twenty-Three New MAPS of the several Countries;
drawn by the Direction of Mr. Salmon, and ingraved by Mr. Jefferys, Geographer
to his Royal Highness the Prince of WALES.

Printed for WILLIAM JOHNSTON, at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard.

This Day is published, (Price Two Shillings and Sixpence,) Being the
cheapest, as containing more in Quantity than any Book of the Kind extant, The
Nineteenth Edition, with Additions and Improvements, (particularly Tables of
Interest at 3, 3, 4, and 5 per Cent. per Ann. from One Pound progressively to
One Hundred, and from one Day to thirty, and from one Month to a Year) of
THE YOUNG MAN's COMPANION: or, Arithmetic made Easy. Containing plain
Directions for a young Man to attain to read and write true English; the best
and easiest Instructions for writing Variety of Hands, with Copies both in
Prose and Verse, digested in an Alphabetical Order. How to write Letters of
Compliment, Friendship, or Business. Forms of Notes, Receipts, Bills, Bonds,
Indentures; Leases and Releases, Letters of Attorney, Wills, etc. A short and
easy Method of Shop and Book-keeping, Merchants Accounts, etc. Directions how
to measure Carpenters, Joiners, Sawyers, Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Plumbers,
Masons, Glaziers, and Painters Work. With Tables for such as have not learned
Arithmetic. How to compute the Charge of building an House, or any Part
thereof. The Rates of each Commodity, and the common Wages of Journeymen.
Measuring, Gauging, Plotting of Land by Gunter's Chain, and taking Heights and
Distances by the Quadrant, etc. Of Gunter's Line in measuring Globes, Bullets,
Walls, etc. The Art of Dialling, and how to direct and fix any Dial.
Instructions for Dying, Coloring, and Making of Colors. With a Description of
the Counties, Cities, Parishes, and Market Towns in England and Wales. Choice
Monthly Observations on Gardening, Planting, Grafting, and Inoculating of Fruit
Trees, and the best Time to prime them.

To which is added,

The Family Companion for Marking on Linen, Pickling, Preserving, making Wine
of Fruit; with many approved and experienced Medicines for the Poor.

Written by W. MATHER, in a plain and easy Style, that a young Man may both
readily and easily improve and qualify himself for Business without the Help of
a Master.

Printed for W. Johnston, at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Church Yard.

This Day is published, In a neat Pocket Volume, Price in Sheets 5 s. bound in
Calf 6 s. bound and colored 12 s. Being the cheapest and most correct Set of
Maps ever yet published. Chorographia Britanniae: OR, A new Set of MAPS of all
the Counties in England and Wales: To which are prefixed the following general
Maps, viz.
I. An Accurate Chart of the Sea Coast, exhibiting all the Royal Docks,
Fortifications, Harbors, Sands, etc.

II. A Map of England and Wales, as divided into Counties, with the Names of
the Cities and County Towns, and the Length, Breadth, and Superficial Content
of the Whole, and each County separately.

III. A Map of the great Roads from London, to all Parts of South Britain; with
Tables showing the Distance of each City and Town upon the Road, from the
Metropolis, both in computed and measured Miles.

IV. A Map of all the Cross Roads from one great Town to another, with the
Distances from Town to Town, both by Computation and Measure. With the
particular Map of each County, is an Account of all the Cities, Boroughs,
Market Towns, Parishes, and Rivers therein; the Number of Members it sends to
Parliament, the Market and Fair Days; and in those of Oxford and Cambridge, are
the Names of all the Colleges and Halls in both Universities, with the Dates of
their Foundations. To the Whole is added an Alphabetical Index of all the
Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns, properly distinguished from each other, and
in what County they are situate.

This Collection (conveying a more comprehensive Idea of South Britain, than
any Thing hitherto published) was first drawn and compiled into a Pocket Book
by Order and for the Use of his late Majesty King George I. for his intended
Tour through England and Wales.

By Thomas Badeslade, Surveyor, and Engraved by W. H. Toms. Published according
to Act of Parliament,

And Sold by W. Johnston at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Church Yard.


