THE Necessity and Usefulness OF THE DISPENSARIES Lately set up by the College
of Physicians in LONDON, For the Use of the SICK POOR.

Together with An ANSWER to all the Objections raised against them by the
Apothecaries, Or Others.

THE Necessity and Usefulness OF THE DISPENSARIES.
THE Practice of Physic in London and seven miles round, being for near two
hundred Years settled by Law wholly in the College of Physicians in London, and
such as they approve of upon Examination, and License; it is worth the while to
enquire by what means they come to enjoy so small a part of it. Chemists and
Distillers, Astrologers and Mountebanks, Midwives and Nurses, and the whole
Train of Broken-Tradesmen-Doctors have every one their share. There are not a
few that are their own Doctors, and practice upon themselves; and there is
hardly any one so unkind, as not to recommend to his sick Friend what has done
himself good. The College can only blame these last for Indiscretion: And the
former are the most of them hardly worth the charge of a Prosecution: yet the
College have been ever and anon making an example of one or other of them, to
strike terror into the rest.

But when I have reckoned up these and as many more such as these, they have
hardly all of them invaded the tenth part of the practice that one single sort
of Men have usurpt, viz. the Apothecaries. And these not only practice, but
pretend to a Right, and to a Necessity so to do. As to their Right, though the
Honorable Court of Kings Bench have more than once quasht that pretense, and
have sufficiently determined the matter against them; yet I shall presume to
give a touch at it, afterward in this Paper. But as to the Necessity which
they plead, I will consider that here.

They plead a Necessity to practice upon the Rich, because many times they
cannot persuade these to send for a Physician, when yet it is necessary that
something should be done, and therefore they must do it. Now this seems a very
odd way of arguing, That if the Patient will not send for a Physician, the
Apothecary must needs undertake the Cure. For if the Patient be covetous, or
foolhardy, or will not believe himself ill enough to have the advice of a
Physician, what is that to the Apothecary? Yes, for if one Apothecary will not
give him something, another will; and so the first shall lose a Patient. This I
must confess is a kind of necessity, se defendendo, for one Apothecary to
defend himself from the invasion of another: But this is far from proving a
Necessity with respect to the Patient, who I dare say had generally much better
be without any of them.

Another Necessity to practice upon the Rich, is, when they are taken suddenly
ill, and no Physician can be met with. As to Practicing in this case of
necessity, so long as such necessity lasts, I dare secure the Apothecaries, or
any other person that does his best in such urgent Cases, that they shall never
be troubled for it by the College. But this Necessity is far from justifying
the Apothecaries continuing to practice even upon such Patients from day to
day, when better advice may be had.

These two Cases, I think, are the only ones for which they can plead
Necessity, with respect to their practicing upon the Rich; and how far they are
from excusing or justifying their practicing upon any such for Weeks or Months
together (as they commonly do) is too obvious to be farther examined.

But then how shall I get over the other Necessity, the great Necessity, with
respect to the Poor, who, if you will believe the Apothecaries, would all
perish for want of looking to, if they did not take care of them: for the
Physicians (of the College) they say, will only visit the Rich that can Fee
them well.

I believe, this accusation of the College-Physicians was never true: But that
for several Years bypast it has been notoriously false, is known to the whole
Town. For, that the Physicians might clear themselves of this false charge,
they have been obliged to set their care of the Poor more in the eyes of the
World than heretofore; not only giving advice gratis to the Poor at their own
and the Patients Lodgings, but appointing public Dispensaries also for the
Poor to resort to every day of the week (except Sundays) where they may both
have the best advice gratis, and also proper Medicines for their respective
Cases at the lowest value: whereby the Poor are at once delivered from the
danger of the Apothecaries ignorance in practice, and also from the oppressive
charge of his Medicines.

And the College have been forced to take this Course, not only to clear
themselves of the aspersions cast upon them, but also to make their charity in
advising gratis, truly serviceable to the Poor: For unless Physicians could
teach the Poor to make something themselves, their advice was seldom followed;
because the Apothecaries used to make them pay so dear for their Physic, and
could by no Overtures or Arguments be induced to abate of their prices, though
often pressed to it by the Physicians, as clearly appears in a Paper some years
ago published under the Title of A short Account of the proceedings of the
College of Physicians, London, in relation to the sick Poor of the said City,
etc.

And notwithstanding that the Physicians, as appears in the said Paper, were so
forward to advise the Poor gratis, and the Apothecaries so backward in
contributing their part; yet these did not only continue to insinuate to the
Town, that the care of the Poor lay wholly upon them; but when about seven
years ago they petitioned the High Court of Parliament to be exempted from
Offices as the Physicians are, they had the confidence to suggest the same
there also, and endeavored to get a Clause in their Bill, that they might have
liberty to give Physic to the Poor, who otherwise were like to perish for want
of due care to be taken of them.

The Physicians being thus unjustly calumniated before the whole Nation, 'twas
high time for them to think of an effectual remedy. Wherefore Dec. 22. 1696. a
Proposal was made in the public College for a subscription by the several
Members thereof, to raise a Fund for the furnishing a Repository of Medicines
for the use of the Poor: which Proposal was then approved of, and a
subscription immediately made to the effect following.

"Whereas the several Orders of the College of Physicians London, for
prescribing Medicines gratis to the Poor Sick of the Cities of London and
Westminster and parts adjacent, as also the Proposals made by the said College
to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council of London, in pursuance
thereof, have hitherto been ineffectual, for that no Method has been taken to
furnish the Poor with Medicines for their Cure at low and reasonable rates: We
therefore whose Names are here underwritten, Fellows or Members of the said
College, being willing effectually to promote so great a Charity, by the
counsel and good liking of the President and College declared in their Comitia,
hereby (to wit, each of us severally and apart, and not the one for the other
of us) do oblige our selves to pay to Dr. Thomas Burwel, Fellow and Elect of
the said College, the sum of Ten Pounds apiece of Lawful money of England, by
such proportions, and at such times as to the major part of the Subscribers
hereto shall seem most convenient: Which Money when received by the said Dr.
Thomas Burwel, is to be by him expended in preparing and delivering Medicines to
the Poor at their intrinsic value, in such manner, and at such times, and by
such Orders and Directions, as by the major part of the Subscribers hereto,
shall in writing be hereafter appointed and directed for that purpose. In
Witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and Seals this 22. December
1696."

This was in a few days subscribed by above forty, (and has by several more,
since.)

The Subscription being made, a College was called, That a Grant might be
forthwith made by way of Lease to the Subscribers, of the College-Laboratory,
and other Rooms and conveniences necessary for executing the intended
Charitable design: And a Grant was accordingly made and Sealed in open College.
Whereupon the Subscribers presently chose a Committee of twelve to manage this
affair, who were so diligent in it, that in about half a year they got it into
a serviceable condition and method.

But this design being wholly new, no wonder if at first it was not brought to
that degree of Serviceableness it is now improved to. At first those Poor only
were supplied with Medicines that repaired for advice to the several Subscribers
Lodgings, or those whom they were called to in their respective Neighbourhoods;
which in comparison were but few: for the Apothecaries still made a shift to
keep most of them in their own hands, so loath were they to part with their
objects of Charity, for reasons best known to themselves. Wherefore the
Subscribers thought it advisable for the enlarging of their Charity, to
appoint certain days wherein two Physicians (by turns) should attend at the
College, to give advice gratis to all the Poor that would resort thither; and
to give notice of this not only in the public Prints, but also by Papers which
they printed and gave away for the information of the Town. By this means far
greater Numbers flocked for advice, and many from the remotest parts of the
Town; for whose convenience it has been thought fit not only to continue the
Attendance (with the Dispensary for Medicines) at the College; but also to erect
two Dispensaries more, one in S. Martin's Lane in the Fields, and the other in
Grace-Church street, that the sick Poor might not have too far to go for
relief; and might at one or other of these Places have advice any day in the
Week, and Medicines every day at all of them. Thus two Physicians attend in the
afternoons on Monday in S. Martin's, on Tuesday in Grace Church Street, on
Wednesday at the College; and so on Thursday in S. Martin's, on Friday in
Grace Church Street, and on Saturday at the College. And the Physicians
attendance at these Places, is not intended at all to excuse any Subscriber
from giving advice gratis at his own House or in his Neighborhood: But because
a Physicians hours are uncertain, being obliged to be abroad whenever called;
that the Poor who can ill lose time, may not be disappointed when they seek for
advice, certain provision is made for them by these fixed days and places.

By this means it is hoped the Physicians have sufficiently wiped off the
Scandal they lay so long unjustly under, and the Poor have that care taken of
them, and kindness showed them, that we challenge any City in Europe to
parallel.

The Committee who are new chosen every Year, meet twice every Week for the
looking after the due management of this Undertaking: and they choose two
Curators Monthly, whose peculiar business it is to buy in the best Drugs they
can meet with, and to see that the Compositions for the Dispensaries be duly
prepared. And that these may be the better inspected, they are all ordered to
be made at the College, and to be conveyed from thence to the other two
Dispensaries as they are wanted.

And as the Medicines at all the Dispensaries are the best that can be made: So
they are sold out for no greater gains than will just bear the Charge, viz. of
House-Rent and Servants wages. So that the Price is ordinarily 8 d. or 9 d. in
the Shilling less than the Apothecaries use to exact.

And now that the Poor are so very well taken care of by the Subscribers to the
Dispensaries, one would think the Apothecaries should be very thankful that so
much trouble is taken off their hands: But instead of that, (to show that their
gains by Practicing upon the Poor, is more in their eye, than their relief)
they rail every where against the Subscribers as men that would undo them, and
have entered into a Combination to hinder them of all the business they possibly
can: while they caress and bring into business such Physicians as have refused
to be concerned in the Subscription. They make it their business also in all
Companies, to raise Objections against the Dispensaries, as well as to
misrepresent the designs of those that have set them up. As I have therefore
plainly shown the Subscribers design to be the most Laudable that can be; and
that they were necessitated to erect them, as well for the relief of the Poor,
as in their own vindication: So to prevent all groundless prejudices, I will
give a full Answer to all such Objections as the Apothecaries have raised
against them.

These Objections may, I think, be reduced to six.

I. They say, That Physicians ought not to give Physic, but only prescribe it.

II. That they have no right to erect public Dispensaries.

III. That if the Dispensaries be suffered, the Apothecaries will all be undone.

IV. That Physicians Fees are as unreasonable and oppressive, as the
Apothecaries prices.

V. That the Rich are supplied with Medicines from the Dispensaries as well as
the Poor.

VI. That the Dispensaries sell Medicines as dear as the Apothecaries.

Obj. 1. That Physicians ought not to give Physic, but only prescribe it.

Answ. It might suffice in answer to this to say, that it is as little the
Apothecaries province to advise the sick, as they can suppose it to be the
Physicians to give them Physic: and yet where is the Apothecary that does not
do this every day? How unfit then are the Apothecaries to impute that as a
Crime to Physicians, which they are so notoriously guilty of themselves, viz.
of intruding into other Men's business? I say, this might suffice as an Answer
to them: but I shall consider the accusation it self, and demonstrate, that
Physicians when they give Physic, are in their own lawful proper business; and
that Apothecaries are not so, when they prescribe it.

When a Physician has arrived at the skill to know Diseases and their Symptoms,
and to take Indications for their Cure as to the quid agendum; he must then
proceed to find out the quo, i. e. Operations, or Medicines, to satisfy those
Indications: And when he has found these out, can any Man think it reasonable,
that he should be obliged to communicate all his skill in every particular
Cure, to what person soever the Patient is pleased to call in for an
Apothecary, so as to make him presently Master of all those Secrets that by
long study and observation he has arrived at the knowledge of? Whosoever is the
Author but of one Invention useful to the Public, has a right by Law to the
sole benefit of it for many years: And shall Physicians that are continually
inventing new and more effectual Remedies for the Diseases of Mankind, be bound
to divulge and prostitute all their Inventions to Men, that if they can help
it, will never let the Inventors have twice the benefit of the same
Prescription, but presently usurp the use of it themselves, and leave the
Physicians at leisure to invent more? I know the Apothecary that is ignorant of
the Reasons and Natures of things, by unfitly applying good Remedies shall
never perform the same Cures that the learned Physician can: but while the
Apothecaries pretend to do it, and give those remedies to Patients, though these
receive no benefit, the Physician is no less injured. I say then, it is against
all the reason and justice in the World, to hinder the Physician himself from
administering to the sick such remedies as he has invented. It Is as absurd, as
to hinder a Workman from using his own Tools which he has invented, and which
he alone knows the right use of. And the Parliament of 32 H. 8. for this, and
other weighty reasons, did wisely enact, "That any Physician being admitted by
the President and Fellowship of Physicians in London, may any where within this
Realm practice and exercise the Science of Physic in all and every its members
and parts." Which Clause is plainly applied to making and giving Medicines, in
the Charter granted to the Apothecaries by K. James I. For after the Charter
had granted them diverse Immunities, Powers and Privileges, particularly the
sole making and vending of internal remedies, etc. at length there is this
Clause added: Et denique volumus -- quod Fraesideus and Communitas Medicor.
(Civit. Land.) omnesque and singuli Medici de eodem Collegio sive Communitate,
and successores sui, sicut and Medici Regis, Reginae and Principum imposterum
debeant, and pro arbitrio suo possint artem medicam in omnibus suis partibus
exercere, etc. i. e. "And lastly we will -- That the President and Commonalty
of Physicians (in the City of London) and all and every the Physicians of the
same College or Commonalty, and their Successors, as also the Physicians of the
King, Queen and Princes, hereafter ought, and at their pleasure may exercise
the Art of Physic in all its parts." And to drive the matter yet further out
of all dispute, it is immediately added, and insuper gaudebunt, utentur and
fruentur, and gaudere, uti and frui valiant and possint eisdem and consimil.
jurisdictionibus, authoritat. supervis. and correctionibus, ac omnibus aliis
potestatibus, privileg. and libertat. qualibus unquam antehac Pharmacopolae usi
and gavisi fuerunt, etc. i. e. "And shall moreover enjoy and use, and have a
right to enjoy and use the same and like Jurisdictions, Authorities,
Supervisings and Corrections, and all other POWERS, PRIVILEGES and Liberties
which the Apothecaries have ever hitherto used and enjoyed, etc." What words
can be more comprehensive and full to continue in the Physicians of the College
an equal power and privilege with Apothecaries themselves, to make and vend
Medicines?

But where is the clause in any Statute or Charter (even their own) that gives
or reserves a power to the Apothecaries to practice Physic, and to dispense
out all the Medicines in their Shops to Patients without the prescription or
advice of any Physician? If they can show none, then I affirm, that they do
this against plain positive Law, while Physicians have Law as plain and
positive to empower them to prepare and give Physic.

Obj. 2. That Physicians have no right to erect public Dispensaries.

Answ. To this I answer, that it seems strange, if each particular Physician
have power by Law to prepare and give his own Physic, (as has been shown) that
two or three, or any number of these Physicians, may not for their own
convenience prepare their Medicines together, and have one common place from
whence to dispense them; especially when all the benefit of such convenience
accrues to the Patient, who by that means has his Medicines considerably cheaper
than they could be afforded, if every Physician were at the charge to keep
Servants and a Dispensary of his own. But suppose there were any weight in this
Objection, of what advantage would it be to the Apothecaries to have the
Physicians debarred from this convenience? There would perhaps in such Case be
as many Dispensaries as there are now Subscribers to the three in being: And
whereas each Subscriber sends in comparison but few of his Patients at present
to the Dispensaries; if he had one at his own House, he would probably supply
all his Patients with his own Medicines. The Objectors therefore had much
better, in my opinion, quietly endure three common Dispensaries set up for the
use of the Poor, than by endeavoring to pull these down, to give occasion to
set up forty or fifty private ones, for the use of the Rich as well as the Poor.

Obj. 3. That if the Dispensaries are suffered, the Apothecaries will all be
undone.

Ans. It must be confessed, that part of their business, especially that relating
to the Poor, must indeed be abated; and that business which they retain, will
hardly be so profitable to them as formerly, when the Rich understand how
unreasonable their gains have been. But if the Apothecaries please, they may in
good part make up these Losses by contenting themselves to live in Houses of
less Rent, to bear only the port of Laboring or handy-crafts-men (as indeed
they are) but especially by keeping fewer Servants, and putting their own hands
to their own work, and by making such Bylaws to their Company in relation to
taking Apprentices, as may lessen the number of Apothecaries, who are now grown
so over numerous. And if notwithstanding, they cannot get so much by their
Trade as they have done, every unprejudiced Man will conclude it more
reasonable and just, that a few Men should be lessened in their gains and
grandeur, than that a thousand times their number should be oppressed for the
support of them. And all must confess, that the ambition of these Men is very
Extravagant, that desire with an hundred pound Stock (many not with half so
much) to vie with the best Shopkeepers or Merchants in their Neighborhood,
that employ fifty times as much in their business.

Obj. 4. That Physicians Fees are as unreasonable and oppressive as the
Apothecaries prices.

Answ. It Is denied, that Physicians Fees are either unreasonable or oppressive:
For how should they be so, when the Patient is at liberty to give what he
pleases? Every one is the best judge of his own condition and ability: And
accordingly some give a Guinea, some ten Shillings, some a Crown and some
nothing: And whatever other Physicians do, the Subscribers to the Dispensaries
profess themselves as ready to serve the two last as the two first. And take
these one with another, how far short will Physicians Fees come of those of
Lawyers, which yet are not disputed? And the disproportion will still appear
the greater, when it is considered, that for one Client the Lawyers have in
forma pauperis, the Subscribers to the Dispensaries have fifty or an hundred
gratis Patients, there being several hundreds of them every Week. So that take
one Patient with another, Rich and Poor, and I dare confidently aver, that no
Physician that duly attends at the Dispensaries, has a Crown a Bill for all the
Bills he writes through the Year; nay I can be positive, that some have not
half a Crown. And what ground then can there be for this great cry against
Physicians Fees?

But supposing they were indeed unreasonable, this Objection would only argue,
that Physicians were not fit persons to accuse the Apothecaries of excessive
gains; but it does no way excuse or justify them. And I will make it appear,
that there is no proportion between their gains and Physicians Fees. In
Chronical Cases, when the Patient can come to the Physician, he ordinarily
gives him but half a Fee; for which he expects to be put into a course of
Physic that shall cure him, which generally lasts several Weeks. In this time
the Physic commonly comes to several pounds; of which, three parts in four at
least shall be gains, (as I will undertake to prove, if it be denied.) And if
the same Patient chance to relapse into the same Disease, he shall repeat the
course toties quoties without ever consulting his Physician again. So that by
such a Patient the Apothecary shall get (at time and time) perhaps twenty times
as much as the Physician.

Yea though the Patients Case be acute and require the daily attendance of the
Physician, the Apothecary's gains shall far exceed his Fees, especially if the
Physician be one of the Apothecaries Friends, and have the knack of writing
well, as their cant is. I could give Instances enough of this: But I appeal to
the experience of most that have been sick of Fevers (for instance) wherein
they have had an Apothecary, with a Physician of his recommending: Let them
cast up the Physician's Fees, and compute three parts in four (at least) of the
Apothecaries Bill to be gains, and they shall generally find the latter greatly
to outbalance the former. Only I must here except two or three Physicians (not
concerned in the Dispensaries) who have got a way (under the specious pretense
of being careful Men) to visit their Patients twice or thrice a day, when once
would serve, only to Multiply their Fees. I am not writing an Apology for such;
but am content they should fall under the same censure with the Apothecaries,
of being unreasonable and oppressive.

Obj. 5. That the Rich are supplied with Medicines from the Dispensaries, as
well as the Poor.

Answ. The prime reason of setting up the Dispensaries was (as has been showed)
the supplying the Poor with Medicines at a low rate: And that the Subscribers do
still put them to this use, hundreds of poor People can Weekly testify. And if
there are any Rich supplied with Medicines from thence, the Apothecaries may
thank themselves for it. For this I will affirm, that whatsoever Physicians
(Subscribers to the Dispensaries) send their Rich Patients thither for Physic,
it is for one or more of these following Reasons. Either first, because of the
general Combination of the Apothecaries to keep out or turn out the Subscribers
from all Patients where they have an interest to do it, in order to bring in
those Physicians that will not be concerned in the subscription. And so the
Subscribers find this the only way to retain some of those they have left. Or
secondly, because the Apothecaries by sending in ill prepared Medicines
disappoint them in their Practice, on purpose to make the Patients question
their Physician's skill, and to send for some other of their recommendation.
(Which I have often known to be done.) Or Thirdly, when the Patients themselves
complain not only of the dearness but of the badness of their Apothecaries
Medicines, and desire they may be supplied from the Dispensaries, where they are
not only cheap, but good. Or fourthly, when the Apothecary has for many days
together (even in dangerous and acute Diseases) kept the Patient in his own
hands, till almost all opportunity of benefiting him is lost: For in such Cases
the Subscribers think it just, that the Apothecaries should receive some check,
to deter them from such unfair and dangerous Practices. Or Lastly, when the
Physician prescribes some secret Medicin that is kept at the Dispensaries,
which he thinks not fit to make known to the Apothecaries, lest they should
presently (as is usual with them) fall a practicing therewith themselves to his
disadvantage. And to these I may add a Sixth reason, which is only accidental,
viz. When Persons of Condition come to the Dispensaries for gratis advice on
the usual days, in forma pauperum, and the Physicians attending are ignorant of
their quality, and so are imposed upon.

These Reasons I allege in answer to this fifth Objection, not that the
Subscribers need give a reason for what they do in this particular (for they
have an undoubted right to give Physic to whom they please, as I have proved
before in the answer to Obj. 1.) but that all the World may see, how every way
justifiable the Subscribers are, as to any complaint the Apothecaries make
against them. And after all the noise of sending the Rich to the Dispensaries
for Medicines, I dare say, take all the Subscribers together, and they do not
send one Bill in thirty (that they write for the Rich) thither: And if some
send more than others, it is upon account of greater injuries and affronts they
have met with from the Apothecaries, for appearing more forward than their
Brethren in this charitable Undertaking.

Obj. 6. The last Objection is, That the Dispensaries sell Medicines as dear as
the Apothecaries.

Answ. It Is confessed, that some Apothecaries, especially the Wholesale ones, do
sell some Medicines as cheap as the Dispensaries can afford them. But pray what
Medicines are they? They are either simple Medicines and Drugs, the nature and
value whereof most people know; or such single compound Medicines as are kept
ready prepared in Shops, to be sold out when called for, by their proper and
peculiar names, the value whereof is as commonly known as that of Drugs and
Simples. As for instance, Venice Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, etc. though
very compounded Medicines, are sold as cheap (I will not say so good) by the
Wholesale Apothecaries as at the Dispensaries; and the reason is, the Buyer
understands what he buys, and the current price of it, and so cannot be imposed
upon by the Apothecary. And the gains the Apothecary has by these Medicines thus
sold, was never called unreasonable and excessive by the Subscribers to the
Dispensaries. But the gain complained of as unreasonable and oppressive, is,
when Medicines either simple or compound are mixed together, or disguised, and
have a new name put upon them, denoting only their form, or their use and
virtue, and the Patient is ignorant what they consist of. As for instance, a
Cordial bolus shall be priced at 1 s. 6 d. (by some at 2 s. 6 d.) when the
Ingredients of it are not worth 2 d. A dose of purging Pills at the same price
with the Cordial bolus, when they are only half a dram of extract. Rudii, Pil.
Ruffi, or Cochiae, worth 2 d. A Cordial draught shall be 1 s. 6 d. when the
Waters and Syrup of which it consists, are dear of 3 d. A Vomit is 1 s. 6 d.
(or 2 s. 6 d.) when it is not intrinsecally worth above 1 d. or 2 d. A
Stomachick Apozem of a quart is never rated at less than 2 s. 6 d. when the
Ingredients that are boiled in the water are bought for 3 d. or less, as in the
bitter Decoction. And many Apothecaries are so void of all Conscience, as to
make eight Shillings of such an Apozem, by dividing the quart into eight parts,
and sending it in to the Patient for so many draughts (with some cramp name
annexed) at 1 s. per draught. The like extravagant way of increasing the price
do they very often take, by dividing an Electuary worth (it may be) 1 s. into
twelve parts or more, and sending in the parts so divided to the Patient under
the name of bolus's at 1 s. a piece at least. And so if a Physician prescribe a
powder of an ounce, to be taken by half a dram at a time: Though the whole
ounce be dear of a Shilling, as consisting only of testaceous Powders, Sal
prunellae, Sugar of Roses, etc. yet the Apothecary by officiously dividing the
ounce into sixteen Papers, shall make 8 s. of it, viz. 6 d. a Paper. Now
whosoever will take the pains to enquire, at what rate the very same bolus's,
Pills, Vomits, Cordial draughts, Apozems, Powders, etc. are priced at the
Dispensaries, he will see that they are generally at least 9 d. in the Shilling
cheaper than what the Apothecaries fell them for. Who then does not see a
notorious fallacy in the Objection, when they affirm, that they sell Medicines
as cheap as the Dispensaries, when it holds not true in a fiftieth part? And
only in those, wherein the People cannot be imposed upon?

And besides, there is another circumstance that makes it yet exceedingly
dearer to have Physic from the Apothecaries, than from the Dispensaries; and
that is, that if either the Apothecary be Doctor himself and send in Medicines
to the sick of his own head; or if he be able to bring in a Favorite Physician
that is an Enemy to the Dispensaries, they shall either of them pour in upon
the Patient three times as much Physic as the Subscribers to the Dispensaries
usually prescribe in like Cases, the greatest part whereof, I dare be bold to
say, is nothing to the purpose of the Cure, but serves only for Pomp and to
raise the Apothecaries Bill, or perhaps does the Patient a great deal of harm.

So that take all considerations together, and who sees not, that the
Dispensaries are the greatest relief to the Poor that can be imagined, when,
for it may be, five Shillings they shall have as much help in their respective
Cases, as the Rich who are supplied with Medicines from the Apothecaries, can
have for five pounds? and at the same time have the ease of taking only a few
necessary Medicines, when the others are crammed and drenched all day and night
long with one slap or other?

And now that I have given a full Answer to all the Apothecaries Objections
against the Dispensaries, I should have put an end to this Paper, were there
not two Objections more, commonly to be met with in the Town, which it may be
necessary to say something to, viz. One on the Apothecaries behalf, against
Physicians having the whole advising part of Physic; and the other against one
particular in the present Management of the Dispensaries.

1. On the Apothecaries behalf people argue, That an Apothecary who has for
many Years made up Physicians Prescriptions for Patients, and has observed
their Operations and effects, ought to have a right to administer such Medicines
as have had good effects, to other Patients in like Cases, when he is desired,
without consulting any Physician.

Ans. In answer to this, we will first suppose, that the Apothecary is of a
capacity to make observations, and to know when a like Case occurs; And yet in
such case I affirm, that he ought not of his own head to administer the most
successful remedy to any other Patient than him for whom such remedy, was first
prescribed, unless in case of urgent necessity, and when the Physician that
prescribed it cannot be had. For a Physician has a double property in his
Prescriptions: First, in that when a Physician prescribes for a Patient, he
prescribes only pro hoc and nunc, for this Man and at this time; and for doing
that alone he receives his Fee. He does not sell his Prescription by way of
alienation, so that it should be to his Patient and to his Heirs or Assigns for
ever; much less does he pass any title over to the Apothecary, who is only
employed by the Patient to make it up, and who ought to return the Bill when he
is paid for it, either to the Patient, or to the Physician that writ it: and if
he either detain it, or transcribe it, in order to make use of it to other
Patients, without the first Prescribers lieve or direction, he is manifestly
guilty of fraudulently usurping another Property. Secondly, a Physician has
another property in his Prescriptions, in that no Man yb Law has a right to
prescribe but himself: And as I take it, there is as real a property in
Practice, as in Estate. No Man ought to meddle in that profession, that he is
not brought up to, or has not a Legal admission into. Not to mention the
Ministry; this is plain in the Law, wherein no Solicitor or Attorney, how long
soever they have practiced, and how well soever versed in their business, can
take upon them the practice of a Lawyer either in the Chamber or in Court.
Preparing of Medicines is but one, and that the meanest and most mechanic part
of Physic: this part is committed to the Apothecaries by such Physicians as
will not undergo the more servile and toilsome part of their Profession, or
through multitude of business are not at leisure for it; but still it remains
inseparable from it, and whatsoever Physician will, may exercise it. But the
Apothecary, whose sole Trade is to prepare Medicines according to the
Dispensatories, or Recipe's put into his hands by Physicians, has no more a
right to invade the advising and prescribing part, than the Solicitor or
Attorney the practice of Council learned in the Law.

But letting pass this argument from property, I will in further Answer to the
Objection demonstrate, that Apothecaries are not capable of making
observations, nor of judging of like Cases, and therefore ought not to have the
Right contended for.

Every one knows an Apothecary's Education to be, to come to the Trade from a
Grammar School, where he has learned to construe or to make a little Latin;
It Is very rare that any designed for that employment, have any smattering in
the Greek. Thus qualified he comes Prentice, and is presently set to the Pestil
and Mortar, to run of errands, etc. And after a Year or two when he has learned
to know one thing in the Shop from another, and to read a Physicians Bill, he
begins to be employed in making up Medicines and carrying them out to Patients,
and continues so to do till his time runs out. All this while he has neither
time to read, nor can have capacity to understand such Books as teach the Art
of Physic: Nor can he know any thing (to any purpose) of the Diseases for
which the Medicines he carries out are administered. For any Patient would reckon
it Sanciness in Boys to be inquisitive about their Cases, in the enquiry
whereinto a Man must be very nice and particular, or he shall be never the
wiser. And during this time of his Apprenticeship he generally loses the little
Latin that he had when he came from School, saving what the Physicians Bills
preserve.

Well, now he is out of his time, what must he do but set up? excellently
qualified for the Practice of Physic no doubt! Yes, there were such and such
famous Doctors writ to his Master's Shop, and he saw all their Bills, and made
many of them up and carried them out to Patients, of whom he saw some live, and
some die; and so he must needs know something of the matter! Well, to judge of
that, let us consider what the matter is, viz. The Art of Physic.

This Noble Art consists of five parts, of which the preparing of Medicines is
but the least part of one.

There is I. the Physiologick, which treats of the Subject and the end of
Physic, and so includes the Anatomy of an humane Body, and explains its
constitution and that of all its parts, with their uses and actions, and the
faculties of the Animal Soul.

II. The Pathologick, which treats of the nature, differences and causes of
Diseases and their Symptoms, and explains every Particular wherein an humane
Body departs from its natural constitution.

III. The Semiotick, which teaches the signs whereby it may be known whether a
Man is well or ill, and how diseases latent in the body, with their causes, and
events, may be discovered: Which signs are commonly called Diagnosticks and
Prognostics.

IV. The 4 th part contains the knowledge of those things which are as it were
the matter of health, and are usually called Non-naturals; as Air, Meat and
Drink, Affections of the mind, exercise and rest, Venery, Sleep and Watching,
with Excrements and Retents: And it contains also the knowledge of the right
use of these Non-natural things, so as that health may be preserved thereby.

And V. the fifth part, called the Therapeutick, shows how loft health may be
restored, and diseases with their causes and Symptoms removed. And to this end
it is necessary to be instructed, first in Method, whereby according to
indications one may find out due helps; and then in the matter of such helps,
whether contained under Diet, Surgery, or Pharmacy.

Now this very last thing (viz. Pharmacy) is all that an Apothecary by his
education can pretend to the knowledge of: And it is but the least part of this
neither that he can have such pretense to. For the Pharmaceutick part contains
not only the preparing of Medicines, but the knowledge of the Natures and
Virtues of all those things that are the matter of Medicines, whether
Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals, and this knowledge he is a stranger to.

With what patience then can a Man animadvert upon the assuming confidence of
these Men, who will set up for Practisers in such a difficult and mysterious
Art, that understand not any one part of it? A man is like to make special
Observations that neither knows the Subject affected, nor the nature nor cause
of the Disease, nor the nature of the Medicines that cure it. And he must needs
be a Witch at judging of like Cases, that for the mentioned defects could never
be a competent judge of any one Case.

The Case in short is this: An Apothecary when he learns his Trade, is taught
to know one Drug from another, can tell which will melt, and which will powder,
nay may observe which will purge, which vomit, etc. He learns also to make them
up into different forms according to the prescripts of Physicians; and I will
grant he has opportunity to observe, that some are given most commonly in
Fevers, others in Consumptions, others in Dropsies, etc. But will any Man
conclude, that because an Apothecary knows and may have observed these things,
that therefore he can judge with due accurateness either of these Diseases, or
the Methods or Reasons of their Cure? There is no general Remedy nor Method for
any one Disease: different Medicines and different Methods must be made use of
in different Subjects, though the Disease in the main be the same. And hereof no
Man can be a fit Judge, but one who is well versed in all the parts of Physic.
And therefore if there were no Law to restrain Apothecaries from practicing,
their undeniabl^ ^gnorance ought to keep all who value their Health or Lives,
from depending on their advice.

2. The other Objection that the People make, is against one particular thing
in the present management of the Dispensaries, and is to this purpose: If, say
they, the Dispensaries sell Medicines so cheap and so good, why may not any body
have such Medicines there as they have occasion for, without the trouble of
going to one of the Subscribers for a Note?

I answer, 1. that People are not competent Judges of what they ail, or what
will help them; and so the Physicians are willing to prevent their doing
themselves a mischief by taking improper things.

2. Unless the Subscribers be still more provoked by the Apothecaries in
juries, they are very unwilling to make that of common use, which was purely
designed for the relief of the Poor only. For they have no intention to injure
the Apothecaries in their proper Calling, if they will keep themselves to that,
will make good Medicines, and be content with moderate gains.

But 3. the Principal reason is, that Medicines are given out from the
Dispensaries by Servants, who are (generally) directed what to take for every
Medicin, by him that prescribes it. And it might be very prejudical as well to
Patients, as to the Subscribers themselves, if the Servants might sell out what
they pleased without order, and might take of the Patient what they pleased for
it. For they would be under a great temptation to sell things and either never
bring them to account at all; or to take more of the Patient then the stated
price, and to put the Overplus into their own Pockets. And therefore how
inconvenient soever it may seem to such as would be their own Doctors, not to
have from the Dispensaries what they think would do them good, the Subscribers
can by no means, for these reasons, recede from their established method in
this Particular.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1702.


