CONSCIENCE: AN ETHICAL ESSAY.

BY The REVEREND J. BRAND.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, in the Strand; W. WOODYER, at Cambridge; and W.
CHASE, at Norwich.

MDCCLXXIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Subject of this Piece is the same with that proposed the two last Years
for SEATON'S Prize Poem, on which Account it was originally written: An
accidental Delay it met with upon the Road, occasioned its being presented to
the Vice Chancellor two Days after the Time appointed by the Will of Mr.
SEATON; who therefore found himself obliged not to receive it.

CONSCIENCE.
THE ARGUMENT.
I. the SUBJECT proposed.

II. [3 -- 40] The INVOCATION addressed to the Spirit of Song, as (1) alleviating
the sufferings of mankind, (2) inspiring virtue, (3) and the piety of men and
angels.


III. [41 -- 46] The DEFINITION of CONSCIENCE. See Note to v. 45.
The sense of pleasure or pain arising from a perception of the agreement or
disagreement of our actions with the rules of virtue.

IV. [47 -- 206] The SOURCES of CONSCIENCE, or this moral sense of pleasure and
pain. -- 1st, Sympathy -- See Note to v. 49.
2d, Pride and Shame -- 3d, Self-love.


1st. [51 -- 70] From Sympathy we rejoice in the pleasures of others, and our
affection is conciliated to their author; relation to him heightens that
pleasure; consequently its greatest strength is, when that happiness springs
from ourselves, and our own Virtue.

[71 -- 74] The converse true of Vice.

2d. [75 -- 88] From Pride. The natural excellencies of the body or mind, when
surveyed, necessarily give a species of pleasure which we call self-complacency
or pride: this emotion is stronger on the perception of those degrees of
perfection, which we give birth to in ourselves, by acts of the will; and is
still augmented in proportion of the dignity of the end by which it is put in
action; the highest gratification of this instinct is therefore, the
contemplation of those of our own actions, to which some virtue was the end.

[89 -- 92] From Shame. The converse of the former argument holds good, as vice
is attended with the greatest degree of shame.

3d. [93 -- 206] From Self-love. Self-love actuates our hopes and fears from a
consideration of -- 1st, our present, and -- 2dly, our future state.

[93 -- 134] From the present State. -- Those actions which promote the
felicity of Society, (or the moral virtues) naturally bring their own rewards
with them: Those which obstruct it, (or vices) their respective punishments.
Whence according to the nature of our actions, we are filled with the hopes of
these rewards, or the fear of these punishments: and as the mind is always more
employed in considering the future, than either the present or the past, these
future expectations (which contribute to compose that moral sense, named
Conscience) form the greater part of our present happiness or misery.

[135 -- 206] From a future State. -- Our hopes are strongly excited by the
views of that eternal happiness, our fears by the representation of the divine
justice revelation has given us. Digression. Description of the divine justice;
her infinity; her almighty power to protect -- or punish. She descends upon
earth to chastise the sins of men; the effects of her vengeance. The terror a
consideration of this must inspire in the breast of the wicked, and more
particularly on the point of death.

V. [207 -- 648] The FINAL CAUSES of CONSCIENCE. -- 1st, to excite repentance
-- 2dly, to counterpoise the passions -- 3dly, to render the happiness of
individuals more proportioned to their moral merits.

1st. [213 -- 220] Conscience excites us by repentance to appease the divine
justice.

2dly. [221 -- 262] It counterpoizes the passions, by making them subservient
to the general good; which otherwise would engage us in excesses the most
destructive to society. It introduces the finest moral harmony in the mind; and
reconciles all the various pursuits of life to universal happiness.

3dly. [263 -- 648] Vice is frequently successful, and virtue deprest in the
world: Conscience, by being the secret punishment of the former, and the
support of the latter, renders the happiness of each, more proportioned to the
moral merit of individuals: and thus forms a necessary supplement to the
external administration of providence.

[273 -- 578] Hence unrestrained Avarice, Ambition, Sensuality, and other
crimes derive their secret punishment.

[579 -- 610] And from hence the man of virtue when distressed, experiences a
support, enabling him to triumph over or despise the afflictions of life.

[611 -- 648] While its influence gives new pleasure to all its finer
enjoyments, and exalts prosperity into happiness.

CONSCIENCE.
CONSCIENCE I sing; her nature, source, and power;
Her secret scourge, and self-approving hour.
OH THOU! whose sway subdues the willing soul,
And charms each passion to thy mild control,

Wakes round affliction's couch, and sooths despair:
PARENT OF VIRTUE! thou whose breath inspires
The good, the wise, and fans their noblest fires;
Excites the high resolve, the godlike deed;

Or taught the voice of piety to raise,
The pealing anthems deep majestic lays;
Where through the solemn isles, and vaulted choir,
With choral sound her hallowed strains aspire:

Where throned thou sit'st in realms of living light,
Crowned with celestial wreaths and flowers that blow
Fast by the streams of life, and as they flow
Drink immortality; while on thy state

To lead the eternal Paean of the skies;
At once from twice ten thousand harps arise
Their golden symphonies, and taught by thee,
Rolls the full tide of heavenly harmony;

And more than rapture fires the sacred notes;
SPIRIT OF IMMORTAL SONG! the verse inspire,
Assist the strain, and kindle all its fire,
To sing what peace, what joy, what soft content,

The keen the secret grief, the heartfelt woe,
The fears, the shame, the pang, the guilty know.
The breathing grace, the glowing thought impart,
To beam conviction on the enlight'ned heart;

Or form that virtue which they fail to find;
To wipe the tear from Virtue's radiant eye,
Spare vice one crime, prevent one rising sigh,
Bid peace and hope on pale dejection shine,

WHEN man compares his actions with the rule
Of moral life deduced from virtue's school,
With joy their just conformity we see,
And mark with grief wherever they disagree:
(V. 45.) Conscience is defined to be a sense of pleasure or pain; not a bare
abstract perception of the mind, exclusive of an operation on the passions:
because such a perception must terminate in itself, and can never become a
source of action, any more than the abstract deductions of geometry or any
other science; and Conscience is an active principle.
This MORAL SENSE of PLEASURE and of PAIN,
Of CONSCIENCE forms the wide extended reign.
From THREE great principles by Heaven impressed,
She holds her empire over the human breast,
Mild SYMPATHY, with PRIDE's more ardent sway; (V. 49.) The term Pride must be
understood in a philosophical sense, as a natural pleasure arising from the
view of its object; not as opposed to the virtue of humility, in which sense it
is a vice. The advantages of life are surveyed with pleasure; the means by
which these are procured are therefore pleasing, by the operation of the mind
associating the pleasure arising from the contemplation of the end, with the
idea of the means: the foremost among these we reckon the natural excellencies
of the body or mind: thus it is proved, there must exist such a pleasure as
self-complacence or pride, from a view of our natural perfections; if nature
has not given us an original primary instinct, which makes the natural
advantages necessarily and per se give pleasure to their possessors. Ours is
not the only language which wants a term which may express self-complacency,
without the danger of being misunderstood without some explanation. Since the
writing the above I have happened of the following observation on the word
orgueil, which one of the best modern French poets wanted to have introduced in
the sense I have used the term Pride. -- "J'aurois substitue le mot d'orgueil a
ces mots, sentiment de nos forces, de nos qualites, etc. mais dans notre langue
le mot d'orgueil se prend toujours en mauvaise part." Les saisons, note, p. 98.


WHEN Virtue wakes felicity around;
And blessed with calm content, gay transport crowned,
That peace the good man spreads, we mark the few;
Each social passion kindles at the view,

Transfers the pleasure to its active cause;
The liberal heart which showers such bliss approves,
And glows expanded over the worth it loves:
Each slight connection can new force impart,

But livelier joy, more home-felt raptures bless
The godlike mind which showers such happiness:
Sweet spring's Favonian airs, and blushing flowers,
Sweet to the thirsty earth descending showers,

And sweet the tuneful lyre's melodious sounds;
Yet sweeter far the joys which Virtue warm,
To view that smiling scene she loves to form,
Sooth pain and care, repress affliction's stings,

WHEN Vice her dark vile industry employs
To waste the happy field of human joys,
Even there shall SYMPATHY assert her laws,
And teach the vile to feel the pain they cause.

Of strength, of form, of mind we boast our own,
This by implanted Instinct given to please,
The soul with PRIDE, and SELF-COMPLACENCE sees:
That excellence from Active Will which flows,

But when Great Ends the kindling soul inspire,
When Virtue animates her sacred fire,
Then glows serene the purest bliss on earth,
The large, the liberal sense, of manly worth,

(A virtue still to virtue where allied;)
Superior to each low, each selfish aim,
And all the vulgar thirst of vulgar Fame.
HENCE in the breast where Vice maintains her throne,

SHAME from himself retiring, lurks unseen,
Stables at large, and desolates his den.
WITH lenient hand to give each pain relief,
By every care to soften every grief,

Pity's mild dew, and bounty's liberal shower;
Or bid injustice, rapine, fraud, and strife,
Range all abroad, and blast the scenes of life,
To point detraction's vile envenomed dart,

Of bleeding Innocence: such aids we find,
And such the ills man suffers from mankind:
On acts like those attends their sacred meed;
Fair fame, Publica Cura.
the public care, the grateful deed,

Wealth without fears, and without envy power;
Peace courts their walk, and Hope their mansion loves,
Earth speaks their virtue, and high Heaven approves:
On these flagitious deeds what pains await?

Pale care and frustrate hope, and chill disdain,
And stern adversity, and all her train,
Fear, want, despair the frantic deed to urge,
Justice' deep lash, and Memory's bitter scourge.

And sink in sorrow, or to rapture raise;
Of half our cares, and half our thoughts, at least,
The future robs the present and the past;
Fond to embrace that future, Hope and Fear

While on the ideal landskip's varying ray
Depends the color of our present day:
Hence glows the heart as summer skies serene,
Where cheerful HOPE irradiates all the scene,

Enjoys the present, yet can wish the last:
But vice in vain shall seek her secret shade,
Dark conscious FEARS her pensive walk invade,
Paint each vile art, each deed of secret night,

The scorn of virtue's keen indignant eye,
Inflicted pain, and galling infamy;
His present lot all grief, his past all care,
His future torment, and his end despair.

By pain and pleasure, pride and shame combined,
Would CONSCIENCE thus maintain her heaven-taught sway,
And bend reluctant Passion to obey:
To nobler ends RELIGION bids us rise,

With every hope the soul of Virtue warms,
With every fear the breast of Guilt alarms:
Here all the bliss of opening Heaven appears,
In golden order rise the eternal years,

Exempt from all satiety and pain:
Insulted Heaven avenging justice there,
And the dark realms of death, and brief, and care:
JUSTICE dread offspring of the God of light!

In vengeance armed, beneath her feet she treads
The reign of death and hell, the vanquished heads
Of fallen immortals and etherial powers;
And crowned with living light, her head she towers

Before her beams her adamantine shield
Effulging flame on flame; divine, immense,
To which, the space the vast circumference
Of Saturn's all-involving orb surrounds,

Systems and worlds from fate and force she saves:
And in her strong right hand, the sword she waves
Which girds omnipotence; whose mighty length
Flames through immense infinitude: its strength

Touched by the power of its resistless sway,
To unessential nothing. When the cries
Of wrong, and lust, and blood confused arise,
FAMINE, and PESTILENCE, and WAR, prepare

She mounts; from all her form the lightnings blaze
Through aether's boundless deeps, incessant plays
Above, around, beneath: on swiftest wing
Through all the Heavens the immortal coursers spring:

Angelic thought, light's instantaneous ray
Darts rapid: at each bound through all the skies,
From world to world the flaming chariot flies.
Famine and Pestilence her march preceed,

Dark sanguine horror shrouds the orbs of light,
Loud tempests rage, the whirlwind's furious might
Howls through the laboring air, the hoary deeps
Roar terrible, from all their pine-clad steeps

Earth to her center trembles at her rod;
Hell hears the coming ruin, and beneath
A deeper horror fills the realms of death;
Its surging flames with added wrath aspire,

Tartarean thunders loud rebellowing roar,
And kindled rage, and pangs unfelt before,
And Heaven's severest agonizing scourge
For endless ages her sad exiles urge;

Amidst the avenging terrors of the scene,
Even Virtue but not trembles. And shall Man,
His world a bubble, and his race a span?
Shall guilty man, though winged with whirlwinds, fly

Death's horrid power arrests him from afar,
And drags his trembling victim to her bar:
And come he will; (fixed is thy utmost date;)
Swift as the rapid march of time and fate;

And enless night and horror in his rear.
ASK we the CAUSE why Nature has impressed
A moral Conscience in the human breast?
To wake remorse her secret scourge was given,

To fortify its vast eternal plan,
Its first great end, the happiness of Man.
WHEN armed in vengeance Justice aims the wound,
Prostrate in dust and growing to the ground,

Often meek-ey'd Penitence, celestial maid,
Hangs on her hand, averts the impending blow,
And calms the avenging terrors of her brow,
Till by her prayers her tears to pity moved,

Two Principles impell the human soul,
Passion to urge, and Conscience to control:
In nicest equipoize united still,
These balanced forces guide the human will:

Urged by attraction, and impulsive force;
With swift celerity this wings his way,
While that with gentle, secret, constant sway,
Makes man by force unseen, yet unwithstood,

And move obedient to the sacred plan,
In that fixed orbit heaven prescribes to man:
Relax the (...) Il. viii. -- The golden chain: -- the force of attraction. See
Pope's Iliad.
golden chain, with mad career
And headlong fury, starting from his sphere

Now here, now there, with madding speed he flies,
Flames through the waste of life with lawless force,
And plagues, and death, and ruin mark his course.
HAIL Conscience! source of all our bliss below,

Grateful to mortal and immortal ears,
The warbled Paean of the heavenly spheres!
But far more grateful when inspired by thee
Man's chast'ned passions moral harmony!

Where hours, days, years, with measured change advance;
The shadowy forms and starry robe of night,
The grateful interchange of useful light;
Spring's laughing pride, gay summer's purple glow,

But far more grateful is the winding maze,
The endless intricacy Life displays:
In varied course its varied rounds we glide,
By turns advance, retreat, combine, divide,

Prompt to urge on, and eager to recede;
Conscience unseen each varied motion guides,
And through the maze with secret sway presides,
Marks all our way, our erring course deflects,

Each wild extreme combines with mutual ties,
And bids fair order from confusion rise.
IF man with philosophic eye survey
The pains, the pleasures which attend her sway,

As moral merit marks the just degrees;
Conscience, the last great supplement, was given
To fill up all the sacred plan of Heaven;
To render all that vice can boast her own,

PLEASURE's gay scene, AFFLICTED VIRTUE's sighs,
Consistent with the justice of the skies.
OPPRESSION may increase the miser's store,
With all the wealth of either India's shore;

Exhaust whole realms, and plundered regions drain;
A thousand vales his golden harvest fills,
His vintage purples over a thousand hills;
Yet not his treasured hoards, his swelling sails,

Clear the sad brow by conscious dread overcast,
Or sooth the bitter memory of the past:
Where dark AMBITION winds her treacherous way,
Smiles to destroy, and flatters to betray,

To sacrifice the generous worth she loves;
With varied guilt each varied shape to try,
Till ceaseless toil wins splendid misery:
Or fired with the delirious dream of fame,

She wildly burns to dare each arduous deed,
Forms the deep phalanx, bids the battle bleed,
Bids rapine, lust, and death with lawless sway
Range uncontrolled through half the realms of day;

The trophied column, and the victor's crown,
The pride of conquest, or the joys of power,
Can calm reflection's self-accusing hour.
With AVARICE and AMBITION it is the same,

Fell discontent with burning hectic cursed,
Who only drinks to parch with double thirst,
Remorse with anguish weeping over the past,
Fear her sad scene with future ills overcast,

Gaunt terror trembling at the name of foe,
Suspicion trembling at the name of friend,
With ceaseless bay their flying speed attend,
And urge sagacious all the rapid course;

Toil up the high hill, sweep along the plain,
Rush from the steep, or cross the stormy main;
Over plains, over rocks, the loud Cerberean cry,
Wing step with step, and follow where they fly,

For ever present though for ever fled.
NOR can the guilty joys which PLEASURE brings
Heal the sick breast or sooth its conscious stings:
Together let us trace her flattering maze,

See the gay scene its shining skirts unfold
Emblazed with purple, elephant, and gold;
The lessening columns graceful ranks extend,
From fretted roofs the starry lamps depend,

Inlaid with every gem from every mine;
The sculptured marbles breathe in living rows,
With thought, with soul the speaking canvass glows:
The courtly youth and virgin train advance,

Through the high dome the sprightly pipe resounds,
The clear recorder wakes her dulcet sounds,
The cittern silver voice, the living lyre,
The vocal flute instilling young desire,

Devolves its stream of melody along:
"ARISE! ye sons of social joy, arise!
"Now radiant Hesper gilds the evening skies;
"Spring, summer, autumn all their treasures join,

"See over the verge its dancing lustres swim,
"And liquid radiance trembles round the brim,
"Prompts the warm wish, inspires the flow of soul,
"And bids new fragrance crown the laughing bowl.

"Oh smile propitious over the genial hour!
"Come with thy sportive train, and bring along
"The jest ambiguous, and the festive song,
"Life's brightest sunshine and her vernal air,

"Wit's laughing front, and humour's grave pretense,
"And all the gay debauch of taste and sense."
THEY cease; alternate then the virgin train
Wake into rapture the symphonious strain:

With new born odours lade their downy wings,
Soft as the tear which streams from beauty's eye,
Soft as the love-lorn virgin's softest sigh,
Whose breast new hopes, new fears alternate move,

The breathing airs in tuneful descant flow,
Now lightly gay, now musically slow,
Or circling wheel their wildly warbling round;
Silence hangs over enamored of the sound,

His downy pinions in the listening air
Not to dissolve the charm. With varied notes
Thus over the soul the smooth enchantment floats.
"IN beauty robbed now comes the JOLLY SPRING,

"He comes, and with him leads the laughing hours,
"The vernal gales, the mildly-genial showers:
"Earth courts his warm approach, wherever he treads,
"Luxuriant all her wanton pride she spreads,

"And newborn odours breathe through every grove.
"Spontaneous tribes their beauteous forms unfold,
"The flaming lotus kindling into gold,
"Gay amaranth, the jasmine's virgin white,

"Myrtle, and asphodell, and iris rise,
"The race of brighter suns and genial skies.
"For Spring thus Nature pants with kind alarms,
"For Youth thus Beauty puts on all her charms,

"Which half conceals, and half betrays the breast;
"Soft speech, the fond repulse, the tender tear,
"The trembling, wishing, kind, reluctant fear;
"The blushing ardor's warm contagious fire,

"Attend her call; and pass not unpossest
"The roseat joys which court thee to be blessed."
YET Melancholy, yet the bitter scourge
Of sad reflection, the tumultuous surge

By guilt, by anguish, by despair deprest,
The pang for ever new, for ever keen,
Haunt the sad master of the guilty scene.
While down his cheek the tear incessant stole

"NOT the gay feast, not music's sprightly sound,
"The blameless dance, the bowl with roses crowned,
"Sweet song, love's gentle joy, the endeared embrace,
"Not every art refined by every grace

"And to her pain speak peace. My God! my God!
"'It Is sharp, it is terrible! to breathe, to be,
"But to converse with ceaseless misery!
"The cool, the fragrant morn returns; again

"But not to me comes joy; his chearing ray,
"Never gilds one dark hour of my gloomy day.
"Night shades the world; beneath her sombre wings,
"Silence, and peace, and balmy sleep she brings;

"Nor balmy sleep ever visits these sad eyes;
"Tomorrow dawns as wretched as today;
"Thus wear my years of misery away.
"Yet ah! might all-involving time consign --

"Vain is the promise of it is soothing power:
"Thus some fond infant on the sea-beat shore,
"When waves on waves move on their marshalled bands,
"In silent eager expectation stands

"Now this, now that, he fondly hopes the last;
"Still surge on surge, on billows billows hurled,
"To the vexed shore rolls all the watery world."
Now reigns the stilly hour, when Night had driven

Spangled with stars; and from her utmost height
Surveys this nether world: In chaster light
Over the calm scene the virgin Moon presides,
Her pale ray trembling over old Ocean's tides:

A wavy sea of mist without a shore;
Above, emerging from the fleecy plain,
The peasant's humble roof, the solemn fane,
The silent groves with trembling light overspread,

Around she views kind sleep's fraternal power,
Through her still reign his balmy blessings shower;
And drooping worth by frustrate hope pursued,
And toil, whose pain but ends to be renewed,

Forget their sorrows, and absolve the day.
YET all the splendid scene's illusion fled,
No soft sleep hovers over its master's head:
Gaunt terror pictures in the midnight shade,

Exposed to piercing want, afflictive pain,
Faint sickening agony, and death's dread reign:
A weeping father, impotent to save,
By frantic sorrow urged to seek a grave.

A new succeeds with deeper anguish fraught;
And memory to wound his inmost heart,
Steeps in her bitterest gall her sharpest dart;
Now here, now there he turns to seek repose,

Till sickening nature by fatigue oppressed,
Sinks down in torturing dreams of feverish rest.
FORSAKEN, chearless, desolate, dismayed,
He seems to wander in the midnight shade,

Chill horror broods through all the hallowed domes:
In awful shades, half veiled from mortal sight,
The flitting melancholy forms of night
Through the long gloom in solemn silence sweep;

Loud-rushing roars a hollow blast around;
And from its womb with more than thunder's sound,
A voice thus breaks on his astonished sense:
"Mortal, it is past! and vengeance sweeps thee hence."

And bursting into light a dread form stands
Shrouded in terrors: his grim bosom gored,
Still freshly streamed beneath the gleaming sword;
Corruption's loathsome bane had half destroyed

Together with him bursts Death's horrid king,
Whose mortal dart he seizes; bent to spring
Upon his trembling prey; "In vain you fly!
"Vengeance demands her victim, and you dye.

"Her tears, her shame, her agonies, her death:
"My frantic breast with every pang to tear,
"Against my soul my madding sword to bare,
"In all my crimes to meet my doom hurled down!

Astonished, nerveless, impotent he stands,
Fear chains his feet, and binds his trembling hands;
He strives, he toils, yet wants the power to fly,
And seems transfixt to fall, to writhe, to dye.

While anxious terror steeps his couch with tears.
To court sleep's balmy gifts again he tries,
And other shapes, and other forms arise:
He strays by sober evening's grateful shades,

Glittering by Moon: a solemn silence reigns;
Save in some bourne that skirts the dewy plains,
The sweetest warbler of the feathered throng
Wakes to soft rapture her love-labour'd song;

His loved, his loveliest charmer weeps his stay.
Thus some fair lily, on the mountain's side,
With rain surcharged declines her silver pride;
Till young Hyperion from his gorgeous height,

Then cheered to life, in virgin state arrayed,
Half her retreating elegance displayed,
While half-conceal'd her modest form she veils,
And streams fresh odor to the passing gales,

To lend new luster to the vernal year.
Hope gleams a moment over his deep distress,
And bids him thus his raptured sense express.
"Dear as soft showers when gasping Nature mourns!

"Dear as the vital air! as balmy rest!
"Dear as the last best hope that warms my breast!
"Often Fancy saw thee mingled with the dead,
"And over the thought my heart with anguish bled:

"Save happily when Remembrance to my view
"The wretched scenes of other days retrac'd,
"In fond idea thy past griefs I chased;
"Repulsed no more with stern averting eye

"But wiped thy tears, bad all thy sorrows cease,
"And smiled thy fond subsiding fears to peace:
"Then fled the fancied scenes, and as they fled,
"I wept no cares could reach the silent dead.

"To bless the Friend thy gentler virtues loved;
"Thus have I said to my expanding heart,
"Had she now lived some joy it might impart
"To that mild breast, where softness fixed her throne,

"While soothed affection's tear, and pleasing grief,
"Through my sick breast diffused severe relief.
"God of my soul! be all her future blessed!
"And let her closing day be peace and rest!

"Let Justice or let Mercy fix my lot."
Then ardent he extends his longing arms,
Intent to grasp her visionary charms,
When lo! that instant, in his fond embrace,

And pangs and terror in her meager eyes,
Expiring, prostrate at his feet she lies,
Convulst with madding agonising pain,
While death and torture burns in every vein;

Now nature laboring in her last sad strife,
Frantic with shrilling shrieks she rends the air,
Then sinks exhausted down in mute despair;
Yet turns on him her fond, forgiving eye,

His boiling brain with frantic passion burns,
He rages, loves, and weeps, and storms by turns;
Now deems, arrayed in terrors and the night,
The kindred shades pursue his trembling flight,

The unutterable fury forms of hell:
Till flying, from some dread tremendous steep
Headlong he sinks, ten thousand fathoms deep;
Down, down, the eternal precipice he goes;

WITH fears and stern conflicting pangs possessed,
Thus Conscience agitates the guilty breast;
Hence Lust that can the golden bands despise
Of Nature and her dearest charities;

To bid it pierce a friend's a parent's heart;
And midnight murder, and relentless hate,
Transfixt with horror feel their future fate.
YET hence the firm support of godlike minds,

She smooths the good man's path, serenes his way,
And on his thickest gloom pours light and day:
If on the sea of life indulgent gales
Aid all his course and fill his swelling sails,

With sober hand her destined course he guides:
If black'ning clouds the face of heaven deform,
He all collected dares the rising storm;
Marks one fixed star, and by her guiding ray,

Darkness in vain the face of heaven o'ershrowds,
Storms swell on storms and clouds are rolled on clouds;
The afflicting hail descends, the driving rain
Sweeps over the surge, and blackens all the main;

Roaring, immense, foamy, abrupt, arise;
Over the tall mast their raging tops aspire,
And wrathful lightnings robe the main in fire,
One wide incessant blaze: loud thunders roll,

And he the angel of Destruction forms
Their must'ring ire, and drives on all their storms;
And deep retired in clouds and tenfold night,
Full on the bark impells their raging flight,

And hurls it flaming over his sacred head:
Serene the good man steers his constant way,
While frustrate lightnings innocently play;
And sees their baffled rage with generous scorn,

IT IS CONSCIOUS WORTH alone can form our bliss,
Exalt prosperity to happiness,
Aid life's best joys, illume her brightest day,
And gild her prospects with distinguished ray.

Her feast, her song, her treasures, and her plume:
And dear the warrior's Wreath, the patriot's Fame,
The poet's bay, the sage's deathless name:
Sweet Friendship's tie, the mutual heart that binds,

Soft Love's endearing joy, and golden dart,
The gentle wish, fond cares, and pleasing smart:
Yet Wealth's enchanting scene, the boast of Fame,
Love's gentle wish, and Friendship's sacred flame,

On Conscious Worth their choicest blessings shower;
And every joy of every appetite
Her secret power refines to true delight:
Thus when the dew of heaven pervades unseen

Then beams the liberal luster of the year,
The hills the plains spontaneous herbage rear,
Intenser beauty robes the laughing spring,
The herds rejoice, the exulting valleys ring;

Eyes its great Source, and pours his soul in praise.
In bright succession year thus leads on year,
Till having finished all his full career,
She sinks mature upon the lap of earth;

No guilty fear disturbs her closing eyes,
But hope serenes her passage to the skies;
Points to the reign of Peace, and Hope, and Joy,
There where no pains torment, no cares annoy;

The eternal Throne, the flood of living light,
And Virtue's highest brightest best reward,
The applauding smile of Heaven's almighty Lord.
THE END.

