A Bold Stroke for a Husband, A COMEDY, AS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN
COVENT GARDEN. By MRS. COWLEY.

LONDON: PRINTED BY M. SCOTT, CHANCERY LANE, FOR T. EVANS, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
MDCCLXXXIV.

PROLOGUE.
WRITTEN BY TWO GENTLEMEN.
NOW, by my sanguine hopes, our author cries,
With expectation sparkling in her eyes,
There Is nothing here should scare me that I see,
They all are saplings of the tough old tree:
Women, who wear Elysium in their look,
And men, unconquered as their native oak.
But yet a word or two I Will briefly say,
To prove we are right in naming of our play.
Of human conduct, in each varied scene,
The extreme succeeds beyond the patient mean;
If eminence in rank our bosoms fire,
If merit to preferment dare aspire,
Follow the active, not the formal part,
"And snatch a grace beyond the rules of art."
Bold Strokes, from bounding genius firmly struck,
Attract success, more than the turns of luck.
The bankrupt swindler, though to pay unable,
Often mends his fortune by the E O table;
Or, failing there, he acts a braver part,
And takes a purse, -- a Bold Stroke for the cart.
The gamester too forgets each tender tie,
And ventures his last guinea on a die,
'Till ruined, and repenting of the evil,
He hangs himself -- a Bold Stroke for the Devil.
The fortune hunter sports a suit of lace,
In this a Count, a Lord in the other place,
Success at length, begins his married life
At Gretna Green -- a Bold Stroke for a Wife.
But are bold strokes to vicious men confined?
Does virtue lie inactive in the mind?
It cannot be, while England's genius breathes,
And many a brow is decked with laurel wreaths.
Bold strokes in war are England's greatest pride;
Think how a HOOD has lived, a MANNERS died!
Our play holds forth the conquest of a heart,
By one bold stroke of nature, not of art.
A female pen calls female virtue forth,
And fairly shows to man her sex's worth.
Could men but see what female sense can do,
How apt their wit, their constancy -- how true;
In vain would rakes the married state revile,
Nor with the wanton, precious time beguile.
Such is our aim, to rectify the age,
By bringing rising follies on the stage;
Be then propitious, let our fears decrease,
While you, with plaudits, ratify the peace!
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
DON JULIO, MR. LEWIS. DON CARLOS, MR. WROUGHTON. DON CAESAR, MR. QUICK. DON
VINCENTIO, MR. EDWIN. DON GARCIA, MR. WHITFIELD. VASQUEZ, MR. FEARON. GASPER,
MR. WILSON. PEDRO, MR. STEVENS. OLIVIA, MRS. MATTOCKS. VICTORIA, MRS. ROBINSON.
LAURA, MRS. WHITFIELD. MARCELLA, MISS MORRIS. MINETTE, MRS. WILSON. INIS, MISS
PLATT. SANCHA, MRS. DAVENETT.


SCENE, SPAIN.

A Bold Stroke for a Husband.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Street in Madrid. Enter SANCHA from a House, she advances, then runs back,
and beckons to PEDRO within. SANCHA. HIST! Pedro! Pedro!

Enter PEDRO. There he is: do see him? just turning by St. Antony in the
corner. Now, do you tell him that your mistress is not at home; and if his
jealous Donship should insist on searching the house, as he did yesterday, say
that somebody is ill -- the black has got a fever, or that --


PED. Pho, pho, get you in. Don't I know that the duty of a iacquey in Madrid
is to lie with a good grace? I have been studying it now for a whole week, and
I Will defy Don or Devil to surprise me into a truth. Get you in, I say -- here
he comes.

[Exit. SANCHA. Enter CARLOS. [PEDRO struts up to him] Donna Laura is not at
home, Sir.


CAR. Not at home! -- come, Sir, what have you received for telling that lie?


PED. Lie! -- Lie! -- Signor! --


CAR. It must be a lie by your promptness in delivering it. -- What a fool does
your mistress trust! -- A clever rascal would have waited my approach, and,
delivering the message with easy coolness, deceived me -- thou have been on the
watch, and runnest toward me with a face of stupid importance, bawling, that
she may hear through the lettice how well thou obeyest her, -- "Donna Laura is
not at home, Sir."


PED. Hear through the lettice -- hah! by'r lady she must have long ears, to
reach from the grotto in the garden to the street.


CAR. Hah! [seizes him] Now, Sir, your ears shall be longer, if you do not tell
me who is with her in the grotto.


PED. In the grotto, Sir! -- did I say any thing about the grotto? I -- I only
meant that --


CAR. Fool! -- do thou trifle with me? who is with her?

[Pinching his ear.
PED. Oh! -- why nobody, Sir -- only the pretty young gentleman's valet,
waiting for an answer to a letter he brought. There! I have saved my ears at
the expense of my place. I have worn this fine coat but a week, and I shall be
sent back to Segovia for not being able to lie, though I have been learning the
art six days and nights.


CAR. Well -- come this way -- if thou will promise to be faithful to me, I
will not betray thee: nor at present enter the house.


PED. Oh, Sir, blessings on you!


CAR. How often does the pretty young gentleman visit her?


PED. Every day, Sir -- If he misses, madam's stark wild.


CAR. Where does he live?


PED. Truly, I know not, Sir.


CAR. How!

[Menacing.
PED. By the honesty of my mother, I cannot tell, Sir. She calls him Florio; --
that is his Christian name -- his Heathen name I never heard.


CAR. You must acquaint me when they are next together.


PED. Lord, Sir, if there should be any blood spilt!


CAR. Promise, -- or I Will lead thee by the ears to the grotto.


PED. I promise, I promise.


CAR. There, take that, [gives money] and if thou art faithful I Will treble it.
Now go in, and be a good lad -- and, do you hear? -- you may tell lies to every
body else, but remember you must always speak truth to me.


PED. I will, Sir, -- I will.


[Exit, looking at the money. CAR. It Is well my passion is extinguished, for I
can now act with coolness; I Will wait patiently for the hour of their security,
and take them in the softest moments of their love. But if ever I trust to
woman more -- may every --


Enter two women, veiled, followed by JULIO. JULIO. Fie, ladies! keep your
curtains drawn so late! The sun is up -- it is time to look abroad -- [tries to
remove their veils] Nay, if you are determined on night and silence, I take my
leave. A woman without prattle, is like Burgundy without spirit. -- Bright
eyes, to touch me, must belong to sweet tongues.

[Going.
CAR. Sure it is Julio. Hey!


JULIO. [Returning] Don Carlos? Yes, by all the sober gods of matrimony! --
Why, what business, goodman gravity, can thou have in Madrid -- I understand
you are married -- quietly settled in your own pastures -- father of a family,
and the instructive companion of country vine dressers -- ha! ha!


CAR. It Is false, by heaven! -- I have forsworn the country -- left my family,
and run away from my wife.


JULIO. Really! then matrimony has not totally destroyed thy free will.


CAR. It Is with difficulty I have preserved it though; for women, thou know,
are most unreasonable beings! as soon as I had exhausted my stock of love
tales, which, with management, lasted beyond the honey-moon, madam grew sullen,
-- I found home dull, and amused myself with the pretty peasants of the
neighborhood -- Worse and worse! -- we had nothing now but faintings, tears
and hysterics for twenty-four honey-moons more. -- So one morning I gave her in
her sleep a farewell kiss, to comfort her when she should awake, and posted to
Madrid; where, if it was not for the remembrance of the clog at my heel, I
should bound over the regions of pleasure, with more spirit than a young
Arabian on his mountains.


JULIO. Do you find this clog no hindrance in affairs of gallantry?


CAR. Not much. -- In that house there -- but, d -- her, she is persidious! --
in that house is a woman of beauty, with pretensions to character and fortune,
who devoted herself to my passion.


JULIO. If she is persidious, give her to the winds.


CAR. Ah, but there is a rub, Julio, I have been a sool -- a woman's sool! --
In a state of intoxication, she wheedled me, or rather cheated me, out of a
settlement.


JULIO. Pho! is that --


CAR. Oh! but you know not its nature. A settlement of lands that both honor
and gratitude ought to have preserved sacred from such base alienation. -- In
short, if I cannot recover them, I am a ruined man.


JULIO. Nay, this seems a worse clog than the other -- Poor Carlos! so bewiv'd
and be --


CAR. Prithee have compassion.


Enter a Servant with a letter to Julio, he reads it, and then nods to the
Servant, who exits. CAR. An appointment, I Will be sworn, by that air of mystery
and satisfaction -- come, be friendly, and communicate.


JULIO. [Putting up the letter] You are married, Carlos; -- that is all I have
to say -- you are married.


CAR. Pho, that is past long ago, and ought to be forgotten; but if a man does a
foolish thing once, he will hear of it all his life.


JULIO. Aye, the time has been when thou might have been entrusted with such
a dear secret, -- when I might have opened the billet, and feasted thee with
the sweet meandring strokes at the bottom, which form her name, when --


CAR. What, it is from a woman then?


JULIO. It is.


CAR. Handsome?


JULIO. Hum -- not absolutely handsome, but she will pass, with one who has not
had his taste spoilt by -- matrimony.


CAR. Malicious dog! -- Is she young?


JULIO. Under twenty -- fair complexion, azure eyes, red lips, teeth of pearl,
polished neck, fine turned shape, graceful --


CAR. Hold, Julio, if thou love me! -- Is it possible she can be so
bewitching a creature?


JULIO. It Is possible -- though, to deal plainly, I never saw her; but I love
my own pleasure so well, that I could fancy all that, and ten times more.


CAR. What star does she inhabit?


JULIO. Irradiate thou should have said, after such a description -- but,
faith, I know not; my orders are to be in waiting at seven, at the Prado.


CAR. Prado! -- hey! -- gad! cannot you take me with you? for though I have
forsworn the sex myself, and have done with them for ever, yet I may be of use
to you, you know.


JULIO. Faith, I cannot see that -- however, as you are a poor woe-begone
married mortal, I Will have compassion, and suffer thee to come.


CAR. Then I am a man again! Wife, avaunt! -- mistress, farewell! -- At seven
you say?


JULIO. Exactly.


CAR. I Will meet thee at Philippi!


[Exit. severally. SCENE II.
A spacious Garden belonging to Don CAESAR. Enter MINETTE and INIS. MIN. There,
will that do? My lady sent me to make her up a nosegay; these orange flowers
are delicious, and this rose, how sweet!


INIS. Pho, what significs wearing sweets in her bosom, unless they would
sweeten her manners? -- it is amazing you can be so much at your ease; one might
think your lady's tongue was a lute, and her morning scolds an agreeable
serenade.


MIN. So they are -- Custom you know. I have been used to her music now these
two years, and I don't believe I could relish my breakfast without it.


INIS. I would rather never break my fast, than do it on such terms. What a
difference between your mistress and mine; Donna Victoria is as much too
gentle, as her cousin is too harsh.


MIN. Aye, and you see what she gets by it; had she been more spirited, perhaps
her husband would not have forsaken her; -- men enlisted under the matrimonial
banner, like those under the King's, would be often tempted to run away from
their colors, if fear did not keep them in dread of desertion.


INIS. If making a husband afraid is the way to keep him faithful, I believe
your lady will be the happiest wise in Spain.


MIN. Ha, ha, ha! how people may be deceived! -- nay, how people are deceived!
-- but time will discover all things.


INIS. What! what is there a secret in the business, Minette? if there is, hang
time! let us have it directly.


MIN. Now, if I dared but tell ye -- lud! how I could surprise ye! --

[Going.
INIS. [Stopping her] Don't go.


MIN. I must go; I am on the very brink of betraying my mistress, -- I must
leave you -- mercy upon me! -- it rises like new bread.


INIS. I hope it will choke ye, if you stir 'till I know all.


MIN. Will you never breathe a syllable?


INIS. Never.


MIN. Will you strive to forget it the moment you have heard it?


INIS. I Will swear to myself forty times a day to forget it.


MIN. You are sure you will not let me stir from this spot till you know the
whole.


INIS. Not as far as a thrush hops.


MIN. So! now, then, in one word, -- here it goes. Though every body supposes
my lady an errant scold, she is no more a --


Don CAESAR without. Out upon it! e -- h -- h!


MIN. Oh, St. Jerome! -- here is her father, and his privy counselor, Gasper.
I can never communicate a secret in quiet. Well! come to my chamber, for, now
my hand's in, you shall have the whole. -- I would not keep it another day, to
be confidant to an infanta.


[Exeunt. Enter Don CAESAR and GASPER. GASP. Take comfort, Sir; take comfort.


CAES. Take it! -- why where the devil shall I find it! You may say, take
physic Sir, or, take poison, Sir -- they are to be had; but what signifies
bidding me take comfort, when I can neither buy it, beg it, nor steal it?


GASP. But patience will bring it, Sir.


CAES. It Is false, sirrah. -- Patience is a cheat, and the man that ranked her
with the cardinal virtues was a fool. -- I have had patience at bed and board
these three long years, but the comfort she promised, has never called in with
a civil how do you.


GASP. Ay, Sir, but you know the poets say that the twin sister and companion
of comfort is good humor. -- Now if you would but drop that agreeable acidity,
which is so conspicuous --


CAES. Then let my daughter drop her perverse humor; it is a more certain bar
to marriage than ugliness or folly; and will send me to my grave, at last,
without male heirs. [crying.] How many have laid siege to her! But that humor
of here is, like the works of Gibraltar, no Spaniard can find pregnable.


GASP. Ay, well -- Troy held out but ten years -- Let her once tell over her
beads, unmarried, at five-and-twenty, and, my life upon it, she ends the
rosary, with a hearty prayer for a good husband.


CAES. What, do you expect me to wait till the horrors of old maidenism frighten
her into civility? No, no; -- I Will shut her up in a convent, marry myself, and
have heirs in spite of her. There Is my neighbor Don Vasquez's daughter, she is
but nineteen --


GASP. The very step I was going to recommend, Sir. You are but a young
gentleman of sixty-three, I take it; and a husband of sixty-three, who marries
a wife of nineteen, will never want heirs, take my word for it.


CAES. What! do you joke, sirrah?


GASP. Oh no, Sir -- not if you are serious. I think it would be one of the
pleasantest things in the world -- Madam would throw a new life into the
family; and when you are above stairs in the gout, Sir, the music of her
concerts, and the spirit of her converzationes would reach your sick bed, and
be a thousand times more comforting then flannels and panada.


CAES. Come, come, I understand ye. -- But this daughter of mine -- I shall
give her but two chances more. -- Don Garcia and Don Vincentio will both be
here today, and if she plays over the old game, I Will marry tomorrow morning,
if I hang myself the next.


GASP. You decide right, Signor; at sixty-three the marriage noose and the
hempen noose should always go together.


CAES. Why, you dog you, do you suppose -- There Is Don Garcia -- there he is,
coming through the portico. Run to my daughter, and bid her remember what I
have said to her.

[Exit GASP. She has had her lesson -- but another memento may not be amiss -- a
young slut! -- pretty, and witty, and rich -- a match for a prince, and yet --
but hist! -- Not a word to my young man, if I can but keep him in ignorance
'till he is married, he must make the best of his bargain afterward, as other
honest men have done before him.

Enter GARCIA. Welcome, Don Garcia! -- why you are rather before your time.


GARC. Gallantry forbid that I should not, when a fair lady is concerned.
Should Donna Olivia welcome me as frankly as you do, I shall think I have been
tardy.


CAES. When you made your overtures, Signor, I understood it was from
inclination to be allied to my family, not from a particular passion to my
daughter. Have you ever seen her?


GARC. But once -- that transiently -- yet sufficient to convince me that she
is charming.


CAES. Why yes, though I say it, there are few prettier women in Madrid; and she
has got enemies amongst her own sex accordingly. They pretend to say that -- I
say, Sir, they have reported that she is not blessed with that kind of docility
and gentleness that a -- now, though she may not be so very placid, and insipid,
as some young women, yet, upon the whole --


GARC. Oh fie, Sir! -- not a word -- A beauty cannot be ill-temper'd; gratified
vanity keeps her in good humor with herself, and every body about her.


CAES. Yes, as you say -- vanity is a prodigious sweetner; and Olivia,
considering how much she has been humoured, is as gentle and pliant as --


Enter MINETTE. MIN. Oh, Sir! shield me from my mistress -- She is in one of
her old tempers -- the whole house is in an uproar. -- I cannot support it!


CAES. Hush!


MIN. No, Sir, I cannot hush -- A saint could not bear it. I am tired of her
tyranny, and must quit her service.


CAES. Then quit it in a moment -- go to my steward, and receive your wages --
go -- begone! It Is a cousin of my daughter's she is speaking of.


MIN. A cousin, Sir! -- No, it is Donna Olivia, your daughter -- my mistress.
Oh, Sir! you seem to be a sweet tenderhearted young gentleman -- 'twould move
you to pity if --

[to Garcia.
CAES. I Will move you, hussy, to some purpose, if you don't move off.


GARC. I am really confounded -- can the charming Olivia --


CAES. Spite, Sir -- mere malice! My daughter has refused her some cast gown,
or some --


OLIVIA without. Where is she! -- Where is Minette?


CAES. Oh it is all over! -- the tempest is coming.


Enter OLIVIA. OLIV. Oh, you vile creature! -- to speak to me! -- to answer me!
-- am I made to be answered?


CAES. Daughter! Daughter!


[During the following conversation he shows the most anxious impatience. OLIV.
Because I threw my work-bag at her, she had the insolence to complain; and, on
my repeating it, said she would not bear it. -- Servants choose what they shall
bear!


MIN. When you are married, Ma'am, I hope your husband will bear your humor,
less patiently than I have done.


OLIV. My husband! -- do think my husband shall contradict my will? Oh, I
long to set a pattern to those milky wives, whose mean compliances degrade the
sex.


GARC. Opportune!

[Aside.
OLIV. The only husband on record who knew how to treat a wife was Socrates;
and though his lady was a Grecian, I have some reason to believe her descendants
matched into our family; and never shall my tame submission disgrace my
ancestry.


GARC. Heavens! why have you never curbed this intemperate spirit, Don Caesar?


OLIV. [starting.] Curbed, Sir! talk thus to your groom -- curbs and bridles
for a woman's tongue!


GARC. Not for yours, lady, truly! it is too late. But had the torrent, now so
overbearing, been taken at its spring, it might have been stem'd, and turned in
gentle streamlets at the master's pleasure.


OLIV. A mistake, friend! -- my spirit, at its spring, was too powerful for any
master.


GARC. Indeed! -- perhaps you may meet a Petruchio, gentle Catherine, yet.


OLIV. But no gentle Catherine will he find me, believe it. -- Catherine! why
she had not the spirit of a roasted chestnut -- a few big words, an empty oath,
and a seanty dinner, made her as submissive as a spaniel. My fire will not be
so soon extinguished -- it shall resist big words, oaths, and starving.


MIN. I believe so indeed; help the poor gentleman, I say, to whose fate you
fall.


GARC. Don Caesar, adieu! My commiseration for your fate subdues the resentment
I should otherwise feel at your endeavoring to deceive me into such a marriage.


OLIV. Marriage! oh mercy! -- Is this Don Garcia?

[Apart to Caesar.
CAES. Yes, termagant!


OLIV. O, what a misfortune! Why did you not tell me it was the gentleman you
designed to marry me to? Oh, Sir! all that is past was in sport; a contrivance
between my maid and me: I have no spirit at all -- I am as patient as poverty.


GARC. This mask sits too ill on your features, fair lady: I have seen you
without disguise, and rejoice in your ignorance of my name, since, but for
that, my peaceful home might have become the seat f perpetual discord.


MIN. Aye, Sir, you would never have known what a quiet hour --


OLIV. [strikes her.] Impertinence! Indeed, Sir, I can be as gentle and
forbearing as a pet lamb.


GARC. I cannot doubt it, Madam; the proofs of your placidity are very striking
-- But, adieu! though I shall pray for your conversion, rather than have the
honor of it -- I Would turn Dominican, and condemn myself to perpetual celibacy.


[Exit. CAES. Now, hussy! -- now, hussy! -- what do you expect?


OLIV. Dear me! how can you be so unreasonable! did ever daughter do more to
oblige a father! I absolutely begged the man to have me.


CAES. Yes, vixen! after you had made him detest ye; what, I suppose, he did
not hit your fancy, madam; though there is not in all Spain a man of prettier
conversation.


OLIV. Yes, he has a very pretty kind of conversation; it is like a parenthesis.


CAES. Like a parenthesis!


OLIV. Yes, it might be all left out, and never missed. However, I thought him
a modest kind of a well-meaning young man, and that he would make a pretty sort
of a husband -- for notwithstanding his blustering, had I been his wife, in
three months he should have been as humble and complaisant as --


CAES. Ay, there it is -- there it is! -- that spirit of yours, hussy, you can
neither conquer nor conceal; but I Will find a way to tame it, I Will warrant me.


[Exit. [Olivia and Minette follow him with their eyes, and then burst into a
laugh.] MIN. Well, madam, I give you joy! had other ladies as much success in
getting lovers, as you have in getting rid of yours, what contented faces we
should see.


OLIV. But to what purpose do I get rid of them, whilst they rise in succession
like monthly pinks? Was there ever any thing so provoking? -- After some quiet,
and believing the men had ceased to trouble themselves about me, no less than
two proposals have been made to my inexorable father this very day -- What will
become of me?


MIN. What should become of you? You Will choose one from the pair, I hope.
Believe me, madam, the only way to get rid of the impertinence of lovers, is to
take one, and make him a scarecrow to the rest.


OLIV. Oh, but I cannot! -- Invention assist me this one day!


MIN. Upon my word, madam, invention owes you nothing; and I am afraid you can
draw on that bank no longer. -- You must trust to your established character of
vixen.


OLIV. But that will not frighten 'em all, you know, though it did its business with
sober Don Garcia. The brave General Antonio would have made a property of me,
in spite of every thing, had I not luckily discovered his antipathy to cats,
and so scared the hero, by pretending an immoderate passion for young kittens.


MIN. Yes, but you was still harder pushed by the Castilian Count, and his
engraved genealogy from Noah.


OLIV. Oh, he would have kept his post as immovably as the griffins at his
gate, had I not very seriously imparted to him, that my mother's great uncle
sold oranges in Arragon. Ha! ha! ha! And my little delicate spark, who washes
in rose water, and has his bed strewed with violets, would never have dismissed
himself, had thou not scented my marshall powder with assag foetida.


MIN. And pray, madam, if I may be so bold, who is the next gentleman?


OLIV. Oh, Don Vincentio, who distracts every body with his skill in music. He
ought to be married to a Viol de Gamba. I bless my stars I have never yet had a
miser in my list -- on such a character all art would be lost, and nothing but
an earthquake, to swallow up my estate, could save me.


MIN. Well, if some one did but know, how happy would some one be, that for his
sake --


OLIV. Now, don't be impertinent, Minette. You have several times attempted to
slide yourself into a secret, which I am resolved to keep to myself. Continue
faithful, and suppress your curiosity.


[Exit. MIN. Suppress my curiosity, madam! -- why, I am a chambermaid, and a
sorry one too, it should seem, to have been in your confidence two years, and
never have got the master-secret yet. I never was six weeks in a family before,
but I knew every secret they had in it for three generations; aye, and I Will
know this too, or I Will blow up all her plans, and declare to the world that she
is no more a vixen than other fine ladies -- they have most of 'em a touch on it.


[Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
An Apartment at Donna LAURA 's. Enter LAURA followed by CARLOS. CARLOS. NAY,
Madam, you may as well stop here, for I Will follow you through every apartment,
but I will be heard.

[seizing her hand.
LAU. This insolence is not to be endured; within my own walls to be thus --


CAR. The time has been, when within your walls I might be master.


LAU. Yes, you were then master of my heart, that gave you a right which --


CAR. You have now transferred to another.

[flinging away her hand.]
LAU. Well, Sir!


CAR. "Well, Sir!" -- Unblushing acknowledgment! False, fickle woman!


LAU. Because I have luckily got the start of you; in a few weeks I should have
been the accuser, and you the false and fickle.


CAR. And to secure yourself from that disgrace, you prudently looked out in
time for another lover.


LAU. I can pardon your sneer, because you are mortified.


CAR. Mortified!


LAU. Yes, mortified to the soul. Carlos! I know your sex: the vainest female,
in the hour of her exultation and power, is still outdone by man in vanity. --
It Is more your ruling passion, than it is ours; and it is wounded vanity that
makes you thus tremble with rage at being deserted.


CAR. [Stamping] Madam! Madam!


LAU. This rage would have been all cool insolence, had I waited for your
change -- the crime which now appears so black in me. Then, whilst, with all my
sex's weakness, I had knelt at your feet, and reproached you only with my
tears; how composed would have been your feelings. -- Scarcely would you have
deigned to form a phrase of pity for me; perhaps have bid me forget a man no
longer worthy my attachment, and recommended me to hartshorn and my women.


CAR. Has any hour since I have first known you, given you cause for such
unjust --


LAU. Yes, every hour -- Now, Carlos, I bring thee to the test! -- You saw, you
liked, you loved me; was there no fond trusting woman whom you deserted to
indulge the transient passion? Yes, one blessed with beauty, gentleness and
youth; one, who more than her own being loved thee, who made thee rich, and
whom thou made thy wife.


CAR. My wife! -- here is a turn! So to revenge the quarrels of my wife --


LAU. No, do not mistake me -- what I have done was merely to indulge myself,
without more regard to your feelings, than you had to here is.


CAR. And you dare avow to my face, that you have a passion for another?


LAU. I do, and -- for I am above disguise -- I confess, so tender is my love
for Florio, it has scarcely left a trace of that I once avowed for Carlos.


CAR. Well, Madam, if I hear this without some sudden vengeance on the tongue
which speaks it, thank the annihilation of that passion, whose remembrance is
as dead in my bosom as in yours. Let us, however, part friends, and with a
mutual acquittal of every obligation -- so give up the settlement of that
estate, which left me almost a beggar.


LAU. Give it up! -- ha, ha! -- no, Carlos, you consigned me that estate as a
proof of love; do not imagine then, I Will give up the only part of our
connection, of which I am not ashamed.


CAR. Base woman! you know 'twas not a voluntary gift -- after having in vain
practiced on my fondness, whilst in a state of intoxication, you prevailed on
me to sign the deed, which you had artfully prepared for the purpose --
therefore, you must restore it.


LAU. Never, never.


CAR. Ruin is in the word! -- Call it back, Madam, or I Will be revenged on thee
in thy heart's dearest object -- thy minion Florio! -- he shall not riot on my
fortune.


LAU. Ha, ha, ha! Florio is safe -- your lands are sold, and in another country
we shall enjoy the blessing of thy fond passion, whilst that passion is
indulging itself in hatred and execrations.


[Exit. CAR. My vengeance shall first fall on her. [following] No, he shall be
the first victim, or 'twill be incomplete. -- Reduced to poverty, I cannot
live; -- Oh, folly! where are now all the gilded prospects of my youth? Had I
-- but it is too late to look back, -- remorse attends the past, and ruin! --
ruin waits me in the future!


SCENE II.
Don CAESAR 's. VICTORIA enters perusing a letter; enter OLIVIA. OLIV. [Speaks
as entering] To be sure -- if my father should enquire for me, tell him I am in
Donna Victoria's apartment. -- Smiling, I protest! my dear gloomy cousin, where
have you purchased that sun-shiny look?


VICT. It is but April sunshine, I fear; but who could resist such a temptation
to smile? a letter from Donna Laura, my husband's mistress, stiling me her
dearest Florio! her life! her soul! and complaining of a twelve hours absence,
as the bitterest misfortune.


OLIV. Ha, ha, ha! most doughty Don! pray let us see you in your feather and
doublet; as a Cavaleiro, it seems, you are formidable. So suddenly to rob your
husband of his charmer's heart! you must have used some witchery.


VICT. Yes, powerful witchery -- the knowledge of my sex. Oh! did the men but
know us, as well as we do ourselves; -- but thank fate they do not, 'twould be
dangerous.


OLIV. What, I suppose, you praised her understanding, was captivated by her
wit, and absolutely struck dumb by the amazing beauties of -- her mind.


VICT. Oh, no, -- that is the mode prescribed by the Essayists on the female
heart -- ha, ha, ha! -- Not a woman breathing, from fifteen to fifty, but would
rather have a compliment to the tip of her ear, or the turn of her ancle, than
a volume in praise of her intellects.


OLIV. So flattery then, is your boasted pill?


VICT. No, that is only the occasional gilding; but it is in vain to attempt a
description of what changed its nature with every moment. I was now attentive
-- now gay -- then tender -- then careless. I strove rather to convince her
that I was charming, than that I myself was charmed; and when I saw love's
arrow quivering in her heart, instead of falling at her feet, sung a triumphant
air, and remembered a sudden engagement.


OLIV. [Archly] Would you have done so, had you been a man?


VICT. Assuredly -- knowing what I now do as a woman.


OLIV. But can all this be worth while, merely to rival a sickle husband with
one woman, whilst he is setting his feather, perhaps, at half a score others?


VICT. To rival him was not my first motive. The Portugueze robbed me of his
heart; I concluded she had fascinations which nature had denied to me; it was
impossible to visit her as a woman; I, therefore, assumed the Cavalier to study
her, that I might, if possible, be to my Carlos, all he found in her.


OLIV. Pretty humble creature!


VICT. In this adventure I learnt more than I expected; -- my (oh cruel!) my
husband has given this woman an estate, almost all that his dissipations had
left us.


OLIV. Indeed!


VICT. To make him more culpable, it was my estate, it was that fortune which
my lavish love had made his, without securing it to my children.


OLIV. How could you be so improvident?


VICT. Alas! I trusted him with my heart, with my happiness, without
restriction. Should I have shown a greater solicitude for any thing, than for
these?

[weeps
OLIV. The event proves that you should; but how can you be thus passive in
your sorrow? since I had assumed the man, I Would make him feel a man's resentment
for such injuries.


VICT. Oh, Olivia! what resentment can I show to him I have vowed to honor,
and whom, both my duty and my heart compel me yet to love?


OLIV. Why, really now, I think -- positively, there is no thinking about it;
it is among the arcana of the married life, I suppose.


VICT. You, who know me, can judge how I suffered in prosecuting my plan. I
have thrown off the delicacy of sex; I have worn the mask of love to the
destroyer of my peace -- but the object is too great to be abandoned -- nothing
less than to save my husband from ruin, and to restore him, again a lover, to
my faithful bosom.


OLIV. Well, I confess, Victoria, I hardly know whether most to blame or praise
you; but, with the rest of the world, I suppose, your success will determine me.


Enter GASPER. GASP. Pray, Madam, are your wedding shoes ready?

[to Olivia.]
OLIV. Insolence!.... I can scarcely ever keep up the vixen to this fellow.

[apart to Victoria.]
GASP. You Will want them, Ma'am, to morrow morning, that is all -- so I came to
prepare ye.


OLIV. I want wedding shoes tomorrow! if you are kept on water gruel 'till I
marry, that plump face of yours will be chap-fall'n, I believe.


GASP. Yes, truly, I believe so too. Lackaday, did you suppose I came to bring
you news of your own wedding? no such glad tidings for you, lady, believe me.
-- You married! I am sure the man who ties himself to you, ought to be half a
salamander, and able to live in fire.


OLIV. What marriage then is it, you do me the honor to inform me of?


GASP. Why, your father's marriage. You Will have a mother-in-law tomorrow, and
having, like a dutiful daughter, danced at the wedding, be immured in a convent
for life.


OLIV. Immured in a convent! then I Will raise sedition in the sisterhood, depose
the abbess, and turn the confessor's chair to a go-cart.


GASP. So the threat of the mother-in-law, which I thought would be worse than
that of the abbess, does not frighten ye?


OLIV. No, because my father dares not give me one. -- Marry, without my
consent! no, no, he will never think of it, depend on it; however, lest the fit
should grow strong upon him, I Will go and administer my volatiles to keep it
under.


[Exit. GASP. Administer 'em cautiously then -- too strong a dose of your
volatiles would make the fit stubborn. Who'd think that pretty arch look
belonged to a termagant? what a pity! 'twould be worth a thousand ducats to
cure her.


VICT. Has Inis told you I wanted to converse with you in private, Gasper?


GASP. Oh, yes, madam, and I took particular notice that it was to be in
private. -- Sure, says I, Mrs. Inis, Madam Victoria has not taken a fancy to
me, and is going to break her mind.


VICT. Whimsical! ha, ha! suppose I should, Gasper?


GASP. Why, then, madam, I should say fortune had used you devilish scurvily,
to give me a gray beard in a livery. I know well enough that some young ladies
have given themselves to gray beards in a gilded coach, and others have run
away with a handsome youth in worsted lace; they each had their apology; but if
you run away with me -- pardon me, madam, I could not stand the ridicule.


VICT. Oh, very well; but if you refuse to run away with me, will you do me
another favor?


GASP. Any thing you will order, madam, except dancing a fandango.


VICT. You have seen my rich old uncle in the country?


GASP. What, Don Sancho, who, with two-thirds of a century in his face, affects
the misdemeanors of youth; hides his baldness with amber locks, and complains
of the toothache, to make you believe that the two rows of ivory he carries in
his head, grew there.


VICT. Oh, you know him, I find; could you assume his character for an hour,
and make love for him? you know it must be in the style of King Roderigo the
First.


GASP. Hang it! I am rather too near his own age; to appear an old man with
effect, one should not be above twenty; it is always so on the stage.


VICT. Pho! you might pass for Juan's grandson.


GASP. Nay, if your ladyship condescends to flatter me, you have me.


VICT. Then sollow me, for Don Caesar, I hear, is approaching -- in the garden
I Will make you acquainted with my plan, and impress on your mind every trait of
my uncle's character. If you can hit him off, the arts of Laura shall be
foiled, and Carlos be again Victoria's.


[Exit. Enter Don CAESAR, followed by OLIVIA. CAES. No, no, it is too late -- no
coaxings; I am resolved, I say.


OLIV. But it is not too late, and you shall not be resolved, I say. Indeed, now,
I Will be upon my guard with the next Don -- what is his name? not a trace of the
Xantippe lest. -- I Will study to be charming.


CAES. Nay, you need not study it, you are always charming enough, if you would
but hold your tongue.


OLIV. Do you think so? then to the next lover I will not open my lips; I Will
answer every thing he says with a smile, and if he asks me to have him, drop a
court'sey of thankfulness.


CAES. Pshaw! that is too much the other way; you're always either above the mark
or below it; you must talk, but talk with good humor. Cannot you look gently
and prettily, now, as I do? and say, "yes, Sir, and no, Sir; and it is very fine
weather, Sir; and pray, Sir, were you at the ball last night? and I caught a
sad cold the other evening; and, bless me! I hear Lucinda has run away with her
footman, and Don Philip has married his housemaid." -- That Is the way agreeable
ladies talk, you never hear any thing else.


OLIV. Very true; and you shall see me as agreeable as the best of 'em, if you
will not give me a mother-in-law to snub me, and set me tasks, and to take up all
the fine apartments, and send up your poor little Livy to lodge next the stars.


CAES. Ha, -- if thou were but always thus soft and good-humored, no
mother-in-law in Spain, though she brought the Castiles for her portion, should
have power to snub thee. But, Livy, the trial's at hand, for at this moment do
I expect Don Vincentio to visit you. He is but just returned from England, and,
probably, has yet heard only of your beauty and fortune; I hope it is not from
you he will learn the other part of your character.


OLIV. This moment expect him! two new lovers in a day?


CAES. Beginning already, as I hope to live; aye, I see it is in vain; I Will send
him an excuse, and marry Marcella before night.


OLIV. Oh, no! upon my obedience, I promise to be just the soft civil creature
you have described.


Enter SERVANT. SER. Don Vincentio is below, Sir.


CAES. I Will wait upon him -- well, go and collect all your smiles and your
simpers, and remember all I have said to you; -- be gentle, and talk pretty
little small talk, do you hear, and if you please him, you shall have the portion
of a Dutch burgomaster's daughter, and the pin-money of a princess, you jade
you. I think at last I have done it; the fear of this mother-in-law will keep
down the fiend in her, if any thing can.


[Exit. OLIV. Hah! my poor father, your anxieties will never end 'till you
bring Don Julio: -- Command me to sacrifice my petulence, my liberty to him,
and Iphigenia herself, could not be more obedient. But what shall I do with
this Vincentio? -- I fear he is so perfectly harmoniz'd, that to put him in an
ill temper will be impracticable. -- I must try, however; if it is possible to
find a discord in him, I Will touch the string.


[Exit. Another Apartment. Enter VINCENTIO and CAESAR. VIN. Presto, presto,
Signor! where is the Olivia? -- not a moment to spare. I left off in all the
fury of composition; minums and crotchets have been battling it through my head
the whole day, and trying a semibreve in G sharp, has made me as flat as double
F.


CAES. Sharp and flat! -- trying a semibreve! -- oh -- gad, Sir! I had like not
to have understood you; but a semibreve is something of a demi-culverin, I take
it; and you have been practicing the art military.


VIN. Art military! -- what, Sir! are you unacquainted with music?


CAES. Music! oh I ask pardon; then you are fond of music -- 'ware of discords.

[aside.]
VIN. Fond of it! devoted to it. -- I composed a thing today in all the gusto
of Sachini and the sweetness of Gluck. But this recrcant finger fails me in
composing a passage in E, octave: if it does not gain more elastic vigor in a
week, I shall be tempted to have it amputated, and supply the shake with a
spring.


CAES. Mercy! amputate a finger to supply a shake!


VIN. Oh, that is a trifle in the road to reputation -- to be talked of is the
summum bonum of this life. -- A young man of rank should not glide through the
world without a distinguished rage, or, as they call it in England -- a hobby
horse!


CAES. A hobby horse!


VIN. Yes; that is, every man of figure determines on setting out in life, in
that land of liberty, in what line to ruin himself; and that choice is called
his hobby horse. One, makes the turf his scene of action -- another drives
about tall phaetons to peep into their neighbor's garret windows; and a third
rides his hobby horse in parliament, where it jerks him sometimes on one side,
and sometimes on the other; sometimes in, and sometimes out, 'till at length he
is jerk'd out of his honesty, and his constituents out of their freedom.


CAES. Aye! -- Well, it is a wonder that with such sort of hobby horses as these
they should still outride all the world to the goal of glory. I wish we had a
few of 'em to jerk Spain into some consideration.


VIN. This is all cantable; nothing to do with the subject of the piece, which
is Donna Olivia; -- pray give me the key note to her heart.


CAES. Upon my word, Signor -- to speak in your own phrase -- I believe that
note has never yet been sounded. -- Ah! here she comes! look at her. -- Is Not
she a charming girl?


VIN. Touching! Musical I Will be sworn! her very air is harmonious!


CAES. [aside.] I wish thou may find her tongue so.

Enter Olivia, court'seys profoundly to each. Daughter, receive Don Vincentio
-- his rank, fortune and merit, entitle him to be the heiress of a grandee; but
he is contented to become my son-in-law, if you can please him.

[Olivia court'seys again.
VIN. Please me! she entrances me! Her presence thrills me like a cadenza of
Pachierotti's, and every nerve vibrates to the music of her looks.

Her step andante gently moves,
Pianos glance from either eye;
Oh how largetto is the heart,
That charms so forte can defy!
Donna Olivia, will you be contented to receive me as a lover?


OLIV. Yes, Sir -- No, Sir.


VIN. Yes, Sir; no, Sir! bewitching timidity!


CAES. Yes, Sir, she is remarkably timid. -- She Is in the right cue, I see.

[aside.]
VIN. It Is clear you have never traveled -- I shall be delighted to show you
England. -- You will there see how entirely timidity is banished the sex. You
must affect a marked character, and maintain it at all hazards.


OLIV. It Is a very fine day, Sir.


VIN. Madam!


OLIV. I caught a sad cold the other evening. -- Pray was you at the ball last
night?


VIN. What ball, fair lady?


OLIV. Bless me! they say Lucinda has run away with her footman, and Don Philip
has married his house-maid. -- Now am I not very agreeable?

[apart to Caesar.]
CAES. Oh, such perverse obedience!


VIN. Really, Madam, I have not the honor to know Don Philip and Lucinda --
nor am I happy enough entirely to comprehend you.


OLIV. No! I only meant to be agreeable -- but perhaps you have no taste for
pretty little small talk?


VIN. Pretty little small talk!


OLIV. A marked character you admire; so do I; I dote on it. -- I would not
resemble the rest of the world in any thing.


VIN. My taste to the fiftieth part of a crotchet! -- We shall agree admirably
when we are married.


VIN. And that will be unlike the rest of the world, and therefore charming.


CAES. [aside.] It will do! I have hit her humor at last -- Why did not this
young dog offer himself before?


OLIV. I believe I have the honor to carry my taste that way farther than you,
Don Vincentio. Pray now, what is your usual style in living?


VIN. My winters I spend in Madrid, as other people do. My summers I drawl
through at my castle --


OLIV. As other people do! -- and yet you pretend to taste and singularity, ha!
ha! ha! Good Don Vincentio, never talk of a marked character again. -- Go into
the country in July to smell roses and woodbines, when every body regales on
their fragrance! Now I would rusticate only in winter, and my bleak castle
should be decorated with verdure and flowers, amidst the soft zephyrs of
December.


CAES. [Aside.] Oh, she will go too far!


OLIV. On the leafless trees I would hang green branches -- the labor of silk
worms, and therefore natural; whilst my rose shrubs and myrtles should be
scented by the first perfumers in Italy -- Unnatural indeed, but therefore
singular and striking.


VIN. Oh, charming! -- You beat me where I thought myself the strongest. --
Would they but establish newspapers here, to paragraph our singularities, we
should be the most envied couple in Spain.


CAES. [Aside.] By St. Anthony, he is as mad as she is.


VIN. What say you, Don Caesar? Olivia and her winter garden, and I and my
music.


OLIV. Music, did you say! Music! I am passionately fond of that!


CAES. She has saved my life -- I thought she was going to knock down his hobby
horse.

[aside.]
VIN. You enchant me! I have the finest band in Madrid -- My first violin draws
a longer bow than Giardini; my clarinets, my viol de gamba -- Oh you shall have
such concerts!


OLIV. Concerts! Pardon me there -- My passion is a single instrument.


VIN. That Is carrying singularity very far indeed! I love a crash; so does
every body of taste.


OLIV. But my taste is not like every body's -- my nerves are so particularly
fine, that more than one instrument overpowers them.


VIN. Pray tell me the name of that one: I am sure it must be the most elegant
and captivating in the world. -- I am impatient to know it. -- We'll have no
other instrument in Spain, and I will study to become its master, that I may
woo you with its music. Charming Olivia! tell me, is it a harpsichord? a piano
sort? a pentachord? a harp?


OLIV. You have it -- you have it -- a harp -- yes, a Jew's harp, is to me the
only instrument. -- Are you not charmed with the delightful h -- u -- m of its
base! running on the ear like the distant rumble of a state coach? It presents
the idea of vastness and importance to the mind. The moment you are its master
-- I Will give you my hand.


VIN. Da capo, Madam, da capo! a Jew's harp!!


OLIV. Bless me, Sir, don't I tell you so? Violins chill me -- clarinets by
sympathy hurt my lungs; and, instead of maintaining a band under my roof, I
would not keep a servant who knew a bassoon from a flute, or could tell whether
he heard a jigg or a canzonetta.


CAES. Oh thou perverse one; you know you love concerts -- you know you do!

[in great agitation.]
OLIV. I detest 'em! It Is vulgar custom that attaches people to the sound of
fifty different instruments at once; 'twould be as well to talk on the same
subject in fifty different tongues. A band! it is a mere olio of sound; I Would
rather listen to a three-string'd guittar, serenading a sempstress in some
neighboring garret.


CAES. Oh you! -- Don Vincentio, this is nothing but perverseness -- wicked
perverseness. -- Hussy! -- didn't you shake when you mentioned a garret?
didn't bread and water and a step mother come into your head at the same time?


VINC. Piano, piano, good Sir! Spare yourself all farther trouble. Should the
Princess of Guzzarat, and all her diamond mines, offer themselves, I would not
accept them in lieu of my band -- a band that has half ruined me to collect. --
I would have allowed Donna Olivia a blooming garden in winter; I would even
have procured barrenness and snow for her in the dog days; -- but -- to have my
band insulted! -- to have my knowledge in music slighted! -- to be roused from
all the energies of composition by the drone of a Jew's harp! I cannot breathe
under the idea.


CAES. Then -- then you refuse her, Sir?


VIN. I cannot use so harsh a word -- I take my leave of the lady -- Adieu,
Madam -- I leave you to enjoy your solos, whilst I fly to the raptures of a
crash.


[Exit. CAESAR goes up to her and looks her in the face; then goes off without
speaking. OLIV. Mercy! that silent anger is terrifying -- I read a young
mother-in-law, and an old lady abbess, in every line of his face.


Enter VICTORIA. OLIV. Well, you heard the whole, I suppose -- heard poor
unhappy me scorned and rejected.


VICT. I heard you in imminent danger; and expected Signor Da Capo would have
snapp'd you up, in spite of caprice and extravagance.


OLIV. Oh they charmed instead of scaring him. -- I soon found that my only
chance was to fall across his caprice. -- Where is the philosopher who could
withstand that?


VICT. But what, my good cousin, does all this tend to?


OLIV. I dare say you can guess. -- Penelope had never cheated her lovers with
a never-ending web, had she not had an Ulysses.


VICT. An Ulysses! what are you then married?


OLIV. O, no, not yet! -- but, believe me, my design is not to lead apes; nor
is my heart an icicle. -- If you choose to know more, put on your veil, and
slip with me through the garden to the Prado.


VICT. I cannot indeed. -- I am this moment going to dress en homme, to visit
the impatient Portuguese.


OLIV. Send an excuse -- for positively you go with me. Heaven and earth! I am
going to meet a man! -- whom I have been fool enough to dream and think of
these two years, and I don't know that ever he thought of me in his life.


VICT. Two years discovering that?


OLIV. He has been abroad. The only time I ever saw him was at the Duchess of
Medina's -- there were a thousand people; and he was so elegant, so careless,
so handsome! -- In a word, though he set off for France the next morning, by
some witchcraft or other, he has been before my eyes ever since.


VICT. Was the impression mutual?


OLIV. He hardly notic'd me -- I was then a bashful thing, just out of a
convent, and shrunk from observation.


VICT. Why, I thought you were going to meet him?


OLIV. To be sure -- I sent him a command this morning to be at the Prado. I am
determined to find out if his heart is engaged, and if it is --


VICT. You Will cross your arms, and crown your brow with willows.


OLIV. No, positively, not whilst we have myrtles. -- I would prefer Julio,
it is true, to all his sex; but if he is stupid enough to be insensible to me, I
shall not for that reason pine like a girl, on chalk and oatmeal. -- No, no; in
that case, I shall form a new plan, and treat my future lovers with more
civility.


VICT. You are the only woman in love, I ever heard talk reasonably.


OLIV. Well, prepare for the Prado, and I Will give you a lesson against your
days of widowhood. Don't you wish this the moment, Victoria? A pretty widow at
four-and-twenty has more subjects and a wider empire than the first monarch
upon earth. -- I long to see you in your weeds.


VICT. Never may you see them! Oh, Olivia! -- my happiness, my life, depend on
my husband. The fond hope of still being united to him, gives me spirits in my
affliction, and enables me to support even the period of his neglect, with
patience.


[Exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A LONG STREET. JULIO enters from a Garden Gate with precipitation; a Servant
within fastens the Gate. JULIO. YES, yes, bar the gate fast, Cerberus, lest
some other curious traveller should stumble on your confines. -- If ever I am
so caught again --

GARCIA enters, going hastily across, JULIO seizes him. Don Garcia, never make
love to a woman in a veil.


GARC. Why so, prithee? Veils and secrecy are the chief ingredients in a
Spanish amor; but in two years, Julio, thou art grown absolutely French.


JULIO. That may be; but if ever I trust to a veil again, may no lovely,
blooming beauty ever trust me. -- Why do know I have been an hour at the feet
of a creature whose first birthday must have been kept the latter end of the
last century, and whose trembling, weak voice, I mistook for the timid cadence
of bashful fifteen!


GARC. Ha, ha, ha! -- What a happiness to have seen thee in thy raptures,
petitioning for half a glance only, of the charms the envious veil concealed.


JULIO. Yes; and when she unveiled her Gothic countenance, to render the thing
completely ridiculous, she began moralizing; and positively would not let me
out of the snare, 'till I had persuaded her she had worked a conversion, and
that I Would never make love -- but in an honest way again.


GARC. Oh, that honest way of love-making is delightful, to be sure. I had a
dose of it this morning; but happily the ladies have not yet learnt to veil
their tempers, though they have their faces.


Enter VINCENTIO. VIN. Julio! Garcia! congratulate me! -- Such an escape!


JULIO. What have you escaped?


VIN. Matrimony.


GARC. Nay, then our congratulations may be mutual. -- I have had a matrimonial
escape too, this very day. I was almost on the brink of the ceremony with the
veriest Xantippe!


VIN. Oh, that was not my case -- mine was a sweet creature, all elegance, all
life.


JULIO. Then where is the cause of congratulation?


VIN. Cause -- why she is ignorant of music! prefers a jig to a canzonetta, and
a Jew's harp to a pentachord.


JULIO. Jews harp! -- Pho, prithee.


GARC. Had my nymph no other fault, I would pardon that, for she was lovely and
rich.


VIN. Mine too was lovely and rich, and, I Will be sworn, as ignorant of scolding
as of the gama; -- but not to know music! --


JULIO. Gentle, lovely, and rich -- and ignorant only of music?


GARC. A venial crime indeed! if the sweet creature will marry me, she shall
carry a Jew's harp always in he train, as a Scotch lord does his bagpipes. I
wish you would give me your interest.


VIN. Oh, most willingly, if thou have so gross an inclination; -- I Will name
thee as a dull-soul'd, largo fellow, to her father, Don Caesar.


GARC. Caesar! what Don Caesar?


VIN. De Zuniga.


GARC. Impossible!


VIN. Oh, I Will answer for her mother. So much is De Zuniga her father, that he
does not know a semibreve from a culverin.


GARC. The name of the lady?


VIN. Olivia.


GARC. Why you must be mad -- that is my termagant.


VIN. Termagant! -- ha! ha! ha! Thou have certainly some vixen of a mistress,
who infects thy ears toward the whole sex. Olivia is timid and elegant.


GARC. By Juno, there never existed such a scold.


VIN. By Orpheus, there never was a gayer tempered creature -- Spirit enough to
be charming, that is all. If she loved harmony, I Would marry her to morrow.


JULIO. Ha, ha! what a ridiculous jangle! It Is evident you speak of two
different women.


GARC. I speak of Donna Olivio, heiress to Don Caesar de Zuniga.


VIN. I speak of the heiress of Dou Caesar de Zuniga, who is called Donna
Olivia.


GARC. Sir, I perceive you mean to insult me.


VIN. Your perceptions are very rapid, Sir -- but if you choose to think so,
I Will settle that point with you immediately -- But, for fear of consequences,
I Will fly home, and add the last bar to my concerto, and then meet you where you
please.


JULIO. Pho! this is evidently misapprehension. -- To clear the matter up, I Will
visit the lady -- if you will introduce me, Vincentio; -- but you shall both
promise to be governed in this dispute by my decision.


VIN. I Will introduce you with joy, if you will try to persuade her of the
necessity of music, and the charms of harmony.


GARC. Yes, she needs that -- You Will find her all jar and discord.


JULIO. Come, no more Garcia -- thou art but a sort of a male vixen thyself. --
Melodious Vincentio, when shall I expect you?


VIN. This evening.


JULIO. Not this evening; I have engaged to meet a goldfinch in a grove, then I
shall have music, you rogue!


VIN. It will not sing at night.


JULIO. Then I Will talk to it till the morning, and hear it pour out its matins
to the rising sun. -- Call on me tomorrow, I Will then attend you to Donna
Olivia, and declare faithfully the impression her character makes on me. --
Come, Garcia, I must not leave you together, lest his crotchets and your
minums, should fall into a crash of discords.


[Exeunt opposite sides. THE PRADO. Enter CARLOS. CAR. All hail to the powers
of Burgundy! Three flasks to my own share. -- What sorrows can stand again
three flasks of Burgundy? I was a damned melanchol sellow this morning, going
to shoot myself to get rid of my troubles. -- Where are my troubles now? Gone
to the moon to look for my wits; and there, I hope, they will remain together, if
one cannot come back without the other. -- But where is this indolent dog, Julio?
He fit to receive appointments from ladies! Sure I have not missed the hour --
No -- but seven yet -- [looking at his watch.] -- Seven's the hour, by all the
joys of Burgundy! The rogue must be here -- let us reconnoitre.


Enter VICTORIA and OLIVIA, veiled, from the top. OLIV. Positively, mine is a
pretty spark, to let me be first at the place of appointment. I have half
resolved to go home again to punish him.


VICT. I Will answer for its being but half a resolution -- to make it entire
would be to punish yourself. -- There Is a solitary man -- Is not that he?


OLIV. I think not. -- If he would please to turn his face this way --


VICT. That Is impossible, while the loadstone is the other way. -- He is
looking at the woman in the next walk. Cannot you disturb him?


OLIV. [Screams.] Oh! a frightful frog!

[Carlos turns.
VICT. Heavens, it is my husband.


OLIV. Your husband! Is that Don Carlos?


VICT. It is indeed.


OLIV. Why really, now I see the man, I don't wonder that you are in no hurry
for your weeds. -- He is moving toward us.


VICT. I cannot speak to him, and yet my soul flies to meet him.


CAR. Pray, lady, what occasioned that pretty scream? I shrewdly suspect it was
a trap.


OLIV. A trap! Ha! ha! ha! -- a trap for you!


CAR. Why not, Madam? -- Zounds, a man six feet high, and three flasks of
Burgundy in his head, is worth laying a trap for.


OLIV. Yes, unless he happens to be trapp'd before. -- It Is about two years
since you was caught, I take it -- Do keep farther off! -- Odious! a married
man!


CAR. The devil! Is it posted under every saint in the street, that I am a
married man?


OLIV. No, you carry the marks about you; that rueful phiz could never belong
to a bachelor. -- Besides, there is an odd appearance on your temples -- does
your hat sit easily?


CAR. By all the thorns of matrimony, if --


OLIV. Poor man! how natural to swear by what one feels -- but why were you in
such haste to gather the thorns of matrimony? Bless us! had you but looked
about you a little, what a market might have been made of that fine, proper
promising person of yours --


CAR. Confound thee, confound thee! If thou art a wife, may thy husband plague
thee with jealousies, and thou never be able to give him cause for them; and if
thou art a maid, may thou be an old one! [Going, meets Julio.] Oh, Julio,
look not that way; there is a tongue will stun thee.


JULIO. Heaven be praised! I love female prattle. A woman's tongue can never
scare me. -- Which of these two goldfinches makes the music?


CAR. Oh, this is as silent as a turtle -- [taking Victoria's hand. -- only
coos now and then. -- Perhaps you don't hate a married man, sweet one?


VICT. You guess right; I love a married man.


CAR. Hah, say thou so! will thou love me?


VICT. Will you let me?


CAR. Let thee, my charmer! how I Will cherish thee for it. -- What would I not
give for thy heart!


VICT. I demand a price that, perhaps, you cannot give -- I ask unbounded love;
but you have a wife.


CAR. And, therefore, the readier to love every other woman; -- it is in your
favor child.


VICT. Will you love me ever?


CAR. Ever! yes ever, 'till we find each other dull company, and yawn, and talk
of our neighbors for amusement.


VICT. Farewell! I suspected you to be a bad chapman, and that you would not
reach my terms.

[going
CAR. Nay, I Will come to your terms if I can; -- but move this way; -- I am
fearful of that wood-pecker at your elbow -- should she begin again, her noise
will scare all the pretty loves that are playing about my heart. Don't turn
your head toward them; if you like to listen to love tales, you will meet fond
pairs enough in this walk.

[forcing her gently off.
JULIO. I really believe, though you deny it, that you are my destiny -- that
is, you fated me hither. -- See, is not this your mandate?

[taking a letter from his pocket
OLIV. Oh, delightful! the scrawl of some chambermaid, or, perhaps, of your
valet to give you an air -- what is it signed? Marriatornes? Tomasa? Sancha?


JULIO. Nay, now I am convinced the letter is yours, since you abuse it; so you
may as well confess.


OLIV. Suppose I should, you cannot be sure that I do not deceive you.


JULIO. True; but there is one point in which I have made a vow not to be
deceived; therefore, the preliminary is, that you throw off your veil.


OLIV. My veil!


JULIO. Positively! if you reject this article, our negotiation ends.


OLIV. You have no right to offer articles, unless you own yourself conquered.


JULIO. I own myself willing to be conquered, and have, therefore, a right to
make the best terms I can. -- Do you accede to the demand?


OLIV. Certainly not.


JULIO. You had better.


OLIV. I protest I will not.


JULIO. [Aside] My life upon it I make you. Why, madam, how absurd this is --
it is reducing us to the situation of Pyramus and Thisbe, talking through a
wall; -- yet it is of no consequence, for I know your features, as well as
though I saw 'em.


OLIV. How can that be?


JULIO. I judge of what you hide, by what I see -- I could draw your picture.


OLIV. Charming! pray begin the portrait.


JULIO. Imprimis, a broad high forehead, rounded at the top, like an
old-fashioned gateway.


OLIV. Oh, horrid!


JULIO. Little gray eyes, a sharp nose, and hair, the color of rusty prunella.


OLIV. Odious!


JULIO Pale cheeks, thin lips, and --


OLIV. Hold, hold, thou villifier. [throws off her veil, he sinks on one knee]
There! yes, kneel in contrition for your malicious libel.


JULIO. Say rather, in adoration. -- What a charming creature!


OLIV. So, now for lies on the other side.


JULIO. A forehead formed by the Graces; hair, which Cupid would steal for his
bow strings, were he not engaged in shooting through those sparkling hazel
circlets, which nature has given you for eyes; lips! that 'twere a sin to call
so -- they are fresh gathered rose leaves, with the fragrant morning dew, still
hanging on their rounded surface.


OLIV. Is that extemporaneous, or ready cut, for every woman who takes off her
veil to you.


JULIO. I believe it is not extemporaneous, for nature, when she finished you,
formed the sentiment in my heart, and there it has been hid, 'till you, for
whom it was formed, called it into words.


OLIV. Suppose I should understand, from all this, that you have a mind to be
in love with me; wouldn't you be finely caught?


JULIO. Charmingly caught! if you will let me understand, at the same time, that
you have a mind to be in love with me.


OLIV. In love with a man! heavens! I never loved any thing but a squirrel!


JULIO. Make me your squirrel -- I Will put on your chain, and gambol and play
for ever at your side.


OLIV. But suppose you should have a mind to break the chain?


JULIO. Then loosen it; for, if once that humor seizes me, restraint will not
cure it. -- Let me spring and bound at liberty, and when I return to my lovely
mistress, tired of all but her, fasten me again to your girdle, and kiss me
while you chide,


OLIV. Your servant -- to encourage you to leave me again.


JULIO. No, to make returning to you, the strongest attraction of my life. --
Why are you silent?


OLIV. I am debating whether to be pleased or displeased at what you have said.


JULIO. Well?


OLIV. You shall know when I have determined. My friend and yours are
approaching this way, and they must not be interrupted.


JULIO. 'Twou'd be barbarous -- we'll retire as far off as you please.


OLIV. But we retire separately, Sir, -- that lady is a woman of honor, and
this moment of the highest importance to her. You may, however, conduct me to
the gate, on condition that you leave me instantly.


JULIO. Leave her instantly -- oh, then I know my cue.


[Exit together at top. Enter CARLOS, followed by VICTORIA, unveiled. CAR.
[Looking back on her] My wife!


VICT. Oh, heavens! I will veil myself again. I will hide my face for ever from
you, if you will still feast my ears with those soft vows, which a moment since
you poured forth so eagerly.


CAR. My wife! -- making love to my own wife!


VICT. Why should one of the dearest moments of my life, be to you so
displeasing.


CAR. So, I am caught in this snare, by way of agreeable surprise, I suppose.


VICT. Would you could think it so.


CAR. No, madam! by heaven it is a surprise fatal to every hope with which you
may have flattered yourself. -- What am I to be followed, haunted, watched?


VICT. Not to upbraid you. -- I followed you, because my castle without you
seemed a dreary desert. -- Indeed, I will never upbraid you.


CAR. Generous assurance! -- never upbraid me -- no by heavens, I Will take care
you never shall. -- She has touched my soul, but I dare not yield to the
impression. -- Her softness is worse than death to me.

[aside
VICT. Would I could find words to please you!


CAR. You cannot; therefore leave me, or suffer me to go without attempting to
follow me.


VICT. Is it possible yoo can be so barbarous?


CAR. Do not expostulate; your first vowed duty is obedience -- that word so
grating to your sex.


VICT. To me it was never grating -- to obey you has been my joy; even now I
will not dispute your will, though I feel, for the first time, obedience
hateful. [going, and then turning back] Oh, Carlos! my dear Carlos! I go, but
my soul remains with you.


[Exit. CAR. Oh, horrible! had I not taken this harsh measure, I must have
killed myself, for how could I tell her that I have made her a beggar? better
she should hate, detest me! than that my tenderness should give her a prospect
of felicity, which now she can never taste. -- Oh, wine-created spirit! Where
art thou now? Madness, return to me again; for reason presents me nothing but
despair.


Enter JULIO, from the top. JULIO. Carlos, who the devil can they be? my
charming little witch was inflexible. -- I hope yours has been more
communicative.


CAR. Folly! -- Nonsense!


[Exit. JULIO. Folly! -- Nonsense! What, a pretty woman's smile! ha, ha, ha!
upon my soul it has more persuasion, and, consequently, more reason, than a
logical disquisition -- but these married fellows have neither taste nor joy.
-- Humph -- suppose my fair one should want to debase me into such an animal;
-- she cannot have so much villainy in her disposition: and yet, if she should?
pho! it will not bear thinking about. -- If I do so mad a thing, it must be as
cowards fight, without daring to reflect on the danger.


Scene, an apartment in the House of Don VASQUEZ, MARCELLA's Father. Enter
CAESAR and VASQUEZ. CAES. Well, Don Vasquez, and a -- you -- then I say, you
have a mind that I should marry your daughter?


VASQ. It is sufficient, Signor, that you have signified to us your intention
-- my daughter shall prove her gratitude, in her attention to your felicity.


CAES. Egad! now it comes to the push! [aside] hem, hem! -- but just nineteen,
you say.


VASQ. Exactly, the eleventh of last month.


CAES. Pity it was not twenty.


VASQ. Why a year can make no difference, I should think.


CAES. O, yes it does; a year's great deal; -- they are so skittish at nineteen.


VASQ. Those who are skittish at nineteen, I fear, you will not find much mended
at twenty. Marcella is very grave, and a pretty little, plump, fair --


CAES. Aye, fair, again! pity she is not brown or olive -- I like your olives.


VASQ. Brown and olive! you are very whimsical, my old friend.


CAES. Why these fair girls are so stared at by the men, and the young fellows,
nowadays, have a damned impudent stare with them, -- it is very abashing to a
woman -- very distressing!


VASQ. Yes, so it is; but happily their distress is of that nature that it
generally goes off in a simper. But come, I Will send Marcella to you, and she
will --


CAES. No, no, stay my good friend. [gasping] You are in a violent hurry.


VASQ Why, truly, Signor, at our time of life, when we determine to marry, we
have no time to lose.


CAES. Why, that is very true, and so -- oh! St. Anthony, now it comes to the
point -- but there can be no harm in looking at her -- a look will not bind us for
better for worse. [aside] Well then -- if you have a mind, I say, you may let
me see her.


Exit Vasquez. CAES. [Puts on his spectacles] Aye, here she comes -- I hear her
-- trip, trip, trip! I don't like that step. A woman should always tread
steadily, with dignity, it awes the men.


Enter VASQUEZ, leading MARCELLA. VASQ. There, Marcella, behold your future
husband; and remember that your kindness to him, will be the standard of your
duty to me.


Exit. MARC. Oh, heavens!

[aside
CAES. Somehow I am afraid to look round.


MARC. Surely he does not know that I am here!

[coughs gently.
CAES. So -- she knows how to give an item, I find.


MARC. Pray, Signor, have you any commands for me?


CAES. Hum! -- not non-plus'd at all. [looks around] Oh! that eye, I don't like
that eye.


MARC. My father commanded me --


CAES. Yes, I know -- I know. [to her] Why, now I look again, there is a sort
of a modest. -- Oh, that smile! that smile will never do.

[aside.
MARC. I understand, Signor, that you have demanded my hand in marriage.


CAES. Upon my word, plump to the point! [aside] Yes, I did a sort of -- I
cannot say but that I did --


MARC. I am not insensible of the honor you do me, Sir, but -- but --


CAES. But! -- What don't you like the thoughts of the match?


MARC. Oh, yes, Sir, yes -- exceedingly. I dare not say no.

[aside.
CAES. Oh, you do -- exceedingly! What, I suppose, child, your head is full of
jewels, and finery, and equipage?

[with ill humor.
MARC. No indeed, Sir.


CAES. No, what then? what sort of a life do you expect to lead when you are my
wife? what pleasures do you look forward to?


MARC. None!


CAES. Hey!


MARC. I shall obey my father, Sir; I shall marry you; but I shall be most
wretched!

[weeps
CAES. Indeed!


MARC. There is not a fate I would not prefer; -- but pardon me!


CAES. Go on, go on, I never was better pleased


MARC. Pleased at my reluctance!


CAES. Never, never better pleased in my life; -- so you had really now, you
young baggage, rather have me for a grandfather than a husband?


MARC. Forgive my frankness, Sir, -- a thousand times!


CAES. My dear girl, let me kiss your hand. -- Egad! you have let me off
charmingly. I was frightened out of my wits lest you should have taken as
violent an inclination to the match, as your father has.


MARC. Dear Sir, you charm me.


CAES. But hark ye; -- you will certainly incur your father's anger, if I don't
take the refusal entirely on myself, which I will do, if you will only assist me
in a little business I have in hand.


MARC. Any thing to show my gratitude.


CAES. You must know, I cannot get my daughter to marry -- there is nothing on
earth will drive her to it, but the dread of a mother in-law. Now, if you will
let it appear to her, that you and I are driving to the goal of matrimony; I
believe it will do -- what say you? shall we be lovers in play?


MARC. If you are sure it will be only in play.


CAES. Oh, my life upon it -- but we must be very fond, you know.


MARC. To be sure -- exceedingly tender; ha, ha, ha!


CAES. You must smile upon me now and then roguishly; and slide your hand into
mine, when you are sure she secs you, and let me pat your cheek, and --


MARC. Oh, no farther pray -- that will be quite sussicient.


CAES. Gad, I begin to take a fancy to your rogue's face, now I Am in no danger
-- may not we -- may not we salute sometimes, it will seem infinitely more
natural.


MARC. Never; such an attempt would make me sly off at once.


CAES. Well, you must be lady governess in this business. -- I Will go home now,
and fret madam, about her young mother-in-law -- By'e sweeting!


MARC. By'e charmer!


CAES. Oh, bless its pretty eyes!


[Exit. MARC. Bless its pretty spectacles! ha, ha, ha! enter into a league with
a cross old father against a daughter! why how could he suspect me capable of
so much treachery? I could not answer it to my conscience. No, no I Will acquaint
Donna Olivia with the plot; and, as in duty bound, we'll turn our arms against
Don Caesar.


[Exit. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
DONNA LAURA'S. Enter LAURA and PEDRO. LAURA. WELL, Pedro! have thou seen Don
Florio?


PED. Yes, Donna.


LAU. How did he look when he read my letter?


PED. Mortal well, I never see'd him look better -- he would got on a new cloak,
and a --


LAU. Pho, blockhead! did he look pleased? did he kiss my name? did he press
the billet to his bosom with all the warmth of love?


PED. No, he didn't warm it that way; but he did another, for he put it into
the fire.


LAU. How!


PED. Yes, and when I spoke, he started, for, I think, he had forgot that I was
by -- so, says he, go home and tell Donna Laura, I fly to her presence.

[She waves her hand for him to go.]
LAU. Is it possible? so contemptuously destroy the letter in which my whole
heart overflowed with tenderness? in which my upbraidings were mingled with the
most passionate love! But why do I question it? has he ever treated me but with
the most mortifying coldness, even whilst he pretended to be sensible of my
charms? I feel myself on the brink of hatred; and, by all the agonies I have
felt, should that passion be once roused. -- Oh, how* idly I talk! he is here;
his very voice pierces my heart. I dare not meet his eye thus discomposed.


Exit. Enter VICTORIA, (in Men's Clothes) preceded by SANCHA. SANCH. I will
inform my mistress that you are here, Don Florio, I thought she had been in
this apartment.


Exit. VICT. Now must I, with a mind torn by anxities, once more assume the
lover of my husband's mistress -- of the woman who has robbed me of his heart,
and his children of their fortune. Sure my task is hard. -- Oh, love! Oh,
married love assist me! If I can, by any art, obtain from her that fatal deed,
I shall save my little ones from ruin -- and then -- But I hear her step --
[agitated, pressing her hand on her bosom] -- There! I have hid my griefs
within my heart, and now for all the impudence of an accomplished cavalier!

[Sings an air -- sets her hat in the glass -- dances a few steps, etc. then
runs to Laura, and seizes her hand.]
VICT. My lovely Laura!


LAU. That look speaks Laura loved as well as lovely.


VICT. To be sure! Petrarch immortalized his Laura by his verses, and mine
shall be immortal in my passion.


LAU. I cannot conceive how you feed this immortal passion.


VICT. Oh, by thinking of you, and reading your letters, and --


LAU. My letters! how often do you read them?


VICT. A dozen times an hour; drink each dear line with my eyes, whilst my lips
drink chocolate; place them every night under my pillow, and --


LAU. In the morning fling them into the fire.


VICT. Madam!


LAU. Oh, Florio, how deceitful! I know not what enchantment binds me to thee.


VICT. Me! my dear! is all this to me?

[playing carelessly with the feather in her hat]
LAU. Yes, ingrate, thee!


VICT. Positively, Laura, you have these extravagancies so often, I wonder my
passion can stand them. To be plain, those violences in your temper may make a
pretty relief in the flat of matrimony, child, but they do not suit that state
of freedom which is necessary to my happiness. -- It was by such destructive
arts as these you cured Don Carlos of his love.


LAU. Cured Don Carlos! Oh, Florio! were thou but as he is!


VICT. Why, you don't pretend he loves you still?

[eagerly
LAU. Yes, most ardently and truly.


VICT. Hah!


LAU. If thou would persuade me that thy passion is real, borrow his words,
his looks; -- be a hypocrite one dear moment, and speak to me in all the frenzy
of that love, which warms the heart of Carlos.


VICT. The heart of Carlos!


LAU. Hah, that seemed a jealous pang -- it gives my hopes new life. [aside]
Yes, Florio, he, indeed, knows what it is to love. -- For me be forsook a
beauteous wife; nay, and with me he would forsake his country.


VICT. Villain! Villain!


LAU. Nay, let not the thought distress you thus; --


Carlos I despise -- he is the weakest of mankind.


VICT. It Is false, madam, you cannot despise him -- Carlos the weakest of
mankind! heavens! what woman could resist him? Persuasion sits on his tongue,
and love, almighty love, triumphant in his eyes!


LAU. This is strange; you speak of your rival with the admiration of a
mistress.


VICT. Laura! it is the fate of jealousy, as well as love, to see the charms of
its object, increased and heightened. -- I am jealous, -- jealous to
distraction, of Don Carlos, and cannot taste peace, unless you will swear never
to see him more. -- How nearly had I been betrayed!

[aside.
LAU. I swear, joyfully swear, never to behold or speak to him again. When,
dear youth! shall we retire to Portugal? we are not safe here.


VICT. You know I am not rich. -- You must first sell the lands my rival gave
you.

[observing her with apprehension
LAU. It Is done -- I have found a purchaser, and tomorrow the transfer will be
finished.


VICT. [Aside] Ah! I have now then nothing to trust to but the ingenuity of
Gasper. -- There is reason to fear Don Carlos had no right in that estate, with
which you supposed yourself endowed.


LAU. No right! what can have given you those suspicions?


VICT. A conversation with Juan his steward -- who assures me that his master
never had an estate in Leon.


LAU. Never! what not by marriage?


VICT. Juan says so.


LAU. My blood runs cold -- can I have taken pains to deceive myself -- could I
think so I should be mad.


VICT. These doubts may soon be annihilated; or confirmed to certainty. -- I
have seen Don Sancho, the uncle of Victoria -- he is now in Madrid -- You have
told me that he once professed a passion for you.


LAU. Oh, to excess; but at that time I had another object.


VICT. Have you conversed with him much?


LAU. I never saw him nearer than from my Balcony, where he used to ogle me
through a glass, suspended by a ribbon, like an order of knighthood; he is weak
enough to fancy it gives him an air of distinction, ha, ha! But where can I
find him? I must see him.


VICT. Write him a billet, and I will send it to his lodgings.


LAU. Instantly. -- Dear Florio, a new prospect opens to me -- Don Sancho is
rich and generous; and, by playing on his passions, without yielding to them,
his fortune may be a constant fund to us. -- I Will dip my pen in flattery.


[Exit. VICT. Base woman! how can I pity thee, or regret the steps which my
duty obliges me to take? For myself, I would not swerve from the nicest line of
rectitude, nor wear the shadow of deceit -- But for my children! -- Is there a
parental heart that will not pardon me?


[Exit. SCENE, DON CAESAR'S. Enter OLIVIA and MINETTE OLIV. Well, here we are
in private -- what is this charming intelligence of which thou art so full this
morning?


MIN. Why, Ma'am, as I was in the balcony that overlooks Don Vasquez's garden
-- Donna Marcella told me, that Don Caesar had last night been to pay her a
visit previous to their marriage, and --


OLIV. Their marriage! How can you give me the intelligence with such a look of
joy? Their marriage! -- what will become of me?


MIN. Dear, Ma'am! if you will but have patience. -- She says that Don Caesar and
she are perfectly agreed --


OLIV. Still with that smirking face -- I cannot have patience.


MIN. Then, Madam, if you will not let me tell the story, please to read it --
here is a letter from Donna Marcella.


OLIV. Why did you not give it me at first?

[reads.
MIN. Because I did not like to be cut out of my story. If orators were obliged
to come to the point at once, mercy on us! what tropes and figures we should
lose!


OLIV. Oh, Minette! I give you leave to smirk again -- listen -- [reads.] " I
am more terrified at the idea of becoming your father's wife, than you are in
the expectation of a stepmother; and Don Caesar would be as loath as either of
us. -- He only means to frighten you into matrimony, and I have, on certain
conditions, agreed to assist him; but whatever you may hear, or see, be assured
that nothing is so impossible, as that he should become the husband of Donna
Marcella." Oh delightful girl! how I love her for this!


MIN. Yes, Ma'am; and if you would had patience, I should have told you that she is
now here with Don Caesar, in grave debate how to begin the attack, which must
force you to take shelter in the arms of a husband.


OLIV. Ah, no matter how they begin it. -- Let them amuse themselves in raising
batteries; my reserved fire shall tumble them about their ears, in the moment
my poor father is singing his Io's for victory. -- But here come the lovers. --
Well, I protest now, sixteen and sixty is a very comely sight -- It Is contrast
gives effect to every thing -- Lud! how my father ogles! I had no idea he was
such a sort of man. -- I am really afraid he is not quite so good as he should
be.


Enter DON CAESAR leading MARCELLA. CAES. H -- um -- Madam looks very placid;
we shall discompose her, or I am mistaken. [apart] So, Olivia, here is Donna
Marcella come to visit you -- though, as matters are, that respect was due from
you.


OLIV. I am sensible of the condescension -- My dear Ma'am, how very good this
is.

[taking her hand.]
CAES. Yes, you will think yourself wonderfully obliged, when you know all.
[aside.] Pray, Donna Marcella, what do you think of these apartments? The
furniture and decorations are my daughter's taste; would you wish them to
remain, or will you give orders to have them changed?


MARC. Changed, undoubtedly; I can have nobody's taste govern my apartments but
my own.


CAES. Ah, that touches -- See how she looks. [apart.] They shall receive your
orders. -- You understand, I suppose, from this, that every thing is fixed on
between Donna Marcella and me?


OLIV. Yes, Sir; I understand it perfectly, and it gives me infinite pleasure.


CAES. Eh! pleasure!


OLIV. Entirely, Sir --


CAES. Tol-de-rol! Ah that will not do -- that will not do. -- You cannot hide it. --
You are frightened out of your wits at the thoughts of a mother-in-law --
especially a young, gay, handsome one.


OLIV. Pardon me, Sir; the thought of a mother-in-law was indeed disagreeable;
but her being young and gay qualifies it. -- I hope, Ma'am, you will give us
balls, and the most spirited parties -- You cannot think how stupid we have
been. -- My dear father hates those things -- but I hope now --


CAES. Hey, hey, hey! what is the meaning of all this? Why, hussy, don't you
know you will have no apartment but the garret?


OLIV. That will benefit my complexion, Sir, by mending my health. It Is
charming to sleep in an elevated situation.


CAES. Here! here is an obstinate perverse slut!


OLIV. Bless me, Sir, are you angry that I look forwards to your marriage
without murmuring?


CAES. Yes, I am -- yes, I am -- you ought to murmur, and you ought to -- to --
to --


OLIV. Dear me! I find love taken up late in life, has a bad effect on the
temper -- I wish, my dear papa, you had felt the influence of Donna Marcella's
charms somewhat sooner.


CAES. You do! you do! why this must be all put on. -- This cannot be real.


OLIV. Indeed, indeed it is; and I protest your engagement with this lady has
given me more pleasure than I have tasted ever since you began to teaze me
about a husband. You seemed determined to have a marriage in the family; and I
hope now I shall live in quiet, with my dear, sweet, young mother-in-law.


CAES. Oh -- oh [walking about.] Was there ever -- She does not care for a
mother-in-law! -- Cannot frighten her!


OLIV. Sure, my fate is very peculiar; that being pleased with your choice, and
submitting with humble duty to your will, should be the cause of offense.


CAES. Hussy! I don't want you to be pleased with my choice -- I don't want
you to submit with humble duty to my will -- Where I do want you to submit, you
rebel -- You are a -- you are -- But I Will mortify that wayward spirit yet.


[Exit Don CAESAR and MARCELLA. MIN. Well, really, my master is in a pitcous
passion -- he seems more angry at your liking his marriage, than at your
refusing to be married yourself. -- Wouldn't it have been better, Madam, to
have affected discontent?


OLIV. To what purpose? but to lay myself open to fresh solicitations, in order
to get rid of the evil I pretended to dread! Bless us! nothing can be more easy
than for my father to be gratified, if he were but lucky in the choice of a
lover.


MIN. As much as to say, Madam, that there is --


OLIV. Why, yes, "as much as to say" -- I see you are resolved to have my
secret, Minette, and so --


Enter SERVANT. SERVE. There is a gentleman at the door, Madam, called Don Julio
de Melessina. He waits on you from Don Vincentio.


OLIV. Who? Don Julio! it cannot be -- art thou ^ure of his name?


SERVE. The servant repeated it twice -- He is in a fine carriage, and seems to
be a nobleman.


OLIV. Conduct him hither. [Exeunt Servant. I am astonished, I cannot see him.
-- I would not have him know the incognita to be Olivia for worlds! -- There is
but one way. [aside.] Minette, ask no questions, but do as I order you --
Receive Don Julio in my name; call yourself the heiress of Don Caesar, and on
no account suffer him to believe that you are any thing else.

[turning from her. I am amazed and confused! -- It is impossible that he can
have discovered me -- Perhaps he comes with offers to my father -- then my
interview last night did not give him those impressions I hoped. -- I am
jealous of myself. -- If it is so, his incognito shall never pardon a passion
for the daughter of Don Caesar.


[Exit. MIN. So! then, this is some new lover whom she is determined to
disgust; and fancies that making me pass for her, will complete it. Perhaps her
ladyship may be mistaken, though. [Looking through the wing] Upon my word, a
sweet man! Oh, lud, my heart beats with the very idea of his making love to me,
even though he takes me for another -- Stay, I think he shall not find me here --
Standing in the middle of a room gives one's appearance no effect. -- I Will
enter upon him with an easy swim, or an engaging trip, or a -- something that
shall strike -- the first glance is every thing.


[Exit. Enter JULIO, *preceded by Servant, who retires. JULIO. Not here! The
ridiculous dispute between Garcia and Vincentio, gives me irresistible
curiosity -- though, if she is the character Garcia describes, I expect to be
cuff'd for my impertinence -- Here she comes! -- A pretty, little, smiling
girl, 'faith, for a vixen.


Enter MINETTE, very affectedly. MIN. Sir, your most obedient humble servant.
You are Don Julio de Melessina. I am extremely glad to see you, Sir.


JULIO. [aside.] A very courteous reception! -- You honor me infinitely, Madam
-- I must apologize for waiting on you without a better introduction -- Don
Vincentio promised to attend me, but a concert called him to another part of
the town, at the moment I prepared to come hither.


MIN. A concert -- Yes, Sir, he is very fond of music.


JULIO. He is, Madam:- You, I suppose, have a passion for that charming science?


MIN. Oh, yes, I love it mightily.


JULIO. [Aside.] This is lucky! I think I have heard Donna Olivia, that your
taste that way is peculiar; you are fond of a -- says I can hardly speak it.
[aside] -- of a -- Jcw's harp.

[smothering a laugh]
MIN. A Jew's harp! Mercy! What do you think a person of my birth and figure,
can have such fancies as that? No, Sir, I love siddles, French horns, tabors,
and all the cheerful, noisy instruments in the world.


JULIO. [Aside.] Vincentio must have been mad; and I as mad as him to mention
it. Then you are fond of concerts, Madam?


MIN. Dote on 'em! I wish he would offer me a ticket.

[aside.]
JULIO. [Aside.] Vincentio is clearly wrong. -- Now to prove how far the other
was right, in supposing her a vixen.


MIN. There is a grand public concert, Sir, to be tomorrow. Pray do you go?


JULIO. I believe I shall have that pleasure, Madam.


MIN. My father, Don Caesar, will not let me purchase a ticket: I think it is very
hard.


JULIO. Pardon me, I think it is perfectly right.


MIN. Right! what to refuse me a trifling expense, that would procure me a
great pleasure?


JULIO. Yes, doubtless -- The ladies are too fond of pleasure. -- I think Don
Caesar is exemplary.


MIN. Lord, Sir, you would think it very hard if you were me, to be locked up all
your life, and know nothing of the world but what you could catch through the
bars of your balcony.


JULIO. Perhaps I might; but as a man, I am convinced it is right. Daughters and
wives should be equally excluded those destructive haunts of dissipation. --
Let them keep to their embroidery, nor ever presume to show their faces but at
their own fire sides. -- This will bring out the Xantippe, surely.

[aside.]
MIN. Well, Sir, I don't know -- to be sure, home, as you say, is the sit
place for women. -- For my part, I could live for ever at home. I am determined
he shall have his way -- who knows what may happen.

[aside.]
JULIO. [Aside.] By all the powers of caprice, Garcia is as wrong as the other!


MIN. I delight in nothing so much as in sitting by my father, and hearing his
tales of old times -- and I fancy, when I have a husband, I shall be more happy
to sit and listen to his stories of present times.


JULIO. Perhaps your husband, fair lady, might not be inclined so to amuse you.
-- Men have a thousand delights that call them abroad; and probably your chief
amusements would be counting the hours of his absence, and giving a tear to
each as it passed.


MIN. Well, he should never see 'em, however. I would always smile when he
entered, and if he sound my eyes red, I Would say I had been weeping over the
history of the unfortunate damsel, whose true love hung himself at sea, and
appeared to her afterward in a wet jacket. -- Sure this will do.

[aside.]
JULIO. I am every moment more astonished! Pray, Madam, permit me a question --
Are you really -- yet I cannot doubt it -- are you really Donna Olivia, the
daughter of Don Caesar, to whom Don Garcia and Don Vincentio, had lately the
honor of paying their addresses?


MIN. Am I Donna Olivia! ha, ha, ha! what a question! Pray, Sir is this my
father's house? -- are you Don Julio?


JULIO. I beg your pardon; but, to confess, I had heard you described as a lady
who had not quite so much sweetness, and --


MIN. Oh, what you had heard that I was a termagant, I suppose -- It Is all
slander, Sir -- There is not in Madrid, though I say it, a sweeter temper than
my own; and though I have refused a good many lovers, yet if one was to offer
himself, that I could like --


JULIO. You would take pity, and reward his passion. Lovely Donna Olivia, how
charming is this frankness! -- it is a little odd, though!

[aside.]
MIN. Why, I believe, I should take pity, for it always seemed to me to be very
hard-hearted to be cruel to a lover that one likes, because in that case one
should -- a -- You know, Sir, the sooner the affair is over, the better for
both parties.


JULIO. What the deuce does she mean? -- Is this Garcia's sour fruit?


CAESAR, without. Olivia! -- Olivia!


MIN. Bless me, I hear my father! Now, Sir, I have a particular fancy that you
should not tell him, in this first visit, your design.


JULIO. Madam! my design!


MIN. Yes, that you will not speak out, 'till we have had a little further
conversation, which I Will take care to give you an opportunity for very soon. --
He Will be here in a moment -- Now, pray Don Julio, go -- If he should meet you,
and ask who you are, you can say that you are -- you may say that you came on a
visit to my maid, you know.


JULIO. I thank you, Madam -- [aloud.] -- for my dismission -- [aside.] I never
was in such peril in my life. -- I believe she has a license in her pocket, a
priest in her closet, and the ceremony by heart.


[Exit. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
DON CARLOS'S. CARLOS discovered writing. CARLOS, [tearing paper, and rising.]
IT is in vain! Language cannot furnish me with terms to soften to Victoria the
horrid transaction. Could she ee the compunctions of my soul, her gentle heart
would pity me -- But what then? She Is ruined! My children are undone! Oh! the
artifices of one base woman, and my villainy to another most amiable one, has
made me unfit to live. -- I am a wretch who ought to be blotted from society.


Enter PEDRO hastily. PED. Sir, Sir.


CAR. Well!


PED. Sir, I have just met Don Florio; he asked if my mistress was at home, so
I guesses he is going to our house, and so I run to let you know -- for I loves
to keep my promises, though I am deadly afraid of some mischief.


CAR. You have done well. -- Go home, and wait for me at the door, and admit me
without noise. [Exit Pedro.] At least then, I shall have the pleasure of
revenge; I Will punish that harlot by sacrificing her paramour in her arms -- and
then -- Oh!


[Exit. Scene changes to DONNA LAURA'S. Enter LAURA with precipitation,
followed by VICTORIA. LAU. It Is his carriage! -- How successful was my letter!
This, my Florio, is a most important moment.


VICT. It is indeed; and I will leave you to make every advantage of it. If I
am present, I must witness condescensions from you, that I shall not be able to
bear, though I know them to be but affected. -- Now, Gasper, play thy part
well, and save Victoria!

[aside.]
[Exit. LAU. This tender jealousy is dear to me! -- Keep in the saloon. Here
comes the dotard.


Enter GASPER, dressed as an old Beau, two Servants follow him, and take off a
rich cloak. GASP. Take my cloak; and, do you hear, Ricardo, go home and bring the
eider down cushions for the coach, and tell the fellow not to hurry me post
through the streets of Madrid. I have been jolted from side to side, like a
pippin in a mill stream. -- Drive a man of my rank, as he would a city vintner
and his fat wife, going to a bull fight! -- Hah, there she is! [looking through
a glass, suspended by a red ribbon.] -- there she is! Charming Donna Laura, let
me thus at the shrine of your beauty -- [makes an effort to kneel, and falls on
his face; Laura assists him to rise.] Fie, fie, those new shoes! -- they have
made me skate all day, like a Dutchman on a canal, and now -- Well, you see how
profound my adoration is, Madam. -- Common lovers kneel; I was prostrate.


LAU. You do me infinite honor. -- Disgustful wretch!


GASP. But how could you be so barbarous, to leave me at Valencia, without
granting me one interview nearer than your balcony?


LAU. I will be ingenuous -- it was female artifice. I knew you would follow
me; and how could I resist the triumph of showing that I led in my chains the
illustrious Don Sancho?


GASP. Oh you dear charming -- But stay [searching his pockets.] -- Bless me,
what a a careless fellow I am! I had a casket, with some diamonds in it -- a
necklace, and a few trifles, which I meant to have had the honor of placing on
your toilette -- Left it at home -- Oh, my giddy pate!


LAU. You are always elegant, Don Sancho. I Will send my servant. -- Pedro!

[calling.]
GASP. No, no, tomorrow. It will be an excuse for me to come to morrow. -- I
shall often want excuses.


LAU. My wishes shall always be your excuse, but tomorrow be it then. You are
thinner than you were, Don Sancho. -- I protest, now I observe you, you are
much altered.


GASP. Aye, Madam -- Fretting. Your absence threw me into a fever, and that
destroyed my bloom: -- You see I look almost a middle-aged man, now.


LAU. No, really; far from it, I assure you. -- The fop is as wrinkled as a
baboon.

[aside.]
GASP. Then, jealousy, that gave me a jaundice. My niece's husband, I hear, Don
Carlos, has been my happy rival -- Oh, my blade will hardly keep in its
scabbard, when I think of him.


LAU. Think no more of him -- He has been long banished my thoughts, be
assured. I wonder you gave your niece to him, with such a fortune.


GASP. Gave! She gave herself; and as to fortune, she had not a pistole from me.


LAU. 'Twas indeed unnecessary, with so fine an estate as she had in Leon.


GASP. My niece an estate in Leon! Not enough to give shelter to a field mouse;
and if he has told you so, he is a braggart.


LAU. Told me so -- I have the writings; he has made over the lands to me.


GASP. Made over the lands to you. -- Oh a deceiver! I begin to suspect a plot.
Pray let me see this extraordinary deed. [She runs to a cabinet.] A plot, I Will
be sworn.


LAU. Here is the deed which made that estate mine forever. No, Sir, I will
entrust it in no hand but my own -- Yet look over me, and read the description
of the lands.


GASP. [Reading through his glass.] H -- m -- m --: "In the vicinage of
Rosalva, bounded on the west by the river -- h -- m -- m, on the east by the
forest -- " Oh, an artful dog! I need read no further; I see how the thing is.


LAU. How, Sir! -- but hold -- Stay a moment -- I am breathless with fear.


GASP. Nay, Madam, don't be afraid! It Is my estate -- that is all -- the very
castle where I was born, and which I never did, nor ever will bestow on any Don
in the two Castiles. Dissembling rogue! Bribe you with a fictitious title to my
estate, ha, ha, ha!


LAU. [Aside.] Curses follow him! The villain I employed, must have been his
creature -- His reluctance all art -- and, whilst I believed myself undoing
him, was duped myself!


GASP. Could you suppose I Would give Carlos such an estate for running away with
my niece? No, no, the vineyards, and the cornfieldsd, and the woods of Rosalva,
are not for him. -- I Have somebody else in my eye -- in my eye, observe me -- to
give those to; -- cannot you guess who it is?


LAU. No, indeed! -- He gives me a glimmering that saves me from despair.

[aside.]
GASP. I will not tell you, unless you will bribe me. -- I will not indeed -- [kisses
her cheek.] There, now I Will tell you -- They are all for you. -- Yes, this
estate, to which you have taken such a fancy, shall be yours. -- I Will give you
the deeds, if you will promise to love me, you little, cruel thing!


LAU. Can you be serious?


GASP. I Will sign and seal tomorrow.


LAU. Noble Don Sancho! Thus then I annihilate the proof of his perfidy and my
weakness. Thus I tear to atoms his detested name; and as I tread on these, so
would I on his heart.


Enter VICTORIA. VICT. My children then are saved!

[in transport.]
LAU. [Apart.] Oh, Florio, it is as thou said -- Carlos was a villain, and
deceived me. -- Why this strange air? Ah, I see the cause -- You think me
ruined, and will abandon me. -- Yes, I see it in thy averted face; thou dare
not meet my eyes. -- If I misjudge thee, speak!


VICT. Laura, I cannot speak. -- You little guess the emotions of my heart. --
Heaven knows, I pity you!


LAU. Pity! Oh, villain! and has thy love already snatched the form of pity?
Base, deceitful --


CARLOS without. CAR. Stand off, loose your weak hold; I Am come for vengeance!

Enter CARLOS. Where is this youth? Where is the blooming rival, for
whom I have been betrayed? Hold me not, base woman!
In vain the stripling flies me; for, by Heaven, my sword
shall in his bosom write its master's wrongs!

VICTORIA first goes toward the flat, then returns, takes off her hat, and
drops on one knee. VICT. Strike, strike it here! Plunge it deep into that bosom
already wounded by a thousand stabs, keener and more painful than your sword
can give. -- Here lives all the gnawing anguish of love betrayed; here live the
pangs of disappointed hopes, hopes sanctified by holiest vows, which have been
written in the book of Heaven. -- Hah! he sinks. -- [She flies to him.] -- Oh!
my Carlos! My beloved! my husband! forgive my too severe reproaches; thou art
dear, yet dear as ever, to Victoria's heart!


CAR. [Recovering.] Oh, you know not what you do -- you know not what you are.
-- Oh, Victoria, thou art a beggar!


VICT. No, we are rich, we are happy! See there, the fragments of that fatal
deed, which had I not recovered, we had been indeed undone; yet still not
wretched, could my Carlos think so!


CAR. The fragments of the deed! the deed which that base woman --


VICT. Speak not so harshly. -- To you, Madam, I fear, I seem reprehensible;
yet when you consider my duties as wife and mother, you will forgive me. -- Be
not afraid of poverty -- a woman has deceived, but she will not desert you!


LAU. Is this real? Can I be awake?


VICT. Oh, may thou indeed awake to virtue! -- You have talents that might*
grace the highest of our sex; be no longer unjust to such precious gifts, by
burying them in dishonor. -- Virtue is our first, most awful duty; bow, Laura!
bow before her throne, and mourn in ceaseless tears, that ever you forgot her
heavenly precepts!


LAU. So, by a smooth speech about virtue, you think to cover the injuries I
sustain. Vile, insinuating monster! -- but thou know me not. -- Revenge is
sweeter to my heart than love; and if there is a law in Spain to gratify that
passion, your virtue shall have another field for exercise.


[Exit. GASP. No, no; you will find no help in the law, charmer! However, the
long robes are rich -- get amongst them; their gravities may administer to your
avarice, though not to your revenge.


CAR. [Turning toward Victoria.] My hated rival, and my charming wife! How
many sweet mysteries have you to unsold! -- Oh, Victoria! my soul thanks thee,
but I dare not yet say I love thee, 'till ten thousand acts of watchful
tenderness, have proved how deep the sentiment's engraved.


VICT. Can it be true that I have been unhappy? -- But the mysteries, my
Carlos, are already explained to you -- Gasper's resemblance to my uncle --


GASP. Yes, Sir, I was always apt at resemblances -- In our plays at home, I am
always Queen Cleopatra -- You know she was but a gypsey Queen, and I hits her
off to a nicety.


CAR. Come, my Victoria -- Oh, there is a painful pleasure in my bosom -- To
gaze on thee, to listen to, and love thee, seems like the bliss of angels
cheering whispers to repentant sinners!


[Exeunt Carlos and Victoria. GASP. Lord help 'em! how easily the women are
taken in! -- Here Is a wild rogue has plagued her heart these two years, and a
whip syllabub about angels and whispers clears scores. -- It Is pity but they
were a little -- though, now I think on it, the number of these gentle fair ones
is so very small, that if it was lessened, the two sexes might be confounded
together, and the whole world be supposed of the masculine gender.


[Exit. SCENE, THE PRADO. Enter MINETTE. MIN. Ah, here comes the man at last,
after I have been sauntering in sight of his lodgings these two hours. -- Now,
if my scheme takes, what a happy person I shall be! and sure, as I was Donna
Olivia today, to please my lady, I may be Donna Olivia to night, to please
myself. I Will address him as the maid of a lady who has taken a fancy to him,
then convey him to our house -- then retire, and then come in again, and with a
vast deal of confusion, confess I sent my maid for him. If he should dislike my
forwardness, the censure will fall on my lady; if he should be pleased with my
person, the advantage will be mine. But perhaps he is come here on some wicked
frolic or other. -- I Will watch him at a distance before I speak.


[Exit. Enter JULIO. JULIO. Not here, 'faith; though she gave me last night but
a faint refusal, and I had a right, by all the rules of gallantry, to construe
that into an assent. -- Then she is a jilt -- Hang her, I feel I am uneasy --
The first woman that ever gave me pain. -- I am ashamed to perceive that this
spot has attractions for me, only because it was here I conversed with her.
'Twas here the little siren, conscious of her charms, unveiled her fascinating
face. -- 'Twas here --


Enter GARCIA and VINCENTIO. GARC. 'Twas here that Julio, leaving champaigne
untasted, and songs of gallantry unsung, came to talk to the whistling branches.


VIN. 'Twas here that Julio, flying from the young and gay, was found in
doleful meditation -- [altering his tone.] -- on a wench, for a hundred ducats!


GARC. Who is she?


JULIO. Not Donna Olivia, Gentlemen; not Donna Olivia.


GARC. We have been seeking you, to ask the event of your visit to her.


JULIO. The event has proved that you have been most grossly dup'd.


VIN. I knew that -- Ha, ha, ha!


JULIO. And you likewise, I know that -- Ha, ha ha! -- The sair lady, so far
from being a vixen, is the very essence of gentleness. To me, so much sweetness
in a wife, would be downright maukish -- I like the little acerbities which
flow from quick spirits, and a consciousness of power. -- One may as well marry
a looking-glass as a woman who constantly reflects back one's own sentiments,
and one's own whims.


VIN. Well, but she is fond of a Jew's harp.


JULIO. Detests it; she would be as fond of a Jew.


GARC. Pho, pho, this is a game at cross purposes; -- Let us all go to Don
Caesar's together, and compare opinions on the spot.


JULIO. I Will go most willingly -- but it will be only to cover you both with
confusion, for being the two men in Spain most easily imposed on.

[All going]
Enter MINETTE. MIN. Gentlemen, my lady has sent me for one of you, pray which
of you is it?


JULIO. [Returning.] Me, without doubt, child.


VIN. I don't know that.


GARC. Look at me, my dear, don't you think I am the man?


MIN. Let me see -- a good air, and well made, you are the man for a dancer. --
[to Garcia] Well dressed, and nicely put out of hands -- you are the man for a
bandbox. [to Vincentio] Handsome and bold -- you are the man for my lady.

[to Julio]
JULIO. My dear little Iris, here is all the gold in my pocket. -- Gentlemen, I
wish you a good night -- I am your very obedient, humble --

[stalking by them with his arm round Minette.]
GARC. Pho, prithee, don't be a fool. Are we not going to Donna Olivia?


JULIO. Donna Olivia must wait, my dear boy; we can decide about her tomorrow.
Come along, my little dove of Venus!


[Exit. GARC. What a rash fellow it is! ten to one but this is some common
business, and he will be robbed and murdered -- they take him for a stranger.


VIN. Let Us follow, and see where she leads him.


GARC. That Is hardly fair, however, as I think there is danger, we will follow.


[Exit. SCENE, DON CAESAR'S Enter OLIVIA and SERVANT. OLIV. Bring me my veil
and follow me to the Prado.

[Exit Servant. Julio will certainly be there -- he has too much breeding not
to translate my positive denial into assent -- at least I must convince myself.
If I see him completely vanquished, I can, by the most unlucky chance in the
world, drop a card with my name, and then all the rest follows in course.


[Exit. Enter MINETTE and JULIO. MIN. There, Sir, please to sit down, 'till my
lady is ready to wait on you -- she will not be long..... I Am sure she is out, and
I may do great things before she returns.

[aside
[Exit. JULIO. Through fifty back lanes, a long garden, and a narrow
staircase, into a superb apartment -- all that is in the regular way; as the
Spanish women manage it, one intrigue is too much like another, whilst the
sprightly dames of Paris have the art of giving the same intrigue every day a
new air. Now, presently, in comes a stately dame with a veil on; she tells me,
she fears I have but a slight opinion of her virtue; I make her an answer about
her beauty, and, after a dozen or two entreaties and denials, off comes her
veil. A fat matron, perhaps of forty -- I swear she is a Hebe -- she thinks me
very obliging, and I find her very grateful; and this is the epitome of half
the amors in Madrid. If it was not now and then for the little lively fillip
of a jealous husband or brother, which obliges one to leap from a window, or
crawl, like a cat, along the gutters, there would be no bearing the ennui. Ah!
ah! but this promises novelty; [looking through the wing] a young girl and an
old man -- wife or daughter? They are coming this way. My lovely incognita, by
all that is propitious! Why did not some kind spirit whisper to me my happiness?
but hold -- she cannot mean to treat the old gentleman with a sight of me.


[goes behind the sopha. Enter CAESAR and OLIVIA. CAES. No, no, Madam, no going
out -- give me your veil; that will be useless 'till you put it on for life.
There, madam, this is your apartment, your house, your garden, your assembly,
'till you go to your convent. Why, how impudent you are, to look thus
unconcerned! -- Can hardly forbear laughing in my face! -- Very well -- very
well!


[Exit, double locking the door. OLIV. Ha, ha, ha! I Will be even with you, my
dear father, if you treble lock it. I Will stay here two days, without once
asking for my liberty, and you will come the third, with tears in your eyes, to
take me out. -- He has forgot that door leading to the garden -- but I vow I Will
stay, [sitting down] I can make the time pass pleasantly enough.


JULIO. I hope so.


[looking over the back of the sopha. OLIV. Heaven and earth!


JULIO. My dear creature, why are you so alarmed; am I here before you expected
me?


[coming round. OLIV. Expected you!


JULIO. Oh, this pretty surprise! Come, let us sit down, I think your father
was very obliging to lock us in together.


OLIV. Sir, Sir! my father!

[calling at the door.
CAES. [without] Aye, it is all in vain -- I will not come near you. There you are,
and there you may stay. -- I shall not return, make as much noise as you will.


JULIO. Why are you not ashamed that your father has so much more consideration
for your guest than you have?


OLIV. My guest! how is it possible he can have discovered me!

[aside.
JULIO. Pho, this is carrying the thing further than you need -- if there was a
third person here, it might be prudent.


OLIV. Why, this assurance, Don Julio, is really --


JULIO. The thing in the world you are most ready to pardon.


OLIV. Upon my word I don't know how to treat you.


JULIO. Consult your heart!


OLIV. I shall consult my honor.


JULIO. Honor is a pretty thing to play with, but when spoken with that very
grave face, after having sent your maid to bring me here, is really more than I
expected. I shall be in an ill humor presently -- I will not stay if you treat me
thus.


OLIV. Well, this is superior to every thing! I have heard that men will
slander women privately to each other, it is their common amusement, but to do
it to one's face! -- and you really pretend that I sent for you?


JULIO. Ha, ha, ha! Well, if it obliges you, I will pretend that you did not
send for me; that your maid did not conduct me hither, nay, that I have not now
the supreme happiness --

[catching her in his arms.
Enter MINETTE, screams and runs out. JULIO. Donna Olivia de Zuniga! how the
devil came she here?


OLIV. [Aside] That Is lucky! Olivia, my dear friend, why do you run away? Keep
the character, I charge you. [apart to Minette] Be still Olivia!


MIN. Oh! dear madam! I was -- I was so frightened when I saw that gentleman.


OLIV. Oh, my dear, it is the merriest pretty kind of gentleman in the world; he
pretends that I sent my maid for him into the streets, ha, ha!


JULIO. That Is right, always tell a thing yourself, which you would not have
believed.


MIN. It is the readiest excuse for being found in a lady's apartment, however.
Now will I swear I know nothing of the matter.

[aside.
OLIV. Now, I think it a horrid poor excuse, he has certainly not had occasion
to invent reasons for such impertinencies often. Tell me that he has made love
to you to day.

[apart.
MIN. I fancy that he has had occasion to excuse impertinencies often; -- his
impertinence to me today --


JULIO. To you, madam?


MIN. Making love to me, my dear, all the morning -- could hardly get him away
he was so desirous to speak to my father. Nay, Sir, I don't care for your
impatience.


JULIO. [Aside] Now would I give a thousand pistoles if she were a man!


OLIV. Nay, then, this accidental meeting is fortunate -- pray, Don Julio,
don't let my presence prevent your saying what you think proper to my friend --
shall I leave you together?


JULIO. [Apart] To contradict a lady on such an assertion would be too gross;
but, upon my honor, Donna Olivia is the last woman upon earth who could
inspire me with a tender idea. Find an excuse to send her away, my angel, I
entreat you. I have a thousand things to say, and the moments are too precious
to be given to her.


OLIV. I think so too, but one cannot be rude, you know. Come, my dear, sit
down, [seating herself] have you brought your work?


JULIO. The devil! what can she mean? [pushing himself between Minette and the
sopha] Donna Olivia, I am sorry to inform you that my physician has just been
sent for to your father, Don Caesar. -- The poor gentleman was seized with a
vertigo.


OLIV. Vertigoes! Oh, he has 'em frequently you know.

[to Minette.]
MIN. Yes, and they always keep me from his sight.


JULIO. Did ever one women prevent another from leaving her at such a moment
before? I really, madam, cannot comprehend --


CAESAR without. It is impossible -- impossible, gentlemen? Don Julio cannot be
here.


JULIO. Hah, who is that?


Enter CAESAR, GARCIA, and VINCENTIO. GARC. There! did we not tell you so? we
saw him enter the garden.


CAES. What can be the meaning of all this? A man in my daughter's apartment!

[attempting to draw.
GARC. Hold, Sir! Don Julio is of the first rank in Spain, and will
unquestionably be able to satisfy your honor, without troubling your sword. --
We have done mischief, Vincentio!

[apart.
JULIO. [to Olivia] They have been cursedly impertinent! but I Will bring you
off, never fear, by pretending a passion for your busy friend, there.


CAES. Satisfy me then in a moment; speak, one of you.


JULIO. I came here, Sir, by the merest accident. -- The garden door was open,
curiosity led me to this apartment. -- You came in a moment after, and very
civilly locked me in with your daughter.


CAES. Locked you in! why then, did you not, like a man of honor, cry out?


JULIO. The lady cried out, Sir, and you told her you would not return; but
when Donna Olivia de Zuniga entered, for whom I have conceived a most violent
passion --


CAES. A passion for her! Oh, let me hear no more on it. -- A passion for her!
You may as well entertain a passion for the untameable hyaena.


GARC. There, Vincentio, what think you now? Xantippe or not!


VIN. I am afraid I must give up that -- but pray support me as to this point,
Don Caesar; is not the lady fond of a Jew's harp?


CAES. Fond! She Is fond of nothing, but playing the vixen; there is not such a
fury upon earth.


JULIO. These are odd liberties, with a person who does not belong to him.


CAES. I Will play the hypocrite for her no more; the world shall know her true
character, they shall know -- but ask her maid there.


JULIO. Her maid!


MIN. Why, yes, Sir, to say truth, I am but Donna Olivia's maid, after all.


OLIV. [Apart] Dear Minette! speak for me, or I am now ruined.


MIN. I will, ma'am. -- I must confess, Sir, [going up to Julio] there never
was so bitter a tempered creature, as my lady is. I have borne her humors for
two years; I have seen her by night and by day. [Olivia pulls her sleeve,
impatiently] I will, I will! [to Olivia] and this I am sure, that if you marry
her, you will rue the day every hour the first month, and hang yourself the next.
There, madam, I have done it roundly now.


OLIV. I am undone. -- I am caught in my own snare.

[aside.
CAES. After this true character of my daughter, I suppose, Signor, we shall
hear no more of your passion; so let us go down, and leave madam to begin her
penance.


JULIO. My ideas are totally confused. -- You Donna Olivia de Zuniga, and the
person I thought you, her maid! something too flattering darts across my mind.


CAES. If you have taken a fancy to her maid, I have nothing farther to say,
but as to that violent creature. --


JULIO. Oh, do not profane her. -- Where is that spirit which you tell me of?
Is it that which speaks in modest, conscious blushes on her cheeks? Is it that
which bends her lovely eyes to earth?


CAES. Ay, she is only bending 'em to earth, considering how to afflict me with
some new obstinacy -- she will break out like a tygress in a moment.


JULIO. It cannot be -- are you, charming woman! such a creature?


OLIV. Yes, to all mankind -- but one.

[looking down.
JULIO. But one! Oh, might that excepted one, be me!


OLIV. Would you not fear to trust your fate with her, you have cause to think
so hateful?


JULIO. No, I Would bless the hour that bound my fate to here is -- permit me, Sir,
to pay my vows to this fair vixen.


CAES. What are you such a bold man as that? Pho, but if you are, 'twill be
only lost time -- she will contrive some way or other, to return your vows upon
your hands.


OLIV. If they have your authority, Sir, I will return them -- only with my own.


CAES. What Is that! what did she say? my head is giddy with surprise.


JULIO. And mine with rapture.

[catching her hand.
CAES. Don't make a fool of me, Olivia. -- Will It marry him?


OLIV. When you command me, Sir.


CAES. My dear Don Julio, thou art my guardian angel -- shall I have a
son-in-law at last? Garcia, Vincentio, could you have thought it?


GARC. No, Sir, if we had, we should have saved that lady much trouble; it is
pretty clear now, why she was a vixen.


VIN. Yes, yes, it is clear enough, and I beg your pardon, madam, for the share
of trouble I gave you -- but pray have the goodness to tell me sincerely, what
do you think of a crash?


OLIV. I love music, Don Vincentio, I admire your skill, and whenever you will
give me a concert, I shall be obliged.


VIN. You could not have pleased me so well, if you had married me.


Enter CARLOS and VICTORIA. OLIV. Hah, here comes Victoria and her Carlos. My
friend, you are happy -- it is in your eyes, I need not ask the event.


CAES. What is this Don Carlos, whom Victoria gave us for a cousin? Sir, you
come in happy hour!


CAR. I do indeed, for I am most happy.


JULIO. My dear Carlos, what has new made thee thus, since morning?


CAR. A wife! Marry, Julio, marry!


JULIO. What! this advice from you?


CAR. Yes; and when you have married an angel, when that angel has done for you
such things, as makes your gratitude almost equal to your love, you may then
guess something of what I feel, in calling this angel mine.


OLIV. Now, I trust, Don Julio, after all this, that if I should do you the
honor of my hand, you will treat me cruelly, be a very bad man, that I, like my
exemplary cousin --


VICT. Hold, Olivia! it is not necessary that a husband should be faulty, to
make a wife's character exemplary. -- Should he be tenderly watchful of your
happiness, your gratitude will give a thousand graces to your conduct; whilst
the purity of your manners, and the nice honor of your life, will gain you the
approbation of those, whose praise is fame.


OLIV. Pretty and matronly! thank you, my dear. We have each struck a bold
stroke today; -- yours has been to reclaim a husband, mine to get one; but
the most important is yet to be obtained. -- The approbation of our judges.

That meed withheld our labors have been vain;
Pointless my jests, and doubly keen your pain;
Might we their plaudits, and their praise provoke,
Our bold should then be termed, a happy stroke.

THE END.
EPILOGUE.
BY A GENTLEMAN.
YOUR servant, friends, from Spain, you see, I Am come,
A peace abroad, -- but is it peace at home?
The sword is sheathed, our heroes all are quiet,
A gentle woman I, and hate a riot.
To pick a lover from a crowd of beaus,
A lady-stroke, though bold, you will scarce oppose.
To night you have had a trial of our skill
In curing lethargy, that growing ill;
That lifeless inattention and neglect,
Which some deserve, some fear, and some expect;
Say, do you like our scheme? methinks I hear
A reverend sire, beyond his sixtieth year,
In grumbling accents, saying, "Stuff, sad stuff!
"Now there is a peace, you may have men enough: --
"They want a leg, perhaps, what is that to you?
"They Are Frenchmen only, who make use of two.
"Then stay your whining, let your bold strokes cease,
"Each wound in war, is a bold stroke for peace."
How weak your wit, ye lords of the creation,
When set to find a woman's inclination;
Her heart, though ice, the virgin fair and young,
Without an ear, with double share of tongue;
Let the fond youth she likes, but once appear,
His dulcet voice with rapture she can hear;
If she could frown, by smiles her pride's disarmed;
She has a heart, when love that heart has warmed;
No tones discordant now, not even nay,
While sighs to sighs responsive seem to say,
In accents sweet, -- "love, honor and obey."
Dear liberty, farewell! from babe to wife,
I Have led a pretty, happy, checkered life;
I Will tell you how, the tale's not very long,
But, if you please, I Will give it you in song.
AIR.
When I was a little baby,
Plump and round as may be,
For a lullaby
I Would fret and cry,
When I was a little baby.
But at six years old, how froward,
Naughty girl, untoward,
To dress my doll,
And prate like poll,
A naughty girl untoward.
At twelve, what a blooming flower!
Around me every hour
Butterflies gay,
To sip and play,
Flew round this blooming flower.
At sweet sixteen, so pretty,
All I said was witty;
A charming lass,
So said my glass,
At dear sixteen so pretty.
Love's dart no more to parry,
At twenty-two to marry,
To one dear youth
I plight my truth,
And that is the youth I Will marry.
With him I Will toy and play so,
He Will wonder why I stay so;
But your applause
Must crown my cause,
So clap your hands and say so.
FINIS.
Of the PUBLISHER may be had, By the same AUTHOR,
The BELLE's STRATAGEM, a Comedy. The RUNAWAY, a Comedy. WHICH IS THE MAN? a
Comedy. ALBINA, a Tragedy. Who Is THE DUPE? a Farce. THE MAID OF ARRAGON, a
Poem.
In the Press, and speedily will be published* MRS. COWLEY's last New COMEDY,
called, MORE WAYS THAN ONE.


