THE Freeholders Plea AGAINST STOCK-JOBBING ELECTIONS OF Parliament Men.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1701.

THE Freeholders Plea AGAINST STOCK-JOBBING Elections of PARLIAMENT Men.
OF all the Nations in the World, we may say, without Detracting from the
Character of our Native Country, that England has, for some Ages past, been the
most Distracted with Divisions and Parties among themselves.

Union, and Charity, the one relating to our Civil, the other to Religious
Concerns, are Stangers in the Land; and whether we speak of difference in
Opinions, or differences in Interest, we must own that we are the most Divided,
Quarrelsome Nation under the Sun.

Poland is the only Nation of Europe which can pretend to Match us in this
Ill-natured Quality, and yet all things examined Poland cannot come near us.

'Twas a true Character given of us, by the Wisest Princess that ever Governed
us, Queen Elizabeth, that the English were harder to be Governed in time of
Peace than War.

What Experience our present Governors have had of this Old Maxim in the short
Peace we have had, we leave to every Man's Observation.

Not to enter into the History of the Divisions, and Civil Disturbances in the
Nations Peace, which is too fresh in our Memories; and cannot be reviewed
without sensible Regret by any Man, who Loves his Country, or has the least
regard to its Prosperity or Reputation.

Yet we cannot but express our sense of the Increase, and more than ordinary
progress of this wrangling Temper, on the present Affairs of the Public; and
with what Fatal success it Invades us in the most Minute, and most tender
Parts; with what subtilty it spreads its contagious Qualities into the Vitals
of the State, and from thence descends into the less Noble Parts, the Trade of
the Nation.

Religion and the State have felt the plague of Contention, eating out the very
Entrails of the Nation, and with a sort of alternate Motion, have equally come
under its Malignant Effects, for almost Four entire Centuries of Years, and as
if it was not enough to hurt us in those two Essentials of our Peace, behold
the Plague is broke out in our Trade, which is the third, and next the other
two, the Supreme Article of the Kingdoms Prosperity.

Wherefore we the Yeomandry, and poor Freeholders of England, having, God
knows, no Hand in the Differences, though we have a deep share in the Damages, do
take the freedom to make our just Remarks upon the Causes, which, as we
apprehend, have conduced too much to the present unhappy Divisions of the
Nation; and which, if some care be not taken to prevent it, may complete the
Ruin of us all.

The Wisdom of late Parliaments have Established two great Rivals in Trade, the
Old, and the New East India Companies.

We do not pretend to Arraign the Justice of those Wonderful and Unintelligible
Assemblies, if they were in being, we dare not, and, since they are not in
being, it is not very Honorable, you will say, to speak ill of the Dead.

But thus far, we hope, without offense, we may be allowed to give our Opinions
in this particular Affair, that though separately and distinctly, every part of
the proceedings of those Parliaments, might be literally and positively Just,
and Right, we mean as to the East India Companies.

Yet when they are Conjunctively, and in the General put together, and
reflected on, they seem to be clouded both as to the public Interest; and as
to the Honor of the proceedings, with dark Enigma's of State, and Inexplicable
Paradoxes, too hard for us to understand, such as these.

1. That during the Being of one Company, and before the Extent of their
Charter, and Privileges were Expired, we mean the 3 years allowed them for
bringing Home their Effects, there should be Erected a New Company, with power
of immediate Trade.

Had the New Company not commenced their Trade, till the time of the Old was
expired, or near it, there might have been a Succession of Companies, not two
Rival Companies in Being together.

2. That the manner of the Trading by the New Company should be so Ordered, as
that the Old Company by Subscribing should enable themselves to Trade
separately, as a Company still; and that with so Capital a Stock, as always to
share the Trade with the New Company; and so at the same time two contraries be
upheld by the same Authority.

Had the New Company been so Established, that at the Expiration of the Old, it
should have had a Commanding Superiority, by which no other Men could have
Traded, but under them, by Permission at the same time, leaving all Men at
liberty to come in and Trade with them, there had been then no Rivals in the
Trade, which will, no question, as they now stand, soon reduce the Trade to
very low Terms.

3. That after this New Company was Established, and the Money paid in, to the
Use of the Government, which some say was the thing which first moved the
Conception of a New Company, and which, if the Old Company would have procured,
they had never been Broke nor the New one Born. That after this New Company was
Erected, the Stock advanced, and the Money to the Government paid they should
prohibit by Act of Parliament Two Thirds of their Trade, and so Starve the
Child they had Begotten.

If the Trade was ruinous to the English Manufactures, and the Interest of the
Nation it should have been foreseen, before Gentlemen had paid their Money, or
else it should not have been Examined afterward.

4. That after all this they should grant a New Charter to the Old Company, by
Virtue of which they have both Power and Time to Trade, to the prejudice of the
New, even to their Hearts Content.

We say nothing of those particulars but thus, that really we do not understand
the consistency of them with themselves, they stand to us as Arcana's of
Policy, too high to be meddled with.

Nor should we trouble our Heads about them, but leave both Companies to
confound one another, as we believe they will; but that we find so great a part
of the Nation concerned in their Quarrel, as gives us cause to Observe, that
the Issue of them seems to threaten the Nation with something Fatal.

For the Power of these two Rivals is so great, and their Interest in the
Kingdom so popular and High, that Matters of higher Moment than Trade seem to
depend upon them, while all the proceedings of their Members, both in the City,
and in the late Parliament, in both which their Parties have been numerous,
are, and have been guided according to their Interest in their respective
Companies.

The Grand Work which the whole Nation is now Intent upon, is choosing their
Representatives in Parliament, Choosing Men to Meet, and advise with the King
about the most Important Affairs of the Kingdom.

And while all Men ought to be fixing their Eyes upon such Men as are best
Qualified to Sit in that Place of Honor, and to Examine who are fittest to be
Entrusted with the Religion and Peace of England, and perhaps of all Europe.

Here we are plagued with the Impertinence of two East India Companies, as if
the Interest of either Company were to be Named in the Day with the Protestant
Religion and the public Peace, or as if they, who are fit to be
Representatives of the People in the great Matters of Peace and War, Leagues,
and Alliances of Neighbors, Succession of Crowns, and Protection of the
Protestant Religion, should not be capable of deciding the petty Controversy in
Trade between two Rivial Companies.

The Grand Question asked now, when your Vote is required for a Parliament Man,
is not as it ought to be, Is he a Man of Sense, of Religion, of Honesty and
Estate?

But, What Company is he for, the New, or the Old?

If Mr. A. M. set up as a Candidate in a Neighboring Borough, Who set him up?
It Is known he is no Inhabitant there, nor ever was, has no Freehold, or
Copyhold, or Lease-hold Estate there, nor is not known there, and of himself
possibly was not acquainted with 20 People there.

But enquire what Company he is for; and then see if all the rest of that
Company were not found running over the Water, to make their Interest with
their Friends for his Election.

And the Time would fail us, and the Paper too, to give you a List of the
Shopkeepers, Merchants, and Pedlers, and the Stock-Jobbers, who, with their
Hired Liveries, in Coaches, and Six Horses, who, God knows, never had Coach or
Livery of their own, are come down into the Countries, being detached from
London, by either Company to get themselves chosen Parliament Men, by those
Boroughs, who are easy to be Imposed upon, and who, like well-meaning Men,
that know nothing of the Matter, Choose them upon the Recommendation of the
Pountry Gentlemen that have Interest in the Towns, which Country Gentlemen are
prevailed upon to quit their own pretensions, to advance theirs; but by what
Arguments we cannot pretend to Determine.

We have formerly been told that spending Money upon the Inhabitants of Towns,
was a pernicious practice; and no doubt it was, and an Act of Parliament has
been wisely made to prevent it.

What any Man could propose to himself by spending 2000 (nay, 11000 pound was
spent at the Town of Winchelsea) to be chosen to Sit in a House, where there is
not one Farthing to be gotten honestly, was a Mystery every one did not
understand.

But here is a New way of getting Money: For if a Country Gentleman has so much
Interest in a Town, that he can be chosen a Member of Parliament, if he will
decline it, here is a sort of Folks they call Stock-Jobbers, help him to a 1000
G^s for his Interest.

This is Parliament-Jobbing, and a New Trade, which as we thought it the Duty
of English Freeholders thus to Expose, we hope an English Parliament will
think it their Duty to prevent.

For as this Stock-Jobbing in its own Nature, is only a new Invented sort of
Deceptio Visus, a Legerde-main in Trade; so mixed with Trick and Cheat, that
it would puzzle a good Logician to make it out by Syllogism: So nothing can be
more Fatal in England to our present Constitution; and which in time may be so
to our Liberty and Religion, than to have the Interests of Elections Jobb'd
upon Exchange for Money, and Transferred like East India Stock, to those who bid
most.

By this Method, the Country Gentlemen may sit at Home; and only Corresponding
with the Brokers at Jonathan's and Garraway's, as the Prizes Rise or Fall, they
may dispose of their Interests in the Towns they can Govern, at as good a rate
as they can.

The Citizens, or such who have their several Companies and Interest to Serve,
will Ease themselves of the Expense of Traveling, with the fine borrowed
Equipages before mentioned; and only go to Market in Exchange Alley, and Buy an
Election, as the Stock-Jobber and they shall agree, which Election shall be
managed by the Country Gentleman, who is to have his Bargain, no Purchase, no
Pay, and is to go through with it, or else he gets none of the Money.

Elections of Parliament Men are in a hopeful way; and Parliaments themselves,
are in a hopeful way by this concise Method of Practice, to come unde the
absolute Management of a few Hands, and no doubt things will go on accordingly.

Banks and Stocks may be laid up, and employed in a short time, for the
purchasing the Interest of Gentlemen, and our Gentry being willing to get a
Penny in an Honest way, as we say, will but too often sell their Interests and
their Country too, especially such Gentlemen, whose Estates are reduced to an
occasion for it.

The truth of it is, it is a Paradox, a Riddle, that we Countrymen cannot
understand, nor never could, what makes our Gentlemen so fond of being
Parliament Men, we do not very well understand what the Business is at the
Parliament. Only we find we are swingingly Taxed; and they tell us it is done by
the Parliament; but we never understood they had any of the Money themselves, we
always thought the Money was for the King, though they had the Giving of it, then
we see in the King's Proclamation for Calling a Parliament, that it was to
Advise with them, about Affairs of the Highest Importance to the Kingdom. Now
we cannot see they can get any thing by coming together to be Advised with, and
our Knights of the Shire tell us they get nothing by it. And here lies the
Difficulty, we can never reconcile their spending so much Money to be Chosen,
going up 200 Miles to London, and spending six Months sometimes there in
attending the House, and all for nothing; we have often been thinking there
must be something else in the case, and we are afraid there is.

Nor did ever any thing explain this Riddle so much, as the struggling of these
two Companies to make Members of Parliament; for the meaning to us seems thus:

That they suppose which Company so ever gets most Friends in the House, will
be most likely to be farther Established, to the Ruin of the other, and
therefore they make such a stir to get Friends there.

Whence first it must be supposed that the Matter shall not stand or fall by
true Merit, and that Company be suppressed that deserves it; for if so, it might
be probable they would both be suppressed; for we apprehend they are both
destructive to our English Trade in general and Manufactures in particular.

But 2. It must be supposed that Friendship, and Number of Voices only will
decide the Controversy.

And in order to this the Stock-Jobbers, who care not a Farthing which Side
gets the better, but makes a Prey of them both, have set up this new Trade of
Jobbing for Elections: And that the way of their proceeding may be a little
plainer understood, We desire you to read the Copy of a Letter come down last
Post, to a worthy Gentleman in our Country, from a Friend of his plying in or
near Exchange-Ally, concerning this Matter.

SIR,
THE Elections for a New Parliament being began almost ever where, I doubt not
but the Time is fixed at your Town of (...) I know you have the Absolute Power
of the Inhabitants there, and can put in whom you please; and finding by your
last you purpose to Decline it you Self, I am to inform you, that a very honest
Gentleman of my Acquaintance, being an Eminent Merchant here, would think
himself very much Obliged, if you would Use your Interest in his behalf, upon
your Grant whereof I have an Order to Preent you with a Thousand Guinea's to
buy my Lady Pins.

He is ready to come down at your first Summons, in a very good Equipage; Pray
dispatch your Mind per the Bearer, to

Your humble Servant,
To the Honorable Sir A, B, C, D, Bar. Postscript.

IF Sir E, F, G, H, will dispose of his Interest in the Town of (...) I can
help him to very good Terms.




Now though the worthy Gentleman to whom this Proposal was made, rejected it with
Disdain, yet the Attempt is made very plain in the case.

And we are informed, that the Number of Members come down into the Counties,
on such accounts, are incredible.

Wherefore we think it very needful to publish our Resentments at such a
practice, and to protest against it in this our Honest Plea, as an indirect,
wicked and pernicious Practice, and which may be of very ill consequence to the
Nation, on these following Accounts,

1. A hundred, or an hundred and fifty such Members in the House, would make a
Dead Weight, as it used to be called, to carry any Vote they are For, or
Against, either in the Negative or Affirmative, as they shall agree, and if so,
it will be almost in their Power to dispose of our Estates, Persons, Liberties
and Religion, as they think fit.

2. If it be true, as is very rational to suppose, that they who will Buy will
Sell; or if it be true, which seems still more rational, that they who have
Bought must Sell, must make a Penny of it, or else they lose their Purchase,
and some their Fortunes, which they expected to raise by these mercenary
Elections; then the Influence such a Number of Members, gotten into the House
by the method We are speaking of, will be capable of selling our Trade, our
Religion, our Peace, our Effects, our King, our Crown, and every thing that is
Valluable, or Dear to the Nation.

If Stock-jobbing of Elections be the first step, in all probability
Stock-jobbing of Votes will be be the second; for he that will give a Thousand
pounds, or more, only for a power to Vote, expects to get something by Voting,
or gives away his Money for nothing.

What shall we say then, if a League of Confederacy should be made between our
Parliament-Sollicitors, and our Stock-jobbing-brokers, two sort of People
equally mercenary and deceitful.

We desire to know, whether 'twould not be more fatal to England than the Union
of France and Spain, which all Europe seems to be so much disturbed at.

In vain do We the Freeholders of England strive to Choose Men of all the Six
Characters, mentioned by a late Author, in order to have a Parliament every way
Quallified for the Important Affairs, his Majesty has mentioned in his
Proclamation.

In vain shall those Gentlemen We chose sit, and Vote in the House, if such a
Generation as We hear of are let into the House, by the help of their Money at
the Boroughs and Towns, for the Citizens and Burgesses outrun the Knigths in
Number above Three for One.

We think it is no small Misfortune to the English Constitution, that so great a
Number of Members Chosen by the Corporations of England, and, according to our
weak Opinions, it seems not equal, That all the Freeholders of a County should
be represented only by two Men, and the Towns in the same County be represented
by above Forty, as it is in Cornwall, and near the like in other Counties.

Again in some of these Corporations, where the right of Voting is in the Mayor
and Jurats; in some the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council; in others the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Capital Burgesses; in others the Bailiff and Jurats, and
the like, the right of Voting is reduced to so few, and those so Mean and
Mercenary, that they are easily prevailed with, to choose such as they know not,
but are recommended by others.

And, which is worse, some Towns whose Charters remain, though the Towns
themselves seem to be Dead, are so mean and contemptible, that nothing remains
of them but a Despicable Village, with the Ruins of what they have been.

We think it would be but reasonable, that the Charters and Privileges of
Towns, should die with the Towns; and that whereas when they were Popolous and
Rich, they were Represented in Parliament, because they were so; when they are
Depopulated and Desolate, there can be no need of any Person to represent them,
what can the Members, who have served for the Town of Winchelsea answer, if
they were asked, who they Represent, they must Answer they Represent the Ruins
and Vaults, the remain of a good Old Town, now lying in Heaps; as for the
Inhabitants, they are not to be Named among the List of the most despicable
Endships, or Village in the County.

Branber in Sussex, Old Sarum, Stockbridge, Gatton, Quinburro, and multitudes
of Towns the like, who send up Gentlemen to represent Beggars, and have had
more Money spent at some of their Elections, than all the Land in the Parishes
would be worth, if Sold at a Hundred Years Purchase.

While on the other Hand, a great many good Towns in England, being of more
modern Rise in the World, are not permitted to choose at all, and the City of
London it self, though some say it bears a proportion to Six parts of the
Kingdom, sends but Four Members of it self; and but Eight in the whole
Circumference.

This Inequality, we humbly conceive opens the Door to the fraudulent
practices, which have all along been made use of in Elections, Buying of
Voices, giving Freedoms in Corporations, to People Living out of Corporations,
on purpose to make Votes, debauching the Electors, making whole Towns Drunk,
and Feasting them to Excess for a Month, sometimes two, or more, in order to
engage their Voices.

These things were so Notorious, and withal so Ruinous to the Gentry
themselves, of whom several Men of plentiful Estates have been miserably
Beggared and undone, that the Parliament wisely took notice of it, and have
prohibited the practice.

But as if the Devil owed the Nation a Grudge, and was rummaging his Invention
to find it out; here is a new project found out, to succeed the other, which is
Ten Fold more the Child of Hell than that.

Elections were obtained by those Clandestine Vicious ways, only to sit in the
House in General; but here the design seems to be formed beforehand, what they
would be chosen for, and the measures concerted, nay we have heard that it may
be known already, and Wagers have been laid in, or near Exchange Alley, which
Company has most Friends in the ensuing Parliament, and how many of the Members
of each Company stand fairest to be chosen.

Those Gentlemen who have Intelligence, suitable to such nice Calculations, are
equally capable of Jobbing the whole Nation; and as is already noted, having
gotten the way of Buying and Selling, that is jobbing Elections, will soon
influence such Persons to Act, as the Money they are able to bid shall direct.

'Twou'd be but a melancholy Thought, to reflect that the matter of our
Succession, should come to be debated before a Parliament, that had a Governing
number of such Members, who could imagine but that the settlement of our Crown
would attend the highest bidder, and our future Liberty, Religion, and all
that is dear to us, be Mortgaged to the Bribes of Foreigners.

The French King need not keep great Armies on Foot, Build Ships, and
Strengthen himself at Sea to Ruin us, if the great Affairs of the Kingdom
concerted in Parliament should come to be prepared, managed, and biased at
Garraway's and Jonathan's Coffee-house, and exposed to Sale by a parcel of
Stock-Jobbers.

And how shall it be otherwise, they that can make Members, will always Govern
Members; Creation supposes a Right of disposing, the Gentlemen who Buy are
Obliged to stand in good Terms with the Broker, least they should find a better
Chapman, and leave him in the lurch the next Election, so that by the Nature of
the thing, they are always subject to this Mercenary, Scandalous thing, called
a Broker, and he keeps them under his Girdle, if he bids them Vote for, or
against, they do it, the mischiefs are endless and innumerable that may at tend
it.

To all Men whose Eyes are to be opened with Reason and Argument, it should be
enough to fill them with abhorrence, to think that the Scandalous Mechanic
Upstart Mystery of Job-brokeing should grow upon the Nation; that ever the
English Nation should suffer themselves to be Imposed upon by the New invented
ways of a few Needy Mercinaries, who can turn all Trade into a Lottery, and
make the Exchange a Gaming Table: A thing, which like the Imaginary Coins of
Foreign Nations, have no reality in themselves; but are placed as things which
stand to be Calculated, and Reduced into Value, a Trade made up of Sharp and
Trick, and managed with Impudence and Banter.

That Six or Eight Men shall Combine together, and by pretended Buying or
Selling among themselves, raise or sink the Stock of the E. India Company, to
what extravagant pitch of Price they will, so to wheedle others sometimes to
Buy, sometimes to Sell, as their occasions require; and with so little regard
to Intrinsic Value, or the circumstances of the Company, that when the Company
has a loss, Stock shall Rise; when a great Sale, or a Rich Ship arrived, it
shall Fall: Sometimes run the Stock down to 35 l. other times up to a 150 l.
and by this Method Buy and Sell so much, that it is thought there are few of the
Noted Stock-jobbers, but what have bought and sold more Stock than both the
Companies possess.

Thus let them Jobb, Trick, and Cheat one another; and let them be bubbl'd by
them that know no better; but for God's sake, Gentlemen, do not let the
Important Affairs of the State come under their wicked clutches.

Don't let them prepare our Acts of Parliament, and then Choose Members to Vote
for them. If Fate and Popish Confederacies, and Union of Popish Powers abroad
threaten us: Let us alone to struggle with them, and have Fair Law, and
Honorable Conditions for it; but to be Bought and Sold, to have our Elections
of Members, and our Laws, Liberties and Estates Stock-jobb'd away, is
intolerable.

Some, and not a few, of our Stock-jobbing Brokers, are French Men, a little
Correspondence between the French Court, and Jonathan's Coffee-house, with a
Currency of Louis D'ors, will make strange alterations here, if this method of
Buying and Jobbing Elections should go on.

The Parliament of England, is the Governing Council; their Breath is our Law,
and on their Breath under the Direction of God's Providence, we all depend, the
greatest Nicety that is possible should be used in choosing Men of untainted
Principles, and unquestioned Wisdom, to compose a Body so Eminent in their
Power and Influence.

But to attempt to fill the House with Mechanics, Tradesmen, Stock-jobbers,
and Men neither of Sense nor Honesty, is tricking at the Root, and undermining
the Nation's Felicity at once; and it is a wonder the impudence of this attempt
has not made them Stink in the Nostrils of the whole Nation.

How can the King be encouraged to place that confidence in his People, which
he mentions in the late Proclamation, by which People, his Majesty understands,
the true Representative Body Assembled in Parliament, if instead of a true
Representative, the House is filled with Elections Clandestinly procured by
Tricks and Shams imposed upon the People.

How can the King depend upon his Parliament, to carry him through any thing he
shall undertake by their advice, if mercenary Men fill the House, whose
Suffrages shall be guided by the Bribes and private procurations of his, and
the Nations Enemies?

How shall the Protestant Religion be Espoused, and Defended, which wise Men
say is in great Danger?

How shall Trade be Encouraged, and Protected, and the Niceties of it Dsputed
and Defended?

How shall Reformation of Manners, which is so much wanted, and which the King
has so often Recommended, be promoted?

Are Stock-jobbers, Agents of Regiments, Tailors, and East India Companies,
Qualified for these Works; or will any sort of Men, who Purchase Elections with
Money, to bring to pass private Interests and Parties, Espouse these General
Cases on which the Welfare of the Nation depends.

Tell a Stock-jobber of the Union of France and Spain; of the Muscovites
breaking the Peace; of the Difference between the Danes, and the Duke of
Holstein, Tell him of a good Barrier in Flanders against the French, or of
Assisting the Emperor on the Rhine, (talk Gospel to a Kettle Drum) it is all
Excentrick and Foreign to him: But talk of the Great Mogul, and the Pirates of
Madagascar; of Fort St. George, and St. Helena, there you will hit him, and he
turns Statesman presently.

It was a Famous Stock-Jobber; and one who is very likely to be a Parliament
Man, who when some body was talking lately of the Election of the New Pope; and
having heard the particulars very attentively, brought out this very grave
Question at the end ont. Well! says he, I am glad it is over, and don't you
think that Stock will rise upon it.

A Learned Question upon the Case, truly; upon which, pray give us leave to ask
another; (...) And is it not pity, (...) But such a one should Represent the
City?

You Londoners may make them Sheriffs, Aldermen, and Deputies, and
Common Counsel Men, and welcome; you know them, and they can hurt no body but
themselves.

But when you come to talk of Parliament Men, Gentlemen, pray consider, it is
the whole Nation lies at Stake, a Man may set his own House on Fire, and
welcome, provided it stands by it self, and neither hurts nor endangers no
bodies else, and the Law has nothing to say to him; but if it stands in a Town,
or a City, he deserves to be Hanged, for he may burn out, and undo his
Neighbors.

Nor are you choosing Men to sit in Parliament, as Persons to Act for you only
whom they Represent; but they are Representatives in a double capacity,
separately considered, every Member Represents the People who choose him, and
all together Represent the whole Nation. Their right to sit is separately
Devolved; but their right in Act, is conjunctively Inherent, every Man
Represents the whole, and Acts for the whole, though he is sent but from part.

The Fate of Bristol, or New Castle, may be decided by a Member of London, or
Canterbury, whose Vote on an equality of Voices carries it which way he pleases.

Therefore London cannot say to Bristol, or New Castle, What have you to do
with our Election? or they to London, What have you to do with ours; why one
bad Member may ruin a City, a Town, or Family, a Person, or perhaps all
together; and if any Town, or City, or Borough, or private Person, is pleased
to give a Friendly Admonition or Caution to another, especially if they seem to
be proceeding against their own, or the Nation's Interest, they ought to accept
the Hint, and reflect upon what they are doing with Honesty, and reform it.

Upon this, we hope it shall be justified, that we have ventured to lay open
the Villainous practices of some People to corrupt and procure Elections, in
order to get Members into the ensuing Parliament, who shall serve a Turn, and a
Party, without considering whether they are Men qualified for the other great
Affairs, which are to be considered there, and which His Majesty has assured
us, are of the highest Importance to the Kingdom.

FINIS.

