A CURIOUS Little Oration, Delivered by Father ANDREW, Concerning the Present
Great QUARRELS That divide the Clergy of France.

The Second EDITION. Translated from the Fourth EDITION of the French, by Dan.
De F^e.

LONDON, Printed: And sold by J. Roberts in Warwick Lane; and A. Dodd, at the
Peacock without Temple Bar; and M. Baldwin, in Stories-Passage, St. James's-
Park, MDCCXVII. [Price Three Pence.]

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
IT IS not so much the Itch of being thought an Author, nor of following, the
Method of those Writers, whether Originals, or Translators, (especially the
last) who think Prefacing so necessary; that, rather than forego their Opinion,
they will spoil a good Work for the sake of a Half-Sheet of their own
Scribbling, that induces me to attempt one in this Place: If I had had no
particular Advantage in so doing, I must, without Flattery, inform you, that I
had waved the Trouble: But since 'twas necessary, pray take it and make the
best on it. And now all I have to say, is to make these Pages have a good Run;
which I cannot pretend to do, by any Elogy on 'em; but refer you to the
Perusal. It has indeed Two of the Best Recommendations Book can have, at this
Time; It is like our Fashions, FRENCH. (And as the Gallican Mode, though never so
ridiculously adjusted upon an English Person, meets not only with Reception,
but Encouragement, I Am in great Hopes the very Place of this Pamphlet's Birth,
will hide the Blunders of the Version.) And then it is against the JESUITS. If
with these Two Qualities it should not meet Acceptance, I shall be apt to
think Diogenes, who would be buried with his Face downwards, that when the
World turned upsidedown, (which in his Days he expected) he might lie right in
his Grave, has now got his Wish; and, by the Ill-vent of this Commodity, judge,
that all the BEAUX, GOOD PROTESTANTS, and WELLMEANING PAPISTS, (if any such
there be) are lost in the Hurricane.

A CURIOUS Little Oration, Delivered by Little Father ANDREW, etc.
IT was one Lent, and about the Time that Monsieur Arnaud, had his Famous
Disputes with the JESUITS; I mean, when JANSENISM was at the greatest height
(a Fantome which the jealous Cunning of those good Fathers knew how to improve
to the Detriment and Prosecution of many better Christians) that Little Father
ANDREW, so famous for his Witty Jokes, preached at Alby.

ACCORDING to the Custom, this LITTLE Good Man, on the Samaritan's Day, did not
fail to make a Discourse on Grace, and what was more, upon Efficacious Grace by
it self: And solidly proved from St. Augustin's Principles, That no one ever
resisted that Grace; not but that Men can, but will not; for its Attribute is
just to inspire what we will not oppugn. He added, That sufficient Grace was a
New System, broached by the JESUIT. Molina, to reconcile the pretended
Contradictions of its Omnipotent Power with Freewill. In short, he asserted
Jansenism to the last Degree.

THOSE of the Society who were present at this Sermon, being nettled to hear
Molina's Reverend School used at this Rate, took it (as you may well suppose)
in great Dudgeon, and resolved to load the Poor Preacher with the heavy Weight
of their Holy and Implacable Fury. They extracted several Tenets, which, in
their Opinion, contained the most poisonous Venom of Heresy, packed away to the
Archbishop of Alby; and, giving the Contents into his Hand, Is it not an Errant
Shame, (say they, with a Zeal animated not for the Glory of God, but of the
Society) Is it not a Shame, my Lord, That this Little Whisk of a Monk shall
come hither to preach JANSENISM Tooth and Nail; whilst the Pope, Bishops,
Kings, Magistrates, and, indeed, all Powers, as well Ecclesiastic as Secular,
are endeavoring to root this Cockle out of the Field of the CHURCH.

THE Archbishop, who knew by Experience how necessary their Good Will was, at
that Time, to the making of a Man's Fortune; and, on the contrary, the Danger
as well as Inconveniency of being hated by them; the Archbishop, I say, came
into their Resentments, and promised them condign and speedy Satisfaction. He
cited Little Father ANDREW, and sharply rebuked him, for having preached up
Heresy, not without terrible Threats, of inflicting on him the Punishments
ordained in such Cases by the Canons of the Church.

THE Little Priest, who was too well acquainted with the JESUITS not to know
that they were not to be offended with Impunity; and that whoever offered to
contradict their Notions, was at least a Heretic, gave a shrewd Guess at what
was coming; and therefore was not mightily dismayed at the Bishop's thundering
Reprimand; but, with a becoming Presence of Mind, made this Answer; God
preserve me, my Lord, from Preaching Heresy I can assure you I never had the
least Intention to deviate from the Sentiments of the Catholic Church; some
unguarded Expressions may perhaps, in the Heat of Discourse, have fallenn from
me; which, having met with an Evil Construction, have given Room for the
Accusation now intended against me. Therefore, be pleased, my Lord, to let me
know what Heretical Propositions I am charged with advancing, that I may
confront them with my SERMON, which contains no such Matters; and if I have
said any Thing that is not Orthodox, I will retract it next Sunday; and, by my
Recantation, undeceive those whom I have scandalized by my Imprudence.

THE Archbishop, satisfied with this Submission of the Little FATHER, delivered
to him the Paper which contained such of his Propositions as were condemned by
the JESUITS; and gave those Cunningham's (as A French Burlesque Author.
Guy Patin calls them) an Account of what had passed; who for once were out in
their Politics, and sung Io Paean before the Victory; loudly publishing,
through the Town, the intended Recantation of Little Father ANDREW. They cloyed
themselves beforehand, with the mighty Pleasure they were to receive, from the
great Shame which they pretended he would be obliged, at that Time, to undergo.

HEAVEN knows there was no want of them at Sunday's Sermon; and they had taken
special Care to invite all their Partisans, and to place themselves over
against the Preacher, that they might more fully rejoice at his Confusion. They
that knew the LITTLE Father better, did not doubt of finding this Sermon
curiously intermixed with Scenes of Mirth: So that with those who were of the
Jesuitical Faction, and those who came to the unravelling of the LITTLE
Gentleman's late Discourse, there was a very numerous Audience.

FATHER ANDREW got into the Pulpit and after having crossed himself, said,
Sirs* before I take my Text, give me Leave to recount to you a Vision I had the
other Night* You may now, perhaps, think me a superstitiou^ Coxcomb, for coming
hither to tell you my Dreams* yet when I let you know, that I hope I am in the
Number of those Servants to whom our Lord is pleased to manifest his Will in a
misteriou^ Manner: As I think my Vision Instructive; and besides, that it will
not be tiresome to you, I can boldly beg your Attention to what follows.

THIS Exordium attracted anew the Ears of all. Sirs, continues this Little
Father, The (...) Night I dreamt that I was carried before the Tribunal of
Jesus Christ, to be Judged. T^ink with your selves what a Terror invaded me, an
unpenitent and unprepared Sinner. I was horribly frightened, and my Fears
increased when the Son of God thus accosted me: Come near, (...) Andrew, that I
may judge you. Seized at once with Fear and Respect, I threw my (...) at his
Feet: Hark'ye, says our Lord to me, with an irritated Aspect, Was it not to
lead My Flock of Alby into saving Pastures, that I gave you to that Fold; and
yet, instead of nourishing them with sound Doctrines, you are accused of
preaching Heresy. My God, says I, I preach Heresy: You who search the Reins and
Heart, know perfectly I had no such intention; and if by Ignorance or Weakness
I have had the Misfortune to advance any Doctrines that are inconsistent with
Thy Holy Verities, I am here ready to suffer whatever Punishment Your Divine
Majesty shall please to inflict on me. Have not you, returned our Savior,
preached up such and such Tenets? (And then Father Andrew cited the very
Passages condemned by the Jesuits.) My Dear Redeemer, continued I, I confess I
have, but hitherto, I thought they were not in the least Heretical; for I took
them from a very Great Master. What Mighty Master is this, says our Savior?
It Is St. Thomas of Aquin, that Angel of the School, which You, of late Ages,
have raised, to be the Pillar of Truth, and Scourge of Heresy: And it is so
evident that this Great Doctor has taught what they condemn as Hetorodox in me;
that my Quotationi^s Word for Word; his Sentiments -- (And then the LITTLE
PRIEST made a Repetition of what St. Thomas had written on that Subject; Man is
converted by his Free Will; but His Free Will can never effect his Conversion,
if God Himself works it not in him, according to the Words of the Prophet
Jeremy; Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted; because Thou art my God.
S. Th. 1. 2. Q. 9. 109. Art. 6. ad 1.

Although Man has Grace, he cannot of himself do Good, and avoid Evil, without a
new Aid and Incitement from God, which must lead him to, and ^^rengthen him in
the Performance of Good Deeds. ^id Art. 9.


which Passages were exactly consonant to those the Jesuits had declared
Damnable.

HO! HO! says our Lord, Let him come before me. Appear Thomas! Is it possible
that you who have been so highly honored by Me; that you of whom I have
rendered so glorious a Testimony, as that you have well written of Me: Is it
possible that you could, notwithstanding all these Favors, pretend to teach,
that My will must infallibly and necessarily be accomplished when I am pleased
that Man shall consent to My Grace; not from an Absolute Necessity, but from an
Infallible Necessity, which nevertheless does not obstruct Free Will? Yes, my
Dear Savior, replied Saint Thomas, I did teach this Doctrine; I assert it: And
I took it from St. Bernard, that Devout and Famous Doctor, who is accounted the
Last of the Fathers of Thy Holy Church: It Is he that has taught such and such
Doctrines, in such and such Places of his Writings. (And then Father ANDREW
recited all the Passages in St. Bernard, What! Can you believe your selves to
be the Principals (or Authors) of your own Merits* And that you have Power to
insure your Salvation simply by your own Good Deeds? You that cannot so much as
pronounce the Sacred Name of Jesus, with out the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost!
Presumptuou^ Men! Have you forgot his Words who says, With out Me you can do
nothing? You will answer, W^ good then does Free Will? And I in few return,
(...) saved by Grace: Thus, Take away Free Will, there^ nothing left to save a
Man; take away Grace, Free-W^ loses the only Means it had to save. St. Bern. de
Grace and Lib. Arbit. Cap. 1. When a Man is fallen into Sin by his own prope^
Will, he cannot by the same Will retrieve himself* God having been pleased to
put it in Adam's Power to stand fast without falling; but not having give^ him
Power to recover himself after his Fall: And (...) this any great Wonder? For
as a Man ever falls easily down a Precipice, from the Hurt of which Fall he
cannot so easily recover himself: So, when he ha^ precipitated himself into a
Profundity of Sin, he has no Power to go back; not being able to forbear
Sinning, though his Desire may be clean conttary. Ibid. Chap. 7.
concerning Efficacious Grace* What means all this, says Jesus Christ? Is sweet
St. Bernard a Jansenist then? Call him. What, Bernard, with your meek and
sanctified Air; would one think you capable of asserting that My Grace has an
absolute Power over Free Will; and yet that this same Grace does not hinder the
Free Will; and that every Man acts infallibly as well as freely, when I please
to attract him to Me by the Sweetness of My efficacious Inspirations? Can it be
true that you have taught all this? Yes, (my Savior) says St. Bernard, I Will
stand to it; but St. Augustine is my Guarantee; and I ought to refer to him;
because Your Church not only approves what he has written concerning Grace; but
has, in a Manner, canonized his Opinion of it, in making use of that Doctor's
Sayings only, to exemplify its Sentiments on that Matter. (And then the Little
Man set himself to work to give the Audience diverse Texts in St. Augustine The
Holy Spirit so far inspires Men's Will upon Earth, that they do Good, because
they will it; and they will that Good, because God works them a Will thereto.
St. Aug. de Cor. and de Gr^ Chap. 12. N. 38. When God will save, no Man's
Free Will (...) resist this Salvation. Ibid. Chap. 21.
that proved the invincible Efficacy and Omnipotence of Grace.

HAS Augustine, says our Lord, who ha^ shared so abundantly of my Love, and who
is so indispensably bound to acknowledge the Effects of it, taught all this? I
must find out his Master. Augustine, who taught you that My Grace has an
absolute Influence over Man's Will; and disposes of it entirely by the
Sovereignty it has over it, equally with the rest of the Creatures under My
Canopy. Who was your Preceptor? St. Paul, my Savior. Is it St. Paul My
Apostle? Yes, 't^ Your Apostle St. Paul, and It is God which works in you
both (...) Will and to Do, of His good Pleasure. Phil^ Chap. xiii. 2.
he teaches that You promote in us whatever You think fit; and that it is You who
form in us (...) Will and the Action. What means all this, says our Redeemer?
Then there are none but Jansenists in Heaven? Call St. Paul to Me, and let him
answer this; I must find out the Root of this Circumstance. Come, Mr. St. Paul,
tell us plainly, Have you taught the Doctrine you are accused of, concerning
Efficacious Grace working by it self? Who taught you that My Divine Inspiration
must infallibly prevail, because Man's Will must consent freely? Who should
teach it me but Your Own Self, my God? Of whom should I learn it, but of the
Holy Ghost, who replenished my Heart? I set my Hand to Paper, and the Divine
Spirit dictated. And is not the Confirmation of these grand Truths palpable in
a thousand Places of Scripture No Man can come to Me, except the Father which
has sent Me draw him. John vi. 44. It is written in the Prophets, And they
shall be all taught of God. Every Man therefore that has Heard and has
learned of the Father, comes unto Me. Ibid. 65. No Man can come unto Me,
except it were give^ unto him of My Father. Ibid. 65. From that Time many of
His Disciples went bac^ and walked no more with Him. Ibid. 66. Abide in Me, and
I in you. As the Branch cannot bear the Fruit of it self, except it abide in
the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in Me. (...) am the Vine, ye are the
Branches: He that abidet^ in Me, and I in him, the same brings forth mucH
Fruit: For without Me you can do nothing. Ibid. Chap. xv. 4. 5.
? And have not You Your Self delivered them from Your Sacred Mouth* I have
indeed, says our Redeemer; I have taugh^ this Doctrine, and have left it to my
Church as a precious Inheritance.

BUT I know very well the Origin of (...) this. Call me hither Father Ignatius.
The Good Saint, who could hardly be found amon^ the Crowd, appeared at last.

(And now the Jesuits trembled with Indignation.) Come hither, Father
Ignatius, yo^ are a very Good Man, and Humble; I wou^^ not have you take it
ill: But I suppose yo^ you cannot have forgot, that when you were Five and
Thirty Years old, you were like a Boy of Five, among the young Students in the
College of St. Barbe, by the same Token that you were often Lashed for your
Childish Tricks. I have bestowed my Heaven on you: Nor do I reproach you now:
Seeing you are in it, you are welcome to it. But your Children are mere
Firebands, Proud Priests, who would impose on the Faithful their new-foisted
and erroneous Doctrines or the ancient and orthodox Belief of My Church. I
charge you to humble them: It Is a hard Task, I own; but I command you again to
go about it; and if you cannot accomplish it, I My Self will put a helping
Hand; and humble them to the Dust, that think themselves the only Lights of the
Church.

Sirs, This is my Dream; but since it is no more than a Dream, you may give what
Credit (...) please to it.

POSTSCRIPT.
THAT the Reader of the preceding Pages may see how that Holy, that Sanctified
Society is abused by those Varlet^ the Jansenists, take a Character of the
Founde^ of the Jesuitical Order, St. Ignatius.

In his Youth (being Nobly Born) he behaved himself like those of the present
Age, wh^ have the Opportunity and Means; we wi^ not talk of Whoring, Drinking,
etc. as being unworthy of such a Founder, but -- he liv^ some Time at Court;
and, as the Courtie^ commonly use to do, he brought a Nob^ to (...)

When he was reduced, God visited hi^ and then he turned Saint, and wrought
in^nite Miracles.

And always in his Performances had (...) particular Kindness for Women in
Labor* For Ignatius's Name would fright the Chi^ from the Woman as safely and
easily, (...) a Jesuit denying Absolution would fright^ poor Penitent, that
knows nothing of (...) Matter.

Much more of this Good Saint's Life (...) Conversation, you may read in that
Celebrat^ Book entitled, The Provincial Letter: Writ^^ by Monsieur Paschal.

FINIS.

