(...)
(...) Gucht Sculp.


AN ESSAY ON THE History and Reality OF APPARITIONS. BEING An Account of what
they are, and what they are not; whence they come, and whence they come not. AS
ALSO How we may distinguish between the Apparitions of Good and Evil Spirits,
and how we ought to Behave to them. WITH A great Variety of Surprising and
Diverting Examples, never Published before.

By Death transported to the Eternal Shore,
Souls so removed revisit us no more:
Engrossed with Joys of a Superior Kind,
They leave the trifling Thoughts of Life behind.
LONDON, Printed: And Sold by ^. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane. M DCC XXVII.

THE PREFACE.
A VERY short Preface may suffice to a Work of this Nature. Spectre and
Apparition make a great Noise in the World; and have (at least formerly) had a
great Influence among us.

Between our Ancestors laying too much stress upon them, and the present Age
endeavoring wholly to explode and despise them, the World seems hardly ever to
have come at a right Understanding about them.

Some despise them in such an extraordinary manner, that they pretend to wish
for nothing more than to be convinced by ^^^^nstration; as if nothing but
seeing the Devil could satisfy them there wa^ such a Person; and nothing is
more wonderful to me, in the whole System of Spirits, than that Satan does not
think fit to justify the Reality of his Being, by appearing to such in some of
his worst Figures, and tell them in full Grimace who he is, when I doubt not
but they would be as full of the Pannick as other People.

Again, some People are so horribly frighted at the very mention of an
Apparition, that they cannot go two Steps in the dark, or in the dusk of the
Evening, without looking behind them; and if they see but a Bat fly, they think
of the Devil, because of its Wings; and as for a Screech Owl, at its first
appearance, they make no scruple of running into the House in a Fright, and
affirming they have seen the Devil.

How to bring the World to a right Temper between these Extremes is a
Difficulty we cannot answer for; but if setting things in a true light, between
Imagination and solid Foundation, will assis^ toward it, we hope this Work may
have some Success.

Not that I expect to fortify my Readers, and establish their Minds against the
Fears of what they may see, so that they shall make an Apparition of the Devil
familiar to them; there is such a kind of Aversion in the Minds of Men to the
Angel of Light, that no body cares to see him in Imagination, much less to be
forced to see him whether they will or no.

But now on the other hand, if it is true that the Devil very rarely does
appear, that almost all real Apparitions are of friendly and assisting Angels,
and come of a kind and beneficent Errand to us, and that therefore we need not
be so terrified at them as we are; if it be true that when any evil Spirit does
appear, it is limited by a Superior Power, and can do us no harm without
special License; methinks this should take off the Terror from our Minds, and
cause us to arm our Souls with Resolution enough to meet the Devil, whatever
Shape he thinks fit to appear in: For I must tell you, Good People, as was said
in another Case, he that is not able to see the Devil in whatever Shape he is
pleased to appear in, is not really qualified to live in this World, no not in
the quality of a common Inhabitant.

But the Mistake lies chiefly here, that we either will allow no Apparition at
all, or will have every Apparition be the Devil; as if none of the Inhabitants
of the World above, were able to show themselves here, or had any Business
among us, but the Devil, who I am of the Opinion has really less Business here
than any of them all; nay, we have some reason to believe he has indeed no
Business here at all, but that of a roaring Lion, etc. and therefore if you
meet him, and had Courage for it, the properest Question you could ask him
would be, not, In the Name of GOD, what art thou? but, In the Name of GOD, what
Business have thou here? Bid him be gone to his Den, and tell him you will pray
to God to chain him up else: I dare say he would turn Tail at such an Attack
seriously made; and it would be the best way in the World to get rid of him.

That we ^ay then be perfectly easy about this undetermined thing called
Apparition, I have endeavored here to bring the thing into a narrow Compass,
and to see it in a true light. I ^ave first given you several Specimens of real
Apparitions well attested, and the truth of them so affirmed, that they may be
depended upon: If in any of them I am not so well assured of the Fact, though
they may be as certain, yet I have frankly told you so, and adhered to the
Moral only: But all together may convince the Reader of the Reason and Reality
of the thing it self.

On the other hand, I have given you Specimens of those Am^sements and
Delusions which have been put upon the World for Apparitions; and you may see
the difference is so Notorious, (whether the Cheat be Political or Whimsical,
Magical or Imaginary,) that no Man can be easily deceived, that will but make
use of the Eyes of his Understanding, as well as of those in his Head.

If, after all, you will give up your Reason to your Fancy, which at best is
but a Distemper, and that you will call every Shadow an Apparition, and every
Apparition a Devil, you must be content to be the Subject of constant Delusion;
for he that will imagine he sees the Devil always about him, whether Satan is
really near him or no, shall never want walking Shado^s to amuse him, 'till he
really calls up the Devil he fears, and bespeaks the Mischief he was before in
Danger of.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. Of Apparitions in General: the Certainty and Nature of them.
Page 1 Chap. I. Of Apparitions in particular, the Reality of them, their
Antiquity, and the Difference between the Apparitions of former Times, and
those which we may call Modern; with something of the Reason and Occasion of
that Difference. p. 8 Chap. II. Of the Appearance of Angels immediately in
Mission as from Heaven; and why we are to suppose those kinds of Apparitions
are at an End. p. 18 Chap. III. Of the Appearance of the Devil in Humane Shape.
p. 21 Chap. IV. Of the Apparition of Spirits Unembodied, and which never were
Embodied; not such as are vulgarly called Ghosts, that is to say, departed
Souls returning again and appearing visibly on Earth, but Spirits of a superior
and angelick Nature; with an Opinion of another Species. p. 25 Chap. V. Of the
Appearance of Departed Unembodied Soul. p. 44 Chap. VI. Of the Manner How the
Spirits of every Kind which can or do appear among us manage their Appearance,
and How they proceed. p. 58 Chap. VII. Of the many strange Inconveniences and
ill Consequences which would attend us in this World, if the Souls of Men and
Women, unembodyed and departed, were at Liberty to visit the Earth, from whence
they had been dismissed, and to concern themselves about Human Affairs, either
such as had been their own, or that were belonging to other People. p. 95 Chap.
VIII. The Reality of Apparition farther asserted; and what Spirits they are
that do really appear. p. 123 Chap. IX. More Relations of particular Facts,
proving the Reality of Apparitions; with some just Observations on the
Difference between the good and evil Spirits, from the Errand or Business they
come about. p. 166 Chap. X. Of the different Nature of Apparitions; how we
should Beh^ve to them; when to be afraid of or concerned about them, and when
not. p. 191 Chap. XI. Of Apparitions in Dream, and how far they are or are not
real Apparitions. p. 201 Chap. XII. Of Apparitions being said to happen just at
the time when the Person so happening to appear is said to be departing; the
Fiction of it confuted. p. 263 Chap. XIII. Of the Consequence of this Doctrine;
and seeing that Apparitions are real, and may be expected upon many Occasions,
and that we are sure they are not the Souls of our departed Friends; how are we
to act, and how to behave to them, when they come among us, and when they
pretend to be such and such, and speak in the first Person of those departed
Friends, as if they were really themselves? p. 313 Chap. XIV. Of Sham
Apparitions, and Apparitions which have been the Effect of Fraud. p. 344 Chap.
XV. Of Imaginary Apparitions, the Apparitions of Fancy, Vapors, waking Dreams,
delirious Heads, and the Hyppo. p. 364
THE History and Reality OF APPARITIONS.
INTRODUCTION. Of Apparitions in General: the Certainty and Nature of them.
OF all the Arcana of the invisible World, I know no One Thing about which more
has been said, and less understood, than this of Apparition: It is divided so
much between the Appearance of good and the Apparition of bad Spirits, that our
Thoughts are strangely confused about it.

FIRST, We make a great deal of Difficulty to resolve whether there are any
such things as Apparitions or no; and some People are for reducing them all
into Fancy, Whimsie, and the Vapors; and so shutting the Door against
Apparitions in general, they resolve to receive no Visits from the invisible
World, nor to have any Acquaintance with its Inhabitants 'till they come there;
Not satisfied with that, they resolve for us all, as well as for themselves,
and will have it, that because they have no Notion of it themselves, therefore
there is really no such thing, and this they have advanced with great
Assurance, as well in Print as in other Discourses. I name no body.

I HAVE, I believe, as true a Notion of the Power of Imagination as I ought to
have, and you shall hear farther from me upon that Head; I believe we form as
many Apparitions in our Fancies, as we see really with our Eyes, and a great
many more; nay, our Imaginations sometimes are very diligent to embark the Eyes
(and the Ears too) in the Delusion, and persuade us to believe we see Specter
and Appearances, and hear Noises and Voices, when indeed, neither the Devil or
any other Spirit, good or bad, has troubled themselves about us.

BUT it does not follow from thence that therefore there are no such Things in
Nature; that there is no Intercourse or Communication between the World of
Spirits, and the World we live in; that the Inhabitants of the invisiblc
Spaces, be those where you please, have no Converse with us, and that they
never take the Liberty to stop down upon this Globe, or to visit their Friends
here; and in short, that they have nothing to do with or say to us, or we with
or to them. The Enquiry is not, as I take it, whether they do really come
hither or no, but who they are that do come?

SPIRIT is certainly something that we do not fully understand, in our present
confined Circumstances; and as we do not fully understand the thing, so neither
can we distinguish of its Operations. As we at present conceive of it, it is an
unrestrain^d, unlimited Being; except by such Laws of the invisible State,
which at present we know little of; its way of conversing we know nothing of,
other than this, that we bel^eve, and indeed see Reason for it, that it can act
in an invisible and imperceptible manner; it moves without being prescribed or
limited by Space, it can come and not be seen, go and not be perceived; it is
not to be shut in by Doors, or shut out by Bolts and Bars; in a Word, it is
unconfined by all those Methods which we confine our Actions by, or by which we
understand ourselves to be limited and prescribed.

YET notwithstanding all this, it converses here, is with us, and among us;
corresponds, though unembodied, with our Spirits which are embodied; and this
conversing is by not only an invisible, but to us an inconceivable way; it is
neither tied down to Speech or to Vision, but moving in a superior Orb, conveys
its Meaning to our Understandings, its Measures to our Conceptions; deals with
the Imagination, and works it up to receive such Impressions as serve for its
purpose; and yet at the same time we are perfectly passive, and have no Agency
in, or Knowledge of the Matter.

BY this silent Converse, all the kind Notices of approaching Evil or Good are
conveyed to us, which are sometimes so evident, and come with such an
irresistible Force upon the Mind, that we must be more than stupid if we do not
perceive them; and if we are not extremely wanting to our selves, we may take
such due Warning by them, as to avoid the Evils which we had Notice of in that
manner, and to embrace the Good that is offered to us: Nor are there many
People alive who can deny but they have had such Notices, by which, if they had
given due Attention to them, they had been assisted to save themselves from the
Mischiefs which followed; or had, on the other hand, taken hold of such and
such Advantages as had been offered for their Good: for it is certainly one of
the grand and most important Difficulties of human Life, to know whether such
or such things, which present in our ordinary or extraordinary Circumstances,
are for our good, as they seem to be, and as may be pretended, or not, and
whether it is proper for us to accept them or no; and many unhappily stand in
the Way of their own Prosperity, for want of knowing what to accept of, and
what to refuse.

NOW by what Agency must it be that we have Directions, for good or foreboding
Thoughts of Mischiefs which attend us, and which it is otherwise impossible we
should know any thing of; if some intelligent Being, who can see into Futurity,
had not conveyed the Apprehensions into the Mind, and had not caused the
Emotion which alarms the Soul?

AND how should that intelligent Being (whatever it is) convey these
Forebodings and sudden Misgivings, as we rightly call them, into the Mind, if
there was not a certain Correspondence between them, a way of talking perfectly
unintelligible to us, uncommon, and without the Help of Sounds or any other
perceptible Way?

For Spirits without the Helps of Voice converse.
AS thus there is a Converse of Spirits, an Intelligence, or call it what you
please, between our Spirits embodied and cased up in Flesh, and the Spirits
unembodied; who inhabit the unknown Mazes of the invisible World, those Coasts
which our Geography cannot describe; who, between Somewhere and Nowhere dwell,
none of us know where, and yet we are sure must have Locality, and for ought we
know, are very near us; why should it be thought so strange a thing, that those
Spirits should be able to take upon them an Outside or Case? why should they
not be able, on Occasion, or when they think fit, to dress themselves up as we
do a la Masquerade, in a Habit disguised like Flesh and Blood, to deceive human
Sight, so as to make themselves visible to us? As they are free Spirits, why
may they not be like what my Lord Rochester expresses in another Case,

A Spirit free to choose for their own Share
What Case of Flesh and Blood they please to wear?
Roch. Sat. against Man. I do not by this affirm that it is so, and that a
Spirit may thus assume a real Case of Flesh and Blood; for I resolve to affirm
nothing that will not bear a Proof, and to suggest nothing without Probability,
in all this Work.

BUT it is enough to the present purpose if these invisible Inhabitants can
assume an Appearance, a Form sufficient to make them perceptible to us; at the
same time not being at all vested with any Substance, much less of the Species
which they represent.

IF they can assume a visible Form, as I see no Reason to say they cannot,
there is no room then to doubt of the Reality of their appearing; because what
may be we cannot but believe sometimes has been, as what has been, we are sure
may be.

TO say that the unembodied Spirits can have nothing to do with us, and that we
have Reason to believe they are not at all acquainted with human Affairs, is to
say what no Man can be assured of, and therefore is begging the Question in the
grossest manner.

I SHALL therefore spend but very little time to prove or to argue for the
Reality of Apparition. Let Mr. Glanville and his Antagonists, the Hobbists and
Sadduces of those Times, be your Disputants upon that Subject; nor shall I
trouble you with much Antiquity or History: a little that is most
unexceptionable may be necessary. If there is an invisible World, and if
Spirits residing or inhabiting are allowed to be there, or placed there by the
supreme governing Power of the Universe; it will be hard to prove, that it is
impossible they should come hither, or that they should not have Liberty to
show themselves here, and converse in this Globe, as well as in all the other
Globes or Worlds, which, for ought we know, are to be found in that immense
Space; Reason does not exclude them, Nature yields to the Possibility, and
Experience with a Cloud of Witnesses in all Ages confirm the Reality of the
affirmative.

THE Question therefore before me is not so much whether there are any such
things as Apparitions of Spirits; but WHO, and WHAT, and from WHENCE they are;
what Business they come about, who sends them or directs them, and how and in
what manner we ought to think and act, and behave about them, and to them; and
this is the Substance of this Undertaking.

THE Angels are said to be ministering Spirits, and we know they have been made
use of (as such) on many Occasions, by the superior Appointment of him that
created them; why then it may not be thought fit by the same Power, to make or
substitute a Ministration of these unembodied Spirits to the Service of the
embodied Souls of Men, which are also God's Creatures, we cannot tell.

UPON what foot, and to what end, either on their Side or on ours, and from
what Appointment, is very difficult to ascertain; and yet some probable Guesses
might be made at it too, if it was the proper Work before me; but I am rather
adjusting the Fact, and asc^rtaining the Reality of Apparitions in general,
than inquiring into the Reasons of them; either the Reasons in Nature, or in
Providence, which are perhaps farther out of our Reach than some People imagine.

IT is as difficult too to determine whether the Spirits that appear are good
or evil, or both; the only Conclusion upon that Point is to be made from the
Errand they come about; and it is a very just Conclusion, I think; for if a
Spirit or Apparition comes to or haunts us only to terrify and affright, to
fill the Mind with Horror, and the House with Disorder, we cannot reasonably
suppose that to be a good Spirit; and on the other hand, if it comes to direct
to any Good, or to forewarn and preserve from any approaching Evil, it cannot
then be reasonable to suppose it is an evil Spirit.

THE Story of an Apparition disturbing a young Gentleman, at or near Cambridge,
is remarkable to this Purpose: He set up, it seems, for a kind of professed
Atheism; but hearing a Voice, supposed it was the Devil spoke to him, and yet
owned that the Voice assured him there was a God, and bid him repent. It was a
most incongruous Suggestion that the Devil should come Voluntier to an Atheist,
and bid him repent; or, that the Devil should with a like Freedom assert the
Being of a GOD.

IF then it was a real Apparition of, or a Voice from an invisible Spirit; (I
say if, because it might be a Phantom of his own Imagination) it must be from a
good Spirit, or from an evil Spirit overruled by a superior and beneficent
Power; and if that were to be supposed, then it would justify our taking
farther Notice of those things called Voices and Apparitions, than I shall
venture to advise.

THE Possibility however of Apparitions, and the Certainty of a World of
Spirits, as I can by no means doubt, so I shall take up none of your time to
answer the Objections and Cavils of other People about it; because I think the
Evidence will amount to a Demonstration of the Facts, and Demonstration puts an
end to Argument.

CHAP. I. Of Apparitions in particular, the Reality of them, their Antiquity,
and the Difference between the Apparitions of former Times, and those which we
may call Modern; with something of the Reason and Occasion of that Difference.
NOTHING can be a stronger Testimony of the Reality of Apparitions in General,
than to descend to the particular Appearances which we are assured have been
seen and conversed with from the superior World. And first I begin with such as
have been evidently from Heaven it self, and by the sovereign Appointment of
Providence upon extraordinary Occasions. And though I shall trouble my Readers
with as little as possible out of Scripture, especially at the Beginning of my
Work, because I am unwilling they should throw it by, before they read it out,
which there would be some Danger of, if I should begin too grave!

YET, as I cannot go back to Originals, or begin at the Beginning, without a
little History out of those ancient Times, you must bear with my just naming
the Sacred Historians. I Will be as short as I can.

NOTHING is more certain, if the Scripture is at all to be believed among us,
than that GOD himself was pleased, in the Infancy of Things, to appear Visibly,
and in Form, to several Persons, and on several Occasions, upon Earth; assuming
or taking up the Shape of his Creature Man, when he thought fit to converse
with him, that he might not be a Terror to him.

THUS Adam was frequently visited in Eden, and we have no room to doubt but it
was in a visible Form, because Adam both heard him speak, and as the Text says,
They heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden in the Cool of the
Day. Genesis iii. 8.

BY all the History of the Antediluvean World, we have reason to believe, that
as God did frequently speak to Men, so he as frequently appeared to them; for
we find they conversed with God Face to Face. Cain, though wicked, talked with
GOD, and GOD with him, when he was charged with the Murder of his Brother
Abel; and the Text is express, Genesis iv. 16. that after it, Cain went out from
the Presence of the Lord. So that God not only spoke to him by a voice, but was
Visible and Present to him.

AND as I must carry the Devil along with me, hand in hand, in every Period of
Time, so even in Paradise the Devil assumed a Shape. For we must allow Satan to
be a Spirit, and indeed, we have good reason to say he is a Spirit, free to
CHOOSE what Case of Flesh and Blood he pleases to put on, or at least seemingly
to put on.

THUS he without doubt spoke in the Mouth of the Serpent in the Garden, or else
took upon himself that Shape, though the former is the most probable; because the
Serpent was cursed for being but the Instrument, however passive he might be.

MR. MILTON makes no doubt of the Devil's assuming a Shape of any kind, Beast
as well as Man, when he brings him in whispering to Eve in her Sleep, and
placing himself close at her Ear, in the Shape of a Toad, which he expresses in
his Sublime Poem, and with that inimitable Manner, peculiar to himself.

FIRST he brings Satan leaping over the Mound or Fence, which God had placed
round the Garden, as a Wolf leaps over the Hurdles into a Sheepfold; and being
gotten into Paradise, he places himself upon the Tree of Life, in the Shape of
a Raven or Cormorant. There Is the Devil's first Apparition.

THENCE he views the whole Garden, and all the Creatures in it, and at last he
spies Adam and Eve, to his great Surprise. But after a while spent in admiring
their Form, their Beauty, Felicity and Innocence, as he resolved to ruin them,
so he comes down from the Tree to be nearer them; and mixing among the Cattle,
where he takes upon him now one Shape, then another, as it best suited him, to
be near Adam and Eve, and yet to be unperceived by them; this the Poet
describes thus;

Then from his lofty Stand on that high Tree,
Down he alights among the sportful Herd
Of those four-footed Kinds; himself now one,
Now other, as their Shape best served his End
Nearer to view his Prey, and unespy'd
To mark what of their State he more might learn.
-- About them round,
A Lion now he stalks with fiery Glare;
Then as a Tiger, --
Milt. Parad. lib. IV. ver. 395.
Again, when he makes the Angels find Satan, as I have observed, whispering
evil Thoughts to Eve in a Dream, and in her Sleep, he says,

-- Him there they found,
Squat like a Toad, close at the Ear of Eve;
Assaying, by his devilish Art, to reach
The Organs of her Fancy, and with them forge
Illusions, as he list, Phantasms, and Dreams.
Ib. ver. 799.
IT IS evident then, that the Devil can assume a Shape, whether of Man or Beast,
and appear as such, in order to disguise himself from our Sight. We shall have
a farther Account of him presently, but in the mean time let us see higher, and
go into the After-Ages.

ABRAHAM is the first Example, after Noah, of an open Converse with his Maker;
and the Scripture distinguishes the very manner; sometimes it is said, that the
Lord had said to Abram, Genesis xii. 1. and again, the Lord said to Abram, Genesis
xiii. 14. again The Word of the Lord came to Abram, and the Word of the Lord
came to Abram in a Vision. Genesis xv. 1. 4, to the 7th.

BUT there are other express Places in which it is said in plain Words, God
appeared to him. Genesis xii. 7. The Lord appeared unto Abram: and Genesis xvii. 1.
The Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him: and ver. 22. And he left off
talking with him, and God went up from Abraham. It Is undeniable that God
appeared, and was with him, and left off talking with him, and went from him:
all Marks of a visible Apparition.

AGAIN, Chap. xviii. here it is still more explicit, and God not only appeared,
but appeared in a Human Shape. Ver. 1. And the Lord appeared to him in the
Plains of Mamre, as he sat in the Door of his Tent. First it is said, he lift up
his Eyes and looked, and behold, three Men stood by him. So visible were they,
that he entertains them, invites them to Dinner, and prepares a fat Calf to be
dressed, and Cakes, and Butter, and Milk. In short, he made a Feast; so much
was he, as it may be said, deluded; so real was the Appearance; nay, when he
sat it all before them, it is said thy DID EAT.

NOW, ver. 13. it is said expressly one of these was the LORD; nay, in the
Original it is JEHOVAH; that was when he charged Sarah with laughing, and she
denied it.

N. B. Sarah was the first of Human Kind, that ever told GOD a LIE to his Face.
But she was frighted, that is certain; the Text says so.

IN the 17th Verse, when God tells Abraham what he had resolved to do to Sodom;
it is plain, he speaks in the first Person as God; And the Lord said, shall I
hide from Abraham the thing that I do? Hereupon Abraham takes upon him to plead
with God in behalf of Sodom; and in this he speaks as to God himself, ver. 30.
O let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: and before that, ver. 27. Behold
now I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD, which am but Dust and Ashes.

THUS I think it is evident, that God himself did appear in Humane Shape to
Abraham, and that more than once. The next Chapter is as plain, that he did the
same to LOT; or if it should be objected that it is not so clear that it was
God himself, it was two Angels; though Interpreters do generally agree, that it
was Christ himself, who is called an Angel, the Angel of the Covenant. But if
that were doubtful, then it will still be allowed that it was an Apparition of
Angels in Human Shape, which will stand good in my next Article.

BUT as I am upon the Highest and Supreme Instances first, I must finish it by
two particular Quotations, which cannot be disputed. (1.) One is of Jacob, Genesis
xxxii. 24. There wrestled a man with him: and ver. 28. the Man is said to be
GOD himself, as a Prince have thou Power with GOD, and have prevailed: and ver.
30. after he had blessed him, Jacob called the Place Peniel, that is the Face
of GOD. For, says he, I have seen GOD Face to Face. Again Jacob says, Genesis
xlviii. 3. God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the Land of Canaan, and
blessed me.

(2.) BUT there is yet a stronger Testimony than all this, for it is spoken
from the Mouth of GOD himself upon a very particular Occasion, which was to
honor Moses, and establish him in the Reverence and Regard of the People, when
the Seventy Men or Elders were appointed to take Part of his Work off his
Hands, and judge of smaller Matters among the People; which is nobly expressed,
Numb. xi. 17. They shall bear the Burden of the People with thee. In the next
Chapter Miriam, and even Aaron himself, spoke against Moses; that is in short
rose in Rebellion; and God, to honor his Servant, tells them how he had, and
would distinguish Moses from all the rest. ver. 8. With him will I speak Mouth
to Mouth, even APPARENTLY, and not in Dark Speeches, and the Similitude of the
LORD shall be BEHOLD.

HERE is a positive Declaration from Heaven, that GOD would appear visibly to
Moses; the like Instance is not to be seen in the whole Bible. The Word
Apparently is plain, it can be no otherwise understood, without gross
Equivocating with the Text.

COME we next to the Times of our Blessed Savior, and there we have two
eminent Appearances within the Compass of our present Argument.

1. THE HOLY GHOST appearing in the Shape of a Dove.

2. THE Appearance of JESUS CHRIST after his Resurrection, when in the
glorified Body wherewith he ascended; and that this was an Apparition, is
plain, from the several Circumstances of his Appearance.

FIRST, When he joined the two Disciples going to Emaus: that he appeared as a
Man, the Text is plain from his walking with them, and Discourse to them; and
that it was but an Apparition is also plain. Luke xxiv. 16. Their Eyes were
holden that they should not know him: and ver. 31. when their Eyes were opened
to know him he vanished out of their Sight.

SECONDLY, When he appeared to Mary Magdalen at the Sepulcher, but forbad her
to touch him, John xx. 17. And again ver. 19. when he came into the Room where
the Disciples were assembled, and when the Doors were shut, and said, Peace be
unto to you. Thus it is evident Christ has appeared, and he has told us he
shall appear again, coming in the Clouds of Heaven; and we look for that
blessed Hope, and glorious Appearing.

THUS then you have GOD himself, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, appearing in
distinct Times, in several Shapes or Forms of Appearance, all giving Testimony
in general to the Reality of this Truth, That Spirits can assume Humane or
other Shapes, and be made visible to Mankind; and this is what we call
Apparition.

HAVING thus brought an Instance of the most exalted Kind, even the Appearance
or Apparition of God himself, it is needful to state a little the Difference
between those Appearances, and that which we are now to discourse of.

IT IS an Objection natural to the Case in hand, We do not question, much less
enquire, whether infinite Power, to whom all things are not possible only, but
easy, can assume a Humane Shape, or any other; and appear, when, where, how,
and in what Form he thinks fit; and that he has, or may have so appeared. But
there is a manifest Difference between what God is able, or may please to do
upon extraordinary Occasions, and what any of his Creatures may or can do.

BESIDES it is evident, or at least we have reason to believe, that God himself
did appear in those Times upon those extraordinary Occasions only, and that he
has never appeared since; except that should be called an Appearance or
Apparition which spoke to St. Paul at his Conversion, when it is expressly said,
he saw a Light, and heard a Voice, but saw no Man; though afterward he calls it
seeing him, 1 Cor. xv. 8. Last of all he was seen of me also. Whereas St. Paul,
we all know, did speak there of seeing Christ in the Flesh, while he was on
Earth. But I say, except this, we have no Example of any Appearance of the
Divine Majesty in Humane Shape, or in any other manner whatsoever.

THAT therefore we must distinguish this from the Subject we are now entering
upon, for that the Appearances of God are extremely different from the
Apparitions of Creatures, whether Angels, Devils, or Souls of Men. That the
Question is not, Whether God can do this or that; but, Whether the Spirits,
Spirits Inferior, can do it: and, which is yet more to our Purpose, Suppose it
has been so formerly, and in ancient times, whether they do continue to do so
still, or have power to do it, let the Occasion be what it will.

THUS the Enquiry is reduced to a narrower Compass. I take upon me the
Affirmative; and we are now to look back into Time for the Confirmation or
Proof of it, and by enquiring what has been, inform our selves of what may be,
is, or is to be expected, as occasion may require.

AND first to describe the Thing, and explain what is generally understood by
the Apparition of Spirits; that I may not hold you in Suspense, or Criticize
upon the bare Words Spirit and Apparition, I come plainly to the Meaning, as I
am to be understood in this Work: By Apparition of Spirits, then, I mean, when
the Invisible Inhabitants of the unknown World, be they who they will, assume
Humane Shapes, or other Shapes, and show themselves visibly to us, so as that
we can see them, speak to them, hear them speak, and the like.

THIS is what our People vulgarly call Walking; and when any such thing
appears, they know not what otherwise to call it, they say Something walks; and
if it be the Appearance of any known Person lately dead, they say Such a one
Walks.

THUS I lay every thing down with the utmost plainness, that I may leave the
Reader in no Uncertainty about my Meaning in the Subject I am upon, or give
room for Cavilings or Disputings at either the Thing it self, or the manner of
Expressing ti.

We speak in Vain
Of Truth it self, unless we speak it Plain.
Words wrapped in Clouds, till their full Meaning's known
Such Words are not the Hearer's, but our own.
The End of Speaking's lost --
For Speech was given to be understood.
ASKING Pardon for giving this Loose to m^ Thoughts, I return to the Subject,
left I should be but an Apparition my self.

THE Apparitions I am to speak of are these.

1. THE Appearance of Angels.

2. OF Devils.

3. OF the departed Souls of Men.

THESE are those, who we mean by the Inhabitants of the Invisible World, or
Worlds; the World of Spirits, and the Superior Beings, who are said to converse
with the Spirits embodied, by Vision or Apparition, or any other Superior Way.

BY Apparition also I am to understand such Appearances of these superior
Beings as are Spontaneous and Voluntary, or at least so far as relates to us;
that is to say, I distinguish between those Apparitions which appear of their
own accord, or by superior Mission and Authority; and those which that dark
Race of People among us, who would be called Magicians, talk of; Spirits, or
things called Spirits, which are raised, as we foolishly call it, by the Arts
of Men; by Witchcraft, Sorcery, Magic, and such other Infernal Arts, as are,
or have been made use of for that Purpose; and by which they tell us Spirits
are called down from the superior Regions (o^ wherever their Abode has been)
to show themselves visibly, speak to, and converse with Mankind, answer
Questions, foretell Events, and the like; as Samuel is said to be brought to
appear to Saul, 1 Samuel xxviii. 14. How far these Magicians, Witches, and other
Dealers in these dark Things, ^ave or have not Power to cause such Appearan^es,
and to sorm Apparitions; and how far they ^mpose upon, and delude the World in
it, That I may speak of by it self, and indeed it well deserves Consideration.
But for the present, I say, I am talk^ng of another Kind of Apparitions.

CHAP. II. Of the Appearance of Angels immediately in Mission as from Heaven;
and why we are to suppose those kinds of Apparitions are at an End.
THAT Angels have appeared to Men, we have abundant Testimony in the Histories
of Times Past, as well Sacred as Profane; nor shall I spend one Moment of your
Time to examine, or confirm it, except as it comes necessarily in by the
occasion of other Discourse: For it is not the Appearance of Angels as such,
but the Appearance of Angels in the Shape of Men, that is the present Enquiry.

THAT this has been, is evident, and in general the Scripture gives this
Testimony to it: when the Apostle advises to Hospitality, and to entertain
Strangers, he adds, For thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. Heb.
xiii. 2. This must be meant of Angels in Humane Shape, otherwise the hospitable
Person could not be mistaken in such a manner: Besides, it plainly refers to
Abraham, Genesis xviii. 1. sitting in the Door of his Tent, ver. 2. three Men
stood by him; two of these were certainly Angels; who the third was, I have
shown already. It may likewise include Lot, in whose Story, Genesis xix. it is
expressed, ver. 1. that they were two Angels, and ver. 8. Lot calls them these
Men, and ver. 10, 12, 16. they are called the Men; so that LOT believed them to
be Men only, and as such he not only invited them unto his House, ver. 2. but
he made them a Feast, and they did eat, ver. 3.

THESE Apparitions of Angels, in the Shape of Men, are undeniable on other
Occasions; but when they appear as Angels, it is said so plainly, and in so
many Words; as in the Case of Abraham, when he was going to offer his Son
Isaac, Genesis xxii. 11. The Angel of the Lord called to Abraham out of Heaven;
and again ver. 15. The Angel of the Lord called the second time.

THERE are innumerable Examples of Angels appearing as Angels; but we are upon
the Appearance of Angels as Men, and in the Shape and Habit of Men. The next
Instance is, of an Angel appearing to Joshua, and who is called the Captain of
the Lord's Host, Josh. v. 13. Joshua looked, and behold there stood a Man
over against him, with a Sword drawn in his Hand. Immediately Joshua,
Soldier-like, gives him the qui vive, or in English, who are you for? art thou
for us, or for our Adversaries? and the Spectre or Apparition spoke immediately
again, ver. 14. and then Joshua perceived that it was not a Man, but an Angel
in Apparition; and in the Heads or Contents of the Chapter, it is expressly said,
an Angel appears to Joshua.

ANOTHER Example is, of the Angel that appeared to Manoah the Father of
Sampson; his Wife indeed calls him a Man of God, and that he appeared to her;
but says, that his Countenance was like an Angel of God, very terrible; Judges
xiii. 6. But still when he appeared a second time, it was in the Shape of a
Man, or else why did Manoah desire him to stay 'till he could dress a Kid for
him? and the Words are express, ver. 16. He knew not that it was an Angel of
the Lord.

THERE are other Examples in Scripture, where the Angels have appeared in
Humane Shape, and conversed with Men upon Earth, besides such as have appeared
in their real Angelick Form as Angels. How and in what they were known to be
Angels, in what Form they have been seen, and in what Voice they spoke, is not
discovered to us in the Scripture. Some are of Opinion, that even those Angels
appeared in the Shape of Men, and clothed as Men; as the Angel that met Balaam
with a flaming Sword in his Hand; the Angels which Jacob saw ascending and
descending on the Ladder; the Angels that spoke to Zacharias in the Temple, to
the Virgin Mary in the Chamber, and that sat in the Sepulcher after Christ was
risen, and asked the Disciples, why seek ye the Living among the Dead? and so
in several Cases: All that can be answered is, that the Text called them
Angels, and so far we are not to doubt it; but I must also allow, that they
seem to me to have been in the Figure of Men; as for those in the Sepulcher,
St. Luke says expressly, they saw two Men in shining Garments, Luke xxiv. 4. and
in the same Chapter, ver. 23. it is said, they had seen a Vision of Angels.

THUS far it relates to good Angels, such as have been seen on Earth in
Apparition, but have made such an Appearance by virtue of the superior Mission,
as the Angel Gabriel, who tells Zacharias, I am sent to speak unto thee.

THAT these have upon many occasions been seen in Humane Shape is evident; and
though much more time might be spent upon the Proof, I think it is needless;
indeed the Evidence is sufficient.

THERE is a Question still remaining, relating to this Part, (viz.) How comes
it to pass that all this is ceased, and that the Angels have done coming, or
are no more sent of such Errands? but that all the Angels we have any Account
of in these Days, are of a worse kind, and generally come upon worse Errands?
and which particular Observation is the very reason of our Doubts, whether the
Appearance of the other is real or not.

THIS Question might be answered many Ways, but it is too grave for the Times;
and as we are not writing Divinity, I shall not load you with serious Points:
The short Account of it is this: We have now a more sure Word of Prophecy:
(that is) that since the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Revelation of God by
a written Word, there is no more need of what the Text calls a ministration of
Angels. The Scripture is a daily Revelation, and the Spirit of God, who is
promised to lead us, is a daily Inspiration, there is no more need of Vision
and Apparition; and this is that glorious Difference between the Revelations of
those Days, and these of ours, and the reason of the Difference between the
Apparitions of these Times and of those.

WHEN I am speaking things serious, I am to speak very short, that I may not
shock your reading; the Taste of the Times happening at this Juncture to lie
another way: but my next Article perhaps may make you amends, I mean the
Appearance of the grand Archangel of all, and, as I suppose, the only
Archangel out of Heaven, namely the Devil.

CHAP. III. Of the APPEARANCE of the DEVIL in Humane Shape.
PRAY observe, when I am speaking of the Appearance of the Devil, it is not to
tell you that he can and does appear among us at this time; so you need not
look over your Shoulders to see for him, or at the Candles, to see if they burn
BLUE, at least not yet; it is time enough for that by and by.

BUT I am examining now the matter of Fact only, as (1.) Whether the Devil can
appear here, yea or no; whether he is allowed to come, that his Chain reaches
so far, and that his Tether is long enough? also, (2.) Whether he is ever sent
or directed to come, or that he comes of his own accord, and about his own
Business? And as all these will lead me to enquire what has been; from thence
we may best judge, what is, or may be.

THAT he has upon special Occasions appeared in former Times is certain, as
well from Scripture as ancient History, and a small Retrospect will satisfy
you in that Point. If it appears that he has been here, then it is very probable
his Chain is long enough, and that he is allowed the Liberty to come so far
from Home. For we have no Authority to say, or to believe, that his Tether is
shortened, or that he is more restrained now than ever he was before.

HIS entering the Garden of God in the beginning of Time, and the Havoc he made
there, the turning Adam and Eve out, and even turning the whole frame of Nature
upside down by his vile Doings there; all this I have mentioned: But we have
more yet to say of him; for he is still in Being, and still the same malicious
Devil, the same Destroyer and Accuser that ever he was; the Flame of Fire set
to guard the Garden, did not burn him; the Deluge didn't drown him: Nor has
Justice thought fit yet to take him into its Iron Hands, though it will certainly
do it at last; and, as the Scripture says in another Case, his Damnation
slumbereth not; for Justice is truly represented

With Leaden Feet and Iron Hands, to show
It will be certain, though it may be slow.
THE first time we meet with the Devil's personal Appearance upon Earth, I mean
after the Flood, is in the Story of Job; nor by all the Calculations of Times,
which the learned Chronologers of those Days have made, could that be long
after it; for Eliphaz the Temanite could not be farther off than the Grandson
of Esau, or thereabouts. Genesis xxxvi. 11.

IN Job's Time, the Text says that the Sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them. So that it seems the Angel of
Light was dressed up like the Sons of GOD, even in those ancient Days; and it
is not likely that this was the first Time neither: Again, it seems by the
Text, that though GOD himself might know Satan in that Disguise, yet the People,
among whom he came, did not know him.

THE Answer likewise which he makes to the Question, implies strongly, that
Satan had been wont to walk among those Sons of God in Disguise long before
that; for when God sa^s to him, whence come thou? his Answer seems to be a
kind of general, I come from following my known Business, my old Trade; do
thou know I am a roaring Lion, and do thou ask me whence I come? Why, I come
from seeking who I may devour, ranging the World, going to and fro in the
Earth, and walking up and down in this Disguise, as thou now see me, that I
may do all the Mischief I can.

GOD'S Return again to Satan confirms it, as if the Lord had said; Well, Satan,
then thou must have seen my Servant Job? Have thou considered him, that there
is none like him in the Earth?

THE Devil makes an Answer that implies he knew Job very well. Do I know him to
be a good Man! yes: But then I know him to be a rich Man too: It Is an easy
thing for a Man to be honest, that is so rich; he can have no room for asking
more: What should he steal for, or be a Knave for, that is the richest Man in
the World? What should he covet, that has no room for Desire? But if thou have
a Mind to try his Honesty, and his Piety, his Fear of thee, and his Hatred of
Evil, blast his Wealth, and take his prodigious Flocks and Herds of Cattle
away; level him, bring him to be like other Men in Riches, and reduce him to
Beggary, and then see if he will not be like other Men in Crime; nay, he will be
raging and furious, and curse thee to thy Face.

THIS, though it may seem remote, is to my Purpopse thus: it shows that the Devil
was no Stranger among the People. He had walked up and down in Disguise, so as
to know them all, and their Circumstance; He had been dressed up like one of
the rest in Human Shape, so that he could not be known from the very best of
Men, no not from the Sons of God.

SOME are of Opinion, by the Sons of God there, is meant the patriarchal Heads
of Families, who had, in right of Primogeniture, the Priesthood in Course, and
were the only Sacrificers at that Time, as Abraham, and as Job were; so that in
short Satan has long ago dressed himself in the Habit of the Clergy. Bless us
all! we hope he does not do so still; for if the Devil should put on the Gown
and Cassock, or the black Cloak, or the Coat and the Cord, and be walking about
the World in that Disguise now, how easily may we be cheated, and mistake the
Sons of God for the Prince of Darkness? and how could we tell one from the other?
But of that hereafter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Apparition of Spirits Unembodied, and which never were
Embodied; not such as are vulgarly called Ghosts, that is to say, departed
Souls returning again and appearing visibly on Earth, but Spirits of a superior
and angelick Nature; with an Opinion of another Species.
THERE appears a Qu^s^ion here in the very Beginning of the Debate, which will
be very hard to decide, and perhaps impossible: However, that we may not
stumble at the Threshold, I will touch it as gently, and yet as clearly as I
can. The Question is this; Whether are there any Spirits inhabiting the
invisible World, which have never yet been embodied, and yet are not to be
reckoned of the Species of Angels Good or Bad?

BY Angels Good and Bad, I suppose I may be easily unde^stood to mean what you
all think you mean when you sort or rank them into only two Kinds, viz. Angels
or Devils; in which vulgar and general, not to say foolish way of expressing
it, I humbly conceive the self-wise World much mistaken. It is true it is a
Speculation, and every one is at Liberty to think for themselves, and among
them so am I; in which, though I have a better Opinion of my own Judgment than
always to sacrifice it to vulgar Notions, and that too at the Price of my
Reason; yet I have withal so little Pride, and so mean an Opinion of my own
Thoughts, that I shall not venture to advance any thing, in a Case so
exceedingly liable to Cavil and Exception.

TWO Places in Scripture speak of Angels in a different Style from the ordinary
and usual way of understanding the Word. Mat. xviii. 10. speaking of little
Children, Christ says, that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the Face of
my Father which is in Heaven: the other is Acts xii. 15. when Peter knocked at
the Door where the Disciples were gathered together, and they believing him to
be in Chains, and in the Prison, said it is his Angel.

THE learned Expositors and Annotators extremely differ upon the Meaning of
these Texts, and it is not my Business here to reconcile them. Some will have it
to mean nothing but a kind of an Exclamation or Admiration; What can it be! is
it an Angel! And of the first, about Children, they say it only intimates, that
their Souls, when glorified, shall always, if they go away in Peace, behold the
Face of GOD in Heaven.

OTHERS run out to an imaginary Scheme of Guardian Angels attending every Man
and Woman while they are upon Earth; a Notion so uncertain, if granted, and
that has so many Difficulties to reconcile, before it can be believed, that
it is much better to leave it where it is, and which I shall explain presently a
much easier Way.

NOW, I say, it is not my present Business to reconcile these distant and
clashing Opinions, at least not in this Work. I have started a Question;
possibly my Opinion is with the affirmative, at least I think it possible, and
that it is Rational to believe it; perhaps I may name you as improbable a
Notion, and much more inconsistent with the Christian Religion, which yet
Philosophy bids us call rational, and directs us to believe.

HOW are we put to it to form Inhabitants for the Planetary Worlds: Philosophy
says they are habitable Bodies, solid, opaac, as this Earth, and we will have
them be inhabited also, whether it be with or without, for or against our
Reason and Understanding; it is no Satisfaction to them, or will it stop their
Cavils, to say it is not Fact; that they are not habitable; that both Saturn and
Jupiter are uncomfortably dark, unsufferably cold, would congeal the very Soul
(if that were possible) and so are not habitable on that Account; that Mercury
and Venus are insufferably hot, that the very Water would always boil, the Fire
burn up the Vitals; and that, in short, no human Creatures could subsist in
such Heat: But this is not satisfactory neither; but rather than not have all
those opaac Worlds be inhabited, and even their Satellites or Moons about them
too, they will have God be obliged to create a Species of Bodies suitable to
their several Climates.

IN Saturn they are to live without Eyes, or be a Kind so illuminated from
their own internal Heat and Light, that they can see sufficiently by their own
Beams.

IN Jupiter there must be another Kind, that can live in Twilight, and by the
Reflection of its own Moons, and subsist in continued Frost.

IN Mercury the Species must be all Salamanders, and live in the continued Fire
of the Sun's Beams, more intense than what would be sufficient to burn all our
Houses, and melt our Copper, Lead, and Iron in the very Mines; so the
Inhabitants must be of a Kind better able to bear the Fire than those Metals,
and would still live though they were continually calcining if not vitrifying
into Glass.

IN Venus the Heat would boil the Water, and consequently the Blood in the
Body, and a Set of human Bodies must be formed that could live always in a hot
Bath, and neither sweat out their Souls, or melt their Bodies.

IN Mars, so very dry in its Nature, no Vegetables or Sensatives could subsist
that we have any Notion of, for want of Moisture; and the Men that lived there
must be dried up sufficiently for pulverizing on any suitable Occasion, I mean
human Beings, and of our Species.

NOW if God must not be supposed to have created so many habitable Bodies
without peopling them, and that it would reflect upon his Wisdom to lay so much
of his Creation waste; that all the Planets should seem to be made for nothing
but to range about the Waste as a kind of dark Inhabitants; of no use but to
shine a little, and that with but borrowed Beams too, upon this little Point
called Earth, where only a Set of Rationals can exist; I say, if this must not
be supposed, but on the contrary there are certainly People of one Kind or
another in all those Bodies, let the Trouble of making them be what it will; if
this be the Case, and that this must be believed in spite of so many
Difficulties and Inconsistencies; then allow me to argue a little upon the
following Enquiry.

WHY may I not as well suggest, and that with every jot as much Probability,
that there are, or at least may be, a certain Number of appointed Inhabitants
in the vastly-extended Abyss of Space, a kind of Spirits (other than the Angels
good or bad, and other than the unembodied or uncased Souls of Men) who dwell
in the invisible World, and in the Vast Nowhere of unbounded Space, of which
we can neither say what it is, what it contains, or how determined: That Great
Waste, of whose Extent it is hardly possible even the Soul itself can conceive,
and of which all the Accounts we give, and Guesses we make, are so remote, look
so Enthusiastic, so improbable, and so like impossible, that instead of
informing the ignorant Part of the World by it, we only arm them with Jest and
Ridicule, and resolve them into incurable Unbelief; depending that what it is
not possible to Conceive of, is not possible to Be.

NOW is this immense Space indeed a Void? is it all a Waste? is it utterly
desolate? or is it inhabited and peopled by the Omnipotent Maker, in a manner
suited to his own Glory, and with such Inhabitants as are spirituous,
invisible, and therefore perfectly proper to the Place?

I MUST needs say, it is much more rational to suggest this to be, than to bring
out a Species of human bodies to live in the Intense Heat of Mercury, or the
acute Cold of Jupiter and Saturn. The latter is agreeable to the general
Understanding we all have of spirituous Beings: We are well assured there are
some always there, and that they can very well subsist there; that the Place is
suitable to them, and that there are Spirits of some Kind or other; and why not
such as we suggest?

IT remains then only to examine what Communication these Spirits have with us,
whether they are or are not able to hold Conversation with us, and whether they
really do converse familiarly with us, yea or no?

IF it should be granted that there are such Spirits in Being, and that they
pass and repass, exist, and have Egress and Regress there; that they inhabit,
as a certain bombastic Author has it, Through all the liquid Mazes of the Sky;
I say, if this should be granted, then it remains that here is a fourth
Species that may assume Shapes; for Spirits may do that, and may appear among
us, may converse with our embodied Spirits, and from those we may receive
abundance of additional Intelligence from the World of Spirits, whether by
Dream, Vision, Appearance, or any superior way, such as to them in their great
Knowledge of things shall seem meet. To speak as distinctly of this nice Part
as I can, admit me to explain my self a little.

IF we grant that Spirit, though invisible in it self, may assume Shape, may vest
it self so with Flesh and Blood, that is seemingly, so as to form an
Appearance, then all Spitit may do it; since we have no Rule given us by which
we may distinguish Spirits one from another, I mean as to their actings in the
Capacity of Spirits: We may indeed, as I have said already, distinguish them by
the Effect, that is to say, by the Errand they come on, and by the manner of
their Operations, as whether they are good or evil Spirits; but not by their
Nature as Spirit. The Devil is as really a Spirit, though a degenerated, fallen,
and evil Spirit, I say, he is as much a Spirit to all the Intents and Purposes
of a Spirit that we are capable to judge of, as an Angel; and he is called the
evil Spirit; He has Invisibility, and Multipresence, as a Spirit has; he can
appear though the Doors be shut; and go out, though bolted and barred in; no Prison
can hold him, but his last eternal Dungeon; no Chains can bind him, but the
Chains fastened on him by Heaven, and the Angel of the bottomless Pit; no
Engine or human Art can wound him; in short, he is neither to be seen, felt,
heard, or understood, unless he pleases; and he can make himself be both seen
and heard too, if he pleases; for he can assume the Shape and Appearance of Man
or Beast, and in these Shapes and Appearances can make himself visible to us,
terrify and affright us, converse in a friendly or in a frightful manner with
us, as he thinks fit; he can be a Companion and Fellow-Traveller in the Day, an
Apparition and a horrible Monster in the Night: in a Word, he can be among us,
and act upon, and with us, visibly or invisibly as he pleases, and as he finds
for his purpose.

NOW if he does, and can do thus, merely as he is a Spirit, and by his
spiritual Nature, we have a great deal of Reason to believe, that all Spirit
may do the same; or at least I may ask, Why may not all Spirit do the same? and
if there are any Kinds of Spirit, as is not improbable, besides those we have
hitherto conceived of, they may be reasonably supposed to be vested with the
same Powers, and may exert those Powers in the same or a like manner.

IF any Man asks me how I make out the Probability of these differing Species
of Spirits? I answer as above, by this, That it appears there are invisible
Operations and a secret Converse carried on among Men from the World of
Spirits, wherever that is, which cannot, at least to our Understandings, b^
supposed to be the Work either of those particular or proper Angels which
reside in Heaven, or the infernal Angels either; that these Spirits, or if you
please to call them Angels, appear and converse for Good, and therefore may not
be supposed to be the Devil, or from the Devil: It is said indeed, that they
act by a visible kind of Restraint, in doing Good with a sort of an
Imperfection and manifest Debility; so as sometimes to act, as it were, to no
purpose, being not able to make the Good they aim at effectual, and therefore
cannot be from Heaven, the Fountain of Good; who, as he is Good, so he is
infinitely able to do all the Good that he appears willing to do: But this, I
think, confirms rather than confutes my Opinion; for, it proves them to be
sent, and under particular Commission; it only suggests, that it is probable
there are Spirits who may be more confined and restrained in their Power of
acting, some than others, and this is not at all inconsistent with the Nature
of the thing.

THE great, and perhaps the strongest Argument which our learned Men produce
for the Credit of their new Philosophy is, that by this they can the better
solve the Difficulties of several other Phoenomena, which before were hardly
intelligible, or at least which they could not account for any other way.

IN like manner, though the Certainty of my Suggestion cannot be arrived to, or
supposing it cannot, and that at best it is but a Speculation, scarcely can be
called an Hypothesis, and that no Evidence can be given for it, yet this must
be said of it, that by this Notion we may solve several other Difficulties
which we cannot understand any other Way: such as,

FIRST, HOW it is, and from whence, or by whose Agency we frequently receive
such kind Notions of Good or Evil as it is certain we do, and yet without
receiving any farther Assistance, which perhaps it is not in the Power of the
kind Informer to give us, either for the avoiding or embracing the Evil or the
Good which they give us Notice of?

WHAT can it be that communicates these approaching distant things, and which
it is so much our Interest and Concern to know? If it were an evil Spirit, I
mean a Devil, as I have said above, he would never concern himself so much for
our Benefit, seeing he is known to will our Ruin to the utmost of his
Endeavor, and to wish us to fall into all possible Mischief and Disaster.

ON the other hand, it cannot be from Heaven or from the Angels; for the Works
of God are all, like himself, perfect, and he would not so far dishonor his
Messengers, as to allow them, nay to send them (for they could never come
unsent) to give us Notice of Evil, and yet take it out of our Power to avoid
it; or to foretell good things at hand, and then give us no Power to embrace
them, or to lay hold of them; and it would neither consist with the infinite
Goodness, or with the infinite Justice, to do thus by his Creatures.

BESIDES, it is a kind of incongruous acting, unworthy of the supreme Power,
unworthy an Angel's appearing; it rather shows that it is the Product of some
intelligent Being, who though it means Good, and has a beneficent Nature that
would contribute to our Safety and Prosperity if it could, yet is under some
Limitations of its actings, is not able to proceed in the Good it has
attempted, that can just do us so much Service as to give us Notice of what may
await us behind the dark Curtain of Futurity; but has no Power to go any
farther, or to give any Assistance to us in pursuing proper Methods for our
Deliverance; no, not so much as to give Directions, much less Powers to act; as
a Child discovering a Fire begun in a House, may cry out and alarm the Family,
but is able to do no more, no no^ so much as to tell them whereabout it is, or
which way they should go about to escape from it, much less to quench or
prevent it.

THESE imperfect Notices, I say, seem to proceed from some good and kind Being,
which is n^ar us, existing, though out of our Knowledge, yet not so remote, but
that it is in Condition to see and know things good or evil, which though
approaching, is yet out of our View, and which, if we could take the silent
Hint, it might be infinitely for our Advantage, but is able to do no more.

NOW, if such Notices, whether to the Mind by Dreams when asleep, or by waking
Impulse, or by Voice, or by Apparation; if they were from Heaven they would
never be so imperfect and unassisting; we cannot suppose Heaven would concern
itself to give us Notices of Danger impending, of Enemies ^ying in wait, of
Mischiefs approaching, and would ^hen leave us to fall into the Snare by an
unavoid^ble Necessity.

AS to what these Spirits therefore are, where ^hey reside, what Circumstances
they are in, and ^ow they have access to our Understandings, I ac^nowledge the
Difficulty to be great, and do not pre^nd to enter upon it here; that they may
sometimes ^pear is not improbable: But I hope I may say, that all Apparitions
are not the Devil, nor yet may they be Angels immediately from Heaven, for many
Reasons.

FIRST, From the Meanness of the Occasions, I mean of some of the Occasions, on
which these things happen. That there are Angels sent from Heaven on particular
Messages and Errands, to fulfill the Mind and Will of their Maker and Sovereign,
all Men must grant; I have already proved it, and abundance of Examples may be
given of it, besides those already named; but we never find thos^ Angels coming
upon trifling Errands, and for things of mean Import. The Angel of the LORD
appeared to Gideon at the Threshing-floor, to summon hi^ to the Deliverance of
the whole Nation of ISRAEL^ The Angel of the LORD appeared to David wit^ his
drawn Sword, threatening Destruction of Jerusalem: The Angels appeared to the
Shepherds to signify the Birth of CHRIST; as an Angel had done to the Virgin to
salute her, and tell her what great a Work was to be wrought in her: Angels
appeared to minister to CHRIST after his Temptation in the Wilderness; and an
Angel appear'^ strengthening him in his Agony, and Angels have appeared on many
other such eminent Occasions^ but not except such Occasions were eminent, an^
that particularly so.

But here you have an old Woman dead, one tha^ it may be, has hid a little
Money in the Orchard o^ Garden; and an Apparition, is supposed, comes an^
discovers it, by leading the Person it appears to to the Place, and making some
Signal that h^ should dig there for somewhat; or a Man is dead and having left
a Legacy to such and such, the Executor does not pay it, and an Apparition com^
and haunts this Executor 'till he does Justice. Is ^ likely an Angel should be
sent from Heaven to fin^ out the old Woman's e^^then Dish with thirty o^ forty
Shillings in it? or an Angel should be sent t^ harrass this Man for a Legacy of
perhaps five or ten Pounds? and as to the Devil, will any one charge Satan with
being sollicitous to have Justice done? they that know him at all, must know
him better than to think so hardly of him.

WHO then must it be? and from whence? To say it is the Soul or Ghost of the
departed Person, and that he could not be at rest, 'till the injured Person be
Righted, is advanced upon no Principle that is agreeable to the Christian
Doctrine at all; for if the Soul is happy, is it reasonable to believe that the
Felicity of Heaven can be interrupted by so trivial a Matter, and on so slight
an Occasion? if the Soul be unhappy, remember the great Gulf fixed; there is
no room for us to believe that those miserable Souls have any Leisure or
Liberty to come back upon Earth on an Errand of such a Nature.

IN a word, there is nothing but Difficulty in it on every side: Apparitions
there are, we see no room to doubt the Reality of that Part; but what, who, or
from whence, is a Difficulty which I see no way to extricate our selves from,
but by granting that there may be an appointed, deputed sort of stationary
Spirits in the invisible World, who come upon these Occasions, and appear among
us; which Inhabitants or Spirits (you may call them Angels if you please)
Bodies they are not, and cannot be, neither had they been ever embodied; but
such as they are, they have a Power of conversing among us, and particularly
with Spirits embodied, and can by Dreams, Impulses and strong Aversions, move
our Thoughts, and give Hope, raise Doubts, sink our Souls today, elevate them
tomorrow, and many ways operate upon our Passions and Affections; may give
Intimations of Good or Evil; but cannot, through some unknown Restraint upon
their Power, go any farther, speak any plainer, or give the least Assistance to
us, no, not by Council or Direction to guide us or tell us how to act for our
own Preservation.

I AM told that these may be good Angels for all that, and that it is no just
way of arguing, to say such things are too trifling to send an Angel from
Heaven upon so mean an Errand, and upon so inconsiderable an Affair; since we
see Providence daily giving Testimony, not of its Government only, but of its
Care and Concern, in and about the meanest Affairs of Life: and that the
Scripture it self frequently gives Examples of it, in his feed^ng the Ravens,
taking care of the Sparrows, clothing the Grass of the Field, numbering the
Hairs of our Head, etc. So that Infinite is not limited or tied up, to or from
any degree of acting^ Nor is there any thing great, or any thing sma^l, but as
God is seen ^n his least Creatures, Insects, Mites, and the like; so he is
active in the most trifling Event: Nor does that Providence, who yet protects
us in, and delivers us from Danger, always act^ alike, but as the Sovereignty
of his Actings is no^ to be disputed, so neither is his Wisdom impeached by
suff^ring Evil to fall upon Man, which the least hint from his Light might have
guided him to prevent.

I THINK this is the utmost that can be said in the Case, and yet it does not
reach us at all^ for this is not the meaning of my Objection, n^ nor is it the
Substance of it; I am not speaking o^ Providence concerning it self in the Care
of i^ Crea^ures, I acknowledge all that; but then this Providence acts in its
own Way, and by its own invisible Operations; nor is there any occasion for the
Agency of such extraordinary Instruments, an^ therefore it may be, that Angels
are never sent a^ Expresses upon such Things.

THE King or Government of a Nation may influence the whole Body of the People,
at whatever Distance, by the Power of his Laws, directin^ the Magistrates, and
the Inferior Officers, to act i^ the Name of the Supreme; and this is done
without any Step out of the ordinary way of the Administration. But if any
extraordinary Occ^sion require, then a Messenger is dispatched with particular
Instructions, and ^pecial Power, as the particular Case may require.

SO Providence, (which is, in a word, the administration of Heaven's Government
in the World) acts in its ordinary Course, and in the usual Way, with an
universal Influence upon all Things, and nothing is below its Concern; but when
extraordinary Things present, then the particular express Messengers from
Heaven, (viz. the Angels) are sent with Instructions on that particular Affair
which they are disp^tch'd about, and no other. And I may venture to say, these
are never sent upon Trifles, never sent but on extraordinary Occasion^, and to
execute some special Commission; and this comes directly to the Case in hand.

IN the next Place I demand, when could it be said, or what Example can be
given, where an Angel from Heaven has been sent to give any particular Person
Notice of approaching Dangers, and at the same time left the Mind unalarm'd,
and in a state of Indolence, not capable of rouzing it self up to shun and
avoid the Danger threatened, or without Direction and Assistance to prevent or
escape it; this is what I allege is unworthy of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness.

LOOK into all the Messages or Notices that have been given from Heaven on such
Occasions, in all the Histories of the Scripture, or almost ^lsewhere, and you
will see the difference evidently. Take a few for Example.

TWO Angels are sent to Sodom, not only to destroy the City for its Wickedness,
but to save Let. Well, they come to him, they tell him what they are about to
do, and that they are sent to do it; namely, to burn the City. This might have
been enough; and perhaps, had it been notic'd to him by the Spirits I am
speaking of, this had been all; and if Lot had not taken their kind
Information, it had been his own Fault; nay, as it was, the Text says, Lot
lingered, and it is plain he left the City with a kind of Reluctance.

BUT the kind Messengers do not satisfy themselves with giving him the
Warning, but they rouse up his Indolence. See Genesis xix. 12. Have thou any here?
any that thou have a Respect for, or Interest in, bring them out of this Place.
ver. 13. We will destroy this Place. There Is a hint of the Danger approaching,
and which is a wise Direction what to do, but this does not satisfy: the Man
is not barely cautioned, and directed, but he is to be saved; and therefore the
beneficent Hand is not content to allarm and counsel him; but, ver. 15. When
the Morning arose they hastened LOT; they stirred up his unconcerned Temper,
ARISE, lest thou be consumed in the Iniquity of the City; and even this being
not enough, for LOT lingered still, and, as I said, seemed loath to leave the
Place; they as it were dragged him out; ver. 16. they laid hold of his Hand,
and upon the Hand of his Wife, and upon the Hand of his two Daughters, and
brought him forth, and set him without the City; and what is the reason of all
this? the Words are express, the Lord being merciful to him.

THE rest of the Story is well known: when they had brought him forth, they let
him know he would not be safe even there; but adds, Escape for thy Life, look
not behind thee: Nay, he tells him whither he should go, ver. 17. Escape to the
Mountain lest thou be consumed. Here was a Message like a Work of Heaven; here
was the Warning of Danger, and Directions to take proper Measures for
Deliverance, and those Measures pointed out even to the very Place where he
should be safe.

TAKE another Place exactly like this, Matt. ii. 13. An Angel is sent to Joseph
in a Dream, to warn him of the Danger attending the Holy Infant, then in the
Virgin Mother's Arms: the Words are express; HEROD will seek the young Child to
destroy him: Does the blessed Notice leave Joseph to sleep on, to say it is
nothing but a Dream? I don't see any Danger, I believe there is nothing in it;
as is our Language often on such Occasions. No, no; This Message was from
Heaven, who never gives such Notice of Evil, and then leaves us unallarm'd,
undirected, supine and easy, 'till it falls upon us without Remedy; the Angel
adds presently, ARISE and take the young Child and his Mother, and flee into
Egypt, and be thou there 'till I bring thee Word.

THUS you see the Nature of the Divine Proceedings, the effectual manner of
Notices from Heaven; the Danger is told, and then the Way to avoid it; and
always with a hasting Allarm, Up, get thee out of the City; Arise, flee into
Egypt; and the like.

ANOTHER is in the Story of Peter in the Prison: an Angel is sent to deliver
him, Acts xii. and what does the Angel do? a Light shined in the Prison, and he
smote him on the Side; this was to awaken and alarm him; this, and a Light to
show him the Way, was sufficient to have put him upon trying to escape. But the
Angel did not come so far to do his Work by Halves, but having awaked him he
goes on with his Work, and to perfect his Deliverance; ARISE QUICKLY Peter, and
raised him up, and then made the Chains fall off from his Hands.

NOR yet had he done; gird thy self, says the Angel, and bind on thy Sandals,
or as we would say, put on your Shoes: still Peter was at a loss what to do;
then the Angel adds, cast thy Garment about thee, and follow me. Then he leads
him through all the Wards, and opens the Iron Gate for him, and never left him
'till he had brought him out into the Street; nay, through one Street, that the
Keepers should not know which way to pursue him.

THIS was an Appearance or Apparition to the Purpose; and such have been all
those Transactions of Heaven, which have been under the Hands of express
Messengers. You see all these three were done by Angels sent on purpose; Peter
expresses it in so many Words, Acts xii. 11. Now I know of a surety, that the
LORD has sent his Angel, and has delivered me.

NOW let us see how it has fared with those who have received Notices of
approaching Danger from the invisible World, by the Hands of other Messengers.

JULIUS CAESAR had several Hints given him of his approaching Fate; one
particular Southsayer pointed out the very Day to him, namely, the Ides of
March, but he had no Power to avoid his Fate. The kind Spirit that foreboded,
and gave hints to him, that he was in Danger, as if contented with having done
his parr, left him to be murdered. No Assistance given him to rouse up his
Spirits to take the Alarm: He is not led by the Hand, and told, go not into the
Senate House, as was done for Lot; escape for thy Life. The kind Monitor does
not name the Traitors and Assassinators to him, and say Brutus, and Cassius,
Casca, and others, wait there to kill you; as the Angel to Joseph, Herod will
seek the young Child to destroy him.

AND on the other side, Caesar, bold and unalarm'd, indolent, and having things
not sufficiently explained to him; (and the good Spirit, as may be supposed,
able to do no more for him;) goes on, enters the Senate House, mocks the
Southsayer, and tells him the Ides of March are come, who sharply returned, But
they are not past. In a word, neglecting his own Safety, and wanting a complete
Information, he goes into the Senate, and is murdered.

JULIAN the Apostate is another Example: He had a thousand ill Omens, as they
called them, which attended him at and before his undertaking the Persian War;
such as the dying of the Consul Julianus of his own Name, the burning of the
Temple of Apollo, and several other Accidents; and though he was the most
superstitious of all the Heathen Emperors that were before him, and sent to all
the Oracles, to all the Augurs and Southsayers he could hear of, insomuch that
the Citizens of Antioch made a Jest of him for it; Yet he was so blinded by his
Flatterers, or deluded by the Priests, who construed the worst and most
portentous things, to mean the best Events; or, which is beyond it all, by the
superior Decree of an appointed Vengeance; that he went on and was killed in
the very beginning of the War; the first Battle with the Persians carried him
off.

I MIGHT multiply Examples of the like kind, even on both sides, and especially
on the last; but it is sufficient; our own Experience will confirm it: secret
Notices are daily given us of capital Dangers attending, and yet how do the
most vigilant Observers of those Signals, and the most eminent Omen-Hunters,
even after those Notices, sit still, and grow indolent? or else, amazed and
bewildered, they say, I know there is something a coming to me, some Mischief
attends me, I have plain Notice of it; but I don't know what it is, I cannot
tell what to do; I can do nothing to avoid or prevent it. And thus they fall
into the Pit, as we may say, with their Eyes open, and in spite of the kind
Spirit's beneficent Warning.

WHAT can this be? but because the Spirit, though really kind and beneficent, yet
limited and impotent in Power, was able to do no more than to give the Hint,
leaving the Person to his own Prudence to guard and direct himself?

I MIGHT add here what it is rational enough to suggest, viz. that Heaven in its
infinite Wisdom and Goodness may have appointed these Good Spirits to give such
Notices, yet allowing them to do no more, that the Mind of Man being duly
alarmed at approaching Evil, and believing something very fatal to him is at
Hand; but seeing no kind Being directing what M^thods to take for his
Deliverance, or for escaping the impending Mischief, should turn his Eyes (at
least) a little upwards, and call for Direction and Council from that Hand, who
alone can both direct and deliver.

BUT hold! whither am I going? This looks like Religion, and we must not talk a
Word of that, if we expect to be agreeable. Unhappy Times! where to be serious,
is to be dull and grave, and consequently to write without Spirit. We must talk
politely, not religiously; we may show the Scholar, but must not show a Word of
the Christian; so we may quote profane History, but not sacred; and a Story
out of Lucan or Plutarch, Tully, or Virgil will go down, but not a Word out of
Moses or Joshua.

WELL, we must comply however; the Humor of the Day must prevail; and as there
is no instructing you without pleasing you, and no pleasing you but in your own
Way, we must go on in that Way; the Understanding must be refined by Allegory
and Enigma; you must see the Sun through the Cloud, and relish Light by the
help of Darkness; the Taste must be rectified by Salts, the Appetite whetted by
Bitters; in a word, the Manners must be reformed in Masquerade, Devotion
quickened by the Stage not the Pulpit, and Wit be brightened by Satyrs upon
Sense.

THIS Hypothesis, of a new supposed Class of Spirits, would lead me into a
great many useful Speculations; and I might remark with great Advantages from
it, upon the general Indolence, which it is evident has so fatally possessed
ou^ Men of Wit in this Age. To see a Fool, a Fop, believe himself inspired, a
Fellow that washes his Hands fifty times a day, but if he would be truly
cleanly, should have his Brains taken out and washed, his Scull Trapan'd, and
placed with the hind-side before, that his Understanding, which Nature placed
by Mistake, with the Bottom upward, may be set right, and his Memory placed in
a right Position; To this unscrew'd Engine talk of Spirits, and of the
invisible World, and of his conversing with unembodied Soul, when he has hardly
Brains to converse with any thing but a Pack of Hounds, and owes it only to his
being a Fool, that he does not converse with the Devil! who if he has any
Spirit about him, it must be one of these indolent Angels I speak of; and if he
has not been listed among the Infernals, it has not been for want of
Wickedness, but for want of Wit.

I DON'T wonder such as these go a mobbing among those meanest of mad Things
called FreeMasons; rough Cheats, and confessed Delusions are the fittest things
to amuse them. They are like those foolish Fish that are caught in large Nets,
that might get out at every Square of the Mash, but hang by the Gills upon the
mere Thread, and choose to hamper and tangle themselves, when there is no
occasion for it, and are taken even in those Snares that are not laid for them.

CHAP. V. Of the Appearance of Departed Unembodied Soul.
I NOW come to the main and most disputed Part of shadowy Appearance, viz. the
Apparition of Unembodied Soul.

IT is a material Difficulty here, and ought to be considered with the utmost
Plainness, (viz.) what we mean by Unembodied Soul; whether we understand Souls
which have been encas'd in Flesh, but being unhous'd are now moving about, in
what State we know not, and are to be spoken of as in their separate Capacity:
Or whether there is any such thing as a Mass of Soul, as a learned but pretty
much inconsistent W^iter calls it, which waits to be embodied, as the superior
Disposer of that Affair, (be that who or what he pleases) may direct.

THIS I confess is to me something unintelligible, looks a little Platonic,
and as if it were akin to the Transmigration-Whimsie of the Ancients; but if
they would found it upon any thing rational, it must be upon the Suggestion
mentioned above, viz. of a middle Class of Spirit, neither AngelickHeavenly, or
Angelick-Infernal: But Spirits inhabiting the invisible Spaces, and allowed to
act and appear here, under express and greatly strained Limitations, such as
are already described, and of which much more may still be said.

BUT that I may clear up your Doubt as to the Part I am upon, I have added at
the Head of this Section, the Word Departed, to intimate to you, that I am
Orthodox in my Notion; that I am none of the Sect of Soul-Sleepers, or for
imprisoning Souls in a Limbus of the Ancients; but that, in a few Words, by the
Appearance of Souls Unembodied, I mean such as having been embodied or
imprisoned in Flesh, are discharged from that Confinement, or as I call it
unhous'd and turned out of Possession. For I cannot agree that the Soul is in
the Body, as in a Prison; but rather that, like a rich Nobleman, he is pleased
to inhabit a fine Country Seat or Palace of his own Building, where he resolves
to live and enjoy himself, and does so, 'till by the Fate of things his fine
Palace being over-turn'd, whether by an Earthquake or otherwise, is buried in
its own Ruins, and the noble Owner turned out of Possession, without a House.

THIS Soul, we are told, and I concur in the Opinion, has sometimes made a Tour
back into this World; whether Earth, or the Atmo^phere of the Earth, call it
where you will, and express it how you will, it matters not much: Whence it
comes, how far the Journey, how, and why it came hither, and above all, how it
goes back again, and what those various Apparitions are which counterfeit these
Spirits: enquire within, and you shall know farther.

THAT the Unembodied Souls of Men Dead, as we say Departed, have appeared, we
have affirmed from the Authority of the Scripture; which I must allow to be an
authentic Document, whatever the Reader may please to do; 'till a History more
authentic, and of better Authority may be produced in the Room of it.

AS to the Appearance of Samuel, raised by the Witch, I despise it, as it is
offered in the Capacity of a Soul, much more as the Unembodied Soul of Samuel;
which though it might have been caused to appear, as the Sovereign of all
Spirits, with whom the Soul of Samuel is at Rest, had thought fit; yet could no
more be summoned from that Rest, by the Conjuration of an old Witch, than the
Devil could fetch it out of Heaven by Force. Nor was it likely that God, who
refused so much as to speak to that abandoned Prince, whom he had so
righteously rejected, and that would answer him neither by Urim, or by Thummim,
that would neither hear his Prayer, or accept his Offering, would hear a Witch,
a Creature likewise sentenced to Death by his own righteous Law, and send
Samuel at her Infernal Paw-wawing from Heaven, to tell Saul that tomorrow he
should be cut in Pieces by the Philistines; there seems to be no Consistency at
all in it, no, none at all.

THE Appearance of the Thing called Samuel, was, in my Opinion, neither more or
less than a Phantasm or Spectre, which (as the Devil is allowed to do) might
personate the old departed Prophet, and who, at the Witch's Summons, and by
Heaven's Permission, came up to pronounce the dreadful Sentence upon Saul, and
let him see what was the Effect of his forsaking God, and rejecting his Prophet
Samuel. And thus it might be allowed also to speak in the first Person of the
Prophet, as it did; nor do I say, or think, as some do, that it was the Devil
in Samuel's Likeness; if it had, it is not likely the old Woman would have been
so frighted as to cry out, seeing she was better acquainted with the Devil,
than to be surpised, if it had been her old Familiar.

BUT she saw something she did not expect, and perhaps had never seen before;
for she tells the King, she saw Gods ascending out of the Earth; by which I
cannot but understand, she saw some of those Spirits which I have mentioned,
which are not Infernal, and who might foresee what the Devil himself cannot;
for I have no reason to believe that Satan knows any thing of Futurity.

IF it be asked here, by what Authority the Witch could bring up one even of
these Spirits; that indeed may be difficult to answer, other than thus, that it
might be as Balaam was overruled to bless, when he intended to curse; and that
at her Call, and to pronounce the approaching Fate of Saul, and Israel with
him, she might be overruled, and so called up, or called in, a good Spirit
instead of the Devil.

AS for the Spectre's speaking in the Name of Samuel in the Scripture, and the
Text representing it as if it were really Samuel himself, 1 Samuel xxviii. 15.
And Samuel said to Saul, why have thou ^isquieted me, to bring me up? I take it
to be an Expression ad Hominem, to the common Understanding, and to be
understood as all Allegorick or Figurative Expressions are understood; and it
no more proves that it was Samuel, and is no more to be taken literally, than
the other Words in the same Verse are to be literally understood.

1. WHY have thou disquieted me? as if it was in Readiness Power, by the
Conjurations of an abhorred condemned Limb of the Devil, a proscribed Witch, to
disquiet the departed Soul of Samuel; the Meaning is no more than this, What is
your Business with me, what do you trouble me for? You that despised me, and
acted contrary to all my Directions, and would go on in your Perverseness in
spite of me, and of all I could say to you; what do you come to me for, now I
am dead?

2. TO bring me up? intimating that Samuel was below, or was called ab Inferis;
which is contrary to Reason as well as Religion, and neither consists either
with our Notion, or any body's else, except it be the Soul-sleepers, who tell
us, the Soul sleeps with the Body in the Grave 'till the Resurrection; and if
so, then must the old Woman have had Power to awake him whenever she pleased.

UPON the whole, it seems this Woman was a Witch of some Eminency, and had more
than ordinary Power in her way. For when Saul applies to her, she asks him,
Whom shall I bring up? intimating that she was able to bring up who she would,
either from Heaven or Hell.

THIS Boldness plainly infers, that she had no Power at all, but this; that
being a Witch, and one that had a Familiar Spirit, she could cause her Familiar
or Devil, call it what we will, to appear and personate who she pleased to
name. For why should not the Devil be as able to dress himself up like one dead
Person, as another? and why not appear as well in the Shape of a dead Man, as
of a living One?

SO that to me there is no more Difficulty in his Dressing himself like Samuel,
than there was in calling himself so, or than speaking in the first Person of
Samuel, as above; Why disquiet ME, and why bring ME up? All that seems
inexplicable in it is, how he should be able to tell Saul what should happen,
(viz.) that GOD would deliver Israel into the Hands of the Philistines, and him
(Saul) with them, and that tomorrow he should be with him; that is, among the
Dead, should be killed in the Battle. This indeed has something difficult in
it, because the Devil is not allowed to be a Prophet, or able to predict what
is to come. But these things may be all answered by the Story of Balaam, where
the wicked Creature, though a Wizard, and a Conjurer, yet was directed, not only
to bless Israel in spite of all the Gifts and Rewards that the King of Moab
offered him, but was enabled to prophesy of Christ, and foretell the glorious
appearing of the Messiah; Numb. xxiv. 17. I shall see him but not now, I shall
bohold him but not nigh; There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter
shall arise out of Israel; and again, out of JACOB shall come he that shall
have Dominion. This was a plain and direct Prophecy of Christ, who is called in
the Revelations the Morning Star; and yet this Balaam ^as a Witch, a Dealer
with an Evil Spirit, and received the Wages of Unrighteousness.

THE next Testimony which we find in ^^cred History, of the Reality of
Appa^iti^ns, ^s it r^^^^cts the Souls of departed Persons, is the Appearance of
Moses and Elias with Jesus Christ in the Mount, at his Transfiguration; they
not only were there, really and personally, in their Habits, and so as to be
known to the Disciples, but they appeared talking with Christ; so that it was a
Perfect and Complete Apparition, (viz.) the particular Persons appearing, and
known by the Persons to whom they appeared, Mat. xvii. 3. And in another Place,
the manner of the Apparition is described, as also what they talked of, Luke
ix. 38. Who appeared in Glory, and talked of his Decease, which he should
accomplish in Jerusalem.

THIS is so plain and unquestionable an Appearance of departed Souls, that they
who dispute it, must not only doubt of the Divinity of Scripture, but must
dispute its being an authentic History; which its Enemies will hardly deny.

WE have yet another Testimony, and this is as positive and express as the
rest; Matthew. xxvii. 52. And the Graves were opened, and many of the BODIES of
the Saints which slept AROSE, and came out of the Graves after his
Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto man^

THIS is a remarkable Place, and would admit of a long Exposition; but I must
not preach, and if I might, I am no Annotator; as far as it is to my present
Purpose, the Bodies arose, that was extraord^^ary but that their Souls were
als^ ^^^h their Bodies, is not to be douted, at least by me; for I have no
Notion of the Body w^lking about without the Soul, nor do we ever read of
bodily Apparitions.

AN Apparition is vulgarly called by us a Ghost, by our Northern People a
Ghest; now the Ghost is a Spirit, and the Apparition of a Spirit has some Sense
in it; the Spirits also assuming a Shape or Body, whether Real, or in
Appearance only, has something in it to be talked about; but the Apparitions of
Body, moving, appearing, walking, or whatever we may call it, without Soul or
Spirit, is what was never heard of, and scarce ever suggested.

IT may be observed, that those Apparitions quoted from the Scripture, are not
Apparitions in Vision; Dreams in the Night, or supposed Appearances only, but
plain, open, daylight Visions; the former would not be to my purpose at all.
These were Apparitions that were spoken to, and conversed with; and this is a
Proof of what I allege, viz. that Spiri^s Unembodied may appear, may reassume
humane Shape, their own former Likeness, or any other, and may show themselves
to the World, or to as many Persons as they please.

THE Difficulties which attend this are not a few, though none of them destroy
the thing it self; as (1.) Whether the Souls of good or bad People unembodied,
are really in a State or Condition for such an Appearance? and whether it
consists with the just Notions we ought to have of the unalterable State? I
mean such Notions as conform to the Scripture, which, if the Parable of the
rich Man and Lazarus be a just Representation of it, seems impossible to be,
except on such an extraordinary Occasion as that of our Savior's
Transfiguration and Resurrection; that is, by Miracle.

LAZARUS, says the Text, was, upon his Death, carried by the Angels into
Abraham's Bosom; the rich Man died, and in Hell he lift up his Eyes. That this
is supposed to be immediately, is evident, because the rich Man speaks of his
Brethren that were then alive: If he was not carried thither immediately, he
would certainly not have been carried there at all 'till after the Great Audit;
so that it was plain he was there presently after his Death: and that Lazarus
was carried immediately to Heaven is evident also; because the rich Man is
brought in seeing him there, and desiring he may be sent to him.

TO say this is but a Parable, is to say what may be granted without Prejudice
to the Point in hand. For as it is a Parable, it would not have been apposite,
if it had not represented things as they were really to be; it would have been
a Delusion, and brought to deceive; whereas it is a Parable of our Lord's own
bringing, and all those Parables that Christ uttered, were the most perfect
Representations and Illustrations of the things which they were brought to set
forth; nor is any one of them lame in their Allusions, but instructive in every
Article; as the Parable of the Prodigal Son, for Example, and the Parable of
the King making a Marriage for his Son, and so of the rest. And why must this
alone be lame, and unapt for the purpose?

IF then this Parable is suited to represent the State of the Souls of the
Departed, those Souls then can no w^^ be concerned in the Apparitions which we
are speaking of; except as is before excepted, viz. on such extraordinary
Occasions, as that of our Savior (...) must be acknowledged to be.

IF then, neither the Souls or Spirits of the Blessed or the Cursed, the Happy
or Miserable, the Saved or the Condemned, are concerned in those Appearances,
who then are these Inhabitants of the invisible World? What are they that
constitute and possess this World of Spirits, so much talked of? And if the
immense Spac^s are taken up, if they are peopled by any spirituous Creatures,
if any thing but Stars and Planets range through the empty Place, as Job calls
it, Job xxvi. 7. what are they, and what are the Spirits that inhabit those
Worlds?

THERE must certainly be a World of Spirits, or of Spirit, from whence we
receive the frequent Visits in Public, and the frequent Notices in Private,
which are so perceptible to us, and which we are so uneasy about: if they are
neither good Spirits or bad, if they have neither Power to do us Good or Hurt,
as I see a great d^al of Reason to believe, then we have not so much Re^^on to
be terrified about them as we generally are: but of that herea^ter.

AS to the Locality of the Devil, and his Appearance, that indeed is another
Ar^^cl^^ and he may, as is said already, cov^r him^^lf with what Shapes, human
or brut^^^ h^ pleases; but then this would bring all Apparition to b by the
Appearance of the Devil, and all the Empire of the Air to be possessed by him;
which I cannot grant: Particularly, because, as I said, some of these
Apparitions come of good Errands, to prevent Mischief, to protect Innocence and
Virtu^, and to discover Injury, Injustice and Oppr^ssion; all which are things
very much out of ^^e Devil's way, remote from his Practice, and much more
remote from his Design: The Spirits I speak of must be of a higher Original;
they must be Heaven-born, of the glorious Original of angelick Species; and as
all things are known by their Consequences, so they are known by their Actings;
they do Heaven's Work, are under his immediate Government and Direction, and
are honored with his special Commission; they are employed in his immediate
Business, namely, the common Good of his Creature Man: They that do Good,
demonstrate in the best manner that they are good.

SO that every way we should meet with some Difficulty in this Case, unless
solved, as I said before, by the denominating another Class of Spirits neither
immediately celestial, or at all infernal; neither embodied, or that have been
embodied, or that shall ever be embodied.

IT cannot be expected I should describe what these are, and in what Condition;
it is sufficient that I only say Such may be there, and that they may be such
as he thinks good to place there who made that empty Place; I may as well ask
the Enquirer what sort of Inhabitants they are who possess the Moon or any of
the Planets, and whether they dwell in a State of Innocence, or have contracted
Guilt; and if the latter, whether there is a glorious Establishment of
Redemption, and a Covenant of Life granted for them, as there is here, by the
Purchase and Merit of a Savior?

IT is no fair Question to ask me a Demonstration for an Hypothesis; or is it
reasonable to tell me they will not believe it, because I cannot prove the
Affirmative of what I do not affirm. I advance the Probability, and say, that
it is the more Probable, because (as they say of the new Philosophy) by this we
can solve several other Phoenomena, which we cannot otherwise account for; and
I allege it is much more probable and more rational to suggest it, than it is
that the Planets should be inhabited, for which it is certain that God must have
created a new Sp^cies of Creatures, or that none can dwell there.

THE Waste or the empty Space, as ^ob (...) it is full of Spirits; I believe
that may be t^ke^ for granted: they are placed there, if they (...) by the
powerful Hand of the Creator: the^^ is no Philosophy can be pleaded against the
Place being habitable; whereas the Objections against the Planets being
habitable are unanswerable, but by the Absurdity of bringing Almighty Power in
to (...) several new Species of Creatures, some to liv^ (...) Fire, some in
Frost, some in all Darkness and Ice, some in boiling Waters and scalding Air.

THE Inhabitants which I suggest are created for the Regions of the invisible
World, are Spirits, invisible Substances, Bodies without Body, such as are
proper for the Expanse in which they live, and eligible for us to conceive of;
and though we cannot grasp a Spirit with our Hands, feel it and see it, yet we
can in some manner conceive of it. But, for the planetary Inhabitants, we
cannot account for them to our selves or any one else, nor can we conceive any
thing of them that we can say is probable or rational

IS it at all irrational to suppose, or improbable to be, that God may have
made a Degree of Angels or of ministering Spirits (whether they are angelick, or
of other Species is not for us to determine) who may be of a differing Degree,
appointed for a differing Residence, and to different Employments from the
superior Angels, for a Season?

AS there are different Degrees of Glory in Heaven, Stars of different
Magnitude and Luster in the Firmament, so may there not be Angels or Spirits of
differing Quality and Degrees of Power and Favor? why else are they called
Thrones, and Dominions, Principalities, and Powers? they are all Titles of
Honor given to the Angels in the Scripture, Ephesians. i. 21. and vi. 12. If there
be several Titles, there must be several Degrees.

THERE can be no Superior, if there are no Inferior; what can we understand by
Thrones and Principalities in Heaven, but Degrees of Angels? Besides, what do
we understand by Angels and ArchAngels? 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16. shall descend with the
Voice of an Archangel; and again, Jude ver. 3. Michael the Archangel.

IF there are Angels which are not Archangels, but of an inferior Degree; so
there may be also different Degrees among the Angels which are not Archangels;
and some of these may be appointed their Residence in the Air or Atmosphere of
this World, (Earth) or within the Compass of this particular Solar System, (for
I allow there may be several like Systems^)

THUS those that will suppose these Appearances to be of none but Angels, I
shall not contend at all with them: I exclude no Species of Spirits, but the
departed unembodied Souls of Men: I have allowed Apparitions to the Devil
himself upon his own wicked and proper Occasions. I only cannot grant, that
because God can, therefore he does employ him, upon his own gracious and
beneficent Orders to his Creature; This must at least seem to bring Providence
to a Necessity of employing him for want of other Officers, which I think is
highly detracting, and dishonouring of the divine Majesty, as if he was obliged
to employ the Devil, as we say, for want of a Better.

BUT excluding Satan, I think God does not want Agents; he has apparently
posted an Army of ministering Spirits, call them Angels if you will, or what
else you please; I say, posted them round this Unequal, this Globe the Earth, to
be ready at all Events, to execute his Orders and to do his Will, reserving
still to himself to send express Messengers of a superior Rank on extraordinary
Occasions.

I MAKE no question but these are the Angels which carried away Lazarus into
Abraham's Bosom, I mean which are supposed to do so.

I DOUBT not, these are the Angels of which Christ says, his Father, if he had
prayed, would have sent him more than twelve Legions for his Guard.

TO say it is not to be expected God should cause such an Host of glorious
Spirits to attend on this little Point the Earth, and this despicable Species
called Man, would be but to oblige me to say, What may not God be supposed to
do for that Creature whom he so loved as to send his only begotten Son to
redeem? So at least that Question is fully answered.

NOW, these Spirits, let them be what they will, and call them Angels if you
please, I conceive these are they whose Appearances give us so much Difficulty
to solve: These may, without any Absurdity, b^ supposed capable of assuming
Shape, conversing with Mankind, either in the ordinary or extraordinary Way,
either by Voice and Sound, though in Appearan^e^ and ^orrow'd Shapes; or by
private Notices of things, Impulses, Forebodings, Misgivings, an^ ot^^r
^mperceptible Communications to the Minds of Men, as God their great Employer
may direct.

NOR are these Notions of them at all absurd or inconceivable, though the Manner
how they act may not be understood by us: It Is but Soul conversing with Soul,
Spirit communicating to Spirit, one intellectual Being to another, and by
secret Conveyances, such as Souls converse by.

NEITHER is the Apparition of these Spirits any Absurdity; these may be
intimate with us, appear to us, be concerned about us, without any thing
unintelligible in it: Why may not one Spirit be so as well as another; and one
Kind or Species of Spirits as well as another?

IF these are innocent, good-meaning, and bene^^cent Spirits, why may it not
consist with the Wisdom and Goodness of God to suffer such to be conversant
with Men, and to have Acce^s to the Spirits embodied; as well as to allow the
Devil and evil Spirits to converse so among us to our Hurt?

BUT let me give one Caution here, and enter my Protest against the Power, or
Pretenses to the Power, of raising, or as it is called, bringing up these
Spirits. To call them, and summon them up for Intelligence of human Affairs,
and this by Magic and Conjurations, which we vulgarly and justly enough call
the Black Art; I cannot allow this Part of Science to have any Influence upon,
or Command over, any good Spirit: But that, as the Witch of Endor obtained of
the Devil to personate the old Prophet Samuel, and appear in his Shape, speak
in his Name, and act the Prophet in Masquerade; so these Men of Art may bring
the Devil to mimick a good Spirit, call himself an Inhabitant of the World of
Spirits, and so delude Mankind, as he does in almost every thing he says to
them; But he cannot really call up one of these independent free Spirits, who
are perfectly out of his reach wherever they are; and whose angelick Nature
places them above, not under him, or at his Command.

SATAN is a conquered, subdued Enemy; and these indeed were his Conquerors, and
are still his Terror; He abhors them, and hates them, and flees before them:
And what if I should say they were placed in this Situation, (namely, in the
invisible Regions near and about this World) for this very Reason, viz. to keep
under this ArchEnemy and Rebel? as a conquering Prince having obtained a
glorious Victory over a powerful Rebel, though he retires from the Country with
his Troops, the War being over, yet leaves a good Body of Forces to keep the
Peace of the Country, and to awe the Rebels from any farther Attempt.

THUS they are Guardian Angels really, and in the very Let^er of it, without
being obliged to attend at every particular Man's Ear or Elbow. Mankind are
thus truly said to be in the Hands of God always; and Providence, which
constantly works by Means and Instruments, has the Government of the World
actually in his Administration, not only by his infinite Power, but by
immediate Deputation, and the subdued Devil is a Prisoner of War both chained
and restrained.

CHAP. VI. Of the Manner How the Spirits of every Kind, which can or do appear
among us, manage their Appearance; and How they proceed.
THE Possibility being thus settled, and it being granted that Spirits, or
detached Angels, do converse with Mankind visibly as well as invisibly, and
have Access to us, to our Souls as well as Bodies, as well by secret
Communication, as by open and public Apparition; it remains to enquire into
the Manner how this Conversation is carried on.

I HAVE already entered my Protest against all those Arts called Magical and
Diabolic, by which Man is made capable (at least) of being Aggressor in this
Communication, that he can call up these Spirits, or call 'em down rather, and
begin the Conversation when he pleases.

WHETHER by Compact and secret Hellish Familiarity with the Devil he may not
obtain Leave to use Satan with such Freedom, I will not determine; I doubt he
may: for the Devil may depute such and such Powers and Privileges to his
Confederates, as to his Honor in his great Wisdom shall seem meet: But that he
can empower them to do the like with those good and beneficent Spirits of the
invisible World, who are (I have supposed) Spirits, not Devils, that I deny,
nor do I see any Reason to grant it.

I COME then to the Manner the Spirits, which I would suppose may inhabit the
utmost Waste, are able to correspond with us: and first, as Spirits or Angels,
call them as you will, they are to be supposed, like other Spirits, to have an
extensive Knowledge, and a View of all created Substances, at least on this
side Heaven; a vast capacious Understanding, an unbounded Sight, a Liberty of
Loco-mo^ion, passing from one Region to another, from one Planet to another;
they are not congealed by Cold, or calcined by Heat; that they are able to
exist in all Climates, even from Saturn to Mercury; that they may go and come,
appear and disappear, here or where else they please; in a word, that they are
free Agents, as well in their Motions as Actings. Hence they are necessarily to
be supposed to know all things needful to he known, relating to us, as well as
to other things; that they can take Cognizance of human Affairs, and that not
by Grant or License, or by second hand Information from Hell, from the infernal
Spirit, or any other Place, but by their own angelick and spirituous
Penetration; and that they have no Dependence upon Satan, or any Power or
Person concerned with him; that they act also as Spirit on all Occasions.

THOUGH we see nothing of them, they see us; though we know nothing of them, they
know and are conversant about us, are capable of being affected and moved in
our Behalf, and to concern themselves for our Good on many Accounts: Hence they
often give us Notices and Warnings of Evils attending us, though they cannot act
so upon material Objects, as to interfere with our Affairs, overruled our Fate,
or direct us how to avoid the Evils which they foresee, or to embrace the Good
which they see attending us; of which, and the Reasons of it, I have spoken
already.

AS they can thus communicate things to our Imagination, so we may suppose,
that in Prosecution of that beneficent Concern which they have for us, they can
and frequently do assume human Shape, and come to us, talk to us, and converse
intimately with us in Apparition and by Voice, nay even in Dialogue, Question
and Answer, a^ they see Occasion.

THIS conversing in Apparition, is what we call Walking; and when any such
thing is seen, we say a Spirit walks, or haunts such a Place; and though this is
a mighty terrible thing in the vulgar Appearance, and the People, when these
things appear to them, are apt to say they see the Devil; yet it i^ very often
a Mistake, and a very wide Mistake, as appears by the Consequence.

I HAVE heard of a Man who traveled four Years through most of the Northern
Countries of Europe with the Devil; if all those Specter or Apparitions are
Devils, which I must not grant; nor was this Spectre so insincere as to conceal
it self all ^he while from him, but discovered to him that he was but an
Apparition, without Body, Substance, or any thing but Shape.

IF the Account I have of this Apparition be true, and I have had it by me many
Years, he did him Good, and not Hurt; he guided him through Deserts and over
Mountains, over frozen Lakes, and little Seas covered with Snow; he diverted
him with Discourses of various Subjects, always issuing for his Good, and for
the Increase of Knowledge: He went with him over the Sea from Ireland to the
Coast of Norway: He procured Winds for him, without buying them of Witches and
Laplanders: He did not raise Storms for him, because being a Traveller and upon
a Voyage, he had no Occasion of them; but he foretold Storms punctually and
exactly, prevented the Ship's putting out to Sea when Storms were approaching;
found the Ship's Boat and Anchors, when the first was driven away in the Night,
and the second weighed and run away with by the Norwegians in the Dark, the
Ship having been obliged to slip and run up into Harbor; I say, he found them,
that is to say, directed the Seamen where to find them, and to discover the
Thieves.

HE did a thousand things for him, and for his Accommodation, in his Travels;
he was acquainted wherever he came, and procured his Fellow-Traveller
Entertainment and good Usage; he knew the Affairs of every Country, and the
very People too; he spoke every Language, German, Norse or Norway, Polish
Prussian, Russian, Hungarian, Tartarian, and Turkish.

HE past Rivers without Bridges, though he would never let his Fellow-Traveller
see him do tha^, or help him to do it; nor would he let him see him mount into
the Air upon any occasion whatever; but would set him in his Way, give him very
faithful Directions how to find the Places he was going to, and then strike off
some other Way, as if he had Business at this or that Place, and would not fail
to meet him again punctually at the place he appointed.

SOMETIMES he would be seen at a distance a Mile or more, today on his right,
tomorrow on his left Hand, and keeping even pace with him, come into the same
Village or Town where he lodged, and take up as it were at another Inn; but if
he inquired for him in the Morning he was always gone, and the People knew
nothing of him, except that they just saw such a Man the Evening before, but
that he did not stay.

WHEN he had traveled thus with him from Ireland, as I said, to the Coast of
Norway, where they were driven in by Storm; and after that by Sea round the
said Coast of Norway to Gottenburgh, where they put in again by contrary Winds,
he persuaded the Traveller not to go any farther in that Ship.

THE Traveller being Bound with the Vessel to Dantzick, and having a
considerable Quantity of Goods on Board, would by no means be prevailed with to
quit the Ship: His Fellow-Traveller told him he had the Second-sight, and that
he was assured the Ship should never come to Dantzick. However the Traveller
not giving so much Credit to him as that required, and not knowing any thing of
him at that time, but that he was a strange, intelligent, foreseeing Man (as he
called him) would continue the Voyage; whereupon the Stranger left him, and the
Ship pursuing the Voyage was surpised with another dangerous Storm; I say
another, because they had had one before. In this Tempest the Ship was driven
upon the Coast of Rugen, an Island on the German side of the Baltic, where with
much Difficulty they put into Straelsund, a Seaport of Pomeren, and there the
Traveller went on Shore.

HERE walking pensively and concerned about the event of his Fortune, and
fearing the Ship would really be lost, as his first Man had foretold him; I
say, walking very anxious upon the Key at Straelsund, there meets him a Man who
he was utterly a Stranger to, but who salutes him in English, calls him by his
Name, and asks him what he did there.

SURPISED with such a Salutation, and glad to see any Man in such a strange
remote Country that he was like to be acquainted with, and much more that could
call him by his Name, he returned his Compliment, and answered that indeed he
had not much Business there, but that he came thither by a very unfortunate
occasion.

I KNOW you are, says the Gentleman; you came in here last Night in yon Ship;
pointing to the Vessel which lay in the Road between the City and the Island of
Rugen.

I DID so, says the Traveller, and I am like to have but ill Luck with her.

I DOUBT so, says the Stranger, and I suppose that made you look so much
concerned.

I CANNOT deny, said he, but I might look troubled, I think I have Cause, for I
am here in a strange Country, without Acquaintance or Interest, and know not
yet what Condition the Ship is in, or my Goods, which I doubt are damaged.

I AM assured, says the Gentleman, the Ship will not be able to pursue her
Voyage, but perhaps your Cargo may be safe. I understand the Goods you have on
Board are Herrings.

THEY are so, says the Traveller; I have twelve Last of Herrings on board, and
we have had a long Voyage already.

I KNOW you have, said the Gentleman; but pull up your Spirits, your Fish is
all safe, and you may get it on Shore; and you shall either sell it here, or
get Ships here to Reload it again for Dantzick; and seeing you are a Stranger,
adds he, I will get you some assistance.

ALL this while he had not asked him his Name; but now he said to him, Will you
not let me know, Sir, who it is I am thus much obliged to?

FIRST, returns he, let me see and get you some help, that you may go
cheerfully about your Business, and we'll talk of that afterward; so he bad
him walk a little there, and he would come to him again.

HE had not walked long but he sees a Messenger coming to him, to tell him,
that there was an English Gentleman desired to speak with him at such a House,
and that he was to guide him to the place.

ACCORDINGLY he follows the Messenger, who brings him to a Public House where
were Three Gentlemen sitting in a Room, and the Man he had conversed with made
a fourth, who called him in, and bad him sit down, which he did.

THE Three Gentlemen saluted him very kindly, and one of them also in English,
and told him they had received an Account of his Circumstances from that
G^ntleman, and that they sent for him to comfort and assist him.

THIS was a kind and agreeable Surprise to him, and he could not but receive it
with all Civility and Acknowledgment possible. After which they asked him to
Sup with them, which he accepted of, and at Supper hearing the whole of the
Case, they sent for a Merchant of that City to come to them.

WHEN the Merchant was come they recommended the Stranger's Affair to him; and
he, the Merchant, was so assistant to the Stranger that he bo^ght all his Cargo
of Fish, or procured others to buy it, giving him a Price to his Satis^^ction,
and gave him as much Money there as he required, and good Bills payable at
Dantzick for the rest.

IN the mean time, (^or this was transacting several Days) the Three Gentlemen
continued exceeding courteous and obliging to him; and after many other
Civilities, they being traveling into Poland, invited the Traveller to go with
them as far as Dantzick, which they knew he was bound for, and that they would
subsist him at their own Charge so far. The Traveller considering his own
Condition, and that the Ship he came in was not in Condition to pursue the
Voyage, resolved to accept of the Offer, and accordingly prepared to go with
them: But he was extremely concerned that he could not see the kind Stranger
who had first saluted him as above, and who brought him to the Gentlemen that
were now so extraordinary civil to him; he inquired after him of the Messenger
that fetched him to that House, but he knew him not; he asked the People of the
House, but they could give no A^count of him; he asked the three Gentlemen
about him, but they knew nothing of him; the English Gentleman among them said,
he thought he belonged to that Gentleman, pointing to another of the three who
was a German; the German answered that he understood he was the third
Gentleman's Friend, who was a Swede, that is a Pomeranian, for Pomeren is under
the Dominion of the Swedes. But the Swede said he thought he was the English
Gentleman's Brother, for he spoke English very well; in a word, no body knew
him, and he saw him no more.

IN a Week more or thereabout the four Gentlemen (for now they were so many)
set out together, with every one a Servant; except our Traveller, who had none.
Every one that knows the Country from Stetin to Dantzick and Poland, knows that
it is a desert and wild Country very thin of Inhabitants, and consequently not
full of Towns; with several Woods and Wastes in their Way, very difficult to
Travel, and this obliged them several times to take Guides by the Way, so that
they made up with their Guides always Eight, sometimes Ten in Company, very
well armed, and tolerably well mounted.

THE third Day after they were past the Oder, and began to come out of that
Part of Pomeren which lies East of Stetin, and is called the Ducal Pomeren,
they observed a Man mean in Apparel, but appearing something more than merely
what Poverty represents, traveling the same Way as they did, but always
keeping at about the distance of half a Mile from them on their left Hand.

HE traveled on Foot, but kept full pace with them, and often was some way
before them; whether he was in a Track or Road, as they were, they could not
tell, but he kept such an equal Distance as if the Road he was in was Parallel
with theirs; indeed sometimes they lost sight of him for a while; yet they were
sure to find him again at some little distance, either before them or behind
them; and this continued three Days before they took any extraordinary notice
of him.

BUT the third Day they were a little more curious about him, and one of them
(with a Servant attending) rode from the Company, intending to speak with him;
but as soon as he saw them come toward him, the Stranger fled farther to the
Left from them; still however keeping on his Way forward, but plainly shunning
being spoken with; so the Gentleman and his Servant came back again, having
made no Discovery; except this, that the Stranger kept no Path or Track, that
there wa^ no Road or Way in the Place where he marched, bu^ that he only kept at
such a certain distance from them; from whence they concluded that he was only
some poor Man that was traveling ove^ that wild Country, and having gotten
some Intelligence of their Journey kept pace with them, to guide him the Way:
But two Things amuse^ them strangely that Third Day of their Travel.

1. THEY observed that Riding over a large Plain, where there were some few
scattering House^ which lay on the other side of the Road South, (for he kept
all along (before) on the North side o^ them) I say, passing over this Plain,
the Travelle^ keeping a little behind them crossed the Road, and going up to
one of the said scattered Houses, knocked at the Door and went in.

UPON this they resolved if possible to get some knowledge of him; so they rode
all up to another of those Houses: Here calling to the Inhabitants, though it was
no Inn or House of Entertainment, but a Poor Husbandman's Cottage, they got
Leave to refresh themselves, having Provisions and Wine of their own, and
giving the good Wife a ^mall Bottle of about half a Pint of Brandy at part^ng,
the People were abundantly satisfied.

HERE talking of the Traveller, and at what House he called in the Village,
(for though the Houses stood straggling over the waste, yet as there were near
twenty of them in all it was called a Town) here, I say, talking of the
Traveller and of his knocking at the Door of one of the Houses, the Woman of
the House understanding their Language, hastily asked, What, says she, have you
seen the Owke Mouraski? Who she meant, they did not know; but describing ^he
Person to her, and she also to them, they began to come to an Understanding.
Did he not keep Pace with you, says she, on the North side of the Road all the
Way? Yes, said they.

AY, says she, and had you offered to ride toward ^^m, you would always have
found him as far off as (...) first.

THAT amused them. Why, what is he? says one ^f the Gentlemen.

NAY we know not, says she, nor desire to ^now.

WHY so? says he.

BECAUSE, says she, he brings no good luck; pray at what House do ye say he
knocked at the Door?

THEY described the House, at which the Woman and all the Children fell a
crying, and making (...) great sign of Sorrow.

WHAT IS the Matter, says the Gentlemen, what ^re you disturbed at?

OF says the good Woman, that Owke Mouraski never calls at any House in the
Town, but some or other of the Family dies that Year.

BY this it seemed that he came often that Way, ^o he asked the Woman how often
he was used to ^e seen thereabouts.

SHE answered, Not often, perhaps once or twic^ a Year; and says she, sometimes
he passes by an^ calls or knocks at no House in his Way, and the^ adds she, we
are glad to see him.

WHY, says the Gentleman, what do you ta^ him to be the Devil?

NO, no, says she, not the Devil, no, he is a ver^ good Man.

BUT why are you so afraid of him then? says (...)

BECAUSE, says she, he knows more than (...) the Men in the World; he knows if
any o^ is to die, and then he knocks at the House to (...) them to be ready.

N. B. Here the Woman enquired more exac^ about the House where the Traveller
called, a^ the Gentleman going to the Door pointed it (...) to her, at which
she left off crying, and the rejoiced as much as she had lamented before; (...)
it seems she had mistaken it for another Ho^ which stood near it, and where her
own Fath^^ and Mother lived.

THEN he asked her what Countryman the Tr^veller was.

SHE said, they did not know that, for no Bo^ ever spoke to him, they were
afraid.

WHY, says he, when he knocks at the Doo^ don't ye speak to him?

NO, says she, nor does he speak a word; but ju^ as he goes away he will
sometimes say -- repeating a word which I do not remember, b^ signifies be
comforted; and then they are sure the Person shall be sick only, but shall not
die.

BUT, says he, do they entertain him, or give hi^ any thing?

YES, says she, they set Bread before him, an^ he takes a small Piece in his
Hand; but no Bod^ can say they ever saw him Eat.

BUT what do you take him to be then? says he^

A GOOD Angel, says the Woman; adding ano^er hard Word of their own, signifying
that he ^id no Hurt to any body; and, says she, to some Families he is a
Messenger of Good. All this gave them Amusement, but no particular
Satisfaction, and rather prompted their Curiosity to make farther En^uiry about
him. After about an Hour's refreshing themselves at this poor Cottage, they
proceeded on their Journey, and having rode about two Miles, they saw their old
Object again on the left or north ^ide of their Road, as before, and he kept in
their sight in the same manner all the rest of the Day.

THERE was a Town, I think it is called Kintzigen, or some such like Name, at a
few Miles distance, and where their Guide told them they should lodge, and
before they came to the Town there was a River, not a great or very wide River,
but too large to ride through it, and at the Town there is a very good stone
Bridge; built, as they were told, by ^he Ancestors of the Kings of Prussia,
that is, as I suppose, the old Dukes of Pomerania.

ACCORDINGLY they passed this Bridge, and ^hen went into the Town. It was most
natural to them to observe what Course the Traveller would take to pass the
River, who as he went on must necessarily come to the Bank, at near a Mile
distance from the Town, so they halted a little, one of them alighting from his
Horse, as if something had required their stay, that the Traveller might go on
before them, which he did.

OBSERVING him as narrowly as possible, they followed him (with their Eyes)
down to the very Edge of the River, nor did he stop or take notice of them,
though they saw him plainly to the very Bank; but here not being able to keep him
exactly in their sight every Moment, they immediately saw him going up the
rising Grounds, on the other side, without being capable of giving the least
accou^^ how he passed the Water.

THIS was the other Passage, which, I say, am^^sed them very much.

AS soon as they came into the Town where the^ were to lodge, their Guide
looking beyond the House where they stopped, called to them, Lo^ yonder, says
he, is your Traveller sitting at the Door of such an Inn or House, pointing to
the Place; and there they saw him plain at the Door ^^ting a piece of Bread,
and having a Pot or Jug (...) Polish Beer standing by him. One of the Gentlemen
(resolving, if possible, to speak with him) walked up^ his Boots to the Place,
seeing him sitting all the wh^ he was going, 'till coming very near, and
happe^ing to turn his Eyes but one Moment from hi^ when he looked again, the
Man was gone.

HE asked the People of the House about hi^ but they knew nothing of him, only
that as the said there was such a Man, but he was gone, (...) they neither knew
who he was, or whither he w^^ gone.

THEN he asked them if they did not know the Owke Mouraski; they said Yes, they
had heard (...) but they did not know him.

WHY, says the Gentleman, don't you know th^^ this was he that sat upon the
Bench?

NO, they said, that could not be he, that was ^ poor Countryman, a Traveller.

THE Gentleman assured them that was he; (...) which they seemed very much
concerned, but seeme^ very willing not to believe him.

WHY, says he, are you afraid of him?

NO, says they, but we don't like his coming t^ us, for, they say, he brings no
good to the Fami^^ where he comes.

BUT this Discourse ended, and the Gentleman gained no Information there.

THE next Day they had his Company again, as before; and passing by a single
House upon the Road, near a Village, but standing quite out of the Road, they
observed the Traveller to stop at that House, and go in.

BY this time their Curiosity was very much heightened, and they began to be
something uneasy about him; it was not very pleasant, they thought, to have the
Devil so near them, and they could think him to be nothing less; so they all
turned back, and resolved to go to the House, and if he was there to speak with
him, if possible; and if not, to inform themselves as much as they could about
him.

WHEN they came within about a quarter of a Mile of the House, they saw the
Traveller on the other side, having gone out at the back Door, and traveling
forward as unconcerned, and taking no notice of them, just as before.

THIS surprised them; however they went up to the House, and enquired about
him, as they did before: but here they received a quite differing Account of
him; here the People blessed him, called him by the same Name, but took him for
their good Angel, (as they called him,) that he always brought them good
Tidings, that they were sure it would fare well with them after he had been
with them; and a great deal more.

BUT to bring this Story to a conclusion, so far as it serves the present
Occasion: This Spectre, or Apparition, for so I must call it, attended them
'till they came within two Leagues of Dantzick, where the Gentlemen separated,
after a Day or two staying in the City; the three Gentlemen going from thence
to Mariemburgh in Polish Prussia, and our Traveller was left in Dantzick.

WHILE he was here a Man made acquaintance ^ith him who was bound to
Koningsberg, and our Traveller being resolved to go for Petersburg, was glad to
have this new Acquaintance, which he had, as we may say, picked up, to go with
him; so they embarked together in a small Hoy, upon the Sea or Lake called the
Frischaff, which carried them to Koningsberg. He gives a strange though diverting
Account of his Conversation with this Man, who told him so many Stories of
several kinds, that it amazed him; and he looked as if he knew all the World,
and all the People in it, and all things that had happened in it, or would
happen in it for ever to come, and something longer.

HOWEVER, as the Frischaff is not above three or four Days sail, and they were
quickly at Koningsberg, the Conversation was soon over, and this new
Acquaintance ended; but the Traveller continuing his Journey, enquired in the
City if there were any Passengers or Gentleman traveling toward Riga, either
by Land or by Sea; and being directed to a House where Strangers used to
resort, he found there several People bound for Riga, some Merchants, some
Country People, some SeafaringPeople, but most inclined to go by Sea, there
being Vessels always ready at the Pillan, which is a Town at the Mouth of the
Haff, ready to Sail for Riga, if Goods or Passengers presented.

BUT among them all there was an ancient Man, habited like a Russ, or rather
like a Greek Priest, with a long venerable Beard, a purple Robe or long
Garment, such as the Russians wear, a high stiffcrown'd Furr-cap, and a close
Vest about his Body, girded with a Silk Sash; and he declared himself for Riga;
but that being an old Man, he would not go by Sea, but that he had two Horses
in the City besides his own, having brought two Servants with him from Grodno
in Lithuania, but one of them had left him; so he offered the Traveller to lend
him one of his Horses for his Company, if he would travel with him to Mittan in
Courland, and thence to Riga.

IT will take up too much Room here, to give a full Account of the Travels of
this wandering Person, and how in almost every Place he found a new Shape ready
to thrust into his Company, and that for four Years intimate Ramble; but that
at last, being in Turkey, his latest Companion discovered to him that he was an
Inhabitant of an invisible Region, that he had been in his Company in all his
Journey in all the differing Figures that he had met with, and that in a Word
he was the same Person that embarked with him in Ireland, landed with him in
Norway, left him at Gottenburg, found him at Straelsund, dogged him upon the
way to Dantzick, sailed with him to Koningsberg, lent him a Horse to go to
Riga, and so on; and that he had only put on so many Shapes and Appearances,
that he might not be uneasy with him, and tired of his Company.

HOW they went on together after that, and the Conversation that passed between
them after the Discovery; how familiar Friends they were for some Months after,
and what Reasons he gave why he would never believe that it was a Devil, but a
good and kind Spirit sent to take Care of him, and assist him in his Travels;
all that, as foreign to my present Purpose, I omit. Perhaps the Story may see
the World by itself, and well worth reading it will be, if it does. But of that
by the by.

AS I do not here enter into the Authority of the Story, (though, as I said, I
have seen it in Manuscript many Years ago) so I have no more to say from it
than this, that if such good Spirits are conversant with Mankind, and resident
in the invisible Spaces, we know not where; if we have reason to believe they
are not Angels, and yet really by their Actions cannot be Devils; then it
follows that there are a certain middle Species of Spirits in Being; let them
be what they will, let them be employed, directed, limited and restrained, how
and in what manner he pleases who is their Maker, and who ought to be their
Guide and Director; that is not the matter, nor can it be enquired into here;
the Question before us is only whether such there are, or no?

NOW if it be granted that there are such, and that brings it down to the
present Case, if there are such, then all Apparitions are not Devils; no, nor
are they walking disturbed Souls of Men lately embodied and departed: a Notion
empty and not to be defended; incongruous, and inconsistent either with
Scripture, the Christian Religion, or Reason, and founded only in the bewildred
Imaginations and Dreams of ignorant People, who neither know how or by what
Rules to judge of such Things, or are capable of right Conceptions about them;
who do not give themselves time to ex^rcise that little Power of thinking that
they are Masters of, and so are left to the Darkness of their own Fancies,
thinking every thing they see is a Devil, merely because they know not what
else to make of it, what other Name to give it, or that it can be possible any
thing but Devils or Ang^ls can come of such Errands.

BY this Mistake they give the Devil the Honor of many an Action, which he is
too much a Devil to have any hand in; ascribe Works of Charity and Benevolence
to him; make him move injurious and knavish Men to do Justice, Thieves to make
Restitution, cruel and inhuman Wretches to be merciful, Cheats to turn honest,
Robbers to desist, and Sinners to repent.

STORY tells us, that Hind that famous out-lawed Robber, the most famous since
Robin Hood, met a Spectre upon the Road, in a Place called StangateHole, in
Hunti^gtonshire, where he used to commit his Robberies; and famous for many a
Highway Robbery since that.

THE Spectre appeared in the Habit of a plain Country Grazier; and as the
Devil, you may suppose, knew very well the Haunts and Retreats that this Hind
used to frequent; he comes into the Inn, and taking up his Quarters, puts up
his Horse, and makes the Hostler carry up his Portmanteau, which was very
heavy, into his Chamber; when he was in the Chamber he opens his Pack, takes
out his Money, which seemed to be in several small Parcels, and puts it
together into no more than two Bags, that it might make an equal weight to each
side of his Horse, and make as much show of it as possible.

HOUSES that entertain Rogues are seldom without Spies to give them due
Intelligence; Hind gets Notice of the Money, sees the Man, sees the Horse, that
he may know him again; finds out which Way the Countryman travels, meets him at
Stangate-Hole, just in the bottom between the two Hills, and stops him, telling
him he must deliver his Money.

WHEN he named the Money the Grazier feigns himself surprised, puts on the
Pannick, trembles, and is frighted, and with a pitiful Tone says, I am (as you
see) but a poor Man; indeed, Sir, I have no Money; [there the Devil showed that
he could speak Truth when it served his Occasion.] O you old Dog, says he, have
you no Money? Come, open your Cloak-bag, and give me the two Bags, one on one
side your Saddle, and one on to other: what, have you no Money, and yet your
Bags were too heavy to lie all on one side? Come, come, deliver, or I Will cut
you to Pieces this Moment. (There he was out too, and threatened more than he
could do.) Well, the poor Devil whines and cries, and tells him he must be
mistaken, he took him for another Man sure, for indeed he had no Money.

COME, come, says Hind, come along with me; and so he takes his Horse by the
Bridle and leads him out of the Road into the Woods, which are very thick there
on both sides, and the business was too long to stand in the open Road all the
while to do it.

WHEN he had gotten into the Woods, Come, Mr. Grazier, says he, dismount, and
give me the two Bags this Minute. In short he dismounts the poor Man, cuts his
Bridle and his Girts, and opens his Cloak-bag, where he finds the two Bags.
Very well, says Hind, here they are, and heavy as before; so he throws them on
the Ground, cuts them open, in one he finds a Halter, and in the other a piece
of solid Brass in the exact shape of a Gibbet, and the Countryman behind him
called to him, There Is your Fate, HIND, take care.

IF he was surprised at what he had found in the Bags, (for there was not a
Farthing of Money but in the Bag where the Halter was, of which presently,) I
say, if he was surprised at what he found in the Bags, he was more so at
hearing the Countryman call him by his Name, and turned about to kill him,
because he thought he was known; but he had no Life nor Soul left in him, when
turning about, as I say, to kill the Fellow, he saw nothing but the poor Horse.
He sunk down to the Earth, and lay there a considerable time; how long, that
(being alone) he could not tell, but it must be some Minutes. At last coming to
himself he goes away terrified to the last degree, and ashamed, wondering what
it should be.

I HINTED that there was no Money but one Piece found, which the Story says was
Scots, a Piece called in Scotland a Fourteen, in English, a Thirteen Pence
Halfpenny, to pay the Hangman with; from whence it may be supposed that Saying
is used to this Day, that Thirteen Pence Halfpenny is Hangman's Wages.

NOW though the Story has some Mirth in it, and may with the many Stories of that
Robber be laid by as Romances, yet it is thus far to my Purpose; That this was
a Spirit, that must be acknowledged. A good Angel from Heaven would hardly have
been sent to give him such an ineffectual insignificant Hint, which had no
sufficient Effect, whatever it might have just then to surprise him, for he
robbed continually after that, and was hanged at last for it.

THE Devil, as before, cannot rationally be suspected in the Case; for why
should the Devil both bauk him, threaten and caution him? threaten him with
hanging him, fright him with the Gibbet and Haltar, and caution him to take
care. This was not for the Devil's Purpose, it was more for his Interest to
have him go on, though he came to the Gallows at last.

IF then it was neither good Angel or Bad, what must it be, and how must we
judge of it? what Name must we give him, and who was this Country Graz^er?

TO come off of this, some will have it be, that it is the Devil under
Constraint, the Devil in Commission, that he is sent on such Errands by a
superior Power that has him at Command; and that when he is directed to do so
and so, he must obey, he dare do no otherwise. This is begging the Question in
the grossest manner imaginable. Besides, why the Devil sent of such Errands?

1. IT is not probable, it is not to be gathered from the ordinary Course of
Providence. The Devil indeed was permitted, or, if you will have it, he was
commissioned to strip and afflict Poor Job; and he was again permitted to enter
into the Herd of Swine; but this does not amount to a Parallel: In both those
Examples he was only employed as an Instrument, and, as we may express it, in
his ordinary Business, in the way of his Calling, that is to say in doing
Mischief: But here he is supposed employed in doing Good, cautioning a hardened
Rogue to leave off his wicked Course, and escape the Gallows. Now this is quite
out of Satan's road of Business; it is also out of the ordinary course of
Heaven's Conduct, for when do we find God employing the Devil in any good Work?
I do not remember one clear Example of it, in all the sacred History.

2. IT would argue that Heaven should want Instruments, which is not at all
just to infer; will they pretend, that, for want of more proper Agents, God
should employ the Devil to save a Highway Man from the Ga^lows? and, which is
more than all the rest, should not bring it to pass neither? But if you will
allow that this was one of the Imaginary species of Spirits, who, willing to
save a poor Wretch that was running head long to the Devil, took all these
Measures to alarm him, and bring him to just Reflections, but was not able to
reclaim him, was not admitted to give him Notice, when he was about the fatal
Act he was surpised in, or to warn him when the Officers came to apprehend
him, this seems rational.

IF the Devil should be supposed to be employed in such a Work as this was, and
so contrary to his Inclination, either he would perform it like himself,
treacherous and unfaithful, or at best, reluctant and unwilling. Perhaps you
will say he durst not perform it treacherously and unfaithfully; and it may be
not: But why must it be supposed Heaven should employ his wor^t and wickedest
Creature, whom he had long since disbanded, and cast out of his Service,
rejecting him as unworthy to be employed; and who, if he was employed, and
durst not decline the Work, yet, it must be acknowledged, would obey with the
utmost ^version and Unwillingness; when at the same time Millions of faithful
Agents, willing and chearfully-obed^ent Servants, are ready at command^ to
execute his Will with the utmost Vigor and Fidelity?

BUT to leave arguing upon Inscrutables, let us come to Narration of Facts.

I HAVE another Account received from a particular Acq^aintance in a
neighboring Nation. I could name Persons and Places in a more exact manner to
these Accounts; but some Reasons of State forbid us at this time to enter into
the Circumstances of Families. For where Matters of Apparition and Witchcraft
are the Substance of the Histor^, it has never been found reasonable to name
Hou^^s and Families; and as this Apology will be all^w'd to be just, I expect
it will be accepted by the R^ader in all the Examples I shall give of this kind.

A CERTAIN Person of Quality, being with his Family at his Country-Seat for the
SummerSeason, according to his ordinary Custom, was ob^^g^d upon a par^icular
Occas^on of Health to leave his said Seat, and go to Aix La Chapplle, to u^e
the Baths there: This was it seems in the Month of August, being two Months
sooner than the usual time of his returning to Court for the Winter.

UPON thus removing sooner than ordinar^, he did not then di^furnish the Horse,
as was the ordinary Usage of the Family, or carry away his Plate and other
valuable Goods, but left his Steward and three Servants to look after the House
and the Padre or Parish Priest was desired to keep his Eye upon them too, and
to succor them from the Village adjoining, if there was Occasion.

THE Steward had no public Notice of any Harm appro^ching; but for three or
four Days successively he had secret strange Impulses of Dread and Terror upon
his Mind that the House was beset, and was to be assaulted by a Troop of
Banditti, or as we call them here, House-breakers, who would murder them all,
and after they had robbed the House, would set it on Fire; and this followed
him so fast, and made such Impression upon his Mind, that he could think of
nothing else.

UPON this the third Day he went to the Padre, or Parish Priest, and made his
Complaint; upon which the Priest and the Steward had the following Discourse,
the Steward beginning thus:

FATHER, said he, you know what a Charge I have in my Custody, and how my Lord
has entrusted me with the whole House, and all the rich Furniture is standing;
I am in great Perplexity about it, and come to you for your Advice.

Pa. WHY, what is the Matter? you have not heard of any Mischief threatened, have
you?


St. NO, I have heard of nothing; but I have such Apprehensions, and it has
made such Impression upon me for these three Days, that *


* Here he told him the particulars of the Uneasiness he had been in, and
added, besides what is said above, that one of the Servants had the same, and
had told him of it, though he had communicated nothing to that Servant in the
least.

Pa. IT may be, you dreamed of these things?


St. NO indeed, Padre, I am sure I could not dream of them, for I could never
sleep.


Pa. WHAT can I do for you? What would you have me do?


St. I WOULD have you first of all tell me what you think of these things, and
whether there is any Notice to be taken of them * --


* Here the Padre examined him more strictly about the Particulars, and sent
for the Servant and examined him apart; and being a very judicious honest Man,
he answered him thus:

Pa. LOOK you, Mr. Steward, I do not lay a very great Stress upon such things,
but yet I don't think they are to be wholly slighted; and therefore I would
have you be upon your Guard, and if you have the least Alarm let me know.


St. THAT is poor Satisfaction to me to be upon my Guard, if I am overpowered.
I suppose, if any Villains have a Design to attack me, they know my Strength.


Pa. SHALL I reinforce your Garrison?


St. I WISH you would.


Pa. WELL, I Will send you some Men with FireArms, to lie there this Night.

ACCORDINGLY the Priest sent him five stout Fellows with Fuzees, and a dozen of
Hand-Granadoes with them, and while they continued in the House nothing
appeared; but the Padre finding nothing come of it, and being loath to put his
Patron to so continued a Charge, sent for the Steward, and in a chiding angry
Tone, told him his Mind.


Pa. I KNOW not how you will answer it to my Lord, but you have put him to a
prodigious Expense here, in keeping a Garrison in the House all this while.


St. I AM sorry for it, Padre; but what can I do?


Pa. DO! Why, compose your Mind, and keep up your Heart, and don't let my Lord
spend two or three hundred Livres here, to cure you of the Vapors.


St. WHY, you said your self, Padre, that it was not to be wholly slighted?


Pa. THAT IS true; but I said also, I would not lay too great a Stress upon it.


St. WHAT must I do then?


Pa. DO! Why, dismiss the Men again, and take what Care you can; and if you
have any Notice of Mischief that may be depended upon, let me have Notice too,
and I Will assist you.


St. WELL then, the good Angel must protect my Lord's House, I see, for no body
else will.


Amen, says the Padre, I trust the good Spirits will keep you all: So he
blessed the Steward, (in his way) and the Steward went away grumbling very much
that he took away his Garrison, and left him to the good Spirits.

IT seems, for all this, that the Steward's Notices, however secret, and from
he knew not who, were not of so light an Import as the Padre though^ they were;
for as he had this Impulse upon hi^ Mind that such Mischief was brewing, so it
reall^ was, as you will see presently.

A SET of Robbers, who had Intelligence the the Nobleman with his Family was
gone to A^ La Chapelle, but that the House was left furnish'^ and all the Plate
and the things of Value were le^ in it, had formed a Design to plunder the
House and afterward to burn it, just as the S^eward h^ said.

THEY were two and twenty strong in the whol^ and thoroughly armed for
Mischief. Yet while the additional Force, which the Padre had placed t^
reinforce the Steward, were in the House, o^ whom, including the other four,
three sat up eve^^ Night, they did not dare to attempt it.

BUT as soon as they heard that the Guard w^^ dismissed, they formed their
Design anew, and, (...) make the Story short, they attacked the House about
Midnight. Having, I suppose, proper I^struments about them, they soon broke
open a Wi^dow, and twelve of them got into the Hou^^ the rest standing Sentinel
at such Places as th^^ thought proper, to prevent any Succors from t^^ Town.

THE poor Steward and his three Men were (...) great Distress; they were indeed
above Stairs, a^^ had barricadoed the Stair-Cases as well as th^^ could,
hearing the Fellows were breaking in; but when they found they were got in,
they expected nothing but to be kept above Stairs 'till the House was
plundered, and then to be burnt alive.

BUT it seems the good Spirits the Priest spoke of, or some body else, made
better Provision for them, as you will see presently.

WHEN the first of the Fellows were gotten in^o the House, and had opened the
Door, and let in as many of their Gang as they thought fit, which (as above)
was twelve in Number they shut the Door ^gain, and shut themselves in; leaving
two without the Door, who had a Watchword, to go and call more Help if they
wanted it.

THE twelve ranging over the great Hall, found ^ittle there to gratify their
greedy Hopes; but brea^ing next into a fine well-furnish'd Parlour, where ^he
Family usually sat, Behold, in a great easy Chair, sat a grave ancient Man,
with a long full^ottom'd black Wig, a rich brocaded Gown, and Lawyer's laced
Band, but looking as if in great ^urprize, seemed to make Signs to them for
Mercy, ^ut said not a Word, nor they much to him, ex^ept that one of them
starting, cried, HA! who is ^ere?

IMMEDIATELY the Rogues fell to pulling ^own the fine Damask Curtains in the
Windows, and other rich Things; but One said to Another ^ith an Oath, Make the
old Dog tell us where the ^late is hid; and another said, if he will not tell you,
^ut his Throat immediately.

THE ancient Gentleman, with Signs of En^eaty, as if begging for his Life, and
in a great ^right, points to a Door; which being opened ^ould let them into
another Parlour, which was ^he Gaming-Room, and served as a Drawing Room ^o the
first Parlour; and by another Door opened ^^to the great Salon, which looked
into the Gardens. They were some time forcing their way into that Room; but
when they came in, they were surpised to see the same old Man, in the same
Dress, and the same Chair, sitting at the upper end of the Room, making the
same Gestures, and silent Entreaties, as before.

THEY were not much concerned at first, but thought he had come in by another
Door, and began to swear at him, for putting them to the Trouble of breaking
open the Door, when there was another way into the Room. But, another wickeder
than the first, said, with a heavy Curse, the old Dog was got in by another
Door, on purpose to convey away the Plate and Money, and bad knock his Brains
out. Upon which the first swore at him that if he did not immediately show them
where i^ was, he was a dead Dog that Moment.

UPON this furious Usage, he points to the Doo^ which opened into the Salon,
which being a thi^ Pair of Folding-Doors opened presently, and i^ they run into
the great Salon; when looking at the farther end of the Room, there sat the
ancien^ Man again, in the same Dress and Posture as before.

UPON this Sight, those that were foremos^ among them cried out aloud, Why,
this old Fellow deals with the Devil sure, he is here before u^ again.

BUT the Case differed a little now; for when they came out of the first
Parlour, being eager for the Plate and Money, and willing to find it ALL^ the
whole Body of them run out into the secon^ Parlour; but now the ancient Man
pointing to the third Room, they did not all immediately rush ou^ into the
Salon, but four of them were left behin^ in the Parlour or Gaming-Room
mentioned jus^ now, not by order or design, but accidentally.

BY this Means they fell into the following Confusion; for while some of them
called out from the Salon, that the old Rogue was there before them again;
others answered out of the Parlour, How the Devil can that be? why, he is here
still in his Chair, and all his Rubbish: with that, two of them run back into
the first Parlour, and there they saw him aga^^ sitting as before.
Notwithstanding all this, far from guessing what the Occasion should be, they
fancied they were gamed, or suggested that they were but jested with, and that
there were three several old Men all dressed up in the same Habits for the very
same Occasion, and to mock them, as if to let them know that the Men above in
the House were not afraid of them.

WELL, says one of the Gang, I Will dispatch one of the old Rogues, I Will teach
one of them how to make Game at us: upon which, raising his Fuzee as high as
his Arm would let him, he struck at the ancient Man, as he thought it was, with
all his Force; but behold! there was nothing in the Chair, and his Fuzee flew
into a thousand Pieces, wounding his Hand most grievously, and a Piece of the
Barrel striking him on the Head, broke his Face, and knocked him down backward.

AT the same time, one of those in the Salon running at the ancient Man that
sat there, swore he would tear his fine brocaded Gown off, and then he would
cut his Throat: but when he went to take hold of him, there was nothing in the
Chair.

THIS happening in both Rooms, they were all in most horrible Confusion, and
cried out in both Rooms at the same Moment, in a terrible manner.

AS they were in the utmost Amazement at the thing, so after the first Clamor
they stood looking upon one another for some time, without speaking a Word
more; but at length one said, Let Us go back into the first Parlour and see if
that is gone too; and with that Word, two or three that were on that side, run
into the Room, and there sat the ancient Figure as at first; upon which they
called to the Company, and told them, they believed they were all bewitched,
and 'twas certain they only fancied they saw a Man in the other Rooms, for
there was the real old Man sitting where he was at first.

UPON this they all run thither, saying, they would see whether it was the
Devil or no; and one of them said, Let me come; I Will speak to him; it is not the
first time I have talked with the Devil.

NAY, says another, so will I; and then added with an Oath, Gentlemen that were
upon such Business as they were, ought not to be afraid to speak to the Devil.

A THIRD (for now their Courage began to rise again) calls aloud, Let it be the
Devil, or the Devil's Grandmother, I Will parley with it, I am resolved I Will know
what it is: and with that he runs forward before the rest, and crossing
himself, says to the ancient Man in the Chair, in the Name of St^ Francis, and
St. -- (and so reckoned up two or three Saints Names that he depended were
enough to fright the Devil) What art thou?

THE Figure never moved or spoke; but looking at its Face, they presently
found, that instead of his pitiful Looks, and seeming to beg for his Life, as
he did before, he was changed into the most horrible Monster that ever was
seen, and such as I cannot describe; and that instead of his Hands held up to
them to cry for Mercy, there were two large fiery Daggers, not flaming, but red
hot, and pointed with a livid bluish Flame, and in a word, the Devil or
something else, in the most frightful Shape that can be imagined. And it was my
Opinion, when I first read the Story, the Rogues were so frighted, that their
Imagination afterward formed a thing in their Thoughts more terrible than the
Devil himself could appear in.

BUT be that as it will, his Figure was such, that when they came up to him,
not a Man of them had Courage to look in his Face, much less talk to him; and
he that was so bold, and thus came armed with half a Regiment of Saints in his
Mouth, fell down flat on the Ground, having fainted away (as they call it) with
the Fright.

THE Steward and his three Men were all this while above stairs, in the utmost
Concern at the Danger they were in, and expecting every Moment the Rogues would
strive to force their Way up, and cut their Throats; They heard the confused
Noise that the Fellows made below, but could not imagine what it was, and much
less the Meaning of it: but while it lasted it came into the Mind of one of the
Servants, that as it was certain the Fellows were all in the Parlour, and very
busy there, whatever it was about, he might go up to the Top of the House and
throw one of their Hand-Granadoes down the Chimney, and perhaps it might do
some Execution among them.

THE Steward approved of this Design, only with this Addition; if we throw down
but into one Parlour, they will all fly into the Gamingroom, and so it will do
no Execution; but, says he, take three, and put down one into each Chimney, for
the Funnels go up all together, and then they will not know which Way to run.

WITH these Orders two of the Men, who very well knew the Place, went up, and
firing the Fuzees of the Grenades, they put one Shell into each of the
Funnels, and down they went roaring in the Chimney with a terrible Noise, and
(which was more than all the rest) they came down into the Parlour where almost
all the Rogues were, just at the Moment that the Fellow that spoke to the
Spectre was frighted into a swooning Fit, and fallen on the Floor.

THE whole Gang was frighted beyond Expression; some run back into the gaming
Parlour whence they came, and some run to the other Door which they came in at
from the Hall; but all, at the same Instant, heard the Devil, as they thought
it was, coming down the Chimney.

HAD it been possible that the Fuzees of the Grenades could have continued
burning in the Funnel of the Chimnies, where the Sound was a thousand times
doubled by the hollow of the Place, and where the Soot burning fell down in
Flakes of Fire, the Rogues had been frighted out of their Understandings;
imagining, that as they had one dreadful Devil just among them in the Chair, so
there were ten thousand more coming down the Chimney to destroy them all; and
perhaps to carry them all away.

BUT that could not be; so after they had been sufficiently scared with the
Noise, down came the Shells into the Rooms, all three together: It happened as
luckily as if it had been contrived on purpose, that the Shell which came down
into the Parlour where they all were, burst as soon as ever it came to the
Bottom, so that it did not give them time o much as to think what it might be,
much less to know that it was really a Hand-Granadoe; but as it did great
Execution among them, so they as certainly believed it was the Devil, as they
believed the Spectre in the Chair was the Devil.

THE Noise of the bursting of the Shell was so sudden and so unexpected, that
it confounded them, and the Mischief was also terrible; the Man that fainted
and who lay on the Ground was killed outright, and two more that stood just
before the Chimney; five of them were desperately wounded, whereof one had both
his Legs broke, and was so desp^rate, that when the People from the Country
came in, he shot himself through the Head with his own Pistol, to prevent his
being taken.

HAD the rest of them fled out of the Parlour into the two other Rooms, it is
probable they had been wounded by the other Shells; but as they heard the Noise
in both the outer Rooms, and besides were under the Surprise of its being not a
Hand-Granado, but the Devil, they had no Power to stir; nor, if they had, could
they know which way to go to be safe: so they stood stock still 'till both the
Shells in the other Rooms burst also; at which being confounded, as well with
the Noise as with the Smoke, and expecting more Devils down the Chimney where
they stood, they run out all that Way, and made to the Door, helping their
wounded Men along as well as they could; whereof one died in the Fields after
they were got away.

IT must be observed, when they were thus alarmed with they knew not, what
coming down the Chimney, they cried out, that the Devil in the Chair had sent
for more Devils to destroy them; and 'twas supposed that had the Shells never
come down they would all have run away. But certain it was, that the artificial
Devil joining so critically as to Time with the visionary Devils, or whatever
they were, completed their Disorder, and forced them to fly.

WHEN they came to the Door to the two Men, they made signals for their
Comrades, who were posted in the Avenues to the House, to come to their Relief;
who accordingly came up, and assisted to carry off their Wounded Men: but after
hearing the Relation of those that had been in the House, and calling a short
Council a little way from the Door, (which, though dark as it was, the Steward
and his Men could perceive from the Window,) they all resolved to make off.

THERE was another concurring Accident, which though it does not relate to my
Subject, I must set down to complete the Story, viz. That two of these
Grenades by the Fire of their Fuzes set the Chimneys on Fire; the third being
in a Funnel that had no Soot in it, the Room having not been so much used, did
not. This Fire flaming out at the top, as is usual, was seen by some Body in
the Village, who run immediately and allarmed the Priest or P^d^^, and h^ again
raised the whole Town, believing there was some ^^^^hief fallen out, and that
the House was set on Fir^.

HAD the rest of the Gang not ^^solv'd to make off, as is said above, they had
certain^^ fallen into the Hands of the Townsmen, who ran immediately with what
Arms came next to Hand, to the House. But the Rogues were fled, leaving, as
above, three of their Company dead in the House, and one in the Field.

I MUST confess, I cannot draw many Inferences to my purpose from the
Particulars of this Story, which however I have told for your Diversion; but
from the General I may; namely, This Apparition was certainly not in favor of
the Robbery; and if all the Particulars are true in Fact as related, we can
hardly with Justice place them to Satan's Account. Take him as a Destroyer and
a Father of Mischief, he could not be supposed to have appeared to prevent the
Robbing the House, or to assist the Steward in the House in defense of his
Master's Goods: what Good Spirit this must be, and from whence, is then a
remaining Question, and that brings it to my purpose again.

I SHALL give you another Story out of more Authentic Records, though related in
a different manner by several People, as their several Interests inclined them.

JAMES IV. King of Scotland being persuaded by the Clergy^ and the Bishops to
break with England, and declare War against Henry VIII, contrary to the Advice
of his Nobility and Gentry, who were to bear both the Expense and the Blows of
a Battle; I say, the King, thus overruled by the Clergy, raises an Army, and
prepared to march to the Frontiers; but the Evening before he was to take the
Field, as he was at Vespers in the Chapel Royal at his Palace of Lithgo or
Linlithgow, an ancient Man appeared to him with a long Head of Hair of the
Color of Amber, (some Accounts would represent it as a Glory painted round a
Head by the Limners) and of a venerable Aspect, having on a rustic Dress, that
is to say, in that Country Language, a belted Played girded round with a Linen
Sash. This Man was (as it seems by the Story) perceived by the King before he
came close up to him, and before he was seen by any of the People; and the King
also perceived him to be earnestly looking at him, and at the Noble Persons
about him, as if desiring to speak to him.

AFTER some little time he pressed through the Crowd, and came close up to the
King, and, without any Bow or Reverence made to his Person, told him with a low
Voice, but such as the King could hear very distinctly, That he was sent to him
to warn him, not to proceed in the War which he had undertaken at the
Solicitation of the Priests, and in Favor of the French; and that if he did
go on with it he should not prosper. He added al^o, that he should abstain from
his Lewd and Unchristian Practices with wicked Women, for that if he did not,
it would issue in his D^struction.

HAVING delivered his Message he immediately vanished; for though his pressing up
to the King had put the whole Assembly in disorder, and that every one's Eye
was fixed upon him, while he was delivering his Message to the King; yet not
one could see him any more, or perceive his going back from the King; which put
them all into the utmost Consternation.

THE King himself also was in great Confusion; he would fain have believed the
Spectre was a Man, and would have spoken to it again, and would have asked some
Questions of him. But the People constantly and with one Voice affirmed that it
was an Angel, and that it immediately disappear^d after the Message was
delivered; that they plainly saw him and felt him thrusting to get by them as
he went up, but not one could see him go back.

THE King upon this was satisfied that 'twas not a real Body, but an
Apparition; and it put him into a great Consternation, and caused him to delay
his March awhile, and call several Councils of his Nobility to consider what
to do.

BUT the King being still over-perswaded by those Engines who were employed by
Monsieur LA MOTTE, the French Ambassador; continued in his Designs for a War,
and advanced afterward with his Army to the Tweed, which was in those times
the usual Boundary of the two Kingdoms.

HERE the Army rested some time, and the King being at Jedburgh, a known Town
in those Parts, as he was sitting drinking Wine very plentifully in a great
Hall of the House, where his HeadQuarters was then held, supposed to be the old
Earl of Morton's House in that Town; the Spectre came to him a second time,
though not in the Form which it appeared in at Lithgo; but with less regard or
respect to the Prince, and in an imperious Tone told him, he was commanded to
warn him not to proceed in that War, which if he did, he should lose not the
Battle only, but his Crown and Kingdom: and that after this, without staying
for any Answer, like the Hand to King Ahasuerus, it went to the Chimney, and
wrote in the Stone over it, or that which we call the Mantle-piece, the
following Distich, Laeta sit illa dies, Nescitur Origo secundi
Sit labor an requies, sic transit gloria Mundi.


THAT the King did not listen to either of these Notices, our Histories, as
well as Buchanan the Historian of Scotland, take Notice of very publicly; and
that he marched on, fought the English at Flodden-Field, and there lost his
Army, all his former Glory, and his Life, is also recorded; I need say no more
of it.

THESE two Apparitions were certainly from such Spirits as we are speaking of,
viz. such as mean well to Mankind, and being Good and Beneficent in their
Nature, would prevent the ruin or destruction of those whom they appear to: But
have not always Power to direct the Measures, or to oblige the Persons to
hearken to their Advice.

HAD it been a Heavenly Vision, it is more than probable it would have laid hold
of the King's Hand, as the Apparition of Angels did to Lot, and as it were
dragged him away, and said You shall not go forward, that you may not be
d^^eated and slain, both you and your Army.

AGAIN, had it been the Devil, or an Apparition from Hell, the Message would
never have been for Good; it would never have warned him to avoid the Battle,
which should be so fatal to him, and in which so much Innocent Blood should be
shed to gratify the Priests, who 'twas not doubted were bribed or otherwise
influenced by France, and by which the King should be sure to lose his Life.

THE Devil is too great a lover of Mischief to concern himself in such an
eminent manner for a Public Good; too great an Enemy to Mankind to take the
Trouble to caution the King twice, and send, as we may say, two Expresses to
him to save his Life, and prevent a War; nor can we suppose the Devil concerned
to promote Peace in the World, but just the contrary; it is his business to
Foment Distractions, public Confusions, and War.

BUT should we suppose for once that the Devil stand^ng Neuter between the two
Nations, should go so far out of his way as to endeavor to keep the Peace for
that time only; yet what shall we say to the other Part of the Message at
Lithgo, viz. That he should abstain from his Lewdness, and from his scandalous
Life, his familiarity with Women, and the like? Did ever the Devil pretend to
this in his Life? if this could be the Devil, then he must be allowed to act
very much out of his ordinary Way, as some express it; it is not his professed,
avowed Practice.

WHAT then must these Appearances be, and from whence? And how reasonable is it
from all these things to believe, that there are some other Spirits which we
yet know nothing of, or but very little, who do so far concern themselves for
the good of Mankind, as that they frequently appear to us to warn us of Danger,
to alarm us at the Approach of Impending Mischief; advising and cautioning us
from evil Courses, and evil Actions, as what is destructive to our present as
well as future Felicity?

IF it be Objected, that some have owned themselves to be the Souls of departed
Persons, as of near Relations, Wives, Husbands, etc. and have appeared in their
Likness, and even in their Clothes; it is answered, That is no Argument against
the thing at all; because as Spirits are allowed in our present Discourse to
assume any Shape, so it is not doubted but they may take up the Shape of the
Dead as well as of the Living, and may assume the very Clothes, Countenances,
and even Voices of dead Persons; and it must be so, or else we must fall into
all the absurdities of Souls remaining in a wandering, unappointed, unsettled
state after Life; which, if it should be granted, we must in many things
contradict the Scripture, and the received Opinions of all the reformed
Churches, and almost of all good Men even in all Ages.

CHAP. VII. Of the many strange Inconveniences and ill Consequences which would
attend us in this World, if the Souls of Men and Women, unembodyed and
departed, were at Liberty to visit the Earth, from whence they had been
dismissed, and to concern themselves about Human Affairs, either such as had
been their own, or that were belonging to other People.
I BELIEVE there are few speculative Delusions more universally received than
this, that those things we call Specter, Ghosts, and Apparitions, are really
the departed Souls of those Persons who they are said to represent.

WE see, or pretend to see, our very Friends and Relations actually clothed
with their old Bodies, though we know those Bodies to be embowell'd, s^parated,
and rotting in the Grave; as c^rtainly as the Head and Quarters of a Man
^xecuted for Treason are drying in the Sun upon the Gates of the City: we see
them dressed up in the very Clothes which we have cut to pieces and given away,
some to one body some to another, or appli^d to this or that use; so that we
can give an Account of every Rag of them: we hear them speaking with the same
Voice and Sound, though the Organ which formed their former Speech we are sure is
perished and gone.

THESE Similitudes of things fix it upon our Thoughts, that it must be the
same; that the Souls of our late Friends are actually come to revisit us; which
is to me, I confess, the most incongruous and unlikeliest thing in the World.

FIRST, They must have a very mean Opinion of the future State, and the exalted
Condition of the Blessed, that can imagine they are to be interrupted in their
Joy; and even disquieted, as Samuel said to Saul, by the importunities of this
World's Affairs: Why have thou disquieted me, to bring me up? as if it was in
the Power of a despicable Witch to bring him up, for it intimates a Force,
whether he would or not; which does not at all correspond with the high
Thoughts we are directed to entertain of the perfect Felicity of that State, of
which Eye has not seen, or Ear heard, or Heart conceived.

SECONDLY, They must have likewise very mean Thoughts of the State of
everlasting Misery, who can think that the Spirits in Prison can get loose from
those determined Chains, to come hither and attend upon the Trifles of Life;
nor do I know whether it would be worth their shifting Hell, and coming back to
this World in the wandering Condition those Things called Ghosts are understood
to be; or indeed to reassume a Body, without making Life a State of farther
Probation. For what would Life be here for a few Years subjected to human
Infirmity, want, distress, and casualty, and no alteration possible of their
future State, no Hope, no room for changing the Sentence? They know little of
that Hell called Despair, that can think it more supportable in this World,
than the Eternal State, which it is a prospect of, is in that to come.

BUT this is too grave abundance for the Times^ and therefore I say no more of
that Part; but I must bring the Case nearer to our present Taste, as well as to
our Capacity.

LET us next enquire into the Necessity of disturbing or disquieting our
departed Friends, with or about the Concerns of their Families: If their coming
is by the Permission of Providence, then I demand what Occasion is there for
it? and of what Service is it? seeing the same Providence is able to employ
other Servants of the same Errand, and to do the same Business, and who will
not only do it as well, but to be sure much better. It is answered, the
Sovereignty of Providence is not to be disputed, He may do what he pleases, and
employ who he pleases: but then the Wisdom of Providence too is not known to
act inconsistent with itself; and, which is a sufficient Answer to all the
rest, we are allowed to judge of all these things by our reasoning Powers, nor
have we any other Rules to judge by; and it can be no Crime to reason with
calmness, and with due respect to superior Power, upon the ordinary
Administration even of Heaven itself.

I WILL suppose that no Apparitions were allowed to show themselves on Earth, but
on Occasions of some unusual Consequence, and that then they might always be
expected; and there are many affirm it to be so; (though I openly say I do not,)
but suppose it, I say; and that whenever these things have appeared it was in
especial Cases, such as of manifestly injured Right, Oppression of Widows and
Orphans, Wrong done to Persons unable to do themselves Justice, depressed
Poverty, and many such Cases which Souls are said to be anxious about, even
after Death; I say, if it were so, the World is at this time (and, perhaps, has
always been) so full of Violence, Injustice, Fraud and Oppression, that the
Souls of our depa^ted Friends would hardly ever be at rest.

HOW many weeping Widows, starving Orphans and oppressed Families have in our
Age suffered by the loss of the Money which their Fathers and other Ancestors
left for their Subsistence and Establishment in a certain City Chamber, or put
into a certain Exchequer upon the public Faith? According to this Notion,
neither the visible or invisible World would have been at Peace: the habited
visible World would have been continually haunted with Ghosts, and we should
never have been quiet for the Disturbance of Spirits and Apparitions: the
invisible World would have been in a continued Hurry and Uneasiness; Spirits
and Unembodied Souls asking leave to go back again to see their Wills rightly
performed, and to harrass their Executors for injuring their Orphans; and all
the Ages of Time would have been taken up in giving Satisfaction to them in
such and such Cases.

IT was the Saying of a Roman, (indeed, I mean, a Roman in Religion) that it
was a Sign to him, past all Dispute, that the Dead could never come to the
Quick, because the Testators of all those Chatities given by departed Souls of
Saints for the Maintenance of Hospitals, Chantries, Colleges, Churches, and
religious Houses, as well in Money as in Lands and Inheritances, did not walk,
and haunt King Hen. VIII, and pull him not out of his Throne only, but out of
his Grave, for taking away, as he did, all those Rents and Revenues, Lands and
Estates from the religious Houses to which they belonged.

NOW if they were not disquieted for so great a Piece of Injustice, why should
they be forcibly disturbed for Trifl^s, compared to those great Events?

AGAIN, should departed Souls get leave to come back to this World, to see
Justice done to their Famili^s and Relations, how comes it to pass that they
have not done it on such frequent Occasions as are daily given them in the
World? And why do any People enjoy peaceably the Estates which they got
wrongfully? The Works of Heaven are all perfect. Would he have sent Angels or
Spirits to procure Justice to be done only in Part, and not in the Whole? And
how much Arrears is the wicked Part of the World then in, to the better Part?
And which way is it possible Right should now be done?

BESIDES, to go back to public Things; what Rage, what Violences, Rapins,
Ruins, not of Persons only, but of Nations, have we seen and heard of in the
World? and yet we see Death puts an End to all Grievance, or Complaints of
Grievance whatsoever; the departed Souls rest undisturbed about it, Resentment
all dies with them; and whatever the Apparitions, which we call Souls, have
pretended, or we have pretended for them, the Souls themselves are perfectly
unconcerned at it all.

WHAT Apparitions have been, have certainly been of those blessed Angelick
Spirits, who may so far have concerned themselves in some Cases of Violence,
Oppression, manifest and atrocious Frauds, to allarm the Offenders, and thereby
bring them to do Right, as well for their own good as for the Relief of the
oppressed Sufferers, who, perhaps, have invoked the Divine Justice against them.

HENCE give me leave to observe, though it is still a little serious, and perhaps
you may think it is out of the way, that it is not a thing of the least Concern
to us to have the Cry of the Poor against us, or to have the Widows and
Orphans, who we have injured and oppressed, look up to Heaven for Relief
against us, when they, perhaps, have not Money to go to Law, or to obtain or
seek Remedy against us in the ordinary way of Justice. I had much rather have
an unjust Enemy draw his Sword upon me, than an injured poor Widow cry to
Heaven for Justice against me; and I think I should have much more Reason to be
afraid of the Last than the First, the Effect is most likely to be fatal. Job.
xxxiv. 28. and Exodus xxii. 22, 23. Ye shall not afflict any Widow or Fatherless
Child: If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will
surely hear their Cry; and v. 24. And your Wives shall be Widows, and your
Children Fatherless. But this is a Digression, and of a kind I shall not fall
often into.

BUT as much as I think there is Reason to apprehend the Prayers of the
oppressed Widow and Orphan, or of any injured Fellow Creatures; yet I must
acknowledge I see no Reason to be afraid of their Ghosts, or of their Souls
visiting me, in order to terrify me into a Change of the evil Practice, and a
humor or resolve of doing Right to their Families.

CONSCIENCE, indeed, is a frightful Apparition itself, and I make no Question
but it oftentimes haunts an oppressing Criminal into Restitution, and is a
Ghost to him sleeping or waking: nor is it the least Testimony of an invisible
World that there is such a Drummer as that in the Soul, that can beat an ^llarm
when he pleases, and so loud, as no other Noise can drown it, no Music quiet
it or make it hush, no Power silence it, no Mirth allay it, no Bribe corrupt it.

CONSCIENCE raises many a Devil, that all the Magic in the World cannot lay; it
shows us many an Apparition that no other Eyes can see, and sets Spectr^s
before us with which the Devil has no Acquaintance; Conscience makes Ghosts
walk, and departed Souls appear, when the Souls themselves know nothing of it.

THIS thing called Conscience is a strange bold Disturber, it works upon the
Imagination with an (...)
invincible Force; like Faith, it makes a Man view things that are not, as if
they were; feel things that are not to be felt, see things that are not to be
seen, and hear things that are not to be heard; it commands the Senses, nay
even the Tongue it self, which is so little under Command, submits to this
sovereign Mandate; and though I do not see that Conscience always overrules it
to Silence, yet it often makes it speak, even whether it would or no, and that
to its own Ruin and Destruction; making the guilty Man accuse himself, and
confess what his Policy had before so effectually concealed, that no Eye had
seen it, no Evidence could prove it.

THE Murderer sees the murdered Innocent as plainly before his Eyes, as if he
was actually sent back from his Place to charge him; nay, he sees him without
Eyes, he is present with him sleeping and waking; he sees him when he is not to
be seen, and testifies to his own Guilt, with no need of other Witness.

I HAVE heard a Story which I believe to be true, of a certain Man who was
brought to the Bar of Justice on Suspicion of Murder, which however he knew it
was not in the Power of human Knowledge to detect. When he came to hold up his
Hand at the Bar, he pleaded, Not Guilty; and the Court began to be at a Loss
for a Proof, nothing but Suspicion and Circumstances appearing; however such
Witnesses as they had they examined as usual; the Witness st^nding up, as is
usual, upon a little Step, to be visible to the Court.

WHEN the Court thought they had no more Witnesses to examine, and the Man in a
few Moments would have been acquitted; he gives a Start at the Bar, as if he
was frighted; but recovering his Courage a little, he stretches out his Arm
toward the Place where the Witnesses usually stood to give Evidence upon
Trials, and pointing with his Hand, My Lord, says he, (aloud) that is not fair,
it is not according to Law, he is not a legal Witness.

THE Court is surpised, and could not understand what the Man meant; but the
Judge, a Man of more Penetration, took the Hint, and checking some of the Court
that offered to speak, and which would have perhaps brought the Man back again
to himself; Hold, says the Judge, the Man sees something more than we do, I
begin to understand him; and then speaking to the Prisoner,

WHY, says he, is not he a legal Witness? I believe the Court will allow his
Evidence to be good, when he comes to speak.

NO, my Lord, it cannot be just, it cannot be allowed, says the Prisoner, (with
a confused Eagerness in his Countenance, that showed he had a bold Heart but a
guilty Conscience.)

WHY not, Friend, what Reason do you give for it? says the Judge.

MY Lord, says he, no Man can be allowed to be Winess in his own Case; he is a
Party, my Lord, he cannot be a Witness.

BUT you mistake, says the Judge, for you are indicted at the Suit of the King,
and the Man may be a Witness for the King, as in case of a Robbery on the
Highway we always allow the Person robbed is a good Witness; and without this
the Highway-man could not be convicted; but we shall hear what he says, when he
is examined.

THIS the Judge spoke with so much Gravity, and so easy and natural, that the
Criminal at the Bar answered, Nay, if you will allow him to be a good Witness,
then I am a dead Man: the last Words he said with a lower Voice than the rest,
but withal called for a Chair to sit down.

THE Court ordered him a Chair, which if he had not had, 'twas thought he would
have sunk down at the Bar; as he sat down he was observed to be in a great
Consternation, and lifted up his Hands several times, repeating the Words, a
dead Man, a dead Man, several times over.

THE Judge, however, was at some Loss how to act, and the whole Court appeared
to be in a strange Consternation, though no body saw any thing but the Man at the
Bar; at length the Judge said to him, Look you Mr. -- calling him by his Name,
You have but one way left that I know of, and I Will read it to you out of the
Scripture; and so calling for a Bible he turns to the Book of Joshua, and reads
the Text, Josh. vii. 19. And Joshua said unto Achan, my Son, give, I pray thee,
Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto him, and tell me now
what thou have done, hide it not from me.

HERE the Judge exhorted him to confess his Crime, for he saw, no doubt, an
Evidence ready to convict him, and to discover the whole Matter against him;
and if he did not confess, Heaven would, no doubt, send Witness to detect him.

UPON this the self-condemned Murderer burst out into Tears and sad
Lamentations for his own miserable Condition, and made a full Confession of his
Crime; and when he had done, gave the following Account of his Case, as to the
Reasons of his being under such a Surprise, viz. That he saw the murdered
Person standing upon the Step as a Witness, ready to be examined against him,
and ready to show his Throat which was cut by the Prisoner, and who, as he
said, stood staring full upon him with a frightful Countenance; and this
confounded him: (as well it might) and yet there was no real Apparition, no
Spectre, no Ghost or Appearance, it was all figured out to him by the Power of
his own Guilt, and the Agitations of his Soul, fired and surprised by the
Influence of Conscience.

THE Soul of the Murdered Person seeks no Revenge; all that Part is swallowed
up in the Wonders of the eternal State, and Vengeance entirely resigned to him
to whom it belongs; but the Soul of the Murderer is like the Ocean in a
Tempest, he is in continual Motion, restless and raging; and the Guilt of the
Fact, like the Winds to the Sea, lies on his Mind as a constant Pressure, and
adds to that, (still like the Seas) it is hurried about by its own Weight,
rolling to and again, Motion increasing Motion, 'till it becomes a m^er Mass of
Horror and Confusion.

IN this distracted Condition, Conscience, like a Storm at Sea, still breaks
over him; first gathers about him in a thick black Cloud, threatening the Deaths
that it comes loaded with; and after hovering about him for awhile, at last
bursts with Lightnings and Thunder, and the poor shattered Vessel suffers
Shipwreck, sinks, and is overwhelmed in the Middle of it.

IF Justice does not overtake him, if he is not discovered and detected, and
brought to public Shame, as the Laws of Go^ and Man require; How is he put to
the Question (so they call it in Countries abroad, when Men are put to the Rack
to make them confess) how is he tortured with the Terrors of his own Thoughts,
haunted with the Ghosts of his own Imagination, and Apparitions without
Apparition? the murdered Person is always in his Sight, and Cries of Blood are
ever in his Ears, 'till at last, less able to bear the Torture of Mind than the
Punishment of his Carcass, he even dies for fear of Death, murders himself,
and goes away in Horror; or, if Heaven is merciful to him, delivers himself up
to Justice, and dies a Penitent.

I COULD give many flagrant Instances of this, enough to crowd up this whole
Work, but I have not room for it; take one or two for Examples.

A GENTLEMAN, and a Man in good Circumstances too, committed a Murder in or
near St. Pancras Soaper-Lane, London, many Years ago; the Murder was attended
with some very cruel and barbarous Circumstances, such as he could not expect
to be pardoned for, so he fled, and making his Escape into France, got out of
the Reach of Justice.

HIS personal Safety was for awhile so much Satisfaction to him, that he did
not make any Reflections at all upon the Fact; but after awhile, he took
shipping from France, and went over to Martinico, where he lived several Years;
and even for two or three Years he carried it off well enough; but the first
Shock given to his Soul was in a Fit of Sickness, when being in Danger of
Death, he saw, as he was between sleeping and waking, the Spectre, as he
thought, of the murdered Person, just as in the Posture when he killed him,
his Wound bleeding, and his Countenance ghastly; the Sight of which exceedingly
terrified him, and at length awakened him.

BUT being awake, and finding it was but a Dream, and that the murdered Person
did not really appear to him, and, as he called it, haunt him, he was easy as
to that Part; but being in a high Fever, and believing he should die,
Conscience began to stare at him, and to talk to him; he resisted a long time,
but Death approaching, he grew very pensive, though, as he said, still more
afraid of dying, than penitent for his Crime.

AFTER he recovered he grew easy, and began to forget things again; came over
to Europe again, and being at Roan in Normandy, he dreamed he saw the murdered
Man again, and that he looked frightful and terrlble; and with a threatening
Aspect, and this threw him into a kind of Melancholy, which increased
exceedingly; the Spectre, as he called it, coming to him every Night.

BUT this was not all; for now as he dreamed of it all Night, so he thought of
it all Day; it was, as we say, before his Eyes continually, his Imagination
formed Figures to him, now of this kind, then of that, always relating to the
murdered Man; so that, in short, he could think of nothing else: And though he
was satisfied there was no real Ghost, as he called it, or Apparition, yet his
own terrified Conscience made the Thought be to him like one continued
Apparition, and the murdered Man was never out of his Sight.

HE was so reduced by the constant Agitation of his Soul, that he was in a very
weak Condition, and in a deep Consumption: But in the midst of these Tumults of
his Soul, he had a strong Impression upon his Mind, that he could never die in
Peace, nor ever go to Heaven, if he did not go over to England, and either get
the Parliament's Pardon (for it was in those Days when there was no King in
Israel) or that if he could not obtain a Pardon, that then he should surrender
into the Hands of Justice, and satisfy the Law with his Life, which was the
Debt he owed to the Blood of the Man he killed, and could no other way be
expiated.

HE withstood this as a wild distracted thing, and the Fruit of his disturbed
Mind: What, said be to himself, should I go to England for? to go there is to
GO and DIE; and these Words, GO and DIE, run daily upon his Mind: But though they
came first into his Thoughts, as an Answer to his other Distractions, yet they
turned upon him soon after, and he dreamed that the dead murdered Man said to
him, GO and DIE; and repeating it said, GO to England and DIE; and this
followed him by Night and by Day, asleep and awak^, that he had it always in
his Ears, GO to England and DIE.

IN short, and to pass over some Cirumstances, though worth telling, which
happened to him in the mean time, he was so continually terrified by the
Reproaches of his Conscience, and the Voice which he thought followed him, that
he answered it once in his Sleep thus; Well, if it must be so, let me alone, I
will GO and DIE.

IT was some time however before he did; but at last, unable to support the
Torture of his Mind, he resolved to come over to England, and did so: He landed
at Gravesend, and there took Passage in the Tilt-Boat for London.

WHEN he arrived at London, intending to land at Westminster, he took a Wherry
at Billinsgate, to carry him through Bridge. It happened, that two Lighters
laden with Coals run foul of the Boat he was in, and of one another,
over against QueenHith, or thereabouts; and the Watermen were so very hard put
to it, that they had much ado to avoid being crushed between the Lighters, so
that they were obliged to get into one of the Lighters, and let the Boat sink.

THIS occasioned him, contrary to his Design, to go on Shore a little to the
Eastward of Queen-Hith; from thence he walked up on Foot toward Cheapside,
intending to take a Coach for Westminster.

AS he passed a Street, which crosses out of Bread-streat into Bow-lane, being
almost Night, and he not well knowing the Streets, having been absent eighteen
Years, he heard some body cry, Stop him, stop him! It seems a Thief had broke
into a House in some Place, as he passed by, and was discovered, and run for
it, and the People after him, crying Stop him, Stop him!

IT presently occurred to him, that being so near the Place where the Murder
was committed, and where he had lived, some body that knew him had seen him,
and that it was him they cried after; upon which he began to run with all his
Might.

HAD the People cried stop Thief, he had had no need to be alarmed, knowing, as
he said, that he had stolen nothing; but the Crowd crying only stop him, stop
him, it was as likely to be him as not; and his own Guilt concurring, he run,
as above.

AS he run with all his Might, it was a good while before the People overtook
him; but just at the Corner of Soaper-lane, near about where now stands the
Rummer Tavern, his Foot slipped, and his Breath failing him too, he fell down.

THE People, not knowing who he was, had lost their Thief, and pursued him; but
when they came up to him, they found he was not the right Person, and began to
leave him; but his own Guilty Conscience, which at first set him a running, and
which alone was his real Pursuer, continuing to follow him close, and which at
last had thrown him down too, so increased his Fright, that believing they all
knew him, he cried out, It is very true, I am the Man, it was I did it.

IT seems, when he first fell, some People, who upon hearing the Noise in the
Street came running to their Doors, as is usual in such Cases; I say, some
People, at the Door of a House, just against where he fell, said one to
another, There he is, that is he, they have caught him; and it was upon that
Saying that he answered, It is very true, I am the Man, and I did it; for still
he imagined they knew him to be the Murderer, that killed the Man so long ago;
whereas there was no body there that ^ad any Knowledge of the Matter, and the
very Memory of the thing was almost forgotten in the Place, as it might well
b^, having been done eighteen Years before.

HOWEVER, when they heard him cry I am the Man, and I did it, one of the People
that came about him said, What did you do? Why, I killed him, says he; I killed
Mr. -- and then repeated his Name; but no body remembered the Name.

WHY, you are mad, says one of the People; and then, added another, the Man's a
distracted, disordered Man. They pursued a little Shoplifting Thief, and here
they have frighted a poor Gentleman, that they own is not the Person, but is an
unhappy disordered Man, and fancied they pursued after him.

BUT are you sure he is not the Man?

SURE? says another; Why, they tell you so themselves. Besides, the Man is
distracted.

DISTRACTED! says a third, how do you know that?

NAY, says the other, he must be distracted, or in Drink; don't you hear how he
talks? I did it, I killed him, and I don't know what. Why, here is no body
killed, is there? I tell you the poor Man is crazed. Thus they talked awhile,
and some run forward toward Cheap Side, to look for the real Thief, and so
they were about to let him go. But one grave Citizen, and wiser than the rest,
cried, nay hold, let us enquire a little further; though he is not the Thief they
look for, there may be something in it; let us go before my Lord Mayor with
him: and so they did. I think the Lord Mayor then in Being, was Sir William
Turner.

WHEN he came before the Lord Mayor, he voluntarily confessed the Fact, and was
afterward executed for it: and I had the Substance of this Relation from an
Ear-witness of the thing, so that I can freely say that I give entire Credit to
it.

IT was remarkable also, that the Place where this Man fell down when he run,
believing he was pursued and known, though at first he really was not, was just
against the very Door of the House where the Person lived that he had murdered.

MANY Inferences might be drawn from this Story, but that which is particularly
to my Purpose, is, to show how Men's Guilt crowds their Imagination with sudden
and surprising Ideas of things; brings Specter and Apparitions into their
Eyes, when there are really no such things; forms Ghosts and Phantasms in their
very View, when their Eyes are shut: They see sleeping, and dream waking; the
Night is all Vision, and the Day all Apparition, 'till either by Penitence or
Punishment they make Satisfaction for the Wrong they have done, and either
Justice or the injured Person are appeased.

BUT to bring all this back to our Business: here is no other Apparation in all
this, than what are formed in the Imagination; the Ghosts, the Souls of the
most injured Person, whether injuriously murdered, or injuriously robbed and
plundered, sleeps in Peace, knows nothing of the Murderer or Thief, except
only that it gives that Part all up to the Eternal Judge: the Murderer has the
Horror of the Fact always upon him, Conscience draws the Picture of the Crime
in Apparition just before him, and the Reflection, not the injured Soul, is the
Spectre that haunts him: Nor can he need a worse Tormenter in this Life;
whether there is a worse hereafter, or no, I do not pretend to determine. This
is certainly a Worm that never dies; it is always gnawing the Vitals, not of the
Body, but of the very Soul -- But I say^ here was no Apparition all this while
of any kind, no Spectre, no Ghost, no not to detect a Murderer.

1. NO Devil or Evil Spirit; as for Satan, he would rather protect, or at least
shelter him, that he might commit another Murder.

2. NO Soul of the deceased, however injur'd^ the Man acknowledged he never saw
any real Apparition.

WHAT was it then the Man was exercised with? I answer, he was harrass'd by the
Reflection of his own Guilt, and the Sluices of the Soul were set open by the
Angels or Spirits attending, and who by Divine Appointment are always at hand
to execute the vindictive Part of Justice, as well as the more merciful
Dispensations of Heaven, when they have them in Commission.

THESE abandoned him to the Fury of an enraged Conscience, opened the Sluices
of the Soul, as I call them, and poured in a Flood of unsufferable Grief,
letting loose those wild Beasts called Passions upon him, such as Rage,
Anguish, Self-reproach, too late Repentance, and final Desperation, all to fall
upon him at once; so the Man runs to Death for Relief, though it be to the
Gallows, or any where, and that even by the mere Consequence of Things.

BUT if then Oppression, Injury, Robbery, and even Murder it self, will not
bring the departed injured Soul back in Ghost or Apparition; if when it is once
Uncas'd, Dismissed, or Unembodied, its State is determined, and that it can
receive no such Impressions as to be disquieted afterward, much less brought
back hither to haunt or perplex the Persons left behind, what then shall we say?

HOW then can we think they should come back for Trifles, nameless Trifles, or
Trifles not worth naming? and what are we to call those real Apparitions which
we have Reason to believe are, and frequently have been seen in the World? what
are they, nay, what can they be, but these Angels or Spirits, call them what
you will, who inhabit, or have their Station in the great Void or Wast? who
have the Guard, not of our Atmosphere only, nay not of the Solar System only,
though that is of Immense and Inconceiveable Extent, and full of distant
Planetary Worlds, but even of the whole System of the Creation, the System of
Empty Space.

THESE may, and no doubt do visit us every Day, whether they are visible to us
or no; their Business is among us, they are posted in their Station as
described, on purpose to take Cognizance of us, and of things belonging to us,
and done by us.

IF Murder, Rapine, and Oppression is exercised upon any, these frequently, if
not always, concern themselves, either to detect it, or to bring the Offender
to Justice, or both, especially in Cases of Blood: And this is the best way we
can account for the Discovery of Murder, which is so general, that it is our
received Opinion, that Murder very seldom goes undiscovered; that Murder will
out, that is, will come out to be known and punished.

IF instead of saying Murder very seldom goes und^scover'd, they had said
seldom goes unpunished, I believe it might have been universally true; for
sometimes secret Murders are never discovered to the Persons who knew of the
Fact, or in the Place where it was committed: but how are they pursued by the
Divine Vengeance, that is to say under the Ministry of these happy Instruments,
who fail not to pursue the Murderer? perhaps it may be the only Case wherein
they are Agents of Justice, without a mixture of Mercy.

HOW many secret, and 'till then undiscovered Murders do these happy
Instruments oblige the guilty Wretches to discover, which no Human Eye had been
Witness to? Some are discovered, as in the Example above, and brought to
Punishment: Some at the Gallows, whither the Criminal is brought for other
Crimes; some upon sick Beds, and in View of Eternal Judgment; some in
Shipwrecks, some in Battles, some one way, some another.

NOR can it be denied, that though these angelick ministering Spirits were to be
constant Messengers of Justice in such Cases, yet it would be much more
merciful than to give the Soul of the injured murdered Person leave to come
back armed with Power, and with the Terrors of its invisible State, to do it
self Justice, inflamed with the Resentments which it might be reasonable to
suppose it must have at the Injury received, able to tear the Murderer in
Pieces, and in Condition to ca^ry on its own Quarrel, and execute the Divine
Justice, in revenge of its private Quarrel.

1. THIS would be inconsistent with the supreme Prerogative of Heaven, by which
he has taken all executive Justice into his own Hand, all Retribution, all
retaliating Justice; and that on purpose to restrain the Rage and Fury of Men,
who would be unbo^nded in the vindictive Part, and set no Limits to their
Vengeance; which for that very Reason, I say, God has declared he takes into
his own Hand; Vengeance is MINE, I will rep^y. Romans xii. 19.

2. IF it were not thus, the World would be a Field of Blood and Confusion, the
departed Soul of a murdered Person would be always harrassing, not the
Murderer only, but all the Persons concerned in his Injury; and without Mercy
would call every one a Murderer, that was on the side of his Enemy, whether
guilty or not; in a word, suppose he died fighting, he would come back to
revenge his own Death, fired with a double Rage, and armed with an irresistible
Ability to revenge.

BUT not to confine my self to the Case of a Murderer only; If Souls after
Death could return to visit those who they had any Concerns with here, let the
Occasion be what it would, the World would be all Confusion and Disorder;
Q^arrels and Contentions would never cease, Feuds of Families would not die,
but the injured Person would always come back to right himself.

AND how do we know that they would, even in that enlightened State of Being, be
impartially just, considering they would act in their own Causes? Are we sure
they would not insist upon pretended Right, as they did perhaps when living? if
so, then we must have Appeals even from the Spirits themselves; for they would
be as liable to do Injury in their Revenge, as those yet living had been to do
to them.

HERE we might make a rational Excursion upon the present State of Things: What
would be the case, if all the injured Souls now in a determined State, were
able to come back, and demand Justice of the present Age? what work would it
make among us? how many wealthy Landlords would be turned out of Possession,
and rich Tradesmen obliged to refund? How would the strong Oppressor be
challenged by the weak, the injured Poor be the ruin of the Rich? How many
Adulterers would be bound to dislodge from the Arms of the fair Intruder? How
many injured Ladies would claim their Properties, and turn the Usurpers out of
Bed?

HOW would young -- be called upon to do right to a whole Family, whose Tears
for the marrying one Sister, and debauching the other, have hitherto been in
vain? How would the civil Rape be discovered, and the Artifices be detected,
which broke two Hearts, for want of doing right to one?

HOW long ago would the Soul of -- have appeared to do her self Justice, which
a wheedl'd C -- a bribed -- and a sleepy -- denied her, and to demand the
Sentence, which the plain acknowledgment of her Murderers could not extort
from them?

HOW would she have haunted the Retirement of the guilty Wretch, and have
beaten him out of all his Subterfuges, 'till he had come upon his Knees to the
Hangman, and begged to be dismissed from a Hell so much worse than that he had
reason to expect he was going to? or have been his own Drudge, and have
anticipated Justice by an immediate dispatch?

BUT they have been left to the Iron Hands of yet slumbring Justice; which
Conscience (however it may at present forbear) must soon tell them, will be not
the less certain for the delay.

BUT let us leave the Mechanic Criminals, and enquire of the superior Ranks of
Men: How many usurping Tyrants possess the Thrones of oppressed, and perhaps
murdered Princes; while the Blood of Armies, nay, of whole Nations (speaking
as to Number) has been sacrificed to support the Ambition of one Man?

WHAT Mercy to Mankind has the supreme Lord exhibited, in this wise allotment
of Things? viz. That the Grave buries all the Rage of humane Resentment: the
Oppressed and the Oppressor rest together; the Murderer and the Murdered; the
most inveterate Enemies; the conquered in Battle, and the Slain of the
conquering Army, make one heap of quiet and peaceable Dust, blended together,
and mouldering into the common Element of Earth.

ALL the Animosity, being fled with the enraged Souls, carries with it the very
remains of the Quarrel, and they no more appear Enemies, but freely encorporate
their Dust with one another. The late D. Ha -- n, might have been buried in the
same Grave, nay, in the same Coffin, with the Lord Mo -- n; and their Swords
left in their Hands; the Souls of the noble Enemies would never have concerned
themselves again with the Quarrel.

HEAVEN, who thought fit to cool the Rage of their Minds, by their own unhappy
Hands, and make 'em reciprocally the Executioners of the Divine Pleasure upon
themselves, has thought fit also to take from both the power of determining any
more who was right, and who was wrong, and obliged them mutually to refer the
further enquiry to himself.

THE two Danish Soldiers who fought at Beverly, one killed upon the spot, and
the other immediately shot to Death for fighting, and buried together; there
they lie quiet in one Grave, the Souls of them never visit one another, to
complain of the Injury.

COULD Souls departed come back to demand Redress of Grievances, and to put Men
in mind of the Injustice done them; could they challenge the living Possessors
of their Estates for the Frauds by which they were obtained; what Confusion
would Exchange-Alley and the Exchange of London be in? what distraction would
it make in all the Affairs of Life? and how soon would the Men who amassed
immense Wealth, Ann. 1720, disappear, like W -- of Hack --, and sink under the
guilt of their good Fortune?

IN a word, it would invert the Order of Eternal Justice, for it would make
this Earth be the Place of Rewards and Punishments, and take the Executive
Power out of the Hands of the great Governor of the World.

DEPEND then upon it, the Souls of our departed Friends, or Enemies, are all in
their fixed and determined State; whether arrived at a full Consummation of
Felicity or Misery, that is not the case, nor is it any part of the Question;
but they are so removed from all possibility of return Hither, or concern with
us, that the very Suggestion, however it has for many Ages prevailed in the
World, is full of Absurdity. The Joys of the Happy are so complete, so exalted,
so superior, that the greatest Affairs of this World are too trifling, to take
up the least Moment, or give the least Interruption to their Felicity; as a
poor or mean Man, that having a vast Estate left him in his immediate
Possession, quits his decayed out-of-repair Cottage upon the Waste, and having
his Hands full of Gold, or even Bags of Gold, scorns to take up the Rags and
Rubbish of his old dirty Habitation; but says to his Servants, Let any one take
'em that will, I have enough here.

ON the other hand, the rejected and condemned Soul, loaded with his own Crime,
and sinking under the Weight of inexpressible Horror; shall he have any thought
about the hated World he came out of! he who abhors and hates the place where
he spent a long Life of such Crime, as now loads him with insupportable
Punishment, is he at leisure, or in composure for concerning himself in Life
any more, where he has already so miserably ruined himself, Soul and Body!

IF he was to come back hither for any thing, it would probably be to take the
heaps of his illgotten Treasure from the unjust Possessor, his Heir; and making
restitution with it to the Poor, whom he had oppressed, to the Widows he had
robbed, and in general to all those he had injured, leave his Family in Poverty
and Rags, instead of their Robes and Velvet; and in Hospitals and Almshouses,
rather than Palaces and Parks, and with Coaches or Horses. Proving the Proverb
untrue, and showing that the Son may not be always happy, though the Father be
gone to the Devil.

I DOUBT it would make but sad work among some Families, who now possess large
Estates; if the Notion some People entertain about Spirits, and about haunting
of Houses, should be true: Namely, that the Souls departed could not be at rest
'till Satisfaction was made in such and such cases, where Injury had been done
to Orphans and Widows; and 'till such Injustice was prevented as was farther
like to be done by their means.

AS to what Rest the Souls of those departed would have, I am not to resolve;
but I doubt the Souls and Bodies too of those that remain, would have small
Rest here, if that were true.

IS it not rather a Proof that the Soul cannot return hither, to do Right to
the injured race of those whom it had oppressed with Violence, when embodied,
that the Ghost or Soul of -- sleeps in its absent State, and does not call upon
his too happy Heir, and charge him to make reparation in its Name, for all the
Ravages and Plunder, out of which he raised those Millions he left behind? If
Usury, Extortion, Perjury and Blood are Injuries that disquiet the Souls
unembodied, How is it that the Souls of all the Families, and even Nations of
Families oppressed and ruined by the late -- do not come and do themselves
right out of the immense Wealth, left in possession to those, who, 'till that
Justice be obtained, could have no Claim to it?

BUT to let the Injured and the Injurious sleep together, as they do, without
disturbing or being disturbed by one another, let us ask a few Questions of the
living? How would a certain wandering Right Honorable, most simply elevated
Object of human Pity, be terrified at the Apprehensions of meeting the
dishonored Souls of his Ancestors? and particularly of his pious Grandfather,
who would if it were possible chastise him for his Lunacy, and drive him home
to the Feet of a merciful Sovereign, to ask Pardon for the most preposterous
things that ever humane Rage drove any Man in his Senses to be guilty of!

IF the Souls of wise Men could be disquieted for the mad things done by their
Posterity, what Regret must the Ancestors of all the exiled Heirs of Noble
Blood now have, who see their Sons forfeiting the ple^tiful Fortunes they left
them, by the most ridiculous and utterly improbable Scheme of the late Preston
and Dumblain Affair? an Attempt without Success, because without rational
Prospect, without humane Probability; and for which, as the late happy Lord
Derwentwater said, they should not have been sent to the Tower, but to Bedlam.

IF Souls could return, how should our Friends the A -- s and B -- s and S -- s
sleep in their Beds, while they enjoy the ruins of so many Families, and the
fortunes of so many Sufferers, who hanged themselves in Desperation for the
loss? and why do they not see Apparitions every Night from the injured Ghosts
of -- L -- Ba -- W -- Hu -- and a thousand more; who, could they repass the
Gulf, would certainly harrass them, 'till they should be glad to dismiss
themselves the same way, and run to that Hell which they know nothing of, from
that Hell of Self-reproach, which they would be no longer able to endure?

I COULD descend to Particulars, 'till I filled a Roll too long for your
reading; and I know not whether it might not be true, as Sir W -- B -- d said
in another case, that he believed all would come up that was under Ground, and
his Grandfather would come with the rest and call for his Estate again.

THE Doctrine of disquiet Souls returning hither, to do or obtain Justice, to
make or demand Restitution, and that they could not be at rest 'till such and
such things were settled, Wills performed, dispossessed Heirs righted,
concealed Treasons discovered, concealed Treasures found out, and the like,
were it true, would make the World uninhabitable: Ghosts and Apparitions would
walk the Streets at Noonday; and the living might go on one side of the
Street, and the dead on the other; the latter would be infinitely more numerous.

NOTHING can be more proposterous than such a Notion. It is true, that the
examples given, or pretended to be given, of it, are but few, and that very
part is against them; for if the thing is real, why are they but few? It must
be acknowledged, as the times go, the cases of the injured and oppressed are
not few: On the contrary, as God said of the old World, the whole Earth is
filled with Violence. Whence is it then, if injured Souls, or the Souls of
injured, oppressed, ruined People could return, that there are not Millions
haunting the Doors, nay the Closets and Bed-Chambers, of those that enjoy the
Wealth which was so unjustly obtained?

IF it could be at all, the Number would be infinitely more; for why should one
guilty Soul be uneasy, and not another? All the guilty would come back to make
Restitution as far as they were able, and all the Sufferers would come back to
obtain it.

AGAIN, the Condition of those that enjoy the illgotten Wealth of their
Ancestors would be deplorable: the Souls of guilty Parents would harrass their
Sons for the Estate, to make Restitution; and the Souls of the oppressed
Sufferers would haunt them, to get their own restored: so that they only would
be easy in the World, who had nothing to restore, or who enjoyed nothing but
what was of their own getting; they only would sleep at Night who had balanced
with the Day, who had earned what they Eat, and had Eaten no more than they
earned.

BUT this we see is not the case: that the Souls of the most guilty remain
where they are, and the Souls of the most oppressed do not come hither to
complain, strongly implies, and is to me a sufficient proof, that their State
is determined; that the Gulf is fixed; that they can only look back with
Self-Reproach, but cannot come back to give themselves the Satisfaction of
doing Justice to those they have injured; that the murdered Person cannot come
back, no, not to detect the Murderer; or the plundered Traveller to discover
the Highwayman. It is plain to me, and will pass for Evidence, that they
cannot, because they do not; and it is plain to me that some do not, because all
do not; for if any, why not all?

IT does not consist with the enlightened Justice of that State which we believe
is beyond Life, to let one injured Soul come hither to obtain Justice against
the Oppressor of his Family, and not let another have the same Liberty; or to
let one injurious Soul return to make Restitution, and make his Peace, that he
may be at Rest, as they call it; and lock up another from it, who would be
equally willing to do it, and is equally miserable in the want of it.

THAT it is not so, is a sufficient Testimony to me that it cannot be so; and
the miserable Condition the World would be in here, if it were so, makes it
clear to me that the Wisdom of Providence has otherwise determined it.

NOR would the Advantage be any thing considerable, at least not in proportion
to the Disorder it would bring along with it; and were we to allow the
Possibility, it would bring in so many Absurdities with it in Points of
Religion, that it would destroy the established Doctrines of all Religion: For
Example,

FIRST, We believe that the final Estate of the Soul is determined with Life,
and as the Tree falls so it must lie; that This is the State of Trial, That the
State of Retribution: If so then, to what purpose should the Souls of the Dead
desire to come back, unless they were to have a farther Probation, or that
there was a Possibility of retrieving their State, and recovering from the
Sentence they were under? and if the divine Wisdom had left room for that, it
would have as well spared them in Life 'till it had been done.

SECONDLY, To what Purpose should the Soul come back to do Justice, if doing
that Justice could make no Alteration of its future State? If it could make any
Alteration, then there must be room after Death to recover the Soul from
eternal Death; and if there was, the Eyes may be supposed to be so opened
there, that none would omit or neglect it.

THIRDLY, If coming hither, or doing Justice here, can be no Help to the Souls
departed, and yet they desire it, you must then suppose a strong Desire of
doing disinterested Good may possess the Souls of those who are in a State of
Condemnation; which is inconsistent with the other Circumstances of Hell, which
we have just Reason to believe shuts out all good Desires, and all good
Principles, from the Souls that are there.

FOURTHLY, The Supposition of Souls being in a Condition after Death to return
hither, destroys all the Descriptions which the Scripture gives us of the
future Condition, either of the good or bad Souls: but that I hinted before.

UPON the whole, it is a Notion, however it may have been received here,
perfectly inconsistent with either Reason or revealed Religion; and I may
venture to say it cannot be, it is impossible, and that all the Pretenses of a
Ghost or Apparition saying it is such a Person, and that it cannot be at Rest
'till so and so be done, and that now it shall go to God, must be a Delusion,
and must be added by the Persons relating the Story; for that no Ghost or
Spirit really happy could say so, or would impose so much upon us.

CHAP. VIII. The Reality of Apparition farther asserted; and what Spirits they
are that do really appear.
THE affirming, as in the foregoing Chapters, that the unembodied Souls of Men
do not appear again, or concern themselves in the Affairs of Life; that the
Good would not if they could, and the Bad could not if they would; does not at
all destroy the Reality of the thing called Apparition, or do I pretend to
argue from thence that there is no such thing as any Apparition at all: on the
contrary, I insist it is reasonable to believe (not withstanding all that has
been said) that there are such things as the Apparition of Spirits; and this I
think I have already proved past the Power of any Scruple or Cavil, as also
that there have been such things in all Ages of the World.

THE Doctrine of the Existence of Spirits is established in Nature; where those
Spirits reside, is Matter of Difficulty, and our Speculations are various about
them; but to argue that therefore there are none, that they exist not, that
there are no such Beings, is absurd, and contrary to the Nature of the thing;
we may as well argue against the Existence of the Sun when it is clouded and
eclipsed, though we see its Light, only because we cannot see its Beams, or the
Globe of its Body: But let us go back to the Principle.

SPIRIT, as it is to be considered here, is to be reduced to four general Heads.

FIRST, The Author of all Spirit, the Fountain of all Being, the Original Cause
of Life, and the Creator both of Spirit and of all the Subsequents of it. This
we justly adore, as the Infinite Eternal Spirit: GOD is a SPIRIT.

SECONDLY, Angels or good Spirits; which ^re real Spirits, we have
Demonstration of it, and they have and do appear daily, as the great Author of
all Spirit directs, for the Service of Mankind, for they are ministering Spirits.

THIRDLY, Devils or evil Spirits; these are really Spirit too, of a spirituous
Nature; it is true they are deprived of their Beauty, their Original Glory,
because deprived of their Innocence; they are deformed as well as defiled by
Crime, but they are not deprived of their Nature; they are Spirits still, though
cast down and cast out, and are called wicked Spirits.

FOURTHLY, Souls of Men, whether good or bad; their Condition may be as you
please to speak of it, Happy or Unhappy; the Case is the same, it does no way
alter their Nature, but still they are Spirits. The Spirits of just Men made
perfect; there is the happy Spirits: the Spirits in Prison, and there is the
unhappy; but both are Spirits, and are to be discoursed of as such in this
Place.

NOW let us bring all this down to our present Purpose. I have asserted their
Being, let me enquire into their State, as it respects our Subject; how far
they may or may not, can or cannot appear among Men, in their present
Circumstances. How they have visited this Earth at several Times, and on what
Occasions, has been mentioned already, and as much at large as the designed
Brevity of this Work admits of.

IT remains to enquire what we have to expect of them for the future, and in
particular, who we may expect to see at any time hereafter; which of them may
visit us for the time to come, and which may not, or can not be reasonably
expected; and this I shall do with the same Clearness if possible, and in very
few Words.

OF the four Kinds of Spirit, then, let us consider the First and the Last.

FIRST, GOD, the Soul and Life, the Being of all Spirit, has appeared, as I
have said; but we are to expect him no more: I do not say he cannot appear to
us, but I believe I may say he has determined to bless the World with no more
such glorious Exhibitions, no more personal Appearances of the Eternal Face,
'till the most glorious Appearance spoken of in Scripture, Tit. ii. 13. Looking
for the blessed Hope and the glorious appearing of the GREAT GOD --

SECONDLY, The dismissed, departed, unembodied Spirits, which we call Souls of
Men, whether happy or miserable, can by no means appear among us; all
Apparition of that Kind is fictitious and imaginary; never was practicable,
except once by Miracle, and never can again be practicable, and therefore is
not to be expected. We are told indeed, that once, on the extraordinary
Occasion of the Resurrection of Christ, and to honor that Resurrection with a
Miracle of the most sublime Nature, the Graves were opened, and the Bodies of
the Saints arose and appeared, etc. The Word is they Arose, and came out of
their Graves after his Resurrection, Mat. xxvii. 53. I might enlarge upon the
Nature of this Apparition of the Saints which slept; the manner of it, and
especially the Reason of it, and show you how it was really miraculous, and
done to convince the doubting Disciples of the Truth of the Resurrection, which
some of them, being perhaps originaly Sadduces, might still question; but my
Business is with an Age not too much delighted in serious Excursions, so I must
not make any Trespass, however seasonable, or turn grave, however useful.

LET it then be sufficient to the Purpose, this Apparition of Souls was
extraordinary and miraculous, and we are to expect them no more; their State is
determined, the happy are too happy, and their Happiness too firmly fixed, to
suffer any such Interruption; the Unhappy have their Confinement too firmly
fixed, to break Prison, and get out; in a word, these cannot, and the other
would not if they could; and we are not to expect to see or hear from them any
more on this Earth; 'till the Restitution of all things, and 'till they shall
be all summoned to that grand Appearance, which we believe will one Day happen,
whatever our flaming Age pretend to say to the contrary.

ALL Apparition then of these two Heads or Species being concluded impossible
in Nature, and not to be expected, we must look for it then among the Angelick
Spirits; and here indeed it is to be found: Angels of all the Kinds have
appeared, may and do appear, and of them alone are all the Apparitions, which
have any Reality in them, formed.

THIS is bringing the Matter into a narrow Compass, and putting an end to Cavil
and Quarrel about it; there is no need to wrangle upon it any more; but when
you at any time see an Apparition, or Appearance of Spirit assuming Shape and
Voice, and you are sure it is really an Apparition, not a Deceptio Visus, a
Cloud, a Vapor of the Imagination; I say, whenever you see such an Apparition,
depend upon it; it is an Angel, or a Devil.

I HAVE only one Distinction to make here, which though it be necessary, shall be
very short and clear, viz. That when I speak of Angels I mus^ be understood as
follows,

FIRST, The Word Angel is to be understood of good Angels; for the Devils, as I
have said, ar^ also Angels: Satan is called an Angel of Light but the evil
Angels I shall always treat with their new Surname, Devil; so that when I speak
of Angels, I am always to be understood of the good Angels.

SECONDLY, But of good Angels, these I distinguish also into two Kinds:

(1.) THE Angels which are actually in Heaven, such as we read of, Gabriel,
Michael, and others not distinguished by Name; these have appeared amongst Men,
upon this Earth, as I have also said before at large; but even these, we have
Reason to believe, we shall see no more; God having pleased to discover himself
to his People now in another Way, by another Ministration, namely, by his
Spirit, and by an Evangelick, not an Angelick Ministry.

(2.) THAT Rank of Angels or Spirits, call them as we please, (and whether
inferior or not, we are not to determine,) who are placed by the Direction of
God himself in a nearer Situation to us; placed, I say, by their Maker, under
his superior Providence, for the Direction and Conduct of human Creatures, and
of their Affairs, or at least to Guard them from the Invasions, Threatening, and
Hellish Designs of the Prince of Darkness and his Angels; and these, as I said,
might well be called Guardian Angels to the whole Earth.

NOW, these two sorts of Spirit, viz. the Guardian Angels, the good Spirits
detached, as I may and did call it, from Heaven, to have the Inspection over,
and Care of his new Creation, as well here as elsewhere; these, and the Devils,
that other sort of Angels, of whom I may have Occasion to speak (more than a
great deal) in this Work; These, I say, may, and do appear, and all Apparition
is really between them; all Spirit you can speak of, or pretend to see the
Appearance of, must be one of these two, must be Angel or Devil, there is no
other, there can be no other: Miracle, and something more than miraculous, and
Things which we have no Reason to look for, only excepted.

BUT on the other hand, as certain as that no other Spirit does, or can, and as
certainly as they do not, or cannot appear; so as certain, and past dispute is
it, that these Spirits, both good and bad, do appear to us upon all Occasions;
I mean all Occasions which they judge needful, and which happens to them,
whether by choice or constraint. It is not indeed in us to determine how they
are moved to go upon these Errands, or in what manner; I may perhaps give some
probable Opinions about the Manner and Causes both of their Mission and
Permission; for I take those two Heads to contain the Regulation of their
Actings; I say Commission and Permission, and without these we are sure never
to be visited in this manner, either by one or other.

IT is true that this gives a considerable Sanction to the Thing called
Apparition in general, and makes it appear to be more solemn than we are
willing to make it; for by this Rule, neither Devil or Angel appears but upon
some extraordinary Occasion; and if it be so, I do not see why we should like
it the worse; for if they were to show themselves upon every trifling Occasion,
they would either terrify Mankind so as to make the World intolerable to him,
or familiarise themselves so as not to be regarded.

NOW as it would be the Devil, not the good Spirits, that would thus haunt the
World upon Trifles; (for the other cannot be supposed to do it) so they would
carry on the Familiarity too far, and Men would be so far from being frighted
and terrified at him, that in short there would be more Danger in the Intimacy;
and, as we say in another Case, Mankind and the Devil might be too well
acquainted.

BUT first to the Fact, that these Spirits, both good and bad, Do thus APPEAR;
and then to the Reason of it. That they do appear, the History, Experience, and
Report of all Ages confirm it; they always have, and still do. The Appearances
of Spirits are confirmed many ways, History is full of Examples; and sacred
History itself, though it does not give Relation of particular Apparitions, yet
confirms the thing, as a Reality, and out of Question.

CHRIST himself, after his Resurrection, seeing his Disciples frighted and
terrified at his Appearance, takes a great deal of Pains to convince them that
he was not a Spirit or an Apparition, as they feared: Luke xxiv. 37. They were
terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a Spirit. This would
be what it is too dishonorable to say of the sacred Writ, if Apparition of
Spirit in the Shape of Body did never come, and that there were no such thing
in Nature.

SEE then what our blessed Lord says to them upon it, v. 39. Behold my Hands
and my Feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones, as ye sce me have. This is as direct and positive as any thing
of its kind can be supposed, or desired to be. If there were no such things as
Spirits appearing, how could Jes^s Christ have expressed himself in such a
manner? the Language is plain, You think you see a Spirit, that is an
Apparition, and you may have some Reasons for your Apprehension, because I came
in thus unseen, when the Door was shut: Now a Spirit may indeed assume a Shape,
and look like the Person it appears for; but if you were to come near to it,
you would find a Spirit, an Apparition, has only the Appearance, it has not
Flesh and Bones as you see me have: Therefore I am not a Spectre or Apparition,
but a real Body.

SO when he came walking upon the Sea to his Disciples, and they were so
frighted that they cried out, believing that they had seen a Spirit; it must be
out of Question that there were such things, and that they, the Disciples, had
heard of them; nay, perhaps, they had seen such Apparitions themselves before
that; why else should they be so frighted as to cry out, Matthew. xiv. 26. And
when the Disciples saw him walking on the Sea, they were troubled, saying, It
is a Spirit; and they cried out for fear. And why, when our Savior spoke to
them, did he not reprove them for being frighted at their own Imagination, and
fa^cy, (like Children,) that they saw a Spirit, when there were no such things
in the World, and no Apparitions to be seen?

ON the other hand he speaks kindly to them, knowing that Apparitions are
frightful Things to People not used to see them, and bids them be of good
Cheer, it is not a Spirit, it is I, be not afraid; it is no Apparition, but
myself in reality. So also you have the Story, Mark vi. 50.

AGAIN, you have a perfect Description of an Apparition in the very manner we
are just now discoursing about it, Job iv. 15, 16. Then a Spirit passed before
my Face, the Hair of my Flesh stood up. It stood still, but I could not discern
the Form thereof: an Image was before mine Eyes, there was silence, and I heard
a Voice. Eliphaz ^as a Man of Sense, he was not deluded to speak of Things not
in Being, he saw an Apparition, not a Fancy.

AGAIN, Joshua saw an Apparition, as I mentioned once before, Josh. v. 13. A
Man with a drawn Sword in his Hand. This was an Angel, that is to say a Spirit,
and yet it spoke to him, and had the Shape of a Man in Arms, with a Sword in
his Hand. Had Joshua offered to touch it, or been permitted to touch it, he
would not have found it had Flesh and Bones; we have our Savior's Words for
it, A Spirit has not FLESH and BONES; an Apparition is a Spirit assuming a
Shape of Flesh and Blood, but without the Reality.

AND this Answers all those fanciful People who say to us, that they saw such
or such a Person: I saw him, says the Ignorant frighted Visionist, perfectly! I
know him well enough! I am sure 'twas him! I saw him plainly! Hence they
conclude it must be the Soul of such a Person, because, say they, it had his
very Countenance and his Clothes on: nay, riding on the same Horse as he used
to ride on: when the truth of the Case is this, the Man is dead, his Body
rotting in the Grave, his Soul carried into the remote Regions of eternal
Felicity or Horror unalterable, and that immovable, as to returning this Way:
his Clothes that were seen, are lying in the Chest, or the Press, where they
usually lay, and the poor Horse grasing in the Field, or perhaps quiet in the
Stable, and not at all disturbed. All that is to be said, the good Angel that
perhaps had some secret Commission to the Relict or Remains of the Man's
Family; to give them Notice of some Evil, to warn, to admonish, etc. assumes
the Shape and Appearance of the Man himself, clothes himself in his Likeness,
forms the Apparition in Air, of his Clothes, his Countenance, his Horse, as a
Painter clothes the Cloth he paints on with Faces, Postures, Habits, Garments,
all i^ Colors, while the passive Person represented is no way affected with,
or concerned in the Draught representing him.

AND why should not this Spirit, thus commissioned to go on such an Errand, be
able to amuse us with the Appearance of a Person departed; taking up his Shape,
Count^na^ce, Clothes, etc. though the Soul of the Person is not affected with, or
concerned in it? when it is known that we often see Apparitions of Persons
living, whom we see and speak to, and converse with; know their Faces, their
Voices, their Clothes; and yet the Persons themselves know nothing of the
matter.

I HAVE by me a very diverting History upon this Subject, which I shall abridge
for the present purpose, as follows, viz.

A CERTAIN young Lady of -- born in the County of -- had been long courted by a
young Gentleman, whose Father had a very good Estate in the same Town: she had
kept him Company too openly, but had not yielded to his Importunities for a
criminal Conversation, though her Reputation suffered for it as if she had; but
at length she was so far over-persuaded, that she made an Appoin^ment to be at
such a time at a Farmer's House, a Tenant of his Father's, and who were, it
seems, let into the wicked Secret. Accordingly she dresses herself up with the
best of her Art, to recommend herself (to the Devil, I may say;) and away she
goes to meet him, having her Servan^ Maid to attend her, because it was over
some Fields that she was to go.

WHEN she was n^ar the House she finds some Excuse or Err^^^ to send ba^k her
Maid to the Town; the Wench, it s^ems, not being privy to the Business.

AS she turns about to dismiss her Maid, the Maid offered to go farther 'till
she was nearer the House; but her Mistress sees the Minister of the Town coming
along the Path, and making that the Excuse, O, says she, there is our Minister,
Dr. -- coming, so I shall have his Company; you may go back, Mary, I shall be
safe enough.

THE Maid sees the Minister also, and goes back accordingly.

AS soon as the Minister came up to her, (for he seemed to overtake her
presently) he gives her the usual Compliment, and asks her how she came to be
in the Fields alone?

SHE answered she had not been alone, but having Occasion to send b^ck her
Maid, she dismissed her the sooner because she saw him coming; and besides,
says she, I am going but to that House there, naming the Farmer's Name.

O, MADAM, says the Doctor, are you going thither? then I know your Errand.

SHE was surpised and blushed, but recovering a little, What Errand Sir? says
she

WHY, Madam, says he, it may not be proper for me to name the Business; but you
know it well enough.

WHAT d' ye mean Sir? says she. I don't understand you

WHY, says he, your Favorite the young Esquire is there before you.

SHE was terribly surprised then, and could hardly speak to him, being touched
with Shame and Indignation; supposing the young Gentleman had boasted of her
Favors before he had received them, and had betrayed her: however, she made
still strange of it: and having, it may be supposed, conquered her Modesty so
far as to make a Promise or Appointment to sacrifice her Virtue to him, she
might the easier conquer the Surprise; so she seemed to slight it.

BUT, Madam, says the Minister, if you would take my Advice -- and there he
stopped.

WHAT ^dvice, Sir? says she. I don't understand what you mean.

WHY, I would advise you to go back to the Town again; and not go into the way
of Mischief.

SHE still withstood, and put him off with the usual Answer, I don't understand
you; what do y^ mean? and the like; but at last the Minister raising his Voice
a little, like to that of a stern Reprover,

COME, come, young Lady, says he, you cannot conceal your wicked Purposes; you
have made Mr. -- an Appointment; he prevailed on you last Night, and you have
now decked yourself up with your Ornaments to meet him, and prostitute your
Virtue, and your Honor, and your Conscience, all to his corrupt vicious
Appetite; and I know it, you may see that I do; my Advice to you is to go back
and break your wicked Promise, and repent that you made it. I shall give him
the same Advice pr^sently.

IF she was surpised before, she was confounded now, partly with Horror at the
Fact itself, which now she was struck a little with the Sense of; and partly,
but Tenfold more, with the Shame of its being known. It put her into such
Confusion, that at first she could not answer a Word; but after awhile she
said, If you know the Gentleman is there, Sir, I shall not go, especially since
you have such hard Thoughts of me: and upon saying this she turns about and
goes directly back again, and the Minister went from her toward the H^use. As
the Farmer lived but a very little way from the Place where she stood talking
with him, she looked behind her and saw him go into the House, and the Door
shut after him.

ANY one will suppose upon this shock to her Design, and being not only
disappointed in her wicked Pleasures, but exposed and betrayed, as she
imagined, by her Lover; she w^nt directly home without any stay, and there gave
vent to her Passions with the utmost Rage, and with all the Resentment that
such base Treatment could inspire her with.

THE Gentleman, on the other hand, being extremely disappointed, and not
knowing what could be the reason of it, after he had waited a long time, came
back to see what was the Matter, believing she must be taken ill, or that
something had happened very extraordinary.

WHEN he came to the House, (she lived it seems with an Aunt, whose Husband was
also dependent upon the young Gentleman's Father,) he inquired for his
Mistress; but her Maid brought him Word, that she could not be spoken with.

THAT Answer not being satisfactory, and having refused to be answered with two
or three more such Excuses, at last she sent him Word plainly, that she had
nothing to say to him; and that she not only would not see him now, but would
never see him more.

SURPISED with this, and not able to guess the Meaning of it, he goes away;
but the next Morning writes her a very civil obliging Letter, wherein, among
abundance of the usual Expressions of Lovers, he begs to know what he had done,
that should merit such Treatment, and that she would let him into so much at
least of the Causes of her Displeasure, as should put him in a way to clear
himself; protesting that he kn^w not the least Step he had taken to disoblige
her, except in punctually attending her Appointment; and having the
Mortification of sitting five Hours by himself, in Expectation of her Company.

IN Answer to this, she sent him a long Letter, full of Reproaches for his vile
Usage of her, drawing her into a sinful, shameful Compliance with him, and then
exposing her, and triumphing over her Weakness; making her with one hand the
pretended Object of his Amor, and with the other the Sport of his Companions.
She upbraided him with telling her that he sat five Hours alone, whereas he had
much better Company than she could have been; seeing the good Doctor, who had
admonished her not to expose her self in meeting him, had given him the same
good Advice that he had done to her, and so had not made so bad a use of his
Treachery in betraying her, as he expected.

SHE concluded with telling him, 'twas her Happiness that this came to her
Knowledge, before she had thrown her self into the Arms of a Traitor; and though
he had done her the Injustice to boast of her Weakness, she thanked God, he
triumphed when he had gained but half a Victory; hat she was infinitely
beholden to him for her Deliverance, and that it was the only Obligation he had
ever laid upon her.

IF I could give you the Entertainment of all the Letters that passed between
them, while they were both under the Amusement of the mysterious Part, and
perfectly ignorant of the Occasion, and then add the Surprise of the Discovery,
it would make two Acts of a good Comedy; but I must shorten the Story as much
as I can.

HE was so surpised with this Answer from his Mistress, that he could not tell
what to make of it, and especially those Paragraphs which related to the good
Doctor's admonishing her, and being in his Company; all which as he really had
known nothing of it, so there was no guessing at the meaning of it. 'Twas
impossible so much as to have the least Notion about it; 'twas all Confusion
and Darkness, and without the least Meanin^ that he could come at. In a word,
abundance of ^etters passed between them, but still she continued using him
after the same manner, talked the same style, about his betraying her, and that
he acted the very Part of the D^^il, first to tempt, and then to accuse; first
^o draw her in with a thousand Importunities, and then expose her for
complying. She reproached him with the many Solicitations and Protestations of
Affection, and appealed to him to testify, whether he had made an easy
Conquest, and whether she had not so long withstood his most incessant
Assaults; challenged him to tell how long he had besieged her, and whether she
had yielded at last but on an honorable Capitulation, though unhappily she had
granted Possession without the due Securities. She asked him why, when he
triumphed over her Honor, he had not had so much Generosity to own what the
Treaty had cost him, and how long it was before he had gained that little he
had to boast of?

HE protested at large, that he was perfectly surpised at the whole Affair,
understood not one Word of it, could not dive into her Meaning, abhorred the
Thought of what she charged him with; and at last very warmly insisted upon her
explaining her self, and that otherwise, as she did him so much Injustice, he
would do himself Justice; for he heard she made it too public, and that though
he had not done it yet, being tender of her Character, yet he could not bear to
be treated in this manner, and not know something of the Reason of it.

AT last he pressed her to let him but speak with her; which, though it was long
before she would grant, yet she did consent to at last, lest he should expose
her.

AT this Interview they began to come to an Understanding; she owned that she
was coming to the Place, but that she saw the Minister go in just before her,
which made her go back again; but she did not tell him a Word of her seeing the
Minister on the Way.

HE protested there was no Minister came to him, or into the House; and
afterward brought the People of the House to testify the same; that he sat
all the while in the Parlour reading a Book, and that no Creature came near
him, nor so much as to the Door.

THIS startled her; and at last, with much Importunity, she told him the whole
Story of her meeting with the Doctor in the Fields; and, in a word, how the
Doctor told her where she was going, and to who; that he was there wating for
her; and, which confounded her worse than all, had told her what she was going
about; adding, that she had made the Promise the Night before, and that he,
meaning the Gentleman, had told him so.

N. B. In this Part she was mistaken; the Doctor said he had been told of it as
soon as she had made the Promise, and she in her Surprise understood it, that
he said the Gen^leman told him.

HE was so full of this heavy Charge, and himself in every Part so clear of it,
that it was impossible he should sit still with it. He knew not what to make of
it, he knew very well that he had never opened his Mouth to any one, Man, Woman
or Child about it; that the Farmer, or any of his Family, knew not a Word of
it, only that he was to me^t her there, as they had frequently done before, and
innocently enough; and he could not suppose she could be so weak to talk of it
her self; so that he could not yet imagine what it could be.

A FEW Days furnished him with an Opportunity to talk with the Minister
himself, who came frequently to his Father's House; and being one Day very free
wi^h him, he jested with him, for hindering him of two or three Hours of very
good Company.

THE Doctor answered him, he should be very sorry to be guilty of any thing so
rude, and desired to know how it could be.

WHY, Doctor, says he, we were with some Friends very merry at such a House;
(insinuating that there was more Company;) and such a Lady, says he, (naming
her,) was coming to us, and you met her, and persuaded her to go back again.

(...)


SIR, says the Doctor, I have only one Satisfaction in the whole Story, and
that is, that it cannot be true, as I shall soon satisfy you.

NAY Doctor, says the Gentleman, I don't tell it you as of my own Knowledge.

NO Sir, says the Doctor, and I should not have so little Respect as to tell
you it was false, if you had told it me as of your own Knowledge.

BUT do you assure me, says the Gentleman, that it is not true?

I DO assure you, says the Doctor, upon my Word, that I know nothing of it.

WHY, Doctor, says the Gentleman, do you give me your Word that you did not
meet her in the Fields, next to Farmer Gi -- 's House on the eleventh Day of
the very last Month, being August? for I have it all down in black and white *
here.

* He pulls out his Pocketbook, and looks for the Day of the Month.

NOT only not that Day, says the Doctor, but I never saw her in those Fields,
or any other Fields, in my Life.

WHY, you surprise me Doctor, says the Gentleman; it is impossible.

I APPEAL to the Lady her self, says the Doctor.

NAY, Doctor, says the Gentleman, if you appeal to her, you must be cast; for I
will swear she told me so her self.

THIS confounded the Doctor for a little while, but he presently recovered
himself; Sir, says he, I was going to desire of you, that we might wait upon
Mrs. -- together, and that I might hear it from her self; but upon recollecting
all the Circumstances, I am very happy in one thing, namely, that let her say
so her self, and forty Ladies more, I can prove to you, that it is impossible
it should be true.

THAT will indeed put an End to it all, says the Gentleman; but how can you do
that?

WHY, Sir, says the Doctor, are you sure she does not give you a wrong Day?

NO, no, says the Gentleman, I have a Reason why it cannot be a Mistake of the
Day, for I have a Memorandum of the Day upon a remarkable * Occasion.

* He had set it down in his Book upon the Occasion of his being disappointed.

AND it is not the Lady's Mistake then, says the Doctor; for you know Women are
not always the exactest in their Accounts of Days, nor Months, unless it be on
worse Accounts than I believe you were to meet about.

WELL, Doctor, says the Gentleman, but I am sure of the Day, for I have it in
my Book.

NAY, if it was mistaken a Day or two, says the Doctor, it matters not; for, as
I said before, I never saw her in the Fields in my Life; or if I might see her
among other People, I am sure I never spoke to her. But besides Sir, I tell
you, this cannot be true, for I was at London all the last Month 'till the 27th
Day, so that it is impossible.

HERE the Discourse necessarily broke off: the Gentleman was loath to discover
his Surprise, but told him he would enquire farther into it; and upon that he
goes immediately back to the Lady, reproaches her a little wi^h her forming
such a Story to pick a Quarrel; but not telling her that he had been with the
Minister at all; only, as he might easily know by other Circumstances, that the
Doctor was out of Town, he told her, that he would not have charged her with
such a thing in such harsh Terms, if he was not, upon looking back a little
upon things, come to a Certainty, that it was not only false, but that it was
impossible to be true.

THEY had a long Dialogue upon that Head; and as he did not presently tell her
the Circumstances, thinking he had a little Advantage upon her, he jested with
her pretty smartly upon it, seemed to laugh that she should first put such a
Sham upon him, and then to tell such a formal Story to make it good, and to
excuse her Breach of Promise, and that not a Word of Truth should be in it.

SHE received his making a Jest of it with Disdain, and told him she began now
to discover what a kind of a Man she was so near being r^in'd by; and that she
had been in good Hands indeed, that could pretend to banter her thus; that she
should have been fin^ly used, if the good Minister had not been sent from
Heaven to save her from being doubly undone.

HE told her she was soon angry; but it touched her home; however Madam, says
he, you shall not slander the good Man, for he had no hand in it.

WELL, well, says she, I can better laugh at you for that Folly, than I should
have done for something too vile to name, if I had fallen into your Hands: For,
says she, I had too much Reason to say now, that I was sure to have been both
betrayed, and exposed.

HE said she grew scurrilous, and went from one Story to another; that she told
him a false Story, and wanted to drop it; he desired her to stick to one thing,
and go through that first.

SHE colored, and raising her Voice, told him 'twas below a Gentleman to give
a Woman the Lie; that she believed, if she had been a Man, he durst not have
said so to her.

HE told her she was mad, and that she had happened to speak a false thing, and
was in a Rage because she could not come off of it.

SHE told him, he showed her again that he was no Gentleman; that if he gave
her the Lie again she would spit in his Face; and that if he would furnish her
with a Sword, she would do her sel^ justice, and give him Satisfaction as
fairly as if she was a Man; and that for his giving her the Lie, she threw it
back in his Face, he might make the best of it.

THAT IS Gallantly done, says he, Madam indeed, there is a Sword for you; and
offers her his own, laying it down upon the Table before her.

YOU an't even with me yet, says she; I scorn as much to take up a Sword
against a Naked Man; as you ought to have scorned, if you had been a Gentleman,
to give the Lie to a Woman.

HE began now to find she was too hard for him; but he came back to the
Question.

WELL Madam, says he, will you own your self in the wrong, if I prove to you
what I said just now, that what you charge me with not only is false, but cannot
be true?

AY, ay, says she, what cannot be true must be false; but what does that do for
you?

WELL, says he, will you venture so much upon it as --

HERE she interrupted him with some warmth^ says she, I Will venture my Life upon
it.

NO Madam, not your Life, says he, you shall only oblige your self to perform
your Promise, if I do prove it; and I Will promise never to ask you more, if I do
not.

I CANNOT go that length again, to save Life; but I Will freely consent to die any
Death in the World, that is not by lingering Torture, if you can do it.

WHY then Madam, says he, you know our Appointment was such a Day: so he
reckoned up the Days to her, 'till she understood the Calculation, and agreed
that it was so.

WELL, it was such a Day, says she, and that Day I saw and talked with the
Doctor in such a place.

WELL Madam, says he, and that Day, and all that part of the Month for several
Days both before and after it, the Doctor was at London. I remember it, and you
shall know it by very good Circumstances, such as cannot be denied. I know it
by several Particulars.

HERE he related to her several Circumstances, as if he knew them by his own
Affairs, not let^ing her know at all that he had seen the Doctor and talked
with him about it.

SHE laughed at him at first, and told him, that he had been too old for her
before; but she was too old for this now: that she might be imposed upon in
many things; but when she saw a Man that she knew, and had known from a Child,
and talked with a Man she had talked to a thousand times, and had heard Preach
for almost fifteen Years, he must not think to run her down with Words: that
she assured him 'twas so, and there was an end of the thing.

WELL Madam, says he, and you pretend he came to the House too while I was
there? How do you pretend to prove that?

ONLY, says she, that I stood still with my Eyes open, saw him at the Door, saw
little Jacky G -- s, the Farmer's Son, open the Door to him, make him a Bow,
saw the Doctor go in, saw the Door shut to again when he was in; that is all,
says she, and smiled.

WELL, says he, I can only say this, I will have the bottom of it out; for I
will not be charged as guilty of using you ill, while I know nothing of it.

NO, no, says she, I don't say I am used ill, I am used well, very well: and
here she puts on an Air of Satisfaction, and sings,

To flee from the Devil's, to bid him pursue;
And ^e ^ertai^l^ needs no invi^ing:
But if you assail, he will quickly turn Tail,
For the Devil was never for fighting.
The Devil can tempt, but he cannot compel;
He can wheedle, delude, and invite us;
But he never would fill up his Quota's in Hell
If he only should Bully and Fright us.
But when once we are got out of his Clutches,
He rages and roars like a Bull:
His Malice and Emptiness such is,
And yet he is of Venom so full.
The way then to deal with the Devil,
Is at his own Weapons to fight him:
When he sets up his Roar, provoke him the more,
And let him but see that you slight him.
For the Devil's a Coward in Nature,
A pitiful sorry Poltroon;
If you take but the Whip, he will give you the Slip;
And before you can lash him, he will run.
HER Singing put him into a Passion; for he took her Song of the Devil to mean
himself; and he told her 'twas all a scandalous Fiction of her own, and she
should hear more of him; and so offered to go out.

SHE bad him do his worst, and made him a Curtsy, as if she supposed he had
been just going away; and now she laughed outright at him.

BUT he could not go away yet; he told her he would not have her expose her
self, that she ought not to use him so, and she would but force him to make her
ashamed of it.

SHE told him it was good Advice, to bid her not expose her self, and she had
the more need of it; because he had exposed her so much already.

THEN he told ^er he would bring the Farmer and all his Family to her, to prove
that the Doctor had not been there that Day, nor for five Months before; and
the Boy should testify that he never saw him, nor opened the Door, nor let him
in.

WELL Sir, says she, now you come close to the Point; pray let all this be
done: But let me ask one thing for you to think of as you go on; Do you think I
know Doctor -- our Minister?

YES Madam, says he, I believe you know him well enough, and that makes me
wonder at you the more.

WELL, and do you think my Maid Mary knows him? says she.

YES, says he, I believe she does; for she was born in the Town.

WELL, says she, then I have one Witness of my side; you shall hear what she
says.

WHY Madam, says he, was Mary with you?

YOU shall hear presently, says she.

So she rings a little Bell, and in comes her Maid.

Mist. Mary, don't you remember you walked out into the Field with me one Day
last Month?


Ma. WHAT, when you went to Farmer Gi -- 's, Madam, and sent me back again?


Mist. YES; don't you remember you would fain a gone further?


Ma. YES Madam, I was afraid you should go over the last Field alone.


Mist. BUT what did I say to you, Mary?


Ma. WHY you would make me go back; by the same Token we saw our Minister Dr.
-- a coming after us, and you said the Doctor would see you safe; and so I came
away contented when I saw him.


Mist. ARE you sure 'twas the Doctor, Mary?


Ma. SURE, Madam! yes: why he spoke to me.


Mist. WHAT did he say to you?


Ma. HE said, How do you do Mrs. Mary? and touched his Hat, just as he used to do.


WELL Sir, says she, then you see I wa'n't drunk, nor I did not walk in my
Sleep. If it were convenient I would send for the Doctor this Minute, and he
should tell you what he said to me.

CONVENIENT or not convenient, says he, I Will send for him, or go to him, for I
will find it out: and then he swore a little.

THAT IS much about as kind as all the rest, says she; rather expose any body
than your self; but do your worst, the Snare is broken and I am escaped, 'twill
expose your self at last.

COME Madam, says he, you shall see I can talk it with the Doctor, and that
before your Face; and yet he shall know nothing of the matter.

I KNOW a little too much of that, says she; he know nothing of it! and then
she smiled.

THIS put him almost out of all Temper, and he gave her ill Words again; and at
last added the whole Story, and told her downright, that he had talked with the
Doctor already; and that he solemnly protested he knew nothing of it, and had
never seen her or spoken with her for so long time, naming the time when he
spoke last to her; likewise he told her what the Doctor said of his having been
at London all those three Weeks when this happened.

SHE begun to be amazed, and a little confounded at this; but recovering her
self, she told him, that if the Doctor was there himself, she had a direct
answer to give him, for she was not a Papist ^o believe a Priest against her
own Senses.

WHAT answer can you give, Madam, says he, when the Doctor shall prove by
twenty Witnesses, if need were, that he was at London, almost a hundred Mile
off, all the while?

WHY my Answer would be this, that 'twas either he or the Devil.

WELL then it was the Devil, says he; I will not dispute that with you, Madam.

NO, no, says she^ I can satisfy you that it could not be the Devil; I can
convince you; you will acknowledge it presently: Do you think the Devil would
have turned me back again, when he knew the dreadful Errand I was going on?

NAY, says he calmly, I confess that is the best thing you have said yet; who
then could it be? says he; for it is plain it could not be the Doctor.

THEN, says she, it must be some heavenly Appearance in the Doctor's Clothes,
for I knew not his Face and his Voice only, but his very Gown; and if it was a
good Angel, I have the more reason to be thankful that he hindered me from
running into the Arms of the Devil: and with that she fell a crying, she could
hold out no longer.

WELL, they parted after this Scuffle, for he was a little daunted himself.

BUT my Story does not end here; for a little while after something happened
that explained all the rest: The Lady had a Visit to pay at a Neighbor's
House, who lived a little out of the Town, only over one little Enclosure,
which she was obliged to cross: Now as she was going over that Close or
Enclosure, who should she meet but the Doctor again; and she saw him a good
while before he came up to her.

SHE was surpised at seeing him; and if she could have avoided him she would:
but 'twas impossible. When he came up to he^, he pulled off his Hat very
courteously, and immediately began to discourse of what he had said to her
before; but took no Notice at all of its having been denied.

SIR, says she, I have been very ill used upon that Day's Work.

I KNOW it, says he, I know it, repeating the Words: But your Innocence shall
be cleared up, I will do it my self; do you be thankful that you escaped the
Snare: And so, giving her no time to answer, he passed by her without taking
any farewell: which being a little Particular, made her turn her Head to look
at him: But though it was in the middle of the Field, which was too large for him
to be out of it if he had flown as swift as a Pidgeon, (for it was not above a
Moment, not a Second of Time) he was gone, and she saw nothing.

SHE was exceedingly surpised, and ready to sink into the Ground; she was so
frighted that she could not help fitting down even upon the Grass; for her
Joints trembled under her, so that she could not stand.

IT happened that a poor Woman of the Town came cross the Close at the very
juncture, and knowing her, she called to her to come and help her up. She did
not tell the Woman what had happened to her, but that she was taken with a fit
of trembling, and that if she had not sat down she must have fallen down; all
which was true: so the poor Woman helped her up, and led her home, where she
continued very ill of the Fright for several Days.

IN this time she had a very great desire to see the Gentleman, for by what the
Apparition said to her she made no doubt but he had seen it too.

AFTER some time he had heard that she was very ill, and thinking what he had
said to her might have had some influence upon her, to hurt her, he resolved to
go and see her; for though he had ruffled her pretty much; yet, as he said
afterward, he loved her very well; and the better for her so seasonably
recovering her Vir^ue and good Principles; and much better than he believed he
should have done, if he had had his Will of her, as he should certainly have
had, if she had met him that time at the Farmer's.

WITH these kind Thoughts h^ went to visit her; and though she was very ill, yet
she would be brought out of her Chamber to see him.

AFTER some Civilities, he frankly told her the reason of his Visit word for
word as above, and that he came to cheer her up a little.

SHE thanked him; but told him it was true it had extremely troubled her, to
think first how near she had been to her utter Ruin, and then how needlessly she
had been exposed for it; and that though she had no Guilt, as he very well knew,
other than that which was in the first wicked Consenting; yet she had been as
much exposed, as if she had been really his Whore.

HE protested to her that he never had opened his Lips of it to the Doctor, or
any one else; and that it was the Resentment at the charging him with it, that
had made him so angry, and nothing else; for that he scorned any thing so base.

SHE told him it was impossible for any one to believe otherwise before; but
that she believed he was satisfied how it all was, now; and that something had
happened since, which had opened her Eyes, though it had almost killed her; and
she believed he knew something of it too.

HE wanted to know what it was, for he protested he knew nothing. What says he,
is there any more Mysteries?

SHE said, she could not tell him, because she supposed he would not believe
her.

HE answered, he would believe her in every thing, that he ought to believe any
body in.

SHE told him, she believed there would be no occasion to tell him, for that
she did not doubt but he would be informed the same way that she was, if he was
not already.

HE importuned her earnestly to let him know what it was; and that with such a
serious kind of Discourse, that she fancied he had seen something too; but it
seems he had not: However he entreated her so much, that at last she let him
know the whole Story, as above.

THER^ is a great deal more belongs to this Story, which would be very
diverting, and not without its Uses too; but as the particular Relation does
not come within the verge of my own Knowledge, I cannot vouch all the
Particulars, at least not sufficiently.

HOWEVER, it is enough to the Case in hand: If the Apparition came to prevent
this poor deluded young Lady from prostituting her self to a Man that had
wheedled her in upon such dishonorable Terms; it could not certainly be the
Devil, or any Spirit of his Class, or under his Government and Direction; he
would never have exhorted her to go back, reproached her with the Crime, and
prevailed upon her to believe it had been revealed to him by the Treachery of
her Lover.

THIS must be certainly one of those Angelick Guards which the God of Nature,
in Mercy to Mankind, has placed as a detached Body of Spirits to counter-act
the Devil, prevent the Arch-enemy seducing his Creatures, and overwhelming the
World with Crime; and if the Story be as I have received it and now handed it
down, it seems a merciful Disposition of Providence in Favor of the Gentleman,
as well as the Lady; and be it a Parable or a History, the Moral is the same,
and the Improvement of it the same too: They that are ^unning the same Course
of Folly would have Reason to be very thankful if they were sure to meet with
the same kind of Disappointment, and would never say it was the Devil that told
it them.

THE Gentleman it seems did not slight the Story so much as she expected he
would, nor did he question the Truth of any or every Part of it; for she told
it with so much Steadiness, always agreeing in every Particular, and gave so
concurring Accounts of the Circumstances as they related to what had happened
before, that it was apparent 'twas no Delusion.

THAT which made him most uneasy, was that the Apparition seemed to promise to
appear to him; and he had no Desire to be convinced that way. Indeed the Story,
at least so far as I have the Particulars, breaks off a little abruptly there
and does not say whether he ever saw any thing or no. But it said, it made him
be quite another Man in his Way of living than ever he was before; and
particularly he was very thankful that he had been prevented being so wicked
with her as in all Probability he had been, if this had not happened.

NOW this Apparition, as is said above, could not with any manner of Reason, be
supposed to be the Devil; for why should an Evil Spirit appear, to keep any
Person from doing Evil? Why should it assume a real Shape, namely that of a
Minister in his Gown and Cassock, and that it was in Appearance the very
Minister of the Parish; for all this she constantly affirmed, and t^o things
are natural Inferences from it.

FIRST, That the Appearance was real.

SECONDLY, That it was a good Spirit.

LET the Divines read us Lectures upon the Nature of Spirits, and upon how far
they can or cannot take Cognizance of human Affairs; That I have nothing to do
with here; my Business is to observe the Matter of Fact, viz. that they do come
hither, do appear, and are seen, talked to and conversed with, and that they do
come on good Errands, and therefore are not likely to be evil Spirits or Devils.

TAKE another Historical Relation, which, though I name no Names, I have very
good Authority for the Truth of, and that more particularly than for the other.

A GENTLEMAN of a very good Estate married a Lady of also a good Fortune, and
had one Son by her, and one Daughter, and no more, and after a few Years his
Lady died. He soon married a second Venture; and his second Wife, though of an
inferior Quality and Fortune to the former, took upon her to discourage and
discountenance his Children by his first Lady, and made the Family very
uncomfortable, both to the Children and to their Father also.

THE first thing of Consequence which this Conduct of the Mother-in-Law
produced in the Family, was that the Son, who began to be a Man, asked the
Father's Leave to go abroad to travel. The Motherin-Law, though willing enough to
be rid of the young Man, yet because it would require something considerable to
support his Expenses abroad, violently opposed it, and brought his Father also
to refuse him, after he had freely given him his Consent.

THIS so affected the young Gentleman, that after using all the dutiful
Applications to his Father that he could possibly do, as well by himself as by
some other Relations, but to no purpose; and being a little encouraged by an
Uncle, who was Brother to his Mother, his Father's first Lady, he resolved to
go abroad without Leave, and accordingly did so.

WHAT Part of the World he traveled into I do not remember; it seems his
Father had constantly Intelligence from him for some time, and was prevailed
with to make him a reasonable Allowance for his Subsistence, which the young
Gentleman always drew Bills for, and they were honorably paid; but after some
time, the Motherin-Law prevailing at home, one of his Bills of Exchange was
refused, and being protested, was sent back without Acceptance; upon which he
drew no more, nor did he write any more Letters, or his Father hear any thing
from him for upwards of four Years, or thereabouts.

UPON this long Silence, the Mother-in-Law made her Advantage several Ways; she
first intimated to his Father that he must needs be dead; and consequently, his
Estate should be settled upon her eldest Son, (for she had several Children.)
His Father withstood the Motion very firmly, but the Wife harr^ss'd him with
her Importunities; and she argued upon two Points against him, I mean the Son.

FIRST, If he was dead, then there was no room to object, her Son being Heir at
Law.

SECONDLY, If he was not dead, his Behavior to his Father in not writing for
so long a Time was inexcusable, and he ought to resent it, and settle the
Estate as if he were dead; that nothing could be more disobliging, and his
Father ought to depend upon it that he was dead, and treat him as if he was so;
for he that would use a Father so, should be taken for one dead, as to his
filial Relation, and be treated accordingly.

HIS Father however stood out a long time, and told her that he could not
answer it to his Conscience; that there might happen many things in the World,
which might render his Son unable to write; that he might be taken by the
Turks, and carried into Slavery; or he might be among the Persians or Arabians
(which it seems was the Cafe) and so could not get any Letters conveyed; and
that he could not be satisfied to disinherit him, 'till he knew whether he had
Reason for it or no, or whether his Son had offended him or no.

THESE Answers, however just, were far from stopping her Importunities, which
she carried on so far, that she gave him no Rest, and it made an unquiet
Family; she carried it very ill to him, and in a word, made her Children do so
too; and the Gentleman was so wearied out with it, that once or twice he came
to a kind of Consent to do it, but his Heart failed him, and then he fell back
again, and refused.

HOWEVER, her having brought him so near it, was an Encouragement to her to go
on with her restless Solicitations, 'till at last he came thus far to a
provisional Agreement, that if he did not hear from his Son by such a time, or
before it, he would consent to a re-settling the Estate.

SHE was not well satisfied with the conditional Agreement, but being able to
obtain no other, she was obliged to accept of it as 'twas; though, as she often
told him, she was far from being satisfied with it as to the Time, for he had
fixed it for four Years, as above.

HE grew angry at her telling him so, and answered, that she ought to be very
well satisfied with it, for that it was time little enough, as his Son's
Circumstances might be.

WELL, she teiz'd him however so continually, that at last she brought him down
to one Year: But before she brought him to that, she told him one Day in a
Heat, that she hoped his Ghost would one time or other appear to him, and tell
him, that he was dead, and that he ought to do Justice to his other Children,
for he should never come to claim the Estate.

WHEN he came, so much against his Will, to consent to shorten the time to one
Year, he told her, that he hoped his Son's Ghost, though he was not dead, would
come to her, and tell her he was alive, before the Time expired: For why, says
he, may not injured Souls walk while embodied, as well as afterward?

IT happened one Evening after this, that they had a most violent Family
Quarrel upon this Subject, when on a sudden a Hand appeared at a Casement,
endeavoring to open it; but as all the iron Casements, used in former Times,
opened outward, but hasp'd or fastened themselves in the Inside; so the Hand
seemed to try to open the Casement, but could not. The Gentleman did not see
it, but his Wife did, and she presently started up, as if she was frighted, and
forgetting the Quarrel they had upon their Hands, Lord bless me! says she,
there are Thieves in the Garden. Her Husband ran immediately to the Door of the
Room they sat in, and opening it, looked out.

THERE IS no body in the Garden, says he; so he clapped the Door again, and came
back.

I AM sure, says she, I saw a Man there.

IT must be the Devil then, says he, for I Am sure there is no body in the Garden.

I WILL swear, says she, I saw a Man put his Hand up to open the Casement; but
finding it fast, and I suppose, adds she, seeing us in the Room, he walked off.

IT is impossible he could be gone, says he; did not I run to the Door
immediately? and you know the Garden Walls on both sides hinder him going

PRY'THEE, says she angrily, I an't drunk nor in a Dream, I know a Man when I
see him, and it is not dark, the Sun is not quite down.

YOU'RE only frighted with Shadows, says he, very full of Ill Nature: Folks
generally are so that are haunted with an evil Conscience: it may be 'twas the
Devil.

NO, no, I Am not soon frighted, says she; if 'twas the Devil, 'twas the Ghost
of your Son: it may be come to tell you he was gone to the Devil, and you might
give your Estate to your eldest Bastard, since you will not settle it on the
lawful Heir.

IF it was my Son, says he, he is come to tell us he is alive, I warrant you, and
to ask you how you can be so much a Devil to desire me to disinherit him; and
with those Words, Alexander, says he aloud, repeating it twice, starting up out
of his Chair, if you are alive show your self, and don't let me be insulted
thus every Day with your being dead.

AT those very Words, the Casement which the Hand had been seen at by the
Mother, opened of itself, and his Son Alexander looked in with a full Face, and
staring directly upon the Mother with an angry Countenance, cried Here, and
then vanished in a Moment.

THE Woman that was so stout before, shrieked out in a most dismal manner, so
as alarmed the whole House; her Maid ran into the Parlour, to see what was the
matter, but her Mistress was fainted away in her Chair.

SHE was not fallen upon the Ground, because it being a great easy Chair, she
sunk a little back against the side of the Chair, and Help coming immediately
in, they kept her up; but it was not 'till a great while after, that she
recovered enough to be sensible of any thing.

HER Husband run immediately to the Parlour Door, and opening it went into the
Garden, but there was nothing; and after that he run to another Door that
opened from the House into the Garden, and then to two other Doors which opened
out of his Garden, one into the Stable-yard, and another into the Field beyond
the Garden, but found them all fast shut and barred; but on one side was his
Gardener, and a Boy, drawing the Rollingstone: he asked them if any body else
had been in the Garden, but they both constantly affirmed no body had been
there, and they were both rolling a Gravel-walk near the House.

UPON this he comes back into the Room, sits him down again, and said not one
Word for a good while; the Women and Servants being busy all the while, and in
a Hurry, endeavoring to recover his Wife.

AFTER some time she recovered so far as to speak, and the first Words she said,

L -- d bless me! what was it?

NAY, says her Husband, 'twas Alexander to be sure.

WITH that she sell into a Fit, and skream'd and shrieked out ^gain most
terribly.

HER Husband not thinking that would have ^ffected her, did what he could to
persuade her out of it again; but that would not do, and they were obliged to
carry her to Bed, and get some help to her; but she continued very ill for
several Days after.

HOWEVER this put an end for some considerable time to her Solicitations about
his Disinheriting her Son-in-Law.

BUT Time, that hardens the Mind in cases of a worse Nature, wore this off also
by degrees, and she began to revive the old Cause again, though not at first so
eagerly as before.

NAY he used her a little hardly upon ittoo, and ^f ever they had any Words
about it he would bid her hold her Tongue, or that if she talked any more upon
that Subject, he would call Alexand^r again to open the Casement.

THIS aggravated Things much; and though it terrified her a great while, yet at
length she was so exasperated, that she told him she believed he dealt with the
Devil, and that he had sold himself to the Devil only to be able to fright his
Wife.

HE jested with her, and told her any Man would be beholden to the Devil to
hush a noisy Woman, and that he was very glad he had found the Way to do it,
whatever it cost him.

SHE was so exasperated at this, that she threatened him if he played any more
of his hellish Arts with her, she would have him Indicted for a Wizard, and
having a Familiar; and she could prove it, she said, plain enough, for that he
had raised the Devil on purpose to fright his Wife.

THE Fray parted that Night with ill Words and ill Nature enough, but he little
thought she intended as she said, and the next Day he had forgot it all, and
was as good-humored as if nothing had happened.

BUT he found his Wife chagreen'd and disturbed very much, full of Resentment,
and threatening him with what she resolved to do.

HOWEVER he little thought she intended him the Mischief she had in her Head,
offering to talk friendly to her; but she rejected it with Scorn, and told him
she would be as good as her Word, for she would not live with a Man that should
bring the Devil into the Room as often as he thought fit, to murder his Wife.

HE strove to pacify her by fair Words, but she told him she was in earnest
with him: and in a Word she was in earnest; for she goes away to a Justice, and
making an Affidavit that her Husband had a Familiar Spirit, and that she went
in Danger of her Life, she obtained a Warrant for him to be apprehended.

IN short, she brought home the Warrant, showed it him, and told him she had
not given it into the Hands of an Officer, because he should have the Liberty
to go voluntarily before the Justice of the Peace, and if he thought fit to let
her know when he would be ready, she would be so too, and would get some of her
own Friends to go along with her.

HE was surpised at this, for he little thought she had been in earnest with
him and endeavored to pacify her by all the Ways possible; but she found she
had frighted him heartily, and so indeed she had, for though the thing had
nothing in it of Guilt, yet he found it might expose him very much, and being
loath to have such a Thing brought upon the Stage against him, he used all the
Entreaties with her that he was able, and begged her not to do it.

BUT the more he humbled himself, the more she triumphed over him; and carrying
Things to an unsufferable height of Insolence, she told him at last she would
make him do Justice, as she called it; that she was sure she could have him
punished if he continued obstinate, and she would not be exposed to Witchcraft
and Sorc^ry; for she did not know to what length he might carry it.

TO bring the Story to a Conclusion; she got the better of him to such a
degree, that he offered to refer the thing to indifferent Persons, Friends on
both Sides; and they met several Times, but could bring it to no Conclusion.
His Friends said there was nothing in it, and they would not have him comply
with any thing upon the Pretense of it; that he called for his Son, and some
body opened the Casement and cried here; that there was not the least Evidence
of Witchcraft in that, and insisted that she could make nothing of it.

HER Friends carried it high, instructed by her: She offered to swear that he
had threatened her before with his Son's Ghost; that now he visibly raised a
Spectre; for that calling upon his Son, who was dead to be sure, the Ghost
immediately appeared; that he could not have called up the Devil thus to
personate his Son, if he had not dealt with the Devil himself, and had a
familiar Spirit, and that this was of dangerous Consequence to her.

UPON the whole, the Man wanted Courage to stand it, and was afraid of being
exposed; so that he was grievously perplexed, and knew not what to do.

WHEN she found him humbled as much as she could desire, she told him if he
would do her Justice, as she called it, (that is to say, settle his Estate upon
her Son,) she would put it up, on Condition that he should promise to fright
her no more with raising the Devil.

THAT part of the Proposal exasperated him again, and he upbraided her with the
Slander of it, and told her he defied her, and she might do her worst.

THUS it broke off all Treaty, and she began to threaten him again; however, at
length, she brought him to comply, and he gives a Writing under his Hand to
her, some of her Friends being by, promising that he would comply if his Son
did not arrive, or send an Account of himself, within four Months.

SHE was satisfied with this, and they were all made Friends again, and
accordingly he gave the Writing; but when he delivered it to her in Presence of
her two Arbitrators, he took the Liberty to say to her, with a grave and solemn
kind of Speech:

LOOK you, says he, you have worried me into this Agreement by your fiery
Temper, and I have signed it against Justice, Conscience and Reason; but depend
upon it, I shall never perform it.

ONE of the Arbitrators said, Why, Sir, this is doing nothing; for if you
resolve not to perform it, what signifies the Writing? Why do you promise what
you do not intend shall be done? This will but kindle a new Flame to begin
with, when the Time fixed expires.

WHY, says he, I am satisfied in my Mind that my Son is alive.

COME, come, says his Wife, speaking to the Gentleman that had argued with her
Husband, let him sign the Agreement, and let me alone to make him perform the
Conditions.

WELL, says her Husband, you shall have the Writing, and you shall be let
alone; but I am satisfied you will never ask me to perform it; and yet I am no
Wizard, adds he, as you have wickedly suggested.

SHE replied that she would prove that he dealt with the Devil, for that he
raised an evil Spirit by only calling his Son by his Name; and so began to tell
the Story of the Hand and the Casement.

COME, says the Man to the Gentleman that was her Friend, give me the Pen; I
never dealt with but one Devil in my Life, and there it sits, turning to his
Wife; and now I have made an Agreement with her, that none but the Devil would
desire any Man to sign: and I will sign it; I say, give me the Pen, but she nor
all the Devils in Hell will ever be able to get it executed, remember I say so.

SHE began to open at him, and so a new Flame ^ould have been kindled, but the
Gentlemen mo^erated between them; and her Husband setting ^is Hand to the
Writing put an end to the Fray ^t that time.

AT the end of four Months she challenged the ^erformance, and a Day was
appointed, and her two ^riends that had been the Arbitrators were invited to
Dinner upon this Occasion, believing that he Husband would have executed the
Deeds; and accordingly the Writings were brought all forth, engrossed, and read
over; and some old Writings which at her Marriage were signed by her Trustees
in order to her quitting some part of the Estate to her Son, were also brought
to be cancelled. The Husband being brought over by fair Means or foul, I know
not whether, to be in a Humor for Peace sake to execute the Deeds, and
disinherit his Son; alleging that, indeed, if he was dead it was no wrong to
him, and if he was alive he was very unkind and undutiful to his Father in not
letting him hear from him in all that time.

BESIDES it was urged that if he should at any time afterward appear to be
alive, his Father (who had very much increased, it seems, in his Wealth,) was
able to give him another Fortune, and to make him a just Satisfaction for the
Loss he should sustain by the Paternal Estate.

UPON these Considerations, I say, they had brought over the poor low-spirited
Husband to be almost willing to comply; or at least, willing or unwilling, it
was to be done, and (as above) they me^ accordingly.

WHEN they had discoursed upon all the Particulars, and (as above) the new
Deeds were read over, she or her Husband took the old Writings up to cancel
them; I think the Story says it was the Wife, not her Husband, that was just
going to tear off the Seal, when on a sudden they heard a rushing Noise in the
Parlour where they sat, as if some body had come in at the Door of the Room
which opened from the Hall, and went through the Room toward the Garden Door,
which was shut.

THEY were all surpised at it, for it was very distinct, but they saw nothing.
The Woman turned pale, and was in a terrible Fright; however, as nothing was
seen, she recovered a little, but began to ruffle her Husband again.

WHAT, says she, have you laid your Plot to bring up more Devils again?

THE Man sat composed, though he was under no little Surprise too.

ONE of her Gentlemen said to him, What is the meaning of all this?

I PROTEST, Sir, says he, I know no more of it than you do.

WHAT can it be then? said the other Gentleman.

I CANNOT conceive, says he, for I am utterly unacquainted with such Things.

HAVE you heard nothing from your Son? says the Gentleman.

NOT one Word, says the Father, no not the least Word these five Years.

HAVE you wrote nothing to him, says the Gentleman, about this Transaction?

NOT a Word, says he, for I know not where to direct a Letter to him.

SIR, says the Gentleman, I have heard much of Apparitions, but I never saw any
in my Life, nor did I ever believe there was any thing of Reality in them; and
indeed I saw nothing now: but the passing of some Body, or Spirit, or
something, cross the Room just now, is plain; I heard it distinctly. I believe
there is some unseen Thing in the Room, as much as if I saw it.

NAY, says the other Arbitrator, I felt the Wind of it as it passed by me.
Pray, adds he, turning to the Husband, do you see nothing yourself?

NO, upon my Word, says he, not the least Appearance in the World.

I HAVE been told, says the first Arbitrator, and h^ve Read that an Apparition
may be seen by some People, and be Invisible to others, though all in the same
Room together.

HOWEVER the Husband solemnly protested to them all that he saw nothing.

PRAY, Sir, says the first Arbitrator, have you seen any thing at any other
time, or heard any Voices or Noises, or had any Dreams about this Matter?

INDEED, says he, I have several times dreamed my Son is alive, and that I had
spoken with him; and once that I asked him, why he was so undutiful, and
slighted me so, as not to let me hear of him in so many Years, seeing he knew
it was in my Power to disinherit him.

WELL, Sir, and what Answer did he give?

I NEVER dreamed so far on as to have him answer; it always wak^d me.

AND what do you think of it yourself, says the Arbitrator, do you think he is
dead?

NO, indeed, says the Father, I do believe in my Conscience he is alive, as
much as I believe I am alive myself; and I am going to do as wicked a thing of
its Kind as ever any Man did.

TRULY, says the second Arbitrator, it begins to shock me, I don't know what to
say to it; I don't care to meddle any more with it, I don't like driving Men to
act against their Consciences.

WITH this the Wife, who, as I said, having a little recovered her Spirits, and
especially encouraged, because she saw nothing, started up; What Is all this
Discourse to the purpose, says she, is it not all agreed already? what do we
come here for?

NAY, says the first Arbitrator, I think we meet now not to enquire into why it
is done, but to execute Things according to Agreement, and what are we frighted
at?

I AM not frighted, says the Wife, not I; come, says she to her Husband
haughtily, sign the Deed; I Will cancel the old Writings if forty Devils were in
the Room; and with that she takes up one of the Deeds, and went to tear off the
Seal.

THAT Moment the same Casement flew open again, though it was fast in the Inside,
just as it was before; and the Shadow of a Body was seen, as standing in the
Garden without, and the Head reaching up to the Casement, the Face looking into
the Room, and staring directly at the Woman with a stern and an angry
Countenonce; HOLD, said the Spectre, as if speaking to the Woman; and
immediately clapped the Casement to again, and vanished.

IT is impossible to describe here the Consternation this second Apparition put
the whole Company into; the Wife, who was so bold just before, that she would
do it though forty Devils were in the Room, skream'd out like a Woman in Fits,
and let the Writing fall out of her Hands: The two Arbitrators were exceedingly
terrified, but not so much as the rest; but one of them took up the Award which
they had signed, in which they awarded the Husband to execute the Deed to
dispose of the Estate from the Son.

I DARE say, said he, be the Spirit a good Spirit or a bad, it will not be
against cancelling this; so he tore his Name out of the Award, and so did the
other, by his Example, and both of them got up from their Seats, and said they
would have no more to do in it.

BUT that which was most unexpected of all was, that the Man himself was so
frighted, that he fainted away; notwithstanding it was, as it might be said, in
his favor.

THIS put an end to the whole Affair at that time; and, as I understand by the
Sequel, it did so for ever.

THE Story has many Particulars more in it, too long to trouble you with; but
two Particulars, which are to the Purpofe, I must not omit, Viz.

1. THAT in about four or five Months more after this second Apparition, the
Man's Son arrived from the East Indies, whither he had gone four Years before
in a Portugueze Ship from Lisbon.

2. THAT upon being particularly enquired of about these Things, and especially
whether he had any Knowledge of them, or any Apparition to him, or Voices, or
other Intimation as to what was doing in England, relating to him; he affirmed
constantly that he had not, except that once he dreamed his Father had written
him an angry Letter, threatening him that if he did not come home he would
disinherit him, and leave him not one Shilling. But he added, that he never did
receive any such Letter from his Father in his Life, or from any one else.

CHAP. IX. More Relations of particular Facts, proving the Reality of
Apparitions; with some just Observations on the Difference between the good and
evil Spirits, from the Errand or Business they come about.
I MAKE no Remarks upon any of these Stories; the present Business is to bring
Examples of such Things, to prove the Reality of Apparitions in general: As to
who, or what it is, that in such cases may appear, and why, and upon what
Occasions; that we shall speak of hereafter.

I SHALL bring one Example now within my own Knowledge, and in which I had some
Concern; not but that other Accounts may be as authentic as this, though I
cannot so positively vouch them at second or third Hand. When I offer those to
you, therefore, I tell you honestly that I have such and such Relations from
good Hands, or I have such a Story by me in Manuscript, and I leave you to make
such use of them as you please.

THIS Caution of mine, however, ought not to lessen the Credit of any of the
Relations here published; for why may not the Account given by another Hand be
as true as this which I give you from my own Knowledge; and why must an Author,
in such cases as these, be made answer^ble for the Particulars of every
History, or be bound to leave it out, which would be the Reader's Loss, not his
own.

HOWEVER the following I can vouch from my own Knowledge. A. B. was a Merchant
in London, and as he drove a considerable Trade beyondsea, he established a
Factor, or as the Language of Trade calls it a HOUSE, at a certain Port in the
English Colonies in America, and sent over his Servants or Apprentices thither,
as is usual for Merchants to do.

ONE of his said Apprentices being fitted out, and ready to Embark, his Cargo
being actua^ly on board the Ship, and the Ship fallen down the River as far as
Gravesend; his Master was getting his Letters and Invoyces, and other
Dispatches, ready for him, he being to go down the River the same Evening.

THE Hurry which thus dispatching him put his Master into, occasioned, that
when he was called to Dinner at the usual Hour, he did not take the young
Gentleman with him as usual, but told him he must be content to stay in the
Counting House 'till he came to relieve him.

ACCORDINGLY Dinner being over, he goes down to send him up to Dinner. And when
he came to the Counting House Door, there sat his Man with the Book-keeper
also, writing as he left him.

IT happened just that Moment, some occasion extraordinary obliged him to step
back again, and go up Stairs to the Dining Room, from whence he came; and
intending not to stay, he did not speak to the young Man, but left him in the
Countinghouse, and went immediately up Stairs.

IT was not possible that he, or any one else, except such as could walk
invisible, could go by, or pass him unseen: Good Manners would have hindered
the young Man from thrusting by his Master upon the Stairs, if he had been
going up; but he is positive he did not, and could not pass, without being seen.

BUT when he came to the top of the Stairs there sat the young Man at Dinner
with the other Servants; the Room they dined in being a little Parlour, which
opened just against the Stairs, so that he saw him all the way of the upper
Part of the Staircase, and could not be deceived.

THE Master did not speak to him, which he was very sorry for afterward; but
the Surprise made him pass by the Room, and go into the Dining Room, which was
to the right Hand of it, but he sent one immediately to look, and he was there
really at Dinner; so that what he (the Master) saw below in the Counting House,
must be the Apparition, as it certainly was.

BUT this was not all: The young Gentleman embarked as above, and arrived safe
with all his Effects in America, though he never lived to return. However, I
cannot say his Apparition in the manner as related could have the least
Relation to his being sick, and dying abroad, which was not 'till three Years
afterward. But what followed was of another kind.

THIS young Man had an elder Brother, who lived in London; he was a fine
Gentleman, and a Scholar, and was at that time studying Physic. He was also a
stout brave Gentleman, and in particular understood a Sword, that is to say how
to use a Sword, as well as most Gentlemen in England.

HE had an accidental Rencounter with a Gentleman in the Street, in that short
Street which goes out of Fleet Street into Salisbury-Court; and being so
complete a Master of his Weapon, he wounded his Antagonist, and drove him into
a Tavern in the Street, from whence came out two Men more upon him with their
Swords, but both of them found the Gentleman so much an Over-match for them,
that they left him as fast as the first; whereupon a fourth came out, not with
a Sword, but a FireFork taken hastily up out of the Tavern Kitchen, and running
at this Gentleman with it, knocked him down, and broke his Skull, of which
Wound he afterward died.

WHILE this was done in London, his Brother, as far off as Boston in
New England, writing to his Master the Merchant, (and who gives this Account of
it) after other Business, writ this Postscript.

SIR, I beg you will be pleased in your Return to this to let me have some
Account, as much as conveniently may be, of how my Brother does, and what
Condition he is in; which you will excuse my Importunity for, when you read the
following Account, (viz.)

THE 20th of -- last, about six a Clock in the Morning, lying in my Bed, and
broad awake, my Brother, or an Apparition of my Brother, came to the Bed's
Feet, and opened the Curtain, looking full in my Face, but did not speak. I was
very much frighted, but however I so far recovered as to say to him, Brother,
what is the matter with you?

HE had a Napkin-Cap on his Head, which was very bloody, he looked very pale
and ghastly, and said, I am basely murdered by -- naming the Person, but I
shall have Justice done me; and then disappeared.

NOW this Letter was so dated, that it was impossible any Account could be sent
of the Disaster, that could reach thither in that time; for it was not dated
above fourteen Days after the Fact was committed in London; and that it was
Genuine I am well assured, because I saw the Letter within an Hour after it was
received in London, read it my self, and knew the young Man's Hand, and the
young Man also perfectly well, as I did his Brother that was killed also, very
intimately.

THE young Man was sober, religious and sensible, not given to Whimsie, or
lightheaded Fancies, not vapourish or distempered, not apt to see double, or
to dream waking, as many of our Apparition-making People are; he was besides
that a Scholar, and very serious: the first I mention as a Protection to him
from foolish Imagination, and the last from Falsehood; and I am satisfied, the
Reader may depend upon both the Stories, I mean as to the Truth of them.

IN my speaking of Apparitions as I have stated the Case, I must take leave to
differ from the Notions of the Ancients, who it is evident understood all
Apparition to be the Souls, or as we call them, the Ghosts, of departed
Persons; but when they came to make rational Conclusions from those first
Opinions, What wild Additions were they driven to make, to the first just
Conceptions which they had formed in their Minds?

THEIR first Conceptions, I say, were indeed just, consistent with Reason, and
with Nature; for they concluded, that when the Body is dead, and the Soul
separated, the State was determined. This Mr. Pope expresses very well in his
Translation of Homer, For to the farther Shore
When once we pass, the Soul returns no more.


THIS was, I say, a rational and just Sentiment; but then they were confounded
in all those Imaginations, by seeing the Apparitions of their departed Friends,
as if come back from those eternal Shades; and how to reconcile this they did
not know.

TO get over this Difficulty, they were driven to strange Shifts, and some of
them it must be confessed were very foolish ones: such as these;

1. THAT the Soul wandered about in the Air, 'till such time as the Body
obtained its due Funeral Rites: from this Notion, the Friends of the de^^ased
were mightily concerned to see the Funeral Pile erected for their departed
Friends, and to have the Body honorably burned; then the Ashes of the Bones
were deposited in an Urn, and that Urn buried in the Earth; when this was done
the Soul was admitted to pass the Flood, (that is) to be transported into the
Elysian Fields, from whence they never should return any more; but in case
these Rites were not performed for any Person, the Soul wandered restless, and
unfix'd, in a state of Perplexity, for an hundred Years. Hence those Lines in
Virgil, Aeneid. vi.

Hae^ omnis, quam c^rnis inops inhumataque turba est:
Portitor ille, Charon: hi, quos veluit unda, sepulti.
Nec ripas datur horrendas nec rauca fluenta
Transportare prius, quam sedibus ossa quierunt.
Centum errant annos, volitantque haec littora circum:
Tum demum admissi stagna exoptata revisunt.
Aeneid lib. vi. line 325.
NOW between this Time, or during this Interval, that is to say, between Death
and the Funeral Pile, they pretended they allowed the separated or unembodied
Souls of Men might appear, and visit their Friends, or harrass their Enemies;
and on this Occasion, the Ghost of Patroclus, slain by Hector at the Siege of
Troy, is brought in visiting his Friend Achilles, and begging of him to get his
Funeral Rites performed, that he might be admitted to Rest.

-- Thus the Phantosm said,
Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
Living, I seemed his dearest, tendrest Care,
But now forgot, I wander in the Air:
Let my pale Corse the Rites of Burial know,
And give me Entrance in the Shades below:
'Till then the Spirit finds no Resting Place,
But here and there the unbodied Specter ^^ace
The Vagrant Dead --
Iliad lib. xxiii.
2. HOMER's Notion of the State of the Dead, was something like the ancient
Philosophy of the Egyptians, which gave the Soul a Shape like the Body, and
that it was only a Receptacle of the Mind; the Mind they made to be the sublime
and superior Part, and that only.

THUS in the Case of Apparitions, they allowed that this Case or Shell called
the Soul, might appear after Death, but the Mind could not, but was exalted
among the Gods, and took up its Eternal Abode; from whence " -- It could return
no more.


THUS the Ghost of Patroclus, going with his Speech to Achilles, says thus,

When once the last the Funeral Flames ascend,
No more shall meet Achilles and his Friend:
No more our Thoughts to those we love make known.
THIS last Notion, though gross and absurd in it self, was the utmost Refuge they
had, by which to solve the Difficulty of Apparitions. They imagined that the
Soul was not only separated by Death from the Body, but that there was a
Separation of the Understanding from its Case or Vehicle, as they called it; so
that the Soul, which was but the Image and Form of the Body, might be in Hell;
the Body it self burnt to Ashes remained in the Urn; and the Understanding or
Mind, which was the sublime divine Part, be in Heaven with the Gods: This Homer
expresses thus,

-- It Is certain Man, though dead, retains
Part of himself; the immortal Mind remains.
The Form subsists without the Body's Aid,
Aerial Semblance, and an empty Shade.
AGAIN he explains it in his Odyssey, lib. xi. line 600. speaking in the Name
of Ulysses,

Now I the Strength of Hercules behold,
A Towering Spectre of Gygantick Mould,
A shadowy Form! For high in Heaven's Abodes
Himself resides, a God among the Gods.
HERE Homer fancies Hercules, that is the Mind, the sublime Part of Hercules,
was in Heaven, and exalted there to the highest Degree too; A God among the
Gods.
and yet at the same time his Soul, his (...) or Image, was in Hell. And
Plutarch gives us the same Description at large.

WHAT learned Nonsense, and what a great deal of it is here, to reconcile a
thing, which upon the Christian Foundation is made as easy, as any thing not
immediately visible to the common Eye, can be made?

NATURE dictated, and Reason confirmed, that the first Principle, namely, the
Soul, or as they call it, the Mind or Understanding, fled to Heaven immediately
after Death, and returned no more.

THUS Andromache mourning for the Loss of her Husband Hector, is brought in
speaking according to the Doctrine of the Ancients: Thou to the dismal Realms
for ever gone,
And I abandoned. --


THE Dead once passed to the dismal Realms (as they called the Shades below)
were gone for ever, and to return no more; but then they were perplexed to find
that they did return, as in this Case of Patroclus to Achilles; though that (by
the way) was a Dream only, not an Apparition, or as we may call it an
Apparition in a Dream, and no more.

BUT they had their Apparitions, and we read of many Apparitions of the Dead to
the Living; as particularly in the famous Example of Caesar appearing to
Brutus: and this perplexed them so, that they knew not how to support the
Principle of the Soul not returning, under the Experience of Souls actually
returning in Apparition, visiting and conversing with their Friends, which was
incontestible, daily Experience making it known to all Parties.

TO reconcile this they fled to Invention, and first to that of the Interval
between the Death and the Funeral of the departed Souls; of which before.

BUT this is liable to so many just Exceptions, so many Absurdities, that it
could not satisfy Men of Sense; for first they were obliged to say and prove,
(which would be very difficult) that none of the Souls of the Dead ever
appeared after the Funeral Rites were solemnized; which if one Example had
contradicted, all the Arguments in the World could not then have supported the
Fiction; and this I cannot doubt was contradicted on many Occasions.

AND this no doubt made the ancient System of the Egyptians be revived, and
pass better among them afterward; though whether the Romans received it or no,
we do not find ascertained in any Part of their History.

BESIDES, there was an Absurdity in the very Doctrine it self; for if the
Apparition of a departed Soul was limited by this Circumstance of burning the
Body, or performing the Funeral Rites; it put the State of the Dead in that
particular Respect into the Power of the Living: for Example, If the Living,
who had Possession of the dead Bodies of Persons slain, suppose them Friends,
had Possession of the Body, the Soul of that Body, though unembodied and
dismissed, could not be admitted to rest, or as they expressed it, could not
pass into the Shades or R^alms below; so if the Enemy had Possession of the
Body, it was in the Power of the Enemy to keep the Soul out of Heaven: an
Absurdity so gross, one would think the wiser Heathens could never entertain
such a Thought: Yet that such it was, the Words of Patroclus's Ghost quoted
from Homer makes evident.

Let my pale Corse the Rites of Burial know,
And give me Entrance in the Shades below.
UNHAPPY Patroclus! How gross would this sound, how harsh and unmusical in our
Times, when Christianity has given us more just Ideas of things? Patroclus
could not get leave to go to the Shades below, 'till his Funeral Rites were
performed; that is, in our Sense, could not be admitted, no not into Hell it
self, 'till his Body was burned on the Funeral Pile or Pyre, and his Ashes
deposited in an Urn; that is, buried like a Gentleman.

BY which Rule, the Souls of those poor Creatures who were killed in the Wars,
and were left unburied in Heaps in the Field, or only a Pile of Stones thrown
upon them, as was often the Case, are wandering still, and neither admitted into
Heaven or Hell.

AGAIN, it was in the Power of the Enemy, if he had a Body in Possession, to
preserve his Hatred against that Enemy even beyond Death, and by keeping him
unburied, keep his Soul or Spirit suspended, wandering, and forgotten in the
Air, and neither admitted to one or other Place, whether above or below.

THUS Achilles had the Body of Hector in his Power twelve Days, and Homer
brings him in triumphing over his Enemy in that case, and in a manner unworthy
of a Man of Honor. When he speaks to the Ghost of his Friend Patroclus, and
vows to sacrifice twelve Trojan Prisoners at his Funeral Pile; he adds,

Achilles' Promise is complete,
The bloody Hector stretched before thy Feet,
Lo! to ^he Dogs his Carcass I resign.
Gloomy he said, and horrible in View,
Before the Bier the bleeding Hector threw,
Prone on the Dust.
Iliad lib. xxiii. line 35.
So again, Achilles mourning over the Body of Patroclus as it lay on the
Funeral Pile, and the Fire not yet kindled; I say, there again he threatens to
deny Hector a Soldier's Burial.

But heavier Fates on Hector's Corse attend,
Kept from the Flames for hungry Dogs to rend.
THIS was a terrible Curse, and very cruel to poor Hector after he was dead,
not to suffer his Soul to enter into the Shades below, which would be (to speak
it in our Language) not to give him leave to go to Hell; that the Gods it seems
thwarted Achilles, and would not let his Cruelty take place, but he was obliged
to grant Priam a Truce, and let the Trojans bury him.

So spoke he, threatening: But the Gods made vain
His Threat, and guard inviolate the Slain.
Celestial Venus hovered over his Head,
And roseat Unguents, heavenly Fragrance! shed;
She watched him all the Night, and all the Day,
And drove the Bloodhounds from their destined Prey.
SO that the Burying of Hector was made the Care of the Gods, defeating the
cruel Vengeance of Achilles.

TO what Length did this foolish Notion of the Ancients carry this Point!
putting it into the Power of a Man's Enemy to keep his Soul out of Heaven too,
as long as his Enemy thought fit to keep the Body out of the Grave.

HAPPY it is for us in these malicious Days that it is otherwise here; when not
Enemies only, but even cruel Creditors, might arrest the dead Body of their
Debtor, and even send the Soul of him to the Devil, or keep it hovering and
wandering in the Air 'till their Debts were paid: As Times go now, and as
Charity stands now rated among us, no poor Debtor could be at Rest any more
after he was Dead, than he could before, 'till his Debts were all paid.

NAY, though it had pleased a merciful Father to forgive him his Sins, and as we
allow it is possible, in spi^e of the cruel T -- S -- that a Brankrupt may die
in the State of a pardoned Penitent; yet I say 'till the Debt was paid the more
inexorable Creditor should refuse to let him be admitted into Heaven 'till he
was paid the utmost Farthing.

I MUST confess if this were the Case among us, I believe it would be the
hardest thing in the World to get a poor Bankrupt's Composition accepted, or
his Certificate signed; for if it was in the Power of the Creditors to send
their Debtors to the Devil, I should be apt to say with the Disciples of our
Lord, Who then shall be saved?

HOW often do we find a Creditor give it for an Answer, when a soliciting
Friend comes begging him to compound, and to accept the utmost Shilling that
the Debtor has to offer: How often, I say, do we find the cruel Creditor reply,
No not I, I Will sign none of it, the Devil shall have him before I Will sign it?

NAY, if his Soul was to hover in the Air, as the Ancients fancied, 'till the
Body was buried; I question whether they would let the Debtor go either to
Heaven or Hell 'till they had their Money; especially if the hovering or
wandering in the Air was a worse Condition, as I don't know but, while the
Devils are said to be there, it may.

BUT to return to the Ancients and their Notion of Futurity, and of Souls
departed, the Difficulty, as I have observed, was very perplexing: They granted
that after the Souls of Men were once determined, and transported in Charon's
Ferryboat to the other side of the River Styx, or the Stygian Gulf, they could
return no more; and all their other Fables upon that Subject would have been
overthrown and come to nothing, if it had been otherwise; such as Cerberus
barking continually at the Gate, Charon the Ferry-man carrying all over but
bringing none back, and the like.

BUT notwithstanding this, as I have said, they found several of these Souls
visiting the World in Apparition, and this quite destroyed all the Scheme of
their being in a determined State; so that they knew not what to think of next.

HOW would it have unravelled all those hard Knots, and made every thing easy
to their Understanding, had they been let into this just way of reasoning? had
they discovered that there is an Angelick World, an invisible World of Spirits,
some of whom being placed by their merciful Maker, as an advanced Body, at or
near the out^r Circumference of the Earth's Atmosphere, have a Power given them
at least to take Cognizance of human Affairs; and to converse with this World,
either by Apparition, Voices, Noises, good or bad Omens, or other sensible
Conveyances to the Mind, by which they can give Notices of Good or Evil, and
can intimate to Man many things useful to him in the Conduct of his Life.

THAT the Spirits inhabiting this invisible World are at hand; (how near is not
necessary to us to know) can assume Bodies, Shape, Voice, and even can
personate this or that Man or Woman; so as to appear in the very Figure,
Countenance, and Clothes or Dress of our departed Friends, speak with their
proper and distinct Voices, and in the first Person of this or that particular
Man or Woman, and in their Names; and can thus suit themselves in their several
Appearances, to the Occasion they appear for:

HAD they known these things, I say, they would have rejoiced in the Discovery,
and it would have made every thing easy to them. Patroclus would never have
troubled Achilles with a Visit from the Air, upon pretense of his being left to
be wandering about the Atmosphere for want of his Funeral Rites; the Dogs, or
the Crows, or the Worms might have feasted themselves on Hector's Carcass, it
would never have disturbed Hector in the least, much less would her
Goddess-ship Venus have concerned herself to protect his Corpse 'till the
funeral Pile was prepared.

THE Doctrine of the Soul's being a Shell or Case formed into a Shape, as a
Mould is formed into Shape to receive the Brass or Copper, and throw out a
Statue or Figure of this or that Hero, which it is appointed to form; I say,
this absurd Doctrine of the Soul, Body and Mind being three distinct Persons in
every Man, would not have found Place in the World; but all things would have
been conceived regularly of, and the World would have been rightly informed of
future things, as well as of things present.

HOWEVER, to bring it down to our Case, all this concurs to the Doctrine of
Spirits, and the Reality of their Appearance, which is the Case before us:
Their Friends departed did appear; what it was appeared they knew not, only
negatively they knew it was not their Bodies, however the Shape might be
assumed; nor could they reconcile that Part to their Understanding. How it
could be, that the Body seemed to appear and did not appear; or, as we might
say, appeared as if they had appeared; but when a Trial was offered, no Body
could be found, as was the Case of Patroclus and Achilles in Homer, which Mr.
Pope thus translates,

He said, and with his longing Arms essayed
In vain to grasp the visionary Shade.
Like a thin Smoke he sees the Spirit fly,
And hears a feeble lamentable Cry.
HOW gross an Ignorance is here in so great a Man as Achilles? to go about to
grasp a Vision! to feel a Shade! One can hardly excuse the Poet for allowing
Achilles, who was the Hero of the whole Poem, to be so weak, even in those
Days; but it must be allowed 'twas all in a Dream, and imaginary, and it might
well awake him indeed, as it did, to grasp at a Man in Armor, and find nothing
in his Arms but Smoke.

THE Result of it all is this, namely, the Reality of Apparition was a certain,
undoubted, and received thing; it is evident that they were not questioned; for
upon the Reality of the Appearance of Souls, all those Pains were taken to
settle the Possibility of it. That it was so, the Frequency of the thing left
them no Room to question; it would have been ri^iculous to have disputed it;
but how it could b^, how to reconcile it to all the Notions of Soul and Body,
the future and the present State, that was what no body could explain, and no
body could understand; which Ignorance put their Invention so much on the Rack
to find out and form Schemes for the bringing the Particulars together, and
making the Appearance possible, whichthey daily found was in Fact real.

'TWAS a little strange that though they were satisfied by daily Demonstration
that the Thing was true, yet they were obliged to believe it was not true at
the same time. They frequently saw their Friends appear, and yet knew they were
not in a Condition from whence they could return to appear. But the strangest
thing of all, at least to me, is, that they should not, all this while,
conceive the Possibility of Spirits assuming human Shape, and appearing in
their Figures, in their Shapes, and in their Names.

THIS would have put an end to all the Difficulty, and have reconciled all the
Doubts that attended it, and at the same time would have led them into several
sublime Truths, such as they were perhaps perfectly ignorant of; as
particularly into the great Doctrine of the Unity of infinite Power; the
universal Empire of Providence, and its Government and Influence of and upon
all the Affairs of this World, even the most minute things in Life; and many
other valuable Inquiries.

THAT Apparitions were believed to be real in those Days, is evident from many
Instances of it given in History, though I have not room to look far back. It Is
said that Alexander the Great was haunted by the Ghost of his Friend Clitus,
whom he had most ungratefully tortured to Death, after a long Series of the
most faithful Services, and successful also; but there is no particular Account
of it in Plutarch.

THE Apparition of the Ghost of Julius Caesar to Brutus a little before the
Battle at Philippi, though it be certain, is nevertheless variously reported;
some Accounts relate it to be the Ghost of Julius Caesar, and vulgar Opinion
concurs with that Report; which is so received at this time, that they show you
an original ancient Piece of fine Italian Painting at Naples, where the
Phantome is represented bloody and wounded, with Casca's Dagger sticking in his
Shoulder, which he, Casca, reaching his Arm over his Shoulder fixed in or near
his Collar Bone before, and left sticking there; according to which our
Frontespiece to this Work is at least designed: Whether that Part of the Story
be right represented or not, is difficult to determine.

BUT according to other Accounts, the Apparition was only of a Man, without any
Similitude of Caesar; and that when Brutus, who was busy writing Dispatches for
his Army which was then drawing together to fight the Octavian Troops, looked
up and saw him, he boldly asked, What art thou? and the Apparition answered, I
am thy evil Genius, and I will meet thee again at Philippi; to which the
undaunted Hero, unconcerned at the Sight, and as if he desired him not to
disturb him at that time, he being then otherwise engaged, answered, Well, I Will
meet thee there, and so went on with his writing.

BRUTUS was, without doubt, a Hero in his personal Valor, and more so in his
Principle, viz. the Love of Liberty, and of his Country; and as nothing but the
Zeal for the Liberty of his Country could have embarked him against the Life of
Caesar, who was otherwise his Benefactor, so he was above the Fear of Death,
and could not be in the least daunted at the Foreknowledge of his Fate at
Philippi; seeing he had the Notion of Life which was general at that time,
namely, that a true Hero could never be miserable, since it was always in his
Power to die a Freeman, and not to outlive any threatened Calamity, whether
Personal or National.

UPON this foot he entered that unequal Battle against the Octavian Troops with
an undaunted Cheerfulness; for he was sure one way or other to come off
victorious; that is to say, that if Augustus conquered his Army, he knew how to
conquer Augustus; if by the Slaughter of his Troops Caesar had the better of
him, and defeated his Designs for the Liberty of his Country, He, by the
Slaughter of himself, knew how to defeat Augustus in his Designs of conquering
Brutus, since he resolved to die free, and not survive the Roman Liberty; and
so he did.

AND upon this Foundation it was, that he was so unconcerned at his approaching
Fate, and so undaunted in his looking at and speaking to the Spectre that
appeared to him.

BUT we have yet abundance more Proofs by Example of the Reality of Apparitions.

ALARICH the famous Gothic King, who overrun so much of the Roman Empire, had
an Apparition which came to him, and told him he should undertake his
Expedition against the Romans, and that promised him Victory and Success; some
said it was an Angel, others that it was the Ghost of his deceased Predecessor
Rhadagaiseus. When he first undertook to raise his Army he was intending to go
upon a glorious Expedition to the East, to wit, against the Hunns and the
Heruli; that is to say, into Poland, Sclavonia and Hungaria, and perhaps
Mus^ovy or Russia. But upon the Apparition speaking to him, he was encouraged
to undertake a War against the ^^mans in Italy; where notwithstanding he was
routed and utterly overthrown by Stilico^ he afterward returned into Italy,
killed Stilico the Roman General, overrun the Country, and took and plundered
the City of Rome it self; this was Ann. 409: so that the Apparition, of
whatever kind it was, must be so far Angelic as to foreknow Events and Issues
of things on Earth, which must be suitable to the Angelic Heavenly Spirits, and
superior to the Diabolic Spirits who know nothing Prophetic.

NOR is it any thing inconsistent with the Angelic exalted and good Spirits;
for this was not encouraging Evil, but stirring up a powerful Prince, who was
to be Flagellum Dei, to execute the Divine Vengeance upon that wicked People
the Romans, whom God had resolved to destroy, or at least to reduce very low^
like as God is said to stir up Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon to come up
against Jerusalem.

I SAY this could not be the Devil, because (as I have always insisted upon it,
so I do still) that he knows nothing of what is to come; the Devil is no
Prophet, he cannot foretell or predict, oth^^ than by probable Guesses,
rational Consequences, and such Circumstances in which he can go farther than
other People.

YOU have an Example of this in the famous Sorceress Jaquelina; she pretended
to speak in the Name of the Devil, and sometimes to have the Devil speak in
her, and so to give Answers as by an Oracle, and resolve Doubts and difficult
Questions, which she did to Admiration; and thereby got both Fame and Money.
Now it was observed that when People came to her with Doubts and difficult
Cases, even such as none could resolve, relating to things past or present, her
Answers were surprising; but if they came to her to ask any Opinion of things
future, and what should be to come, the Devil was always Nonplust, and
generally lied in his Answers; so that none ^ould depend upon any thing he
said. In a word the Devil was not able to foretell any thing; and hence I
infer, as I havealways said, the Devil is no Prophet, he can predict nothing,
for he knows nothing; and that if any Apparition comes to be seen or heard, who
takes upon it to tell what should come to pass, you may depend upon it that
Apparition is not from the Devil.

HENCE I think we may readily account for that Story so well published, whether
so well known or no, of which Mr. Aubrey has given us the last Relation, as
follows:

TWO Persons (Ladies) of Quality, both not being long since deceased, were
intimate Acquaintance, and loved each other entirely: It so fell out, that one
of them fell sick of the Smallpox, and desired mightily to see the other, who
would not come, fearing the catching of them; the Afflicted at last dies of
them: she had not been buried very long, but she appears at the other's House
in the dress of a Widow, and asks for her Friend who was then at Cards, but
sends down her Woman to know her Business; who in short told her, she must
impart it to none but her Lady, who after she had received this Answer, bid her
Woman have her into a Room, and desire her to stay till the Game was done, and
she would wait on her. The Game being done, down Stairs she came to the
Apparition, to know her Business. Madam, says the Ghost turning up her Veil,
and her Face appearing full of the Smallpox, You know very well that you and I
loved entirely, and your not coming to see me I took so ill at your Hands, that
I could not rest 'till I had seen you, and now I am come to tell you, that you
have not long to live, therefore prepare to die; and when you are at a Feast,
and make the thirteenth in Number, then remember my Words; and so the
Apparition vanished. To conclude, she was at a Feast where she made the
thirteenth Person in Number; and was afterward asked by the deceased's
Brother, whether his Sister did appear to her, as was reported; she made him no
Answer, but fell a weeping, and died in a little time after. The Gentleman that
told this Story, says, that there is hardly any Person of Quality but what
knows it to be true. I DO not enter into an Enquiry here whether the Story is
true or no, I believe it in Common, for it was generally believed to be true:
But it is strange to have this brought for an Evidence of the Prescience of the
Devil; whereas on the contrary it confirms what I have said, viz. That this
could not be the Devil, or what we call the Appearance of the Devil, no, nor
could it be the Soul of the departed Person; and for the Apparition saying it
could not be at Rest, either it may be put in by some of the very many Authors
relating the Story; or it might be said by the good Angel or Spirit appearing,
to introduce her Message, and to rouse the Mind of the Person spoken to by
something that should touch her more to the quick, be the more feeling, and
sensible to her, and so make a due Impression upon her of the Truth of that
which was to follow.

BUT first, for its not being the Devil; for I have granted that the Devil may
make an Apparition, though far from inferring from thence that all Apparitions
are the Devil: But I say as to its not being the Devil that appeared here, in
the Shape of the deceased Lady, it is Evident,

FIRST, Because, as I said above, and have repeated often, the Devil cannot
predict, he has no Prescience of things before they are in View; he can juggle
and play scurvy Tricks of many kinds, as when he prophesied to the Farmer the
Fall of his Stack of Corn, and then raised a sudden Storm and blew it down. It
may be he can see at some farther Distance than we can, and judge of the
Consequences of such and such Causes better than we can, and with a more
perfect and exact Judgment. But to predict things which are only concealed in
the Womb of Time, and behind the Curtain of Providence, as this of Life and
Death was, it is not in Satan to do it; and therefore this could not be from
the Devil: the Lady was in Health, was Cheerful, nay Merry, was at a Feast and
at Cards. Here was no Signal of Death, or so much as of Sickness: I see no
token of the Devil in this Apparition; except it be his extraordinary Civility
that he would not interrupt her Game.

SECONDLY, It could not be the Devil, because of his bidding the Lady prepare
for Death; which, as I have often observed, does not seem to be much of Satan's
Business, not being very suitable to his Disposition, and less to his Design.

THERE is some little Incongruity in this Story too, which renders it
inconsistent, not with the Devil only, but even with the Nature of a Spirit or
Apparition: As (1) Why should the Apparition come when the Lady was engaged and
could not speak to her? as if she, being a Ghost or Spirit as we vulgarly
express it, did not know what she was doing, as well as where she was? (2) How
does her taking ill the living Lady's not visiting her, oblige her to come and
give her this kind Notice of her Death? I took it so ill at your Hands, that I
could not rest 'till I had seen you.

THOUGH this does not shock my Belief of the Apparition it self; yet it seems to
hint that the several Hands through which the Relation has passed, have made up
the Speech for the Ghost, and committed some Blunders in it, that are inde^d
shocking to the Reader.

IT seems more rational to be as I have read the Story, that the Ghost should
say thus: Though I took it very ill at your Hands that you would not come to see
me; yet I could not rest 'till I had seen you, to tell you that you have not
long to live, and that you should prepare, etc. This is much better Sense, and
more agreeable to the Nature of the thing; for certainly coming in that manner
to give the Lady No^ice of the Approach of her End, and to counsel her to
prepare accordingly, must be allowed to be an act of Kindness, not of
Resentment, and a T^stimony of the Affection that was between them; and
therefore her taking it ill that she had not been to Visit her in her Illness,
could not rationally be given as a Reason for it.

BUT as to the Apparition it self, since it could not be the Soul of the
deceased Lady, and for the Reasons above was not likely to be the Devil, or I
may venture to say positively was not the Devil; What then was it? I answer
with a Question: What could it be but a good Angel, or Angelic Spirit from the
Invisible World, sent with a Message of Goodness, and a merciful Notice of her
Approaching Death; that she might receive a due caution, preparing her Mind and
turning her Thoughts to a proper Meditation upon so serious a Subject; in a
word, warning her of Death that she might prepare for it?

THE Story of Sir John Burroughs's Son, who forsaking a Mistress in Italy she
murdered her self, and then haunted him as long as he lived, this is of like
kind with the rest; and though the Devil to worry and perplex him might take up
the Appearance of his Whore, as well reproaching him with the Crime, as with
her Tragical End; yet it goes no farther than this, that the Devil may appear,
and may harrass and terrify those he appeared to, and this I make no doubt of;
and it rather adds to what is insisted on, I mean the Reality of Apparitions;
but the Devil gave this Gentleman no good advice to repent, or prepare, and the
like; but only appeared, frighted, and terrified him to the very Day of his
Death.

IT is also remarkable, that though this Devil in Apparition showed it self to
him the very Day of his Death, (for he was kil^'d that Day in a Duel) yet it
said not a word to him of what was to befall him, or of what he was going to
do, and it is very probable did not know it.

THERE is another Story something but darkly recorded of Charles VII. of
France, which seems likely enough to be an Apparition of the Devil. That King
had been distempered and very ill two or three times, but was recovered again
tolerably well, and was riding for the Benefit of the Air in the Forest of
Man's: On a sudden a Spectre starts up or out of the Woods, being a tall meagre
ill-look'd old Man, of ghastly Countenance and half naked, and coming directly
to the King takes hold of his Horse's Bridle, and says, Stop, King: Whether go
you? you are betrayed: and then immediateiy vanished. Now first of all, this
was a falsehood in Fact, for the King was not betrayed by any body; neither was
there any Plot against him, or against any that belonged to him, ever heard of
before, or afterward; on the contrary, Secondly, his Reign was at that time
peaceable and quiet, his Subjects all easy; and for his Person, he had so few
Enemies that he was called Charles the Beloved, and was exceedingly tendered by
the generality of his People.

A GOOD Spirit, an Angelic Spirit, one of the Sacred Guard I have supposed to
be placed about this Earth, or in the Regions adjacent, and employed by their
Bountiful Maker for the good of Mankind, would never have come in such a
manner, surprising, and at unawares. It would never have put on a fierce and
frightful Countenance, thus to have terrified a poor distempered Prince, whose
Brain was already disordered; taking the advantage of his Weakness, and so to
increase the Frenzy and Distraction of his Mind even to his Destruction, for he
never more perfectly recovered his Senses.

THIS mightily differed from the Conduct of the several Spirits appearing in
the Examples mentioned before, and who kindly warned the Persons of Danger,
foretold Events that they might avoid them, or prepare for the Consequences; in
a word, this was an Apparition purely Devilish, for it was merely to do Evil,
and to the ruin of the Person to whom it appeared.

I THINK nothing can be a juster Rule for us to distinguish Apparitions by: the
Evil Spirit, Devil like, comes to deceive, he is the Father of Lies; and comes
to do hurt, he is a Lover and the Author of Mischief. The good Spirit is from
God, the Fountain of all Good, and appears always for good and merciful
Purposes; and this I think is a just Observation, and a Rule for us to judge of
the Nature of whatever Apparitions we hear of.

CHAP. X. Of the different Nature of Apparitions; how we should behave to them;
when to be afraid of or concerned about them, and when not.
DANGER may be the Reason of Caution; but Guilt only is the reason of Fear.
Caution is the Mind's just Regard to the Evil in view; but Fear is a Horror of
the Soul, in apprehension of some farther Evil yet out of view; unseen, and
therefore terrible; merited, and therefore dreadful.

IF there were no Guilt in the Mind, Death it self would be no Evil, and
therefore not the Subject of our Fear; nor is Death it self our Fear now as it
is in it self a mere passing out of life, otherwise than as it is an inlet of
some terrible State beyond it^ It is not what we pass out of, that is the
bitterness, but what we pass into; not what we part with, but what the Exchange
will be; not the leap out of Light, but the leap into the Dark: and to come
nearer to it, the Thought of what is beyond Death is only made better or worse
by what we know on this side of it; the Dread of what is to come, is founded on
our conscious sense of what is past.

THIS State beyond Death is made our Terror, as we expect in it the Punishment
of Offenses, a Retrbitution for an ill-spent Life, and as we have upon our
Minds a Sense of Guilt; that is to say, a Conscience of having ill-spent our
past time, and dreading the Justice of the Superior Hand, in whom is the Power
of Rewards and Punishments. Now to bring it to the case in Hand.

ALL Apparition is looked upon as a something coming, or sent to us, from that
State of Beingwhich is beyond Death, and therefore is looked upon with the same
Terror and Fright, which we are seized with at the Thoughts of Death it self.

HENCE, if we could consider calmly the Nature of the Apparition which we s^e,
we might presently know whether we ha^ reason to be terrified at the
Apparition, yea or no: If the Apparition comes with a Message of Peace, if it
reprehends with Kindness and Tenderness, if it admonishes with Gentleness, and
gives Advice to amend and reform, it certainly comes from a good Hand, and we
need be under no concern at all about it, because it has no Evil in it self.

IF it come in all its threatening Postures, ghastly as the Devil can make it,
horrible as himself in Person; yet were there no Guilt there would be no fear
from the Apparition, or even from the Devil appearing in Person; because we
should know ourselves to be out of his Power.

AS then the Good or Evil of the Message, which the Apparition brings,
distinguishes the Apparition it self, and tells us of what kind it is; so as
our Minds are, or are not intimidated by our own Guilt, so we have or have not
reason to be surpised at the Appearance of a Messenger, or Messengers, from
the invisible World, or at whatever he shall say.

Hic murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi nulla palescere culpa.
MR. Aubery gives us the Story in his Miscellanea of the Apparition to Cashio
Buroughs, Esquire; in the time of King Charles I, and which I hinted at just now
on another occasion; the Story is as follows:

SIR John Buroughs being sent Envoy to the Emperor by King Charle^ I. did take
his Eldest Son Cashio Buroughs along with him; and taking his Journey through
Italy le^t his said Son at Florence, to learn the Language; where he having an
Intrigue with a beautiful Courtisan, Mistress to the Grand Duke, their
Familiarity became so public, that it came to the Duke's Ear, who took a
Resolution to have him murdered; but Cashio having had timely notice of the
Duke's Design, by some of the English ther^, immediately left the City without
acquainting his Mistress of it, and came to England. Whereupon the Duke being
disappointed of his Revenge fell upon his Mistress in most reproachful
Language: She, on the other, side resenting the sudden departure of her
Gallant, of whom she was most passionately enamored, killed her self. At the
same Moment that she expired she did appear to Cashio at his Lodgings in
London. Colonel Remes was then in Bed with him, who saw her as well as he,
giving him an account of her Resentments of his Ingratitude to her, in leaving
her so suddenly, and exposing her to the Fury of the Duke; not omitting her own
Tragical Exit; adding withal, that he should be slain in a Duel; which
accordingly happened: And thus she appeared to him frequently, even when his
younger Brother (who afterward was Sir John) was in Bed with him. As often as
she did appear he would cry out with great Shricking and Trembling of his Body,
as well as Anguish of Mind, saying, O GOD! h^re she comes, she comes! and at
this rate she appeared 'till he was killed. She appeared to him the Morning
before he was killed. Some of my Acquaintance (says Aubery) have told me, that
he was one of the handsomest Men in England, and very Valiant. THE Appearance
of this Devil, for I can call it no other, had nothing in View but to harrass,
plague and affright the Gentleman: Perhaps expecting it should bring him into
some fit of Desperation; so to destroy himself, as the Woman who appeared had
done before.

THE Gentleman whom it appeared to, was conscious of Crime; the Woman in whose
shape the Devil thus harrass'd him was a Courtesan, that is in English a Common
Woman, with whom he had had an Intrigue in Italy: He had not only been
dishonest with her, but it seems had been dishonest to her; and the last, with
the assistance of the Devil, had it seems worked so upon her Rage as to cause
her to be her own Executioner; and I take the Apparition to be the Devil
pursuing the same Management, and endeavoring to produce the same Effect upon
him.

NOW see the Consequence of Crime: the sense of Guilt makes this Apparition
dreadful to him; when it appeared, he trembles, falls into Convulsions, cries
out, O GOD! here she comes! and in a word, is in an Agony of horror and
affright.

HAD he only conversed with the Lady as a common Acquaintance, had he neither
been concerned with her, or had done any dishonorable thing by her, he had
natural Courage to have looked the Devil in the Face, and boldly have asked
what business she could have with him.

I HAVE read of a Story of a very religious Lady, who the Devil, it seems, had
some particular Picque at, and set all his Stratagems at work to ruin her, both
Soul and Body. He attacked her in a hundred several ways in Covert, as I may
call it, that is to say by Attempts to draw her into Crime, alluring her, and
laying Snares for her of several kinds. But when he found himself steadily
resisted by the Lady's resolved Virtue, Modesty and Temperance, he attacked her
in Person with frightful Apparitions, assuming ugly and terrible Shapes; and
once appearing all in Fire, with a frightful threatening Voice, he told her he
was come to fetch her away: The Lady had a secret Spirit of Courage and
Resolution came upon her at the very Moment, and, as we say in other cases,
brisking up to him as if she would fight him: Resist the Devil, says she, and
he shall flee from us! come for me! added she, I Will venture that! for I am sure
thou lie, Satan, thou have nothing to do with me.

THE Devil called her Whore, and told her she loved such a Man, who was a
married Man, and therefore she had intentionally committed Whoredom with him,
and should be damned.

N. B. It seems the Lady had loved that Gentleman before he was otherwise
engaged, by marrying; but had never had any Thought toward him, or the least
Acquaintance with him, afterward.

THOU showest thyself, says she, to be full of Subtilty, a real Devil, and even
Malice itself: it is true, I did love that Gentleman, says she, and thou
settedst him to work to persuade me that he loved me, and to court me with
honorable Pretensions, and so far gained upon me, that I really loved him; but
--

HERE he interrupted her, and told her, Such a time, says the Devil, you wished
you were a-bed with him, and you are as guilty by wishing to Sin, as if you had
done it.

THOU art the Father of Lies, Satan, says she, and the Father of Liars, and
thou lie in this; nay, thou lie like a Devil, that is maliciously, for thou
know that it is not true.

YOU will be damned, says he, and I will take you away this minute.

THOU can not take me away without God's Permission, says she, and he will
not give me into thy Hands; therefore touch me at this Peril: and with that she
fell down on her Knees, and cried, LORD, preserve me from the evil Spirit: with
which the Devil left her, and walked off.

THESE are Apparitions that may be called Apparitions of Devils indeed, and by
his Works you may know him, for this is acting like himself; but where there is
no Guilt we need not be afraid of the Devil, in whatever Shape or frightful
Figure he thinks to attack us in.

THIS Lady had never been able to reproach Satan with Lying, if what he said
had been true; but she knew herself innocent, and that put Courage into her
Soul, that she indeed Bully'd the Devil, defied him, and bad him do his worst.

IT seems the Devil rumag'd hard to find a Crime out to charge this Lady with,
and came up to her very close; but he was put to his shifts for Evidence; for
even in collecting all the Actions of her Life, he could not find any thing of
real Guilt to load her with.

HE attacked her after this in several Shapes, and one time he told her she
would be damned for a Hypocrite; for, says he, for all your pretended Sanctity
you was in a violent Passion at such a time, and you cursed your Cousin --
naming her Name to her.

SHE answered, as before, boldly; And Satan. says she, though you are a Devil,
and cannot be ashamed, yet you are too cunning and too knowing to act like a
Fool; I was angry, but in no Passion; and for my Anger I had just cause; but
thou wast the cause of the Crime, and so of the Anger too: For she owned the
Devil tempted my Kinswoman to rob me, so thou have been the Occasion both of
her Sin, and of my Anger.

BUT you cursed her, and wished the Devil (meaning me, says he) might take her.

THAT IS like thee again, Devil, says the Lady; I was far from wishing thou
should take her, I am not so much thy Friend to wish thou should be
gratified in any one's Ruin. But I told her, indeed, if she did such things,
thou would take her away.

BUT you ly'd in that, says he, for I will not hurt her.

I AM sorry, says she, thou art so much her Friend.

SHE is mine already, adds the Devil, I shall not do her any harm.

VERY well, Devil, says she; then I hope I am out of your List, or why else are
you raging at me?

YES, yes, says he, you shall be mine quickly, as well as she.

I DEFY thee, says she again, and I Will tell the poor Girl what you say of her.
I hope she will get out of your Hands again.

THEN I Will break her Neck that Minute, says he.

THAT IS not in your Power, says the Lady.

WELL, but, says he, you played at Cards on Sunday Morning last.

SHE was a little surpised at the Charge, and stopped awhile; but recovering
her Courage, It Is strange, Devil, says she, thou can bring nothing but Lies
against me; why I have Faults enough, that are real Faults, and true, and that
I could not deny. Why I think Satan's turned Fool, adds she, as if she jeered
him. Why don't you fall upon me in those Things I am guilty of? and not make
Lies for the sake of lying? I did play at Cards a Saturday Night, but not a
Sunday Morning.

BUT, said he, you played at Cards against your Conscience too, when you
believed it was a Sin to play, and you will be damned for that.

WHY truly, Devil, says she, you go nearest the Truth in this of any thing you
have said; for after our Minister's talking against Play, one Evening, he so
far persuaded me that it was not lawful, that I did resolve to leave it off.

BUT you broke your Word, and played again; and did it, I tell you, against
your Conscience.

I DID not tie myself by any Promise, but I did question a little, indeed,
whether I should play any more or no.

YES, and did it against your Conscience, I tell you, and you shall be damned
for that.

HERE the Lady could not refrain Tears; but still she answered the Devil
boldly: As thou art a Liar, Satan, I hope I shall not, because thou say I
shall. However, thou shall never have it to upbraid me with again; for though I
did not promise to Man, I now promise it to the Devil, I will never play more.

IT IS too late now, says he, and threatened her again.

NO, Satan, says she, never too late for any one to Repent, but Thee; and thou
shall never Repent, or be Forgiven.

WITH this, says my Story, the Devil left her. I have taken this, by
Abridgement, from a very large Account of the several Disputes this courageous
Lady had with the Devil for some Years; which if I could assert the Particulars
so as to be sure of the Truth of every Part, and of my own Knowledge too, I
should make farther use of here; but thus far they are to the present Occasion,
namely,

1. THAT where the Devil appears, he always does it like a Devil, for some
wicked Purpose or other.

2. WHERE he cannot prevail and excite to do Mischief, he assaults with Rage,
and threatens with suffering Mischief.

THE good Spirits or good Angels are quite of another Kind; and as they come,
or are sent from other Hands, so they come of other Errands and in another
manner, as I shall give a more particular Account of presently.

BUT let us from hence enquire into an Opinion which I have met with, and that
of some Men of Learning and Judgment, viz. That take the Apparitions in
general, whether of good or bad Spirits, they never, or very rarely, do any
harm. As for the good Spirits, we know, as above, they will do none; and if the
bad do not, it is because they cannot.

THE good Spirits, it is certain, will do no harm; it is by their general
appearing for good, that we determine them to be good Spirits; and that kind of
Judgment is certainly very just: but if the evil Spirits, which do appear, do
no harm neither, it is because they are under some extraordinary restraint of
Divine Power; so that though they may come about in the Air, they are not
suffered to do any considerable Mischief in the World. In both which cases all
the Occasion of our Terror about them is taken away; for whether they are good
Spirits, or evil Spirits restrained, it is much the same; one will do you no
hurt, and the other cannot; and there remains no room then for the Pannick,
which is so much upon us, when we hear of them.

IT is true that Angels have sometimes been sent in Judgment from Heaven, and
have executed God's terrible Threatenings upon Men in an apparent Shape; as the
Angel called the Destroying Angel, which David saw in the Air, with his Sword
drawn and stretched over Jerusalem to destroy it, 1 Chronicles. xxi. 15. So the
Angel of the Lord that slew 180000 of the Assyrians in one Night; and it is not
improbable that an Host of Angels or Apparitions appeared in the Assyrian Camp,
and cut in Pieces the Assyrian Army, with a Terror that they were not able to
resist.

THESE are extraordinary and miraculous Cases; so likewise is that when the
Angel appeared to Balaam with a flaming Sword, and told him that if the Ass had
not turned away from him, he (the Angel) had slain him, Numb. xxii. 33. But we
are not now speaking of Angels sent out with especial Commissions to execute
God's Vengeance, but of the Apparition of good Spirits or Angels from the
invisible World of Spirits, who frequently appear, and sometimes upon small and
very trifling Occasions, and who visit People as well by Night as by Day; this
we call Walking, and Apparition, and this is such as is the Subject of our
present Enquiry.

OF these it is that I say, however they may disturb us, and however terrified
we are about them, they very rarely do any harm.

I HAVE heard of an Apparition which came to a Farmer in Surry, and threatened
him that he would burn his House and his Barn, and all his Corn and Hay; what
his Pretenses were the Story does not relate, or what the poor Farmer had done
to disoblige him; but the Man was, it seems, in the utmost Consternation, and
expostulated with the Apparition a great while; but at last he plucked up his
Spirits, and spoke with a little more Courage to it.

WHAT art thou, says he, that threatnest me thus without a cause, and say
thou will ruin me, notwithstanding I never did thee any wrong? thou should be
the Devil, by thy usage of me, for good Spirits never do any Injustice.

TO this the Devil answered in a long, and to appearance, a threatening Speech,
but in a Language the poor Man did not understand one Word of.

I KNOW not what thou say, says the Farmer, but I tell thee again thou
seem to me to be the Devil, or one of his Angels, and I suppose those are
Words understood in the bottomless Pit; but ^hreaten me no more with thy Rage,
and with burning my House and Corn; thou art a great Dragon indeed, but thou
art chained, and can do nothing but what thou art permitted to do by thy
Maker, and I fear thee not. Upon which the poor Man prayed Mentally that he
might be delivered from the Power of the Devil, and away run the Spectre, and
did him no harm.

THIS was certainly a commendable Courage, and had something of the Christian
in it too; and such a Courage, and upon the like Foundation, would, for ought I
know, lay all the Devils that ever walked, and drive away all the Apparitions
and Spirits that People are so terribly haunted with, and so terrified about.

CHAP. XI. Of Apparitions in Dream, and how far they are or are not real
Apparitions.
THERE may be Dreams without Apparition, as there may be Apparitions without
Dreams; but Apparition in Dream may be as really an Apparition as if the Person
who saw it was awake: The difference may be here, that the Apparition in a
Dream is visible to the Soul only, for the Soul never sleeps; and an Apparition
to the Eyesight is visible in common Perspective.

HOW is it then that we see in our Dreams the very Faces and Dress of the
Person we dream of; nay, hear their Voices, and receive due Impressions from
what they say, and oftentimes speak to them with our own Voices articulately
and audibly, though we are fast asleep? What secret Power of the Imagination is
able to represent the Image of any Person to itself, if there was not some
Appearance, something placed in the Soul's view, by a secret, but invisible
Hand, and in an imperceptible manner? which Something is in all Respects, and
to all Purposes, as completely an Apparition, as if it was placed in open sight
when the Person was awake.

THE Scripture confirms this Opinion by many Expressions directly to the
purpose, and particularly this of Appearing, or Apparition in Dream. Genesis xx.
3. God came to Abimelech in a Dream; had it been said that Abimelech dreamed
that God came to him, there might have been some exception to the Parallel; but
God actually came to him: and what though Abimelech was asleep, and in a Dream,
it was not the less an Apparition, for God came to him, and spoke, and said to
him: and in the 4th Verse Abimelech spoke to the Apparition. Whatever the Shape
was, that the Text does not mention; but Abimelech knew who he talked with too,
that is evident, for the Text mentions it fully, And he said, LORD, will thou
slay also a righteous Nation? and so he goes on, Verse the fifth, to
expostulate and plead for himself and his People, said he not unto me, she is
my Sister? so that he knew he was speaking to the Lord. The Text is very
remarkable, it is plain that there was an Apparition, but the Man was asleep
and in a Dream.

AGAIN in the case of Laban pursuing Jacob, Genesis xxxi. 24. God came to Laban
the Syrian in a Dream by Night, and said unto him. Here again is an Apparition,
and a speaking Apparition too; GOD came to him, and GOD spoke to him; and Laban
owns, not that he dreamed of God's appearing, but that God really spoke to him,
v. 29. The God of your Father spoke to me Yester-night, saying.

CERTAINLY Dreams in those Days were another kind of thing than they are now.
God spoke to them, and they answered; and when they were awake they knew that
it was God that spoke, and gave heed to the Vision or Apparition of God to them.

THERE are many more Instances of the like in the sacred History; as first in
the remarkable case of King Solomon, 1 Kings iii. 5. The Lord appeared to
Solomon in a Dream by Night, and GOD said, ask what I shall give th^e.

THIS is called in the Scripture a Dream, v. 15. and Solomon awoke, and behold
it was a Dream; and yet it is all confirmed; and the Petition that Solomon
made, though in his Sleep, or Dream, is accepted and answered as his real Act and
Deed, as if he had been awake. A good hint, by the way, that we may both please
and offend in our Dreams, as really as if we were awake; but that is a hint, I
say, by itself.

THAT Passage of Solomon is very remarkable to the case in hand. If my Readers
please to believe that there was such a Man as Solomon, and that he had such a
Dream; they must allow also that it was a real Apparition, God appeared to him
in a Dream.

TO bring it down a step lower: as God has thus Personally appeared to Men in
Dreams, so have inferior Spirits, and we have Examples of this too in the
Scripture. Matt. i. 20. While he thought on these Things, behold the Angel of
the Lord appeared unto him in a DREAM: and again, Matt. ii. 13. Behold the
Angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a Dream, saying: and a third time
it is repeated, the Angel came again to him in Egypt, v. 19. of the same
Chapter; when Herod was dead, Behold an Angel of the Lord appears in a Dream
to Joseph in Egypt.

I WILL for once suppose, that no Man need desire any farther Evidence than
these for the Reality of the thing it self; we may bring it down from hence by
just Parallels to Matters within our own Reach, Experience will furnish us with
particular Passages sufficient; and some Account I shall give you within the
Compass of our own Times; in which if I do as much as possible, as I have done
all along, omit all those Accounts which others have published, refering you to
those Publications for the particulars, and only give you new and more modern
Accounts, such as come within the Verge of my own Knowledge, or of the
Knowledge of such as I have good Reason to give Credit to; I believe the
Variety will be as acceptable, and much more useful than a bare Repeating of
what others have said. If I find it needful to quote what others have
published, you shall have it justly marked as a Quotation, that you may search
for the Truth in its Original.

BUT before I come to Quotation, or to Collection of Story, it is needful to
observe here also, that as it has pleased God to appear in this Manner, and to
cause Angels to appear also in the same Manner, and upon special Occasions, so
I make no Question but the Devil often appears in Dreams too; and I might give
but too many Examples of it, as particularly one in the Scripture.

IT is apparent that God gave Satan a kind of general License to a^flict Job,
only not to kill him; with such a terrible Commission it might be expected the
Devil would fall upon him with the utmost Fury he was capable of, or at least
that he was allowed to take; he ruined his Fortunes, reduced him to Misery,
murdered his Children, tormented him with Boils and Sores; in short, left him
nothing but Potsherds, and an ill Wife to relieve him; and as he had worried
him, to use a modern Phrase, within an Inch of his Life, he followed him in the
Night with Apparition, lest he should recruit Nature with Rest, and be a little
refreshed with Sleep. Job himself complains of it, Job vii. 14. Thou scarest me
with DREAMS, and terrifiest me with VISIONS. Not that GOD appeared to Job in
any frightful or terrible Form; but the Devil, to whom God was pleased to give
a Liberty of afflicting Job, took that Liberty, and exerted his Malice to the
utmost in such ^ Manner. We are not indeed told what M^^hods the Devil took to
scare and terrify that poor distressed Sufferer; but as he can show us nothing
uglier, and more frightful than himself, so it is very likely he appeared to
him in Person, and that in the most surprising Manner possible, with all the
Circumstances of Horror that he was able.

IT IS thought by some, who critically note tha^ Part of the Text where Pilate's
Wife warned her Husband to have nothing to do in condemning Christ to be
crucified, that it was the Devil that stirred her up to oppose it. Satan, as
soon as he perceived that the Death of Christ, however intended for Mischief by
the Jews, and pursued violently by them in their Rage and Malice at our Lord
personally, was yet a thing appointed by the determinate Council of God, for
the Salvation of Mankind: I say, as soon as he perceived that Part, which it is
probable he did not know before, he strove all he could to prevent it; and as
fierce as he had been to irritate the Jews before, and raise their Fury and
Malice up to a Pitch, even to almost rabballing the Governor into it; now he
underhand strove to prevent it, and used this Stratagem among others by
attacking Pilate's Wife in the Night, and setting her to persuade her Husband,
that he was going to deliver up an innocent Person to gratify the Jews; and
that he should have a care what he did. Matt. xxvii. 19. When he was set down
on the Judgment Seat, his Wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do
with that just Man: For I have suffered many things this Day in a Dream,
because of him.

WHETHER it was so or not, it is very probable the many things she suffered must
be from the Devil; because Heaven, by whose determinate Council and
Foreknowledge the Death of Christ was appointed, would have done nothing to
have prevented or interrupted his own Appointment.

NOW as the Dreams in those Days, and our Dreams at this Time, are exceeding
different; and that as our Heads are so full of impertinent Thoughts in the
Day, which in proportion crowd the Imagination at Night, so our Dreams are
trifling and foolish: How shall we do to know when they are to be taken Notice
of, and when not? When there is a real Apparition haunting us, or showing it
self, to us and when not? in a word, when an Angel, or when a Devil, appears to
us in a Dream?

IT is a nice Question, and as it does not particularly relate to the present
Enquiry, so it would require too long a Digression to discourse Critically upon
it; but I shall dismiss it with this short Answer, We must judge, as I said
before in the Case of open Apparitions, by the Weight, and by the Nature of the
Message or Errand which the Apparion comes about; evil Messengers seldom come
of good Errands, and Angels good or bad seldom come on trifling Messages.

TRIFLING Dreams are the Product of the Mind being engaged in trifling Matters;
a Child dreams of its Play, a House-wife dreams of her Kitchen, a Nurse of the
Children, a Tradesman of his Shop; these have nothing of Apparition in them;
nothing of Angels or Spirts, God or Devil; but when Dream comes up to Vision,
and the Soul is embarked in a superior Degree, to a Commerce above the ordinary
Rate, then you may conclude you have had some extraordinary Visitors, that you
have been in some good or bad Company in the Night, and you are left to judge
of what kind, by the Substance or Tenor of the Vision. If it be to open the
Understanding, to increase Knowledge, to seal Instruction; in a word, if it is
for direction to good Actions, or stirring up the Soul of Man to perform his
Duty to God or Man, it is certainly from above; it is an Apparition from God,
it is a Vision of Angels and good Spirits. Job xxxiii. 15. In a Dream, in a
Vision of the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon Men, in slumbrings upon the
Bed.

IF it be an Allurement to Vice, laying before you an Opportunity to steal,
presenting an Object of Beauty, an Intic^ment to commit an unlawful Action;
depend upon it it is from the dark Regions, it is an Apparition of the Devil, and
he employs his Agents, and perhaps attends in Person to draw you into Mischief.

N. B. HERE it is worth a wise Man's considering, whether the Devil representing
a Temptation to any Person in a Dream, and the Person complying, he is not
guilty of the Fact as really as if he had been awake. I leave it only as a Head
of Reflection: For Example,

THE Devil, subtle in his Contrivance, as well as vigilant in Application of
Circumstances, knows a Man to be in perplexed Circumstances, distressed for
want of Money, a perishing Family, a craving Necessity; he comes in his Sleep
and presents him with a little Child dressed up with Jewels of a great Value,
and a Purse of Gold in its Hand, and all this as happening in a Place perfectly
opportune for the Purpose, the Nurse having negligently left the Child out of
her Sight.

AS he presents the Temptation, he stands at the Person's Elbow; prompts him;
says, Take away that Chain or String of Pearl, and the Purse, the Child is
alone, it can tell no Tales, take it quickly; are not you in Distress, and do
you not want it at this time to an Extremity, and can any one ever discover it?
the Child's Friends are rich, it will do them no hurt; if they valued such
things, they would never have put them about a little Child, it is no great
Matter to them; besides it is due to their Vanity and Ostentation, which was the
only reason of dressing up a little Child in such a Manner. Come, come, take it
up quickly, it may save you from Ruin, and as soon as you are able, you may
make them Satisfaction again, and so discharge your Conscience. The Man, unable
to resist the Snare, consents, strips the innocent Child of its Ornaments, and
goes away unseen; but in a Moment or two wakes with the Surprise, sees it is a
Cheat, and looks back on it with a double Regret. 1. That he is disappointed of
the Prize which he wanted, and fancied himself relieved by. 2. That the Devil
Triumphs over him, and he is both deluded into the Crime, and deceived in the
Expectation of its Reward.

I COULD give this in the Form of a Relation of Fact, and give Evidence of the
Truth of it; for I had the Account of it from the Person's own Lips, who was
attacked in Sleep, and (as he said with a sincere Affliction) yielded to the
Temptation; and I committed the barbarous Robbery, said he, with the utmost
Resentment; I plundered and stripped the poor smiling Infant, who innocently
played with me when I took off its Ornaments, gave me the Purse of Gold out of
its little Pocket, and bid me keep it for her to play with. I robbed it, says
he, in my Imagination, and deserve as much to be hanged for it, as if I had
actually committed the horrid Fact at Noonday; Ay, says he, with a kind of
Tremor in his Conscience from the Horror of the Fact, I ought to be hanged for
it, and to be damned for it too, for I as really and effectually did it as if I
had been apprehended and carried to Newgate for it.

IT is true, it gave him a particular Satisfaction, with respect to his
Personal Safety, that he had not committed the Fact; but it gave him no less
Trouble in his Conscience, than if he had been actually guilty.

WHAT was this but an Apparition of the Devil, a real visible Apparition!
visible to the Mind, though not to the Body? and that in a double Capacity too;
the Devil without in the Temptation, and the Devil within yielding to it.

I KNOW another living Example of this kind, and I had that Part too from the
Person himself: He was a sober religious Gentleman; he was in the letter of it
a single Man; for though he had been unhappily married, he lived in a separate
State from his Wife; and, to say no more of it, upon a justifiable Occasion,
namely, that his Wife was wickedly gone away, as he supposed, with another Man.

BEFORE he was married to the unhappy Woman, he had loved a very handsome
beautiful Lady, and had gone so far as to court her a long time for Marriage;
but some Difficulty in their Circumstances prevented their coming together, and
he took another; which the first Lady resented so, as that it cost her too
dear, for she died soon after.

THE Affliction of this was very heavy to him, after he found himself abused in
his real Marriage, as above. I say after, for at first it seems it was not.
Under the melancholy Reflections of these contrary Circumstances, which
frequently loaded his Mind, He dreams one Night, that his former Mistress came
to him with a smiling Countenance; I might have expressed it rather, that his
former Mistress appeared to him in a Dream, and with a smiling cheerful
Countenance, told him, that his Runaway Wife was Dead, and now you are mine,
says the Apparition. He received the News with a particular Satisfaction, and
embraced the Lady, as his former Inclinations dictated to him; he had not the
least Notion, as he protested solemnly, or the least Remembrance that she was
dead.

WHEN he awaked, and found it all a Dream, he was exceedingly afflicted with
the Surprise; looking upon himself to be as really Guilty, as if he had been
awake, and the Lady alive; and I cannot but say he had some Reason.

WHETHER this, if really True, could be any thing but an Apparition of an evil
Spirit; the Devil laying a Snare for him, and prevailing with him in Dream in a
manner, and to commit a Crime, which he could not prevail with him to be guilty
of when she was alive.

I COULD give an Account of another Person, whom the Devil haunted frequently,
and that for many Years together, with lewd Apparitions; tempting him in his
Sleep with the Company of beautiful Women, sometimes naked, sometimes even in
Bed with him; and at other times in Conversation prompting him to Wickedness,
and that sometimes he was prevailed upon to consent; but always happily
prevented by waking in time: But the Case has on two or three Occasions been
mentioned by other Hands, and the Person is too much known to allow the farther
Description of it, without his Consent.

I CANNOT doubt but these things are stated formal Apparitions of the Devil;
and though the Person nmay be asleep, and not thoroughly sensible either of what
he is doing, or of what is doing with him, yet that the evil Spirit is actually
present with him in Apparition, I think will not admit of any Question.

THE World is too full of Examples of this kind, to enter into a long Account
of the Particulars. There is hardly a Book upon the Subject but is filled up
with historical Relations; hardly a Person to be conversed with upon the
Subject, but is full of them, either for themselves or some of their
Acquaintance; and every one is rendering their Dreams to be considerable, and
all to come to pass: But out of five hundred Dreams so told, and which so much
Stress is seemingly laid on, it is hard to find one that we can call a real
Apparition in Dream.

THE great, and perhaps one of the greatest Difficulties of Life, I mean that
relates to Dreams, is to distinguish between such as are real Apparitions, and
such as are only the Product of an encumbered Brain, a distempered Head, or
which is worse, a distempered Mind: But some Dreams are so significant, and
there follows such an immediate visible Effect answering the designed
Illumination, that it cannot but be significant.

A CERTAIN Gentleman who had lately buried his Wife, a Lady of great Piety and
Virtue, was so exceedingly afflicted at his Loss, that among other melancholy
things which were the Effect of it, this was one; that he was so far from
desiring to marry again, that he entertained a settled riveted Aversion to the
whole Sex, and was never thoroughly easy in their Company; and thus he lived
near two Years.

AFTER a certain time his Wife appeared to him in his Dream, or he dreamed that
he saw his Wife; but I rather put it in the first Sense: She came to him, as he
thought, to the Bedside, with a smiling and pleasant Countenance, and calling
him by the Term which she always gave him, My Dearest.

HE was in a great Consternation, but could not speak to her; but she said, Do
not be afraid of me, I will do you no Hurt; and then said, What is the Reason
that you mourn thus for me?

He still said nothing; that is to say, he dreamed that he said nothing, but
that he fetched a deep Sigh.

COME, come, says she, Friends lost are Friends lost, and cannot be recalled.

THEN he spoke, that is dreamed that he spoke, and asked her, why she appeared
to him.

SHE said, to put an End to his unreasonable Grief.

HOW can that be? says he. You now increase my Grief, by bringing your self
thus to my Remembrance.

NO, no, says she, you must forget me, and pray take another Wife, which will
be the way to cause you to forget me effectually.

NO, no, said he, that I can never do; and how can you desire it of me?

YES, says she, I do desire it of you, and I come to direct you whom you shall
have.

HE desired she would talk no more to him; for, says he, you cannot be my Wife;
it must be some evil Spirit come to tempt me in such a Shape, and to destroy me.

WITH that she seemed to weep, and to pity him.

HE sighed again, and desired that if she was able to retain any Affection to
him in the Condition she was then in, that she would show it by coming no more
to disorder him in that manner.

SHE said, Well, I will trouble you no more, if you listen to the Directions I
shall now give you, and will perform them.

WHAT are they? says he.

On the first Wednesday in October, says she, you ^ill be invited to Dinner to
such a House, there (...) ^ill see a Gentlewoman dressed in white sit (...)
against you at the Table; she shall be your (...), and she will be a kind
Mother to my Children. (...) seems she gave other Particulars of the
Gen^^^^oman's Dress, and in particular that she would (...) to him; all which
came to pass accordingly.

^^TER she had said this, she disppeared; the Story does not say she went away
with a melodious Sound, or with rich Perfumes, or the like, as is pretended
often in such like Cases; nor do I remember to have heard that he married the
Person, though he really saw her at the Feast.

BUT the Question from all this Story is only this, viz. Whether, supposing the
Case to be literally true, was this an Apparition, or was it only a simple
Dream? I affirm it must be an Apparition, that is to say, a Spirit came to him
in the Person of, or personating his Wife.

THE following Story I had from the Mouth of the very Person who was chiefly
concerned in it, I mean the Captain of the Ship itself.

ONE Captain Thomas Rogers, Commander of a Ship called the Society, was bound
on a Voyage from London to Virginia about the Year 1694.

THE Ship was hired in London, and being sent light, as they call it, to
Virginia for a Loading of Tobacco, had not many Goods in her outward bound,
suppose about two or three a hundred Ton, which was not counted a Loading, or
indeed half her Loading; the Ship being very large, above five hundred Ton
Burden.

THEY had had a pretty good Passage, and the Day before had had an Obser^ation,
whereupon the Mates and proper Officers had brought their Books and cast up
their Reckonings with the Captain, to see how near they were to the Coasts of
America; they all agreed that they were at least about an hundred Leagues
Distance from the Capes of Virginia. Upon these customary Reckonings, and
withal heaving the Lead, and finding no Ground at an hundred Fathom, they set
the Watch, and the Captain turned in (as they call it at Sea) that is, went to
Bed.

THE Weather was good, a moderate Gale of Wind, and blowing fair for the Coast,
so that the Ship might have run about twelve or fifteen Leagues in the Night
aft^r the Captain was in his Cabin.

HE fell asleep, and slept very soundly for about three Hours, when he waked
again, and lay 'till he heard his second Mate turn out, and relieve the Watch;
and then he called his chief Mate as he was going off from the Watch, and asked
him how all things fared; who answered, that all was well, and the Gale
freshen'd, and they run at a great Rate; but 'twas a fair Wind and a fine clear
Night; so the Captain went to sleep again.

ABOUT an Hour after he had been asleep again, he dreamed that a Man pulled him
or waked him, and he did wake. I am not sure, but I think he said the Thing
that waked him bad him get up, that is, turn out and look abroad. But whether
it was so or no, he lay still and composed himself to sl^ep, and drop'^ again,
and suddenly awaked again, and thus several times; and though he knew nothing
what was the Reason, yet he found it was impossible for him to go to sleep, and
still he heard the Vision say, or thought he heard it say, turn out and look
abroad.

HE lay in this Uneasiness near two Hours, but at last it increased so upon
him, that he could lie no longer, but gets up, puts on his Watch Gown, and
comes out upon the Quarter Deck; there he found his second Mate walking about,
and the Boatswain upon the Forecastle, the Night fine and clear, a fair Wind,
and all well as before.

THE Mate wondering to see him, at first did not know him; but calling, Who Is
there? the Captain answered, and the Mate returns, Who, the Captain! what is the
matter, Sir?

SAYS the Captain, I don't know, but I have been very uneasy these two Hours,
and some body or my own Fancy bid me turn out and look abroad, though I know not
what can be the meaning of it.

THERE can be nothing in it, but some Dream, says the Mate.

SAYS the Captain, How does the Ship Cape?

SOUTH-WEST by South, says the Mate; fair for the Coast, and the Wind East by
North.

THAT IS all very good, says the Captain; and so, after some other usual
Questions, he turned about to go back to his Cabin; when, as if it had been
some body that stood by him had spoke, it came into his Mind like a Voice,
Heave the Lead, heave the Lead.

UPON this he turns again to his second Mate, Mate, says the Captain, when did
you heave the Lead? what Water had you?

ABOUT an Hour ago, says the Mate, sixty Fathom.

Heave again, says the Captain.

THERE IS no manner of Occasion, Sir, says the Mate, but if you please it shall
be done.

I DON'T know, says the Captain, it is needless indeed, I think; and so was
going away again, but was, as it were, forced to turn back as before, and says
to the Mate, I know not what ails me, but I cannot be easy; come call a Hand
aft, and heave the Lead.

ACCORDINGLY a Hand was called, and the Lead being cast or heaved, as they call
it, they had Ground at eleven Fathom^

THIS surpised them all, but much more when at the next Cast it came up seven
Fathom.

UPON this the Captain in a Fright bad them put the Helm a Lee, and about Ship,
all Hands being ordered to back the Sails, as is usual in such Cases.

THE proper Orders being obeyed, the Ship stayed presently and came about; and
when she was about, before the Sails filled, she had but four Fathoms and a
half Water under her Stern; as soon as she filled and stood off, they had seven
Fathom again, and at the next Cast eleven Fathom, and so on to twenty Fathom;
so he stood off to Seaward all the rest of the Watch, to get into deep Water,
'till Daybreak; when being a clear Morning, there were the Capes of Virginia
and all the Coast of America in fair View under their Stern, and but a very few
Leagues Distance: Had they stood on but one Cable's length farther, as they
were going, they had been Bump ashore (so the Sailors call it) and had
certainly lost their Ship, if not their Lives.

NOW, what could this be? Not the Devil, that we may vouch for him, he would
hardly be guilty of doing so much good; hardly an Angel sent from Heaven
Express, that we dare not presume; but that it was the Work of a waking
Providence, by some invisible Agent employed for that Occasion, who took Sleep
from the Captain's Eyes; as once in a Case of infinitely more Importance was
done to King Ahasuerus; This we may conclude. Had the Captain slept as usual,
and as Nature required, they had been all lost; the Shore being flat at a great
Distance, and, as I suppose, the Tide low, the Ship had been a-ground in an
Instant, and the Sea, which run high, would have broke over her, and soon have
dashed her in Pieces.

HOW it happened that the Mates and other Navigators on Board (for it being a
very great Ship, they had several experienced Men among them) should all of
them have kept, and yet all be out in their Reckoning, and that so much as to
think themselves an hundred Leagues from the Coast, when they were not above
twenty or twenty five, that was to be accounted for among themselves; but
certain it was, if it had not been for thus being waked and jogged in the
Night, and kept awake too in spite of his own Drowsiness, the Captain had lain
still, and the whole Ship's Company been in the utmost Hazard.

IF this was not an Apparition, it must be what the Scripture calls it in
another Case, being warned of God in a Dream; which by the way is the same
thing; but here was something more than being warned, for the Captain owned he
was in no Dream. He dreamed nothing at all, much less any thing of Danger; he
went to his Bed or Cabin with all the prudent Caution that any Man in that
important Trust of a Ship in the Ocean could do; and then after having made
their Calculations, cast up their Reckonings, set their Watch, and made every
thing sure, he laid down with all the Satisfaction that it was possible for any
Man in a like Case to have.

TO any Men that understand the Sea Affairs, this Case will be more feelingly
and sensibly read; they will be more touched with the Surprise the Ship's
Company must be all in, to see themselves just running a-ground, when they
believed themselves an hundred Leagues from the Shore, to find themselves
within two Inches of Death, when they believed themselves as safe as a Ship at
Sea with a moderate Gale and a fair Wind could be supposed to be.

AND how will those modern Wits, of which our Age is so full, account for this,
who allow no God or Providence, no invisible World, no Angelick, kind and
waking Spirits, who, by a secret Correspondence with our embodied Spirits, give
merciful Hints to us of approaching Mischiefs and impending Dangers, and that
timely, so as to put the Means into our Hands to avoid and escape them?

WHICH way will such Men solve the main Difficulty in such a Case as this, viz.
What this should be? Will they resolve it all into fortuitous Chance, mere
Accident, a mere Circulation of things in the ordinary Course? As they say
Shoals are raised to bar up a Haven, which they tell us, is nothing but the
Sand and Stones driven down the Stream of a River, which lodge here or there,
as their own Weight, or the abating Force of the Water, or this or that Eddy
and Counter-stream checks them, so deep'ning one Channel where it was Shoal,
and choking up another where it was deep, and all by mere Accident: But this
is very gross arguing.

IT were easy to confute these weak pretenses to Chance and Incident, and to
show the necessity of an intelligent Being; but that is not my work: I am not
upon the Reality of such an intelligent Being, but the Reality of its ordinary
and extraordinary actings, the Agents it employs, and the manner of their
executing the Commissions they receive; which it is evident they faithfully
perform, and effectually too; sometimes by one method, sometimes by another,
and particularly by this of Apparition, as well to the Eyes of the Soul, as to
the Eye of the Body, sleeping or waking it is the same.

OUR Friends the Critics may stumble here, perhaps, at the seeming
contradiction in the Terms, as particularly this of invisible Apparition. But
it is easily solved, by answering that it is but a seeming Contradiction, for
both the Apparitions are visible, only not to the same Optic Powers; the
Apparition in Dream is visible to the intellectual sight, to the Eye of the
Soul; and the Daylight Apparition is visible to the common ordinary sight: and
you have an Expression in the Scripture often made use of, which gives an
unquestioned Authority for this way of speaking.

THE expressing things dreamed of, as things seen, is very frequent in the
Sacred Text. Jacob dreamed a Dream about Laban's Cattle, Genesis xxxi. 10. where
it is thus expressed, and I saw in a Dream. Again Daniel, vii. 1, 2. Daniel had
a Dream and Visions of his Head upon his Bed, v. 2. and I saw in my Vision by
Night: v. 7. after this I saw in the Night Visions, and behold a fourth Beas^:
and v. 13. I saw in the Night Visions, and behold; and besides this, we have
the same way of speaking ten or eleven times in the same Chapter, and as many
or more times in the next.

IT IS the like in relating the Dreams of Pharaoh and of Nebuchadnezzar, or the
Apparitions rather which appeared to those Kings in Dream. Pharaoh says to
Joseph, Genesis xli. 17, 18, 19. In my Dream I stood upon the Bank of the River,
and BEHOLD there came up; that is the same thing as, I saw them come up: v. 19.
and BEHOLD seven other Kine came up, or I saw seven other Kine come up. So that
an Apparition in Dream is visible to the Soul, the Imagination sees, though the
Eyes of the Body are closed.

THIS Digression is owing to the nice Judgment of our Critics, whose exactness
you see I mightily reverence, and am wonderful careful not to fall under their
dreadful Hands, in a thing so essential to my Subject; as for Trifles, I leave
them to trifle with them to the utmost of their more malicious Impotence.

BUT I come now to another Relation of Fact, which also I take upon me to vouch
the Reality of, having been present at the very instant of every part of it.

A PERSON, whose Name it is not so proper to mention here, but who may be
produced if there should be occasion, being still living, was under the
disaster, about the Year 1701, to fall under a Party Censure, (the occasion is
needless to the present Case.) In hopes, upon the Recess of the House, which
was not far off, he should (as is usual) be at Liberty, he withdrew himself,
and avoided being taken up as much as he could; but the House resenting it, a
Vote was past, ordering the Secretary of State to prosecute him at Law; which
obliged him to resolve to leave the Kingdom, and in the mean time to conceal
himself with more exactness; the Government having issued out a Proclamation
for apprehending him, with a Reward to the Person who should discover where he
was, so as he might be taken.

IN order to conceal himself more effectually, he left his Lodging where he had
been hid for some time, and removed to Barnet on the Edge of Hertfordshire;
intending, as soon as he had settled some Family Affairs, to go away North into
Scotland: But before he went away he was obliged to come once more to London,
to sign some Writings for the securing some Estate, which it was feared might
be seized by Outlaw, if the Prosecution had gone on so far.

THE Night before he had appointed to come to London, as above, being in Bed
with one Mr. R -- D -- he dreamed that he was in his Lodgings at London, where
he had been concealed as above, and in his Dream he saw two Men come to the
Door, who said they were Messengers, and produced a Warrant from the Secretary
of State to apprehend him, and that accordingly they seized upon and took him.

THE Vision surpised and waked him, and he waked Mr. D -- his Brother-in-law,
who was in Bed with him, and told him the Dream, and what a Surprise he was in
about it. Mr. D -- seeing it was but a Dream, advised him to give no heed to
it, but compose himself and go to sleep again, and he did so.

AS soon as he was fast asleep again, he was waked again with the same Dream
exactly as before; and he awaked his Brother again, as before^ It disturbed
them both very much; but being heavy to sleep, they both went to sleep again,
and dreamed no more. It is to be observed, that he saw the very Men that
apprehended him, their Countenances, Clothes, Weapons, etc. and described them
in the Morning to his said Brother D -- in all the Particulars.

HOWEVER the Call to go to London being as he thought urgent, he got ready in
the Morning to go, resolving to stay but one Day, and then set forward for
Scotland. Accordingly he went for London in the Morning, and that he might not
be known, walked it on Foot; that so he might go by more private ways over
Enfield Chase, and so to Southgate, Hornsey, etc.

ALL the way as he walked his Mind was heavy, and oppressed; and he frequently
said to his Brother who walked with him, that he was certain he was going to
London to be surpised: and so strong was the foreboding Impression upon his
Mind, that he once stopped at Hornsey, and endeavored to get a Lodging,
intending to send his Brother to London to see if nothing had happened there to
give him any Alarm.

AS he had just secured a convenient Lodging, he accidentally saw a Gentleman
standing at the next Door, who he knew very well, but durst not venture to
trust on that Occasion; and finding on Enquiry that he dwelt there, he
concluded that was no Place for him, and so resolved to go forwards.

THE Impression upon his Mind continuing, he stopped again at Islington, and
endeavored to get a Lodging there; but could not: so at last, when his Brother
brought him word he could not get a Lodging, except where it was too public,
Well, say^ he, than I must go to London, and take what follows; or to that
purpose; and accordingly did go, and the next Morning was taken by the
Messengers, just in the very manner as he had been told in his Dream; and the
very same two Men, whose Faces he had seen, and with the same Clothes on and
Weapons, exactly as he had described.

THIS Story I had from his own Mouth, and confirmed by Mr. R -- D -- his
Brother-in-law, to whom he related his Vision at the very Moment of it, as
above.

I REFER it to any impartial Judgment to weigh every Circumstance of this
Account (the Truth of which I have not the least Reason to question) and to
tell me, by what Powers, and from what Influence could these things be
performed, if there were no invisible World, and no Inhabitants there, who
concerned themselves with our Affairs? no good Spirits which conversed with our
embodied Spirits, and gave us due intelligence, notice, and warning of
approaching Danger.

IF there is any Difficulty in this Case, it seems to me to be in the Event of
the thing, as in the Case mentioned: Why was not the Intelligence made so
complete, so forcible, and the Impression so plain, that the Person in whose
Favor it was all done might have been effectually alarmed, his going forward
stopped, and consequently the Mischief which was at hand, and which he had the
notice of, effectually prevented?

IT is not indeed so easy to answer that part; but it may be resolved into
this, that the Fault seems to be our own, that we do not give due attention to
such notice, as might be sufficient to our Deliverance. If an Enemy be at hand,
and the Out-Centinel fires his Piece, he does his Duty; if the whole Camp does
not take the Alarm, but are surpised, the fault is their own, the Man did all
that was to be expected from him; nor do the Officers or Generals slight the
notice, and say it is nothing but a sorry Fellow shot off his Musket, and so
take no more heed to it.

ON the contrary, they conclude the C^ntinel is posted upon Duty; he would not
fire his Piece without a sufficient Cause, and give a false alarm to the Camp
for nothing; ther^ must be something extraordinary, and accordingly they order
the Drums to beat, and immediately call to Arms.

THUS if the invisible Spirits give a due alarm, they do their part; if they
jog us and awaken us in a deep sleep, and pull us again and again, and give us
notice that something is coming, that some Danger is at the Door; if we will
sleep on 'till it comes, if we will go on, happen what happen may, the kind
Spirit has done its Duty, discharged its Office, and if we fall into the
Mischief, the fault is our own, we can by no means blame the insufficiency of
the Notice, and say, to what purpose is it? seeing we had due and timely
warning, but would not take the hint; we had due notice of the danger, and
would not step out of the way to avoid it; the fault is wholly our own.

ANOTHER Account I had a sufficient Voucher for, though the Gentleman is now
dead; but I had great reason to believe the truth of it.

A YOUNG Gentleman of good Birth and Fortune, in the beginning of the late War
with France, had a violent inclination to see the World, as he called it, and
resolved to go into the Army; his Father was dead, and had left him a good
Estate; that is to say, between four and five hundred Pounds a Year; besides
his Mother's Jointure, which after her Life would fall to him of course.

HIS Mother earnestly entreated him not to go into the Army; but pressed him
rather to travel, and so might see the World, as she said, without feeling the
Calamities of the War, and without hazarding his Life.

HE told her Traveling indeed in time of Peace was all a Gentleman could do,
and was at best very expensive; but that now was the time a Man might see the
World at the expense of the Public, and perhaps might make his Fortune too.

HIS Mother represented the danger of his Life, and bad him consider how many
Gentlemen went into the Army, and of them, have few lived to come home again,
much less to rise to any degree of Preferment.

HE made light of all that, and told his Mother (as is the general Saying of
warm Heads when they push their Fortunes, as they call it,) that if he happened
to be knocked on the Head there was an End of him, and he was provided for.

WELL, Son, says the old Lady, I am obliged to submit to it, you are your own
Master; but remember your Mother's Tears, (and with those Words she wept;) I
can but entreat you not to go, you have Estate enough to make you easy; let
those go whose narrow Circumstances make the hazard rational, and let them go
abroad to die, that cannot tell how to live; you can pay those that do go; you
have no need to run the Risque, who do not want the Pay.

HE slighted all her entreaties, and told her, if his Father was alive he did
not doubt but he would give his Consent, for he had done the same thing in his
young Days.

NO, no, Son, said his Mother, your Father knew better; he took a Commission
when he was the youngest of three Sons, and had nothing to expect at home but
the fate of a younger Brother; but as soon as he heard that his Elder Brothers
were both dead, and the Estate all come to him, he laid down his Arms, sold his
Commission, and said he had no more Business in the Army; and he would tell you
the same thing if he was alive: he used always to say, that the Sword and the
Book are the Portions of younger Brothers, the Coach and the Equipage is for
the Heir.

WELL, 'twas all one; whatever his Mother's Arguments could do, or even
speaking Tears could say, nothing could prevail; but he mortgaged part of his
Estate to purchase a Company in the first Regiment of Guards, and into the Army
he would go.

THE Night before he signed the Agreement for the Company, being in his Bed and
fast asleep, he saw in a Dream his Father come to him in his Gown, and with a
great Fur Cap on, such as he used to wear: And calling him by his Name, What is
the Reason, says he, that you will not listen to the entreaties of your Mother
not to go to the Wars; but answer her that I would not dissuade you? I do
assure you, that if you resolve to take this Commission you will not enjoy it
three Years.

WHY, says he (in his Dream) what wi^^ hinder me? being it seems desirous to
know something of his Fortune.

ASK me not the Particulars, says the Apparition, but either decline the
Employ, or when you have enjoyed it two Years and a half, sell out again, as I
did before you.

I CANNOT promise that, says he.

THEN you may promise your self, says the Apparition, that it shall be worse.

HE seemed to slight the Admonition, and said, it was too late to look back.

TOO late! too late! says the Apparition, repeating the Words; then go on, and
repent too late.

HE was not much affected with this Apparition, when he waked and found it was
but a Dream; for Dreams, said he, are not to be heeded; so he went on and
bought the Commission.

A FEW Days after the Commission was bought, the Father appeared again, not to
him but to his Mother, in a Dream too as before; and taking notice to her, how
his Son had rejected her Admonition, it added,

YOUNG Heads are wilful: Robert will go into the Army; but tell him from me, he
shall never come back. ALL these Notices were of no force with this young
Gentleman; but as he had resolved, so he pursued his Resolution, and went into
the Army; and two Battallions of that Regiment going into the Field that
Summer, his Company was one, and so he went abroad into Flanders.

HE wanted no occasion to show his Bravery, and in several warm Actions come
off with applause; so that he was far from being suspected of Cowardice: But
one Day, and in the third Year of his Service, the Army was drawn out in order
of Battle, the General having received certain Advice, that the Enemy would
come and attack them. As he stood at the Head of his Company, he was suddenly
seized with a cold shivering Fit, and it was so violent that some Officers who
were near him, every one at their Post, perceived it.

AS it was to no purpose for him to conceal it, he turned to his Lieutenant who
stood next to him, and from whose Mouth I received the particular Account of
it: I cannot imagine, says he, what is the occasion of this shaking Fit.

IT is your eagerness to fall on, says the Lieutenant, I have often been so,
and begin to be so now; I wish the French would come on, that we might have
something to do.

IT continued about a quarter of an Hour, and the Enemy did come on as was
expected; but the fight began upon the left, a good distance from them, so that
the whole left Wing was engaged before they began.

WHILE this lasted, the Lieutenant called to the Gentleman, Colonel, say^ he,
how do you do? I hope your shivering Fit is over.

NO, says the Colonel, it is not over; but it is a little better.

IT will be all over presently, says the Lieutenant.

AY, so 'twill, says the Colonel, I am very easy, I know what 'twas now; and
with that he called the Lieutenant to come to him for one Moment.

WHEN he came, says he, I know now what ailed me, I am very easy, I have seen
my Father; I shall be killed the first Volley; let my Mother know I told you
this.

IN a few Minutes afte^ this, a Body of the Enemy advanced, and the very first
Volley the Regiment received was the fire of five Plottoons of Grenadiers, by
which the Captain and several other Officers, besides private Men were killed,
and the whole Brigade was soon after put into Confusion; though being supported
by some Regiments of the second Line, they rallied again soon after; the
Captain's Body was presently recovered; but he was irrecoverably Dead, for he
received a Shot in his Face which killed him immediately.

IF all the Notices from the invisible World could have been of any Use to him,
or he had been to be wrought upon by Cautions and Advices, which nothing but a
most obstinate Temper would have so totally disregarded, the Man had been safe;
But what can be expected when Men are as plainly informed of things, as by such
Methods can be supposed rational, and will not take the Hint?

LUCIUS FLORUS records of Julius Caesar, that a Woman of a Masculine
Countenance, and of a mighty Stature, appeared to him in a Dream, and beckoned
to him to follow her; that upon his following her, she went over the River
Rubicon, and stood on the farther Bank, beckoning to him to come over; upon
which the next Day he boldly entered Italy, passing the Rubicon, which was the
Boundary of Italy on that Side.

I KNOW some relate this as an Apparition to Caesar in the open Day, but I
understand it otherwise, and that it was understood of the Genius of Italy, as
they then called it, and that he had such a Vision in his Sleep, which
encouraged him in his Attempt upon the Liberty of his Country; intimating, that
the whole Country invited him, and that he might be sure of Success.

I SHALL not run out here into the Account of Dreams; the Variety of them is
Infinite, and, as I hinted before, few of them of Importance enough to deserve
any Regard; but such Dreams as necessarily intimate an Apparition of Spirits,
those I think must be Significant.

THE following is part Vision, part Apparition, and seems to make One be an
Evidence of the Other, and therefore is very particularly to my Purpose. T -- H
-- a Gentleman of Fortune, eldest Son of the Family, his Father a Baronet, and
of an honorable Line, and then living, being a young Man, and a Man of
Pleasure, had an Intreague with a certain Lady, in which his younger Brother
(of the two rather more Gay, and given that way than himself) was his Rival:
The Lady was handsome, and of no despicable Fortune, but much inferior to the
eldest Son of the Family, whose Fortune was near two thousand Pound per Annum,
after his Father Sir G -- H --.

THE younger Gentleman was really in Love with the Lady, and inclined to marry
her, if he could bring his Father to consent to it, and had two or three times
spoken to the old Knight about it; nor was his Father much averse to it, only
he thought her Fortune too small.

SIR G -- told his Son, if he had been his Eldest, he should have been easier
in the Proposal, because his Paternal Estate being Free, and perfectly
unincumber'd, he thought the Heir was not under that Necessity of making his
Fortune by a Wife; but that a younger Brother ought always to seek a Fortune to
mend his Circumstances. He used to jest with his Son, and tell him, it was this
made him connive at his way of Life; that a younger Brother should be Handsome,
be a Scholar, Dress, and be Gay; the first to recommend him to the Court, the
second to recommend him to the Ladies; that the Heir having no need, was often
left to be a Booby Knight, just able to write his own Name, Halloo to his own
Dogs, and ride the light Saddle; but as he had seldom any Share of Brains,
Nature wisely gave the Wit ^o one, and the Estate to the other; so, says the
Knight, your Brother has his Affairs in a quite different Si^uation.

THESE good-natured kind of Arguments the old Knight used with his younger Son,
to persuade him against marrying the Lady; but he did not absolutely forbid him
on pain of his Displeasure, and of withdrawing his Hand from him, with respect
to Money, so that the young Gentleman kept the Lady Company openly; and though
he had not yet made the Proposal to her, yet did really design it; I mean the
honorable Proposal, (viz.) of Marriage.

ON the other hand, the Esquire, as they called him, kept her Company, on
another and far worse Account, designing to make a Mistress of her, and not a
Wife.

UPON these differing Views, the Brothers often met at the Lady's House, that
is to say, at her Aunt's where she lived; for she had no Father, and her Mother
had changed Circumstances, so that her Daughter was as it were in her own Hands.

THE elder Brother had this Advantage in his Interest, (viz) that the Lady
loved him, and would have been very well pleased if he had courted her for
Marriage, but that was not his Design; so that in a word, the Case stood thus,
the younger Brother loved the Lady, but the Lady loved the Esquire;.

THE elder Brother laid Siege to her Virtue, and the younger laid Siege to her
Affection; but, as I said, the Stream running in Favor of the eldest, the Lady
was in some Danger of sacri^izing her Honor to her Passion, and the honest
Pretensions of the young Gentleman were in some Hazard of a Miscarriage.

THE Gentlemen carried on their Affairs separately, and their own way; but were
neither of them so close as to conceal it from one another that they had some
Designs, though they did not fully discover what their Pretensions were; however
as I have said that they often met at the Lady's Apartment, it could not be
long before they came to a Conversation upon the Subject, and this unhappily
embroiled them together at last, as you shall see presently.

THE eldest Brother began one Evening to be a little rough with his Brother
upon the Subject; Jack, says the Eldest, you and I often meet here, I don't
understand it, pray what do you pr^t^nd to? it is a little odd that two Brothers
should have but one Mistress; pr'ythee, Jack, don't let us turn Italians.

NAY, says Jack, what do you pretend to? If either of us is in the Wrong, I
believe it is always on your Side.

NO, says T -- I don't allow that neither, I am right I am sure of it; I am
always right, and I will be right, pray take Notice of that.

I TAKE Notice of nothing about it, not I, says Jack; all the World knows that
I am right, and they shall know it, and you shall know it too, Tom --

WELL, Pr'ythee Jack, says Tom. alter one Piece of your Conduct, I desire that
of you.

WHAT Conduct? I don't understand you; but if I did, I know no Conduct of mine
that is amiss, and I shall alter none of it, I assure you.

WHY, this it is, that when I meet you here, which I think is a little too
often, says the Esquire, I observe you always strive to stay after me, and to
have me go away first; I tell you, I don't like it.

I SHALL alter nothing about that, I assure you, says Jack. I think I have some
Business here more than you have; and as for your meeting me here too often^ I
think so too, I think you do come a little too often, unless you came with an
honester Design.

YOU are very Pert, Mr. Jack, to your ^lder Brother; I think I must handle you
a little, says Tom.

WHY, good Mr. elder Brother Esquire Thomas, ^^ys Jack, when you are Baronet,
you may take upon you a little; but 'till then, the Cap and the Knee is not so
much your due, as you may think it is.

LOOK you Jack, says the Esquire, I am not jesting with you, nor I will not be
jested with by you; the bent Answer a Gentleman gives to a Jest, is a Box on
the Ear; or la coup de Batton.

WHY, Sir, says Jack, I must call my self a Gentleman as well as you, or else I
could not have the Honor to call you Brother: And since you are disposed to be
in Earnest, I take leave to tell you Sir, I will be used like a Gentl^man, and
if you don't know how to do it, I am able to teach you.

THEY were now both very hot; for upon the last Words of his Brother, the
Esquire laid hold of his Cane, at which the younger laid hold of his Sword.
Look you Sir, says he, if you are disposed to treat your Brother thus, take
Notice Sir, my Father's Son may be killed, but he cannot be can'd, and I will not
take the least Offer toward it at your Hand; I am ready for you when you
please.

SOME Company that were not far off, and Friends to both, ran in upon this, and
kept them asunder for that time; but they soon met again at the same Place; and
though it was two or three Days or more, yet they soon began the same kind of
Discourse; and which was still worse, the elder Brother, who was certainly in
the Wrong, yet always began the Discourse.

IT happened they met the last time at the Lady's Lodgings, and were let into
her Parlour, but the Lady was very unhappily abroad; she had charged her Maid,
if ever the Gentlemen cam^ when she was abroad, she should never let them both
in, or at least not both into the same Room; for she had perceived they began
to be very uneas^e one with another; she knew they were both hot and angry, and
she was afraid of some Mischief between them, notwithstanding they were
Brothers.

BUT some of her Aunt's Servants happening t^ come to the Door, when the eldest
of the Gentlemen knocked, they carried him into the sam^ Parlour where the
younger Brother was waiting before for the Lady's Return.

THIS was as unluckily pointed for what followed, as if the Devil, who is
always ready for Mischief, had contrived it on Purpose; for the Brothers were
no sooner met, but they fell to quarrelling.

WELL, Jack, says the ^ld^r Brother, you will it seems keep your Haunt her^,
notwithstanding what I said to you.

I DO not really understand what you mean by your way of talking, says Jack;
you seem to take a Liberty with me, you have n^ right to.

WHAT Liberty do I take. says the Esquire. I asked you what Business you had
here with Mrs. -- was that taking too much Liberty? and I ask you again, is
that an Offense?

AND I told you, says Jack, I should give you no Account of my self, did not I?
was that an Offense to you? If it was, I see no help for it, I shall give you
the same Answer now: I cannot imagine what you mean by asking me such a
Question.

I KNOW what I mean by it, and I shall expect a better Answer, I tell it you in
a few Words, says the Esquire.

NAY, if you have a Mind to make a Quarrel of it you a^e welcome, says Jack,
I Will make as few Words as you please; Only let me know your Pleasure, tell me
what you would have, and you shall have a direct Answer, or a direct Refusal at
once.

WHY, my Question is short, says the Esquire, What do you visit Mrs. -- for?
you may ^asily understand me.

I SHALL answer it with the same Qu^s^ion, says Jack; Pray what do you visit
her for?

WHY, that is as rude as you can answer an eld^r Brother, says the Esquire, and
as spi^^ful; but few Words are best, Jack, I visit her for that which bears no
Rivals; I hope you understand me now.

WELL, and I do the same, says Jack; but there is one Question between us then,
that carries matter of Right with it, and that is, who visited her first?

WHY that is true, Jack, says the Esquire, in some Cases, but not in Love;
Priority is no Claim there, I shall not trouble my self about it.

THEN I Am sure, says Jack, being an elder Brother is no Claim; so I shall take
no Notice of that.

NO, no, says the Esquire, I don't expect it; there are no Relatives in
whoring, Jack. I know no Brother, or Father, Uncle or Cousin, when I talk of my
Mistress.

VERY well, says Jack, now you have answered me more particularly than it may
be you intended; and perhaps we may come to an Understanding sooner than I
expected.

WHAT do you mean, says the Esquire, by an Understanding?

NAY, what can I mean? I mean, that you give me to understand, that you court
Mrs. -- to make a Whore of her.

BETTER Language, Jack, however, says the Esquire: a Mistress, you would say?

NOT I, says Jack, 'twill bear no better Language; a Whore's a Whore, you know,
call it what you will, it is the same thing to me.

WELL, and suppose it then, what Business have you with it?

WHY, suppose then that I Court the same Lady for a Wife, I hope I have the
better of you there?

NOT at all Jack, says the Esquire, I shall not allow you should make a Wife of my
Mistress.

NOR I cannot allow, says Jack, that you shall make a Whore of my Wife.

BUT I shall make no Scruple of it I assure you, says the Esquire, if she is
willing, for all you are my Brother, I shall do it if I can.

AND I will not flatter you, that let her be willing or not willing, if you really
do it, says Jack, I shall make no Scruple to cut your Throat for it if I can,
for all you are my Brother.

VERY well, Jack, says the Esquire, then I know what I have to trust to.

IT IS very true, says Jack, it is the old Road of Knight Errantry Sir, win her
and wear her, is the Word.

AND what must be done then? says the Esquire.

NAY, says Jack, I need not tell you what to do; I tell you she is my Wife, I
think that is enough to tell you what you ought to do.

AND I tell you, says the Esquire, she is my Mistress, that is enough to tell
you, you are a Cuck^ld, or shall be so, I think that is fair, to tell you
beforehand.

AND I think, says Jack, that is telling me I must cut your Throat beforehand
too; for I will neither be a Cuckold, or be called so by you, or any Man alive.

N. B. AT this the younger Brother rose up in a violent Rage, and went away;
and the elder Brother, as hot as he, told him as he went out, he did well to
leave him in Possession.

THIS urged him yet more, and he turned back, and said, I hope you will have
the Manners to follow me?

NO, Jack, says the Esquire, and swore to him, you shall not fight for my
Mistress, and my Estate too; I Will take care first you shall get nothing by me.

WITH all my Heart, says Jack, we give a Rogue time at the Gallows to say his
Prayers, you know.

I SHALL correct you for your Impudence, Sir, tomorrow Morning, without fail,
says the Esquire.

MUST I wait upon your Worship so long? says Jack, and added something very
bitter, as if his Brother was too much a Coward to go on with it. But it
appeared otherwise, for that very Evening he received a Challenge from the
Esquire, appointing Time and Place to meet the next Day by Five in the Morning.

THESE two rash hotheaded young Fellows were carried into this Fit of Rage by
the Violence rather of their fiery Spirits and Passions, than of their real
J^alousy, for they had scarce either of them begun to engage with the Lady one
way or another; but being hot and heady, they raised the Storm between
themselves, and the Match and the Tinder meeting, the Flame broke out by the
mere Nature of the thing.

BUT my Business is not to moralize upon the Story, but to relate the Fact. The
Challenge being given, they had no more to do but to meet, fight, play the
Butcher upon one another, and leave the Consequences to Time.

THE Father, the good old Knight, who was then living, could know nothing of
what had passed between his Sons, for he was at that very time down at his
Country Seat in W -- shire, at least sixty Miles from London.

ON the Morrow early, according to Agreement, the Brothers prepared themselves
for the Business, and out they went, but by several Ways, to the Place
appointed, their Lodgings being in different Parts of the Town.

THE younger Brother, whose Blood it seems was warmest, was first out, and it
was scarce Daylight when he came within Sight of the Place appointed; there he
saw his Brother, as he supposed him to be, walking hastily to and fro, as if he
waited with Impatience for his coming.



NAY, says he to himself, I am sure I am within the Time; however, don't be
impatient, Brother Tom, I Will be with you presently; and with that he mended his
Pace. He had not gone many Steps more, but he saw his Brother (as he still
thought him to be) coming forward, as if it was to meet him, and with his Sword
drawn in his Hand.

YOU are mighty nimble with your Sword (said he again to himself) what, did you
think I would not give you time to draw? But how was he surprised when he came
up to him, and found it was not his Brother but his Father, and that instead of
a Sword in his Hand he had nothing but a small little Cane, such as the old
Knight generally walked with!

HE was the more at a stand, because he supposed his Father was, as is said
above, at his Seat in the Country, above sixty Miles off: However he was out of
doubt when he not only saw him nearer hand, but that his Father spoke to him?

WHY how now Jack, says the old Gentleman, What, * challenge and draw upon your
Father.

* When he thought he saw his Brother with his Sword in his Hand, he had laid
his Hand on his Sword.

YOU may be sure, Sir, says he, I did not suppose it was you. I don't doubt you
know whom I expected here; it is a poor cowardly Shift for him first to
challenge his Brother, and then send you in his stead; you would not have done
so your self, when you was a young Man.

IT IS no time to talk now, Jack, says his Father, I have your Challenge here,
and I am come to fight you, not to talk to you; therefore draw, says he, you
know there is no Relation in Love; and wi^h that his Father draws his Sword, and
advances upon him.

DRAW! says Jack: what, and upon my Father! Heaven's forbid! no, I Will be
murdered first.

BUT his Father advancing again, and with a furious Countenance, as if he would
indeed kill him, Jack pulls out his Sword and Scabbard, and throwing it on the
Ground, cried out, There Sir, take it, kill me with it; for God's sake, what do
you mean?

BUT his Father as it were running upon him, Jacks turns from him, and giving a
spring out of his Power, seems resolved to run from him; at which his Father
stoops, takes up his Sword, and stood still.

THE young Gentleman, surprised and amazed at the Rencounter, was all in Terror
and Confusion, and knew not what to do; but going back a considerable Way, and
observing that his Father was gone, as he thought, he resolved, though he had no
Sword, he would go the Place appointed, and see if his Brother was come; for he
should not be able to say he did not meet him, however he was thus strangely
disarmed.

ACCORDINGLY he went back to the Place, and sat him down upon the Ground,
waiting near two Hours there, but heard nothing of his Brother; but as he came
away again at the End of the two Hours, he found his Sword lying just in the
Place where it was thrown down, or as near the Place as he could imagine, though
he was sure it was not there when he went the second time by the Place.

THIS amused him more, and he knew not what to make of it; but he took up the
Sword and went home, wondering at what the meaning of all this should be.

HE had not been long at home, but his Brother's Servant comes to his Lodging
with a very civil Message from the Esquire, to know how he did; and the Servant
was bid to ask him from his Brother, if he had not met with something
extraordinary that Morning, and to tell him that he, (his Brother) was very
ill, or he would have come to see him.

THE Oddness of the Message added to the Surprise he was in before; upon which,
he called the Messenger up Stairs, and parlied with him a little thus:

J. WHAT IS the matter, Will? how does my Brother do?


Will. MY Master gives his Service to your Worship, and sent me to know how you
do.


J. INDEED I Am out of order a little; but how is your Master? what is the matter?


Will. WHY truly, and't please your Worship, I don't know what is the matter; I
think my Master has been frighted this Morning.


J. FRIGHTED, Will! with what, pry'thee? your Master is not easily frighted.


Will. WHY no, an't please you, I know he is not; but this has been something
extraordinary; I don't know how it is, for I was not with my Master, but they
talk in the House, that he has seen his Father, or seen an Apparition in the
Shape of his Father.


J. WHY so have I too, Will; now you fright me indeed, for I made light of it
before; why, it was my Father to be sure.


Will. No Sir, alas your Father! why, my old Master was at -- in W -- shire,
and very ill in his Bed but a Friday last; I came from him, my Master sent me
to him on an Errand.


J. AND did you see him your self, Will?


Will. IF your Worship please to give me my Oath, I Will take my Oath I saw him
and spoke with him in his Bed, and very ill he was; I hope your Worship will
believe I know my old Master?


J. YES, yes, you know him, no doubt, Will. I think you lived four Years with
him, didn't you?


Will. I dressed him, and undressed him five Years and a half, an't please you.
I think I may say I know him in his Clothes, or out of 'em.


J. WELL, William, and I hope you will allow that I may know my own Father too,
or him I have called Father these thirty Years?


Will. YES to be sure, an't please you.


J. WELL then, tell my Brother, it was either my Father or the Devil; I both
saw him, and spoke with him, and I Am frighted out of my Wits.


AWAY went Will with this Message back to his Master, and his Master
immediately goes again with Will to see his Brother.

AS soon as he came into the Room to his Brother, he runs to him and kisses
him; Dear Jack, says he, What has been the matter with us today? we have both
played the Fool, but forgive me my Part, and tell me what has happened.

JACK received him with all the Passions and Tenderness imaginable, and they
fell immediately to comparing things with one another. Will had told his
Brother in general how it was, as the younger Brother had ordered him; that he
had seen his Father and spoke to him; and now he told him all the Particulars
himself, as I have related them above^ and how he came at him with such Fury,
that he really thought he would have run him through the Body, and that he run
away.

THE Squire related his Story much to the same purpose, How that as he was
coming to the Place appointed, his Father met him, and asked him whither he was
going; that he put him off with a slight Answer, and told him, he was going to
Kensington to meet some Gentlemen there, who were to go with him to
Hampton Court.

THAT upon this, his Father turned very angry; and I observed, said he, his
Face looked as red as Fire; he stamped with his Foot, as he used to do when he
was provoked, and told me I put him off with a Sham; that he knew my Errand as
well as I did my self; that I was going to murder my younger Brother, and that
he was come to satisfy my Fury with his Blood, and I should murder him, not my
Brother.

I was so confounded, said the Esquire, I could not speak to him a good while;
but recovering my self a little, and going to excuse my self, he gr^w more
angry; when I said my Pretensions were as honest to Mrs. -- as yours were, he
gave me the Lie, and indeed, Jack, I deserved it; though I could not imagine he
knew: but he told me in short, that I lied, for that I courted her to debauch
her, but that you courted her honorably, to marry her, and he had given his
Consent to it.

I WAS confounded, then begged his Pardon; so he bad me go Home and be
reconciled to my Brother, or that he would talk other Language to me the next
time he saw me; and now, dear Jack, says the Esquire, I am come to ask your
Pardon, not only in Obedience to my Father, but really on my own Account, for I
am convinced I was in the wrong to you very much.

YOU may be sure the Brothers were immediately as good Friends as ever they
were in their Lives. But still Jack was uneasy about this being the real
Appearance of his Father; and his Brother's M^n William's Words run in his Mind
all that Night; for as to this first Meeting, it was so taken up with the
Ecstasies of their Reconciliation, that they had no time for any thing else.

BUT the next Morning the young Gentleman went to see his Brother, to return
his Visit, and talk things over again.

DEAR Brother, says Jack, I am very uneasy about one Part of our Story still; I
am glad from my Soul that you and I are brought to understand one another, and
I hope it shall never be otherwise; but I cannot be thoroughly satisfied about
who it was that was the Peacemaker; if wha^ your Man Will says be true, it
could never be my Father.

NAY, says his Brother, Will told me that you said it was my Father, or the
Devil.

WHY yes I did say so, says Jack, but that was to intimate my Certainty of its
not being my Father; not that I supposed it was the Devil. But, pray, how long
has my Father been in Town?

NAY, says the Esquire, I did not know that he is in Town, but that I saw him I
know well enough.

BUT did not you send Will down to him, says Jack, into the Country? and is it
possible he could come up since that, in so little time?

YES, yes, he might come up, says the Esquire; he often drives it in a Day and
a piece, sometimes in a Day; six Horses go at a great rate, you know.

BUT pray what think you of it yourself? you saw him as well as I. Was it
really my Father? Your Man Will talks that 'twas impossible; besides he says my
Father was very ill, and kept his Bed.

WILL does say he was much out of Order, but he did not say he kept his Bed;
but I confess I never entered into that Dispute in my Thoughts: 'Twas my Father
sure! What else could it be? As you said, Brother, it must be my Father or the
Devil.

NAY, I don't know what to say neither, Brother, says Jack, as to its being the
Devil. I believe the Devil and my Father have no manner of Correspondence.

BESIDES, Brother, says the Esquire, how should the Devil owe you and I so much
Good Will, as to concern himself to reconcile us? I believe he had much rather
have seen us murder one another, as we were in a fair way to have done.

I RATHER believe, says Jack, he had a Hand in making us Quarrel.

AY indeed, so do I, says the Esquire; I think, for my Part, I was mad; and, as
folks commonly say, the Devil was in me, or I should never have been such a
Fool.

WELL, but Brother, says the young Gentleman, how shall we come at the bottom
of this Matter? we both think it was my Father, and we both think it can hardly
be him neither, and we both think it was not the Devil.

AY, and, says the Esquire, if it should not be my Father nor the Devil
neither, what shall we say then?

WHY that, indeed, makes me so impatient to have it out: now I Will tell you one
thing which allarms me a little too; I have sent to Mr. -- 's where you know my
Father always lodges, and to the Black-Swan-Yard, where you know his Coach
stands, and they all say he is not in Town, and that he is to be in Town about
six Weeks hence.

WHY that is extraordinary too, I confess, says the Esquire; I never thought of
it, because I never entertained any Jealousy of this kind, it was quite out of
my Head; but, upon my Word, you make me very uneasy about it now.

FOR my part, says his younger Brother, I would give any thing to come to a
Certainty about it, I could almost take my Horse, and go down on purpose.

I WILL go with you, with all my Heart, says the Esquire.

TO bring the Matter to a conclusion, the two Brothers agreed, and they went
both away to see their Father. The very Day they took Horse to go down, but
some Hours after they were gone, a Letter came in to the elder Brother's House
from their Father; the Contents of which I shall take Notice of presently.

AND first I am to observe that when they came to their Father they found him
at home, and very ill, nor had he been from home; and was greatly concerned for
the Safety of his Sons, upon the following Occasion.

THE Night before he wrote the Letter, spoken of above, he was surpised in his
Sleep with a Dream, or rather a Vision, that his two Sons had fallen out about
a Mistress; that they had Quarreled to that degree, that they had challenged
one another, and were gone out into the Fields to fight; but that some body had
given him Notice of it, and that he had got up in the Morning by four a Clock
to meet and prevent them.

UPON this Dream he awaked in great Disorder and Terror; however finding it but
a Dream he had composed his Mind, and gotten to sleep again: but that he
dreamed it again in so lively a manner, that he was forced to call up his Man
that waited on him to sit up the rest of the Night with him; and he was
frighted, and much out of order with the Fright.

That, in Consequence of this Dream, he had sent a Servant up Express, with
Orders to ride Night and Da^, to enquire how his Sons did, and to bring him
word if there had been any such breach among them; and earnestly to press them,
if such a breach had been, that they would consent to let him mediate between
them, that it might go no farther 'till he could come up, that so he might put
an end to their Resentments, and make Peac^ among them, according to his
Dreams: and this was the Letter, mentioned above, that came to Hand in a few
Hours after they were set out.

IT cannot be doubted but it was very confounding to his Sons to hear the
Account their Father gave them of his Dream, or Vision rather, about their
Quarrel; and it was equally amazing to see it confirmed by all the true
Particulars; also that the old Gentleman, to be sure, had been so far from
being at London, that he had scarce been a whole Day off from his Bed.

THEY conferred together seriously upon the private Question, (viz.) whether
they should tell their Father the Story of their Quarrel, but especially of
their seeing him severally, and his really parting them, or preventing their
fighting.

UPON the whole, they concluded not to let their Father know of his Likeness
(as they called it) appearing to them, lest it might disquiet him too much; and
for the rest, as they were perfectly reconciled again, they said there was no
manner of Occasion to mention it at all; so they only paid their Compliment as
a Visit of Duty, to see how he did, and to ask his Blessing; Will having told
them that he was out of Order: and as for his Letter, they could happily tell
him they had not seen it.

ACCORDING to this Resolution they performed the Ceremony of Visiting their
Father, and made haste away again, that they might converse the more freely
about this strange Conjunction of Circumstances, which had in it so many things
surprising to their Thoughts, and even to their Understandings; for they knew
not what to make of it, nor, indeed, could they resolve it into any thing but
this, which is to my purpose exactly, and which is the reason of my mentioning
the whole Story, namely, that here was a double Apparition within the compass
of our proposed System.

1. HERE was the Apparition of the living Person of their Father, without his
participation in the Action; his Face, Voice, and, perhaps, Habit was assumed,
and yet he himself knew nothing of the Matter, was not in the least concerned
in it, or acquainted with it.

2. HERE was an Apparition to the Father in Dream; 'twas a plain Vision, the
thing that was true in Fact was revealed to him in his Sleep, which is the very
Subject I am now speaking of. The Sons were represented, or appeared to him,
Quarrelling, and in a state of Feud, as they really were, and yet neither of
them knew any thing of the Matter.

FROM hence (supposing the Reality of the Story) it necessarily follows that a
Spirit or invisible Being, let it be called what we please, may take upon it
the Shape, Face, Voice of any living Person, whom it pleases to represent,
without the Knowledge, Consent, or Concurrence of the Person so represented, in
any manner whatsoever.

AND from hence also it is evident that Dreams are sometimes to be called, and
really are, Apparitions, as much as those other visible Apparitions which are
seen when we are (as we call it) broad awake; that Apparition is to the Eyes of
the Soul, and as it is so, it may be seen as well sleeping as waking, for the
Imagination sleeps not: the Soul ceases indeed to act organically, but it
ceases not to act as a Soul, and in a spirituous Manner, and consequently can
act upon spirituous Objects; and that as well in Sleep as at any other time.

I COULD load this Account with Story, for Example is frequent in these Cases,
and I am forced to leave out some which are very good, and would be
entertaining, because they are too ^edious for the Work; besides, I am not
pretending to write a Collection of old Stories, if I did I should call it a
History of all the Chimney-Corners in the three Kingdoms. However, I must not
leave you barren of Examples neither in Cas^^ so pregnant; take one more which
my Author assures me was never in Print.

A CERTAIN Lady of good Figure and some Quality, had a terrible Quarrel with
her Husband upon the great and critical Points of Virtue and Honor; he was a
Gentleman of public Business, and passed for a Man of Sense; but had that
particular Infirmity, which with me will always pass for a deficiency in the
Understanding; I mean to be jealous of his Wife, and yet to be able to fix
nothing upon her, no not so much as a just blot upon her Conversation.

IT IS very hard for a Man to be Fool enough to disquiet himself on such an
Account, and not be Knave enough to make it uneasy to his Wife too; I say
Knave, because where there is no just cause of Reproach, he cannot be an honest
Man that loads his Wife with the Scandal of it.

HE had thought fit to use her very ill upon this Subject many times, with no
manner of Foundation, nay, indeed, not so much as a pretense for it, except
what was to be fetched from his own bewildred Imagination; and he gave himself
up so much to his Jealousy, without grounds, that his Wife was obliged to lay
her Condition before some of her Relations, who took upon them to talk with him
about it.

THIS talking with him had a worse Effect than was expected, for the Man was so
far from being influenced by the friendly Expostulations of his Wife's Kindred,
that he grew rude and abusive to them; and if any one of them spoke a little
warmer than ordinary in her favor, he turned it presently upon that Person, as
if he had been the Man, and had been naught with her; and yet when one of them
challenged him to give any one Instance of his Wife's Conduct, or of any
Person's associating with her in a manner as should give an honest Man the
least grounds of suspicion, he could not assign the least Reason; but as is
most true in ordinary, that those who are the most Jealous have oftentimes the
least Cause for it, so it was here; yet notwithstanding all the Expostulations
that were, or could be used with him, the coolest Reasonings and most friendly
Persuasions, he continued to use his Wife so ill, that her Friends began to
think it necessary to part them.

THE Lady, a Woman of Piety as well as Virtue, though grieved heartily with the
ill Usage, and particularly as it reproached her Virtue, yet was loath to
unhinge her Family and separate from her Husband, having also two Children
which she could not part with, her Affection not suffering her to leave them to
want the Care and Conduct of a Mother; so she chose rather to bear his daily
ill Usage of her, than to leave her Family.

BUT he carried the Brutish Part so far at length, that not content to use her
in the most scandalous manner with his Tongue, he fell upon her with his Hands,
and two or three times, in his Rage, abused her very much: she concealed this
part (for his sake) as much as she could, and endeavored to prevent its being
known.

BUT he took care to expose himself in it upon many Occasions, and particularly
by affronting a Gentleman of his own Acquaintance, and some Relation to him
too: the Case was thus; He fell to charging his Wife with dishonesty in his
ordinary Discourse, and before Strangers; upon which the Gentleman said, Fie,
Cousin, really I believe you wrong her, at least you should be very sure you
were in the right before you talked so; your Lady has a general Character of an
honest, modest and virtuous Woman; and I am told she is a very pious and
religious Person also.

AT this he flew out in a Passion, and said, D -- her, he was satisfied she was
a Whore.

BUT, Cousin, says the Gentleman, then I suppose you know the Person too, and
could prove the Fact!

HE believed he did, he said.

NAY, you ought to be very sure of it, Cousin, says he, before you charge your
Wife so positively.

HE answered, without any manner of Respect to his Cousin, I believe you are
the Man; and adds, I take it for granted.

WHAT Suspicion, says the Gentleman, did I ever give you of it? I was never in
your Wife's Company in my Life, but when you were present.

IT IS no matter for that, says he, if you were not guilty, why should you
concern yourself to vindicate her?

THE Gentleman, though greatly provoked, kept his Temper still, and smiled at
him; Cousin, says he, I doubt you have no better Argument to prove your Wife's
Guilt than you have mine, and if you have not, she is as inno^^nt as a sucking
Child.

HIS Smiling provoked him, and he gave the Gentleman the Lie, and added some
very scurrilous Language to it, such as might be expected from a Madman, a Man
out of himself; not by Lunacy, as a Dist^mper, but by that worse Frenzy, called
groundless Jealousy.

AS giving the Lie is the last Injury one Man can do to another with his
Tongue, it so provoked his Cousin, that scorning to draw his Sword upon him, he
corrected him heartily for it with his Cane, as he deserved; and he again, like
a true Coward, (when they were go^^) revenged himself upon hi^ Wife; for he
abused her again in a brutish and barbarous Manner: nor did it pacify him at
all that he vented his Rage thus upon his Wife at that time; but he continued
it upon every Occasion of his being harrass'd with his own Jealousy: and
whenever he abused his Wife after that time, he upbraided her with this
Gentleman, and with her still keeping him Company; though, as it appeared
afterward, the Gentleman was not in England, nor had been for several Months.

IT happened one time in particular, that coming home, not at all in Drink, but
very much out of Humor, and, as it seemed, provoked, though it could not be so
much as guessed at, what the Reason was, he picked a Quarrel with his Wife, and
without any other Provocation than what was to be found in his own want of
Temper, fell foul of her in a most unmerciful manner; and had not Help been
fetched in 'twas feared he would have murdered her. In a Word, Neighbors
coming in to her rescue, saved her from farther Mischief; yet before them all
he bad her go out of the House, and forbid her coming any more within his Doors.

THE Lady could not now avoid what she had so long been persuaded to before; so
taking some Clothes, and her own Jewels, which she brought to him, she withdrew
the same Evening to her own Brother's House, taking sufficient Witness of the
occasion of it.

BUT to bring this Story nearer to the Case in Hand: The Gentleman whom he had
thus ill used, had (on some occasions of his own) been obliged about five
Months before this last Broil to go over to Germany; and as he went from
England by Sea and landed at H^mburgh, he traveled from Hamburgh up to
Magdeburgh, and from thence to Leipsick in Saxony.

AS he was sitting alone in a Summer House as we call it, or Garden-House, as
they more properly call it there, belonging to a Burgher of Leipsick, and
reading a Book to divert himself, being in the heat of the Day, and a little
after Dinner; he dropped asleep, and dreamed that a Lady was come from England to
speak with him, and was in the House waiting for him.

UPON this Dream, and being not very sound asleep, only leaning his Head on his
Hand as he was reading, he waked; and as soon as he waked he started up, and
intended to go into the House to see who it should be, when immediately he sees
a Lady in an English dress coming up the Garden toward the Summer House.

HE did not know her at first; but when she came nearer she spoke to him; he
calling her by her Name, would have saluted her; but she seemed to decline it,
and stepping back, said, You and I, Sir, have been sufficiently abused upon
that Head already; and I come to you for Justice. I am ill used, and in danger
of being murdered every Day by my cruel Husband on your Account, and am at
last turned out of Doors.

ALAS! says he, Madam, he is a Brutish Man, and I am very sorry; but what can I
do for you?

YOU know my Innocence, says she, as far as relates to yourself; do me justice,
I ask no more: and that moment she disappeared.

HE was extremely surpised, as he might well be indeed; and the more, because
he had not the least notion of its being an Apparition, no more had the
Burgher's Servant who let her in at the Door, and waited on her up the Garden
to the Summer House.

HE went immediately back into the House, and inquired who let the Lady into
the House; and the Servant that had ushered her up the Walk in the Garden told
him he did; and also that he had that Minute let her out again; but looking out
into the Street, nothing of her could be seen again, or did he ever see or hear
any more of her in that manner.

WHILE this passed, the Lady lived a very melancholy retired Life in her
Brother's Family, seeing no Company, and spending her time in a most
uncomfortable Solitude; especially grieved for the Reproach so causelessly
raised upon her Character, and having nothing to comfort her but the knowledge
of her own Innocence; that which we call the Comfort of a good Conscience:
which, as the World goes now, I must be cautious how I lay too much stress
upon, or moralize too much upon, lest I should be called Religious and Grave,
which is as much as to say Mad.

THIS Separation continued some time; all endeavors to bring it to a
Reconciliation had been tried, but proved ineffectual; the Husband continuing
insolently abusive to his Wife; and his Wife (Things being carried to such a
height) insisting upon a Reparation of the Injury offered to her Reputation, by
having either the Facts proved, or a due Cause of Suspicion assigned. Between
both, a Reconciliation seemed impracticable, and Friends on both sides having
done their utmost, began to give it over.

BUT, to the agreeable surprise of all that wished well to the Family, the
Husband comes one Morning to his Wife's Brother all alone, and asked to speak
with his Wife.

HER Brother was a litttle doubtful at first what Answer to give him; and
particularly was afraid to bring his Sister forth to him, not knowing what the
Devil and an exasperated Temper might prompt him to; and he perceiving it,
said, with a quite differing Tone from what he used to talk with, You need not
be afraid, Brother, to let me see my Wife, though indeed I have given you all
Cause enough to be uneasy; but I assure you I will soon satisfy you that I do
not come to do her any harm, but just the contrary: I come to put an end to all
this wicked Breach, and that in a manner as shall be to your Satisfaction, and
hers too; and I am very willing you shall be present when I speak to her, for I
desire you should hear what I have to say.

HE spoke it with such an apparent Alteration in his Temper, that it was easy
to see that he was quite another Man, and that there was no hazard in letting
him see her: so he went and acquainted his Wife with what had passed; who though
she was a little afraid at first, yet upon her Brother's persuasions came down,
and her Brother led her into the Room to him, in his Hand.

AS soon as he saw his Wife, he run to her, and took her in his Arms and kissed
her, holding her fast; but was not able to speak a word for some time. At last
getting a little vent of his Passion, My Dear, says he, I have wronged and
abused you; and I come to acknowledge it in as public a manner as possible I
can. I come to ask you Pardon for it, and am ready to declare my full
satisfaction of your Innocence, in as open a manner as ever the Devil and my
own ungoverned Passion inflamed me against you. Make your own Demands what
Satisfaction I shall make you, and what Security I shall give you, that you
shall have no more such Treatment, I am ready to comply with them; and go home
with me, if you dare trust me. The Moment I break my Promise to you in the
least Circumstance, you shall freely remove again without the least hindrance,
or the least Contradiction from me: in the mean time depend upon it, you shall
never have any occasion of uneasiness given you, and as long as I live I will
acknowledge, when ever you desire it, that I did you wrong, and that you gave
me no just occasion for what has passed.

HE spoke this with so much Affection, and even with Tears in hi^ Eyes, that he
forced Tears not from his Wi^e only, but from her Brother too, and another
Relation of hers that was in the Room with them. In a word, the Reconciliation
was made in a few Minutes; for he not only complied with any thing his Wife or
her Brother desired, but even more than they asked; and when they proposed
that, to prevent Mistakes afterward, he would consent they should put into
Writing what they desired, and what he had said to her, He called for a Pen and
Ink, and drew it out himself in the fullest Terms imaginable, to the same
purpose as has been related, and fuller indeed than they could desire, and set
his Hand to it, desiring the Brother and the other Relation to be Witnesses of
it, and then gave it to his Wife.

UPON this his Wife with a glad Heart went home that very Night along with him,
her Brother and the other Relation being invited to go also, which they did;
where he entertained them very kindly at Supper, which finished the
Reconciliation, and they lived very comfortably together ever after.

BUT now for the Reason and Occasion of all this; and whence this strange
Alteration proceeded: To this purpose, you are to understand that one Evening
this Gentleman being either in his Chamber, or some other Room in his House,
(the Story is not particular in that part) he sees his Cousin, who had differed
with him about his Wife, come into the Room, and says to him, Cousin, I am very
sorry to hear you have continued to use your Wife ill, and at last have turned
her away upon my Account. I come on purpose to admonish you to repent of the
Injury you have done her, for she is Innocent, and you know you have injured
her; as for the Wrong you do me, I am out of your reach: But fetch your Wife
home, and reconcile your self to her, or I shall visit you again much less to
your Satisfaction than I do now.

HE gave him no time for a Reply, but immediately disappeared. It may be easily
guessed what a Consternation he was left in, when he found it was ^n
Apparition. He concluded his Cousin was dead, because he said he was out of his
reach; and he concluded that this was his Ghost, or his disquieted Soul, and he
dreaded the threatening of his Return. He endeavored to wear it off of his
Mind, but it ^onld not do; the Impression to be sure would be ^trengthned by
his own Guilt, and both together ^rought him to himself.

FOR this is to be observed in all such things, viz. That it is not the Fright
or the Surprise that works ^n the Mind, but the Conviction; and therefore ^ho'
this is one of those Relations which I do not ^ake upon me to assert the fact
of from my own ^nowledge, yet supposing it to be true, the Moral ^s the same,
and on that Account I relate it, viz. That there may be an Apparition of a
Person ^iving; and yet the Person living, and so seeming ^o appear, not know
any thing of it, or be any ^ay concerned in it; and so in this Story now told,
^t is implied, that the Lady here was living when ^he appeared to the Gentleman
in Germany, and that ^he Gentleman in Germany was living when he ap^ear'd to
his Cousin in London, whatever manner they ^ppear'd in; and yet it seems that
neither of them ^new any thing of the matter, and doubtless had ^o concern at
all in it.

I HAVE not been able to dive so far into this ^tory, as to say, that they were
ever enquired of ^fterward, whether they were acquainted with the Circumstances
or no; but I am indifferent as to that Point, it is out of Question with me,
that they might not be any way concerned in the thing it self, and yet that it
might be really an Apparition of the Persons, their Faces, Voices, Clothes, and
all the needful Apparatus fit for the Delusion.

THERE are many Instances of like kind with this, and I have a very particular
Relation by me of a Person who in Apparition told a Friend of his, of the Fire
of London, two Months before ^t happened, mentioned the manner of the
Confl^gration, how it would begin in the Heart of the Ci^^, and would burn East
and West, and lay the City level with the Ground; to use the very words.

HE happened not to tell the Place exactly where it was to have been done; if
he had, he might have been afterward brought into Trouble, by the unadvised
relating the Particulars; for his Friend believed he really saw him; and not
that it was an Apparition: But it seems he made a long Religious Excursion upon
the dismal Condition of the Citizens, and how their Pride would be brought low;
how their Glory would be laid in the Dust; and how it was all to be looked upon
as a Blow upon them for their Luxury, and for their public Sins; and so seemed
to preach pretty ^much: And you know if Spirits from the other World were to
preach, some People have such an Aversion to that dull heavy Business, as they
call it, that they would give very little heed to it. I say, the Apparition
seemed to preach pretty much upon the Subject, and so the Friend began to be
weary of the Discour^^, and put him off to something else.

THAT which seems Particular in this Story, and which (had I room here) would
take up some time to Discourse upon at large, is, that the Apparition went off
in Form, not discovering it self so much as to be an Apparition; but came in at
the Do^r, was let in by a Servant in the usual manner, aft^r knocking at the
Door, and was carried into the Parlor among the Family; that it discoursed of
other Matters also; as of the Dutch War, and the bloody Engagement at Sea: I do
not remember exactly, whether it said a bloody Engagement had been, or would
be; but I think it was Engagement that had lately been.

THAT there were several other Transitions in their Discourse, from one Article
of public Business to another; and at last to that of the Fire of London: The
Gentleman who it was discoursed to seemed not to be much concerned at the
Prediction about the Fire, looking upon it as a piece of guesswork, and that
his Friend spoke it as of a thing which he feared, rather than as a thing he
foretold, and pretended to know of: But after the Terrible Conflagration had
happened, and that the City was indeed laid low from the East to the West, as
had been mentioned, then all the Particulars came into his Mind with some
weight, and some unusual reflection; for the Circumstances were too evident to
be slightly thought of.

HOWEVER it passed over in the ordinary way, with a little kind of wonder; and
it was strange that Mr. M -- should be able to talk so; and sure Mr. M -- deals
with the Devil, and the like; whereas all this while Mr. M -- knew nothing of
the Story; and whatever Hand it was, and for whatever kind purposes, no notice
was taken of it, and Mr. M -- had so little knowledge of it himself that his
own House was burnt down in the general disaster, and he had hardly time to
save one quarter part of his Goods.

IT might indeed be formed here as an Objection against this Notion, of good
^pi^^ts from the Insivible World, and their concerni^g them^e^ves in giving
Notices of appro^ching Misc^i^^s, viz. That they do not concern themselves to
give such Notices in Cases of public Calamities, when many thousands not of
Persons only, but even of Families, are concerned, and in danger; and even
where many particular Persons, who at other times have had such warnings from
them, and have been as it were their Particular care, have been left to fall in
the common disaster.

THIS is what I may take notice of again, in its proper place; but at present I
am rather observing to you what is, than the Reason of its being so: The ways
and works of Providence are Sovereign and Superior; the Manner concealed, and
beyond our Understandings and Reason; not always visible to us; and yet its
Proceedings not the le^^ just, or the less to be accounted for in themselves;
nor is it necessary that we should be always able to account for them to our
selves. Heaven has its own Reasons for all its Actings, and it is not for us to
dispute its Sovereignty, any more than to examin^ into the Reason of its
working. The Bishop of Dow^, the Pious and Devout Doctor Jeremy Tailor, in the
Case of an Apparition yet to be spoken of, would needs have the Person it
appeared to ask this Question when it came again, Why he appeared, or how he
come to appear in so small a matter, as that of doing Justice to one single
Child, when so many oppressed Widows and Orphans groaned under the weight of
greater Injuri^s, without any of their Relations concerning themselves in the
least for their Deliverance? and the Man did accordingly ask the Question, as
we shall see in its place; but had no answer given him, as indeed I think he^
ought not to have expected: but of this hereafter.

IT is certain the approach of that Terrible Fire, the like of which was never
known in this part of the World, was not discovered from the In^isible World;
at least but to very few: an evident token that departed Souls knew nothing of
it, or, if they did^ had no Power to come hither, and give notice of it; if
they had, what Numbers of Predictions, Forebodings and Apparitions would there
have been in the City for some Months before!

BUT are we not answered by the Scripture, and might we not reply in the
Language of our Savior speaking of the general Deluge, Matt. xxiv. 38, 39. For
as in the days that were before the flood, they were ^ating and drinking,
marrying, and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the Ark,
and knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the
coming of the Son of Man be?

JUST so likewise was it at the time of the Fire of London: it is said indeed,
with some Remark, that it was not a Wedding Night to many, if to any one Couple
in the City; because the Fire beginning on the Sunday Morning, very few, if
any, are said to be married of a Saturday; but as it was a mighty Custom in
those Days to marry on a Sunday, so there were a great many Weddings appointed
for the next Morning, which were hindered without any forebodings or
foreknowledge; and that which was infinitely worse, many Women in Travel that
very Night, were, as it was reported, forced to be carried out of their
Chambers in the very Article of Childbirth, and some as I have heard were
delivered in the very Passage from one House to another: Others, not thinking
the Fire would follow so fast, having removed but a little way, their extremity
being great, were obliged to be removed again; yet we find no notice of any of
these things given in the lea^t.

THIS indeed is what I s^y we cannot account for, neither is there any need for
us t^ account for them in the Discourse we are upon; for our Question is not,
Why there are no more Notices given than there are, and why they are not
universal to on^ as well as another; as if it were a Grace M^n ought to have an
equal Claim to: But it is a Proposition that such Apparitions there are, and
that therefore there are certain Agents so appointed to appear.

WE have like Accounts to these at the time of the great Massacre at Paris; a
critical Juncture, in which the Rage of Hell seemed to be carried to a terrible
Height, and when innocent Blood lay ready to be spilt in a terrible manner; the
Unguarded Protestants having no Means to avoid the Mischiefs that a^tended
them, and no Strength to resist the Power of the Cutthroat Armies which
surrounded them; so they had no Intimations from the invisible World to assist
their Escape.

BUT what does this amount to, any more than the like Cases may argue in a
thousand Calamities and Disasters which have befallen Mankind before? Nay, it
confirms the grand Truth which I have insisted on; namely, that Souls departed
know not any thing, and can communicate nothing, though unembody'd Spirit may.

FOR could the departed Souls of deceased Relations have known that their
Fathers, or Children, or Brothers, or Relicts, etc. were the next Day to have
been murdered, can we doubt but they would have given them all the N^tice that
it was in their Power to do, and at least have alarmed them so, as to put them
upon their Gua^d, and give them an Oppo^^unity to die like Hero's, as many of
them were? and as they did not do thus, I think, without Injustice, or
Presumption, we may conclude they cannot; they could not then, neither can
others do the like now.

AND yet as to such Notices as the Inhabitants of the invi^^^le World were
allowed to make, I believe they w^^^ not without them at that time, though it was
not thought fit by the Appointment of Heaven to have the wicked Resolution of
Murder and Massacre defeated: as to the Reasons why, which is what we have
nothing to d^ to dispute, that we leave in Silence, as we may well do.

THE Histories of those Times are full of the secret Warnings and Notices then
given by the kind Apparitions of those invisible Agents (whoever they are) in
Dream. The Admiral Coligni had no l^ss than three particular Notices given him
by Dreams, that his Life was in danger, and that he would be murdered if he
stayed in Paris; an Express was sent him from the Count S --, at S^umur, to
make his Escape and flee for his Life before it was too late; nay, it was even
said that the King of Navarr, who was afterward Hen. IV. sent a private
Message to him to be gone, and if he staid one Night longer he would find it
impossible: But, as they said afterward, his Hour was come, and his Fate was
det^rmin'd; and he was de^f to his Friends, for several others who h^d a
J^alousy of his Danger, gave him like War^i^gs, but it was all in vain, he was
deaf and indolent to his own Safety.

SOME others who were more obedient to the heavenly Vision, more touched then
with the Sense of their Danger, as the Count de Montgomery, the Vidame of
Chartres, de Caversac, and others, too many to name; and who had severally, and
some of them jointly, timely Warning of their Danger, mounted their Horses, and
fled the very Night before, and preventing the vigilance of their Pursu^rs,
m^de their Escap^.

I MIGHT here enlarge upon the Probability of this as a Maxim, that though these
Spirits may have leave to give such Notice and such Warnings to some particular
Persons for the saving their Lives, yet we are not to suppose it is placed in
their Power to contravene the Determination of H^aven, and to act contrary to
Appointments of his Providence, especially in things of general Import, such as
public Judgments, which are immediately in the disposing of his Power, and not
to be disappointed or delayed.

BESIDES, as w^ may have Reason to believe that they all act by Commission,
it is also most certain that they cannot go an lnch, no not a Hair's br^adth
beyond that Commission, or step one Foot out of the Way of it, to the right
Hand, or to the left: and thence we are to infer that they do not give farther
or more frequent Notices to us, because they are not p^rmitted; and this is,
besides the rest, adding a greater Reverence to the thing itself; for take off
their superior Commission, and I know not what we should say to them, or of
what real Notice or Value they would be.

I CANNOT but say that there were many Notices given of the Calamity of the
Parisian Massacre, which were enough to have alarmed the Protestants; and the
Chiefs of them were, in some Measure, alarmed; though not sufficient, as it
proved, to drive them out of the Danger; yet so as that they did p^rceive some
Mischief was hatching, but they could not possibly guess at the manner; and
besides if they had, the other Par^y had gotten them so far in their Power that
they could not avoid the Danger, but were taken (as it were) in a Toil; and yet
they did s^^d such Notices of their Danger to their Friends in s^v^ral Places,
as to warn them in time to be upon their Guard; and which Warning did (speaking
^f second Causes) preserve them from the like Mischief; for the Massacre was
intended to be Universal, at least in ^ll the Citi^s in France.

CHAP. XII. Of Apparitions being said to happen just at the time when the
Person so happening to appear is said to be departing; the Fiction of it
confuted.
THERE is a great Clamor, as I might justly call it, raised about Peoples
appearing just at the time of their expiring; and so exactly they will tell us
it, as to time, as if, though a thousand Mile off, the Soul was in Apparition the
same Moment. I see no foundation for any of these Relations, much less for the
Circumstances; and yet the Apparition it self may be really true in Fact: such
a Man appeared to his Wife, such another to his Son, and the like; and they set
down the time, adding, and that very Moment, as near as could be calculated, he
died, perhaps in the East Indies, or at Sea at some vast distance.

A CERTAIN Lady of my Acquaintance going out of her Chamber into a Closet in
the adjoining Room, saw her Husband walking along in the Room before her: She
immediately comes down in a great surprise, tells the Family she had seen her
Husband, and she was sure it was he; though at the same time she knew her Husband
(who was the Commander of a Ship) was at Sea, on a Voyage to or from the Capes
of Virginia.

THE Family takes the Alarm, and tells her, that to be sure her Husband was
dead, and that she should be sure to set down the Day of the Month, and the
Hour of the Da^; and it was ten thousand to one but she should find that he
died that very Moment, or as near as could be found out.

ABOUT two Months after her Husband comes home very well; but had an Accident
befell him in his Voyage, viz. that stepping into the Boat, or out of the Boat,
he fell into the Sea, and was in danger of being lost; and this they Calculated
upon to be as near the time as they could judge, that he appeared to his Wife.
Now if this was his Ghost, or Apparition of his Soul, in the Article of Death,
it seems his Soul was mistaken, and did not know whether it was dismissed or
no; which is a little strange, I must confess: but of that hereafter.

Sir Jo -- O -- was a P^rs^n of Note, and of well known Credit; his Lady and
one of her Sons lived here in London; and being of a gay Disposition, and given
to live h^gh and exp^nsive, it was thought she spent beyond what the Knight
could afford, and that he was sensible of it, and uneasy at it: She had a very
good House in London, and a Country House or Lodgings for the Summer at -- and
kept a great Equipage; the Consequence of things did at last prove, that Sir J
-- 's dislike of it was justly founded: but that is by the by.

IT happened one Day, the L^^y being at her Country Lodgings, a Person well
dress^d, appearing very much like a Gentleman, came to her City House, and
knocking at the D^^r, asked the Maid if there were any Lodgings to be let
there, and if her Lady was at home; the Maid answered No, there were no
Lodgings to Le^t there; and speaking as if it was with some ^^sen^ment,
Lodgings! says she, no, I think not! my Lady does not use to Let Lodgings.
Well but Sweet ^eart, says he, don't be displeased, your Lady h^s ha^ some
thoughts of ^^aying at her Summer Lodgings all the Winter, and so would dispose
of some Apartments here for the Parliament Season; and I am directed by her
self to look upon the Rooms, and give my Answer; let me but just see them,
Child, I shall do you no harm: so he stepped in, and as it were pushed by her,
going into the first Parlour, and sat down in an easy Chair, his Servant
staying at the Door; and as the Maid did not apprehend any Mischief, she went
in after him; for he did not look like one that came with an ill Design, or to
rob the House; but looked like a Gentleman that could have nothing of such a
kind in his View; so I say she went in after him.

WHEN she came in he rose up, and looking about the Room, he found fault with
every thing, the Furniture, and the manner of it, nothing pleased him; not as
if not good enough for him, but that all was too good, and too rich, far above
her Quality that owned it; That the Lady did not know what she did, that it was
an Expense she could not carry on, and her Estate would not support it; but
that such a way of living would bring all the Family to Rui^ and Beggary, and
the like.

BY and by she carried him into another Parlour, and there he did just the
same; he told her he admired what her Lady meant; that she lived in a Figure
which Sir John's Estate could never maintain, and she would but ruin him, and
bring him into Debt, and so he would be undone by her Extravagance.

UPON this the Maid begun to take him short a little, and told him, this was
all out of the way of what he came about; if the Lodgings were too good for
him, that was his Business indeed, but else he had nothing to do with her Lady,
and how she pleased to furnish her House: That her Master was a Gentleman of a
great Estate, and had large Plantations in Jamaica; that he constantly supplied
her Lady with Money, sufficient ^or her Support, and for all her Expenses; and
she wondered he should trouble h^mself with that, which she was sure was none
of his Business: in short, the Girl huffed him, and asked him what it was to
him, who was a Stranger, how her Lady lived.

HOWEVER he turns to the Maid, and sitting down again, calmly entered into some
Discourse with her about her Lady, and her way of Living, and told so many of
the Secrets of the Family to her, that she began to use him better, and to
perceive that he knew more of the ^amily than she thought he had, or indeed
than she did her self; at last the Wench began to be un^^si^, and to question
in her Thought, whether it was not her Master himself, come over Incognito, and
only that he had not yet discovered himself.

SHE tried several times to learn who he was, his Quality, his Country, his
Name, and how she might send to him; but he put it off, only told her he would
go to -- where her Lady lodged, and wait upon her Lady himself; and so treating
the Servant very civily, and thanking her for showing him the House, he went
away in Form with his Servant following him, so that he did not vanish as an
Apparition at all.

YET the poor Wench was very uneasy, she began to think it could not be an
ordinary Creature, because he gave such strange and particular Accounts of
things done in the Family; as where several things were deposited that belonged
to the Family, with several Circumstances belonging to her Mistress, to her
little Son, and to his Father in the West Indies; and, in short, said some
things, which, as she said, none but the Devil could tell of: which, by the
way, was talking as ignorant People talk of such things; namely, that if any
thing be said, or done, out o^ the ordinary Way, and more than is common for
Men to talk, or do, they immediately say it must be the Devil.

IT must be confessed, it shows a Difference between the Present and the Past
Ages: In former Times, if a Man did extraordinary Things, he was looked upon as
inspired from Heaven; or if great miraculous Things were wrought, it was said
immediately to be from Heaven. Come see a Man that h^s told me all that ever I
did, says the Woman of Samaria, John iv. 29. and it follows, is not this the
Christ? she did not say presently this must be the Devil. Never Man spoke like
this Man! say the Messengers sent to apprehend Jesus Christ, and away they came
without him, struck with awful Apprehensions, John vii. 49. not concluding
presently that it was the Devil. No Man could do these Miracles that thou
do, except God be with him, John iii. 2. he does not say, no Man could do
such Miracles as these, but it must be the Devil. On the contrary, his
Conclusion is, We know by these Mirac^es, that thou art a Teacher sent from
God. But now, if any thing be done extraordinary, or said surprizingly, it must
be the Devil; as if God had ceased to work, and all Extraordinaries were
committed to the Devil.

THUS the Pertuis Rostan, which is a wonderful Passage cut through a Mountain
near Briancon, on the Frontiers of Dauphine, called one of the five Wonders of
Dauphine, is said to be the Work of the Devil; only because the People have no
History recording the Time or Manner of its making, or by who; and because they
think it past the Power of Men's Hands: and the like of many Places, and Things
in England. But this is a Digression.

THE Poor Wench I am speaking of was surpised very much at this Gentleman, and
more after he was gone, than before; for he did not give her time before, to
reflect upon the Particulars he mentioned to her, but following one thing with
another, he found her enough to do to take in the heads of Things in the gross.

BUT when he was gone, and she came to reflect, and lay things together, she
began to consider, Who must this be? How could he know such and such things?
How could he tell whose Picture that was? Where my Mistress had such a Suit of
Curtains, and such a Cabin^t? Who must he be, to tell me how long my Master has
been at Jamaica, how much his Estate is there, and how much Money he has sent
my Lady o^^r, i^ so and so long time? This must be the Devil in my Master's
Clothes, something must be in it, I Will go to my Lady, and let her know it all;
and wi^h this the Maid gets a Woman, that used to be trusted in such Cases, to
look after the House, and away she goes to -- to her Mistress, without so much
as staying to dress her.

INDEED I think it is a part of the Story, that the Gentleman desired she would
acquaint her Mistress with it; that such a Person had been there; and gave her
some particular Tokens, by which he said her Mistress would understand who he
was; and that she should tell her what he said, that her Income would not
support the Expenses she lived at, but that it would bring her to Ruin, and she
would be undone; but this Part I do not positively remember; but that he told
the Maid it would be so, that I am particular in.

HOWEVER, the poor Girl, the more she ruminated upon the thing, the more she
was frighted, and di^order'd about it; and away she went, as I have said, ^o
give her Lady an Account of it: and she was the more eager to go also, because
she under^tood him, that he int^nded to wait upon her himself, to talk about
the Lodgings; and so she would prepare her Lady to receive him, and to consider
what kind of a Man it must be, that she might not be frighted at him: But he
had been too quick for the Maid.

WHEN she came to -- she found her Mistress thrown down upon the Bed very ill,
and so ill, that at first they told her she could not speak with her. Don't
tell me, says Mary, (that is the L^ndon Maid) I must speak with her, and will
speak with her, for I have extraordinary Business with her. What extraordinary
Business can you have? says the Lady's Woman, taunting at her; if your Business
was from the Devil, you cannot speak with my Lady just now, for she is very ill,
and laid down upon the Bed.

FROM the Devil! says Mary. I don't know but it may, and I believe it is
indeed, and I must speak with my Lady immediately.

NAY, says the Woman, here has been one Messenger too many from the Devil
already, I think; sure you don't come of his Errand too, do ye?

I DON'T know whose Errand I come of, but I am frighted out of my Wits; let me
speak with my Lady presently, or I shall die before I deliver my Message.

DIE! says the Woman: I wish my Lady don't die before she can ^ear it; pr'ythee
Mary, if it be any thing to fright her, don't t^ll it her just now, for she is
almost frighted to Death already.

WHY, says Mary, has my Lady seen any things

AY, ay: Seen! says the Woman, she has seen and heard too; here has b^^n a Man
here, has brought her some dreadful Tidings, I don't know what it is.

THEY talked this so loud, or were so near, that the Lady heard something of
it, and immediately she rung a Bell for her Woman.

WHEN the Woman went in, Who is that below, says she, talking so earnestly? is
any body come in from London?

YES, Madam, says her Woman, here is Mary come to speak with your Ladyship.

MARY come, says she, with a Surprise, what is the Matter! what, has she seen
any thing too? mercy on me, what is the Matter! what does she say?

SHE does not say much, Madam, says the Woman, but she wants mightily to speak
with your Ladyship, and is in a great Hurry.

WHAT, says the Lady, is she frighted?

I BELIEVE she is, says the Woman, but she will not tell any thing but to your
self.

O, I shall die! says the Lady; call her up.

PRAY Madam, says her Woman, don't call her up 'till you^ Ladyship has
recovered your self a little from your other Disorders; she will tell you some
wild Tale or other of her own Imagination, that will raise the Vapors, and do
you a Mischief.

O, says the Lady, let me hear it, let it be what it will; if it be from the
Devil, it cannot be worse than it is; call her up, I must speak with her.

ACCORDINGLY Mary came up, and the Woman was ordered to withdraw.

AS soon as the Door was shut, her Lady burst out into Tears again, for she had
been crying vehemently before. O Mary, says she, I have had a dreadful Visit
this Afternoon, here has been your Master.

MY Master! Why, Madam, that is impossible.

NAY, it has been your Master to be sure, or the Devil in his Likeness.

IN a word, it is certain it was her Hu^band in Apparition, or an Apparition of
her Husband, and he talked very warmly and closely to her, and told her his
Estate would not support her expensive way of Living, and that she would bring
her self to Misery and Poverty; and a great deal more to the same Purpose, as
he had said to Mary.

MARY immediately asked her Ladyship, what manner he appeared in; and by the
Description that her Mistress gave, it was exactly the same Figure that came to
her, and desired to see the Lodgings; so Mary gave her Lady a particular
Relation of what happened to her also, and of the Message she was charged to
deliver.

WHAT followed upon this Alarm, and how the Lady was reduced, and obliged to
sell her fine Furniture and Equipage, and came to very low Circumstances, though
it was a part of the Story, is not so much to my Purpose in the Relation. But
what is remarkable to the Case in hand is, that they allege, that just at this
Juncture Sir J -- O -- ne, the Lady's Husband, died in the West Indies: I
suppose by his Death her Supplies were immediately stopped, and that was the
Occasion of her being reduced so suddenly.

NOW the Apparition, and its appearing in the Shape or Figure of the Husband,
his warning her of her approaching Circumstances, and moving her to abate her
expensive way of Living, and the like, all this is agreeable to the Opinion I
have already given, that good Spirits may be allowed to assume humane Shape,
and the Shape of any particular Person, whether the Person be dead or living;
and may appear to us, to caution us in our wrong Measures, to warn us against
impending Mischiefs, and to direct us in Difficulties. And how merciful is it
to Mankind, that there are such kind Monitors at hand, at any time, for our
good!

BUT that this must be just in the Article of Death, just when the Person was
dying, and the Soul departing; as if the Soul could stay in its Passage,
between Life, and the eternal State, to call at this, or that Place, and
deliver a Message: For Example; if it was to be carried by the Angels into
Abrabam's Bosom, you must suppose those Angels would go about with it from
Jamaica to London, to give it leave to speak with his Wife, before its
Translation, before those swift Messengers performed their Task; nay that he
must stop at the London House, assume a Shape for that Purpose, talk about the
most frivolous things with Mary the Servant Maid, and then go with another
formal Errand to -- to his Wife, all this in his Journey; and having dispatched
these more weighty Affairs, then go on for Heaven afterward.

THIS, I say, has to me no Consistency in it, no Coherence, it does not hang
together in my Opinion at all, nor can I make any common Sense of it; no, not
if I was to come to the old poetic Fictions of Charon and his Ferry-Boat; even
the old Ferry-Man would not have stepped out of his Way, upon any such Business.

WHAT might be done by the Agency of those Spirits, appointed by the Great Lord
of all Spirit, to attend for the good of his Creatures, I have not the least
Objection against; but that the Soul of the Deceased, or Departed, can come of
this Errand it self, that I deny, and must insist upon it, that there is
neither Reason or Religion in it, it is founded wholly in the Imagination; and
though the Imagination may not in this Case form the Apparition, yet it is evident
the Imagina^ion only appropriates it to the Person, that is, to the Soul of the
Person, who has really ^o Share in the Operation.

UPON this Foundation likewise stands the old Heathen Notion, taken from the
C^^e of Achilles and his Friend Patr^^lus, that the Soul of the Deceased cannot
be at Rest, 'till he h^s come and given Notice of such and such things; that
Justice be done to such and such injured Persons; and Money, so and so
appropriated, be regularly disposed, and the Will of the Deceased punctually
performed: These I take not to be imaginary but fictitious, and made or
supplied out of the Invention of the Relator, in order to dish up the Story.

AND this makes the Story of the Duke of Buckingham's Father, of which mention
has been made already, be liable to so many Exceptions: That his Father could
not rest, or his Soul could not be at rest, because of the wicked Life his Son
George lived at Court; That part must certainly be added by some of the very
very many Relators, or who have called themselves Relators of that Story; and
my Lord Clarendon, who seems to have been the most exact and judicious in the
putting the whole Story together, has none of that Passage in his Account of
it, as we shall see presently.

UPON what Religious Foundation can we suggest, that the Sins of the Children
should disquiet the Fathers in their Graves, or that the Souls departed can
receive any Impression from the Behavior of those in Life, subsequent to any
Action those Souls departed have been concerned in?

THAT they may be affected in a Future State with the Wickedness and Offenses
committed in their past Life, that I will not doubt; though even not that in such
a manner, as to send them back hither upon any Errand about it; for all is
irretrievable; as there is no Repentance, so no Reparation, there is neither
Work nor Invention in the Grave, whither we are all going. The Soul may be in a
State of Self-Reflection and Reproach; but not in a State of Reaction, no
recovering for our selves, nor concern for others; it is all out of the
Question, and all the Notices from the other side of the Curtain come from
other Hands, whose Name soever they may speak in, or whose Shape soever they
may assume.

I AM forced, how reluctant soever, to talk Scripture to my Readers, upon this
nice part of the Subject; whether they will lay any weight upon it or no, be
that to themselves.

IN INSIST upon it, that the Souls of the dead can make no Visits hither when
once they are removed; that when they are unembodied, disrobed of Flesh and
Blood, they have no more concern with or about us; so as either to disturb
their Rest or ours; and this is plain to me, not only from the Nature of the
thing, from Reason and Observation; but from the Scripture. Eccl. ix. 5. For
the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither
have they any more a Reward, for the memory of them is fotgotten. This latter
part relates to their having any Reward or Concern in things here of this Life,
no more Reward or Benefit or Share of things here: But look into the next
words, ver. 6. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is
done under the Sun.

WHAT can be plainer than this, if Scripture be of any moment among us? if not,
I can say nothing to that. But I say, what can be plainer, and what do those
People mean who tell us a Ghost or Spirit appeared, and said it could not be at
Rest 'till it had come to do so and so, 'till it had discovered such and such
things, and 'till it had seen it well performed?

IF my Vote in this Case may be of any Value, or I may offer any thing by way
of Direction to weaker Heads; let them make this one thing a Character or Mark
to know such things by, or to judge of them, viz. That when they meet with any
Story told in such a manner, they should conclude it a fiction, a cheat; that
it is only a Story made by the Invention of Story-Makers, a Delusion, and that
no Spirit or Apparition really coming upon any Message from the Invisible
World, ever talks after that manner; or that if they do it is a Cheat of the
Devil to carry on some Delusion, and to make some Lie appear plausible; for
that there can be no reality in it, that is asserted as above, The dead know not
any thing, not any thing HERE; but their Love, and their Hatred, and their Envy
is perished.

WE have another Story to offer in this case, which has been mentioned, as if
it were the Act and Deed of the Person departed; and in whose Name it was said
to be done, and who, as we may say, was personated in it. I shall relate the
Story impartially as I received it, and let all the Advantage that can be taken
of it be made, I believe it will not amount to any rational Conclusion, in
Favor of this Notion, that the Soul of the Person deceased is any way
concerned in it, or in any part of it.

THIS is the famous Story of the Apparition of one James Haddock in Ireland,
which is pu^lish'd many several ways, and that by several Authors; and some of
them intimating that it was really the departed Soul of James Haddock, who
could not be at Res^, as some of the Writers of the Story would insinuate,
because his little Son by his Wife Eleanor Welsh was wronged in a Lease le^t by
him to the Child; but kept from him by her second Husband.

THE abridg'd Story is this. In the Year 1662, an Apparition meets one Francis
Taverner on the Highway; the Man having Courage to speak to it, asks it what he
is? and the Apparition tells him he is James Haddock, and gives him several
Tokens to remember him by, which Taverner also calling to mind owns them; and
then boldly demands of the Apparition what business he had with him; the
Apparition did not tell his Business that Night; but would have had Taverner
rode back his way with him, and he would tell him his Business, which Taverner
refused, as well he might; and that part indeed seems the only improbable part
of the Story.

HOWEVER the next Night the Apparition comes to him again, and then tells him
the Business, which was to desire him to go to his Wife, whose Maiden Name was
Eleanor Welsh; but was then married again to one Davis, which Davis withheld
the Lease from the Orphan, Haddock's Son, and tell her she should cause Justice
to be done to the Child.

TAVERNER neglected to perform this Errand, and was so continually followed by
the Apparition, that it was exceeding terrible to him; and at last it
threatened to tear him in Pieces, if he did not go of his Errand.

UPON this he goes and delivers the Message to the Woman, who it seems took but
small Notice of it; and then the Apparition came again, and told him he must go
to his Executor, and do the same Errand; which he was it seems afraid to do,
for fear of Davis; but the Apparition threatened Davis if he should attempt to
do him (Taverner) any Injury.

N. B. Here I am to Note, that this Story made so much Noise in the Country,
and the Particulars appeared to be so faithfully related by Taverner, that
abundance of Persons of Note came to him to have the Relation from his own
Mouth; and among the rest the Lord Bishop of Down and Connor, who I name in
Reverence, not to his Dignity only, or so much, as in Reverence of his known
Piety and Seriousness in Religion: Being the famed Doctor Jeremy Tailor, Author
of a known Book called Rules of Holy Living and Dying.

THIS Reverend Father sent for the said Francis Taverner, to examine him about
this strange scene of Providence, so the Bishop called it; and he did examine
him strictly about it, and the Account says, his Lordship was fully satisfied,
that the Apparition was true and real; that is to say, that it was true that
there was really such an Apparition.

NOW all this is within the Bounds of what I have laid down, viz. That there
are really Apparitions, and these Apparitions do personate such and such Bodies
or Shapes, whose Names they take upon them, and whose Persons they represent.

BUT for the rest, I think all the Notions that the People then entertained of
it, and even the Bishop among the rest, must be very erroneous and mistaken.
For,

1. THE Bishop entertained the Story, as if this Apparition was really the Soul
of the departed James Haddock, as appeared by a second Examination of Taverner
by his Lordship; for the Lady Conway, and other Persons of Quality, hearing the
Bishop had sent for Taverner to examine him, went all away to be present at the
Examination: And the Bishop being gone to a Town called Hillsbro' three Miles
off, the Company went all thither, and Taverner was sent for to them, and there
examined of all the Particulars again, and answered again to the Satisfaction
of all the Company.

BUT here (and for this reason I relate this part) his Lordship, after asking
many more Questions, concluded by advising Taverner to ask the Apparition when
it came again, Whence are you, are you a good or an evil Spirit? by which is
supposed his Lordship understood, Are you in a good or bad State; for his next
Question was, Where is your Abode? what Station do you hold? how are you
regimented in the other World? and what is the Reason that you appear for the
Relief of your Son in so small a Matter, when so many Widows and Orphans are
oppressed in the World, being defrauded of greater Matters, and none from
thence of their Relations appear to right them?

AND the very same Night Taverner meeting the Apparition again, who, it seems,
was fully satisfied with what he had done in delivering the Message to the
Executor; at this Appearing Taverner asked him the Questions above, but it gave
him no Answer; and indeed it could not be expected that Curiosity should be
answered.

FOR, as I said above, it is evident by the Questions, the Bishop, in all these
Examinations, fell in with the vulgar Error of the Time about such Apparitions,
namely, that it was the Soul of James Haddock; and well indeed might he ask how
he came to Appear, when others in Cases of greater Moment did not.

BUT he should have asked, How is it possible you that are dead should be
acquainted with these Circumstances, when the Word of God says expressly the
Dead know not any thing, and that all their Love and Hatred is perished? Had he
asked him, that, perhaps he might have told him that he was not the Soul of
James Haddock, but a good Spirit sent from the invisible World by the especial
direction of Heaven, to right a poor, ruined, oppressed Orphan, abandoned to
Injury by its own unnatural Mother. But to talk of the Soul of James Haddock,
and what Station it held in the other World, the Apparition might well go away,
and give no Answer to it.

NOR in any of this Discourse did the Apparition pretend it was not at Rest, or
could not be at Rest 'till Justice was done to the Child, or 'till the Message
was delivered: the Apparition was too just to itself to say so: and on the
other Hand, it is to me one of the most convincing Proofs, that it was really an
Apparition or Appearance of a Spirit.

NOW, as in other Cases, what Spirit it was may be worth taking Notice of; here
is not the least room to suggest that it was the Devil, or an evil Spirit; and
therefore the Bishop was wrong in that too, to ask if it was a good or evil
Spirit; for how should his Wisdom judge, who was himself a good Man, that an
evil Spirit should come of a good Errand, to right an injured Orphan, an
oppressed Fatherless Child? the Devil, or any evil Spirit, could hardly be
supposed to move about such Business.

IT is to be observed here, and should have been added to the Story, that the
said Davis and his Wife, though it seems much against his Will, did give up the
Lease to the Child, the Son of that James Haddock; with this dismal
Circumstance, attending it, viz. That about five Years after, and when the
Bishop was dead, one Costlet, who was the Child's Trustee, threatened to take
away the Lease again, railed at Taverner, and made terrible Imprecations upon
himself if he knew of the Lease, and threatened to go to Law with the Orphan.
But one Night being drunk at the Town of HillHall, near Lisburne in Ireland,
where all this Scene was laid, going home he fell from his Horse and never
spoke more, and so the Child enjoyed the Estate peaceably ever after.

IN a Word, the little injured Orphan seemed to be the Care of Heaven in a
particular manner; and the good Angel which appeared in its behalf without
doubt executed God's Justice upon the wicked drunken Oppressor, the Trustee;
and as he imprecated Vengeance on himself, ^o that same Spirit might be
Commissioned to see it fall upon him.

AND here it most naturally occurs to observe that the departed Souls of Men
and Women dead and buried, cannot be supposed to have any Commission to execute
particular Vengeance on any in this World; the Supposition of this would bring
a confused medly of Notions upon us, such as would be inconsistent not with
Religion only, but even with common Sense; and which need not take up any of
our Pains to confute them.

NOTHING has more filled the idle Heads of the old Women of these latter Ages
than the Stories of Ghosts and Apparitions coming to People, to tell them where
Money was hidden, and how to find it; and it is wonderful to me that such Tales
should make such Impressions, and that sometimes among wise and judicious
People too, as we find they have done. How many old Houses have been almost
pulled down, and Pitts fruitlesly dug in the Earth, at the ridiculous Motion of
pretended Apparitions? of which I shall speak more in its Place.

I HAVE hitherto studiously avoided giving you any Accounts, however
extraordinary, that have been already made public; but this one, which relates
to the Assassination of the great Duke of Buckingham, (whether famous or
infamous I know not which to determine him) in the time of the late King
Charles I, I cannot omit, because the various manner of its being related so
eminently touches the Case in Hand.

THAT the Duke of Buckingham was slabb'd by one Lieutenant Felton at
Portsmouth, as he was going upon an Expedition for the Relief of Rochelle,
History is so full of it, and all that know any thing of our English Annals are
so well acquainted with the Story of it, that I need say nothing to introduce
that Part: Mr. Aubrey takes upon him to relate the Story of an Apparition upon
this Occasion in the following manner:

To one Mr. Towes who had been School-fellow with Sir George Villers, the
Father of the first Duke of Buckingham, and was his Friend and Neighbor, as he
lay in his Bed awake (and it was Daylight) came into his Chamber the Phantome
of his dear Friend Sir George Villers. Said Mr. Towes to him, Why, you are
dead! what makes you here? Said the Knight, I am dead, but cannot rest in Peace
for the Wickedness and Abomination of my Son George at Court. I do appear to
you to tell him of it, and to advise and dehort him from his evil ways. Said
Mr. Towes, The Duke will not believe me, but will say that I am mad, or dote.
Said Sir George Go to him from me, and tell him by such a Token (a Mole) that
he had in some secret Place, which none but himself knew of. Accordingly Mr.
Towes went to the Duke, who laughed at his Message. At his return home, the
Phantome appeared again, and told that the Duke would be stabbed (he drew out a
Dagger) a quarter of a Year after; which accordingly happened. THIS Part of the
Story indeed is calculated like a true Chimney-corner Piece of News; that Sir
George, who was dead, should say he could not rest in Peace for the Wickedness
and Abomination of his Son George at Court.

PREPOSTEROUS! What State must old Sir George be in? If in a State of Misery,
what does he mean by resting in Peace? if in a State of Blessedness, what could
his Son do to impeach his Rest? and if we shall give any weight to what the
Scripture says in that Case, he knew nothing of him, let his own State or his
Son's Abominations (as he calls them) be what they would. See Job xiv. 19, 20,
21. The waters wear the Stones: thou washest away the things which grow out of
the dust of the earth, and thou destroyest the hope of man. Thou pr^vailest for
ever against him, and he passes: thou changest his countenance, and sondest
him away. His sons come to honor, and he knows it not; and they are brought
low, but he perceives it not of them.

IT IS plain here that the Hope (that is the Knowledge and Wisdom) of Man as to
this World, is destroyed and washed away in Death; his Sons may rise or fall,
be great or little, high or low, good or evil, it is all one to him, he knows
nothing of it. How then could Sir George Villers say, several Years after he
was dead too, that he could not rest in Peace? What! had he been at Rest and in
Peace, and was he disquieted again by his Son George's Wickedness? that does
not hang together at all. The old Knight had been dead several Years before his
Son George came to rise at Court; when he did rise, he was not immediately so
abominably wicked as he was afterward: Where then was the Soul of Sir George
the Father, all the while? his Rest could not be disturbed 'till the
Circumstances that disturbed it happened.

BUT my Lord Clarendon tells this same Story, with much more Probability of
Truth; for first he leaves out the Absurdity, which indeed his Lordship was too
wise a Man to impose upon the World with the Sanction of his Authority, nor was
there Sense enough in it to give it Credit.

IN the next Place he does not make the Person to whom Sir George Villers
appeared, be an Equal, and an Int^mate Friend, but one that had lived in the
same Town where Sir George had lived, and had not seen him for many Years, but
recollected him from the Clothes he had seen him wear; whereas the Story above
makes them dear Friends, which if it had been so, it was not likely he should
refuse to hear the Message, and yet he scruples it very much.

BUT there are more discording Circumstances in the Story. Let us take the Lord
Clarendon's Relation, which is done with an appparent Regard to Truth, and is
as follows:

The Account of the Apparition of Sir George Villers, relating to the Murder
of the Duke of Buckingham his Son, as taken from the Lord Clarendon's History,
Vol. I. Fo. 34, 35. as follows:

THRRE were many Stori^s scattered abroad at that time of several Prophecies
and Predictions of the Duke's untimely and violent Death; amongst the rest,
there was one which was upon a better Foundation of Credit than usually such
Discourses are founded upon.

THERE was an Officer in the King's Wardrobe in Windsor-Castle, of a good
Reputation for Honesty and Discretion, and then about the Age of fifty Years or
more.

THIS Man had in his Youth been bred in a School in the Parish where Sir George
Villers, the Father of the Duke, lived, and had been much cherished and obliged
in that Season of his Age by the said Sir George, whom afterward he never saw.

ABOUT six Months before the miserable End of the Duke of Buckingham, about
Midnight, this Man being in his Bed at Windsor, where his Office was, and in
very good Health, there appeared to him on the side of his Bed, a Man of a very
venerable Aspect, who drew the Curtains of his Bed, and fixing his Eyes upon
him, asked him if he knew him.

THE poor Man, half dead with Fear and Apprehension, being asked the second
^ime, whether he remembered him, and having in that time called to his Memory
the Presence of Sir George Villers, and the very Clothes he used to wear, in
which at that time he seemed to be habited, he answered him, That he thought
him to be that Person; he replied, He was in the right, that he was the same,
and that he expected a Service from him, which was, That he should go from him
to his Son the Duke of Buckingham, and tell him, if he did not somewhat to
ingratiate himself to the People, or at least to abate the extreme Malice which
they had against him, he would be suffered to live but a short time.

AFTER this Discourse he disappeared, and the poor Man (if he had been at all
waking) slept very well 'till Morning, when he believed all this to be a Dream,
and considered it no otherwise.

THE next Night, or shortly after, the same Person appeared to him again, ^in
the same Place, and about the same time of the Night, with an Aspect a little
more severe than before, and asked him, Whether he had done as he had required
of him; and perceiving he had not, gave him very severe Reprehensions, told him
he expected more Compliance from him, and that if he did not perform his
Commands, he should enjoy no Peace of Mind; but should always be pursued by
him: Upon which, he promised him to obey. But the next Morning, waking out of a
good Sleep, though he was exceedingly perplexed with the lively Representation of
all Particulars to his Memory, he was willing still to persuade himself that he
had only dreamed, and considered that he was a Person at such a distance from
the Duke, that he knew not how to find out any Admission to his Presence, much
less had any Hope to be believed in what he should say; so with great Trouble
and Unquietness he spent some time in thinking what he should do; and in the
end resolved to do nothing in the matter.

THE same Person appeared to him the third Time with a terrible Countenance,
and bitterly reproaching him for not performing what he had promised to do. The
poor Man had, by this time, recovered the Courage to tell him, that in Truth he
had deserred the Execution of his Commands, upon considering how difficult a
thing it would be for him to get any Access to the Duke, having Acquaintance
with no Person about him; and if he should obtain Admission to him, he should
never be able to persuade him that he was sent in such a manner; that he should
at least be thought to be mad, or to be set on and employed by his own, or the
Malice of other Men to abuse the Duke; and so he should be ^sure to be undone.

THE Person replied, as ^he had done before, that he should never find Rest
'till he should per^orm what he required, and therefore he were better to
dispatch it; that the Access to his Son was known to be very easy, and that
few Men waited long for him; and for the gaining him Credit, he would tell him
two or three Particulars, which he charged him never to mention to any Person
living but to the Duke himself; and he should no sooner hear them but he should
believe all the rest he should say; and so repeating his Threats, he left him.

IN the Morning the poor Man, more confirmed by the last Appearance, made his
Journey to London, where the Court then was; he was very well known to Sir
Ralph Freeman, one of the Masters of Requests, who had married a Lady that was
nearly allied to the Duke, and was himself well received by him: To him this
Man went, and though he did not acquaint him with all the Particulars, he said
enough to let him know there was something extraordinary in it; and the
Knowledge he had of the Sobriety and Discretion of the Man, made the more
Impression on him: He desired that by his means he might be brought to the Duke
in such a Place and in such a Manner as should be thought fit, affirming that
he had much to say to him, and of such a Nature as would require much Privacy,
and some Time and Patience in the hearing.

SIR Ralph promised he would speak first with the Duke of him, and then he
should understand his Pleasure; and accordingly, the first Opportunity he did
inform him of the Reputation and Honesty of the Man, and then what he desired,
and of all he knew of the matter.

THE Duke, according to his usual Opennes^ and Condescension, told him, that he
was the next Day early to hunt with the King; that his Horses should attend him
at Lambeth Bridge, where he should land by five of the Clock in the Morning;
and if the Man attended him there at that Hour, he would walk and speak with
him as long as should be necessary.

SIR Ralph carried the Man with him the next Morning, and presented him to the
Duke at his Landing, who received him courteously, ^^d walked aside in
Conference near an Hour; ^one but his own Servants being at that Hour in that
Place; and they and Sir Ralph at such a Distance, that they could not hear a
Word, though the Duke sometimes spoke loud, and with great Commotion, which Sir
Ralph the more easily observed and perceived, because he kept his Eyes always
fixed upon the Duke, having procured the Conference upon somewhat he knew there
was of extraordinary.

The Man told him, in his Return over the Water, that when he mentioned those
Particulars which were to gain him Credit, (the Substance whereof he said he
durst not impart unto him) the Duke's Color changed, and he swore he could
come at that Knowledge only by the Devil, for that those Particulars were only
known to himself and to one Person more, who he was sure would never speak of
it.

THE Duke pursued his Purpose of Hunting, but was observed to ride all the
Morning with great Pensiveness and in deep Thoughts, without any Delight in the
Exercise he was upon; and before the Morning was spent, left the Field, and
alighted at his Mother's Lodgings in Whit^hall, with whom he was shut up for
the Space of two or three Hours; the Noise of their Discourse freq^ently
reaching the Ears of those who attended in the next Rooms. And when the Duke
left her, his Countenance appeared full of Trouble, with a Mixture of Anger; a
Countenance that was never before observed in him in any Conversation with her,
toward whom he had a profound Reverence; and the Countess her self (for though
she was marri^d to a private Gentleman, Sir Thomas Compton, she had been
created Countess of Buckingham shortly after her Son had first assumed that
Title) was at the Duke's leaving her found overwhelmed in Tears, and in the
highest Agony imaginable.

WHATEVER there was of all this, it is notorious Truth, that when the News of
the Duke's Murder (which happened within a few Months after) was brought to
his Mother, she seemed not in the least degree surprised, but received it as if
she had foreseen it; nor did afterward express such a degree of Sorrow as was
expected from such a Mother for the Loss of such a Son.

BESIDES the abovenamed clashing Circumstances in the differing Relation of
this Story, there are one or two that are very material, as will appear by the
following Remarks.

1. AUBREY says Mr. Towes, as he calls him, went to the Duke, and told him the
Token; notwithstanding which, the Duke laughed at his Message: whereas my Lord
Clarendon tells just the contrary, that the Duke gave him an open, though a very
particular Audience; all his Attendance keeping at a distance, and that he held
him in that earnest Discourse for an Hour.

2. AUBREY says, the Token Sir George gave to enforce or engage his Son's
Attention, was, that he (the Duke) had a Mole in such a private Part of his
Body; but my Lord says, the Token given was of such a Nature as the Duke swore
none but the Devil and one Person in the World could know, and that he was sure
that one Person would not speak of it; and that the Duke was extremely
disturbed when he heard of it.

N. B. FAME, though with some Privacy, says, that the secret Token was an
incestuous Breach of Modesty between the Duke and a certain Lady too nearly
related to him, which it surprised the Duke to hear of; and that as he thought
he had good Reason to be sure the Lady would not tell it of her self, so he
thought none but the Devil could tell it besides her; and this astonished him,
so that he was very far from receiving the Man slightly, or laughing at his
Message.

WHAT this Apparition then was, and from whom, or from whence, remains to be
decided. That the thing was real, is too well attested; it comes loaded with so
many concurring Circumstances, and told in the hearing of so many Witnesses of
good Fame and Credit, that there is no Room to question the Fact; and as to the
various Ways of relating it, the Truth of the whole is not abated by it at all:
only as is natural to things of this Nature which pass through so many Hands,
every one expressing themselves their own way, though meaning the same thing;
they often vary at last in the very Substance, by only varying at first in the
Ci^cumstances.

THE Truth of the Matter is at last, that the Apparition foretold his Ruin, and
it soon followed. Now that this Apparition could not be the Devil, is evident
from the Reasons laid down before in the like Cases. How can we suppose the
Devil would be offended with the wicked Life and abominable Practices of the
Duke of Buckingham at Court? His incestuous Lewdness, and whatever other
scandalous Practices he allowed himself in, the Devil might, perhaps, encourage
and prompt him to, but he would never s^nd a Messenger to him to warn him
against them, and to alarm him with Apprehensions of Danger attending him if he
did not reform. This is none of the Devil's Business, it is quite foreign to
him, 'twould be the weakest thing in the World to suggest it of him.

AGAIN, if it were any thing immediately from Heaven, it would have been
effectual to have awakened and reformed him: But as it might be a kind
Messenger from another part of the invisible World, where his approaching Fate
was known, and who having given him this Notice, left his Reformation in his
own Power, and laid the Necessity of it before the Eyes of his Reason, as well
as of his Conscience, and that after this his Fall was of himself; this makes
it all rational, and easy to be understood, and is agreeable to the ordinary
Custom of Providence in like Cases, of which many Examples might be given in
the World.

NOR is it strange, that the Apparition should personate the old deceased
Father of the Duke, and assume his Shape, to add as it were a Solemnity to the
Message, and give it a greater Influence upon the Mind of the Duke; and the
same Messenger might have assumed any other Shape or Person if it had thought
fit, whether living or dead.

BUT if the Shape assumed was the most likely to give Weight to the Errand it
was to be sent about, we are not to wonder at all that a Spirit employed, or
employing it self on an Errand of such Importance, should be able to single out
such Appearances, or such Shapes and Persons to appear in the Figure of, as
were aptest to enforce the Message. The well-chusing the Person is to me a
Testimony for, not against the Goodness, the Judgment and Capacity of the
personating Spirit, and would with just reasoning confirm to us the validity of
the Message, and of the Messenger also.

AND yet it is very reasonable to believe, that Sir George Villers, thus seeming
to appear, and whose Surface or Outside is put on like a Masquerade Habit upon
this Occasion, knew nothing of it, and had no manner of concern in it. Nothing
is more wonderful in any part of the Story to me, than that Men of Sense and
Learning, as some such have been, could be prevailed upon, or rather could
prevail upon themselves, to publish to the World such incongruous, such
irrational things as these; that a Man dead, perhaps twenty Years before, I
think it is so much at least; should appear, and say, he could not rest in Peace
for such and such things. And in another of the same Author's Stories, an
Apparition is brought in appearing to Dr. Turberville's Sister, being a Lady
who was dead, and had left some Children to her Husband, which Children were
injured by a second Wife, contrary to the Settlement of the first Wife's
Marriage; and this Settlement of the first Marriage was it seems hid behind the
Wainscot, in such and such a Place, which no body knew of but the Children's
Mother, that is to say the first Wife. This Lady appeared to discover where
this Writing lay, and tells the Person to whom she discovered it, that 'till
she had made this Discovery, she had wandered in the Air, but that now she was
going to God.

STRANGE! that Mr. Glanvil, A^brey, and others, could publish such a Story as
this, without some just Enquiries to reconcile it to common Sense, as well as
to Religion; as particularly how long this Lady had been Dead; for it seems to
have been some Years, the Husband being married again, and the Children being
in danger of being wronged by the Children of the second Venture? Now, did the
Soul of the first Lady wander all that while in the Air, to see whether there
should be any occasion for her, to vindicate her Children's Right, or no? did
she stay from going to God all that while, only for discovering a concealed
Deed, that her Children might not be wronged? how shall we make such a thing
out to be rational? what Notions of Religion or of a future State will support
it?

WHY did she not immediately discover where the Deed, or Marriage Settlement
lay, and put it into the Hands of some honest People, in Trust for her
Children? and then she had not need to have wandered in the Air 'till it had
been done.

THEY must have very low-priz'd Thoughts of Heaven, and of going to God, after
the departing or separating of the Soul from the Body in Life, who think the
Passage can be interrupted by any of the Affairs of this Life left unfinished.
If even our Repentance unfinished, our Peace with God unfinished, can never be
retreiv'd, if Time is not to be recalled; but that as the Tree falls, so it
shall lie: Shall we pretend the Soul shall be stopped and interrupted in its
Passage, to retrieve the Injustice and Violence done to the Orphans, or Relicts
of the Family? shall the Soul be brought back to find out old hidden
Parchments, or as it is pretended in other like Stories, to dig up old
long-buried Money, and the like?

NO, no; those things should be done in time: like Rep^ntance, they should not
be left to that Hazard; for we may depend, there is no Work, or Device, or
Invention in the Grave, whither we are all going.

THAT there are invisibe Agents, which in Pursuance of the Government of
Providence in the World, may be made Instruments, to act in such Cases as
these; to discover Writings which being concealed may ruin Families, rob and
plunder Orphans, and distress the right Heirs of Estates, and i^ many like
Cases, this need not be denied, and is inde^d not to b^ disputed; and it is a
glorious Testimony to the Justice of Providence, that in such Cases he does not
abandon the Widows and the Orphans, who for want of lost or concealed Deeds,
are sometimes in Danger of being undone, by Violence and R^pine. But all this
is easier to be understood to be done without Interruption of the ordinary
Course of Things, without obstructing the Soul's Passage into its determined
state of Happiness or Misery; which it must be the weakest, and indeed the
wickedest thing in the World, to think can be diverted by these Trifles; and
whose direct Progression is plainly stated in the Scripture in these Words: It
is appointed unto all Men once to die, and after Death to Judgment; or
immediately after Death to Judgment, at least so as nothing to prevent or
intervene; Heb. ix. 27. It is appointed, and sur^ly these things can never
break in upon that solemn Appointment:

BESIDES, it is an evident Impeachment of the Power and Justice, as well as the
Wisdom of Providence, in his Disposition of things, as if he could not find out
Ways to do right to injured Orphans, or to detect the Injustice and Oppression
of violent and unreasonable Men, but the Soul of the departed Mother must be
kept out of Heaven to do it her self. Horrid Absurdity! and inconsistent with
all the Notions that true Religion has inspired us with, relating to a Future
State, and to the Gulf that is fixed between this and that.

THE Soul can no more be kept out from, or delayed its Entrance into Heaven, if
its Portion be appointed for Happiness, by any Concern for the Affairs of this
World, than it can b^ disq^iet^d after it is entered those Realms of Peace, and
disturbed or brought back from thence upon any Account whatsoever.

THE very thoughts of it are so mean, so lowrated and base, that it is unworthy
of our Reason, but especially of our Christian reasoning Powers, to ent^rtain
them. I take this Absurdity indeed to be much of the Cause of that just
Ridicule, which the wiser Part of Mankind have put upon most of the Stories
which are told among us about Witchcraft and Apparitions; for that they are
told with such evident Inconsistences, that they cannot go down with rational
People: Who can believe what cannot be true? who can make a serious thing of a
piece of ridiculous Nonsense? That a Soul dismissed from Life, and going
directly into Heaven, shall be called back by the Cry of the Children after
her, with a hold! stay Mother! come back, and come and tell us where the
Writings are for your Joyntur^, or we shall be undone? and the poor Mother,
Uncas'd, Unembodied, must come back, dismiss the Angels that were carrying her
into Abraham's Bosom, and bid them come for her another time; and here she must
hover about we know not how many Years, to do Right to these Children. Sure the
same Power that could thus interrupt her Passage into Heaven, might have
prevented her separating from the Body, and she might with as much ease, and
less injustice to her self, have been kept out of the Grave, as kept out of
Heaven.

BUT I am sick of the very Repetition; the Delusion is so gross, I say it is
not to be wondered that we are shocked by it in our belief of the thing called
Apparition in general. The ridiculous Part discredits the real Part, and it
being so sufeiting to our Reason to hear the first Part, we throw off our
Patience, and will hear nothing at all of it.

IT is true we should not do thus; the Reality of the Thing, abstracted from
these distracted and enthusiastic Notions, is not lessened: it is our Business
then to reject the foolish Part, which indeed has almost smothered and buried
the rest in its Dust and Rubbish, and let us judge rightly of things as they
are. There is no want of Examples, where (Providence permitting) Apparition has
made Discoveries of villainous and dishonest Ac^ions and Designs; detected
Violence and Murder, done Right to injured and oppressed Widows, and
Fatherless Children; and this without such a monstrous and inconsistent
Addition, as that of bringing back the Soul from its Entrance into Heaven, or
disturbing its Rest and Peace in a future State: things too gross to be so much
as named among Christians, whose Faith in things Future is too well established
to be capable of receiving any Impressions from such Delusions.

I HAVE an Example in Story very particular to this Case; and which my Author
assures me of the Truth of, though never yet published in Print: The Story is
told of the late Reverend Dr. Scot, a Man whose Learning and Piety was eminent,
and whose Judgment was known to be so good, as not to be easily imposed upon.

THE Doctor, as I have the Story related, was sitting alone by the Fire, either
in his Study or his Parlour, in Broadstreet where he lived, and reading a Book,
his Door being shut fast and locked; he was well assured there was no body in
the Room but himself, when accidentally raising his Head a little, he was
exceedingly surpised to see sitting in an Elbow Chair, at the other side of
the Fireplace or Chimney, an Ancient grave Gentleman in a black Velvet Gown, a
long Whig, and looking with a pleasing Countenance toward him (the Doctor) as
if just going to speak.

N. B. Another Person relating this Story, says the Ancient Gentleman appeared
standing, and having just opened the Door of the Doctor's Study, he was come
in; and saluting the Doctor spoke first to him: but the Difference is but small.

THE Relations agree in this part, that the Doctor was greatly surpised at the
sight of him; and indeed the seeing him as sitting in a Chair was the most
likely to be surprising; because the Doctor knowing the Door to be locked, and
then seeing a Man sitting in the Chair, he must immediately and at first sight
conclude him to be a Spirit, or Apparition, or Devil, call it as you will;
whereas seeing him come in at the Door, he might at first sight suppose him to
be really a Gentleman come to speak with him, and might think he had omitted
fastening the Door, as he intended to have done.

BUT be it which of the two it will, the Doctor appeared in great disorder at
the sight, as he ac^nowledg'd to those to whom he told the Story, and from whom
I received this Account, with very little remove of Hands between.

THE Spectre it seems began, for the Doctor had not Courage at first, as he
said, to speak to it; I say the Spectre or Apparition spoke first, and desired
the Doctor not to be frighted, not to be surpised, for that he would not do
him any hurt; but that he came to him upon a Matter of great Importance to an
injured Family, which was in great danger of being Ruined; and that though he
(the Doctor) was a Stranger to the Family, yet knowing him to be a Man of
Integrity, he had pitched upon him to do an act of very great Charity, as well
as Justice; and that he could depend upon him for a punctual Performance.

THE Doctor was not at first composed enough to receive the Introduction of the
Business with a due attention; but seemed rather inclined to get out of the
Room if he could, and once or twice made some Attempt to knock for some of the
Family to come up, at which the Apparition appeared a little displeased.

BUT it seems he need not; for, as the Doctor said, he had no power to go out
of the Room if he had been next the Door, or to knock for Help if any had been
at hand.

BUT here the Apparition seeing the Doctor still in Confusion, desired him
again to compose himself, for he would not do him the least Injury, or offer
any thing to make him uneasy; but desired that he would give him leave to
deliver the Business he came about, which when he had heard, perhaps he would
see less cause to be surpised or apprehensive than he did now.

BY this time, and by the calm way of Discourse above mentioned, the Doctor
recovered himself so much, though not with any kind of Composure, as to speak.

IN the Name of God, says the Doctor, what art thou?

I DESIRE you would not be frighted, says the Apparition to him again; I am a
Stranger to you, and if I tell you my Name, you do not know it; but you may do
the Business without enquiring.

THE Doctor continued still discomposed and uneasy, and said nothing for some
time.

THE Apparition spoke again to him not to be surpised, and received only for
Answer the old ignorant Question,

IN the Name of God, what art thou?

UPON this the Spectre seemed displeased, as if the Doctor had not treated him
with Respect; and expostulated a little with him, telling him he could have
terrified him into a Compliance, but that he chose to come calmly and quietly
to him; and used some other Discourses, so civil and obliging, that by this
time he began to be a little more Familiar, and at length the Doctor asked,

WHAT is it you would have with me?

AT this the Apparition, as if gratified with the Question, began his Story
thus.

I LIVED in the County of --

I do not exactly remember the County he named; but it was in some of the
Western Counties of England.

where I left a very good Estate, which my Grandson enjoys at this time. But he
is sued for the Possession by my two Nephews, the Sons of my younger Brother.

N. B. Here he gave him his own Name, the Name of his younger Brother, and the
Names of his two Nephews; but I am not allowed to publish the Names in this
Relation, nor might it be proper for many Reasons.

HERE the Doctor interrupted, and asked him how long the Grandson had been in
Possession of the Estate; which he told him was -- Years, intimating that he
had been so long dead.

THEN he went on, and told him, that his Nephews would be too hard for his
Grandson in the Suit, and would OUT him of the Mansion House and Estate; so
that he would be in danger of being entirely ruined, and his Family be reduced.

STILL the Doctor could not see into the Matter, or what he could do to help or
remedy the Evil that threatened the Family; and therefore asked him some
Questions: for now they began to be a little better acquainted than at first.

SAYS the Doctor, And what am I able to do in it, if the Law be against him?

WHY, says the Spectre, it is not that the Nephews have any Right; but the
grand Deed of Settlement, being the Conveyance of the Inheritance, is lost; and
for want of that Deed they will not be able to make out their Title to the
Estate.

WELL, says the Doctor, and still what can I do in the Case?

WHY, says the Spectre, if you will go down to my Grandson's House, and take
such Persons with you as you can trust, I will give you such Instructions as
that you shall find out the Deed or Settlement, which lies concealed in a Place
where I put it with my own Hands, and where you shall direct my Grandson to
take it out in your Presence.

BUT why then can you not direct your Grandson himself to do this? says the
Doctor.

ASK me not about that, says the Apparition; there are diverse Reasons which you
may know hereafter. I can depend upon your Honesty in it, in the mean time; and
I will so dispose Matters that you shall have your Expenses paid you, and be
handsomely allowed for your Trouble.

AFTER this Discourse, and several other Expostulations, (for the Doctor was
not easily prevailed upon to go 'till the Spect^e seemed to look angrily, and
even to threaten him for refusing,) he did at last Promise him to go.

HAVING obtained a Promise of him, he told him he might let his Grandson know
that he had formerly conversed with his Grandfather, (but not how lately, or in
what Manner,) and ask to see the House; and that in such an upper Room or Loft,
he should find a great deal of old Lumber, old Coffers, old Chests, and such
Things as were out of Fashion now, thrown by, and pil'd up upon one another, to
make room for more modish Furniture, Cabinets, Chests of Drawers, and the like.

THAT in such a particular Corner was such a certain old Chest, with an old
broken Lock upon it, and a Key in it, which could neither be turned in the
Lock, or pulled out of it.

N. B. Here he gave him a particular Description of the Chest, and of the
Outside, the Lock and the Cover, and also of the Inside, and of a private place
in it, which no Man could come to, or find out, unless the whole Chest was
pulled in Pieces.

IN that Chest, says he, and in that place, lies the grand Deed, or Charter of
the Estate, which conveys the Inheritance, and without which the Family will be
ruined, and turned out of Doors.

AFTER this Discourse, and the Doctor promising to go down into the Country and
dispatch this important Commission; the Apparition putting on a very pleasant
and smiling Aspect, thanked him, and disappeared.

AFTER some Days, and within the time limited by the Proposal of the Spectre,
the Doctor went down accordingly into -- shire; and finding the Gentleman's
House very readily, by the Direction, knocked at the Door, and asked if he was
at home; and after being told he was, and the Servants telling their Master it
was a Clergyman, the Gentleman came to the Door, and very court^ously invited
him in.

AFTER the Doctor had been there some time, he observed the Gentleman received
him with an unexpected Civility, though a Stranger, and without Business: They
entered into many friendly Discourses, and the Doctor pretended to have heard
much of the Family, (as, indeed, he had) and of hi Grandfather; from whom, Sir,
says he, I perceive the Estate more immediately descends to yourself.

AY, says the Gentleman, and shook his Head, my Father died young, and my
Grandfather has left Things so confused, that for want of one principal
Writing, which is not yet come to Hand, I have met with a great deal of trouble
from a couple of Cousins, my Grandfather's Brother's Children, who have put me
to a great deal of Charge about it. And with that the Doctor seeming a little
inquisitive.

BUT I hope you have got over it, Sir? says he.

NO truly, says the Gentleman, to be so open with you, we shall never get quite
over it unless we can find this old Deed; which, however, I hope we shall find,
for I intend to make a general Search for it.

I WISH with all my Heart you may find it, Sir, says the Doctor.

I DON'T doubt but I shall; I had a strange Dream about it but last Night, says
the Gentleman.

A DREAM about the Writing! says the Doctor, I hope it was that you should find
it then?

I DREAMED, says the Gentleman, that a strange Gentleman came to me, that I had
never seen in my Life, and helped me to look it. I don't know but you may be
the Man.

I SHOULD be very glad to be the Man, I am sure, says the Doctor.

NAY, says the Gentleman, you may be the Man to help me look it.

AY, Sir, says the Doctor, I may help you look it indeed, and I Will do that too
with all my Heart; but I would much rather be the Man that should help you find
it: Pray when do you intend to make a search?

TOMORROW, says the Gentleman, I had appointed to do it.

BUT, says the Doctor, in what manner do you intend to search?

WHY, says the Gentleman, it is all our Opinion^ that my Grandfather was so very
much concerned to preserve this Writing, and had so much Jealousy that some
that were about him would take it from him if they could, that he has hid it in
some secret Place; and I Am resolved I Will pull half the House down but I Will find
it, if it be above Ground.

TRULY, says the Doctor, he may have hid it so, that you must pull the House
down before you find it, and perhaps not then either. I have known such things
utterly lost, by the very Care taken to preserve them.

IF it was made of something the Fire would not destroy, says the Gentleman,
I Would burn the House down but I Would find it.

I SUPPOSE you have searched all the old Gentleman's Ches^s, and Trunks, and
Coffers over and over? says the Doctor.

AY, says the Gentleman, and turned them all inside outward, and there they lie
of a heap up in a great Loft, or Garret, with nothing in them; nay, we knocked
three or four of them in Pieces to search for private Drawers, and then I burnt
them for Anger, though they were fine old Cypress Chests, that cost Money enough
when they were in Fashion.

I AM sorry you burnt them, says the Doctor.

NAY, says the Gentleman, I did not burn a scrap of them 'till they were all
split to Pieces; and it was not possible there could be any thing there.

N. B. This made the Doctor a little easy; for he began to be surpised when he
told him he had split some of them out, and burnt them.

WELL, Sir, says the Doctor, if I can do you any Service in your Search, I Will
come and see you again tomorrow, and wait upon your Search with my good Wishes.

NAY, says the Gentleman, I don't design to part with you; since you are so
kind to offer me your Help, you shall stay all Night then, and be at the first
of it.

THE Doctor had now gained his Point so far as to make himself acquainted and
desirable in the House, and to have a kind of Intimacy; so that though he made as
if he would go, he did not want much En^reaties to make him stay; so he
consented ^o lie in the House all Night.

A LITTLE before Evening the Gentleman asked him to take a Walk in his Park,
but he put it off with a Jest; I had rather, Sir, said he smiling, you would let me
see this fine old Mansion House that is to be demolished tomorrow; methinks
I Would fain see the House once, before you pull it down.

WITH all my Heart, says the Gentleman. So he carried him immediately up
Stairs, showed him all the best Apartments, and all his fine Furniture and
Pictures; and coming to the Head of the great Staircase where they came up,
offered to go down again.

BUT, Sir, says the Doctor, shall we not go up higher?

THERE IS nothing there, says he, but Garrets and old Lo^ts full of Rubbish, and
a Place to go out into the Turret, and the Clock-house.

O, LET me see it all, now we are a going, says the Doctor. I love to see the
old lofty Towers and Turrets, the Magnificence of our Ancestors, though they are
out of Fashion now; Pray let us see all, now we are going.

WHY, it will tire you, says the Gentleman.

NO, no, says the Doctor, if it don't tire you that have seen it so often, it
will not tire me, I assure you: Pray let us go up. So away the Gentleman goes, and
the Doctor after him.

AFTER they had rambled over the wild Part of an old-built great House, which I
need not describe, he passes by a great Room, the Door of which was open, and
in it a great deal of old Lumber: And what Place is this, pray? says the
Doctor, looking in at the Door, but not offering to go in.

O! THAT IS the Room, says the Gentleman softly, because there was a Servant
attending them, that is the Room I told you of, where all the old Rubbish lay,
the Chests, the Coffe^s, and the Trunks; look there, see how they are pil'd up
upon one another almost to the Ceiling.

WITH this the Doctor goes in and looks about him; for this was the Place he
was directed to, and which he wanted to see: He was not in the Room two Minutes
but he found every thing just as the Spectre at London had described, went
directly to the Pile he had been told of, and fixes his Eye upon the very Chest
with the old rusty Lock upon it, with the Key in it, which would neither turn
round, nor come out.

ON my Word, Sir, says the Doctor, you have taken Pains enough, if you have
rumag'd all these Drawers, and Chests, and Coffers, and every thing that may
have been in them.

INDEED, Sir, says the Gentleman, I have emptied every one of them myself, and
looked over all the old musty Writings one by one; with some help, indeed; but
they, every one, past through my own Hand, and under my Eye.

WELL, Sir, says the Doctor, I see you have been in earnest, and I find the
thing is of great Consequence to you: I have a strange Fancy come into my Head
this very Moment; will you gratify my Curiosity with but opening and emptying
one small Chest or Coffer that I have cast my Eye upon? there may be nothing in
it, for you are satisfied, I believe, that I was never here before; but I have
a strange Notion that there are some private Places in it which you have not
found; perhaps there may be nothing in them, when they are found.

THE Gentleman looks at the Chest smiling, I remember opening it very well; and
turning to his Servant, Will, says he, don't you remember that Chest? Yes, Sir,
says Will, very well, I remember you were so weary you sat down upon the Chest
when every thing was out of it, you clapped down the Lid and sat down, and sent
me to my Lady to bring you a Dram of Citron; you said you were so tired you was
ready to faint.

WELL, Sir, 'twas only a Fancy of mine, and very likely to have nothing in it.

IT IS no matter for that, says the Gentleman, you shall see it turned bottom up
again before your Face, and so you shall all the rest, if you do but speak the
Word.

WELL, Sir, says the Doctor, if you will oblige me but with that one, I Will
trouble you no farther.

IMMEDIATELY the Gentleman causes the Coffer to be dragged out, and opened; for
it would not be locked, the Key would neither lock it nor unlock it: when the
Papers were all out, the Doctor turning his Face another way, as if he would
look among the Papers, but taking little or no Notice of the Chest, stooped
down, and as if supporting himself with his Cane, chops his Cane into the
Chest, but snatched it out again hastily, as if it had been a Mistake, and
turning to the Chest he claps the Lid of it down, and sits down upon it, as if
he was a weary too.

HOWEVER he takes an Opportunity to speak to the Gentleman softly, to send away
his Man a Moment; for I would speak a Word or two with you, Sir, says he, out
of his hearing; and then recollecting himself, Sir, says he aloud, can you not
send for a Hammer and a Chisel?

YES, Sir, says the Gentleman. Go, Will, says he to his Man, fetch a Hammer and
Chisel.

AS soon as Will was gone, Now, Sir, says he, let me say a bold Word to you; I
have found your Writing; I have found your Grand Deed of Settlement; I Will lay
you a hundred Guineas I have it in this Coffer?

THE Gentleman takes up the Lid again, handles the Chest, looks over every Part
of it, but could see nothing; he is confounded and amazed! What do you mean? says
he to the Doctor, you have no unusual Art I hope, no Conjuring in hand; here is
nothing but an empty Coffer?

NOT I upon my Word, says the Doctor, I am no Magician, no Cunning-Man, I abhor
it; but I tell you again the Writing is in this Coffer.

THE Gentleman knocks, and calls as if he was frighted, for his Man with the
Hammer, but the Doctor sat composed again upon the Lid of the Coffer.

AT last up comes the Man with the Hammer and Chisel, and the Doctor goes to
work with the Chest, knocks upon the flat of the Bottom; Hark! says he, don't
you hear it, Sir, says he, don't you hear it plainly?

HEAR what? says the Gentleman. I don't understand you, indeed.

WHY the Chest has a double Bottom, Sir, a false Bottom, says the Doctor; don't
you hear it sound hollow?

IN a Word, they immediately split the inner Bottom open, and there lay the
Parchment spread abroad flat on the whole breadth of the Bottom of the Trunk,
as a Quire of Paper is laid on the flat of a Drawer.

IT is impossible for me to describe the Joy and Surprise of the Gentleman, and
soon after of the whole Family; for the Gentleman sent for his Lady, and two of
his Daughters, up into the Garret among all the Rubbish, to see not the Writing
only, but the Place where it was found, and the Manner how.

YOU may easily suppose the Doctor was caressed with uncommon Civilities in the
Family, and sent up (after about a Week's stay) in the Gentleman's own Coach to
London. I do not remember whether he disclosed the Secret to the Gentleman, or
no; I mean the Secret of the Apparition, by which the Place where the Writing
was to be found, was discovered to him, and who obliged him to come down on
purpose to find it: I say, I do not remember that Part, neither is it material.
As far as I had the Story related, so far I have handed it forward; and I have
the truth of it affirmed in such a manner, as I cannot doubt it.

NOW to observe a little upon this Passage, which I am obliged to say is
reported to me for Truth, and I firmly believe it to be so: Certain it is, that
finding this Writing was of the utmost Importance to the Family; and though I am
not indeed inclined to publish Names to the Story, or to examine into the
Particulars, by discoursing with the Persons, for some may be yet Living, yet I
say the Establishment of not a Family only, but a Generation of Families, might
depend upon this Writing, and that no doubt made the ancient Gentleman lay it
up so safe. But why then might not Providence permit, nay even direct one of
those Intelligent Spirits or Angels, mentioned above, to give this Notice, and
in this manner, where the main and only Deed or Charter for the Inheritance was
to be found? as well as it has upon many like Occasions, or in Cases alike in
their Importance, made strange and unaccountable Discoveries of Things hid for
many Ages; and this without Apparition, but by a manifest concurrence of Causes
and Accidents next to Miracles.

I CANNOT think but that Providence, whose Concern for the good and safety of
his Creatures is so Universal, and who it must be acknowledged is not
unconcerned even in the minutest Circumstances, may think meet to bring such a
thing as this to Light, upon which the good and welfare of a whole Family did
so much depend; and even to appear in an extraordinary Manner in it, without
any Impeachment of its Wisdom or its Power; and if the same Providence that
thought fit to save this Family from so much Injustice as at that time
threatened it, thought fit to do it, by the Agency of a Spirit coming in
Apparition to a third Person, so to bring it about as in the ordinary Method,
what have we to do to dispute the manner? or what just Objection lies against
it?

UPON the whole, here is no Devil here, no imaginary Phantoms in the Air, no
Voices and Noises delusive and imposing upon the Fancy one way o^ other; no
Soul appearing, and pretending it cannot be at rest; and yet here is an
Apparition directing to find out what was in Being, and was to be found, and
what Justice required should be produced.

NOR could this be the Devil: that wicked Agent goes up and down upon a much
worse Employment. He is busy enough, that is true; but it is wid'ning breaches in
Families, not healing them; in prompting Mischief, not preventing it; tempting
Man to Robbery, to Whoredom, to Murder; not moving them to repent. As is the
Errand, such is the Messenger; as is the Work, such is the Labourer; and the
way of judging is as just as it is certain, it is easy and plain, we cannot fail
to know who and who is together.

IT IS the same in our most retired Thoughts; we may very well know who talks to
us, by the Discourse, who tempts us, by the Mischief he tempts to. My good,
wicked, pious, hellish Friend and old Acquaintance Z -- G -- must never tell
me, that he does not know by whose Direction he transacts, and who he converses
with, when he is bid to break Oaths and Promises under the cover of Conscience;
when he assaults Innocence by Clamor, and levies War by Slander, against
Reputation and Virtue on pretense of Zeal to Truth; blackning Characters in
pretense of giving the Innocent Person opportunity to clear himself; I say he
must not do this without knowing from whence he derives the extraordinary
Motion to it, what Spirit prompts, and from whose dictates he takes the
Direction.

WHEN he daubs on purpose to wash, and sullies with intention to clean the
Faces of his Innocent Neighbors, he knows as well as I, he is actuated from
Hell, and agitated ab Inferis; because he knows that all Hypocri^y is from the
Devil; and as he knows himself to be a most accomplished Che^t, even from the
outside of his Face to the inside of his Soul, he may sing after my Lord of
Rochester in his Sarcasm upon a much honester Man,

He said, O Lord, O Lord of Hosts,
I am a Ra -- l, that thou know.
IT IS a strange Hypothe^is, that a late Visionist in those pieces of secret
History attacked me with the other Day, viz. That he would undertake to prove
from the late Reverend and Learned (but to himself unintelligible) Jacob
Behemen, that a Man's Soul was capable of comprehending GOD, Futurity,
Eternity, and all occult and retired things of the utmost importance, but it
self; but that, for diverse wise Reasons, the light of self-knowledge was hid
from his Eyes; except by immediate Revelation; which immediate Revelation
Friend Jacob pretended to have attained, only with this unhappy disaster
attending it, viz. That he could never express himself, no not to his own
Understanding; so that indeed he understood this only, namely, that he could
not understand what he did understand.

NOW to leave Friend Jacob to his own Quibbles, and to his three and twenty
Parenthesis, like a nest of Boxes one within another, and never to be prolated;
it is my Opinion, that if Mankind will be faithful to themselves, they may
always know themselves; that Friend -- G -- not only always has the Devil in
him, but always knows it; as it is certain, that he that wilfully Lies and
Cheats always knows that he Lies and Cheats; so it is impossible T -- E --
should be a complete Rogue, and not know it; he may be indeed not able to know
how much a Rogue he is, 'till the Devil and he have drawn out the Thread to its
full length, and tried him effectually, searched him to the bottom, and seen
whether he will stop at any thing or no; and what the wicked thing can be that
is too gross for him. But he cannot be ignorant of himself in the main; he
cannot be so blind to his own Inside, as not to know that he is an Original
Knave; that he has broken in upon Principles, betrayed Trust, cheated Orphans,
abused Widows, sold Friendship; and a thousand such things as these already;
and that he has nothing for it, but to put as good an Outside upon it as he
can, to have the Face of an honest Man upon the Heart of a Hypocrite, and to be
sure to be a Cheat to the World, to the end of the Chapter.

INDEED it might not have been improper to have represented those two worthy
Gentlemen as Apparitions, for that they are such is a most improving Truth, and
what it may be much for the Service of the World to have publicly known: But
as we are now speaking of Apparitions which represent Men and things as they
really are, it seems first needful to bring their insides to be their outsides,
and then the World may know them by their shadows as well as by their
substance; and for this I doubt we must wait a while, the Issue of an Assizes
or two; for certainly, if Justice takes place, they may both be heard of at the
Gallows.

BUT to bring it home to the present purpose, I insist that no Man can be
deceived in himself; he may know whether he is a Knave or an honest Man,
whether he is a Substance, or an Apparition, whether he be a Re^lity or a
Shadow; and that Jacob Behemen advanced only a Delusion proper for a Knave,
pretending that a Man might be honest when he believed himself to be a Knave,
and be a Knave when he thought himself honest.

BUT to return to the Affair of the Writing found in the Chest, and which,
according to the Notion which some have of these things, the Soul of the
ancient Gentlemen above came in Apparition to discover; our Question is first
How did he come to know in his determined State, his State of SoulExistence, be
that where it would, I say, How did he come to know, that the Writing was not
discovered, and that his Grandson was in danger of coming to any injury about
it? How did he know that the Lawsuit was commenced, the thing prosecuted so
far, and the damage like to be suffered so very much?

HE might know where it was, if not found; because he hid it there, because he
laid it up with so much care; but he could not know what Circumstance had been
attending the case since that time, what proceedings had been at Law, and how
things stood with the Family; if he could, then the Text quoted before out of
Job cannot be true, that the Son rises and falls, and the Father knows it
not.

IT IS observable that this Apparition, which came to Doctor Scot, did not
allege that he could not rest 'till this matter was discovered; he seemed
concerned that the Family would be uneasy, and that they were so; and that
there was great danger, they might lose the Estate; but did not pretend he
could not rest in Peace, or as the other, that he could not go to Heaven 'till
it was discovered.

I CANNOT but wonder a little at the Ignorance of the Ancients, in that Notion
of the Soul's wandering in the Air all the while the Body was without a Funeral
Obsequy; for according to their Doctrine, those Souls who had no such Funeral
Pyre prepared for them, must have been wandering in the Air to this Day, and
will be so for ever; not being able to get admittance either in one place or
other.

NO wonder the Air is said to be so filled with wandering Spirits, with Demons
and Ghosts, as some are of the Opinion it is; for where must all the Millions
of Spirits be gone, who have lain without Burial, or been cast into the Sea, or
been overwhelmed with Earthquakes and Storms, or died by Plagues, where the
living have nor been sufficient to bury the dead? and the like in many public
Calamities.

I KNOW the Roman Catholics have a way of performing a Service for the dead by
Thousands; and in particular for the Souls of the dead, slain in such and such
a Battle: whether that has any relation to this old Pagan Notion, or not, I
will not say. I know Popery has pretty much of the Pagan in their Original, I
mean of their Worship; but will saying one Service for the dead answer the End,
whether they have any Burial or no, and though their Bodies are left, as Achilles
says of Hector, for greedy or hungry Dogs to rend? This they do not answer, and
I doubt cannot; so that perhaps all those Souls killed in fight are wandering
still in the Air, and cannot have admittance, no not to the Shades below.

ON the other hand, if the poor Soldiers believed, that if they were killed in
fight, they were to wander for ever, and not be prayed out of Purg^^ory; nay,
not be admitted into it; few of them but would choose to be hanged, provided
they might be admitted to be buried under the Gallows, rather than go to the
War and die in the Bed of Honor.

THEY tell us (who pretend to know) that the Corpse of the deceased Princes of
France, as well Kings as Princes of the Blood, are not buried, but deposited in
the Abbey of St. Dennis near Paris, 'till the immediate Successor is Dead; and
that then the Pr^d^cessor is buried, and the next is deposited; so that there
is always one kept above Ground.

I DO not take upon me to determine the Matter, or to say whether it is really
so or not: But if so, and i^ should be as in the case of Patroclus, that those
H^roes are then to be out of the happy Regions, I must say their Kings are but
little beholden to that Custom, and Lewis XIII had a hard time of it, to have
his Son hold it 70 Years, and keep him all that while even out of Purgatory;
and how long he has to stay there, who knows? but it is c^^tain, he might have
been 40 or 50 Years onward of his way by this time, if he had not been so many
Years unburied.

BUT enough of this Pagan and Popish Frippery: our business is to talk to the
more rational World; their Fate is before them; all Men die, and after Death to
Judgment, nothing can interrupt it, and what their Sons do or suffer behind
them they know not.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Consequence of this Doctrine; and seeing that Apparitions
are real, and may be expected upon many Occasions, and that we are sure they
are not the Souls of our departed Friends; how are we to act, and how to behave
to them, when they come among us, and when they pretend to be such and such,
and speak in the first Person of those departed Friends, as if they were really
themselves?
HAVING thus settled the main point, and determined what Apparition is not;
namely, not an Angel immediately from Heaven; not a returned unembodied Soul;
and having advanced, in Essay at least, what we are to suppose them to be;
namely, a good or evil Spirit from the Invisible World; and having settled the
Rule of judging whether of the two, whether a good or an evil, according to the
apparent good or evil of their Design; it is time now to bring the matter into
Practice; to settle the grand Preliminary, and determine, since this is their
Behavior to us, how we are to behave to them.

NOR is this a needless Enquiry, for we find the World at a great loss on such
Occasions. Men are exceedingly terrified and discorded upon the very
Apprehensions of seeing any thing as they call it from the Invisible World;
even the great King Belshazzar, though in the midst of his whole Court, the Lords
of 127 Provinces, a full Assembly of Ladies and Courtiers; yet when he saw but
a piece of an Apparition, (for it was but one Hand) yet his Countenance
changed, and the joints of his Knees were loosed, and his Knees smote one
against another, Dan. v. 6. Charles VIII of France was not frighted only, but
frighted out of his Wits, with an Apparition in the Forest of Man's, and never
recovered his Senses any more; and we have several instances in Story, of Men,
even of the greatest Resolution, who have lost all their Courage, and all their
Resolution, when they have had but a short Visit of this kind, though without
receiving any injury from them.

BUT whence is it, that the Mind is thus surpised? why is our Aversion so
great to any appearance from the other World, without so much as enquiring into
the Particulars?

THERE are many Reasons indeed to be assigned to prove why it is so; but not
one good Reason that I know of to prove it should be so, or that we have any
Occasion to be so alarmed and disturbed at these Appearances; I mean, when the
Mind has any degree of Composure: It is true, they come from an Invisible
Place, and that is one of the Reasons of our fright; because, as we say, we
know not whence they are, of what Errand they come, with what Commission, and
with what Power to execute that Commission; all these uncertainties bring a
Terror upon the Spirits; the Soul receives a shock; the Man is like one of
those poor People where they are in an Earthquake, they see the Buildings
totter and fall before them, and though they are not buried in the Ruins, but are
perhaps escaped out into the Fields; yet they feel the Earth roll and move
under them, and they are doubtful and apprehensive le^t they may be swallowed
up every Moment; and, according to the old Poet, it is Matter of real Terror;
"Fear chills the Heart, what Heart can Fear dissemble,
"When Steeples stagger, and when Mountains tremble?


THIS uncertainty of the Mind in the case of Apparitions, is the real ground of
Fear; (viz.) that we know not

WHENCE their Errand comes, WHAT Commission they have, WHAT Power to execute
the Commission.

FIRST, WE don't know whence they are, and from whom their Errand, nor indeed
can we be easy in the uncertainty: The reason is, there is a secret doubt of
the Mind, founded upon Guilt: Here the Atheist bauks his assurance, and though he
pretends to believe neither God or Devil, staggers at a Messenger that comes
for ought he knows from one or both of them, to convince him by immediate
demonstration. Here his Heart fails him, he turns pale, starts at the sight,
and would be glad to be assured there were really both, that one might protect
him from the other.

WHILE he knows not whether the Message comes from Heaven or Hell, whether the
Messenger may be Angel or Devil, the uncertainty attended with the real Danger
of the worst, leaves him in Horror, and he fears Hell because he knows he has
provoked Heaven, he fears the Devil because he knows he that can command the
Devil is his Enemy.

IN a Word, a sense of God makes men afraid of the Devil, as they say fear of
the Devil gives a sense of Homage to God.

SECONDLY, WE tremble at the Messenger, because we don't know what his Message
may be; we dread the Officer, because we dread his Commission; we are afraid of
what he has to say; we know we have no reason to expect good News from the
place, which we suppose he comes from, and therefore we turn pale at his
coming, nor is it possible to be otherwise.

THERE are but two Principles that fortify the Mind against the Fears of a
future State, no not that seeming^y fortify it; and these are,

1. INNOCENCE, or a good Heart founded in Religion, Virtue, and an exact
rectitude of behavior. OR,

2. IMPUDENCE, a hardened shutting the Eyes against Conv^ction, and the Ears
against Conscience.

IT is with some Perplexity that I found my self obliged to give a Character in
another place of a famed Man of pretended Brightness and Wit: He was always
merry, a constant Smile sat upon his Countenance, a perfect easiness possessed
his Mind, he knew not a Moment of Melancholy or Chagrin. He never sighed,
because he seldom prayed or grieved; I wish I could have said, because he never
sinned. His Heart was light as his Head; and as for his Heels, he always walked
in Minuit and Rigadoons. His Mirth was as uninterrupted as his Breath, and he
laughed by the Consequence of Respiration; his Voice was a natural Music, and
his Rhetoric was all Sonnet and Solfa's.

SURE, said I, my Cousin M -- D -- must have the clearest Conscience in the
Universe, he has not the least Scar upon his Inside; and if he was to see the
Devil, he could not change Color, or have the least Hesitation at the most
frightful Appearance: He must be all Innocence and Virtue.

Did the least Spot upon his Soul appear,
It could not be: his Conscience must be clear:
For where there is Guilt, there always would be Fear.
BUT I mistook my Kinsman most extremely, for on the contrary, his Soul is
blacker than Negro Sancho, the Beauty of Africa; he boasts himself of the most
hardened Crime, defies Heaven, despises Terror, and is got above Fear by the
mere force of a flagrant Assurance.

HE would no more value seeing the Devil in his most fiery formidable
Appearance, than he would to see a storm of Fire in the Tempest, or a Harlequin
Diable in Fresco; if you will take his Character from himself, he has no more
fear about him, than he has Conscience, and that is so little, it is not worth
naming. He knows no Sorrow, no Chagrin; he was born Laughing, and intends to
die Jesting: and what is all this founded upon? not glorious Innocence
mentioned above, but notorious Impudence.

IT IS true indeed, I had not cared to speak so grossly of one of my near
Relations, but he will have it be so; he speaks it of himself, bids me take
notice of it, that it is the Character he gives me of himself, and d -- s me
with a full Stream of Billinsgate, if I dare to give any other Character of him
than what he gives of himself.

I MUST acknowledge I did believe the Devil and my Cousin were not much at
Strife, that he did not fear the old Dragon, because he had never done any
thing to disoblige him; but it seems the Case differs, and he defies the Devil
purely upon the same foot that he defies him that made the Devil; and acts the
Fury merely as a Fury, not as a Man of Sense or as a Man of Courage.

ALL that I have to say to this, is, that this will last just 'till the Rage is
abated, and no longer; 'till the Blood cools, and the Spirits return to their
natural Course, and then the Wretch will be as cold as now he is hot, as calm
as now he is outrageous, and as base and low-spirited as now he is fiery and
furious.

ALL the hotheaded Courage of these Men, is only a Flash, a Meteor in the Air;
when they are cooled, when the Exhalation is spent, they are as phlegmatic as
other People; and then they look pale, the Countenance changes, and the Knees
knock one against another, as well as other People's.

THERE IS no scorning the Terrors of a Messenger from the other World, but by a
settled established Composure of the Soul; founded on the Basis of Peace
within, Peace of Conscience, Peace and Innocence, or Peace and Penitence, which
is in effect all one: This is the only Face that a Man can hold up to the
Devil; with a clean Heart, he may boldly see the Devil, talk to him, despise
him, and tell him he scorns him, for that he has nothing at all to do with him.

BUT this is not our present Condition; few People wear this Armor in our
days; they neither value it or know the use of it, and therefore it is that we
are so full of Terror and Disturbance when we see the Devil; at least if we
think he has any thing to say to us.

BUT now for the great Question, Why it should be so? as I said, it is Truth too
evident that it is so, but to say that it should be so, that requires another
kind of Sophistry to make out.

IT is true, it requires a great deal of Courage, and of cool Courage too, in
bearing up the Soul against the Surprise of such things as these; a Man must be
able to talk to the Devil in a Dialect which he (Satan) himself does not very
well understand, to bid him be gone, to bid him Get thee behind me, and the
like; it is an authoritative way of talking that every one cannot support; and
if the Devil is sensible of it, he will not fail to exert himself to the
utmost, to maintain the Right which he seems to enjoy, and keep the Hold he has
gotten; for he knows how ill his Cause is to be defended by Justice and Reason,
and if he should answer as he did to the Sons of Scev^ the Jew, what then if
you should say to him, in the vulgar and ignorant Dialect of speaking to
Spirits, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Who
art thou? or, I charge thee in the Name of the Father, etc. to be gone, and
disturb me no more.

I SAY, if the Devil should answer, The Father I know, and the Son I know, and
the Holy Ghost I know, but who are you, you that pretend to use their Names
thus? What would you say for your self?

NOW that we may know how to answer the Devil, as well as how to speak to him,
(for both are very necessary) let me enter into the State of the Case a little,
between the Devil and us; nay, between all the Inhabitants of the invisible
World, and their Friends in this, let them be who, or of what kind they will.

FIRST, In order to be free from the Surprise of these things, you must
endeavor to establish your Mind in the right understanding of the thing called
Apparition; that you may reason your self into a sufficient Firmness, and
Steadiness of Soul against all the whimsical and imaginary Part of it.

LET us think of things as they are, not as they are only imagined, and
supposed to be; for it is the Reality of the thing, not the Shadow, that can
fright and disorder us, that is to say, that can have any just Reason to do so.

FOR want of this we are often scared and terrified with Dreams and Visions,
even when we are awake, and when really there is no such thing in Substance or
Reality as any Vision or Apparition, other than Apprehension throws in upon us,
and other than our bewitched Imagination represents to us.

IT is absolutely necessary, if you would not be always looking over your
Shoulders, and always forming Specter to your Fancy: I say, it is necessary to
have a right Notion of Apparition in general; to know what it is, and what it
must be, whence it comes, and what the utmost of its Commission can be; that
you may think your self into a true and clea^ Understanding of it, and then
your Fears about it will be regulated after another manner. For Example:

1. ESTABLISH your Mind in this particular and fundamental Article, that
whatever appears it must be either a good Spirit from the invisible World, an
Agent of Mercy, a Messenger of Peace, and consequently will do you no Hurt: OR,

2. AN evil Spirit, an Agent of Hell from Satan's Region and Empire, the Air;
and that so whatever evil Design or evil Message he pretends to come about, and
however mischievous his Intention is, he cannot do the Hurt he desires, because
that as the good Spirits are under Direction, so the bad are under Limitation;
the one will not, and the other cannot hurt you, without an immediate Command
from above. The Fear therefore which we have upon us concerning Apparition, is
not or ought not to be guided by their Appearance, but by the rectitude of our
own Thoughts; and as we are or are not quiet and calm within, so we shall or
shall not be under Apprehensions from without.

FORTIFY your Minds then with a steady Confidence in the Supreme Maker and
Governor of all things, who has the great red Dragon in a Chain; and when you
think you see the Devil, fear nothing, for He will never let loose the
Destroyer upon any one whose Mind is steadily fixed upon himself.

THIS is a critical, and perhaps a too curious Piece of Practice for me to
meddle with, especially here, and must be but gently touched at; you will, it
may be, object too against the Doctrine of it, and say, Who can so effectually
trust in God, as not to be at all afraid of the Devil? Now, though this may seem
true upon many Accounts, and, as Times go with us, may be really a just
Objection, yet, if we will believe History or Experience, it is not so much a
Difficulty as to say Who can do it? for it has been done.

I REMEMBER the known and famous Story of a Maid under a real and personal
Possession of the Devil, at Little Gadsden in Hertfordshire, though by an unhappy
Disappointment I was not present, not knowing of the thing time enough; yet I
saw and conversed with several that were present and heard the Devil speak in
the Maid and by the Organ of her Voice, though without any apparent Motion of her
Tongue or Lips, or any Part of her Mouth.

OF this Person it was positively true, that there was a certain good Man, though
a Lay Christian, who so frequently prayed with the poor Demoniack, being a
Neighbor of her Father's, and so constantly talked to the Devil, and battered
him with Scripture, that he was, as I might say, the Devil's Terror, and he
would not let the Girl go to any House or into any Room where this Man (whose
Name was Monks) was; and if she was directed to any Place he would stop her, as
if he was to go and see first if Mr. Monks was there or not, and then he would
bid her go, for Monks was not there.

NOW, as I am well assured of the Truth both of the Girl's being possessed,
really actuated by a Devil in her, and of this Devil being afraid of Mr. Monks;
then the Q^^stion above is so far directly answered, that it is possible to
arrive to such a State, as not only not to be afraid of the Devil, but even to
make the Devil afraid of us. I confess it would be a State of Felicity that
would make Life very easy to us upon many Accounts; and I could enlarge very
pleasantly (to my self) upon that Subject. But as things go with the World, I
question much whether it would be so pleasant to those I am writing to, and
therefore I leave it: and so if I have been preaching a little, it is so little
in length, and I hope so much to the purpose, that you may forgive me for once,
e^pecially upon Promise of saying as little for your Good for the time to come,
as I can.

THERE is indeed a right worthy and commendable State of Indifference, not only
as to Who shall or shall not visit us from the invisible World, and from what
Part of it they come; but also as to what Station we are to have among them
hereafter; and this happy Temper is much recommended to me by some of my
fashionable Friends, as a most desirable Condition of Life: to be perfectly
easy, void of Anxiety and Perplexities of any kind, and forming the most
perfect Composure of Soul that can be imagined.

THEY describe this the most accurately indeed by the Practice, for they say
most feelingly, that no Tongue can express the Felicity of it; which indeed I
believe is very true; they are perfectly easy about, because thoughtless of,
that dull remote thing called Futurity. As for there being a State of Life, or
a Something like Life after Death, they cannot say but it may be so, for they
never enquired much into the Principles of the Saduces, or into any other
Pricinciples about it. But what that State is to be, or what we are to be, or
not to be, in it, they never trouble themselves about it; they look upon it as
a thing remote, which People are not agreed about, and they believe never will,
'till they come there; and to be beating their Heads and perplexing their
Thoughts, about what, when they have done all, they are sure they shall never
arrive to a Certainty about, they do not see it is to the Purposeat all.

THIS is certainly a mighty brief Way with their Doubts, and a short answer to
all Enquiries; and I must own it is putting a short end to all Disputes with
themselves, about the thing called a future State.

BUT there remains a Question still unanswered, and which is a Question of
moment with me, whatever it may be with them, viz. Where is the Felicity of
this kind of Calm?

O, says a Deist of my Acquaintance, Peace of Mind is a Felicity, I hope.

Yes, said I, if it be built upon a right Foundation.

Nay, says he, Peace is Peace; don't tell me of Foundations.

Hold Friend, said I, even Molinos himself the Author of the Quietisme, which
one Author well calls Sotisme, and of the Sect of the Quietists, and who
resolved all Felicity and all Religion into the Calm of a retired Soul, yet
fixed that Calm upon the Meditations of an upright Mind, and the Calm of a
clear Heart.

I VALUE none of your Sects, says my Friend. Gallio was a true Politician and a
happy Man, Acts xviii. 17. He cared for none of these things; and there was his
Happin^ss.

SO a Madman, says I, is happy in his Lunacy, and enjoys a thoughtless Calm,
all the while he is in the greatest Hurry and Disorder of his Soul. I ^ay,
there is no Calm in Distraction.

WELL, but I am calm, says he, and yet I am not distracted.

I DON'T know that, said I, I doubt the Fact.

WELL, if I am mad, I don't know it, says he, and, as I said before, that is a
Happiness to me.

A HAPPINESS in Misery, said I; and such is all the Peace that such a Temper
can give.

BUT why is it not a sufficient Felicity, says he, to be calm and quiet?

BECAUSE, said I, a Mind insensible and unmoved in Dangers of the greatest
Importance, is not consistent with the Condition it self, or with Prudence and
Reason, under that Condition.

HOW is it not consistent? says my Friend.

WHY, for Example; suppose, says I, a Man in the upper Rooms of a House, when
all the lower Part was on Fire; the Staircase and all Retreats cut off, except
throwing himself out of the Window, if this Man sat smoking his Pipe, or
singing a Song, or reading a Play, would not you say he was demented and mad?

BUT how are the Cases parallel? says he.

EXACTLY, said I, they agree in every Part but this; that he is certain the
Fire is under him, and you don't know but it may be so, and don't think it
worth while to enquire: and to make it chime in that Part too, you may suppose
the Man ignorant too, only that People call to him, and tell him the House is
on Fire, and he does not so much as rise off his Seat to go to the Stair-head
and see whether it be so or no; though he hears them, and tells them he hears
them, he bids them not trouble their Heads about him, it is time enough when he
feels it; and the next Moment the Floor falls under him, and soon after the
Roof falls in over him, and so he is burnt to death.

WHAT do you infer from this? says he.

I ENQUIRE, said I, whether that Indolence and Unconcernedness be consistent
with common Sense, and if a wise Man would do so?

SUPPOSE I grant it? said he.

SO, says I, you must grant that an Indifference about what shall be our Share
of that State which is beyond us, Whether the bright or the dark, is
inconsistent with common Sense, and that no wise Man can act so.

HERE my Friend and I ended, for instead of being touched with it, he talked
profanely, and then I always think it is time to leave off talking at all; for
when Men give up their Reason to Atheism, and their Sense of GOD to Blasphemy,
who shall labor to wash that Ethiop?

IT is the same in the Case before me; here is an Apparition, or suppose it;
the Man that sees it is utterly unconcerned about it; he cares not one Farthing
whether it comes from above or from below, whether it be an Angel or a Devil, a
Messenger from Hell or from Heaven; and so this Man is not afraid of it, but
boldly goes up to it, and like a Soldier cries, Who are you for? Whence come
you? What have you to say to me? And it may be gives it for Answer, Very well,
go about your Business then, I have nothing to say to you. And this sort of
Courage, as he calls it, this unconcerned Bravery, he recommends as the best
way to deal with these Spirits.

BUT suppose the Devil will not be put off so, but says, I Will come and Visit you
tomorrow in another Dress; I Will try your Courage; and at last masters this
sort of indolent, unconcerned Easiness, and the Man falls into Terror and
Amazement; what has he at the bottom to preserve him from the Devil then? truly
nothing; but he is, like Cashio Buroughs, all trembling, and cries out, O God!
here she comes, and is frighted even to Death. Certainly a cold Indifference
about it whether it be an Angel or the Devil, and above all, whether its
Message be from Heaven or Hell, will not hold it out against the Terror that
may come along with it from without, or the reflections of Guilt that may be
raised by it from within; so that some better-grounded Courage, a Calm begun
from a better Principle, must be inquired after; or else, as I said to my
Deistical Friend, when you do really see the Devil you will not be so easy as
you promise your self to be. But this is too serious for you, I must go on.

I COME next to the Enquiry, What is our business, and how should we behave if
it is our misfortune to have any such Appearance come to us? and suppose our
Minds to be as much composed as ordinarily may be expected, not more than our
Neighbors; but what, I say, shall we do, and what is the best course for us to
take?

IN my Opinion, and it is the next Advice I would give, I say next to that of
fortifying the Mind with religious Considerations, of which I have spoken, and
which should always go first, speak to it.

BY speaking to it, my meaning is, Speak though it does not speak to you. I have
heard of some Apparitions, who it is said, had no power to speak 'till they were
first spoken to, and some cases of that kind are published by those who I
suppose believed them; though I see no reason to do so; and particularly of an
Apparition that caused a poor Man to follow it over Hedge and Ditch all Night
for many a Night together, 'till the poor Man was almost hurried to Death; but
could not speak to him, and the frighted Wretch was afraid to speak to it; but
at last the Man spoke, and then the Apparition's Mouth was loosed too: all
which I must con^ess I see no manner of reason to believe, and therefore cannot
recommend it to any body else to believe.

THERE seems no Consistency in the Nature of the thing, no foundation for it in
Religion, or any thing in it that we can Reason upon for our own Understanding;
and where neither Nature, Religion or Reason allow us any Light in it, upon
what Principle can we go to make our Judgment?

BUT leaving it therefore where we find it, I say if you see an Apparition,
that is such an Apparition as we have been speaking of, not a Phantosm of your
own Brain, not an imaginary Apparition the effect of Fright or Dream, or mere
Whimsie, not a Hypocondriack Apparition, the effect of Vapors and Hysteric
Shadows, when the Eye sees double, and Imagination makes it self a Telescope to
the Soul, not to show Realities, but to magnify Objects at the remotest
distance, and show things as in being which are not, if you see such an
Apparition as this and speak to it, it is no wonder you receive no answer, and
so you go away more frighted with a silent dumb Devil than you would be with a
speaking one; but I say, if the Vision be real, if it be a Shape and Appearance
in form as has been described, never shun it and fly from it; but speak to it.

IF you would ask me what you should say to it, it is an unfair Question in some
Respects; it is not possible for any one to dictate, without the proper
Circumstances be described. The old way you all know: In the name of, etc. as
above, is the common road. I will not cry down the Custom, because it is the
usual way, and the words are good; but I believe a sincere mental Ejaculatory
Prayer to the Blessed Being of Beings for his superior Presence, would be as
effectual as presenting the Words to the Devil as a kind of Exorcism; such a
Petition sent up, and then a plain what are you? I think is Compliment enough
for the Devil.

AN honest, plain, religious Scotsman who I knew, and who thought he saw the
Devil, though he was mistaken too, yet had this (to me) perfectly new Expression
upon the surprise, the Lord be between me and thee, Satan awa, that is go away,
or get thee away: 'twas certainly a good thought, and the poor Man was right,
for if the Lord was between him and the Devil there was no great need to fear
him or any of his.

BUT to wave particular Instructions in the case, the Occasion will certainly
administer the Substance of what you should say; the present Direction is only
in general, speak to it, never sink under the Terror or Surprise of the sight.
The Devil is rarely seen in his own Shape, and ordinarily for ends of his own,
he chooses to appear in familiar Shapes, personating some or other that we know,
or have known, and representing to our Fancy something that will not terrify
us; nay, it is the Opinion of the learned Divines, that the Devil would do much
less harm, and be far less dangerous, if he appeared as a mere Devil, with his
Horns, his cloven Hoof, and his Serpent's Tail and Dragon's Wings, as Fancy
figures him out, and as our Painters dress him up, than he does in his
disguises, and the many Shapes and Figures he assumes to himself.

So fatal are Masks and Disguises, Habits and Dresses to the World, and such
advantage does a false Countenance give to Criminal Perf^rmances of many kinds,
that even the Devil is more dangerous dressed up in Masquerade, than in his own
Clothes, and in his own Colors; if he would come in all his Formalities and
Frightfuls, he would not be capable of half so many Cousinings and Cheatings as
he now puts upon us: now you have him here and have him there, you have him
every where and no where, he is here a Tempter to Wickedness, there a Preacher
of Righteousness; today in one disguise, tomorrow in another; you know him
and you don't know him, see him and don't see him, and how then can any one
tell you what to say to him, or how to talk with him?

HOWEVER, to come as near to it as we can, the first and ordinary Question,
natural to the Occasion, is to know who he is, and whence he comes, what
Message he has to deliver, what Business he comes about, and what you have to
do with it, why he disturbs you in particular, and the like; and if you may
obtain so much Civility from him, to desire him to trouble you no more;
especially if you find the Apparition to be of the worst kind.

IF it is apparently a good Spirit, I think the Conduct should differ, as the
Message he comes about will certainly differ; if it warns you to repent of such
and such a scandalous Life; or if it bids you reform such and such a criminal
Practice, which you know your self guilty of; accept the kind Admonition,
submit to the Reproof, and promise Obedience; you may depend, as I have often
said, the Devil com^s of no such Errand.

IF it tells you such and such Dangers attend you, take the kind hint, and use
the proper means to avoid them, thankfully acknowledging the Goodness of the
Hand that sent the Notice, as well as the Messenger that brought it; for depend
upon it the Devil, who is a Lover and Author, as well as the Promoter of
Mischief, takes no Pains to prevent it, but would rather have a Hand in
bringing it upon you.

AND if such things as these are the Subject of the Message, what can you say
why you should be afraid of the Messenger? It Is hard to rejoice in the Message,
and be scared at the Messenger: the truth is, we are not much accustomed to
such solemn Admonitions, such good and beneficent Cautions and Assistances; and
this makes the thing strange and aweful, and be received with Terror and
Fright, and perhaps if it was not so we should receive them oftener.

WE do not find the old Patriarchs, or after them, the Children of Israel, were
so frighted at the Apparition of Angels and Spirits; it is true indeed when the
Angel appeared to Gideon at the Threshing-Floor, it is said he was troubled at
his Presence; nevertheless the Message was kind and encouraging; yet we find he
recovered himself, and took Courage to talk very particularly with it, and to
expostulate with him about the Circumstances of his Country, and of the People,
and even to ask a double Sign from the Angel to confirm his Faith: and how went
he on? he obeyed the Voice of the Vision, notwithstanding all his Fears and
Doubts, and he bowed his Soul, and followed the Directions given him.

THERE are abundance of Reasons why we should listen to such Apparitions as
these; their distinguishing Character is, that they always come of some Errand
or other for the good of Mankind; take it either in general, or in particular:
Sometimes it is alleged they come upon trifling and mean Occasions, as is the
Case in many Instances given in Story, and in Print. But it may be answered
with an Enquiry, Are we sure these are not trifling Stories, and brought in by
Persons, perhaps, but half informed? But what are we to think of the Apparition
to King James V. in Scotland, who warned him against his Flodden-Field
Expedition? which if he had listened to he had saved his Life, and the Lives of
ten thousand of his People: for less, it is said, did not fall in the whole
Undertaking.

AND what shall we say of the Warning given to the Duke of Buckingham, by the
Apparition of his own Father, which if he had listened to, it is very likely he
had escaped the fatal Knife? for Felton, who Assassinated him, did it, as it
seems he declared at the Gibbet, upon the Account of the Popular Hatred, and
that he thought him a public Enemy to his Country.

THESE, and many more which I have mentioned, or which I have not mentioned,
have been the Subject of such Messengers, and were far from trifling. If an
Appari^ion gives any of us Notice of our approaching End, and bids us prepare
for it, is not the Message solemn, and the Occasion of it weighty; and is not
the Notice worth our Regard? Is the Preparation for Death a trifling thing? and
the assurance how near the time is cannot but be a valuable Notice; I am sure
it ought to be esteemed so.

A FLOUTING atheistick Man of Wit, who must be nameless, because he will not
bear to be named to the Crimes which he is not ashamed to commit, told me, when
discoursing this Part of the Subject, that it was no Kindness at all, for that
Men ought always to be prepared for Death; and yet could not deny but that it
was a remote Affair which he had not yet given himself the trouble to think
about.

I CANNOT believe but that if some People, who now value themselves upon their
bright Thoughts, and their being above the Power of Chagrine, or of any
melancholy Reflections to disturb their Joy, were told (nay, though it was by a
kind Apparition) that they were to die, one in a Fortnight, one in three Days;
one at one time, and one at another, and all within a short time, they would
have a little alteration upon their Outsides. G -- M -- who laughs evermore,
is continually titt^r^ng and prompting others to the lowestpriz'd Part of
Mirth, who is all Levity and Froth, and owns that one Sigh never yet reached
his Heart; should a solemn Apparition come to him and his merry Friend, the
very Duplicate of himself, and say, Repent G --, and prepare for Death, for you
have but three Months to live, and you --, pointing to his Fellow-mimick, but
five Days; I say, should such a Message be seriously delivered him in such an
aweful Manner, as many Relations tell us have been done to others, I cannot
have so little Charity for the Beau, but to think he would change Color a
little, and begin to consider, and especially if at the five Days end he had
News that his other Self, the Image of his extraordinary Soul, the very Sosio
to himself, in Life, though not in Figure, was found dead in his Bed to a tittle
of the time.

I SAY I cannot doubt but that he would learn to Sigh a little; and my Charity
is the more extensive in Mr. M -- 's Case, because, take him a little off of
his ordinary Titillations, and unhinge him from the light Article which has
gained so entirely upon him as to Eclipse him, the Man has ye^ some Brains, and
they might perhaps assist a little upon such an Occasion, to condense the
Vapor, and bring the solid Part uppermost, which at present has not happened
to him.

AND not to single out a gay Humor or two from the rest, how many among our
Box and Pit Heroes, were they told they were under the Sentence of Death, and
only Reprieved for so many, and so many Days: I say, how many of them would
shine at the next Opera? how would their Countenance^ change, and their Knees
knock one against another? How would they sit down in Tears and Repentance, or
sink into the Death foretold, even by the mere Horror of its approach? for
there is the most Dread where there is the least Repentance: Nor let any one
cavil at the Expression, a Sentence and a Reprieve, let them take it as they
will; the thing is no less, and can be understood no otherwise of us all: We
are all under the Sentence, as directly as a Criminal that hears it read at the
Bar, with only this significant Difference, namely, That we are Reprieved sine
die, the Criminal is not, and the Consequence of this may be the worse; for we
promise ourselves it shall be longer than we have reason to believe it is, and
so are often Executed in Surprise, our Preparations being delayed by
Presumption; whereas the Offender knows he must die at the Expiration of his
Reprieve, and perhaps is assured that it is in vain to expect any farther delay.

NOW a kind Messenger comes, as the Prophet did to Hezekiah, and says, Prepare
yourself, for you shall die, and not live; is this Message to be slighted and
disregarded? If it is so treated it is at your Peril, you take that Part upon
yourself; and if you find this the Case, you will hardly call the Message
trifling, much less say such Apparitions generally come upon trifling Occasions.

HISTORY records a great many foreboding Signs, and some by Apparition,
foretelling the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple; not that any of
those Signs could be supposed to give Warning of it, so as that it might be
prevented; for our Savior had expressly said it should be destroyed, Their
House should be left unto them desolate, Matt. xxiii. 38. Not one Stone left
upon another which shall not be thrown down, Matt. xxiv. 2. But those Signs and
Apparitions were apparent Warnings to the People, at least to such of them as
had the Wisdom to take Notice of them, to make their Escape out of the City
before the Romans invested it, and before it was too late; particularly the
opening the great brazen Doors of the Temple, which Josephus says twenty Man
could scarce turn to open or shut, and which opening of themselves, an
Apparition was seen in the House of GOD, and a Voice heard, saying, Let us
Depart hence.

NO question, but as the Warning or Alarm was given to direct many to their
Escape, so many had that Wisdom given them as to make their Escape; and though
the Desolation was horrible, and such as perhaps was never equaled, except in
the same Place, and the same Country, by the Assyrians, when the first Temple
was burnt; yet, as they say it is a hard Battle where none escape, so Josephus
himself owns, that many Thousands, and others say many hundreds of thousands
fled in time, and made their Escape, flying, as the Text says, from the Wrath
to come. Nor can I doubt but that many had warnings in Dreams, that is, as I
say, by Apparitions in Dream, by Visions, and some by open Apparitions, that
the City would be destroyed.

RABBI JUDAH says, the Patriarchs appeared to many, and gave them Notice, that
the Romans would come and besiege their City, and that the Temple should be
destroyed; but I doubt much of the Story, and that On a double Account. 1.
Whether ever any of the Patriarchs did so appear and forewarn them; for had
they done so, they would certainly have told them that the Messiah was come,
and that therefore the second Temple was to be destroyed, for that all the
Prophesies were fulfilled. But, 2. I doubt also that Rabbi Judah, if such an
Author there was, never said so, and that it is only a Tradition.

IT is certain there were the like Omens, and I doubt not Apparitions too, just
before the taking and sacking of Rome by the Barbarians, the Vandals and Goths;
and we might descend to modern History for many of the like: so that these
Apparitions do not always come upon trifling Occasions, at least they are not
trifling to those whom they regard in particular, and therefore it is not an
Objection for a particular Person to make.

I HAVE troubled you with none of those Apparitions, which have come to help
you to find out Money, to reveal little love Secrets and Intrigues, and upon
other such Cases; nor do I recommend it to you to believe those Trifles; they
are most certainly the Apparitions of Fancy, as I shall observe at large in its
Place; such People make a mere Harlequin of the Devil, a common Jack-Pudding,
to make Game with; it is most certain, the Spirits I speak of, know how to make
themselves be better regarded, know how to make themselves considerable, can
come clothed in Terror if they please, and have done so where occasion has
called for it; either to enforce their Message, or alarm such Persons who set
up for a hardened Face beyond the Power of invisible Terrors.

BUT as their Message is generally peaceable, and the Intent of it kind and
good, so they choose to come in a manner, as little attended with the frightful
Part as they can.

BUT not to dwell on this Part, or enquire at all what the Message is they come
about, whether trifling or otherwise, the present Enquiry is, what is our Part,
what is to be done when they do appear: For 'till we see them, we know nothing
of their Business; nor perhaps when we see them, unless we speak to them; and
we have many Stories of Apparitions, that only show themselves, and perhaps it
may be never speak at all.

THIS our People call Walking, and indeed it is not improperly called so,
because, as to us, we know no more of their Business; but it no more follows
that they have no other Business here because we don't know it, than that it is
likely they should come hither, and walk to and fro, and have nothing to do.

AS for those non-appearing Apparitions, if I may call them so, (for not to
appear, and not to let us know what they appear for, seems to be much the
same;) I mean those not-speaking Apparitions, we can indeed give no Account of
them, because we cannot converse with them: It seems to me they are not of the
Heavenly or Angelick Kind, because they would certainly have some more apparent
Business, and perhaps not be backward to speak of it, at least they would not
seem to be ashamed of their Errand.

NOR is it my Opinion, that those Apparitions who come of good Errands can be
supposed to be unable to speak, if it was necessary to their Business to use
Speech; much less that they should receive their Commission or their Ability to
speak from our first speaking to them: There is no Coherence in it: But
certainly if the Spirits that appear upon good Designs, and come upon good
Errands, do not speak to us; they are not sent to us; their Business is with
somebody else, which we know nothing of, though we may see the Spectre; for it
may be that a Man may see an Apparition that has nothing to do with him, or to
say to him.

OR perhaps the Spectre may execute its Commission effectually, without
speaking. A Ghost was said to haunt a certain House in the Country not far from
Rygate in Surrey; it was met in the Garden by one of the Family, who had long
valued himself upon believing, and saying also, that there were no such things
as Apparitions, and that he would be sure of it whenever he met such a thing,
he would know what it was made of before he parted with it.

GOING out of the House in the Evening when it was almost dark, but not quite,
he meets the Apparition in the Garden; the Apparition shunned him, and would not
have been seen, or made as if it would not have been seen. H A! says he boldly,
are you there! What are you? The Apparition still makes from him, and he speaks
again, Who are you? What is your Name? says he, in a kind of jesting manner. My
Business is not with you, says the Apparition. But I have some Business with
you, says he, I must know what you are, and I will know what you are; and with
that, says my Story, (though by the way I must tell you, I don't know how true
it is) I say, with that the bold Fellow offers to go up to it and lay Hands upon
it; at which it advanced to him and overrun him, bore him down, and threw him
against the Garden Wall, which was at least five or six Yards from him, with
such Violence, that he was taken up for dead; and I suppose he never ventured
to lay Hands upon a Spirit or Apparition again.

NOW be this Story true or not, I mention it to warn rash Heads, who pretending
not to fear the Devil, are for using the ordinary Violences with him, which
affect one Man from another, or with an Apparition, in which they may be sure
to ^eceive some Mischief. I knew One fired a Gun at an Apparition, and the Gun
burst in a hundred Pieces in his Hand, (that is in a great many Pieces.)
Another struck at an Apparition with a Sword, and broke his Sword in Pieces,
and wounded his Hand gri^vously. It is most certain that an Apparition or a
Spirit is not to be cut with a Sword, or shot with a Gun; as there is no
Substance, there can be no Wound made; and it is next to Madness for any one to
go that way to work, be it Angel or be it Devil.

BUT to carry this farther: In particular, an Apparition may show itself, and
peform its Mission in a full and complete manner, and yet not speak. I have a
Story by me of a Gentleman who carried on a Secret and Criminal Conversation
with a certain Lady, and having made an Assignation to meet the Lady, was met
at the Place by an Apparition of his own Mother; she said nothing, she did not
offer to speak, nor did he at first know it to be an Apparition. The Gentleman
walks about in the Field near a House where he had appointed the Lady to meet;
the Apparition walked about likewise, and he takes it to be a Woman in
ordinary, as any Woman might be seen to walk up and down in the same Field or
Walk.

BY and by the Woman or Lady appointed comes, he meets her, and goes forward to
salute her; the Apparition shows itself just behind the Lady, and looks him
full in the Face; he starts back from the Lady, and instead of kissing her,
cries out, and asks her, Who Is that behind her; she turns about, but sees
nobody, nor he neither, which frights them both.

HE fancies it to be an imaginary Vapor, having no Faith at all in
Apparitions, and offers to go up to the Lady again; and behold, he sees the
Apparition just behind her again, the Face standing just so as to look over the
Lady's Shoulder, and stare just upon him; he cries out again, and knows it to
be his Mother, who it seems was dead, and in crying out again, he adds, My
Mother! at which it vanishes.

HAD this Apparition any occasion to speak? Was it not Rebuke enough to look
him in the Face? Even in common Affairs, a Look from the Eye of one who has
Authority to reprove, is sometimes more effectual than the Reproof, if it was
given in Words at length.

SUPPOSE this Spectre to regard him not with a threatening Aspect, but with a
Countenance of Pity, of a Maternal Reprehension, a Reproof urging Shame and
Reproach, like that of Solomon, What, my Son! what, the Son of my Vows! my Son
be seen embracing a Strumpet! the Man went away, says my Story, filled with
Confusion; as no question indeed but he would.

HERE was no need of Speech; the Look was a Lash, and a Reproof sufficient; the
Man would hardly meet there any more, if he would meet the same Lady any more,
and it is very likely he never did.

IT IS very unhappy in the Case before me, that it is impossible to attest the
Truth of all the Stories which are handed about upon such a Subject as this is;
and therefore though I might make Flourishes of the Truth of the Particulars in
all Cases, as others do; I choose rather to insist upon the Moral of every
Story, whatever the Fact may be, and to enforce the Influence, supposing the
History to be real, or whether it be really so or not, which is not much
material.

ALL these Cases, however, return me back to the Advice above, namely, always
if you see an Apparition, speak to it, speak to it early, and answer any
Questions it asks, but be sure to ask it no Questions except such as are
reasonable, and may be supposed to be within the Reach of its imm^diate
Capacity to answer; no Questions tending to reveal the Mysteries of a future
State. To ask such Questions as are a plain diving into the Secrets of Heaven,
which it is already declared shall not be laid open, is asking the good Spirit,
if it be such, to offend on his Part, and is really criminal on your Part; as,
to ask what Condition the Person is in, meaning the Person whose Shape the
Apparition takes up; How he gets Leave to appear here; why he comes in this or
that Manner; what kind of Place Heaven is, and such like; as the Bishop of Down
and Connor ordered James Haddock to ask.

BUT suit your Questions to what the Spectre shall say, or as the manner of its
Appearance shall direct you; as particularly, if it requires you to do any
thing, to speak to any Person, or to deliver any Admonition to a third Person,
as in the case of the Apparition about the Duke of Buckingham, and as in the
Case of Dr. Scot and others; you may justly ask Tokens by which you may make
your self be believed; also such Questions as relate to yourself, and to the
Nature of the thing which the Apparition comes about.

BUT Questions relating to things beyond Time, curious Enquiries into Futurity
and Eternity, are upon many Accounts to be avoided; and for some Reasons which
I care not to mention in particular; because I would not form frightful Ideas
in the Minds of those that read. I have some Stories by me which give an
Account that upon such needless Inquiries the Apparition has turned itself into
terrifying Appearances, intimating Resentment; not only a Resentment on its own
Account, but as if it was an Offense and a high Provocation to the supreme
Power to offer to search into what Heaven has concealed: To me, indeed, it
seems it would be so, and therefore it is certainly best to refrain those
Inquiries.

In a word, the Apparition is, as I may say, Aggressor; it appears; you are
passive; be so still, otherwise you make your self the Apparition, and put the
Apparition in your Place: ask it wherefore it appears to you, whether for Good
or Evil; if for Evil, call upon God for Protection; if it comes for Good,
declare your self ready to receive its Message, and to observe every just
Direction, to obey every righteous Command, and attend to what it shall say.

THIS is to act fearless, and yet cautious; bold, and yet wisely; resolved, and
yet humble; and in this Temper of Mind, I think no Man need to be afraid of an
Apparition.

YOU may resolve all such things into this; Whether they are good Spirits or
bad, Ang^lick Appearances or Diabolick, they are under superior Limitations^
the Devil we know is chained, he can go no farther than the length of his
Tether; he has not a Hand to act, or a Foot to walk, or a Mouth to speak, but
as he is permitted. The Case of his Commission to Job is explicit; such and
such things he might do, such he might not; even the Lives of Job's Children,
and Cattle, and Servants were given him; and, like a Devil as he was, he went
to the full Extent of his Commission; he spared not one of them that he could
destroy, but he was forbid to touch the Life of Job, and he did not, he durst
not, he could not kill him.

IF then we are sure the Devil is restrained from hurting us, any otherwise
than he is directed and limited, we may be sure that good Spirits are; for
their Nature, their Business, their Desires are all fixed in a general
Beneficence to Mankind; their Powers and Employments, as far as they are
concerned among us, and in things upon this Surface, are included in the
heavenly Acclamation when the Angels sung to the Shepherds, On Earth Peace,
Good Will toward Men, Luk^. ii. 14.

IF at any time they are Messengers of Judgment, Executors of the divine
Vengeance, it is likewise by special, nay, by extraordinary Commission; and
then they are indeed Flames of Fire, and punctually do what they are commanded,
and no more.

BUT even then, that we may be easy in the matter of Apparition, they do not
disguise themselves or conceal their Commission: As Manoah's Wife said to him
when the Angel appeared to her, if the LORD were pleased to kill us, he would
not have received a Burnt-offering, and a Meat Offering at our Hands, neither
would HE have showed us all these things, Judges xiii. 23. So here, the
Apparition of a good Spirit would not betray us, would not act by Stratagem
with us, would not appear in Peace when he means War; come like a Friend, when
he was sent for an Enemy; give good Council, when he meant Death and
Destruction: But if it appears in Peace, its Design and its Message is
certainly Peace.

UPON the whole, you have no way any Occasion to be disturbed at an Appearance,
but to regard the Power sending, not the Agent sent; looking beyond the
Apparition itself, and with a resolved Mind, and a steady, calm Courage, speak
to it, and demand its Business; I do not mean by Demand, a Demand of Insult and
Arrogance, but an humble, yet resolved Enquiry, Why, and on what Occasion it
comes to you.

I HAVE done counselling. If this Part is too grave for you, as I said before,
it is not very tedious, you may make it a Parenthesis, and the Work will read
without it; for why should I desire you to do any good thing against your Will?

IF you don't think there is any thing in it all, if it is not worth your
Notice, go on without it; and when you see any thing, be not surpised and
confused, covered with Horror and Fright; as is usually the Case of those who
laugh loudest at such things before they come. W -- G --, Esquire; famous for that
particular Virtue called Impudence, and for that more than ordinary Perfection
of it, which some People call Blasphemy; how m^rry did he use to make himself
about the ordinary Notions of seeing Apparitions, and hearing People talk of
Spirits and the Devil!

HOW witty would he be upon the poor Ladies, when they seemed a little
disordered at frightful Stories of People's walking, and of the Devil's
appearing in horrible Shapes, and such like things, as the old Women perhaps
had weakly enough filled their Heads with! Nothing pleased the young Hero like
making a Jest of those things; and the Truth was, that many of them deserved
it: but the Jest of all Jests was, to see the Esquire come home frighted out of
more Wits than any one ever thought him Master of, when riding home in the dark
one Night, he met, that is, his Fancy met, the Devil in some monstrous Shape or
other; but such as his Terrors could not leave him room to describe, only by
two great Saucer Eyes glaring in the Dark, and by puffing and blowing most
frightfully. (It seems the Devil had been upon some hasty Business, and was out
of Breath.)

IN this Terror he is become such a Convert to the Doctrine of the Reality of
Apparitions, that he dares not be a Moment in the dark, dares not lie alone, or
go up Stairs by himself: When upon full Examination, the Devil he met was only
a hunted Bullock that some Butchers had made half mad, and had pursued 'till
they lost him in the Night, and he passed the Esquire in the dark, and was
found the next Morning half dead, near the Place where his Worship was scared
with him. Yet the Fright has got such Possession of his Soul, that all the
laughing at him, and all the Fools and Childrens mocking him in the very
Streets cannot bea^ that Fit of trembling out of his Joints, nor fortify his
Soul against the Vision but of a Cat, if it be in the dark.

SO eminently silly does that needless Passion Fear bring us to be, when it has
once gotten Possession of the Mind; How foolish, how inconsistent, are the
Operations of it! Hence really the Saying, to be frighted out of our Wits, or
Such a one is frighted out of his Wits, is not so out of the way as some may
imagine; and the Esquire mentioned just now is as effectually so frighted out
of his Wits, even in the letter of it, as is possible; for nothing ever acted
more like a Fool than he does now; except it was himself when he made a Jest of
the Reality of that very thing, of which now he is so disordered with the
Shadow.

CHAP. XIV. Of Sham Apparitions, and Apparitions which have been the Effect
either of Fraud or Fear.
BY sham Apparitions I am to be understood such as have been put upon People by
the Fraud and Craft of subtle Knaves, in order to bring about their wicked
Designs, or such as Fear and weak Apprehension have presented to, and imposed
upon the Imagination. In short,

FIRST, Apparitions with which People are cheated by others.

SECONDLY, Apparitions with which they cheat themselves.

FIRST, Apparitions formed by the Knavery of others, to cheat, abuse and impose
upon the Credulity of the People. Such was the Fable of Jupiter descending in a
Golden Shower, and falling into the Lap of Danaae, whom he had a mind to
Debauch. And indeed, whose Virtue could we think would in those Days, (not to
say a Word of our more modest and sanctified Ladies) resist a shower of Gold,
falling into their Lap? with a God in the middle of it too; But that by the way.

THE like Apparition that Immortal Ravisher of Virgins, called Jupiter, made,
when he stole the Lady Europa in the shape of a Milk-white Bull, inviting the
Lady to get up upon his Back, and immediately jumps into the Sea with her, and
swims over the Hellespont; from whence the other side where she landed is
called Europe to this Day. Indeed when Ladies come to ride upon Bulls, what can
they expect? Such was the horrid Cheat put upon that poor virtuous, but
bigoted Roman Lady, persuading her that the God -- desired to enjoy her, which
she in blind Devotion submitted to with Raptures of divine Joy and Elevation;
caused her Bed to be laid in the Sacristie of the Temple, decked it with
Flowers and Perfumes, and caused the debauched Priest to be dressed up with
Robes of State, and offering rich Odours all the Night; when at length, instead
of the God, instead of the Apparition which she expected, she was betrayed, and
was violated by the Traitor that lay in wait for her in the Temple. Such again
was the Apparition of Apollo which Lucian speaks of, which was seen su^pended
in the Air, and carried or moved about from place to place in the Temple of
Apollo at Hierapolis. Lucian de Dea Syra.

SUCH was the sordid Imposture of Mahomet, who having brought up a tame Pidgeon
to come to his Ear, where he fed her always with Pease or Tares, so that she
constantly came thither at his Call; persuaded his Followers that it was an
Apparition of the Angel Gabriel sent from GOD to whisper divine Oracles into
his Soul; and that he received the heavenly Inspirations by that means. Such
was the Voice which pronounced him to be the Prophet of the most high GOD,
which Voice sounding in the Air, no Person appearing to speak, was concluded to
be the Voice of an Angel, appearing to him, whereas it was spoken by his own
Direction by a poor Fellow who he had placed on purpose at the bottom of a
Well; and when he found the Imposture take with the People, he sent a
Detachment of his Followers to fill up the Well with Stones, pretending it was
that it should no more be profaned by any Man or Cattle drinking of its holy
Waters, from whence the Voice of an Angel had been heard; but really to bury
the poor Wretch at the bottom of it, that he might not betray the Secret, and
discover the contrived Delusion.

SUCH likewise was the Story of the Ass that carried him up into Paradise, and
that not only to one, but through seven or eight Paradises or Heavens, where he
saw two and thirty thousand Visions: And such were all the Apparitions which
that ridiculous Impostor feigned to see upon every Occasion, 'till his blinded
Followers believed him to be an Apparition himself.

SUCH was the Image of St. George, rightly called Miraculous, which the Greeks
to this Day play horrible Pranks with at the Isle of Skyros in the
Archipelague, and which they put upon the People as an Apparition indeed;
exercising particular Severities upon People in several Cases: But as it is
managed by the Priests, so it is especially very furious upon all those that
neglect to fulfill the Vows made to the said Saint George, or in general to all
those that do not pay their Debts to the Clergy.

MONSIEUR Tournefort in his Voyage into the Levant gives a diverting Account of
the Conduct of this Devil of Skyros; how they worry the Ignorant People to
Death with it, and impose upon them by it in the grossest and absurdest manner
possible. As there are not greater Impostors in the World than the Greeks, and
especially the Greek Clergy; so there are not a more ignorant,
easilyimpos'd-upon People in the World than the Greek Layety; and especially
those whom the Greek Clergy have to do with: Hence it is, that the most absurd
Reasonings go down with them; and indeed they may be truly said to be Believers
in the literal sense, for they take all things by the lump, and without
reasoning at all upon them: if not, it would be impossible to possess them, as
the Priests do, with a Belie^ that the Image of St. George moves the Priest,
not the Priest the Image, though he carries it about upon his Shoulders.

YET this is the fact: The Image of St. George is no more than a Picture, and
that of very course Painting representing St. George upon a log of Wood; it is
placed over the great Altar of the Cathedral at Skyros, which is dedicated to
that Saint: when the Church is full of People, the Image is seen to move of it
self. This they call, and were the fact true, it might well be called, the
Apparition of St. George; but be the Fact true or not, it is believed to be so,
and that is as well to all the intents and purposes of an Apparition, as if the
Image were invigorated.

BUT to speak it in their own words, the Image is seen to move of it self, and
to show it self in Apparition to all the People; for notwithstanding its Bulk
and Weight, it will transport it self through the Air into the midst of the
Assembly; there it hovers about, as it were viewing every Face and examining
every Heart; if it finds any one that has failed to perform any Vow to him (the
Saint,) the Image immediately fixes it self on the Shoulders of the Delinquent,
singles him out, and not only he is exposed to the whole Assembly, but the
Image plies him with furious and continued Buffettings, 'till he becomes
penitent, and promises again in the Face of the Assembly to pay what he owes to
the Church.

BUT this is not all: but when the Assembly is thus purged by the Justice of
this Ghost in an Image, it is then taken up and placed upon the Shoulders of a
blind Monk, who carries it out of the Church into the Town; the Monk being
blind and not knowing whither he goes, is guided by the occult impression of
the Image, who guides him as a Rider guides a blind Horse; and thus he carries
him directly to the House of such as are Delinquent in the case of Debt to the
Altar of St. George.

NOR is it enough that the Debtor seeing the Apparition or Image coming to him,
flies from it, and escapes from House to House; for the Image causes the Monk
to follow him by the Foot, as a Hound does a Hare; so that, in a word, there is
no escaping St. George, no flying from him, the Monk is steady in his pursuit,
ascends, descends, passes, repasses, enters all places, 'till the poor Wretch,
who may be truly said to be hunted down, or Hounded down as they express it in
the North, is obliged to pay the utmost Farthing.

THIS Story fully confirmed my thoughts in a Remark which I made from the
beginning of this Work, that really Church Apparitions are the most frightful,
most teizing, and terrible in their way, of all the real Devils that walk about
in the World.

BUT what need we wander thus among the Ancients, and hunt among the Greek
Schismatics for artificial Apparitions, and for Ecclesiastic Delusions of this
kind? The Roman Church, that true Catholic Establishment, built upon the solid
Rock of St. Peter himself, how full is it of glorious Frauds of this kind? and
how has the whole Scheme of Papal Tyranny been supported among the People in
this very manner, ever since the great defection of the Roman Hierarchy, from
its true Primitive Purity, and original holy Institution?

NOT that I purpose to make this Work a Collection of Church Apparitions,
whether Popish or Protestant; any more than I shall enter upon a reciting the
Universalia of State Apparitions; it is well for this Age, both in Church and
State, that my Doctrine of the Rest of Souls is established; for certainly, if
the Souls of the Departed could be disturbed either in Heaven or Hell, by the
mad things, or the simple things, the good things, or the wicked things
transacted by their Posterity in these Days, there must be as great an
Uneasiness in those eternal Mansions on account of the present Age, as ever
there was since History gives us any Account of things: Never did any
Generation make such Fools of their Fathers, and such wise Men of themselves,
and both so unaccountable; sure it must be, that the Dead cannot come to the
Quick, and that they know nothing of us, or the whole World would be one
Apparition, and we should, as Sir W -- B -- said above, have all come up again
that was under Ground, the dead World would be too many for the living World,
and we should meet ten Apparitions in every Street for one living Creature.

BUT to come to the Case in hand, the first Christian Apparition I meet with
deserves our particular Remark; first indeed, because of the Importance of the
Occasion, namely, for the Confirmation of the Faith of all true Catholics in
that great disputed, yet unsettled Point, viz. Whether ever St. PETER was at
ROME or no? a Point so essential, and which the Heretics take so much Pains to
make doubtful, that if we Catholics do not establish it past all the Cavils of
our Enemies, we do nothing; and for this we bring the miraculous Apparition of
Jesus Christ to St. Peter just without the City, and which carried Peter back
again into the City; so that as he came out of Rom^, and returned to Rome,
Christ himself being Witness to it, sure it can never be disputed any more.

THIS being of so great Importance to the Catholic Church, it is meet I should
bring you good Authority for the Relation; and therefore thinking my self not
competent, not a sufficient Evidence, being perhaps suspected of Heresy, I
shall give it you out of the Labors of an ancient Father of the Roman Church,
and you shall have the Story from his own Mouth, and in his own Words, as
follows: It is the famous Doctor Smith, a Popish Preacher in Queen Mary's Days,
who boasted that he had overcome both Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, in a
Dispute against them about St. Peter's having been at Rome. Take a piece of the
Reverend Doctor's Sermon.

THE Doctor's Business was to take upon him to run down the poor oppressed
Confessors, Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, and make them odious to the People;
and being to preach a Sermon upon this Subject at Whitti^gton College in
London, (the same, or near it, that is now called St. Martin Vintry) He begins
thus,

MY Masters, you are in great E rror concerning the blessed Sacrament, and all
your Trust was in Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer; as for Latimer, he said in open
Disputation at Oxford, that he had no Learning in that Matter, but out of
Cranmer's Book. Before this I disputed with Latimer twenty Years ago, and then
he had no Learning: As for Cranmer, he said that his Learning came from Ridley;
and as for Ridley, I disputed with him my self now at Oxford the other Day, and
I proved my Argument thus, Ille cui Christus obviavit Romae fuit Romae; ac
Christus obviavit Petro Romae: Ergo Petrus fuit Romae. That is, He whom Christ
met at Rome was at Rome; but Christ met Peter at Rome, ERGO Peter was at Rome.

BY this Argument I prove two things, and singular Mysteries of our Faith.

FIRST, That Peter was at Rome, against those who clatter that Peter never was
at Rome

SECONDLY, That if Peter met Christ bodily, as Abdias reports, and which I am
sure is true, or else such an ancient and holy Father would never have written
it; then consequently he may as well be in the Blessed Sacrament, as he was met
bodily. To this Ridley stood like a Block, and feeling himself convinc'^,
answered nothing. Then said I, cur non respondes Haeretice, Haereticorum,
Haereticissime? did I not handle him well?

THEN he denied the Minor, which I proved thus. Christ met Peter going out of
Rome, and said Good Morrow Peter! whether go thou? Peter answered,
Good Morrow good Man, whither go thou? Then said Christ, I go to Rome to
suffer. What! says Peter: I trow, unless I take my Marks amiss, ye be JESUS
CHRIST: Good Lord, how do you? I am glad I have met you here. Then said Jesus
Christ to Peter, Go back and suffer, or else I must; and pro te and me.

WHEN Ridley had heard this my Proof, and Abdias's Authority, a Doctor ancient
and ^rrefragable, he answered never a word; and thus I confuted Ridley in the
Audience of a thousand; and yet ye say, that Jesus Christ was never bodily on
Earth since his Ascension.

HERE IS an Apparition of good Fame, and of extraordinary Authority; and if any
Objection can lie against it, it is only whether it be true or not; but I am not
to answer for that, it is certainly true, that the Learned Doctor preached this
excellent Sermon, and that is enough for me.

BUT having thus given you an Apparition of such great Authority, namely of
Jesus Christ himself, I shall quote you a few others of a more modern kind to
confirm you in this Principle, namely, that Apparitions did not cease in the
Church: Though Miracles are said to cease, and Prophesies cease, though Oracles are
dumb, and the Dead do not return; yet that Apparition is not wanting, and the
Artifices of the Fathers remain; namely, that they can show you wonders in
Vision every Day for the Confirmation of that great Catholic Verity.

I MIGHT descend here to the famous Apparition of Loudon, commonly called the
Devil of Loudon; and the yet more famous Apparition of Jetzer at Bern in
Switzerland. These are indeed Orthodox Delusions, and both carried on with the
utmost Assurance, I had almost said Villainy, by the Priests: But I am not come
so far down yet on our way to Modern Roguery.

ONE of our Popes I think insisted, that he had had an Apparition of the Devil
to him; whereas St. Francis, and St. Ignatius each in their turn put the Bite
of Apparition upon the World, in so many particular cases, that if they had
not, as we may say, left it off in time, as the World took them for mad Men and
Fools, they would have taken them for what they really were, viz. Knaves and
Cheats, and have used them accordingly; and indeed it was once within an Ace
with St. Francis of his being whipped through the Streets at Naples for an
Impostor; and he had but one way to get off, which was to add some things to
his Conduct so extremely silly and ridiculous, that he was taken for an Idiot,
and let run loose in the Streets with a crowd of Boys at his Heels following
and shouting at him, and throwing Dirt and rotten Eggs upon him. This he turned
into a species of Martyrdom, valued himself upon it, and would not suffer the
Filth to be s^raped off from him; because it was the Ornament and Crown of his
Sufferings for preaching the Gospel.

IT was doubtful, for some time, whether this holy Enthusiast had more
Apparitions of the Blessed Virgin, or of the Devil, following him: It is true,
some of our Heretics affirmed he had no Apparitions at all, either of the
Virgin or of the Devil; but that it was all a devilish Cheat, which he had the
Face to put upon the World. But this, they tell us, is too uncharitable;
because it is supposing the Wretch himself, (who, it is allowed, was a very weak
and silly, though an impudent Fellow) was able to Impose upon all the World at
that time, who Universally believed that he had seen some Apparitions which
elevated his Mind to that degree of Euthusiasm which he appeared acted by.

BUT then, if we must allow he was visited with Apparitions, it must be of the
Devil, not the Blessed Virgin; because we have no Scripture Authority to
support the Notion that she ever did, or can appear at all, either to him or
any body else^ and that all the pretended Apparitions of the Virgin Mary, of
what kind soever, which the Legends are full of, are the mere Impostures of the
Priests, as really and openly as if they had been seen to be performed: Such
was her speaking to St. Bernard, when he came up the Nave of the great Church
at Millan, at four steps, twen^y Yards at a step; at the first step he said O
Faelix! at the second step, O Pia! at the third step, O Santa! and at the
fourth step, Maria! to which the Image answered, Salve Bernardi. The Marks of
the four steps, Dr. Burnet, in his Letters, tells us are to be seen in the
Church still, covered with little Plates of Brass, having the Words severally
cut upon them: and yet in spite of the Relic we cannot for our Lives believe
that the silent Image spoke to him, any more than that he stepped twenty Yards at
a stride.

UPON the whole, we are at a Point with St. Francis, that if any Apparition did
haunt him, it was that of the Devil; and they tell us this was so frequent,
that at last he prayed to the Virgin, that the Devil might not be allowed to
appear to him but upon extraordinary Occasions; and that whenever he did, he
should have the better of the Devil, if he contended with him: after which the
Devil never appeared to him at all in his own Shape, as it seems he used to do,
but always under some Disguise, or in other Persons Shapes, tempting him in
those Apparitions, as he found Occasion; but that he was always too hard for
him, and drove him away. Who had the Victory at last, History is silent: but
some are apt to doubt that the Devil had the better of him then, for that we do
not read much of his Triumph over the Devil, in Articulo Mortis.

ST. IGNATIUS, the Patron of the Jesuits, pretended to make St. Francis, who
was before him, his Patron, and to Mimick him in all his most ridiculous
Extravagancies; and these of Apparitions amongst the rest: and his Life indeed
is full of Histories of Apparitions, either of one Saint or other, or of the
Devil, or of the Virgin, upon all Occasions, and some of them the most trifling
and frivolous in the World.

ST. FRANCIS being very melancholy, earnestly desired to hear some Music,
being told that Music would exhilerate the Soul; and immediately an Apparition
of Angels surrounded him, and making a Concert of most harmonious Music played
admirably for his Consolation, for a very considerable while.

ST. IGNATIUS had like Apparitions of Angels playing sweet Lessons of heavenly
Music to him when he was writing his Book of Constitutions; likewise after his
Death a Concert of Angels made most excellent Music at his Grave, and several
Stars were seen placed upon his Sepulcher.

N. B. The first Stars that were ever seen in Apparition upon Earth; nor indeed
did I ever hear that the Stars walked before.

SOME Apparitions have been formed by the Policy, or rather the mere Face of
the Priests, to prove their absurd Doctrines. Surius, a zealous Writer for
Invocation of Saints, says, that whatever Heretics may prate, (he should have
said, whatever the Scripture may prate) it is abundantly prov'^ that the
departed Saints know our Concerns on Earth, and hear our Petitions, and so he
determines the Question in Controversy, viz. Invocation of Saints.

Surius Not. ad Bonavent. in Vit. St. Francisci.

HE does not indeed offer any thing to prove the Fact, but several miraculous
Apparitions of the Blessed Virgin to the devout Priests praying to her, one of
which may be as true as the other.

TO prove the Possibility of a Person being in two Places at once, we are
assured of the following Apparition of St. Ignatius.

LEONARD KESEL, a Jesuit of Cologne, passionately desired to see this
extraordinary Person; of whom he had heard such wonderful Things related, and
whose Fame spread far and wide for a most wonderful Man: Kesel, an honest
well-meaning Man, knowing very well the best way to see a Man was to be brought
to the Place where he was, and having no Notion of his being a Worker of
Impossibilities, though he thought him a strange Person too; yet, I say, not
dreaming of Miracles, he writes to Ignatius what a desire he had to see him,
and begs his Leave, (for Kesel being a Priest of his Order, he could not stir
without License) I say, begs his Leave to come to Rome to receive his Blessing.

IGNATIUS forbids him; positively assuring him that if such an Enterview was
necessary, GOD would provide a way for it, without giving him the trouble of so
long a Journey.

KESEL did not understand the meaning of the Answer, and was extremely
dissatisfied to be so far under the Displeasure of his Superior, as to be
denied coming to see him, which he so passionately desired; however he was
obliged to submit, and waited the Event.

UPON a Day, says the Story, when he least thought of it, behold Ignatius comes
up into his Cell, or Chamber, and having talked with him a very considerable
while, suddenly disappeared; leaving the Jesuit exceedingly comforted with such
a prodigious wonderful Visit.

ST. FRANCIS did these things frequently, it seems, and rid through the Air in a
fiery Chariot; which I dare say is as true as that St. Dunstan, while he was a
Boy, flew down from the top of Glastenbury Tor, or Tower, a Place well known in
Somersetshire.

THE Conversion of St. Ignatius, they tell us, was brought to pass by an
Apparition of St. Peter to him, who came and touched his Wounds received in
Battle, and healed them immediately; and yet it seems as if St. Peter was but a
lame Doctor, for that St. Ignatius halted, and that his Leg was crooked as long
as he lived, cannot be denied; whereas when St. Peter healed the impotent Man
at Jerusalem, the Text says he made him every whit whole, Acts iii. 7, 8.

ST. FRANCIS is said to have done innumerable Cures for sick and diseased
Persons, by appearing to them after his Death, and I could fill a Volume with
the History of them; but it seems to be needless, all true Catholics
acknowledge it.

PASCALL, Ignatius's Chamber-Fellow and Companion, being reduced to great
Necessities after his Death, implores the Assistance of his Colleague in the
Church of St. Laurence, or some other Church at Rome; immediately he heard a
melodious Sound, and saw Ignatius appearing to him, attended with a numerous
and beautiful Train of the Servants of God; but what Relief the Apparition gave
him in his extreme Necessity, this Deponent says not.

BUT I may close the Discourse of imposed Apparitions with that memorable Story
of Jetzer, a Dominican in the Monastry or House of Dominicans at Bern, in
Swisserland: The Forgery is manifest, and the Reason of it; 'twas an Imposition
upon the Franciscans, and contrived to carry on the Contention which was
between the two Societies to a complete Victory.

THE Franciscans insist upon the Blessed Virgin's being Immaculate, and born
without original Sin, sanctified from the Womb; and therefore they cannonize
Blessed St. Ann, who was the Virgin's Mother, and make her a triumphant Saint;
almost as glorious as her Daughter, and have a Service for her, called, the
Prerogatives of St. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God: wherein they declare she
conceived the Blessed Virgin without the Knowledge of a Man, and that it was
upon an Apparition of two Angels to her, which she relates to her Husband
Joachim. There Is an Apparition too for the Confirmation of the Franciscans.
(That Is by the way.)

THE Dominicans, on the other hand, deny that the Virgin is Immaculate; they
allow that she is conceived in Sin, but that she continued under the Culpa or
Defilement but three Days; and they bring in an Apparition of the Blessed
Virgin to this Friar Jetzer, lamenting to him that they should go about to make
her equal to her Son in Holiness, and confessing, in the Words of the Text,
that she was shapen in Iniquity, Psalm. li. 5.

SO here is one Miracle to confute another, and perhaps both alike authentic.

BUT the Story of Jetzer is full of Miracles, all contrived by the Prior, and
three of the Fathers: first, the Apparition of a Soul in Purgatory comes to
Jetzer with a Box near his Mouth, so contrived, that when he breathed upon it,
it appeared to be all Fire coming out of his Mouth; he had also three Dogs
hanging upon him, and gnawing him as his Tormentors.

IN this Posture he comes to the poor Friar Jetzer in the dark, and when he was
in his Bed, tells him his deplorable Condition, but that he might be taken out
of Purgatory by his Means, and by his Mortifications; and this Story he backs
with most horrible Groans, as in the utmost Misery by his Sufferings.

N. B. You are to understand that this Friar Jetzer was a Fellow picked out to
make a proper Tool for these Impostures, being very silly, and very devout; and
had they not over-acted the thing, the Design might have gone a great way.

IN Consequence of the first Apparition, they made the poor Friar undergo
severe Discipline, Whipping and Mortifications, and then the Apparition came
and thanked him, and told him he was delivered out of Purgatory by his Means;
so that Part ended, to the infinite Satisfaction of the poor macerated Friar.

THE next was the Apparition of the same Person, but in the Habit of a Nun,
representing St. Barbara, and all in Glory; telling him, ^^at the blessed
Virgin was so delighted with his Zeal and Devotion, that she would visit him
the next Day in Person, and give him her Benediction for Consolation in his
Sufferings and Mortifications; at which the Fool (the Friar I mean) was
ravished with Joy, and prepared himself and the whole Conv^nt to receive her.

AT the appointed time, the expected Delusion appeared: The blessed Virgin,
clothed with the utmost Magnificence, dressed up with Jewels, as she used to be
on Occasion of the most sol^mn Festivals; attended by Angels which were seen to
be flying about her, as her Pages.

N. B. They were the little carved Angels which were placed in the Church upon
extraordinary Days, and now placed as Machines about the Apparition, and lifted
up in the Air, with Pullies fastened in the Room above.

IN this Equipage, the Lady Queen of Heaven, Mother of God, was brought in
Apparition to her poor mortified and humble Servant; she carest him with high
Expressions of Affection to him, extolling the Merit of his Charity, in
suffering such S^verities for the mere Love of delivering a poor tormented Soul
out of Purgatory; owned to him, that she was conceived in original Sin; and
told him Pope Julius, who then held the Chair, should put a final End to all
those Disputes, and should abolish the Feast of her Conception. After much more
to the same purpose, she promised him a Mission to go to the holy Father in her
Name, to assure him of the Truth of the Vision, and that it was her Pleasure it
should be so; and in Confirmation of it all, she gave him three Drops of Blood,
which she told him were the Tears Christ shed, when he wept over Jerusalem;
with abundance of such like.

HERE was a true sham Apparition now, formed to establish a particular Sect or
Society; and a particular Profession, concerning the immaculate Conception;
here could the impatient Friars have set Bounds to their Revenge, they had had
a complete Victory over the Franciscans. Nay, had St. Francis himself come up
in Apparition on the other side, it would not have balanced the Cheat; for all
the World began to give Credit to the Apparition.

BUT the Priests knew no Bounds; nothing would serve them but new Apparitions
to the Friar, and new Mortifications to the Franciscans; 'till in short J^tzer
himself, as foolish and simple as he was, saw through it, detected the Cheat,
and escaping out of the Monastery, discovered it all to the Magistrates, having
twice escaped being poisoned by them; so the whole Fraud ended at the Gallows,
or rather at the Stake, for the four Friars were condemned to be burnt, and
were executed accordingly.

THE History of the Discovery is not to my Purpose, it may be seen in many
Authors, as also the Trial, Sentence, and Execution of the Criminals at Bern,
May 31, 1509, where they were all burnt together. But this Part is effectually
to my Purpose, viz. that there has been, and I doubt not still is, a great deal
of sham Apparition imposed upon the World by the Delusions of others; and as it
lies chiefly among the Clergy, where must we look for it, but where it is to be
found?

NOR are the Pagan Clergy free from the same vile Practices, namely, to forge
Apparitions to confirm their Delusions; and the History of all Countries are
full of Accounts of it, too many to repeat here.

THE Possessions and Exorcisms in the dismal Story of the Devils of Loudon, are
full of Apparitions and Visions, by which the wretched Fraud was carried on,
and by which so much Villainy was practiced, as is almost without Example; a
Story which has already filled a Book, and is extant in many Languages; a Fraud
not outdone by the Brachmans and Priests of the Pagans in China, or in Japan.

I MIGHT next entertain you with sham Apparitions put in Practice by the Devil
himself, in those Countries where he has made himself be worshipped as a God,
and where he supports all the Devilworship by Apparition; showing himself now
one way, now another, as he finds it for his Purpose; appearing one Day in Fire
and Flame, at another time in Storm and Tempest, at a third time in Humane and
Familiar Shape; and in all the End is to keep up the Dread of his Person in the
Minds of his Worshippers, and to preserve a Reverence to his Institutions,
whatever they are.

IF we may believe our Writers of Travels, and Observers of Things, the Devil
not only assumes Humane Shape, but insinuates himself in the real Person of a
Devil to the Women, and so possesses them, (to say no more of it) as to commit
horrid nameless Wickednesses with them, such as are not to be suggested without
Horror. In other Places, the Apparition of the Devil is the Fund of all their
religious Worship, and he has Altars erected, and Sacrifices, nay, which is
worse, Human Sacrifices offered to him.

IN these horrid Performances, he appears in terrible Shapes, and the poor
Natives are so frighted at him, that the Fear only excites the Homage which
they pay to him, and secures to him an entire Sovereignty: for Fear, may, for
ought I know, be the Characteristick of a Pagan Worship, as Love is that of a
Christian.

THE Great Temple of Montezuma at Mexico was little else but a horrible
Butchery of Humane Carcasses, the Blood of which lay sprinkled or dashed
against the Walls, 'till it lay there hardened and congealed, if Report may be
believed, above a Foot thick, and that they sacrifiz'd at least twentythousand
People a Year, in that one Pagode or Temple.

THE Indians confessed, that they had frequent Apparitions among them of the
Spiritis, which they called by several Names; and that the Great Spirit, that
is the Devil, also appeared to them upon their Great Festivals, in bright and
extraordinary Apparition; to approve and accept of their Worship and Homage,
and no doubt of their Sacrifices too.

IN Cochin China we are told the Devil goes farther; for he not only shows
himself in Apparition, but he utters lying Oracles, even himself in his proper
Person, and also whispers such Answers to the Priests, as serve to keep up a
Decorum in their Worship, and a secret Reverence to his Person. And Father
Borri says, the Devil walks about there so frequently, and so familiarly in
Humane Shapes, that they are not at all disturbed at him.

AT other times, as the same Author affirms, they associate themselves with
particular Persons, upon various Occasions, and especially with the Women, as
abov^; so that, in short, in some Cities, which are very populous, it would be
something hard to distinguish between the real People and the Apparitions. How
far, if it were examined into, it would not be the like among us, I will not
pretend to say.

WHO knows, in our Throngs of divided Christians, whether he meets with a Saint
or an Apparition; whether he talks with a Counselor or a Devil? and the art of
discerning would indeed be well worth having; indeed, it would be worth buying,
if Money would purchase it. The Devil's Disguises are very many, and Apparition
is one of the best of them, because he can soon change Shapes, and change
Postures, which in other Cases he may find less advantageous to his Interest.
Nor is it easy for Mankind to come to the Certainty, even when he sees an
Apparition, whether it be a Good or an Evil Appearance; and the best way of
finding it out, except that of judging by the Errand he comes on, and which I
have mentioned already, is to ask it the Question directly; if it equivocates
and shuffles, conclude it is the Devil; for he is a Sharper, and a Dissembler
from the Beginning: if it is a good Spirit, it will answer you directly and
honestly, and tell you its Business at once; and this is what I mean, where I
say, SPEAK TO IT.

IF you find it is a good Spirit hearken to it; if the Devil, defy it; and
whether it be a good or evil Spirit, fear it not; for both are under the
special Direction and Authority of him that made the World, and will govern it,
in whose Hands you are; and it is well it is so; For as Good is above Evil, so
God is above the Devil. Tell him so, and bid him Defiance, and if you can but
do it with a good Heart he is gone; depend upon it, he will never stand you,
Probatum est. But I must leave off the religious Cheats, for they are endless;
it is time to talk of Apparitions of another nature, less serious, and less
tiresome to hear of.

CHAP. XV. Of Imaginary Apparitions, the Apparitions of Fancy, Vapors, waking
Dreams, delirious Heads, and the Hyppo.
AS the Devil is not so Black as he is Painted, so neither does he appear in so
many Shapes as we make for him; we Dress him up in more Suits of Clothes, and
more Masquerade Habits, than ever he wore; and I question much, if he was to
see the Pictures and Figures which we call Devil, whether he would know himself
by some of them or no.

IT would require more Skill than, I doubt, I am Master of, to bring you all to
a right Method of thinking upon this Subject; however I shall venture upon it
by way of Essay, that you may form such Images of the old Gentleman in your
Mind, that you may not be cheated about him, may know him when you see him, may
not call him out of his Name, or bestow his Right Worshipful Titles upon
another.

IT is observable, that though most People in all Parts of the World allow there
is such a thing as a Devil, an evil Spirit, an Arch-Enemy of Mankind; and they
are pretty near one another in their several Notions of him; for even those
Savages that worship him, acknowledge they do so only that he may not hurt
them; yet they differ exceedingly in their Ideas of his Person, and that almost
every where; and accordingly it follows that they must differ in their
Representations and Pictures of him.

SOME Paint him one way, some another; and yet I observe that so little good
Will they have for him any where, that they all Picture him as ugly, as
monstrous, and as deformed as they can.

I HAVE heard of some Pagans who worship a black Cloud for the Devil, because
it often speaks in Noises, and breathes out Fire. I cannot say but worshipping
the Sun for a God, and the Thunder and Lightening for a Devil, seems to me to
have more Sense in it than many of the other Branches of Idolatry in the World;
the one being the most natural resemblance of the greatest Good, and the other
of the greatest Evil in the World.

SOME, I am told, resemble or represent the Devil by a vast great Globe of Wood
carved or cut all over into Mouths, described in a thousand different
Distortions, gaping, grining, and voracious Figures; all intimating a greedy
unquenchable Thirst or Appetite to devour and destroy; rolling itself
continually about, so that some of its thousand of Mouths being undermost, are
always gaping and biting, and taking in something, but ever unsatisfied, the
rest of 'em gaping still for more. If this hideous Representation is not just
to his Form, I think verily it is just to his Nature, and is very Emblematick:
the Thoughts it gives Birth to in our Fancy, may not be so remote as are formed
by those simple, Comic, and yet wou'd-befrightful Draughts we draw of him;
with a Cock's Bill, Ass's Ears, Goat's Horns, glaring Eyes, Batts Wings, cloven
Foot, and Dragon's Tail; not one of which, except the last, having either
Antiquity or Authority for them, that I know of.

IT IS true, he is described in the Apoc a lypse as a great red Dragon, and in
another Place as a Beast, but neither of them give us any true Idea of his real
Form.

NOW if we do not know his Figure, how shall we know him in Apparition? for if
we know nothing of his real Shape, how shall we judge of him in his Disguise?
How shall we single him out upon Occasion? Suppose we were to look for him at a
Masquerade; For my Part I cannot deny but I might mistake him, and pitch upon a
Priest, or a Turk, a Tinker or a Tarpaulin, and say this is the Devil, or that
is the Devil, as soon as the real Hydra-pater himself, and let him pass perhaps
for a Nobody worth taking Notice of.

AS then, I say, we have such unguided Notions of him, and know him so little
in any of his uncouth Figures and Disguises, it is not so much wonder that we
mistake every ugly misshapen monstrous Thing, and call it by his venerable
Name.

HOW often has poor unhappy shapeless Z -- M -- been started at, even in the
open Day; nay, in the very Sunshine? Bless me! says a fine Lady in the Mall,
one Day as she passed him, sure that is the Devil: Why Sister, says she to the
Lady that was next her, did not you see it? I Will be gone, I am frighted out of
my Wits: Why if I should meet it again, I shall sink into the Ground: I Am sorry
I did not see him, says the Sister, for I want mightily to see the Devil; but I
was happily better employed, for just that Moment Sir G -- D --, that Glory of
Heroes, the brightest of Men, went by me; my Soul flew along with him, dear
Sister, it is hardly come back yet.

O! YOU'RE happy, Sister, you saw a Heavenly, I an Infernal; you an Archangel,
I the Devil: let me go, Sister, for I am undone if I see him again; if I were
with Child I should bring forth a Monster.

HE had not gone twenty Yards farther, but a Knot of Ladies met him; it seems
they were Roman Catholics, and they all crossed themselves and looked up to
Heaven, said every one of them an Ave and a Pater, and went on as fast as they
could.

A LADY big with Child had the Misfortune to be next, who was so frighted, she
fell into Fits, went home, and Miscarried; and lastly, which was more unhappy,
just as he stepped out of the Mall, at the turning to St. James's, he almost
jostled another Lady that was nearer her Time, and she immediately called for a
Chair, was carried away, fell into Travel, and died in Childbed.

AND yet this Piece of Deformity, this Scare Devil, Z -- M --, is an honest
good-humored Fellow as lives, and I happened to see him soon after.

WHAT have you done, Zach? said I, was you in the Park to Day?

YES I was, says he. Why, what is the Matter, have any of the Ladies fallen in
Love with me?

YES, yes, says I, you put the whole Mall in an Uproar.

I THOUGHT so, says he; I knew I should have Admirers as well as other Beaus:
Why not, pray? but let 'em die, I am Inexorable.

BUT do you know what Mischief you have done? said I in Earnest.

NOT I, says he, but I suppose I may have frighted somebody or other with my
Devil's Face; and what then? how can I help it? If they don't like me, they may
look off of me.

WHY no, says I, it seems they cannot.

NO, no, Beauty is attractive, you know, and so is Deformity, says he; if you
meet a Will with a Wisp you cannot look off of it: They will look at me, they
cannot help it, and they look so long you see, that I fright every now and then
one or two of them into Love with me.

HARD Fate of the Sex, said I, Zach. that Men should be so scarce they must be
in Love with the Devil. I am persuaded many of them take you for an Apparition.

THAT IS a Sign of horrid Ignorance, says he merrily; why, he is not half so
ugly as I am. It Is a sign they don't know him; I tell you the Devil's a comely
Fellow to me, Jack.

THOU art an ugly Dog, that is true, said I, but thou art the best-humour'd,
goodest-natur'd Creature alive, said I: upon my Word, I Would be Z -- M --, though
I frighted all the Ladies in the Park, to have half the Wit, and Sense, and
good Humor that is covered with so much Deformity.

AND I Would be any thing but two, says he, to be but just tolerable to Mankind,
and not fright the Horse I ride on.

BUT two! What two pray? said I. Are there two Things you would not change for?

YES, says Z --, I would not be a Fool or a Beggar; but especially not the
first.

NOW what is the Case of this unhappy Gentleman? it is quite the Reverse of what
the Ladies take him for; one says he is the Devil, and another says it is the
Devil, and another that it is an Apparition; and the last is true. But, of what?
not of the Devil, I assure you. Apparitions, they say, generally assume a
different Likeness; the Devil never Masks in Deformity, an Angel may; the
Devil often puts on the Beau, and the Beauty; he is today a smart young
rattling Fop, tomorrow a Smirk, a Spruce, a Harlequin; today he is a devout
Lady at Prayers, tomorrow a Coquet, a Masquer at the Ball; but it is all fine
and clever: he very rarely puts on Ugliness, for that would be no Disguise to
him.

ON the contrary, when a bright Seraph dresses in Form, it takes up the Extreme
of its Contrary; and a Divine and exalted Soul may put on the Habit of an
unsightly Carcass, to appear in the World in a more complete Masquerade; and
thus it was with my Friend Zach. Ma --, his Outside was indeed a Masquerade to
him, he was perfectly the Reverse of what he appeared, and he had the brightest
and sublimest Soul that was ever wrapped up in Flesh and Blood, in the Posture or
Habit of something uglyer to look on than the Devil.

IN a word, he was a Devil to the Imagination, for every body thought of the
Devil when they saw him; went home and told their Maids and their Children they
had seen the Devil, and told it over so often, 'till they believed it
themselves, and so made a real Apparition of him, as it were by the mere force
of his extraordinary Countenance.

YET the honest Gentleman had no Horns on his Head, no Cock's Bill, or a cloven
Foot, I assure you; but was mere Zach. M --, as merry and as good-humored a
Creature as ever lived; full of Wit, Master of Learning, Temper, and a thousand
good Qualities, without one bad one; nothing amiss in him, or about him, but
his Outside, and as to that nothing so frightful in the three Kingdoms.

NOW if meeting poor mortified merry Zach. M -- should raise the Vapors among
us, and from a little Jesting at first, fright the poor Ladies into
Miscarriage, Travel, and the Grave; make them go home, and say in Jest, they
had seen the Devil, 'till they believed it in Earnest: what will not the like
ungovernable Fancy, and Power of a frighted Imagination, prevail upon us to
think or say?

A SOBER grave Gentleman, who mu^^ not wear a Name in our Story, because it was
rather a Distemper in his Mind than a real Deficiency of Brains, had, by a long
Disuse of the sprightly Part of his Sense, which he really had no want of at
other times, suffered himself to sink a little too low in his Spirits, and let
the Hypochondria emit too strongly in Vapor and Fumes up into his Head. This
had its Fits and its Intervals; sometimes he was clearsighted, and
clear-headed, but at other times he saw Stars at Noonday, and Devils at Night:
In a word, the World was an Apparition to his Imagination, when the Flatus
prevailed, and the Spleen boiled up; of all which he could give no account, nor
could he assist the Operation of Physic by any of his own Powers toward a
Cure.

IT happened that he was abroad at a Friend's House later than ordinary one
Night, but being Moonlight, and a Servant with him, he was easy, and was
observed to be very cheerful, and even Merry, with a great deal of good Humor,
more than had been observed of him for a great while before.

HE knew his Way perfectly well, for it was within three Miles of the Town
where he lived, and he was very well mounted; but though the Moon was up, an
Accident which a little disordered him was, that it was not only cloudy, but a
very thick, black Cloud came suddenly, (that is to say, without his Notice, so
it was suddenly to him) and spread over his Head, which made it very dark; and
to add to the Disorder, it began to rain violently.

UPON this, being very well mounted, as I have said, he resolved to ride for
it, having not above two Miles to the Town; so clapping Spurs to his Horse, he
galloped away. His Man, whose Name was Gervais, not being so well mounted, was
a good way behind. The Darkness and the Rain together put him a little out of
Humor; but as that was a little unexpected perhaps it made him ride the
harder, rather than abated his Pace.

IN the Way there was a small River, but there was a good Bridge over it, well
walled on both sides; so that there was no Danger there, more than any where
else: But the Gentleman kept on his speed to go over the Bridge, when being
rather more than half over, his Horse stopped on a sudden, and refused, as we
call it, bearing off to the right hand; he saw nothing at first, and was not
much discomposed at it, but spurred his Horse to go forward; the Horse went two
or three Steps, then stopped again, snorted, and stared, and then offered to turn
short back; then the Gentleman looking forward to see what was the matter, and
if he could observe what the Horse was scared at, saw two broad st^ring Eyes,
which, as he said, looked him full in the Face.

THEN he was heartily frighted indeed; but by this time he heard his Man
G^rvais coming up. When Gervais came near, the first thing he heard his Master
say, was -- Bless me, it is the Devil! at which Gervais, a low-spirited Fellow,
was as much frighted as his Master. However, his Master, a little encou^aged to
hear his Man so near him, pressed his Horse once more, and called aloud to
Gervais to come; but he, as I said, being frighted too, made no haste: at
length with much ado his Master, spurring his Horse again, got over the Bridge,
and passed by the Creature with broad Eyes, which (the Light a little
increasing) he affirmed positively, when he was passed, was a great black BEAR,
and consequently must be the Devil.

THOUGH Gervais was near enough, yet fearing his Master would set him to go
before, he kept as far off as he could: When his Master called he answered
indeed, but did not come on, at least did not make much haste; but seeing his
Master was gone past, and that he himself was then obliged to follow, he went
on softly, and when he came to the Bridge, he saw what it was his Master's
Horse snorted at, and refused to go on; of which you shall hear more presently.

HIS Master's Horse being got past the Difficulty, needed no Spurs, but (as
frighted Horses will) flew away like the Wind; and the Rain continuing, his
Master, who on many Accounts was willing to be at home, let him go; so that he
was at home and got into the House, long before his Man Jervais could get up
with him.

THE Master, as soon as he came into the Light, swoon'd away, and the Fright
had had such an effect upon him, that when with much Difficulty they had
brought him to himself, he continued very ill; and when his Lady, and a Sister
he had in the House with him, as much overrun with the Hyppo as himself, came
to enquire what had happened to him, he told them a formal Story, that at such
a Bridge he met the Devil; that he placed himself just at the coming off from
the Bridge, on his left hand, at the Corner of the Wall; that he stood and
stared in his Face, and that he could distinctly perceive it was the Devil in
the Shape of a Bear: He gave other Descriptions, so punctual and particular,
that there was no room to doubt but it was an Apparition, and that it was in
the Shape of a great Bear.

GERVAIS came home soon after, and going into the Stable directly, as was his
Business, to take care of his Master's Horse as well as his own, there he told
the Story his Way, among the other Servants, and especially two or three
Grooms, and Servants belonging to Gentlemen that were Neighbors; and he tells
them, that his Master was in great danger of being thrown over the Wall of the
Bridge, for that his Horse was frighted at an Ass which stood just at the
Corner of the Wall; and it was my Fault indeed, says Gervais, for it was a
young Horse, and I had never told my Master; but it was a Trick he had got that
he could not abide an Ass, and would by no means come near one if he could help
it.

AND are you sure 'twas an Ass, Gervais? s^ys the other Servants, staring at
one another as if they were frighted: Are you sure of it? Yes, says Gervais,
for as soon as my Master got by it, I rid up to it and thresh'd it with my
Stick, and it fell a braying, which you know, says Gervais, is a base ugly
Noise, and so I came away and le^t it.

WHY Gervais, says they, your Master believes it was the Devil, as really as if
he had spoken to it.

I AM sorry my Master should be so frighted, says Jervais; but I am very sure it
was nothing but an Ass. But the Story had gotten Vent, and the first Part of it
flew all over the Town that Mr. -- had seen the Devil, and was almost frighted
to Death.

THEN came his Man Jarvis's Tale, and made it appear that Mr. -- 's strange and
wonderful Apparition was dwindled into an Ass, and that the Devil he had seen
in the Shape of a Bear was no more than a poor Boricco, as the Italians call
him; this made his Master be laughed at sufficiently.

HOWEVER, poor Jarvis or Gervais was ^ain to turn out, and lost his Place for
it; and the wise Mr. -- to this Day insists upon it, that 'twas the Devil, and
he knew him by his broad Eyes; though it is known that a Bear has very little
Eyes: but it is impossible to persuade any Vapourish Body, that they have not
seen the Devil, if they have but seen something, and that they are very sure,
they are not sure what it is.

I REMEMBER a Delusion almost as gross, the Memory of which I believe remains
for a Truth to this day. Not far off of the Town of Darking in Surrey, the
People, or some People rather, entertained a Notion, from the following
Passage, that a Ghost walked in such a Place; that she (for it was an ancient
Lady lately dead) was seen hovering about the Mansion House which was left
uninhabited for some time, that she would be up and down in the House very
often, in the Daytime, making a rumbling, and a clattering Noise; and in the
Nightime she walked in the neighboring Fields with a C^ndle in her Hand, and
that though the Wind blew ever so hard, it would not blow the Candle out; that
sometimes she would appear in the open Field, sometimes up in the Trees, and
particularly there was a little Heath near Darking called the Cottman D^an,
where it was said she was frequently seen.

THERE was a Boarding-school of Boys in that Town, where there was in
particular some roguish London Boys, who contrived all this Walking from the
Beginning to the End; First, they got a small Rope, and tying one end of it to
an old Chair which stood in an upper Room of the H^^se, (for they had found
means to get in and out of the House at pleasure) they brought the other end of
the Rope down on the Outside of the House in a private Place where it could
not easily be seen, and by this they pulled the old Chair up, and then let it
fall down again, and made a great Noise in the House, so as it might be easily
heard by the Neighbors; then other Boys of the same Gang took care to call out
to the old Women in the next Houses, that now they might hear the old Lady a
playing her Pranks; and accordingly they would all a^semble in the Courtyard,
where they could plainly hear it, but not one would venture to go up Stairs. If
any offered to go up a little way, then all was quiet again; but as soon as
ever they retired, the rumbling would begin again: This was for the Day.

IN the Night, one of these unlucky Boys had gotten a dark Lanthorn, which was
a thing the Country People did not understand, and with this he walked all
about the Orchard, and two or three Closes near the House, sometimes showing
the Light on this side, and then his Comrades calling all the old Women about
'em to see it, on a sudden the Light would go out, the Boy closing up the
Lanthorn; and then he would run swiftly cross the whole Field, and show his
Light again on the other side. Now he would be up in a Tree, then in the Road,
then upon the middle of the Heath; so that the Country People made no more
Question, but that the old Lady walked with a Candle in her Hand, than that
they saw the Light of it; and in a word, it passed for an Apparition as
certainly as we on the other hand knew what Knavery agitated it all.

IT must be con^ess'd that a dark Lanthorn, joined with an Enthusiastic Head,
might prevail to make such a Sham take, with weak and bigoted People, and they
were mighty willing to say beforehand that they were sure something walked.

WHEN they heard the Chair tumble about in the Chamber, though pulled by a String
and no body near it, no nor in the whole House, the People who came together in
the Courtyard, fancied often the saw Heads of People moving up and down the
Room where the Noise was, and one said positively she saw a white Head-dress.

BUT to realize the Delusion, one cried out, There Is the Spirit, there is the
Ghost, just at such a Place of the Window; and affirmed it stood close to the
Glass, and described it; another, as Moon-blind as her self, says, Ay, so it
does, and points peremptorily to the Place, declaring that she sees it plainly;
and thus they run away with it all together, that the Ghost walks and the House
is haunted, and for a long time it is believed no other; when here was nothing
but the mean Contrivance of a few Boys.

THE Notion of Spirits appearing to discover where Money has been buried, to
direct People to dig for it, has so universally prevailed with Womankind, I
might say and even with Mankind too, that it is impossible to beat it out of
their Heads; and if they should see any thing which they call an Apparition,
they would to this Day follow it, in hope to hear it give a Stamp on the
Ground, as with its Foot, and then vanish; and did it really do so, they would
not fail to dig to the Center (if they were able) in hopes of finding a Pot of
Money hid there, or some old U^n with Ashes and Roman Medals; in short, or some
considerable Treasure.

A COUNTRY Gentleman had an old-built House, which was the Remains of an old
Demolished Monastery or Religious House, and he resolved to have it pulled
down, but thought the Charge too much to bestow; so he bethought himself of a
Stratagem, which was to give it out that the House was haunted, and this he did
so artificially, that it began to be currently believed; for he made a Fellow
dress himself up in White, and pass swiftly cross the inner Court of the House,
just at a time when he had appointed others to be at the Window to see it.

THEY gave Notice to the House that there was an Apparition; then the Master
and Mistress and all the Family were called up to the Window, where, though it
was so dark that they could not distinguish what he was, yet they plainly saw
the thing in white go cross the Yard, and in at a Door of the old Building;
soon after it was in they perceived a Flash of Fire in the House, which was
contrived that the Fellow should make with some Brimstone and other Materials
on purpose, so that it should leave a Stench of Sulphur behind it, but not be
just the Smell of Gunpowder.

AS he expected, it began to work; some fanciful People having notice of it,
and being desirous to see the same Apparition, had the occasion offered them,
and saw it in its usual manner of showing it self; its frequent walking was
ordinary, at one part of the House where the Spirit had an opportunity to slip
out at a Door into another Yard, and so into the dwelling House; and when it
went off that way it gave a great stamp with its Foot, and immediately it was
gone.

UPON this it was presently said there was Money hid, and the Gentleman gave it
out that he would dig there for it, and mighty eager People were to have it
done; however the Gentleman seemed to cool in the matter: still the Apparition
was seen to come and go, walk to and again, almost every Night, and ordinarily
it vanished in a flash of Fire as above, which in a word was very extraordinary.

AT length some of the Towns People in the Village adjoining, finding the
Gentleman began to slight or neglect it, gave out, that if Esquire -- would
give them leave, they would dig, for that certainly Money was hid there; nay if
he would consent they should have it if they found it, they would dig for it
and find it too, though they dug the whole House down.

THE Gentleman replied, that was not fair for them to pull his House down and
have all they found too, that was too hard; but he would consent to this, That
provided they would carry away all the Rubbish, and all the Materials which
they dug down, and pile up the Bricks and Timber in the Yard near the House,
and would be content with half they found, he would give them leave to dig.

WELL, they consented, and to work they went; the Spirit or Apparition which
appeared at first seemed to point out the Place, and the first thing they took
down was a great stack of Chimnies, and a heavy piece of work it was; but the
Gentleman, willing to encourage them, secretly hid seven and twenty Pieces of
old Gold in a hole in the Chimney, which had no entrance into it but by one
passage, which he Brick'd up.

WHEN they came to this Money they were perfectly deluded, and out of their
Wits; the Gentleman happened to be near, but not just upon the Spot when it was
found, and he being called, very ^rankly gave it them all; but upon Condition
they should not expect the like, if they found any more.

IN a word, this Bite made the Country Fellows work like Horses, and more came
into the knot; but that which encouraged them farther was, they did really find
several things of Value in the pulling down the House, which perhaps had lain
hid from the time of Demolishing it as a religious House; and some Money was
found too; but continual expectation and hope of finding more so animated the
Fellows, that in short they pulled the whole House down; nay, I might say they
pulled it up by the Roots, for they dug up the very Foundations, which was what
the Gentleman desired, and would have given a great deal of Money to have had
done.

NOR did they leave the House in a heap of Rubbish; but, according to his
Agreement with them, they carried the Materials away, and set up the Timber and
old Bricks in an adjacent Yard as he directed them, and in good order too.

SO violent was the Persuasion, that (upon this fancied Apparition walking in
the House) Money was hid there, that nothing could stop the eagerness of the
Country People in working; as if the Souls of the old Nuns or Friars, or
whatever they were who had hid any Treasure there, supposing any was hid, could
no^ be at Rest, as was said in other Cases, or could be any way concerned for
the finding it so many Years afterward, being almost two hundred Years.

IF they could suppose any thing so weak, where must they suppose those
Departed Souls or Ghosts could have been, during all that time? and why did
they not appear before? what had all the Ages between done to be so much less
in their Favor, that they did not come to discover this Money to them? but
that the Deposit should remain un ^r Ground so long, without any enquiry after
t, 'till this Age, not at all more worthy than their Ancestors, should be
informed of it.

THERE is not a thing in Nature so generally received, which has so little
Foundation, either in Reason or Religion, either in Nature or common Sense; it
seems not only absurd, but ridiculous; there is not only no religious Reason in
it, but it is inconsistent with it self: what seems only wonderful and
unaccountable in it is, that such gross things should make such Impressions,
and that it should be so impossible to beat it out of the Heads of the
possessed People.

IF you should offer to tell them that no hidden Money was ever thus
discovered, they would laugh at it as the greatest Jest imaginable, and tell
you there were five hundred Examples to the contrary; and yet in all my Search
after those things, and after evidence of Fact, I cannot arrive to one Example,
where ever an Apparition directed to the finding Money hid in the Ground or
Earth, or any other place, and that any Authentic Voucher has been brought to
prove it. I know there have been many, perhaps thousands, of such Stories told,
and the Particulars are handed down with them; but I say I never met with any
Authentic Proof of the Fact, such as that the Story might be told after them
for Truth, and that a Man might say without Blushing that he believed it. And
let us but enter a little into the usual manner in which those Tales are
related, there seems to be something so weak and silly in the telling, as if it
was only calculated for Children and Chimney corners: for Example; the
Apparition is called a Ghost, it is dressed up (to suit the weakness of the
Imagination) in a Shroud, as if it came just out of the Coffin and the
Churchyard, and as if the Habit of the Dead was assumed, to possess the People
with the Fancy of its being really the dead Body of the Person, and yet allow
it at the same time to be a Spirit.

WELL, when it comes, and (be it what you will) forms it self in Apparition,
all in white, and in a Shroud; what is next? it says nothing to you, but goes
away before you; and perhaps speaks and bids you go or come along with it, or
perhaps without speaking at all, leading and beckoning the Parties they have
appeared to, to follow them, and then stamping with the Foot it disappears at
once.

THIS Stamp with the Foot is reckoned to be a Direction to you to dig just
there, in order to find some extraordinary Treasure; and he would be reckoned
very stupid and sordidly dull that should neglect the Direction, and not dig
there; and many a vain and fruitless Pit has been dug on such occasions, to no
purpose at all.

BUT that I may not declare my Infidelity in these things in an unreasonable
manner, and disbelieve without any just Reason; let me give you a long Story,
which seems to be left upon Record, of a Pedlar in the Town of -- in Suffolk, a
Story believed as certainly as the Gospel; and which it would be thought very
absurd for any one to question the Truth of.

THERE was a Pedlar, says the Story, who used to travel about the Country with
his Pack, but kept a Chamber or Warehouse in the Market Town for the
depositing and laying up some Goods which he had there, and which were too many
at a time to carry them all about with him.

IT happened that this Man having been abroad late, and coming home with his
Pack, sat himself down upon a Style, resting his Pack at the same time for his
Ease: while he sat here, there came up to him a Ghost, in the Appearance of a
Woman dressed as above; she came up to him with a smiling Countenance, and when
she discovered her self she stepped backward, and holding up a fine white Hand
beckoned to him with a Finger to follow her.

THE Pedlar, frighted as he was, immediately followed the Apparition; (what he
did in the mean time with his Pack that is a gap in the Story, which Tradition
has not supplied;) the Apparition leads him in this manner, going backward and
beckoning with her Hand over two or three Fields, 'till it came to a particular
place, where there lay a great Stone, and there giving a stamp with its Foot it
vanished.

THE Man takes the hint, marks the Stone, goes home to carry his Pack, as we
ought to suppose, and comes out the next Night with a Spade and a Pick Axe, and
goes to work to dig a great Pit in the Earth.

HE had not dug far it seems, (though the Story does not say expressly how far)
but he found a large Chest; I say large, for it could not be a small one, by
what you shall hear presently.

HE doubled his Diligence when he came to the Chest, and with great Labor at
length got it out of the place; and we may suppose was not long before he found
means to split it open, and get into the inside of it to see the Contents; for
he found it very heavy when he labored to get it out.

IN a word, he found the Chest full of Silver, that is to say, full of Money;
then keeping his own Council, he took care to deposite it so, that by some and
some he got the Money all safe home, and after that carried the Chest home also.

WHAT the Sum was that he found here, the Story is not particular in; but it
seems the bulk was such, that the Pedlar thought fit to leave off his
traveling about the Country as a Pedlar, takes a House in the Town, furnishes
himself a Shop, and becomes a settled Inhabitant and Shopkeeper. During his
appearing in this Figure, it happened that the Parish Church being exceeding
old and out of Repair, the Parishioners, (whether by order of the Diocesan upon
a Visitation, or by the voluntary act and deed of themselves the Parishioners,
I know not,) resolved to Repair the Church.

IN order to furnish the needful Sums for this good Work, they call a Vestry,
and propose a Subscription of the Inhabitants, for supporting the Expense; so
the Minister and Church Wardens go about from House to House to see what the
Charitable Parishioners would contribute, and among the rest they at length
came to the Pedlar's (now Shopkeeper's) House, and he being told their Business
desires them to walk in.

AFTER some Discourse, and perhaps treating his Neighbors, he asks for their
Roll or Subscription Paper, in order to subscribe; looking over the Roll he
sees Sir Thomas -- five Pounds, another Gentleman five Pounds, another ten
Pounds, another forty Shillings, and so on: Come, says he, give a poor Pedlar
the Pen and Ink; Will your Gentry subscribe no more than that? so he takes the
Pen, and subscribes five and twenty Pounds.

SOME time after this, having Occasion to make a Hatch to his Shop-Door, as in
the Country is very frequent, it happened, that sending for a Workman to make
this Hatch, and looking about among his old Lumber, he found nothing so proper
as the old Chest that the Money was found in, and accordingly a Hatch was made
of it.

AWHILE after this, as the Pedlar was sitting in his Shop, he observed an
Ancient Gentleman who lived in the Town, and who had the Reputation of a
Scholar, and particularly of a great Antiquary, stood poring very earnestly,
with his Spectacles on, upon his new Hatch: This brought the Pedlar to the
Door, who after waiting a good while to see what it was the old Gentleman had
discovered, at last he asked him what it was he found upon his new Hatch, that
was worth so much of his notice.

TRULY Neighbor, says the Gentleman, what I observe is very remarkable, though I
cannot tell the Meaning of it; and I suppose it is in a Character that you
cannot easily read, as well as in a Language that you may not understand.

THE Pedlar desired he would read it to him.

WHY, says the Gentleman, you do not understand it, when I have read it.

BUT Sir, says the Pedlar, can you not tell the meaning of it in English?

WHY, says the old Gentleman, it is the old Saxon English in the ancient Gothic
Character, and it may be read thus, Where This once stood
Stands another twice as good.


HUM! says the Pedlar, that is old stuff indeed: what can that signify?

NAY, says the old Gentleman, that I don't know, for who can tell where this
stood?

AY, who indeed!? says the Pedlar: and if they did, what can there be in that?

THEY had a little more Chat of that kind; but in short the Pedlar got rid of
his old Gentleman as soon as he could, and began to ruminate upon the thing;
where this stood! Why I know well enough, says he to himself, where this stood;
I must go and see, it may be there is some more of the same.

BUT then he argued, why this is so many Years ago (six or seven at least, it
seems) and if it was a Ghost or Spirit that showed me the way to it, I warrant
she has showed some body else the way to the rest: Indeed I did not deserve it,
that I did not look farther when I was at it; to be sure it is gone by this time.

THUS he argued himself almost out of the thing again, 'till ^t length he told
his Wife of it, who it seems had been in the Secret before.

WHY, you are mad, says she, why don't you go immediately to the place?

NAY, says he, I don't know whether I can find it again or no, now.

WHAT, says his Wife, must the Devil come to show it you again? sure you an't
so dull, but you may find it again.

WELL, the Man went however; indeed his Wife drove him out almost, Go, try,
says she, you can but come without it.

HE goes, and found the place in general, but could not distinguish the
particular Spo^, which was levelled partly by himself when he filled up the
Hole again, and partly grown up with Grass and Weeds; so he comes back again,
and tells his Wife, he could not tell which was the Place, so as to be
particular enough to go to Work

WELL, says his Wife, go in the Night; I warrant you the good Devil that showed
you the first will put you in some way to find the rest, if there is any more.

SO prevailed with by his Wife's Importunity away he went, and I think they say
his Wife went with him; being come to the Place, the Apparition appeared to
them again, and showed them, in the same manner as before, the very Spot; and
then vanished.

IN short, the Man went to work, and digging a little deeper than he did
before, he found another Chest or Coffer, bounded about with Iron, not so big
as the other, but richer; for as the first was full of Silver, so this was full
of Gold.

THEY carried it home with Joy enough, as you may suppose, and opening it,
found (as above) a very great Treasure. Fame has not handed down the Sum; but
something may be guessed at by the latter part of the Story, which is told thus.

IT seems that all this while the Repair of the Church (mentioned above) went
on but slowly; according to the old Saying, it was Church-Work; and a Vestry
being called upon some other Churchwork, the Pedlar, who was present among the
rest of his Neighbors, took occasion to complain, that he thought that
Business was not honestly managed, that it was indeed like Church-Work, carried
on heavily.

SOME of the Gentlemen took him up a little, and told him, he took too much
upon him; that it was none of his Affair; that he was not in Trust for the
Work; that they to whom it was committed knew their Business, and that he
should let it alone, and mind his Shop.

HE answered, it was true, that he was not trusted with it, if he had, it
should have been finished before now; and that he had a right to complain,
because he paid to it as well as other People; adding, that if they did not
dispatch, he would complain to the Bishop, and obtain another Visitation.

THIS alarmed the People entrusted, so they gave him good Words, and told him,
the truth was, the Parish Stock was almost gone, and that they had not Money to
go on, 'till the Gentlemen would come into a second Collection.

SAY you so? says the Pedlar; there may be some Reason in that; you cannot go on
indeed without Money; but pray how much do you want?

THEY told him it would cost near two hundred Pounds more to fin^sh it, and do
but indifferently neither; for the Roof wanted to be taken off, and they feared
the Timber was rotten, and would require so much Addition, they were afraid to
look into it.

IN a word, he bid the Churchwardens call a Vestry upon that particular
Affair, and he would put them in a way to finish it.

A VESTRY was called; the Pedlar told them, that seeing they were poor, and
could not raise Money to go on with it, they should leave it to him, and he
would finish it for them.

ACCORDINGLY he took the Work upon himself, laid out near a Thousand Pounds,
and almost new-built the Church; in Memory of which, on the Glass-windows,
there stand the Figures of the Pedlar and his Pack, and (as the People fancy)
there is also the Apparition beckoning to him, to come to the Place where he
dug up the Money.

THUS far the Story. How Tradition came to hand it down to us in this manner,
and so turn it into a Fable, I have nothing to do with; but the real and more
probable Part of the Tale is recorded thus.

THAT there was a Pether, so the old English calls him, that is a Pedl^r, who
having long used to travel up and down the Country with his Horse, and his
Wife, and himself, all three loaded with their Goods, and going from House to
House for many Years, was grown rich, by his Industry; and that being too old
to continue the laborious Part, he took a Lodging, first in the Town, and sold
his Goods in a Chamber, and in the Markets only, but afterward took a House and
a Shop in the Marketplace, and drove a great Trade.

THAT growing thus to be very rich, he contributed, upon their first coming
about for a Subscription, twenty five Pounds toward the Repair of the Church;
and after that, finding they wanted Money to finish it, took the Work wholly
into his own Hand, and finished the Church at his own Charge; and that the
Parish, in Gratitude to his Memory, caused that Figure of the Pedlar to be
painted upon the Glass, where the Pedlar and his Pack is represented in one
Place traveling about the Country, by which he got his Living.

IN another Place, there are Workmen digging the Foundation of the Church, and
the Pedlar giving them Directions what to do, and how to proceed; and in
another, the Church is built up a great way, and almost to the Roof, and the
Pedlar still directing.

IN another Place, an Angel is painted standing by the Pedlar, and pointing
with a Rod or Staff in his Hand, to a Place where the Pedlar sets two Workmen
to dig.

NOW from the Pedlar's being grown so unexpectdly rich, common Fame it seems
raised a Report, that he had found a Chest of Money in the Ground, and after
that another. It seems also, there is an Original for the two Verses too, which
is thus: when the Pedlar had first contributed twenty five Pounds toward
building the Church, and yet the Parishoners told him, they could not go on for
want of Money; he told them they should not be discouraged, he had given them
one Bag of Money, and, says he, where that stood, stands another twice as good:
I Will do it my self.

HENCE they thought the Pedlar must certainly have found some Money that had
been hid in the Ground, and that the Devil had discovered it to him; and so
came the whole Story to grow up by little and little into the Form as I have
told it; and now to confirm it farther, they tell us the Angel, which perhaps
might be but indifferently painted on the Glass, or on the Wall of the Church,
is taken for the Ghost that discovered the two Chests of Money to the Pedlar,
and is showing where to dig for it.

THUS the Story of an Apparition is handed on to Posterity, and now it is as
curr^ntly believed in the Country, almost as the Gospel; and any Man would be
thought very bold, that should pretend to contradict it, or to say that it is
not true in every Particular.

IF all the Stories of Apparitions leading People to dig for Money, were as
well traced as this, I believe they might be found as plainly fictitious.
Invention has been mighty fruitful upon this particular kind of Notion, that
when Money is hidden some Spirit or Apparition will discover it; as if the
Souls of those that hid the Money were disturbed, 'till it was found out and
made use of.

HOW absurd the very Suggestion it self is, I can hardly think worth while to
speak of again; but there are other Difficulties in it also, if an Apparition
knows of and discovers this Money.

1. WHY not discover it sooner? Why let it lie in the Ground, sometimes two or
three hundred Years before it has been discovered? and then an Apparition
comes, from none knows where, to bring it to light.

2. WHY is the Discovery made to a Stranger, and not to some of the Line or
Race of those to whom the Money did at first belong? One would suppose the
Apparition came, or was sent, or directed to come, to do Justice, and to give
the Money lost to the right Owner; whereas these Discoveries are often
pretended to be made to Strangers, who have no Claim or any Right to it, or any
Relation to those who laid it there; and this indeed is unaccountable, and
makes the rest of the Story improbable to be true.

3. If Ghosts, or Apparitions, and Spirits, or call them what you will, are
thus officious, and busy to discover Money hid in the Earth, so as to run up
and down to Strangers, who are no way related to it, or to the Race or Families
who were first concerned in it; Why then do they not discover all the Money
that is thus deposited in the Dark? and which no doubt is yet in great
Quantities, lodged out of the Reach of Mortal Sight, and of which we find
frequent Discoveries made; as particularly a great Parcel of old Gold, found
lately in the digging up the old Foundation of a House in Oxfordshire. A great
Parcel of Roman Gold Coin and Medals found this very Year, in digging up an old
Vault in France, and which must have lain there a thousand Years at least, and
no kind Apparition came to discover it in so long time.

MANY such Examples are daily shown us of Money found Underground, without the
Help of the Devil, or of any Apparition, Spirit or Ghost, to discover it, and
which had lain, ever since the Time of the Romans, concealed and unknown.

FROM all which Reasons I must conclude, that the departed Spirits know nothing
of these things, that it is not in their Power to discover their old Hoards of
Money, or to come hither to show us how we may come at it; but that in short,
all the old Women's Stories, which we have told us upon that Subject, are
indeed old Women's Stories, and no more.

I CANNOT quit this part of my Subject without observing that, indeed, if we
give up all the Stories of Ghosts and Apparitions, and Spirits walking, to
discover Money that is hid, we shall lose to the Age half the good old Tales,
which serve to make up Winter Evening Conversation, and shall deprive the
Doctrine of Souls departed coming back hither to talk with us about such
things, of its principal Support; for this indeed is one of the principal
Errands such Apparitions come about.

IT is without Doubt, that Fancy and Imagination form a world of Apparitions in
the Minds of Men and Women; (for we must not exclude the Ladies in this Part,
whatever we do) and People go away as thoroughly possessed with the Reality of
having seen the Devil, as if they conversed Face to Face with him; when in
short the Matter is no more than a Vapor of the Brain, a sick delirious fume
of Smoke in the Hypochondria; forming it self in such and such Figure to the
Eyesight of the Mind, as well as of the Head, which all looked upon with a
calm Revision, would appear, as it really is, nothing but a Nothing, a Skeleton
of the Brain, a Whymsy, and no more.

So Hypochondriack Vapors represent
Ships, Armies, Battles, in the Firmament:
'Till steady Sight the Exhalation solves,
And all to its first Matter Cloud dissolves.
IT is out of Question that the Imagination forms a great many of these Visions
in the Heads of the People that relate them again to us; and they as firmly
believe them to be real Apparitions, as I believe them to be nothing but
Vapors and Cloud. But on the other hand it cannot be denied, but that there is
a strange Forwardness among our People to propagate, nay, to raise and invent
such Stories of Apparitions and Visions; to furnish them out with popular
Circumstances, and to spread them as Realities, merely and on purpose to form a
plausible Relation; and perhaps some, according to Custom, fall into that old
School-boy's Error, of telling the Tale over so often, 'till they believe it to
be Truth.

BUT all this Fiction and Fable, of which the World is so full, does not at all
lessen the solid Part which I first advanced, and still insist upon, viz. The
Reality of Apparition in general; for the fruitfulness of other Men's
Imagination in coining of Falsehood, does not at all lessen the Validity of a
Truth which the Lie is made to Mimick and Counterfeit.

WE have had a world of Tales imposed upon the World about Apparitions showing
themselves to abundance of People, before, at, and after the late Massacre in
Ireland, Ann. 1641, and it would fill up a Volume of itself to give an Account
of them; nor is it possible to distinguish between those of them that are Real,
and those that were Imaginary, especially at this Distance of Time; but if I
may believe the Report of those that were upon the Spot, and of others who
received the Accounts from the most Judicious and most Considering of those who
were upon the Spot, the Fears and Apprehensions of the People, especially in
Dublin, where they expected the Murderers would break in upon them every Day,
filled them with Dream and Phantosm, Vision and Apparition, when indeed there
was nothing in it but their own dreadful Apprehensions.

NOR could they be so much blamed as in other Cases, for here were People
escaped from the Murderers, even out of their very Hands; some that had seen
their Wives, Children, Fathers, Mothers, Husbands, Neighbors butchered before
their Faces; and no Wonder if these had the Images of Death before their Eyes,
after they arrived; no Wonder if they had Apparitions and Visions of the like
Mischiefs every Hour.

NO Wonder if they saw Clouds of Irish Armies in the Air, heard Shrieks of
dying murdered Women and Children, and that they vouched these things with the
utmost Solemnity. Now it is true in the common Notions of Humanity, one could
not but pity those poor People, and give allowance to their Fears, and to the
Fright and Horrors that were upon their Minds; yet it does not at all follow
that we, who are not under the same Impressions, must come into the Delusion
with them, give up our Understanding and our Reason to their imagined Visions.

WE are to judge of those things by the Rules by which we ought to judge in
like Cases, and after you have made Allowances for the Terrors and Fright which
the poor People might be in then, we should consider the rational Part, for
where the Apparition is real, the Rational Part is always apparent as well as
the Visionary Part: for Example,

WHAT Apparitions came from a good Hand, and for the good of the innocent
People, whose Dangers were so imminent, would certainly come in some Space of
Time before the Danger, either so as to give Opportunity of Escape, or at least
Preparatory Warnings, that the People might have time to look up to Heaven,
which the butchering Enemy would not spare them; and such Apparitions as these
I should be inclined to give the most Heed to; but of these we read of very few.

ON the other hand, to what Purpose could Apparitions show themselves
afterward? and from whom did they come? If the Souls of the murdered
Protestants could appear and cry for Revenge, why did they not all appear, as
well as one Woman at Bandon-Bridge? Why did they not Haunt the Murderers in a
most frightful manner, and terrify them Night and Day, 'till they brought their
own Guilt to be the worst of Apparitions to them?

WHY did not the Terror of Blood lie upon them, like a constant Devil
harrassing their Souls, and terrifying them 'till they were made their own
Executioners? We saw none of these Things happen either to them, or to the
Murderers, Actors and Directors of the Parisian Massacre. Charles IX. King of
Fr^nce, by whose Direction it was all managed, died as composed, without any
Repentance for it, as if he had never been concerned in it; calmly giving
Directions for the Administration of the Affairs of the Government after him,
and told his Mother how to act with the Hugonots, 'till his Brother the King of
Poland should arrive.

IN Ireland the Priests and Zealots, nay the very Women, boasted of the Number
they had killed; showed the Skeins or Daggers with which they cut the Throats
of the Protestants; one so many, and another so many; their Soldiers fought as
fearless after it as before, nor did any Apparition haunt them, that ever I met
with any Account of.

ON the other hand, for the Devil's disturbing them, I see no Reason in it; the
Devil was not at all displeased with the Fact; what should he disturb them for?
he would rather appear to assist them, encourage them, harden them in it, take
all Remorse from them, and reproach them with Cowardice if they showed the
least Inclination to Pity; though I don't hear of the least Blame the Devil
himself could lay upon them of that kind.

AS to Apparitions after it was over, I do not see Room to think them so much
as Rational; there was not the least Occasion of them, or Use for them; the
Mischief was done; what could the invisible World have to say to any body about
it after it was done? We do not read of any Apparitions, Voices, Noises, Signs,
or Wonders at Jerusalem after the Temple was destroyed, though above a Million of
People are said (by Josephus) to have perished there. There were Signs and
horrible Noises, Apparitions and Voices before it, in several Places, but none
after it; the miserable Dead lay quiet in their Heaps, Graves they could not be
called, and gave neither their Friends or Enemies any Disturbance.

TO conclude: The sham Apparitions which People put upon themselves are indeed
very many; and our Hypochondriack People see more Devils at noonday than
Galilaeus did Stars, and more by many than ever really appeared. But this no
ways Impeaches the main Proposition, viz. That there are really and truly
Apparitions of various kinds; and that Spirits or Angels (call them what we
will) Inhabitants of the invisible and empty Spaces, do visit us here upon many
Occasions, either for Good or Evil, as He who made them is pleased to direct.

THE general End and Design of Providence in suffering such things, and the Use
and Application to our selves, which we are directed to make of them in common
Prudence; how far they are, or are not mercifully restrained from hurting us,
and even from terrifying and affrighting us, if our Reason could be our
Governor in such Cases, with a great Number of Examples in Story of the effect
of such Apparitions as have been allowed to visit Mankind, whether peaceably or
otherwise; these would take up a great deal more room: But I am run my length
in the present Relation, and the Reader must be content to draw Consequences
for himself from what is said, to guide his Judgment in the variety of such
Cases as may happen: his only way, in our Opinion, is to keep an even pace
between Apprehension and Contempt; neither to fear or desire them; but resolve
to act with the Calmness and Courage of a Christian, in whatever may be his
Case.

BUT above all I would beg my reading merry Friends of the thoughtless kind not
to be so much surpised at the Apparitions of their own Brain; not to start and
be frighted when they first make Devils by Daylight, and then see them in the
dark; and as they may be assured they will hardly ever see any thing worse than
themselves, so let them resolve not to be scared at Shadows, or amused with
Vapors; mistaking the Devil for an Ass, and tell us of the Saucer Eyes of a
Pink-eyed Bear; not fancy they see a Hearse with headless Horses, and take the
Night Cart for a fiery Chariot, which one would think they might distinguish by
their Noses, unless they will own that their Fear gave them a worse Smell than
that of the Devil.

FINIS.

