THE CASE OF Mrs. CLIVE.

[Price Six Pence.]

THE CASE OF Mrs. CLIVE Submitted to the PUBLIC.

LONDON: Printed for B. DOD at the Bible and Key in Ave-Mary-Lane near
Stationers' Hall. MDCCXLIV.

[Price Six Pence.]

THE CASE OF Mrs. CLIVE Submitted to the PUBLIC.
IN order to put an End to some false Reports, which have been raised in
Relation to my not acting this Season, as well as to bespeak the Favor of the
Public, I have, by the Advice of my Friends, ventured to address my self to
them, from whom I have received many and great Marks of Favor, and whose
further Protection I now stand in need of.

I know Appeals of this Nature, which relate to Disputes that happen at a
Theater, are by some thought presuming and impertinent, supposing they are too
trifling to demand Attention: But, as I persuade my self, that Injustice and
Oppression are by no means thought Matters of Indifference by any who have
Humanity, I hope I shall not be thought to take too great a Liberty. I am the
more encouraged to hope this from Experience; it having been observed, that
those Performers, who have had the Happiness to please on the Stage, and who
never did any thing to offend the Public, whenever they have been injured by
those who presided over Theaters, have seldom, if ever, failed of Redress upon
representing the Hardships they met with: And, as I at this time, apprehend my
self to be greatly oppressed by the Managers of both Theaters, I hope I shall
be justified in taking this Method of acquainting the Public with my Case,
submitting it to their Determination.

Before the Disputes happened betwixt the Manager of Drury Lane Theater and his
Actors, I had articled for Five Years to receive Three Hundred Pounds a Year,
though another Performer on that Stage received for Seven Years Five Hundred
Guineas, per Year; and at the Expiration of my Agreements the Manager offered
me an additional Salary to continue at that Theater.

And since I have mentioned those Disputes, which ended so greatly to the
Disadvantage of the Actors, I must beg Leave to endeavor to set that Matter in
a clear Light, which hitherto has been misrepresented to the Public: I think
my self obliged to this, as the Hardships I at present labor under are owing
to that Disagreement; if any think I treat this Matter too seriously, I hope
they will remember, that however trifling such Things may appear to them, to
me, who am so much concerned in 'em, they are of great Importance, such as my
Liberty and Livelihood depend on.

As only two Theaters were authorized, the Managers thought it was in their
Power to reduce the Incomes of those Performers, who could not live independent
of their Profession; but in order to make this appear with a better Face to the
Town, it was agreed to complain of the Actors Salaries being too great, and
accordingly a false Account was published of them in the daily Papers, by whom
I will not say: Whether, or no, some particular Salaries were so, I will not
pretend to determine; yet, in the whole, they did not amount to more than had
been allowed for many Years, when the Theater was under a frugal and exact
Regulation; when the Managers punctually fulfilled, not only all Engagements to
their Actors, but to every other Person concerned in the Theater, and raised
very considerable Fortunes for themselves.

But supposing the Expense of the Theater too high, I am very certain it was
not the Actors refusing to submit to a proper Reduction of them, which made so
many of them quit the Stage, but from great Hardships they underwent, and
greater which they feared would happen from an Agreement supposed to be
concluded betwixt the two Managers, which made 'em apprehend, that if they
submitted to act under such Agreements, they must be absolutely in the Managers
Power; and the Event has proved that their Fears were not ill-grounded, as I
doubt not but I shall make appear.

When the Actors Affairs obliged 'em to return to the Theaters last Winter,
under such Abatements of their Salaries as hardly afforded the greater Part of
them a Subsistence, I was offered, by the Manager of Drury Lane Theater, such
Terms as bore no Proportion to what he gave other Performers, or to those he
had offered me at the beginning of the Season. They were such as I was advised
not to accept, because it was known they were proposed for no reason but to
insult me, and make me seek for better at the other Theater; for I knew it had
been settled, by some dark Agreement, that Part of the Actors were to go to
Covent Garden Theater, and others to Drury Lane; I did, indeed, apprehend I
should meet with better Terms at Covent Garden, because that Manager had made
many Overtures to get me into his Company the preceding Season, and many times
before: But when I applied to him, he offered me exactly the same which I had
refused at the other Theater, and which I likewise rejected, but was persuaded
to accept some very little better, rather than seem obstinate in not complying
as well as others, and yielded so far to the Necessity of the Time, as to Act
under a much less Salary than several other Performers on that Stage, and
submitted to pay a Sum of Money for my Benefit, notwithstanding I had had one
clear of all Expense for Nine Years before; an Advantage the first Performers
had been thought to merit for near Thirty Years, and had grown into a Custom.

When I was fixed at that Theater I determined to stay there; I did, in all
things which related to my Profession, submit entirely to that Manager's
Direction, and, with the help of other principal Performers, did greatly
promote his Interest, as was evident from the Audiences after we went to Act
there; but I found, by his Behavior to me, it was designed I should not
continue with him, but return the next Season to Drury Lane.

The Agreements betwixt that Manager and me were verbal, but made before two
Gentlemen of Character and Fortune, on whom I must depend for the fulfilling of
them; they were for one Year. At the end of the Acting-season the Manager sent
an Office-keeper to me with some Salary that was due, who required a Receipt in
full; I told him a very great Part of my Agreements were yet due, and requested
to see the Manager, who came and acknowledged them, and promised to bring one
of the Gentlemen who was present at our Engagements in a Day or two and pay me,
and then he said he had done with me; but he has not paid me, nor have I ever
seen him since, or as much as heard from him.

It has always been a Custom in Theaters, that if ever any Actor or Actress was
to be discharged, or their Allowance lessened, they were acquainted with it at
the End of the Season; the Reason of this will appear to be the giving them a
proper Notice to provide for themselves: This the Manager of Covent Garden did
to all his Company whom he designed to discharge, or whose Allowance was to be
lessened, except to me, which made me actually then conclude he determined I
should continue with him, 'till I was undeceived by his Play-Bills with the
Names of other Actresses in Parts I used to perform; so that he has not only
broke through the Customs of the Theater, but those in practice almost every
where, in dismissing me, and has done me a real Injury in such an unprecedented
Act of Injustice; for had I been informed of his Design at the End of the
Season, I could have made Terms to have acted in Ireland, where I had met with
most uncommon Civilities, and received very great Advantages, which I shall
ever remember with the utmost Gratitude, and take this and every other
Opportunity to acknowledge.

As I have said, it has been a Custom to give Actors Notice of a Discharge: I
must at the same time observe, That it never was a Custom to discharge any, but
upon Neglect of their Business, or such as were obnoxious to the Public; this
Maxim extended even to those of the lowest Class; but to those, on whose
Performances the Town had been pleased to stamp a Value, by their Indulgence
and Applause, the Stage was always a Support, even after Age or any Accident
had made 'em incapable of their Profession; for the then Patentees thought it
as great a Piece of Insolence to deprive the Public of their Pleasures, as of
Cruelty and Injustice to deny those a Subsistence who had contributed toward
'em; for they knew and acknowledged, that the Public was the only Support of
all, consequently had an indisputable Right to be pleased in the best manner
possible.

It is pretended by the Managers, that they have the same Right to discharge an
Actor that a Master has to turn away a Servant, than which nothing can be more
false and absurd; for, when a Master dismisses a Servant, there are many
thousands besides to apply to; but when the Managers dismiss an Actor, where
are they to apply? It is unlawful to act any where but with them; Necessity or
Inclination brings every one to the Stage; if the former happens to be the
Case, they will not readily find an Employment; and if the latter, they will
not be fit for one; so that it will appear an Act of great Injustice and
Oppression. If it should be objected, That the Actors Demands are so
exorbitant, that the Managers cannot comply with 'em? I have already
endeavored to show, that though two or three Salaries might be thought so in
general, they did not amount to more than had been allowed, and very
considerable Profits arising to the Patentees. But there is a very melancholy
Instance, that the Actors Demands is not the Reason of dismissing 'em, but the
Will of the Manager alone; since last Season an Actor and Actress returned to
Drury Lane under such Abatements as that Manager thought proper, and such as
were in no degree equal to their Merit; and yet, at the beginning of this
Season, were dismissed, after having been from their Infancy on the Stage, and
having no other Professions to live by, and very numerous Families to support.

The Manager of Drury Lane, though he cannot but know I am disengaged from the
other Theater, has not made any Application to me to act with him, which he has
done to several others who quitted that Stage at the Time I did: The Reasons
which obliged me to leave him still subsist: He owes me a Hundred and Sixty
Pounds, twelve Shillings, which he has acknowledged to be justly due, and
promised Payment of it by last Christmas to a Person of too great Consequence
for me to mention here, the greater Part of it Money I expended for Clothes for
his Use. He offered me, last Season, not near half as much as he afterward
agreed to give another Performer, and less than he then gave to some others in
his Company; so that I must conclude, as every one knows there are Agreements
betwixt the Managers, that there is a Design to distress me, and reduce me to
such Terms as I cannot comply with.

I am sorry I am reduced to say any thing in favor of myself; but, as I think
I merit as much as another Performer, and the Managers are so desirous to
convince me of the contrary, I hope I shall be excused; especially when I
declare, that at this time, I am not in the least vain of my Profession.

As to my Performances, the Audience are the only proper Judges: But I may
venture to affirm, That my Labor, and Application, have been greater than any
other Performers on the Stage. I have not only acted in almost all the Plays,
but in Farces and Musical Entertainments; and very frequently two Parts in a
Night, even to the Prejudice of my Health. I have been at a very great Expense
in Masters for Singing; for which Article alone, the Managers now give five and
six Pounds a Week. My additional Expenses, in belonging to the Theater, amount
to upwards of one Hundred Pounds a Year, in Clothes, and other Necessaries; and
the pretended great Salaries, of ten and twelve Pounds a Week, which have been
so artfully, and falsely represented to the Town, to the Prejudice of the
Actors, will, upon Enquiry, appear to be no more than half as much, since they
performed last Season, at the Theaters, very seldom above three or four Days a
Week; so taking in the long Vacation, when there are no Plays at all, to those
Days the present Managers omit acting, a Salary which appears to be great, will
be found, in effect, to be very moderate; and those which are less, not a
Sufficiency.

I have now finished all I proposed; I have shown in how aggravating a manner,
without any Reason assigned, and at a Time a very considerable Sum of Money was
owing to me, I have been turned out of Covent Garden Theater. The Manager of
Drury Lane, though he cannot but know what just Reasons I had for quitting him,
has never applied to me to return, nor made the least Excuse for not paying my
Arrears, though due so long, and after promising Payment near a Year,
notwithstanding I have, for many Years, not only endeavored, but succeeded, in
greatly promoting that Manager's Interest, as is known to himself and his whole
Company.

The Reason of my taking the Liberty to communicate these Things to the
Public, is most earnestly to interceed for their Favor and Protection, from
whom I have always met with great Generosity and Indulgence: For, as I have
already declared, in a Letter published by me last Year in the Daily Papers,
that I had not a Fortune to support me, independent of my Profession, I doubt
not but it will appear, I have not made any considerable Acquisition to it
since, having not received two Hundred Pounds Salary for acting in Plays,
Farces, and Singing; though other Performers have received more than twice that
Sum. I have, in Consideration of these Hardships, been promised the Protection
of many Ladies, to whom I have the Honor to be personally known, and will not
doubt the Concurrence of the Public, in receiving my Performance in the best
manner I am, at present, capable of, which I shall always most gratefully
Acknowledge.

C. CLIVE.

FINIS.

