AN ODE TO TRAGEDY.

By a GENTLEMAN of SCOTLAND.

EDINBURGH: Printed by A. DONALDSON and J. REID. For ALEX. DONALDSON. MDCLXI.

[Price SIX PENCE.]

TO JAMES BOSWELL, Esquire
MY DEAR SIR,
IF Adam Fitzadam presumed to inscribe a volume of the WORLD to MR MOORE, I can
see no reason why I, a Gentleman of Scotland, may not take much the same
liberty with MR BOSWELL.

Do not imagine, Sir, because this address comes in the form of a dedication,
that I have been invoking the goddess of Flattery. Indeed I have no intention
to pay your compliments: not that your discernment is so nice as to reject them
with indignation; but because it is my sincere opinion that they would do you
harm. To entertain agreeable notions of one's own character, is a great
incentive to act with propriety and spirit. But I should be sorry to contribute
in any degree, to your acquiring an excess of self-sufficiency.

To talk thus freely, is certainly a proof that I wish you well: and I make no
doubt, Sir, but you consider me as your very good friend; although some people,
-- and those too not destitute of wisdom, -- will not scruple to insinuate the
contrary.

Be that as it may, give me leave to thank you for your particular kindness to
me; and chiefly for the profound respect with which you have always treated me.

I own indeed, that when I have boasted of a glimpse of regard from the finest
eyes, and most amiable heart in the world; or, to display my extensive
erudition, have quoted Greek, Latin, and French sentences, one after another
with astonishing celerity; or have got into my Old-hock humor, and fallen
a-raving about princes and lords, knights and geniuses, ladies of quality and
harpsichords; -- you, with a peculiar comic smile, have gently reminded me of
the importance of a man to himself, and slily left the room, with the witty
DEAN lying open at (...) P. P. clerk of this parish.

The following ODE which courts your acceptance, is on a subject grave and
solemn; and therefore may be considered by many people, as not so well suited
to your volatile disposition. But I, Sir, who enjoy the pleasure of your
intimate acquaintance, know that many of your hours of retirement are devoted
to thought; and that you can as strongly relish the productions of a serious
Muse, as the most brilliant sallies of sportive Fancy.

As to my merit as a poet, I shall only say, that while I am certain of YOUR
approbation, I shall be entirely satisfied: and if I can any how improve the
noble feelings of that honest open heart of yours, I shall reckon myself
infinitely happy.

I must now bid you farewell, with an assurance, that while you continue the
man that you are, you shall ever find me, with the greatest sincerity and
affection,

MY DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.

ODE TO TRAGEDY.
I.
GODDESS supreme! whose power divine
The yielding Passions all obey,
On me, O! with thy influence shine!
O! send a spark to fire each lay!
A soul by nature formed to feel
Grief sharper than the tyrants steel,
And bosom big with swelling thought,
From ancient lore's remembrance brought,
Prompt me with pinions bold my way to wing,
And like the sky-lark at heaven's gate to sing.
II.
Come, mistress of superior grace,
Daughter in hour sublime of Jove!
Over the strong features of whose face
With air of distant awe we rove:
While mingling softness to the eye
Seems over each lineament to fly;
As when the sun's resplendent rays
In summer glow with redd'ning blaze,
A floating blue-ting'd cloud does interveen,
And through a veil the sire of light is seen.
III.
Come, Muse! while Terror's ghastly form,
And Pity, gentle maid, appear,
Or to assault the soul by storm,
Or steal the generous heart-sprung tear:
While they attendant on thy state,
Submissive thy behests await,
Dread as a hideous lion chained,
And Pity's looks with crying stained,
O in thy dazzling majesty advance,
Thou who through nature shoot'st with eagle glance.
IV.
It Is thine the soul to humanize
By fancied woe; -- Goddess! it is thine
To bid compassion melt the eyes,
And all the feelings soft refine.
It Is thine, with great Apollo's skill,
The inmost springs of life to thrill;
It Is thine to move a breast of stone,
And make a brazen heart to own,
That solemn tragic numbers are of force,
To stop a villain in his bloody course.
V.
Behold the buskined bard of Greece!
The enchantment of whose tuneful shell
Could sooth the mind to gentle peace,
Or rouse to fury sprung from hell!
See in his kindling look, the fire
Bright flaming from his golden lyre!
Hark how he sweeps the strings! -- such tones
Nature designed affliction's groans.
I feel, when now he wakes another strain,
The love of glory panting in each vein!
VI.
Unhappy Oedipus! thy fate --
-- Gods! for one mortal how severe! --
While Sophocles deigns to relate,
In pomp of sadness shall appear.
The direful oracle we dread,
While on thy bare dejected head,
We see the black tempest'ous shower
Of Fortune's wrath incessant pour:
We see a wretch over boiling eddies tossed,
Till in a gulf of woe the victim's lost!
VII.
O say, thou arbitress of mind,
What sympathy unites our race,
That even in savages we find
This wondrous tender, human grace?
How is the heart of man so soft?
-- Which I, alas! have felt too often. --
How are we moved with others woe?
How do the streams of pity flow?
How does the breast with throbs spontaneous beat?
How is compassion found so strangely sweet?
VIII.
Hail! father of the British stage!
Shakespeare! to whom shall still belong
Through each successive wondering age,
The glories of immortal song!
Melpomene, with aspect mild,
With joyful hope exulting smiled,
What time on Avon's banks she saw
Thee young thy first rude sketches draw
Of richest poesy, whose strains sublime
Already aimed the empyreum's height to climb.
IX.
Genius unbounded as the sky,
That spreads itself from pole to pole,
Disdains a formal course to fly,
Or sweep the ground with lazy stole.
The Stagyrite may preach in vain,
And tasteless critics cold complain
That thou all rules of art have broke,
And flung away the stated yoke;
To the kind heart alone thou do appeal,
And bidst the ingenuous there conviction feel.
X.
Say thou! the illustrious poet's shade!
Whether old Westminster's famed dome
Thou haunt'st, or where his childhood strayed,
And where his bones have fixed their home;
O say from whence such powers he drew,
By which the universe he knew:
Ye ghosts, and beings of the brain!
Witches, and all the magic train!
You he could lively paint with pencil nice,
And scourge, by force infernal, blasted vice!
XI.
Greatest of bards! O hear my prayer!
Gleam on my soul with chearing view:
Yet think not that I rashly dare
One of thy footsteps to pursue.
How have I, in my youthful age,
Adored to see the passions rage!
As when her swain with Juliet strove,
Who felt the anguish most of love;
Or when Old England's annals were displayed,
And Piercy stormed in martial fire arrayed.
XII.
Forgive, though I forbear to tell
Of you, ye other bards who shine,
Forgive though I forbear to swell
With crowd of names the sounding line.
When Oroonoko's godlike soul,
By misery distracted, roll
In gloomy blood-streak'd eyes we see,
Can any bosom ruthless be?
Will not a hapless orphan make us weep?
Or Randolph's lady plunged in sorrows deep?
XIII.
Augusta's theaters! -- with pride
How often have I witnessed there,
The lucid pearls of pity glide
From lovely eyes of British fair!
How often have I raptured seen
The passion of the present queen
With uncontrolled applauses loud
Burn in each feature of the crowd!
Lo! boundless liberty submissive deigns --
Triumph how great! to wear the actor's chains!
XIV.
See Garrick in poor Lear rave,
Borne down the tide of sore distress!
He seems against each o'erwhelming wave
With hoary majesty to press!
See Sheridan in Denmark's heir! --
Wide spreads the prospect of despair!
With dusky clouds the sky is hung!
Pale horror falters on his tongue!
Torn is his wretched mind! even now I view
Cold, pain-wrought drops his mournful face bedew!
XV.
O why by Cam's delightful streams,
Does Mr Mason.
he who sung Elfrida's woe,
Indulge his warm, poetic dreams,
But to the private eye to show?
Why does the moralizing train The ancient chorus.

Him from the world's just glass detain?
Beams not bright beauty brighter still,
From the high summit of yon hill?
Drive him, Ambition, from the inglorious seat,
Though Hurd approve his indolent retreat.
XVI.
Goddess supreme! my vows attend.
O let the honored task be mine,
Thy temple trembling to ascend;
Trembling to offer at thy shrine.
While idle Folly's glittering train
Bask in the sunshine, ever vain;
Like Juno's bird so pert and gay,
Their gaudy plumage still display;
O! let me visit often thy sacred store,
And in ecstatic heat intranc'd adore!
FINIS.

