AN ESSAY ON THE Genius and Writings OF SHAKESPEARE: WITH Some Letters of
Criticism to the SPECTATOR.

By Mr. DENNIS.

-- Me Lectori credere malim
Quam Spectatoris fastidia far superbi.
Horace. LONDON: Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT at the Cross-Keys between the Two
Temple-Gates in Fleetstreet. 1712. Price 1 s.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE GRANVILLE, Esquire Secretary at War.
SIR, AN Address of this Nature made upon your Advancement to one of the
principal Employments of the State, and made by one who has had the Honor to
be known to you so many Years, might be pretended by malicious People to be a
Homage rather to your Fortune and Power, than a due Respect to your Merit and
Virtue; if it were not publicly known, that I formerly applied my self to you
in the same manner, when you were much more distingnished by Merit and Virtue,
than by Fortune and Power.

But if any one farther maliciously urges, that, even when I formerly applied
my self to you, by the distinguishing Qualities of your Mind and Person, I
foresaw your Fortune and Power; to him I answer, in order to vindicate the
Reputation of my Sincerity and my Disinterestedness, that though I saw very well
that those great Qualities fitted Mr. Granville for the most Illustrious
Employments; yet who could have ever imagined that any Man living had Merit
enough to raise him in spite of so many unfortunate Virtues with which that
Merit was attended, in spite of not only a true Poetical Genius, but a
Frankness, a Probity, a matchless Integrity, a Sincerity worthy of Heroic
Times, and a most untainted Honor.

But though your Character were less conspicuous, and what I had formerly done
were entirely forgot, the numerous and powerful Obligations I have to you,
would more than justify this Address; and the omitting the first Opportunity
of making you a public Acknowledgment would look like black Ingratitude. You
have taken such Care of my Interest with others at a most seasonable
Conjuncture, and have your self made me a Present so noble, and so
extraordinary at a time when I stood most in need of it, that how few alive
have Spirit and Magnanimity to do any thing like it? At least I defy any one
to name that living Man, who in a private Capacity has done any thing like it.

I know very well indeed that you are very far from desiring such a public
Acknowledgment, that you aim at nothing by doing daily good, but the Godlike
Pleasure which results from your Actions; and that others perhaps may censure
me for sacrificing your Modesty to my own Vanity. For to publish to the World
that I have been obliged in an extraordinary (...) by a Person so universally
esteemed and ^^stinguish'd, that one of the very few Things in which the most
violent of both Parties agree, is the Character of Mr. Granville, will be
thought to be the Result of uncommon Vanity, by those who have not Goodness
enough to believe it to be the Effect of a lively Gratitude.

But though, Sir, I had no Obligation to you, and you had no other Merit but that
of perfectly understanding an Art which you have perfectly practiced, viz. the
Art which is the Subject of the following Treatise, that Treatise would be by
Right of Nature yours. For to whom can an Essay upon the Genius and Writings of
Shakespeare be so properly addressed, as to him who best understands Shakespeare,
and who has most improved him. I would not give this just Encomium to the Jew
of Venice, if I were not convinced from a long Experience of the Penetration
and Force of your Judgment, (...) no Exaltation can make you a^^^m'd of your
former noble Art; that you know it to be a Weakness barely to imagine, that the
most noble and most exalted of all Arts, and the most difficult to excel in,
can render a Man less qualified for public Business, or for the first
Employments of the State; that all the great Statesmen who have best succeeded
in Affairs of Government, have either writ Poems or Treatises concerning
Poetry. The most ancient of Historians and Legislators, Moses, at least of
those whose Laws and Histories remain, has given us a pathetick and a lofty
Poem upon the Passage of the Red Sea.

The Athenian Legislator Solon thought it not in the least below his Dignity to
render Moral Virtue lovely by the Charms of Verse. And Lacedemonian Licurgus,
even the rigid and the austere Lycurgus, thought it an Employment worthy of his
Wisdom and Virtue, to restore and publish the Immortal Works of Homer: Having
the same Opinion of that Prince of Poets that Horace afterward had; that his
Poems would better instruct Mankind in Virtue than they could be possibly
taught by Prose. The most Illustrious Writers of Politics among the Grecians,
Plato and Aristotle; one of them had a figurative, a lofty and a Poetic Prose;
and the other, who may be called the Legislator of Parnassus, wrote the Laws of
Tragedy so exactly and so truly in Reason and Nature, that succeeding Critics
have writ justly and reasonably upon that Art no farther than they have adhered
to their great Master's Notions. Tacitus the very Oracle of Modern Statesmen
has a Style that is warm and daring, and figurative, that is to say Poetic.
Machiavel the Prince of Modern Politicians, if we except but one of our own
Countrymen, wrote more than one Comedy, and more than one Poem has been
attempted by our British Politician Harrington. The two Princes of Poets may
easily be proved to have been great Statesmen; Homer particularly made choice of
a Moral, which in his Time, when Greece with the Islands of the Aegaean was
divided into petty Sovereignties, was the fundamental Maxim of their Politics
and their true Interest; which Moral was, as Sallust afterward expressed it,
Concordia res parvae crescunt, Discordia maxima dilabuntur; from whose noblest
Poem you formerly gave us a Tragedy, in which in Imitation of Homer, you are
daring yet just, fiery yet regular, sublime yet natural and perspicuous, chaste
yet alluring, and easy yet strong and powerful.

But to come to the more active part of Government, the greatest Monarchs and
Captains, and Ministers of State that ever were known in the World, either were
or would have been great Poets. When Athens flourished in all her Glory, their
Poets and their famous Writers were they who directed their Counsels, and led
their Armies to Battle. Alexander read nothing but the Works of Homer while he
conquered the Orient. In Rome the greatest Captain that flourished in the Time
of the Commonwealth vouchsafed his Assistance to a Comic Poet: And the two
first Caesar's were proud to write Tragedies with those fatal Hands that were
victorious over the Universe. Mecaenas, at the Time that he was first Minister
to the Emperor of the World, was not only the greatest Patron of the Muses that
ever was, but endeavored to be himself a Poet. If we descend to Modern Times,
Richlieu, who laid the Foundation of the French Greatness, wrote more than one
Dramatick Poem, with that very right Hand which dictated to the Cabinets of so
many Sovereign Princes, and directed the successful Motions of so many
conquering Commanders. And that Greatness, which upon a French Poetic
Foundation was in the Space of less than one Century raised to an insupportable
Height, was in less than twenty Years sapp'd and undermined, and overturned by
a British Poetic Ministry: It being undeniable, that several of the Persons
who made the chief Figures in both the old and the new Ministry were Poets. I
make no doubt, Sir, but the Time will come when you will be distinguished by
the Wisdom and Reach of your Counsels, as much as you were formerly by the
Spirit and Justness of your Writings. For the very Virtues which we once were
afraid would hinder your Advancement even in the most virtuous Court, are now
like to preserve and support your Interest since you have had an Opportunity of
publicly practicing them so long. It Is impossible to behold that Ardor, that
Sincerity and that Alacrity, with which you every Day endeavor to do good to
your Fellow Creatures, without loving you, and without wishing, as well as
hoping, that you may be the peculiar Care of Providence, which by advancing you
to one of the most eminent Stations would provide for Thousands. But when we
behold that Ardor and that Alacrity, attended with such an attractive Sweetness
and such a manly Grace, and with a Nobility which God and Nature seem to have
imprinted both on your Mind and Person, we have no longer Power over our
selves, but give up all our Affections to you; and not only wish, but firmly
believe that since God and Nature have given you those several Excellencies
which were the undoubted Original of all Political Nobility, they have
determined you to succeed to the most extensive Fortunes and Titles of your
Noble Ancestors; which is warmly desired and earnestly expected by all who have
the Honor to know you, but more especially by

SIR, Your most obliged, most humble, and most faithful Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

LETTER. I.
On the Genius and Writings of Shakespeare.
To Mr. (...)
Feb. 1. 1710/11. SIR,
I Here send you the Tragedy of Coriolanus, which I have altered from the
Original of Shakespeare, and with it a short Account of the Genius and Writings
of that Author, both which you desired me to send to you the last time I had
the good Fortune to see you. But I send them both upon this condition, that you
will with your usual Sincerity tell me your Sentiments both of the Poem and of
the Criticism.

Shakespeare was one of the greatest Genius's that the World ever saw for the
Tragic Stage. Tho'he lay under greater Disadvantages than any of his
Successors, yet had he greater and more genuine Beauties than the best and
greatest of them. And what makes the brightest Glory of his Character, those
Beauties were entirely his own, and owing to the Force of his own Nature;
whereas his Faults were owing to his Education, and to the Age that he lived
in. One may say of him as they did of Homer, that he had none to imitate, and
is himself inimitable. His Imaginations were often as just, as they were bold
and strong. He had a natural Discretion which never could have been taught him,
and his Judgment was strong and penetrating. He seems to have wanted nothing
but Time and Leisure for Thought, to have found out those Rules of which he
appears so ignorant. His Characters are always drawn justly, exactly,
graphically, except where he failed by not knowing History or the Poetical Art.
He has for the most part more fairly distinguished them than any of his
Successors have done, who have falsified them, or confounded them, by making
Love the predominant Quality in all. He had so fine a Talent for touching the
Passions, and they are so lively in him, and so truly in Nature, that they
often touch us more without their due Preparations, than those of other Tragic
Poets, who have all the Beauty of Design and all the Advantage of Incidents.
His Master-Passion was Terror, which he has often moved so powerfully and so
wonderfully, that we may justly conclude, that if he had had the Advantage of
Art and Learning, he would have surpassed the very best and strongest of the
Ancients. His Paintings are often so beautiful and so lively, so graceful and
so powerful, especially where he uses them in order to move Terror; that there
is nothing perhaps more accomplished in our English Poetry. His Sentiments for
the most part in his best Tragedies, are noble, generous, easy and natural,
and adapted to the Persons who use them. His Expression is in many Places good
and pure after a hundred Years; simple though elevated, graceful though bold, and
easy though strong. He seems to have been the very Original of our English
Tragical Harmony; that is the Harmony of Blank Verse, diversifyed often by
Dissyllable and Trissyllable Terminations. For that Diversity distinguishes it
from Heroic Harmony, and bringing it nearer to common Use, makes it more
proper to gain Attention, and more fit for Action and Dialogue. Such Verse we
make when we are writing Prose; we make such Verse in common Conversation.

If Shakespeare had these great Qualities by Nature, what would he not have
been, if he had joined to so happy a Genius Learning and the Poetical Art. For
want of the latter our Author has sometimes made gross Mistakes in the
Characters which he has drawn from History, against the Equality and
Convenience of Manners of his Dramatical Persons. Witness Menenius in the
following Tragedy, whom he has made an errant Buffoon, which is a great
Absurdity. For he might as well have imagined a grave majestic Jack-Pudding,
as a Buffoon in a Roman Senator. Aufidius the General of the Volscians is shown
a base and a profligate Villain. He has offended against the Equality of the
Manners even in his Hero himself. For Coriolanus who in the first part of the
Tragedy is shown so open, so frank, so violent, and so magnanimous, is
represented in the latter part by Aufidius which is contradicted by no one, a
flattering, fawning, cringing, insinuating Traitor.

For want of this Poetical Art, Shakespeare has introduced things into his
Tragedies, which are against the Dignity of that noble Poem, as the Rabble in
Julius Caesar, and that in Coriolanus; though that in Coriolanus offends not only
against the Dignity of Tragedy, but against the Truth of History likewise, and
the Customs of Ancient Rome, and the Majesty of the Roman People, as we shall
have occasion to show anon.

For want of this Art, he has made his Incidents less moving, less surprising,
and less wonderful. He has been so far from seeking those fine Occasions to
move with which an Action furnished according to Art would have furnished him;
that he seems rather to have industriously avoided them. He makes Coriolanus
upon his Sentence of Banishment, take his leave of his Wife and his Mother out
of sight of the Audience, and so has purposely as it were avoided a great
occasion to move.

If we are willing to allow, that Shakespeare by sticking to the bare Events of
History, has moved more than any of his Successors, yet his just Admirers must
confess, that if he had had the Poetical Art, he would have moved ten times
more. For it is impossible that by a bare Historical Play he could move so much
as he would have done by a Fable.

We find that a Romance entertains the generality of Mankind with more
Satisfaction than History, if they read only to be entertertain'd; but if they
read History through Pride or Ambition, they bring their Passions along with
them, and that alters the case. Nothing is more plain than that even in an
Historical Relation some Parts of it, and some Events, please more than others.
And therefore a Man of Judgment, who sees why they do so, may in forming a
Fable, and disposing an Action, please more than an Historian can do. For the
just Fiction of a Fable moves us more than an Historical Relation can do for
the two following Reasons: First by reason of the Communication and mutual
Dependence of its Parts. For if Passion springs from Motion, then the
Obstruction of that Motion or a counter Motion must obstruct and check the
Passion: And therefore an Historian and a Writer of Historical Plays passing
from Events of one nature to Events of another nature without a due
Preparation, must of necessity stifle and confound one Passion by another. The
second Reason why the Fiction of a Fable pleases us more, than an Historical
Relation can do, is, because in an Historical Relation we seldom are acquainted
with the true Causes of Events, whereas in a feigned Action which is duly
constituted, that is, which has a just beginning, those Causes always appear.
For it is observable, that both in a Poetical Fiction and an Historical
Relation, those Events are the most entertaining, the most surprising, and the
most wonderful, in which Providence most plainly appears. And it is for this
Reason that the Author of a just Fable, must please more than the Writer of an
Historical Relation. The Good must never fail to prosper, and the Bad must be
always punished: Otherwise the Incidents, and particularly the Catastrophe
which is the grand Incident, are liable to be imputed rather to Chance, than to
Almighty Conduct and to Sovereign Justice. The want of this impartial
Distribution of Justice makes the Coriolanus of Shakespeare to be without Moral.
It Is true indeed Coriolanus is killed by those Foreign Enemies with whom he had
openly sided against his Country, which seems to be an Event worthy of
Providence, and would look as if it were contrived by infinite Wisdom, and
executed by supreme Justice, to make Coriolanus a dreadful Example to all, who
lead on Foreign Enemies to the Invasion of their native Country; if there were
not something in the Fate of the other Characters, which gives occasion to
doubt of it, and which suggests to the Skeptical Reader that this might happen
by accident. For Aufidius the principal Murderer of Coriolanus, who in cold
Blood gets him assassinated by Ruffians, instead of leaving him to the Law of
the Country, and the Justice of the Volscian Senate, and who commits so black a
Crime, not by any erroneous Zeal, or a mistaken Public Spirit, but through
Jealousy, Envy, and inveterate Malice; this Assassinator not only survives, and
survives unpunished, but seems to be rewarded for so detestable an Action; by
engrossing all those Honors to himself which Coriolanus before had shared with
him. But not only Aufidius, but the Roman Tribunes, Sicinius and Brutus, appear
to me to cry aloud for Poetic Vengeance. For they are guilty of two Faults,
neither of which ought to go unpunished: The first in procuring the Banishment
of Coriolanus. If they were really jealous, that Coriolanus had a Design on
their Liberties, when he stood for the Consulship, it was but just that they
should give him a Repulse; but to get the Champion and Defender of their
Country banished upon a pretended Jealousy was a great deal too much, and could
proceed from nothing but that Hatred and Malice which they had conceived
against him, for opposing their Institution. Their second Fault lay in
procuring this Sentence by indirect Methods, by exasperating and inflaming the
People by Artifices and Insinuations, by taking a base Advantage of the
Open-heartedness and Violence of Coriolanus, and by oppressing him with a
Sophistical Argument, that he aimed at Sovereignty, because he had not
delivered into the Public Treasury the Spoils which he had taken from the
Antiates. As if a Design of Sovereignty could be reasonably concluded from any
one Act; or any one could think of bringing to pass such a Design, by eternally
favoring the Patricians, and disobliging the Populace. For we need make no
doubt, but that it was among the young Patricians, that Coriolanus distributed
the Spoils which were taken from the Antiates; whereas nothing but caressing
the Populace could enslave the Roman People, as Caesar afterward very well saw
and experienced. So that this Injustice of the Tribunes was the original Cause
of the Calamity which afterward befell their Country, by the Invasion of the
Volscians, under the Conduct of Coriolanus. And yet these Tribunes at the end
of the Play like Aufidius remain unpunished. But indeed Shakespeare has been
wanting in the exact Distribution of Poetical Justice not only in his
Coriolanus, but in most of his best Tragedies, in which the Guilty and the
Innocent perish promiscuously; as Duncan and Banquo in Mackbeth, as likewise
Lady Macduffe and her Children; Desdemona in Othello; Cordelia, Kent, and King
Lear, in the Tragedy that bears his Name; Brutus and Porcia in Julius Caesar,
and young Hamlet in the Tragedy of Hamlet. For though it may be said in Defense
of the last, that Hamlet had a Design to kill his Uncle who then reigned; yet
this is justified by no less than a Call from Heaven, and raising up one from
the Dead to urge him to it. The Good and the Bad then perishing promiscuously
in the best of Shakespeare's Tragedies, there can be either none or very weak
Instruction in them: For such promiscuous Events call the Government of
Providence into Question, and by Scepticks and Libertines are resolved into
Chance. I humbly conceive therefore that this want of Dramatical Justice in the
Tragedy of Coriolanus, gave occasion for a just Alteration, and that I was
obliged to sacrifice to that Justice Aufidius and the Tribunes, as well as
Coriolanus.

Thus have we endeavored to show, that for want of the Poetical Art,
Shakespeare lay under very great Disadvantages. At the same time we must own to
his Honor, that he has often performed Wonders without it, in spite of the
Judgment of so great a Man as Horace.

Natura fieret Laudabile carmen an art
Quaesitum est; ego nec studium sine Divite vena?
Nec rude quid profit video Ingenium, alterius sic
Altera poscit opem res, and conjurat amice.
But from this very Judgment of Horace we may justly conclude, that Shakespeare
would have wonderfully surpassed himself, if Art had been joined to Nature.
There never was a greater Genius in the World than Virgil: He was one who seems
to have been born for this glorious End, that the Roman Muse might exert in him
the utmost Force of her Poetry: And his admirable and divine Beauties are
manifestly owing to the happy Confederacy of Art and Nature. It was Art that
contrived that incomparable Design of the Aeneis, and it was Nature that
executed it. Could the greatest Genius that ever was infused into Earthly Mold
by Heaven, if it had been unguided and unassisted by Art, have taught him to
make that noble and wonderful Use of the Pythagorean Transmigration, which he
makes in the Sixth Book of his Poem? Had Virgil been a circular Poet, and
closely adhered to History, how could the Romans have been transported with
that inimitable Episode of Dido, which brought a-fresh into their Minds the
Carthaginian War, and the dreadful Hannibal? When it is evident that that
admirable Episode is so little owing to a faithful observance of History, and
the exact order of Time, that it is derived from a very bold but judicious
Violation of these; it being undeniable that Dido lived almost 300 Years after
Aeneas. Yet is it that charming Episode that makes the chief Beauties of a
third Part of the Poem. For the Destruction of Troy it self which is so
divinely related, is still more admirable by the Effect it produces, which is
the Passion of Dido.

I should now proceed to show under what Disadvantages Shakespeare lay for want
of being conversant with the Ancients. But I have already writ a long Letter,
and am desirous to know how you relish what has been already said before I go
any farther: For I am unwilling to take more Pains before I am sure of giving
you some Pleasure. I am,

SIR, Your most Humble, Faithful Servant.

LETTER II.
On the Genius and Writings of Shakespeare.
To Mr. (...)
Feb. 6. 1710/11. SIR,
UPON the Encouragement I have received from you, I shall proceed to show under
what Disadvantages Shakespeare lay for want of being conversant with the
Ancients. But because I have lately been in some Conversation, where they would
not allow, but that he was acquainted with the Ancients, I shall endeavor to
make it appear that he was not; and the showing that in the Method in which I
pretend to convince the Reader of it, will sufficiently prove, what
Inconveniences he lay under, and what Errors he committed for want of being
conversant with them. But here we must distinguish between the several kinds of
Acquaintance: A Man may be said to be acquainted with another who never was but
twice in his Company; but that is at the best a superficial Acquaintance, from
which neither very great Pleasure nor Profit can be derived. Our business is
here to show, that Shakespeare had no familiar Acquaintance with the Grecian
and Roman Authors. For if he was familiarly conversant with them, how comes it
to pass that he wants Art? Is it that he studied to know them in other things;
and neglected that only in them, which chiefly tends to the Advancement of the
Art of the Stage? Or is it that he wanted Discernment, to see the Justness and
the Greatness, and the Harmony of their Designs, and the Reasonableness of
those Rules upon which those Designs are founded? Or how come his Successors to
have that Discernment which he wanted, when they fall so much below him in
other things? How comes he to have been guilty of the grossest faults in
Chronology, and how come we to find out those faults? In his Tragedy of Troylus
and Cressida, he introduces Hector speaking of Aristotle, who was born a
thousand Years after the Death of Hector. In the same Play mention is made of
Milo, which is another very great fault in Chronology. Alexander is mentioned
in Coriolanus, though that Conqueror of the Orient lived above Two hundred Years
after him. In this last Tragedy he has mistaken the very Names of his Dramatick
Persons, if we give Credit to Livy. For the Mother of Coriolanus in the Roman
Historian is Vetturia, and the Wife is Volumnia. Whereas in Shakespeare the Wife
is Virgilia, and the Mother Volumnia. And the Volscian General in Shakespeare is
Tullus Aufidius, and Tullus Attius in Livy. How comes it that he takes
Plutarch's Word, who was by Birth a Grecian for the Affairs of Rome, rather
than that of the Roman Historian, if so be that he had read the Latter? Or what
Reason can be given for his not reading him, when he wrote upon a Roman Story,
but that in Shakespeare's Time there was a Translation of Plutarch, and there
was none of Livy? If Shakespeare was familiarly conversant with the Roman
Authors, how came he to introduce a Rabble into Coriolanus, in which he
offended not only against the Dignity of Tragedy, but the Truth of Fact, the
Authority of all the Roman Writers, the Customs of Ancient Rome, and the
Majesty of the Roman People? By introducing a Rabble into Julius Caesar, he
only offended against the Dignity of Tragedy. For that part of the People who
ran about the Streets upon great Festivals, or public Calamities, or public
Rejoicings, or Revolutions in Government, are certainly the Scum of the
Populace. But the Persons who in the Time of Coriolanus, rose in Vindication of
their just Rights, and extorted from the Patricians the Institution of the
Tribunes of the People, and the Persons by whom afterward Coriolanus was
tried, were the whole Body of the Roman People to the Reserve of the
Patricians, which Body included the Roman Knights, and the wealthy substantial
Citizens, who were as different from the Rabble as the Patricians themselves,
as qualified as the latter to form a right Judgment of Things, and to contemn
the vain Opinions of the Rabble. So at least Horace esteems them, who very well
knew his Countrymen.

Offenduntur enim, quibus est equus, aut pater, aut res,
Nec siquid fricti ciceris probat aut nucis emptor,
Aequis accipiant animis donantve Corona?
Where we see the Knights and the substantial Citizens, are ranked in an equal
Degree of Capacity with the Roman Senators, and are equally distinguished from
the Rabble.

If Shakespeare was so conversant with the Ancients, how comes he to have
introduced some Characters into his Plays, so unlike what they are to be found
in History? In the Character of Menenius in the following Tragedy, he has
doubly offended against that Historical Resemblance. For first whereas Menenius
was an eloquent Person, Shakespeare has made him a downright Buffoon. And how is
it possible for any Man to conceive a Ciceronian Jack-pudding? Never was any
Buffoon eloquent, or wise, or witty, or virtuous. All the good and ill
Qualities of a Buffoon are summed up in one word, and that is a Buffoon. And
secondly, whereas Shakespeare has made him a Hater and Contemner, and Vilifyer
of the People, we are assured by the Roman Historian that Menenius was
extremely popular. He was so very far from opposing the Institution of the
Tribunes, as he is represented in Shakespeare, that he was chiefly instrumental
in it. After the People had deserted the City, and sat down upon the sacred
Mountain, he was the chief of the Delegates whom the Senate deputed to them, as
being looked upon to be the Person who would be most agreeable to them. In short
this very Menenius both lived and died so very much their Favorite, that dying
poor he had pompous Funerals at the Expense of the Roman People.

Had Shakespeare read either Salust or Cicero, how could he have made so very
little of the first and greatest of Men, as that Caesar should be but a
Fourth-rate Actor in his own Tragedy? How could it have been that seeing
Caesar, we should ask for Caesar? That we should ask, where is his unequalled
Greatness of Mind, his unbounded Thirst of Glory, and that victorious
Eloquence, with which he triumphed over the Souls of both Friends and Enemies,
and with which he rivall'd Cicero in Genius as he did Pompey in Power? How fair
an Occasion was there to open the Character of Caesar in the first Scene
between Brutus and Cassius? For when Cassius tells Brutus that Caesar was but a
Man like them, and had the same natural Imperfections which they had, how
natural had it been for Brutus to reply, that Caesar indeed had their
Imperfections of Nature, but neither he nor Cassius had by any means the great
Qualities of Caesar: Neither his Military Virtue nor Science, nor his matchless
Renown, nor his unparalleled Victories, his unwearied Bounty to his Friends,
nor his Godlike Clemency to his Foes, his Beneficence, his Munificence, his
Easiness of Access to the meanest Roman, his indefatigable Labors, his
incredible Celerity, the Plausibleness if not Justness of his Ambition, that
knowing himself to be the greatest of Men, he only sought occasion to make the
World confess him such. In short, if Brutus, after enumerating all the
wonderful Qualities of Caesar, had resolved in spite of them all to sacrifice
him to public Liberty, how had such a Proceeding heightened the Virtue and the
Character of Brutus? But then indeed it would have been requisite that Caesar
upon his appearance should have made all this good. And as we know no Principle
of human Action but human Sentiment only, Caesar who did greater Things, and
had greater Designs than the rest of the Romans, ought certainly to have
outshin'd by many Degrees all the other Characters of his Tragedy. Caesar ought
particularly to have justified his Actions, and to have heightened his
Character, by showing that what he had done, he had done by Necessity; that the
Romans had lost their Agrarian, lost their Rotation of Magistracy, and that
consequently nothing but an empty Shadow of public Liberty remained. That the
Gracchi had made the last noble but unsuccessful Efforts, for the restoring the
Commonwealth, that they had failed for want of arbitrary irresistible Power,
the Restoration of the Agrarian requiring too vast a Retrospect to be done
without it; that the Government, when Caesar came to public Affairs, was got
into the Hands of a few, and that those few were factious, and were contending
among themselves, and if you will pardon so mean an Expression, scrambling as
it were for Power: That Caesar was reduced to the Necessity of ruling or
himself obeying a Master; and that apprehending that another would exercise the
supreme Command, without that Clemency and Moderation which he did, he had
rather chosen to rule than to obey. So that Caesar was faulty not so much in
seizing upon the Sovereignty, which was become in a manner necessary, as in not
re-establishing the Commonwealth, by restoring the Agrarian and the Rotation of
Magistracies, after he had got absolute and uncontrollable Power. And if Caesar
had seized upon the Sovereignty only with a View of re-establishing Liberty, he
had surpassed all Mortals in Godlike Goodness as much as he did in the rest of
his astonishing Qualities. I must confess, I do not remember that we have any
Authority from the Roman Historians which may induce us to believe, that Caesar
had any such Design. Nor if he had had any such View, could he, who was the
most secret, the most prudent, and the most discerning of Men, have discovered
it, before his Parthian Expedition was over, for fear of utterly disobliging
his Veterans. And Caesar believed that Expedition necessary for the Honor and
Interest of the State, and for his own Glory.

But of this we may be sure that two of the most discerning of all the Romans,
and who had the deepest Insight into the Soul of Caesar, Salust and Cicero,
were not without Hopes that Caesar would really re-establish Liberty, or else
they would not have attacked him upon it; the one in his Oration for Marcus
Marcellus, the other in the Second Part of that little Treatise De Republica
ordinanda, which is addressed to Caesar. Haec igitur tibi reliqua pars, says
Cicero, Hic restat Actus, in hoc elaborandum est, ut Rempublicam constituas,
eaque tu in primis composita, summa Tranquillitate and otio perfruare. Cicero
therefore was not without Hope that Caesar would re-establish the Commonwealth;
and any one who attentively peruses that Oration of Cicero, will find that that
Hope was reasonably grounded, upon his knowledge of the great Qualities of
Caesar, his Clemency, his Beneficence, his admirable Discernment; and that
avoidless Ruin in which the whole Empire would be soon involved, if Caesar did
not effect this. Salust urges it still more home to him and with greater
vehemence; he has recourse to every Motive that may be thought to be powerful
over so great a Soul. He exhorts him by the Memory of his matchless Conquests,
not to suffer the invincible Empire of the Roman People to be devoured by Time,
or to be torn in pieces by Discord; one of which would soon and infallibly
happen, if Liberty was not restored.

He introduces his Country and his Progenitors urging him in a noble
Prosopopeia, by all the mighty Benefits which they had conferred upon him, with
so little Pains of his own, not to deny them that just and easy Request of the
Restoration of Liberty. He adjures him by those Furies which will eternally
haunt his Soul upon his impious Refusal: He implores him by the foresight of
those dismal Calamities, that horrible Slaughter, those endless Wars, and that
unbounded Devastation, which will certainly fall upon Mankind, if the
Restoration of Liberty is prevented by his Death, or his incurable Sickness:
And lastly, he entreats him by his Thirst of immortal Glory, that Glory in
which he now has Rivals, if he has not Equals; but which, if he re-establishes
Liberty, will be acknowledged by consenting Nations to have neither Equal nor
Second.

I am apt to believe that if Shakespeare had been acquainted with all this, we
had had from him quite another Character of Caesar than that which we now find
in him. He might then have given us a Scene something like that which Corneille
has so happily used in his Cinna; something like that which really happened
between Augustus, Mecaenas and Agrippa. He might then have introduced Caesar,
consulting Cicero on the one side, and on the other Anthony, whether he should
retain that absolute Sovereignty, which he had acquired by his Victory, or
whether he should re-establish and immortalize Liberty. That would have been a
Scene, which might have employed the finest Art and the utmost force of a
Writer. That had been a Scene in which all the great Qualities of Caesar might
have been displayed. I will not pretend to determine here how that Scene might
have been turned, and what I have already said on this Subject, has been spoke
with the utmost Caution and Diffidence. But this I will venture to say, that if
that Scene had been managed so, as, by the powerful Motives employed in it, to
have shaken the Soul of Caesar, and to have left room for the least Hope, for
the least Doubt, that Caesar would have reestablished Liberty, after his
Parthian Expedition; and if this Conversation had been kept secret till the
Death of Caesar, and then had been discovered by Anthony, then had Caesar
fallen, so beloved and lamented by the Roman People, so pitied and so bewailed
even by the Conspirators themselves, as never Man fell. Then there would have
been a Catastrophe the most dreadful and the most deplorable that ever was
beheld upon the Tragic Stage. Then had we seen the noblest of the Conspirators
cursing their temerarious Act, and the most apprehensive of them, in dreadful
expectation of those horrible Calamities, which fell upon the Romans after the
Death of Caesar. But, Sir, when I write this to you, I write it with the utmost
Deference to the extraordinary Judgment of that great Man, who some Years ago,
I hear, altered the Julius Caesar. And I make no doubt but that his fine
Discernment, and the rest of his great Qualities have amply supplied the
Defects which are found in the Character of Shakespeare's Caesar.

I should here answer an Argument, by which some People pretend to prove, and
especially those with whom I lately conversed, that Shakespeare was conversant
with the Ancients. But besides that the Post is about to be gone, I am heartily
tired with what I have already writ, and so doubtless are you; I shall
therefore defer the rest to the next opportunity, and remain

Your, etc.

LETTER III.
On the Writings and Genius of Shakespeare.
To Mr. (...)
Feb. 8. SIR,
I Come now to the main Argument, which some People urge to prove that
Shakespeare was conversant with the Ancients. For there is, say they, among
Shakespeare's Plays, one called The Comedy of Errors, which is undeniably an
Imitation of the Menechmi of Plautus. Now Shakespeare, say they, being
conversant with Plautus, it undeniably follows that he was acquainted with the
Ancients; because no Roman Author could be hard to him who had conquered
Plautus. To which I answer, that the Errors which we have mentioned above are
to be accounted for no other way, but by the want of knowing the Ancients, or
by downright want of Capacity. But nothing can be more absurd or more unjust
than to impute it to want of Capacity. For the very Sentiments of Shakespeare
alone are sufficient to show, that he had a great Understanding: And therefore
we must account some other way for his Imitation of the Menechmi. I remember to
have seen among the Translations of Ovid's Epistles printed by Mr. Tonson, an
Imitation of that from Oenone to Paris, which Mr. Dryden tells us in his
Preface to those Epistles was imitated by one of the Fair Sex who understood no
Latin, but that she had done enough to make those blush who understood it the
best. There are at this day several Translators, who as Hudibrass has it,

Translate from Languages of which
They understand no part of Speech.
I will not affirm that of Shakespeare; I believe he was able to do what Pedants
call construe, but that he was able to read Plautus without Pain and Difficulty
I can never believe. Now I appeal to you, Sir, what time he had between his
Writing and his Acting, to read any thing that could not be read with Ease and
Pleasure. We see that our Adversaries themselves acknowledge, that if
Shakespeare was able to read Plautus with Ease, nothing in Latinity could be
hard to him. How comes it to pass then, that he has given us no Proofs of his
familiar Acquaintance with the Ancients, but this Imitation of the Menechmi,
and a Version of two Epistles of Ovid? How comes it that he had never read
Horace of a superior Merit to either, and particularly his Epistle to the
Piso's, which so much concerned his Art? Or if he had read that Epistle, how
comes it that in his Troylus and Cressida [we must observe by the way, that
when Shakespeare wrote that Play, Ben Johnson had not as yet translated that
Epistle] he runs counter to the Instructions which Horace has given for the
forming the Character of Achilles?

Scriptor: Honoratum si forte reponis Achillem,
Impiger, Iracundus, Inexorablis, Acer,
Jura neget sibi nata.
Where is the Impiger, the Iracundus, or the Acer, in the Character of
Shakespeare's Achilles? Who is nothing but a drolling, lazy, conceited,
overlooking Coxcomb; so far from being the honored Achilles, the Epithet that
Homer, and Horace after him give him, that he is deservedly the Scorn and the
Jest of the rest of the Characters, even to that Buffoon Thersites.

Though Shakespeare succeeded very well in Comedy, yet his principal Talent and
his chief Delight was Tragedy. If then Shakespeare was qualified to read Plautus
with Ease, he could read with a great deal more Ease the Translations of
Sophocles and Euripides. And though by these Translations he would not have been
able to have seen the charming coloring of those great Masters, yet would he
have seen all the Harmony and the Beauty of their great and their just Designs.
He would have seen enough to have stirred up a noble Emulation in so exalted a
Soul as his. How comes it then that we hear nothing from him, of the Oedipus,
the Electra, the Antigone of Sophocles, of the Iphigenia's, the Orestes, the
Medea, the Hecuba of Euripides? How comes it that we see nothing in the Conduct
of his Pieces, that shows us that he had the least Acquaintance with any of
these great Masterpieces? Did Shakespeare appear to be so nearly touched with
the Affliction of Hecuba for the Death of Priam, which was but daubed and
bungled by one of his Countrymen, that he could not forbear introducing it as
it were by Violence into his own Hamlet, and would he make no Imitation, no
Commendation, not the least mention of the unparalleled and inimitable Grief
of the Hecuba of Euripides? How comes it, that we find no Imitation of any
ancient Play in this but the Menechmi of Plautus? How came he to choose a Comic
preferably to the Tragic Poets? Or how comes he to choose Plautus preferably to
Terence, who is so much more just, more graceful, more regular, and more
natural? Or how comes he to choose the Menechmi of Plautus, which is by no means
his Masterpiece before all his other Comedies? I vehemently suspect that this
Imitation of the Menechmi, was either from a printed Translation of that Comedy
which is lost, or some Version in Manuscript brought him by a Friend, or sent
him perhaps by a Stranger, or from the original Play it self recommended to
him, and read to him by some learned Friend. In short, I had rather account for
this, by what is not absurd than by what is, or by a less Absurdity than by a
greater. For nothing can be more wrong than to conclude from this that
Shakespeare was conversant with the Ancients; which contradicts the Testimony of
his Contemporary, and his familiar Acquaintance Ben Johnson, and of his
Successor Milton;

Lo Shakespeare, Fancy's sweetest Child,
Warbles his native Wood-notes wild.
And of Mr. Dryden after them both; and which destroys the most glorious Part
of Shakespeare's Merit immediately. For how can he be esteemed equal by Nature,
or superior to the Ancients, when he falls so far short of them in Art, though he
had the Advantage of knowing all that they did before him? Nay it debases him
below those of common Capacity, by reason of the Errors which we mentioned
above. Therefore he who allows that Shakespeare had Learning and a familiar
Acquaintance with the Ancients, ought to be looked upon as a Detractor from his
extraordinary Merit, and from the Glory of Great Britain. For whether is it
more honorable for this Island to have produced a Man, who without having any
Acquaintance with the Ancients, or any but a slender and a superficial one,
appears to be their Equal or their Superior by the Force of Genius and Nature,
or to have bred one who knowing the Ancients, falls infinitely short of them in
Art, and consequently in Nature it self? Great Britain has but little Reason to
boast of its Natives Education, since the same that they had here, they might
have had in another place. But it may justly claim a very great share in their
Nature and Genius; since these depend in a great measure on the Climate; and
therefore Horace in the Instruction which he gives for the forming the
Characters, advises the noble Romans for whose Instruction he chiefly writes to
consider whether the Dramatick Person whom they introduce is

Colchus an Assyrius, Thebis nutritus an Argis. Thus, Sir, I have endeavored
to show under what great Disadvantages Shakespeare lay, for want of the Poetical
Art, and for want of being conversant with the Ancients.

But besides this, he lay under other very great Inconveniences. For he was
neither Master of Time enough to consider, correct, and polish what he wrote,
to alter it, to add to it, and to retrench from it, nor had he Friends to
consult upon whose Capacity and Integrity he could depend. And though a Person of
very good Judgment, may succeed very well without consulting his Friends, if he
takes time enough to correct what he writes; yet even the greatest Man that
Nature and Art can conspire to accomplish, can never attain to Perfection,
without either employing a great deal of time, or taking the Advice of
judicious Friends. Nay, it is the Opinion of Horace, that he ought to do both.

Siquid tamen olim
Scripseris, in Metii descendat Judicis aures,
Et Patris, and nostras; nonumque prematur in Annum.
Now we know very well that Shakespeare was an Actor, at a Time, when there were
seven or eight Companies of Players in the Town together, who each of them did
their utmost Endeavors to get the Audiences from the rest, and consequently
that our Author was perpetually called upon, by those who had the Direction and
Management of the Company to which he belonged, for new Pieces which might be
able to support them, and give them some Advantage over the rest. And it is easy
to judge what time he was Master of, between his laborious Employment of
Acting, and his continual Hurry of Writing. As for Friends, they whom in all
likelihood Shakespeare consulted most, were two or three of his Fellow-Actors,
because they had the Care of publishing his Works committed to them. Now they,
as we are told by Ben Johnson in his Discoveries were extremely pleased with
their Friend for scarce ever making a Blot; and were very angry with Ben, for
saying he wished that he had made a thousand. The Misfortune of it is, that
Horace was perfectly of Ben's mind.

-- Vos O,
Pompilius sanguis, carmen reprehendite, quod non
Multa dies, and multa litura coercuit, atque
Praesectum decies non castigavit ad unguem.
And so was my Lord Roscommon.

Poets lose half the Praise they should have got,
Could it be known what they discreetly blot.
These Friends then of Shakespeare were not qualified to advise him. As for Ben
Johnson, besides that Shakespeare began to know him late, and that Been was not
the most communicative Person in the World of the Secrets of his Art; he seems
to me to have had no right Notion of Tragedy. Nay, so far from it, that he who
was indeed a very great Man, and who has writ Comedies, by which he has born
away the Prize of Comedy both from Ancients and Moderns, and been an Honor to
Great Britain; and who has done this without any Rules to guide him, except
what his own incomparable Talent dictated to him; This extraordinary Man has
erred so grossly in Tragedy, of which there were not only stated Rules, but
Rules which he himself had often read, and had even translated, that he has
chosen two Subjects, which according to those very Rules, were utterly
incapable of exciting either Compassion or Terror for the principal Characters,
which yet are the chief Passions that a Tragic Poet ought to endeavor to
excite. So that Shakespeare having neither had Time to correct, nor Friends to
consult, must necessarily have frequently left such faults in his Writings, for
the Correction of which either a great deal of Time or a judicious and a well
natured Friend is indispensably necessary.

Vir bonus and prudens versus reprehendet inertes,
Culpabit duros, incomptis allinet Atrum
Transverso calamo signum, ambitiosa recidet
Ornamenta, parum claris lucem dare coget,
Arguet ambigue dictum, metanda notabit.
There is more than one Example of every kind of these Faults in the Tragedies
of Shakespeare, and even in the Coriolanus. There are Lines that are utterly
void of that celestial Fire, of which Shakespeare is sometimes Master in so
great a Degree. And consequently there are Lines that are stiff and forced, and
harsh and unmusical, though Shakespeare had naturally an admirable Ear for the
Numbers. But no Man ever was very musical who did not write with Fire, and no
Man can always write with Fire, unless he is so far Master of his Time, as to
expect those Hours when his Spirits are warm and volatile. Shakespeare must
therefore sometimes have Lines which are neither strong nor graceful? For who
ever had Force or Grace that had not Spirit? There are in his Coriolanus among
a great many natural and admirable Beauties, three or four of those Ornaments
which Horace would term ambitious; and which we in English are apt to call
Fustian or Bombast. There are Lines in some Places which are very obscure, and
whole Scenes which ought to be altered.

I have, Sir, employed some Time and Pains, and that little Judgment which I
have acquired in these Matters by a long and a faithful reading both of
Ancients and Moderns, in adding, retrenching and altering several Things in the
Coriolanus of Shakespeare, but with what Success I must leave to be determined
by you. I know very well that you will be surpised to find, that after all
that I have said in the former part of this Letter, against Shakespeare's
introducing the Rabble into Coriolanus, I have not only retained in the second
Act of the following Tragedy the Rabble which is in the Original, but deviated
more from the Roman Customs than Shakespeare had done before me. I desire you to
look upon it as a voluntary Fault and a Trespass against Conviction: It Is one
of those Things which are ad Populum Phalerae, and by no means inserted to
please such Men as you.

Thus, Sir, have I laid before you a short but impartial Account of the
Beauties and Defects of Shakespeare, with an Intention to make these Letters
public if they are approved by you; to teach some People to distinguish
between his Beauties and his Defects, that while they imitate the one, they may
with Caution avoid the other [there being nothing of more dangerous Contagion
to Writers, and especially to young ones than the Faults of great Masters] and
while with Milton they applaud the great Qualities which Shakespeare had by
Nature, they may follow his wise Example, and form themselves as he assures us,
that he himself did, upon the Rules and Writings of the Ancients.

Sir, if so candid and able a Judge as yourself shall happen to approve of this
Essay in the main, and to excuse and correct my Errors, that Indulgence and
that Correction will not only encourage me to make these Letters public, but
will enable me to bear the Reproach of those, who would fix a Brand, even upon
the justest Criticism, as the Effect of Envy and ill Nature; as if there could
possibly be any ill Nature in the doing Justice, or in the endeavoring to
advance a very noble and a very useful Art, and consequently to prove
beneficent to Mankind. As for those who may accuse me of the want of a due
Veneration for the Merit of an Author of so established a Reputation as
Shakespeare, I shall beg leave to tell them, that they choose the wrongest time
that they could possibly take for such an Accusation as that. For I appeal to
you, Sir, who shows most Veneration for the Memory of Shakespeare, he who loves
and admires his Charms and makes of them one of his chief Delights, who sees
him and reads him over and over and still remains unsatiated, and who mentions
his Faults for no other Reason but to make his Excellency the more conspicuous,
or he who pretending to be his blind Admirer, shows in Effect the utmost
Contempt for him, preferring empty effeminate Sound to his solid Beauties and
manly Graces, and deserting him every Night for an execrable Italian Ballad, so
vile that a Boy who should write such lamentable Dogrel, would be turned out of
Westminster-School for a desperate Blockhead, too stupid to be corrected and
amended by the harshest Discipline of the Place. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc

To the SPECTATOR upon his Paper on the 16th of April.
YOU know, Mr. Spectator, that Esquire Bickerstaff attacked the Sharpers with
Success; but Shadwell is of Opinion that your Bully with his Box and his false
Dice is an honester Fellow than the Rhetorical Author, who makes use of his
Tropes and Figures which are his High and his Lowrunners, to cheat us at once
of our Money and of our Intellectuals.

I would not have you think, Mr. Spectator, that this Reflection is directed to
you: It Is only intended against one or two of your Correspondents, and
particularly the Inns-ofCourt-man, who, as you told us in your Second Paper
supplies you with most of your Criticism: who seems to me so little to
understand the Province that he has undertaken, that you would do well to
advise him to do by you as he has done by his Father, and make a Bargain in the
gross with some honest Fellow to answer all your Occasions. Which wholesome
Advice if he proves too obstinate or too proud to take; I am confident at least
that he is too gallant a Person to take it ill if once a Week or once a
Fortnight I should show so much Presumption as to cause a Writ of Error to be
issued out to reverse his Temple-Judgment.

I cannot wonder that Criticism should degenerate so vilely at a time when
Poetry and Acting are sunk so low. For as Hobbes has observed, that as often as
Reason is against a Man, a Man will be against Reason; so as often as the Rules
are against an Author, an Author will be against the Rules. Men first write
foolish ridiculous Tragedies, which shock all the Rules of Reason and
Philosophy, and then they make foolish extravagant Rules to fit those foolish
Plays. It Is impossible that your Gentleman of the Inns-ofCourt could have sent
you so much wrong Sense as there is in your Paper of the 16th, if he had not
formerly writ an absurd Tragedy. There are as many Bulls and Blunders, and
Contradictions in it almost as there are Lines, and all delivered with that
insolent and that blustering Air, which usually attends upon Error, and
Delusion, while Truth, like the Deity that inspires it, comes calmly and
without noise.

To set a few of his Errors in their proper Light, he tells us in the beginning
of that Paper, That the English Writers of Tragedy are possessed with a Notion,
that when they represent a virtuous or innocent Person in Distress, they ought
not to leave him 'till they have delivered him out of his Trouble, and made him
triumph over his Enemies.

But, Mr. Spectator, is this peculiar to the English Writers of Tragedy? Have
not the French Writers of Tragedy the same Notion? Does not Racine tell us, in
the Preface to his Iphigenia, that it would have been horrible to have defiled
the Stage with the Murder of a Princess so virtuous and so lovely as was
Iphigenia.

But your Correspondent goes on, This Error, says he, with an insolent and
dogmatick Air, they have been led into by a ridiculous Doctrine in modern
Criticism, that they are obliged to an equal Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments, and an impartial Execution of poetical Justice.

But who were the first who established this Rule he is not able to tell. I
take it for granted, that a Man who is ingenuous enough to own his Ignorance,
is willing to be instructed. Let me tell him then, that the first who
established this ridiculous Doctrine of modern Criticism, was a certain modern
Critic, who lived above two thousand Years ago; and who tells us expressly in
the thirteenth Chapter of his critical Spectator, which Pedants call his
Poetic, That since a Tragedy, to have all the Beauty of which it is capable,
ought to be Implex and not Simple, (by the way, Mr. Spectator, you must bear
with this critical Cant, as we do with your Speculations and Lucubrations) and
ought to move Compassion and Terror, for we have already shown that the
exciting these Passions is the proper Effect of a tragical Imitation, it
follows necessarily, that we must not choose a very good Man, to plunge him
from a prosperous Condition into Adversity, for instead of moving Compassion
and Terror, that on the contrary would create Horror, and be detested by all
the World.

And does not the same deluded Philosopher tell us in the very same Chapter,
that the Fable to which he gives the second Preference, is that which has a
double Constitution, and which ends by a double Catastrophe; a Catastrophe
favorable to the Good, and fatal to the Wicked. Is not here, Mr. Spectator, a
very formal Recommendation of the impartial and exact Execution of poetical
Justice? Thus Aristotle was the first who established this ridiculous Doctrine
of modern Criticism, but Mr. Rymer was the first who introduced it into our
native Language; who notwithstanding the Rage of all the Poetasters of the
Times, whom he has exasperated by opening the Eyes of the Blind that they may
see their Errors, will always pass with impartial Posterity for a most learned,
a most judicious, and a most useful Critic. Now is not your Correspondent a
profound and a learned Person? and ought he not to own himself obliged to me
for this notable piece of Erudition?

But he goes on in his dictatorian way, This Rule, says he, whoever established
it, has, I am sure, no Foundation in Nature, in Reason, and in the Practice of
the Ancients. But what will this dogmatick Person say now, when we show him
that this contemptible Doctrine of poetical Justice is not only founded in
Reason and Nature, but is it self the Foundation of all the Rules, and even of
Tragedy itself? For what Tragedy can there be without a Fable? or what Fable
without a Moral? or what Moral without poetical Justice? What Moral, where the
Good and the Bad are confounded by Destiny, and perish alike promiscuously.
Thus we see this Doctrine of poetical Justice is more founded in Reason and
Nature than all the rest of the poetical Rules together. For what can be more
natural, and more highly reasonable, than to employ that Rule in Tragedy,
without which that Poem cannot exist? Well! but the Practice of the Ancients is
against this poetical Justice! What always, Mr. Spectator! will your
Correspondent have the Assurance to affirm that? No, but sometimes: Why then
sometimes the Ancients offended against Reason and Nature. And who ever
believed that the Ancients were without Fault, or brought Tragedy to its
Perfection. But I shall take another Opportunity to show that the Practice of
the Ancients, in all their Masterpieces, is exactly according to this
fundamental Rule. I have not time to do that in this short Letter, because that
would necessarily oblige me to show that poetical Justice is of a much larger
Extent than this profound Critic imagines; but yet I shall give the discerning
Reader a hint of it in that which follows.

Poetical Justice, says your Correspondent, has no Foundation in Nature and
Reason, because we find that good and evil happen alike to all Men on this side
the Grave. In answer to which he must give me leave to tell him, that this is
not only a very false but a very dangerous Assertion; that we neither know what
Men really are, nor what they really suffer.

It Is not always that we know Men's Crimes, but how seldom do we know their
Passions, and especially their darling Passions? And as Passion is the Occasion
of infinitely more Disorder in the World than Malice, [for where one Man falls
a Sacrifice to inveterate Malice a thousand become Victims to Revenge and
Ambition; and whereas Malice has something that shocks human Nature, Passion is
pleasingly catching and contagious.] Can any thing be more just, than that that
Providence which governs the World should punish Men for indulging their
Passions, as much as for obeying the Dictates of their most envenomed Hatred
and Malice?

Thus you see, for ought we know, Good and Evil does not happen alike to all
Men on this side the Grave. Because it is for the most part, by their Passions,
that Men offend; and it is by their Passions, for the most part, that they are
punished. But this is certain, that the more Virtue a Man has the more he
commands his Passions; but the Virtuous alone command them. The Wicked take the
utmost Care to dissemble and conceal them; for which reason we neither know
what our Neighbors are, nor what they really suffer. Man is too finite, too
shallow, and too empty a Creature to know another Man thoroughly, to know the
Creature of an infinite Creator; but dramatical Persons are Creatures of which
a Poet is himself the Creator. And though a Mortal is not able to know the
Almighty's Creatures, he may be allowed to know his own; to know the utmost
Extent of their Guilt, and what they ought to suffer; nay, he must be allowed
not only to know this himself, but to make it manifest and unquestionable to
all his Readers and Hearers. The Creatures of a poetical Creator have no
Dissimulation and no Reserve. We see their Passions in all their height, and in
all their Deformity; and when they are unfortunate, we are never to seek for
the Cause.

But suppose I should grant that there is not always an equal Distribution of
Affliction and Happiness here below. Man is a Creature who was created
immortal, and a Creature consequently that will find a Compensation in Futurity
for any seeming Inequality in his Dealing here. But the Creatures of a poetical
Creator are imaginary and transitory; they have no longer Duration than the
Representation of their respective Fables; and consequently, if they offend,
they must be punished during that Representation. And therefore we are very far
from pretending that poetical Justice is an equal Representation of the Justice
of the Almighty.

We freely confess that it is but a very narrow and a very imperfect Type of it;
so very narrow, and so very imperfect, that it is forced by temporal to
represent eternal Punishments; and therefore when we show a Man unfortunate in
Tragedy, for not restraining his Passions, we mean that every one will for such
Neglect, unless he timely repents, be infallibly punished by infinite Justice
either here or hereafter.

If upon this foot we examine the Tragedies of Sophocles and Euripides, we
shall find that in their most beautiful Pieces, they are impartial Executors of
Poetic Justice. And it is upon this foot that Aristotle requires that we should
examine them. Your Correspondent I must confess is in the right when he says
that that Philosopher declares for Tragedies, whose Catastrophes are unhappy
with relation to the principal Characters. But then what Instructions does he
give us for the forming those principal Characters? We are neither to make them
very virtuous Persons on the one side, that is Persons who absolutely command
their Passions, nor on the other side Villains who are actuated by inveterate
Malice, but something between these two, that is to say Persons who neglecting
their Passions suffer them to grow outrageous, and to hurry them to Actions
which they would otherwise abhor. And that Philosopher expressly declares as we
have shown above, that to make a virtuous Man unhappy, that is a Man who
absolutely commands his Passions, would create Horror instead of Compassion,
and would be detested by all the World. And thus we have shown that Aristotle
is for Poetical Justice, notwithstanding that he is for unhappy Catastrophes:
And so one would think was your Correspondent. For when he enumerates and
commends some English Tragedies, which have unfortunate Catastrophes; there are
not two of those which he commends, whose principal Characters can be said to
be innocent, and consequently there are not two of them where there is not a
due Observance of poetical Justice.

Thus, Mr. Spectator, I have discussed the Business of poetical Justice, and
shown it to be the Foundation of all Tragedy; and therefore whatever Persons,
whether ancient or modern, have writ Dialogues which they call Tragedies, where
this Justice is not observed, those Persons have entertained and amused the
World with romantic lamentable Tales, instead of just Tragedies, and of lawful
Fables.

It Is not my Business at present to take any farther notice of the Errors of
your Correspondent; perhaps I no more approve of Tragi-Comedies, or Tragedies
with double Plots, than he does; but I hope he will not take it ill if I put
him in mind that several of the Plays which he recommended before are
Tragi-Comedies, and that most of them have double Plots. But he is vilely
mistaken if he thinks that Tragi-Comedy is of the Growth of our English
Theaters.

I shall take another Opportunity to show him that he is as much mistaken in
what he has said of Humors, as in what he dictates concerning poetical Justice.

I am Your very humble

LETTER to the SPECTATOR upon his Paper on the 24th of April.
SIR,
I Have read over your Paper of the 24th with a great deal of Satisfaction, and
here return you my Acknowledgments for the Honor you have done me in quoting
two of my Verses with Applause. I think my self obliged in Gratitude, my worthy
Friend, to do as much Honor to your Judgment as you have done to my
Imagination; and as you have the Goodness to allow me to be an humorous Poet, I
am bound in Justice to celebrate you for a wonderful Critic; and to make it
appear that contrary to the Observation of the Author of a late Rhapsody, one
who has shown himself no great Poet may be a prodigious Judge. Indeed the
Observation of that Author is so far from being true, that most of the Critics
Ancient and Modern have been no Poets, and most of the Poets Ancient and Modern
have been no Critics. I cannot find out that any but Homer, and Virgil, and
Horace, and Sophocles, and Euripides among the Ancients were great Critics.
For who can believe that has read them, that Apollonius Rhodius, Nonnus, Lucan,
Statius, and Silius Italicus ever so much as heard that Nature, and the
Philosophers her Interpreters and Commentators had laid down Rules for an Epick
Poem? And who that has read the Moderns could imagine, that most of their
Dramatick Poets, had ever so much as heard that there were such things as the
Rules. As Boileau has observed of the French, that some Persons among them had
distinguished themselves by their Rhimes, who never knew how to distinguish
Lucan from Virgil; so some among our own Rhimers have been renowned for
versifying, who never so much as knew that Horace and Milton were good Poets.
And I can on the other side name several who never distinguished themselves by
Poetry, who yet have obliged the World with Criticisms which have been
Non-pareillo's, and the very Top-Critick of all those Critics is my worthy
Friend the Spectator.

Though who the Devil could have ever expected to have found my worthy Friend a
Critic, after he had treated Critics with so much Contempt in two or three of
his Immortal Tatlers, and particularly in the 29th and the 246th, where they
are pronounced to be the silliest of Mortals, Creatures, forsooth, who profess
Judgment; though by the way, Mr Spectator, he who professes or practices Poetry,
and does not profess Judgment in it, professes himself an Ass. It was from
those Tatlers and one or two more, Mr. Spectator, that I guessed that you had a
mortal Aversion to Criticism; but now I find plainly that they were none of
your own, but were sent you by two or three damned Poets, who are a sort of
Offenders that have not half the Charity which other Malefactors are wont to
show, but bear eternal Malice to their Executioners.

Thus the Invectives against Critics and Criticism were other Peoples; you
were too wise to write any such thing, as knowing that Taste which declines so
fast is only to be restored and maintained by Criticism. And therefore instead
of writing Invectives against it, you have obliged the World with the thing it
self, with Criticism upon Criticism, and such Criticism. -- As those Tatlers
were the Offspring of some certain Poets, which is manifest by their insipid
Satyr, like the faint Eagerness of Vinegar decayed: nothing is more clear than
that the Criticisms could be none but yours. For as you may discover ex ungue
Leonem, and ex pede Hercules, so in this Case the prodigious Offspring speaks
and confesses the Gigantick Father.

In your very Folio of the 24th of April, how have you shown the Finess of your
Discernment, and the Profundity of your Penetration, by your Encomium of two
Verses of my Translation of the Fourth Satyr of Boileau? It Is now thirty Years
since I translated that Satyr, and consequently was a very Boy at the Time of
that Translation; yet from that Time to this the stupid Age has been ignorant
of the Beauty of that Couplet. How very phlegmatic a Wretch have I been, and
how illegitimate an Offspring of Mr. Bays, not to know any thing of my own
Excellence till I heard of it from you?

How little did I imagine when I translated that Couplet, that the great
Critic was then in Embrio who thirty Years afterward should declare it to be
a charming Couplet, by giving it a place in his never dying Speculations.

I am perfectly convinced, my most worthy and most ingenious Friend, that we
Authors are as blind and as partial Judges of our own Works, as we are
unrighteous ones of other Peoples. I was apt to imagine, before I submitted my
own Opinion to the decisive Authority of your Judgment; that you would have
done more for the Credit of my Genius and of your own Discernment, by
commending the following Verses of the Fourth Book of the Poem upon the Battle
of Ramelies, when you had so fair an occasion of taking notice of them, as you
had at the writing the 56th Tatler. If I begin the Verses a little higher than
the couching of the Cataracts which is the Subject of the 56th Tatler, I am
confident you will have the Goodness to pardon me, and the rather because you
discovered more than a common Satisfaction when you were present with your
Friend Mr. A. at the reading those Verses in Manuscript. A celestial Spirit
visits the Duke of Marlborough in a Vision the Night before the Battle of
Ramelies, and after he has said several other things to him goes on thus.

A wondrous Victory attends thy Arms,
Great in it self, and in its sequel vast;
Whose ecchoing Sound through all the West shall run
Transporting the glad Nations all around,
Who often shall doubt, and often suspend their Joy,
And often imagine all an empty Dream;
The Conqueror himself shall cry amazed,
It Is not our Work, alas we did it not,
The Hand of God, the Hand of God is here,
For thee, so great shall be thy high Renown
That Fame shall think no Music like thy Name;
Around the circling Globe it shall be spread,
And to the World's last Ages shall endure;
And the most lofty, most aspiring Man,
Shall want the Assurance in his secret Prayers
To ask such high Felicity and Fame,
As Heaven has freely granted thee; yet this
That seems so great, so glorious to thee now,
Would look how low, how vile to thy great Mind,
If I could set before thy astonished Eyes,
The Excess of Glory, and the Excess of Bliss,
That is prepared for thy expiring Soul
When thou arriv'st at everlasting Day.
O could embodied Mind but comprehend
The Glories of the Intellectual World,
Or I the blissful Secret were allowed,
But Fate forbids, to Mortals to reveal:
O I could lay a Scene before thy Eyes
Which would distract thee with transporting Joy,
Fire the rich Blood in thy illustrious Veins,
Make every Nerve with fierce Convulsions start,
Blast all thy Spirits and thy Life destroy;
Thou could not taste the Extatick Bliss and live.
As one who has lived thirty tedious Years,
And ever since his wretched Birth been dark;
His visual Orbs with cloudy Films overcast,
And in the Dungeon of the Body dwelt
In utter Ignoranceof Nature's Works
And Wonders of this vast material World,
And has no Notion ever conceived of Light
Or Colors, or the verdant flowery Earth,
Or the stupendous Prospect of the Sky;
If then he finds some Artist whose nice Hand
Couches the Cataracts and clears his Eyes,
And all at once a Flood of glorious Light,
And this bright Temple of the Universe,
The crystal Firmament, the blazing Sun,
All the amazing Glories of the Heavens,
All the Great Maker's high Magnificence
Come rushing through his Eyes upon his Soul;
He cannot bear th'astonishing Delight,
But starts, exclaims, and stamps and raves, and dies:
So the vast Glories of the upper World
If they were set before embodied Mind
Would oppress Nature and extinguish Life.
These are the Verses, my most discerning Friend, that I thought might have
been preferred to the forementioned Couplet, especially since they would as it
were have introduced themselves, whereas the Couplet is dragged in by extreme
Violence. But I submit to your infallible Judgment, not in the least suspecting
that my worthy Friend can have any Malice in this Affair, and insert that
Couplet in his immortal Speculations only on purpose to expose me; no, far be
it from me to entertain any such Jealousy of my dearest Friend, who is so good,
so kind, so beneficent, and who has so often given himself the glorious Title
of the Lover and Benefactor of Mankind. Who could imagine that one who has
given himself that glorious Appellation, could ever be prompted by Malice or
Passion, or Interest thus slily and hypocritically to abuse one whom he had
called his Friend?

I have been apt to believe likewise, my worthy Friend, that you would have
been kinder to your self and to me, if instead of commending the forementioned
Couplet you had taken some notice of the following Verses which are in my
Paraphrase upon the Te Deum; especially when you had so fair an occasion to
mention them as you had at the writing the 119th Tatler. The Couplet of the
translated Satyr was introduced by Violence. But how very naturally would the
following Verses of the Paraphrase, have been mentioned either before or after
the last Paragraph of the forementioned Paper, where a Spirit is introduced,
who after he has spoke of that part of the Creation which is too little for
human Sight, comes afterward to speak of the immense Objects of Nature after
this manner.

Tat. 119.
I must acknowledge for my own part, that although it is with much Delight that I
see the Traces of Providence in these Instances, I still see greater pleasure
in considering the Works of the Creation in their Immensity, than in their
Minuteness. For this Reason, I rejoice when I strengthen my sight so as to make
it pierce into the most remote Spaces, and take a view of those Heavenly
Bodies, which lie out of the reach of Human Eyes though assisted by Telescopes;
what you look upon as one confused White in the milky way, appears to me a long
Tract of Heavens, distinguished by Stars, that are ranged in proper Figures and
Constellations: while you are admiring the Sky in a starry Night, I am
entertained with a variety of Worlds and Suns placed one above another, and
rising up to such an immense Distance that no created Eye can see an end of
them. Upon the writing this Paragraph, how could you avoid the making mention
of Verses which had the very same Ideas, and Verses which you had formerly
mentioned with Applause in private Conversation? I know you will answer that
you had entirely forgot them, and therefore I take the liberty here to refresh
your Memory. The Angels are introduced in that Paraphrase speaking to God, and
saying after other things that which follows.

Wherever at utmost stretch we cast our Eyes,
Through the vast frightful Spaces of the Skies;
Even there we find thy Glory, there we gaze
On thy bright Majesty's unbounded Blaze;
Ten thousand Suns, prodigious Globes of Light
At once in broad Dimensions strike our sight;
Millions behind in the remoter Skies,
Appear but Spangles to our wearied Eyes;
And when our wearied Eyes want farther strength
To pierce the Void's immeasurable Length,
Our vigorous towering Thoughts still farther fly,
And still remoter flaming Worlds descry;
But even an Angels comprehensive Thought
Cannot extend so far as thou have wrought,
Our vast Conceptions are by swelling brought,
Swallowed and lost in Infinite to naught.
How glad am I that the forementioned Verses were writ before the above-named
Tatlers? Otherwise I should have been thought to have borrowed from my worthy
Friend, without making any manner of acknowledgment, only adding or
endeavoring to add to what I borrowed a little of that Spirit, and Elevation
and Magnificence of Expression which the Greatness of the Hints required.

It Is for this Reason that I am glad the Verses were printed some Years before
the Prose. For you know, my dear Friend, that a Plagiary in general is but a
scandalous Creature, a sort of a spiritual Outlaw, and ought to be treated as
such by all the Members of the Commonwealth of Learning. But a Plagiary from
living Authors is most profligately impudent, and in so slow and splenatick a
Nation as ours most unjust and barbarous. For among us any thing that is
admirably good is twenty or thirty Years before it comes to be understood. And
how infinitely base is it in the mean while to deprive an Author of any thing
that is valuable in him, and to intercept his coming Praise. As Laws are made
for the Security of Property, what pity it is that there are not some enacted
for the Security of a Man's Thoughts and Inventions, which alone are properly
his. For Land is alienable and Treasure is transitory, and both must at one
time or other pass, either by his own voluntary Act, or by the Violence and
Injustice of others, or at least by Fate. And therefore nothing is truly and
really a Man's own.

-- Puncto quod mobilis Horae
Nunc prece, nunc precio, nunc vi, nunc sort suprema
Permutet Dominos, and cedat in altera Jura.
It Is only a Man's Thoughts and Inventions that are properly his: being alone
Things that can never be alienated from him, neither by Force nor Persuasion,
nor by Fate it self; and though another may basely usurp the Honor of them, yet
they must for ever rightfully belong to their first Inventor. Thus even the
richest and the happiest of Men have nothing that is truly and really their own
but their Thoughts and Inventions. But Authors for the most part, and
especially Poets have nothing that can so much as be called their own but their
Thoughts. It Is for those alone, and the Glory which they expect from those that
they entirely quit their Pretensions to Riches, and renounce the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World; and therefore to endeavor to deprive them of
those is exceedingly inhuman. What a Joy it is to think that the Precedence of
Times sets me free from the Imputation of this Injustice? Had I been capable of
doing this, and doing it to my worthy Friend, of wronging my dearest Friend in
this manner, who knows how far that Barbarity might have extended it self; I
might have proceeded to have upbraided him with some weak place in his
never-dying Folio's; and having forcibly deprived him of his Silver and his
Gold, have pelted him with his Brass and his Copper out of counterfeit Anger or
pretended Scorn, because they were of no richer Metal.

But the Case of my dear Friend is vastly different. You have that Reputation,
and the World has that Opinion of your Merit, that they will be so far from
believing that you have Obligations to a living Author which you have not, that
though you had really made thus bold with me, it would have been impossible to
have convinced above forty or fifty People of it. And here, my dear Friend, at
the same time that I acknowledge your uncommon Merit, I cannot but congratulate
your incomparable Felicity, It being plain that you have got more Reputation in
three Years time than Milton has done in fifty Years, or than Shakespeare has in
an hundred. I shall therefore judiciously conclude with the generality of your
Readers, that you have a Merit paramount to that of all British Authors both
living and dead, and that you have not only more Merit than any one Moralist
either Ancient or Modern, but that if you continue your Paper Three Years
longer, you will have as much Merit as they have all together. I am,

My dear Friend, With great Respect and Fidelity, Your, etc

March the 7th, 1710/11. Mr. Spectator,
YOU tell us in your Fourth Paper, that you know Peoples Thoughts by their
Eyes. How apt we are all to imagine fine Things of our selves! especially we
Authors, Mr. Spectator. There was a certain Friend of mine, a Squire lately
defunct, who made the very same boast that you do; and yet he recommended a
Pettifogger to me for an honest Fellow, who diving into my Secrets, betrayed me
to those very People with whom he pretended to serve me; a Pettifogger through
whose Eyes, even I and several others who pretend to none of my Friend the
Squire's Profundity, can discern the working of his mischievous Thoughts, as
plainly as I can see the Operations of Bees through a Crystal Hive.

As soon, Mr. Spectator, as I found my self betrayed, I began to enquire into
this Fellow's Character, though if you were to look between his two Eyes, you
would swear there was no occasion for it. For, Mr. Spectator, he tells you what
he is, when he only looks on you; and uniting in his pettifogging Person both
your noble Attributes, is at one and the same time Tatler and Spectator. In
short, though he is an errant Traitor in his Heart, his Face is a plain Dealer,
and lets you immediately without Ceremony and without Reserve into the inmost
Secrets of his Soul.

Upon Enquiry I found his Character to be as extraordinary as his Person. He is
by Politics a Jacobite, by Moral Principle a Setter and a Betrayer, by
Religion a Quaker, an utter Foe to all Civil and Religious Ceremony, unless it
be drinking the Pretender's Health on his Knees, to whom alone of the Race of
Men he has been true and faithful: By this one may guess that his Education has
been very extraordinary. I find upon the most curious Enquiry that I have been
able to make, that the only Schools that ever he has been at have been spunging
Houses and County-Gaols; and that his two Universities have been the Fleet and
the Queen's-Bench.

I hope, Mr. Spectator, that this Letter may afford you a Hint, for a
Lucubration, or a Speculation, or whatever other learned Term you may be
pleased to give it; which by discovering to your Readers the Error and the
Frailty of the Squire lately defunct, may convince them how little we know even
those with whom we daily converse. Alas our Judgments of one another are empty
and superficial, and either built upon vain Appearances, or the Reports of
those, who neither truly know us, nor speak what they really think of us, but
often traduce us, and misrepresent us, in order to comfort or vindicate, or to
support themselves.

But of all Mankind there are none who know the rest of Men so little as the
generality of your Authors; for this Pettifogger was so foolish a Rogue, that
any one might see through him at first sight. And yet my Friend the Squire was
stark blind to him: By the way, you may know that my Friend the Squire was an
Author, as celebrated an Author as you are, Mr. Spectator, a Penny-Folio
Author. He got some Reputation by his Lucubrations; but had the Fault of most
Authors who have more Imagination than Judgment, he could not leave off when he
was well; not considering, Mr. Spectator, that had honest Sir Martin left off
in time, his Mistress had never made the Discovery that Warner played and sung
for him. I am

Your, etc.

To the SPECTATOR.
Mr. Spectator,
I Have a short Case of Conscience to put to you; to You who have established
your self in the Office of Ductor Dubitantium general. About January last I
happened to have an Obligation to a certain Author, an Obligation that reposed
a Trust in me which I have since discharged. Being pleased with the Frankness
of this Author's doing this, I resolved upon reading his celebrated
PennyFolio's, I mean upon reading them in order. For till then, I had read but
here and there one, and none at all of the first two Months. The first thing
that I observed in them was, that I was endeavored to be exposed and
calumniated clandestinely and perfidiously by one who at the same time caressed
me wheree'er he saw me, and called himself my Friend, and all this only to
serve a poor pitiful Turn, which was to establish the Opera at the Expense of
Dramatick Poetry; I say of Dramatick Poetry, Mr. Spectator, if it had not been
for which, that Author had long since been in the Dust. The Quere is, whether
the foresaid Obligation ought to debar me of the Right of vindicating the Truth
and my self. It was not long after this, Mr. Spectator, that the abovesaid
Author repented him so far of the Obligation he had laid on me, that he
insulted and affronted me several times most barbarously by a Wretch so
despicable and so impotent, that it would have been Cowardice to have beat him;
a Wretch whose Character will come enclosed to you in the same Cover with this;
and not content with that, endeavored once more to expose me in his Quotidian
Folio's. The second Quere is, Mr. Spectator, whether I am not free, now I am
got quit of the Obligation which was laid upon me, though it had been far greater
than it was, to show my just Resentment, which I am about to do by publishing
three or four modest Letters which I have picked and culled from the numerous
company of those which are more bitter, and which I resolve to suppress in
order to show that I have a Soul that is capable of remembering Obligations, as
well as of revenging Injuries I impatiently expect your Decision in this
matter! in the mean time it seems to me that common Sense obliges me to
believe, that no Man can have an Obligation strong enough laid on him to make
him pass by a Box on the Ear, or the being exposed in Print, without returning
each of the Affronts in kind. I am

Your, etc.
Oct. 23. 1711.
FINIS.
Books Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT.
PRaelectiones Poeticae in Schola naturalis Philosophiae Oxon. habitae. Authore
Josepho Trapp. A. M. Price 2. s. 6 d.

An Historical Account of the Heathen Gods and Hero's, necessary for the
understanding of the ancient Poets. Being an Improvement of whatever has been
hitherto written by the Greek, Latin, French, and English Authors upon that
Subject. By Dr. King, for the Use of Westminster and all other Schools. Price 2
s.

Decerpta ex Ovidii Fastis. Per Thomam Johnson Usui Scholae Brentfordiensis and
quarumvis aliarum. Price 1 s.

The Iliads of Homer, made English from the French Version of Madam Dacier.
Revised and compared with the Greek, by Mr. Johnson late of Eaton, and Fellow
of King's-College, Cambridge, now Master of the Grammar School at Brentford. By
whom will be made some Additional Remarks. Illustrated with 26 Copper Plates
copied from those printed at Paris.

Advice to young Gentlemen concerning the Conduct of Life necessary to atrain
the greatest Honors, To which is added some Advice of Sergeant Winnington to
his Sons relating to Matrimony. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Art of Love in imitation of Ovid de Art Amandi. By Dr. King. Price 3 s. 6
d.

Rapin of Gardens, a Latin Poem, in Four Books; of Flowers, Trees, Waters, and
Orchards, Englished by Mr. Gardener. Illustrated with Copper Plates. Price 3 s.
6 d.

The Works of Virgil, translated into English by the Right Honorable the Earl
of Lauderdale. Price 5 s.

The Grounds of Criticism in Poetry, contained in some few Discoveries never
made before, requisite for the writing and judging of Poems surely. By Mr.
Dennis. Price 1 s. 6 d.

An Essay on Public Spirit: Being a Satyr in Prose upon the Manners and Luxury
of the Times, the chief Source of our present Divisions. By Mr. Dennis. Price 6
d.

Reflections Critical and Satirical, upon a late Rhapsody called an Essay upon
Criticism. By Mr. Dennis. Price 6 d.

The Second Edition of the Works of Mr. George Farquhar: Containing all his
Letters, Poems, Essays, and Comedies published by himself, (viz.) Love and a
Bottle; The Constane Couple, or a Trip to the Jubilee; Sir Harry Wildair; The
Inconstant, or the way to win him; The Twin Rivals; Recruiting Officer, and
Beaux Stratagem. Price 6 s. 6 d. Any of these Plays may be had separately.

All the Comedies of Mr. Steel, Author of the Tatlers and Christian Hero, viz,
The Lying Lovers, or The Lady's Friendship; The Funeral, or Grief Alamode; and
The Tender Husband, or The Accomplished Fools. Printed in a neat PocketVolume,
upon an Elziver Letter. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Collection of Poems in two Volumes: Being all the Miscellanies of Mr.
William Shakespeare, which were published by himself in the Year 1609. And now
correctly printed from those Editions. Price 3 s.

The Lady Chudley's Poems on several Occasions. The Second Edition. Price 3 s.

The Miscellaneous Works of the Right Honorable the late Earls of Rochester
and Roscommon: With some Memoirs of the late Earl of Rochester, in a Letter to
the Duchess of Mazarine. By Monsieur St. Evremont. To which is added a
Collection of several other Poems. The Second Edition. Price 5 s.

Familiar Letters written by the late Mrs. Philips, to the late Sir Charles
Cotterell, under the borrowed Names of Orinda to Polyarchus. Printed from
Originals. Price 3 s.

Oxford and Cambridge Miscellany Poems, chiefly written by Mr. Fenton, Mr.
(...), Mr. Charles Hopkins, Mr. Philips, Mr. Gardener, Sir John Denham, Lord
Hallifax, Dr. Sprat now Bishop of Rochester, Dr. ^^^^en, Dr. Waldern of All
Souls Mr. Bishop, Mr. Jackson, Dr. Chetwood, Mr. Boil, Col. Henningham, Mr.
Otway, Jo. Haynes, Mr. Milton, Mr. Trapp, Mr. D^^e, Mr. Bate, Mr. H^ll, Mr.
Burnaby, and Mr. Warm^^ey, etc. Price 5 s.

Seneca's Morals by way of Abstract. To which is added, A Discourse under the
Title of an After-thought. By Sir Roger L'Estrange. The 10th Edition. Price 5 s.

M^^cipul^ sive Cambro-m^^-machia, proving from learned Antiquity, the Welsh to
be the first Inventors of Mouse-traps. A Latin Poem. Price 6 d.

Callipaedia, A Poem in four Books. Written originally in Latin, and tr^^^lated
into English by several Hands. Illustrated with Cuts. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Where may be had most of the Comedies and Tragedies Printed these seven Years.


