THE SHORTEST-WAY WITH THE DISSENTERS: OR PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE CHURCH.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCII.

THE SHORTEST-WAY WITH THE DISSENTERS, etc.
SIR Roger L'Estrange tell us a Story in his Collection of Fables, of the Cock
and the Horses. The Cock was gotten to Roost in the Stable, among the Horses,
and there being no Racks, or other Conveniences for him, it seems, he was
forced to roost upon the Ground; the Horses jostling about for room, and
putting the Cock in danger of his Life, he gives them this grave Advice; Pray
Gentlefolks let us stand still, for fear we should tread upon one another.

THERE are some People in the World, who now they are unpearcht, and reduced to
an Equality with other People, and under strong and very just Apprehensions of
being further treated as they deserve, begin with Aesop's-Cock, to Preach up
Peace and Union, and the Christian Duties of Moderation, forgetting, that when
they had the Power in their Hands, those Graces were Strangers in their Gates.

It is now near Fourteen Years, that the Glory and Peace of the purest and most
flourishing Church in the World has been Eclipsed, Buffetted, and Disturbed,
by a sort of Men, who God in his Providence has suffered to insult over her,
and bring her down; these have been the Days of her Humiliation and
Tribulation: She has born with an invincible Patience the Reproach of the
Wicked, and God has at last heard her Prayers, and delivered her from the
Oppression of the Stranger.

And now they find their Day is over, their Power gone, and the Throne of this
Nation possessed by a Royal, English, True, and ever Constant Member of, and
Friend to the Church of England. Now they find that they are in danger of the
Church of England's just Resentments; now they cry out Peace, Union,
Forbearance, and Charity, as if the Church had not too long harbored her
Enemies under her Wing, and nourished the viperous Brood, till they hiss and
fly in the Face of the Mother that cherished them.

No Gentlemen, the Time of Mercy is past, your Day of Grace is over; you should
have practiced Peace, and Moderation, and Charity, if you expected any your
selves.

We have heard none of this Lesson for Fourteen Years past: We have been huff'd
and bully'd with your Act of Tolleration; you have told us that you are the
Church established by Law, as well as others; have set up your
Canting-Synagogues at our Church-Doors, and the Church and her Members have
been loaded with Reproaches, with Oaths, Associations, Abjurations, and what
not; where has been the Mercy, the Forbearance, the Charity you have shown to
tender Consciences of the Church of England, that could not take Oaths as fast
as you made 'em; that having sworn Allegiance to their lawful and rightful
King, could not dispense with that Oath, their King being still alive, and
swear to your new Hodge-podge of a Dutch-Government. These have been turned out
of their Livings, and they and their Families left to starve; their Estates
double Taxed, to carry on a War they had no Hand in, and you got nothing by:
What Account can you give of the Multitudes you have forced to comply, against
their Consciences, with your new sophistical Politics, who like the new
Converts in France, Sin because they cannot Starve. And now the Tables are
turned upon you, you must not be Persecuted, it is not a Christian Spirit.

You have Butchered one King, Deposed another King, and made a mock King of a
Third; and yet you could have the Face to expect to be employed and trusted by
the Fourth; any body that did not know the Temper of your Party, would stand
amazed at the Impudence, as well as Folly, to think of it.

Your Management of your Dutch Monarch, whom you reduced to a mere King of Cl
-- s, is enough to give any future Princes such an Idea of your Principles, as
to warn them sufficiently from coming into your Clutches; and God be thanked,
the Queen is out of your Hands, knows you, and will have a care of you.

There is no doubt but the supreme Authority of a Nation has in its self a
Power, and a Right to that Power, to execute the Laws upon any Part of that
Nation it governs. The execution of the known Laws of the Land, and that with
but a weak and gentle Hand neither, was all that the phanatical Party of this
Land have ever called Persecution; this they have magnified to a height, that
the Sufferings of the Hugonots in France were not to be compared with -- Now to
execute the known Laws of a Nation upon those who transgress them, after having
first been voluntarily consenting to the making those Laws, can never be called
Persecution, but Justice. But Justice is always Violence to the Party
offending, for every Man is Innocent in his own Eyes. The first execution of
the Laws against Dissenters in England, was in the Days of King James the
First; and what did it amount to, truly, the worst they suffered, was at their
own request, to let them go to New England, and erect a new Collony, and give
them great Privileges, Grants, and suitable Powers, keep them under Protection,
and defend them against all Invaders, and receive no Taxes or Revenue from
them. This was the cruelty of the Church of England, fatal Lenity! 'Twas the
ruin of that excellent Prince, King Charles the First. Had King James sent all
the Puritans in England away to the West Indies, we had been a national unmixed
Church; the Church of England had been kept undivided and entire.

To requite the Lenity of the Father, they take up Arms against the Son;
Conquer, Pursue, Take, Imprison, and at last put to Death the anointed of God,
and Destroy the very Being and Nature of Government, setting up a sordid
Impostor, who had neither Title to Govern, nor Understanding to Manage, but
supplied that want with Power, bloody and desperate Councils and Craft, without
Conscience.

Had not King James the First witheld the full execution of the Laws; had he
given them strict Justice, he had cleared the Nation of them, and the
Consequences had been plain; his Son had never been murdered by them, nor the
Monarchy overwhelmed; 'twas too much Mercy shown them, was the ruin of his
Posterity, and the ruin of the Nation's Peace. One would think the Dissenters
should not have the Face to believe that we are to be wheedl'd and canted into
Peace and Toleration, when they know that they have once requited us with a
civil War, and once with an intolerable and unrighteous Persecution for our
former Civillity.

Nay, to encourage us to be Easy with them, it is apparent, that they never had
the Upper-hand of the Church, but they treated her with all the Severity, with
all the Reproach and Contempt as was possible: What Peace, and what Mercy did
they show the Loyal Gentry of the Church of England in the time of their
Triumphant Commonwealth? How did they put all the Gentry of England to ransom,
whether they were actually in Arms for the King or not, making People compound
for their Estates, and starve their Families? How did they treat the Clergy of
the Church of England, sequestered the Ministers, devoured the Patrimony of the
Church, and divided the Spoil, by sharing the Church Lands among their
Soldiers, and turning her Clergy out to starve; just such Measure as they have
mete, should be measured to them again.

Charity and Love is the known Doctrine of the Church of England, and it is
plain she has put it in practice toward the Dissenters, even beyond what they
ought, till she has been wanting to her self, and in effect, unkind to her own
Sons; particularly, in the too much Lenity of King James the First, mentioned
before, had he so rooted the Puritans from the Face of the Land, which he had
an opportunity early to have done, they had not the Power to vex the Church, as
since they have done.

IN the Days of King Charles the Second, how did the Church reward their bloody
Doings with Lenity and Mercy, except the barbarous Regicides of the pretended
Court of Justice; not a Soul suffered for all the Blood in an unnatural War:
King Charles came in all Mercy and Love, cherished them, preferred them,
employed them, witheld the rigor of the Law, and oftentimes, even against the
Advice of his Parliament, gave them liberty of Conscience; and how did they
requite him with the villainous Contrivance to Depose and Murder him and his
Successor at the Rye-Plot.

KING James, as if Mercy was the inherent Quality of the Family, began his
Reign with unusual Favor to them: Nor could their joining with the Duke of
Monmouth against him, move him to do himself Justice upon them; but that
mistaken Prince thought to win them by Gentleness and Love, proclaimed an
universal Liberty to them, and rather discountenanced the Church of England
than them; how they requited him all the World knows.

THE late Reign is too fresh in the Memory of all the World to need a Comment;
how under Pretense of joining with the Church in redressing some Grievances,
they pusht things to that extremity, in conjunction with some mistaken
Gentlemen, as to Depose the late King, as if the Grievance of the Nation could
not have been redressed but by the absolute ruin of the Prince: Here Is an
Instance of their Temper, their Peace, and Charity. To what height they carried
themselves during the Reign of a King of their own; how they crope into all
Places of Trust and Profit; how they insinuated into the Favor of the King,
and were at first preferred to the highest Places in the Nation; how they
engrost the Ministry, and above all, how pitifully they Managed, is too plain
to need any Remarks.

BUT particularly, their Mercy and Charity, the Spirit of Union, they tell us
so much of, has been remarkable in Scotland, if any Man would see the Spirit of
a Dissenter, let him look into Scotland; there they made an entire Conquest of
the Church, trampled down the sacred Orders, and suppressed the Episcopal
Government, with an absolute, and as they suppose, irretrievable Victory, though,
it is possible, they may find themselves mistaken: Now 'twou'd be a very proper
Question to ask their Impudent Advocate, the Observator, Pray how much Mercy
and Favor did the Members of the Episcopal Church find in Scotland, from the
Scotch Presbyterian-Government; and I shall undertake for the Church of
England, that the Dissenters shall still receive as much here, though they
deserve but little.

In a small Treatise of the Sufferings of the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland,
'twill appear, what Usage they met with, how they not only lost their Livings,
but in several Places, were plundered and abused in their Persons; the
Ministers that could not conform, turned out, with numerous Families, and no
Maintenance, and hardly Charity enough left to relieve them with a bit of
Bread; and the Cruelties of the Party are innumerable, and not to be attempted
in this short Piece.

And now to prevent the distant Cloud which they perceived to hang over their
Heads from England; with a true Presbyterian Policy, they put in for a union of
Nations, that England might unite their Church with the Kirk of Scotland, and
their Presbyterian Members sit in our House of Commons, and their Assembly of
Scotch canting Long-Cloaks in our Convocation; what might have been, if our
Phanatick, Whiggish-States-men had continued, God only knows; but we hope we
are out of fear of that now.

It Is alleged by some of the Faction, and they began to Bully us with it; that
if we will not unite with them, they will not settle the Crown with us again, but
when her Majesty dies, will choose a King for themselves.

If they will not, we must make them, and it is not the first time we have let them
know that we are able: The Crowns of these Kingdoms have not so far disowned
the right of Succession, but they may retrieve it again, and if Scotland thinks
to come off from a Successive to an Elective State of Government, England has
not promised not to assist the right Heir, and put them into possession,
without any regard to their ridiculous Settlements.

THESE are the Gentlemen, these their ways of treating the Church, both at home
and abroad. Now let us examine the Reasons they pretend to give why we should
be favorable to them, why we should continue and tolerate them among us.

First, THEY are very Numerous, they say, they are a great Part of the Nation,
and we cannot suppress them.

To this may be answered 1. THEY are not so Numerous as the Protestants in
France, and yet the French King effectually cleared the Nation of them at once,
and we don't find he misses them at home.

But I am not of the Opinion they are so Numerous as is pretended; their Party
is more Numerous than their Persons, and those mistaken People of the Church,
who are misled and deluded by their wheedling Artifices, to join with them,
make their Party the greater; but those will open their Eyes, when the
Government shall set heartily about the work, and come off from them, as some
Annimals, which they say, always desert a House when it is likely to fall.

2 dly. The more Numerous, the more Dangerous, and therefore the more need to
suppress them; and God has suffered us to bear them as Goads in our sides, for
not utterly extinguishing them long ago.

3 dly. If we are to allow them, only because we cannot suppress them, then it
ought to be tried whether we can or no; and I am of Opinion it is easy to be
done, and could prescribe Ways and Means, if it were proper, but I doubt not
but the Government will find effectual Methods for the rooting the Contagion
from the Face of this Land.

ANOTHER Argument they use, which is this, That it is a time of War, and we have
need to unite against the common Enemy.

WE answer, this common Enemy had been no Enemy, if they had not made him so;
he was quiet, in peace, and no way disturbed, or encroach'd upon us, and we
know no reason we had to quarrel with him.

But further, We make no question but we are able to deal with this common
Enemy without their help; but why must we unite with them because of the Enemy,
will they go over to the Enemy, if we do not prevent it by a union with them --
We are very well contented they should; and make no question, we shall be ready
to deal with them and the common Enemy too, and better without them than with
them.

Besides, if we have a common Enemy, there is the more need to be secure
against our private Enemies; if there is one common Enemy, we have the less
need to have an Enemy in our Bowels.

'Twas a great Argument some People used against suppressing the Old-Money,
that 'twas a time of War, and 'twas too great a Risque for the Nation to run,
if we should not master it, we should be undone; and yet the Sequel proved the
Hazard was not so great, but it might be mastered; and the Success was
answerable. The suppressing the Dissenters is not a harder Work, nor a Work of
less necessity to the Public; we can never enjoy a settled uninterrupted Union
and Tranquillity in this Nation, till the Spirit of Whiggisme, Faction, and
Schism is melted down like the Old-Money.

To talk of the Difficulty, is to Frighten our selves with Chimaeras and
Notions of a Powerful Party, which are indeed a Party without Power;
Difficulties often appear greater at a distance, than when they are searched
into with Judgment, and distinguished from the Vapors and Shadows that attend
them.

We are not to be frightened with it; this Age is wiser than that, by all our
own Experience, and theire's too; King Charles the First, had early suppressed
this Party, if he had took more deliberate Measures. In short, it is not worth
arguing, to talk of their Arms, their Monmouths, and Shaftsburys, and Argiles
are gone, their Dutch-Sanctuary is at an end, Heaven has made way for their
Destruction, and if we do not close with the Divine occasion, we are to blame
our selves, and may remember that we had once an opportunity to serve the
Church of England, by extirpating her implacable Enemies, and having let slip
the Minute that Heaven presented, may experimentally Complain, Post est Occasio
Calvo.

Here are some popular Objections in the way.

As first, THE Queen has promised them, to continue them in their tolerated
Liberty; and has told us she will be a religious Observer of her Word.

WHAT her Majesty will do we cannot help, but what, as the Head of the Church,
she ought to do, is another Case: Her Majesty has promised to Protect and
Defend the Church of England, and if she cannot effectually do that without the
Destruction of the Dissenters, she must of course dispense with one Promise to
comply with another. But to answer this Cavil more effectually: Her Majesty did
never promise to maintain the Tolleration, to the Destruction of the Church;
but it is upon supposition that it may be compatible with the well being and
safety of the Church, which she had declared she would take especial Care of:
Now if these two Interests clash, it is plain her Majesty's Intentions are to
Uphold, Protect, Defend, and Establish the Church, and this we conceive is
impossible.

Perhaps it may be said, THAT the Church is in no immediate danger from the
Dissenters, and therefore it is time enough: But this is a weak Answer.

For first, IF a Danger be real, the Distance of it is no Argument against, but
rather a Spur to quicken us to prevention, lest it be too late hereafter.

And 2dly, Here is the Opportunity, and the only one perhaps that ever the
Church had to secure her self, and destroy her Enemies.

The Representatives of the Nation have now an Opportunity, the Time is come
which all good Men have wished for, that the Gentlemen of England may serve the
Church of England; now they are protected and encouraged by a Church of England
Queen.

What will ye do for your Sister in the Day that she shall be spoken for.

If ever you will establish the best Christian Church in the World.

If ever you will suppress the Spirit of Enthusiasm.

If ever you will free the Nation from the viperons Brood that have so long
sucked the Blood of their Mother.

If you will leave your Posterity free from Faction and Rebellion, this is the
time.

This is the time to pull up this heretical Weed of Sedition, that has so long
disturbed the Peace of our Church, and poisoned the good Corn.

BUT, says another Hot and Cold Objector, this is renewing Fire and Faggot,
reviving the Act De Heret. Comburendo: This will be Cruelty in its Nature, and
Barbarous to all the World.

I answer, IT IS Cruelty to kill a Snake or a Toad in cold Blood, but the Poison
of their Nature makes it a Charity to our Neighbors, to destroy those
Creatures, not for any personal Injury received, but for prevention; not for
the Evil they have done, but the Evil they may do.

Serpents, Toads, Vipers, etc. are noxious to the Body, and poison the
sensative Life; these poison the Soul, corrupt our Posterity, ensnare our
Children, destroy the Vitals of our Happyness, our future Felicity, and
contaminate the whole Mass.

Shall any Law be given to such wild Creatures: Some Beasts are for Sport, and
the Huntsmen give them advantages of Ground; but some are knocked on Head by
all possible ways of Violence and Surprise.

I do not prescribe Fire and Faggot, but a Scipio said of Carthage, Dilenda est
Carthago; they are to be rooted out of this Nation, if ever we will live in
Peace, serve God, or enjoy our own: As for the Manner, I leave it to those
Hands who have a right to execute God's Justice on the Nation's and the
Church's Enemies.

BUT if we must be frighted from this Justice, under the specious Pretenses,
and odious Sense of Cruelty, nothing will be effected: 'Twill be more Barbarous
and Cruel to our own Children, and dear Posterity, when they shall reproach
their Fathers, as we do ours, and tell us, 'You had an Opportunity to root out
this cursed Race from the World, under the Favor and Protection of a true
English Queen; and out of your foolish Pity you spared them, because, forsooth,
you would not be Cruel, and now our Church is suppressed and persecuted, our
Religion trampled under Foot, our Estates plundered, our Persons imprisoned and
dragged to Jails, Gibbets, and Scaffolds; your sparing this Amalakite Race is
our Destruction, your Mercy to them proves Cruelty to your poor Posterity.'

HOW just will such Reflections be, when our Posterity shall fall under the
merciless Clutches of this uncharitable Generation, when our Church shall be
swallowed up in Schism, Faction, Enthusiasme, and Confusion; when our
Government shall be devolved upon Foreigners, and our Monarchy dwindled into a
Republic.

'Twou'd be more rational for us, if we must spare this Generation, to summon
our own to a general Massacre, and as we have brought them into the World Free,
send them out so, and not betray them to Destruction by our supine negligence,
and then cry it is Mercy.

Moses was a merciful meek Man, and yet with what Fury did he run through the
Camp, and cut the Throats of Three and thirty thousand of his dear Israelites,
that were fallen into Idolatry; what was the reason? 'twas Mercy to the rest,
to make these be Examples, to prevent the Destruction of the whole Army.

How many Millions of future Souls we save from Infection and Delusion, if the
present Race of poisoned Spirits were purged from the Face of the Land.

IT IS vain to trifle in this matter, the light foolish handling of them by
Mulcts, Fines, etc. it is their Glory and their Advantage; if the Gallows
instead of the Counter, and the Galleys instead of the Fines, were the Reward
of going to a Conventicle, to preach or hear, there would not be so many
Sufferers, the Spirit of Martyrdom is over; they that will go to Church to be
chosen Sheriffs and Mayors, would go to forty Churches rather than be Hanged.

If one severe Law were made, and punctually executed, that who ever was found
at a Conventicle, should be Banished the Nation, and the Preacher be Hanged, we
should soon see an end of the Tale, they would all come to Church; and one Age
would make us all One again.

TO talk of 5 s. a Month for not coming to the Sacrament, and 1 s. per Week for
not coming to Church, this is such a way of converting People as never was
known, this is felling them a Liberty to transgress for so much Money: If it be
not a Crime, why don't we give them full License? And if it be, no Price ought
to compound for the committing it, for that is selling a Liberty to People to
sin against God and the Government.

If it be a Crime of the highest Consequence, both against the Peace and
Welfare of the Nation, the Glory of God, the Good of the Church, and the
Happyness of the Soul, let us rank it among capital Offenses, and let it
receive a Punishment in proportion to it.

We Hang Men for Trifles, and Banish them for things not worth naming, but an
Offense against God and the Church, against the Welfare of the World, and the
Dignity of Religion, shall be bought off for 5 s. this is such a shame to a
Christian Government, that it is with regret I transmit it to Posterity.

IF Men sin against God, affront his Ordinances, rebel against his Church, and
disobey the Precepts of their Superiors, let them suffer as such capital Crimes
deserve, so will Religion on flourish, and this divided Nation be once again
united.

And yet the Title of Barbarous and Cruel will soon be taken off from this Law
too. I am not supposing that all the Dissenters in England should be Hanged or
Banished, but as in cases of Rebellions and Insurrections, if a few of the
Ringleaders suffer, the Multitude are dismissed, so a few obstinate People being
made Examples there is no doubt but the Severity of the Law would find a stop in
the Compliance of the Multitude.

To make the reasonableness of this matter out of question, and more
unanswerably plain, let us examine for what it is that this Nation is divided
into Parties and Factions, and let us see how they can justify a Separation, or
we of the Church of England can justify our bearing the Insults and
Inconveniences of the Party.

ONE of their leading Pastors, and a Man of as much Learning as most among
them, in his Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, A Enquiry into the occasional
Conformity, has these Words, P. 27 Do the Religion of the Church and the
Meeting Houses make two Religions? Wherein do they differ? The Substance of the
same Religion is common to them both; and the Modes and Accidents are the
things in which only they differ. P. 28 Thirty nine Articles are given us for
the summary of our Religion, Thirty six contain the Substance of it, wherein we
agree; Three the additional Appendices, about which we have some differences.

Now, if as by their own acknowledgment, the Church of England is a true
Church, and the Difference between them is only a few Modes and Accidents, Why
should we expect that they will suffer Gallows and Galleys, corporeal
Punishment and Banishment for these Trifles; there is no question but they will
be wiser; even their own Principles will not bear them out in it, they will
certainly comply with the Laws, and with Reason, and though at the first,
Severity may seem hard, the next Age will feel nothing of it; the Contagion
will be rooted out; the Disease being cured, there will be no need of the
Operation, but if they should venture to trangress, and fall into the Pit, all
the World must condemn their Obstinacy, as being without Ground from their own
Principles.

Thus the Pretense of Cruelty will be taken off, and the Party actually
suppressed, and the Disquiets they have so often brought upon the Nation,
prevented.

THEIR Numbers, and their Wealth, makes them Haughty, and tha it is so far from
being an Argument to persuade us to forbear them, that it is a Warning to us,
without any more delay, to reconcile them to the Unity of the Church, or remove
them from us.

AT present, Heaven be praised, they are not so Formidable as they have been,
and it is our own fault if ever we suffer them to be so; Providence, and the
Church of England, seems to join in this particular, that now the Destroyers of
the Nations Peace may be overturned, and to this end the present Opportunity
seems to be put into our Hands.

To this end her present Majesty seems reserved to enjoy the Crown, that the
Ecclesiastic as well as Civil Rights of the Nation may be restored by her Hand.

To this end the Face of Affairs have received such a Turn in the process of a
few Months, as never has been before; the leading Men of the Nation, the
universal Cry of the People, the unanimous Request of the Clergy, agree in
this, that the Deliverance of our Church is at hand.

For this end has Providence given us such a Parliament, such a Convocation,
such a Gentry, and such a Queen as we never had before.

AND what may be the Consequences of a Neglect of such Opportunities? The
Succession of the Crown has but a dark Prospect, another Dutch Turn may make
the Hopes of it ridiculous, and the Practice impossible: Be the House of our
future Princes never so well inclined, they will be Foreigners; and many Years
will be spent in suiting the Genius of Strangers to the Crown, and to the
Interests of the Nation; and how many Ages it may be before the English Throne
be filled with so much Zeal and Candor, so much Tenderness, and hearty
Affection to the Church, as we see it now covered with, who can imagine.

It Is high time then for the Friends of the Church of England, to think of
Building up, and Establishing her, in such a manner, that she may be no more
Invaded by Foreigners, nor Divided by Factions, Schisms, and Error.

IF this could be done by gentle and easy Methods, I should be glad, but the
Wound is coroded, the Vitals begin to mortify, and nothing but Amputation of
Members can complete the Cure* all the ways of Tenderness and Compassion, all
persuasive Arguments have been made use of in vain.

THE Humor of the Dissenters has so increased among the People, that they hold
the Church in Defiance, and the House of God is an Abomination among them: Nay,
they have brought up their Posterity in such pre-possest Aversions to our Holy
Religion, that the ignorant Mob think we are all Idolaters, and Worshippers of
Baal; and account it a Sin to come within the Walls of our Churches.

The primitive Christians were not more shie of a Heathen-Temple, or of Meat
offered to Idols, nor the Jews of Swine's-Flesh, than some of our Dissenters
are of the Church, and the Divine Service solemnized therein.

THIS Obstinacy must be rooted out with the Profession of it, while the
Generation are left at liberty daily to affront God Almighty, and Dishonor his
Holy Worship, we are wanting in our Duty to God, and our Mother the Church of
England.

How can we answer it to God, to the Church, and to our Posterity, to leave
them entangled with Fanaticisme, Error, and Obstinacy, in the Bowels of the
Nation; to leave them an Enemy in their Streets, that in time may involve them
in the same Crimes, and endanger the utter Extirpation of Religion in the
Nation.

What Is the Difference betwixt this, and being subjected to the Power of the
Church of Rome, from whence we have reformed? If one be an extreme on one Hand,
and one on another, it is equally destructive to the Truth, to have Errors
settled among us, let them be of what Nature they will.

Both are Enemies of our Church, and of our Peace, and why should it not be as
criminal to admit an Enthusiast as a Jesuit? Why should the Papist with his
Seven Sacraments be worse than the Quaker with no Sacraments at all? Why should
Religious-houses be more intolerable than Meeting Houses -- Alas the Church of
England! What with Popery on one Hand, and Schismatics on the other; how has
she been Crucified between two Thieves.

Now let us Crucify the Thieves. Let her Foundations be established upon the
Destruction of her Enemies: The Doors of Mercy being always open to the
returning Part of the deluded People: Let the Obstinate be ruled with the Rod
of Iron.

Let all true Sons of so Holy an Oppressed Mother, exasperated by her
Afflictions, harden their Hearts against those who have oppressed her.

And may God Almighty put it into the Hearts of all the Friends of Truth, to
lift up a Standard against Pride and Antichrist, that the Posterity of the Sons
of Error may be rooted out from the Face of this Land for ever --.

FINIS.

