THE LONDON HERMIT, OR RAMBLES in DORSETSHIRE.

THE LONDON HERMIT, OR RAMBLES IN DORSETSHIRE, A COMEDY, IN THREE ACTS, AS
PERFORMED WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE AT THE THEATER ROYAL, HAYMARKET, WRITTEN BY
JOHN O'KEEFFE, Esquire.

AUTHOR OF Tony Lumpkin in Town, The Son-in-law, The Dead Alive, Agreeable
Surprise, Castle of Andalusia, Fontainbleau, or Our Way in France, The Positive
Man, The Poor Soldier, Love in a Camp, or Patrick in Prussia, The Farmer, The
Young Quaker, Beggar on Horseback, Peeping Tom, The Prisoner at large, The Toy,
or Hampton Court Frolics, Wild Oats, or the Strolling Gentlemen, Little
Hunchback, The Siege of Curzola, Modern Antiques, or the Merry Mourners, The
Highland Reel, Birthday, or Prince of Arragon, Sprigs of Laurel, etc.

LONDON: Printed for J. DEBRETT, opposite BURLINGTON-HOUSE, PICCADILLY. 1793.

DEDICATION.
TO THE REV. -- BALL, OF WINFRITH, NEAR WEYMOUTH.
DEAR SIR,
WHEN I rambled into Dorsetshire in the summer of 1791, my only introduction to
your acquaintance was your own frank affability, and my sole recommendation to
your hospitable roof, that I was a stranger. By your good-natured politeness,
my mind was cheered in the solitudes of Lulworth, and by your many friendly and
kind offices I was furnished with information in a place where all was novelty,
though my first charm there was the certainty of what I had supposed to be
common in England, a pious and benevolent clergyman; and though I could,
previous to my visits at Winfrith, boast the honor of having stood before the
great gates of a bishop's palace; yet, for the comforts I there enjoyed in the
little parlour of a country parsonage-house, accept this trifling testimony of
well-remembered goodness to,

DEAR SIR, Your highly honored, and much obliged servant, J. O'KEEFFE.
BROMPTON, July 13, 1793.
PROLOGUE.
Written by GEORGE COLMAN, Jun. Esquire. Spoken by Mr. BARRYMORE.
DREAD censors! by whose nod we sink or rise!
Be merry, pray, tonight, and not too wise!
Our bard will smile at the strict critic rule,
He had his learning in a laughing -- school.
Order, and ancient laws, he dares neglect;
And rather would be pleasant, than correct;
Nay, spite of all grave classical communities,
Would sooner make you laugh than keep the unities.
Mirth is his aim -- and critics! we implore you,
Relax, while our light scenes we lay before you!
Good Humor to the countenance adds graces,
Unbend the iron muscles of your faces!
Lay acid wisdom by; think mirth no sin;
Throw your sour dignity aside, -- and grin!
Yet though we laugh we won'd not quit the grounds
Where sportive nature marks her ample bounds:
Various her range! calm, gay, then in the vapors --
We catch the goddess while she is cutting capers.
To prove that we have caught her in the act,
Our Hermitage is built upon a fact.
If, then, the drama's frolic pencil draws
A frolic fact -- away with critic laws!
And grant the sketcher's fancy your applause!
Often has he drawn before -- this shop is full
With touches from his hand; and none thought dull;
Should this, tonight, seem vapid to your eyes,
'Twould prove a Dis-Agreeable Surprise --
Oh! think on his collection now in store,
And smile on him, on whom you smiled before!

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
WHIMMY, Mr. SUETT. OLD PRANKS, Mr. AICKIN. YOUNG PRANKS, Mr. BANNISTER, Jun.
PEREGRINE, Mr. EVATT. APATHY, Mr. BLAND. POZ, Mr. BARRETT. BITE, Mr. COOK.
NATTY MAGGS, Mr. PALMER, Jun. BARLEYCORN, Mr. BENSON. TULLY, Mr. JOHNSTONE.
SKIP, Mr. ABBOT. BAREBONES, Mr. WEWITZER. TOBY THATCH, Mr. PARSONS. CARTER, Mr.
BURTON. JOHN GRUM, Mr. ALFRED. POST BOY, Mr. CORNERFORD. JOHN, Mr. LIONS.
COACHMAN, Mr. LEDGER.
WOMEN.
DIAN, Miss HEARD. Mrs. MAGGS, Mrs. WEBB. KITTY BARLEYCORN, Mrs. KEMBLE.
FISHWOMAN, Mrs. POWELL. LADIES, Mrs. CUYLER. LADIES, Mrs. HALE.
SCENE, DORSETSHIRE.

THE LONDON HERMIT, OR RAMBLES in DORSETSHIRE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Before a Country Inn and great Gates leading to Whimmy's House.
Enter BARLEYCORN, (from the Inn.) BARLEYCORN. TOBY, Toby Thatch! what do
stand gaping about there?


Enter TOBY. Been up hill to look toward great road.


BARLEYCORN. Any carriages coming?


TOBY. Fine coach and four horses -- a high thing -- O me! chay -- a pheaton (I
think they call it) -- and a whiskey-me-gig.


BARLEYCORN. And there is a boat full of company just put in at the cove, all to
see 'Squire Whimmy's improvements -- Then there is our poney-race. Dang my
buttons, we shall have a house full today. What a donkey was I to let that
daughter of mine go gadding to Blandford. Company flocking, -- and my child,
that ought to have my interest at heart, when she should be preparing
entertainment for the guests, mayhap, she is now gawking over a race-course.


TOBY. And all the business left upon I.


BARLEYCORN. Always grumbling, you idle rascal.


TOBY. Well, I Have more trades than the best idle rascal in all England. I Am
waiter and attend the company, as ostler I wait on horses; I paints the names
on the smugglers' boats; I plays the fiddle at church; I Am a tight locksmith;
I Am a bit'n a parish constable; and for walking on messages to Weymouth,
Blandford, Corfe, Poole, or Wareham, I Am allowed to be as smart a footpad as
any in the county of Dorset. [ Laughing without.] There Is the 'Squire's
sarvants within, ha! ha! ha! -- they have rare stingo at home, and yet come
drinking our taplash. I Will go sarve 'em. (Going.) -- but there is their master
come upon 'em; -- he is in a mortish fury with som'at.


BARLEYCORN. Dang my buttons! This daughter of mine not come yet, and here the
house now chuck full.


TOBY. I Will run and see; for I warrants Kitty will bring home some fine ballads.


BARLEYCORN. Our subscription' not full to buy the silver cup; and the folks
are already gaping for the race. Take you the paper about and ax what the
company will give toward it.


TOBY. I wool.


Exit. Enter WHIMMY, (in a rage.) WHIMMY. You, sirrah! did I not build this inn
here for you at the very entrance of my improvements? Did not I put you and
your family into it, and an't you getting money here as if you coined it? Is it
not a bean-garden that I Have turned you into; and an't you fattening in it, like
a base ungrateful great boar as you are?


BARLEYCORN. Great boar! I don't understand what your honor would be at.


WHIMMY. Here, on the very day I have propriated to oblige the world of taste
and fashion, by showing them my house, pictures, gardens, and improvements, you
must fix your damned twopenny poney-race.


BARLEYCORN. I did it to draw company to the village.


WHIMMY. Yes, to your own paltry alehouse, you sordid rascal!


BARLEYCORN. Improvements! -- Who'd come to view your improvements, Sir, if
they wa'n't sure of a good dinner from me? If they can eat marvel and drink
water, they may feast upon your improvements; but after all their eye-gluttony
in your gardens, their palates are ready enough for a Scotch-collop at the Red
Lion. Here, you Toby, why don't you mind the company. (Calling off.) Dang my
buttons! -- Landlord -- Big boar -- Pay his rent.


Exit muttering. WHIMMY. Here Is plebeian gratitude! -- Oh! plague of the
fingers that signed you a seven years lease.


OLD PRANKS without. No, no, -- I Will walk up to Whimmy's -- Oh! why he is here
-- How do you do, Dick? -- Found you out, eh!


WHIMMY. My name is Richard. -- What! the friend of my youth, Billy Pranks. --
(Aside.) Now shall I be twitted with former favors; and I don't like that.


OLD PRANKS. So, you have picked up the mocusses in the Indies! Packed up, came
over. -- Never looked after me.


WHIMMY. I asked every body after you.


OLD PRANKS. What! I suppose you asked King Charles at Charing Cross; -- Nobody
about 'Change could tell of William Pranks, the banker, of Lombard Street. --
You hound, I was your friend when you had not another; but now you don't want
one --


WHIMMY. Hound, what is the matter with you? Would you have me advertise or send
the bellman about to cry you?


OLD PRANKS. You're most plaguily altered for the worse. Well, I Have been told
all about you.


WHIMMY. Then, as you have heard l've hopes of a peerage, you might be a little
more respectful, Billy.


OLD PRANKS. If you want to have more respect than another man, be better than
another man; for your being called a lord, can neither give you a wise head or
a good heart. How Is your daughter? fine girl, I hear; wondered at it, when I
thought of your phiz.


WHIMMY. You are as civil as ever.


OLD PRANKS. You shall give her to my nephew, the greatest rogue in England.


WHIMMY. Why there may be finer girls than my daughter, yet I think she is too
good for a rogue.


OLD PRANKS. Where did you make your fortune?


WHIMMY. You know in the Indies to be sure. (Aside.) If I had millions this
fellow still overawes me, that I Am a mere mouse before him.


OLD PRANKS. I scorn to remind you; -- you owe all that fortune to me.


WHIMMY, (aside.) 'Twill be long enough before I repay you.


OLD PRANKS. Only think of all the good things I Have done for you. Didn't I
suffer you to write for me from six in the morning to seven at night; locked
you up, and fed you upon bread and cheese, to sharpen your industry upon the
grindstone of necessity.


WHIMMY. Yes; you did keep my nose to the grindstone.


OLD PRANKS. Was Not it I got you out to Bombay in a respectable line of a
guinea-pig? Didn't I procure the letters to the Governor and general officers?
Didn't I write myself, "This young man, the bearer, is a "prudent lad, that
will do all you dirty work?"


WHIMMY. Certainly, your letter did me great honor.


OLD PRANKS. Didn't you derive all your interest from a pamphlet that I wrote,
and gave you the credit of, though I thought 'twou'd bring the author to the
pillory?


WHIMMY. I acknowledge all your goodness.


OLD PRANKS. Then give your daughter to my nephew; they shall have every penny
I Am worth when I die.


WHIMMY. Aye; but there is danger of your living a great while, Billy.


OLD PRANKS. What! are you afraid of it, you golden calf?


WHIMMY. Where is your nephew?


OLD PRANKS. Was in the Temple; is now in the King's Bench; he does not know it,
but it is I that keep him there, to make him, from a dread of confinement, avoid
running in debt. Shall Not give him two sixpences unless he marries your daughter.


WHIMMY. Aye; but I Have promised her to a good young man in the neighborhood
here, who has made the tour of Europe. Ah! Mr. Peregrine brought home taste
enough to lay out my gardens, dispose my statues, and make yon spot the seat of
virtu and elegance.


OLD PRANKS, (aside.) Got his money like a knave, and now gives it away like a
fool.


WHIMMY. Not half an hour since I actually promised Mr. Peregrine that he
should marry her tomorrow.


OLD PRANKS. But, don't you recollect a prior promise to me? Didn't you engage
if you ever made a fortune and had a child, my next akin should have both?


WHIMMY. Aye; but Peregrine will shoot me if I break my word to him.


OLD PRANKS. Break it with me, and I Will cut your wizen.


WHIMMY. Oh dear! I Am brought into this dilemma by my bad memory. Hark ye,
Billy, I Will make Peregrine wait, on pretext that his constancy must be tried.
-- Yes, I Will send him to travel again for a seven years.


OLD PRANKS. Instead of marriage, let him go tomorrow.


WHIMMY. Aye; but on his return he will claim my promise.


OLD PRANKS. Pshaw! -- his back turned, my nephew will be here; -- I Have already
sent for him; Tom's a sprightly blade, monstrous wicked though. -- This the
entrance to your grounds?


WHIMMY. Yes, I Have transported Italy into England.


OLD PRANKS. Italy!


WHIMMY. Here you will see gardens.


OLD PRANKS. I Have a garden at Brixton Causeway.


WHIMMY. Such bananas --


OLD PRANKS. What! do they boil better with a bit of corn'd beef than a summer
cabbage?


WHIMMY. Cabbage! My hot-house! -- half a dozen such peaches last Christmas!
upon a sum up, the rearing will cost me two guineas a piece.


OLD PRANKS. For whose eating?


WHIMMY. My own, to be sure.


OLD PRANKS. Old Nick jump after them; swallow in a minute what would have kept
a whole family for a twelvemonth.


WHIMMY. Wer'n't they my own?


OLD PRANKS. Superfluities are not our own, whilst the poor want common
necessaries. When do you dine?


WHIMMY. Not till tomorrow, because I resign my house and improvements today
to the admiration of a wondering public; but you shall sup with me, my friend.


OLD PRANKS. Thank ye.


Enter BARLEYCORN. BARLEYCORN. Sir, Parson Jack be making collections for the
poor sufferers that was burnt out there at Minehead. He has sent the paper
here, to put down your worship's name for a trifle.


WHIMMY. I wish Parson Jack would mind the business of his own parish; what
have we to do with the poor of another county?


OLD PRANKS. Hark ye, Dick Whimmy, in the hour of calamity, the unhappy of
every country are our fellow-citizens (gives money.) Put that down.


BARLEYCORN. Your name, Sir?


OLD PRANKS. Never mind my name -- If I can do any good, I don't want to blow a
trumpet about it.


WHIMMY. Eh! well, as it is a charity, I Will give --


BARLEYCORN. How much?


WHIMMY. I Will give them -- As I love to be modest, put down plain Dick Whimmy,
one pound one.


BARLEYCORN. I Will give it myself, and dang me if your shabby name shall
disgrace our parish paper.


Exit. OLD PRANKS. That fellow has a soul.


WHIMMY. There Is a saucy villain.


OLD PRANKS. Yes; but Dick, a sordid mind sinks a man into contempt, though
master of millions.


WHIMMY. I desire, Billy, not to hear disagreeable things; will you come up
with me now?


OLD PRANKS. I Will throw on a shirt.


WHIMMY. Well, you will excuse me till supper. -- I must give Tully, my gardener,
his lesson, -- and -- no hermit got yet! Look! I Have advertised for a man to sit
dressed up as a hermit in the hermitage of my gardens.


OLD PRANKS. Dick, have a good supper; remember old times.


WHIMMY. Yes, I shall never forget bread and cheese.


Exit. OLD PRANKS. Invites every body to see his gardens, and then the shy
churl sneak out of the way. Tell me of carvings and paintings! I say the best
part of a gentleman's house is his kitchen and wine cellar.


Enter TOBY. TOBY. Shall your horse have any oats, Sir?


OLD PRANKS. Yes, Sir; but if you please, Sir, I Will see him eat them myself,
Sir; for if the poor beast is cheated, he cannot even summons us to a court of
conscience.


Ex. TOBY. Stand to look at a horse eating corn! Ecod then you must be main
fond of seeing other folks at dinner.


Exit. Enter YOUNG PRANKS, and KITTY BARLEYCORN in a genteel traveling dress.
YOUNG PRANKS. Have you forgot any thing in the chaise, Ma'am?


KITTY. Oh dear! yes, (searching her pockets.)


Enter POST BOY. BOY. You dropped this.


Exit. KITTY. Oh Lord! my book of ballads that I bought at Blandford.


YOUNG PRANKS. A divine girl! -- but what the devil does she want with a book
of ballads? (aside) -- Really Miss don't you go any farther?


KITTY. Why no, Sir. -- Lud I hope he will not find out that my father keeps this
inn here, (aside.) -- Sir, I wait here, and expect my friends to send a servant
and a horse for me.


YOUNG PRANKS. Oho! then you're fond of riding, I presume, Miss?


KITTY. Oh, yes, Sir, with a pillion.


YOUNG PRANKS. Oh! -- behind a -- Heavens! that I was the happy servant to ride
before you.


KITTY. Could Not expect a gentleman like you, Sir. -- Dear, I Am afraid my
father or Toby will come out to expose me, (aside.) Then, Sir, you're going on
to Weymouth?


YOUNG PRANKS. Yes, Ma'am, my feet, head, body, and hands, but my soul remains
at -- What Is the name of this village, Miss?


KITTY. I really don't know, Sir, -- though I was born in it,

(aside.)
YOUNG PRANKS. I wonder, do we change horses here, or get another chaise?


KITTY. I fancy, Sir, you change the carriage. -- Lud! I wish it was ready, and
he would go off, though when he is gone, I shall be indeed unhappy.

(aside.)
YOUNG PRANKS. Miss, will not you take some refreshment? we'd best -- step in. --
Permit me the honor of accompanying you.


KITTY. (Aside.) Oh dear! then he finds out who I am, and will despise me. --
Why no, Sir -- my grand papa's servant may be now waiting, and he is a very
cross crusty grumps, if he would see a gentleman with me.


YOUNG PRANKS. Eh! what is going forward yonder up the hill? a race here I
believe.


KITTY. Oh! yes, Sir, for the silver cup. -- Dear! what a fine thing 'twou'd be
for father to win it. Our parlour customers love to drink out of silver.


YOUNG PRANKS. Customers!


KITTY. (Aside, and confused.) Oh, Lud! -- I mean, Sir -- my papa -- likes a
race. Sir, your most obedient humble servant.


YOUNG PRANKS. Madam, (they part with great ceremony and tenderness.)


Exit Kitty into the house. YOUNG PRANKS. Oh, by Heavens! she is a cherubim! a
good fortune, I dare say -- thinks me rolling in gold. Ah! she will be in all the
fashionable blaze of Weymouth, and should I see her, I must sneak out of the
way with my empty pockets.


Enter PEREGRINE. PEREGRINE. I was right enough -- it is Tom Pranks.


YOUNG PRANKS. What! my worthy Cambridge Johnian, George Peregrine? ah! how
do you do?


PEREGRINE. Ah! but Tom, what has brought you here? what are you on?


YOUNG PRANKS. I Am on air, fire -- Are you on a visit down here?


PEREGRINE. Visit! no, at home; I Have a sort of little lodge hard by, at which I
shall be very happy to see you; but, come, what brought you down here? To see
Mr. Whimmy's gardens!


YOUNG PRANKS. Whimmy! who is he? You cannot conceive what a variety of high --
low -- jack -- and game, since the morning we parted at the Shakespeare, you in
a post-chaise for Dover. I in a phaeton for New Market, just run a horse at
Blandford -- lost -- best of the fun, I Am at this moment a prisoner in the
King's Bench.


PEREGRINE. A prisoner in the King's Bench, and 122 miles from town? Why, Tom,
you have skipp'd out of bounds indeed! Come, how?


YOUNG PRANKS. Why you may suppose, George, that my expenses far exceeded my
uncle's allowance -- thought to help out by a lucky hit now and then, so bought
a blood mare, had her put in training, then entered for the plate at Blandford
-- a beautiful thing -- the crack of the caurse -- but before the meeting, a
few positive mechanical rascals thrust me into the King's Bench -- must go to
Blandford though, so procured the rules, and in hopes the turf could bring me
in money enough to pay my debts, off I spank'd for Dorsetshire, and, spite of
informers, appeared on the course. The opinion seemed all in favor of my mare;
but, like a cursed green horn, I withdrew her from the plate, and made a
by-match to run her against Lord Skelter's sour-crout, to ride ourselves -- but
after the first round, my infernal groom told me I carried too much weight,
slung part away, came in first; but my Lord insisting on our being again
weighed, I was too light by a pound and an half, so that though I won, I lost
the race; two hundred to my Lord; in short, every guinea of a full five hundred
that an honest methodist preacher, my landlord in the rules, raised to equip me
for the expedition.


PEREGRINE. Ah, Tom! I thought when you and I were at Cambridge together, your
scampers to Newmarket would turn to this at last.


YOUNG PRANKS. Certainly it is life, my boy. -- You were always a dead fag, and
I was a blood. You know I never could prevail on you, even then, to make one of
our toxophilite club.


PEREGRINE. But where are you going now?


YOUNG PRANKS. Can you tell me? Dem'me if I can tell you. -- Sir, I was
distressed -- distracted -- I --


PEREGRINE. Ay! but Tom, your mare, -- as she won --


YOUNG PRANKS. She Is gone; sold her for five hundred -- went to dinner, tucked
three bottles under my girdle -- hopp'd off as steady as old time to the
assembly, laughed at the minuets -- tol lol, (mimicks) adjourned to a snug
hazard party -- lost every face -- rolled into the street at eight in the
morning -- saw a carriage at the Greyhound door -- pretty girl all alone --
finding it was a return chaise, stepped in without knowing whither bound -- had a
most delectable chat -- a lovely creature -- single -- hither we have come --
she is there -- I Am here -- she is an angel with a great fortune -- I Am a dog
without the price of a collar.


PEREGRINE. Ha! ha! ha! Well this is a most curious detail of your adventures.
Tom you hav'n't heard, perhaps, I Am going to be married to the heiress of the
Castle yonder?


YOUNG PRANKS. Indeed! this is your muzzing for a fellowship.


PEREGRINE. But will not you return to the King's Bench?


YOUNG PRANKS. No! cannot do that; they would never let me out again.


PEREGRINE. Yes; but if you're found out here, it will be worse: what will you
do?


YOUNG PRANKS. What will I do? Damn it, you're always putting me to the
mathematics: fling by your Euclid, and you tell me what I shall do.


PEREGRINE. Ha! ha! ha! the very thing for you, Tom, ha! ha! ha!


YOUNG PRANKS. Plague of your sneer; what are you at?


PEREGRINE. Read that paper.


YOUNG PRANKS. Paper! what is this? (reads an advertisement which is posted up
against the sign post.) A liberal offer. -- A person wanted to sit dressed as a
hermit in the hermitage of very capital gardens: on condition of his attendance
for seven years, he will be entitled to a gratuity of two thousand pounds, and
three hundred a year for the remainder of his life. -- For particulars inquire
within. -- Eh! what is all this about? Hermit!


PEREGRINE. Tom, why suppose you apply for this.


YOUNG PRANKS. Me! what I turn hermit? -- Pooh, nonsense! a high go, faith.


PEREGRINE. Will your uncle pay your debts?


YOUNG PRANKS. He! I Have got a hint 'twas he threw me into prison. -- No! never
shall I touch an ounce of his.


PEREGRINE. A couple of thousands -- three hundred a year for life!


YOUNG PRANKS. Oh! but how would it tell among one's friends? mine are all
bloods, my dear.


PEREGRINE. While you can keep pace with them in flash and expense: but drove
into a corner by sickness or poverty, there they leave you.


YOUNG PRANKS. Three hundred a year --


PEREGRINE. If you think it an object, I Will answer for your getting the
situation.


YOUNG PRANKS. What else can I do? for when I came into this village, I didn't
know which way to turn my face; back to London I cannot go; I Will have it -- two
thousand! three hundred a year! I Will have it. Tol, lol.


PEREGRINE. No, but stop -- can I believe that you would continue seven years?


YOUNG PRANKS. Seven thousand! Be independent of uncle -- dressed up in a gown
and long beard, dam'me, I Will be a fine old bald-headed buck -- besides the
change of person, if the marshal should send constables down here after me --
the very thing!


PEREGRINE. Stop in the house a few minutes and I Will acquaint Mr. Whimmy.


YOUNG PRANKS. Do, tell him I Will be a hermit, a pilgrim. (Sings.)

In penance for past folly,
A Pilgrim blythe and jolly.

Exeunt. Young Pranks goes into the house. SCENE II. A Room in the Inn.
Enter BARLEYCORN. BARLEYCORN. Oh! the gentlefolks that came from Weymouth by
water; they seem to have got a sousing.


POZ without. POZ. All your fault, Bite.


BITE (without.) Mine! 'twas yours, Mr. Poz.


Enter POZ and BITE. POZ. You know you would not let the sail be up.


BITE. If it had we should have tipp'd over, been knocked against Durdle Door
rock, as they call it.


POZ. I know better; we should have skim'd like a swallow -- boxing about three
hours in dabbling oars.


BITE. I wish we had dinner; I Am proud to say I Am quite peckish.


POZ. Ay! you peck'd all the way at the ham and cold fowls.


BITE. We were so blown about -- the wind sharpens one's appetite.


POZ. I know better -- we came upon a party of pleasure, and had nothing but
crosses and wrangling. Keep your temper like Mr. Apathy yonder.


BITE. Aye! because Mr. Apathy's a man of fashion, his absent insipidity is
thought agreeable.


Enter APATHY and LADIES. FIRST LADY. Water excursion! horrid!


APATHY. And this is a party of pleasure, (yawns.)


FIRST LADY. Some vulgar club-room, I suppose.


BITE. This the president's chair.


POZ. Aye, it just suits a fat beadle.


APATHY. So it does. Will you please to sit, Ma'am, (hands it to First Lads.)


FIRST LADY. Offer me a great chair, indeed.


Enter KITTY. KITTY. Oh! that dear sweet gentleman -- from his having such fine
running horses, he must be certainly some great squire. Heigh ho!

(sits in the great chair.)
FIRST LADY. Pray do you know this young lady?


BITE. Miss, will you take a glass of negus?


BARLEYCORN. I ax pardon. Miss, will you be kind enough to go boil the lobsters
for the company? Dang my buttons, this is letting you go to Blandford races --
I Will buy riding habits and feathered hats for you -- go put on your mob-cap and
whire apron -- there is the keys -- get along.


KITTY. I shall, father; don't be angry. As that charming gentleman does not see
me in this mean situation, I don't care what any body else thinks of me; but
he is far off by this, (aside) What would you please to have, ladies? -- Father,
I hope the gentlemen haven't been long waiting. Here, Toby, I Will look to every
thing myself, father; don't make yourself uneasy.


Exit. FIRST LADY. Oh! then, good man, that is your daughter?


BARLEYCORN. Yes, Ma'am, that is my daughter.


FIRST LADY. You shou'dn't suffer her to give herself such airs before people.


BARLEYCORN. True, Ma'am, that is all along of an aunt of her mother's --
leaving her a little budget of money -- makes the saucy slut independent of me.


Enter YOUNG PRANKS. YOUNG PRANKS. I ask pardon, I fear I intrude?


POZ. Oh! no, Sir, we dine in this room; but we were just on the wing to see
the gardens, come.


Enter FISHWOMAN. FISHWOMAN. Master, I be's poor woman, brings fish to
Blandford; Mrs. Pooley, at the Greyhound, sends you this, you had forgot there,
(giving a small portmanteau.)


YOUNG PRANKS. Yes, faith, here is my jockey dress -- there you beauty (gives
money.)


Exit woman. Enter TOBY. TOBY. If one of you gentlefolks be called Lawyer Poz,
and be come from London to breed disturbances, there is a mon would talk with
you.


POZ. Any man that talks to me, must pay for my talk to him. Where?


Exit, Toby follows. YOUNG PRANKS. Landlord, I have now seen since I came here
two such females, one, the finest woman in the world -- and --


FIRST LADY. Sir, you should always except the present company.


YOUNG PRANKS. Madam, I ask pardon -- and the other the most ordinary I ever
saw, except the present company, (bows.)


APATHY. I like a party of pleasure, come Madam. (Takes Barleycorn by the hand.)


Exeunt all but Young Pranks. YOUNG PRANKS. Yes, I recollect this Attorney Poz,
and a very litigious scoundrel he is too. Eh! they sell wine in our ale house
-- waiter! (rings) -- the charming young lady by this is with her friends.


Enter KITTY, ( in a plain dress, with a bowl in her hand.) KITTY. Did you
please to call? this brandy and water for you, Sir? -- Oh, Lord! I shall sink
with shame,

(aside.)
YOUNG PRANKS. My dear, if you please to get me -- Eh! why it is certainly she?
could she have so much deception? but I Will not distress her, (aside.)


KITTY, (confused.) Sir, I -- I -- the -- the waiter -- shall bring -- you what
-- you want.


YOUNG PRANKS. Poor thing! I feel her confusion from my soul, (aside) I -- do,
Miss -- Ma'am -- my dear -- I -- I -- dam'me but I Am as much confused as
herself! I -- hem! -- Irang the bell.


KITTY. Yes, Sir -- you called -- I thought you called -- you wanted --


YOUNG PRANKS. Yes, my dear, I wanted -- that is it. -- Curse me if I know what
I wanted, (aside). Her modesty gives me some hope that this may have been the
first little art she was ever guilty of.


KITTY. Toby! bring the gentleman the -- the -- Sir, you shall have it
presently.


Exit with emotion. YOUNG PRANKS. You most delicate piece of artful loveliness!
-- now is she the maid or daughter of the Red Lion? the daughter she must be.
Oh! ho! now I see her wish for the silver cup -- dam'me I wish I could win it
for her. I Have my jockey dress here ready ( puts his hand on the valise.) and
would ride, but a horse is necessary. This lovely impostor -- such a fair
cheat! old Grumps waiting to bring her to grandpappa! a very good offer that,
faith, ha! ha! ha! Oh! this has clinch'd it. I Will turn hermit for
one-and-twenty years, if only to be near this beautiful hypocrite.


Enter SKIP. SKIP. Sir, I believe you are the gentleman -- Mr. Peregrine's
compliments, would be glad to see you up at my master's.


Exit. YOUNG PRANKS. Very well, Sir! I Have a mind to ring the bell again for
another look at this charming girl -- girl! true, I Am a hermit.

"In penance for past folly,
"A pilgrim blythe and jolly."

Exit singing. END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I. Before the Inn.
Enter from it TOBY and POZ. POZ. WELL, where is this man?


TOBY, (looking about.) He Is not in the road, nor he is not in the house, nor
he is not in the stable, nor he is not in --


POZ. Zounds! I don't want to know where he is not -- where is he?


TOBY. Here be the very mon.


POZ, (looking out.) Eh! what Ham Bar^bones, the Methodist preacher, informer,
pedlar, money-lender, broker, old-clo^^hs-man, in the way of my profession a
most choice friend; the conversation between him and I will not admit of a third
person. (To Toby) Has your master no call for you? but you must stand grinning
here.


TOBY. Yes, Sir, I Have the knives to rub, and dinner-tables to set out; but I Will
be in the way, for I know when a lawyer comes down here amongst us, he soon
cuts out work for the constable.


Exit. Enter BAREBONES. POZ. Ah! Master Barebones, so far from London, how do
do?


BAREBONES. Lives -- as much as honest folks can do nowadays.


POZ. I know better, my old friend; you will live where an honest man will starve.


BAREBONES, (canting.) Vhen I vas a coal-heaver, my face vas a black angel, but
my inward man vas as vhite as a vhite wall that is vhite.


POZ. Plague o'your canting to me! any business? Come, to it.


BAREBONES. I am a tender Christian, and vith my money I did relieve the poor
by lending it them.


POZ. On good interest.


BAREBONES. I did take care of myself; I did lend five hundred pounds to a
young Muster Pranks.


POZ. What! are you telling me this? Was Not it I that threw him into the King's
Bench for you?


BAREBONES. As he received the money by a third hand, not knowing I vas the
creditor, vhen he got the rules he did take lodgings in my house in St.
George's Fields; I did advise him to run away, he did; then I did tell the
Marshal.


POZ. But I suppose, as you knew where he went, you will try to re-take him for
the reward.


BAREBONES. I Will do that thing. 'Twas to run a horse at Blandford races that
made him run from his bail. Don't you know him?


POZ. No! when I send a man to quod, it is enough for me if my bailiff knows
him. Lucky for you finding me here; I come down to Weymouth on business; as I
shall charge my client three guineas a day for my traveling expenses, I
thought I might as well give my wife a little country air and a sea-dip -- left
her behind, ill at Weymouth, when I came upon this water excursion to see Mr.
Whimmy's improvements. Barebones, I Am in genteel company, so don't seem to know
me -- Oh! yonder I see they are going into the gardens; you and I will talk over
this affair.


BAREBONES. You are encompassed with the wicked -- I am moved by the spirit.


Exit Barebones as in ejaculation. POZ. Ha! ha! sanctified muns and rogue's
heart.

Exit.
SCENE II. A magnificent Garden, with Statues, Fountains, etc.
Enter WHIMMY, ( repeating with great exultation) "I build, I plant whatever I
intend,
"I rear the column, and the arch I bend,
"I swell the terrace, or I sink the grot,
"My taste refined" --
The company flocking in already to see my gardens; that tough old bully Pranks
will not even pay me the compliment. I must have a good supper for him though, or
he will do nothing but quarrel -- give orders to Mrs. Maggs, my housekeeper,
about it. Oh! here she is. Since I set her to show my house and pictures, it
has given her such a consequential -- all talk herself, but never listens to
any body else, always dinning in my ears the grandeur of the last people she
lived with; nothing but the family of the Olmondles.

Enter Mrs. MAGGS. WHIMMY. Mrs. Maggs, you must --


MRS. MAGGS. Well, Sir, I know that very well.


WHIMMY. What, before I tell you! a gentleman sups with me tonight.


MRS. MAGGS. Well, Sir, I know a gentleman sups with you.


WHIMMY. Ay! you know now I tell you; and I Will have --


MRS. MAGGS. Well, Sir, I know what you would have.


WHIMMY. Before I tell you! I must be sure have a brill and variety of other
fish.


MRS. MAGGS. Well, I know you must have a brill, and variety of other fish.


WHIMMY. Certainly you know when I tell you. Besides all other wines, as my
friend is a London soaker, have some of my oldest port, some bottled porter,
and a pipe.


MRS. MAGGS. Well, I know you must have bottled porter and pipe of port.


WHIMMY. Now you know nothing at all about it -- go along.


MRS. MAGGS. Ah! when I lived with Squire Olmondle, he never bid me go along.


WHIMMY. Stupid wise fool!


MRS. MAGGS. Ah! the Olmondles! that was the genteel family that knew how to
treat a housekeeper like a gentlewoman.


WHIMMY. Damn the Olmondles! I detest the very name; it grates my ear like
cutting of cork -- a teasing ninny! you know all, will not let any body else know
any thing, and after all know nothing at all. Mrs. Maggs, step and bring me
word.


MRS. MAGGS. Certainly, Sir, I Will bring you word -- (going.)


WHIMMY. Of what now? See if the young man, the hermit that I hired --


MRS. MAGGS. Well, Sir, I know that.


WHIMMY. Ay! you know that and this -- and after that, Mrs. Maggs, you must --


MRS. MAGGS. Well, Sir, I will, you may depend upon it.


Exit. WHIMMY. Now what will she! never knew one of your professed, notable,
clever women worth a penny in a house, but to say all and do nothing. Where Is
my -- Oh! Tully, my Irish gardener?


Enter TULLY. Tully, have you placed my new hermit yet at his post?

TULLY. Ay! faith, and he started for the post; for as I led him through the
paddock yonder, up he jumps upon a little horse, and away he scampered as if
the devil was before him, round the fish pond.


WHIMMY. My hermit galloping round a fish pond! Tully, tomorrow you may go
with the other servants to Wool Fair, but today you must brush up all your
eloquence for your post of Ciceroni to describe the attic urbanity of my
English Tusculum here. But mind, Tully, I command you not to take a penny from
one of the company.


TULLY. A penny! not I, Sir: but may not I take half-a-crown if they offer it?


WHIMMY. No. Gentlemen suffering the public to pay their servants wages, and
turning their own houses into a Sadlers Wells and a Royal Grove, is mean. I
never paid for seeing pictures in palaces and grape vines in gardens, that I
didn't blush for the disgrace thrown upon the dignity of the owner. Is the
water party come that stopped at the Red Lion?


TULLY. Yes, Sir. Mrs. Maggs is now showing them the house. Ah! she told them,
that the picture of Mary Magdalen was Mrs. Molly Olmondle.


WHIMMY. A most horrid --


TULLY. Sir, don't fret about that woman; you know in the showing way I Will
bring up your credit with a wet finger; Mrs. Maggs will insist that this is a
pyramid -- now pray, Sir, is not it an obsticle? I must go and put on my
Wednesday's fine suit of clothes that you gave me to show the gardens in. --
What country fellow's that stalking about the walks -- only I Am in a hurry to
dress myself, or by my soul I Would knock his head against the gateway.


WHIMMY. Stop, Tully, pray remember the names and characters of the several
antiques.


TULLY. I Will tell 'em of your anticks.


Exit. WHIMMY. Obsticle! my anticks! very ignorant this said Master Tully; I
must watch how you go on with your description. -- Poor Peregrine thinks he
marries my daughter tomorrow, I Have scarce the heart to kill him with the
disappointment. -- I should like to come at the people's real opinion of my
gardens and improvements.


Enter a WAGGONER, ( whistling and staring about.) WHIMMY. Were you desired to
walk in here?


WAGGONER. Noa! 'twas my own fancy.


WHIMMY. Why then it is my own fancy that you walk out again.


WAGGONER. Ah! if I thought I could not do that I shou'dn't have comd in, I can
tell thee.


WHIMMY. What! keep your distance.


WAGGONER. I wool; because, at the same time, you keep yours --

(A laughing without.)
WHIMMY. Oh! the company. I wish to hear how Mr. Tully performs his office of
orator. If I could mix amongst them without being known -- this clodpate's ha^
wig, and frock, may do it -- you have no objection to a draught of strong beer
and a slice of beef?


WAGGONER. Noa!


WHIMMY. (Mimicking.) Noa! then come with me.


WAGGONER. I wool.


WHIMMY, (turns to look at him.) Do! (mimicking.)


WAGGONER. Yez.


Exeunt. Enter TULLY, in a suit of tarnished laced clothes and a bag wig, with
a small white rod in his hand, followed by BITE, POZ, APATHY, BAREBONES, and
LADIES. TULLY. Hem! my Lady, this is counted the finest place in all Ireland --
England I mean.


BAREBONES. Pagan wanity!


SECOND LADY. What noise is this under ground?


TULLY. My Lady, its the succedaneous river of black Tartary; it creeps over
sticks and stones like an eel, hops like a trout, and then jumps like a salmon
up the rocks yonder; then it sails away so gay into the sea like a maiden ray.


BAREBONES. (Apart to Poz.) I Have spoken with the post-chaise boy that did drive
a gemman and the girl of the alehouse to the village here, and by the
description it is young Mr. Pranks, the man ve vants.


POZ. (Apart.) The parish constable is the waiter at the Red Lion, engage him
to arrest -- hem!


Enter WHIMMY in a waggoner's frock, etc. WHIMMY. I don't think they can know
me -- now I shall hear how my gardener performs his office, (aside.)


BITE. What figure call you this?

(points to a statue.)
TULLY. Ay! you're a nice figure to come thrust your nose into the company of
ladies and gentlemen, (to Whimmy.)


BITE. No! I mean this.


TULLY. That Is Venus, the goddess of medicine -- a pretty employment I Have got
to throw away my roratory and knowledge to divart such dirty blackguards as
you. (to Whimmy) -- this is --


WHIMMY. Apollo of Belvidere, (apart.)


TULLY. Ay! that is Poll the bell-weather, that run after Daphne, and was kicked
out of heaven by Jove, (I Will be free) and so turned cow-boy to --


WHIMMY. Shepherd to king Admetus, (apart.)


TULLY. Ay! they will all meet us; but who bid you put in your prate?


FIRST LADY. Heavens! who is that?


TULLY. That is -- that is, (confused) -- that is, my Lady -- I don't know what
it is myself, (aside) -- Why, your Honor, it is not a watch-box, nor it is not a
wheelbarrow, nor it is not a --


WHIMMY. (Whispering.) Minerva -- Pallas.


TULLY. It Is not a palace, or a cake-house -- I wish you would hold your gab -- you
made me say it was a watchbox just now -- why it is marvle, it is all made of
marvle.


SECOND LADY. But the lady marvles who 'twas made for.


TULLY. Oh! 'twas made for my master; he bought it from the stone-man.


POZ. Is it like? --


TULLY. I Am glad you like it.


FIRST LADY. This I suppose is --


TULLY. Not at all, my Lady, it is, it is --


WHIMMY. (Apart.) Saturn eating his child --


TULLY. Yes, Ma'am, it is the child eating citron -- will you hold your prate,
(to Whimmy) -- this, gentlemen and ladies, is --


BAREBONES. Idolatry!


TULLY. What is it? Pooh! Now had not you best all teach me instead of I
larning you! You see, your Honor, he has a flute in his mouth.


WHIMMY. Such a damned Irish plough-ploy!


TULLY. Ay! "The Irish plough-boy that whistled over "the lea," that is the man.


POZ. Cursed stout fellow this, Who is he?


WHIMMY. (Apart.) Hercules of Farnese.


TULLY. It Is not bare knees, but big knees and big legs, -- that is the tired
paver resting himself on his stone paving-stick.


WHIMMY. Oh heavens! I Have sent to Italy for a fine purpose,

(aside.)
TULLY. But I Am talking here by word of mouth, when I might say it all in
reading, as I have it by heart from my describing-book -- now I desire you will
hold your tongues, for if you talk, you will put me out; please your Honor, hem!
( takes out a book and looks at it) "These gar" -- Oh! now I go on velvet;
These gardens, which are now the admiration of the larn'd and curish, were once
a barren flat, like Salisbury Plain, till Mr. Humphry Freak Whimmy, Esquire. gave
forty thousand pounds for the old castle and lands, turned the course of the
river through them, and with Roman taste and British magnificence --


APATHY. (Advancing.) Pray, friend, (looking at his watch) what o'clock is it?


TULLY, (confused.) Roman -- half an hour after one -- two -- Roman -- two --
Roman -- breeches -- hem! -- breeches -- British magnificence -- the river --
in the old castle -- ran! -- round the lands. The curish -- of Salisbury
Plain. The devil's in this man, and his what o'clock is it? He Is put me all out
-- so I must -- my describing book. (Takes out his book, wets his thumb, and
turns over the leaves hastily, and vexed.) Bri-tish mag-ni-fi-ci -- Oh! here it
is. (Looking and reading.) Having first traveled to see the ancient beauties
of Italy, I-I-taly -- I -- (Looks again.) Italy, (Puts the book behind his
back.) and selected with classical -- Ah! ah! classical -- Ah! damnation!
(Thrusts the book into his pocket.) These gardens which are now the admiration
of the larned and curish, were once a barren flat like Salisbury Plain, till
Mr. Humphrey Freak --


APATHY. Oh! my -- Pray, my friend, does Mr. Freak take snuff?


TULLY. Yes, blackguard -- till Humphrey Freak Whimmy, Esquire -- Humphrey,
Esquire -- Salisbury Street -- pooh! -- the Plain -- larned and curish -- river
upon the old castle -- land turned -- aboat -- about --


FIRST LADY. Why the orator's in a hobble.


TULLY. Orator Hobble -- oh! the devil take -- I was sailing on like a young
swan, till this fellow comes with his snuff box. (Very quick.) These gardens,
which are now the admiration of the larn'd and curish, were once a barren flat
like Salisbury Plain, (drops the book, stoops to pick it up) till Humphrey
Freak Whimmy, Esquire, gave forty thousand pounds for the old castle, (Apathy
picks it up) and lands round it. (Looks at Apathy.)


APATHY, (opens and reads.) Turning to the left you wind through a most
delicious shrubbery.


TULLY, (confused.) Humphrey Freak -- a barren flat. My master's a flat.


APATHY. You reach the labyrinth. (Reading.)


TULLY. Like Salisbury Plain.


APATHY. So intricate that you're puzzled to get out. (Reading.)


TULLY. I Am puzzled to get out -- I Am out -- Humphrey Whimmy --


WHIMMY. Damned blockhead!


TULLY. Is a damned blockhead.


ALL. Ha! ha! ha!


TULLY. Well, ladies and gentlemen, I don't wonder at your laughing at my
master's nonsense in laying out so much money on the balderdash you see round
about you here. But, ladies and gentlemen, though my master's a fool, you will
remember my trouble, I hope. (Stretching out his hand.)


WHIMMY. Not a farthing. (Apart to him.)


TULLY. Why a didn't expect any thing from such an ill-looking beggarly whelp
as you. Will you walk out of the grounds, if you plaise, Sir? The next thing
you're to see is --


WHIMMY. An aviary and pheasantry.


TULLY. Yes, my master's knavery and pleasantry. Then there is King Pluto's
Tartary -- then my master's Elysian Fields -- then my master's hanging wood,
where my master will hang himself, and then the hermitage.


WHIMMY. If the new hermit's not ready, he will disgrace me as much as my worthy
gardener has done. (Going.) I must be sure. --


TULLY. Oh! stop -- you and your farthing. Pretty manners to walk out before
the gentlemen and ladies, that know how to pay their money.


BAREBONES. The spirit does whisper, "Ham Barebones arise, "and speak the word
to thy deluded brethren." -- Down, accursed Dagon. (Pushes down a statue and
stands upon the pedestal.)


TULLY. Why, then I suppose you think yourself a fine Roman bust. The devil's
in your assurance to cock yourself up there! If you plaise, you will walk down.


BAREBONES. Brethren, I vas a coal-heaver, but on the stony cage where I now
stand, I have brought you some biscuits, baked in the oven of charity,
carefully consarved for the chickens of the church, and the sweet swallows of
--


(A sudden noise without of falling water.) TULLY. Oh! the devil! -- If what
o'clock hasn't pulled up a sluice. Half the garden will be overflowed; and we
shall have the carp and tench dancing among the daises.


Exeunt hastily several ways. SCENE II. Another part of the Gardens, with the
view of the Outside of an Hermitage.
Enter KITTY BARLEYCORN. KITTY. The race is over, and I not see it. Since this
dear gentleman is obligated to take a hermit's place, he cannot be angry at my
playing off the fine lady upon him -- In there he sits.


(Points at the hermitage.) Enter at the side YOUNG PRANKS in a loose coat,
with a silver cup. YOUNG PRANKS. Huzza, my girl! the day is yours.


KITTY. The gracious! --


YOUNG PRANKS. Tully left me in the hermitage -- slipped out again -- flung off
my gown, beard; and girdle -- had my jockey-dress that I rode in at Blandford
ready under it -- the poney I found younder; had first tried it though -- spank
up the hill -- four poor jades ready to start -- a village race -- horse, mare,
colt, or filly -- I was entered -- rode myself -- won. Huzza! the glorious
prize is yours. (Gives her the cup.)


KITTY. What a wild gentleman! Sir, don't think little of me for the fib I told
you this morning.


YOUNG PRANKS. No, my sweetest, when a man's heart is set in a flame by such a
charming girl as you, it is not a cup of tea that can extinguish it.


KITTY. Would you have a cup of tea, Sir? -- la! Sir, you hav'n't dined.


YOUNG PRANKS. Oh! yes, my dear, I did -- yesterday.

(Aside.)
KITTY. It Is Mr. Whimmy's way not to allow the hermit any dinner on the day
when the company's expected: but, ecod, you shall not fast while my father's house
affords a dinner. (Aside.) -- But, what did you come down here and turn hermit
for?


YOUNG PRANKS. For love of you, my dear -- dying for you these five years.


KITTY. Sure!


YOUNG PRANKS. Never saw you before this morning. (Aside.) -- (Looking out.)
The very Lady I danced with at Blandford assembly! -- My love, a gentleman
comes yonder with whom I must talk politics. Kisses her.)


KITTY. The deuce is in you for a hermit.


Exit. Enter DIAN. DIAN. I -- I wish my father, with his other changes of
humor, would give up this fancy of resigning the house thus to strangers;
people, one don't know who, every Wednesday here come stamping and staring
about -- even my dressing room is not my own.


YOUNG PRANKS. My charming angel, to meet you here!


DIAN. Bless me, Sir, you! -- I hope you're very well, Sir?


YOUNG PRANKS. On a visit here?


DIAN. No, Sir, this is my father's house.


YOUNG PRANKS. Her father's house! -- Oh! here may be another crusty old
grumps. And hem! my dear, you love riding on a pillion, like Queen Elizabeth
going in state.


DIAN. Sir!


YOUNG PRANKS. I mean -- your parlour customers like to drink out of silver.


DIAN. Parlour customers! -- But the unexpected honor of seeing you here!


YOUNG PRANKS. Merely for admission to you, my angel; I Have hired as your
father's hermit -- dying for you ever since we parted -- a fine creature -- but
demme, if I ever thought of you since. (Aside.)


DIAN. I thought you then a rattler, and find I was right, -- but don't tease
me now with nonsense, for I Am really distressed.


YOUNG PRANKS. Eh! Peregrine's intended, distressed! eh! -- how? tell me -- you
may. Why, my dear Ma'am, I Am -- you don't know, perhaps, that I Am your
Peregrine's most intimate friend.


DIAN. Was it, indeed, you I saw just now arm-in-arm with him? -- Oh! then you
don't know, perhaps, that my father, after giving his sanction to the addresses
of a young gentleman in the neighborhood, now suddenly changes his mind, and
insists upon my marrying the nephew of some old friend of his. -- Yonder Is
Peregrine, (looking out) he hasn't yet heard this unlucky news.


Exit hastily. YOUNG PRANKS, (whistles.) My friend, Peregrine's intended sposa;
I had hopes, that if he got this lady and her fortune, he might tip me a
thousand pounds, without a seven year's imprisonment in the old gentleman's
hermitage; but borrowing money is throwing water upon the warm heart of
friendship. (Laughing without.) 'Sdeath, the company! -- I must now earn my
annuity. -- Heh! is that Kitty gliding through the bushes? -- a most dear
dangerous little Barleycorn this. Marriage is all out of sight, and, without
it, to take all a simple young girl's innocence may bestow, would be, indeed,
giving life in my breast to the worm that never dies.

Goes into the Hermitage.
SCENE III. The Hermitage.
Enter KITTY, with meat and drink for YOUNG PRANKS, and knocks at the door.
KITTY, (singing.) "Fair Ellinor came to Lord Thomas's bower,
"And pulled so hard at the ring," --
Are you within, Mr. Hermit?


Enter MRS. MAGGS. MRS. MAGGS. This poor hermit mus'n't sit here, and have no
dinner. My master has got so crusty with me of late, that I Am quite weary of
looking after other people's concerns; and as our young lady's to be married
tomorrow, this will be no place for me. If I could get a man to my mind, I Would
keep house for myself, and this handsome fellow is just to my liking. --
Besides, my conceited son, Natty Maggs, is soon out of his time; he shall have
a father to thrash him, when he gets saucy to me.


KITTY. The hermit's Wednesday allowance is roots and cold water, but --

"None so ready as Lord Thomas,
"To let fair Ellinor in."

MRS. MAGGS. What are you doing here, Kitty Barleycorn?


KITTY. O Lord! Mrs. Maggs the housekeeper! Ma'am, I was going --


MRS. MAGGS. I know you was going. Child, do you know the danger of a young
woman like you, resorting to this lonely place, where this new-come hermit sits
with his books, and his skull, and his cross bones? Do you know, Kitty, that
this hermit may be a ramscallion?


KITTY. Yes, Ma'am -- to be sure, Ma'am -- Thank ye, Ma'am --


MRS. MAGGS. What have you got there?


KITTY. A little eatables and a little drinkables.


MRS. MAGGS. For this Mr. Tom?


KITTY. Yes, Ma'am. (Curtsies.)


MRS. MAGGS. Then you were now going to see him?


KITTY. Yes, Ma'am. (Curtsies.)


MRS. MAGGS. And you would have heard some love nonsense from him?


KITTY. Yes, Ma'am. (Curtsies.)


MRS. MAGGS. And you think me very impertinent for interrupting you?


KITTY. Yes, Ma'am. (Curtsies.)


MRS. MAGGS. Child, take example from me -- Do you think I Would sit there alone,
to eat and drink with any strange hermit?


KITTY. Yes, Ma'am. (Curtsies.)


Enter JOHN, with a Tray of covered Dishes. JOHN. Mrs. Maggs, here, I Have
brought the dinner.


MRS. MAGGS. What dinner? -- Go along!

(Apart, confused.)
JOHN. Why, the roast fowl for you and the hermit, as you ordered me.


Exit. KITTY, (mimicking.) Child, do you know the danger of a young woman, like
you, going into this lonely place? Do you know, Mrs. Maggs, that this hermit
may be a ramscallion? -- Ha! ha! ha!


Exit. TULLY, (without.) Now, if you plaise, your honor, don't walk upon the
grass beds.


MRS. MAGGS. Oh!

Steals off.
SCENE IV. Inside of an Hermitage. Young Pranks discovered in his Hermit's
Dress at a Table, with lamp, skull, bones, large book, and jockey whip.
YOUNG PRANKS. A hermit should have been my last trade. Tol de roll lol. How
devilish well Slingsby kicked the tamborine. (Holds up a wooden trencher and
kicks at it.) Zounds! (Runs suddenly and seats himself at a table.) Eh! Nobody!
-- I wish that gander, Tully, would bring his flock of staring geese, till I
get down again to play with my little lamb at the Red Lion. Old Whimmy on the
other days, it seems, stints me to a bottle. Dam'me, what is two bottles to me?
how many have I won, by jumping over the table at Medley's? By'r leave pair and
his nob. Puts the skull and bones by, is going to jump, but sits down suddenly.)


Enter TULLY, BITE, and LADIES. TULLY. The hermitage, plaise your honor.


FIRST LADY. Is this your anchorite!


TULLY. My Lady, I didn't hear he was an anchor-smith. He Is old Father Anthony.


YOUNG PRANKS, (repeating in a tremulous tone) Here I may sit and rightly tell
Of all the stars that Heaven does show
And all the herbs that sip the dew,
Till old experience --

TULLY. Aye! what signifies your old experience, man, with your beard across
your forehead? What the devil have you been about with your indecency? -- Now,
if you can but sit quiet, Tom, just while I explain you. (Apart.)


YOUNG PRANKS. Tom! -- I Will break your head.

(Apart.)
TULLY. Will you? arrah, man, I Will break your two heads, plaise your honors.

(Apart.)
Enter WHIMMY, ( in the Carter's Dress -- Tully stares at him.) WHIMMY. My
sarcophagus defaced, -- my Hercules thrown down, -- my labyrinth overflown!
Now, but let us hear how Tully and my new galloping hermit go on.

(Aside.)
TULLY. Gentlemen and ladies, this is a hermit. Here he lives, and never stirs
out of this lonesome grotto. -- Hide your boots, you devil, you. To Y. Pranks.


WHIMMY. What! not taken off his boots?


TULLY. What Is that to you? -- you have come in here too. Here he always sits at
his prayers, all alone by himself, and nobody with him, and never sees a human
soul.


YOUNG PRANKS. Tedious fool! -- I Will quicken him though with a touch of the
rippers.


TULLY. He Is so meek and quiet. (Y. Pranks spurs him, he jumps up.) Oh!
(Alights on Whimmy's toes.) He eats nothing but herbs.


WHIMMY. And wild berries.

(Apart to Tully.)
TULLY. And gooseberries! What, you will be putting in your jabber. Lives on
roots and fruits.


BITE, (uncovers a tray.) Nice roast fowl, faith!


TULLY. Man, what bewitched you to spoil my descriptions? (Apart to Y. Pranks.)
and drinks of the pure --


WHIMMY, (apart.) -- Purling rill.


TULLY. He dosn't drink purl and gill. The hermit drinks nothing but --


WHIMMY. (Apart.) Mere element.


TULLY. A mere elephant!


WHIMMY. (Apart.) The limpid brook.


TULLY. I Will make you a limping rook, if you don't hold your -- He drinks
nothing but --


WHIMMY. (Apart.) Water.


TULLY. Aye! this hermit drinks nothing but clear rock water.


BITE. I Am proud to say, this is (takes up a bottle and drinks) devilish good
wine.


TULLY. Wine and roast chicken! why you did it on purpose. (Apart.)


YOUNG PRANKS. I wish, whoever left them, had told me.


TULLY. Though he is a clean, well-behaved old man.


YOUNG PRANKS. Say gentleman, you rascal. (Apart.)


TULLY. Oh! be aisy. An't you an old saint? (Apart.)


WHIMMY. These two villains muttering and quarrelling!


(Aside.) TULLY. He neither uses napkins, nor plates, nor knives, nor forks.
All his household furniture is in the empty trunk of that hollow tree. That Is
his cupboard; and there he keeps his wooden dish and his little pitcher.


BITE. Ah! well let us -- (Goes toward it.)


TULLY. There! you see his bed is the moss, and the herbs and the innocent
simplicities of the earth. Go, you! (Pushes Whimmy, who falls on the leaves.)


KITTY. Ah! (Squalls out and discovers herself under them.)


FIRST LADY. So! is this the hermit's simplicity?


BITE. And this, I am proud to say, is his little pitcher. (Pulling Mrs. Maggs
out of the tree -- The company laugh.)


YOUNG PRANKS, (aside.) A smart dinner -- a pair of women! and I sitting like a
grave owl!


Enter BARLEYCORN. BARLEYCORN. I Have followed you, dang my buttons! -- So you have
com'd up here after this new hermit.


KITTY. O father! you're the cruel stepmother.

(Barleycorn takes her off.)
BITE. Well, this is --


MRS. MAGGS. Yes, Sir, I know it is as you say. I have my reasons, as Mr.
Oldmondle says.


Curtsies round and exit. TULLY. Arrah! Tom, is this like a hermit, to have
Kitty and Mrs. Maggs? What do you stand shaking your fist at? (To Whimmy, who
is threatening.)


Enter APATHY. APATHY. Mr. -- what is it, has a pretty looking poney in the
paddock yonder; but I Would run my brute against it for fifty pounds.


YOUNG PRANKS. Done, damme! and I Will ride myself. (Suddenly flings off his
hermit's gown, and appears in a complete jockey dress.) Zounds! I forgot -- but
since it is so, hey! -- we start! -- the way -- knees tight -- toes in -- spur
out -- carpet ground -- slow gallop -- crack -- take the lead -- tough at
bottom, the other horses wind rakes hot -- slack girt -- want a sob -- down ears
-- whisk tail -- up nose like a pig -- rattle whip -- give a-loose -- push for
it, hey! all to fortune, the way, the way.


Exit running, and cracking his whip. TULLY. Holloa! stop, Tom; come back till
I explain you out!


Exeunt all but Whimmy. Enter PEREGRINE. PEREGRINE. Sir, here is --


WHIMMY, (in a rage.) Sir, could not you find any man in England to make a jest
of but me? How dare you, Sir, introduce such a rascal as that? He a hermit!


PEREGRINE. Sir, I Am very sorry.


WHIMMY. I lay out forty thousand pounds, and then such a scoundrel to get me
laughed at by the world! but, you marry no daughter of mine. A good excuse to
quarrel and put Pranks's advice into practice. (Aside.) You did collect some
valuable things to be sure, but your taste's not confirmed. You shall travel
again; make another seven year's tour; and, by Heavens! not till you return
will I give you my daughter.


PEREGRINE. Sir! sure you cannot have the cruelty -- Sir, only think.


WHIMMY. I Am determined, will not hear a word.


Exit hastily. PEREGRINE. But, Sir!


Exit following. END OF ACT THE SECOND.
ACT III.
SCENE I. The Gardens.
Enter OLD PRANKS. OLD PRANKS. TO consider on the plaguey news this puppy, my
'prentice, has brought me; he too gaping at Whimmy's raree show. -- Natty Mags.
(Calling.)


Enter MAGGS. MAGGS. (Looking about.) Beats Kensington hollow! -- make a smart
Vauxhall! -- wants an orchester -- caskade -- a handsome box to eat custards.


OLD PRANKS. The Marshal of the King's Bench --


MAGGS. Yes, Sir, as you desired, he gave your nephew, young Mr. Tom, the
rules; but he is run away. The Marshal's best respects, Sir, has got information
he is down in these parts; a man's come after him; but he would know if you would have
him caught and cag'd up again.


OLD PRANKS. A mad dog; but like me


MAGGS. Yes, Sir, he is a sad rascal.


OLD PRANKS. What! -- after all I have done for him -- ingratitude is worse
than --


MAGGS. A face without cheek whiskers.


OLD PRANKS. Whiskers!


MAGGS. Sir, I was only saying -- by the description, Mr. Tom rattled off from
Greyhound door at Blandford for Weymouth with a pretty girl in a post-chaise.


OLD PRANKS. Weymouth! I Will have him -- Step you and fetch my horse up from the
inn, sirrah! Stop, I Will go myself.


Exit. MAGGS. Fetch his horse, sirrah! As Kit Cateaton says, the time's out for
sirrahs and scoundrels -- cracks over the sconce with canes -- I Am not an
apprentice now, to breakfast on cold scrag of mutton and small beer -- retiring
from table after dinner with one glass of wine; I Am not an apprentice now. I Will
no more punish my half ounce at the playhouse, than 'fraid to cry up, or cut
down the new piece over a pint and an oyster, but thank the footman for letting
me in, and sneaking softly up stairs with my shoes in my hand, and my hat in my
pocket, to my flock bed in the attic. -- Your authority over me is out, and
I Will let you know it too, old Bounce. -- I Will let him and every body know that
I am out of my time. -- Nobody's boy; but my own man -- and dem'me I Will set up
for myself. Eh! hey! --


Enter KITTY. KITTY. For the soul of me I cannot bide at home while this
delightful Mr. Tom the hermit is here.


MAGGS. One of the family! Servant, Ma'am, (respectfully) my dear, when in
town, my mode to fetch a rural saunter, cross Holborn before breakfast to
Bagnigge Wells, cull the newspapers, give a twiggle on the organ, and take a
tiff of rum and milk. Shall I thank your pretty good nature?


KITTY. Sir, if I had you down at our house, we keep the Red Lion.


MAGGS. Red Lion! -- How do you do, girl! (familiarly impudent) My dear, my late
master, Mr. Pranks of Lombard Street, a friend of Mr. Whimmy's, they have agreed
that young Mr. Tom Pranks --


KITTY. La! I heard Mr. Peregrine call my hermit by some'at like that name.


MAGGS. I suppose every body knows he is to marry the lady of this house.


KITTY. No, Sir, it is the young lady of our house he is to marry; but I don't
set up for a lady either; though when dressed like, sooth, all the folks here
allows that somebody would make a good sort of a lady. Aye! all except Mrs.
Maggs; -- but she is jealous and envious.


MAGGS. Mrs. Maggs! who is she, pray?


KITTY. The 'squire's housekeeper.


MAGGS. Oh! the devil! true, my very honored mother, her last letter, which I
never answered, said, that she was coming to live with some old rich East India
Quiz in this very part of the country, (aside.) She Will claim me as her son; but
I Would sooner be found playing at skettles at the Devil and Bag-o'-nails. -- Oh,
zounds! yon is indeed my very mamma (looking out.) -- She Will be for calling me
her son, and her dear boy Natty. But dem'me, as Kit Cateaton says, I Am just out
of my time; nobody's boy, but my own man. Eh! hey!


Exit. KITTY. Mr. Tom really a gentleman after all? going to be married to Miss
Dian? -- Ah! that is because she has fortin. -- I shall break my heart.


Enter YOUNG PRANKS. YOUNG PRANKS. Ah! my cherub --


KITTY. Ay, Sir, now that you're going to get this great fortin by marrying --


YOUNG PRANKS. Marrying who! Mrs. Maggs?


KITTY. (Aside.) Then he hasn't yet heard -- and you would really wed poor humble I?


YOUNG PRANKS. Wed! Eh! Why, my love, I -- I -- love you to be sure, and --
we'll walk and talk together, and when tired we'll sit and rest ourselves in
the hermitage, my love. Tol de roll lol, I love you so, oh! my divine creature!
-- Distraction! -- Rose buds! -- Sun beams -- and pretty birds! Come; but such
innocence. -- I Am in a humor now -- I Will not venture into the hermitage,
honor and humanity forbid it. (Aside.)


KITTY. Sir, since you're so good as to think of a poor girl like me, you
sha'n't demean yourself for want of being informed that you may have Miss Dian
and all her wealth.


YOUNG PRANKS. I have Miss Dian?


KITTY. Yes, Sir, it is agreed upon.


YOUNG PRANKS. By whom?


KITTY. Miss's papa and the old gentleman -- Mr. -- Mr. -- Lud now I Have forgot
the name again.


YOUNG PRANKS. (Aside.) Cannot be my uncle? -- Was it -- but drop my name -- may
get about; and if the knabbers should follow me -- no, no, it cannot be me. --
However, her intention is charming. -- Kitty kiss me, you're a lovely -- a good
girl -- and for your disinterested generosity in revealing a circumstance that
you supposed might rob you of me; for I will be vain enough to think you're --
a -- little -- partial -- toward -- a certain ordinary fellow, (fondling.) --
I owe you eternal gratitude.


KITTY. (Sprightly.) Oh, then you are -- but my joy that you're not to have a
lady and a fortune is very ill-natured of me. Don't you think so?


YOUNG PRANKS. Oh! you sweet -- (kisses her hand.)


Enter BARLEYCORN. BARLEYCORN. Dang my buttons, go home and sweeten the punch,
and squeeze the lemons. -- Come and handsell your silver cup; you're an honest
lad, I must say; but if you want any chat with my daughter, you must come to my
house for it, good Master Hermit.


Exit with Kitty. YOUNG PRANKS. Well, if a publican will keep the sign of an
angel, there a saint may take his bottle, (sings)


"In penance for past folly,
"A pilgrim blythe and jolly."
Exit. SCENE II. Before BARLEYCORN'S.
Enter KITTY (in high spirits) and BARLEYCORN. BARLEYCORN. Come, now do, child,
mind the business.


KITTY. Oh! I Am so happy! -- I Have yet some hopes that this dear -- Father,
though he is a hermit, he is a gentleman too.


BARLEYCORN. Well, I Would be a gentleman if I Would nothing else to do.


KITTY. I forgot my singing, I don't know how long, since I Have seen this sweet
fellow, (singing)

"A young gentleman she saw."


Enter TOBY and JOHN GRUM from the house. TOBY. (Singing.) "Who belonged to the
law." -- Measter, I Am now constable. -- Miss Kitty, you like bachelors of every
station.


KITTY. Dearly!


BARLEYCORN. Do you? it is that new come Mr. Tom has brought you to this; so if
he does marry you, let him keep you to himself an he can.


KITTY. (Sings.) "Being at a noble wedding,


TOBY. (Sings.) "In the famous town of Reading." (ringing within.)


BARLEYCORN. Od dang you both, am I to be rhim'd and ballad sung, and the
business of my house all -- Will you go?


KITTY. (Sings.) "If she is rich you will rise to fame."


TOBY. (Sings.) "If she is poor you are the same." (ringing within.)


BARLEYCORN. Will you go?


KITTY. (Sings.) "She was left by a good grannum."


TOBY. (Sings.) "Wed me, Sir, or else I Will fight you."


BARLEYCORN. You Will fight me? Dang my buttons I Will fight you, and knock you to
the devil, you idle rascal; I Will sing and ballad you, (beats him) and you, you
baggage!


KITTY. Father, I believe you're uncle to the Babes in the wood.


TOBY. You're the old barbarous Blackamore.


BARLEYCORN. I Will (makes a blow at Toby) -- Get in you jade, (puts her in, and
exit.)


TOBY. Oh! Jahn Grum, here be the mon that sent for us.


Enter BAREBONES. BAREBONES. According to Lawyer Poz's advice, I Will have young
Muster Pranks apprehended. -- You be's a sinner and a publican.


TOBY. I Am no sinner, and only sarvant to the publican. Eh Jahn, I Am a bit'n a
parish constable though, 'twas said you wanted to attach som'en, wa'n't it Jahn?


JOHN. Hum!


BAREBONES. I does. Seize him; he run'd out of prison, Thomas Pranks is the man.


TOBY. Oh! Thomas Pranks's man.


BAREBONES. I thought him a sarvant of grace.


TOBY. Oh, he thought him a sarvant out of place, do you see, Jahn.


JOHN. Hum!


BAREBONES. I followed the chap with this here varrant, I be's coom'd from
Babylon after him.


TOBY. Babylon! oh, that mun be in Barkshire.


BAREBONES. Great London itself. Thou seem strong in flesh, is the spirit
with thee?


TOBY. Don't valley the devil his self, when I Am doing my duty, no more does my
assistant, Jahn Grum, doey?


JOHN. Hum!


BAREBONES. There bee's description of his parson, (gives paper.)


TOBY. Measter Barleycorn would know if you will eat dinner at Red Lion. -- You
may bring company, for we have entertainment for mon and beast -- An't we Jahn?


JOHN. Hum!


BAREBONES. Get a good dinner for me, for I loves to eat and drink of the best.


TOBY. You're a genteel mon -- (apart to John) Jahn, he will be as drunk as a
tinker, then I comes chalk double on him. Eh, Jahn!


JOHN. Hum!


TOBY. Oh! the Squire, (looking out.)


WHIMMY. (Without.) Where did he run -- (Enters) Oh, you are the canting bawler
that broke down one of my statues, (to Barebones.)


BAREBONES. I had an inward call.


WHIMMY. Curse your call!


BAREBONES. He does put it in mine head, with the same act, to comfort my flesh
and do a good vork, I will get myself an appetite fore dinner with disbolishing
this man's idols in his groves and high places.


Exit. WHIMMY. If you are still a constable, why didn't you take that dangerous
leveller into custody?


TOBY. I munna, he be the planter, and walks at large where he list; but I Am
going to catch the defender, and I Will bring his body and soul before your
worship, in sasararo. -- Come, Jahn!


JOHN. Hum!


Exeunt. WHIMMY. This prancing hermit has so deranged and jumbled all my
schemes of elegant magnificence -- No attention to my old friend Pranks; my
daughter not yet prepared to receive his nephew -- the final dismission not yet
given to Peregrine -- Lucky that the rest of my household is in train, that all
my servants are sober and regular. -- An't this my fine Irish orator? (Retires.)


Enter TULLY ( with a mug in his hand.) TULLY. Upon my soul this hermit is no
better than a bad man, that he cannot stay there at his business, where he has
nothing to do but sit quiet -- Oh fie, to come here drinking in a public house!
(Drinks.)


Enter COACHMAN. WHIMMY. And my coachman! --


COACHMAN. Ah! Master Tully, I saw you go out at the gate, and so out of pure
good nature I followed you, to give you a little hint, that if Master hears you
left the gardens today, you may chance to lose your place; besides, coming
here to booze is not quite the thing. (Drinks.)


WHIMMY. My daughter's footman too!


Enter SKIP. SKIP. Eh, waiter!


Enter BARLEYCORN ( with a mug.) The negus I ordered, a gill of wine, some
water, sugar, and a lemon.

BARLEYCORN. Why, for wine, (...) out the license tomorrow; the man is to call
n^xt Wednesday with the lemons; my daughter Kitty has lost the key of the
sugar-chest; nobody drinks water at Red Lion, so I have brought you a mug of
ale.


Exit. WHIMMY. (Advancing.) Hey! you scoundrels, what are you at here with your
mugs?


SKIP. Sir, I came to look for coachman.


COACHMAN. And I came to bid the gardener drive home.


TULLY. And, Sir, I came after the hermit, because he came before me.


WHIMMY. You most stupid --


TULLY. Stop, Sir, what sort of talk is that, I Am stupid? faith, and that is a
sacret, Sir, Sir Isaac Newton never found out. Sir, I Am a gardener, and though
I do dig, I Am not a spalpeen potatoe-boy -- I Have read big books of bo^amy, and
the Millar's Dictionary and Cyclopaddy's. Didn't I graft a mayduke upon a
kackagay apple tree then in my hot-house. Didn't my Lord (when he breakfasted
with you) pull from the same tree a cannister of Hyson tea and a basket of
Seville oranges? A'n't my flowers so sweet that the hives round the country are
empty, and the swarms of bees come in a grand congregation into your gardens,
humming every body with their bagpipes, so discreet all in their black bonnets
and their yellow velvet breeches?


WHIMMY. Men! rascals! I wish I could, like the Great Mogul, be attended only
by women. Ay, one comfort, my female servants are diligent and sober.


TULLY. Faith, Sir, and here is the head of your female servants coming in very
sober here; but how she will get out, for I don't think her business here is to
drink tea.


MRS. MAGGS. (Without.) I will find him.

(Enters.)
WHIMMY. Mrs. Maggs, did you want me or my coachman?


MRS. MAGGS. No, Sir, it was the hermit brought me here.


WHIMMY. Why, I think --


MRS. MAGGS. Yes, Sir, I know you think.


WHIMMY. 'Twas the hermit brought us all here.


MRS. MAGGS. He Is come after Kitty -- and my love for him is --


TULLY. He Is a ramping devil.


YOUNG PRANKS (without.) (Singing.) "With cockle shell on hat brim."


TULLY. There he hops over the bush like a jackdaw


WHIMMY. Stop him!


Exeunt all but Whimmy and Mrs Maggs. What vexations! Now, my dear Mrs. Maggs,
I Have found out that Tully is a worthless man, my whole dependence of showing my
fine place is upon you.

MRS. MAGGS. Now that is so like Mr. Olmondle.


Exit Whimmy hastily. Bless me! here comes this most delightful young man. I
protest his very approach brings all my blood up in my face, my heart throbs,
-- and my limbs -- I Am such a poor creature -- so faint -- I must sit, (goes
into a porch at the door.)

Enter YOUNG PRANKS. YOUNG PRANKS. Come out there, you most delicate
loveliness, my darling rose bud.


MRS. MAGGS. (Rises and appears.) Oh, dear Sir -- (simpering.)


YOUNG PRANKS. By the lord, this is my little pitcher again.


KITTY. (Unseen, whips out of the door, and taps him on the shoulder.) Mr.
Thomas!


MRS. MAGGS. A'n't you ashamed of yourself, Kitty Barleycorn?


YOUNG PRANKS. Come, my dear creatures, you mustn't --


MRS. MAGGS. Well, I know we mustn't --


YOUNG PRANKS. What, Ma'am? Don't quarrel about me, zounds! I Am like a stately
peacock between a pheasant and a turkey hen.


KITTY. La! you're so wild --


MRS. MAGGS. But he is very merry, he! he! he!


YOUNG PRANKS. Wild! merry! my whole life has been one frolic.


MRS. MAGGS. Ay, I dare say, when you were a boy --


YOUNG PRANKS. Such diversions! altering the numbers of doors to puzzle the
postman, at Christmas in a stage coach changing the directions of geese, hares,
and turkeys, with a bit of chalk and charcoal making a whole room of family
portraits squint down upon every body.


MRS. MAGGS. I vow you must not come and see our pictures.


KITTY. La! he is so pleasant! Well, and ah, Mr. Tom!


YOUNG PRANKS. My sweet creature, I came to hansel the silver cup. Hey! a
bottle of port and a roasted orange! Ladies, I vow on the honor of a hermit,
I Will treat you with a bishop.


Exit into house. KITTY. Toby! (calling.)


Enter OLD PRANKS. OLD PRANKS. Eh! where is this young dog my prentice, bad as
my mad nephew. Waiter! my horse.


MRS. MAGGS. Sir, you will return to sup at our house.


OLD PRANKS. Foolish Dick Whimmy to have no dinner! plague of his gardens, in
his ponds plenty of carp and tench, that nobody dare fling into a drying pan;
on his green slopes, neither grass lamb nor asparagus, and for flocks of geese
and chickens, there a peacock struts, or an eagle perches, that instead of any
body eating him, by the Lord, looks as if he would eat us. My dear, I Am going to
Weymouth, could not you give one a snack.


KITTY. Oh! our bill of fare, Sir, (going.)


OLD PRANKS. (Stops her.) As fine a bill of fare as ever I looked on, (gazing)
what dish shall I choose -- a white forehead, a brace of black eyes, garnished
with long auburn eye-lashes, two rosy cheeks, cherry lips, my desert.


KITTY. A pity, Mr. Thomas, to disguise his fine hair and delightful shape, in
that long old beard and gown. La! Sir, what a choice hermit you would make for Mr.
Whimmy; you would be a nice bald-headed buck, as Tom says.


OLD PRANKS. I a bald-headed buck! don't you see I wear my own hair, child?


Re-enter YOUNG PRANKS. YOUNG PRANKS. I Have brewed the bishop. Eh! what old
fellow -- so smooth with Kitty -- Sir, a word if you please, (twitches off Old
Pranks's wig) -- Zounds, my uncle! (runs off.)


OLD PRANKS. Stop that scoundrel, (runs after him.)


Bell rings violently, Kitty runs into the house. Enter MAGGS walking hastily.
MRS. MAGGS. Oh, Heavens! my son Natty!


MAGGS. Mamma! she has me, but I will not be disgraced, (aside, and turns.)


MRS. MAGGS. My dear child, who could think of seeing you down here, (he turns
from her, and walks.)


MAGGS. Any business with me, Ma'am?


MRS. MAGGS. Why, my dear! Don't you know me, Natty?


MAGGS. Zounds, Ma'am, don't Natty me!


MRS. MAGGS. Will Not you speak to your mother?


MAGGS. Who are you talking to, Ma'am?


MRS. MAGGS. Look at me -- my own child deny me, (puts her handkerchief to her
eyes, and walks up.)


Enter TOBY and JOHN GRUM. TOBY. John, is that the young man you saw?


JOHN. Hum!


MAGGS. (Looking at his watch.) I shall be late with my party, (going.)


MRS. MAGGS. Stay, my dear boy!


MAGGS. I Am nobody's boy, but my own man, he! he!


TOBY. Seize him, (to John) Your name? (to Maggs.)


MAGGS. What of it?


TOBY. What is it?


MAGGS. What it was yesterday, and will be tomorrow.


TOBY. Mind how he shuffles; do ye see it, John? Tell me your name tomorrow,
(to Maggs.)


MAGGS. Musn't, because of mamma. (aside.)


TOBY. You belong to Mr. Pranks.


MAGGS. Supposing so.


TOBY. Then I suppose you're my prisoner.


MAGGS. Me! for what!


TOBY. You broke out of jail in Babylon, but we'll handcuff and send you to
Dorchester.


MAGGS. (Aside.) Handcuff! Broke jail in Babylon! Ay! why surely they take me
for Tom Pranks! -- I Am not the person you want.


TOBY. I arrest you.


MAGGS. I Am not the man indeed, my friend.


TOBY. Who answers for you? who knows you?


MAGGS. Then I must own mother -- let me go, this gentlewoman here is my
honored mamma.


MRS. MAGGS. (Aside.) A wicked wretch, first to deny, and now to own me in his
distress!


TOBY. Mrs. Maggs, be he your son?


MRS. MAGGS. Oh! no, he is no son of mine.


MAGGS. Nay, my dear mamma.


MRS. MAGGS. Sir, don't mamma me; who are you talking to? (mimicking.)


MAGGS. Ay! why sure, sweet mamma! --


TOBY. Stop; you see, my friend, it will not pass. John, look he don't run away,
while I read description of his parson, (takes out paper and reads) five feet
eight inches tall, an expressive eye, pleasing features, good complexion, fine
teeth, show your teeth, (to Maggs) a handsome countenance --


MAGGS. 'Pon my soul this description's very much like me though.


TOBY. Well-made, a genteel deportment; upon the whole, an elegant figure.


MAGGS. Amazing! what a picture of me!


MRS. MAGGS. Astonishing like the child indeed.


TOBY. You see it is you.


MAGGS. No, it is such another handsome fellow, but really not me.


TOBY. Come, I arrest you with a little tap, (trips up his heels) hold his
legs, Jahn, that he may not kick I.


MAGGS. Damned uncivil this!


MRS. MAGGS. I cannot bear to see him treated so -- let the child go, you
fellows!


TOBY. Yes, the child shall go -- to prison.


MRS. MAGGS. You're wrong, he is my son.


TOBY. And just now you said -- Ay, I see how it is, Measter Butler told me that
Mrs. Maggs locks herself in her own room, and there drinks the presarved
apricocks -- Jahn don't mind, Madam Maggs is so fond of talking she will say any
thing -- bring him along.


MAGGS. Sir, gentlemen constables! mamma! kind country justices! mother! (Toby
holding him by the head, and John by the legs, they drag him off.)


MRS. MAGGS. Why, you horrid villains, you shall not! -- my child!


Exit after them. SCENE III. The Gardens. Statues thrown down, and broken
fragments lying about; shrubs and plants, as pulled up.
Enter BAREBONES, ( with a broken statue.) BAREBONES. I will complete the good
work; lay there accursed, (throws it down on a heap) and I will pulls up thy
groves, and I will root thee out of the land, (pulls plants out of pots, and
flings them about.)


Enter BARLEYCORN. BARLEYCORN. Sir, your dinner's waiting. (Aside) Dang my
buttons! here is a fine kick-up! what rascal could have got in here -- some one
that owes the 'squire a grudge.


BAREBONES. I Have been doing of the job, 'twas all pagan wanity.


BARLEYCORN. So it was, Sir, and you were right to capsize it.


Enter KITTY. KITTY. Oh! father, I shall go distracted; I Am sure it is my
beloved Tom that they are taking prisoner to Dorchester, yet so cruel not to let
me see him.


Enter TOBY. TOBY. I Have left the prisoner in safe custody with Jahn Grum.


BAREBONES. (Aside.) Then I brings him up to town, and lodges him with the
Marshal.


KITTY. Oh heaven! tell me, Toby, is it the hermit?


TOBY. No.


KITTY. It is he.


TOBY. It Is not though -- why you're as bad as Mrs. Maggs, who just now said he
was her son, and he was not her son -- there is description of his person, (gives
Kitty a a paper.)


KITTY. (Reading with emotion.) Handsome, elegant, fine teeth, expressive eye
-- it is he! you hard-hearted creature -- but I Will release my own true love,
though I beg my bread for it.


Exit hastily. TOBY. Ay now, she too has been drinking apricocks. -- Be's I to
lay the cloth for you in the two-bedded room, (to Barebones.)


BAREBONES. I loves to eat in a parlour.


BARLEYCORN. Why we wish to resarve that for --


TOBY. Parlour! than, Sir, shall not I tap no vind -- he will not inform -- (to
Barleycorn.)


BAREBONES. I drinks vind, for I thirsts after the good things of this world.


BARLEYCORN. That Is right.


TOBY. He Is a wet Christian.


BARLEYCORN. Shall they take up dinner?


BAREBONES. Yes, I hungers after good; I could munch one morcil of Portlin
mutton; yea, one pound and an half, and six, and four, and two wheat ears,
roasted in wine leaves, and other settries of niceish saver.


Exit with Toby. BARLEYCORN. (Looking out.) The 'squire -- dang my buttons,
here'll be work.


Exit. Enter WHIMMY, ( looks at the broken Statues with amazement.) WHIMMY.
Fury and distraction! what is all here! -- Tully! (calls.)


Enter TULLY, ( a little intoxicated.) TULLY. (Singing.) "They Would be like the
Highlanders eating of kall,
"And cursing the Union, says Granawaile."

WHIMMY. This is your going to the alehouse, here is your brags, here is
yellow-breech'd bees humming their bag-pipes -- but I Will turn over a new leaf,
I Will dig and root out --


TULLY. Arrah, Sir, I wish you would let the leaves and the trees alone! you have
been digging and rooting prettily: what put it into your head to pull up the
plants in this manner?


WHIMMY. My head, there is my dancing Faunus.


TULLY. Oh! I see how this is; you want to keep me only as your show-man, and
take the head gard'ning into your own hands -- the geranums all torn, the
myrtles, and lillies, and laylocks, are all pulled about as if they were old
bean stalks.


WHIMMY. You rascal! what do you talk of your paltry plants -- look at my
statues, none equal to them in the Barbarini gallery.


TULLY. The barber's gallery! Only tell a body what you intend to put down in
the place -- if yourself was planted, the devil a thing would grow out of your
head but potatoe apples.


WHIMMY. Two of my Seasons --


TULLY. You don't know the seasons; you're a gentleman, and you have money to buy
roots and fruits, but I tell you, you don't know an annual from an evergreen. I
got myself finely laughed at today by showing your kickshaws, but I wash my
hands out of it. There Is your describing book (throws book down) and you may
get another Ciceroni magpye to chatter to the company.


Exit. WHIMMY. There Is a villain!


Enter OLD PRANKS. OLD PRANKS. Knock people's hats off -- cannot think who the
fellow was! -- Dick, I Am on the spur to fetch my nephew from Weymouth; an idle
scoundrel! what perplexities he has involved me in! Dolts to apprehend Natty
Maggs for him; these country constables are so obstinate, will not even take my
word: but what sort of wild people have you settled amongst here that pull
folks heads about?


WHIMMY. Yes, heads, legs, and arms, look! (points to the statues.)


OLD PRANKS. (Looking round.) Ha! ha! ha! a good deed however.


WHIMMY. What, to demolish my beauties?


OLD PRANKS. Your modern gardens are art spoiling nature^ fixing up a stone
woman where one expects to find a rosy girl of health, flesh, and blood: if we
must have statues, instead of importing ancient heathen gods into English
meadow, why not encourage British arts to celebrate British heroes? for a
Jupiter by Phidias give me an Elliot by a Bacon: the five thousand pounds you
laid out upon that clumsy Pantheon yonder, would have built a neat cluster of
almshouses, where age and infancy might find an asylum from the pangs of
indigence.


WHIMMY. Why, but Billy --


OLD PRANKS. 'Sblood, when I reflect I owe my present independence to my
education in the Blue Coat School, as I drive my whisky on a Sunday by Dulwich
College, I feel more warmth of affection for the memory of Edward the king, or
Alleyn the player, than for all the traveling cognoscenti in Christendom.
Dick, I love reason.


Enter YOUNG PRANKS. YOUNG PRANKS. A rare chase, but I got from him -- zounds!
(sees Old Pranks, runs off.)


OLD PRANKS. Oh, damme, I Will have you, (pursues.)


WHIMMY. He likes reason, and the fellow's mad; there he runs after my hermit.
Certainly 'twas this savage old Goth committed these barbarisms -- I hope he will
not find his nephew; however, I must prepare my daughter for the marriage.


Exit. SCENE III. Inside of Hermitage. YOUNG PRANKS sitting in his Hermit's
Dress, as if put on hastily.
Enter OLD PRANKS. OLD PRANKS. (Looking about.) I thought I had a glimpse of
him darting this way -- Eh! one of Whimmy's toys -- (seeing Young Prauks)
Father Dominick -- seen a scoundrel run in here -- Do ye hear! can you speak!
-- it was certainly my nephew; a hound! skulking about, and suffer a poor
innocent man to be taken up for him; to be handcuff'd, haul'd, and dragged --


YOUNG PRANKS. An innocent man suffer for me! (throws off his hermit's dress.)


OLD PRANKS. You! Oh you villain! How dare you borrow money about as you have
done!


YOUNG PRANKS. Sir, (confused) I -- I -- borrowed money to get out of debt.


OLD PRANKS. Eh! how?


YOUNG PRANKS. Yes, Sir, to pay my debts.


OLD PRANKS. But why get in debt?


YOUNG PRANKS. All owing to my good principle, the people would trust me, my
character was so excellent.


OLD PRANKS. Then from your excellent character they think you a damned rogue
-- you villain!


YOUNG PRANKS. Dear Sir, discriminate between vice and folly; you are the only
one I ever wronged, my second parent, my friend, my benefactor. Sooner than let
this person you spoke of just now any longer bear the disgrace that I only
deserve, I Will instantly free him by delivering myself up to hopeless
imprisonment, (going.)


OLD PRANKS. Eh! stop you rogue you, consider how terrible a prison is.


YOUNG PRANKS. Lord, Sir, no! the only difference between the people walking by
and I is, that they are on one side of the door and I Am on the other. A prison! to
resign myself to it, now, is barely performing the duties of honesty.


Exit. OLD PRANKS. Surrenders to free the guiltless! Not so bad as I thought
him.


Enter KITTY. KITTY. Sir, I Have been told, since you're a banker gentleman in
Lombard Street, London, you bankers, Sir, have always a great deal of money.


OLD PRANKS. (Aside.) I Have heard of petticoat pads -- a pistol may come out
here! Well, my dear, granting I have money, do you want any?


KITTY. Not myself, Sir; there is a young gentleman is taken up for debt, Sir; I
thought it a pity he should go to prison, as he got out of it before, and that,
you know, Sir, is a sign he does not like it; hard for a person to go where they
cannot be happy.


OLD PRANKS. Upon my word this young lady reasons exceeding pretty -- Well,
Miss?


KITTY. And Sir, my aunt by mother's side, has left me three hundred pounds
independent of my father, here are the papers, Sir, all about it, Sir, if you would
be so kind as to advance the money, and transact the business of releasing the
young gentleman with it, I Would be very much obliged to you, Sir, (curtsies.)


OLD PRANKS. Here Is a charming girl! And so, my dear, you think Natty Maggs so
fine a fellow, that you give up all your fortune to release him.


KITTY. Natty Maggs! No, Sir, our 'squire's hermit.


OLD PRANKS. Hermit! She must mean my wild nephew, (overjoyed.)


KITTY. Sir, keep the papers, I know you will free him; you look so good-natured,
I beseech you, Sir, Sir,


curtsies and exit. OLD PRANKS. Tol lol lol, (sings.) The heart of an amiable
woman is the true touchstone of manly merit. This good and delicate creature
loves my nephew, and he must be a worthy lad. The girl, no matter for her
situation, is come of a good stock, and should be transplanted. I didn't, till
now, know my nephew -- I Will forgive, I Will give him all -- Go to the King's
Bench again! that he shall not, while I Have a guinea to keep him out of it, tol lol
lol. Sings and exit.


SCENE IV. A Gallery in Whimmy's House.
Enter YOUNG PRANKS (hastily crossing) and PEREGRINE meeting, (much agitated.)
PEREGRINE. Stop, Tom, whither now?


YOUNG PRANKS. To the King's Bench -- what is the matter? Oh, true, Miss Dian
told me -- upon my soul her father uses you both very ill -- who is this whelp
he is going to give her to?


PEREGRINE. I don't know; Mr. Whimmy has never even seen him.


YOUNG PRANKS. No! An uncle, is not it that is bringing this about? I Have a good
uncle -- but long before he would think of providing me with an heiress -- but then
I Have been such a cursed fellow.


PEREGRINE. One chance, this spark may, as it is a forced thing, (...)
indifferent, and the old gentleman doats so upon his daughter, that were an
emperor to slight her, 'twou'd for ever lose his favor.


YOUNG PRANKS. What Is this uncle's name? -- who, where, what is he?


PEREGRINE. I know nothing about him.


YOUNG PRANKS. Nor old Whimmy neither.


PEREGRINE. I Have never seen him, I told you.


YOUNG PRANKS. Then I Will personate him, and I warrant you disgust the old
gentleman sufficiently to make him break off the match; then, Peregrine, is
your harvest, I Will be with you in a trice. Never be dismayed, Peregrine, when
you admit me as a schemer into your cabinet; for I have turned my coat so often
since I arrived in these parts, that there is no doubt of my being a most
finished politician.

Exit.
Enter WHIMMY and DIAN, weeping. WHIMMY. In vain talking, child; -- I must keep
my first promise.


DIAN. But, dear Sir, will you sentence your child to misery?


PEREGRINE. Sir, you encouraged me with a certainty that I should be the
happiest of men, and now in a moment, to snatch me from Heaven, and plunge me
into an abyss of despair.


WHIMMY. Cannot help it, Dian; -- I must give you to my friend's nephew.


Enter SKIP. SKIP. Sir, here is a young gentleman will see you -- seems in a
piteous taking. Here Is my master, Sir.


(Calling off.) Enter YOUNG PRANKS, disguised like a boy, his hair pulled round
his face, etc. YOUNG PRANKS, (crying.) Oh! I will not have her.


WHIMMY. Ah! who are you?


PEREGRINE. Certainly Tom Pranks. (To Dian.)


WHIMMY. What do you want?


YOUNG PRANKS. I don't want a wife. (Roars out crying.)


WHIMMY. Who the devil cares, whether you do or no -- have you any business?


YOUNG PRANKS. No; I Am a gentleman. My uncle says I must marry your daughter;
but I will not. (Roaring out.)


WHIMMY. Ah! can this be the wild rogue I Have heard so much of? why, your uncle
told me you were another-guess being. Dian, this is your husband. -- How do you
like him?


DIAN, (apart to Peregrine.) I fee this. Sir, if Mr. Peregrine can pardon me,
since you have set your heart on it, I Am resigned to your will, with the dutiful
obedience of a daughter.

(Curtsies.)
WHIMMY. Now, that is very lucky. Peregrine, you see --


PEREGRINE. Then, Sir, since the lady is so very fickle, I resign her with
little regret.


WHIMMY. Ah! this is all very well; then we'll call your uncle; Parson Jack is
in the next room, and you shall be married immediately.


YOUNG PRANKS. But I will not marry, oh! (cries) -- I Will never say, father-in-law,
to such an ugly old fellow as you.


WHIMMY. Why, you damned impudent young scoundrel, dare you affront me, and
refuse my daughter? then let your uncle do his worst. There, Peregrine, take
Dian, and may I be cursed if ever I again attempt to part you.


PEREGRINE. You Will alter your mind again, Sir.


WHIMMY. I Will put that out of my power -- go, Doctor, (calling off) tack that
couple together instantly.


(Puts Dian and Peregrine off.) Enter OLD PRANKS. YOUNG PRANKS. My uncle! oh!
zounds!


WHIMMY. Billy, what bouncing you have kept about this nephew of yours. He, a
buck, and a blood! -- a blubbering milksop.


OLD PRANKS. My Tom a milksop! I say he is a buck.


WHIMMY. I say he is an ass. (Wrangling, Y. Pranks cries out.)


WHIMMY. There Is the buck! a tasteless hound, has been abusing me here, and
refused my daughter.


YOUNG PRANKS. Oh! the devil! am I really the character I only personated.
(Aside.)


OLD PRANKS. Where is he?


WHIMMY. Cannot you see? thrash him for his impudence to me.


OLD PRANKS. Why, ah, Tom!


YOUNG PRANKS. Aye, poor Tom! (Snivelling.)


WHIMMY. By the Lord, it is my galloping hermit! (surprised) and your nephew.


YOUNG PRANKS. (To Old Pranks.) Sir, I now see your goodness; but had I even
before known it, I could not have enjoyed the blessing you designed for me, at
the expense of a friend's happiness. Mr. Peregrine has love and merit. -- I
admire, but don't deserve the lady.


OLD PRANKS. Then, since you're so disinterested as to decline the golden
pippin, I Will give you a sweet wild strawberry.


Enter KITTY. KITTY. O Mr. Banker, have you -- it is he (looking at Young Pranks
with joy) thanky, Sir. (Curtsies to Old Pranks.)


OLD PRANKS. Tom, here is a girl that would have bartered all her little fortune
for your freedom; and now as you hope for mine, take her.


WHIMMY. Why, she is daughter to the Red Lion.


OLD PRANKS. Aye, my honest landlord, that relieved the sufferers, while you
were swallowing peaches in December, and the poor shivering in cold and
nakedness. Red Lion, Dick! where honor's derived from benevolence; she is
daughter to a nobleman. What say you, my girl?


KITTY. Only, Sir, that my heart is filled with gratitude; but you must ask the
Red Lion's consent; for though you were a husband for a queen, I would not have a
prince, if it might grieve an indulgent parent.


Enter TOBY and JOHN GRUM, with MAGGS, (his dress very much disordered and
torn.) TOBY. Your worship, here is the defender is obstropolos, and has licked I
and John Grum.


MAGGS. Aye, dem'me, I plump'd 'em.


YOUNG PRANKS. Was It you, Natty? I Am sorry that my irregularities should have
involved you in this trouble.


Enter Mrs. MAGGS. MRS. MAGGS. Oh! Natty Maggs -- my child to be haul'd and
mauled -- but this comes of your denying me your honored mother.


OLD PRANKS. Haul'd and mauled -- may the son never get better usage who could
deny his parent.


Enter BARLEYCORN and TULLY, bringing in BAREBONES. BARLEYCORN. Dang my
buttons, you shall --


WHIMMY. What Is this?


TULLY. Only this devout preacher walks into Mr. Barleycorn's and crams himself
like a great fowl; then walks off without discharging his shot; when asked,
says he, you will be paid above, and says Mr. Barleycorn, by who there? and says
he, why by Abdiel; so they walked up stairs to me, where I was taking a pint
and a whiff of tobacco. I was christened Mr. Tull^* so I walks down -- but who
ever saw an angel with a pipe in his mouth? I don't mind paying for a man^
dinner; but, Sir, be so kind as to send this geatleman to jall. How do ye do,
Mrs. Maggs?

(Bowing.)
YOUNG PRANKS. My Saint George's Fields landlord!


BAREBONES. The spirit opens my mouth.


TULLY. You opened your mouth to swallow a leg of lamb, honey.


BAREBONES. All things shall be in common with the righteous?


TOBY. Pay me for sarving capias on Muster Pranks.


YOUNG PRANKS. Me! how?


OLD PRANKS. Capias! What, you villain, are you that Ham Barebones that has
lent my nephew money at an exorbitant usance.


YOUNG PRANKS. That, like the devil, tempted me by the means, and now punishes
me for the sin.


TULLY. Talk of righteousness! and bilk the house of an honest industrious man.
(Lays hold on Barebones.)


Enter PEREGRINE and DIAN. PEREGRINE. Mrs. Peregrine (to Whimmy.)


DIAN. Dearest father, your blessing. (They kneel to Whimmy.)


TULLY. There, my blessing on you both, you two souls. (Puts his hand on their
heads.)


YOUNG PRANKS. Then, my dear uncle, I take my lovely Kitty Barleycorn, and
whilst her gentle qualities convince our friends, that birth and rank are not
necessary to constitute an amiable wife, my respect for her virtues may prove,
that the thoughtless prodigal can make a good husband.


WHIMMY. Oh! I Am happy! ha! ha! ha! We Have all got so very generous. Peregrine,
with his little fortune, have Dian and all my wealth; your nephew, with your
riches, takes little Kitty Barleycorn with nothing at all; and ecod, Mrs. Maggs
looks so spruce, that I could find in my heart to -- (going up to her.)


MRS. MAGGS. Now that is so like Mr. Olmondle, (smiling and advancing.)


WHIMMY. Oh! (runs from her.)


TULLY. And now, Mrs. Maggs, you will be drinking the apricocks.


YOUNG PRANKS. Then, Sir, shall we be merry. Here ends my seven years
hermitage, and, instead of my annuity, I shall think myself nobly rewarded, if
my extravagant tricks and fancies can, by an indulgent smile, receive the
forgiveness of my generous friends.


FINIS.
NEW PUBLICATIONS, Printed for J. DEBRETT.
THE LITTLE HUNCH-BACK, or a FROLIC in BAGDAD Written by John O'keefe, Esquire.
Price 1s. JUST IN TIME, a Comic Opera, as performed at the Theater Royal,
Covent Garden, with a Preface and Dedication by THO. HURLSTON. Third Edition.
Price 1s. 6d. THE ROAD TO RUIN, a Comedy, as performed at the Theater Royal,
Covent Garden. Ninth Edition. By Thomas Holcroft. Price 1s. 6d. The FUGITIVE, a
Comedy, as performed at the King's Theater, Haymarket. Fourth Edition. By
Joseph Richardson, (...) The HEIRESS, a Comedy. By Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne. Te^^^
Edition. Price 1s. 6d. FALSE APPEARANCES, a Comedy. By the Right Hon. G^^
Conway. Price 1s. 6d. The FARM HOUSE, a Comedy, as altered by J. P. K^^^^^^
Esquire. Price 1s, MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS, a Tragedy. By the Hon. Jo^^ St. John. A new
Edition. Price 1s. 6d. L'ECOLE de SCANDALE, ou Les Moeurs du Jour, Comedi^^ Par
M. Sheridan. Traduite en Francoise par Mr. Bunel de L^^^^ Avocat au Parliament
de Paris. Price 2s. 6d. The ISLAND of ST. MARGUERITE, an Opera, in two Acts, as
performed at the Theater Royal, Drury Lane. Price 1s. The TEMPEST, or the
Enchanted Island, written by Shakespeare, with Additions from Dryden, as
compiled by J. P. Kemble, Esquire. Price 1s. 6d. KING HENRY V. or the Conquest of
France, a Trag^^^ written by Shakespeare, printed exactly conformable to the
Representation on its Revival at the Theater Royal, Drury Lane. Price 1s. 6d.
RICHARD COEUR DE LION, from the French of M. ^^^daine. Sixth Edition. Price 1s.
6d. The FAMILY PARTY, a Comic Piece, in two Acts, acted (...) the Theater
Royal, Haymarket. Price 1s. ALL IN GOOD HUMOR, a Dramatic Piece as performed
at the Theater Royal, Haymarket. Price 1s. The ENCHANTED WOOD, a Legendary
Drama, in three Acts. Price 1s. 6d. SHAKESPEARE's All Is Well that ends Well,
with Alterations by J. P. KEMBLE, as performed at the Theater Royal, Drury
Lane. Price 1s. 6d.

