THE IRISH MIMIC; OR BLUNDERS AT BRIGHTON: A MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT IN TWO ACTS.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE.

WRITTEN BY JOHN O'KEEFFE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. N. LONGMAN, PATERNOSTER ROW.

1795.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
CYPRESS, MR. MUNDIN. CAPT. CLIFFORD, MR. M'READY. PARROTS, MR. JOHNSTONE.
COLIN, MR. FAWCETT. HARRY, MR. FARLEY. PORTER, MR. THOMPSON.
MISS MELCOMBE, MRS. DAVENPORT. JULIA MELCOMBE, MRS. LEE. LANDLADY, MISS PLAT.
Company, Band, Soldiers, etc.

SCENE -- At Brighton.

TIME -- An evening, night, and morning.

A LOUNGE AT BRIGHTON.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Street.
Enter COLIN with a Basket. COLIN YES, it bes, Harry. Enter Harry in morning
dress, Trowsers, etc. and bathing man.]


Harry. No, I shall not bathe tomorrow. [Exit man.] Every morning relaxes, and we
come down here to brace ourselves up like drums, for the rattle of a London
winter campaign;


Colin. My brother Harry!


Harry. Colin! what brought you here?


Colin. An if you go to that, what has brought you here?


Harry. I came here but yesterday with my lady.


Colin. Oh, then you got a pleace? So did I the very day after we parted in
London.


Harry. Why, that is lucky, the first week you set foot in town.


Colin. No, it was quite misfortunate. My place was so badish, Measter was one
of the show.


Harry. What, an actor.


Colin. Yes, he acted your foreign Opera Plays, in Haymarket.


Harry. What! oh, zounds, ha, ha, ha, then, Colin, you was servant to an Opera
finger?


Colin. Yes, that was it; he got a huge deal of money from our high gentry here
in England; but to save it all, and bring it away with him, he starved himself,
and gave me nothing to eat: I Will be dom'd but he did, for his sallads made me
pick dandelion, and water cresses out of the ditches; then he made maccoroni
which be's just like our hard dumplings cut into long tobacco stoppers; then he
made omlets, and when he used to boil eggs wanted me to sup the broth, a dom'd
Italian son of a sausage, wanted to fatten me with egg broth, so I left him --
oh, I left him.


Harry. Well, who do you live with? Some Sussex Squire, Eh?


Colin. No, I bes servant to a desperate voine lady! Miss Melcomb, from
Lancashire.


Harry. What! (surprised) ha! ha! ha! by heavens exceeding good!


Colin. Now your Mistress's name, Harry?


Harry. Miss Melcomb from Lancashire. -- You impudent puppy, how dare you tell
me you live with Miss Melcomb, when I am certain, I Am the only man servant she
has at Brighton.


Colin. I say I Am her only man servant; and dom your impudence, brother Harry!
a conceited fool! In his trowsers, strutting about like a pair of compasses.


Enter CYPRESS. Cypress. Oh, sure I Have seen you before.


Colin. Yez, sir, before the chair, and behind the coach.


Cypress. You live with Miss Melcomb?


Colin. Now mind that Harry, -- I do, sir.


Cypress. My beloved here? oh, let me fly! -- no, she likes ceremony, my name
first -- (takes out card and writes.)


Colin. But I must go give our cook the Arundel mullets, (goes in house.)


Cypress. (turns) Eh, where is Miss Melcomb's servant?


Harry. (advancing) I Am here, sir.


Cypress. Then you too belong? -- step in with this card to your mistress, and
bring me back an answer; tell her you saw her dear Cypress, and that I look
charming. (Harry goes into distinct house from Colin, Cypress seeing him.)
Never man had such disappointments! it is the business of my life to be kind to
my old friends; to be sure I hope they will leave me something when they die,
but no chance of that; here I suppose they fancy a puff of sea air can restore
their breath, and a mouthful of salt water pickle and preserve them, and ecod
its no fancy, Tom Nibble that I left in town with one foot in the grave, I met
just now with two in a pair of boots. Dick Toothless that I left steeped in
barley broth, I find at Hick's Tavern, peeping at me over a round of beef. --
Lady Squab I parted, hid in a stuffed elbow chair, I met this morning
gallopping over the downs, running a race with a staff officer.


Enter CAPTAIN CLIFFORD. Capt. C. What, Mr. Cypress!


Cypress. Mad Captain Clifford here! -- eh he don't look well, I Will be civil,
(aside.) how do you do a thousand times, my dear, dear, sir?


Capt. C. Never better, thank heaven! just got from our mess; them it, they
drink so hard.


Cypress. I see now he is fresh and florid, find every body I meet in barbarous
health, (going.) Oh, but true, I must wait for an answer from the mistress of
my heart.


Capt. C. Ha! ha! ha! who is your goddess? Come, don't be ashamed to tell! ha!
ha! ha!


Cypress. Sir, I boast of my love for Miss Melcomb, as her love to me is her
greatest glory!


Capt. C. Miss Melcomb! -- Can it be my Julia? (aside.)


Cypress. Yes; I Am the lad of her soul, I Have sent in my name; now you will see
her ardent desire for me to send in myself.


Capt. C. Miss Melcomb's not at Brighton?


Cypress. Then that house is not in Brighton. (pointing to that where Harry
went off.)


Capt. C. My love next door to me, and I not know it!


Re-enter Harry, both seeing of him. Cypress. Well, you delivered my card to
your mistress?


Harry. Yes, sir, but the says the knows no such person. (Exit.)


Cypress. What!


Capt. C. Not know the glorious lad of her soul, (Claps Cypress on the back.)
ha! ha! ha!


Cypress. I desire, sir, you will -- by my honor she is the most --


Capt. C. Hold, sir! Miss Melcomb is a lady for whom I have the utmost
veneration --


Cypress. You!


Capt. C. Yes, I, and for proof I Will indulge you, and in your own way too, I Will
send in my name. (writes.)


Cypress. Not know any such gentleman. (walks about.)


Capt. C. Eh! but where is Miss Melcomb's man?


Enter COLIN from where he went off, unperceived. Colin. Here I be, sir.


Capt. C. Are you her servant?


Colin. Oh, yez, sir, I bes her livery man.


Capt. And perhaps her common councilman.


Colin. Noa, sir, I never durst give her council, though I advised her sometimes.
-- Will you walk in, old gentleman?


Cypress. Old! rascal!


Capt. C. Come, sir, I will not hear even Miss Melcomb's servant abused.


Colin. That Is right, sir, love me, love my dog.


Capt. C. Then carry that in your paw to your mistress. (Exit Colin in the
house from whence he came out unperceived.) Now Mr. Cypress, I don't absolutely
boast I Am quite her glory! but perhaps she will not desire me to send in myself.
Ironical


Re-enter COLIN. Colin. Sir, my lady says, she does not know any thing about the
person that wrote upon this.


Cypress. Ha! ha! ha!


Capt. C. Impossible! by heavens she is the most capricious! -- I see her
duplicity in this seeming denial to Cypress, Julia prefer a sordid rascal to
me! hark'ye, you old raven! your hovering about for legacies is notorious,
through almost every public place in England; you have been hooted out of the
rooms at Bath, drove from the pantiles at Tunbridge, and by heaven, I Will have
you beat off the Steine at Brighton.


Cypress. I beat! ha! ha! ha! well, I should like to see that.


Colin. So should I, sir he! he! he!


Cypress. Rascal!


Colin. He! he! he! Runs off.


Capt. C. I Will have this refusal from Miss Melcomb's own lips. -- No, I Will see
her no more; but, them me, I Will match you Mr. Cypress. Exit.


Enter Miss MELCOMB, in full dress, from the house where Colin went in and out
of unperceived. Miss M. Colin! fetch my parasol.


Cypress. [turns] Oh! here is my persidious Peggy.


Miss M. Those young gentlemen will keep flying after one so, I Am glad I didn't
bring my niece Julia here; no chance of admirers her flimsy beauty in the way.
-- What Mr. Cypress! I protest I Am glad to see, you!


Cypress. Yes, ma'am; you would be glad to see me at Pondicherry, so you were at
the same time upon a Sussex cliff, even from thence, madam, I should behold
you. Love is a monstrous telegraphe: if you had any pity, you could read
without spectacles, that slighted passion is a piteous case.


Miss M. What do you talk to me, sir, of spectacle cases?


Cypress. Then, madam, I Will be round with you: you might have put on your
barnacles, and answered my card.


Miss M. Yours! my servant did bring me a card just now, but not from you.


Cypress. Forgets even my name!


Enter HARRY dress;ed. Miss M. How provoking! here is some gentleman has sent
his servant to watch me about. Aside.


Harry. Now for the library. -- My mistress should have set down more than one
number. Going.


Cypress. Didn't I give you a card for your lady?


Harry. Certainly, sir.


Cypress. And was not her answer that she didn't know the writer?


Harry. Knew nothing at all about him, sir. Exit.


Cylpress. There madam! Oh shame! that a lady can rend a man's honest heart,
and then deny it to his miserable face!


Miss M. What, sir, do you talk to me of cards to ladies; and, sir, I cannot
help your miserable face.


Cypress. You can help, madam, my bleeding heart, that you yourself have given
the fatal stab to! -- But -- I don't care twopence about her: I Will now scorn in
my turn.


Miss. M. Sir, if I have attractions, am I to blame? I didn't make them.


Cypress. Make! no, Miss, you bought your lilies and roses ready made; the
master of the ceremonies at your toilet places them well enough Miss, but if
one was to see them in a morning, there is a cast off, and change sides, Miss:
Where are the lilies? on the cheeks of my Phillis! where is the rose? on her
pretty little nose! Sings.


Miss M. Barbarous, cruel man!


Cypress. Nay now, Miss Melcomb, my dear Peggy!


Miss M. Sir, though I was christened Margaret, I told you I was since
confirmed Seraphina. -- Seraphina is my name!


Cypress. Will you be Seraphina Cypress? taking her hand.


Enter Colin, with parasol. Miss M. Colin, go to the library and ask for the
telescope I chose on my fortunate raffle yesterday. Any messages, you will find
me on the Steine.


Cypress. My dear Peggy --


Miss. M. Sir, be assured Miss Melcomb will never be Mrs. Cypress, Exit with
COLIN,


Cypress. There Is a coquet! All art, her denial to Captain Clifford. Gone to
first with him on the Steine. How have I lost her? Some disgust! Was it when
she pop'd in upon me the other day whilst I was shaving? She desired me not to
mind her, and like an ass, on I went, up to the eyes in fuds, twissting my
features into fifty ugly shapes before, her. When she asked me for her
favorite air, like a fool I must play it on the german flute, and put my mouth
into such an uncomely shape: my attitudes were graceful though! [Imitates.] Love
is gone! Come revenge! But how?

Enter Boy, puts hand-bills under knockers, gives one to Cypress, and exit.
Pshaw! pester me with auction bills! and -- Eh, [Reads.] "Great rooms -- Mr.
Parrots -- Give imitations -- principal performers -- sawing a deal board --
celebrated orator -- two cats in a gutter -- drawing a cork" -- Oh, here is an
occasion for ample revenge on my perfidious Peggy! She has killed me, and I Will
make her ridiculous! Oh, I Will have her among the cats and gutters! Exit


SCENE II. -- The Steine, before Gregory's library -- A view of the sea --
Company walking, conversing, etc -- JULIA, and others reading,
Julia. [To Shopman]. I desired my servant to call for the book. No matter:
I Will take it myself.


Man. [Writing] Miss Melcombe.


Julia. Eh, what Captain Clifford is this? [Looking at book.] My dear Charles
at Brighton! most certain!


Enter Capt. CLIFFORD. Capt. C. Oh, here is Julia! Most obedient ma'am.


Julia. Ma'am -- so cool! well then, your most obedient, sir. Ah, I was once
the loveliest creature in the world: was not I, Charles? Look in my face wretch:
Is not there now somebody else more lovely?

AIR.
I.
I WOULD fain ask you a this, but in steps a that,
Ah! why did you, truant, away from me go?
Yet, not that I Am curious, but merely for chat,
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
II.
What lady detained you? I Am sure she was fair,
Much taller than I am, perhaps full as low;
No business of mine it is -- what color her hair?
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
III.
Pray, was she demure? or coquetishly gay?
The voice of a cherub, or may be so, so?
Her eyes -- I don't ask whether hazle or gray,
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
IV.
But one thing, O, tell me! No more then impart,
Did give her what was not your own to bestow?
Though sure you would not venture to give her your heart,
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.

Capt. C. Why, ma'am, you're very pleasant.


Julia. Certainly; this is the place for pleasure. But how long have you been
at Brighton?


Capt. C. Long enough, madam, to receive proofs of what I never even suspected.


Julia. Don't talk so loud; the people are all staring at us.


Capt. C. Oh, madam, it is your ambition to be stared at, by young and old!


Julia. I was going to take a turn on the Cliff; come, give me your arm, and
let us know what is this mighty business.


Capt. C. 'Pon my honor, ma'am, this is exceeding well -- my arm! then you are
not afraid of meeting old Cypress?


Julia. Now bless your pretty little soul, Charles, who is old Cypress.


Capt. C. Oh, ma'am, that incomprehensibility of surprise is absurd: you first
refused to admit Cyprese, because I was in the way; then, to soften him by a
complete triumph over me, you send me out word --


Julia. I send you out word; of what pray?


Enter COLIN -- Speaks in at shop. Colin. I want the telepope, that mistress
won with the dice-box.


Capt. C. [Stops him.] Oh! I gave you a card for your lady: you brought out for
answer that she did not know me?


Colin. Yez sir. [Exit into shop.]


Julia. But what is all this to me?


Capt. C. Ma'am, you seem very careless about it; but I think it is very much to
you; and Julia, all in all to me: [Tenderly.] therefore, madam, I insist --


Julia. Hold, sir! you forget yourself: Such behavior in a public place?


Capt. C. But, Julia, sure I have a right to demand an explanation.


Julia. Oh, my valiant Captain! To proceed in form: had not you best send me a
challenge? -- but you may take it for granted, sir, whether in resentment or
affection, this is the last time I shall ever give you the meeting. Exit.


Capt. C. I Will flog Grogan! no, the good-natured people round have witnessed my
insulting a woman; they sha'n't add to my disgrace by seeing me beat an old
man! Oh, Julia! at our tender parting did I think to meet you thus?

AIR. -- CAPT. CLIFFORD.
I.
How bitter the moment, with those we hold dear,
When exchanging the tender adien;
I followed you far with my eyes, when a tear
Hid the object I loved from my view.
I pensive retired to forget you; ah, vain!
I found solitude cherished despair;
In company sought a relief from my pain:
Your dear image still followed me there.
II.
Thro'grove, mead, and garden I varied the scene,
With fond hope some repose I might find;
But still a loved spot, where together we have been,
Some loved incident brought to my mind.
When I muse in the grove, there I see your dear name,
That I carved on the rind of a tree,
In a garden I Am charmed with a rosebud, the same,
Whence a flower you presented to me.
III.
I range through the me down attended by Tray,
Once yours: -- his affection is proved
And the linnet's sweet pipe can blessed raptures convey,
When he carrols the tune that you loved.
By moonlight I walk, I enjoy her mild rays,
And this heart soothing fancy pursue:
I think at the instant whilst on her I gaze,
She then may be looked on by you.
Eh! is not this Mr.Parrots, the celebrated Irish mimick? Ha! ha! ha! A capital
mistake in talent his, attempts to imitate every character and dialect the most
opposite; yet, with such an invincible brogue, that when he fancies he speaks
or sings a variety of voices, you can only think yourself in a debating society
at Tipperary,


Enter Parrots and Servant, Parrots. Waiter, prepare me a good breakfast of
some tea and cakes; but if you cannot get three new laid eggs, you may eat them
all yourself. -- Captain Clifford, how do you do, sir?


Capt. C. Ha! Mr. Parrots, true I saw your bills for performance.


Parrots. Yes, sir, I Am come to give my imitations, and have hired a fine big
room; but such a bushel of troubles --


Capt. C. I Am glad you're come Parrots, I wanted something to laugh at, this
place is very pleasant, eh? the Steine, -- and Downs, -- and bathing, --


Parrots. Bathing! oh a blessed affair happened to me, the very day I arrived,
I was so afraid of nobody coming to hear me, that I was about to go back to
London; so I took my place in the machine, but instead of a stage coach, they
put me into a wooden closet, and dragged me into the sea: Hallo! says I, let me
out! Off with your clothes, says the fellow, and tumble out here headlong.


Capt. C. Ha! ha! ha!


Parrots. Well, I thought I Would stay here a few days longer, if only to pick up,
among their bathing shops, and raffling Machines, a new stock of originals; and
faith. I Have been at them eves dropping about every where, why the other night in
the playhouse, I had a Scotch presbyterian calling to the music for God save
the King! A French marquis bawling for Roast Beef! and an Irishman roaring for
Rule Britannia!


Capt. C. Oh, you have him at your tongue's end.


Parrots. Who, the Irishman? now there you're out: he has such a devil of a
brogue, that he is the only person there I cannot mimick neatly.

AIR -- PARROTS.
I AM the man that can take off every fowl,
From the singing Lark, to the barking Dog.
[ Hark! the Lark (mimicks) now the Dog.]
All beasts I can mimick upon my foul,
From the cackling Hen, to the grunting Hog.
[ Tie Hen, (mimicks) the Hog, (mimicks)
All Is food for wit, that falls into my dish,
Like crowing Cock, I Am a fine bird-call,
And yet I cannot well mimick a fish,
Because that a fish says nothing at all.
Burden
At all jolly parties I make a rout,
I Am called for my song; for a joaker I pass;
But some how or other -- I bring it about,
That the people all think me a fine jack-Ass,
II.
At Hanover Square when your Concert plays,
Like them I can Presto, Piano too,
[presto! piano.] I sing and I whistle with so much ease,
The black Crow's neat song, and the tight Cuckoo,
[Lo! the Crow the Cuckoo.] The sawing Boards, and the drawing of Cork,
And water as dropping, drop, drop, drop,
I tune up my pipe, with my great pitch-fork,
At the bottom now, and now at the top.
BURDEN.
At all jolly parties I make a rout,
I Am called for my song; for a joaker I pass;
But some how or other I bring it about,
That the people all think me a fine Jack-Ass.

Capt. C. Ha! ha! ha! this offers something for old Cypress. [Aside.] Mr.
Parrots, if you shou'dn't be encouraged here, equal to your merits, you may
easily get money for your traveling expenses however.


Parrots. Then how? my dear sir!


Capt. C. Listen. -- A gentleman here had an old friend, whom he once insulted
grossly: this friend had not spirit to resent it himseif, yet dying lately,
carried his resentment to his last breath, absolutely in his will left a legacy
of a hundred pounds, to any one that would cane him on the open Steine. Now
suppose you were to --


Parrots. Beat a gentleman! you don't catch me at that Captain.


Capt. C. Why besides touching the Cash, you chastise an impudent little rascal.


Parrots. If I was to chastise all the impudent rascals, I should have five
firsts for everyone of my ten fingers, thumbs and all.


Cap. C. Interest is not the string, I must touch, the Hibernian's courage,
(aside.) I don't think the legacy will ever be claimed, though the money is a
temptation, yet nobody hitherto has ventured to win it by striking him, he is a
remarkably strong little fellow indeed, full of tricks with his strength when
he gets a bottle; twisting pokers round his neck, battering pewter pots with
his forehead, they talk here, (but I never believed it) that the cause of the
east cliffs falling, was his shoving in a drunken sit one of the great guns off
the battery: yes, yes it requires a deal of resolution to --


Parrots. Why, sir, do you think I Am afraid? upon the Steine you say? any
particular time mentioned in the will?


Cap. C. Eh, yonder is old Cypress, (aside.) when there is a good deal of
company about; now, a propos, look, that is your man.


Parrots. What that clergyman bowing to the ladies? or the man in deep mourning
laughing so hearty? (looking out.)


Cap. C. Pho, them it, look there.


Parrots. Oh the little squab lad in the bob wig and blue and silver coat. But,
Captain, if I do win this legacy, who is to pay it me?


Cap. C. Zounds! what name! oh, -- any, (aside.) eh, -- one -- one Captain
Tomkins is the executor.


Parrots. But where does he live?


Cap. C. Any body will tell you, look that is his house. (points.)


Parrots. Very well.


Cap. C. Here Is jack Daily, he will be dragging me to the bottle, (going.)


(Enter an Officer tipsey.) Officer. Ha! ha! ha! hollo Clifford! by heavens
you're a fine fellow to slip off so!


Capt. C. Pho, never mind me, there is a lady that I --


Officer. Zounds! meet a lady with such a sober stupid face, Them it come along
my boy! (sings) "for Venus never looks with a smile so divine!" (drags him off.)


Parrots. To get my bottle I must first touch the corks; he is here, a hundred
pounds is a good thing; but beating him in cold blood -- by my foul I Would rather
get a threshing myself (so that nobddy might know it) than strike a man that
has never done me any harm. -- But a stick is necessary. (Exit into shop)


(Enter CYPRESS with newspaper.) Cypress. I Am burning for revenge on my cruel
Peg, but no finding this Mr. Parrots the mimick -- a deal of fashion here this
evening. (Enter COLIN from shop with telescspe.) Oh is your lady on the Steine.


Celin. Walking in yon voine company.


Cypress. She shall see what terms I Am on with people of condition (puts up
glass.) Sir Luke! we'll settle our bet at the rooms. (Calling off.) Lady Dimple
I do you ride to Rottingdeane tomorrow? Our friend the Colonel promises a
charming treat from the Dorset band, on the level. (Calling off.)


Colin. Yes, sir, mistress and I will be on the level. (puts up the Telescope)
Dick Coachman! Shall us tig a mug of Newhaven beer a: the white horse?

(Calling off.)
Cypress. Colin! Could Not you draw your lady this way I tell her sha'll see
something very pleasant.


Colin. What, sir, you wi child and tumbling blackamoor?


Cypress. No make her look toward me.


Colin. I wull. (Exit.)


Cypress. Then she will learn that I Am somebody for all her scorn.


Re-enter Parrots from shop (with stick.) Parrots. I Will pay you for this little
hag, but now take it out an airing upon trial, (speaking off.)


Cypress. Let Us see what valetudinarian friends at Buxton. (sits and reads,
PARROTS walks round, then sits by him.)


Parrots. I must get him more amongst the company, (aside.) sir, had not you
best take a walk?


Cypress. Take a walk!


Parrots. Yes, sir, and I Will take another, and yet we'll both take the same
walk.


Cypress. Who is this man? (aside.)


Parrots. I Will make him affront me, and then it will be all his own doing.
(Drops the cane on CyPRESS'S, foot.) Sir you needn't kick shelalah about, you
and he will be better acquainted bye and bye.


Cypress. I protest this is an odd person. (aside.)


Parrots. I don't like striking a naked man; I wish he had some weapon,
(aside.) Sir, how do you like this colt? because, sir, if you would step and take a
silly out of the same paddock yonder, they would breed charming.


Cypress. Breed what?


Parrots. They Would breed a quarrel!


Cypress. I do not like this man. (aside.)


Parrots. How shall I rouse him! (aside.) When that paper's out of hand, sir,
I Will thank you for it; (takes it.) I Am obliged to you, sir.


Cypress. It Is now out of hand indeed.


Parrots. Sir I say that is false, for now it is in hand, and yet I Will read it
out of hand -- (reads) On Saturday died." --


Cypress. Lord, sir, just let me look at the deaths!


Parrots. Takes an affront like mull'd claret, then I Will beat him without any
ceremony for the meanness of his spirit! (aside.) Look ye, sir? as to battering
pewter pots against men's foreheads, and making cravats of their kitchen
pokers, that is all to me a mere dog's whistle!


Cypress. Sir!


Parrots. I never attempted to throw a cannon over a cliff like others!


Cypress. Didn't you, Sir? I beg pardon, I thought you did, -- Gad this is an
odd fellow! ha! ha! ha! (aside.)


Parrots. Harkye, sir, I wish to avoid strife, and so -- if you will only tell
the executor I did it, I Will not do it at all.


Cypress. Then, sir, you, may let it alone, what the devil's all this he is
talking about, I Will do, and you will not do.


Parrots. Oh but I will if you go to that, sblood! and thunder sir! why don't
you put me into a fury as you did the dead man? but what did you do to make the
dying soul leave you such a token of affection?


Cypriss. Who! what! has any deceased friend? --


Parrots. Ay you're left the truth of a thumping legacy!


Cypress. Indeed! where am I to receive it, my dear sir!


Parrots. Why here.


Cypress. Here! when?


Parrots. Now.


Cypress. Who Is to pay me it?


Parrots. I.


Enter Colin. Colin. I told my lady sir, and she and company are all looking.


Parrots. The executor may want a witness --


Cypress. Witness! why, my dear sir, will not my receipt do? Come we'll get pens,
ink, and stamp in the shop.


Parrots. No, leaving a mark will do for this, -- you stand there, and observe
what passes. (to Colin.)


Cypress. Tell your lady what marks of affection I receive from others. Now I Am
ready to take it.


Parrots. And I to give it. -- (Strikes him.)


Cypress. Murder! help!


Parrots. There I Have tried the poney -- (throws it down.) Now to tell the
Captain, and then for a touch at the executor! Exit,


Cypress. Oh heavens! oh my back!


Collin. Then this is the joke they are to see, -- he! he! he! how my lady
laughs, all the gentlefolks be's laughing at you! he! he! he! he! what a happy
man you be, to make people so merry! he! he! he!


Cypress. Merry, you dem'd Villain, yes I Am very happy, publicly disgraced!
Miss Melcomb may indeed now despise me, I myself to draw her attention and be
cursed to me, I Will write to her, -- Explain what I don't understand, I Will go --
oh is not this my old landlady! [enter Landlady,] Eh, now, good dame, where are
you gadding, and nobody at home to light me a candle?


Landlady. Ah, Mr, Cypress, I wish I could afford to keep a maid, but lawk one
must call in upon one's neighbors to see whether they are dead or alive.


Cypress. What then you're a legacy hunter? you selfish creature! I say return
home and light my candles!


Landlady. Ah, sir, take a couple of turns more on the Steine, for the sea air
is so wholesome for you phthysicy old gentlemen. Exit.


Cypress. There Is a scandalous gossip! eh, she is gone into the apothecary's
shop, some hope of an old woman that goes into an apothecary's shop, I Will make
her a present of a pair of fleecy hosiery gambadoes.


Colin. Oh here is the poney. (takes up stick.)


Cypress. Boy, you step home with me to strike a light, and carry a letter to
your lady.


Colin. Yes, sir, he! he! he! you be more comical than tumbling blackamoor. --
How cleverly he managed the poney, here he went so! and then he went so!
(flourishing it over Cypress's head.)


Cypress. Why you damned rascal! (snatches it, Colin run off.) What will Peggy
think of me, sure she will not have me after this public disgrace, well if not,
I Will still pursue her; perhaps when she dies she may leave me something in
token of former friendship.

AIR. -- Cypress.
OUR joys are all fled,
Oh! alas, and alack!
My friend now lies dead,
And the house hung with black.
How can his loved wife
Her yast sorrows endure?
She Is lost to all life,
As the Mutes at the door.
Our handkerchiefs wave,
And our hearts are in dole;
He Is laid in the grave,
And we think on the -- cole.
With glass of wine we'll cheer our woe,
And wipe our muzzy faces,
Then hey! for Doctor's Commons go,
To see how there the case is.
"I have the fortune," cries one son,
"And the other not a souski,"
The wife sings, "My kind husband's gone,
"He was a rousi-ouski."
Executors grand!
Now think how they can crib,
Left plate, house and land,
To his dear loving rib.
With widow we dine,
All bachelors met,
The hatchment's the sign,
There Is a wife to be let.
So lonely her-bed!
Her sad heart sure will break;
She swears she cannot wed
In less than a -- week.
With glass of wine, etc.

[Exit]. Enter JULIA agitated, and HARRY. Julia. And Clifford lives next door
to me? -- I will not live next door to him -- Harry -- You must look out other
lodgings, -- Then this was the cause of his behavior to me! -- ah! fie! fie!
men are all base, and venal. (aside.) How long has your brother and his
mistress been here?


Harry. But a few days, ma'am.


Julia. And Captain Clifford you say sent in a tender message to my aunt? --
that is your brother Colin's Lady -- the other Miss Melcomb?


Harry. Most certainly, ma'am -- I didn't know your ladyship had an aunt; they
say she is very rich? but that to he sure you know.


Julia. And that she is very rich my false Clifford to be sure knows, -- But
dear he need not be vain of his conquest, for my venerable aunt throws out her
lure for every bird that flies! he fancies it is his fine person that has
caught her, but I Will convince him, that with all his grace, and accomplishments
and sweet voice, he may be supplanted by the first insignificant, dangling
coxcomb, that chooses to pay her any attention, (aside.) Harry you're acquainted
with some of the officers' servants?


Harry. Oh yes, madam -- very genteel valets.


Julia. Then if you know any very genteel valet -- that has a very smart little
master -- whose regimentals would fit me --


Harry. Madam! -- (surprised.)


Julia. Borrow them -- ha, ha, ha! -- I think I shall make a smart Brighton
Officer! I can dance -- sport my uniform on the Steine -- chatter at the
libraries -- show the ladies my neat marquee -- then at our camp and review,

I Will make a rout,
The cows and sheep my only foes,
On prancing steed curvet about!
With pops of powder, fright the crows!

Exeunt. SCENE III. -- Moon light. Cliff before CYPRESS'S house -- Enter
CAPTAIN CLIFFORD, Celevated with Wine, singing.
Capt. C, What Is company, wine, mirth, without love! women should be indulged
in their little caprices and pets, since man cannot exist without their
charming smiles. I Will call on my divine Julia, throw myself at her feet, and
ask her pardon.

(A light appears at the upper window; CYPRESS seated in cap and gown writing.)
Enter Colin from House. Colin. Ecod I Will wait on him no longer, my lady will
want me, and this old rogue will give me nothing.


Capt. C. Julia's servant! where have? -- who lives here?


Colin. Mr. Cypress, sir.


Capt C. Zounds! totally forgot -- I wonder if Parrots performed the exploit!
Them that 'tother bottle! lost all the fun by it, -- what you're come with a
letter?


Colin. No, sir, I stay to take one, his old landlady be's not yet com'd home,
so stingy will not keep a maid -- so Mr. Cypress bid me watch door.


Capt. C. Well, I want to ask him a question.


Colin. Noa, sir, he bid me not let any one disturb him whilst he is writing
love --


Capt. C. Is that he up there?


Colin. Yes; Sir, he sleep's in a Garret for the good air over the hills.


Capt. C. Go home, your lady wants you.


Colin. Does she? good bye, sir. (shuts door.)


Capt. C. Why the devil did you shut the door?


Colin, That nobody might go in, till old woman comes back.


Capt. C. Them the old woman!


Colin. How fine these officers talk, them the old woman! Exit.


Capt. C. Julia's dissimulation, carrying on a correspondence -- Cypress has
the name of money, can she be so base! you're composing your loveletter? then
I Will discompose. -- (looking up, knocks at the door.) -- I don't think he can
know me. [Deranging his dress.]


Cypress. (within) Colin! why don't you go to the door?


Capt. C. I Will teaze, but them it what shall I say! (Cypress opens door with
candle.)


Cypress. Where is this clown run to?


Capt. C. Pray, sir, does Captain Tomkins liye here?


Cypress. No, Sir.


Capt. C. Ask pardon, sir, any where in this neighborhood, sir?


Cypress. 'Pon my word, sir, I Am but a stranger myself.


Capt. C. Good night; sir, -- sorry -- give you -- much trouble.


Cypress. Oh, sir, no trouble, good night, sir. (shuts door.)


Capt. C. Ay, trot up, (listens) seated? (looks up) yes -- (Cypress appears at
window, takes up pen, Captain Clifford knocks; Cypress starts, takes candle and
retires.) -- ay, now trot down again. I hope he will not let his candle fall, for
I like to contemplate his delectable phiz -- (listening, Cypress opens door.)
-- Pray, sir, does Captain Tomkins live here?


Cypress. No, sir, Captain Tomkins does not live here, eh! why, sir, you are
the gentleman asked this instant!


Capt. C. Bless my soul! the same door indeed! sir, I ask pardon.


Cypress. Oh, sir, no offense, -- plague what keeps the old woman!


Capt. C. Sir I wish you good night.


Cypress. Oh, sir, good night to you. Exit.


Capt. C. (listening.) Up we trot again, -- set to our love-letter? Eh, I
believe he has taken his pen and ink-horn into some other room, -- oh no! there
sits old amorous Ovid, -- (Knocks, Cypress starts, appears vexed, tries to open
window but cannot, Captain knocks.) -- Oh we trot down a little faster.
(listening) demme I believe he is tumbled down -- (Cypress opens the door.) --
Pray, sir, does Captain Tomkins live here?


Cypress. Why what the devil, sir, I told you twice no Captain Tomkins lived
here.


Capt. C. I beg pardon, sir, sorry to give so much trouble.


Cypress. Sir, really I don't understand what you mean --


Capt. C. Sir your most obedient, I wish you good night.


Cypress. Well, sir, good night. -- (as he is shutting the door, Captain
Clifford pushes it.)


Capt. C. Oh, sir, you seem to have lost one of your slippers.


Cypress. Curse it all!


Capt. C. Pray, sir, don't stay out in the cold, -- you will have a sore throat.
-- (Cypress sutting the door, Captain Clifford pushes it.) -- Oh but, sir, can
you tell me where Captain Tomkins lives?


Cypress. Damn it! Inquire at the public houses.

shutting the door Capt. Clifford pushes it open.
Capt. C. Pray, sir, which is the public house?


Cypress. Hell and sury, I don't know!


Capt. C Sir, I ask pardan, -- most obedient, good night, sir.

Exit bowing.
Cypress. This old devil to take the key of my parlour, but I Will quit her
lodgings to morrow! damn me! I Will come down no more if the house is on fire!

shuts the door, Enter a Porter.
Porter. Letter says number twelve. -- (holds it to the lamp. Cypress appears
at the window writing; Porter knocks, Cypress after many attempts, bursts open
windows and looks cut.)


Cypress. I Will come down no more! Get away you rascal!


Porter. I Have a letter for Mr. Cypress.


Cypress. A letter, oh.

(shuts the window.)
Porter. Get away you rascal! -- don't care, the lady shall pay me for bringing
it.

Exit.
Enter PARROTS. Parrots. Unlucky, Captain Clifford and his jolly party broke
up, but where does the executor live? the captain pointed this way, so since
I Am on the spot, I may as well try to find it out to night, that I may be sure
of knowing it in the morning, oh this is it. -- (going to knock, Cypress opens
the doer.) Pray, sir, does Captain Tomkins live here?


Enter Landlady with a lanthorn going toward door Cypress claps it violently,
she fails, Parrots, runs off. -- Curtain drops hastily. END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- Tilt's coffee-room.
(Captain CLIFFORD discovered at breakfast.) Capt. C. I Will got leave of
absence, quit Brighton, and see Julia no more.


Enter Parrots. Parrots. Ah, sir, what did you run such a hum upon me? first
make me beat a man, then ask himself for the reward?


Capt. C. What do you mean?


Parrots. Mean! why Captain Tomkins is the gentleman I thres'd, and not the
executor! laft night I knocked at the house, and I thought he'a have knocked
the door and myself into the window the other side the way.


Capt. C. Why zounds Parrots did you inquire? ha! ha! ha!


Parrots. Pho, none of your laughing, sir, tell me where the executor lives
that I may get in the money, and out of the town, as he may be for bringing me
before a justice.


Capt. C. Ha! ha! ha! and he opened the door in a red nightcap? ha! ha! ha!


Parrots. Yes he did, but never mind his red nightcap now.


Capt. C. With a candle in his hand? ha! ha! ha!


Parrots. Oh the devil burn your candle, sir, what a laughing you keep!


Capt. C. And you asked, "pray, sir, does Captain Tomkins live here?" ha! ha!
ha!


Parrots. Yes, I did.


Cap. C. Ha! ha! ha! let us see, the captain is one executor, but you certainly
went to the wrong house.


Parrots. Well right or wrong, I Will go no more to Captain Tomkins, if there are
two executors who is the other?


Cap. C. It Is Mr -- Come with me, and I Will show you, ha! ha! ha!


Parrots. Oh, sir, if you keep grinning I will not go with you! 'pon my honor.


Capt. C. Now I Am serious, ha! ha! ha!

(Exeunt.)
SCENE II. -- CYPRESS'S lodgings.
Enter CYPRESS. Cypress. Pay two guineas a week here and an old beldam keep no
maid! Oblige me to open doors, and get myself insulted by all the raff in the
streer. I Will directly for town -- pack up my clothes --

(Enter Colin crying.)
Colin. Yes, sir, it is all along of you!


Cypress. Colin! what is the matter?


Colin. You would bring me away last night todling after you, and while I was
out mistress was in a worry to send me with a letter.


Cypress. Ay to Captain Clifford I warrant, I Am glad I didn't send my letter to
her. -- well?


Colin. And so when I com'd hoame, Colin, says she, you're an honest creature
and the best zarvant that ever flourised a flambeau, but I discharge you for an
idle vagabond. I Have lost my place on your account, and if you have any conscience
you will get me another or take me yourself.


Cypress. This fellow will tell me all her secrets. (aside.)


Colin. I Am now an honest mon out of bread, bread bes the staff of life, and
without it I shall tumble down, as you would was I to trip you up. (pushes him.)


Cypress. Damn your illustrations you dog! -- but his coming is a propos, to
prepare and attend me on my journey -- I fear you're a sad fellow --


Colin. Yes, sir, I bes sad out of pleace, hire me, and I Will be a merry fellow.


Cypress. But living with a lady has spoiled you.


Colin. But I have lived with a gentelman who was sometimes a prince! sometimes
a Roman duke!


Cypress. Did he keep a coach?


Colin. No, sir, he was an Italian, so the English nobility kept a coach for
him, sir. My master sung in the Haymarket, he told me, sir, he used to sing for
the Pope; ecod, he was a comical fellow, they called him the first Buffalo.

AIR. -- COLIN.
MASTIERI wasi Opera singer,
Lived in Alley called Cramboni,
In his ring he wore a singer,
Much be loved to munch Bologni!
Sop'd it in vinegarini,
And shake over pepperini.
Caro then his month he would open,
With no pia Andrac,
[Sags in Italian style.] In the coffee house Spring Garden,
Signior would so spendi farden,
At the Orange take his coffee,
Fianoiffimo drinks off he.
At the bar whips op a jelli,
Reads then newspaperelli,
Nice sallad, if he should eye any,
With peenyo he will buy any.
If it have dandilioni,
Saladini, beetrootini,
Endivini, celerini,
Napkinnini, swingidini,
Cuto with the knife or forko
Jaw to worko, draw se corko.
Flasky glaski,
Primo, Brimo,
Brinky, winki,
Soko, Joko,
As he pass Hay -- marketti,
Horse in carto there he metti,
Hair-bag full was stuffed with hay,
Hungry Horso drag away,
Look like ninni,
Ladies grinni,
I approachi,
Call a coachi.
To del watermano throw;
Penny si fottissimo
He steps in step up I puto,
On his fingers, door I shuto,
Squall whip smacko.
Pavement, cracko,
Pall-Mall-dini,
Cockspurini
Up Strandini,
From Sanguini,
Buy Pomatum
For my patum,
Tavistocko,
For my blocko;
Of Vickeri,
Buy false hairi,
Hardhamofi,
Snuff my nosei,
Me a caro,
Temple Baro,
Fetter Lani,
Sausageani,'
Buy of Longman,
Pretty songman;
Signior fill his Pockets full,
Sail to Italy backino,
Dear he laugh at Johnny Bull,
in his superfine Caffino.

Cypress. Well, I Will try you -- step to the castle Inn, desire them to send me
a post chaise about eleven; tell the master I Would join for part, if he knows any
infirm old lady or gentleman, because on a journey I Am very tender of the sick.


Colin. So am I, sir, 'twou'd do your heart good to get sick only to see how
careful I Would nurse you -- law, I had it of feyher and mother; an old friend,
(that they didn't care two -- pence about, only hoped he would leave them something
when he kicked,) was woundy ill in our street; mother used to make him nice
barley-broths -- and wi little puddings; -- ecod, she once sent him a roast
chicken, and would you think it, after all, he slipped up to heaven without
leaving them a marvadee!


Cypress. That was a bilk! to heaven! no, he slipped down to the other place, for
his damned ingratitude!


Colin. Then, sir, when you are sick, I Will take such care of you, that the
sooner you go up to heaven, ard leave me something -- the better for us both;
'twill be so unexpected you know, (going.)


Cypress. Hem?mdash;where are you going?


Colin. To bid them have chay at twelve.


Cpress. There, wrong already, I said eleven; when I give you a message always
repeat my words exactly.


Colin. I woll; but, sir, old landlady's gone out again, and a lady inquired
for you as I com'd in.


Cypress. Oh, it is lady Squab; true, I promised to ride with her to
Rottingdeane -- plague on it I Have no humor for parties of pleasure.


Colin. She be sitting in parlour great chair.


Cypress. Weil, there let her sit, and when she is tired she may walk off.
(peevish.)


Colin. ( Bawling) Lady Squab! sit in big chair, and when you're tired, walk
off!


Cypress. God's Death and fury!


Colin. Was Not that speaking your words exactly?


Cypress. Never bawl out so! (knocking without.) That Is Tom Nibble, don't say
I Am at home.


Colin. I will not. Exit.


Cypress. My brains boiling from Seraphina's falsehood, and teased by a parcel
of people galloping in upon me, all in impudent rude health too, no speculation
of advantage from their death.


Re-enter COLIN. Colin. (Softly.) Sir, I told Mr. Nibble; he bes in the next
room, writing a card to leave.


Cypress. What do you say? I hate whispering.


Colin. Zur! I told the gentleman you wan't at home, as you desired me. (very
loud.)


Cypress. The devil's in the fellow's bawling!


Colin. Why, law, sir, a poor servant don't know when to tell lies and when to
tell truth.


Cypress. Tell lies to all the world, but truth to your master. Colin, I think
your mistress will repent losing me; she fancies her Captain Clifford a very
charming object in his blue sleev'd waistcoat, and his brass cap and feathers,
and sword -- when I Am dressed! eh, Colin?


Colin. Yes, sir, you have the advantage of the captain, he looks handsome in his
regimentals, but you're ugly always.


Cypress. What, sirrah?


Colin. Tell truth to my master! besides, sir, every body that saw you thresh'd
on the Steine, says you're such a desperate coward.


Cypress. What! I must retrieve my character, (takes ink and paper,) right;
I Will send that Irish fellow a challenge; bring me a light. (Cypress writes,
exit Colin.) I don't know who the scoundrel is, or Where he is to be found, but
Colin will spread the report through Brighton that I did challenge him, which
will answer the same purpose.


Re-enter COLLIN. Colin. Ugly always!


Cypress. How dare you say, and even repeat such a thing to me?


Colin. Tell truth to my master.


Cypress. Truth, hem! yes, my lad; but discretion bids us not to be over ready
with our tongues; think three times before you speak once, (writes with his
head near the candle.) You must find out that gentleman that affronted me
yesterday on the Steine, and bear him this my mortal challenge.


Colin. Yez, sir, -- I think once, I think twice, I think three times, -- your
wig's on fire! (it blazes.)


Cypress. Get away from me you rascal! [beats him] I take such a fellow? --
burn my wig! -- my challenge all blotted too!


Colin. Don't trouble yourself, sir; here comes the very gentleman, so you may
deliver it yourself.


Cypress. I will. [tears it] oh, lord! I Am going to London; help me with my
luggage, sirrah. [Pulls trunks about, throws clothes over him.]


Enter PARROTS. Parrots. Well, as the captain has sent me now to the right
executor, he has made amends for all his capers. -- Oh! lucky, stop boy, as you
saw me trim the old man yesterday you must stay, and be my voucher that I did
it; there is, half-a-crown for your gentility -- oh, the gentleman, I presume;
good morning to you, sir; according to the will, I beat the old man yesterday,
and if you don't believe it, here is a witness.


Cypress. Eh! [turns, Parrots surprised.]


Colin. Oh! sir, he will believe it without my oath.


Parrots. Boy, return me that half-crown.


[Exit Colin.] Cypress. If you're come to renew your barbarism, I Will bawl
murder out of the window, you villain.


Parrots. I Am had again! -- I might expect this, when the captain got upon his
red night caps -- I find now he has brought me to the same house, only it looks
into another street. --


Cypress. Begone!


Parrots. Sir, are you Mr. Cypress, or Captain Tomkins, or the executor, or the
dead man, or the legatee, administrator, or testator? In the devil's name, who
are you? I have earned the legacy, and will have it.


Cypress, What legacy?


Parrots. The hundred pound!


Cypress. Are you dreaming? Who told you of this hundred pound?


Parrots. Why, faith, a queer kind of genius enough set me on, -- but, do you
know one Capt. Clifford?


Cypress. Capt. Clifford! I see it, a concerted plan between him and Miss
Melcomb. (aside.) You Have been imposed on.


Parrots, Why, I suspect there has been some hum; but no harm done; I wish you
good morning.


Cypress. Sir, there has been a deal of harm, and I Will have justice.


Parrots. Be easy, you look like a kind hearted gentleman.


Cypress. Zounds! who are you?


Parrots Sir, I Am a gentleman without an estate, though I Am an elder brother, as
my father had no son but myself, so I Am obliged to live upon secondhand voices;
since there is no legacy, I must exhibit my imitations in the big room, [aside.]
Sir, my bill, I hope you will honor it. [gives bill.]


Cypress. The devil, are you Mr. Parrot's, the Mimic? Very lucky you are, for I
intended to have killed you.


Parrots. In Faith that would have been a new thing to me.


Cypress. The very man I wished to see.


Parrots. I thought so, sir, therefore introduced myself to you.


Cypress. What, with your oak sapling, you wicked fellow? however, I forgive
all; I Will start you a character to mimic, the most whimsical lady!


Parrots. But is she well known? -- a great bird?


Cypress. Who? Miss Melcomb! the feather of the fashion. -- Oh! she once loved
me.


tarrets. And she does not now? well, second thoughts are best.My dear sir
introduce me to her.


Cypress. She will not let me introduce myself.


Parrots. But I must hear her actions, and see her talk, or how die devil can I
mimic her?


Landlady, [with out.] Yes, sir, very airy.


Cypress. This cursed old woman, dancing the people in upon me to see die
lodgings.


Enter LANDLADY and HARRY. Landlady. Ay, sir, you will not find more pleasant
lodgings in the town.


Harry. Oh; somebody here [struts about] them it, madam, band-boxes! not room to
whip a cat -- [opens windows, flings chairs about, throws himself en sofa]
don't let me disturb any body. -- Eh! sure the old blade that sent the card to
my lady this morning.


Cypress. Peggy's other servant! (aside.)


Parrots. A very saucy conceited gentleman this.;


Harry. No object in the prospect. (Looking out of the window, Parrots snatches
hat and flings it out of window.)


Parrots. Now, sir, you have a capital object, how do you like it.


Harry. Them me, sir! -- well, ma'am, if I don't see any thing more to my fancy,
I shall call again.

Exit.
Cypress. His mistress send him to look for lodgings in this house! then she
cannot know I live here. [aside.] That was Miss Melcomb's servant, run after
him, he will put you in the way of seeing his lady, who, if you can by your
mimicking make a ridiculous laughing stock --


Parrots. But you must bring me a great deal of company, -- fill my rooms, with
an overflow.


Cypress. Yes, yes -- and forgive you all.


Parrots. Thanky', sir, but if I offend a man, till I make him reparation I
cannot forgive myself, therefore I must ask your pardon in;resence of all the
people that saw me wrong you.


Cypress. What repeated! I desire it may end here.


Parrots. I Will make ample atonement, for I Will say, sir, I Am sorry I stigmatized
you by beating your fine old back about, with my dirty little bit of a stick.


Cypress. Zounds! this will be more disgrace than the thing itself.


Parrots, The Steine is now full, come, sir.


Cyprss. What the devil, sir! I Will not go!


Parrots. Do you think I Have nothing to do but to thresh you, then deny me an
occasion to rub off as I go? Come, --


Cypress. Damnation, sir! I do forgive you.


Parrots. What here in a closet? Your nan acceptance of my conception; is a
demand of satisfaction, that is my inference.


Cypress. Confound your infernal inference and impudence.


Parrots. Only walk with me up the Steine, before the pavilion, on the parade
-- and I will, in the hearing of them all --


Cypress, Get out of my house.


Parrots. Have a care, or before I clear off one flogging, you will make me give
you another why, I believe I must keep a tally to score down all the apologies
I have to make you.


Cypress. Well, ir, I attend you.


Parrots. No, sir, I Will wait oh you.


Cypress. Curse your positeness. Exeunt,


SCENE III. -- Pavilion, Parade.
Company conversing, walking, etc. Carriages, borses, crowd, tents, sentinels,
etc. Military band; first, wind instruments, plaintive Scotch air; then drums
and fifes -- quick Irish tune.

Enter JULIA in regimentals, Julia, I think I Have past, hitherto, quite,
officer-like: -- now for'a loving attack upon my aunt Margaret. -- From, the
time she came out, she should be here by this.

AIR -- JULIA.
My blushes I must with my sex now forget,
Though coy I Am no longer a maid,
In bright burnished Gorget a brazen face set,
A ball room shall be my parade,
In nice chicken gloves as I gallantly stand,
While siddles for action prepare,
For dear pas-de-deux, give the word of command
And gracefully foot to the fair,
With ha! ha! ha! Fal-tal-ta! Sa, sa, sa
II.
At mess when old care in a bumper is drowned,
Let the toast give a zest to each glass,
When Bacchus the temples of Cupid has crowned,
I reel off to my favorite lass,
"Most lovely," says I, "O thou witty and fair,
Permit me to play with your fan,"
I Will strut and I Will smile, them it quite militaire!
'Pon my soul I Am a very fine man!
With ha-ha-ha, etc.

Enter PARROTS. Parrots. When I thought he was coming out of the street door
with me, to run back and lock himself up in his garret! Captain Clifford told
me he Was as strong as a camel! Oh, here is Miss Melcomb's saucy footman.


Enter HARRY calling. Harry, Madam! -- Well, ma'am, I Have seen variety of
lodgings.


Julia. Hush! how indiscreet. apart.


Parrots. Madam! -- I Am sure he did say madam. Oh, oh! then this must be the
lady Cypress desired me to mimick, Such a beautiful creature love him! may be
so, as the F's fat, fair, and forty was all the toast of the young men. -- Who
knows but the S's shriveled, fallow, and sixty may be the rage of the young
women. Aside.


Julia. If Clifford quits Brighton, and carries my aunt off with him, I shall
have no occasion to change.


Exit Harry. Music plays. Parrots. This Irish music is very fine. -- Pray, sir,
how do you like Planxty Connor?


Julia. I don't know any such person.


Parrots. Person! why, sir, its -- 'Pon my soul she is a pretty little fellow!
-- Dressed herself up for some frolic I suppose. -- When a lady is inclined for
fun, a gentleman should take half the business on himself. Aside.


Julia. I must brazen it out. (Aside.) Sir, you spoke to me. -- Any businesis?


Parrots. Why, sir, I have no objection, sir.


Julia. Over a bottle?


Parrots. Ay, sir, any way, sir! that is a pretty cap upon your head; is not it
heavy? does not it hurt your forehead?


Julia. This. (Takes off the belmet.) Oh, no; I Am used to wearing a cap.


Parrots, Hem! I believe you are indeed. (Aside.) that is a fine big sword: who
tied you to it?


Julia. What, sir! (fiercely.) sir, my sword is tied to me.


Parrots. It it, sir? -- Oh, she is a lovely little soul; but can she think of
such an old crab as Cypress! however, as he will pay me for mimicking her, I Will
do it; -- and now to catch her manner. Aside.


Julia. My captain! I dare say to meet my aunt, for yonder she trips: -- I must
keep up my character though. (Aside.) But, sir, the aforesaid bottle.


Parrots. Ay, sir, I Am for a bottle and its concomitants.


DUETTE.
Give Jove divine! a merry companion to me,
Then with g jod wine a very boon couple are we.
Leave no space in your jolly full glass:
In your empty glass leave no wine:
By drinking deep this, and high filling that!
We make our noses shine.
Give Love divine! my favorite girl to me;
Then with good wine, a very fond couple are we.
But if she think of another whilst I
To her my soul resign,
A rosy bumper my heart shall cheer!
And make our noses shine.
Enter CAPTAIN CLIFFORD. Capt. C. Julia take lodgings in the very house with
Cypress!


Parrots. Oh, Captain, are not you ashamed of yourself?


Capt. C. Parrots! what are you at here?


Parrots. My business! -- I.'m come to mimic Miss Melcomb.


Capt. C. What! -- unkind as she is, I cannot suffer this. (Aside.) Harkye, Mr.
Parrots, we shall quarrel if you turn your talents of mimickrv to any freedom
with that lady.


Parrots. You have turned your talents of hum to a great deal of freedom with
me. -- I Have played enough; I must now work a little.


Julia. Oh, here is my aunt Margaret. (Aside. Puts up glasss,) A devilish fine
woman, 'pon my soul


Parrots. "Devilish fine woman, 'pon my soul."

Mimicks.
Capt. C. What little martinet have we here?"


parrots. "What little martinet have we here?"


(Mimicks.) Sergeant. (Without.) To the right about!


Parrots. "To the right about!" (Mimicks.) Zounds, sir! you have confused me so,
I don't know whose voice I Am catching at; if it is the lady's, or the
serjeant's, or yourself, or myself.


Enter MISS MELCOMB, in riding habit -- JULIA bows to her, kisses her hand
sighs passionately, and exit. Capt. C. Parrots, who is that puppy?


Parrots. Oh, he is a very great admirer of one Miss Melcomb.


Capt. C. Indeed! (Exit hastily.)


Miss M. M. A very impudent young man!


Parrots. Oh, you are gready affronted.


Irtmically aside. Miss M. I think 1 look better listening to the music on
horseback, beating time with my little whip. Eh, is not that my lord? Title is
charming! the privilege of dressing as one pleases, (no matter how) it is soon
followed because worn by 'the Duchess! talk loud in the libraries! politics, a
bold manly voice, stagger about, have a finical dangling church beau snuffling
and flammering, "Yes, maddam, just the opinion of Montesquieu, your grace."
Then I look round, to see the small gentry's embarassment -- As I canter by
their parlour windows, make a full stop, up with my glass, then hey, gallop
off, turn full front like a gallant officer!


Parrots. Faith I thiink she throws a bit of an ogle upon me -- I Will give her a
little touch of one of my die aways -- hiegho! (sighs, kisses his handkerchief
and gazes at her.)


Miss M. That gentleman seems to admire, what timid bashfulness, -- only steals
a glance.


Parrots. One may guess what is the matter with this dowager, how she is
bridling, and purring about, like an old tabby cat.


Miss. M. Seems deeply smitten.


Parrots. The devil (she will stretch her neck off her head! heavens! how she
rolls her twinklers, now she shuts them, there is a smile looping the corners of
her mouth to the gusset of her eyes. Faith I believe it is for me; we are making
swans and peacocks of ourselves; this may be a shorter cut to the cash than my
imitations, I Will say something comical and witty to her -- (aside.) Pray,
ma'am, what is a'clock?


Miss M. Sir, I Am past two.


Parrots. Yes, madam, you are past two -- and, forty (aside.) Lord, madam, how
fond you young ladies are of walking up and down.


Miss M. I wish I had not been so hasty in discharging that simple fool Colin, I
already feel the inconvenience of being without a servant.


Parrots. Speak your commands, madam; shall I order your carriage? is that it!
with shoulder knots on the horses heads?


Miss M. No, sir, but it is an handsome equipage.


Parrots. That Is the reason, madam, I thought it was yours, for when one is
handsome themselves it gives a beauty to every thing that belongs to them. I Am
ambitious madam to be yours, for at present I Am but an ordinary fellow.


Miss M. Be mine, sir.! what do you mean?


Parrots. Faith, I believe I was too quick to the point there. (aside.) Madam,
I meant -- no meaning at all. (bows.)


Miss M. A very polite man indeed. (aside.) Oh, sir, when a tender idea comes
in the shape of a compliment, it is an over-delicate modesty to be ashamed of
revealing it.


Parrots. Yes, madam, modesty is the fault of all my countrymen. Mine had like
to have been the death of me; last week a great musician, no faith he was a
physician, ordered me -- saying, "Mr. Parrots you should go into the hot-bath."
So I went ma'am, and I saw two doors close together, by my soul I was so modest
that I didn't ask the man which was which, so opening one, instead of the hot,
I plunged over head and ears into the cold bath. Oh, the shock was such a devil
of a surprise!


Miss M. Ha! ha! ha? I protest, sir, just such an error was made --


Parrots. Wirh who pray, ma'am?


Miss M. My lap-dog little Bluff! but I sent the dear creature to the cold, and
the man slung him into the hot bath.


Parrots. The same mistake as mine, only 'twas quite the reverse; what was the
matter with the pretty little soul?


Miss M. What soul, sir?


Parrots. Your lap dog, madam!


Miss M. Oh the dear little animal, quite in the gaitedu coeur, was frisking
about to amuse me, jumping up to catch flies, unfortunately swallowed one.


Parrots. Swallow a live fly, ma'am! You shoul'd have made him swallow a spider
to destroy it.


Miss M. And pray, sir, what should I have sent after the spider?


Parrots. There, madam, ends my skill as a glass blower; however I Will
illustrate it by example, suppose a poor debtor was flying from his country in
a ship -- my case, (aside,) the ship is cast away, and the debtor's swallowed
by a whale, -- not my case -- (aside,) then I Would send an attorney after him.


Miss M. Very pleasant, -- but then what would you send after him?


Parrots. Beelzebub himself! oh I warrant the devil would bring up the attorney,
as sure as a pair of nutcrackers!


(Enter COLIN.) Colin. No pleasing that beggarly four crab, I wish my lady
would forgive me; oh here she is, and that Irish buck smirking at her: now or
never's my time to catch her in a good humor, (aside.) do, my lady, pray take
me again into your service; kind sir! put in a good word for me.


Parrots. I will; madam, if the poor devil has had the misfortune to offend
you, I Will answer he will never repeat it, and the next time he does, cashier him,
without bail or main-prize.


Colin. If Mr. Cypress gets me to neglect you again, this gentleman, my friend,
here, shall lay two ponies on his back, like a pair of drumsticks.


Miss M. Well, mind your business in future.


Colin. Yes, ma'am (joyful.) porter brought back letter last night from Mr.
Cypress, it is on your toilet, ma'am.


Miss. M. Don't talk to me of Mr. Cypress. -- I cannot bear those staring
officers! -- Colin, prepare the horses, I Will ride toward the camp.


Parrots. One way to avoid the officers. (aside.)


Miss M. No, it is like to rain -- I Will take an airing in the sociable.


Parrots. Ma'am the other day I and a friend went out in my sociable, and we
conversed very jocose, at last we quarrelled about spelling of a finger post,
and my friend pulled my nose in my sociable, and I with one bother knocked my
friend out of his sociable. -- Madam, will you step over to Mr. Jones's shop to
hear him play on his Wealth harp?


(Enter JULIA.) Julia. Permit me the honor, mem -- mem, your hand. aside.


Miss M. The pretty little officer! oh sy, sir, do you think l'd admit such
liberties, sir? I don't know what you mean, sir! I Would have you to know, sir! I Am
not the person, sir!


Julia. Oh mem -- dear mem -- pon my soul, mem -- that is -- sir, your most:
obedient (triumphantly to PARROTS. Exit galanting Miss MELCOMB.)


Parrots. Well this is fine, after all my modesty and politeness she has walked
off with the impudent little officer -- hollo Dowager you're mistaken in your
man, I Have heard of such marriages; oh mustn't let the fine old lady be
deceived; eh, is not that my friend the Rev. Dick Bellange, oh, oh! I Will talk to
him. Exit.


SCENE IV. -- The street before Miss MELCOMBS' bouses.
(Enter COLIN and Captain CLIFFORD.) Capt. C. Stop, my lad! -- but why should I
teaze myself, -- what concern to me now where Julia goes! -- yet to take
lodgings in the very house with Cypress! -- by heavens! -- I will talk to her
about it.


Colin. Sir, I did stop, what bes I to do now?


Capt. C. Where are you going?


Colin. I bes not going, -- I stand still!


Capt. C. Is your lady at home?


Colin. Noa, in the music shop, with a beautiful little officer.


Capt. C. Turned off old Cypress, and now got a beautiful little officer?
(aside.)


Colin. Good bye, sir, it is as much as my pleace be worth, -- not to moin'd my
business now, --


(going.) Capt. C. Eh, but is not it there your lady lives? the house next door
to me?


Colin. I knows naught of what house wives next door to you, but Miss Melcomb,
my mistress bides here.


Capt. C. Well I thought Julia lived -- but no matter; I Will stop till she comes
in. runs in.


Colin. He says he will stop, and then he jumps up stairs, and when I stop, he
cries, "where be you going?" I Will be hanged if this young chap, be's not in
love; ah when a mon's in love, he does'nt know which he should put, his hat, or
his pumps, on his head, or his heels.


Enter HARRY. Harry. My brother! -- Ah Colin! how do you do? how do you do?
(foppishly)


Colin. How ye do' how ye do? (aping)


Harry. 'Pon my soul, my dear fellow, I languish'd for this rencontie' to
interrogate you about this family, -- you say you live with --


Colin. I bes as curious to know about the family you lives with.


Harry. Well, but we havn't time to talk over our own affairs now. -- Pray did
you see an Officer go in there? (points.)


Colin. What Captain Clifford? he be's just brushed into our house.


Harry. Oh! then you and your Miss Melcombe live here? I and my Miss Melcombe
live here, next door to the Captain. I Am charged with an embassy to him from my
lady. (going)


Colin. Hold, -- (interposing) -- since my pleace is so uncertain, whilst I Am
in I should make the most by perquisites. -- (aside.) -- Your embassy is
certainly about love, and when a gentleman receives a kind message from a lady,
he always well rewards the person that brings it, -- so I Will be dom'd brother
Harry, if you set nose over threshold, till you promise to give me half of
whatever you get.


Harry. Ha I ha! well I will. (goes in.)


Enter CYPRESS. Cypress. Oh, boy!


Colin. Measter Cypress! As I have got my pleace, I don't valy him an auld
gooseberry.


Cypress. I may take a wrangling leave of Peggy however. -- Did you bespeak the
chaise as I ordered you?


Colin. You order me! auld bosky Joe!


Cypress. What do you mean, sirrah?


Colin. I mean that there bes a deal of dirt in my livery coat, so I wish you would
put it on your kettle back, till I and my friend drum it out, old punmplenose!


Cypress. You scoundrel, an't you my servant?


Colin. Yes, sir, I bes your most humble servant. bows and goes in.


Cypress. Ho! ho! (exit after.)


SCENE V. MISS MELCOMB'S dressing room.
Enter CAPTAIN CLIFFORD. Capt. C. Oh Miss Melcomb's dressing room! -- I Am
impatient, yet dread to see her. -- (looking at his watch.) -- I don't like
quarrels -- life, where we esteem, should be a summer's day of sweet
complacency. Eh! Julia's toilet seems odly furnished! phials, and stuffs of
lotion! Paregoric Elixir! lozenges, eh, books, prophecies! Buchan! novels,
"female stability!" -- Oh from this she has studied her new attachment for
Cypress, the devil, she does'nt paint? A wig! why she seems changed in soul,
mind, and person! -- Yet her face to day retained all its native loveliness!
Oh, here is her other servant. -- Shall I question him? -- No, that is mean.


Enter HARRY. Harry. Sir, my lady has sent me --


Capt. C. Oh then she is not come home from the music shop?


Harry. Sir, she is gone to take an airing toward Preston; but sends her
compliments, and begs you will not quit Brighton without seeing her.


Capt. C. Still think of me! -- I may wrong her. -- (aside.) -- Very well, for
your agreeable message, here -- offering money


Enter COLIN out of breath. Colin. Dam that old codger to stop me! come in time
though, -- you're right sir, brother Harry, deserves a guinea. -- Mind, I Am to
have half. -- I Have ten shillings change, ready money. -- (apart.)


Harry. Oh, oh, -- sir, pardon me, but, if you think my message deserves a
reward, pray let it be about a dozen --


Colin. Twelve? -- Deuce of your impudence?


Harry. Smart, pretty, round, hard -- kicks.


Capt. C. What Is here -- a letter for Cypress, treacherous Julia! (a loud
knocking without.)


Colin. My lady!


Capt. C. Julia! A man's voice! -- hum, -- not a word of my being here, and
I Will fairly divide the kicks and blows. (runs in.)


Exit Colin and Harry wrangling. Enter JULIA and MISS MELCOMB. Julia. Yes, mem,
the harp is delectable, but you have a fine voice, mem.


Miss M. Oh, sir, you have a fine taste.


Julia. Yes, ma'am, and I Have now and then the Voice of a humming bird, --
singing convivial songs at our mess, -- has rather impaired -- then we officers
are obliged to give the word of command full and bold. gives the word of
Command.


Miss M. Oh, sir, you military gentlemen are so terribly charming!


Enter PARROTS. Parrots. No, madam, it is I that am terrible, because you are
charming. -- I tell you what, sir, I thought you were harmless, but now I Am
afraid of you, so quit this lady, except you can parry a bullet.


Julia. Oh, sir, you shall see that -- exit hastily.


Miss M. Heaven's! I Am all terror! Sir, declare, what brought you on the Steine
this morning?


Parrots. To take off the lovely Miss Melcomb.


Miss M. Indeed! but not without my consent?


Parrots. I didn't know that was necessary when Mr. Cypress bid me --


Miss M. He! then he wants to recede -- an answer to my letter last night, --
(takes it) -- heaven's! it is my own sent back unopened. Yet it will break his
heart if I give my hand to another -- (aside) -- he! he! he! then, sir, you are
determined to take me off?


Parrots. You, madam! why, this fine Maccau thinks I mean to mimick her too!
Yet, how smiling she looks. -- (aside.) Then, madam, to watch and catch you. --
(mimicks) -- Oh, charming lady! I have you! my manner of taking you off, must
give univerfal pleasure.


Miss M. But, sir, consider -- don't let the ardour of your passion --


Parrots. The ardour of my passion!


Miss M. The attempt to run away with me would be so exceedingly romantic.


Parrots. Then I Am to run away with her too! Oh, very well. -- Though we had two
meanings, we are both of one mind. -- (aside.) -- My lovely soul! --


Embraces her. Enter JULIA with pistols. Julia. Now, sir, the survivor take the
lady.


Parrots. Then I will take you my brave little lady.


Julia. Heaven's! discovered! (aside.)


Parrots. Come to me, yourself, big sword and pistols. -- (embraces her.)


Miss M. Oh, this great man, will kill my pretty little officer!


Enter CLIFFORD enraged. Cap. C. Beyond all doubt, have I caught you.


Parrots. Hem! -- "Pray, sir, does one Captain Tomkins live here?" --


Miss M. Heavens! --


Parrots. Peace! -- I Will have you, my brave charmer! (embraces Miss Melcomb.)


Enter CYPRESS. Cypress. What the devil are you about with my Peggy?


Miss M. Oh, mercy! here are four gentlemen will fight -- and perhaps all be
killed for me -- oh, what mischief in our sascinating sex!


Julia. So, captain Clifford, you have set your heart on this lady?


Capt. C. sir! I know nothing about that lady.


Julia. Really! and was it not to address her that you quitted me -- oh, lord!
(aside.)


Capt. C. You!


Miss M. Why, certainly it is --


Capt. C. My Julia!


Julia. Ha, ha, ha! then since I have inadvertently discovered myself -- my
dear aunt, how glad I am to see you.


Miss M. My niece in this scandalous metamorphoses! go, you are a shame to your
sex;.


Parrots. Faith, such a pretty little fellow would do honor to a hundred of
our sexes -- How do you do, major?


Capt. C. Ha, ha, ha? come Julia, you must forgive me ha! ha! ha! I see now our
odd mistakes proceeded from -- ha! ha!ha! I never once thought of your aunt!


Cypress. Nor did I know the aunt had a neice.


Enter COLIN. Colin. Mr. Parrots, the parson bes waiting up stairs to do the
job you bespoke him for.


Miss M. What, sir! have you brought a parson into my house too?


Parrots. Madam, he foretold he should marry me to you; and the devil take him
that makes a false prophet of a everend divine!


Cypress. Fire and fury! a fine blunder you have made with your stupid mimickries
-- Peggy, sure you will not --


Parrots. Be quiet, or I Will ask your pardon before the whole blessed bevy here.
(aside.) Don't wait for legacies of dead men's shoes, but buy new pumps to
dance at the four weddings of us two.


[takes Clifford's hand.] Capt. C. What says my lovely Julia? but let things go
as they will, I Will give an entertainment at Tilts! and who knows but Cupid and
Bacchus may light the torch of Hymen!


Parrots. Yes, when my dowager gets a sup in her eye, she will be able to see all
my perfections double -- and while the bottle goes round, my only imitations
shall be to'take off my glass!


FINALE.
JULIA. Love is ever breaking
Laws of his own making,
Though his mandates tell us,
We should never be jealous,
Yet what is most endearing.
Still to lose we are fearing.

PARROTS. Merry I, so you sing,
Fun our fun producing,
Hearts of care we lighten,
Joyous jokes at Brighton!

Chorus.
Merry I, so you sing,
COLIN. Here I Have eat fine wheat ears,
Sop'd in sea my neat ears;
Gollop'd South-down Mutton,
Tipsey Steine I strut on!

Chorus.
Merry I so you sing, etc.
JULIA. Light is my dragooning,
Sauntring, tripping, toning!
Captain fierce arrayed is,
But to kill the Ladies.

Chorus.
Merry I, so you sing, etc.
CYPRESS. I myself could kill! so
Vexed, I Will make my will though
And to one old Save-all,
That Is myself, I Will leave all.

Chorus.
Merry I, so you sing, etc.
MISS MELCOMB. Farewell Paregoric!
Gentle tales of Yorick
Loll me soft to slumber!
Sweet delights well number.

Chorus.
Merry I, so you sing, etc.
PARROTS. Sweet our moon of honey,
Sweet l'll touch your money;
Then so brisk and airy,
Hey for Tipperary!

Chorus.
Merry I, so you sing, etc.
THE END.

