THE CHASE: A PASTORAL DRAMA OF TWO ACTS.

Multa fidem promissa levant. HOR. CAMBRIDGE, PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR. MDCCLXXII.

ERRATUM.
For my, read our -- Page 11th -- 24th line.

TO WILLIAM MARTIN, Esquire L. L. B. One of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for
the County of Nottingham.
SIR,
I Should not have presumed to have made use of your Name, as the Patron of my
Pen, had I not known that you courted the Friendship of the Muses. This little
Drama which I now humbly offer to your impartial Eyes, whose small intrinsic
Value aspires not to those Applauses of a crowded Audience, when habited with
the gorgeous Decorations of a Stage, may, I hope, however, merit an Hour's
Perusal in the Closet, when the fatigued Mind demands a Relaxation from
Business; there naked and unmasked it will disclose its Deficiencies, and sue
for your Clemency, to dissipate the Anxieties which every early Writer feels
for the first Production of his Brain, as does

Your devoted SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.
December 17, 1771.
Dramatis Personae.
SARRASTES, TIBISTHEUS.
Two Noblemen of Arcadia. ALEXIS, Son to Sarrastes, educated as a Shepherd.
AEGEMON. STIMICHUS, ALCIMEDON, POLLIO, TITYRUS, LYCIDAS, MOPSUS,
Shepherds. RODETHUSA, Daughter to Tibistheus, educated as a Shepherdess MYSIS,
NEAERA,
Shepherdesses. NYMPH of the Groves.
Huntsmen, Shepherds, and Shepherdesses.

SCENE, ARCADIA.

Time, about thirteen Hours.

THE CHASE.
ACT I.
A little after Twilight. On one Side appear Rocks, on the other Mountains and
Valleys. Enter Sarrastes, Tibistheus, and Aegemon, with Huntsmen and
Attendants. SARRASTES. NIGHT's sable Monarchy in Haste recedes,
The Stars grow faint, and smiling Light succeeds:
Behold Aurora! Parent of the Day,
Betwixt yon towering Cliffs emits a Ray,
Fair Messenger of Phoebus, to proclaim
His near Approach to our ethereal Frame.
The Lark, in Raptures, spreads her russet Wings,
And, high in Air, her soft Sonatas sings:
The warbling Tenants of the Groves combine
In tender Greetings: From the lofty Pine
Sweet Philomel relates her tragic Tale,
As Progne skims across the dewy Dale:
The sleecy Tribes, awakened, stretch their Feet,
But, pent in Folds, for flowery Meadows bleat;
Their happy Masters, pitying their Cry,
Leap from their Beds, and to their Prisons hie.

Aegem. To Horse, my Lords -- from yonder Thicket rose
A beamy Stag.

Tibist. I see him -- there he goes.
AIR I.
Away, away,
No more Delay,
The Hounds are on the Scent:
Mount, mount your Steeds,
Actaeon speeds,
And gains the steep Ascent.
Though Risks alarm,
We'll fear no Harm,
Our dauntless Souls on Flame!
Down Hill, over Vale,
Up Rock we'll scale,
To keep in View our Game.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Alcimedon and Pollio. Poll. Such heavenly Music ravishes
my Soul!
Let me entreat thee --

Alcim. Whither would thou prowl?

Poll. To see the Hunt.

Alcim. To see the Hunt, thou silly!
Where is thy Nag?

Poll. I Will saddle our dun Philly --
I think she is able.

Alcim. Yes, thy Neck to break.

Poll. Forget not, Sir, the Promise thou did make.

Alcim. What Promise, Boy?

Poll. That which thou made last Spring --
How I should go an hunting.

Alcim. No such Thing;
Besides, the Mare's with Foal -- thou can not go --
Get thee to work.

Poll. Consent I pray thee.

Alcim. No.

Poll. Excuse me, Sir, -- I cannot work to day;
If Pan permits, tomorrow I Will make Hay:
Though not on Dun, there is Aegon's Diamond yet;
He cannot refuse me, as he is in my Debt.

Alcim. I like it not -- Should thou but jade his Beast,
Or break her Wind -- a Quarrel's next at least.

Poll. What, Sir, -- when I so often have kept his Sheep --
Helped him to plough, to sow, to weed, and reap?
Thou gav'st a Promise, therefore let me go.

Kneels down. Alcim. On these Conditions, Idler, then I do:
Observe thou thine tomorrow.

Poll. So I will,
Since thou today do let me have my Fill --
My Fill of Pleasure! -- Gods! how I will toil --
Thou shall not say thou do thy Pollio spoil.
AIR II.
Though a Novice -- no Matter,
My Joy is the greater,
By Use all Diversions grow vile:
It Is Newness that causes
Such thundering Applauses,
And makes us run mad for awhile.

Exit Poll. Alcim. solus. Now to return to Business: To Night,
In Hymen's Bands, these Foundlings we unite,
Though dubious of their Loves; but meet they must
Ere to the Gods we can discharge our Trust.
Young Rodethusa seems a toward Maid,
Obliging, easy, though of Men afraid --
Is Modesty a Fault? Girls should be coy:
Alexis too appears a ductile Boy.
Omitting but the Supper, we should do --
And, now I think on it -- I Will go kill an Ewe.
O -- here comes Stimichus.

Enter Stimichus. Stim. How fares it, Neighbor?
Dost' long to foot it to the Pipe and Tabor?

Alcim. No, no, my Friend -- Things yet are not complete.

Stim. Hah! -- Is the Maid unwilling?

Alcim. No -- this Treat
Puts Matters in Confusion -- Nothing's bought --
And our Neglect perplexes every Thought.
What makes thee smile?

Stim. Thy Ignorance.

Alcim. And why?

Stim. No Matter now -- I Will tell thee by and by.

Alcim. The Bridegroom finds the Feast -- pray does he not?
Indeed thou well might laugh.

Stim. Had thou forgot?
How did thou do when thou did Dorcas wed?
Call that to Mind: Is thy Remembrance fled?

Alcim. Youth's former Pleasures from us slip apace,
When hoary Hairs our Memories efface.

Stim. What now, Alcimedon!

Alcim. It Is very true.
The Fates as yet have but begun thy Clue --
Mine Is almost out!

Stim. How old dost' think I am?
Why I was Forty when Sol touched the Ram.

Alcim. And I was Sixty when he left the Scales:
Besides, my Eyes grow dim, my Hearing fails,
And all the sore Infirmities of Age
Begin to pinch, and hale me off the Stage!

Stim. No more of this I beg -- thou make me quake.

Alcim. I Will to my Dame -- by this Time she is awake.

Stim. About Provision.

Alcim. The main Article.

Stim. On that at present there is no need to dwell:
Step to thy Dorcas, but return to me,
And then these Stipulations we'll agree.

Alcim. Nay, do not stop -- walk slow, and I will follow:
If thou art out of Sight I Will give a Holla.

Exeunt Ambo. SCENE, a GROVE. The Sun rising. Alexis appears cutting down
Boughs, and singing the following Air. AIR III.
Oh! did the timorous Fair One know
The rending Pangs I feel,
With Love her frozen Heart would glow,
And every Anguish heal.
Unkind she shuns my odious Sight,
All Vows, all Sighs are vain;
Yet still her Syren-Beauties smite --
Assuage, ye Gods! my Pain.
Throughout the Night I never closed my Eyes,
But passed the restless Hours in venting Sighs;
Nor does the Morn afford me any Ease,
Throbbings and parching Fires my Members seize.
Who is there that could wish to be in Love
Like wretched me! and yet how have I strove
To snap the cruel Fetters, and regain
Primeval Liberty -- alas, in vain!
What art thou Love, thou strange mysterious Thing?
Had thou no Sire? did thou from Nothing spring?
An Origin thou had, from whence it is hid --
Our perfect Knowledge of thee is forbid --
Excepting this -- to know thou can torment
When thou for wanton Cruelty art bent.
Till now I had no Fellowship with Pain,
I knew not what it was to wear a Chain;
No Virgin's Charms had smote my giddy Eyes,
Nor was I wont to waste my Time in Sighs:
My Days rolled on in Ignorance and Ease;
All Things appeared as if conspired to please --
When Tyrant Love beheld my happy State,
And sculking caught me by a glittering Bait.

A Nymph of the Groves appears. Nymph. Crush thy Complaints, audacious Youth,
and know
The Gods, if pleased, may better Days bestow.

Alex. Almighty Powers! protect me from her Rage!
Aside. Goddess! compassionate my tender Age --
Kneeling. If I have said amiss -- forgive my Error!
I can no more -- I Am struck with such a Terror.

Aside. Nymph. Though Sorrow for awhile disturbs thy Peace,
Submit to Patience, and thy Pains shall cease:
A Father's Voice shall strike thy wondering Ear,
Life shall be sweet, and Joys on Joys appear.

Vanishes. Alex. Amazement! -- Gone? -- My Pulse denies to beat --
The Wards of Reason in Confusion meet --
This awful Visit -- wherefore was it paid?
To tell me I shall wed this lovely Maid?
"Though Sorrow for awhile disturbs thy Peace,
"Submit to Patience, and thy Pains shall cease."
This means that Rodethusa shall be mine,
If for the future I no more repine
At Cupid's Persecutions -- I Will obey
The strict Injunction -- Heaven shall not say
I slight its high Commands -- And yet it is hard
To suffer Torture, and to be debarred
Heaving a Sigh, or letting fall a Tear.
"A Father's Voice shall strike thy wondering Ear."
It is a Sentence I cannot explain --
This I Will forget -- 'twill only rack my Brain.
Suppose I tell my Mother what has passed --
Disclose my Passion -- Secrets cannot last --
She may unriddle what I cannot make out --
But then, perhaps, she will blaze it at my Rout;
And Folks may think -- Alexis is turned Fool:
On second Thoughts, it is best to keep it cool.

Exit. SCENE, a PLAIN. Enter Mopsus. Mop. Ho! Swain -- how dare thou drive
thy Sheep to mine?


Enter Lycidas. Lyc. Dost' think my Sheep will deign to herd with thine? Thou
sorry Jackanapes!


Mop. Take them away.


Lyc. That would be pretty.


Mop. Will thou not obey?


AIR IV.
Beware, thoughtless Swain,
Left my Hands may be fain
To give thy thin Bones a Salute:
It Is better to yield,
And surrender the Field,
Than come to a dangerous Dispute.

Lyc. Proud Boaster, come on --
I defy thee --

Mop. Begone.

Lyc. Hah, Coward! dost' think to escape
A Victor, and brag?
Take that, vaunting Wag --
Say -- Pride led thee into this Scrape.

Lycidas beats Mopsus. Enter Tityrus. Tit. Arcadians, fie! -- do ye behave like
Men?

Mop. Enough! enough!

Lyc. Will thou be easy then?
This Fellow had the Impudence to dare
Me to a Contest -- Nay, and did declare
Himself the Victor ere we had engaged:
Pray had not I a Cause to be enraged?

Mop. Thief, hold thy Tongue -- or I can something blab --
I can -- that will thy Reputation stab.

Tit. Make me your Judge -- I will the Quarrel end:
Mopsus, thy Charge -- Thou, Lycidas, attend.

Mop. The Accusation I shall bring is this;
I know in Honesty he is remiss:
As I was sitting here, keeping my Flock,
He comes and drives to them his rotten Stock,
In hopes to intermix his with my sound.

Lyc. Now let me ask -- To whom belongs the Ground?

Tit. It Is free to all that are Arcadians born.

Lyc. What say thou, Sir, to that? To wrong I scorn.
My Honesty is frail -- I am a Thief --
Please to expound thy Words.

Mop. I will in brief:
Did I not see thee, Varlet -- did I not --
As thou wast sculking to filch Mycon's Goat?
And when I cried -- "There! there he goes!" -- away
Thou slily slunk'st, defeated of thy Prey.

Lyc. Has not a Man a Right to take his own?
Think thou to have a mighty Secret blown?
And that my Character is now undone?
The Goat was mine -- by Wrestling fairly won:
Ask Mycon if he can the Debt deny:
Thy peevish, stupid Malice I defy.
Who broke down Linco's Fence, and barked his Vines?

Mop. Four Kids, two Ewes I paid -- the stated Fines.

Tit. Ye both are jealous of each other's Love,
And of your Spite I cannot, Sirs, approve --
Each wants to accuse the other where he can:
These foolish Squabbles don't become the Man --
Therefore be Friends.

Lyc. Yes, Tityrus, it is true
Love made us Foes: I Am willing to renew
Our former Friendship, since we are both to blame.

Mop. And so am I, if thou wilt renounce all Claim
To Rodethusa.

Lyc. No: I Will not do that.

Tit. Come, come -- shake Hands -- I Have thought of something.

Mop. What?

Tit. The best in Singing, his shall be the Prize:
Will you consent to that? Will that suffice?

Mop. So let it be.

Tit. She cannot be both's.

Lyc. Why no --
Thou reason'st well -- we'll then conclude it so.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Rodethusa and Neaera. Rod. Heigh-ho!

Ne. Heigh-ho!

Rod. Dear Heart, how we do sigh!

Ne. I am in Love!

Rod. Alas, and so am I!

Ne. Love is a Malady that few can cure.

Rod. Till now I ever thought myself secure.

Ne. Is Rodethusa smote at last?

Rod. She is.

Ne. And must my Friend her coy Reserve dismiss?

Rod. Her Fortitude is vanished -- Cupid's Dart,
That never errs, sticks in her conquered Heart.

Ne. Is young Alexis that high-favour'd Swain?

Rod. The melting Music thrills through every Vein!
Alexis! Oh how ravishing's that Sound!

Ne. Cupid, indeed, has made a ghastly Wound:
Aside. These burning Symptoms -- when did they appear?

Rod. But Yesterday.

Ne. But Yesterday, my Dear!

Rod. Long has the Youth confessed himself my Slave,
To which Avowal I no Credence gave:
So far from that, his fulsome Sight I Would shun --
If Face to Face -- I Would think myself undone:
And when the Tears stood quivering in his Eyes --
I Would fancy him a Tiger in Disguise.
But Yesterday! disrobed of my Fears,
This frightful Object amiable appears!
Close to a purling Brook, beneath a Shade
Of branching Elms, the lovely Boy was laid --
Pale was his Visage -- languishing his Eyes --
"Pitiless Maid!" he cried -- three heavy Sighs
Uttered the Rest -- Compassion melts the Ice --
My Soul dissolves -- I fall Love's Sacrifice!

Ne. Did not thy Countenance this Change betray?

Rod. He saw me not -- rising he went away.

Ne. I see no Reason that thou shoud'st bewail
Thy captive Heart. No -- I would rather hail
Thy Embryo-Bliss.

Rod. Perhaps it is not for me
He sighs and pines.

Ne. For whom then should it be?

AIR V.
Rod. It Is Conscience that assassinates
Each rising Hope, each budding Joy:
It Is Conscience that Dismay creates --
I Have been too rigid to the Boy!
For when he comes to hear
That he to me is dear,
He Will off and cry --
"Damsel, good bye,
"Now I Will be shy."
Then have not I a Cause
To fear the Youth's Disdain?
If he his Love withdraws,
Hah! how can I complain!

Ne. Self-Accusation does not rack my Mind:
My Swain in me did no Resistance find;
For to his first Addresses I was kind.
I do not ask thee if thou know his Name.

Rod. I may suppose it is Pollio.

Ne. Yes, the same --
Whence comes that Groan?
Steps behind the Scene. Good Heaven! whom do I see?
Pollio!

Rod. My Brother? -- It can never be.

Steps behind the Scene. Pol. [behind] A Murrain seize the Brute! -- What
Sister here?
I Am glad to find Assistance is so near --
Fly -- catch the Beast -- I Will baste the stumbling Jade!

Ne. [behind] My Pollio lives!

Pol. [behind] Hah! -- how dost' do, sweet Maid?

Ne. [behind] Give me thy Hand.

Pol. [behind] Sister, why do thou stay?
Quick, quick -- or else the Beast will run away.

They come forward. Ne. What ails the Youth? Oh, how his Eye Balls roll!
He shakes! he pants! he raves! he is mad, poor Soul!

Rod. Vex not thyself -- The Lad is very well;
No baneful Accident has him befell;
A Fall has only discomposed his Play --
He Would better stayed at Home and made his Hay.

Pol. Let loose my Arms.

Rod. Ill-manner'd Numscull!

Ne. Peace!
Thou will not go?

To Rodethusa. Pol. Then give me a Release.

A Sound of Horns at a Distance. AIR VI.
Pol. Hark! the merry-ton'd Horn --

Ne. Would I Would never been born!

Pol. Has unharbour'd the out-lying Stag --

Rod. Why, Brother, -- for Shame!

Pol. Now the Hounds seize the Game --

Ne. Ungrateful! -- Pol. And here I must lag.

Ne. Away, false Swain! no more I Will court
Thy tiresome Stay -- pursue thy Sport.

Pol. My Life, fond Maid, is wholely thine,
But let these few short Hours be mine.

Ne. Away! away!

Rod. Who bids thee stay?

Exeunt Omnes. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, a GROTTO. Rodethusa and Neaera appear sitting. RODETHUSA. I Know what
racking Conflicts tear thy Soul --
And pity thee -- but let soft Love control.

Ne. Hah! Rodethusa, what do thou prescribe?

Rod. Object not -- pause not -- my Advice imbibe.

Ne. Could thou put up with this Indifference?
Would thou not chase the faithless Boy from hence?
Laying her Hand on her Bosom. How easy it is good Counsels to impart,
But to pursue those Counsels is the Art.

Rod. Hear me, Neoera -- Pollio is young --
To call him faithless thou do do him wrong --
He loves, adores thee.

Ne. Yes -- he is thy Brother:
And, without Doubt, ye ost' assist each other.

Rod. How? Do thou think that I would aid Deceit?
Mistrustful Maid -- I scorn to love a Cheat.
AIR VII.
From Infancy, in Friendship's Ties,
As yet we have walked Hand in Hand;
Our Hopes and Fears, without Disguise,
We told, and wanted no Demand.
Shall one harsh Doubt obscure the Flame
Which to this Hour has been so clear?
Shall Discord to the World proclaim
We are not to each other dear?

Ne. Excuse my rash Surmise -- my Grief provoked
My Tongue to utter what I should have choked.
Friendship's a Blessing I shall ever prize,
So precious and so pleasing are its Ties.
Thou say thy Brother loves.

Rod. I do -- and know it.

Ne. In my Anxiety pray did he show it?

Rod. I blame him there -- but this I can attest,
The Joys of Hunting had his Mind possessed:
For, 'till this Morn, he never could acquire
My Father's Leave to see the Stag expire;
And having the Misfortune of a Fall,
It made him cross.

Ne. The Apology, though small,
Conveys some Ease.

Rod. Let Us to our fleecy Care --
While we are absent they may badly fare.

Exeunt Ambo. SCENE, a Room in Stimichus's Cot. Enter Alexis, with Mysis behind
him. Alex. This Morn's Adventure, and this timorous Maid,
Engage my whole Attention: I Am afraid
My Mother will remark it -- then I must
To her Direction these same Secrets trust.

Mys. Alexis!

Alex. [astonish'd] Here!

Mys. Look at me.

Alex. I obey.

Mys. Tell me, I beg, what troubles thee to Day?

Alex. [faltering] Me! Madam -- Nothing.

Mys. Nothing? This is strange.
Pray, Sir, what makes thy Countenance to change?
What -- I am not discreet enough to hear
A Son's sweet Secrets -- my obedient Dear?

Chucks him under the Chin. Alex. That she over heard me I can make no Doubt:
Vexation on it! now they all must out.

Aside. Mys. Hide Nothing from me.

Alex. With Attention hear:
Know that a Goddess did this Morn appear.

Mys. A Goddess! Boy -- then it was in a Dream.

Alex. To thee, who saw her not, so it may seem.
Whilst I was hewing Wood within the Grove,
And sighing at the Cruelty of Love,
(Who can ward off his never-erring Dart!)
I Am sure I tried -- but it was past my Art!)
A Deity, in shining Robes, confessed
Before me stood, and thus thy Son addressed:
"Crush thy Complaints, audacious Youth -- and know
"The Gods, if pleased, may better Days bestow:
"Though Sorrow for awhile disturbs thy Peace,
"Submit to Patience, and thy Pains shall cease:
"A Father's Voice shall strike thy wondering Ear;
"Life shall be sweet, and Joys on Joys appear."
Mysis meditates and retires. What can the Meaning of this Silence be?
Some wonderful Event she does foresee.

Walks about for some Time. Re-enter Mysis with Stimichus and Alcimedon. Stim.
Who is this cold inexorable Fair --
This Idol of thy Soul? Her Name declare.

Alex. A Sire's Command Alexis will obey:
Thy Daughter -- Rodethusa.

To Alcimedon. Alcim. Then away --

Mys. Seek for this Beauty.

Stim. And conduct her here.

Alex. Am I awake? Ye Gods, what do I hear!
Do ye indeed consent she may be mine?
Father! Alcimedon!

Alcim. This Night she is thine.

AIR VIII.
Alex. Waft me, Cupid! waft me straight,
To my dear enchanting Mate!
Who relenting,
Is consenting
To obey the Voice of Fate.
Eased of her late Alarms,
Love has added to her Charms,
Peace and Pleasure
Without Measure --
Hark! she calls me to her Arms!

Exit Alexis. Mys. What think ye now?

Stim. That it is by Heaven's Hand
All is conducted.

Alcim. That their Births are grand.

SCENE, a PLAIN. Enter Tityrus solus. Tit. Now these two Fools take me to be
their Friend,
And on a Lover let their Suit depend:
What Service it is to have one's Thoughts acute!
By interposing in their Morn's Dispute
I gain Esteem, and only them reserve
For worser Broils, which will my Purpose serve.
Should I succeed in this my Stratagem,
Whatever I do will all be laid to them.
Suppose, for fear the Maid should me betray,
I rob her of her Tongue -- The safest Way
After Enjoyment. Hush! I hear them coming --
Upon his Lyre young Lycidas is thrumming.
Enter Lycidas, Mopsus, and other Shepherds. Lyc. Now, Tityrus, lend thy
impartial Ear
To this our Match -- Arcadian Swains draw near.

Tit. Who first begins?

Lyc. Thou, Mopsus -- or shall I?

Mop. It matters not.

Lyc. My Voice I first must try.
Hums to his Lyre.
AIR IX.
[Lycidas begins.] Woman, Nature's fairest Jewel,
Man's chief Pride and Happiness;
Sometimes tender, sometimes cruel,
Fond of pleasing, loath to bless.
Yield, dear Charmer, yield and ease me;
Time is always on the Wing:
Ever will I strive to please thee;
Yield, now Beauty's in its Spring.

AIR X.
[Mopsus begins.] Little Cupids, hear my Prayer,
Commis'rate Woes that know no Cure;
To the beauteous Maid repair,
Relate the Pangs that I endure:
Tell her, in the softest Sighs,
It is to her I owe them all:
Gently whisper, "Mopsus dies!"
That only she can Life recall.

Tit. To say which of you two deserves the Prize
I cannot -- So some other Match devise.

Exit Tityrus. Lyc. What must we do? I think she should be mine.

Mop. Nay, hold thee there -- don't fancy she is thine --
My Right is best, because I sung the last.

First Shep. In my Opinion you should Lots up cast.

Lyc. I Will not agree to that.

Mop. Nor I.

First Shep. How then?

Second Shep. By Pan! I think you both two merry Men.

Lyc. Neither of us has got the Sire's Consent.

Mop. Nor have I to the Maid my Mind unbent.

Lyc. I Will with thee to Alcimedon.

Mop. Agreed.

Lyc. Let him the Case decide.

Mop. Well, then, proceed.

Exeunt Lycidas and Mopsus. Second Shep. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Good Luck attend
you, Sirs.

First Shep. Did thou ever hear of two such silly Curs?

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Sarrastes solus. Sar. A sudden Dizziness attacks my Head,
My Blood runs cold, my Spirits too are fled:
I must desist from following the Chase,
Though I am loath to leave it with Disgrace --
Tibistheus will excuse me: I Will repair
To some good Shepherd's Cot, and rest me there.

Going. Enter Alexis. Alex. I am afraid, my Lord, thou art not well:
May I conduct thee to my Father's Cell?

Sar. Thanks, courteous Youth -- thy Offer I receive.

Alex. My Lord, I Will step and fetch thy Horse, with Leave.

Sar. I will not trouble thee -- If it is not far
The Walk may be of Service to me -- Hah!
Sure I should know those Features!

Aside. Alex. How his Eyes
Are fixed on mine -- what strange Commotions rise
Within me -- every Word he utters shakes
My wondering Soul!

Aside. Sar. No -- Yet there is something makes
Me feel I know not how!

Aside. Alex. Why do we stay?

Aside. Sar. O Thought, rack me no more!

Aside. Alex. My Lord, this Way.

Exeunt Ambo. SCENE, a GROVE. Shrieking behind. Enter Tityrus with Rodethusa
Prisoner. Rod. Where would thou lead me, barbarous Man?

Tit. To Joy.

Rod. Villain! -- dost' think my Honor to decoy!

Tit. Those pretty ruddy Cheeks! those sparkling Eyes!
Cannot they show Pity to a Shepherd's Sighs!

Rod. What do thou mean by this Impertinence?

Tit. My Fairest, I Am in Love.

Rod. By what Pretense?

Tit. By those enticing Charms that smote my Heart!

Rod. Off! let me go!

Struggling. Tit. No -- thou must cure the Smart.

Enter Neaera. Ne. Where has this Ruffian borne my injured Friend?
Protect her, Gods! the virtuous Maid defend!

AIR XI.
Rod. Fell Monster! forbear
My Honor to tear!

Tit. It Is in vain to contend.
When there is none to befriend.

Ne. Help! help! she is undone!
Oh, where shall I run!

Rod. Tyrant! Monster!

Ne. Oh, she falls!

Tit. Now I have thee --

Ne. Help!

Alex. Who calls?
Enter Alexis. What a Scene! Who can it be?

Ne. Rodethusa!

Alex. Is it she!

Alex. Down, Villain! to the deepest Gulf in Hell --
In Lakes of Sulphur there thy Passions quell!

Knocks down Tityrus. Rod. May Heaven the charitable Deed repay!

Alex. Thy Prayer is heard -- Rise, Love, and let us away.

Rod. Alexis my Deliverer?

Alex. Thy Mate.

Rod. How irresistible art thou, O Fate!

Alex. Hymen has light'd his Torch -- all Things prepared --
To me thy Father this our Bliss declared.

Ne. Celestial Powers, be praised!

Rod. Art thou sincere?

Alex. Am I not then to Rodethusa dear,
That she should disbelieve her constant Swain?

Rod. I yield, my Hand is thine -- no more complain.

Ne. May Cupid still increase your mutual Fires,
And every Blessing crown your chaste Desires.

Exeunt Alexis, Rodethusa, and Neaera. Tit. [recovering] Am I alive or dead? I
wish the latter!
Since Fortune chooses all my Hopes to scatter.
By Pluto, and by his infernal Crew!
I wish I had returned the Dog his Due:
To show my Face, would be to get me pelted:
Friends I have none, so I cannot be sheltered:
To foreign Meads I Will drive my little Stock,
And live retired under some kind Rock.

Exit Tityrus. AIR. XII.
CHORUS behind the Scenes. What Joys with the Chase can compare?
There Is nothing can drive away Care
So soon as the Chase,
When Actaeon we trace;
Who bounding before us,
Horns and Hounds in full Chorus,
We cutting the thin yielding Air.
Over Lawns and through Forests we fly,
The swift-footed Stag in our Eye,
Which we never lose,
But soon him enclose;
His Strength now exhausted,
With Bites he is accosted --
Alas! poor Actaeon must die.
Enter Tibistheus and Aegemon. Aegem. This Day has been a Day of glorious Game!

Tibist. Its like before did never my Soul inflame:
The eager Hounds, with double Warmth, pursued
The starting Deer; as if the Gods them viewed:
For when the Scent came strong in every Breeze,
Impatient for Approach, they rushed with Ease
Through thorny Thickets, then like Lightning flew,
Snuffing the Steps imprinted in the Dew:
The panting Deer for Breath awhile stood still,
But the stanch Pack disdained to use him ill:
With their loud Cries the Valleys round us rung,
Till blowing with our Horns, away he sprung;
But leaping over a Bush he missed his Aim;
The Hounds came up, and seized the royal Game.

Enter Stimichus. Stim. Art thou my Lord Tibistheus, Sir?

Tibist. Yes, Friend.

Stim. My Lord Sarrastes begs thou wilt me attend.

Tibist. Was he not with us at the Death? -- Lead on:
To Stimichus. Couple the Hounds, and wait -- we'll here anon.

Exeunt Omnes. SCENE, the Outside of Stimichus's Cot. Tables and Benches before
the Door. Enter Lycidas and Mopsus. Lyc. Hey-day! -- and what is going forwards
here?
Seats, Tables, Trenchers -- here is to be some Cheer.

Mop. It Is well we came at such a lucky Hour;
We may be bidden if the Cream's not sour.
Here is the very Man.

Alcimedon enters from the Cot. Lyc. Speak thou.

Mop. Not I.

Alcim. Whom want ye, Shepherds?

Lyc. Let Us make some Reply.
Alcimedon going. Stay, Master, stay -- Our Business is with thee.

Alcim. Declare it then: Could ye nor hear, nor see?

Mop. Be quick, or else thou wilt spend thy Breath in vain;
Old Age is cross -- thou must not him detain.

Aside to Lycidas. Lyc. Thou have a Daughter, Sir -- a Beauty rare.

Alcim. Whose Name is Rodethusa -- Yes, she is fair;
And, what is more, at present she is a Maid.

Mop. Out with it -- now is the Time -- don't be afraid.

Aside to Lycidas. Lyc. O happy Youth! who shall this Virgin wed --
None but celestial-born must with her bed.

Mop. What think thou, Sir, of me -- I Am plump and jolly --

Lyc. I Am light and nimble --

Mop. Free from Melancholy --

Lyc. Wary --

Mop. Pacific --

Lyc. Ever toiling --

Mop. Wealthy.

Lyc. And, Pan be praised! my Constitution healthy --

Alcim. Celestial-born! No Mortal can survive
The rushing of a God -- Do not deprive
An hoary Father of his Age's Joy:
I have engaged her to a Neighbor's Boy;
And to retract a Promise is not right --
To give or take, my Soul disdains a Slight:
Let your ethereal Mansions you receive,
And to ourselves us petty Mortals leave.

Exit Alcimedon. Lyc. Here ends our Rivalship -- the Game is flown.

Mop. Do thou repine at Fate? -- Let Us laugh, not moan.

Lyc. True; Friendship has no Thorn to stunt its Blade;
Now it may spread, and hide us in its Shade.

Exeunt Ambo. Enter Alexis and Rodethusa. AIR XIII.
Alex. Sweet Elysium!

Rod. Ecstacy!

Alex. Happy, happy, happy me!

Rod. Lost in Pleasure's Maze I roam!

Alex. These Arms, my Dear, shall guide thee Home.

Rod. Lovely Creature!

Alex. Pride of Nature!

Both. When on those bright Eyes I gaze!
I glow! I burn! I melt! I blaze!

Enter Tibistheus, Stimichus, Alcimedon, Pollio, and Neaera, with Shepherds and
Shepherdesses. -- Sarrastes and Mysis come forth from the Cot. -- Tibist. I
hear, Sarrastes, that thou have been ill.

Sar. Yes: I was seized with a sudden Chill,
And, fearful of some Danger, left the Chase --
But, praise the Gods! my Health returns apace.
Thou will excuse my sending for thee here,
These honest Shepherds have a Wedding near,
Which Fancy much induces me to see.

Tibist. It Is well: It will be pleasing too to me.
Are those the Couple? What a graceful Pair!

Stim. And yet, my Lords, we know not who they are.

Sar. Are they not yours then?

Rod. What do I hear!

Alex. Fear not, my Love -- Heaven will these Matters clear.

Stim. Passing, my Lords, one Morning by the Cave,
Whose rocky Back divides the surging Wave,
A Place which we with sacred Awe revere,
An Infant's Cry struck my astonished Ear:
Approaching to the Avenue, I spied
A Babe in Velvet wrapped, and by its Side
A little Hound, (which with us lived and died.)
After examining my precious Prize,
I bore it Home, wiping it is watery Eyes:
My Dame delighted much with what I Would done;
We brought him up, and called the Youth our Son.

Mys. He'th been a dutiful and sober Boy;
Though not my Child, he is my chiefest Joy.

Alcim. Some few Days after, Sirs, as I passed by
That sacred Cave, I heard an Infant's Cry,
And entering in -- a beauteous Infant found,
And by its Side another little Hound:
(For, this my Friend, had told me, Sirs, before
Of his Adventure, which made me the more
Astonished at this second Incident)
Recov'ring from my deep Surprise, I went
And took the Infant up, and to my Cot
Conveyed it, pleased with the sweet Load I Would got.
As she in Years, so she in Beauty grew,
To Honor humble, and to Virtue true.

Tibist. What mean these strong Emotions that so shake
My troubled Soul!

Sar. It Is surely no Mistake!
Those handsome Features all confess the Mother!
And, lo! I see Tibistheus in the other --

A Nymph of the Groves appears. Nymph. The Gods no longer will your Births
conceal.
Children advance, and to your Parents kneel.

Vanishes. [They all appear astonished, and a profound Silence continues for
some Time.] Sar. My Son!

Tibist. My Daughter!

Alex. and Rod. Sire!

Stim. The Myst'ry's out --
Rejoice, my Friends, and greet them with a Shout!

A general Shout. Alcim. List up your Voices -- let the Air resound.

Another Shout. Rod. Have I a Father lost -- a Father found!

Tibist. Yes -- but a cruel Father! -- Oh, my Child!
Necessity parental Love beguiled:
A numerous Offspring forced me to expose
Thee, injured Innocence, to bring up those
Whom angry Heaven had said should never live
To bless a Father so severe -- forgive! --

Weeps over his Daughter. Rod. Oh, Sir -- thou art too good!

Sar. Pardon, my Son,
What thy unnat'ral, barbarous Sire has done --
'Twas I who sent thee hither -- Yes! 'twas I
Who thee exposed to thirst, to starve, to die!
The same which forced Tibistheus to the Act,
Forced also me -- but Heaven chose to retract
Her former Blessings to revenge the Deed.

Embraces his Son. Tibist. But what should the connubial Rites impede,
Sarrastes?

Sar. Thou have my Consent.

Tibist. Though, stay --
Here are some Debts which we have first to pay.

Sarrastes and Tibistheus commune with Stimichus and Alcimedon.] Rod. Has my
good Brother his Excuses made?

Ne. He has, my Dear.

Rod. Then let your Loves be laid
Before the Company.

Ne. That is not fair.

Alex. Neoera, fie! -- can thou refuse a Share
Of Mirth and Love? -- It is thy Friend's Request.

Rod. Pollio?

Poll. Pray speak a Word.

Ne. She is in Jest.

Aside to Pollio. Rod. Since you designed this for a Wedding-Night,
This amorous Pair you also must unite.
This, Sir, my Brother was.

[ Handing Pollio to Tibistheus. Tibist. I Will stand his Friend.

Alex. This, Sir, my Sister was.

Handing Neaera to Sarrastes. Sar. Son, I attend.

Tibist. I Will make a Settlement.

Sar. And so will I.

Stim. My Lords! --

Alcim. This is too much --

Tibist. Make no Reply.

Poll. By Pan! this has been a most glorious Day --
I think it is Time to leave off making Hay;
Now I may have my Belly-full of Hunting!

Ne. If thou in Gratitude be never wanting.

AIR XIV.
CHORUS. To Heaven our Voices in Songs let us raise,
And warble our Gratitude, Wonder, and Praise.

Alex. O Virtue! Source of every Joy,
Thy Guidance still I crave,
Lest Wealth and Honor me decoy,
And I become their Slave.

Rod. As yet thou have a Parent been,
And lent thy friendly Aid;
Still keep my Heart secure and clean,
Thou gone -- 'twill rust and fade.

CHORUS. Submit to Care,
And never despair,
All Pains shall have an End;
The virtuous Mind
Shall ever find
In Heaven a tender Friend.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

