THE NUN: AN ELEGY. By the AUTHOR of the MAGDALENS.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head, Pall Mall. MDCCLXIV.
[Price Six Pence.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP STANHOPE, EARL of CHESTERFIELD. THIS ELEGY IS,
WITH THE GREATEST RESPECT, INSCRIBED, BY HIS LORDSHIP's OBLIGED AND HUMBLE
SERVANT,

THE AUTHOR.

THE NUN.
WITH each Perfection dawning on her Mind,
All Beauty's Treasure opening on her Cheek,
Each flattering Hope subdued, each Wish resigned,
Does gay Ophelia this lone Mansion seek?
Say, gentle Maid, what prompts Thee to forsake
The Paths, thy Birth and Fortune strew with Flowers?
Through Nature's kind endearing Ties to break,
And waste in cloistered Walls thy pensive Hours?
Let sober Thought restrain thine erring Zeal,
That guides thy Footsteps to the Vestal Gate,
Lest thy soft Heart (this Friendship bids reveal)
Like mine unblest should mourn like mine too late.
Does some angelic lonely-whisp'ring Voice,
Some sacred Impulse, or some Dream divine,
Approve the Dictates of thy early Choice? --
Approach with Confidence the aweful Shrine.
There kneeling at yon Altar's marble Base
(While Tears of Rapture from thine Eyelid steal.
And smiling Heaven illumes thy Soul with Grace)
Pronounce the Vow, Thou never can repeal.
Yet if misled by false-entitled Friends,
Who say -- "That Peace with all her comely Train,
"From starry Regions to this Clime descends.
"Smooths every Frown, and softens every Pain:
"That Vestals tread Contentment's flowery Lawn,
"Approved of Innocence, by Health carest:
"That robbed in Colors bright, by Fancy drawn,
"Celestial Hope sits smiling at their Breast."
Suspect their Siren Song and artful Style,
Their pleasing Sounds some treacherous Thought conceal:
Full often does Pride with sainted Voice beguile.
And sordid Interest wear the Mask of Zeal.
A Tyrant-Abbess here perchance may reign,
Who, fond of Power, affects the Imperial Nod,
Looks down disdainful on her Female Train,
And rules the Cloister with an Iron Rod.
Reflection sickens at the Life-long Tie,
Back-glancing Memory acts her busy Part,
Its Charms the World unfolds to Fancy's Eye,
And sheds Allurement on the wishful Heart.
Lo! Discord enters at the sacred Porch,
Rage in her Frown, and Terror on her Crest:
Even at the hallowed Lamps she lights her Torch,
And holds it flaming to each Virgin Breast.
But since the Legends of Monastic Bliss
By Fraud are fabled, and by Youth believed,
Unbought Experience learn from my Distress,
Oh! mark my Lot, and be no more deceived.
Three Lustres scarce with hasty Wing were fled,
When I was torn from every weeping Friend,
A thoughtless Victim to the Temple led,
And (blush ye Parents) by a Father's Hand.
Yet then what solemn Scenes deceived my Choice?
The pealing Organ's animating Sound,
The choral Virgins' captivating Voice,
The blazing Altar, and the Priests around:
The Train of Youths arrayed in purest white,
Who scattered Myrtles as I passed along:
The thousand Lamps that poured a Flood of Light,
The Kiss of Peace from all the Vestal Throng:
The Golden Censers tossed with graceful Hand,
Whose fragrant Breath Arabian Odor shed:
Of meek-ey'd Novices the circling Band,
With blooming Chaplets wove around their Head.
-- My willing Soul was caught in Rapture's Flame,
While sacred Ardor glowed in every Vein:
Methought applauding Angels sung my Name,
And Heaven's unsullied Glories gilt the Fane.
This temporary Transport soon expired,
My drooping Heart confessed a dreadful Void:
Ever since, alas! abandoned, uninspir'd,
I tread this Dome to Misery allied.
No wakening Joy informs my sullen Breast,
Through opening Skies no radiant Seraph smiles,
No Saint descends to sooth my Soul to Rest,
No Dream of Bliss the dreary Night beguiles.
Here hagard Discontent still haunts my View;
The sombre Genius reigns in every Place:
Arrays each Virtue in the darkest Hue,
Chills every Prayer, and cancels every Grace.
I meet her ever in the chearless Cell,
The gloomy Grotto and unsocial Wood:
I hear her ever in the Midnight Bell,
The hollow Gale, and hoarse-resounding Flood.
This caused a Mother's tender Tears to flow,
(The sad Remembrance Time shall never erase)
When having sealed the irrevocable Vow
I hastened to receive her last Embrace.
Full-well she then presaged my wretched Fate,
The unhappy Moments of each future Day:
When locked within this Terror-shedding Grate,
My joy-deserted Soul would pine away.
Yet never did her maternal Voice unfold
This cloistered Scene in all its Horror dressed:
Nor did she then my trembling Steps withhold
When here I entered a reluctant Guest.
Ah! could she view her only Child betrayed,
And let Submission over her Love prevail?
The unfeeling Priest why did she not upbraid?
Forbid the Vow, and rend the hovering Veil?
Alas! she might not -- Her relentless Lord
Had sealed her Lips, and chid her streaming Tear,
So Anguish in her Breast concealed its Hoard,
And all the Mother sunk in dumb Despair.
But Thou who own'st a Father's sacred Name,
What Act impelled thee to this ruthless Deed?
What Crime had forfeited my filial Claim?
And given (oh blasting Thought!) thy Heart to bleed?
If then thine injured Child deserve thy Care,
Oh haste and bear her from this lonesome Gloom!
In vain -- no Words can sooth his rigid Ear:
And Gallia's Laws have riveted my Doom.
Ye cloistered Fair -- ye censure-breathing Saints,
Suppress your Taunts, and learn at length to spare,
Though mid these holy Walls I vent my Plaints,
And give to Sorrow what is due to Prayer.
I fled not to this Mansion's deep Recess,
To veil the Blushes of a guilty Shame,
The Tenor of an ill-spent Life redress,
And snatch from Infamy a sinking Name.
Yet let me to my Fate submissive bow:
From fatal Symptoms if I right conceive,
This Stream Ophelia has not to flow,
This Voice to murmur, and this Breast to heave.
Ah! when extended on the untimely Bier
To yonder Vault this Form shall be conveyed,
Thou Wilt not refuse to shed one grateful Tear,
And breathe the Requiem to my fleeting Shade.
With pious Footstep join the sable Train,
As through the lengthening Isle they take their Way:
A glimmering Taper let thy Hand sustain,
Thy soothing Voice attune the funeral Lay:
Behold the Minister who lately gave
The sacred Veil, in Garb of mournful Hue,
(More friendly Office) bending over my Grave,
And sprinkling my Remains with hallowed Dew:
As over the Corse he strews the rattling Dust,
The sternest Heart will raise Compassion's Sigh:
Even then no longer to his Child unjust.
The Tears may trickle from a Father's Eye.
FINIS.

