THE MAGDALENS: AN ELEGY. By the AUTHOR of the NUNNERY.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head, Pall Mall. M DCC
LXIII. [Price Sixpence.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MARY LEPEL, Baroness Dowager HERVEY of ICKWORTH. THIS
ELEGY IS, WITH THE GREATEST RESPECT, INSCRIBED,

BY HER LADYSHIP's OBLIGED AND HUMBLE SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

THE MAGDALENS.
LO! kneeling at yon Rail with pensive Air,
A numerous Train of suppliant Nymphs I spy:
Their youthful Cheek is pal'd with early Care,
And Sorrow dwells in their dejected Eye.
Hark, They attune a solemn plaintive Lay,
Where Grief with Harmony delights to meet:
Not Philomela from her lonely Spray
Trills her clear Note, more querulously sweet.
Are These the Fair who wont with conscious Grace
Proud Ranelagh's resplendent Round to tread?
Shine in the studied Luxury of Dress?
And vie in Beauty with the highborn Maid?
The smiling Scenes of Pleasure they sorsake,
Obey no more Amusement's idle Call,
Nor mingling with the Sons of Mirth partake
The Treat voluptuous, or the festive Ball.
For sober Weeds they change their bright Attire,
Of the Pearl Bracelet strip the graceful Arm,
Veil the white Breast, that lately heaved Desire,
And thrilled with tender exquisite Alarm:
Unbraid the cunning Tresses of the Hair,
And each well-fancied Ornament remove,
The glowing Gem, the glittering Solitaire --
The costly spoils of prostituted Love!
Yet Beauty lingers on their mournful Brow,
Unwilling to forsake the Tear-dew'd Cheek,
Which scarcely blushing with a languid Glow
Partakes a Softness delicately meek.
No more compare then to the stately Flower,
Whose painted Foliage wantons in the Gale:
They look the Lily drooping from the Shower,
Or the pale Vi'let sickening in the Vale.
Let not the Prude with acrimonious Taunt,
Upbraid the humble Tenants of this Dome,
That Pleasure's rosy Bower they used to haunt,
And in the Walks of loose-rob'd Dalliance roam.
If fond of Empire, and of Conquest vain,
They frequent Vot'ries to their Altars drew,
Yet blazed those Altars to the Fair ones' Bane,
The Idol They, and They the Victim too!
Some in this sacred Mansion may reside,
Who lost their Parents in their Infant Years,
And hapless Orphans! trod without a Guide
The Maze of Life perplexed with guileful Snares.
Some, that encircled by the Great and Rich,
Were won by Wiles, and deep-designing Art,
By splendid Bribes, and sost persuasive Speech,
Of Power to cheat the young unguarded Heart.
Some, on whom Beauty breathed her choicest Bloom,
Whilst adverse Stars all other Gifts removed,
Who fled from Misery and a Dungeon's Gloom,
To Scenes their inborn Virtue disapproved.
What though Their Youth imbibed an early Stain:
Now gilded by the Rays of newborn Fame,
A second Innocence they here obtain,
And Nun-clad Penance heals their wounded Name.
So the young Myrtles nipt by treacherous Cold,
(While still the Summer yields his golden Store,)
In sheltering Walls their tender Leaves unfold,
And breathe a sweeter Fragrance than before.
Though white-wing'd Peace protect this calm Abode,
Though each tumultuous Passion be suppressed,
Still Recollection wears a Sting to goad,
Still arrowy Remorse afflicts their Breast.
The torturing Hour of Memory this may prove,
Who wrapped in pensive Secrecy forlorn,
Sits musing on the Pledges of her Love,
Exposed to chilly Want, and grinning Scorn:
Left by their Father in the Time of Need,
Just in the unfolding Blossom of their Age!
"Was this, Seducer, this the promised Meed?"
She cries: Then sinks beneath Affliction's Rage.
Another mourns her Fall with Grief sincere,
Whom tranquil Reason tells she is shunned, disdained,
Repulsed as vile by those who held her dear,
Who called her once Companion, Sister, Friend.
That recollects the Day, when lost to Shame
She fondly sacrificed her vestal Charms:
Resigned the Virgin's for an Harlot's Name,
And left a Parent's for a Spoiler's Arms.
Imagination pencils to her Mind
The Father's Rage, the Mother's softer Woe:
Unhappy Pair! to that Distress consigned
A Child can give, a Parent only know.
The dreadful Picture fixes Sorrow's Dart,
Fond filial Passions in her Breast revive:
She feels keen Anguish preying at her Heart,
To Nature's Pangs too sensibly alive.
If this, or similar tormenting Thought,
Cling to their Soul, when pensively alone,
For Youth's Offense, for Love's alluring Fault,
Say, do they not sufficiently atone?
O mock not then their penitential Woes,
Thou, who may deign to mark this humble Theme,
Nor seek with foul Derision to expose
And give to Infamy their tainted Name.
Nor deem me one of Melancholy's Train,
If anxious for the Sorrow-wedded Fair,
(Though little skilful of poetic Strain
Whose pleasing Music takes the tuneful Ear)
I steal impatient from the idle Throng,
The roving, gay, Companions of my Age,
To temper with their Praise my artless Song,
And soft-ey'd Pity in their Cause engage.
It Is Virtue's Task to soothe Affliction's Smart,
To join in Sadness with the Fair distressed:
Wake to another's Pain the tender Heart,
And move to Sympathy the feeling Breast.
THE END.

