IL LATTE. AN ELEGY.

LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall. MDCCLXVII.

IL LATTE. An ELEGY.
Incipe, parve puer, risu cognoscere matrem.
YE fair, for whom the hands of Hymen weave
The nuptial wreath to deck your virgin brow,
While pleasing pains the conscious bosom heave,
And on the kindling cheek the blushes glow:
Whose spotless soul contains the better dower,
Whose life unstained full many virtues vouch,
For whom now Venus frames the fragrant bower,
And scatters roses over the expecting couch:
To you I sing. -- Ah! ere the raptured youth
With trembling hand removes the jealous veil,
Where, long regardless of the vows of truth,
Unsocial coyness stamped the ungrateful seal,
Allow the poet round your flowing hair,
Culled from an humble vale, a wreath to twine,
To Beauty's altar with the Loves repair,
And wake the lute beside that living shrine:
That sacred shrine! where female virtue glows,
Where even the Graces all their treasures bring,
And where the lily, tempered with the rose,
Harmonious contrast! breathes an Eden spring:
That shrine! where Nature with presaging aim,
What time her friendly aid Lucina brings,
The snowy nectar pours, delightful stream!
Where fluttering Cupids dip their purple wings:
For you who bear at mother's sacred name,
Whose cradled offspring, in lamenting strain,
With artless eloquence asserts his claim,
The boon of nature, but asserts in vain:
Say why, illustrious daughters of the great,
Lives not the nursling at your tender breast?
By you protected in his frail estate?
By you attended, and by you caressed?
To foreign hands, alas! can you resign
The parent's task, the mother's pleasing care?
To foreign hands the smiling babe consign?
While Nature starts, and Hymen sheds a tear.
When 'mid the polished circle ye rejoice,
Or roving join fantastic Pleasure's train,
Unheard perchance the nursling lifts his voice,
His tears unnotic'd, and unsooth'd his pain.
Ah! what avails the coral crowned with gold?
In heedless infancy the title vain?
The colors gay the purfled scarfs unfold?
The splendid nurs'ry, and the attendant train?
Far better had thou first beheld the light,
Beneath the rafter of some roof obscure;
There in a mother's eye to read delight,
And in her cradling arm repose secure. --
Nor wonder, should Hygeia, blissful Queen!
Her wonted salutary gifts recall,
While haggard Pain applies his dagger keen,
And over the cradle Death unfolds his pall.
The flow'ret ravished from its native air,
And bid to flourish in a foreign vale,
Does it not often elude the planter's care,
And breathe its dying odors on the gale?
For you, ye plighted fair, when Hymen crowns
With tender offspring your unshaken love,
Behold them not with rigor's chilling frowns,
Nor from your sight unfeelingly remove.
Unsway'd by fashion's dull unseemly jest,
Still to the bosom let your infant cling,
There banquet often, an ever-welcome guest,
Unblam'd inebriate at that healthful spring.
With fond solicitude each pain assuage,
Explain the look, awake the ready smile;
Unfeigned attachment so shall you engage,
To crown with gratitude maternal toil:
So shall your daughters in affliction's day,
When over your form the gloom of age shall spread,
With lenient converse chase the hours away,
And smooth with duty's hand the widowed bed:
Approach, compassionate, the voice of grief,
And whisper patience to the closing ear;
From comfort's chalice minister relief,
And in the potion drop a filial tear.
So shall your sons, when beauty is no more,
When fades the languid luster in your eye,
When Flattery shuns her dulcet notes to pour,
The want of beauty, and of praise, supply:
Even from the wreath that decks the warrior's brow
Some chosen leaves your peaceful walks shall strew:
And even the flowers on classic ground that blow,
Shall all unfold their choicest sweets for you.
When to the embattled host the trumpet blows,
While at the call fair Albion's gallant train
Dare to the field their triple-number'd foes,
And chase them speeding over the martial plain:
The mother kindles at the glorious thought,
And to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For, at the nurt'ring breast, the hero caught
The love of virtue, and the love of fame.
Or in the senate when Britannia's cause
With generous themes inspires the glowing mind,
While listening freedom grateful looks applause,
Pale slavery drops her chain, and sculks behind:
With conscious joy the tender parent fraught,
Still to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For, at the nurt'ring breast, the patriot caught
The love of virtue, and the love of fame.
FINIS.

