AN HEROIC POSTSCRIPT TO THE PUBLIC.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

AN HEROIC POSTSCRIPT TO THE PUBLIC, Occasioned by their favorable Reception
of a late HEROIC EPISTLE To Sir WILLIAM CHAMBERS, Knt. etc. By the AUTHOR of
that EPISTLE.

Sicelides musae, paullo majora canamus. VIRGIL. THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for J. ALMON, opposite BURLINGTON-HOUSE, in PICCADILLY.
MDCCLXXIV.

AN HEROIC POSTSCRIPT TO THE PUBLIC.
Verse 1. [I that of late]

Rle ego qui quondam, etc. VIRGIL; or somebody for him.
I THAT of late, Sir William's Bard, and Squire,
Marched with his helm and buckler on my lyre,
(What time the Knight pricked forth in ill-starr'd haste,
Verse 4. [Works of taste]

Put synonimously for his Majesty's works.

See Sir William's title page.


Comptroller General of the works of taste,)
Now to the Public tune my grateful lays,
Warmed with the sunshine of the Public praise;
Warmed too with memory of that golden time,
When Almon gave me reason for my rhyme;
-- glittering orbs, and, what endeared them more,
Each glittering orb the sacred features bore
Of George the good, the gracious, and the great,
Unfil'd, unsweated, all of sterling weight;
Or, were they not, they passed with current ease,
Good seemings then were good realities:
No Senate had conveyed, by smuggling art,
Verse 16. [Cadogan's part] Master of the Mint.


Power to the mob to play Cadogan's part;
Now, through the land, that impious power prevails,
All weigh their Sovereign in their private scales,
Verse 19. [And find him wanting.] Thou art weighed in the balances, and art
found wanting. Daniel, chap. 8, v. 27.


And find him wanting: all save me alone,
For, sad to say! my glittering orbs are gone.
But ill beseems a Poet to repent,
Lightly they came, and full as lightly went.
Peace to their manes! may they never feel
Some keen Scotch banker's unrelenting steel;
While I again the Muse's sickle bring
To cut down Dunces, wheresoe'er they spring,
Bind in poetic sheaves the plenteous crop,
And stack my full-ear'd load in Almon's shop.
For now, my Muse, thy fame is fixed as fate,
Tremble ye Fools I scorn, ye Knaves I hate;
I know the vigor of thy eagle wings,
I know thy strains can pierce the ear of Kings.
Did China's monarch here in Britain doze,
Verse 34. [A King of Prose.] Kien-Long, the present Emperor of China is a
poet. M. de Voltaire did him the honor to treat him as a brother above two
years ago; and my late patron, Sir William Chambers, has given a fine and most
intelligible prose version of an ode of his Majesty upon tea, in his postscript
to his Dissertation. I am, however, vain enough to think, that the Emperor's
composition would have appeared still better in my heroic verse; but Sir
William forestalled it; on which account I have entirely broke with him.


And was, like western Kings, a King of Prose,
Thy song could cure his Asiatic spleen,
And make him wish to see and to be seen;
Verse 37. [That solemn vein of irony.] "A sine vein of solemn irony runs
through this piece." See Monthly Review, under the article of the Heroic
Epistle to Sir William Chambers.


That solemn vein of irony so fine,
Which, even Reviewers own, adorns thy line,
Would make him soon against his greatness sin,
Desert his sofa, mount his palanquin,
And post wherever the Goddess led the way,
Perchance to proud Spithead's imperial bay;
Verse 43. [There should he see.] A certain naval event happened just about two
calendar months after the publication of the Heroic Epistle. 'Twas impossible,
considering the necessary preparations, it could have been sooner. Facts are
stubborn things.


There should he see, as other folks have seen,
That ships have anchors, and that seas are green,
Should own the tackling trim, the streamers fine,
With Sandwich prattle, and with Bradshaw dine,
And then sail back, amid the cannon's roar,
As safe, as sage, as when he left the shore.
Such is thy power, O Goddess of the song,
Come then and guide my careless pen along;
Yet keep it in the bounds of sense and verse,
Verse 52. [Nor like Mac-Homer.] See, if the reader thinks it worth while, a
late translation of the Iliad.


Nor, like Mac-Homer, make me gabble Erse.
No, let the flow of these spontaneous rhymes
So truly touch the temper of the times,
That he who runs may read; while well he knows
I write in meter, what he thinks in prose;
So shall my song, undisciplined by art,
Find a sure patron in each English heart.
If this it is fate, let all the frippery things
Be-plac'd, be-pension'd, and be-starr'd by Kings,
Verse 62. [Like old young Fannius.] The noble personage here alluded to, being
asked to read the Heroic Epistle, said, "No, it was as bad as blasphemy."

Verse 62. [Fannius.] Before I sent the M. S. to the press, I discovered, that
an accidental blot had made all but the first syllable of this name illegible.
I was doubtful, therefore, whether to print it Fannius or Fannia. After much
deliberation, I thought it best to use the masculine termination. If I have
done wrong, I ask pardon, not only of the Author, but the Lady. The Editor.


Frown on the page, and with fastidious eye,
Like old young Fannius, call it blasphemy.
Let these prefer a levee's harmless talk,
Be asked how often, and how far they walk,
Proud of a single word, nor hope for more,
Though Jenkinson is blessed with many a score:
For other ears my honest number sound,
With other praise those numbers shall be crowned,
Praise that shall spread, no power can make it less,
While Britain boasts the bulwark of her press.
Yes, sons of freedom! yes, to whom I pay,
Warm from the heart, this tributary lay;
That lay shall live, though Court and Grub-street sigh,
Your young Marcellus was not born to die.
The Muse shall nurse him up to man's estate,
Verse 76. [And break the black asperity of fate.]

-- "Si qua fata aspera rumpas,
Tu Marcellus eris."
VIRGIL.
And break the black asperity of fate --
Admit him then your candidate for fame,
Pleased if in your review he read his name,
Though not with Mason and with Goldsmith put,
Yet cheek by jowl with Garrick, Colman, Foot;
But if with higher Bards that name you range,
His modesty must think your judgment strange --
So when over Crane-Court's philosophic Gods,
The Jove-like majesty of Pringle nods,
If ever he chance to wake on Newton's chair,
He "wonders how the devil he came there."
Whatever his fame or fate, on this depend;
He is, and means to be his country's friend.
It Is but to try his strength that now he sports
With Chinese gardens, and with Chinese courts:
But if that country claim a graver strain,
If real danger threat fair Freedom's reign,
If hireling P**rs, in prostitution bold,
Sell her as cheaply as themselves they sold;
Or they, who honored by the People's choice,
Against that People lift their rebel voice,
And, basely crouching for their paltry pay,
Vote the best birthright of her sons away,
Permit a nation's in-born wealth to fly
In mean, unkingly prodigality;
Nor, ever they give, ask how the sums were spent,
So quickly squandered, though so lately lent --
If this they dare; the thunder of his song,
Rolling in deep-ton'd energy along,
Shall strike, with Truth's dread bolt, each miscreant's name,
Who, dead to duty, senseless even to shame
Betrayed his country. Yes, ye faithless crew,
His Muse's vengeance shall your crimes pursue,
Stretch you on satire's rack, and bid you lie
Fit garbage for the hell-hound, Infamy.
FINIS.
Just Published.
AN HEROIC EPISTLE to Sir William Chambers, Knight, Comptroller General of his
Majesty's Works, and Author of a late Dissertation on Oriental Gardening.
Enriched with Explanatory Notes, chiefly extracted from that elaborate
Performance. -- Non omnes Arbusta juvant, humilesque Myricae. VIRGIL.

BY THE AUTHOR OF THIS HEROIC POSTSCRIPT.

Printed in Quarto, the Eleventh Edition. Price One Shilling.

AN EPISTLE from OBEREA, Queen of Otaheite, to Joseph Banks, Esquire Translated by
T. Q. Z. Esquire Professor of the Otaheite Language in Dublin, and of all the
Languages of the undiscovered Islands in the South Sea. With Historical and
Explanatory Notes. Printed in Quarto. Fourth Edition. Price 1s.

OBSERVATIONS on the Discourses delivered at the Royal Academy. Addressed to
the President. Price 1s.

OBSERVATIONS on the Power of Climate over the Policy, Strength, and Manners of
Nations. Price 3s. sewed.

THE SIXTH PART of the New Foundling Hospital for Wit; being a Collection of
Fugitive Pieces in Prose and Verse, in no other Collection. Written principally
by Persons of Eminence and Fashion. Price 2s. 6d. sewed.

The Volumes, or Parts of this Work having been published at different Times,
it is humbly desired, that such Noblemen and Gentlemen as have occasionally
purchased any of them, and choose to complete the Work, will please to send for
the Volumes they want as soon as possible: it being intended, when the present
Impression is sold, to reprint the whole together, and sell the Work complete.
The whole is six Volumes, and may be had, neatly bound 18s. or sewed 15s. or
any Part separately 2s. 6d. sewed.

A COMPANION for a Leisure Hour, being a Collection of Fugitive Pieces, chiefly
serious; printed in the same Size and Manner; bound 3s. and sewed 2s. 6d.

On the First of March 1774, will be published,

Volume I. (Price 2s. 6d. sewed) to be continued occasionally,

THE FUGITIVE MISCELLANY. Being a Collection of such Fugitive Pieces, in Prose
and Verse, as are not in any other Collection. With many Pieces never before
published.

The New Foundling Hospital for Wit being finished, and the Idea of a
Collection of those Fugitive Pieces of Merit which occasionally appear in
Print, or are handed about in Manuscript, being approved by the Public; the
Plan will be continued under the above Title, that it may not seem compulsatory
on the Purchasers of the former Work to proceed. But it is intended to print
these Volumes in the same Size, that such Gentlemen as choose to have both, may
be enabled to bind them uniformly, if they please.

The Assistance of the Ingenious is humbly requested. They may be assured their
Favors will be very gratefully received.

Printed for J. ALMON, opposite Burlington-House, in Piccadilly; and sold
likewise by every other Bookseller in Town and Country.


