POEMS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS. VIZ. THE NUNNERY, THE MAGDALENS, The NUN, RUINS OF
AN ABBEY, YARICO TO INKLE, IL LATTE, FUGITIVE PIECES.


By Mr. JERNINGHAM.

La muse qui dicta les rimes,
Que je vais offrir a vos yeux,
N'est point de ces muses sublimes,
Qui pour amans veulent des Dieux.
GRESSET. LONDON: Printed for J. ROBSON, Bookseller, at the Feathers, in New
Bond-Street. MDCCLXVII.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 2. for unfold read infold. Page 36. line 5. for tea read tear.
Page 54. line 14 for seen read seem Page 57. line ^. for bolds read bold. Page
6^. last line, a (...).
CONTENTS.
THE Nunnery Page 1 The Magdalens Page 10 The Nun Page 17 Alisia, a Ballad Page
27 Matilda, a Ballad Page 33 To the P -- of W -- Page 38 Stanzas to the E. of
Chesterfield Page 41 The Naiad, to Dr. A Page 44 Lines in Mr. Hume's History
Page 47 The Lily's Triumph Page 48 The Rookery Page 50 The Dialogue Page 58
Celia sleeping Page 56 To the D -- of Q -- Page 59 The Strawberries Page 60 On
Lady Sarah B -- 's Cat Page 62 Imitated from the French Page 65 Elegy among the
Ruins of an Abbey Page 67 Yarico to Inkle Page 76 Il Latte, an Elegy Page 86
THE NUNNERY: An ELEGY.
I.
REtirement's hour proclaims the tolling bell,
In due observance of it is stern decree;
Each sacred virgin seeks her lonely cell,
And leaves the grate to solitude and me.
II.
Now throws the western sun a fainter glare,
And silence sooths the vestal world to rest,
Save where some pale-ey'd novice (wrapped in prayer)
Heaves a deep groan, and smites her guiltless breast.
III.
Save that in artless melancholy strains,
Some Eloisa whom soft passion moves,
Absorpt in sorrow, to the night complains,
For ever barred the Abelard she loves.
IV.
Within these ancient walls with moss overspread,
Where the relenting sinner learns to weep,
Each in her narrow bed 'till midnight laid,
The gentle daughters of devotion sleep.
V.
Of wantonness the pleasure-breathing lay,
Or laughter beck'ning from his rosy seat,
Or vanity attired in colors gay,
Shall never allure them from their lonely state.
VI.
For them no more domestic joys return,
Or tender father plies his wonted care,
The nuptial torch for them must never burn,
Or prattling infants charm the lingering year.
VII.
Often do they weave the chaplets pictured gay,
To deck their altars and the shrines around;
How fervent do they chant the pious lay?
How through the lengthening isle the notes resound?
VIII.
Let not the gay coquette with jest profane,
Mock their veiled life and destiny severe;
Nor worldly beauty with a sneer disdain
The humble duties of the cloistered fair.
IX.
The glist'ning eye, the half-seen breast of snow,
The coral lip, the bright vermilion bloom,
Awaits alike the inexorable foe;
The paths of pleasure lead but to the tomb.
X.
Nor you, ye vain, impute to these the fault,
If flattery to their fame no trophies raise,
Where through the dome with grandeur's treasures fraught,
The numerous fopplings lift the voice of praise.
XI.
Can artful phrases or alluring words,
Bid the pale cheek assume a second prime!
Can even Apollo's sweetly-sounding cords,
Arrest the speedy steps of conquering time.
XII.
Perhaps in this drear mansion are confined,
Some whose accomplished beauty can impart,
Each soft emotion to the sternest mind,
And wake to extacy the beating heart.
XIII.
But pleasure flies them a forbidden guest,
Decked with the flowers in youth's gay path that bloom,
The clay-cold hand of penance chills their breast,
And over the rays of fancy throws a gloom.
XIV.
Full many a riv'let wandering to the main,
Sequestered pours it is solitary wave;
Full many a flower is rooted from the plain,
To waste it is sweetness on the desert grave.
XV.
Some veiled Eliza (like the clouded Sun)
May here reside inglorious and unknown;
Some like Augusta might have reared a son
To bless a nation and adorn a throne.
XVI.
From flatt'ry's lip to drink the sweets of praise,
In rival charms with other belles to vie;
In circles to attract the partial gaze,
And view their beauty in the admirer's eye.
XVII.
Their lot forbids, nor does alone remove
The thirst of praise, but even their crimes restrain;
Forbids through folly's labyrinth to rove,
And yield to vanity the slackened rein:
XVIII.
To raise 'mid Hymen's joys domestic strife,
Or seek that converse which they ought to shun;
To loose the sacred ties of nuptial life,
And give to many what they vowed to one.
XIX.
Far from the circle of the splendid throng,
They tread obscurity's sequestered vale;
Their lonely hours unvaried creep along,
Unfan'd by pleasure's ever shifting gale.
XX.
What though they are sprinkled with etherial dew!
With blooming wreaths by hands of seraphs crowned!
Though heaven's unfading splendors burst to view,
And harps celestial to their ear resound.
XXI.
Still grateful memory paints the distant friend,
Not even the world to their remembrance dies;
Their midnight orisons to heaven ascend,
To stay the bolt descending from the skies.
XXII.
For who entranced in visions from above,
The thought of kindred razes from the mind?
Feels in the soul no warm returning love,
For some endeared companion left behind?
XXIII.
Their joy encircled hearth as they forsook,
From some fond breast reluctant they withdrew:
As from the deck they sent a farewell look,
Fair Albion sunk for ever to their view.
XXIV.
For thee who mindful of the encloister'd train,
Do in these lines their mournful tale relate;
If by compassion guided to this fane,
Some kindred spirit shall enquire thy fate.
XXV.
'Haply some aged vestal may reply,
'Oft have we heard him 'ere Aurora's ray
'Had painted bright the portal of the sky,
'At yonder altar join the matin lay.
XXVI.
'Where hapless Eloisa sought repose,
'Oft at yon grave would he her fate condole,
'And in his breast as scenes of grief arose,
'Sigh the kind requiem to her gentle soul.
XXVII.
'One morn I missed him at the hour divine,
'Along that Isle and in the sacristy:
'Another came, nor yet beside the shrine,
'Nor at the font, nor in the porch was he.
XXVIII.
'The next we heard the bell of death intone,
'And in the fearful grave we saw him laid:
'Approach and read on this sepulchral stone,
'The lines engraved to sooth his hovering shade.
THE EPITAPH.
XXIX.
BY Fate's stern hand untimely snatched away,
Does this deep vaulted cave a youth unfold:
He gave to solitude the studious day,
And pity framed his bosom of her mould.
XXX.
With lyre devoted to companion's ear,
Did he bewail the vestal's hapless doom;
Often has this marble caught his falling tear,
And for that generous tear he gained a tomb.
THE MAGDALENS. An ELEGY.
I.
AT yonder hallowed rail what scenes appear?
A numerous train of suppliant nymphs I spy!
Their youthful cheek is pal'd with early care,
And sorrow dwells in their dejected eye.
II.
Hark! they awake a solemn plaintive lay,
Where grief with harmony delights to meet;
Not Philomela from her lonely spray,
Trills her clear note more querulously sweet.
III.
Are these the fair who wont with conscious grace,
Proud Ranelagh's resplendent round to tread?
Shine in the studied luxury of dress!
And vie in beauty with the highborn maid!
IV.
The smiling scenes of pleasure they forsake,
Obey no more amusement's idle call;
Nor mingling with the sons of mirth partake,
The treat voluptuous, or the festive ball.
V.
For sober weeds they change their bright attire,
Of the pearl bracelet strip the graceful arm;
Veil the white breast, that lately sighed desire,
And to the wrapped eye heaved, the imprisoned charm.
VI.
Unbraid the cunning tresses of the hair,
And each well-fancied ornament-remove;
The glowing gem, the glittering solitaire --
The costly spoils of prostituted love!
VII.
Yet beauty lingers on their mournful brow,
As loath to leave the cheek bedewed with tears;
Which scarcely blushing with a languid glow,
Like morn's faint beam through drizzling rain appears.
VIII.
No more compare them to the stately flower,
Whose painted foliage wantons in the gale:
They look the lily drooping from the shower,
Or the pale vi'let sickening in the vale.
IX.
Let not the prude with acrimonious taunt,
Upbraid the humble tenants of this dome;
That pleasure's rosy bower they used to haunt,
And in the walk of loose-rob'd dalliance roam.
X.
If fond of empire and of conquest vain,
They frequent vot'ries to their altars drew;
Yet blazed those altars to the fair one's bane,
The idol they, and they the victim too!
XI.
Some in this sacred mansion may reside,
Whose parent's ashes drank their early tears;
And hapless orphans! trod without a guide,
The maze of life perplexed with guileful snares.
XII.
Some that encircled by the great and rich,
Were won by wiles, and deep-designing art;
By splendid bribes, and soft persuasive speech,
Of power to cheat the young unguarded heart.
XIII.
Some on whom beauty breathed her radiant bloom,
Whilst adverse stars all other gifts removed;
Who fled from misery and a dungeon's gloom,
To scenes their inborn virtue disapproved.
XIV.
What though their youth imbibed an early stain,
Now gilded by the rays of newborn fame;
A second innocence they here obtain,
And cloistered penance heals their wounded name.
XV.
So the young myrtles nipt by treacherous cold,
(While still the summer yields his golden store)
In sheltering walls their tender leaves unfold,
And breathe a sweeter fragrance than before.
XVI.
Though white-wing'd peace protect this calm abode,
Though each illicit passion be suppressed;
Still recollection wears a sting to goad,
Still fang'd remorse invades their anxious breast.
XVII.
The torturing hour of memory this may prove,
Who wrapped in pensive secresy forlorn;
Sits musing on the pledges of her love,
Exposed to chilly want, and grinning scorn:
XVIII.
Forgot, deserted in the extremest need,
By him who ought to shield their tender age:
Was this seducer this the promised meed!
She cries, then sinks beneath affliction's rage.
XIX.
Another mourns her fall with grief sincere,
Whom tranquil reason tells she is shunned, disdained;
Repulsed as vile by those who held her dear,
Who called her once companion, sister, friend.
XX.
That recollects the day when lost to shame,
She fondly sacrificed her vestal charms:
Resigned the virgin's, for an harlot's name,
And left a parent's for a spoiler's arms.
XXI.
Imagination pencils to her mind
The father's rage, the mother's softer woe:
Unhappy pair! to that distress consigned,
A child can give, a parent only know.
XXII.
The tragic picture fixes sorrow's dart,
While filial passions in her breast revive:
She feels beak'd anguish preying at her heart,
To nature's pangs too sensibly alive!
XXIII.
If this or similar tormenting thought,
Cling to their soul, when pensively alone;
For youth's offense, for Love's alluring fault,
Say, do they not sufficiently atone!
XXVI.
Oh mock not then their penitential woes,
Thou who may deign to mark this humble theme;
Nor seek with foul derision to expose,
And give to infamy their tainted name.
XXV.
Nor deem me one of melancholy's train,
If anxious for the sorrow-wedded fair;
(Tho little skilful of poetic strain,
Whose pleasing music takes the tuneful ear.)
XXVI.
I steal impatient from the idle throng,
The roving gay companions of my age;
To temper with their praise my artless song,
And soft-ey'd pity in their cause engage.
XXVII.
It Is virtue's task to soothe affliction's smart,
To join in sadness with the fair distressed:
Wake to another's pain the tender heart,
And move to sympathy the feeling breast.
THE NUN: An ELEGY.
Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum.
I.
WITH each perfection dawning on her mind,
All beauty's treasure opening on her cheek;
Each flattering hope subdued, each wish resigned,
Does gay Ophelia this lone mansion seek!
II.
Say, gentle maid, what prompts thee to forsake,
The paths thy birth and fortune strew with flowers?
Through nature's kind endearing ties to break,
And waste in cloistered walls thy pensive hours?
III.
Let sober thought restrain thine erring zeal,
That guides thy footsteps to the vestal gate;
Lest thy soft heart (this friendship bids reveal)
Like mine unblest, should mourn like mine too late.
IV.
Does some Angelic lonely-whisp'ring voice,
Some sacred impulse, or some dream divine,
Approve the dictates of thy early choice! --
Approach with confidence the awful shrine.
V.
There kneeling at yon altar's marble base,
(While tears of rapture from thine eyelid steal,
And smiling heaven illumes thy soul with grace)
Pronounce the vow thou never can repeal.
VI.
But if misled by false-entitled friends,
Who say -- 'that peace with all her comely train;
'From starry regions to this clime descends,
'Smooths every frown, and softens every pain:
VII.
'That vestals tread contentment's flowery lawn,
'Approv'd of innocence, by health carest:
'That robbed in colors bright by fancy drawn,
'Celestial hope sits smiling at their breast.
VIII.
Suspect their siren song and artful style,
Their pleasing sounds some treacherous thought conceal;
Full often does pride with sainted voice beguile,
And sordid interest wear the mask of zeal.
IX.
A tyrant Abbess here perchance may reign,
Who fond of power, affects the imperial nod;
Looks down disdainful on her female train,
And rules the cloister with an iron rod.
X.
Reflection sickens at the life-long tie,
Back-glancing memory acts her busy part;
Its charms the world, unfolds to fancy's eye,
And sheds allurement on the wishful heart.
XI.
Lo! discord enters at the sacred porch,
Rage in her frown, and terror on her crest:
Even at the hallowed lamps she lights her torch,
And holds it flaming to each virgin breast.
XII.
But since the legends of monastic bliss,
By fraud are fabled, and by youth believed;
Unbought experience learn from my distress,
Oh! mark my lot, and be no more deceived.
XIII.
Three lustres scarce with hasty wing were fled,
When I was torn from every weeping friend;
A thoughtless victim to the temple led,
And (blush, ye parents) by a father's hand.
XIV.
Yet then what solemn scenes deceived my choice!
The pealing organ's animating sound;
The choral virgin's captivating voice,
The blazing altar, and the priests around;
XV.
The train of youth arrayed in purest white,
Who scattered myrtles as I passed along:
The thousand lamps that poured a flood of light,
The kiss of peace from all the vestal throng.
XVI.
The golden censers tossed with graceful hand,
Whose fragrant breath Arabian odor shed;
Of meek-ey'd novices the circling band,
With blooming chaplets wove around their head.
XVII.
-- My willing soul was caught in rapture's flame,
While sacred ardor glowed in every vein;
Methought applauding Angels sung my name,
And heaven's unsullied glories gilt the fane.
XVIII.
Methought in sunbeams robed the heavenly spouse
Indulged the longings of my holy love:
Not undelighted heard my virgin vows --
While over the altar waved the mystic dove.
XIX.
This temporary transport soon expired,
My drooping heart confessed a dreadful void:
Ever since, alas! abandoned, uninspir'd,
I tread this dome, to misery allied.
XX.
No wakening joy informs my sullen breast,
Through opening skies no radiant seraph smiles;
No saint descends to soothe my soul to rest!
No dream of bliss the dreary night beguiles.
XXI.
Here haggard discontent still haunts my view,
The sombre genius reigns in every place;
Arrays each virtue in the darkest hue,
Chills every prayer, and cancels every grace.
XXII.
I meet her ever in the chearless cell,
The gloomy grotto and unsocial wood:
I hear her ever in the midnight bell,
The hollow gale, and hoarse-resounding flood.
XXIII.
This caused a mother's tender tears to flow,
(The sad remembrance time shall never erase)
When having sealed the irrevocable vow,
I hastened to receive her last embrace.
XXIV.
Full-well she then presaged my wretched fate,
The unhappy moments of each future day:
When locked within this unrelenting grate,
My joy-deserted soul would pine away.
XXV.
Yet never did her maternal voice unfold,
This cloistered scene in all its horror dressed;
Nor did she then my trembling steps withold,
When here I entered a reluctant guest.
XXVI.
Ah! could she view her only child betrayed,
And let submission over her love prevail?
The unfeeling priest why did she not upbraid,
Forbid the vow, and rend the hovering veil?
XXVII.
Alas! she might not -- her relentless lord
Had sealed her lips, and chid her streaming tears;
So anguish in her breast concealed its hoard,
And all the mother sunk in dumb despair.
XXVIII.
But thou who own'st a father's sacred name,
What act impelled thee to this ruthless deed!
What crime had forfeited my filial claim!
And given (Oh! blasting thought) thy heart to bleed.
XXIX.
If then thine injured child deserve thy care,
Oh! haste and bear her from this lonesome gloom:
In vain -- no words can soothe his rigid ear;
And Gallia's laws have riveted my doom.
XXX.
Ye cloistered fair! ye censure-breathing saints,
Suppress your taunts, and learn at length to spare;
Though mid these holy walls I vent my plaints,
And give to sorrow what is due to prayer.
XXXI.
I fled not to this mansion's deep recess,
To veil the blushes of a guilty shame;
The tenor of an ill-spent life redress,
And snatch from infamy a sinking name.
XXXII.
Yet let me to my fate submissive bow,
From fatal symptons if I right conceive;
This stream, Ophelia, has not long to flow,
This voice to murmur and this breast to heave.
XXXIII.
Ah! when extended on the untimely bier,
To yonder vault this form shall be conveyed;
Thou Wilt not refuse to shed one grateful tear,
And breathe the requiem to my fleeting shade.
XXXIV.
With pious footstep join the sable train,
As through the lengthening isle they take their way:
A glimmering taper let thy hand sustain,
Thy soothing voice attune the funeral lay.
XXXV.
Behold the Minister who lately gave,
The sacred veil, in garb of mournful hue;
(More friendly office) bending over my grave,
And sprinkling my remains with hallowed dew:
XXXVI.
As over the corse he strews the rattling dust,
The sternes^ heart will raise compassion's sigh:
Even then no longer to his child unjust,
The tears may trickle from a father's eye.
ALISIA. A BALLAD.
I.
TO yon dark grove Alisia flew,
Just at the appointed hour;
To meet the youth whose bosom true,
Confessed her beauty's power.
II.
All that fair beauty could bestow,
Or fairer virtue give,
Did on his face unrivaled glow,
And in his bosom live.
III.
But not the charm of beauty's flower,
Or virtue's fairer charm;
Could in her father's soul the power
Of Avarice disarm.
IV.
He bad the youth his mansion fly,
And scorned his ardent vow:
And when the tears flowed from his eye,
He bad them faster flow.
V.
Alisia with a bleeding mind,
Beheld the injured youth:
And vowed, in holy wedlock joined,
To crown at length his truth.
VI.
As she forsook her native seat,
'Farewell ye fields so fair;
'May blessings still my Father meet!
'She said -- and dropped a tear.
VII.
The oppression of a parent's hand,
A parent dead to shame:
In her meek breast by virtue fan'd,
Never quenched the filial flame.
VIII.
Now safe she reached the appointed ground,
Though love was all her guide;
But absent when the youth she found,
She looked around and sighed.
IX.
Each breeze that rustled over the tree,
Soothed for a space her smart;
She fondly cried -- Oh that is he!
While patted fast her heart.
X.
The pleasing images of hope,
Night's terrors now deform:
While on her mind drear sceneries open,
And raise the mental storm.
XI.
On some rude stone she bowed her head,
All helpless and forlorn;
Now starting from her rugged bed,
She wished the lingering morn.
XII.
With heavy heart I now unfold,
What the absent youth befell;
Who fierce beset by ruffians bold,
Oppressed with numbers fell:
XIII.
At length the morn disclosed its ray,
And calmed Alisia's fear;
She restless took her various way,
(Distracted) here and there.
XIV.
Thus as she wandered, wretched maid,
To misery doomed! she found
A naked corse along the shade,
And gash'd with many a wound.
XV.
Struck to the soul at this dread scene,
All motionless she stood!
To view the raven bird obscene,
Drink up the clotting blood.
XVI.
What horrors did her breast invade,
When as she nearer drew?
The features that the raven fed,
Her lover gave to view.
XVII.
With shrieks she rent the affrighted air!
To tears had fond recourse;
With frantic hand now tore her hair,
Now sunk upon the corse.
XVIII.
Then throwing round a troubled glance,
With madness' ray inflamed:
Beheld some travelers advance,
To whom she thus exclaimed.
XIX.
'Ye base inhuman train, away!
'What urged yon to this deed?
'You've turned my gentle love to clay,
'And bad me sorrow wed.
XX.
'Hark, hark! the raven flaps her wings --
'She drinks his blood again --
'Ah I now she feeds on my heart strings --
'Oh Jesu! soothe my pain.
XXI.
This scene of woe what could create,
The travelers admired;
While shrinking at the blow of fate,
She with a groan expired.
MATILDA. A BALLAD.
I.
OUtrageous did the loud wind blow,
Across the sounding main!
The vessel tossing to and fro,
Could scarce the storm sustain.
II.
Matilda to her fearful breast,
Held close her infant dear;
His presence all her fears increased,
And waked the tender tear.
III.
Now nearer to the grateful shore,
The shattered vessel drew:
The daring waves now cease to roar,
Now shout the exulting crew.
IV.
Matilda with a mother's joy,
Gave thanks to heaven's power:
How fervent she embraced her boy!
How blessed the saving hour.
V.
Oh much deceived and hapless fair!
Though ceased the waves to roar,
Thou from that fatal moment never,
Did taste of pleasure more.
VI.
For stepping forth from off the deck,
To reach the welcome ground;
The Babe unclasping from her neck,
Plunged in the gulf profound.
VII.
Amazement-chain'd! her haggard eye
Gave not a tear to flow;
Her bosom heaved no conscious sigh,
She stood a sculptured woe.
VIII.
To snatch the child from instant death,
Some braved the threatening main;
And to recall his fleeting breath,
Tried every art in vain.
IX.
But when the corse first met her view,
Stretched on the pebbly strand:
Awak'ning from her trance she flew,
And pierced the opposing band;
X.
With tresses discomposed and rude,
Fell prostrate on the ground;
To the infant's lips her lips she glew'd,
And sorrow burst its bound.
XI.
Uprising now with frantic air,
To the wide-circling crowd,
Who, pity-struck, partook her care,
She thus discoursed aloud.
XII.
'Heard ye the helpless infant weep!
'Saw ye the mother bold!
'How as she flung him in the deep,
'The billows over him rolled.
XIII.
'May beak'd remorse her bosom tea^*
'Despair her mind up-plough!
'Its angry arm let justice rear,
'To dash her impious brow.
XIV.
'But soft, awhile -- see there he lies,
'Embalm'd in infant sleep:
'Why fall the dew-drops from your eyes,
'What cause is here to weep!
XV.
'Yes, yes! his little life is fled,
'His heaveless breast is cold;
'What tears will not thy mother shed,
'When thy sad tale is told!
XVI.
Ah me! that cheek of livid hue,
'If much I do not err!
Those lips were late the roses blew,
'All, all, my son declare.
XVII.
Strange horrors chill my every vein,
'A voice confused and wild,
Whispers to this distracted brain,
'Matilda slew her child.
XVIII.
She added not -- but sunk oppressed --
Death on her eyelids stole:
While from her much afflicted breast,
She sighed her troubled soul.
To -- --
APOLLO bids the muses rove,
The lonely path the silent grove:
He bids the graces often resort,
To festive scenes and splendid court,
Yet will he let the muse repair,
To where Charlotta guards her heir;
Unblam'd the royal babe approach,
And strew fresh flowerets over his couch,
As on his cheek buds nature's rose,
With virtue's bud his bosom glows;
Whose foliage opening into day,
Shall each parental streak display:
And when the coming spring prevails
With sweets maternal, scent the gales.
Your choicest wreath, ye fairies bring,
To crown the little embrio king:
Behold that hand with gewgaws play,
Which shall Britannia's scepter sway:
Attentive over the nurs'ry plain,
Behold him range his mimic men:
Unconscious of the future hour,
When vested with imperial power,
He, Hero-like, shall lead his train,
To combat on a real plain;
While victory shall bless the war,
And scatter laurels from her car: --
Illustrious babe, though deaf to praise,
For thee I frame these humble lays:
The day will come (but may kind fate
Keep back that day 'till very late)
When thou thy much-loved father's heir,
Like him shal't grace the regal chair;
Shall hold, approved the imperial helm,
And bless, like him, a grateful realm.
Oh! then shall praise ring out her peal,
And flattery her bright flowerets deal:
Ah, if thine eye in future time
Should chance to mark this artless rhyme,
When stretched beneath the funeral ground,
This frame shall lay with osier bound;
Thou Wilt find one of the muse's train,
For thee awaked his gentle strain:
What time unconscious of the theme,
That did unfold thy future fame;
Thou cou'd'st not with a smile reward
The numbers of the unvenal bard:
While they who shall these lines peruse,
If lines like these survive their muse;
Shall own, when they look up to you,
That he was bard and prophet too.
To the EARL of CHESTERFIELD. AUGUST 7th.
I.
Reclined beneath thy shade, Blackheath!
From politics and strife apart;
His temples twined with laurel-wreath,
And virtue smiling at his heart:
II.
Will Chesterfield the muse allow,
To break upon his still retreat?
To view if health still smooths his brow,
And prints his grove with willing feet?
III.
Though gratitude is rarely found,
At court or spacious drawing room;
Still shall she tread poetic ground,
And favors past shall never intomb.
IV.
'Twas this awaked the present theme,
And bad it reach thy distant ear;
Where if no rays of genius beam,
Sincerity at least is there.
V.
May pale disease fly far aloof,
Over venal domes its flag display;
And health beneath thy peaceful roof,
Add luster to thine evening ray.
VI.
If this my fervent wish be crowned,
I Will dress with flowr's the godhead's shrine: --
Nor thou with wisdom's chaplet bound,
At any absent gift repine.
VII.
What though thou do not grace a throne,
While subjects bend the supple knee;
No other king the muses own,
And science lifts her eye to thee.
VIII.
Though deafness by a doom severe,
Steals from thy ear the murmuring rill;
Or Philomel's delightful air,
Even deem not this a partial ill.
IX.
Ah, if anew thine ear was strung,
Awake to every voice around?
Thy praises by the many sung,
Would stun thee with the choral sound! --
THE NAIAD. To Dr. AKENSIDE.
I.
ONCE did this cool and twilight grot,
Which babbling streams surround;
And all this still umbrageous spot,
Re-echo to thy sound!
II.
Thy tuneful muse' harmonious sound!
My mind retains the day;
When circling Naiads beat the ground,
In honor of thy lay.
III.
How pleasure brightened every face!
How murmured soft the stream;
How flushed each flower a newborn grace,
As conscious of thy theme.
IV.
Ever since the mazy, tinkling rill,
Or Philomela's air;
Resounding clear at evening still,
Are all the notes we hear.
V.
Rejoin (nor let this prayer be vain)
Rejoin our pebbled haunts:
Once more awake the unwilling strain,
That our fair troop enchants.
VI.
Thee now alas occasion dear,
Calls to this grotto's gloom:
From Naiads gush the heart-sprung tear,
And soils their wonted bloom.
VII.
For Aganippe, lovely maid,
To mirth become a foe;
On her white arm reclines her head,
A prey to constant woe.
VIII.
This morn at twilight's grateful hour,
The subject Naiad throng;
Approached the virgin's lonely bower,
And plied a soothing song:
IX.
But music's soothing art was vain,
To raise her eyelids dim:
'Till one of the fair choral train,
Tuned thine unrivaled hymn.
X.
Ah, when that pleasing line was heard,
That sounds her grateful name;
Her drooping head she gently reared,
And owned the powerful theme.
XI.
Revisit then our watery bowers,
And bring thy magic lyre:
Ah, bring thy wreath of smiling flowers,
And lead the tuneful choir:
WRITTEN IN MR. HUME's HISTORY.
I.
BIG with the tales of other years,
Here lays the historic tome;
Which to the pensive mind appears,
A deep capacious tomb:
II.
Where long embalmed by Clio's hand,
The patriot and the slave;
Who saved, and who betrayed the land,
Press one extensive grave:
III.
With those that grasped the imperial helm,
And trod the path of power:
With those who graced fair learning's realm,
And beauty's fairer bower:
IV.
If thus the illustrious close their scene,
Oblivion then may laugh;
What flows from Hume's immortal pen,
Is but an Epitaph!
THE LILY's TRIUMPH.
THE sun unveiled his brightest ray,
The birds attun'd their sweetest lay;
As Flora issued from her bower,
To shed perfumes on every flower.
As she approached her painted train,
With joy she viewed the cheerful scene;
This flower she kissed, and that she raised --
She gathered one, another praised;
Yet still of all her gay parterre,
The lily seemed her greatest care;
Meek child, the radiant goddess cried,
Of gardens now be thou the pride.
Know that Lucinda, beauteous fair!
Does thee to all my train prefer.
Ah go beyond thy equals blessed,
And breathe thine odor on her breast;
Yet envy not that ivory shrine,
Whose whiteness far surpasses thine;
By nature's hand with incense spread,
Whose sweetness far does thine exeeed:
Enough that thou enjoy'st the seat,
Where virtue and the graces meet.
THE ROOKERY.
OH thou who dwell'st upon the bough,
Whose tree does wave its verdant brow;
And spreading shades, the distant brook,
Accept these lines, dear sister Rook!
And when thou'st read my mournful lay,
Extend thy wing and fly away,
Lest pinion-maim'd by fiery shot,
Thou should like me bewail thy lot;
Lest in thy rook'ry be renewed,
The tragic scene which here I viewed.
The day declined, the evening breeze
Gently rocked the silent trees,
While spreading over my peopled nest,
I hushed my callow young to rest:
When suddenly an hostile sound,
Explosion dire! was heard around:
And levelled by the hand of fate,
The angry bullets pierced my mate;
I saw him fall from spray to spray,
Till on the distant ground he lay:
With tortured wing he beat the plain,
And never caw'd to me again.
Many a neighbor, many a friend,
Deformed with wounds, invoked their end:
All screaming, omen'd notes of woe,
Against man our unrelenting foe:
These eyes beheld my pretty brood,
Fluttering in their guiltless blood:
While trembling on the shattered tree,
At length the gun invaded me;
But wayward fate severely kind,
Refused the death, I wished to find:
Oh! farewell pleasure, peace, farewell,
And with the gory raven dwell.
Was it for this I shunned retreat,
And fixed near man my social seat?
For this destroyed the insect train,
That eat unseen the infant grain!
For this with many an honest note,
Issuing from my artless throat;
I cheered my Lady, listening near,
Working in her elbow chair?
THE DIALOGUE.
EVANDER. OH thou (so very rarely found)
With youth at once, and wisdom crowned:
If yet no swain with happy art,
Ever fond a passage to thy heart:
(Stain not thy cheek with crimson hue,
But tell me, fair Belinda, true)
Each vain distinction I Will remove,
And take thee for my bridal love!

BELINDA. This guileless breast does love awake?
It glows for my Evander's sake:
No daring youth shall ever steal
The sacred flame for thee I feel:
Amid the grove, the choicest tree,
Does loved Evander seem to me.

EVANDER. That happy tree shall prove a screen,
To shield thee through life's various scene;
From every gale that envy blows,
From every blast that misery knows:
From danger's threatening clouds that lower,
Oppression's storm, and sorrow's shower.
A flower recoiling from the gale,
Just wakening in the lowly vale;
And waving near the purest stream,
To me does fair Belinda seen.

BELINDA. Oh may the sun with powerful beam,
Revive that flower, beside the stream!
Paint her all in the gayest bloom,
And call forth every kind perfume:
May Flora come in welcome hour,
To raise her drooping from the shower:
May Zephyr with his cooling breath,
Still fan away the sultry death;
Till perfected at length by time,
And opening in her brighest prime;
She may by love and fortune blessed,
Breathe all her odors on thy breast.

CELIA SLEEPING.
I.
WHERE yonder shades exclude the skies,
The fairest of her sex was seen;
While Morpheus sealed her radiant eyes,
And half eclipsed her lovely mien:
II.
The unerring archer by her side,
In idle slumbers pressed the ground;
The feathered shafts in crimson died,
Were innocently spread around.
III.
'Twas then the youthful pleasures came,
By their transparent cincture known;
They danced around the beauteous dame,
And jocund stole her sacred zone.
IV.
The kind occasion cried -- be bolds!
But Celia thou had naught to fear:
The youth is by respect controlled,
Whose bosom owns a love sincere.
V.
Alarmed, the little God I sought,
And seized his brow-encircling band;
(By Venus' rosy singers wrought)
And veiled thy charms with trembling hand.
VI.
The godhead starting from his dream,
Straight gathered every idle dart;
And then vindictive took his aim,
While many an arrow reached my heart.
VII.
Nor yet content the godhead swore,
If thou would not the band deliver;
He would on me exhaust his store,
Nor leave a dart within his quiver.
VIII.
Let then my life, by thee secured,
Over Cupid's spite at length prevail:
Ah! cure the wounds for thee endured,
And throw away the hateful veil.
To the D -- -- of Q -- Y.
WHEN beauteous Q -- y reached her fiftieth year,
A period fatal to the blooming fair!
Time snatched his hostile scythe, intent to mow
The native flowers that grace her lovely brow:
Vain thought! the scythe dropped harmless from his hand,
His hour glass falling, lost the imprisoned sand;
His agitated breast confessed alarms,
And the world's victor stood subdued with charms.
At length withdrawing he reversed the doom,
And bad her features wear unfading bloom.
THE STRAWBERRIES.
THE winter left the naked plain,
And spring's gay pencil decked the scene;
And as she waved her magic wand,
With early fruitage blushed the land:
'Twas then Pomona raised her head,
And joyful viewed a strawb"ry bed!
Two sister berries caught her eye,
Impurpled with the brighest die.
'These blushing twins, the goddess said,
(And plucked them from their verdant bed)
'I'll give to some thrice beauteous fair,
'To bloom, concealed beneath her care;
''Till an illustrious Duke (whose name
'Is known to Ancestry and Fame)
'Conducted by some partial power,
'Shall gather them at midnight hour:
'And love remove the slender vest,
'To light him to the heavenly feast': --
The blushing twins she thus addressed,
Then fixed them on Amanda's breast.
On LADY SARAH B -- 's CAT.
WITH fancy's gay suggestion fraught,
Venus indulged a frolic thought;
Departing from her former plan,
New schemes she framed to conquer man:
Discharged her troop of smiling loves,
Her archer-son and cooing doves;
Admitting to their vacant place,
The gentlest of the purring race.
This change of ministerial measures,
Provoked at first the youthful pleasures;
They swore they would no more resort
To Paphos, or the Idalian court:
But reason their resentment cooled,
And bad them be by Laura ruled!
Ah! happiest of the feline train,
Will thou admit this artless strain?
The lover now for Cupid's dart,
Shall feel thy talon at his heart:
Thy form upon the seal impressed,
Where Venus once her birds expressed,
Shall (stamped upon the crimson glue)
Secure the secret billet-doux.
Echo, amid the darkened grove,
Shall heed no more the murmuring dove;
But in the precincts of White Hall,
Shall sit attentive to thy call.
Ah! happiest of the purring train!
When Morpheus holds his silent reign;
Thy Queen's love darting radiant eyes,
That emulate the starry skies;
It Is thine with velvet foot to close,
And gently purr her to repose.
Ah! would thou purr this heart to rest.
And close the wounds within this breast;
How grateful would I wake the string,
And Venus and her Laura sing
Imitated from the FRENCH.
I.
STRAYING beside yon wood-skreen'd river.
Dan Cupid met my wondering view;
His feathered arrows stored his quiver,
Each feather glowed a different hue:
II.
'For him who frames the daring deed,
'(The little godhead said and laughed)
'To fly with Miss beyond the Tweed,
'An eagle's plume adorns the shaft.
III.
'The prattler vain of his address,
'The magpye's feathers never fail;
'And for the youth too fond of dress,
'I rob the gaudy peacock's tail.
IV.
'Whene'er I mean to rouse the care
'That lurks within, the jealous heart,
'The owl that wings the midnight air
'Lends his grave plume to load the dart.
V.
'But rarely when I would assail
'The constant heart with truth impressed,
'Then for the trembling shaft I steal
'A feather from the turtle's breast:
VI.
'Lo! one with that soft plumage crowned,
'Which more than all my arms I prize' --
Alas! I cried, this gave the wound,
When late you shot from Julia's eyes.
AN ELEGY WRITTEN AMONG THE RUINS OF AN ABBEY.
I.
WHERE sighs the zephyr to yon lonely tree,
A solemn grove its leafy mantle spread:
Where bend yon mouldering turrets over the sea,
A venerable dome once reared its head.
II.
The solemn grove, the venerable dome,
Were erst frequented by a numerous train,
Even chaste as they who Dian's mountain roam,
But not subjected to her gentle reign:
III.
Far other Goddess did this train obey,
Far other temples, other altars raised,
Far other meaning breathed their choral lay,
Far other incense on their altars blazed:
IV.
Veiled Superstition waked her magic sound,
Bad Albion's sons forsake the splendid court,
Forsake Amusement's variegated round,
And to her sable standard here resort:
V.
Alas! obsequious to her stern command,
A sullen-pensive brotherhood they came,
Refused to trace the paths by nature plan'd,
And razed from glory's page their ancient name.
VI.
Nor these alone were found incloister'd here,
Here also dwelt the simple-minded swain,
Who wrapped in sloth dreamed out the lazy year,
'While Industry sat weeping on the plain.'
VII.
The many temples rising fair to view,
Which towering Superstition called her own,
With hand unerring radiant Truth o'erthrew,
And snatched the impostor from her tinsel'd throne:
VIII.
On yon dust-level'd spire the crafty maid,
With indignation brooding in her breast
Sits gloomily. -- Her vot'ries all are fled,
Her lamps extinguished, and her rites suppressed:
IX.
Within her hand a vacant string she holds
That once connected many a hallowed bead:
The blotted scroll the other hand unfolds,
Contains the maxims of her slighted creed:
X.
Couched at her feet, behold a mouldering shrine
(Of various relics once the dread abode)
Where runs the spider over his treacherous line,
Where lurks the beetle, and the loathsome toad:
XI.
On darkness' wing now sails the midnight hour,
When for the grateful sound of choral prayer,
The shrieking owl from yon disparted tower,
With notes of horror wakes her trembling ear.
XII.
Of human grandeur mark the fleeting day,
How frail each purpose, and each wish how vain!
The strong-built domes, the cloistered fanes decay,
And ruin hovers round the desert scene.
XIII.
The path that leads to yonder shattered pile
Is now perplexed with many a sordid brier:
No crowd is seen within the sacred isle,
The Sabbath mourns its long-deserted quire.
XIV.
The golden crozier blended with the dust
In horrid folds the serpent clasps around:
The powerful image, and the sainted bust,
Defamed, unhallowed, press the weedy ground.
XV.
Not distant far, her gold-encircled tower
The inviolable dome majestic reared,
On whose dread altar breathed some hidden power,
By terror guarded, and by kings revered:
XVI.
To which asylum even the assassin came,
(His hand audacious still imbrued with gore)
The boon of full impunity to claim,
While feeble Justice wept her baffled lore.
XVII.
So Truth at once dissolved the mental chain,
And banished Error from the enlightened shore:
So closed at length the busy-acted scene,
The curtain dropped, and Folly's mask was over.
XVIII.
Then gladsome Ceres raised her drooping head,
(While yellow harvests gilt the smiling plain)
Beheld a youthful band around her spread,
With sickles armed to reap the bearded grain.
XIX.
The warrior then beneath the trailing vest,
The peaceful cassock, or the drowsy cowl,
No longer quenched the flame within his breast,
Or lulled the purpose of his daring soul:
XX.
But rushed undaunted to the doubtful war,
Pursued where glory led the radiant way,
Till Neptune rising on his coral car,
Resigned his watery world to Britain's sway.
XXI.
The virgin fair by venal guardians doomed,
By error prompted, or subdued by force,
No more in cloisters drear their days consumed:
Like flowrets strewn around the senseless corse.
XXII.
Triumphant Hymen hailed the blissful hour,
And saw a white-rob'd social train approach,
For whom the Pleasures dressed the happy bower,
And scattered roses over the destined couch.
XXIII.
Still other blessings from this change appeared,
No injured family did then behold
On loit'ring monks its native wealth conferred,
Nor spacious altars covered with its gold.
XXIV.
Full many trod that crooked path to fame,
Yet from her hand received no lasting meed,
She from her annals rends their fading name,
And gives to infamy the worthless deed:
XXV.
But vengeance some pursued with dire disgrace,
Pursued beyond the circle of its sphere,
Even to the cemetary's dark recess,
Nor spared them sleeping on the peaceful bier:
XXVI.
Beside the spreading of that sombrous yew,
Where yawns with hideous chasm the vaulted cave,
Presenting to the fixed astonished view,
The profanation of a rifled grave:
XXVII.
The large-endowing Rufus lay inurn'd
With many a sculptured image on his shrine,
That smit with sorrow over his ashes mourned,
The Sister-Graces and the tuneful Nine.
XXVIII.
Imprinted on Tradition's storied leaf
Is found (to this sepulchral spot confined)
A terror-breathing tale that wins belief,
And often repeated by the neighboring hind!
XXIX.
From where yon mountain shades the dreary plain,
Attracted by the scent of human blood,
A troop of wolves voracious scoured amain,
And at this charnel vault required their food:
XXX.
When, horrid to relate! they burst the tomb,
And swift descending to the deepest shade,
Up-tore the shrouded tenant from its womb,
And over the mangled corse relentless preyed.
XXXI.
The paly stars with dim reluctant light,
Like tapers glimmer'd on their orgies foul,
While gliding specter scream'd with wild affright,
Re-echo'd loud by their tremendous howl!
XXXII.
Ah! what availed the solemn-moving hearse?
The sable-mantled cars, the funeral throng?
Engraved on his monument the soothing verse?
The priests, the torches, and the choral song?
XXXIII.
Misjudging wretch! while thou with hand profuse,
Thy treasures on this mansion did entail,
And pour down riches on the vowed recluse,
Thine orphan babes partook a scanty meal:
XXXIV.
Thy widowed fair, her cheek bedewed with tears,
Approached with suppliant knee the cloister-gate,
There often disclosed in vain her poignant cares,
Returning still to weep her hapless fate.
YARICO to INKLE: An EPISTLE.
WITH falsehood lurking in thy sordid breast,
And perj'ry's seal upon thy heart impressed,
Dare thou, Oh Christian! brave the sounding waves,
The treacherous whirlwinds, and untrophied graves?
Regardless of my woes securely go,
No curse-fraught accents from these lips shall flow;
My fondest wish shall catch thy flying sail,
Attend thy course, and urge the favoring gale:
May every bliss thy God confers be thine,
And all thy share of woe comprised in mine.
One humble boon is all I now implore,
Allow these feet to print their kindred shore:
Give me, Oh Albion's son, again to roam
For thee deserted my delightful home:
To view the groves that deck my native scene,
The limpid stream, that graceful glides between:
Retrieve the fame I spurned at Love's decree,
Ascend the throne which I forsook for thee:
Approach the bower -- (why starts the unbidden tear?)
Where once thy YARICO to thee was dear.
The scenes the hand of time has thrown behind,
Returns impetuous to my busy mind:
'What hostile vessel quits the roaring tide
'To harbor here its tempest-beaten side?
'Behold the beach receives the ship-wreck'd crew:
'Oh mark their strange attire and pallid hue!
'Are these the Christians, restless sons of pride,
'By avarice nurtured, to deceit allied?
'Who tread with cunning step the maze of art,
'And mask with placid looks a cankered heart?
'Yet note, superior to the numerous throng,
'(Even as the citron humbler plants among)
'That youth! -- Lo! beauty on his graceful brow
'With nameless charms bids every feature glow,
'Ah! leave, fair stranger, this unsocial ground,
'Where danger broods, and fury stalks around:
'Behold thy foes advance -- my steps pursue
'To where I Will screen thee from their fatal view:
'He comes, he comes! the ambrosial feast prepare,
'The fig, the palm-juice, nor the anana spare:
'In spacious canisters nor fail to bring
'The scented foliage of the blushing spring:
'Ye graceful handmaids, dress the roseate bower,
'And hail with music this auspicious hour;
'Ah no! forbear -- be every lyre unstrung,
'More pleasing music warbles from his tongue;
'Yet, utter not to me the lover's vow,
'All, all is thine that friendship can bestow:
'Our laws, my station, check the guilty flame,
'Why was I born, ye powers, a Nubian dame?
'Yet see around at Love's enchanting call,
'Stern laws submit, and vain distinctions fall:
'And mortals then enjoy life's transient day,
'When smit with passion they indulge the sway:
'Yes! crowned with bliss we'll roam the conscious grove,
'And drink long draughts of unexhausted love:
'Nor joys alone, thy dangers too I Will share,
'With thee the menace of the waves I Will dare:
'In vain -- for smiles his brow deep frowns involve,
'The sacred ties of gratitude dissolve,
'See Faith distracted rends her comely hair,
'His fading vows while tainted zephyrs bear!'
Oh thou, before whose seraph-guarded throne
The Christians bow and other Gods disown,
If wrapped in darkness thou deny'st thy ray,
And shroud'st from Nubia thy celestial day!
Indulge this fervent prayer to thee addressed,
Indulge, though uttered from a sable breast:
May gathering storms eclipse the cheerful skies,
And mad'ning furies from thy hell arise:
With glaring torches meet his impious brow,
And drag him howling to the gulf below!
Ah no! -- May heaven's bright messengers descend,
Obey his call, his every wish attend!
Still over his form their hovering wings display!
If he be blessed, these pangs admit allay:
Me still her mark let angry fortune deem,
So thou may walk beneath her cloudless beam.
Yet often to my wrapped ear did thou repeat,
That I sufficed to frame thy bliss complete:
For Love's pure flame I took thy transient fires:
We fondly credit what the heart desires.
I hoped, alas! to breathe thy native air,
And vie in splendour with the British fair:
Ascend the speedy car enchas'd with gold,
With robes of silk this pearl-deck'd form infold:
Bid on this jetty hand the diamond glow,
And chosen rubies sparkle from my brow.
Deluded sex! the dupes of man decreed,
We, splendid victims, at his altar bleed.
The grateful accents of thy candy'd tongue,
Where artful flattery too persuasive hung,
Like flowers adorned the path to my disgrace,
And bade destruction wear a smiling face.
Yet formed by Nature in her choicest mould,
While on thy cheek her blushing charms unfold,
Who could oppose to thee stern Virtue's shield?
What tender virgin would not wish to yield?
But pleasure on the wings of time was born,
And I exposed a prey to grinning scorn.
Of low-born traders -- mark the hand of fate!
Is YARICO reduced to grace the state,
Whose impious parents, an adventurous band,
Imbrued with guiltless blood my native land:
Even snatched my father from his regal seat,
And stretched him breathless at their hostile feet?
Ill-fated prince! The Christians sought thy shore,
Unsheathed the sword, and mercy was no more.
But thou, fair stranger, came with gentler mind
To shun the perils of the wrecking wind.
Amidst thy foes thy safety still I plan'd,
And reached for galling chains the myrtle band:
Nor then unconscious of the secret fire,
Each heart voluptuous throb'd with soft desire:
Ah pleasing youth, kind object of my care,
Companion, friend, and every name that is dear!
Say, from thy mind can thou so soon remove
The records pencil'd by the hand of love?
How as we wantoned on the flowery ground
The loose-rob'd Pleasures danced unblam'd around:
Till to the sight the growing burden proved,
How thou o'ercam'st -- and how, alas! I loved!
Too fatal proof! since thou, with avarice fraught,
Did basely urge (ah! shun the wounding thought!)
That tender circumstance -- reveal it not,
Lest torn with rage I curse my fated lot:
Lest startled Reason abdicate her reign,
And Madness revel in this heated brain:
That tender circumstance -- inhuman part --
I will not weep, though serpents gnaw this heart:
Frail, frail resolve! while gushing from mine eye
The pearly drops these boastful words belie.
Alas! can sorrow in this bosom sleep,
Where strikes ingratitude her talons deep?
When he I still adore, to nature dead,
For roses plants with thorns the nuptial bed?
Bids from the widowed couch kind Peace remove,
And cold Indiff'rence blast the bower of Love?
What time his guardian power I most required,
Against my fame and happiness conspired!
And (do I live to breathe the barbarous tale?)
His faithful YARICO exposed to sale!
Yes, basely urged (regardless of my prayers,
Even while I bathed his venal hand with tears)
What most for pity called -- I can no more --
My future child -- to swell his impious store: --
All, all mankind for this will rise thy foe,
But I, alas! alone endure the woe:
Alone endure the fest'ring hand of care,
The bleeding soul, and swoonings of despair,
Was it for this I left my native plain,
And dared the tempest brooding on the main?
For this unlocked (seduced by Christian art)
The chaste affections of my virgin heart?
Within this bosom fan'd the constant flame,
And fondly languish'd for a mother's name?
Lo! every hope is poisoned in its bloom,
And horrors watch around this guilty womb.
With blood illustrious circling through these veins,
Which never was checkered with plebeian stains,
Through ancestry's long line ennobled springs,
From fame-crown'd warriors and exalted kings:
Must I the shafts of infamy sustain?
To slav'ry's purposes my infant train?
To catch the glances of his haughty lord?
Attend obedient at the festive board?
From hands unscepter'd take the scornful blow?
Uproot the thoughts of glory as they grow?
Let this pervade at length thy heart of steel;
Yet, yet return, nor blush, Oh man! to feel:
Ah! guide thy steps from yon expecting fleet,
Thine injured YARICO relenting meet:
Bid her recline woe-stricken on thy breast,
And hush her raging sorrows into rest:
Ah! let the youth that sent the cruel dart,
Extract the point envenomed from her heart:
The peace he banished from this mind recall,
And bid the tears he prompted cease to fall.
Then while the stream of life is given to flow,
And sable hue overspread this youthful brow;
Or curl untaught by art this woolly hair,
So long, so long to me shall thou be dear.
Say, lovely youth, flow all my words in vain,
Like seeds that strew the rude ungrateful plain?
Say, shall I never regain thy wonted grace?
Never stretch these arms to catch the wished embrace?
Enough -- with new-awak'd resentment fraught
Assist me, Heaven! to tear him from my thought;
No longer vainly suppliant will I bow,
And give to love what I to hatred owe;
Forgetful of the race from whence I came,
With woe acquainted, but unknown to shame.
Hence, vile dejection, with thy plaintive prayer,
Thy bended knee, and still descending tear:
Rejoin, rejoin the pale-complexion'd train --
The conflict's past -- and I Am myself again.
Thou parent sun! if ever with pious lay
I ushered in thy world-reviving ray!
Or as thy fainter beams illum'd the west,
With grateful voice I hymn'd thee to thy rest!
Beheld with wondering eye thy radiant seat,
Or sought thy sacred dome with unclad feet!
If near to thy bright altars as I drew,
My votive lamb, thy holy Flamen, slew!
Forgive! that I, irrev'rent of thy name,
Dared for thy foe indulge the unhallowed flame:
Even on a Christian lavished my esteem,
And scorned the sable children of thy beam.
This poniard by my daring hand impressed,
Shall drink the ruddy drops that warm my breast:
Nor I alone, by this immortal deed
From stav'ry's laws my infant shall be freed.
And thou, whose ear is deaf to pity's call,
Behold at length thy destined victim fall;
Behold thy once-lov'd Nubian stained with gore,
Unwept, extended on the crimson floor:
These temples clouded with the shades of death,
These lips unconscious of the lingering breath:
These eyes uprais'd (ere closed by Fate's decree)
To catch expiring one faint glimpse of thee.
Ah! then thy YARICO forbear to dread,
My fault'ring voice no longer will upbraid,
Demand due vengeance of the powers above,
Or, more offensive still, implore thy love.
IL LATTE: An ELEGY. Incipe, parve puer, risu cognoscere matrem.
I.
YE fair, for whom the hands of Hymen weave
The nuptial wreath to deck your virgin brow,
While pleasing pains the conscious bosom heave,
And on the kindling cheek the blushes glow:
II.
Whose spotless soul contains the better dower,
Whose life unstained full many virtues vouch,
For whom now Venus frames the fragrant bower,
And scatters roses over the expecting couch:
III.
To you I sing. -- Ah! ere the raptured youth
With trembling hand removes the jealous veil,
Where, long regardless of the vows of truth,
Unsocial coyness stamped the ungrateful seal,
IV.
Allow the poet round your flowing hair,
Culled from an humble vale, a wreath to twine,
To Beauty's altar with the Loves repair,
And wake the lute beside that living shrine:
V.
That sacred shrine! where female virtue glows,
Where even the Graces all their treasures bring,
And where the lily, tempered with the rose,
Harmonious contrast! breathes an Eden spring:
VI.
That shrine! where Nature with presaging aim,
What time her friendly aid Lucina brings,
The snowy nectar pours, delightful stream!
Where fluttering Cupids dip their purple wings:
VII.
For you who bear a mother's sacred name,
Whose cradled offspring, in lamenting strain,
With artless eloquence asserts his claim,
The boon of nature, but asserts in vain:
VIII.
Say why, illustrious daughters of the great,
Lives not the nursling at your tender breast?
By you protected in his frail estate?
By you attended, and by you caressed?
IX.
To foreign hands, alas! can you resign
The parent's task, the mother's pleasing care?
To foreign hands the smiling babe consign?
While Nature starts, and Hymen sheds a tear.
X.
When 'mid the polished circle ye rejoice,
Or roving join fantastic Pleasure's train,
Unheard perchance the nursling lifts his voice,
His tears unnotic'd, and unsooth'd his pain.
XI.
Ah! what avails the coral crowned with gold?
In heedless infancy the title vain?
The colors gay the purfled scarfs unfold?
The splendid nurs'ry, and th'attendant train?
XII.
Far better had thou first beheld the light,
Beneath the rafter of some roof obscure;
There in a mother's eye to read delight,
And in her cradling arm repose secure. --
XIII.
Nor wonder, should Hygeia, blissful Queen!
Her wonted salutary gifts recall,
While haggard Pain applies his dagger keen,
And over the cradle Death unfolds his pall.
XIV.
The flow'ret ravished from its native air,
And bid to flourish in a foreign vale,
Does it not often elude the planter's care,
And breathe its dying odors on the gale?
XV.
For you, ye plighted fair, when Hymen crowns
With tender offspring your unshaken love,
Behold them not with Rigor's chilling frowns,
Nor from your sight unfeelingly remove.
XVI.
Unsway'd by Fashion's dull unseemly jest,
Still to the bosom let your infant cling,
There banquet often, an ever-welcome guest,
Unblam'd inebriate at that healthful spring.
XVII.
With fond solicitude each pain assuage,
Explain the look, awake the ready smile;
Unfeigned attachment so shall you engage,
To crown with gratitude maternal toil:
XVIII.
So shall your daughters in affliction's day,
When over your form the gloom of age shall spread,
With lenient converse chase the hours away,
And smoothe with Duty's hand the widowed bed:
XIX.
Approach, compassionate, the voice of grief,
And whisper patience to the closing ear;
From comfort's chalice minister relief,
And in the potion drop a filial tear.
XX.
So shall your sons, when beauty is no more,
When fades the languid luster in your eye,
When Flattery shuns her dulcet notes to pour,
The want of beauty, and of praise, supply:
XXI.
Even from the wreath that decks the warrior's brow,
Some chosen leaves your peaceful walks shall strew:
And even the flowers on classic ground that blow,
Shall all unfold their choicest sweets for you.
XXII.
When to the embattled host the trumpet blows,
While at the call fair Albion's gallant train
Dare to the field their triple-number'd foes,
And chase them speeding over the frightened plain:
XXIII.
The mother kindles at the glorious thought,
And to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For, at the nurt'ring breast, the ^ero caught
The love of virtue, and the love of fame.
XXIV.
Or in the senate when Britannia's cause
With generous themes inspires the glowing mind,
While listening Freedom grateful looks applause,
Pale Slavery drops her chain, and sculks behind:
XXV.
With conscious joy the tender parent fraught,
Still to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For, at the nurt'ring breast, the patriot caught
The love of virtue, and the love of fame.
FINIS.

