HENRY AND EMMA, A NEW POETICAL INTERLUDE, ALTERED FROM PRIOR'S NUT BROWN MAID,
WITH ADDITIONS AND A NEW AIR AND CHORUS, (THE MUSIC BY DR. ARNE.) As Performed
on WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 1774, AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN FOR THE
BENEFIT OF MRS. HARTLEY.

LONDON: Sold by T. DAVIES, in RUSSEL STREET, COVENT GARDEN, and all the
Booksellers in Town and Country. 1774. [Price SIXPENCE.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT needs the most humble apology from the Compiler of this little Interlude,
for the liberties he has taken with a Poem so universally, and justly admired.
The different prunings which he judged necessary for his purpose, were as
sensibly lamented by the hand that performed them, as they can possibly be by
the most zealous advocate for the ingenious PRIOR. These however, with various
other alterations, far from being the result of self-consequence, arose from
absolute necessity, in order to give the whole an appearance, somewhat
conformable to the laws of our drama. It was therefore found expedient likewise
to introduce the two new, though trifling characters of VENUS and EUGENIUS; and
to conclude the whole with an AIR and CHORUS, which are here tacked to the
piece, with every conviction in the breast of the author for his presumption.

A transposition of some lines, an occasional addition of others, some
variation of the personal pronouns, etc. were judged proper to accommodate the
performers, and prepare the piece for stage representation.

Under these circumstances it is hoped that this temporary sacrifice of PRIOR
will be heartily overlooked by the Public, since it was made but to assist in
some measure the modest merit of MRS. HARTLEY, and to gratify no other desire
in the COMPILER.

April 13 th, 1774.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
HENRY MR. SMITH. EUGENIUS MR. HULL.
EMMA MRS. HARTLEY. VENUS MISS BROWN.
CHORUS, etc. etc.
HENRY AND EMMA, A NEW POETICAL INTERLUDE, etc.
SCENE. A moon light view of an extensive forest.
EUGENIUS entering alone. -- NIGHT silent reigns: the world in sleep is laid,
Save HENRY, tortured for his Nut Brown Maid.
He, wretched slave to love's corroding fears,
Greets solemn midnight with his manly tears;
And clad in false attire, with borrowed name
Now meets the lovely object of his flame.
From prattling infancy I trained his mind
To honor's call, and virtues most refined.
Now soft repose his troubled breast forsakes,
Of every pang my sympathy partakes.
Though full of years I watch his sorrowing way,
And strive to guide him by calm reason's ray.
Led by the moon's pale lamp, through yonder grade
The anxious lovers seek this beachen shade;
Their converse trying to fair Emma's heart:
A fiction planned by Love's, and Henry's art.
With wishes raised, with jealousies oppressed,
(Alternate tyrants of the human breast)
By one great trial he resolves to prove
The faith of woman, and the force of love,
If scanning Emma's virtues, he shall find,
That beauteous frame enclose a steady mind,
He Will fix his hope, of future joy secure,
And live a slave to Hymen's happy power.
But if the fair one, as he fears is frail,
Light fly her merits, and her faults prevail,
His mind he vows to free from amorous care,
Resume his arms, and shine again in war.
But soft -- their mournful accents speak them nigh:
In spite of fond affection, I must fly.
May no cursed demon over their mind prevail,
But every thought, be weighed in virtue's scale!
[Exit.
Enter HENRY and EMMA. HENRY. Sincere, O tell me, have thou felt a pain,
Emma, beyond what woman knows to feign?
Has thy uncertain bosom ever strove
With the first tumults of a real love?
If so, with pity view my wretched state;
At least deplore, and then forget my fate:
To some more happy knight reserve thy charms,
By fortune favored, and successful arms:
For lo! these hands in murder are imbrued;
These trembling feet by justice are pursued:
And I this night must fly from thee and love,
Condemned in lonely woods a banished man to rove.

EMMA. What is true passion, if unblest it dies?
And where is Emma's joy, if Henry flies?
If love, alas! be pain, the pain I bear,
No thought can figure, and no tongue declare.
Oh cease then coldly to suspect my love;
And let my deed at least my faith approve.
Alas! no youth shall my endearments share;
Nor day, nor night shall interrupt my care:
Nor to hard banishment shall Henry run;
While careless Emma sleeps on beds of down.
View me resolved, wherever thou lead'st, to go;
Friend to thy pain and partner of thy woe;
Blessed when my dangers and my toils have shown,
That I of all mankind, could love but thee alone.

HENRY. Let prudence yet obstruct thy venurous way;
And take good heed, what men will think, and say:
That full of youthful blood, and fond of man,
You to the woodland with an exile ran.
Reflect, that lessened fame is never regained;
And virgin honor once, is always stained.
Timely advised, the coming evil shun;
Better not do the deed, than weep it done.
No penance can absolve our guilty fame;
Nor tears, that wash out sin, can wash out shame.

EMMA. Let Emma's hapless case be falsely told
By the rash young, or the ill-natured old:
Let every tongue its various censure choose,
Absolve with coldness, or with spite accuse.
Fair truth at last her radiant beams will raise;
And malice vanquished heighten virtue's praise.
Let then thy favor but indulge my flight;
O let my presence make thy travels light.

HENRY. But can thou wield the sword, and bend the bow?
With active force repel the sturdy foe?
When the loud tumult speaks the battle nigh;
And winged deaths in whistling arrows fly;
Will thou, though wounded, yet undaunted stay;
Perform thy part and share the dangerous day?

EMMA. Near thee, mistrust not, constant I Will abide,
And share each danger fearless by thy side.
Though my inferior strength may not allow,
That I should bear, or draw the warrior bow,
With ready hand I will the shaft supply;
And joy to see thy victor arrows fly:
Touched in the battle by the hostile reed,
Should thou (but heaven avert it!) should thou bleed;
To stop the wounds my finest lawn I Would tear;
Wash them with tears, and wipe them with my hair.

HENRY. But can thou tender maid, can thou sustain
Afflictive want, or hunger's pressing pain?
When with hard toil we seek our evening food,
Berries and acorns, from the neighboring wood;
And find amongst the cliffs no other house,
But the thin covert of some gathered boughs;
Will thou not then reluctant send thine eye
Around the dreary waste, and weeping try,
(Though then, alas! that trial be too late)
To find thy father's hospitable gate,
That gate, whence long excluded thou must mourn;
That gate, for ever barred to thy return?

EMMA. Did I but purpose to embark with thee,
On the smooth surface of a summer's sea,
While gentle Zephyrs play in prosperous gales,
And fortune's favor fills the swelling sails;
But would forsake the ship, and make the shore,
When the winds whistle, and the tempests roar?
No, Henry, no: One sacred oath has tied
Our loves; one destiny our life shall guide.

HENRY. But e're thou go, unhappy'st of thy kind,
Thy sex and habit thou must leave behind:
No longer shall thy comely tresses break
In flowing ringlets on thy snowy neck;
But with a bolder stride, and looser air,
Mingled with men, a man thou must appear.
Vagrants and outlaws shall offend thy view;
(For such must be my friends) a hideous crew!
With such must Emma hunt the tedious day;
Assist their violence, divide their prey:
With such she must return at setting light;
Though not partaker, witness of their night.
Now, Emma, now the last reflection make,
What thou would follow, what thou must forsake:

EMMA. O Grief of heart; that our unhappy fates
Force thee to suffer, what thy honor hates:
Mix thee amongst the bad; or make thee run
Too near the paths, which virtue bids thee shun:
Yet with her Henry still let Emma go;
With him abhor the vice, but share the woe:
And sure my little heart can never err,
Amidst the worst, if Henry still be there.

HENRY. O wildest thought of an abandoned mind!
Name, habit, parents, woman left behind;
Even honor dubious, thou preferr'st to go
Wild to the woods with me; said Emma so?
Or did I dream what Emma never said?
O guilty error! and oh wretched maid!
Whose roving fancy would resolve the same
With him, who next should tempt her easy fame.

EMMA. Are there not poisons, racks, and flames, and swords;
That Emma thus must die by Henry's words?
Yet what could swords, or poison, racks or flame
But mangle, and disjoint this brittle frame?
More fatal Henry's words; they murder Emma's fame.
Did ever my tongue speak my unguarded heart
The least inclined to play the wanton's part?
Did ever my eye one inward thought reveal,
Which angels might not hear, and virgins tell?
And have thou, Henry, in my conduct known
One fault, but that which I must ever own
That I, of all mankind have loved but thee alone?

HENRY. Vainly thou talk of loving me alone;
Each man is man, and all the sex is one.
Nor in love's ritual can we ever find
Vows made to last, or promises to bind.
Be wise, and false; shun trouble, seek delight;
Change thou the first; nor wait thy lovers flight.
Why should thou weep? let Nature judge our case:
I saw thee young, and fair: pursued the chase
Of youth, and beauty; I another saw
Fairer, and younger; yielding to the law
Of our all-ruling mother, I pursued
More youth, more beauty: blessed vicissitude!
This younger, fairer, pleads her rightful charms,
With present power compels me to her arms.
And years may roll ever, in her turn, the maid
Shall weep the ardor of my love decayed:

EMMA. Are we in life through one great error led?
Is each man perjured, and each nymph betrayed?
Of the superior sex art thou the worst?
Am I of mine the most completely cursed?
Yet let me go with thee, and going prove,
From what I will endure, how much I love.
This potent beauty, this triumphant fair,
This happy object of our different care,
Her let me follow; her let me attend,
A servant: (She may scorn the name of friend)
Yet when increasing grief brings slow disease;
And ebbing life, on terms severe as these
Will have its little lamp no longer fed;
When Henry's mistress shows him Emma dead,
Rescue my poor remains from vile neglect,
With virgin honors let my hearse be decked;
Oh let my Henry then at least persuade
This happy nymph, that Emma may be laid,
Where thou, dear author of my death, where she,
With frequent eye my sepulcher may see.
See the sad fate which she may one day prove,
Who hopes from Henry's vows eternal love.

HENRY. Hear, solmn Jove! and conscious Venus hear!
And thou, bright maid, believe me, whilst I swear;
No time, no change, no future flame shall move
The well-plac'd basis of my lasting love:
O powerful virtue! O victorious fair!
At least excuse a trial too severe;
No banished man condemned in woods to rove
Entreats thy pardon, and implores thy love:
In me behold the potent Edgar's heir
Beloved in peace, and terrible in war:
Crown of my love, and honor of my youth,
Henry, thy Henry with eternal truth,
As thou may wish, shall all his life employ,
And sound his glory in his Emma's joy.
Music and song shall wake the marriage-day;
And while the priests accuse the brides delay;
Myrtles and roses shall obstruct her way.
Hence then for ever from my Emma's breast
(That heaven of softness, and that seat of rest)
Ye doubts and fears, and all that know to move
Tormenting grief, and all that trouble love!

EMMA. O Day the fairest sure that ever rose!
Period and end of anxious Emma's woes;
Sire of her joy, and source of her delight;
Now winged with pleasure take thy happy flight;
Yet tell thy vot'ry, potent queen of love,
Henry, my Henry, will he never rove?
Will he be ever kind, and just, and good?
And is there yet no mistress in the wood?
None, none there is: the thought was rash and vain;
A false idea, and a fancied pain.
Doubt shall for ever quit my strengthened heart,
And anxious jealousie's corroding smart;
Nor other inmate shall inhabit there,
But foft belief, young joy, and pleasing care!
But hark! --

HENRY. What sounds harmonious strike the ravish 'dear!

[ SCENE shifting VENUS is discovered alighting from her Car.]
RECITATIVE, ACCOMPANIED. VENUS.
[HENRY and EMMA kneeling.] Descending from my sacred Paphian bower
Far hence I Have chased suspicion and her train.
Hail happy pair! extatic bliss pursue,
And reap the harvest of your well tried love.
These two stanzas are omitted to shorten the representation.
AIR. Miss BROWN.
To HENRY. Now thy trophies graced with beauty,
HENRY'S valor is repaid,
Love, and honor be thy duty,
Guardian of the Nut brown Maid.
To EMMA. Though our slaves when most obeying
Are but captives of the mind,
EMMA, beauty's scepter swaying,
Will a constant empire find.
AIR. VENUS.
To BOTH. Love's bondage shall charm ye,
No tumults alarm ye,
If anxious you fan the dear fire;
The flame once neglected,
Its rays back reflected,
By Time's icy fingers expire.
CHORUS. Hark the spheres with rapture swelling,
Ratify their vows above!
Fame with ready trumpet telling,
HENRY'S honor! -- EMMA'S love!
THE END.

