THE MAID of KENT, A COMEDY.

Price One Shilling and Sixpence.

Act 4th Scene 2d



THE MAID of KENT.

A COMEDY: Acted at the THEATER ROYAL, IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. ROBINSON, No. 25, PATERNOSTER ROW; AND P. NORBURY,
BRENTFORD.

M,DCC,LXXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THREE or four years having elapsed since the representation of the following
trifle, it will, no doubt, be thought extraordinary, that it should make its
appearance in print just at the time when so capital a production as The SCHOOL
for SCANDAL engrosses all theatrical attention: in some degree to excuse the
ill-timing of this publication, the author assures the public, that the
copy-right was disposed of, and some sheets of it in the press, before that
Comedy appeared; otherwise they would never have been troubled with this
apology, or the cause of it.

TO THE LADIES and GENTLEMEN, Who, by their admirable performance of this first
essay, and excellent delivery of the prologue and epilogue to it, obtained such
applause to them, as in themselves they could not merit, The MAID of KENT Is
most gratefully inscribed, by their much obliged Servant,

The AUTHOR.
Jan. 24, 1778.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. KING. WHEN a melodious lark, ascending, sings,
The wide expanse with shrilly echoes rings;
'Till, strongly winging his aerial way,
To sight he is lost, warbling his heav'n-tun'd lay!
Not so, when the young bird first 'ttempts a flight,
Emerging from his nest to dazzling light --
With fluttering pinions, half-form'd notes, dimmed eyes,
From the too powerful glare, he, trembling, hies
To some thick wood, low copse, or shady grove,
Where he, secure from birds of prey, may rove;
Where safely he may try his feeble wings,
There flits from spray to spray, and faintly sings:
Patient remains 'till strength and art are won,
Then soars and warbles against the noonday sun!
But, when he ventures first t'explore the sky,
Should critic-buzzard, hawk, or kite be nigh,
Skimming and winding round, then on him dart,
His beak and talons dig into his heart;
No more he sings, no more can ever fly,
His artless song and self together die!
So will it fare with our green-bird or sparrow,
If, groveling found, you over him draw the harrow;
No more he will chirrup his insipid note,
Or vainly gurgle his discordant throat:
O loss of losses! -- never to be recovered --
A green-bird in a furrow you have smothered!
But say you're merciful, and, 'stead of killing
The venurous fool, to rear him should be willing;
Pleased, he will crack rape-seed, bucket raise of water,
TO amuse yourself, spouse, son, and pretty daughter;
And while he grunsell picks, or chickweed eats,
Will, chirping, thank each generous heart that treats;
May learn the linnet's, lark's, canary's song,
His tuneful life if kindly you prolong;
And strive each hour t'improve his simple lay,
In clearer strains your favors to repay!

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Lord Sealand, Mr. DAVIES. Sir Thomas Richacre, Mr. PARSONS. Doctor Goodman,
Mr. PACKER. George, Mr. PALMER. Meter, Mr. WALDRON. William, Mr. VERNON.
O'Connor, Mr. MOODY. La Poudre, Mr. BADDELEY. Robert, Mr. GRIFFITHS.
Emily, Miss YOUNG. Patty, Miss POPE. Dame Quickset, Mrs. BRADSHAW.
Scene -- Sir Thomas Richacre's Seat, near the Seacoast, in Kent.

Time -- an Afternoon.

THE Maid of Kent.
ACT I. Scene a Study in Sir Thomas Richacre's House. Doctor Goodman and Emily
are discovered sitting: the Doctor shutting a Book, they presently rise.
Dr. GOODMAN. HERE, madam, if you please, we'll conclude the labor of the day.


Emily. Call it rather the pleasure of the day, sir, -- for such it is to me, I
assure you -- to you indeed, sir, I fear it must be otherwise -- the
instruction of a silly girl, no doubt, is painful and tedious.


Dr. Good. Pardon me, madam, I did not call it labor in that sense; so far am
I from thinking it irksome, the hours I pass in this our every morning's
exercise, and the duties of my holy function, are the happiest of my life: --
for, believe me, were you my own child, instead of my honored patron's, I
could not love you better!


Emily. Nor do I think Sir Thomas's affection (although the best of fathers)
exceeds the very paternal regard you have ever been pleased to express for me
-- and -- I know not why -- I think I feel not a more filial love for him, than
for yourself, sir!


Dr. Good. Dear madam, say not so: -- the many hours we pass together in our
delightful studies, beget in you a customary regard -- think it no more.


Emily. Perhaps it is no more, sir, nay, it cannot -- for never had a child a
kinder parent!


Dr. Good. Nor ever had a man a truer friend! Indeed, so general is his
goodness, he might be a pattern for mankind: -- he never saw an infant without
a parent's fondness, or a gray head, but, like a child, he honored it!


Sir Thomas Richacre enters. Sir Thom. Ha, ha! what, hard at it? -- What is it?
-- Ethics or mathematics, astrology or theology? -- it is a thousand pities,
Doctor, your pupil is a girl, otherwise she would certainly be a bishop in time.


Emily. Perhaps not, papa; -- you see Dr. Goodman, with as much piety,
learning, good sense, and, I am sure, as good a heart as any, has hitherto
attained to no greater dignities than rector of this parish, your chaplain,
sir, and my tutor.


Dr. Good. Were I, madam, what you are pleased to say of me, it does not at all
follow I should ever be so exalted. -- There are, no doubt, an infinitely
greater number of deserving ministers than there are mitres, or even inferior
dignities; but whoever has attained to that of an honest man, will feel, that
church or state can never raise him higher!


Sir Thom. I think so too, Doctor; and, in that respect, there is not a more
exalted character than yourself.


Dr. Good. Heaven forbid, sir!


Sir Thom. But all this while I forget your boy, Doctor. -- I made my morning's
airing shorter than usual, that I might be in the way when he arrived. -- He is
not come yet, I suppose?


Dr. Good. No, sir.


Emily. Does young Mr. Goodman come home from Oxford to day, sir?


Dr. Good. Yes, madam, I expect him.


Emily. Bless me! I thought he was not to have come till next week, sir.


Sir Thom. Yes, yes, he will be here to day, and then you may have a new tutor,
for I suppose you have almost tired your old one. -- I warrant, by this time,
he can speak Greek as well as his father; what think you, Doctor?


Dr. Good. I not only think that of him, sir, but, were he not my own, I could
be bold to say, he is the most accomplished youth I ever saw, and, add to that
-- the best!


Sir Thom. Ay, ay, George is a good boy! -- ay, and a clever one too -- every
body says so as well as yourself: -- but if they did not, the crow, you know,
always thinks her own young whitest, ha, ha, ha! -- Let me see, [looking at his
watch] it is past one, -- will the rogue be here to dinner, think you?


Dr. Good. I expect him every moment, sir.


Sir Thom. Od! I wish he was come! I have not seen him this age: -- and are not
you glad he is coming, Emily?


Emily. Yes, indeed, sir, very glad -- for I think him a most amiable young
man; and have often thought it a thousand pities he is not heir to a good
fortune; as this idolatrous world of ours, still worshipping a golden calf,
would value him much more for inheriting a fund of wealth than virtues: -- and
a rich coxcomb is oftener proposed to us poor girls, than the most deserving of
our affections, whose merits are not backed with that powerful recommendation
-- a great estate!


Sir Thom. It Is very true, my dear, -- too often the case, I must confess.


Emily. And I make no doubt, but even our ridiculous worthless neighbor, Lord
Sealand's addresses, would be esteemed an honor, and plain George Goodman's,
an affront, to most great families in the kingdom.


Sir Thom. Why, he is a peer of the realm, you know.


Emily. True, papa; and there are very few so ill-bred, as to think a coronet
may sometimes cover a weak head, or a glittering star, a bad heart!


Sir Thom. Ha, ha! well said, my little satirist! -- We are to be honored with
his lordship's company to day at dinner, on purpose to see George.


Dr. Good. His lordship has been always kind enough to take great notice of my
poor boy.


Emily. That is the only proof of understanding he ever gave -- and, but for
that, he would be intolerable, with his unaccountable whims and caprices. --
Now own, papa, don't you think it a strange amusement he has lately taken to,
keeping sailing vessels, to be so often tossing about on the sea as he is?


Sir Thom. Why ay, child, I think it rather too boisterous to be called
pleasure; but he seldom makes a much longer trip than just across to Calais, to
furnish himself with some of their knicknacks and fopperies.


Emily. Right, papa; for such a finical waterfly is he, that, when on shore, he
lays out more money in powder and perfumes in a week, than, I fear, he gives to
the poor in a year. -- I never see him, papa, but I think of beau Mizen in the
play. Ha, ha, ha!


Sir Thom. Well, but, Emily, my dear, you, of all people in the world, should
not be so severe upon him: he is a very warm admirer of you, you know; and has
almost asked my consent to marry you.


Emily. He is not a bit more in my good graces for that, I assure you, papa;
for, could he obtain your consent, I believe he would care very little whether he
had mine or not.


Dr. Good. But Sir Thomas, I am persuaded, madam, will never grant one without
the other.


Emily. That I confide in, sir. -- I suppose I shall be teiz'd to death with
his supercilious nonsense to day, which he gives me to understand he means for
courtship.


Sir Thom. And are not you delighted at the very idea of being his lady? --
Countess of Sealand!


Emily. Not I, indeed, papa; lud! lud! what a character! a foppish sailor! a
compound of tar and civet! faugh! -- I Would sooner marry our honest Old Meter
yonder, and be dame to the clerk of the parish.


Sir Thom. Ha, ha, ha! here comes the old psalm-singer as fast as he can hobble.


Emily. Poor good old man! he is worth a court-calendar full of such lords!


Meter enters. Meter. Your reverence! your reverence! -- goodlack, I most
humbly crave your worship's pardon for my abrupt intrusion, [to Sir Thomas] but
I come a joyful harbinger! As I am a sinner, sir, your well-beloved son is just
arrived. [to the Doctor.]


Dr. Good. Indeed!


Sir Thom. Is he faith, old Sternhold?


Meter. Yes, in truth, your worship, or may I never set another stave.


Emity. [Looking out.] O lud, ay! he is just stepping out of the post-chaise --
bless me -- what a figure I am! -- I -- I beg pardon, sir, but indeed I cannot
stay -- I must go and make myself a little more fit to be seen?


Exit Emily. Sir Thom. Did you observe the girl, Doctor?


Dr. Good. Most heedfully, sir -- and fear --


Meter. He approaches, your honors, he approaches!


Sir Thom. Ay, here he comes, sure enough.


George enters. George. Your blessing, sir, [kneeling to Dr. Goodman.]


Dr. Good. Heaven grant thee grace!


George. My honored patron! my second father! [to Sir Thomas] I cannot resist
an impulse that throws me at your feet, and bids me beg your blessing too!


Sir Thom. Heaven bless and preserve you, my good lad!


George. My dear father, forgive this transport -- I fear it hurries me into a
neglect, I Would sooner die than willingly be guilty of -- but -- this meeting
overpowers me! -- don't be offended, sir, [to Sir Thomas] at the frankness of a
poor lad like me -- indeed I am very happy to see you, sir! I hope both you,
sir, and my dear father, are as well as --


Sir Thom. Well? odzookers! who can be ill and look such a ruddy-cheek'd rogue
as you in the face? -- faith, you look bravely, my lad! -- and a devilish
handsome young dog you are grown! rare work, I warrant, he has made at Oxford,
Doctor! how many dozen have you left crying their eyes out, eh, George?


George. You are merry, sir,


Sir. Thom. Well, but -- joking apart -- have you left never a little tender
soul breaking her heart after you; -- a sweetheart, eh, George? for I Will engage
you have got one, boy.


George. To what end, sir, so young and unprovided for, as I am? -- But, excuse
me, sir, for interrupting you by hoping Miss Richacre is well.


Sir Thom. Ay, Emily is pure hearty, and as reserved as yourself -- She wont
confess the power of the little blind boy any more than you.


George. The longer she is, sir, before she makes her choice, we may reasonably
hope the better it will be. -- But, I believe, sir, she may wait long indeed,
before she finds one to deserve her.


Sir Thom. Odzookers, George, that is a civiler thing than ever I heard Lord
Sealand say of her, with all his courtship.


George. Lord Sealand! [aside] I -- I hope, sir, I do not offend in speaking my
sentiments so freely?


Sir Thom. Offend! no, no, boy -- I like you the better for speaking your
thoughts -- I wish all mankind did so, they would not be the worse for it.


Meter. Then, with your worship's indulgence, I can withhold no longer -- As I
am an unworthy sinner, sir, [to George] I am more delighted to behold you than
a full congregation! and that is the delight of my old heart.


George. What, my good old friend! nothing but my extreme joy at seeing my
honored parent and protector, could have made me overlook you -- I am very
glad to see you -- I hope you are well! [taking Meter kindly by the hand.]


Meter. In troth, the better for seeing you well, sir! [wiping his eyes.]


George. Ah, my old playfellow, "Thou have born me on this back a thousand
times!"


Meter. And a pleasant load thou were, my ever gentle task-master! he, he, he!
-- and, in like sportful sort, although I am waxen old, I hope to live to bear
your tender offspring!


George. No, my poor Yorick! time will, I fear, bear you away first!


Sir Thom. Not so neither, George -- for, as my mother used to say to me, those
eyes of yours will make many a pretty girl's heart ach -- so, don't be
timorous, lad, but look about you; and, if you take a liking to a girl, let her
be who she may, attack her boldly -- I am a whimsical old fellow, and if I take
it into my head, may make you worth her having.


Dr. Good. Sir, I fear your goodness will --


Sir Thom. Pho, pho, be quiet, Doctor -- you know I am not (like too many in
the world) easily talked out of a good design, or into a bad one -- but, tell
us, George, sincerely, now we are upon the subject, have you really never a
sweetheart at Oxford?


George. No, I assure you, sir. -- I never saw a face there that made the least
impression on me.


Sir Thom. And you are heart-whole, ha?


George. As when I left this house, sir! [sighing aside.]


Sir Thom. Why, how have you passed your time, lad? always at your studies?


George. Pretty constantly, sir -- the only return in my power for your great
bounty to me, was the making a proper use of it. -- But, if I may be so bold,
sir, I think you mentioned something of Lord Sealand's having paid his
addresses to Miss Richacre.


Sir Thom. Ay, George, I believe I might --


George. But I think, sir, you said too, that Miss Emily had not hitherto
confessed any particular inclination --


Sir Thom. Why, no -- but he is very rich -- and when a suitor is both wealthy
and noble, you know --


George. Very true, sir!


[Metre talks apart with Dr. Goodman.] Sir Thom. Not that I believe Emily likes
him a jot better for those accidental advantages, as she calls them -- She and
I are much of a mind about him; for, in my opinion, he is but a frothy kind of
a spark, like too many of the present age -- and it is paying you no
compliment, George, to say such a lad as you are, is worth a score such as Lord
Sealand. [George bows respectfully.]


Dr. Good. I fear, sir, what you are pleased to say of my poor boy will make
him vain.


Sir Thom. Vain of what such an old fellow as I say! no, no, -- If Emily had
said as much indeed -- but, Doctor, I must rob you of George's company a little
-- come, boy, -- you must go and ask my girl how she is -- she will be glad to
see you, I Am sure -- She just saw you alight, and scamper'd away to set her cap
strait, or some such important matter -- Come along, my boy, and I Will promise
you a kiss for your pains.


Exit Sir Thomas Richacre. George. Will you excuse me a few moments, my dear
sir, while I pay my respects to Miss Richacre?


Dr. Good. Ay, ay, attend Sir Thomas by all means -- meantime, I Will step and
see a poor cottager hard by, who, Meter has just been telling me, is very ill.


George. You are as humane as ever, sir, heaven bless you!


Dr. Good. And you too, my dear boy!


Exeunt Dr. Goodman and George severally. Meter. Amen! and heaven be with you
both! for such a father and such a son, are hardly to be paralleled! -- No
marvel his good worship is so well pleased in ye -- he, whese benignity
extends even unto my unworthy self, and my poor child, Martha; whom he has
most benevolently reared, as waiting-maid unto his fair daughter, from
childhood even unto womanhood -- and, in commiseration of my forlorn condition,
when my loving helpmate, Rebecca, departed this transitory life, bountifully
took me to end my days in peace in his most hospitable mansion!


[going.] Emily and Patty enter. Patty. Lord, ma'am, there is nobody here but my
father --


Meter. Whom seeks her good ladyship, Martha?


Emily. I thought Mr. Goodman had been here.


Meter. No, madam -- his reverence is gone to visit the afflicted.


Emily. O, no -- I don't mean the Doctor, but George Goodman -- I met his
father this moment, and he said he was this way.


Meter. Good madam, I most humbly crave forgiveness for my misapprehension --
my dearly beloved young master departed hence but even now indeed, to accompany
his worship, in order to pay his most dutiful respects unto your ladyship.


Emily. Run, Patty -- tell my papa I came down the other stairs, and am here.


Meter. So please your ladyship, I will acquaint his worship forthwith.


Emily. Thank you, Mr. Meter.


Meter. I long for the sweet young pair to meet methinks!

Would it might be never to part again --
That I devoutly pray, and to it add -- Amen!

aside. Exit Meter. Emily. And so, Patty, you did see him, you say?


Patty. Yes, ma'am, I just had a peep at him as he passed through the hall, and
he did look so handsome you cannot think.


Emily. I wish you are not in love with him, girl.


Patty. Ah, madam! if I was as much his betters as he is mine, I Would soon tell
him a piece of my mind.


Emily. Why really the youth's not amiss -- I had a glimpse of him myself, and
think him considerably improved, I must confess -- his complexion more florid,
and air more lively than when he left us.


Patty. Ay, ma'am, that he is, more lively and more lovely too than ever; and
so you would say, ma'am, I am sure, if you spoke your thoughts.


Emily. Indeed! and pray how came you so well acquainted with my thoughts?


Patty. Why, ma'am, the dressing glass discovered them to me -- for you have
looked more in it since you knew young Mr. Goodman was arrived, than ever I
knew you in all my life before -- And I Will be whipped if you don't wish to appear
as handsome in his eyes as he does in yours.


Emily. O you wicked girl, how can you say so?


Patty. Indeed, ma'am, if I was as rich as your ladyship, and we were both at
our own disposal, I fancy we should puzzle the poor young gentleman which to
choose -- for his choice he might have, that is certain.


Emily. And, in that case, you think he would be puzzled which to choose?


Smiling. Patty. O, dear ma'am, I had quite forgot one thing -- that is -- If I
was as beautiful as your ladyship.


Curtsying. Emily. O, your ladyship's most obedient! [curtsying] and so you
have quite forgot your sweetheart, William?


Patty. William? -- yes -- no, ma'am -- that is -- O gemini, ma'am, here the
sweet gentleman comes as sure as a gun!


Emily. Eh! what! where?


confused. Sir Thomas Richacre and George enter. Sir Thom. Here, Emily, my
girl, where are you? I was just going to storm your dressing room as old Amen
overtook me -- I have brought an old acquaintance to see you.


George. With your leave, sir -- [offering to salute Emily.]


Sir Thom. Ay, ay, kiss her, boy, kiss her! -- and kiss him, girl! you two must
not be strange.


George. Madam! -- I -- I hope -- [saluting her.]


Emily. Sir! -- I am -- very -- [both hesitate through confusion.]


Sir Thom. Heyday! Madam -- I hope -- and, Sir, I am very -- and there they
both stop! -- why what ail you both? you are not tonguetied sure all on a
sudden? -- Pray, sir, -- what may you hope? -- and, ma'am, -- what are you
very? -- come, come, I fancy I can explain the matter -- I suppose, George, if
the truth was known, you hope to get another kiss -- and you, Emily, are very
willing to give it him! well, well, with all my heart, never heed me -- kiss
her again, boy, kiss her again!


George. Sir, I beg pardon for --


Sir Thom. Pho, pho, kiss her again, I tell you -- I insist upon it -- and
then, perhaps, you will recover your speech a little.


George. [Saluting her again] I am so overjoyed, madam --


Emily. Sir, I am extremely -- [They stand bowing and curtsying confusedly*]


Patty. [To Sir Thom.] Dear heart, sir, I hope you will not be angry, but indeed I
cant hold my tongue any longer -- You're welcome to Kent, sir! I hope you are
well, sir? [Curtsying to George.]


George. Very well, I thank you, Patty. -- I am glad to see you -- I hope you
are well?


Patty. Pretty well, 'thank you, sir; how do you do?


Sir Thom. Why look you there now -- I warrant Mistress Patt could hold on a --
how do you do, sir? and a -- pretty well, thank you, sir! till this day
fortnight; [mimicking Patty] while you stand as mute as an Egyptian mummy.


Emily. Dear papa, forgive me. -- Sir -- I beg your pardon, but indeed I was so
glad to see you, I had scarce power to tell you so!


George. You have bereft me, madam, of reply, by saying the very words I would
have uttered if I could -- may I flatter myself so far as to think --


Patty. O yes, indeed, sir, you may flatter yourself -- for my lady and I are
both very glad to see you!


Sir Thom. Hold your tongue, you chatter-box! I don't know any business you
have here.


Patty. Dear heart, sir! I did but just speak -- Chatter-box! -- I wish I had
been as cunning as some folks, and held my tongue, I might then have been
kissed a little as well as some other people. [aside.]


Emily. Pray, papa, excuse her -- she always seemed to have so great respect
for Mr. Goodman, and was so desirous now of seeing him, that I gave her leave
to come with me.


Meter enters. Meter. So please your worship, the right honorable the Earl of
Sealand is just alighting from his gilded cha-ri-ot.


Sir Thom. I Will go to him directly -- children, I Will leave you to yourselves a
little -- you will find your tongues, perhaps, when my back's turned -- but,
George, you have not much time to spare -- Lord Sealand will be enquiring for
you, so get dressed as soon as possible.


George. I will, sir.


Sir Thom. Come along then, old Pitch-pipe, and young madam Prate-a-pace!


Exit Sir Thomas Richacre. Meter. We follow your good and merry worship! ha,
ha, ha! Martha, my child, come your ways.


Patty. I Will come presently, father -- I am in great hopes he will kiss me yet!


[aside.] Meter. Presently will not do, child, come now! [aside to her] Will thou never learn more manners than to hearken unto gentlefolks' discourse? an
eves-dropper! fie for shame! get thee gone about thy business, that is my good
girl.


Patty. [aside] Psha! fiddle, faddle! how provoking this is! now I am sure I
sha'n't get a kiss.


Exit Patty. Meter. [to Emily] Your honor's very humble servant! heaven bless
you, my sweet young master!


George. And you too, my good old friend!


Meter. Just such a lovely pair were those first formed -- ah! would your
conditions were as equal! then might I hope, ere long, unto your nuptial
benediction, most joyfully to cry Amen!


Exit Meter. Emily. [smiling] What a whimsical old soul it is!


George. But exceeding kind and honest -- at least to me -- he knows no bounds
to his good wishes for my welfare -- which is all I can say in extenuation of
his freedom now to you, madam!


Emily. O, the well-meaning good creature cannot easily offend me.


George. Have a care, dear madam, your condescension don't destroy the respect
I should preserve --


Emily. Let me beg of you to forget those distant words, respect, and madam --
our compliments are over, (though with much difficulty) [smiling] let us now
resume that innocent familiarity we were bred together in, and ever were
delighted with -- when we parted last, you was less ceremonious; then, instead
of madam, you called me your Emily -- nay more, your dear Emily!


George. That I still might without a crime! for sure there can be nothing
dearer to me.


Emily. Then why this distance -- this reserve?


George. O Emily! think but of your condition, your rank in life, and think of
mine!


Emily. And shall that lay a restraint upon our lips? -- must they be denied to
express what our hearts will feel, forgetful of distinction?


George. What my heart feels they cannot express -- gratitude, love, admiration!
all the most susceptible can feel, or eloquent describe, is there. -- My
dearest Emily, still I must call you so -- why are you thus kind -- thus
condescending! --


Emily. In what? -- 'prithee, now, where is the mighty difference between us?
is not your father in every respect (but the lowest of all considerations,
riches) as good as mine? and wherein can I pretend to vie with thee, who art an
abstract of both their virtues! -- but we grow serious -- besides, you have to
dress, and see that odious Sealand, which this detains you from; so, 'till we
meet at dinner, dear George, adieu!


Exit Emily. George. Adieu, sweet Emily! lovely, engaging, bewitching Emily! O
that I were but rich enough to dare aspire to thee! never did I repine at want
of fortune but on thy account, and when I find that the only bar to my success,
I must repine; since, were I not the child of poverty and dependence, what
might I not hope! -- her partiality for me, I think, is evident -- and my
determination to conquer this ill-suited passion, she has, in one moment,
utterly destroyed! [he stands musing]


Patty enters. Patty. I gave my father the slip nicely -- and here he is yet --
and alone too, that is charming! Now, who knows but I may have better luck than
I had before [aside] -- Pray, sir, is not my young lady here? [George does not
observe her.] Hoity toity! why he is speechless again -- may be he is always so
when he wants to kiss a pretty girl -- I wish Sir Thomas would pop in his head,
and cry (as he did just now) kiss her, boy! kiss her again! [aside.] -- Sir!
Sir! -- pray is not madam Emily here?


George. [Starting from his reverie.] Ha! Emily! what of Emily?


Patty. Nothing, sir, -- only I thought she had been here --


George. Yes, no -- she has just left me -- the happiest, yet most wretched, of
mankind! [aside.]


Exit George. Patty. Not one kiss, by jingo! I could cry for madness! I suppose
he is proud, and thinks himself too much above me -- marry come up! and yet --
he is a pretty gentleman, and if I was as rich as a jew I Would marry him directly.
-- Stay -- let me consider -- I have got a little money by me that my father
knows nothing of, if I don't buy a lottery-ticket I Will be burnt! -- and if I
get the twenty-thousand-pound-prize, nay, if I am so unlucky as to get only the
ten-thousand, I Will tell him my mind directly -- and sure then he will not think
himself above me! I Have heard say, that in London the gentry -- ay, even your
lords and dukes, now and then marry poor girls that are pretty -- like me, for
love -- nay, (though I hardly know how to believe it) folks say, they will
sometimes take up with their own, ay, or other people's, kept-madams! and I am
sure it would not be a quarter so bad as that, for a parson's son to marry a
clerk's daughter!


Exit Patty. End of the First Act.
ACT II. Scene, Sir Thomas Richacre's Garden. -- A Summer House in view. --
Meter comes out of the Summer House, William meets him carrying a Chair.
WILLIAM. HERE, master Meter, here be another chair, and now it be all right, I
believe -- there be two for madam Emily and young master Goodman -- two
elbow-ones for Sir Thomas and his reverence, and this gilded damask one you bid
me fetch for my lord -- but ecod, if I was his worship, I Would set upon it myself.


Meter. Ha, ha, ha! -- well, put it into the summer house with the rest, that is
my good lad.


William. Never stir if I don't believe it be made of lead, it feels so plaguey
heavy -- thof I suppose I only think so 'cause I fetched it with an ill will --
for, to be sure, I did grudge my labor most confoundedly.


Meter. Why so, William? I never knew thee idle yet -- Why so?


William. Why, because I don't like un -- and it goes mortally again' the grain
with me to do any thing for such a scape-grace -- for, as the old saving be --
he is like the wind at east, good to neither man nor beast!


Meter. For shame, William, for shame! you should not speak so disrespectfully
of a nobleman.


William. Nobleman! why I hope, master Meter, you don't think such a whiffling
chap as Lord Sealand deserves to be called noble? I Will be judged by yourself
now, if he be one crumb like his worship, or a quarter so noble, -- thof he be
no more but a knight-barrow-knight.


Meter. I profess, William, I do not think this light young lord so deserving
of his dignity as our nobles in general are said to be; which makes me most
heartily wish he was more like his worship's honor than he is.


William. More like un! I Will be shot an' he be a bit like un -- no more than a
crab-apple be like a golden-pippin! I wonder, for my part (nay, for that
matter, so do the whole neighborhood) why such a good gentleman as Sir Thomas,
keeps company with him, and lets him come dangling here for ever a'ter young
madam, like a tantony-pig?


Meter. Why, thou know, William, his lordship has a great estate adjoining
to his worship's -- and, although he has it not in his will, I fear, to do
much good, it is in his power to do a great deal of harm, therefore, I
conjecture, his worship holds it prudent to keep friends with him.


William. More the pity, I say, master Meter, that what few good men there be
in the world should be obligated to truckle to the bad -- or that any one
should have a good estate that has not a good heart likewise!


Meter. William! thou art an honest righteous lad, I verily believe; and,
although it has pleased heaven to place thee in so humble a station, the
uprightness of thy heart would adorn the princes and the rulers of the land,
more than their costly raiment, precious stones, purple and fine linen!


William. Thanks to your kind opinion, master Meter -- I do hope I shall never
prove no otherwise.


Meter. I am morally certain thou will not -- hold forth thy hand -- there is a
shilling for thee -- and I will bestow upon thee too a donation of good books,
particularly, the Old and New Testament, the Liturgy, with, thereunto annexed,
the Old and New Version of the Psalms of David, done into English Meter.


William. 'Thank you kindly -- odsbobs, I shall be quite set up --


Meter. Moreover, I will recommend thee unto his reverence, to succeed me in my
holy office upon my demise --


William. What, me to be clerk and sexton! oh lord!


Meter. To qualify thee for which important undertaking, I will instruct thee
in every thing appertaining unto a clerkship -- particularly in psalmody --
likewise how to adapt, as well as set, a stave -- and eke also, both audibly
and emphatically to cry Amen!


William. I shall soon learn, for I know all the notches already, and can give
the key with the pitch-pipe, and sing fol fa with ever a he in the parish --
and as to Amen -- no offense, master Meter, I hope -- but I could say it twice
as laudable as you do.


Meter. Audible, thou would say, William -- and audibly did I use to say it
-- but, alackaday, I am waxen old, and my voice is impaired -- but when I was
thy age -- hem! A -- a -- men!


Speaking as loud as he can, William puts his hand before Metre's mouth.
William. Odsbobs! here comes my lady.


Emily enters -- William carries the Chair into the Summer House -- Meter is
going, Emily recalls him. Emily. No, not here! -- where is my George? what can
have become of him? -- Mr. Meter!


Meter. Did your good ladyship please to call?


Emily. Are you going into the house, pray?


Meter. Unless your ladyship has occasion to send me elsewhere.


Emily. No, only be so good to tell Patty I want to speak with her.


Meter. I will communicate your ladyship's pleasure unto her incontinently. --
Ah! when young, I had a voice like any bell! -- and, as the old song says,
could dig a grave, and set a stave, and say Amen full well! [aside as he goes
off.]


Exit Meter. -- William returns, and is following Meter, Emily calls him.
Emily. William!


William. Ma'am!


Emily. Step to the cottage below our garden-door in the green-lane; I am told
the poor labourer there is ill, and the family in great distress -- give this
to the poor woman -- [gives money and be careful not to mention it to any body
else, I charge you.


William. No, indeed, ma'am, I Will never open my lips about it, but when I Am
praying heaven to bless and preserve your ladyship's goodness!


Emily. Run then, William, as fast as you can; and go out at the garden-door,
that none of our family may see you.


William. Yes, ma'am, I will -- I Am sure I should not think this a heavy load
if it weighed as much again as the gilt chair, for I should like to be so
employed from one week's end to the other!


Exit William. Emily. What a humane creature! such goodness must not go
unrewarded. -- How different are our natures! this uninstructed boy, possessing
virtues too seldom met with in the most exalted! -- What then avail a pompous
title, wealth, and illustrious ancestry? since the meanest peasant, possessing
but humanity, has no superior! while the heart that cannot feel for others'
woes, disgraces, not only a distinguished rank, but even our very nature!


Patty enters. Patty. Did you want me, ma'am? my father said --


Emily. Yes, Patty; my papa intends passing the afternoon in the summer house,
so order coffee and tea to be served there.


Patty. Yes, ma'am.


going. Emily. Patty -- have you seen any thing of young Mr. Goodman since
dinner?


Patty. Yes, ma'am, I saw him steal slily by the hall windows a little while
ago -- I don't know where he went, but I have a notion he has seen some trollop
in the neighborhood, as he came along in the post-chaise, that he has taken a
liking to, and is gone in search of -- and I Am sure that is a shame, when he
might pick and choose out of the two prettiest in the whole county!


Emily. Why, Patty, this is love in downright earnest -- I Will be whipped if you
have not quite forgot poor William, and are jealous of this young gentleman.


Patty. Jealous! not I indeed, ma'am -- William is worth a dozen of him --
young gentleman! he don't behave like one, that is what he don't, for he has not
once had the good manners to offer to salute me since he came home.


Emily. Poor Patty! that is provoking, indeed --


Patty. Yes, ma'am -- I believe you would think it was, if he had served you so!


Emily. Indeed! ha, ha, ha! why I wish you are not jealous of me next.


Patty. No, ma'am, I am pretty secure there, if I really did like him well
enough to care about him -- for, your ladyship being heiress to so many
thousand pounds a year, he would never dare to make love to you, ma'am -- and I
hope, ma'am, setting case you was weak enough to like the poor lad, you would never
demean yourself so much as to tell him so.


Emily. I don't know that, Patty; for setting case (as you phrase it) I liked
him, I should make very little scruple of confessing it.


Patty. Indeed! lord, lord, how little pride some people have! If I was a
baronet's daughter, I Would never think of taking up with a poor clergyman's son,
when I might marry a lord, and be a countess.


Emily. A mind like his would reflect a luster upon the meanest origin! and I
desire, Patty, you would restrain this freedom, nor make so free with Mr.
Goodman's name again.


Patty. Dear heart, ma'am, I did but just speak -- and I should not have said
what I have, had not your ladyship asked me about him -- if I am a little
jealous of him, there is somebody to the full as jealous of me!


Emily. How I am tormented with this silly girl, while my mind is racked with a
thousand apprehensions! [aside]


Patty. You wanted coffee and tea served in the summer house, I think you said,
ma'am?


Emily. Yes, child! [peevishly.]


Patty. Child! goodlack! -- ay -- she is in love with him as sure as a gun, as
well as myself -- I Am sure I will not buy a lottery ticket since that is the case,
for, 'twou'd be only throwing my money away! [aside]


Exit Patty. Emily. Heyday! what ails the foolish girl! I wish she is not
jealous in good earnest -- and -- what is the matter with the other foolish
girl! I wish she is not more affected than she ought -- for, were I certain
George was absolutely gone upon the errand Patty mentioned, I believe -- I
should not be very well pleased! -- but it cannot be -- therefore be still, my
heart! poor frightened fool! nor throb and flutter without cause!


William reenters. William. Ma'am, I ha'run as hard as ever I could, and the
poor souls send their duty and ten thousand thanks to your ladyship -- but,
blessed be providence, they say, they don't want any money now.


Emily. How so, William?


William. Why, ma'am, what do you think? when I went into the cot, who should I
see sitting by the sick man but young Master Goodman; and thof the poor soul be
so bad, 'twould have puzzled a stranger to tell which of the two ailed most,
young gentleman looked so piteously.


Emily. Indeed! was young Mr. Goodman there?


William. Yes, indeed, ma'am --


Emily. My mind's at rest again! [aside]


William. And the poor woman told me he had been there a good while, and had
writ a description to be made up at 'pottecary's for her husband, and had guve
'em money to pay for it, and more to buy victuals with, and kissed the sweet
babes, and was so kind to 'em, nothing could be like it!


Emily. The dear, the amiable youth! how could I wrong him by my late
ungenerous fears! [aside]


William. And when I came out, ma'am, who should I see but his worship and Dr.
Goodman, and they ax'd me what I had been doing there, and what I was crying
about -- for, to be sure, young gentleman's goodness had made my eyes water a
little -- and when I told 'em, I wish I may never stir if their honors did not
almost cry too!


Emily. And where did my papa and the doctor go, William?


William. Why where do you think they went, ma'am?


Emily. Nay, how can I tell?


William. I am sure it made my heart dance with joy, to see such a grand
gentleman as Sir Thomas Richacre, a knight-barrow-knight, justice of peace and
quorum, stoop to go into a poor hovel like that --


Emily. What, the cottage you had just come out of!


William. Yes, indeed, ma'am -- into poor Quickset's little hut! -- but I could
not see Lord Sealand, thof I looked all about -- and if he had gone along with
their honors, his coat would not have set the worse on his back of Sunday, as
the saying be -- axing your ladyship's pardon!


Emily. Indeed, William, I am entirely of your mind -- but, if I was not, why
do you ask my pardon? it is not me you are speaking against.


William. Noa, madam, mercy forbid! it is out of any one's power to say ill of
your ladyship -- but it be rife all over the parish that your ladyship's going
to be married to my lord, and there is not a living soul but what pities you:
for your ladyship's as much beloved as my lord's hated -- and to be sure,
that is not a little.


Emily. Well, William, I am not married to his lordship yet -- and 'till I am,
you need not fear offending me by such remarks.


William. Thank your ladyship's goodness -- does your ladyship please to want
any thing else?


Emily. No, 'thank you, William, not at present.


William. [aside as he is going] Now I know the poor souls don't want for any
thing, if I can but coax Patty into a good humor, I shall be as happy as a
king -- Odrabbit it! I axe ten thousand pardons, but if I had not like to have
forgot to remember to give your ladyship the piece of gold again, I Will be shot.


Emily. William, you are a humane good lad, and shall not want encouragement --
keep it yourself as an earnest of what I may do farther for you.


William. 'Thank you kindly and heartily, ma'am! -- it be more your goodness
than my desert -- [aside] now I Will run back again to the cottage the other way,
and watch 'till their honors be gone in at garden door, then make the poor
souls have the money, whether they will or not!


Exit William. Emily. Married to Lord Sealand! I shudder to hear it mentioned!
whence could such a report take rise? from himself, or from Sir Thomas? sure my
dear father, kind to all besides, will never single me out to be cruel to! and
(as he does nothing without his worthy friend's advice) surely the good, the
pious Doctor Goodman never can approve it! -- why should I fear then? -- and
yet I do -- the bare idea that it is possible makes me tremble -- gracious
heaven! how dreadful is my present situation! demanded by a worthless insolent
I detest! hopeless of him I cannot choose but love! Oh! George, where is the
spot, or what the condition I should not think a paradise with thee, rather
than share a kingdom with Lord Sealand! [Lord Sealand sings without] Heavens!
here comes the hateful wretch -- let me endeavor to conceal my agitation!


Lord Sealand enters. L. Sealand. Emily, my divine creature! how could you be
so cruel to leave me to mope and grow stupid for want of your animating
brilliancy and vivacity? 'twas abolutely barbarous, carissima mia!


Emily. Those are qualities, my lord, I am not happy enough to possess -- but
surely it is impossible for Lord Sealand ever to be grave, whose animating
brilliancy and vivacity would dispel the gloom of a Greenland winter.


L. Sealand. O you flatterer! but, perhaps, you really think so -- do you, my
adorable? make me happy by confessing it.


Emily. I dare say your lordship has not the least doubt but every body thinks
so.


L. Sealand. Mia bella Signora! I see you do -- I read it in those eyes, whose
brightness I adore more than the beacons on the South-foreland, when I am
returning from Calais in a hazy evening.


Emily. Calais! bless me, does your lordship ever venture so far.


L. Sealand. Far! O child, that is nothing to me who have even had thoughts of
sailing up the Baltic, or crossing the Bay of Biscay, merely to kiss the
empress's fair hand, and the pope's great toe! and for a kiss of those divine
lips, I would explore the North-East-Passage! nor think I flatter you, my
angel, when I swear, that neither flip when I am aboard, or capillaire ashore,
are half so dear to me!


Emily. You do me great honor indeed, my lord -- but does your lordship ever
taste the liquor they call flip?


L. Sealand. Taste it? ay, many a can do I toss off when I have my watch-coat
and trowsers on, and am turning to windward in a brisk gale -- but the flip I
drink is not like the vile stuff commonly so called, for mine has a most
delicate flavor, as I always mix it with capillaire.


Emily. Well, it is amazing to me what could induce a person of your lordship's
delicacy to venture upon this dangerous amusement you have lately taken a fancy
to.


L. Sealand. Why, faith, mia cara! I commenced sailor merely to avoid the
imputation of effeminacy -- though if we meet with any bad weather at sea, I
immediately retire to my cabin, and order my pilot, O'Connor, to make for land
with all convenient speed.


Emily. Ha, ha, ha! you are perfectly in the right upon my word, my lord.


L. Sealand. But let us change the coarse indelicate subject -- I am almost
tired of the scheme, and another sea-sickness will make me drop it, I believe
-- pray what is become of George? first he walked off -- then you, mia crudel!
deserted us -- and soon after, Sir Thomas asked me to go with him to see the
sick fellow old Goodman was speaking of -- as if I had been a physician --
which I declining, he took away Domine, and left me to indulge in soliloquy,
just as I was concluding our marriage, ma chere! upon honor I have not been
treated so politely ever since I lodged with Mynheer Vander-Dunder, the fat
Burgo-master at Rotterdam.


Emily. Concluding our marriage, did you say, my lord!


L. Sealand. Si, Signora -- we were on the very brink of settling the
preliminaries.


Emily. Why, does your lordship really suppose we are to be married?


L. Sealand. Is it possible you can still make that a question? have not I told
you repeatedly I would marry you, my angel?


Emily. But did I ever consent to marry your lordship?


L. Sealand. Consent? egad I don't recollect I ever asked you -- on purpose to
spare your confusion in consenting, as I am sure my adorable will. [taking her
by the hand.]


Emily. Perhaps your lordship may be deceived!


George enters. George. What do I see! Emily and Lord Sealand hand in hand!
distraction! now I am lost indeed! -- but she seems averse to him -- why then
should I tamely give her up? what is his fortune, title, birth, to me? I have a
mind as noble, name as fair, though unadorned with honors and possessions! --
but I rave -- and, if perceived, shall be thought a mean list'ner to their
converse. [retiring]


L. Sealand. Ha! George! where have you been, you runaway! in some dull arbor
I suppose, poring over your musty Greek.


George. I beg pardon, my lord, for this accidental intrusion --


L. Sealand. O you are come quite opportunely to help me soften the rigor of
this obdurate fair one.


George. I shall be but an indifferent advocate for love, my lord -- it is a
language I have not been used to talk.


L. Sealand. Pho, pho, tell me something monstrous tender now out of your Ovid,
Catullus, Tibullus, or any of the soft amorous dogs, suited to the extreme
violence of my passion.


George. Were I in your place, my lord, I should rather follow their example,
than barely repeat their words -- they never said any thing to the object of
their wishes but what was dictated and inspired by love itself!


L. Sealand. Ay, that is true -- but a rough tar as I am, cannot be supposed to
have so many fine expressions ready on these occasions, as you studying rhyming
sonneteers; and Lady Sealand, like a tender mother, would never suffer me to
read or study much, for fear of spoiling my eyes, or making my head ache --
come, do now, say something monstrous clever for me -- and, in the mean time,
(as I fancy my dad, that is to be, is returned by this) I shall go and make you
happy, my angel, by concluding the treaty with him.


Emily. My lord! -- be not so precipitate I entreat your lordship!


L. Scaland. He, I am sure, will be no less proud of the honor of having me
for a son-in-law, than you, my charmer, are to have me for a husband --
therefore, mia cara sposa! think what day will be most agreeable to you for the
celebration of our nuptials; but, for your own sake as well as mine, let me
entreat you, not to delay our felicity too long! -- Addio! (jusqu'au revoir)
Addio! mia contessa carissima! fa, la, la, etc.


Exit Lord Sealand singing. George. Insolent reptile!


Emily. Now had I not a father more attentive to the happiness than grandeur of
his child, I should be completely miserable! -- Oh, Georgel do not think
lightly of me for this declaration -- I Would sooner beg with thee, than shine in
all the splendour this wretch's utmost power could place me!


George. Dearest Emily! think not of me -- had providence designed us for each
other, my lot in life had been more suited to your birth -- as it is, though I
have presumed to love, I never cherished hope -- for, not even to gain thee,
Emily! would I abuse my honored patron's confidence! may you, sweet maid, but
meet one more deserving, while I pray heaven to bless and to protect you!


Emily. Do not talk so -- thee only can I love! to thee only will I ever give
my hand -- I am sure my father will never force me to marry Sealand, or any
one, against my will -- and perhaps some blessed moment may incline him to
prefer my poor, but virtuous George!


George. No more, no more, sweet Emily! I cannot bear it!


Emily. Well! we'll drop the subject! -- pray, did you see Sir Thomas just now
where you have been?


George. Where I have been? --


Emily. Yes, at the cottage, down the lane -- William told me all.


George. Did he? -- but, it is no great matter, for the poor woman told me all
too, when she returned from the door, (whither William had taken her to deliver
your benefaction) -- and likewise, that Sir Thomas and my father were talking
with him in the lane -- whereon, suspecting they were coming there, I quitted
the cot immediately, and returned another way unperceived by them.


Sir Thomas Richacre and Dr. Goodman enter. Sir Thom. Why, George, where have
been, lad? I have been seeking you.


George. Sir, I was only -- [hesitating]


Sir Thom. Come, come, never blush at a good action; that is a false shame, and
almost as wrong as not to be ashamed of a bad one: I know where you have been,
and how employed. -- Your charity is sterling, I am sure, without that too
common alloy of ostentation -- and so is yours, my dear good girl! -- but,
pray, have you seen nothing of my lord lately, Emily? I expected to have found
him here, for when I asked him to go with me, he declined it, saying he would walk
a turn or two in the garden with you till I returned.


Emily. He was here just now, papa, and after addressing me in a most insolent
manner, saying he was sure both you, sir, and myself would be proud of his
alliance, he left me (as he said) to conclude the treaty with you!


Sir Thom. He did, ha? O, come along, I Will conclude it presently.


Emily. Sir! I hope -- dear sir, [to Dr. Goodman] speak to my papa -- for
heaven's sake intercede for me.


Dr. Good. Don't alarm yourself, dear madam -- Sir Thomas will do nothing
contrary to your happiness or inclination, I am certain.


Sir Thom. What Is the fool frightened at?


Emily. You said, sir, you would conclude this hateful treaty!


Sir Thom. Why, ay, so I will --


George. Then I am lost indeed! [aside]


Emily. Is it possible, sir! must your poor Emily be made a sacrifice!


Sir Thom. Heyday! what the plague's the matter with the girl? I Will conclude it
-- put an end to it -- break it off, you fool! -- what can I say more to please
you? I Would sooner marry you to William, or old Meter, than the first duke in the
land, if he had no better a heart than Lord Sealand.


Emily. Then I am happy!


George. And I! [aside]


Patty enters. Patty. Ma'am, Lord Sealand sent me to beg the favor of your
ladyship to come and play a tune upon your harpsichord till Sir Thomas returned
-- which (as you came in the garden way) his lordship did not know you was, sir.


Sir Thom. A tune, eh? -- ay, ay, we'll go play him a tune directly -- I Will
soon put you out of your pain, I warrant you -- for when he hears what must be
known before you marry any one, and what I believe I shall now tell him, I
fancy he will give over the chase of his own accord.


George. Heavens! what can that be? [aside to Emily]


Sir Thom. If he does not, you will perhaps think better of him than you do at
present, and willingly be Lady Sealand.


Emily. Never, sir, I am certain!


Sir Thom. Well, well, there is no knowing -- we shall see -- go, children, go
before us.


George. Come, my sweet Emily!


Emily. What can my father mean? [aside to each other.]


George. I know not what to think, whether to with or dread an explanation.


Emily. Nor I! -- but (be it what it may) assure yourself, dear George, I never
will be Lady Sealand!


Exeunt George and Emily. Sir Thom. I believe, my good old friend, no better
time than now for the discovery.


Dr. Good. I think so too, dear sir -- heaven prosper the event!


Sir Thom. Shall she be Sealand's if he holds his purpose?


Dr. Good. By no means, sir! and heaven avert, hereself should ever wish it!


Sir Thom. Ay, so say I -- but to be a countess is perhaps an almost
irresistible temptation!


Exeunt Sir Thomas Richacre and Dr. Goodman. Patty remains. Patty. By gemini, I
am in great hopes she will have my lord! and if she does, I think I stand no bad
chance of having young Mr. Goodman! oh, lud! the very thoughts of it make me
almost out of my wits! -- but, hang this college-education -- he seems so very
bashful, I am afraid he will never have courage to ask one the question downright
-- what shall I do then? -- why, I don't know any other way than this -- if he
cannot get the better of his modesty, and ask me, I must even try if I cannot
conquer mine, and ask him!


William enters. William. Ecod, here she be! -- I Have found the little baggage
at last -- why, Patty, love! I thought I Would lost you -- never stir if I have not
looked up and down for you like bewitched -- odsbodikins! I Am glad I have found
you.


Patty. [coldly] Why, did you want any thing, William?


William. Want any thing, Patty! no, not I -- nothing but to see thee, cause
you know you was a little frumpish before dinner; and I 'a'n't been easy in my
mind ever since -- come, Patty, will not you make it up?


Patty. Make what up, Mr. William? I don't know that we have had any difference
-- you have done nothing to offend me, and I have no reason to suppose I have
said or done any thing to affront you.


William. Me! no, lord love your dear heart! I never was angry with you two
minutes together in my life -- so let us kiss and friends --


Patty. Kiss! -- Pray, Mr. William, keep your distance -- I don't know what
behavior of mine can have caused you to forget yourself so much.


William. Why, Patty, you be only joking sure -- come, gi' us a buss, you
little cross-patch you.


Patty. Why, William, you have been drinking sure, or you could never be so
bold.


William, Drinking, Patty! -- I don't know what you mean by such an
insinivation as that -- I believe (ay, and you knows it too as well as I do)
there ben't a soberer lad in all the parish -- drinking! -- lord help me! -- if
I have swallowed a drop or a crumb of any thing since breakfast, but one horn
of ale, and a bit of meat as big as my three fingers, I Am a drunkard and a
glutton into the bargain! and I Would as lief be thought a thief as either -- so
you should not say that of me, Patty!


Patty. Bless me, Mr. William, I said nothing about your eating -- it is nothing
to me what you eat, or drink either -- what do you think I care? or whether you
ever eat or drink again or not!


William. Indeed! -- if I thought you was in earnest, Patty, I don't think I
ever should!


Patty. Well, that is none of my business, you know -- I don't concern myself
about inferior servants! -- all I desire of you is, that you will not make so
free with me for the future as you have had the confidence to do lately, for I
am determined I will not put up with it!


William. Why, I am sure you cannot say I ever behaved uncivil to you, Patty --
and if so be I have made bold to tell you I loved you, I said naught but truth
-- ay, and you have said as much to me more than once, for all you're so
scornful now.


Patty. I say I loved you? no, William! -- I own I had a sort of friendship for
you, because I thought you an honest young man and so forth -- but, love? O,
no, William! I am very sorry you mistook my civility -- I never had such a
thought I assure you -- I have very different views!


William. Patty! -- eh? -- what do you say? -- don't you go to -- dear Patty!
-- odrabbit it! my heart's so full I cannot speak to her -- and, if I could help
it, I Would never speak to her again!


Patty. I should be very glad of it -- and I desire, nay, I insist upon it,
that you never offer to open your lips to me again; for if you do I sha'n't
answer you, and so, your servant!


William. Stay, Patty -- one word more before we break off our courtship -- for
a courtship it has been, say what you will -- ay, and a tender one too! or else
when I set off for Oxford so long ago with Master George --


Patty. George! you make very free with your betters methinks -- it might be
Mr. Goodman in your mouth.


William. Ay, bless his dear soul! there is no name too kind for him -- but, as
I was going to say -- if so be you was not in love with me, as well as I in
love with you, why did you break this bit of gold with me, which I have worn
next my heart ever since? but I Will be hanged if I wear it any longer -- come
off, rot thee! -- there, there is your keep-sake, your love-token again! and
you're a false-hearted girl! -- and if you will promise never to speak to me
again, I never will to you while I have breath in my body!


Patty. I believe there is no great need of promising on my side, I shall not be
the first to break the silence, I dare say.


William. Why then fare thee well, Patty! my heart's my own again!


Patty. Ay, and a good riddance! take up with a footman indeed, when I have
such a prospect of being a gentlewoman -- I wonder who'd be fool then! I Am sure
I will not be such a one, and so your servant, Mr. William!


Exit Patty. William. And your servant, Mrs. Patt! if you go to that -- a
murrain take her for a scornful young toad! [bawls after her] I don't care a
brass thimble for you! no nor a pin's point! -- and you're a base, deceitful,
false-hearted -- [bursts out a crying] odrabbit it! I don't think I shall get
the better of this the longest day I have to live!


Exit William the contrary Way. End of the Second Act.
ACT III. Scene, the Summer House. -- Lord Sealand, Sir Thomas Richacre, Doctor
Goodman, George, and Emily, discovered seated.
LORD SEALAND. AND now the decks are cleared of the tea equipage, if you
please, Sir Thomas, we'll resume our topic.


Sir Thom. With all my heart, my lord; the sooner we come to the point the
better.


George, [rising] You have some private business with his lordship, I believe,
Sir --


Sir Thom. O no, there are no secrets going forward, George; at least, none
that are to remain so -- you need not stir, boy.


George. With your leave, sir, I Will take a turn or two in the garden the while
-- [aside] I dread the event, nor dare I stay to hear it -- heaven preserve
you, my dear -- lost Emily!


Exit George. Lord Sealand. Now, sir, if you please -- for I wait with as much
impatience as a becalmed vessel for a brisk gale to drive her safe into port.


Sir Thom. A brisk gale quotha! ecod, I have a notion there will blow such a
breeze presently as will go near to overset you, my lord -- or that your
vessel, not being heart of oak, will spring a leak; for our discourse will take
a turn you little think of.


Emily. Dear papa, permit me to retire! [rising]


Sir Thom. By no means, my dear -- there is a particular reason why you should
be present, otherwise indeed it might be deemed a solecism in forms -- but,
don't be alarmed, for I have not the most distant idea that this will come to
any thing.


L. Sealand. What a savage! -- O, sir, we'll dispense with a little form -- to
the point, if you please, Lady Sealand and I are all attention.


Emily. [aside] Insolent and cruel!


Sir Thom. To begin then -- your lordship has addressed this young woman? --


L. Sealand. This angel! this goddess whom I adore!


Sir Thom. Plain English, if you please, my lord -- and demanded her of me in
marriage? -- pray now, if I may be so bold, what is your lordship's motive for
it?


L. Sealand. What can it be but the most ardent passon?


Sir Thom. For her?


L. Sealand. For her! who else, dear sir, could I possibly --


Sir Thom. Say rather, what else?


L. Sealand. I don't understand you, sir.


Sir Thom. Why, your lordship being (no doubt) pretty well informed of the
value of my rent-roll; is that, or this [taking Emily by the hand] the goddess
you adore?


L. Sealand. This is mighty strange, Sir Thomas --


Sir Thom. No offense I hope, my lord -- but, as I must be assured that whoever
marries her has no other motive than a real, a disinterested affection for
herself; this is the single question, upon your answer to which depends the
event.


L. Sealand. Propose it, dear sir, propose it.


Sir Thom. If, instead of being daughter to a baronet, and heiress to a very
considerable estate, she had no other recommendation or endowment than her own
beauty and virtue, would you, my lord, or would you not, raise her to the rank
of Lady Sealand?


L. Sealand. Is it possible, sir, you can have a doubt of it? what is the
condition I would not raise her from!


Sir Thom. Emily, my dear, come hither -- I am going to lose thee, my little
cherub!


Emily. Sir! is it possible! --


Sir Thom. The time is come, sweet child, I must resign thee!


Emily. [to Dr. Goodman] Good sir, support me -- I cannot -- oh! [faints]


Dr. Good. [to Sir Thomas] Dear sir, her spirits are quite overcome --


L. Sealand. Don't be alarmed, gentlemen; -- nothing but the mauvaise honte
usual on these occasions -- or perhaps the excess of joy may have been too
powerful for her -- where the devil is my eau-de-luce? -- look up, carissima
mia sposa!


Emily. [reviving] O my dear father! --


Sir Thom. One kiss, sweet girl! and I resign that name -- for, I am not your
father! --


Emily. Gracious heaven! --


L. Sealand. What do you say, Sir Thomas?


Sir Thom. I am not her father -- and now, my lord, determine -- here she is,
as rich in personal and mental gifts, as she is poor in fortune, for she has
none!


L. Sealand. The devil! what a narrow escape! I had like to have weighed
anchor, and hoisted sale for that damned long round-the-world-voy-age of
matrimony, in a vessel without either ballast or provision! [aside] -- Why,
undoubtedly, Sir Thomas, fortune was my least consideration -- but, if the
young lady is not your daughter, it is proper I should first know who is her
father -- it may be somebody whose family it would be improper for me to marry
into.


Emily. [kneeling to Sir Thomas] Most honored sir! --


Sir Thom. Rise, rise, my dear! you must kneel no more to me! [raising her]


Emily. Where shall I kneel? where seek my father, if you are not!


Dr. Good. Turn hither, my heart's darling! and behold him --


Emily. Did I hear right? are you, sir, are you my father!


Dr. Good. I am! I am! [embracing her] I have endured a long constraint, but at
length am free to boast -- I am your father! --


L. Sealand. Heyday! here is a turn! the wind has chopped about with a vengeance
-- one minute south, and the next due north as ever it can blow.


Emily. [to Sir Thom.] O sir, forgive me, nor think this an ill return for your
paternal goodness. -- I love -- I honor you most highly, sir, and ever must
revere you! but nature pleads most strongly in my breast -- I love my father
too! [kneeling to Dr. Goodman, who raises and embraces her]


Sir Thom. Why that is my brave girl! I never yet knew half your goodness, and
love you (if possible) better now than ever.


L. Sealand. Well, upon honor, this is the most whimsical adventure I ever met
with -- what, in the name of oddity, Sir Thomas, could induce you to bring up
the young gentlewoman as yours?


Sir Thom. That Is my concern, my lord -- I had my reasons for it, which time
perhaps may show -- the only question necessary at present is, whether (if she
is willing) you will, or will not, marry her?


L. Sealand. A moment's pause, I beg, Sir Thomas --


Sir Thom. Pho, pho, come -- speak boldly, man -- was it the girl, or the
estate you adored? in plain english, are you a man of honor, or are you a --


L. Sealand. Sir Thomas -- you are really so precipitate -- I beg the
indulgence of a few moments reflection -- I Will -- think a little, madam, and
let you know my determination presently --


Emily. My lord, you need not trouble yourself to think about it; for rest
assured, that (fallen as you may think me) nothing can induce me ever to be
your lordship's!


L. Sealand. [aside] I never met with such a cursed embarras before!


Exit Lord Sealand. Sir Thom. Ha, ha, ha! so much for modern love! -- Emily,
you have lost your countessship, my dear --


Emily. His refusal has made me happy, sir, beyond expression -- and so I
flatter myself it will make George -- ha! -- George! -- merciful heaven! the
thought occurred not 'till this moment -- he is my brother!


Sir Thom. And I fancy you had conceived more than a sisterly affection for him
-- eh, Emily? --


Emily. I had indeed, sir! for, to confess what now is needless to conceal, I
loved him ardently; and (ignorant of my birth) had I been mistress of the
world, he must have shared it with me, or I had been a beggar!


Sir Thom. Ay, I thought as much -- well, well, time's a good physician, and
cures more ills than half the doctors living -- it will wear off, I warrant you
-- no sign of my lord weathercock's turning about again? no! -- I believe it is
in vain to expect him -- we had better seek for George, and inform him of what
has passed.


Dr. Good. Come, my delight! my only pride! my sweet child, come --


Emily. Excuse me a little, my dear father! I Will follow you directly -- I will
but dry these tears and -- oh! [in a burst of grief.]


Sir Thom. Pho, pho, never take on so about it, Emily -- you sha'n't go without
a husband yet, if there is one in the kingdom that deserves you -- what say you
to a Richacre, my girl?


Emily. Oh, sir, that I respect, revere and love you with a most filial
affection, I think you do not boubt -- but -- most honored sir! my other
parent! -- let me stop there -- my heart's too full! -- be not offended, sir --
I can no more -- Oh, George! George!


Sir Thom. Well, well, we'll talk no more about it at present -- but upon my
word you must not remain single, Emily -- for, to tell you the truth, I should
have been sadly balked, and my whole scheme frustrated, had my lord behaved
otherwise; as I have all along had hopes (which I flatter myself will yet be
accomplished) of prevailing on you to accept for ever that name you have so
long honored by the using! -- come along, my old friend -- friend, quotha!
ecod, who knows how nearly we may be related soon! eh? -- ha, ha, ha!


Exit Sir Thomas Richacre and Dr. Goodman. Emily. What a reverse of fate! how
am I bereft of all my fond, vain hopes of happiness and love! -- had I been
reduced to the most abject poverty -- had I lost him I thought my father, and
found no other -- had every calamity our woe-fill'd lives are fraught with, but
this, at once besel me, I had still been happy; but now, (oh, George! oh,
brother!) I am sunk ten thousand times more deep than wretch ever plunged
before!


George enters. George. Alone, Emily? where are Sir Thomas and my father? I saw
my lord go down the yew-tree walk, so thinking the conference over, I returned
to learn how it had ended -- what was the important secret on which so much
depended?


Emily. Oh, George! --


George. How! weeping! then I know enough, and now am nothing! O fortune!
title! how powerful are your charms that can betray goodness itself and make it
err!


Emily, Forbear, forbear! -- you know not why I grieve -- you cannot conceive
the exquisite distress of my present situation!


George. Not conceive how dreadful to be given to those we hate, as I am
persuaded you do Sealand?


Emily. Oh, George, there now needs no disguise -- the doom irrevocable's past!
did you indeed ever love me?


George. Love you! do I breathe? do I exist? -- could I, but to love you!


Emily. Then we both are truly wretched!


George. We are indeed! but if, as I have fondly thought, our love was mutual,
how doubly wretched is your fate -- doomed thus to marry one that you detest!


Emily. No, that is not my grief -- 'thank heaven he has refused me.


George. Refused you!


Emily. You will not wonder when I can tell you why -- Sir Thomas Richacre --
is -- not my father! [bursting into tears]


George. Not your father! amazing -- yet most happy sound! then I may hope --
and the first gleam I ever knew now shoots into my soul!


Emily. No, there is no hope -- an eternal barrier is fixed between us! for you
are -- I cannot speak it!


George. I am -- gracious heaven! -- what?


Emily. My brother!


George. Your brother!


Emily. My dear, dear brother!


George. Support me, or I fall!


Emily. With my very life! [weeping and embracing him]


Patty enters. Patty. So, so! here is fine work going forward -- kissing and
hugging at a rare rate! it is more than he ever offered to me! -- by jingo, I
don't half like this; she will never have my lord, nor I him, if they go on thus
-- it is well I did not buy the lottery-ticket, seeing how matters are going!
[aside]


Emily. Look up, dear George!


Patty. Dear George! lord, how loving we are! [aside]


George. Am I indeed so near to you?


Patty. Yes, you cannot be much nearer, I think! in her very arms! how near
would you be, I wonder! [aside]


George. Your brother!


Patty. What! [aside]


George. Then there is no hope indeed!


Patty. No, I hope not -- but, what can this mean? [aside]


Emily. Patty! -- how long have you been here?


Patty. I am but this moment come, madam -- Sir Thomas sent me to desire your
ladyship --


Emily. O Patty, you must forget those words -- I am no lady now --


Patty. No ma'am! how so?


Emily. No longer heiress to a splendid fortune, but sister to this much loved
youth -- the virtues of a reverend parent must be now our joint inheritance!


George. But to what purpose, Emily, was you bred up as daughter to Sir Thomas?


Emily. He told Lord Sealand there was a reason for it, which time perhaps
would show -- and, in addition to my misery, after my lord had left us, said he
was pleased at his refusal of me; having all along intended I should still keep
the name of Richacre -- meaning, no doubt, with my concurrence, to marry me
himself!


George. Astonishing! yet that accounts for all.


Patty. Good gracious! I hardly know how to believe all this -- I am afraid
she is only joking [aside] -- lord, ma'am, I hope you an't serious all this time
-- are n't you Sir Thomas's daughter indeed?


Emily. No, Patty, you have lost your mistress.


Patty. [aside] I have found a husband in the stead though, and that is ten times
better! -- but I must seem sorry -- Dear heart, ma'am, I am vastly concerned to
hear this, for you was very good to me, and I must never expect to have so many
nice clothes given me again, unless his worship should really be so kind as to
marry you himself, ma'am.


Emily. Happy, happy girl! 'would I had no greater grief than thine!


Patty. Why, to be sure, ma'am, the black ox has trod upon your foot a little,
as the saying is -- and one misfortune seldom comes alone, as the other saying
is -- you have been very unlucky indeed, ma'am, to lose a great fortune, and
your sweetheart too, both at once -- for I do verily believe you had a kindness
for Mr. Goodman before you knew he was your brother -- but now that is all over.
-- [aside] 'Thank my kind stars! and I shall be Mrs. Goodman as sure as fate!


George. No, Patty, it is not all over! --


Emily. Nor will be but with life!


Patty. Lord, ma'am! why sure you would not love your own brother!


Emily. Not love him! who shall debar me that?


Patty. Nay, ma'am, I only just spoke -- for brothers and sisters did formerly
marry I grant, or the world could not have been peopled -- but that is quite out
of fashion now, you know, ma'am -- unless indeed you had been
romancatholic-papishes, and were lucky enough to be Sir Thomas's children
instead of Dr. Goodman's; because I have heard say, if people have but money
enough, the pope will grant a -- compensation -- I think they call it, or some
such hard name, (I suppose it means an act of parliament) for a man to marry
his own grandmother! but indeed, ma'am, if I was you, I Would think no more of my
brother, but take Sir Thomas at his word, and marry my father -- that is, as he
is not your father.


Emily. Prithee have done, Patty; I am not yet reconciled enough unto my fate,
to bear this ill-timed mirth -- I might, nay, perhaps I shall, find refuge in a
cloister, and dedicate my future wretched life to heaven!


George. No, Emily! it is I should be sequestered from the world; you have been
taught to look for happiness, and, by accepting of Sir Thomas's most worthy
hand and noble fortune, yet may find it.


Emily. Impossible! oh, name it not again -- never will I basely take the hand
and fortune I cannot in return for give my heart!


George. Forgive me, dearest maid! nor think I had any view in what I said, but
your repose and welfare; for what little patrimony my honored father may have
gathered for us both, shall now be wholly yours; as I will immediately enter
into holy orders, devote my life to a religious celibacy, nor ever think again
of love or womankind!


Patty. O goodness heart! that will be a great pity, sir; for there is many a
pretty girl, I dare say, would be proud to have you.


Emily. Come, my dear brother! let us attend Sir Thomas and our father, I
promised to follow them directly.


George. Our father! oh, Emily -- my sister! -- I cannot bear the thought -- it
shocks -- it overpow'rs -- it mads me! -- my sweet Emily -- go you, while I
endeavor to compose this agitation of my spirits before I see them.


Emily. May heaven restore you to your peace of mind! -- but mine -- is lost
for ever!


Exit Emily. [George sits down, musing] Patty. [after some little pause] Sir,
-- sir, -- sir!


George. What do you say, child? [peevishly]


Patty. Why, sir, -- I hope you will not be angry at such a simple girl as me
offering to advise you -- but really I would not have you think of living
single; for to my certain knowledge, there is a girl in the world, ay, and a
good pretty girl too, that is not far off, would be very sorry you should die a
bachelor.


George. Which I most surely shall! [sighing]


Patty. Mercy forbid, sir! -- for indeed you are a very pretty gentleman! and
seeing as how you and your sister cannot conveniently come together, if I was in
your place, I should look about me a little -- and if such a thing was to
happen, that you even took a fancy to me, sir, I don't think I could find in my
heart to be cruel to you -- and though I am not your equals, you might go farther
and fare worse -- for I have a little money by me, and a prospect of getting a
very large sum soon -- and you know, sir, I am a sort of an heiress (as I may
call it) besides, and I dare say my father has saved something worth having.
[she stands curtsying and simpering to him]


George. How this silly girl torments me! I had better check her, or the giddy
creature may suppose I know not what -- I thank you, Patty, for your good will
to me, --


Patty. Thank you, Patty! O gemini, I believe he will come to at last. [aside]


George. But hope you will not deceive yourself into what might hereafter prove a
trouble to you.


Patty. No indeed, sir, it never would -- so far from it, every thing I did for
you would be a pleasure to me!


George. Still you mistake me, my good girl --


Patty. Good girl! O the dear soul, I shall have him as sure as a gun! [aside]
No, indeed, sir, I don't --


George. Pray hear me without interruption --


Patty. Yes, sir, that I will [curtsying] for, to be sure, I could hear you
talk for ever!


George. I am afraid you have conceived something like love for me --


Patty. Like love? indeed, sir, if a poor bashful girl must speak out -- it is
love in downright earnest! [curtsying very low]


George. Pray don't interrupt me -- you have entertained, I say, a partiality
for me you mistake for love, and which a return to might possibly confirm in
you; but, as that can never be, I entreat you, for your own repose, in time to
check it, and never think again of what is impossible! -- Oh, love! thou tyrant
over the heart, how contradictory are thy decrees!


Exit George. Patty. Impossible! why is it impossible? sure I am not his fister
too -- lord, lord! that any body should stand so in their own light! -- well --
it don't signify fretting about it -- if I cannot have him, I must have somebody
else? -- and, as he will not marry me, I think I Will even behave kinder to poor
William, for I Am sure he loves me dearly -- and if I can but coax him to forget
how I used him to day, and ask me the question (as he often has before) again,
if I don't have him, I Will be whipped! -- as I live, here he comes, and a likely
lad he is as any in the parish -- George Goodman, with all his airs, an't half
so handsome. -- I Will pretend not to see him, to try if he will break his
resolution and speak first.


William enters. William. Ay, there she stands, a sulky thing! what can have
made the little puss so plaguey cross-grained to day? -- she will not take a bit of
notice of me -- a stubborn young baggage! and I Will be hanged if I speak to her
first -- if I can help it! [seemingly going]


Patty. Not one word, by jingo! -- if I don't take care I shall lose him too --
since he will not speak, I must! so, come down proud stomach! -- William!


William. Did you call, Mrs. Patty?


Patty. Ay, William, -- why you pass by a body as if you had never seen one
before.


William. Why, Mrs. Patty, I be unwilling to anger any one -- and the last time
we parted, you know you bid me never speak to you again; so I was trying to
please you that way -- thof it almost breaks my heart! but if it killed me
outright, I should not care, if it did but pleasure you, Patty! [half crying]


Patty. Lord, William! why you did not think I was in right earnest, did you?
-- ha, ha, ha!


William. Eh! -- he, he, he! why, wa'n't you Patty? [wiping his eyes while he
laughs]


Patty. Wa'n't I! why no, I tell you -- I only did it to try you a little --
ha, ha, ha! -- that was all.


William. Was that all? lord, lord, if I could not ha'sworn you was in
downright earnest! for you have looked all day long as if you could eat me with
a grain of salt!


Patty. But I could not though, William -- for I have too great a regard for you
to hurt a hair of your head.


William. Have you indeed? -- well now, that is kind to tell it me!


Patty. I should be very ungrateful to behave otherwise than kind to you,
William, who have always professed so much love to me -- nay, more than once even
asked me to marry you.


William. Ay, more than twenty times, Patty -- and, if you were but willing,
I Would axe your father leave to get Mr. Liturgy, our curate, to publish the banns
for us next sabbath; and, as soon as ever we were out-ax'd, I Would marry you, and
love you to my dying day!


Patty. I thank you kindly, William, for your offer -- but, had not we better
wait a few years longer, 'till we have saved a little to begin the world with;
as I don't imagine you are much richer than myself.


William. Pho, never heed riches, Patty -- it is none but those who have too
much already, that marry for the lucre of gain! -- not that I be poor neither
-- last wages, I gave my father to save for me, made (with what he had before
of mine) forty-four pounds, twelve shillings and fix-pence -- that is, in even
money, forty-two golden guineas and a half -- so, you see, Patty, I be
somebody, and have gotten a good round sum to begin the world -- but, if we had
not a sixpenny-piece between us, a young couple that have health and limbs to
work, a good heart, and a sound conscience, have enough to begin twenty worlds!


Patty. That Is very true, William -- and I don't think there is a heartier young
couple in the county than we are -- besides, I have a very handsome sum of
money by me too, and a power of good clothes Miss Emily gave me --


William. Well then, Patty, shall us put what little we have together, and make
a match on it, eh?


Patty. Indeed, William, I don't know what to say to it --


William. Come, never be faint-hearted -- nor stand shilly-shally about it, you
simple tony -- [kissing her]


Meter enters unobserved by them. Meter. Bless my eyesight! what do I see? I
hope the boy has no unchaste purpose!


William. You know, Patty, I do love you dearly --


Meter. But honestly I trust --


William. And if you will only say the word --


Meltre. Goodlack, I am terrified!


William. I Will go buy a ring directly. --


Meter. Oh! -- I am satisfied!


William. I do know the size of this dear finger to a tittle -- and it shall be
as heavy as your heart can wish.


Patty. No, heavy rings are not the fashion now -- let it be a light one, Willy.


William. Now then, my dear Patt, you be my own for ever and ever! [kissing and
hugging her]


Meter. He, he, he! their amorous parley is wondrous pretty, I do protest!


Patty. Well, I vow, Billy, you have a most bewitching tongue, and have quite
won my heart!


William. He, he! that is pure!


Patty. But you must ask my father's leave, for I would not do such a thing
without his blessing for ever so much.


Meter. Thou art a dutiful good child, and heaven I hope will bless and prosper
you! [still aside]


William. Why you know, Patty, I mentioned that before, and I Will go directly
and tell un the whole story -- odsflesh! here he is, as sure as a gun! -- well,
how lucky this be!


Meter. Heyday! what has exhilarated thee so, William? -- thou look as
merry and happy! --


William. Merry and happy! ay, that I be -- and hilarated too, as you call it,
I believe; for, ecod! I hardly know whether I stand upon my head or my heels!


Meter. Why? -- what has pleased thee so overmuch?


William. What I do hope will not displease you, or we shall be all in a sad
quandary.


Patty. Lord, I am so ashamed, I cannot look my father in the face. [aside]


Meter. What is all this about?


William. Why, fir, -- I -- that is, Patty and I, if -- you --


Meter. Patty, and I, if -- you! what? what? -- why do not speak out? -- do
thou know, Martha, what it is he lacks?


Patty. I believe, father, I partly guess --


Meter. Well, what is it? --


Patty. Why don't you tell my father, Mr. William?


William. No, do you, Patty -- [shifting each other to Metre]


Meter. Come, come, speak out boldly, lad! -- faint heart never won fair lady.


William. Ecod, you have hit it! for -- you must know, sir, -- Patty being in
love with me -- that is -- I being in love with she I mean -- if so be you were
but willing, we should be main proud to become man and wife together!


Meter. Is this true, Martha?


Patty. If you please, father! [blushing and curtsying]


William. Yes, if you please, fa her! [bowing]


Meter. Why, William, as I have often told thee before, I believe thou art a
very honest good lad -- but, in troth, ye are both full young.


Patty. No indeed we a'n't, father!


William. 'Twould be only losing time to stay any longer --


Meter. Well, I will take it into serious cogitation -- as you will be under my
eye -- I think -- I shall not oppose your virtuous inclinations, but will most
humbly solicit the sanction and permission of his reverence and Sir Thomas,
which I am prone to think, at my entreaty, will not be withheld.


Patty. No, I hope not!


William. And then, father, when I am Patty's spouse, I Will keep the bible you
said to day you would give me as choice as old gold, to write the names of all our
children in; if so be that we increase and multiply, which I do hope and pray
to heaven we may, Patty!


Patty. Ay, and so do I, I am sure, William!


Meter. [taking one of them in each hand] Never did I unto any prayer more
fervently ejaculate Amen!

All three go off repeating -- Amen!


End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. Scene, a retired Part of the Garden.
Emily and Lord Sealand enter. EMILY. WHY do you persist, my lord, in detaining
me thus rudely, and prevent my returning to the house? pray let me pass, my
lord -- I desire you would leave me!


L. Sealand. Leave you? impossible, my angelic creature! I exist but in your
presence!


Emily. That your lordship's existence has no sort of dependence upon me, I
have had a most convincing proof.


L. Sealand. How can you be so cruel, my adorable! have I not declared the most
ardent passion for you? am I not now confirming it? what can I say or you
desire more?


Emily. Indeed, my lord, I never thought to hear such words as these from you
again -- the effect Sir Thomas's explanation had upon your lordship, made me
conclude --


L. Sealand. O, crudel! can you suppose I love you more or less, my charmer,
for being daughter to this gentleman or that? no -- my love is (as Sir Thomas
wished it) entirely personal, and in possessing you, my angel, I ask no more!
-- bravo, Sealand! [aside]


Emily. How have I been deceived! I blush to think how much I have wronged this
generous man! [aside]


L. Sealand. Why do you turn away, ma chere? why avoid me? sure I deserve a
better treatment -- I, that am waiting to receive, and place you in a state of
affluence superior to that in which you have been bred, and from which you are
so unexpectedly fallen -- but grieve not at that, for in my arms you will find
safe harbor from all the storms of fortune! -- Pretty and poetical that! I
don't think Ovid, or any of the lovesick tribe, ever said a better thing.
[aside]


Emily. O my lord! pardon me, I beseech you, for having thought of you so
unworthily -- I feel the warmest gratitude for this so generous a declaration,
but cannot profit by it.


L. Sealand. Say not so, my charmer -- you know not half the good that waits on
you and yours -- your father shall be raised as high as I have power or
interest to advance him -- your brother too --


Emily. Ah, my poor George!


L. Sealand. He shall be poor no longer -- I Will give him a living, buy him a
commission -- or place him to his wish in whatever style of life he may prefer
-- say but you will be mine --


Emily. What is there else I would not do to serve my father and too-much-lov'd
brother! and testify my gratitude, and the great respect I now have for your
lordship.


L. Sealand. No more, no more; prithee, my charming angel, have done with
gratitude, respect, and all such cold unanimated expressions -- love is all I
require; give me but that, and all the joys and luxuries of life attend you --
well said again, Sealand! egad, this love makes a man talk divinely! [aside]


Emily. Oh, sir! think not of a wretched creature, who never can taste of joy
again! -- were you, if possible, more noble, good and generous than I now find
you -- were you at once the greatest and the best of human kind -- so indelible
is the impression (though ever unattainable the object it is made by!) on my
afflicted heart, I could not marry with your lordship.


L. Sealand. Ha? what! -- marry? O no, my dear, I did not mean that!


Emily. My lord! --


L. Sealand. I love you, my divine creature, to adoration, almost distraction
-- every thing but matrimony -- and that, oh, that would be downright madness
indeed! non, non, mia cara signora! that is quite out of the question now --
your planks are started! and, from a vessel of burden richly freighted, that
has lost her cargo in a storm, you must now be cut down to a pleasure-boat! --
no had metaphor that for a sailor -- 'gad, I think I shine to day! [aside]


Emily. Good heaven! what can your lordship mean?


L. Sealand. Mean, my charmer? mean that I adore you! -- that you shall be as
happy as love and gold can make you -- shall command my heart and share my
fortune -- any thing but marriage; and that your own good sense must tell you
is now impossible!


Emily. At length I awake -- my dream of honor, generosity, respect, and
gratitude is now no more --


L. Sealand, But when your father and George are informed of what I propose for
their advancement, as well as for your own, I am sure they will readily --


Emily. Stop your licentious tongue, abandoned wretch! are you not content with
this most base attempt on me, but must my pious father and most virtuous
brother be your sacrifices too! must they partake and countenance such guilt!
oh, shame, shame! disgrace and scandal to your dignity and birth!


L. Sealand. Heyday! what is all this? you cannot be serious sure, child, in
rejecting so genteel an offer?


Emily. Sweet heaven look down with pity on me! the measure of my woes was full
before -- now it overflows!


L. Sealand. Why, my dear, you have really made a very fine progress in the
small time you have known yourself to be the parson's daughter -- you both
preach and pray most divinely upon my soul! -- but we'll leave such dull stuff
at present to those who know no better how to employ themselves -- come, my
Venus! let us retire to yonder mossy couch; where Paphian, Cyprian, and
Citherean boughs entwine to form a shade for love!


Emily. Unhand me, sir! -- how do you dare insult me thus! -- be assured,
although Sir Thomas is not my father, he will resent this outrage.


L. Sealand. O fie! how can you be so illbred, my dear creature, and want so
much courting to your own happiness? Come -- I am certain you will not be angry
at a little gentle violence -- let me thus force my angel to be kind!


Emily. For honor's sake, my lord, forbear! pity my distressed condition,
bereft of fortune, love, almost of life! nor with unmanly violence add infamy
to my already insupportable afflictions!


L. Sealand. It Is all in vain -- you are a charming girl, I love you, the place
is bien commode! and --


Emily. On my knees I beg! -- think what distraction a reverend parent and a
tender brother both must feel for my undoing! and, with a nobleness suited to
your birth, my lord! forego the advantage you now have over my defenseless
situation, and quit your horrid purpose!


L. Sealand. Ridiculous! to suppose I Would miss this golden opportunity -- no, no!
-- comply therefore, my charmer! and spare me the disagreeable necessity of
compelling you -- you will not, eh? why then we must have a fair trial of who is
strongest --


Emily. Help, help, sweet heaven! rescue a helpless creature from destruction!
oh, save me from dishonor and perdition!


L. Sealand. You may as well be silent, child, for we are far enough from the
house -- nobody hears you --


George enters. George. Yes, villain, I do!


Emily. And so has heaven!


L. Sealand. Pox take him! is he here? -- I wish he was at Oxford again with
all my soul. [aside]


Emily. O my dear brother! my protector! my guardian angel!


George. My sister! my sweet innocence!


L. Sealand. O rot you both! I have got into a blessed scrape here -- I wish I
was in the Bay of Biscay with all my heart! [aside]


Emily. Cruel insulter! to trample on a wretch just fallen to earth!


George. How did you dare, sir -- if you had no other sense of guilt -- how did
you dare to violate the laws of hospitality thus grossly!


L. Sealand. Oh, now you are going to preach -- very good -- proceed, sir -- I
am all attention! and must edify, no doubt, as I shall be finely lectur'd (I
suppose) between you.


George. Insensible villain! dead to every feeling of shame, remorse, of honor
or humanity!


L. Sealand. Sir, your most obedient!


George. But, my lord! though you did not think this poor girl worthy to be your
wife, remember she is my sister, and not to be dishonored by the most exalted
ruffian! -- for your present safety be thankful we are unarmed; else, in the
cause of injured virtue, I should forget there was a female present, and punish
your atrocious villainy on the spot!


L. Sealand. Why really, sir, if you are certain of victory before the
encounter, I think it full as well indeed that we are unarmed!


Emily. My dear George, contain yourself -- oh! -- I can scarce stand -- pray
lead me in!


George. Lean on me, my sweet sister, and fear nothing! have a care, sir, how
we meet again, it may be fatal to you!


Emily. Be calm, my brother! my deliverer!


George. Fear nothing, dearest! -- bear up -- bear up! he must be more than man
who injures you while I am by, and less than man who could at any time attempt
it! [looking scornfully on L. Sealand]


Exeunt George and Emily. L. Sealand. Pox take you for an ignorant,
impertinent, meddlesome puppy, I say! -- here am I to lose a fine girl, because
her stupid brother knows so little of the world -- rot him! -- but I Will not
drop the affair here I am determined -- let me consider -- um! -- ay faith, the
very thing! then she may squall 'till she is hoarse again, and I need not
apprehend a second interruption -- my French scoundrel shall about it
instantly. [going] -- Hold -- what noise is that? --


[La Poudre and Robert cross the back of the stage, talking and laughing.] L.
Sealand. Apropos! yonder is the very fellow I want -- La Poudre! La Poudre!


La Poudre reenters. La Poudre. Est ce que your lorship plese to vant a me?


L. Sealand. Yes, I do please to vant a you, you puppy; come hither --


La Poudre. Je suis bien aise -- I ver much glad den I happen to valk a dis vay
-- save a your lorship de peine to send for me.


L. Sealand. Hold your damned Babel of a tongue, and mind what I say.


La Poudre. I am not say von vard, mi lor -- I am dumb.


L. Sealand. I wish you was with all my soul -- at least for the present --


La Poudre. Fort bien, my lor -- I shall not open my mous -- je ne dirai pas un
mot -- not von vard I will speak.


L. Sealand. Then cease that confusion of languages, you damned French
chattering rascal, and hear me!


La Poudre. I hear a your lorship parfaitement bien, and so may de whole
parish, ma foi! -- you talk a so loud, I hear you if I was two tree mile off
--


L. Sealand. Ha! egad the puppy says true -- and that is not altogether so
proper at present -- who was that with you?


La Poudre. Your lorship coashaman, Robert.


L. Sealand. That Is lucky, by Jupiter! call the surly savage hither.


La Poudre. I will, my lor -- ici! -- Robert! Robert! -- come speak a mi lor --
courez, courez, plus vite! for vy you not make a great haste, you surly sauvage!


Robert reenters. Robert. Do you want me, my lord?


L. Sealand. Yes, Robert; put the horses to directly.


Robert. I cannot just yet a while, my lord; the poor things have not quite
dined.


L. Sealand. I tell you they must be put to directly -- I have not a moment to
spare.


Robert. Very well, my lord -- then they shall only just finish the handful of
meat that is in the manger --


L. Sealand. Damn the manger! I tell you I must go immediately.


Robert. What, may not they make an end of the mouthful they are about, my lord?


L. Sealand. I tell you no! I Will make an end of you, you rascal, if you don't
get the carriage ready this instant.


Robert. Very well, my lord! -- then I Will get 'em rubbed down and put to
presently --


L. Sealand. Rubbed down! you damned provoking dilatory rascal, if they are not
put to this moment, I Will (...) down with a witness!


Robert. I wonder ^^no'd wish to be a coachhorse? poor souls I can never have a
meal in comfort! [going toward the house]


L. Sealand. But hark ye, Robert! go this way, or you will ruin all -- through the
private door, which you may unbolt, at the bottom of this walk -- if any of Sir
Thomas's people are at the stables, make some pretense to get them out of the
way -- let nobody see you take the carriage out, be sure, if you can possibly
avoid it, then saddle La Poudre's horse, and wait for us at that garden-gate.


Robert. Very well, my lord. -- what maggot's in his head now, I wonder! not
that I cared a whisp of hay what was going forward, if the poor beasts had but
filled their bellies -- it is bad enough of all conscience to be a coach- man,
but, damn it, it is worse yet to be a coach- horse.


Exit Robert. La Poudre. Diable! for vy is all dis, mi lor?


L. Sealand. Why, I have got into a cursed dilemma here, La Poudre, and you
must be a damned rascal to endeavor to help me out of it.


La Poudre. Sans doubt, my lord! -- assurement I sal do every ting in my
possibilite -- mais vat dilemme, mi lor, is it I mus help you out?


L. Sealand. I had like to have been finely taken in here, La Poudre: -- Emily
is not Sir Thomas's daughter, but the parson's.


La Poudre. Ah, morbleu! den I suppose she have peu on point d'argent, littel
or no moneys -- not so grande fortune as you did expeck?


L. Sealand. You have hit it -- therefore I have declined marrying her as I
intended, and offered (instead) to take her into keeping.


La Poudre. Vous avez raison, mi lor; it is ver vel juge -- and she vil make ver
pretty fille de joye for your keep, en verite.


L. Sealand. Why, ay, La Poudre, though she is not freighted for a matrimonial
voyage, she would make a charming pleasure yatch! but she has refused that --


La Poudre. Refuse dat? la grande sotte! oh que de great a fool!


L. Sealand. Her puppy of a brother just now interrupted me in an attempt upon
her, and they are gone in doors to acquaint the family of it, I suppose -- now,
unless I can contrive to carry her off, I lose her for ever!


La Poudre. Parbleu, c'est vrai, mi lor -- it is ver true inteed.


L. Sealand. In hopes of which, you hear how I have ordered the carriage --
now, if you think it possible to decoy her out, Robert and I will be ready to
hurry her into it in a moment.


La Poudre. Je ne scai pas, mi lor -- it vil be ver difficile -- but I will try
all my possibilite.


L. Sealand. No matter what unaccountable lies you tell --


La Poudre. Lie! bygar I will lie and swear through tick and through tin;


L. Sealand. If you succeed, the moment she is without the garden door, do you
bolt it within to prevent their tracing us; then climb over the wall directly,
mount your horse, and scour away as if you rode for your life.


La Poudre. Oui, mi lor -- but vere mus I scour?


L. Sealand. Down to the beach as hard as ever you can ride, and hail the
Tarquin -- bid O'Connor bring the skiff ashore immediately, and both of you
wait my coming to assist me.


La Poudre. Je vous entend bien, mi lor -- and I sal scour comme le diable!


L. Sealand. Then, if I get her but safe down there, I have no more to do but
whisk her on board the Tarquin, put off to sea, and -- [a noise heard without]


La Poudre. Allez, allez, mi lor -- somebody come --


L. Sealand. I am gone -- succeed, my dear La Poudre, and you are made for
ever! -- now, Venus! be propitious to my scheme, I Will sail for Paphos, and
there worship thee!


Exit L. Sealand. La Poudre. Ma foi! it be de old gentilman himself come!
parbleu, I no like his look -- he is fort enrage -- in one devil a great
passion -- mort de ma vie! I wish I no get break a my bone! fa, la, la, la,
etc. [singing carelessly]


Sir Thomas Richacre and Dr. Goodman enter. Sir Thom. Where is the rascal?


La Poudre. Fa, la, la, la! -- who, sire?


Sir Thom. That scoundrel of a lord! --


La Poudre. Mi lor scoundrel? je ne scais pas -- I am not acquaint vid mi lor
Scoundrel, ni monsieur Rascal non plus! I have not de honneur to know de
gentilmens en verite -- who do you mean, sire?


Sir Thom. Mean, sire! why, when I ask for a scoundrel, a rascal, and a lord,
who can I mean but Lord Sealand?


La Poudre. Mi lor Sealand! --


Dr. Good. Heaven forbid there should exist another lord, those names could be
applied to!


George enters. George. Is the villain here yet, sir?


Sir Thom. I don't know where he is, not I, nor will this fellow tell me.


La Poudre. Parbleu! I am amaze! je vous en pry, gentilmens, vat is all dis
fracas and tintamarre? -- est ce que you dit ask a me, sire, vere be mi lor
Sealand?


Sir Thom. Why, who should I ask but you? do you think I inquired of the trees
and flower-plots?


La Poudre. Je vous demand pardon, dat I ave no understand vat you speak ven
you ask or mi lor Scoundrel --


Sir Thom. Well, now you do understand -- where is he?


La Poudre. Vat, mi lor Sealand?


Sir Thom. Yes, you damned incomprehensible puppy! Lord Sealand.


La Poudre. Sire, he be only just valk littel way down de jardin.


George. Down which walk? --


La Poudre. Down dat a walk, sire -- [shewing a wrong way]


George. Now then, if the villain has a heart, I Will put it to the proof! [aside]


Exit George. La Poudre. C'est par la gauche, de left hand, fire; [calling
after George] gentilmens, mi lor be just by de orangerie. [to Sir Thomas and
Dr. Goodman]


Sir Thom. He sha'n't be there long, a dog! nor in any other place that I am
master of -- for, as soon as I have told him what a scoundrel I think him, if
he don't walk out of his own accord, I shall make bold to kick him out!


Exit Sir Thomas Richacre. La Poudre. Kick him out! mort de ma vie! kick a mi
lor Sealand? vat, in de name of vonder, all dis mean, sire?


Dr. Good. It means that your wicked lord has made a most infamous attempt upon
my daughter's honor?


La Poudre. Your daughtere, sire! -- vat daughtere?


Dr. Goodman. My Emily -- my dear, my innocent child!


La Poudre. Your shild, sire! be mademoiselle Emily your shild?


Dr. Goodman. She is! which that disgrace-to-his-rank no sooner knew, than (not
content most poorly to reject her he had just before solicited for a wife) he
wickedly endeavored to seduce her to be his mistress!


La Poudre. Very wicked inteed, sire! --


Dr. Good. Nay more, to aggravate his guilt, proposed rewards for me, her
wretched father! to be the pander to my daughter's infamy!


La Poudre. Helas! c'est une chose bien infame et extraordinaire, inteed! I am
quite shocka to hear it! I no mush vonder now de old gentilman be go kick a mi
lor -- but I vonder great deal you ave so mush patience and philosophy dat you
no go give him littel kick too, sire.


Dr. Good. 'Twould ill become my cloth to seek revenge -- though I came here, I
must confess, in anger; and, had I met him, should have loaded him with
bitterest reproaches -- but, on reflection, think it better to avoid him -- if
he repents his fault, I am satisfied!


La Poudre. It Is very good of you inteed, sire -- for mi lor ave been fort
mechant, very naughty I mus confess; and I should be no mush surprise if de
young gentilman fight a mi lor and kill him -- ecoutez! -- hark a, monsieur! I
think I hear de sword clash -- oh, que oui! dey fight! dey fight! ah, mon
pauvre lor! he vill be kill! he vill be kill! and I fall lose my place!


Dr. Good. Killed! forbid it heaven! though he deserves the worst that could
befall him, yet -- let me endeavor to prevent more sin!


Exit Dr. Goodman. La Poudre. Ha, ha, ha, ha! so far I ave tell de very pretty
lie inteed, to get them all out of de vay -- now, vile de coast be clear, I go
to de maison, and try all my possibilite to get mademoiselle to mi lor -- eh!
parbleu, it vill be no politic to come back dis way and meet a les
gentilshommes again! vat I sall do, ma foi! -- let a me considere -- [going]


Emily speaks without. Emily. George -- brother! where are you, my dear, cruel
George? --


La Poudre. Quel bonheur! here come de lady quite apropos! -- now for de bold
stroke -- ah miserable que je suis! la peur me fait mourir! I am frighten to
death! help a meurtre! meurtre!


Emily enters. Emily. Ah, murder? merciful heaven! I feared as much, and
therefore followed -- where? who?


La Poudre. Ah, madame! I am frighten out of my sense! Young monsieur Goodaman
be gone out of de gate of de jardin to fight a mi lor Sealand, and I justement
hear de sword clash and pistol fire!


Emily. Gracious heaven defend him! -- brother! father! help! murder! help!


Exit Emily the way L. Sealand went. La Poudre. Ha, ha, ha, ha! dat is bien
fait -- ver vell done inteed! [looking after her] you be goot girl, run ver
vell -- mi lor vill kesh you dans un moment, and carry you quite away! ha, ha,
ha, ha!


Sir Thomas Richacre reenters at the upper End of the Stage, looking about.
Sir Thom. Where, in the devil's name, has he hid himself?


La Poudre. Ah, ma foi! here come old gentilman again! now I must run bolt a de
jardin door apres mademoiselle, climb over de vall, (take care I no break a my
neck though) monter a cheval, and scour down to de beeche as if de devil vas
scour after me! -- ha, ha, ha, ha! bygar, I am von very greata devilish lucky
rogue! ha, ha, ha, ha!


Exit La Poudre. George and Dr. Goodman re-enter. George. It Is in vain to seek
him here, sir; he must certainly have returned up the yewtree walk to the
house, while we have been this way, and may offer fresh insult to my sister --
the thought alarms me! -- let me fly to her protection!


Exit George. Sir Thom. Why, there is no finding the dog any where, Doctor -- he
is not in the garden I Am sure -- unless he has hid himself at the bottom of the
canal -- I Will have it dragged, and if I find him there, I sha'n't have quite so
bad an opinion of him as I had.


Dr. Good. Let us hope, sir, he has reflected on the heinousness of his
behavior, and withdrawn himself privately through shame.


Sir Thom. Shame, a villain! he was not ashamed of committing the offense, but
I suppose he would blush up to the eyes to ask pardon; nay, run the best friend he
has in the world through the body, or blow his brains out, sooner than do it!


Dr. Good. It is to that false shame, sir, we may attribute most of the impious
duels, by which our laws divine and human are daily scandalized and broken!


Sir Thom. Ay, it is too true, Doctor -- the more the pity! -- come, George --
heyday! what is gone with him?


Dr. Good. He went in doors to Emily, I believe, sir.


Sir Thom. Well -- come, my good friend, let us forget this puppy that has
vexed us -- 'thank heaven no harm came of it -- I think we had even as well go
tell your sweet girl what I was proposing, when George and she came in from
Sealand; and have the wedding celebrated as soon as possible.


Dr. Good. Dear sir, consider once more the vast disparity before you finally
determine -- the obligations you have conferred on me and mine already, are
never to be cancelled, but this unthought-of condescension --


Sir Thom. No more, no more, my dear old friend! I have considered it
thoroughly, and (if you will so far indulge me) it shall be so -- we'll show
the libertine we can set a proper value upon merit, without the recommendation
of fortune, though he could not, by offering her a husband not much inferior to
himself, who will love her and protect her!


George reenters. George. Have you seen my sister, sir?


Dr. Good. Not since we left her in the house; is she not there?


George. No, sir! Patty says, that fearful of my having a rencounter with Lord
Sealand, she followed me into the garden.


Dr. Good. Bless me! where can she have gone so suddenly?


Sir Thom. Why the devil's in the people to day, I think, i'my conscience --
one cannot turn one's head, but, like goblins and fairies, or a jugler's cups
and balls, they are vanished! -- Odzookers! now I think a little, my mind
misgives me -- sure that damned fellow, Sealand, has not conveyed her off!


George. Which way, dear sir? the garden door, you see, is shut, and fast
bolted, which, if they had gone out of it, must have been left open.


Sir Thom. Why, Emily! Sealand! Frenchman! scoundrel! -- where, in the devil's
name, are you all got to? [running up and down the stage]


William enters hastily. William. Sir! sir! your worship!


Sir Thom. What are you bawling about, you rascal? is not one enough at a time?


William. Your worship!


Sir Thom. What does the blockhead stare so at? have you seen your young lady
any where lately?


William. N -- n -- no, your worship!


George. Nor Lord Sealand?


William. N -- n -- no, sir! I have not seen never a one of them since tea-time
--


Sir Thom. Then what do you come to plague us now for, you puppy!


William. Lord, your honor! I only came to tell your worship the poor woman,
Dame Quickset, that lives at the cottage where your honors all went after
dinner to day, is begging for dear life to speak to your worship.


Sir Thom. I am busy now -- I cannot speak to her -- zounds! I could not speak
to the great mogul if he was here -- why, Emily! Sealand!


Dr. Good. Dear sir, be patient for a moment -- it may be something concerning
my child -- pray let her speak with you.


Dame Quickset speaks without. D. Quick. Where is his good worship? I must
speak with un, for it be upon life and death! [she enters] O, heaven bless your
worship! you're undone! you're undone!


Sir Thom. So I have been just thinking! -- but how, how?


D. Quick. Young madam! your daughter! your daughter!


Sir Thom. What of her! --


George. Speak! speak! --


Dr. Good. Where is she, good woman, where is she?


D. Quick. Heaven knows where by this, not I! -- some vile villains have
kidnap'd the precious lady away, to have their wicked will of her; or else (for
the lucre of gold) to sell her for a neger-slave, or a turk, I do verily
believe!


Sir Thom. A negro or a turk! why what a plague does the woman mean?


D. Quick. Why, an't please your worship, a strange outlandish looking man came
galloping down our lane not a minute agone, whipping and spurring poor beast
like any mad! and a fine chariot came driving a'ter him from your worship's
garden door, as thof 'twou'd have tore the ground to very bits; with somebody
screaming and crying in the inside on it as thof they had been murdered! and, as
it passed by our hut, who should I see it was but the sweet young Lady
Richacre, your worship's daughter, with some vile rogue sitting beside and
holding her, disguised like a gentleman!


Sir Thom. As sure as death it was that dog Sealand!


Dr. Good. Good heaven protect my child!


George. Follow me, William! and help to get arms and horses ready!


William. Od rot un! I Will take blunderbuss from hall-chimney for myself, and,
if I come up with un, I Will make un remember the day of the month I warrant un!


Sir Thom. Meter! John! Coachman I saddle all the horses! load all the fire
arms! raise the whole county! blood! I Will blow the villains all to pieces!


Exeunt omnes. End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. Scene, a Parlour.
Patty enters alone. PATTY. DEAR heart, how I tremble! I am sadly afraid they
will not overtake them -- lud, lud! I wish somebody was come back again, for I
begin to be afraid to stay in the house any longer -- who knows but they will
come and run away with me next! O, I wish William was come back! I hope the
dear soul will not come to any harm! -- lud, lud! what a twitter am I in! -- and
what can have become of my father? -- sure he has not followed them a-foot --
hark! did not I hear a noise? perhaps I forgot to fasten the hall-door in my
fright, and somebody is coming to run away with me!


Meter enters out of breath, she runs and embraces him. Patty. O dear father!
is it you? I am glad you are come back! -- where have you been? what have you
heard? have you seen any thing of them?


Meter. What! has no one returned yet, Martha?


Patty. Nobody but you, father. --


Meter. Goodlack! goodlack! was there ever the like heard of! neither tale nor
tidings can I learn, and I have run up and down almost every lane in the
parish, until my poor old legs are just ready to drop off!


Patty. You had better sit down, father, and rest yourself, while I get
something for you.


Meter. Sit down, child? no, I will neither eat, nor drink, nor rest, until
the precious lady is found! -- I wanted but to know if any one had been more
prosperous than myself, before I journeyed to any vast distance; and since no
one has, I will travel unto the world's end, but I will find her!


[going] Patty. Pray, dear father, don't -- for, if you should chance to meet
with the villains, they may murder you, and then come and run away with me! --
indeed I cannot stay here any longer by myself with such dreadful apprehensions
-- O! I am terrified out of my senses!


Meter. Be composed, my good child -- they must be hardened wretches indeed to
slay a poor old man like me, who could assail them with naught but prayers and
supplications -- therefore, make fast the door after me, and look heedfully
unto the mansion, child, while I -- [going] -- as I am a sinner, my reverend
master is returned! -- I pray heaven he brings joyful tidings! --


Dr. Goodman enters. Dr. Good. Ha? what is that I hear? joyful tidings, said
you? is she found, Meter? is she found?


Meter. No, truly, if your reverence has not been so prosperous!


Dr. Good. Distraction! O my child! my lost, lost, violated child!


Meter. The Philistines are come upon her, verily!


Sir Thomas Richacre speaks without. Sir Thom. Here, Patty! where are you?


Patty. Lord! here is his worship come back, sir -- who knows but he may have
had better luck -- I am in great hopes --


[going] Dr. Good. No, no, no! there are no hopes! no hopes!


Sir Thomas without. Sir Thom. Patty! Meter!


Meter. Here, your worship! --


Sir Thomas Richacre entering. Sir Thom. Who Is at home? has nobody found this
rascal yet? nobody returned?


Meter. Yes, an't please your worship, his reverence is returned, and so am I.


Sir Thom. And so are you! -- why I did not know you had been any where --
where the devil did you hide yourself? I called and bawled for you before I
went out 'till I was hoarse again, but could not find you.


Patty. Indeed, your worship, my poor father has been running all over the
parish, seeking for young madam, 'till he is almost dead.


Sir Thom. Well! and has he found her?


Dr. Good. Oh, no, no, no!


Sir Thom. Why then I wish he was quite dead -- and I wish I was dead -- and we
were all dead! and buried! and --


Meter. Good your worship wax not wroth with your poor old servant! I did my
best, in truth; and was just going to repeat my feeble endeavors as his
reverence came in.


Dr. Good. Dear sir, advise me -- I am almost distracted! -- what shall I do?
where shall I seek her?


Sir Thom. I know no more than you -- almost distracted, quotha? zounds! I have
been stark mad this half hour!


Meter. Will your good worship please to repose you in your easy chair?


Sir Thom. Repose the devil! --


Meter. Mercy on us!


Sir Thom. Which way did you go, Doctor?


Dr. Good. I went first, sir, to Lord Sealand's house --


Sir Thom. Psha! that I know already, for I was there just after you -- what
could induce you to go there? you might be sure enough he would not carry her
home -- which way did George go?


Dr. Good. I know not, sir -- heaven will, I hope, direct him better!


Sir Thom. He cannot have worse luck than I had go which way he will -- for, so
far from a coach or a chariot, I could not see so much as a cart or a
wheel-barrow -- but, come, come -- don't let us stand chattering here -- let us
go look somewhere or other -- [going]


O'Connor speaks without. O'Connor. Hilli ho! my hearts! -- what cheer, honies?
-- what, all under hatches? tumble up, tumble up, my jewels! -- [he enters] By
my soul! this is the strangest vessel I ever stuck foot aboard -- the devil a
hand is there walking deck to keep watch! so, fait, I even made bold to take a
peep into the cabin!


Sir Thom. Who the devil are you, sir? what do you want here?


O'Connor. Arrah, be easy, my jewel! don't put yourself out of your latitude,
and you will know who I am presently -- but why will not you station a hand upon
deck yonder to keep a bit of a look out? or you may be boarded by a
land-pirate, honey!


Meter. Go, Martha, and make fast the door, child.


Patty. Dear heart! I am almost afraid this strange man is come to run away
with me! [aside]


Exit Patty. Sir Thom. What Is your business? what do you want of me?


O'Connor. What do I want with you? the devil a toothful do I want of you, but
a little civil discourse; nor that neither, unless you are the commander here.


Sir Thom. Well, sir, I am the commander as you call it -- What then?


O'Connor. Why then -- I Will lower my top-sail to you, honey! [pulling off his
hat]


Sir Thom. But -- what is your business? for I Am in haste --


O'Connor. Why you are to know, joy, I am just come full sail upon the outside
of a horse (with another in tow) from the salt-sea-shore, to bring you advice
of a sweet cratur, a female young woman, (belonging here) and my master Lord
Sealand --


Sir Thom. Lord Scoundrel! --


O'Connor. Indeed you may say that -- more pity the two words should ever be
splic'd together!


Dr. Good. But your news, sir, your news!


O'Connor. Why, you must know, I received orders from Mounseer Powder-puff, my
lord's walley-de-shaver, to have our skiff ready to carry my lord, and the
young woman I mentioned, aboard our cutter, the Tarquin -- but I soon found, by
her unwillingness, that she was not a volunteer of her own accord; but had been
pressed into the sarvice without giving her consent to it -- so, faith! I began
to be a little queer with my lord about it; for the sweet cratur looked as
innocent as a sucking dove, ay, or a newborn dove's egg! and I determined not
to aid and assist at making her otherwise!


Dr. Good. Eternal blessings on you for your goodness!


O'Connor. Devil a goodness in the case, honey -- 'twas no more than the duty
of every honest man that is not a rogue!


Sir Thom. Give me your hand, my heart of oak! I am your friend for ever!


O'Connor. So, while we were raving and squabbling within half a cable's length
of land, a good clever likely young jontleman, and a carrotty-pated
livery-servant, came galloping and splashing into the salt-sea, as if they were
riding post over to France or Holland! for their horses were fairly afloat, and
half way to the skiff in the turning of a handspike.


Sir Thom. So, friend! --


O'Connor. Hollo! you young harebrains! says I -- have a care you don't run
foul of our little nut-shell, and spill us all! upon which the poor girl cried
out, it was her brother!


Meter. Her brother!


O'Connor. Devil fire me! says little Brian O'Connor (that is myself) if their
beasts shall board us, and send us to the bottom, if he was your brother and
sister too! but, do you hear, young jontleman? says I, have a little wit in
your folly, and don't fink your friends and your foes together, but take in a
reef a two and we'll be alongside you presently.


Sir Thom. That was right, friend, that was right!


O'Connor. Upon which, you may take your swear, my bug-of-a-lord did all he
could to prevent my carrying the boat ashore -- and, at last, when he found
nothing else would do, (nor that neither) was trying to hussle me overboard --


Meter. Was it possible!


O'Connor. Indeed it was not! -- for, as soon as I perceav'd it, Oho! thinks
little Brian, are you for that fun? I Will be bound I match you to a tittle, my
jewel! so, upon my conscience, I made no more ceremony, but gave him as pretty
a genteel lift as you shall see in a summer's day, and capsiz'd him (souse!)
headlong into the wet ocean! where he looked, for all the world, like the gold
and filver fish folks keep in glass washing-rubs!


Sir Thom. Ha, ha, ha! well done, well done, in faith!


Meter. But (notwithstanding his demerits) he was not drowned, sir, I hope!


Sir Thom. There we differ, old Stave, for once -- for I hope he was.


O'Connor. No, faith, sir, as ill luck would have it, he was not drowned.


Sir Thom. The more the pity, say I.


O'Connor. Upon my conscience, sir, you say very right -- it was God's mercy
and a thousand pities sure enough! but I take it he was a little damp or so,
for when he scrambled ashore, the salt brine ran from him by pailfuls.


Sir Thom. Ha, ha, ha, ha! I shall burst, I shall burst! upon second thoughts I
am glad the dog was not drowned, for if he had, I should have been killed
outright.


O'Connor. Yes, fait, and so would he too!


Dr. Good. But how ended the matter, pray sir?


O'Connor. O, it was soon over, honey! for when I had thrown the whale into
Jonas's belly --


Meter. Jonas into the whale's belly, I apprehend you mean, sir!


O'Connor. Well! the whale into Jonas, or Jonas into the whale, it is all one
an't it? -- when I had given my lord a summerset, I say, and spilt him into the
ocean, we got ashore presently -- but, as the young jontleman was hoisting his
sister out of the boat, his draggle-tail'd lordship lent him such a pat of the
cheek, as was enough to break his handsome face, or put one of his forecastle
lights out!


Sir Thom. The cowardly villain! but he repaid it, I hope?


O'Connor. Och! I Will be bound he did -- and with interest too -- for he had the
honor of horse-whipping his lordship to his heart's content! and (by way of
premium) I divarted myself the mean time with beating his impudent French
walley-de-shaver!


Sir Thom. Bravo! bravo! ha, ha, ha! but what became of the livery-servant all
this while? sure he was not idle?


O'Connor. What, the lad with the bunch of carrots growing on his head? indeed
he was not -- for he had no sooner handed the poor frighted girl out of the
gangway, and brought the two horses they went, and I came upon, to an anchor;
but the tight lad beseag'd the coach-box, took it by storm, and is now piloting
the young jontleman and lady safe into port here, aboard my lord's own chariot,
fait: leaving him and his rascally companions to pad the hoof, and trudge home
upon their ten toes!


Sir Thom. Odso! then let us go meet 'em! they cannot be far off by this, and I
long to see the dear rogues again -- [going] -- hark! sure I hear a carriage
stop.


Patty enters hastily. Patty. My lady's come back, sir! my lady's come back!
young Mr. Goodman and William have found her, and they are all come back
together!


Meter. Rejoice and sing! kill the fatted calf and be merry, for the lost sheep
is found!


George and Emily enter. She runs to Dr. Goodman, Sir Thomas Richacre catches
George in his arms. Sir Thom. My dear, dear, brave boy! you are welcome home
again!


Emily. [to Dr. Goodman] O my loved sire! scarce did I know my father, ere I
was torn from him! but am restored (thank heaven!) to his paternal arms!


Dr. Good. Thanks, gracious providence! I see my child again!


Meter. Amen! --


Sir Thom. Odzookers! George! I have been in a plaguey pucker about you, you
rogue!


George. Sir, I am eternally bound to you for this solicitude! And, was not my
dear father exceedingly alarmed? [to Dr. Goodman]


Sir Thom. Alarmed! why I tell you I have been almost out of my wits about you
both!


George. Sir, I am bound to you for ever! but, my dear father -- [to Dr.
Goodman] -- is not he happy too that my sister, his sweet daughter, is safe
restored?


Sir Thom. Ay, that he is, I Will answer for him -- and, as you have so bravely
helped to recover a daughter for him, the least he can do in return is to
provide you with a father, by restoring me my son!


George. Sir! what does my patron say?


Sir Thom. Say? -- ecod I don't know what to say? -- only that, in having you
for my heir, I am father to one of the best and bravest lads in the kingdom!


George. Father --


Sir Thom. Yes, my dear boy! I am indeed! -- your father! George, your father!
[embracing him] Odzookers, Doctor, I could contain myself no longer, faith!


Dr. Good. Dear sir, he is your own, and truly worth the claiming!


Emily. Indulgent powers! is it possible? [aside]


Patty. O good gracious! ma'am! here is good news for you. [aside to Emily]


Meter. Wonderful! wonderful! most wonderful!


George. Am I in a dream! --


O'Connor. Upon my conscience I cannot tell -- but, if you are, you have had a
very pleasant ride in your sleep!


George. Dear sirs! what am I to think? -- within these few hours I thought
myself the son of this worthy divine, and this sweet maid, your daughter, sir
-- [to Sir Thomas Richacre] we then were wretched beyond idea, supposing
ourselves the issue of one parent! and now, sir --


Sir Thom. And now, my dear boy! all is set right -- you are my son, my own
flesh and blood! at least your mother, Lady Richacre, (who was a pattern of
conjugal fidelity) told me so -- and Emily is as surely Dr. Goodman's daughter.
[George kneels to Sir Thomas, who raises and embraces him]


Emily. Transporting sounds! then we may yet be happy! [aside]


O'Connor. Devil burn me! but this makes out the old saying good -- that it is a
wise father knows his own child -- O no, fait, I don't mean so neither -- (though
that may be true too) but, it is a wise child knows it is own father!


George. Most honored parent! [to Sir Thomas] (if I really am so blessed) may I
presume to ask why we have both been bred in such a mutual error?


Sir Thom. I Will tell thee, George -- I had observed, with great concern, how
seldom young men, bred in the insolent pride of inheriting great estates,
deserved them! -- I am a whimsical old fellow, you know -- and therefore
proposed to, and prevailed on, my respected friend (as we became widowers
almost together) to join with me in a project I had formed (in imitation of the
Spectator's Leontine and Eudoxus) of exchanging children for a time -- hoping
thereby to render you more worthy than you might otherwise have been, of the
fortune and title you was born to -- the experiment was a singular one, I own,
but the event has fully justified it! [George bows]


George. And, sir! -- if I dare ask one question more -- what recompense did
you purpose to this young lady for being deluded with such an imaginary
grandeur?


Emily. Bless me! what is he saying? [aside]


George. Was it to realize the golden dream?


Sir Thom. Why, I had some such notion, indeed, George. --


George. If I remember right the story you alluded to, sir, the good, the
generous Eudoxus, joined the young and loving pair: is that my sire's
intention? or (which I dread to ask!) -- is it to -- marry her yourself?


Sir Thom. Ha? what! marry Emily myself? bless her dear little heart, heaven
forbid! no, no, I had a younger spark in my eye for her --


Emily. Benignity itself! he means my George, I Am certain, and I shall yet be
blessed! [aside]


George. Then, sir, I may speak plainer --


Emily. What will the dear youth say! [aside]


George. And declare, that I am vet a beggar, if you add not to my late
acquisition of fortune, the supreme delight of restoring this loved maid to the
station she was bred in, by permitting me still to call this best of men my
father!


Sir Thom. What do you ask me for? she is none of mine, you fool! why don't you
ask the Doctor?


George. [to Sir Thomas] My indulgent father! [to Dr. Goodman] O, sir! either
my behavior has hitherto been unfilial, or you will kindly receive me for your
son again.


Dr. Good. My ever dearest son! -- take her, and may heaven shower down eternal
blessings on you both!


Meter. Amen! --


O'Connor. Ay, and so be it too, say I!


George. Now, if my Emily thinks me not unworthy --


Emily. O talk not so! it is I that am unworthy -- yet wherefore? -- if desert
consisted but in riches, then I were indeed deficient! but, conscious of a mind
superior to the distinctions of birth and fortune, I feel that I deserve your
love! for, had our conditions really been as we imagined, preferring thee, the
worthiest, to the most wealthy, I should have gloried in my acquisition more
than in a conquest of the most exalted!


George. I know it, my sweet Emily! I know it.


Emily. And, if my preserver loves like me, he will not ask, but take my
trembling hand; assured, that he possesses wholly my fond, my beating heart!


George. Thus then I take thy snowy hand! here seal my faith! [kissing her
hand] and henceforth we are one!


O'Connor. Ay, and a very pretty splice you have both made on it!


Emily. [to Sir Thomas] I have so full a sense, sir, of your most unexampled
goodness, in first adopting your poor girl, and now confirming thus your
favor, I cannot thank you as I ought! -- let these duteous, grateful tears
speak for me! [falling on her knee]


Sir Thom. Rise, rise, my sweet child! you are my daughter now indeed! [raises
and kisses her]


O'Connor. [wiping his eyes] Well! I wish I may never taste another cheekful of
beef and biscuit, or a sup of grog again, if this is not as pretty a piece of
business --


George. My good friend! the preserver of my Emily! amid these several
transports I have too long overlooked you!


O'Connor. Och! no offense, gra! I have been overlooking you too, 'till I don't
know what ails me fait! but I Have a notion the salt water that spalpeen of a
lord splash'd in my face when I tilted him overboard, had not got out of the
corners of my eyes before! for some drops trickled down the scuppers of my
cheeks into my mouth just now that tasted quite brackish! they could not be
tears sure! for (though we Irishmen are apt to make blunders) a weather-beaten
chap like myself would not cry, sure, at what he is so well pleased with!


George. You have a double title to my gratitude, as I received assistance from
you against your own master; not fearing, in the cause of virtue, to offend the
wretch you served!


O'Connor. I Will tell you what, honey! -- Saint Patrick be thankful, I Am never
afraid of doing what is right! -- for though I Am but a menial man of low degree, I
am sprung from a very great offspring, and have got the thick blood of the
kings of Ireland bubbling in my veins, joy! -- and, in my foolish way of
thinking, so far from offending, I sarv'd my master most faithfully by not
sarving him at all at all, in such an unjontlemanlike undertaking!


Sir Thom. You are a right honest tar! and shall never serve any one again
while you live.


O'Connor. Indeed and I will always sarve both you and yours with all the blood
in my bones!


Emily. How, or in what words shall I express my very fervent thanks to you,
for having saved a helpless creature from what I dread to think of! [to
O'Connor]


O'Connor. I Will tell you how you shall thank me, jewel! by holding your sweet
tongue, and never saying another word about it!


Emily. Generous man! my deeds shall then speak for me.


Patty. Dear father! now every thing else is settled so nicely, do, pray, put
in a word for poor William.


Meter. And yourself, eh, Martha?


Patty. If you please, father.


Meter. Well, I will adventure to address their honors -- hem! hem! good your
worship! -- and good your reverence! -- this seeming an auspicious hour, your
poor old servant has an humble boon to crave.


Sir Thom. What is it, old silver-locks?


Meter. That it may please your honors, when the bans of matrimony are
published between my dear and honorable young master and mistress, (as I trust
his reverence will not approve they should be married by license) the names of
my poor child, Martha Meter, spinster -- and her chosen spouse and helpmate,
William Strongbow, bachelor, both of this parish, may be permitted most humbly
to follow.


Sir Thom. William Strongbow! what, young carrotty-poll? where is the
red-headed rogue? I have not seen him since he scaled the coach-box.


Patty. He is in the hall, I believe, father! [aside to him]


Meter. William Strongbow! approach his worship's presence.


William enters. William. Did your worship please to want me?


Sir Thom. Ay, come hither, William -- I am told you have behaved like a man of
Kent to day, in helping to rescue my maid of Kent here from Lord Sealand and
his myrmidons?


William. I did my best, an't like your worship, as I was in duty bound.


Sir Thom. And likewise that you and Patty want to make a match together?


William. If your worship and his reverence please to give us leave. [bowing]


Dr. Good. What say you, Patty?


Patty. William has spoke my mind, your honors! [curtsying]


Sir Thom. Why then marry away, you young rogues, as fast as you can! you have
my goodwill.


Meter, William, and Patty. I humbly thank your worship! --


Dr. Good. And mine!


Meter, William, and Patty. I humbly thank your reverence! --


Dr. Good. And I pray heaven to bless and prosper you!


Meter. Amen! --


Sir Thom. And in reward for your service to day, I Will make a man of you, my
boy!


William. I most humbly thank your noble worship's honor and goodness!


George. And, with your leave, sir, I will give Patty a little portion.


Patty. 'Thank you kindly, sir! and may you and my dear young lady be as happy
together as you deserve!


Emily. I thank you, Patty! -- may you, [to Patty and William] and every
virtuous pair be no less so!


Meter. Amen! --


William. And now, Patty, we shall be as merry as grigs, or as midsummer-day is
long!


Patty. That we shall, William! and I long for the wedding to be over, that,
instead of plain Patty, I may hear myself called Mrs. Strongbow!


Sir Thom. Now, I believe, all parties are rewarded and satisfied, except the
poor Quicksets; and they too shall partake the happiness they, by the timely
alarm given us, were in great measure the means of, and never be poor, or want
for any thing again, unless it be health, and that the richest of us cannot
bestow! And so, every thing is settled, and we are all happy! are we not, old
boy? shake hands, my heart of oak! what say you?


O'Connor. Why, sir, I say -- the honor of wagging a fist with you would make
the happy if I was ever so miserable! but I Am after thinking the young
jontleman and his little sweetlips there, ay, and the other young couple too,
will not be quite easy 'till they have shook hands and been splic'd together in
church, fait!


George. The idea transports me! -- my Emily! -- my destined bride! we now
approach the height of human bliss! blessed as we are in the paternal care of
these our best of fathers, the affections of our faithful friends and servants,
and the fruition of our mutual disinterested love! -- the vices of that
miscreant lord, you happily was delivered from, are punished by an indelible
disgrace! while the virtues of this circle are rewarded with a perfect, and, I
hope 'twill prove, a lasting felicity!


Meter. AMEN!


The END.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Miss YOUNG. OUR silly author fain would have me speak
Something I understand no more than Greek;
His epilogue -- which he, sure, thinks as fine
As if inspired by Phoebus and the Nine!
Such moral lessons -- sage, instructive rules --
Drawn from learned folios, and the ancient schools.
Morals, said I, the schools, and huge dull folios?
Why, sir, these sort of things should be quite olios!
Composed of choice tid-bits culled up and down,
From the gay fancies that amuse this town --
With scavoir-vivres let your scene be laid,
Tell us of coteries, or a masquerade;
Of such materials epilogues are made!
Yet still he begs that I would plead his cause,
And say, "the piece conforms to critic laws
In scene, time, action; and his further plan
To draw men as they are, not more than man,
Some good, some bad" -- thus tritely on he ran.
Preach this yourself for me, sir, I replied,
An epilogue I want where may be tried
My comic talents, after this dull part,
Which was not worth the getting off by heart --
Give me a taste of gay Thalia's art!
In witty verse to satirize the beaux,
And swear they know no bliss beyond fine clothes:
While smirking -- leering -- playing with my fan --
I may attract each modish, ape of man,
And make him feel -- if feel such beings can.
Speak scandal of the ladies -- say the cits
Have hearty stomachs, and but puny wits;
Nay, any thing to please and to amuse
This generous circle -- politics or news; --
Joyful I Would come, on such an errand sent,
And you still more approved The MAID of KENT!


