DESIGNS, etc.



DESIGNS BY Mr. R. BENTLEY, FOR SIX POEMS BY Mr. T. GRAY.

Frontispiece to first Ode

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall. MDCCLIII.


ODE.
LO! where the rosy-bosom'd Hours,
Fair VENUS' train appear,
Disclose the long-expecting flowers,
And wake the purple year!
The Attic warbler pours her throat,
Responsive to the cuckow's note,
The untaught harmony of spring:
While whispering pleasure as they fly,
Cool Zephyrs through the clear blue sky
Their gathered fragrance fling.
Wherever the oak's thick branches stretch
A broader browner shade;
Wherever the rude and moss-grown beech
O'er-canopies the glade;
Beside some water's rushy brink
With me the Muse shall sit, and think
(At ease reclined in rustic state)
How vain the ardour of the Crowd,
How low, how little are the Proud,
How indigent the Great!
Still is the toiling hand of Care:
The panting herds repose:
Yet hark, how through the peopled air
The busy murmur glows!
The insect youth are on the wing,
Eager to taste the honied spring,
And float amid the liquid noon:
Some lightly over the current skim,
Some show their gayly-gilded trim
Quick-glancing to the sun.
To Contemplation's sober eye
Such is the race of Man:
And they that creep, and they that fly,
Shall end where they began.
Alike the Busy and the Gay
But flutter through life's little day,
In fortune's varying colors dressed:
Brushed by the hand of rough Mischance,
Or chilled by age, their airy dance
They leave, in dust to rest.
Methinks I hear in accents low
The sportive kind reply:
Poor moralist! and what art thou?
A solitary fly!
Thy Joys no glittering female meets,
No hive have thou of hoarded sweets,
No painted plumage to display:
On hasty wings thy youth is flown;
Thy sun is set, thy spring is gone --
We frolic, while it is May.

A FAVORITE HAS NO FRIEND

T.G.
R.B.


ODE On the Death of a Favorite CAT, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes.
IT WAS on a lofty vase's side,
Where China's gayest art had died
The azure flowers, that blow;
Demurest of the tabby kind,
The pensive Selima reclined,
Gazed on the lake below.
Her conscious tail her joy declared;
The fair round face, the snowy beard,
The velvet of her paws,
Her coat, that with the tortoise vies,
Her ears of jet, and emerald eyes,
She saw; and purr'd applause.
Still had she gazed: but 'midst the tide
Two angel forms were seen to glide,
The Genii of the stream:
Their scaly armour's Tyrian hue
Through richest purple to the view
Betrayed a golden gleam.
The hapless Nymph with wonder saw:
A whisker first and then a claw,
With many an ardent wish,
She stretched in vain to reach the prize.
What female heart can gold despise?
What Cat's averse to fish?
Presumptuous Maid! with looks intent
Again she stretched, again she bent,
Nor knew the gulf between.
(Malignant Fate sat by, and smiled)
The slippery verge her feet beguiled,
She tumbled headlong in.
Eight times emerging from the flood
She mewed to every watery God,
Some speedy aid to send.
No Dolphin came, no Nereid stirred:
Nor cruel Tom, or Susan heard.
A Favorite has no friend!
From hence, ye Beauties, undeceived,
Know, one false step is never retrieved,
And be with caution bold.
Not all that tempts your wandering eyes
And heedless hearts, is lawful prize;
Nor all, that glisters, gold.

AH TELL THEM THEY ARE MEN

J. S. Muller sc:


ODE On a Distant Prospect of ETON COLLEGE.
YE distant spires, ye antique towers,
That crown the watery glade,
Where grateful Science still adores
Her HENRY's holy Shade;
And ye, that from the stately brow
Of WINDSOR's heights the expanse below
Of grove, of lawn, of mead survey,
Whose turf, whose shade, whose flowers among
Wanders the hoary Thames along
His silver-winding way.
Ah happy hills, ah pleasing shade,
Ah fields beloved in vain,
Where once my careless childhood strayed,
A stranger yet to pain!
I feel the gales, that from ye blow,
A momentary bliss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing,
My weary soul they seem to sooth,
And, redolent of joy and youth,
To breath a second spring.
Say, Father THAMES, for thou have seen
Full many a sprightly race
Disporting on thy margent green
The paths of pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant arm thy glassy wave?
The captive linnet which enthrall?
What idle progeny succeed
To chase the rolling circle's speed,
Or urge the flying ball?
While some on earnest business bent
Their murmuring labors ply
Against graver hours, that bring constraint
To sweeten liberty:
Some bold adventurers disdain
The limits of their little reign,
And unknown regions dare descry:
Still as they run they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind,
And snatch a fearful joy.
Gay hope is theirs by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when possessed;
The tear forgot as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast:
Theirs buxom health of rosy hue,
Wild wit, invention ever-new,
And lively cheer of vigor born;
The thoughtless day, the easy night,
The spirits pure, the slumbers light,
That fly the approach of morn.
Alas, regardless of their doom,
The little victims play!
No sense have they of ills to come,
Nor care beyond today:
Yet see how all around 'em wait
The Ministers of human fate,
And black Misfortune's baleful train!
Ah, show them where in ambush stand
To seize their prey the murderous band!
Ah, tell them, they are men!
These shall the fury Passions tear,
The vulturs of the mind,
Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear,
And Shame that sculks behind;
Or pineing Love shall waste their youth,
Or Jealousy with rankling tooth,
That inly gnaws the secret heart,
And Envy wan, and faded Care,
Grim-visag'd comfortless Despair,
And Sorrow's piercing dart.
Ambition this shall tempt to rise,
Then whirl the wretch from high,
To bitter Scorn a sacrifice,
And grinning Infamy.
The stings of Falsehood those shall try,
And hard Unkindness' altered eye,
That mocks the tear it forced to flow;
And keen Remorse with blood defiled,
And moody Madness laughing wild
Amidst severest woe.
Lo, in the vale of years beneath
A griesly troop are seen,
The painful family of Death,
More hideous than their Queen:
This racks the joints, this fires the veins,
That every laboring sinew strains,
Those in the deeper vitals rage:
Lo, Poverty, to fill the band,
That numbs the soul with icy hand,
And slow-consuming Age.
To each his sufferings: all are men,
Condemned alike to groan,
The tender for another's pain;
The unfeeling for his own.
Yet ah! why should they know their fate?
Since sorrow never comes too late,
And happiness too swiftly flies.
Thought would destroy their paradise.
No more; where ignorance is bliss,
It Is folly to be wise.

J. S. Muller sc.


A LONG STORY.
IN BRITAIN's Isle, no matter where,
An ancient pile of building stands:
The Huntingdons and Hattons there
Employed the power of Fairy hands
To raise the cieling's fretted height,
Each panel in achievements clothing,
Rich windows that exclude the light,
And passages, that lead to nothing.
Full often within the spacious walls,
When he had fifty winters over him,
My grave Hatton, preferred by Queen Elizabeth for his graceful Person and fine
Dancing.
Lord Keeper led the Brawls:
The Seal, and Maces, danced before him.
His bushy beard, and shoe-strings green,
His high-crown'd hat, and sattin-doublet,
Moved the stout heart of England's Queen,
Though Pope and Spaniard could not trouble it.
What, in the very first beginning!
Shame of the versifying tribe!
Your History whither are you spinning?
Can you do nothing but describe?
A House there is, (and that is enough)
From whence one fatal morning issues
A brace of Warriors, not in buff,
But rustling in their silks and tissues.
The first came cap-a-pee from France
Her conquering destiny fulfilling,
Whom meaner Beauties eye askance,
And vainly ape her art of killing.
The other Amazon kind Heaven
Had armed with spirit, wit, and satire:
But COBHAM had the polish given,
And tip'd her arrows with goodnature.
To celebrate her eyes, her air --
Coarse panegyricks would but teaze her.
Melissa is her Nom de Guerre.
Alas, who would not wish to please her!
With bonnet blue and capucine,
And aprons long they hid their armor,
And veiled their weapons bright and keen
In pity to the country-farmer.
Fame in the shape of Mr. P^t
(By this time all the Parish know it)
Had told, that thereabouts there lurked
A wicked Imp they call a Poet,
Who prowl'd the country far and near,
Bewitched the children of the peasants,
Dried up the cows, and lamed the deer,
And sucked the eggs, and killed the pheasants.
My Lady heard their joint petition,
Swore by her coronet and ermine,
She Would issue out her high commission
To rid the manor of such vermin.
The Heroines undertook the task,
Thro'lanes unknown, over styles they ventured,
Raped at the door, nor stayed to ask,
But bounce into the parlour entered.
The trembling family they daunt,
They flirt, they sing, they laugh, they tattle,
Rummage his Mother, pinch his Aunt,
And up stairs in a whirlwind rattle.
Each hole and cupboard they explore,
Each creek and cranny of his chamber,
Run hurry-skurry round the floor,
And over the bed and tester clamber,
Into the Drawers and China pry,
Papers and books, a huge Imbroglio!
Under a tea-cup he might lie,
Or creased, like dogs-ears, in a folio.
On the first marching of the troops
The Muses, hopeless of his pardon,
Conveyed him underneath their hoops
To a small closet in the garden.
So Rumor says. (Who will, believe.)
But that they left the door a-jarr,
Where, safe and laughing in his sleeve,
He heard the distant din of war.
Short was his joy. He little knew,
The power of Magic was no fable.
Out of the window, whisk, they flew,
But left a spell upon the table.
The words too eager to unriddle
The Poet felt a strange disorder:
Transparent birdlime formed the middle,
And chains invisible the border.
So cunning was the Apparatus,
The powerful pothooks did so move him,
That, will he, nill he, to the Great-house
He went, as if the Devil drove him.
Yet on his way (no sign of grace,
For folks in fear are apt to pray)
To Phoebus he preferred his case,
And begged his aid that dreadful day.
The Godhead would have backed his quarrel,
But with a blush on recollection
Owned, that his quiver and his laurel
Against four such eyes were no protection.
The Court was sat, the Culprit there,
Forth from their gloomy mansions creeping
The Lady Janes and Joans repair,
And from the gallery stand peeping:
Such as in silence of the night
Come (sweep) along some winding entry
( The HOUSEKEEPER.
Styack has often seen the sight)
Or at the chappel-door stand sentry;
In peaked hoods and mantles tarnish'd,
Sour visages, enough to scare ye,
High Dames of honor once, that garnished
The drawing room of fierce Queen Mary!
The Peeress comes. The Audience stare,
And doff their hats with due submission:
She curtsies, as she takes her chair,
To all the People of condition.
The Bard with many an artful fib,
Had in imagination fenced him,
Disproved the arguments of Groom of the Chambers.
Squib,
And all that The Steward.
Groom could urge against him.
But soon his rhetoric forsook him,
When he the solemn hall had seen;
A sudden fit of ague shook him,
He stood as mute as poor A famous Highwayman hanged the week before.
Macleane.
Yet something he was heard to mutter,
'How in the park beneath an old-tree
'(Without design to hurt the butter,
'Or any malice to the poultry,)
'He once or twice had penned a sonnet;
'Yet hoped, that he might save his bacon:
'Numbers would give their oaths upon it,
'He never was for a conj'rer taken.
The ghostly Prudes with hagged face
Already had condemned the sinner.
My Lady rose, and with a grace --
She smiled, and bid him come to dinner.
'Jesu-Maria! Madam Bridget,
'Why, what can the Vicountess mean?
(Cried the square Hoods in woeful fidget)
'The times are altered quite and clean!
'Decorum's turned to mere civility;
'Her air and all her manners show it.
'Commend me to her affability!
'Speak to a Commoner and Poet!
[ Here 500 Stanzas are lost.]

And so God save our noble King,
And guard us from long-winded Lubbers,
That to eternity would sing,
And keep my Lady from her Rubbers.


J. S. Muller sc.

HYMN to ADVERSITY.
DAUGHTER of JOVE, relentless Power,
Thou Tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and torturing hour
The Bad affright, afflict the Best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain
The Proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple Tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy Sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling Child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly Birth,
And bad to form her infant mind.
Stern rugged Nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore:
What sorrow was, thou bad'st her know,
And from her own she learned to melt at other's woe.
Scared at thy frown terrific, fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse, and with them go
The summer Friend, the flattering Foe;
By vain Prosperity received,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom in sable garb arrayed
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid
With leaden eye, that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend:
Warm Charity, the general friend,
With Justice to herself severe,
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh, gently on thy Suppliant's head,
Dread Goddess, lay thy chast'ning hand!
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful Band
(As by the Impious thou art seen)
With thundering voice, and threatening mien,
With screaming Horror's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, oh Goddess, wear,
Thy milder influence impart,
Thy philosophic Train be there
To soften, not to wound my heart,
The generous spark extinct revive,
Teach me to love and to forgive,
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are, to feel, and know myself a Man.

C. Grignion sculp.

C. Grignion. sculp.

ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCH YARD.
THE Curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The mopeing owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude Forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the ecchoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy houswife ply her evening care:
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their study stroke!
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Awaits alike the inevitable hour.
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye Proud, impute to These the fault,
If Memory over their Tomb no Trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery sooth the dull cold ear of Death!
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire,
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear:
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little Tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes
Their lot forbad: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to dye.
For who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
Even in our Ashes live their wonted Fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonour'd Dead
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If chance, by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred Spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed Swain may say,
'Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
'Brushing with hasty steps the dews away
'To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
'There at the foot of yonder nodding beech
'That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
'His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
'And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
'Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
'Mutt'ring his wayward fancies he would rove,
'Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
'Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
'One morn I missed him on the custom'd hill,
'Along the heath and near his favorite tree;
'Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
'Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he,
'The next with dirges due in sad array
'Slow through the church way path we saw him born.
'Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
'Grav'd on the stone beneath you aged thorn.
The EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of Earth
A Youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown,
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to Misery all he had, a tear,
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
C. Grignion, sculp.

EXPLANATION OF THE PRINTS.
ODE on the SPRING.
FRONTISPIECE. A Figure musing, etc. The ornaments allude to the chief subjects
of the poems, as the altar, chaplet of flowers and rustic pipe, to this ode: a
boy with a hobbyhorse and a book, to that on Eton: a cat-Arion, or a cat with
a lyre sitting on a dolphin's back, to that line on the death of a cat No
Dolphin came, no Nereid stirred: a monkey with a violin and lawyer's wig, to my
lord keeper Hatton's dancing, in the Long Story: a Roman sepulchral altar
inscribed Diis Manibus Sacrum, with a spade and skull, to the elegy. The monkey
painting, the lyre, the pen and crayon, are allusive to the poems and drawings.
HEADPIECE.] The Graces and Zephyrs sporting. INITIAL LETTER.] Flowers.
TAILPIECE.] A landscape with herds reposing.
ODE on the Death of a Favorite CAT.
FRONTISPIECE. THE cat standing on the brim of the tub, and endeavoring to
catch a gold fish. Two cariatides of a river god stopping his ears to her
cries, and Destiny cutting the nine threads of life, are on each side. Above,
is a cat's head between two expiring lamps, and over that, two mouse-traps,
between a mandarin-cat sitting before a Chinese pagoda, and angling for gold
fish into a china jar; and another cat drawing up a net. At the bottom are mice
enjoying themselves on the prospect of the cat's death; a lyre and pallet.
HEADPIECE.] The cat almost drowned in the tub. A standish on a table to write
her elegy. Two cats as mourners with hatbands and staves. Dead birds, mice and
fish hung up on each side. INITIAL LETTER.] The cat, demurest of the tabby
kind, dozing in an elbow chair. TAILPIECE.] Charon ferrying over the ghost of
the deceased cat, who sets up her back on seeing Cerberus on the shore.
ODE on the distant Prospect of ETON.
FRONTISPIECE. BOYS at their sports, near the chapel of Eton, the god of the
Thames sitting by: the passions, misfortunes, and diseases, coming down upon
them. On either side, terms representing Jealousy and Madness. Above is a head
of Folly: beneath, are play-things intermixed with thorns, a sword, a serpent
and a scorpion. HEADPIECE.] Science adoring the shade of Henry VIth. Two angels
bearing shields inscribed with that king's name support a Gothic building, in
allusion to his foundations at Eton and Cambridge. INITIAL LETTER.] Part of
Windsor-castle. TAILPIECE.] Two boys dressed in watermen's clothes, rowing
another. A view of Eton college at a distance.
THE LONG STORY.
FRONTISPIECE. THE Muses conveying the Poet under their hoops to a small closet
in the garden. Fame in the shape of Mr. P^ is flying before; and after him the
two female warriors, as described in the verses. On one side is my lord keeper
Hatton dancing; and among the ornaments are the heads of the Pope and queen
Elizabeth nodding at one another; behind him is a papal bull, a phial of
sublimate, a dagger and a crucifix; behind her the cannon called queen
Elizabeth's pocket-pistol. HEADPIECE.] A view of the house which formerly
belonged to the earls of Huntingdon and lord keeper Hatton. INITIAL LETTER.] A
coronet, fan, muff and tippet, in the manner of Hollar. TAILPIECE.] Ghosts of
ancient ladies and old maids, peeping over the gallery.
HYMN to ADVERSITY.
FRONTISPIECE. JUPITER delivering infant Virtue to Adversity to be educated.
Minerva and Hercules on each side. HEADPIECE.] Adversity disturbing the Orgies
of Folly, Noise and Laughter. INITIAL LETTER.] A Gorgon's head, and instruments
of punishment. TAILPIECE.] Melancholy.
ELEGY Written in a Country Churchyard.
FRONTISPIECE. A Gothic gateway in ruins with the emblems of nobility on one
side; on the other, the implements and employments of the Poor. Through the arch
appears a churchyard and village-church built out of the remains of an abbey.
A countryman showing an epitaph to a passenger. HEADPIECE.] Country-labours.
INITIAL LETTER.] An owl disturbed and flying from a ruinous tower. TAILPIECE.]
A country burial. At bottom, a torch fallen into an ancient vault.

