THE KING's EVIL Perfectly Cured.

A Perfect CURE FOR THE King's EVIL, (Whether Hereditary or Accidental,) By
Effectual Alcalious Medicines: Faithfully approved by the Experience of
Eighteen Years Practice, and the Testimony of above Four Hundred Patients
restored beyond Relapse.

By THOMAS FERN Surgeon.

P. S. Giving an exact Account also how He himself was perfectly cured by the
same Medicines; after having languish'd Eleven Years under the same Distemper,
and being given over at last, by several Eminent Physicians and Surgeons in
LONDON.

Varia Hominum dona.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by D. Brown, at the Black Swan without Temple Bar.
G. Strahan, at the Golden Ball in Cornhill. A. Bettesworth at the Red-Lion on
London-B^idge; C. King in Westminster Hall. Mr. Corbet, at the Bible on St.
Mary-Hill. Mr. Mears against Lincoln's-Inn-Gate in Chancery Lane; and at the
Author's House in Grange-Court, near Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.

TO George Boddington, Esquire;
WORTHY SIR,
YOU will easily pardon the Presumption of Dedicating this Book to Your Self,
upon so particular a Subject; if you consider either your own Generous Temper,
or my Interest and Reputation. However, Your great Regard for the Public Good
and Welfare of all Mankind, emboldened me to make you this Address, as much as
my own Resolution never to publish this Treatise, without having the Honor of
Prefixing your Name to it. Now, as you had done me the Signal Favor to employ
me in your own Family, about an Affair of this Malignant Nature, I thought you
would not take it ill of me to acknowledge it in Print; but rather heartily
interpret it as a Piece of Gratitude for your countenancing my Practice. And if
I have succeeded so far or so well hitherto in what I privately undertook, as
to deserve your Good Word and Public Recommendation of my Endeavors, as you
lately did to the Duke of L -- ds and some others: I hope, you will yet also
further vouchsafe to grant me your Patronage to this small Tract of the KING'S
EVIL, which I designed purely for the Common Benefit of the World.

For whether I consider your Generosity, as a Public Spirited Gentleman; your
Great Merit, as an Eminent Member of our Metropolis; your extraordinary
Goodness and Charity, as one of the Governors of Christ's Hospital; your
Prudence and Vast Dealing in one of the best of Companies for Commerce and
Traffic, as a Turkey-Merchant; or your Tender Care and Affection at last, as a
most discreet Father of a Family: All these Honors and Excellencies strongly
persuade me; that, as I have been so Happy as to have your Dear Son (sick of
this Distemper) for a private Patient, I shall not want also your Self for a
Patron of my approved Practice in Public.

The Treatise, I believe, will prove, as I intended it, without Ostentation, of
General Use and Singular Service to all Persons that are afflicted with
Scrofulous Diseases themselves, or that have either Children or Friends
laboring under the same in their Families. For what can be more valuable than
Health; without which, all other Enjoyments are so insipid? No other Blessing
has any Taste without this. Besides, the SCROFULA, of all other Distempers,
takes the Eye soonest, and is the most disagreeable Sight in Society: an ugly
offensive Distemper, that often hinders People from appearing abroad in
Public; which for that very Reason, they most of all covet the Cure of, to be
like other Persons in open View.

But however, as to the Performance it self, I did it upon your ingenious Son's
account, as well as the Success and Encouragement I have had from you upon this
Occasion, for curing the Scrofula in its most desperate Circumstances: and let
the Critics pretend what they please, whether they censure or insult; I shall
always think it my chief Happiness and sufficient Security, to live in your
Good Opinion, to continue under your Protection, and to deserve the Character
of being,

Worthy Sir, Your most Obedient Faithful Servant, THOMAS FERN.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAVING for many Years last past, advertised the World of an extraordinary
Secret in Physic, designed both by Nature and Art for the Public Good; and
proposed as often likewise, not only to relieve, but also perfectly cure all
Persons whatsoever afflicted with any Scrophulous Diseases, Strumous Tumors, or
Malignant Ulcers; either in the Glands, or any other parts of the Body, which
are commonly called the KING's EVIL: I thought I could not do better now, after
repeated Successes, than publish a rational Discourse of this kind, exemplified
by many Experimental Cures; as well to justify my own Pretensions and Knowledge
against common Prejudice or vulgar Incredulity, as to satisfy other People
either about my Care, Method, or Ability, and to convince 'em at last of the
Truth of it by Matter of Fact.

This Discourse then is not ushered into the World with a Bravado, either to
offend or affront other excellent Practicers in their way, though perhaps often
Unsuccessful; but only, with a modest Confidence, and without much boasting of
an incomparable NOSTRUM, to aver, that for Eighteen Years already past, I have
cured great Numbers of Men, Women, and Children, who had been sorely afflicted
a long time with this difficult Distemper, and almost (if not altogether)
despaired of by many eminent Surgeons: as will evidently appear by the Names
and Places of Abode of the several Patients hereafter mentioned in the
Conclusion of this Book.

Now the Reason of the Thing being plainly made out here, I think there is no
denying of Experience or Skill in the Affair of this Disease; without winking
(as it were) at the Sun, to dispute its shining. But how should such unlicens'd
or illiterate Empericks, that know either little of Physic or nothing at all
of Chirugery, and yet pretend to cure so unaccountable a Malady with Old Wives
Medicines, or worse; how should they (I say) ever do any Good upon it? This is
what I do not understand, and wonder at; why they should either he fondly
employed by some credulous People, or should forwardly undertake such
Impossibilities themselves; being both beyond their Reach as to manual
Operation, and above the Sphere of their Knowledge as to Internal Medicines.

The Blessing of GOD indeed will go a great way in these desperate Cases, and
without it, all is but Labor in vain at the best; let Man's Endeavors be
never so great, or their Medicines never so good: But then, who should find out
better ordinary Means of Cure, or take more proper Methods for it, than some old
able experienced Professor or other of the Art? As for my Self, far be it from
Me to pretend to more than I can perform, and have often accomplished with
undeniable Success. However, Divines do not use to work Miracles now adays;
neither can they cure the KING's EVIL, I believe, by Virtue either of their
Function, Sanctity, or Blessing. It Is certainly either a Physician's or a
Surgeon's Business, without making Ill Work on it. In short, setting aside any
other Formality of prefacing or vanity of Conceit as to my Pretension, I can
only say this modestly; That the Hall has long since authorized my Practice by
a DIPLOMA, besides the License I have from Doctors Commons; and I hope the
Reader as well as my Brother Surgeons, will now also approve on it, for the
Benefit of Mankind.

However, I hope, I may have leave to say this by the By further, that through
the whole Work, I have industriously avoided all the Hard Terms of Art, that I
could possibly omit, in order to make it the more Obvious and Useful to the
meanest Capacity among my Readers.

Farewell. From my House in
Grange Court, Little Lincoln's End Fields. Oct. 31. 1709.
N. B. This Treatise particularly sets forth,
I. The Names of the Disease. II. The Nature of the Thing. III. The Causes of
it. IV. The Parts affected with it. V. The Case of a Person so afflicted. VI.
The Cure, by Experience and Example.
To my Worthy and Ingenious Friend, Mr. FERN, Surgeon.
SHould I forbear, Dear Friend, to own thy Worth,
Infants and Cripples soon would set it forth;
Such had I been, had You not, for your Part,
Done more than what is common in this Art.
V -- kers may boast, He has a Secret got,
And crack of mighty Cures he never wrought;
While You by Art and Practice have attained
The only way that the EVIL e're restrained.
First on Your Self the Method was allowed,
On Others then by You with Care made good.
They stood amazed this dire Disease should yield,
By your Alcalious Diuretics healed;
All Tumors you discuss, and Ulcers cure;
Dispatch the accutest Pains Men-sick endure;
As Powerful Sol his healing Warmth displays,
And swelling Clouds dispels with kindest Rays
Whether such Evils from the Parents come,
Or rather from Corrupted Chyle in some;
No Venom can withstand, nor Sore abide,
When your digestive Balsam is applied.
Proceed then F^RN, and for the common Good,
Nature restore to it is untainted Blood.
What Maladies can then withstand thy Art,
Since thine Arcanum heals every Part?
Just Fame will sure inspire a lively Pen
To sing thy Praises, among diseases Men:
Since thy Rare Medicines have Effective Power
With perfect Ease to work the Noble Cure.
J. GAYNAM

A Perfect CURE FOR THE KING's EVIL.
The Introduction.
IT IS well known, that many Authors of great Learning and Experience, have
written particular Treatises of the King's Evil, with no less Applause to
Themselves than Instruction to Others; highly Useful in all Respects toward
finding out an infallible Remedy for the eradicating and curing of so growing
and so grievous a Disease, beyond Relapse. It Is also to be confessed that they
have not failed sometimes of good Success, or of working great Cures in this
Case: But whether by specific Applications, by Accident, by God's Blessing, by
the Royal Touch, or any other Arcanum; is not so easy for me to distinguish
and determine. However, I am positive, and it must be granted on the other
hand, that the King's Evil has often been left off, by very many judicious
Professors both of Physic and Surgery, as a Thing incurable in several of
their languishing Patients; for although I do not look upon it to be the
Ludibrium Medicorum, yet they have always found it, a very perplexing and
puzzling Distemper. And therefore, though I shall not vaunt my self like the
vain Philosopher with an (...) that I have found out the Difficulty of all
Diseases, or some Wonder or other of an Universal Medicine: Yet I have good
Reason to persuade my self, both by Practice and Experience, that I long ago
found a Faithful Friend; who cured Me effectually of an inveterate Scrofula, in
spite of all popular Discouragements; and that I my self have also perfectly
cured a vast many Others since of the like Malady, by the same Means or Virtue
of the same Particular Secret: So that I think, I may now the more boldly
publish my Notions of the King's Evil, in Print; as well for the Interest and
Advantage of all Mankind afflicted with it, as for my own Satisfaction and
Credit. And this I shall endeavor to perform ingenuously, with Submission to
all Men living of the same Profession, in a singular Method confirmed to me,
and experienced through a long Practice of many Years; by showing particularly
in this Treatise, the Name of the Disease, the Nature of the Thing, the Causes
of it, the Parts affected with it, the Case of a Person so afflicted, and the
Cure at last by Experience and Example; with general Observations and brief
Remarks upon each Head of the Discourse, throughout the whole Treatise.

CHAP. I. The NAME
FIrst then; the Name of the Disease in the Greek, is either (...) or (...),
according to Hesychius. The First [(...)] signifies a Sow or a Hog; as I
suppose those Creatures have been thought by the Ancients, and are still
reckoned by some Moderns to be infested in a more peculiar manner with this
scrofulous Disease: For in the Throats of Swine, we may often find such
strumous Tumors, and the Glandules indurated. And it is no wonder neither that
Men and Brutes should sometimes be troubled with the same Distemper; especially
seeing they both agree in many other things of Constitution or Humor. Or else
the Word signifies a Rock lying with a Ridge upon the top of the Sea, not much
unlike a Hog's Back; and this may bear some Analogy also to a Glandulous Tumor:
Whether the Metaphor be fetched either from the Hardness, the Greatness, or the
Figure sometimes of the Part afflicted.

The other Name of it in the Greek Tongue [(...)] imports a dry, arid or
inflamed Malignancy; and, as if it were (...), Torrid, from (...), uro, to
burn. Now a hot, scurfy or friable Inflammation represents the Thing very
properly to the Eye, and expresses the Nature of it exactly (as it often
happens) to the very Life. But my Author Hesychius also says, it is likewise a
Disease of Bees, and explains himself by this particular Observation; that They
are troubled with it at the same time, when they breed Worms or make Cob-webs.
However, be it as it will as to that matter, this Word shows the Nature of the
Malady well enough in one Respect by Heat and Friability; though it does not
answer yet for all the other Qualities of the whole Evil.

But besides, it has also Two Names in the Latin Tongue; for the Grammarians
call it either by That of Scrofula, or That of Struma, indifferently, without
any great Distinction: only that the Former is a diminutive Word, signifying a
Wen in the Throat as well as a Little Pig, from Scrofa an Old Sow; which seems
to be a fictitious Name of that Creature, taken from the Sound of the Greek
Word (...) (as Hesychius thinks) perhaps as delighting to grub up the Earth in
Holes or Hillocks; and These indeed are Both sometimes very apt Denominations
or near Resemblances at least of the King's Evil, by reason either of
perforating Ulcers in one Respect, or exceeding large Tumors in the Other. But
the Latter Word Struma differs a little from the Former; for it is derived from
Ruma, a Teat or Dug, etc. which may be sucked: either from (...), traho or sugo
to suck; or from (...), fluo to flow, as the Milk does in sucking; which holds
some Analogy with the Curdling Matter of the King's Evil, like Cheese. And so
the Grammarians say well, that Struma is as it were struens Rumam, making a Dug
or Pap, because it rises up frequently in a Bump of that Shape or Figure; so
that, in short, Struma is supposed to signify in general any Tumor, Botch or
Wen, either in the Throat, Neck or Arm-holes; the Word coming immediately (as
some think) from (...), which arises from (...), sterno, to spread; because the
Disease might probably be observed formerly to lie and spread most under the
Throat. And therefore by the same Analogical Reason, this Term may likewise
very properly import, what we now call the King's Evil.

Now I must needs say, that Either or Any of these Words express the Thing very
well as to the main Import of a scrofulous or strumous Tumor; and do not only
give us some Light into the Nature of it, but also lead us in course to
consider the Disease more essentially and fully than can be made out, by any
nominal Disquisition or Etymology. But I beg leave here to make one Digression
by the way, about our English Term for the Struma or Scrofula, as it is now
commonly called the King's Evil in every Body's Mouth; before I begin to define
what I have hitherto been only a describing by Name. And some Writers think
that this Name was given to any scrofulous or strumous Disease, long before
Edward the Confessor's Time; but however All agree at least, that from his
Reign it was called nothing else generally (and I may say vulgarly too) but the
King's Evil in England. The Reason for so calling it is Plain; whether we
believe the miraculous Cure of that Distemper in many Cases, to be an
extraordinary Blessing of God bestowed upon the Kings of England, ab origin,
and so to continue as a powerful Faculty by hereditary Succession attending on
the Crown: or whether we take this Cure of the Evil by the Royal Touch to have
been no Antienter than Edward the Confessor, and that it was a peculiar Gift to
Him at first, and to no Body before Him, as a singular Reward of his Holiness;
to be by a kind of hereditary Right annexed to Regal Authority for the future.
The Matter is in Dispute still. But be it as it will, the History affords us
ample Testimony and great Authority for calling this Disease by a Royal Name,
The King's Evil; For, because it cannot be denied, but that wonderful Cures of
it have been formerly wrought, by the Good Kings and Queens ox England, and are
still done by a continued Series even to this very Day: Not that I believe,
They ever were, or perhaps ever may be troubled with the Distemper themselves;
as the Vulgar in some Countries think at the first hearing of the Name.
However, it must be granted on the other hand, that several Persons have never
been the better for being Touched, nor ever received any greater Benefit by
this Means than the Gold that was given 'em upon their Application; and yet it
is certain They have afterward been perfectly cured of the same Maladies, by
the successful Medicines of good Artists: so that though Surgery may perhaps
fail sometimes, where the Royal Hand performs the Cure; yet it has held as true
also on the contrary, in Favor of the other Side, by many singular Instances.

Wherefore I hope, I may without any Offense either to the Court, the City, or
the Country, either to Princes or Professors, take upon me to say, and that by
long Experience too, for the public Good; that let this Disease prove never so
Inveterate or Obstinate, I am possessed of such Sovereign and Effectual
Medicines as will cure it perfectly by God's Blessing, when all other Measures
or Methods fail.

CHAP. II The Nature of the EVIL.
SEcondly; As to this Nature of the King's Evil, several Authors have defined
it several ways: but the best Definition that I can pretend to gather from 'em
all, is This in brief. The Scrofula, is a praeternatural malignant Tumor or
Humor, produced by a particular Acidity of the Serum of the Blood: either in
Gland, Muscle or Membrane, which it both coagulates and indurates; or in the
Marrow, which it always dissolves, and also putrefies the Bone. But lest this
Definition should want any further Illustration, I shall explain my self thus
more at large, in a particular manner: Now it is plain, this Acidity in the
Serum of the Blood, must needs occasion a very Crass, Glutinous and Acid Lympha
in the Body; which not finding any convenient or regular Passage through its
proper Channels, presently stops in the Glands or Elsewhere, and sensibly
tumefies or indurates the Parts affected: So that, in short, by reason of this
Corrosive Quality, the Distemper in time becomes Malignant, obdurate and very
difficult to be cured; the Lympha being so viscous and so strongly settled in
some extreme Parts, that it often proves the hardest thing in the World to
thin, rarifie and attenuate, or take away such an Obstruction, of sour,
stagnating, coagulated Juices. From hence it appears, that the Acid Matter
whether contained within a Cystis, or Swelling elsewhere without, either in the
Salivatory Glands, etc. in One Respect, or in thick Upper Lips chopped etc. in
the Other; is the only Thing to be rectified or sweetened, in Order to effect a
perfect Cure: And I cannot conceive how that can be done radically, save only
by Alcalious Medicines, which is the Nostrum pretended to in my Practice: For
otherwise the latent, habitual and inveterate Corrosiveness of the sharp
indurated Lympha, which is the principal Cause of the King's Evil, will
continually prove Incorrigible by all the Art of Man. And therefore the Struma
being a Disease of that rank and sour Nature, it must be corrected and
dulcified by sweet healing Medicines, as the most Powerful Means to bring the
Acid Humors or Juices to their due Tone, as well as the Constitution to it is
pristine or natural State of Health and Vigor.

But to give a more exact Account of the Nature of the Thing already defined, I
think my self obliged to explain the true Meaning of the Terms, Coagulation and
Dissolution, in this Place, as pat to the Purpose. Now by Coagulation, I mean
an irregular Curd-ling or Thick'ning of the Blood by a real Privation of
Moisture; so that I can compare it to nothing but that of making a Curd of Milk
with Rennet. Now it is notorious that many strumous Tumors, being full of a
white curled Matter, have a Likeness at least, if not also an Affinity with the
Curd of Milk; which are Both alike occasioned by a coagulating Acidity, though
perhaps of a different Nature: and yet they must be Both very near as
acrimonious as Aqua fortis or Spirit of Vitriol, to turn either the fibrous
Parts of Blood or the gross Particles of Milk into a kind of Cheese or curdled
Matter by a coagulating Fermentation. To confirm this Notion, it will be
sufficient to appeal to many Patients, whether they are not often sensible of
the most painful Corrosions, next to the gnawing of Dogs; which must needs
proceed from a sort of a sharp vitriolick Acidity, that stops, coagulates and
corrodes the Part so affected, or indeed rather afflicted, with this Malady.

But on the other hand; the Reason why I ascribe Dissolution to the same
Acidity, is this: Because whenever it comes to the Marrow, and mixes with the
Fibers of the Bone, it dissolves and rots 'em in all Persons; for every Body
knows that One and the same Cause may have different Effects, according to the
Nature of the Subject Matter that is wrought upon; for it is a true Maxim, that
Whatever is received, is received according to the Quality or Nature of the
Receiver; As for Instance, the Sun melts Butter and hardens Clay; and Vinegar
coagulates Milk, but dissolves an Egg, White and Shell and all. Thus in like
manner does our strumous Acidity operate diverse ways; for when it falls upon
the Serum of the Blood, then follows Coagulation in the fibrous Parts of it,
and so it proceeds uncorrected to the furthest Members of the Body: But when it
penetrates the Bone and gets into the Marrow, it has a quite contrary Effect;
and is so far from indurating or hardening them, that it dissolves and
putrefies the very Hardness or Consistency that it meets with there.

And thus, in short, having set forth the Nature of the Struma, whether as a
Tumor or Ulcer; whether in the Glandules or elsewhere, by as clear a Light as I
could fetch, either from Authority or Reason; I shall now take upon me in Order
of my Discourse, to enquire into the various Causes of it.

CHAP. III. The CAUSES of it.
THirdly; I suppose by this time no Man will deny, that the Praeternatural
Acidity of the Serum of the Blood, is the immediate Cause of the King's Evil;
as it renders the whole Lympha acrimonious and indurated, and thereby produces
a Crass, Glutinous, Coagulated Matter in several Parts of the Body. But as to
the Mediate or more Remote Causes of the Scrofula, there are a great many
assigned by the Learned; to make it either Hereditary from the Parents, or
Accidental from Air, Diet, Exercise, etc.

It Is as manifest, as the Nose upon a Man's Face, that the Children of
Scrophulous or Strumous Parents, are commonly liable to the same Distemper; and
so are Those that suck the Milk of such diseased Nurses. Now this argues the
Malady to be deeply imprinted upon the whole Mass of Blood, or naturally
implanted in the very Constitutions of some Persons; seeing that it may be, and
often is so traduced, and entailed by Parents, thus afflicted and never cured,
upon their Posterity.

And here I cannot omit one Observation by the By; that Children also who are
begotten at improper Times of the Moon, have been often subject to be afflicted
with This Evil, and to the last Degree too of Virulency. Let this be a Warning
to Married People.

But besides These, there are some Persons whose natural Temper of Blood being
very Acid, and the Serum by that means very apt to coagulate, are generally
Obnoxious to it; as Children troubled with the Rickets, and all Others that are
Weakly, or in whom the Heat is not strong enough for a regular Digestion.

People likewise may be made very liable to Scrofulous crude Humors and Tumors
by the Indisposition of Place; That is, by living always in Extremes of Air,
either too thin or too thick, too keen or too gross: For the Air is as it were
pabulum vitae, and must needs have as peculiar an Influence upon our Bodies, as
our daily Food has without Dispute. Besides, salt, sour, slimy Meats or Drinks
may often occasion the King's Evil; sharp or fulsom Diet naturally disposing
the Body to such a desperate corroding Disease: And we can expect no better
Effect from so bad a Cause. And so will the Want of Exercise sometimes render
the Blood Corrosive and full of Slime or Phlegm or a stagnated Acidity; where
the Body frequently falls into the same Distemper, and becomes troubled with
hard Glandulous Flesh, white Tumors or sore Ulcers all over the Body. But
besides yet, there are Thousands and Thousands of other Accidents also, that
may produce this malignant Disease, in a Body thus predispos'd for it, either
by Ill Habits or Irregular Acts.

However yet I must needs grant, that there are various Opinions among diverse
Authors about the True Causes of the King's Evil. Some think that it proceeds
from the Succus Nutritious, being disordered in those that feed too much upon
slimy Meats; whose Phlegmatic, Cold and weak Digestions, create a great Mass
of crude Humors; which being carried thence to those distant Parts affected,
become Hard, Fixed and Unfit for any Suppuration. Others again have fancied,
that die Imagination being mightily disturbed by Want, Sadness or Melancholy;
it weakens and disorders the Digestive Faculty in the Stomach; and so
consequently at long run, produces those knotty Tumors, we find in Scrofulous
Patients: But this seems to be Ridiculous. There are Some yet that say, the
Viscous Nature of the Succus Nervorum must needs be the very Immediate
Efficient Cause of those strumous Tumors in the Salivatory Glands; for that the
thick Juice lying there long, grows harder and harder by coagulating, and
cannot pass at last, by reason of it is Induration. However, we find Others
again of a quite different Opinion; who ascribe the Cause of it to a coagulated
Phlegm or a sour Blood in the very Part affected: where the thick Acid Juices
are obstructed, grow stiff or obdurate, and magnify to the last Extremity of
Rancour or Foulness. But Some, on the other hand, will have it to arise
immediately from a Crass Lympha or Phlegmatic Humor, which stops in some Part
for want of a due Passage or Evacuation, and tumefies there into what we call
it the Struma. However, after all yet, the best and most plausible Opinion I
have met with, seems to be This; that the Scrofula comes originally from the
Chyle being distempered; which by some bad Fermentation or other growing Sour,
Acid and Corrosive, afterward affects the Mesentery-Glands in this manner; and
so by consequence the Lympha being corrupted at first, can never after that be
good for any thing in any other Part of the Body, but only to provide a Patient
for some Person or other, that can cure the King's Evil.

The AUTHOR's Opinion.
AS for my Part, I cannot but believe, that the King's Evil, taking it a prima
origin, certainly proceeds from an extraordinary Acidity in the First
Digestion; which Vice is never afterward corrected by the Second, Third,
Fourth, etc: but conveys its Malignity further, and at once of course spoils
the Chylus, sharpens the Blood, and corrupts the whole Lympha. This is what in
my Judgment always occasions those strumous Tumors or Ulcers, happen where they
will in the Body, as the Causa sine qua non; the very Source and Beginning of
the Malady: And what Artist soever can perfectly rectify that vicious Acidity
in the First Digestion, by Alcalious Effectual Medicines, must necessarilly
Cure the Distemper in Course; and as naturally accomplish the Work, and with as
much Truth too, as it is to take away the Effect by removing the Cause: Which
is the main thing, in short, of my Pretension.

But perhaps some People may judge better yet of this vast, spreading and
extensive Evil, by my saying something of the Parts commonly affected; and
showing particularly how they are concerned, and how they labor or languish,
under the heavy Oppression.

CHAP. IV. The PARTS Affected.
FOurthly; Now the Parts that are most frequently afflicted with the Struma, I
reckon to be the Glandules (that have sometimes passed under the Comical
Allusive Name of the Sow and Pigs) the Muscles, Membranes, Tendons and Bones.
The Viscera likewise often suffer by it: but if the Nerves or Brain are ever
touched or tainted with any scrofulous Humor, the Juices of those Parts are
dissolved, not coagulated nor tumefy'd, as I said before of the Marrow and the
Bones: For I have never yet observed any Tumors either in the Nerves or the
Brain, but only those Parts wasted and grown Carious by the Corrosion of the
vicious Humors, and more inclined to Putrefaction than any obdurate
Consistency.

However, the Part that is usually first affected with this Malady, proves to
be the Mesentery; for it has often been found by undeniale Experience that the
Mesenterick Glands have been inwardly strumous, both as to Obstruction and
Tumor; when at the same time, there have appeared no visible Symptoms of any
such Malignity Upon the outward Glands: Nor indeed has there been any such
scrofulous Disposition of Humor at all there in Reality. And then again we may
depend upon it, that whenever the external Glands are obstructed and swelled,
the Mesentericks are certainly afflicted in like manner: So that there is no
doubt but the Mesentery is commonly the first Part affected and spoiled by a
corrosive Acidity of this Kind.

But the Glands, after all is said, are the principal Seat of the King's Evil;
insomuch, that some of the Ancients restrained the Disease to those Parts only,
as if no other had been subject to it: And yet we find many more Places
notoriously affected with it to a violent degree. However, considering that
there are several sorts of Glandules, whether Conglobate or Conglomerate (as
some call 'em); I cannot but think, that those we term Reductive, which serve
for the Percolation of the Lympha, must needs be most afflicted of all others:
For why? whenever the Serum or the Lympha is so disordered and grown Acid,
those Glands that perform the Office of Aquae.ducts, or Conduits, will
doubtless suffer extremely, either by Obstruction, or by Corrosion, or both.
Now when the Parts through which the Lympha should pass pure and regular, are so
tumefy'd and stopped up, we may depend upon it to be an infallible Symptom of
the Kings' Evil.

However yet, no Place of the Body more frequently and visibly abounds with
strumous Coagulations, than the Neck quite around; which being Bare, especially
in Women, is more exposed to the Sharpness of the Cold Weather; and that
Quality of the Air, without doubt, hugely helps on the Acid Matter to stagnate
or lodge there, as well as it aggravates the Evil in this particular Part.

But to proceed; the Breasts, the Armpits, the Lungs themselves, the Salivals,
and the Tonsils are also sometimes miserably troubled with Scrofulous Tumors;
as will evidently appear to the Eye of any Common Practicer.

Neither are the Glands in the Groyn always free from this Malady, nor the
Testicles, nor the Prostatae, which are two Glandules under the Seminal
Bladders; though it is a little difficult sometimes to distinguish those Tumors
from the Effects of another base suspected Distemper.

So much for the Natural Glands; but now there are besides those, several
Adventitious Praeternatural ones, occasioned by this Disease; which arise
visibly infected with the same Rancour, in the Face, Arms, Legs, Skin, Muscles
and Membranes; no, and sometimes spreading over the whole Body, from Head to
Hands and Feet, Fingers and Toes; not excepting the very Viscera themselves
from being frequently in some Cases afflicted with Strumous Swellings.

As to the Affection of the Bones, it is notoriously well known, that setting
aside the Glands, they are as much troubled (I might say, tormented) with this
corroding Disease, as any other Parts of the Body; not to say more. But then
these are very distinct from all Glandulous Tumors; for though the Bone may seem
outwardly hard and sound, yet the Juices are all putrefy'd and rotten within at
the same time. However, Bones will be often also externally, as well as
internally affected with this venomous Humor; which always either bares them,
or makes 'em very Carious and much Corrupted: And this commonly happens by the
Contiguity of some Membrane or Tendon sorely afflicted with this Acidity that
infects the adjacent Parts, or the very Bones themselves. And indeed, how
frequently are the Tendons likewise troubled with a gross Gumminess, or a thick
Mass of Scrofulous Matter? It Is palpable from the Elbows, Knees and Ankles; or,
in short, from all the Joints of the Body thus distempered.

In fine, what miserable Objects do we daily meet with, even at Death's Door,
wasted to mere Sceletons, by languishing under this lingering Disease in all
Parts of the Body; for want of effectual Medicines to heal those sick and
wounded poor Souls! But the Consideration of this leads me directly to the
singular Case of a Person so afflicted, and as sorely too, even absolutely
despaired of by several Eminent Practisers; who was yet perfectly cured, to
Admiration, by the Blessing of Almighty God, and the Means of a Powerful
Medicine: Such a one, as has not failed since also of the same good Success of
working as Great Cures upon others, by its Sovereign Alcalious Virtue.

CHAP V. Of a PERSON so afflicted.
FIfthly then; the Case will be this: when I was about Seven Years of Age, at
Kingsley in Staffordshire, it so happened, that a large Scrofulous or Strumous
Tumor arose in my Left Breast; which afflicted me very much, and in a violent
manner too: Upon which, a Neighboring Surgeon of Note being sent for, he first
made use of Cataplasms to break it, and then applied several Suppurating
Emplastres; but all to little or no Purpose, save only, that he entertained
some Hopes still of doing me good. However, afterward he plied me over and
over with Catharticks and Emeticks, besides other outward Applications, in
order to discuss or dissolve the impacted Humor: And this Treatment lasted a
whole Year, but without any greater Success; for I remained still in as bad a
Condition, and as Languid as ever.

After this, a second Surgeon was immediately employed; who having diligently
dressed me about a Year, at last brake the Swelling, and also perfectly healed
it to every Bodies thinking; but then it proved to be only a palliative Cure,
for in less than a Month's time, another large Tumor fell into my Left Thigh;
which yet cost both him and my self a great deal of Trouble for above a Year,
before ever we could perceive it any better. And when we did find it pretty
well, as far as we could judge externally, it lasted but for a small time; for
in six Weeks after, my Left Foot and Ankle appeared swol'n to a vast Bigness:
insomuch, that a third Surgeon then was sent for, who, in less than a Year's
time, indeed, by what Methods he used, effectually brake it in Twenty Places a^
least; but however, having dressed it still on for above a Year and a half,
without any Amendment, he gave it over as Labor in vain, and ingenuously
advised my Friends to send me to one of the Hospitals in London. And
accordingly I was carried thither at last in a Horse-Litter, not being able to
travel any other way. Immediately after my Arrival here from the Country, I was
carried to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, a miserable Object then as I was with
the King's Evil; where the Best Surgeons had no sooner viewed my Thigh and
Foot, but they found them as Cavous as Cony-buries, and putrefy'd to the very
Bone; so that, in short, they gave us very little Encouragement of a Perfect
Cure, or indeed, of any other Relief; even so far from it, that they did not
design to dress me, till my Father importuned them to do it in common
Compassion.

To be brief, I was under their Hands, and other Eminent Surgeons, for full
Eleven Years or upwards; and one of them, indeed, had healed my Thigh in that
time: But then my Foot continued as bad as ever, not to say worse. Whereupon,
two or three of the Hospital-Surgeons consulted about it; and despairing of any
Cure, were absolutely unanimous for Amputation. I readily agreed to it, how
unwillingly soever; and the Day was fixed. Upon this, my Father asking them, if
the Cutting-off my Leg would secure the Distemper from breaking out again in
any other Part of my Body? They told him flatly, That they could secure
nothing; it might break out again in a Month's time, for any thing they knew to
the contrary.

Now, by this time, my whole Body Was so emaciated and weak, that I could not
support my self without my Crutches, and I had not set my Left Foot to the
Ground for near Seven Years. But, as Providence would have it, before the Day
came that was fixed for cutting off my Leg, we were well recommended to one Mr.
Joseph Turner, a considerable Surgeon; who gave us greater Hopes, and the
comfortable Encouragement of a Cure, without Amputation. In short, he passed
his word, that I should, in all Probability, be perfectly well within a Years
time; and according to his Promise, I soon found my self, by his Management and
Medicines, in the direct way to be restord to my Limbs and Health, beyond
Relapse; for in a Quarter of a Year, I perceived my self infinitely better, and
could set my Foot to the Ground; in a Quarter more, a large Pill-Box full of
foul Bones came away from the ulcerated Parts, and several of the Ulcers were
quite healed up; in about three Quarters time, I could easily walk about
without my Crutches; and before the Year was expired, I was perfectly well
recovered, and bound an Apprentice to the very same Mr. Turner (an excellent
Surgeon) for Seven Years. And now I could not but think my self Happy, and
bless GOD, that I had fallen into such effectual and good Hands in both
Respects.

An Account of the AUTHOR'S MASTER.
BUT to go on; during my whole Apprenticeship, I observed that my Master had
all sorts of Practice; but more especially in Scrofulous, or Venereal Cases. He
had a Great Name for either of those Distempers. He cured abundance of
Patients, of both Sexes and of all Ages, without one Grain of Mercury; even
after they had been given over by many other Eminent Professors, as well as
ignorant Pretenders. He did not administer many Catharticks, and very few
Emeticks; but gave Diuretics in abundance. His external Applications likewise
were quite different from what I ever then saw, or heard of since that Time.
Besides, I prepared all the Medicines he made use or with my own Hands for
several Years; and I am morally certain, there is not an Ounce of the same
Medicines, either External or Internal, prepared by any Person but my Self in
London to this very Day: As I could easily prove by the Druggists, upon
Occasion.

However it must needs be granted, that there are of late Days started up
several Great Pretenders; who, according to their own Report and Ostentation,
have effectually Cured many Persons of scrofulous Diseases: And I heartily wish
only, that they did thoroughly understand what they pretend to with so much
Assurance; for then I should not be troubled with half so many deplorable
Patients, as I daily meet with in a languishing Condition, who have generally
been tampered with by Empericks, labored under Five or Six Hands (or as many
as I my self was under formerly) and to as little Effect. And therefore give me
leave to say, that though the Distemper is bad enough at the first Appearance
of it, yet it might be happily Cured in a great deal less Time, if that
pernicious Corrosive Humor was not suffered to lurk so long, under unskilful
Hands, as to destroy the Flesh and foul the Bones: For upon my Word, there is
not One Patient in Ten, but I find him either so neglected or abused, that for
want of being duly or skilfully managed at first, I am commonly forced to wait
for Exfoliation with Patience, before I can perfect the Cure. But besides, I
have Cured several Persons in the remote Parts of this Kingdom, upon receiving
an exact Account of their Malady by Letters, in far less Time, than Those I
dress every Day, in and about London; and I cannot ascribe This to any other
Reason, but because I had the good Fortune to be their first Surgeon.

And moreover, my Medicines are also as Prevalent and Expeditious in Venereal
Cases, to Admiration: For indeed they are so Powerful, and Successful, by the
Blessing of God, that I have cured several sad Spectacles of the most virulent
Ulcers, whose Bodies have been covered all over with Scurf, Scabs and Spots
innumerable as well as frightful to the Beholder. One troubled with a Leprosy,
has very lately returned me his Thanks for his being perfectly Cured, and as
well as ever he was in his Life. I have at this time also Two more Leprous
Patients under my Care; the One of 'em almost well already: And I do not
question but to occomplish the Cure of 'em Both quickly, to the Satisfaction of
the World. But this brings me to the last particular Head of my Treatise: That
is, to set forth some of the many Cures of the King's Evil, which I have
already wrought with my own Hands.

CHAP. VI. The CURE by Experience and Example.
SIxthly, in fine, to conclude this Tract, I humbly conceive, that nothing can
be more Credible or Certain than Matter of Fact; confirmed by undeniable
Experience and Testimony: The Truth of which will appear best by the following
Instances.

I. The first Patient I had, April 6th, 1691. was Mr. Chandley's Only Daughter
of Shacklewel near Kingsland; she was about six Years of Age; both her Hands
were full of Ulcers and foul Bones; which I perfectly cured in about a Year's
Time with my Digestive Balsam, upon giving her at the same time my Alcalious
and Diuretic Medicines internally: By virtue whereof, I so rectified the
Corrosive Humors, and sweetened the whole Mass of Blood, that She has
continued very well ever since without any Relapse.

II. The Second Daughter of Mr. Crips, at the Golden Crown near Half Moon-Alley
in Bishopsgate-street, was afflicted with several strumous Tumors and Ulcers in
both her Arms. This Patient being nearly related to the former, I undertook her
after great Discouragements of other Surgeons; dressed her Sores with my great
Digestive Balsam, and the Tumors with my powerful Discussive Emplaister: So
that by their Application, together with my internal Alcalious and Diuretic
Medicines, I effectually cured her within the Compass of one Year.

III. Mr. Biddle, Joyner, in Portugal-street near Lincoln's Inn, was miserably
diseased with many scrofulous Tumors and Ulcers in his Head, Neck and Back;
having had the best Advice, in vain, for above Twenty five Years: Whom I
restored to a good State of Health; having healed all the Parts affected, by
the aforesaid Method and Medicines. Be pleased to enquire of Mrs. Jackson at
the Bell and Dragon in the same Street.

IV. A young Woman obout Sixteen Years of Age, Niece co one Mr. Wood of
Whitecross-street, had most violent Tumors and Evil Sores in both her Jaws,
from Ear to Ear; all which I effectually healed and cured, as before, in half a
Year's Time. You may hear of Her at Mrs. Thornton's, a Millener, near
Shoreditch-Church.

V. A Daughter of Mr. Mason in Cook's Court near Lincolns Inn, had been
afflicted a long while with a large strumous Tumor on the small of her Back;
insomuch that the Vertebres or Spondyles were mightily distorted, and She had
no manner of Strength in the lower Parts of her Body, nor any Use of her Legs.
Upon this, I was earnestly desired by Mrs. Moor, a Neighbor of Hers, at the
Bible over against Lincoln's Inn Bach-Gate, to go and see Miss Mason; where, at
the Door, I heard an Eminent Physician and a Surgeon, under whose Hands she had
been a considerable Time, tell Mr. Mason plainly, that all the Means in the
World could not save her Life; for that the Spinal Marrow of her Backbone was
wasting. However, after They were gone, I went up to see her, through many
Importunities; and finding some Hopes yet of her Recovery, I undertook the
Cure, with much ado, and performed it with Success in less than half a Year's
time; After which, in short, She soon took a Journey to Bristol, without any
ill Consequence, and continues still in a perfect State of Health and Vigor.

VI. Mrs. Stephens, Furrier and Fanmaker, over against Surrey-street end in the
Strand, was a great while troubled with a large strumous Tumor in her right
Leg. She had the Advice of several eminent Surgeons; who One and All, told her
that the Bone was foul, and ought to be laid open by a Caustic: Upon which, I
was sent for by one of the Neighbors; where I found her Cousin Jones an
eminent Apothecary in Lombard Street; by whose Approbation and Request, I
presently undertook the Cure, which I perfected in a little above half a Year,
with my aforesaid Internal and External Medicines.

VII. I cured a young Man, one Mr. William Miller, about Twenty Years of Age,
at the Sign of the Peacock in Shoe-Lane, who was diseased with several King's
Evil Sores in his Mouth and Throat, having also one large Ulcer in his Cheek;
all which I perfectly healed within the space of Six Months.

VIII. About Seven Years ago, I absolutely cured Mr. Minneway's Second
Daughter, now living in Blackamore-street, at the Sign of the Patten, near
Clare-Market, of several strumous Tumors and Ulcers in borh her Hands. I found
the Sores indeed, more intricate than usual, but however, I happily performed
the Cure in a little more than a Years time.

IX. Mr. John Goodwin, formerly Cook at the two Blew Posts in Devereux-Court,
was so afflicted with two foul malignant scrofulous Ulcers in his Right Leg and
Left Foot, that the rest of the Servants could not endure to come into he Room
where he lay, the Smell was so very offensive: Whereupon I was fent for by his
Mistress Dutton; at whose earnest Request, I undertook to cure him. And
accordingly I performed my Promise, by my abovementioned Medicines and
Management, in about Five Months. N. B. He now keeps the Two Blew Posts and
Anchor in Arundel-street.

X. Mr. John Denby, in Devereux-Court, was violently tormented with a painful
malignant Ulcer in one of his Legs for above Seven Years. He had been dressed
by three able Surgeons a long while, without any Success, so that I was
importuned at last, by Mrs. Dutton, beforementioned; to go and look upon him.
In short, he begged me at first sight (if I would do any thing for him) to cut
off his Leg; but having undertaken him, according to my usual Method, without
any such Violences, I perfectly cured him of the Sore, within the Compass of
Half a Year; and he has enjoyed the Right Use of his Leg ever since.

XI. A Daughter of Mr. Davis, in Stanhop-street, near Clare-Market, being
sorely afflicted with a strumous Tumor, very large and painful, in her Face; I
was employed, and thereupon I brought it to Suppuration in a small time, with
my strong Digestive Balsam; so that by the Help of my prevalent Internals, I
accomplished the Cure with Dispatch.

XII. Mr. John Bridges, of the Six Clerks Office, sent for me about Three Years
ago, to his Chambers in New-Inn, there to advise with me about his Brother
Thomas Bridges, of Herefordshire, then in Town; who was troubled with a violent
Scrofula in all the extreme Parts of his Body; and the Humor was so corrosive
in the Palms of his Hands, that that several of his Fingers were contracted,
and had been so a considerable Time. And therefore, upon his requequesting me
to do what I could for his Brother, with all Expedition: I undertook him
immediately, and treated him as I used to do in such like Cases; with so much
Success, that in a short time I perfectly freed him from that ugly Distemper,
and made his Skin as clear and smooth as ever.

XIII Mr. Underwood, an able Apothecary, overagainst Devonshire Square without
Bishopsgate, entreated me to take his Son in hand, who was sorely distempered
with the Evil in his Jaws, where he had several Strumous Tumors, and grievous
Ulcers, and likewise the same in his Legs, with which he had been sadly
afflicted for Thirteen or Fourteen Years: Whereupon, I went to work with him;
managed him as usually, and in less than three Quarters of a Years time, I
cured both his Tumors and Ulcers.

XIV. In the Year 1704, Mr. John Buck, a young Gentleman, about Fourteen Years
old, was recommended to me for a Patient, who had been diseased Seven Years
with a large Strumous Tumor in the Glands under the Left Jaw, besides a thick
Scrofula over all his Body. He had been a great while under the Care both of
Physicians and Surgeons, but without any Success at all; so that they were
going at last to lay open the Part affected, by Incision: Upon which, his
Father sent for me to the Garter-Coffee-House in Thread-Needle-Sttee, and there
agreed with me to undertake the Cure of his Son at Bed and Board in my own
House; whom accordingly I did entertain and treat so successfully, that within
the Compass of about a Year, I perfectly restored him from that Distemper;
nothing of any Acid Humor remaining, nothing ever ebbing or flowing in the
Glands for these Four Years last past; but only the Cystis a little bigger than
ordinary, which does not in the least detract from the Cure.

N. B. This young Man is now an Apprentice to Mr. Amy a Goldsmiths, at the
Black Boy on London Bridge, near Tooly-Street in Southwark.

XV. Mr. Crook, Perriwig-maker, at Lincoln's- Inn-Gate, next Shear-Lane, having
a Son sorely afflicted with the King's Evil, but especially in his Neck; who
had also lost the Use of his Right Arm and Hand by it; desired me to dress it,
and to take him under my Care: Which I accordingly did, and by means of my
Alcalious Medicines, etc. I healed his Sores, brought him to a right Use of the
Parts affected, and restored him to his perfect Health out of Hand.

XVI. Mr. Brooks, a Portugal Merchant, had been diseased Fourteen Years with
several Scrofulous Tumors and Ulcers in his Head and Neck, in so violent a
manner, that he had followed the Advice of several Doctors and Surgeons about
his Malady, for many Years, to little or no Purpose. However, I effectually
cured him in Sixteen Weeks time, or there-abouts, as can be attested by several
Credible Persons in Portugal-street, near Lincoln's Inn; where the Gentleman
formerly lodged, and was well known in the Neighborhood.

XVII. Mr. Homp's Child, of Hampstead, about three Years old, being grievously
troubled with the Evil, insomuch, that she had lost the Use of her Left Hand:
Mr. Akres, at the Three Tuns, sent for me to undertake her in this Condition;
which I did, with much Entreaty, after several other Surgeons had told her
Father, that her Hand must be laid open. But she having Patience, I perfectly
cured her, by the Blessing of God upon my Powerful Medicines, and she now
enjoys the right Use of that Part, as well as a complete State of Health.

XVIII. One Mr. Harris, being miserably afflicted with several Strumous Ulcers,
of great Malignancy, in one of his Legs, occasioned at first, as I perceived,
by a Compound Fracture: He had consulted with Two or Three Able Surgeons; and
one of 'em had dressed him for a considerable time, without the least Sign of
Amendment. It seems, Sir John Hollis of Lincoln's Inn, with whom Mr. Harris
then lived, had employed the foresaid Surgeons, but they could give him no
Hopes of any Cure, and proposed the Cutting off his Leg: Whereupon, Mr. Gibbons
in Portugal-street, near Lincoln's Inn, recommended me to the Business, and I
undertook it by Sir John Hollis's own Order; so that, to be brief, I perfectly
cured my Patient, and healed all his Sores in less than half a Years time. Upon
this Success, I also undertook to cure his Son of a large white Swelling in the
Knee, that had occasioned a great Contraction in his Ham; the Cure of which
uncommon Tumor (being the most difficult of all others to work upon
effectually) was accomplished by my Powerful Medicines within a few Months.
This same Mr. Harris now lives with the Portugal Ambassador in Great Lincoln's
Inn-Fields.

XIX. Mrs. Prat, being about Four Years ago, almost distracted with a vast
painful Swelling, and several Ulcers in one of her Breasts, she had the Advice
of several Surgeons; one of whom told her, That he was fearful of the Cure, and
truly his Opinion was, that it must be cut off. Now Mr. Prat speaking of this
to Mr. Jackson, at the Bell and Dragon near Lincoln's Inn, I was immediately
sent for, undertook it, and digested the sharp Humor in Twenty Four Hours, so
that she was sensibly eased, to the great Satisfaction of the good Family; and
in a short time afterward, I discussed the Tumor in the Glands, healed all the
Ulcers, and made her perfectly well. In short, she has had two fine Children
since, without any the least Sign or Symptom of the like Malady.

XX. Mr. May's Son in Devereux-Court, near the Temple, about Seventeen Years of
Age, was grievously tormented with a large white Swelling in his Left Thigh,
spreading from his Hip to his Knee, with a Contraction. He had the Advice of an
Hospital Surgeon, and another who was his Relation, a great while, with little
Success: Whereupon, Mrs. Dutton his Aunt, recommended the Cure of it to my
Care; which, with much ado, I undertook, when I found him in a Hectic Fever,
his Body emaciated, and his Thigh so monstrously distended with the painful
Tumor, that it drew him in his Bed as crooked as a Bow. And likewise he had not
slept for several Weeks through the Anguish of the Distemper. However, upon
giving him my Alcalious Medicines internally and applying my strong Digestive
externally, he slept well the second Night, and in a few Days time, his Fever
was quite abated, his Swelling all suppurated to a wonderful Discharge of
Matter, and the Man himself was perfectly restored to his former Strength and
Vigor in less than half a Year, and is now Drawer at the Bell Tavern in
Westminster.

XXI. A Son of Mr. Garraway's, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, was
desperately afflicted with the King's Evil in both his Eyes; whom, after he had
been tampered with a considerable time in vain by one that is no Surgeon, and
yet disingenuously pretends to cure this Distemper. I willingly undertook him
to show my Practice. I found him in this Condition. His Left Eye was bound up,
and the other wonderfully weak, being overloaded with a filthy Acid Humor.
However, he had not used my Digestive Balsam above Six times, but he could open
his worst Eye; and at the End of one Month, I espied him at Play in the Streets
without any thing over either of 'em, and his Sight tolerably strong. In a
word, he is now very well, and will so continue, I dare say, if he can be
persuaded by his Parents to take my Alcalious Medicine internally, to take away
the Cause, otherwise the Effect cannot totally cease.

XXII. I cannot, without being injurious to the Public, forbear mentioning one
Instance more of a young Gentleman, about Nineteen Years of Age, whose
Condition was more deplorable and desperate than I have either yet set down, or
ever saw in all my Practice: For, besides the Evil, with which he was sorely
affl^cted, he was also full of Pain to the last Extremity, and Convulsive from
the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, insomuch, that he had three or
four Persons constantly to attend him Day and Night, for above two Months
successively; who were all forced to hold him in his strong Convulsion Fits,
which were almost as innumerable as they were violent. He had not been in his
Bed for above Six Weeks together, Night nor Day, so that the Physicians and
Surgeons left him in this languishing Condition, without any manner of Hopes of
Recovery, after having given him abundance of Medicines for several Years
without any Success. At last, the young Gentleman's Father came to my House
upon this Occasion, to know my Method and Terms for curing the Evil; of both
which I gave him a particular and satisfactory Account, and so accordingly I
waited upon him in the City the next Day; where I found his Son in the most
desperate State of Health, as aforesaid. Indeed, I was very much surpised at
first, when I saw him in so great an Agony with Convulsion Fits; and having
heard nothing of them before, I was unwilling to prescribe any thing, although we
had agreed. for the Cure; but being requested over and over by his Father, to
try my Medicines, I forthwith gave him my Alcalious Pills, and applied some
Externals; which had so good an Effect upon my Patient, that we got him to Bed
the Fourth Night. His Convulsions abated every Moment, both in their Frequency
and Violence; so that in a Fortnights time he felt them no more, neither had he
any Symptom of their Returning, but could eat, and drink, and sleep as well as
any other of my Patients afflicted with this Distemper. His Father, Mr. James
Boddington, an Eminent Turkey Merchant, lives in Little St. Helen's,
Bishopgate-street.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND now having quite finished what I at First proposed about the King's Evil;
as to the Name, the Nature, and the Causes of it, as well as the Parts
affected, the Case of a Person so afflicted, and the Cure of the Disease by
Experience: I might here make some Apology according to Custom, Fashion, or
Formality, for the Meaness of the Performance; but I am none of that modish
Temper, or complaisant Faculty in Writing, as only to oblige the Airy People of
the Age by a dissembling Modesty. And therefore I have chose rather to send
this Treatise (such as it is) into the wide World; barely with this patient
Motto of Indifferency along with it, or Terence's Wish, for its Welsare:

Valeat quantum valere potest. But However; I must beg leave, before we part,
to hint by the way, that I have on Purpose omitted a vast many more notable
Instances of my curing the King's Evil perfectly, which I could have produced
with Credit; but only for Fear of swelling this Book to such a Bulk, as might
in all Probability have either disgusted or disobliged the Reader.

POSTSCRIPT.
UPon second Thoughts, it may, perhaps, be expected by the Public, that I
should give some Account of my Medicines abovementioned, both as to the Nature
and Virtue of them: And therefore, as I would not omit any thing material that
might oblige the World, so I could not, for the better Satisfaction of People,
forbear making the following Proposals, by way of After-Thought.

I. As for my Alcalious and Diuretic Medicines, which I give internally in all
Cases of the King's Evil, with the greatest Safety imaginable; they certainly
correct every praeternatural Acidity in the first Digestion, which is the
primary Cause of all other ill Effects in the Body. They give the Patient an
extraordinary Appetite, comfort the Vitals, throw off the morbifick Humor from
the Viscora or Bowels to the Extreme Parts of the Body; cheer the Spirits,
strengthen the Nerves, and at last sweeten the whole Mass of Blood: Giving
immediate Ease also to Persons under the most violent, acute and corroding
Pains, in what Part soever afflicted, either with scrofulous Tumors or Ulcers.
Besides, I must needs say, that several languishing People, who have had the
Use of their Limbs taken from them by those Evils, for a considerable time
together, have yet been perfectly restored by these powerful Alcali's, beyond
Expectation. I need not mention many more also, who have been Convulsive to the
last degree of Danger and Despair, that have been preserved in like manner, and
effectually cured, both of their Fits and the Disease by the same Medicines;
even when Opiates themselves have proved ineffective, and where all other Means
have failed of Success. Only give me Leave to add over and above, that they are
very pleasant to the Taste; and the largest Quantity that I give to any one
Patient at once, does not exceed the Bigness of a common Pea. In short, they
are wonderfully Gentle and Easy in their Operation, so that they work only by
Perspiration and Urine, without any Stress upon Nature or Confinement from
Business.

II. And as those Cordial Alcali's which are both of a Diuretic and
Diaphoretick Virtue, contribute very much toward bringing any malignant
strumous Tumors to a palpable Suppuration the sooner, so they happily prepare
the Parts affected for the immediate Application of my Digestive Balsam; which
is so Powerful in its Digestion, that without either Caustic or Incision, or
any other painful Treatment, it does in a short time, gently lay open the most
inveterate Swelling of what kind soever, in the Glands or elsewhere; it sucks
out the cold, curdl'd and coagulated Cores; exfoliates the foul Bones, destroys
the Callow Lips of the Sores, mundisies, incarns, and absolutely cicatrizes the
Parts aggrieved, by its balsamic and healing Virtue. But I will here presume
to say by the By, that I have wrought as great and remarkable Cures with it
also upon Cancers; although treated by many others, whether Artists or unskilful
Pretenders, a long time without any commendable Success: For by dressing them a
few times with this Digestive Balsam, the Patients have forthwith been sensibly
relieved, and found a great deal of Ease from such tormenting Maladies. It Is
matter of Fact, that in all the Cancers I have had under my Care, this Balsam,
by the Help of my Alcalious Medicines, has never failed yet of digesting that
filthy, sanious, sharp, foetid, obstinate Humor into laudable Pus or Matter;
and has also in a reasonable time, discharged the whole Cancerous Substance
and cured its Malignity, without leaving the least Hardness or Pain, or Danger
of Relapse behind it. In a word, this same Digestive Balsam is likewise of that
cleansing and healing Nature; that, in case of any gross Scurf, Scabs, Pimples,
Blotches, or even Leprous-spots in the Face, or any other remote Parts of the
Body, it being applied at Night only going to Bed, without any offensive Smell,
painful Influence, or disagreeable Sight, will gently attract and suck out the
peccant Humor, and in course quickly restore the Skin to its perfect Beauty or
Natural Smoothness.

III. In fine, as to my Discussive Emplastre, it is of such a Sovereign Virtue,
and Power, that let a scrofulous Tumor be never so Hard and Obstinate to resist
all suppurative Medicines whatever, though it be of the largest Size and Figure;
yet this efficatious Discutient, being applied only once a Week, opens the
Pores so powerfully, and discharges the sharp Humor so much by Sweat, that in
short, at last, by the Assistance of my Alcalious and Diuretic Medicines, it
perfectly discusses and annihilates the whole vicious Coagulation. The Nature
of this Emplastre is as strengthening also, as it is undeniably discussive; and
it does not only disperse the acrimonious Humor, but as well also fortifies
the Part that was affected with the most obdurate Tumor; against any future
Relapse.

Now for the Benefit of the Public, I propose, that any Persons who live in
the Remote Parts of the Kingdom, may be supplied with all these Medicines, both
Internal and External, and with particular Directions also how to make use of
'em; upon giving me an exact Account of their Constitutions, and the Nature of
their Maladies.

I have also an Excellent SECRET, which in One Hour's time, cures the Toothache
without Drawing, and prevents it from ever Returning; as a great many of the
Nobility and Gentry, and several Hundreds of others in this City and Suburbs,
for Twelve Years last past, have found by Experience. Being the Author of this
Medicine, to prevent its being Couterfeited, I do dispose of none but what I
apply my self.

FINIS.
A PATIENT'S Advertisement, To all Persons troubled with the EVIL. By a Brother
in Affliction.
I HAVE made the Author o'th foregoing,
Promise to Print what I should throw in
By way of Epilogue to his Book;
So to himself now let him look.
As for the Critics, they will cry,
It Is dull enough to make one die;
Not of the Evil, I Will assure 'em,
And of their Malice he can cure 'em.
Now all who have this Book read through,
Must give the Author what is his due,
And own they Benefit found by
Knowing the Cause, the How and Why:
And all the Pedigree from whence
This sad Distemper did commence.
Though thus I write in Burlesque way,
Yet all is most true that I do say;
And therefore let all Mortals know,
All Women, and their Children too;
That now are troubled with this Evil
And can believe me truly Civil;
The likeliest Person to apply to
Is whom these Verses have an Eye to:
An honest Surgeon, whose great Skill
Can cure this Malady at Will:
You Will find it so if you but try,
I speak Experimentally;
What Pains had I? at point of Death,
In strong Convulsions every Breath!
But ah! the Ease, you cannot guess
His Medicines gave me, with Success.
No Lance or Caustic does he use,
But gently soon the Foe subdues:
Happy his Patients also be,
Who no Fatigues of Physic see.
HE shows his Skill to be the greater
In leading, and not driving Nature;
But his just Praise I must deny him,
Else you would think I did belly him.
J. BODDINGTON.


