MADRIGAL AND TRULLETTA.

A MOCK-TRAGEDY.

ACTED (Under the Direction of Mr. CIBBER) AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN.

WITH NOTES by the AUTHOR, and Dr. HUMBUG, Critic and Censor-General.

By J. REED.

Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhyme. MILTON. LONDON: Printed for W.
REEVE, at Shakespeare's Head, Fleet Street. 1758.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

PREFACE.
AS I am under a necessity of giving a preface to the following work, I shall,
in the language of our immortal countryman, imitate the ROMANS in brevity, as
brevity is the soul of wit; and not be so studious of the necessary ornaments
of style, as of relating FACTS, with the unbiased integrity of a faithful and
impartial historian. This I have thought fit to premise, that the reader may
not imagine he is running over a jumble of facts and fiction; since it is but
too common, with modern authors of the poetical cast, to lard their prefaces
with a set of ingenious flourishes, which carry a greater air of rhodomontade
than truth.

The following tragedy was originally written in Italian, by the celebrated
Signior FUNIDOSO DELL'ARUNDO, formerly a ropemaker in Civita Vecchia; from
which place he prudently retired, to avoid the addresses of the lady
INQUISITION, who had a strange hankering after his person, on account of his
libertinism in religion; for, though a Catholic in appearance, he was a
Lutheran at heart. In the year 1751 he arrived in London, with that theatrical
family of Italians, who gave the town such exquisite pleasure, in the
performance of several incomparable burlettas, all, or most of which, are said
(with what truth I will not venture to ascertain, as I am writing a narrative
of FACTS) to be the production of our hempen genius.

In the following year, which the reader, without my chronological assistance,
will be able to discover to be the year 1752, Signior DELL'ARUNDO took shipping
for Newcastle, with an intention of residing in that part of the world, on
account of the cheapness of the necessaries of life, and accordingly settled in
a sea port about thirty miles to the southward of that place. He had not been
many months in his new residence, till he married a widow, who was somewhat
past the heyday of her blood; or, to speak less poetically, pretty well
stricken in years; and before he had been a dozen moons in his altered state,
to his great affliction, he lost his lady. I might here, according to the usual
prolixity of historians, take up my reader's time, by telling him of what
distemper the Signiora departed this life; but, as I don't intend to clog my
narrative with useless matters, I shall be totally silent on the occasion: nay,
I am so great a lover of conciseness in history, that I shall not even so far
intrude on my candid reader's leisure, as to inform him that the lady died of a
fit of the cholic.

As our Italian phoenomenon was a great admirer of poetry, it is no wonder,
after he had acquired a competent knowledge of the British language, that he
received so sensible a pleasure from the perusal of the English poets. He was
so captivated with the masterly style and expression of our dramatic authors
(especially the more modern ones) that he resolved to collect the principal
beauties in our language, and throw them into a tragedy, formed on the British
plan, in his native tongue; which he at length so happily executed, that his
performance will undoubtedly be an honor to literature in general, and to the
Italian language in particular.

In October 1756, our celebrated foreigner departed this life; and, according
to the phrase of our diurnal scribblers, universally lamented by all his
acquaintance; and as a perpetual monument of the friendship, which had long
existed between us, left his valueable performance to my care, in the following
words contained in the body of his last will and testament.

Item, I give and devise to my most dear friend, brother bard, and brother
rope-maker, JOSEPH REED, late of STOCKTON aforesaid, now of KING DAVID'S FORT,
near Sun-Tavern-Fields, London, all and singular my piece, production,
performance, drama, or tragedy, called MADRIGAL and See Note 1. in the First
Act.
TROLLETTA, with the prologue, epilogue, airs, odes, dirges, and all
appurtenances thereunto belonging, or in any wise appertaining; to be
translated, altered, imitated, and made fit for the English, or other stage, by
him the said JOSEPH REED. I also will and require that the profits, arising
from the publication, or theatrical exhibition of the said tragedy, be applied
and issued to, and for the sole use, interest, behalf, ad-vantage, and
emolument of him the said JOSEPH REED, his heirs, executors, administrators,
and assigns; only willing and requiring of him the said JOSEPH REED, after such
translation, alteration, or imitation is completed, that the original at the
sole expense of the said JOSEPH REED, may be sent to the Vatican library at
Rome, to be there preserved as a perpetual monument of my dramatic genius.

I have given this extract to prove my legal title to the Piece; for I must
confess, not withstanding that clause in the bard's MAGNA CHARTA, called
poetica licentia, I think it little less than downright robbery, to raise any
considerable sum from the translation, or alteration of the works of an exotic
brother, unless such brother, or his descendents, be admitted to go snacks in
the profits. I could wish that Mr. POPE had been of my opinion in this
particular, but am sorry to tell the world he was not, which I think no small
blemish in his character. It is universally known this great, though little man,
pocketed some thousands by his translation of the works of MEONIDAS HOMER, Esquire
one of the fine old Grecians; yet I could never learn (though I have made very
strict enquiry) that he had the gratitude or good manners, to send even a bill
of exchange, or bank note of a cool hundred, to any of Mr. HOMER'S lineal
descendents. I am aware that some of Mr. POPE'S advocates will be ready to
bellow out, Zounds! the fellow's mad! Where the devil could be find such
descendents? -- But pray, gentlemen, why did not your admired little friend
advertise in all the public papers in Europe, and Asia, to effect such
discovery? Instead of this, I could never find he advertised at all. -- Had he
but even issued out a notice to that purpose in our Daily Advertiser only, I
make no doubt but he would have had, within eight and forty hours of the
publication, one or more claimants, who would have proved their lineal descent
upon oath, which I think is as much satisfaction, as any reasonable person, who
is not a downright infidel, would require. -- But to return to my subject.

If it be plagiarism, without benefit of clergy, to borrow a few lines from a
native author, it is certainly as criminal to steal whole plays from a
foreigner. -- When I reflect on the prevalency of this iniquitous practice, I
am ready to fall down on my marrowbones, to return my humble and hearty thanks
to goddess NATURE, for so kindly disqualifying me for the perpetration of such
offense, by giving me the knowledge of one language only -- The filching of
plays, under cover of translation, heaven knows, is a crime of no short
standing -- Nay, some of our countrymen have carried their villainy to a yet
greater height, and stole plays with little or no alteration at all. Among
these abandoned plagiaries, I am told, was AARON HILL, Esquire of turgid, altering,
and translating memory. I have heard a report of his borrowing the tragedy of
ZARA; and, as the story is in few hands, I shall, by way of secret, give it to
my readers; at the same time most earnestly conjuring and requiring my said
readers that it may go no further; for I would not be known to propagate any
rumor, to the disadvantage of an author, for whose memory I have so profound a
veneration.

In the year one thousand seven hundred and -- I have forgot what -- Mr. THOMAS
HUDSON, then an usher to a grammar school at Durham, now a clergyman in
Northumberland, translated Mons. VOLTAIRE'S Zaire. On sending such translation
to London, for the perusal and examination of some connoissieur in drama, it
unfortunately fell into the hands of a considerable dealer in hats: this
beaverite having a more delicate taste in the outside, than inside ornaments of
a head, gave the piece to a friend for such examination; by means of which
friend poor Miss Zara fell into the hands of the aforesaid poetical ravisher,
AARON, who Crop'd this fair rose, and rifled all its sweetness,
Then cast it, like a loathsome weed, away.
Otway's Orph. that is, in plain prose, pilfer'd the copy; and, the better to
conceal the theft, gave out that the piece was absolutely unfit for the stage;
but, notwithstanding such insinuation, in that, or the following season, Miss
Zara was thrown upon the town, and received with universal applause. It is true
the play, in the strictest sense, could not be HUDSON'S, as HILL had misplaced
a single scene, and made the considerable alteration of fifty lines or upwards,
by which the property (according to modern authors' latitudinarian notions of
meum and tuum) undoubtedly became his own -- The above anecdote I had from Mr.
HUDSON; wherefore if brother AARON'S ghost know it to be a fib, I humbly desire
the said ghost to take a trip into the north, and confront the sermonizer. I
shall not pretend to ascertain the truth of this charge, but only offer, as my
private opinion, on the side of the church, that the styles of the English Zara
and Merope, (both the same author's in French) are almost as different, as
those of Jane Shore and Irene.

After this digression, I shall lay before the public my embarrassments
concerning this tragedy. Signior DELL'ARUNDO had unfortunately forgot, that his
most dear friend understood no human language but that of his mother tongue:
however, that no pains might be wanting, on my side, to do as much honor as I
could to the production of my deceased brother, I got one of the
Opera-Translators to give me the piece in English; but alas! the version was so
very sublime, that I could not possibly understand any three lines of it
together. After this I employed my friend, PETER RONE, professor of languages,
to give me a literal translation, which answered my purpose so well, that I was
able to trace many of the beauties, our foreigner had borrowed from the English
playwrights. Where the context would allow, I have given the many striking
passages in the very dress of the respective authors, from whom they were
undoubtedly borrowed: where the text would not allow me such passages in the
very words, I have by parody, or imitation, kept as near the sublime originals
as I possibly could.

Signior DELL'ARUNDO, in a codicil to his will, has also left me, subject to
the aforesaid conditions, the farther legacy of three plays, viz. one Comedy
and two Tragedies, called the Contrast, the Distressed Princess, and the
Distressed Wife. The Comedy is thought to be a tolerable piece; but as to the
Tragedies, I must own I think them greatly inferior to the following work. They
have no triumphal entries, ROMAN ovations, sacrifices, dirges, processions,
ghosts, drums, trumpets, thunder, lightning, battles, miraculous revolutions
(so necessary, according to Mr. BAYES'S rule, to ELEVATE and SURPRISE) or any
of that sublime rant, which may be called the very soul of modern tragedy. In
short, they have nothing but nature, propriety, and simplicity of fable and
diction to recommend them. I have been advised to lard them plentifully with
the above tragic artillery; but, so depraved is my taste, that I cannot listen
to such innovation: I rather choose to wait till nature and common sense come
into play again on the British stage. In the mean time, if the town have a
desire to see the theatrical exhibition of the said pieces; and the said town
can or will raise me a patron, that has influence sufficient to procure their
representation, one, or more of the said pieces shall be at the service of the
public in the ensuing season.

That nothing might be wanting to render the following production as
entertaining as possible, I have prevailed on my learned and ingenious friend,
Dr. HUMBUG, to assist me in writing annotations to the piece.

I can hardly conclude this preface, without an intimation of the excellency of
Mr. DAVIS in the character of BUCKRAMO. I hope his voice, figure and abilities
for the stage will, in the ensuing season, entitle him to the regard of the
Public on a PATENT THEATER.

PROLOGUE.
YE awful censors of the tragic scene,
Who come, from principle of fun or spleen,
To rob the bard of fame and profit too,
(Rob him of that, which not enriches you, Othello.

And make him poor indeed) for this one night
Forgo the pleasantry of damning spite.
Prologue to Cato.
Our author shuns, in scenes of sound and show,
To move by buckram springs of royal woe;
Where struts, and starts, and twists, and lungs supply
The want of nature, sense, and energy.
He casts his drama in life's humbler sphere;
That the small vulgar, with the great, may share
The mournful pen'orths of his tragic ware.
No hackney'd tale or plan, our bard would choose
For the sad subject of his melting muse:
Hoping from novelty to draw renown
(For novelty's the darling of the town)
His many moving incidents are taken,
From whence? The book and volume of his brain. Hamlet.

Our bard -- (he hopes without offense) presumes
To deck his mimic play with borrowed plumes.
Whenever the nature of his subject brought
A known similitude of tragic thought,
He snatched the sentiment already penned,
Afraid to alter what he could not mend.
Then to his motley scenes give patient ear,
Each line with caution scan, with candor hear;
Your kind compassion with your judgment blend,
Prologue to the Drummer.
Least, in attacking him, you wound a friend.
Besides the errors in the pointing, please to correct as follows.

In Note 9. p. 3. after omitting add the explanation of. p. 15. l. 12. for
hum'd read humm'd. p. 18. for curs^d read cursed. p. 18. l. 16. in the notes,
for aches read aches. p. 19. note 25. for tipperanian read tipperarian. p. 28.
l. 11. in the notes, for are read is. p. 30. l. 22. in the notes, for honors
read honor. p. 41. l. 7. for gods read o god. In some of the copies, p. 34. l.
21. for (bell sounds that dreadful knell) read (bells sounds) that dreadful
knell. p. 30. l. 16. for a street read the street. p. 48. l. 1 and 2. for
Guelderstern read Guildenstern.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
MADRIGAL, a Bard, BUCKRAMO, a Tailor, Mr. DAVIS. STRAPADA, a Cobbler, Mr.
BLAKEY.
As these TWO were the only persons, who received the applause of the public,
it is unnecessary to add the names of the other performers.
Ghost of CABBAGINO. Chiefs of MADRIGAL'S Party.
LYRIC, ACROSTIC, FUSTIANO, EPIGRAM,
Chiefs of BUCKRAMO'S Party.
GOOSINO, BODKINDA, PRESSBOARDALIO, YARDWANDELLI,
Pages to TRULLETTA.
BUTTONELLI, THIMBLETONIO

WOMEN.
TRULLETTA, a Taylor's Daughter. SCULLIONA, her Confident. SCOURELLA, a
Chair-Woman.
Poets, Tailors, Drums, Trumpets, Thunder, Lightening, Processions, etc.

SCENE; St. Giles's and West-Smithfield.

In the original it is Madrigal and Trolleta. As sound may be reckoned among
the primary beauties of the Italian drama, I am almost persuaded our author
fixed on TROLLETTA, to render the name of his heroine more musical and
harmonious. A British author should prefer sense to sound; wherefore I have, by
the alteration of a single letter, made it Trulletta; the force, the
significancy, and the propriety of which name, will be obvious to the most
illiterate English reader. I wish, for the honor of my country, the preference
of sound to sense were confined to ITALY only. We have melancholy instances in
some of our modern tragedies, that such infection has reached even the British
climate.
MADRIGAL AND TRULLETTA. A MOCK-TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Garret. BUCKRAMO, STRAPADA (embracing.) BUCKRAMO. In the first six lines of
this tragedy, our author seems to have had his eye on the beginning of the 3d
act of Cato, viz. Thanks to my stars, I have not ranged about
The wilds of life, ever I could find a friend
Nature first pointed out my Portius to me,
And early taught me, by her secret force,
To love thy person, ever I knew thy merit;
Till what was instinct grew up into friendship.
Which lines, though extremely beautiful, are far short of the sublimity of our
author. Instead of thanking his stars, which is the hackney'd phrase of every
mechanic, and nature pointing out, he puts into BUBKRAMO'S mouth, Thanks to
all-bounteous fate, whose index hand
Has pointed out, etc.
which undoubtedly is more pompous and sublime. Not to mention any thing of
white moments, informing instinct plucking a soul by the sleeve, and other
beauties in this passage; it will be sufficiently apparent to a reader of even
ordinary sagacity, how much our author has improved on Mr. ADDISON.

Dr. HUMBUG.
THANKS to all-bounteous fate, whose index hand
Has pointed out STRAPADA for my friend!
The moments sure were white and lucky all, A better order of succeeding days
Comes smiling forward, while and lucky all.
Fair Penitent.

When by the sleeve informing instinct plucked
BUCKRAMO'S soul, and cried, "BUCKRAMO, list!
"BUCKRAMO, take STRAPADA to thy heart --
Happy BUCKRAMO! Thrice more happy far
The beauty, elegance, and the propriety of this, and the following simile, are
scarce to be equalled in any language. Dr. HUMBUG.
Than whisker'd Turk, who on Elysian plains
Satiates his fancy with immortal nymphs;
Or half-starv'd 'prentice; whose supplying purse
Can gratify, when tiresome shop is shut,
A punning critic of my acquaintance, to whom I lately showed this tragedy,
made the following remark; Tripe is partly derived from guts; wherefore your
Italian friend has given the world a proof he had some guts in his brains,
when he hit upon this simile.
With tripe, or sausages, his craving maw --
A figure of such universal use among tragic writers, that if I were to give
all the examples, which have occurred to me in the perusal of English tragedy,
they would make as large a folio, as any of the ancient fathers. Dr. HUMBUG.
But oh, STRAPADA! oh! my friend, amid
This flow of joy, BUCKRAMO'S soul is pierced,
As with a paring knife, or bodkin sharp.

Strap. O ye immortal powers! that guard the just, O ye immortal powers that
guard the just,
Watch round his couch, and soften his repose!
Cato.

And govern all contingences below;
With careful watch beset BUCKRAMO'S soul,
And keep, for ever keep it free from woe!
What is it that torments STRAPADA'S friend?
Two games well known to gamblers -- The reader may observe, in this
definition, that I have imitated the manner of the ingenious N. BAILEY,
Philologos. A specimen of this judicious author's abilities may be seen in his
explication of the word thunder, which he defines, "A noise known by persons
not deaf."
Has Put, or Cribbige, with insatiate sweep,
Of all thy coin despoiled thee, left thee bare
And pennyless? or salamander nymph,
Inhabitant of DRURY, from thy fob,
With faithless palm, decoyed thy gutless watch?
Or infidel retailer of ENTIRE I cannot, in this place, forbear taking notice
of the negligence of our dictionary-mongers, in omitting the word ENTIRE; or,
as it is frequently written, ENTIRE, in the sense I have now used it. I am
persuaded they cannot plead the obsoleteness of the word, since there are so
many signal instances of the use and propriety of it, in and about this
metropolis. For want of such previous explanation, I am not ashamed to own,
that I was led into a very great error in regard to the true meaning of the
word, when I first came to London. On seeing Parsons Entire at the bottom of a
sign, I took it for a laconic advertisement; That entire or finished clergymen
might be hired, or heard of at that place -- This mistake of mine I have
thought proper to mention, that the future publishers of dictionaries may not
slip over the explanation of a word of such consequence.

Denied a morning draught of purl on tick?
Say why is this? speak, speak, I charge thee speak. Speak, speak, I charge
thee speak.
Hamlet. If our author had not visibly borrowed this expression, I should
scarce have imagined the preceding part of the speech was intended as an
imitation of Horatio's beautiful address to the ghost.




Buck. Yes I will speak; will to STRAPADA tell
The latent secrets of my inmost soul --
Know then -- but by the sacred ties of friendship; A solemn conjuration to
secrecy, and of equal importance to the secret about to be revealed -- there
are so many resemblances of this speech in our dramatic writers, that I hardly
know from which of them our Italian has borrowed.

By all the spangled train of glittering stars;
By my grim father's shade, who pendent died That no future critic may plume
himself with the discovery of a blunder, I have thought proper to inform my
readers, it was not the father's shade, but the father himself, who pendent died
On gallow tree.


On gallow tree, I charge thee keep it locked
From mortal cognizance, from human ear,
An alien -- yes, STRAPADA -- would thou think it?
I am -- yes, by the Gods, I am in love.

Strap. Ye heavenly powers, in love! astonishment
On my corporeal faculties has made
Sudden arrest -- unsay it, and I Am happy --
Thy head, with melancholy shake, confirms
The doleful truth -- ah! what a falling off Oh! Hamlet, what a falling off was
there!
Hamlet.

Is here -- in love! O lost, undone BUCKRAMO!
But say; what witching nymph with magic glance
Has stung BUCKRAMO'S soul?

Buck. What if it were
TRULLETTA -- would thou disapprove the choice?

Strap. A very imperial, but foolish oath, replied the punning critic.
By JOVE'S imperial bird, not I, not I.
The simplicity, beauty, and propriety of this thought cannot be sufficiently
admired. Some critics may possibly disbelieve the story of the wandering Jew;
but that does not at all affect our author in the choice of this image, since
fiction, as well as fact, is allowable in poetry. Our Bard lived in a country
where tradition had greater weight, than in this infidel island. But that our
author may not be supposed to have taken this image from tradition only, I can
assure the world I have seen several editions of the history of this remarkable
traveller, and could produce a hundred gentlemen of veracity to attest the
like; and as none of our critics have yet shown the falsity of such history,
it is to me a sufficient proof that there was, is, and must be such a person as
the wandering Jew. A certain modern author has intimated the image is too low
for the dignity of tragedy, and advised the following alternation, viz. For
sure the sun, in his diurnal round,
Nor moon, nor stars, ever saw a form so fair --
but I would ask the judicious reader, whether, according to our present
knowledge of the heavenly bodies, it would not be downright nonsense to talk of
the sun, moon, or stars seeing a form so fair. Several dramatic authors make no
scruple of affirming these bodies are capable of vision, and among the rest the
ingenious Mr. ROW; who says, -- if only
The midnight moon, and silent stars had seen it.
Fair Penitent. but unless Mr. ROW means the man in the moon, or the supposed
inhabitants of the starry orbs seeing it, he must mean nothing at all.

Dr. HUMBUG.
For should the Wandering Jew, with restless search,
Rumage this ball of earth from east to west,
From south to north, through all its different climes,
He could not find a fairer, lovelier she.
Our author seems to have drawn this beautiful image from the French-English
song of Sweet a prittee Bettee, den de moon brighter,
Or scow'r pewder, or silver spoon.

No splendent pewter from the scourer's hand
Comes half so bright -- shea's beauty might ensnare -- shea's beauty might
ensnare
A conqueror'; soul, and made him leave his crown
At random, to be scuffled for by slaves.
Caius Marius.

A miser's soul, and make him leave his bags
At random, to be scuffled for by the Mob.
So radiant is her form, so more than mortal,
That if perfection were with her compared,
This may be styled, in Mr. BAYES'S phrase, the poetical non ultra. Dr. HUMBUG.
'Twould seem imperfect.

Buck. Hold thy lavish tongue,
Or jealousy will mad my raging soul.

Strap. Far as futurity's untravel'd waste This and the following line from
Irene, a tragedy of the sublimest diction in the English language. Dr. HUMBUG.

Lies open to conjecture's dubious ken,
It seems to me thou will not, can not win
The peerless virgin, but by blood and broil:
For MADRIGAL, a Grub-street sonetteer,
Her senses fascinates with magic rhyme.
The bard incessant tunes the sapphic lyre,
And paints her in his song of mien divine.
Well-pleased she hearkens to the praiseful strain,
As venal statesmen to the chink of gold;
And deems herself the goddess he pourtrays.

Buck. Too well, alas! alas! too well I know
Her fond affection for the starvling bard --
Bard did I say? a ballad-monger rather!
A wilful murderer of sense in rhyme --
Now, by the powers! his ditties scarce outvie
The pasted ornaments of cobler's stalls! --
Do we not know that GARRICK has refused DAVID GARRICK, Esquire an actor, and
manager of the theater in Drury Lane, in the 18th century. This great man,
though not above five feet six inches in stature, was the most celebrated, and
universal performer, that ever trod the British, or any other stage in the
known world. In all his theatrical personations he was so exact a copyer of
nature, that it was a proverb in his day, with the best judges of the stage,
Nature and GARRICK are the same. This note, my readers are desired to remember,
is made for the benefit of the lovers of drama, in the year two thousand and
upwards. It would be an affront to the above gentleman's merit and
universality, to add a note, to inform the world who, and what he is; or even
to suppose that his memory would not outlive his theatrical performances, at
least, a brace of centuries.



The horrid fustian he so vainly styles
A tragedy, at which the caitiff swears
That GARRICK is a dolt, a goose, a fool?

Strap. True, my brave friend: would she, like GARRICK too,
Refuse his suit --

Buck. She must; she shall, STRAPADA.
By hell! in spite of all her wayward pride,
I Will have her still -- spite of her self, I Will have her: This may, at first
sight, appear a kind of Tipperarian rhodomontade; but, according to the method
of bringing about many modern marriages, I believe my readers will soon be
convinced, that several young ladies have been drawn into the nuptial state in
spite of their own inclinations: which is all our author means. Dr. HUMBUG.

Though fate, and all the world should join to oppose me:
Or, by the gods, I Will lay a scene of blood,
Shall make this dwelling horrible to nature!
I Will do it! -- bark you, my lord --
Orphan.
Or, by the gods, I Will lay a scene of blood
Shall make her dwelling horrible to nature! --
I Will do it! -- hark you, my friend! -- this very night!
I Will put her to the trial -- should the maid
With uncomplying stubbornness refuse,
On horror's head, horrors accumulate.
Othello.
On horror's head horrors accumulate
Shall wait her mansion -- see this trusty bodkin,
And guess the rest.

Strap. What means my noble friend?

O blood! Iago, blood!
Ibid.
Buck. Blood! blood! STRAPADA, blood! -- by the powers of hell,
-- By the powers of hell
I will be drunk with vengeance.
Regicide. A liquor I never yet heard of.
Dr. HUMBUG.
I will be drunk with vengeance! princely drunk
With blood's rich nectar -- I will murder all,
That suck-in vital air beneath her roof!
Nay not a louse shall 'scape to tell the tidings.

Strap. How! not a louse escape! a single louse!
On what extremes extreme distress impells me.
Brothers. An extreme pretty line!
Dr. HUMBUG.
To what extremes extreme revenge impells thee?
What! turn a murderer ten thousand fold,
To glut thy vengeance on the marbled maid!
Thy inclination to shed blood rides post.
Fatal Secret. If Mr. THEOBALD, at the time of writing this celebrated line,
were not riding post on Pegusus, we may fairly conclude, there is no such beast
as a poetical post-horse.

Dr. HUMBUG.
Thy inclination to shed blood rides post.
Art thou so lost to virtue, to revenge
Thy slighted vows on a poor peaceful tribe;
A harmless people, that have wittingly
Never done thee wrong? -- Now, by my awl I swear,
Such cruelty ensanguin'd speaks a mind
Of temp'rament infernal -- fare thee well!
I Will never hold communion with thee more:
But from the day-book of my dearest friendship
I Will cross thee out -- I love thee yet, BUCKRAMO, -- Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be officer of mine.
Othello.

But, never more be intimate of mine.

Buck. What means STRAPADA?

Strap. Like the faithless boy, A simile as simple, natural, and beautiful, as
ever appeared in the English language. Dr. HUMBUG.

Who has by secret felony despoiled
The feathered parents of their unfledged brood,
To which his partner had an equal claim,
Thus, thus, I ring thee off.
joining his little finger to BUCKRAMO'S.
Buck. O stay! my friend,
A very common tragical expression -- nay, I have known many dramatick heroes
uttering such complaints, when they have been absolutely mad from their first
speech in the play. An instance of this dramatic madness, may be found in a
tragedy, which was published by subscription in the present century. Dr. HUMBUG.
Or thou will run me into madness -- nay,
By all the shades of my great ancestry;
By all thy virtuous friendship to SCOURELLA,
The dame, who give me birth, my more than mother, Oh, my Sciolto! oh, my more
than father! Fair Penitent. Which phrase may probably mean grand father, or
great grand father. HUMBUG.

Thou shall not leave me thus!

Strap. Let go my arm;
My friend, Mr. RONE, has translated it soul; but I am of opinion it ought to
be soal, as there is an antithesis of awl and end in the sequel of the line.
Or, on my soal, this awl shall be thy end.

Buck. But, hear me, noble youth --

Strap. The solemn vow
Has reached the skies, and is recorded there
In characters indelible -- forgo
Thy hold! nor vainly hope to shake my purpose.

Buck. But think upon our friendship --

Strap. Damn our friendship!
What fellowship can virtue have with murder?
Still do thou hold me! -- think on what I Have sworn;
Nor dare provoke the impending blow -- unhand me!
Or, by the gods! -- nay, if you are obstinate,
Take this, and this.
wounds him with his awl.
SCENE II.
BUCKRAMO. I Am hurt -- but not to death:
Ia. What are you hurt, lieutenant?

Cass. Past all surgery.

Othello.
Yet past all surgery -- alas! I Have lost
The dear companion of my early youth;
Life's now not worth a quid -- O, woe is me! -- O woe is me!
TO have seen what I have seen, seeing what I see!
Hamlet.

To Have seen what I have seen, seeing what I see!

SCENE III.
A Parlour. TRULLETTA mournful on a couch; SCULLIONA and SCOURELLA attending:
BUTTONELLI playing on a Jew's Harp, THIMBLETONO on a Strum. Scul. See where the
lone majestic mourner weeps!
Lost even to musick's power -- try, strain each note --
-- -- --
First in low sympathy of sorrow's softness
Sooth her dejected soul -- then start at once
To swells of joy, and storm attention's ear.
Merope.
SEE where she weeps! -- lost even to musick's power --
SCOURELLA! try -- strain every varied note:
First, in low sympathy of sorrow's softness
Sooth her desponding soul -- then start at once
To swells of joy, and storm attention's ear.

SCOURELLA sings. AIR 1. Accompanied by the Jews harp.
This, and the following air, were extracted from that inimitable musical
dialogue, between Messieurs Flute and Trumpet in the same tragedy. Flute. Stay,
stay, despair -- be gone, vain hoper, go;
Sorrow can hear no voice, but that of woe.

Trumpet. Away with your tears where enjoyment should flow.
Did defiance to pain -- let her go, let her go.
Do the gods love complainers? No, no, no.

Flute. Ah! it is in vain to strive! -- farewell, believing;
Death is the sure short road -- to shun deceiving.
-- -- --
Rest and the grave will meet -- but ah! -- till then
Joy flies, the vain pursuit of hopeless men.

As our author has borrowed so largely from the above tragedy, I would refer
the reader to the opening of that play; which, if he apply to the bookseller
for, let me advise him in the cautionary phrase of our modern advertisers, to
be careful to ask for HILL'S Merope.


Vain hoper, begone -- stay, despair:
Despair, stay -- vain hoper, go, go.
For sorrow no accents should hear,
But those of lamenting and woe.
Believing, farewell -- the sure road
Is death all deceiving to shun;
Till placed in our clay-cold abode,
Joy flies man's pursuit like a nun.
AIR 2. Accompanied by the Strum.
Away with your tears, where enjoyment should flow;
Bid defiance to pain -- let her go, let her go:
Do the gods love complainers? No, no.
Away with your tears, from your eyes, have them banged:
Bid defiance to pain, let her go and be hanged;
Let her go, let her go, let her go, let her go,
Let her go, and be hanged, let her go, let her go:
Do the gods love complainers? No, no.
Scul. Away -- she rises -- angels, that have tuned,
Reward the vocal magic of thy pipe.

SCENE IV.
TRULLETTA, SCULLIONA. Trul. When next thy too-officious kindness tries
The harmonious charm of jew's harp, strum, or voice,
Let me have music solemn all and slow,
Sad-suited to my thoughts -- no tidings yet
From my dear father, or my dearer bard?

Scul. Our emissary yet has hardly reached
The street Grubaean, For the benefit of my less learned readers, I must remark
that street Grubaean signifies Grub-street.
residence of bards.

Trul. Ah me! the lazy minutes seem to halt Our heroine seems to be of the same
opinion with Juliet, where she wishes for such a charioteer as Phaeton, etc.
Dr. HUMBUG.

On crutches!

Scul. As just an observation as ever was made. Ibid.
Thus they ever seem to grief.

SCENE V.
TRULLETTA, SCULLIONA, FUSTIANO. Fus. Queen of the verseful kingdom's lord: his
heart's Queen of the kingdom's lord: his heart's high empress.
Merope.

High empress, hail! -- this tender greeting sends
Thy bard enamored -- though his bosom feels
The incessant flame of love's devouring fire,
Though much he wishes to behold thy beauties,
As much, I think, as a fond parent can.
Fair Penitent. I think a very beautiful line.

Dr. HUMBUG.
As much, I think, as a fond lover can,
And bask him in the sunshine of those eyes; A very common tragical phrase.

Yet necessary prudence stays his visit,
Till night has spread her sable mantle over
The azure hemisphere -- this afternoon --
Probably in imitation of Oh horrible! oh horrible! most horrible!
Hamlet.
O horrible to tell! most horrible! --
Nine of the verseful train -- by all the gods,
Not less than nine -- the tuneful sister's number --
Unwary, unintent, uncircumspect,
Or deeply wrapped in meditation, fell
In legal ambush, and were vilely dragged
To spunging dome by slaves, that know no mercy.

Trul. Ice at my conscious heart were warm compared This line, and following
hemestic, from Merope.

With what thou chill'st my soul with! -- hapless nine!
Tear-touch'd, one of AARON HILL'S sublime epithets.
My tear-touch'd eye, in sympathetic woe,
Wails their disaster.

Fus. More I would unfold
Of misery poetic; but my stay
Admits no farther parle -- illumined maid,
Adieu.
Exit.
Trul. O iron-hearted law! what cause
Have bards to curse thy rigor -- SCULLIONA,
Thy arm -- to my sad chamber guide my steps --
Griess rush on griefs, on passions passions roll,
And in the rapid torrent whelm my soul.

End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Street. MADRIGAL. THUS far into the bowels of this street Thus far into
the bowels of this land
We Have marched without impediment.
K. Richard III.

We Have marched without impediment -- O night! This invocation to night is
certainly one of the sublimest pieces that ever was written. Dr. HUMBUG.

Alternate regent of the lapsing hours,
Sister of chaos, ever the upstart sun
And world had being, thou, with sable sway,
Did rule the uncreated mass of things. Did rule the uncreated mass of
things.
Paradise Lost.

What golden 'vantage from thine eyeless reign
To mortals flow! beneath thy friendly veil
The meagre bard often escapes the prying ken
Of lurking catchpole, and eludes the touch This image seems to be borrowed
from that ingenious poem, the Splendid Shilling.

Unhallowed. City prigs, of sober seeming,
Quaff their nocturnal beverige, and reel
Unnotic'd home. The painted courtezan,
Who with her quartern, and the liquid food
Of Indian shrub, repels the keen attacks
Of raging hunger, all the live long day,
Now in full blazon, with alluring leer,
Patroles the slippery streets -- the -- but that lovely vision TRULLETTA
appears at the window.
Forbids all further simile -- she beckons --
He comes, TRULLETTA: most refulgent maid,
Thy MADRIGAL -- with hasty strides he comes --
The comparison of ladies' eyes with the sun is very frequent in tragedy. Among
numberless passages of this kind, that of ROW is not the least poetical, viz.
Those eyes, which could his own fair beams decay,
Might shine for him, and bless the world with day.
Amb. Step. but the thought of our heroine's eyes eclipsing the sun, is
certainly a more striking, and sublime allusion, than ever was yet met with on
the subject of eyes. Dr. HUMBUG.
Now, would the sun, in his meridian glare,
Suffer eclipse from her more radiant eyes.

SCENE II.
MADRIGAL, SCULLIONA. Scul. O! Mr. MADRIGAL, I Am glad you're come. To all
judges of nature, how beautiful must the unaffected simplicity of this line
appear! some of our modern wholesale dealers in fustian, would have expressed
this image in the following words, O bard sublime! thy coming glads my soul.
but how far the simplicity of our image excels the force of such rant, I leave
the learned to determine. Dr. HUMBUG.


Mad. Thanks, gentle SCULLIONA -- for this kindness,
And all thy other courtesies, ever long
I will fulfill my promise -- thy bright charms
Shall be the subject of my tuneful song.
For thee I Will strain each faculty of thought,
Here Is room for meditation, even to madness,
Till the mind burst with thinking.
Fair Penitent.
Till my brain burst with thinking -- every tongue
Shall chaunt the beauteous SCULLIONA'S name.
In verse immortal I Will record thy charms;
And when dear A little poem, or sonnet, which was sung by all Britons, who had
the faculty of humming, or chanting. The sublimity of this little piece was so
great, that the connoissieurs affirmed it to be equal, if not superior to any
of the odes, or sonnets, antiquity can boast. Dr. HUMBUG.
Ally Crocar is forgot,
Thou shall be hum'd, or warbled through each street,
From IIyde Park Corner to Limehousian Hole In plain prose, Limehouse-hole.
.

Scul. Our author, in this scene, has given us a second proof of his knowledge
of human nature, in preferring simplicity of expression to a chain of pompous
words. In most of our modern tragedies, the chamber maid; or, to speak more
politely, the confident, is drawn a person of better sense than the mistress
(which is indeed sometimes the case) and her diction is generally more
elevated; but our author shows his dislike of such practice, by making a
chamber maid speak like a chamber maid. Dr. HUMBUG.
That will be pure! -- but come; TRULLETTA waits.

SCENE III.
A Parlour. MADRIGAL, TRULLETTA. meeting. Mad. My fair TRULLETTA! embracing.


Trul. Oh! my MADRIGAL! embracing.


Mad. Thou nature's whole perfection in one piece! Thou nature's whole
perfection in one piece!
Orphan.

I Will hold thee thus, till we incorporate,
An original image, and of double beauty of any I ever yet met with in the
English language. Dr. HUMBUG.
And make between us an hermaphrodite.
So closely will I clasp thee in my arms,
That the big wedge, which cleaves the knotted oak,
Could hardly rend me from thy loved embrace --
Oh! my TRULLETTA, let me press thy lips,
My eager, my devouring lips to thine,
Devours his lips; eats him with hungry kisses.
Alexander the Great. The expression of eating with hungry kisses is
undoubtedly very sublime; but the same author in his Massacre of Paris, carries
the image yet higher, where he says, And eat your Marguirite with your hungry
eyes. The epithet hungry is frequently used by tragic authors, which may
probably be occasioned by the hunger they so often expeperience. The sublime
Mr. Banks, in his Earl of Essex, has the elegant phrase of hungry nostrils:
with hungry nostrils
waits for my blood,
which last word I am apt to imagine an error of the press: I am of opinion it
ought to be read snuff, as snuff is almost the only food for the nostrils.

Dr. HUMBUG.
And eat thee with my hungry kisses -- Now
Ye envying deities Olympian!
Aquatic! and Infernal! see, behold!
An author of less sagacity, would have only desired the gods to look down. Dr.
HUMBUG.
Look down, look up -- confess -- but speak the truth -- In my opinion a very
reasonable injunction. Ibid.

Say, would you not ungod yourselves, to be
The happier MADRIGAL? to clasp her thus?
Thus, thus to strain her to your panting bosoms?
To suck the Ambrosia of her Hybla lips?
To banquet on her eyes? to be, like me,
This is the most superlatively grandest expression, I have met with in any
dramatic author, and may justly be called, a carrying the English language, as
far as it can possibly go. Dr. HUMBUG.
So more than most superlatively blessed.

Trul. Alas, my MADRIGAL!

Mad. That deep-fetch'd sigh,
Sorrow's sad offspring, speaks thy tender soul
An epithet of vast use, and beauty. Ibid.
Laboring with woe -- thy brilliant eyes appear
Studded with pearly drops -- oh! let me kiss them off,
These richer jewels, than embowell'd lie
In pregnant India's gem-prolific womb -- The most brilliant thought, that ever
issued from the womb of the human brain. Ibid.

Why all this grief? -- and is it thus we meet? --
Yes, I must chide; perforce, must chide thee, fair one:
But oh, our meeting was not like the former!
Fair Penitent. See 38th note of this act.


For, oh! our meeting is not like the former;
When every look, when all our talk was love -- -- And all our talk was love.
Orphan.

Yes, changeful beauty! once there was a time,
When my TRULLETTA rushed into my arms,
Swift as the iron messengers of death,
Forced from the mortal engines, whose wide throats And O! ye mortal engines,
whose wide throats
The immortal Jove's dread clamours counterfeit.
Othello.

The Immortal JOVE'S dread clamours counterfeit.

Trul. Well might thou think my heart encrusted over
With marble; or insensible, as rocks,
Should my unfilial niggard eyes refuse
To sympathize my father's threatened ruin.
Thou know the angry sentence of the law
Hangs heavy over him, like a gathered cloud;
And, ever tomorrow's journeying sun has made
His lucid progress to his noonday summit,
His thread of life, like an unheeded remnant,
Must by the law's fell shears be cut in twain --
Ye gods! what havoc does the Ye gods, what havoc does ambition make
Among your works!
Cato. Our author has certainly given the world the most striking instance of
humanity, and universal benevolence, that was ever known. Though his bread
depends on halter-making, yet this tender image is a sufficient evidence, that
he prefers the welfare of his fellow creatures, to his own private interest.
How few such instances of generosity are to be met with among the trading part
of mankind!

Dr. HUMBUG.
halter make
Among your works!

Mad. Alas! angelic nymph;
Even with a more, far more than filial woe,
I mourn the good old CABBAGINO'S danger:
For, should the fatal noose -- the stinging thought
Alas! has bred ten thousand scorpions here,
And given my very soul a fit of the gripes: This line may possibly admit of a
cavil among some quibbling critics; but there are innumerable dramatic
authorities to justify our author, and incontestably prove the soul is subject
to the disorders of the body. Among such authorities is one of the judicious
Aaron Hill, Esquire, who says in his Merope, And my shocked soul aches at him.
Now if the soul be liable to aches, I would ask these pitiful carpers, the
critics, why it may not be as naturally subject to a fit of the gripes. Dr.
HUMBUG.

That curs^d mercer for a web of velvet --
Web, did I say? by all the gods a remnant!
A paultry remnant! scarce a yard! to bring
Thy venerable father to the tree;
It Is such infernal cruelty, and ire,
My translator, Mr. Rone, has rendered it horse-shoe bearded; but as
circle-bearded is a more genteel and musical epithet, I have given it, as it
now stands in the text.
As circle-bearded Israelites would scorn --
Yes; he shall feel the terrors of my rage --
The slave shall feel -- I Will tear him all to pieces.
By hell's grim king I will -- in black and white --
I Will have a hundred hawkers bellow out,
Before his doors, the venom of my page,
In roar most dreadfully vociferous --
Oh! how I Will gall him -- may this carcass rot Our author, in this spirited
image, which is taken from the Regicide, has, in my opinion, followed the
original too closely; for, with submission to so great a genius as the DOCTOR,
loathsome banquet seems to border a little on the tipperanian idiom. Dr. HUMBUG.

A loathsome banquet to the fowls of heaven,
If ever my breast admit a thought to bound,
A single thought, the progress of my rage.

Trul. May the revengeful bloodhound never feel
A moment's respite from his gouty pangs:
And all the racking pains, that flesh is heir to, -- That flesh is heir to.
Hamlet.

Shall he accumulated underbear.
Mourning Bride.
May he accumulated underbear!
Eternal moths and mildews haunt his shop!
When, over his pipe, the exhilerating juice
In the original it is compound quadruple; which phrase, I apprehend, is not so
just as compound manifold. It is generally supposed that punch is sometimes
made of more ingredients than four; especially when brewed by the three-penny
retailers. Dr. HUMBUG.
Of punch, that compound manifold, he sips,
May my dear father's grinning spectre rise,
And snatch the uplifted nipperkin away
From his untasting lips! when from his glass Our author seems to have had an
eye on the following passage in the dedication to Merope, viz. -- Life's
evening gleam survey,
Nor shake the out-hast'ning sands, nor bid them stay.
It may not be amiss to inform my less knowing readers, that the said
dedication is in rhyme; and that it is indubitably the most sublime, and
poetical dedication in the English language. There are such a variety of
beautiful sentiments, figures, and metaphors in it, that it will bear reading
over a thousand times, For my part, I must ingenuously own, the style is so
very masterly and poetical, that I am not yet acquainted with all its beauties,
though I have studied it like an enigma. Dr. HUMBUG.

Of life th'out-hast'ning sands are shook, may fiends
Hurry the wretch into a hell, more hot
Ten thousandfold than elemental fire:
Then snatch, half-roasted, snatch him to a mount
In icy Zembla's keen-congealing clime:
There let him freeze, ye gods! unpitied freeze, kneels
With shivering limbs, blue nose, and chatt'ring teeth,
A spectacle of horror!

Amen to that, sweet powers!
Othello.
Mad. Amen to that, sweet powers! -- thy filial prayer
Is registered above; and he is doomed
To suffer all thy imprecated curse --
But come, my dearest; dry this crystal sluice!
Thou have been tender over much, and mourned, Thou have been tender overmuch,
and mourned
Even too profusely.
Regicide.

Even too profusely mourned, thy father's danger --
Madam, it is prudent, I confess it is; This, and the two following lines,
verbatim, from the Brothers.

But is it loving, as true lovers ought,
To be so very prudent in our loves?
What interruption this? A tragical interrogatory; which, without the
imputation of plagiarism, may be used by any dramatic writer.


SCENE IV.
MADRIGAL, TRULLETTA, SCULLIONA, SCOURELLA. Scul. Horror on horror!

Scou. O inauspicious hour!

Mad. Ha! what portends
This tristful exclamation?

Scul. I am come
A secret to disclose, that would awake you, And I am come a secret to disclose,
That might awake thee, were thou dead already.
Brothers. If the DOCTOR would be kind enough to give up to the public this
grand restorative nostrum, I am persuaded he would have the thanks of a great
many widows and orphans, who are starving for want of their deceased supporters.

Dr. HUMBUG.

Were you already dead. -- My dearest master --

Scou. Alas! that I should ever live to tell it! -- This interrupted manner of
telling a melancholy story, is used by a variety of tragic authors.


Scul. The best of masters, and the best of friends --

Scou. The sweetest, kindest, gentlest CABBAGINO --

Scul. Is now -- O savage, marble-hearted fate! --

Scou. Is now -- I cannot tell it for my tears --

Scul. A corseful shade. Alamode de Merope.


Mad. Trul. O ye immortal gods! A tragical exclamation -- But why immortal? An
unnecessary epithet, unless intended to convince an audience, that the speaker
does not mean the mortal deities in the upper gallery. Dr. HUMBUG.


Scul. Despairing of reprieve (the turnkey thus
Reports) and nobly scorning to be dragged
A public spectacle up Holborn Hill,
By plenteous draughts of Juniperian juice,
Death-dealing liquid, his undaunted soul,
Freed from corporeal limbo.

Trul. Oh! The vocal picture of grief in miniature, and of great service to
tragic writers, as it frequently helps to set a broken verse on its heroic
legs. For example: But oh, our meeting was not like the former!
Fair Penitent. To touch thee's heaven; but to enjoy thee -- oh,
Thou nature's, etc.
Orphan. And I Am relapsed into a coward -- oh,
Bear me, etc.
Abra-Mule.


Mad. Oh!

Scul. Scou. Oh!

Mad. The deed was worthy of a Roman soul: This line is borrowed, but I cannot
recollect from whom. Dr. HUMBUG.

And sad necessity makes all things just. A maxim, that may probably be of some
comfort to future criminals at the foot of the gallows -- I had almost forgot
to inform the reader, this line is in Merope.


Trul. Oh! it is too much; and life and I are lost. This beautiful line may be
found in Merope also.
faints.

Mad. Alas! she faints: she dies: -- SCOURELLA, haste;
Swift as a witch upon a broomstick fly;
Nay, swifter than the lightning's swiftest speed,
And bring a son of Galen to her aid -- Among the many bleeding heroines I have
seen on the British stage, I remember but one, whose lover had the presence of
mind to call an Aesculapian to her assistance. If the reader can recollect the
lady, I need not inform him that the dedication of our hero's tragedy is an
imitation of the vast reward to the surgeon, whose art should restore her.

The dedication of my tragic piece
To him, who saves her -- draw thy smelling phial,
And try the odoriferous charm to lure
Her fleeting spirit back -- alas! she is gone!
Gone! irrecoverably gone -- she stiffens
A monument of grief -- her eyes have lost
Their fire -- ah! where is that Promethean heat, -- Where is that Promethean
heat
That can thy light relumine!
Othello.

That can their light relumine? -- wake, my fair!
Shake off that ghastly ravisher, grim death;
Whose ruffian arms detain thee in his clasp,
Or thy bard rushes on his point to join thee -- Or Portius rushes on his sword
to join thee.
Cato.

She hears -- the fair one hears my well-known voice --
She breathes -- she wakes -- returning color 'gins
T'illume her reddening cheek.

Trul. Ill-fated hour!
Undone TRULLETTA!

Mad. Pious maid! forbear
This heartfelt woe -- to her apartment lead --
I Will hence, and for the interment of thy sire
Make preparation -- lovely nymph! farewell!
It Is heaven to have thee; and without thee hell. This line is taken from the
Orphan -- Methinks so beautiful a thought should be clothed in a more
grammatical dress. Dr. HUMBUG.


End of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Street. STRAPADA. A Yearning fondness hangs about me still: A woman's
softness bangs about me still.
Fair Penitent.

I Would give the empire of ten thousand worlds Our author could not have given a
finer demonstration of the virtuous and philosophical character of STRAPADA,
than in this and the following line. I could wish that all mankind would
imitate our virtuous cobbler in the conscientious observance of his vow. He has
so strict a regard to what he has sworn, that he would even give the empires of
ten thousand worlds for the bare privilege of unswearing a rash oath. The
height of that yearning fondness to BUCKRAMO, as our author most pathetically
expresses it, could not be more strongly drawn, than in these two happy lines.
Dr. HUMBUG.

For privilege to unswear what I have sworn --
His father was my friend, and taught me first, This and the two succeeding
lines are a distant imitation of somewhat in the character of Horatio, in the
Fair Penitent.

With curved awl, to pierce the rugged foal,
And join the horny bristle to the thread.
Such benefits demand no vulgar gratitude --
His mother too -- be hushed, my fluttering soul -- A tragical lullaby,
frequently met with in drama. Dr. HUMBUG.

GOOSINO tells me, he resolves on blood;
A rival's blood: yet, which of them must fall
None but the Olympian gods alone can tell.
The event of battle, like a growing foetus,
Lies 'prison'd in futurity's dark womb,
Till midwife time do bring it into birth --
Whoever the conqueror, BUCKRAMO dies;
For should he MADRIGAL'S quietus make It would be loss of time to tell the
reader this image is borrowed from Shakespeare.

With a bare bodkin, justice acts the second,
And brings the victor to the shameful tree --
It is resolved This laconic sentiment may be found in almost every tragedy,
but it is a plagiarism from the speech of Prince Prettyman in the Rehearsal.
-- I Will watch him to prevent
His rage, and save him from the double danger
Of steel and hempen noose -- It shall be so: It shall be so:
Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.
Hamlet.

Madness in tailors must not unwatch'd go.

SCENE II.
STRAPADA, BUCKRAMO. Buck. My ears deceive me, or I heard the voice
Of dear STRAPADA once; but, now alas!
No more my friend -- it is he -- avenging steel! puts up his bodkin.
Rest here unseen -- his laboring mind is locked
In contemplation's closest cell -- I Will try
To rouse him from this trance of thought -- what, ho!
STRAPADA!

Strap. Ha! -- BUCKRAMO! -- Thou wast once
My trustiest friend: in my heart's core I wore thee;
Ay in my heart of hearts. In my heart's core I Will wear him;
Ay, in my heart of hearts.
Ibid. If we admit the heart to be formed like an onion, I suppose this phrase
means the innermost coat.

Dr. HUMBUG.


Buck. Ammonian JOVE! As I cannot, with all my sagacity as an editor, trace any
imitation of the following prayer, I must conclude it to be an original. Dr.
HUMBUG.
kneeling.
And all ye gods, and goddesses: peruse
The folio of my past and present thoughts!
Peruse it page by page, or in the way
Of modern connoissieurs, videlicet,
Run over contents and index -- if you find
A wish, unless to have TRULLETTA mine,
Preferred to good STRAPADA'S dearest friendship,
Hurl my thrice-thankless spirit vengeful down
Into the infernal pitchy lake, prepared
For negro-soul'd ingratitude.

Strap. By Saturn! -- By heaven!
His father's in his face.
Fair Penitent.

His mother's in his face -- the dear SCOURELLA --
It is too much to bear -- spite of my vow
This conflict in the bosom of Strapada plainly shows, that our author designed
to draw him a man, as well as a philosopher; two characters, which seldom meet
in the same person; especially in dramatic philosophers. The struggle is so
great, that the tenderness of the man overcomes the stiffness of the sage; and
compells him to break that vow, which, a few minutes ago, he would have given
the empire of so many thousand worlds to forswear with impunity. In the midst
of the conflict, we still find him so great a friend to virtue, that he only
pardons his repenting friend, on condition of his being virtuous. That this
frailty, in regard to his vow, may not appear a blemish in the character of our
heroic cobbler, I must beg leave to inform my readers, that such breach of rash
vows, in dramatic heroes, has seldom or never been counted criminal. I could
produce many instances of such frailty; that of Pierre in Venice Preserved may
suffice, without quoting further authorities. Dr. HUMBUG.
I must, I must relent -- there is a way
To reinstate thee in my love: be virtuous.
The friends of virtue are STRAPADA'S friends --
Forgo thy black design on MADRIGAL,
And be as dear as ever -- what incites thee
To seek his blood?

Buck. He robs me of my mistress:
And in return I rob him of his life.
The robber rob, and robbery grows virtue. Our author seems to have had in view
that moral and musical line, viz. Deceive deceivers, and deceit grows virtue.
Merope.


Strap. The subtlety of schools may paint this maxim;
The schools, where learned error stalks abroad -- Faction stalks abroad
In such gigantic strides.
Virginia. A sentiment that stalks very majestically in the road of blank verse.

Dr. HUMBUG.

With such gigantic strides, in wisdom's garb;
But truth, and sound philosophy, disclaim
The paultry dawbing -- know, blood thirsty youth!
Know, thou death's orator! dread advocate O thou death's orator! Dread advocate
For bowelless severity!
Brothers. A man must have no bowels, who cannot feel the force of these
wonderful metaphors.

Dr. HUMBUG.

For bowelless severity! forgiveness
Is greater, wiser, manlier bravery
Than wild revenge.

Buck. Ha! whither would thou lead me?

Strap. To virtue, to forgiveness -- talk no more
Of fell revenge.

Buck. Not talk of it, STRAPADA?
I Will talk of it, though hell itself should gape I Will talk of it though hell itself
should gape,
And bid me hold my peace.
Hamlet.

And bid me hold my peace -- not talk of it?
Not of revenge? the attribute of the gods, Revenge the attribute of gods; they
stamped it
With their great image on our natures.
Venice Preserved.

Who stamp it in our natures to impell
Mankind to noblest darings.

Strap. Rather call it
The attribute of devils, stamped on man
To draw deluded mortals to destruction.

Buck. No more, no more -- tempt me no more in vain -- No more, no more --
tempt me no more in vain.
Black Prince.

My soul is wrought to the sublimest rage My soul is wrought to the sublimest
rage
Of horrible revenge.
Regicide. A very sublime way of telling the world he is in a damned passion.
This image, in my opinion, would be more proper and intelligible, if the word
rage were altered to pitch.

Dr. HUMBUG.

Of horrible revenge.

Strap. And thou art fixed
On bloody purpose?

Buck. Fixed as Cambrian mountain
On its own base, or gaming lords on ruin. Our author seems to be led away by
the prevailing opinion of Gaming, which paints it as the effect of idleness and
prodigality; but I am not yet so much a slave to vulgar prejudice, as to
suppose that idleness and prodigality are the sources of Gaming. Yet should we
judge of its merits, from its prevalency in the fashionable world, we might
rather esteem it to be the effect of a laudable desire of acquiring riches, and
a praiseworthy calling; under which character the worst of men insinuate
themselves into the company of gentlemen, and nobles. And I am of opinion that
the philosopher's stone (notwithstanding all the labors of the chemical tribe)
will be found, if ever it be found, by a gaming projector. Dr. HUMBUG.


Strap. Then all my flattering hopes of thy reclaim
Are lost; and my shocked soul aches at thee And my shocked soul aches at him.
Merope. See note 23 of the second act.


: yet
Attend my last request -- defer thy purpose,
Till the cold earth, in her parental bosom,
Receive thy venerable master's corse.
Ever long the sad procession will begin:
Then do not with unhallowed broil profane
The dread solemnity of funeral rites:
But lend thy kind assistance to support
Thy sorrowing mistress through the mournful scence.
This thou will promise?

Buck. By yon silver lamp, Less metaphorically speaking, the moon.

Which stringless hangs, or hangs by string unseen
In azure firmament, I will!

Strap. Till then farewell!

SCENE III.
BUCKRAMO. Farewell! -- till then farewell! -- so hot, my friend?
So very hot? -- no matter -- let him cool --
He thinks my reason a mere babe, a suckling,
To need the leading-strings of his advice --
But to the interment -- if I should appear
In this unseemly dress, they will think I come
To laugh and fleer at their solemnity. To fleer and scorn at our solemnity.
Romeo and Juliet.

Custom, that great, that venerable tyrant Custom, a venerable tyrant.
Tancred and Sigismunda.

On such occasions, asks, requires, demands
A coat -- a coat! -- alas! -- I have no coat. In this, and the four following
lines, our author has imitated the complaint of Othello for the loss of his
wife.

Oh insupportable! -- oh heavy hour!
Methinks it now should be a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at the alteration of my dress --
Of all superfluous cloth necessity Buckramo's condition seems to resemble that
of Sharp in the Lying Valet.

Has stripped me. My incarcerated coat
Lies in that infidel confinement, whence Probably in the pawn-broker's custody
-- This thought has some distant resemblance of, That undiscovered country from
whose bourn
No traveller returns.
Hamlet.

No captive ever returns unransom'd -- how
To fetch the prisoner thence puzzles the thought --
Lost in a labyrinth, I wander on
The want of these poetical clews are often complained off by buskined heroes.
Dr. HUMBUG.
Without a clew to guide -- O dark estate
Of dull mortality! where reptile man,
With all his boasted intuition, is
More blind than reptile mole -- GOOSINO'S counsel
Must guide me through this maze.

SCENE IV.
An apartment hung with black. TRULLETTA. weeping over a coffin. -- -- Hail
venerable ghost!
Hail heart-wept Manes of my murdered lord!
Merope. O earth-wrong'd goodness!
Ibid.
Hail venerable ghost!
Hail heart-wept Manes of my murdered sire!
O earth-wrong'd goodness! -- in Newgatian cell,
This inimitable description of Newgate is taken (with very little alteration)
from the Brothers.
That subterranean sepulcher of peace,
That home of horror, hideous nest of crimes,
Guilt's first sad stage in her dark road to hell,
Whose thick-barr'd, sunless passages for air
Do keep alive the wretch, that longs to die,
Was thy majestic eye-beam closed in blood.
Merope. A very majestic description of murder; but rather too much on the
sublime for common capacities. -- In compassion to the benighted understandings
of my countrymen in general, I could with the publisher of the sublime tragedy
of Merope would, in his next edition of that wonderful production, annex a
glossary, that the beauties of that piece might be more universally understood,
and comprehended by those, who have not had the good fortune of an academical
education.

Dr. HUMBUG.
Was thy majestic eye-beam closed in gin;
In the 18th century, the inhabitants of Great Britain were very much addicted
to drinking a liquid, called Geneva; or, according to its usual abbreviation,
gin, which was a slow, but sure poison. They swallowed it, as the Turks do
opium, merely for the sake of intoxication. The consumption of this liquid was
so great, that some thousands of poisoners general, distinguished by the modest
appellation of distillers, got their livelihood; nay, some of them amassed
immense fortunes by the composition of this inebriating spirit. So great was
the skill of these chemical poisoners, that they could extract this
intoxicating liquor from molosses, juniper berries, turpentine; nay, I believe,
had they set about it, from the upper leathers of old shoes; but the chief, and
most benefical principles, from which they could possibly draw this fatal
juice, were wheat, barley, or other grain. In the years 1757 and 1758, on
account of the real, or artificial scarcity of grain in England, these gentry
were prohibited the use of it, which so affected the distillery, that, happily
for the nation, several of its professors were obliged to leave off their
pernicious trades, and launch into less destructive callings. During such
prohibition it was remarked, that human excrement, both a priori and a
posteriori bore an advanced price, which might probably arise from the use of
these fragrant materials in distillery. This conjecture is not at all
unnatural, as bread and porter, after they have undergone the internal
operations, must still retain some remaining part of their wheaten and malten
qualities. For my part, I am almost confirmed in this opinion, from the near
analogy of flavor between gin, and that more solid species of excrement, on
which the honors of knighthood has been time immemorial conferred. After so
long a note, it will be almost unnecessary to prove the truth and propriety of
our author's stiling gin, the bliss and bane of human life; especially as
drunkenness seems to be the primary happiness of the present age. This note I
have written partly for the present, and partly for the future tense.

Dr. HUMBUG.
In gin, that bliss, and bane of human life --
O could my pious drops recall thy breath,
My sluicing eyes should pour such cataracts This seems to have been drawn from
the following beautiful lines: Pouring forth tears at such a lavish rate,
That were the world on fire, they might have drowned
The wrath of beaven, and quenched the mighty ruin.
Mithridates.

Of ceaseless tears, as would redeluge earth,
And pickle the huge mass in human brine --
The napping of the gods is very frequently intimated by tragic authors. Dr.
HUMBUG.
O all ye sleeping gods! why did you thus
Nod over your charge supine, and suffer one,
So sagely formed, to close his death-shrunk reign, Sagely-form'd, and
death-shrunk reign: two dramatic flourishes of the author of Merope.

By copious swill of gin lethiferous?
Ye should have dashed the untasted moisture from him -- Did he not dash the
untasted moisture from him.
Cato.

But hence this profanation! it is impiety
To question the just gods, since reason's line And reason's line wants depth
to sound heaven's will.
Merope. Here are two technical terms, viz. line and sound, which it behooves me
to explain -- The line in the text is a lead or deep sea line, a species of
cordage, about three quarters of an inch in circumference; to which is fixed a
quantity of lead to make it gravitate, or sink to the bottom more
expeditiously, when thrown into the sea to find the depth of water; which is
called sounding. This, by the by, is a kind of proof that Mr. HILL imagined the
will of heaven to lie below, and not, as commonly supposed, above. If Mr. HILL,
in this remarkable image, had written length instead of depth, it would have
been much more clear and intelligible; but as obscure phrases are generally
more poetical than common ones, Mr. HILL was undoubtedly in the right to give
the word, as it now stands in the text.



Wants depth to sound the Olympian will.

SCENE V.
TRULLETTA, GHOST. Some of our modern connoissieurs in drama mistakenly
suppose, a ghost is a kind of unnecessary agent in tragedy. To those learned
gentlemen, who are of such infidel opinion, I beg leave to recommend the
authority of no less ingenious and judicious a writer, than Mr. JOHN GAY, of
facetious memory, who in his What do you call it, puts into the mouth of the
sagacious Sir Roger this conclusive argument, on the necessity of ghosts in
dramatic exhibitions, viz. A play without a ghost is like -- is like -- egad it
is like nothing. Dr. HUMBUG.
Trul. Dread powers!
What would your awful messenger? A seeming imitation of Ye heavenly guards,
what would your gracious figure!
Hamlet.


Ghost. I am
Thy father's spirit, doomed for many years
To fry in liquid lakes of subtlest fire,
T'attone my manifold, my deadly sins
Of cabbage, and high bills.

Trul. Alas! poor ghost!

Ghost. My furlo from my prisonhouse is short:
Brief let me be -- I come to warn my child
Against -- but hark! the infernal boatswain calls! A whistle within.
He pipes me hence! -- my wasted respite grants
No longer stay -- again! -- relentless dog!
I come. -- but this short prayer -- not for my self;
Not for my self, but thee -- hear me, all-gracious --

SCENE VI.
TRULLETTA. It Is wanting what should follow -- Jove should follow; An imitation
of Osmyn's complaint in the Mourning Bride.

But it is torn off -- why should that word alone
Be torn from his petition? Quere, whether a word, with as much propriety, may
be said to be torn off from a verbal, as from a written petition? -- This I
recommend as a question to be debated by a certain disputing society. Dr.
HUMBUG.
-- why, indeed?

SCENE VII. This, and the two foregoing scenes, (in imitation of many of our
modern tragedies) appear to be introduced on Mr. Bayes's principle, viz. "What
a devil is the plot good for but to bring in fine things?"

MADRIGAL, TRULLETTA. Mad. Hail to you horrors! hail thou house of death! Hail
to you horrors! hail thou house of death?
And thou, the lovely mistress of these shades.
Fair Penitent.

And thou, the mournful mistress of these shades! --
But, ha! what means this quivering in thy limbs?
This terror in thy eyes? these ghastly looks?
This image is taken from the greatest connoissieur in human nature that ever
existed, I mean our inimitable SHAKESPEARE.
Even such a form, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
Drew PRIAM'S curtain in the dead of night,
And told the mournful tale of blazing Troy.

Trul. Alas! some sudden ruin waits TRULLETTA --
My father's spirit has been here to warn me
Against something fatal, but I know not what;
For just as he began the tender caution,
A noise, not much unlike the catcall's knell,
Abridg'd the mournful tale, and down he sunk
Reluctant; yet obedient to the sound.

Mad. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange! This line from Hamlet.

The world's last groan, wrapped in surrounding fires, This line, and succeeding
hemistic, from Merope.

Had less amazed me! -- was he clothed, or naked?

Trul. Clothed in his 'custom'd garb from top to toe.

Mad. Wore he his beaver on his head? -- or cap
With cat-skin lined?

Trul. His head armed cap a-pe.

Mad. With, or without his apron?

Trul. With it, Love!

Mad. His sandals -- shoes, or slippers?

Trul. One of each.

Mad. His beard was red?

Trul. It was, as thou have seen it,
Almost the color of the rising moon.

Mad. Seemed it not singed? The above interrogatories, with the major part of
the foregoing scene between TRULLETTA and the ghost, an imitation of Hamlet.


Trul. Not in the least.

Mad. That Is strange! --
I would I had been there!
Hamlet.
I would I had been here! -- it must portend
Some festinating evil -- but to whom,
Or what, my comprehension fathoms not: It has been often observed, that
mechanics generally speak in the terms of their respective callings. The word
fathoms is a proof, that our author is not free from this almost-universal
absurdity. Dr. HUMBUG.

This is however sure, so sage a ghost
Would hardly come on an unmeaning errand.
But more of this hereafter -- come, my Love!
The sad procession waits -- now summon all
Thy reason's fortitude to grapple with
Affliction's potence -- hark! -- (Bell sounds.) that dreadful knell
O CABBAGINO, is thy passing bell.

A Procession.

End of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
An Apartment. MADRIGAL, TRULLETTA. Mad. THY last sad duties to thy sire are
paid:
The grave has opened its consecrated maw
To swallow down thy father's hallowed corse.
For the benefit of our less learned readers, we have thought proper to
signify, that the Stygian tar is Charon, the owner of the infernal ferry boat.
The Stygian tar no longer can refuse
His spirit passage to the Elysian shades.

SCENE II.
MADRIGAL, TRULLETTA, SCULLIONA. Scul. Oh! Sir, these wretched eyes have newly
seen
BUCKRAMO skulking 'hind a cobler's stall.
Some hint's officious note had reached his ear Those who are acquainted with
the sublimity of Mr. HILL'S style, need not be informed from whom this line is
borrowed. Dr. HUMBUG.

That you was here -- In his right hand he bore,
Most terrible to tell! a glittering bodkin;
And asked, if I had seen you: I replied,
(Forgive me, Jove, the pious falsehood!) no:
On which, with sullen aspect, he rejoined;
"Well! I may meet him ever the noon of night." That is, I presume, when the
moon is in her meridian, and not as commonly supposed, at midnight -- Many
tragic authors are fond of this beautiful phrase. Dr. HUMBUG. Lean wolves
forget to bowl at night's pale noon.
Theodosius. But see where silent, as the noon of night,
These lovers lie.
Regicide.


Mad. Where is the stall, my gentle SCULLIONA?
This line, and the remaining part of the speech from Hamlet. Our hero seems to
be in greater earnest than the young Dane, as he flies with greater expedition
to his revenge.
Haste me to know it, that I with wings as swift
As meditation, or the thoughts of love,
May fly to my revenge.

Trul. A breathless horror I am persuaded our author would scarce have ventured
on this expression, if he had not found it in so correct a writer, as the
author of Eugenia, for fear of incurring the charge of an Iricism. How
breathless horror can heave panting at the heart, is not very obvious to human
understandings; but Mr. Francis must have undoubtedly been satisfied of the
possibility of such an effect, of he would hardly have made use of the
expression. Dr. HUMBUG.

Heaves panting at my heart! -- Indeed, my Love,
You must not hence to night: the time is big
With danger.

Mad. What! be cooped within these walls;
Through fear of one base cross-legg'd animal,
But the ninth part of manhood? -- by Alcides!
Were there a hundred of the prick-louse tribe,
With each a hundred bodkins in his hands,
I could, with steadfast, and advancing scorn, I could with steadfast, and
advancing scorn,
Look in death's face full-sighted.
Merope. What could a DRAWCANSIR have said more?



Stare in each phyz, full-sighted -- I Will be gone,
And sacrifice a hecatomb of tailors And sacrifice a hecatomb of priests.
Victim.

Waked wrath, every body knows, is a phrase of Shakespeare.
To my waked wrath, while mercy's faintest glympse
Shall shun to reach them. And mercy's faintest glympse shall shun to reach me.
Merope. Happy was it for literature, that this great line did not shun to
reach the sublime skill of Aaron Hill, Esquire.

Dr. HUMBUG.


Trul. MADRIGAL! forbear,
And do not rush on such eventful broil.

Mad. If all their lice were lives, If all his hairs were lives, my great
revenge
Has stomach for them all.
Othello.
my great revenge
Has stomach for them all.

Trul. And can thou leave me,
Disconsolate to mourn thy rashness? -- have thou
So soon forgot me?

Mad. Do not rive my heart Why will you rive my heart with such expressions?
Cato.

With such unkind expressions -- Did thou say
Forget thee? -- much indeed must be forgot, -- Much must be forgot,
Ever Tancred can forget his Sigismunda?
Tan. and Sigis.

Ever MADRIGAL forget his fair TRULLETTA --
The gods, that pry into the close recesses
Of every heart, can evidence the love,
The wondrous love I bear thee -- Now, even now,
A flow of fondness gushes from my eyes:
And did not honor's call command me hence,
I would not leave thee for the laurell'd wreath,
That binds a MILTON'S, or a SHAKESPEARE'S brow; The sirnames of two bards, that
will be an honor to Great Britain as long as her present language is known.
The first the greatest epic poet that ever existed; the last so great a
dramatic genius. that to him (to imitate his own phrase) -- All the NINE did
seem to set their seals,
To give the world assurance of a bard.
To this note Dr. HUMBUG has added, I am sorry to inform the world, these two
immortal men were such latitudinarians in morals, that the former was a rebel,
and the latter a deer-stealer.

But, throwing thus my arms about thy neck, If, throwing thus my arms about thy
neck,
I play the boy, and blubber in thy bosom:
Oh, I shall drown thee with my sorrows.
Venice Preserved.

Would play the boy, and blubber in thy bosom
Till I had drowned thee with my streaming tears.

Trul. And is it possible that thou should love,
Yet leave me thus inhumanly?

Mad. Forbear Cast to the ground this unprevailing woe.
Hamlet.

This unprevailing woe -- Alas! it is more
Than death to see thee weep! An expression dragged into almost every tragedy.
-- but we must part --
O! I could curse this idle bubble, honor;
This fashionable frenzy, that enslaves
The mob polite, that tears me from thy arms? --
Farewell, my Love! -- why do thou hang upon me? --
Release me! give me way! -- let go my arm!

Trul. Thou shall not leave me.

Mad. Shall not! have a care;
Thou Wilt wake the slumbering lion in my breast: Our author has borrowed this
image, but I cannot satisfy she reader's curiosity from whence. Dr. HUMBUG.

Do not provoke my rage too far -- thou know
My hasty temper -- quit thy stubborn hold,
Or, by the gods, I Will force thee to forego it!

Trul. Behold my streaming eyes --

Mad. Ha! shall the tears This hemistic, and the four following lines, which,
for their sublimity, may be ranked with any in the English language, are taken
verbatim from Boadicia.

Of abject importunity detain me,
While vengeance, striding from his grizly den
With fell impatience, grinds his iron teeth,
And waits my nod, to satisfy his hunger? --
Not all the tears, that ever yet were shed,
Could stop my rapid course -- May JOVE exhaust -- May heaven exhaust
Its thunders on my head; may hell disgorge
Infernal plagues to blast me, if I cease
To persecute the caitif till his blood
Assuage my parched revenge.
Regicide.

His thunder on my head! may hell disgorge
Infernal plagues to blast me, if I cease
To persecute the Prick-louse, till his blood
Assuage my parched revenge -- Oh! my TRULLETTA! -- Oh Rossano!
Or give me way, or you are no more my friend.
Fair Penitent.

Or give me way; or you are no more my friend.

Trul. Help, SCULLIONA! SCULLIONA, help
To save my raging bard!

Mad. To save me so, -- To save him so,
Were but to lose him surer.
Merope. Very sublime and laconic!

Dr. HUMBUG.

Were but to lose me surer -- quit me, fair ones!

Trul. For pity's sake --

Mad. With thee a kneeling world As I cannot recollect from what author I have
borrowed this sentiment, I should take it as a favor, if the said author, or
his ghost would give me a letter (post paid) to inform me in which of his
performances it may be found; in which case I assure him, that honorable
mention shall be made of it in the next publication of this tragedy, if my
bookseller have the good fortune to get off the present edition, and courage to
venture on a second.

Should sue in vain -- Unhand me, gentlewomen! -- Unhand me, gentlemen;
By heaven, I Will make a ghost of him that lets me.
Hamlet.

By hell! I Will make a ghost of her that lets me! --
Nay it is in vain to strive -- no force can hold me --
Let BROUGHTON, or let SLACK do what he may, This, and the following line, a
parody from the tragedy last mentioned. As these two heroes are so universally
known, it would be loss of time to say any thing about them. Dr. HUM.

The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
breaks from them.
SCENE III.
TRULLETTA, SCULLIONA. Trul. Then go, inhuman bard! begone for ever --
I vainly hoped TRULLETTA'S eyes had power
To check the impetuous sallies of his rage --
So have I heard, with equal suddenness, This simile, which, for its beauty,
propriety, elegance, (and I may justly add, conciseness) for it only consists
of twelve lines, may be called the masterpiece of simile. Allowing the
alterations of scate for dolphin, and lobster for whale; it is almost verbatim
as in the sublime original, which may be found in the close of the third act of
Abra-Mule, a tragedy written by a Levitical play-wright. -- My punning friend,
on reading this simile, replied, " So, I see you understand TRAP."

Ebbing prodigiously the sea withdraw,
And quite defenseless left the scaly race.
The huge scate, which ever while with wanton pride
Spread his broad fins, and lashed the foaming tide,
Vainly essayed to suck the faithless flood
With heaving gills, and tumbled in the mud.
The lobsters, whose great trunks the stars could reach
Flounc'd their huge claws, and panted on the beach.
So have my hopes, whose waves ever while ran over,
And to the skies my towering wishes bore,
Retired, and left me gasping on the shore.

SCENE IV.
The Street. MADRIGAL. Where is this hero, famous and renowned
For wronging innocence, and breaking vows.
Orphan.
Where is this hero, famous and renowned
For killing vermin, and for botching clothes? --
What ho! BUCKRAMO!

SCENE V.
MADRIGAL, BUCKRAMO. Buck. Ha! who calls BUCKRAMO,
With lungs so loud, and vehemence so great?
Is it the voice of thunder, or of man? Buckramo seems to be in the same
perplexity with Calista, where she says, Is it the voice of thunder, or my
father?
Fair Penitent. That such mistake in sounds may not appear unnatural, to the
tragic already quoted, I shall add a comic authority, which comes from the
mouth of no less ingenious a personage, than Mr. Scrub in the Stratagem.
Archer. "Did you hear nothing of Mrs. Sullen?"

Scrub. "I did hear something that sounded that way, but whether it was Sullen
or Dorinda I could not distinguish."




Mad. Of one, that comes to scourge thy insolence,
Presuming arrogant! unlettered slave! The altercation in this scene between
our two heroes, seems to be a distant imitation of that spirited conference
between Horatio and Lothario in the Fair Penitent.

Thou little more than a bare tithe of manhood!

Buck. The lewdest sland'rer, that ever broached abuse, One would naturally
imagine from this verse, that Mr. Theobald, whom envy itself (notwithstanding
Pope's sarcasm, viz. SHAKESPEARE of TIBBALD sore) must allow to be a judicious
editor, had been a tapster, as well as a critic and play-wright -- The curious
reader may find the above image in the Fatal Secret. Dr. HUMBUG.

Came short of this -- Take note, take note, gods, Take note, take note, O
world.
Othello.

Of this reproachful calumny -- This railer,
With breath envenomed, impiously affirms,
Your human figures are but decimals,
But tithes of manhood -- Vile, licentious cur!
The very dogs would spurn thy wretched carcass;
Because -- it scarce would furnish out a meal.
Go hence! buy food! and get thee into flesh! -- buy food and get thee into
flesh.
Romeo and Juliet

'T would grieve my very soul to grace a gibbet
For killing but a shadow.

Mad. This from thee!
Thou seeming semblance of the human form,
Made from the shreds, and clippings of mankind! A king of shreds and patch^^.
Hamlet.

Are not thy cross-legg'd tribe th'unsifted mold,
The dross, the leavings of humanity?
Nay, by the powers! your composition is
Of baser matter still, the lumpish dregs,
The refuse vile of animal creation! The critics, a set of snarling people,
that right or wrong, must always be finding fault; have established it for a
standing rule, that dramatic heroes must never be allowed to degenerate into
Billingsgate scolds. If authorities were necessary to refute this absurd
restriction, I could bring a whole string of examples from our best
play-wrights, ancient and modern, to prove the legality of sarcastic raillery
and altercation in tragedy. The immortal SHAKESPEARE makes his Danish hero call
his father-uncle-sovereign A cutpurse of the empire.
A king of shreds and patches.
A vice of kings.
and a great many other names. ROW makes Lothario call his opponent a
tavern-bully, slave, villain, beggar, parasite, etc. These authorities (to
mention no others) will certainly justify the use of a few sarcastic
appellations. Dr. HUMBUG.


Buck. Do thou compare the fashioners of man
With these base botchers of the verseful train?
What are ye but a shrivel'd, half-starv'd race
Of living skeletons? shadows of shadows?
With brains of whirligigs, and limbs of reeds?
A cringing, lying, snarling, monkey tribe, Probably an imitation of A
skipping, dancing, worthless tribe you are.
Fair Penitent.

That, pack-horse like, jogg through the stage of life,
Proud of your senseless jingle?

Mad. Awful shades
Of HOMER, SOPHOCLES, EURIPIDES, A string of versysiers ancient and modern.

VIRGIL, and HORACE, MILTON, SHAKESPEARE, POPE,
Hear this blasphemer of the gods and you!
Was it for this ye toiled, incessant toiled,
To polish, and refine that lump of oar,
The mind? -- immortal shades! ye gods on earth! kneels.
Look down from your blessed thrones, or laurel groves,
And make this sland'rer feel, to poet's ears,
How sharper, than a serpent's tooth, it is How sharper than a serpent's tooth
it is,
To have a thankless child.
King Lear.

To hear a thankless railer -- rises.
Mark me, caitif!
No single life can expiation make
For this abuse -- choose thou a hundred Knights
Of Cabbage, skilled in chivalry and arms;
My self, in opposition, will select
As many Garretters -- To morrow night,
At twelve, our different prowess shall be tried
On Smithfield's flinty plains -- Dare ye the combat?

Buck. What is beyond the daring of my tribe?
Why, I will meet thee at West-Smithfield then. Why, I will meet thee at
Philippi then!
Julius Caesar.


SCENE VI.
MADRIGAL. Tomorrow -- oh! my better stars, to morrow! -- I cannot help taking
notice that our hero's address to the stars is much more rational, than that of
Lothario, who says, Tomorrow -- oh, my better stars, tomorrow
Exert your influence, shine strongly for me!
Fair Penitent. The combat proposed by the Genoese duelists was to be at ten in
the morning; wherefore a petition for the stars to shine strongly for him in
the forenoon, must certainly border a little on the absurd. Our author was
within an ace of falling into Mr. ROWE'S mistake; but perceiving the blunder,
he sensibly checks himself, and adds, My gracious stars, I mean tomorrow night.
Dr. HUMBUG.

(My gracious stars! I mean tomorrow night)
Exert your influence! shine strongly for me! --
But, wherefore should I doubt? -- now will I steal
To my dear Love, and with assuasive sounds
Allay her sorrow's ferment -- knocks at the door.
Gone to sleep! --
She cannot yet! -- again -- once more --
knocks.
SCULLIONA. (at the window) Who Is there, Flo. Whose there,
That comes so rudely to disturb our rest?

Cas. It Is I.

Orphan.

That comes so rudely to disturb the house?

Mad. It Is I -- the bard.

Scul. You have no business here;
My mistress never will see you more -- good night.

Mad. Blast to my soul's best hope! Blast to my soul's best hope.
Merope. A very poetical not of interjection.

Dr. HUMBUG.
-- never see me more! --
Chaos is come again Chaos is come again.
Othello.
-- and I am -- nothing -- I now am -- nothing.
Orphan.

Henceforth I Will live a sad recluse from man,
And in some shady grove, or lonely cell,
Or garret of stupendous height, enclosed,
(Retirements blessed!) where CLIO, heavenly muse,
To whom the rapturous charms of song pertain,
Holds frequent visitation, will I write
Ten thousand ditties in TRULLETTA'S praise --
TRULLETTA! most irradiate nymph, in whom
Perfection centers: in whose form the gods
Infused an angel's soul: whose fulgent eyes,
With brilliant sparkle, strike adorers through
The heart, the lights, the liver, and the -- guts:
With her my ditties shall begin; with her
My endless ditties end. Her I Will pursue
Through all the vast infinity of thought.
Till death to worms, insatiate cannibals,
Consigns this frame, and sends my widowed soul
To regions unexplor'd; to realms opake,
Where boiling Tartarus roars -- Oh! how unlike
The bubbling music of a purling stream,
Or gently-murmuring rill! to quaff, instead
Of Helicon, whole gulps of brimstone down --
Unfragrant bev'rige! unpoetic juice!

SCENE VII.
MADRIGAL, SCOURELLA. Scour. O miserable hour! ill-fated maid!

Mad. What of my Love? -- O my portending soul!

Scour. Ah fatal day to me! poor SCULLIONA A fatal day to Sicily! -- The king
Then touches last moments?
Tancred and Sigismunda.

Now touches her last moments -- as she climbed
Into the garret, her too-faithless foot
Slipped from the ladder's topmast round; she fell,
And with the fall expires.

Mad. O ill-starr'd wench! -- O ill-star'd wench!
Othello.


Scour. I saw her in her pangs -- her out-stretch'd eye -- His out-stretch'd eye
Strained with a death-mix'd tenderness on mine.
Merope. As out-stretch'd an image as ever was strained from a muse-mix'd brain.

Dr. HUMBUG.

Strained with a death-mix'd tenderness on mine --
But thy relenting mistress craves an ode,
From thy great muse, for her endangered friend.
The pious maid a holy visit means
To Guildhall's dome, with solemn invocation,
To sue the GOGAN and MAGOGAN gods, Gog and Magog, the tutelary deities of
Guildhall, vulgarly called the giants.

For danger'd SCULLIONA'S lengthened life --
Haste to the cheerless maid, while I in quest
Of barber-surgeon trudge -- O cursed spite! The time is out of joint -- O
cursed spite!
That ever I was born to set it right.
Hamlet.

That ever I was born to fetch the wight!

An Invocation to GOG and MAGOG. End of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
An Apartment. TRULLETTA, SCOURELLA. Thunder and Lightning. Trul. HEaven's!
it is a fearful night! Many of our tragic authors have judiciously ushered in a
dreadful night, by way of prologue or preparative to the catastrophe of their
plays. Such preparative seldom fails of success, as it throws a gloomy
melancholy over the mind, and renders the reader, or audience, more susceptible
of the ensuing distress of the performance. It further serves to heighten the
character of the hero, or heroine; for certainly nothing can be a stronger
proof of the dignity and importance of any personage, than when we are
convinced, that even nature itself is mourning the impending fall of her
favorites.

Scour. Though age has snow'd -- Till age
Has snow'd a hundred winters on thy head.
Constantine. The word snow'd, in the sense now implied, is a favorite
metaphor with a variety of authors; yet I am of opinion the thought would be
mended, if it were changed to hailed.



Almost thrice twenty winters on my head,
I never saw a night so terrible --
Most terrible indeed -- The moon's eclipsed;
-- This dull flame
Sleeps in the socket.
Fair Penitent.
The stars sleep in their sockets: scarce a ray
Of light t'illume the welkin's pitchy cope,
But what the sheeted light'ning's flash affords.
The bursting thunder roars with frightful crack,
As if heaven's magazines were blowing up.
The blustering Boreas, like a bully, storms,
And threatens to unhinge earth's mass, which rocks
Affrighted on its axis, like a sign.
Owls, magpies, ravens on the chimney tops
Screech, chatter, croak: geese cackle, crickits chirp,
Dogs howl, cats mew, pigs squeak, and asses bray,
In concert dissonant. This speech is certainly the finest night piece that
ever was drawn. Dr. HUMBUG.


Trul. It Is said, strange sights Our author, in the following speech, seems to
have had the prodigies in Julius Caesar in view. Ibid.

Appear in the air?

Scour. Ten thousand hags and wizzards,
On broomsticks mounted, through the frightful sky
Gallop apace their fiery footless steeds -- Gallop apace your fiery-footed
steads
Romeo and Juliet.

Squadrons of bodkins, press-boards, yardwands, sheers,
Against penknives, sheets of paper, inkhorns, quills,
Appear drawn up in battailous array What a triumph must this, and a few of the
preceding lines, afford a half-finish'd critic? how will he swell with his
wonderful discovery? Methinks I hear him exulting to the following effect. -- I
thought I should catch our author tripping! A few lines ago he tells us it was
a very dark night; and yet and old woman of sixty, whose sight we may naturally
imagine to be none of the best, is able to discern with the naked eye such
minute objects as bodkins and inkhorns in the air. To such critic I shall
reply, and pray what is there unnatural in all this? Might not the lightning
enable our matron to make such discovery? Though her eyes were none of the best,
yet she might discern these objects through ber spectacles; nay, possibly,
through a telescope. But pray, Sir, who informed you of the size of bodkins and
inkhorns, which you arbitrarily call such minute objects? Not our author I Am
confident. For any thing you know to the contrary, they might be as large as a
maypole; nay, as the Monument itself. In short, Sir, if you know any thing of
the figure HYPERBOLE, which every author has a right to use, you would have
been silent on this occasion. -- Besides, with all your sagacity, you cannot
even tell whether SCOURELLA really saw them or no; from the relation she gives,
she may be as naturally supposed to have taken the account from those that had
seen them, as that she had seen them herself, for it is no uncommon thing
nowadays to see with other people's eyes. Dr. HUMBUG.
--
Such sights seem certain prologue to the fall
Of mightiest empires, or the crush of worlds.

Trul. What is this puny tempest in the sky,
To that my bosom feels! my mind's surcharged
With ominous presage -- No joy, no comfort
Remains, but what the hopes of lengthened life
To SCULLIONA leave -- would I were placed
With my dear father in his cold last bed! --
I shall not long survive him.

SCENE II.
TRULLETTA, SCOURELLA, BUTTONELLI, THIMBLETONIO. Trul. BUTTONELLI,
And THIMBLETONIO, have you seen my bard?

But. Thim. We have.

Trul. Thanks, BUTTONELL; and, gentle THIMBLETONIO. King. Thanks, Rosencraus,
and gentle Guildenstern.
Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern, and gentle Rosencraus.
Hamlet.


Scour. Thanks, THIMBLETON; and, gentle BUTTONELLI.

Trul. Is he alive and well?

But. He and BUCKRAMO,
With each a hundred squires, are now preparing --

Thim. For dire encounter on the plains of Smithfield.

Scour. O fly with me, TRULLETTA! and prevent
The broil fraternal.

Trul. Broil fraternal! ha! --
Let all, except Gonsalez, leave the room.
Mourning Bridge.
Let all, except SCOURELLA, leave the room -- Exeunt But. and Thim.
What mean thou -- by fraternal?

Scour. Ask no more;
The secret I Will unravel as we go.

SCENE III.
West-Smithfield. MADRIGAL, LYRIC, ACROSTIC, FUSTIANO, EPIGRAM, and their
party. a flourish. Mad. The storm subsides: the full-orb'd moon illumes,
With silver beams, yon cloudless canopy,
And seems, my friends! to smile upon our cause As the sun, by a variety of
tragic writers, is described capable of laughing, I hope it will not be denied
our author to paint the moon capable of smiling.
--
My fellow-warriors! brethren of the muse!
Remember this is the PHARSALIAN field,
That must immortalize the name of Bard,
Or blast it with eternal infamy --
But hark! yon trumpet speaks the approaching foe --
Charge you their right, ACROSTIC -- I and LYRIC
The center -- FUSTIANO, you the left --
You, EPIGRAM, must wheel your phalanx round,
And, as your rhyming custom always is,
Gall, sting them in the rear -- now draw your inkhorns,
And on them make this great, this solemn vow,
(Or else my penknife, with unbatter'd edge, Or else my sword, with an
unbatter'd edge,
I Will sheath again undeeded.
Macbeth. As I intend in a few months to give the world a complete edition of
SHAKESPEARE'S works, in twenty volumes in folio, it may not, in this place, be
amiss to give a specimen of my critical abilities. My 475th note on the tragedy
of Macbeth runs thus: Though all the stream of editions concur in reading, Or
else my sword with an unbatter'd edgr,
I Will sheath again undeeded. --
yet I am persuaded our immortal poet, who never wrote a line of fustian in his
life, could not be guilty of such a turgid expression. I shall therefore
propose three several readings, one of which our poet certainly wrote: 1. Or
else my sword with an unspatter'd edge,
I Will sheath again unspeeded. --
as if he had said, or else my sword, with edge unsprinkled, or unsmear'd, with
human gore, I Will sheath again unspeeded, i. e. unsuccessful. 2. Or else my
sword, with an unbattled edge,
I Will sheath again unbleeded -- that is, unbloody.
3. Or else my sword, with man-unbatten'd edge,
I Will sheath again in dead hide. --
q. d. or else my sword, with edge unbatten'd, or unfatten'd with man, or the
blood of man, I Will sheath again in dead hide; that is, in the scabbard. To
illustrate this image more fully, it may not be amiss to add, that scabbards
are generally made of dead hides, or leather. I am apt to think, from the
analogy of sound between in dead hide, and undeeded, that such corruption has
crept into the text.

Dr. HUMBUG.



I Will sheath again undeeded) that each bard,
Who escapes the battle's rage, in pompous lays
Will paint the glories of a brother slain;
That every son of verse, who falls this night,
May live immortal in a brother's song -- The concern of our hero for the
immortality of his poetical brethren, is certainly a very masterly stroke. Dr.
HUMBUG.

Your inkhorns to your lips Probably a distant imitation of But still your
singers on your lips, my friends.
Hamlet.
-- this do you swear; -- This do you swear,
As grace and mercy at your most need help you.
Hamlet.

As rhyme and numbers at your most need help you.

All. We swear.

Mad. Then let us all embrace.

Ac. Now on.

Fus. The tecbir?

Mad. Clio, and Trulletta's eyes. The word is victory, and Eudocia's eyes.
Siege Damascus.


SCENE IV.
BUCKRAMO, GOOSINO, BODKINDA, PRESSBOARDALIO, YARDWANDELLI, and the rest of
their party. a flourish. Buck. Thy train-band lore in martial science asks
The chief command, GOOSINO -- be it thine --
BODKINDA, PRESSBOARDALIO, YARDWANDELLI,
Sons of the needle all, the foes at hand.
Now act like men; or by yon azure heaven -- This line from Cato.


Goos. The word of onset?

Buck Cabbage, and Saint George.

Goos. Then, slaughter and black vengeance, fall on gruff;
And damned be they that first cry, hold, enough. -- Fall on, Macduff;
And damned be he that first cries hold, enough.
Macbeth.

fight off the stage.
SCENE V.
BUCKRAMO, and a TAILOR. Buck. Haste to GOOSINO, bid him turn his force
On EPIGRAM, or all is lost: our rear
Gives way -- by hell, they fly! the dastards fly! --
Perdition! sulphur! vengeance! death and devils! Distraction! fury! sorrow,
shame and death.
Fair Penitent.

Excursions.
SCENE VI.
MADRIGAL. This, and the three following lines, an imitation of a speech in
King Richard the Third.
A shield! a shield! my Genius for a shield!
I think there be ten BUCKRAMS in the field,
Nine I have slain today instead of him.
A shield! a shield! my Genius for a shield! Excursions.

SCENE VII.
EPIGRAM, BODKINDA, and three of BUCKRAMO'S Party. 1st Tailor. Submit, or die.

Ep. No: such divinity There Is such divinity does hedge a king.
Hamlet. A bard might as reasonably expect such divine hedge as a regicide,
parricide, adulterer and usurper.

Dr. HUMBUG.

Does hedge a bard, that my great spirit smiles The soul secure in her
existence, smiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point.
Cato.

At your drawn bodkins, and defies their points --
The gods take care of EPIGRAM. The gods take care of Cato!
Ibid.


1st Tay. Then this all wound him.
To try their care. all wound him.

2d Tay. And this. all wound him.

3d Tay. And this. all wound him.

Bod. And this. all wound him.

Ep. Et tu, BODKINDA? -- then fall EPIGRAM. Et tu, Brute -- then fall Caesar.
Julius Caesar. A very pathetical last dying speech!

Dr. HUMBUG.
Dies.

Bod. This for thy coat unpaid -- thy waistcoat this -- -- This for my Father;
This for Sciolto; and this last for Altamont.
Fair Penitent.

And this thy breeches -- now to further slaughter.
Excursions.
SCENE VIII.
MADRIGAL, LYRIC, and Bards in pursuit, Mad. As Mr. BAYS makes his two kings
speak French to show their breeding; our author makes his hero speak Latin, to
show his education. A dash of Latin gives great spirit to tragic writings, and
is often used with great success by dramatic authors.
Victoria! Victoria! they fly!
Like hares pursued the base plebeans fly! --
Io triumph! -- such another blow
Will end the war, and crown with victory
Complete our arms puissant -- valiant LYRIC!
The greatest chief, antiquity can boast,
Might wonder at the wonders thou have done.
How shall acknowledgment enough reward How shall acknowledgment enough reward
Thy worth unparalleled?
Regicide.

Thy worth unparalled?

Ly. You touch me there,
Where modesty most exquisitely feels. -- That wounds me there; there, where
the human heart
Most exquisitely feels.
Tancred and Sigismunda.

You bleed, my prince!

Mad. A scratch from BUCKRAM'S point:
No more.

SCENE IX.
MADRIGAL, LYRIC, POET. Po. Away, my chief; the day is lost!
GOOSINO to the flying foe opposed
His ireful point, and cut off all retreat --
Like hunted boars, in wild despair they turned
On their pursuers, madly fought, and conquered --
Heaps of Parnassian carcases are pil'd
Olympus-high -- ACROSTIC bites the plain --
FUSTIANO fled -- scarce half a score of bards
Are left alive to grace the victor's car.

Mad. Death and damnation! oh! -- Death and damnation, oh!
Othello.


Po. I bring alas!
Yet heavier tidings -- With dishevelled hair,
Probably in imitation of the mobled queen.
Hamlet.
Thy mobless queen rushed through the ranks of death,
Almost alone, amidst a crowd of foes, But found him compassed by Lothario's
faction,
Almost alone, amidst a crowd of foes.
Fair Penitent.

In search of thee -- a random bodkin reached
Her tender bosom -- but I can no more --
Tears choke my utt'rance.

Mad. O ye cruel gods!

SCENE X.
To them TRULLETTA, supported by her Pages. Trul. Now have I reached my wishes
utmost goal I should be glad to inform the reader from whom this image is
borrowed. I have read upwards of two hundred plays to find it, but in vain. --
Our author acknowledges it is not his own, but cannot recollect from whom it is
taken. Dr. HUMBUG.

To die in MADRIGAL'S blessed arms.

Mad. Alas!
A very pertinent epithet as Trulletta was slain by a bodkin; and, in my
opinion, as beautiful as the iron teeth in Boadicia. See note 18 in the fourth
act.
The iron hand of death is on thee -- ever
Life's lamp be quite extinguished, speak, oh! speak
Some peace, some comfort to thy mournful bard!

Trul. May the shrill catcall's knell, the boxes sneer, This dying speech and
prayer of our heroine is an original, and perhaps one of the finest pieces of
dramatic painting in the whole world of literature. Dr. HUMBUG.

The hiss of faction, or the templar's groan,
Never blast thy muse's offspring on the stage!
But heels, sticks, hands, in thundering peals, attend
Thy race dramatic to their thrice-third night --
May ever-blooming laurels crown thy brow,
And fame -- immortal fame -- the rest is silence. Dies.

Mad. Dead! dead! oh dead! -- is there no death for me? Dead! dead! oh, dead!
Is there no death for me?
Sophonisba.


Ly. Hold thy rash hand -- this widowed isle would mourn,
Tears of blood frequently occur in tragic productions. -- These tears, which
from my wounded heart,
Bleed at my eyes.
Spanish Friar.
In tears of blood, the loss of such a bard.
Think of immortal fame, and deathless honors --
Live, and pursue the labors of thy muse;
And all eternity is thine.

Mad. How die How die the thoughts of death!
Brothers. An uncommon expression, but of vast force, and significancy.

Dr. HUMBUG.

The thoughts of death in friendship's soft persuasion! --
Yes thou have roused me into life again,
And last posterity's posterity A very beautiful thought, yet it savours pretty
strong of Tipperary. Ibid.

Shall bless thee for thy counsel -- Gods! cruel gods!
Take notice, I forgive you Gods! cruel gods, take notice, I forgive you.
Theodosius. An instance of great benevolence and charity!

Dr. HUMBUG.
-- yet, my LYRIC!
Something like poison courses through my veins, Some deadly draught, some enemy
to life,
Boils in my bowels, and works out my soul.
Don Sebastian.

Boils in my bowels, and works out my soul.

Ly. It Is fancy all -- and yet thy looks are changed.

Mad. Let me sink gently down on the cold ground --
O I am all on fire! a thousand hells
Blaze in my bosom! streams of molten lead A bolt of ice runs hissing through
my bowels.
Alexander.

Hiss through my veins, and burn my body up --
LYRIC! I die -- my posthumous productions This paternal regard in our hero for
the orphan children of his brain, is a very masterly touch. Dr. HUMBUG.

I leave to thy correcting hand -- with care,
O! with the greatest care, my dearest friend,
Revise, and to the flames commit whatever
Shall seem unworthy my great muse -- my fame
Is in thy hands -- Remember the vast trust --
I cannot recollect from whence this image is taken.
My grateful ghost shall rise to thank thee for it.

SCENE XI.
MADRIGAL, LYRIC, BUCKRAMO, STRAPADA, SCOURELLA, GOOSINO, BODKINDA,
PRESSBOARDALIO, YARDWANDELLI, Pages, and the conquering Party, with Prisoners.
Buck. Got by a templar, while my father lived Our author, more sensibly to
heighten the distress of the piece, has judiciously brought about a discovery
that cannot fail of having its proper effect. Discoveries of this kind, and
introduced for the same purpose, are frequently met with in dramatic writings.
Dr. HUMBUG.

In cruel exile on Columbian shores! This cruel exile probably means
transportation. This conjecture seems to be strengthened by what we are told of
BUCKRAMO'S father in the first act, viz. that he pendent died
On gallow tree.
Ibid.

Then I am sentenced to eternal woe! --
Eternal? yes, eternal, and eternal -- Eternal? yes, eternal; and eternal.
Brothers. Our author might have mended this line, both as to sense and sound,
if he had not stuck so close to the DOCTOR -- as thus: Eternal? Yes, eternal;
and infernal.



Honored SCOURELLA, had I known but this
A little hour ago This hand --
A little hour ago was given to me.
Tan. and Sigis. By the phrase of little hour, I presume we are to understand
about three quarters of an hour.

Dr. HUMBUG.
we might have lived
In amity fraternal -- but alas!
When stern BELLONA seemed, with step-dame look
To lour upon our arms, I daubed this point
And for this purpose I Will anoint my sword:
I bought an unction of a mountebank,
So mortal --
that no cataplasm so rare --
-- can save the thing from death,
That is but scratched withal.
Hamlet. This long quotation I have thought proper to give, that the reader
might not too hastily imagine the manner of our hero's death in the least
unnatural.

Dr. HUMBUG.
With unguent, bought of mountebank so poisonous,
That if the Aesculapian deity,
Instead of my poor brother, had been scratched,
-- A poison of such deadly force,
Should Aesculapius drink it, in five hours,
(For then it works) the god himself were mortal.
Alexander the Great.
In half an hour the god himself were mortal.

Goos. Then thou have done a deed the very devils
Would startle at -- secure the murdering chief.

Mad. (raving) Ha! who art thou with catcall in thy hand, In this, and the
following speeches of our hero, the author has shown uncommon abilities for
painting a mad scene. I must ingenuously own, I think it the most natural
madness I ever met with. Dr. HUMBUG.

Whose looks malign, and yellow eyes bespeak
A jaundic'd mind? -- by hell! thou art the monster
Yclep'd a critic -- seize him, devils! seize him!
Whip him with scorpion's stings, and rods of iron!
Roast him in elemental fire, and baste
His hissing frame with boiling sulphur, mixed
With his own gall.

Scou. O my poor raging child!

Buck. O monster! monster! beats his breast.

Mad. Zembla's isles of ice
Are in me -- how I shiver! -- cold! cold! cold! ( The ghosts of our heroine,
and her father, seem to rise on the same important business with those of
Jassiere and Pierre in Venice Preserved. Dr. HUMBUG.
Ghosts of Cabbagino and Trulletta rise.)
Angels, and ministers of grace, defend me! -- Angels, and ministers of grace
defend us.
Hamlet.

They wave me -- stay, ye dear illusions; stay! -- Stay, illusion!
Ibid.

I come to join you. Ghosts descend.

Ly. Help! O help to hold him!

Mad. Hark! how it thunders! -- what a flash was there!
The temple's all on fire -- see how the naked clerks
And gownless vestals from the windows leap,
To 'scape the flaming ruin -- off your ruffian hands,
Ye damned inhuman dogs -- ye shall not part us --
Nor gods nor men shall part us.
Victim.
Nor life, nor death, nor heaven, nor hell shall part us --
TRULLETTA -- oh! they tear -- they tear thee from me --
My feeble arms can hold -- no longer hold thee --
This seems to be an imitation of a celebrated actor, who has the happy art of
clipping language in his mock agonies, as Oh, Juliet -- July -- oh!

Oh my TRULLETTA -- TRULLY -- TRULL -- oh! oh! Dies.

Ly. He Is gone! the great, the immortal bard is gone!

Press. There cracked the cordage of a noble heart. Now cracks the cordage of a
noble heart!
Hamlet. Our author shows more of the tradesman, than the bard, in the mention
of an hempen manufacture; though I think, as a tradesman, it is not much to his
credit to speak of a cracking commodity.

Dr. HUMBUG.


Goos. Then drag your chief to justice.

Buck. Soft, my friends: -- Soft you --
I Have done the state some service, and they know it --
-- in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant, and a turband Turk
Beat a Venetian, and traduced the state:
I took by the throat the circumcised dog,
And smote him thus.
O bloody period!
Othello.

I Have done the craft some service, and they know it.
Once in the noon of night, at Southwark fair,
When a malignant barber sadly mauled
A taylor's 'prentice, and traduced the trade,
I took by the throat the circum-dusty dog,
And smote him thus. stabs himself with his bodkin and falls.

Yard. O bloody period!

Buck. Draw near, STRAPADA -- nearer yet -- attend
My last request -- comfort my mourning mother --
Thou long have loved her -- take her to thy arms,
Dispel her griefs, and -- cheer her orphan age.

Strap. Thy will shall be religiously observed. Thy will shall be religiously
observed.
Cato.


Buck. In the representation, instead of this line was added the following
speech, which was supplied by a brother author. Mr. Davis performed it so
inimitably well, that he was obliged to rise from the dead to speak it a second
time. I thank thee for it -- and now, thou flower of friends,
There Is but one favor left for me to ask,
Or thee to grant -- I pray thee mark it well --
Report my death, just as thou wilt see me play it --
Observe this struggle -- See this wriggling twist --
I grind -- I writhe -- and now I kick -- kick out --
A general shudder runs through all my limbs;
And, with a hollow voice, I groan my last -- Oh! oh! oh! Dies.

Thus let me thank thee -- and -- the rest is -- oh! Dies.

Scou. Alas! that in one circling sun alone,
A poor lone mother should her two sons lose!

Strap. The gods enable thee to bear the loss --
Let us, my friends, about the sad interment
Of this unhappy pair -- BUCKRAMO'S suicide
Forbids the holy rites of funeral --
From hence let fierce contending lovers know
What dire effects from rival discord flow.
It Is this that shakes each country with alarms,
Gives up hot youth a prey to youthful arms:
Produces fraud, and cruelty, and strife,
This tragedy originally ended with the line, Forbids the holy rites of funeral
-- on which the punning critic beforementioned observed, it was an immoral
play. Our author took the hint, but could not be prevailed on to annex a moral.
I expostulated with him, in the most friendly manner, on the necessity of such
termination of the play; but he very obstinately and whimsically insisted, that
a moral, unless drawn up in the epilogue, was unnatural, because it is an
immediate address to the audience; which audidience, the speaker, in his
dramatic character, cannot with propriety suppose to be present -- that it
could not properly be spoken by any of the persons in the drama, unless such
person had been present during the whole representation, and was consequently
acquainted with every incident in the play -- that it was an affront to an
audience, to suppose them incapable of drawing a moral from the representation
-- that it was a modern custom, and, in his opinion, More honored in the
breach, than the observance.
Hamlet. that many judicious authors had shown their dislike of such practice,
particularly GAY, who severely satiriz'd it in his ingenious and pithy epilogue
to the What do you call it, viz. Our stage play has a moral, and no doubt
You all have wit enough to find it out.
and finally, that our immortal SHAKESPEARE seldom or never concluded any of his
plays with a moral. He was so obstinate on the occasion, that it was with no
small difficuity I could prevail on him to suffer me to annex the foregoing
moral; which the reader may perceive is taken, with slight alteration, from the
most finished tragedy, that any language has yet produced, I mean Mr.
ADDISON'S Cato.

As I have now ended my annotations, and occasionally scattered a few encomia
on the play, it will be naturally expected I should give my summary opinion of
its merits, which I shall deliver, not so much with the candor of the friend,
as the impartiality of the critic. I shall divide the subject of my remarks
into three heads, viz. the fable, the manners, and the diction.

As to the fable -- but it had quite slipped my memory, that the printer's boy
has been waiting this half hour at my elbow for the finishing note, wherefore
I must defer my criticism, till the next edition of this tragedy.

Dr. HUMBUG.
And robs the guilty world of a BARD'S life.

A Procession. THE END.
EPILOGUE.
Designed to be spoken by SCOURELLA.
FROM the dear swain, who promises to wed me,
My curiosity has hither led me,
To know what fate attends our author's lays;
Videlicet, the halter, or the bays --
You Have heard the cause his buskined fourtunes rest on;
To damn, or not 40 damn, is now the question:
Yet ever his awful judges come to sentence,
List, list, O! list to me, your late acquaintance.
Behind the curtain our dramatic Wight,
(I never saw more miserable sight)
Stalks over the stage in deep-dejected air,
A living monument of sad despair,
Soliloquizing thus -- " The die is thrown;
And I must stand or fall by -- what? -- the town --
The town -- perhaps the critics -- there is the rub --
The town encourages, the critics snub
An author's hope -- but how to mercy bend'em --
I Am weary of conjectures -- this must end'em. Pulling out a halter.
Such his complaint, so pitiful his moan,
It would have mollified a heart of stone.
I Have told his case to make you cry -- or laugh.
Now for a word or two in his behalf.
Ladies and Gents, our bard's but a beginner,
'Twere pity to cut off so young a sinner:
Even justice sometimes strains a statute's sense.
To spare a Culprit, in his first offense.
Receive this novel brat with kind applause,
And, if I Am read in divination's laws,
I prophecy -- ay, now begin your laughter --
Our hempen bard will please you all hereafter.
ODE to the procession, at the end of the third act.
AIR.
HARK! the bell, with doleful hum,
To the lagging corse cries come.
To the lagging corse the bell,
Sounds, with doleful hum, this knell.
CABBAGINO, come away!
Hasten to thy kindred day!
To thy kindred day, O haste!
Faster yet, and yet more fast;
To thy kindred day, O come!
Sounds the bell with doleful bum."
RECITATIVE.
When law had hemmed on death, his foll'wer,
To take our master by the collar,
We pressed him, with our low beseeches,
To pocket up all former breaches,
Nor sit in's skirts with such fell strife,
To prick him off the list of life.
As buckram stiff, the cross-grained glutton,
Regarding not our suit a button;
Replies, give over your sleeveless whining.
I Will have the body, hell the lining;
Then singeing hot plucked out his shears,
Cut off the remnant of his years.
AIR.
Mourn, ye beaus, with drooping head;
Mourn, your second maker dead.
When nature botch'd the human shape,
And 'stead of man produced an ape,
Our sage's art repaired the slaw,
And from an ape a beau could draw.
CHORUS.
Mourn, ye beaus, with drooping head;
Mourn, your second maker dead.
GRAND CHORUS.
Hark! the bell, with doleful hum,
Cries, O CABBAGINO! come.
CABBAGINO, come away!
Hasten to thy kindred clay!
Hasten to thy kindred tomb!
CABBAGINO! come, come, come.
ODE to GOG and MAGOG, at the end of the fourth act.
MADRIGAL. GUardian LARES of Guildhall,
Hear a mournful suppliant's call!

TRULLETTA. Hear a mournful suppliant's call,
Guardian LARES of Guildhall!

CHIEF PRIEST. With guardful eye, great GOG attend,
The health of our endangered friend!
MAGOG, attend with guardful eye,
Poor SCULLIONA'S agony!
MAGOG and GOG, each, both attend,
The health of our endangered friend!

CHORUS of PRIESTS and VIRGINS. MAGOG and GOG, each, both attend,
The health of our endangered friend!

CHIEF PRIEST. Permit not death, with cruel strife,
To blast her in the spring of life;
But, in compassion to our prayers,
To summer's verge extend her years;
And when so far you have kindly brought 'em.
Protract her mortal date to autumn;
And do not then, like niggards, stint her,
But let her live to age's winter.

CHORUS. And do not then, etc.

CHIEF PRIEST. The longest life of mortal man,
Is but a short, a little span;
Then send not death, your ghastly porter,
To cut that little span yet shorter.

CHORUS. Then send not death, etc.

CHIEF PRIEST. GOG and MAGOG, hear, O hear!
GOG and MAGOG, lend an ear!
GOG and MAGOG hear, and save,
SCULLY from a present grave!
SCULLY'S danger'd health restore,
GOG and MAGOG, we implore!
GOG and MAGOG, we implore,
SCULLY'S danger'd health restore!

CHORUS. GOG and MAGOG hear, O hear! etc.

ODE for the procession, at the end of the fifth act.
CHORUS of PRIESTS and BARDS. He Is fled, he is gone! the immortal bard,
Whose song would charm a savage pard,
Fled to return no more!
Parnassus drops its towering head,
Apollo wails the favorite dead;
His loss the NINE deplore.

CHORUS of PRIESTS and VIRGINS. She Is fled! the lovely nymph is gone!
Whose charms would fire a breast of stone;
Fled never to return!
Diana and the Cyprian queen,
With ceaseless sighs, and tristful mien,
Their breathless favorite mourn.

RECITATIVE. Bards. Of temper sweet, of manners mild --

Virgins. She was a dear, an only child --

Bards. Such harmony his numbers blessed --

Virgins. Such dignity her person graced --

Bards. Such majesty his lays attended --

Virgins. Such sov'reignty her mein befriended --

Bards. He was the tuneful sisters' boast --

Virgins. And of St. Giles's she the toast: --

Bards. Amongst wits he claimed the highest post, --

Virgins. Amongst fairest nymphs she ruled the roast. --

CHORUS of PRIESTS, BARDS, and VIRGINS. He was the tuneful sisters' boast,
And of St. Giles's she the toast;
Amongst wits he claimed the highest post,
Amongst fairest nymphs she ruled the roast.

DUETTO.
In one grave were never laid,
Such a BARD, and such a MAID.
CHORUS.
Britons, mourn! the loss deplore;
Wit and beauty are no more!
Where is now your country's boast?
Fled, alas! forever lost!
Never, never, to return!
Mourn, lamenting Britons, mourn!
Mourn your fate, your loss deplore;
Wit and beauty are no more!

