THE APPRENTICE. A FARCE, IN TWO ACTS, As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL,
in Drury Lane.

By Mr. MURPHY.

LONDON. Printed for PAUL VAILLANT, facing Southamptonstreet, in the Strand.
1756.

[Price One Shilling.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE was Room to apprehend, before the Representation of the following Farce,
that the Subject might appear extravagant and merely ideal; but the real
existence of it is displayed in such a lively and picturesque Manner by the
Author of the Prologue, and was at once so universally felt by the Audience,
that all necessity of saying any thing farther on this Head is now entirely
superseded. What at present remains to be feared, is, that the Apprentice will
not make so lively a figure in the closet, as on the Stage, where the Parts in
general were allowed to be well performed; where Simon was represented with a
perfection of folly, where the Skill of Mr. Yates exhibited the Impotence of a
Mind, whose Ideas extend very little beyond the multiplication Table, and whose
Passions are ever in a crazy Conflict, unless when they all subside into a
sordid Love of Gain; and where Mr. Woodward's admirable comic Genius gave such
a Spirit to the whole, that there is Reason to think, whenever he relinquishes
the Part, the Apprentice may again elope from his Friends, without any one's
desiring him to Return to his Business.

The Author has however endeavored to render all its Defects as excusable as
he could, and he wishes no stronger Criticism could be brought against him,
than the two following Observations, which he thinks very singular and somewhat
entertaining. I cannot, says one, give my Opinion of the Piece, till I have Time
to consider the Depth of it -- Po! says another, this is not all his OWN, I
remember some of it in other Plays. -- In order to assist the former in his
deep Researches, and to enable the latter to make good his charge of
Plagiarism, References are made to the several Plays, from which the
distempered Hero of the piece makes up his motley, but characteristick Dialect.
The intelligent Reader, if he think it worth his while to turn over these
Leaves, will be pleased to remember that a Parody does not always carry with it
a Burlesque on the Lines alluded to. For (as it is judiciously remarked in a
note to Mr. Pope's Dunciad) It is a common, but foolish, mistake that a
ludicrous Parody of a grave and celebrated Passage; is a Ridicule of that
Passage. A Ridicule indeed there is in every Parody, but where the Image is
transferred from one Object to another, there the Ridicule falls not on the
Thing imitated, but imitating. Thus for Instance, when A Line of pope's in a
ludicrous Account of the coronation in Henry the VIIIth.
Old Edward's Armor beams on Cibbers Breast. It is without Doubt an Object
ridiculous enough; but then, I think, it falls neither on old King Edward, nor
his Armor, but on his Armor-bearer only.

But this is prefacing a Farce as if it were a Thing of moment; I shall
therefore dismiss it to the Press, without adding any Thing farther, except my
grateful Acknowledgements for the very favorable Reception, with which the
Public has honored the trifling Scenes of

Their most obliged and most obedient Servant, ARTHUR MURPHY.
Tavistock Row 5th Jan. 1756.
PROLOGUE
written by Mr. GARRICK,
spoken by Mr. MURPHY, dressed in Black. BEhold a Wonder for Theatric Story!
The Culprit of this Night, appears before ye.
Before his Judges dares these Boards to tread,
"With all his Imperfections on his Head!"
Prologues precede the Piece, -- in mournful Verse;
As Undertakers -- walk before the Hearse.
Whose doleful March may strike the hardened Mind,
And wake it is feelings -- for the Dead -- behind.
Trickt out in Black thus Actors try their Art,
To melt that Rock of ROCKS, -- the Critic's Heart.
No acted Fears my Vanity betray;
I am indeed, -- what others only play.
Thus far myself -- The Farce come next in View;
Though many are it is Faults, at least it is NEW.
No smuggled, pilfer'd Scenes from France we show,
It Is English -- English, Sirs! -- from Top to Toe.
Though Coarse my Colors and my Hand unskilled,
From real life my little Cloth is filled.
My Hero is a Youth, -- by Fate designed
For culling simples, -- but whose Stage-struck Mind,
Nor Fate could rule, nor his Indentures bind.
A Place there is where such young Quixots meet;
It Is called the SPOTING-CLUB; -- a glorious Treat!
Where Prentic'd-Kings -- alarm the Gaping Street!
Three Brutus starts and stares by midnight Taper;
Who all the DAY enacts -- a Woollen Draper.
There Hamlet's Ghost stalks-forth with doubled Fist*
Cries out with hollow Voice, -- List, List, O List"
And frightens Denmark's Prince -- a young Tobacconist.
The Spirit too, cleared from his deadly White,
Rises -- a Haberdasher to the Sight!
Not young Attorneys -- have this Rage withstood,
But change their Pens for TRUNCHEONS, Ink for BLOOD;
And (Strange Reverse!) -- die for their Country's Good.
Through all the Town this Folly you may trace;
M^self am Witness -- it is a common Case.
I Have further Proofs, could ye but think I wrong ye;
-- Look round -- you will find some Spouting Youths among ye.
To check these Heroes, and their Laurels crop,
To bring 'em back to Reason, -- and their SHOP,
To raise an harmless Laugh was all my Aim,
And if I shun Contempt, -- I seek not FAME.
Indulge this Firstling, -- let me but BEGIN,
Nor nip me -- in the Buddings of my Sin;
Some Hopes I cherish -- in your SMILES I read 'em;
Whatever my Faults, -- your Candor can exceed 'em.

EPILOGUE
written by a FRIEND,
spoken by Mrs. CLIVE. [Enters reading the Play-Bill.] A Very pretty Bill, --
as I Am alive!
The Part of -- Nobody -- by Mrs. Clive!
A paltry, scribbling Fool -- to have me out --
He Will say perhaps -- he thought I could not spout.
Malice and Envy to the last Degree!
And why? -- I wrote a Farce as well as He.
And fairly ventured it, -- without the Aid
Of Prologue dressed in black, and Face in Masquerade;
O Pit -- have Pity -- see how I Am dismayed!
Poor Soul! -- this canting Stuff will never do,
Unless, like Bay's, he brings his Hangman too.
But granting that from these same Obsequies,
Some Pickings to our Bard in black arise;
Should your Applause to Joy convert his Fear,
As Pallas turns to feast -- Lardella's Bier;
Yet 'twould have been a better Scheme by half
To Have thrown his Weeds aside, and learned with me to laugh.
I could have shown him, had he been inclined,
A spouting Junto of the Female Kind.
There dwells a Milliner in yonder Row,
Well-dress'd, full-voic'd, and nobly built for Show,
Who, when in Rage, she scolds at Sue and Sarah,
Damned, Damned Dissembler! -- thinks she is more than ZARA.
She has a Daughter too that deals in Lace,
And sings -- O Ponder well -- and Cherry Chase,
And fain would fill the fair Ophelia's Place.
And in her cock't up Hat, and Gown of Camblet,
Presumes on something -- touching the Lord Hamlet.
A Cousin too she has, with squinting Eyes,
With wadling Gait, and Voice like London Cries;
Who, for the Stage too short by half a Story,
Acts Lady Townly -- thus -- in all her Glory.
And, while she is traversing her scanty Room,
Cries -- "Lord, my Lord, what can I do at home!"
In short, there is Girls enough for all the Fellows,
The Ranting, Whining, Starting, and the Jealous,
The Hotspurs, Romeos, Hamlets, and Othellos.
Oh! Little do those silly People know,
What dreadful Trials -- Actors undergo.
Myself -- who most in Hamony delight,
Am scolding here from Morning until Night.
Then take Advice from me, ye giddy Things,
Ye Royal Milliners, ye apron'd Kings;
Young Men beware and shun our slippery Ways,
Study Arithmetic, and burn your Plays;
And you, ye Girls, let not our Tinsel train
Enchant your Eyes, and turn your madd'ning Brain;
Be timely wise, for oh! be sure of this; --
A Shop with Virtue, is the Height of Bliss.

Speedily will be published In Two Volumes 12mo PRICE bound SIX SHILLINGS THE
GRAY'S INN JOURNAL.

BY Mr. Murphy.

Dramatis Personae.
Wingate, a passionate Old Man, particularly fond of Money and Figures, and
involuntarily uneasy about his Son. Mr. YATES. Dick, his Son, bound to an
Apothecary, and fond of going on the Stage. Mr. WOODWARD. Gargle, an
Apothecary. Mr. BURTON. Charlotte, Daughter to Gargle. Miss MINORS. Simon,
Servant to Gargle. Mr. H. VAUGHAN. Scotchman, Mr. BLAKES. Irishman, Mr.
JEFFERSON. Catchpole, a Bailiff. Mr. VAUGHAN. Spouting-club, Watchmen, etc.
THE APPRENTICE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter WINGATE and SIMON. WINGATE NAY nay, but I tell you I am convinced -- I
know it is so, -- and so Friend, don't you think to trifle with me; -- I know
you're in the Plot, you Scoundrel, and if you don't discover all, I Will


Simon. Dear Heart, Sir, you will not give a Body Time.


Wingate. Zookers! an whole Month missing, and no Account of him far or near,
-- Wounds! it is unaccountable. -- Look ye Friend, -- don't you pretend --


Simon. Lord, Sir, -- you're so main passionate, you will not let a Body speak.


Wingate. Speak out then, -- and don't stand muttering -- What a lubberly
Fellow you are! ha! ha! -- Why don't you speak out, you Blockhead?


Simon. Lord, Sir, to be sure the Gentleman is a fine young Gentleman, and a
sweet young Gentleman -- but, lack-a-day, Sir, -- how should I know any thing
of him?


Wingate. Sirrah, I say he could not be 'Prentice to your Master so long, and
you live so long in one House with him, without knowing his Haunts and all his
Ways -- and then, Varlet, what brings you here to my House so often?


Simon. My Master Gargle and I, Sir, are so uneasy about un, that I have been
running all over the Town since Morning to enquire for un; -- and so in my Way,
I thought I might as well call here --


Wingate. A Villain, to give his Father all this Trouble -- And so you have not
heard any Thing of him Friend?


Simon. Not a Word, Sir, as I hope for Marcy; though, as sure as you are there, I
believe I can guess what is come on un. As sure as any thing, Master, the
Gypsies have gotten hold on un, and we shall have un come home as thin as Rake,
-- like the young Girl in the City, -- with living upon nothing but Crusts and
Water for six and twenty Days. --


Wingate. The Gypsies have got hold of him, you Blockhead! -- Get out of the
Room -- Here, you Simon --


Simon. Sir, --


Wingate. Where are you going in such a Hurry? -- let me see; what must be
done? -- a ridiculous Numskull, with his damned Cassanders and Cloppatra's and
Trumpery; with his Romances, and his Odyssey Popes, and a Parcel of Rascals not
worth a Groat; -- wearing Stone Buckles, and cocking his Hat; -- I never wear
Stone Buckles, -- never cock my Hat -- but, zookers, I Will not put myself in a
Passion -- Simon, do you step back to your Master, my Friend Gargle, and tell
him I want to speak with him -- though I don't know what I should send for him
for -- a sly, slow, hesitating Blockhead! -- he will only plague me with his
Physical Cant and his Nonsense -- why don't you go you Booby, when I bid you?
--


Simon. Yes, Sir --

Exit.
Wingate. This Fellow will be the Death of me at last -- I cannot Sleep in my
Bed sometimes for him. -- An absurd insignificant Rascal, -- to stand in his
own Light! -- Death and Fury, that we cannot get Children, without having a Love
for 'em! -- I have been turmoiling for the Fellow all the Days of my Life, and
now the Scoundrel's run away -- Suppose, I advertise the Dog, and promise a
Reward to any one that can give an Account of him -- well, but, -- why should I
throw away my Money after him? -- why, as I don't say what Reward, I may give
what I please when they come -- ay, but if the Villain should deceive me, and
happen to be dead, -- why then he tricks me out of two Shillings -- my Money's
flung into the Fire -- Zookers, I Will not put myself in a Passion -- let him
follow his Nose -- it is nothing at all to me -- what care I? -- What do you
come back for, Friend? --


Re-enter Simon. Simon. As I was going out, Sir, the Post came to the Door, and
brought this Letter.


Wingate. Let me see it -- The Gypsies have got hold of him! ha! ha! what a
pretty Fellow you are! ha! ha! why don't you step where I bid you, Sirrah! --


Simon. Yes Sir.

Exit.
Wingate. Well, well, -- I Am resolved, and it shall be so -- I Will advertise him
Tomorrow Morning, and promise, if he comes home, all shall be forgiven: -- And
when the Blockhead comes, I may do as I please -- ha! ha! I may do as I please!
-- Let me see: -- He had on -- a Silver-loop'd Hat: -- I never liked those vile
Silver Loops: -- A Silver-loop'd Hat; -- and -- and -- Slidikins, what
signifiies what he had on? -- I Will read my Letter, and think no more about him.
-- Hey! what a Plague have we here? [mutters to himself] Bristol -- a -- what is
all this? --

Esteemed Friend,
Last was 20th ultimo, since none of thine, which will occasion Brevity. The
Reason of my writing to thee at present, is to inform thee that thy Son came to
our Place with a Company of Strollers, who were taken up by the Magistrate, and
committed as Vagabonds, to Jail. --

Zooker's! I Am glad of it -- a Villain of a Fellow! Let him lie there --

I am sorry thy Lad should follow such profane Courses; but out of the Esteem I
bear unto thee, I have taken thy Boy out of Confinement, and sent him off for
your City in the Wagon, which left this four Days ago. He is consigned to thy
Address, being the needful from thy Friend and Servant,

Ebeeneezor Broadbrim.



Wounds! what did he take the Fellow out for? -- a Scoundrel Rascal! -- turned
Stage Player -- I Will never see the Villain's Face. -- Who comes there? --

Enter Simon. Simon. I met my Master on the Way, Sir; -- our Cares are over: --
Here he is, Sir. --


Wingate. Let him come in -- and do you go down Stairs, you Blockhead. --

Exit Simon.
Enter Gargle. Wingate. So, Friend Gargle, -- Here Is a fine Piece of Work --
Dick's turned Vagabond! --


Gargle. He must be put under a proper Regimen directly, Sir. -- He arrived at
my House within these ten Minutes, but in such a Trim! -- He Is now below Stairs
-- I judged it proper to leave him there, till I had prepared you for his
Reception. --


Wingate. Death and Fire! what could put it into the Villain's Head to turn
Buffoon?


Gargle. Nothing so easily accounted for: -- Why, when he ought to be reading
the Dispensatory, there was he constantly poring over Plays, and Farces, and
Shakespeare. --


Wingate. Ay, that damned Shakespeare! -- I hear the Fellow was nothing but a
Deer-stealer in Warwickshire: -- Zookers! if they had hanged him out of the
Way, he would not now be the Ruin of honest Men's Children -- But what Right
had he to read Shakespeare? -- I never read Shakespeare! -- Wounds! I caught the
Rascal, myself, reading that nonsensical Play of Hamblet, where the Prince is
keeping Company with Strollers and Vagabonds: A fine Example, Mr. Gargle! --


Gargle. His Disorder is of the malignant Kind, and my Daughter has taken the
Infection from him -- bless my Heart! -- She was as innocent as Water Gruel,
till he spoilt her: -- I found her, the other Night, in the very Fact.


Wingate. Zookers! you don't say so! -- caught her in the Fact! --


Gargle. Ay, in the very Fact of reading a Play-book in Bed.


Wingate. O, is that the Fact you mean? -- is that all? -- though that is bad
enough. --


Gargle. But I have done for my young Madam: -- I have confined her to her
Room, and locked up all her Books.


Wingate. Look-ye, Friend Gargle, I Will never see the Villain's Face: -- Let him
follow his Nose and bite the Bridle. --


Gargle. Lenitives, Mr. Wingate, -- Lenitives are properest at present: -- His
Habit requires gentle Alteratives: -- but leave him to my Management; -- about
twenty Ounces of Blood, with a Cephalic Tincture, -- and he may do very well.


Wingate. Where is the Scoundrel?


Gargle. Dear Sir, moderate your Anger, and don't use such harsh Language.


Wingate. Harsh Language! -- Why do you think Man, I Would call him a Scoundrell,
if I had not a Regard for him? -- You don't hear me call a Stranger a Scoundrel.


Gargle. Dear Sir, he may still do very well, the Boy has very good Sentiments
--


Wingate. Sentiment! -- a Fig for Sentiment! let him get Money, and never miss
an Opportunity -- I never missed an Opportunity; got up at Five in the Morning,
-- struck a Light, -- made my own Fire -- worked my Finger's Ends -- and this
Vagabond of a Fellow is going his own Way -- with all my Heart -- what care I?
-- let him follow his Nose, -- let him follow his Nose -- a ridiculous --


Gargle. Ay, ridiculous indeed, Sir -- Why for a long Time past, he could not
converse in the Language of common Sense. -- Ask him but a trivial Question,
and he would give some cramp Answer out of some of his Plays that had been running
in his Head, and so there is no understanding a Word he says. --


Wingate. Zookers! this comes of his keeping Company with Wits, and be damned
to 'em for Wit's -- ha! ha! -- Wits! a fine Thing indeed -- ha! ha! Its the
most beggarly, rascally, -- contemptible Thing on Earth. --


Gargle. And then, Sir, I have found out that he went three Times a Week to a
Spouting-Club.


Wingate. A Spouting-Club, Friend Gargle! -- What Is a Spouting-Club?


Gargle. A Meeting of Prentices and Clerks and giddy young Men, intoxicated
with Plays; and so they meet in Public Houses to act Speeches; there they all
neglect Business, despise the Advice of their Friends, and think of nothing but
to become Actors. --


Wingate. You don't say so! -- a Spouting-Club! wounds, I believe they are all
mad.


Gargle. Ay, mad indeed, Sir: -- Madness is occasioned in a very extraordinary
Manner, -- the Spirits flowing in particular Channels. --


Wingate. 'Sdeath, your'e as mad yourself as any of them. --


Gargle. And continuing to run in the same Ducts. --


Wingate. Ducks! Damn your Ducks! -- Who Is below there?


Gargle. The Texture of the Brain becomes disordered, and [Wingate walks about
uneasily and Gargle follows] thus, by the Pressure on the Nerves, the Head is
disturbed, and so your Son's Malady is contracted. --


Wingate. Who Is without there? -- Don't plague me so, Man.


Gargle. But I shall alter the morbid State of the Juices, correct his Blood,
and produce laudable Chyle. --


Wingate. Zookers, Friend Gargle, don't teaze me so -- Don't plague me with
your physical Nonsense. -- Who Is below there? -- Tell that Fellow to come up.
--


Gargle. Dear Sir, be a little cool -- Inflammatories may be dangerous. -- Do,
pray, Sir, moderate your Passions. --


Wingate. Prithee, be quiet, Man -- I Will try what I can do -- Here he comes.


Enter Dick. Dick. Now, my good Father, what is the Matter? Hamlet.



Wingate. So, Friend, -- you have been upon your Travels, have you? -- You have
had your Frolic? -- Look-ye, young Man, -- I Will not put myself in a Passion: --
But, Death and Fire, you Scoundrel, -- what Right have you to plague me in this
Manner? -- Do you think I must fall in Love with your Face, because I am your
Father? --


Dick. A little more than Kin, and less than Kind. -- Hamlet.



Wingate. Ha! ha! -- what a pretty Figure you cut now? -- ha! ha! -- why don't
you speak, you Blockhead? -- Have you nothing to say for yourself? --


Dick. Nothing to say for yourself? -- what an old Prig it is?


Wingate. Mind me, Friend -- I have found you out -- I see you will never come to
Good. -- Turn Stage Player! -- Wounds! you will not have an Eye in your Head in a
Month -- ha! ha! -- you will have 'em knocked out of the Sockets with withered
Apples -- remember I tell you so. --


Dick. A Critic too! [whistles] Well done old Square-toes. --


Wingate. Look-ye, young Man -- take Notice of what I say: -- I made my own
Fortune, and I could do the same again. Wounds! -- if I were placed at the
Bottom of Chancery Lane, with a Brush and Blackball, -- I Would make my own Fortune
again -- you read Shakespeare! -- Get Cocker's Arithmetic -- you may buy it for
a Shilling on any Stall -- best Book that ever was wrote. --


Dick. Pretty well, that; -- Ingenious, Faith! -- Egad, the old Fellow has a
pretty Notion of Letters.


Wingate. Can you tell how much is five Eigths of three Sixteenths of a Pound?
-- Five Eigths of three Sixteenths of a Pound -- Ay, ay, I see you're a
Blockhead: -- Look-ye young Man, -- if you have a Mind to thrive in this World,
study Figures and make yourself useful -- make yourself useful. --


Dick. Hamlet.
How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable seem to me all the Uses of this World!
--


Wingate. Mind the Scoundrel now. --


Gargle. Do Mr. Wingate, let me speak to him -- softly, softly -- I Will touch
him gently: -- Come, come, young Man, lay aside this sulky Humor, and speak as
becomes a Son.


Dick. Ditto.
O Jeptha, Judge of Israel, what a Treasure had thou? --


Wingate. What does the Fellow say?


Gargle. He relents, Sir. -- Come, come, young Man, he will forgive. --


Dick. Ditto.
They fool me to the Top of my Bent. -- Gad, I Will hum 'em, to get rid of 'em, --
a truant Disposition, good my Lord: -- No, no, stay, that is not right -- I have
a better Speech. -- Suspicious Husband.
It is as you say -- when we are sober, and reflect but ever so little on our
Follies, we are ashamed and sorry; and yet, the very next Minute, we rush again
into the very same Absurdities. --


Wingate. Well said Lad, well said -- mind me Friend: Commanding our own
Passions, and artfully taking Advantage of other People's, is the sure Road to
Wealth: -- Death and Fire! -- but I will not put myself in a Passsion: -- It Is my
Regard for you makes me speak; and if I tell you you're a Scoundrel, its for
your Good.


Dick. Without Doubt, Sir. stifling a Laugh.


Wingate. If you want any Thing, you shall be provided: -- Have you any Money
in your Pocket? -- ha! ha! what a ridiculous Numskull you are now? -- ha! ha!
-- Come, here is some Money for you. -- [Pulls out his Money and looks at it] --
I Will give it to you another Time; and so you will mind what I say to you and make
yourself useful for the future. --


Dick. Richard III.
Else, wherefore breath I in a Christian Land!


Wingate. Zookers! you Blockhead, you would better stick to your Business, than
turn Buffoon, and get Truncheons broke upon your Arm, and be tumbling upon
Carpets. --


Dick. Hamlet.
I shall in all my best obey you, Sir. --


Wingate. Very well, Friend, -- very well said -- you may do very well if you
please and so I Will say no more to you, but make yourself useful, and so now go
and clean yourself, and make ready to go Home to your Business -- and mind me
young Man, -- let me see no more Play-Books, and let me never find that you
wear a laced Waistcoat -- you Scoundrel, what right have you to wear a laced
Waistcoat? -- I never wore a laced Waistcoat! -- never wore one till I was
Forty -- But I Will not put myself in a Passion -- go and change your Dress,
Friend.


Dick. I shall Sir --


Hamlet.
I must be cruel, only to be kind, Thus bad begins, but worse remains behind.

Cocker's Arithmetic, Sir?


Wingate. Ay, Cocker's Arithmetic -- study Figures, and they will carry you
through the World --


Dick. Yes, Sir, (stifling a Laugh) Cocker's Arithmetic! Exit.


Wingate and Gargle. Wingate. Let him mind me, Friend Gargle, and I Will make a
Man of him.


Gargle. Ay, Sir, you know the World. -- the young Man will do very well -- I
wish he were out of his Time; he shall then have my Daughter --


Wingate. Yes, but I Will touch the Cash -- he shall not finger it, during my Life.
-- I must keep a tight Hand over him -- [Goes to the Door.] -- Do ye hear,
Friend! -- Mind what I say, and go home to your Business immediately -- Friend
Gargle, I Will make a Man of him. --


Enter Dick. Dick. The last new Play called Barbarossa.
Who called on Achmet? -- Did not Barbarossa require me here?


Wingate. What Is the Matter now? -- Barosa! -- wounds! -- what is Barossa? --
does the Fellow call me Names? -- what makes the Blockhead stand in such
Confusion?


Dick. That Barbarossa should suspect my Truth! --


Wingate. The Fellow's stark staring mad -- get out of the Room you Villain,
get out of the Room


Dick stands in a sullen Mood. Gargle. Come, come, young Man, every thing is
easy, don't spoil all again -- go and change your Dress, and come Home to your
Business -- nay, nay, be ruled by me


Thrusts him off. Wingate. I Am very peremptory, Friend Gargle; if he vexes me
once more, I Will have nothing to say to him -- well, but, now I think of it -- I
have Cocker's Arithmetic below Stairs in the Counting House -- I Will step and
get it for him, and so he shall take it Home with him -- Friend Gargle your
Servant.


Gargle. Mr. Wingate a good Evening to you -- you will send him Home to his
Business --


Wingate. He shall follow you home directly. Five Eighths of Three Sixteenths
of a Pound! -- multiply the Numerator by the Denominator; five Times Sixteen is
ten Times Eight, ten Times Eight is Eighty, and -- a -- a -- carry one Exit.


Enter Dick and Simon. Simon. Lord love ye, Master -- I Am so glad you're come
back -- come, we had as good even gang Home to my Master Gargle's --


Dick. No, no, Simon, stay a Moment -- this is but a scurvy Coat I have on --
and I know my Father has always some Jemmy Thing locked up in his Closet -- I
know his Ways -- He takes 'em in Pawn, for he will never part with a Shilling
without Security.


Simon. Hush! he will hear us -- stay, I believe he is coming up Stairs.


Dick. [Goes to the Door and listens.] No, no, -- no, -- he is going down,
growling and grumbling -- ay, -- say ye so Scoundrel, Rascal -- Let him bite
the Bridle -- Six Times Twelve is Seventy-two -- all is safe Man, never fear
him. -- Do you stand here -- I shall dispatch this Business in a Crack. --


Simon. Blessings on him! what is he about now? -- why the Door is locked,
Master. --


Dick. Ay, but I can easily force the Lock -- you shall see me do it as well as
any Sir John Brute of 'em all -- this right Leg here is the best Locksmith in
England -- so, so, -- [forces the Door and goes in.]


Simon. He Is at his Plays again -- Odds my Heart, he is a rare Hand -- he will go
through with it, I Will warrant him -- Old Cojer must not smoke that I have any
Concern -- I must be main cautious -- Lord bless his Heart, he is to teach me to
act Scrub. -- He begun with me long ago, and I got as far as the Jesuit before
a went out of Town: -- Stratagem.
Scrub -- Coming, Sir -- Lord, Ma'am, Iv'e a whole Packet full of News -- some
say one Thing and some say another; but, for my Part, Maam, -- I believe he is a
Jesuit -- that is main pleasant -- I believe he is a Jesuit.


Re-enter Dick. Dick. Macbeth.
I have done the Deed -- Did thou not hear a Noise?


Simon. No, Master; we are all snug. --


Dick. This Coat will do charmingly -- I have bilked the old Fellow nicely. --
Vide the Mourning Bride.
In a dark Corner of his Cabinet, I found this Paper; what it is the Light will
show.


I promise to pay -- ha! --

I promise to pay to Mr. Moneytrap, or Order, on Demand -- it is his Hand -- a
Note of his -- a Note of his -- yet more -- The Sum of seven Pounds fourteen
Shillings and Seven-pence, Value received, by me

London this 15th June, 1755. -- It Is wanting what should follow -- his Name
should follow -- but it is torn off -- because the Note is paid. --

Simon. O Lud! Dear Sir, you will spoil all -- I wish we were well, out of the
House -- Our best Way, Master, is to make off directly. --


Dick. I will, I will; but first help me on with this Coat -- Simon, you shall
be my Dresser -- you will be fine and happy behind the Scenes. --


Simon. O Lud! it will be main pleasant -- I have been behind the Scenes in the
Country, when I lived with the Man that showed wild Beastices. --


Dick. Hark-ye, Simon; -- when I am playing some deep Tragedy, and Hamlet.
cleave the general Ear with horrid Speech, you must stand between the Scenes,
and cry bitterly


Teaches him. Simon. Yes, Sir.


Dick. And when I Am playing Comedy, you must be ready to laugh your Guts out
[Teaches him.] for I shall be very pleasant -- Tolderoll -- [Dances.]


Simon. Never doubt me, Sir. --


Dick. Very well; now run down and open the Street-Door; I Will follow you in a
Crack.


Simon. I am gone to serve you, Master --


Dick. Richard III.
To serve thyself -- for look ye, Simon, when I am Manager, claim thou of me the
Care of the Wardrobe, with all those Movables, whereof the The Property-Man, in
the Playhouse Phrase, is the Person who gives Truncheons, Daggers, etc. to the
Actors, as Occasion requires.
Property-Man now stands possessed. --


Simon. O Lud! this is charming -- Hush! I am gone.

Going.
Dick. Well, but harkye, Simon, come hither -- Every Man in his Humor.
what Money have you about you Master Matthew?


Simon. But a Tester, Sir,


Dick. A Tester! -- That Is something of the least, Master Matthew, -- let us see
it.


Simon. You have had fifteen Sixpences now --


Dik. Never mind that -- I Will pay you all at my Benefit --


Simon. I don't doubt that, Master -- but mum.

Exit.
Dick, solus. Richard III.
Thus far we run before the Wind. -- An Apothecary! -- make an Apothecary of me!
-- Vide Romeo and Juliet.
what cramp my Genius over a Pestle and Mortar, or mew me up in a Shop, with an
Alligator stuffed, and a beggarly Account of empty Boxes! -- to be culling
Simples, and constantly adding to the he Bills of Mortality. -- No! no! It will
be much better to be pasted up in Capitals, The Part of Romeo by a young
Gentleman who never appeared on any Scage before! -- My Ambition fires at the
Thought -- But hold, -- may not I run some Chance of failing in my Attempt --
Hissed, -- Pelted, -- laughed at, -- not admitted into the Green-Room -- that
will never do -- Venice Preserved.
Down busy Devil, down, down. -- Try it again. -- Loved by the Women, envied by
the Men, applauded by the Pit, clapped by the Gallery, admired by the Boxes.
Dear Colonel, is not he a charming Creature. My Lord, don't you like him of all
things. -- Makes Love like an Angel. -- What an Eye he has? -- fine Legs! --
I Will certainly go to his Benefit. -- Celestial Sounds! -- And then I Will get in
with all the Painters, and have myself put up in every Print-Shop -- in the
Character of Macbeth! "This is a sorry Sight." (stands an Attitude.) In the
Character of Richard (Give me another Horse, bind up my Wounds.) -- this will
do rarely -- and then I have a Chance of getting well married -- O glorious
Thought! -- Tamerlane.
By Heaven I will enjoy it, though but in Fancy -- But, what is o'Clock? -- it
must be almost nine. I Will away at once, this is Club-night. -- 'Egad I Will go to
'em for a while -- the Spouters are all met -- little they think I Am in Town --
they will be surprised to see me -- Off I go, and then for my Assignation with my
Master Gargle's Daughter -- Poor Charlotte! -- she is locked up, but I shall
find Means to settle Matters for her Escape -- She Is a pretty Theatrical Genius
-- If she flies to my Arms like a Hawk to its Perch, it will he so rare an
Adventure, and so Dramatic an Incident; --


The Orphan.
Limbs do your Office, and support me well; Bear me but to her, then fail me if
you can.

END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Scene discovers the Spouting-Club, the Members seated and roaring out Bravo,
while one stands at a Distance repeating. -- 1st. Member. CURSED be your
Senate, cursed your Constitution The Curse of growing Factions, and Divisions
Still vex your Councils. Venice Preserved.
--


2d. Memb. Don't you think this Action a little confined?


1st. Memb. Psha! you Blockhead, don't you know that I Am in Chains? --


2d. Memb. Blockhead say ye? -- was not I the first that took compassion on
you, when you lay like a sneaking Fellow under the Counter, and swept your
Masters Shop in a Morning? when you read nothing but the Young Man's Pocket
Companion, or the True Clerks Vade Mecum, did not I put Chrononhothonthologos
in your Hand?


All. Bravo! Bravo! --


President. Come, Gentlemen, let us have no Disputes. Consider Gentlemen, this
is the Honorable Society of Spouters, and so to put an end to all Animosities,
read the seventh Rule of this Society.


A Member Reads, That Business, or want of Money, shall not be received as an
Excuse for Non-Attendance, nor the Anger of Parents or other Relations, nor the
Complaints of our Masters be ever heard; by which means this Society will be
able to boast its own mimic Heroes, and be a Nursery of Young Actorlings for
the Stage, in spite of the Mechanic Genius of our Friends.

President. That is not the rule I mean; -- but come, Macbeth.
we'll fill a Measure the Table round -- now good Digestion wait on Appetite,
and Health on both.


All. Huzza, huzza, huzza.


President. Come Gentlemen, let us have no Quarrels.


All. Huzza, huzza. --


Scotchman. Come now I Will gee you a Touch of Macbeeth. --


1st. Memb. That will be rare, come let us have it. --


Scotchman. What do lier at Mon? -- I have had muckle Applause at Edinburgh,
when I enacted in the Reegiceede, -- and I now intend to do Macbeeth -- I seed
the D^gger Yesterneet, and I thought I should have killed every one that came in
my way. --


Irishman. Stand out of the way Lads, and you will see me give a Touch of Othello
my Dear -- (takes the Cork and burns it and blacks his Face) The Devil burn the
Cork -- it would not do it fast enough.


1st. Memb. Here, here I Will lend you a helping Hand, (Blacks him.)


(Knocking at the Door.) 2d. Memb. Macbeth.
Open Locks, whoever Knocks. --


Enter Dick. Dick. Ditto.
How now ye Secret, Black, and Midnight Hags? -- what is it ye do?


All. Ha! the Genius come to Town -- Huzza! huzza! -- the Genius --


Dick. How fare the honest Partners of my Heart? -- Jack Hopeless, give us your
Hand -- Guildersten yours -- Ha! Rosencross -- Gentlemen I rejoice to see ye --
But come, the News, the News of the Town! -- has any thing been Damned? -- any
new Performers this Winter? -- How often has Romeo and Juliet been acted? --
come my Bucks inform me, I want News. --


1st. Memb. You shall know all in good Time. -- but prithee my Dear Boy how was
it? -- you played at Bristol, lets hear. --


2d. Memb. Ay, lets have it Dear Dick. --


Dick. Look ye there now -- Suspicious Husband.
lets have it Dear Boy, and Dear Dick. --


1st. Memb. Nay, nay, but how was you received --


Dick. Romeo was my part -- I touched their Souls for 'em, -- every pale Face
from the Wells was there, and so on I went -- but rot 'em, -- never mind them
-- Richard III.
what Bloody Scene has Roscius now to act? --


1st. Memb. Several Things -- But Genius; why did you come to us so late? --
Why did not you come in the Beginning of the Night?


Dick. Why, I intended it: But who should I meet in my Way but my Friend
Catcall, a devilish good Critic; -- and so he and I went together and had our
Pipes, to Every Man in his Humor.
close the Orifice of the Stomach you know; -- and what do you think I learned
of him?


1st. Memb. I cannot say.


Dick. Can you tell, now, whether the Emphasis should be laid upon the Epitaph
By Mistake for the Epithet.
, or the Substantive?


1st. Memb. Why, no. --


Dick. Ever, while you live, lay your Emphasis upon the Epitaph. --


Irishman. Arrah, my Dear, but what is that same Epitaph now?


Dick. Stratagem.
Arrah, my dear Cousin Mackshane, will not you put a Remembrance upon me? --


Irishman. Ow! but is it mocking you are? -- Look-ye; my Dear, if you would be
taking me off -- Don't you call it taking off? -- By my Shoul I Would be making you
take yourself off. -- What? If you're for being obstropolous, I would not
matter you three Skips of a Flea. --


Dick. Nay, prithee, no Offense -- I hope we shall be Brother-players.


Irishman. Ow! then we'd be very good Friends; for you know two of a Trade can
never agree, my Dear.


Scotchman. Lock is certainly reet in his Chapter aboot innate Ideas; for this
Mon is born without any at all -- and the other Mon yonder, I doot, is no great
Heed-piece. --


Dick. What do you intend to appear in?


Irishman. Othollo, my Dear, let me alone; you will see how I Will bodder 'em --
Though by my Shoul, myshelf does not know but I Would be frightened when every Thing
is in a Hub-bub, and nothing to be heard, but Throw him over -- over with him
-- off, off, off the Stage -- Music -- will not y' have some Orange-chips -- will not
y' have some Nonpareills. -- Ow! -- but may be the dear Craturs in the Boxes
will be lucking at my Legs -- Ow! to be sure -- the Devil burn the Luck they will
give 'em. --


Dick. I shall certainly laugh in the Fellow's Face. --


Irishman. Ow! never mind it -- let me alone, my Dear -- may-be I Would see a
little round Face from Dublin in the Pit, may-be I would; but then, will not I be
the first Gentleman of my Name that turned Stage-Play'r? -- My Cousins would
rather see me starve like a Gentleman with Honor and Reputation -- Myshelf
does be ashamed when I think of it. --


Scotchman. Stay till you hear me give a Speecimen of Elocution.


Dick. What, with that Impediment, Sir?


Scotchman. Impeediment! what Impeediment? I do no leesp -- do I? -- I do no
squeent -- I am well leem'd, am I not? --


Irishman. By my Shoul, if you go to that, I am as well timber'd myself as any
of them, and shall make a Figure in genteel and top Comedy. --


Scotchman. I Will give you Speecimen of Mockbeeth --


Irishman. Make Haste, then, and I Will begin Othollo. --


Scotchman. -- Is this a Dagger that I see before me, etc.


Irishman. [collaring him.] Willian, be sure yon prove my Love a Whore, etc.


[Another Member comes forward with his Face powdered, and a pipe in his Hand.]
-- I am thy Father's Spirit, Hamlet --

Dick. Po! Prithee! you're not fat enough for a Ghost. --


Memb. I intend to make my first Appearance in it for all that, only I Am
puzzled about one Thing -- I want to know, when I come on first, whether I
should make a Bow to the Audience?


Another Memb. Now, Gentlemen, for the true Way of Dying -- [spreads a
Blanket.] -- now for a little Phrenzy -- [Repeats a dying Speech, and rolls
himself up in the Blanket.]


[Watch behind the Scenes; Past Five o'Clock, cloudy Morning.] Dick. Hey! past
five o'Clock -- 'Sdeath, I shall miss my Appointment with Charlotte -- I have
staid too long, and shall lose my Proselyte -- Come, let us adjourn. --


All. Ay, let us sally forth. --


Irishman. With all my Heart; though I should, have bodder'd 'em finely if they
had staid.


Scotchman. I should have sheen'd in Mocbeeth -- but never meend it -- I Will go
Venice Preserved.
now to my Friend the Bookseller, and translate Cornelius Tacitus, or Grotius
de Jure Belli, -- and so, Gentlemen, your Servant. --


All. Huzza! Huzza


Dick. Sir John Brute.
We'll scower the Watch -- Confusion to Morality -- I wish the Constable were
married -- Huzza, Huzza --


Irishman. By my Shoul, myshelf did not Care if I had a Wife, with a good
Fortune, to be hindering me from going on -- But no matter -- I may meet with a
willing Cratur somewhere --

Exit singing.
All. Huzza, Huzza! --

Exeunt.
SCENE a Street.
Enter a Watchman. Past five o'Clock, cloudy Morning. Mercy on us -- all mad I
believe in this House -- They Are at this Trade three Nights in the Week, I
think -- Past five o'Clock, a cloudy Morning.

All. Huzza,

(without)
Watchman. What in the Name of Wonder are they all at? --


Hurra, Hurra, without. Enter the Spouters. Dick. Hamlet.
Angels and Ministers of Grace defend us.


1st Memb. Romeo* about nothing.
By Heavens I Will tear you Joint by Joint, and strew this hungry Churchyard with
your Limbs.


Dick. Macbeth.
Avaunt, and quit my Sight -- thy Bones are Marrowless -- There Is no Speculation
in those Eyes, that thou do glare withal.


Watchman. Prithee, don't disturb the Peace --


A Member. Much ado
Be sure you write him down an Ass.


Dick. Macbeth.
Be alive again, and dare me to the Desert with thy Pole, -- take any Shape but
that, and my firm Nerves, shall never tremble --


Watchman. Soho! Soho!


Enter Watchmen from all Parts, some drunk, some coughing, etc. 2d Watchman
What Is the Matter there? --


1st Watchman. Here are the Disturbers of the Peace -- I charge 'em all --


Dick. Richard.
Unmanner'd Slave, advance your Halbert higher than my Breast, or by St. Paul,
I Will strike thee down, and spurn thee, Beggar, for this Insolence --


They fight, Dick is knocked down. Exeunt Watchmen fighting the rest. Dick.
Romeo.
I have it; it will do; -- 'Egad I Will make my Escape now -- O I am Fortune's
Fool --

Exit.
Re-enter Watchmen, etc. Watchman. Come, bring 'em along --


1st Memb. Revenge.
Good Ruffians, hold awhile --


2d Memb. Oroonoko.
I am unfortunate, but not ashamed of being so


Watchman. Come, come, bring 'em along

Exeunt.
SCENE, another Street.
Enter Dick, with a Lanthorn and a Ladder. All Is quiet here; the Coast's clear;
-- now for my Adventure with Charlotte -- this Ladder will do rarely for the
Business -- though it would be better, if it were a Ladder of Ropes -- but hold;
have not I seen something like this on the Stage? -- yes I have in some of the
Entertainments -- Ay, Romeo.
I remember an Apothecary, and hereabout he dwells -- this is my Master
Gargle's; -- being dark the Beggars Shop is shut -- what ho! Apothecary -- but
soft, -- what light breaks through yonder Window -- It is the East, and Juliet is
the Sun, arise fair Sun, etc.

Charlotte. Who Is there? my Romeo?


Dick. The same my Love, if it not thee Displease. --


Charlotte. Hush! not so loud, you will waken my Father. --


Dick. Alas! there is more peril in thy Eye Romeo.
.


Charlotte. Nay, but prithee now -- I tell you you will spoil all -- what made
you stay so long?


Dick. Fair Penitent.
Chide not my Fair, but let the God of Love laugh in thy Eyes, and Revel in thy
Heart. --


Charlotte. As I am a living Soul, you will ruin every thing; be but quiet, and
I Will come down to you --

Going.
Dick. No, no, not so fast -- Charlotte -- let us act the Garden Scene first --


Charlotte. A Fiddlestick for the Garden Scene --


Dick. Nay, then I Will act Ranger -- up I go, Neck or nothing.


Charlotte. Dear Heart, you're enough to frighten a body out of one's Wits --
Don't come up -- I tell you there is no occasion for the Ladder -- I Have settled
every thing with Simon, and he is to let me through the Shop, when he opens it.


Dick. Well, but I tell you I would not give a Farthing for it without the
Ladder, and so, up I go. --


Enter Simon at the Door. Simon. Sir, Sir, Madam, Madam --


Dick. Prithee be quiet Simon -- I am ascending the high Top Gallant of my Joy
--


Simon. An't please you Master, my young Mistress may come through the Shop --
I Am going to sweep it out, and she may Escape that way fast enough --


Charlotte. That will do purely -- and so do you stay where you are, and
prepare to receive me --

Exit from above.
Dick. No, no, but that will not take -- you shall not hinder me from going through my
Part (goes up) Suspicious Husband.
a Woman by all that is lucky -- neither old nor crooked -- in I go -- (goes in)
and for Fear of the Pursuit of the Family, I Will make sure of the Ladder.


Simon. Hist! hist! Master -- leave that there to save me from being suspected
--


Dick. With all my Heart Simon --

Exit from above.
Simon alone. Lord love him, how comical he is! -- it will be fine for me, when
we are playing the Fool together, to call him Brother Martin. " Stratagem.
Brother Martin."


Enter Charlotte. Charlotte. O Lud! I Am frighted out of my Wits, where is he?
--


Simon. He Is a coming, Ma'am -- (calls to him) "Brother Martin."


Enter Dick. Dick. Suspicious Husband.
Cuckold him, Ma'am, by all means, -- I Am your Man.


Charlotte. Well now, I protest and vow, I wonder how you can serve a Body so
-- feel with what a Pit-a-pat Action my Heart beats --


Dick. Old Bachelor.
It Is an Alarm to Love -- quick let me snatch thee to thy Romeo's Arms, etc.
Watchman behind the Scenes. Past Six o'Clock, and a cloudy Morning --


Charlotte. Dear Heart, don't let us stand fooling here -- as I live and
breathe we shall both be taken -- do for Heaven's Sake let us make our Escape.


Watch. Past; Six o'Clock, a cloudy Morning --


Charlotte. It comes nearer and nearer; let us make off --


Dick. Give us your Hand then -- my pretty little Adventurer I attend you. Vi^e
Distressed Mother.
Yes, my dear Charlotte, we will go together, Together to the Theater we'll go,
There to their ravished Eyes our Skill we'll I show, And point new Beauties --
to the Pit below.


Simon. Heaven's bless the Couple of 'em; but mum!

Exit, and shuts the Doors after him.
Enter Bailiff and his Follower. Bailiff. That Is he yonder, as sure as you're
alive -- Ay, it is -- and he has been about some Mischief here.


Follower. No, no, that an't he -- that one wears a laced Coat -- though I cannot
say -- as sure as a Gun, it is he --


Bailiff. Ay, I smoked him at once -- Do you run that Way and stop at the
Bottom of Catherine-Street; I Will go up Drury Lane, and between us both, it will
be odds if we miss him.

Exeunt. Enter Watchman.
Watch. Past Six a Clock and a cloudy Morning. -- Hey-day! what is here, a
Ladder, at Master Gargle's Window? -- I must alarm the Family -- Ho! Master
Gargle --


Knocks at the Door. Gargle above. What Is the Matter? -- How comes this Window
to be open? -- ha! -- a Ladder! -- Who Is below there?


1st. Watch. I hope you an't robbed, Master Gargle? -- As I was going my
Rounds, I found your Window open.


Gargle. I fear this is some of that young Dog's Tricks -- Take away the
Ladder; I must enquire into all this. --

Exit. Enter Simon, like Scrub.
Simon. Vide Stratagem.
Thieves! Murder! Thieves! Popery! --


Watch. What Is the Matter with the Fellow?


Simon. Spare all I have, and take my Life --


Watchman. Any Mischief in the House?


Simon. They broke in with Fire and Sword -- they will be here this Minute --
Five and forty -- this will do Charmingly -- "my young Master taught me this."

Aside.
Watchman. What are there Thieves in the House! --


Simon. With Sword and Pistol, Sir, -- Five and forty


Watch. Nay, then it is Time for me to go, -- for mayhap I may come to have the
worst on it --

Exit Watchman.
Enter Gargle. Gargle. Dear Heart! dear Heart -- she is gone, she is gone -- my
Daughter! my Daughter! -- what is the Fellow in such a Fright for?


Simon. Down on your Knees -- down on your Marrowbones -- (this will make him
think, I know nothing of the Matter -- Bless his Heart for teaching me, -- Down
on your Marrow-bones. --


Gargle. Get up, you Fool, get up -- Dear Heart, I Am all in a Fermentation.

Enter Wingate, reading a News-Paper. Wanted, on good Security, Five hundred
Pounds, for which lawful Interest will be given, and a good Praemium allowed:
Whoever this may suit, Enquire for S. T. at the Crown and Rolls in
Chancery Lane. -- This may be worth looking after. -- I Will have a good Praemium
-- If the Fellow's a Fool, I Will fix my Eye on him -- Other People's Follies are
an Estate to the Man that knows how to make himself useful -- So, Friend
Gargle, -- your up early, I see -- nothing like rising eatly -- nothing to be
got by lying in Bed, like a lubberly Fellow. -- What Is the Matter with you! --
ha! ha! you look like a -- ha! ha! --


Gargle. O -- no Wonder -- My Daughter, my Daughter!


Wingate. Your Daughter! -- what signifies a foolish Girl? --


Gargle. Oh dear Heart! dear Heart! -- out of the Window


Wingate. Fallen out of the Window! -- well, she was a Woman, and it is no
Matter -- if she is dead, she is provided for. -- Here I found the Book -- could
not meet with it last Night -- Here it is -- there is more Sense in it, than in
all their Macbeths and their Trumpery (reads) Cocker's Arithmetic -- look ye
here now, Friend Gargle, -- suppose you have the sixteenth-Part of a Ship, and
I buy one fifth of you, what Share of the Ship do I buy? --


Gargle. Oh dear, Sir, it is a melancholy Case --


Wingate. A melancholy Case indeed to be so ignorant -- why should not a Man
know every thing? One Fifth of one Sixteenth, what Part have I of the whole?
Let me see -- Ill do it a short Way. --


Gargle. Lost beyond Redemption. --


Wingate. Zookers, be quiet Man, you put me out -- Seven Times Seven is
Forty-nine, and six Times Twelve is Seventy-two, -- and -- and -- and -- a --
Here, Friend Gargle, take the Book and give it that Scoundrel of a Fellow. --


Gargle. Lord, Sir, -- He Is returned to his Tricks. --


Wingate. Returned to his Tricks! -- What, -- broke loose again? --


Gargle. Ay, and carried off my Daughter with him. --


Wingate. Carried off your Daughter -- How did the Rascal contrive that?


Gargle. Oh, Dear Sir, -- the Watch alarmed us a while ago, and I found a
Ladder at the Window -- so I suppose my young Madam made her Escape that Way.
--


Wingate. Wounds! what Business had the Fellow with your Daughter?


Gargle. I wish I had never taken him into my House -- He may debauch the poor
Girl --


Wingate. And suppose he does -- she is a Woman an't she? -- Ha! ha! Friend
Gargle, Ha! ha! --


Gargle. Dear Sir, how can you talk thus to a Man distracted?


Wingate. I Will never see the Fellow's Face.


Simon. Secrets! Secrets! Vide Stratagem.



Wingate. What are you in the Secret, Friend? --


Simon. To be sure, there be Secrets in all Families -- but, for my Part, I Will
not speak a Word pro or con, till there is a Peace.


Wingate. You will not speak, Sirrah! -- I Will make you speak -- Do you know
nothing of this Numskull? --


Simon. Who, I Sir? -- He came home last Night from your House, and went out
again directly. --


Wingate. You saw him then --


Simon. Yes Sir, -- saw him to be sure Sir -- he made me open the Shop Door for
him -- he stopped on the Threshold and pointed at one of the Clouds and asked
me if it was not like an Ouzel? --


Wingate. Like an ouzel? -- wounds! what is an Ouzel? --


Gargle. And the young Dog came back in the dead of Night to steal away my
Daughter.


Wingate. I Will tell you what Friend Gargle -- I Will think no more of the Fellow
-- let him bite the Bridle -- I Will go mind my Business, and not miss an
Opportunity.


Gargle. Good now Mr. Wingate, don't leave me in this Affliction, -- consider
when the animal Spirits are properly employed, the whole System's exhilerated,
a proper Circulation in the smaller Dusts or Capillary Vessels --


Wingate. Look ye there now -- the Fellow's at his Ducks again, ha! ha!


Gargle. But when the Spirits are under Influence --


Wingate. Ha! ha! what a fine Fellow you are now? -- you're as Mad with your
Physical Nonsense, as my Son with his Shakespeare and Ben Thompson --


Gargle. Dear Sir, let us go in quest of him -- he shall be well Phlebotomized,
and for the future I Will keep his Solids and Fluids in proper Balance --


Wingate. Don't tell me of your Solids -- I tell you he will never be Solid --
and so I Will go Hamlet.
and mind my Business -- let me see where is this chap -- (reads) ay, ay, at
the Crown and Rolls -- good morning Friend Gargle -- don't plague yourself
about the Numskull -- study Fractions Man; Vulgar Fractions will carry you
through the World, Arithmetical Proportion is when the Antecedent and Consequent,
-- a --

going.
Enter a Porter. Wingate. Who are you pray? -- what do you want? --


Porter. Is one Mr. Gargle here?


Gargle. Yes -- who wants him? --


Porter. Here Is a Letter for you? --


Gargle. Let me see it. O dear Heart! -- (reads) To Mr. Gargle at the Pestle
and Mortar -- 'Slidikins, this is a Letter from that unfortunate young Fellow
--


Wingate. Let me see it Gargle --


Gargle. A moments patience good Mr. Wingate, and this may unravel all --
(reads) -- Poor young Man! -- his Brain is certainly turned -- I cannot make
Head or Tale of it --


Wingate. Ha! ha! -- you're a pretty Fellow -- give it me man -- I Will make it
out for you -- it is his Hand sure enough

(reads) To Mr. Gargle, etc.

Most potent, Grave Othello.
and Reverend Doctor, my very noble and approved good Master, that I have taken
away your Daughter it is most true, true I will Marry her; Hamlet.
-- it is true it is Pity, and Pity it is, it is true. -- What in the name of
Common Sense is all this? Othello.
I have done your Shop some Service, and you know it, no more of that --
Mourning Bride.
yet I could wish, that at this Time, I had not been this Thing -- what can the
Fellow mean? -- For Time Ditto.
may have yet one fated Hour to come which winged with Liberty may overtake
occasion past -- overtake occasion past! -- Time and Tide waits for no Man -- "
Venice Preserved.
I expect redress from thy noble Sorrows -- thine and my poor Countries ever."
R. Wingate.

Mad as a March Hare! I have done with him -- let him stay till the Shoe
pinches, a crack-brained Numskull!


Porter. An't please ye Sir, I fancys the Gentleman is a little beside himself
-- he took hold un me here by the Collar, and called me Villain Othello.
and bid me prove his Wife a Whore -- Lord help him, I never see'd the
Gentleman's Spouse in my born Days before.


Gargle. Is she with him now?


Porter. I believe so -- There a likely young Woman with him all in Tears --


Gargle. My Daughter to be sure --


Wingate. Let the Fellow go and be hanged -- Wounds! I would not go the Length
of my Arm to save the Villain from the Gallows* where was he, Friend, when he
gave you this Letter? --


Porter. I fancy, Master, the Gentleman's Macbeth.
under Troubles -- I brought it from a Spunging-House.


Wingate. From a Spunging-House!


Porter. Yes, Sir, in Grays-Inn-Lane.


Wingate. Let him lie there, let him lie there -- I am glad of it --


Gargle. Do my dear Sir, let us step to him --


Wingate. No, not I, let him stay there -- this it is to have a Genius -- ha!
ha! -- a Genius! -- ha! ha! -- a Genius is a fine Thing indeed! -- ha! ha!

Exit:
Gargle. Poor Man! he has certainly a Fever on his Spirits -- do you step in
with me, honest Man, till I slip on my Coat, and then I Will go after this
unfortunate Boy.


Porter. Yes, Sir, -- it is in Grays-inn-Lane.

Exeunt.
Scene a Spunging-House, Dick and Bailiff at a Table, and Charlotte sitting in
a disconsolate Manner by him. Bailiff. Here Is my Service to you young Gentleman
-- Don't be uneasy -- the Debt is not much -- why do you look so sad?


Dick. Because Mourning Bride.
Captivity has robbed me of a just and dear Diversion.


Bailiff. Never look sulky at me -- I never use any body ill -- Come, it has
been many a good Man's Lot -- here is my Service to you -- but we have no Liquor
-- come, we'll have the other Bowl --


Dick. Venice Preserved.
I Have now not fifty Ducats in the World -- yet still I am in Love, and pleased
with Ruin --


Bailiff. What do you say? -- you have fifty Shillings, I hope. --


Dick. Ditto.
Now thank Heaven! I Am not worth a Groat --


Bailiff. Then there is no Credit here, I can tell you that -- you must get
Bail, or go to Newgate -- who do you think is to pay House-rent for you? -- You
see your Friends will not come near you -- They Have all answered in the old Cant --
I Have promised my Wife never to be Bail for any Body; or, I Have sworn not to do
it -- or I Would lend you the Money if I had it, but desire to be excused from
bailing any Man. -- The Porter you just now sent, will bring the same Answer, I
warrant -- Such Poverty-struck Devils as you shall not stay in my House -- you
shall go to Quod, I can tell you that --

Knocking at the Door.
Bailiff. Coming, coming, I am coming -- I shall lodge you in Newgate, I
promise you, before Night, -- not worth a Groat! -- you're a fine Fellow to
stay in a Man's House -- You shall go to Quod.

Exit.
Dick. Come, clear up, Charlotte, never mind this -- come, now -- let us act
the Prison-Scene in the Mourning-Bride --


Charlotte. How can you think of acting Speeches, when we are in such Distress?
--


Dick. Nay, but my dear Angel. --


Enter Wingate and Gargle. Gargle. Hush! Do, dear Sir, let us listen to him --
I dare say he repents --


Wingate. Wounds! -- what Clothes are those the Fellow has on? -- Zookers, the
Scoundrel has robbed me. --


Dick. Come, now we'll practice an Attitude -- How many of 'em have you? --


Charlotte. Let me see -- one -- two -- three -- and then in the fourth Act,
and then -- O Gemini I have ten at least --


Dick. That will do swimmingly -- I Have a round Dozen myself -- Come now begin
-- you fancy me dead, and I think the same of you -- now mind --

They stand in Attitudes.
Wingate. Only mind the Villain. --


Dick. O thou soft fleeting Form of Lindamira! --


Charlotte. Romeo and Juliet.
Illusive Shade of my beloved Lord!


Dick. Ditto,
She lives, she speaks and we shall still be happy. --


Wingate, You lie you Villain, you shall not be happy. --

Knocks him down.
Dick. (on the Ground.) Richard III.
Perdition catch your Arm, the Chance is thine. --


Gargle. So my young Madam -- I have found you again. --


Dick. Romeo.
Capulet forbear; Paris let loose your Hold -- She is my Wife -- our Hearts are
twined together. --


Wingate. Sirrah! Villain! I Will break every Bone in your Body --

Strikes.
Dick. Romeo and Juliet.
Parents have flinty Hearts, no Tears can move 'em: Children must be wretched --


Wingate. Get off the Ground, you Villain; get off the Ground. --


Dick. It Is a Pity there are no Scene-drawers to lift me --


Wingate. A Scoundrel, to rob your Father; you Rascal I Have a Mind to break your
Head.


Dick. Barbarossa.
What, like this?

Takes off his Wig, and shows two Patches on his Head.
Wingate. It Is mighty well, young Man -- Zookers! I made my own Fortune; and
I Will take a Boy out of the Blue-coat-Hospital, and give him all I have. --
Look-ye here, Friend Gargle -- You know I Am not a hard-hearted Man -- The
Scoundrel, you know, has robbed me; so, do you see, I will not hang him, -- I Will
only transport the Fellow -- And so, Mr. Catchpole, -- you may take him to
Newgate. --


Gargle. Well but, Dear Sir, you know I always intended to marry my Daughter
into your Family; and if you let the young Man be ruined, my Money must all go
into another Channel. --


Wingate. How Is that? -- into another Channel! -- Must not lose the handling of
his Money -- Why, I told you, Friend Gargle, I Am not a hard-hearted Man. --


Gargle. Why no, Sir -- but your Passions -- However, if you will but make the
young Gentleman serve out the last Year of his Apprenticeship, you know I shall
be giving over, and I may put him into all my Practice. --


Wingate. Ha! ha! -- Why -- if the Blockhead would but get as many crabbed
physical Words from Hyppocrites and Allen, as he has from his nonsensical
Trumpery, -- ha! ha! -- I don't know, between you and I, but he might pass for
a very good Physician. --


Dick. Romeo and Juliet.
And must I leave thee, Juliet? --


Charlotte. Nay, but, prithee now have done with your Speeches -- You see we
are brought to the last Distress, and so you had better make it up --

Aside to Dick.
Dick. Why for you're Sake, my Dear, I could almost find it in my Heart --


Wingate. You Will settle your Money on your Daughter? --


Gargle. You know it was always my Intention. --


Wingate. I must not let the Cash slip through my Hands: (Aside.) Look-ye here,
young Man -- I am the best-natured Man in the World -- How came this Debt,
Friend?


Bailiff. The Gentleman gave his Note at Bristol, I understands, where he
boarded -- it is but twenty Pounds. --


Wingate. Twenty Pounds! Well, why don't you send to your Friend Shakespeare now
to bail you -- ha! ha! I should like to see Shakespeare give Bail -- ha! ha! --
Mr. Catchpole, will you take Bail of Ben Thompson, and Shakespeare and Odyssey
Popes? --


Bailiff. No such People have been here, Sir -- are they Housekeepers? --


Dick. Mourning-Bride.
You do not come to mock my Miseries? --


Gargle. Hush! young man, you will spoil all -- Let me speak to you -- How is
your Digestion?


Dick. Macbeth.
Throw Physic to the Dogs, I Will none of it --


Charlotte. Nay, but dear Dick for my Sake --


Wingate. What says he, Gargle --


Gargle. He repents, Sir -- he will reform. --


Wingate. That Is right Lad -- now you're right -- and if you will but serve out
your Time, my Friend Gargle here, will make a Man of you -- Wounds! you will have
his Daughter and all his Money -- And if I hear no more of your Trumpery, and
you mind your Business, and stick to my little Charlotte, and make me a
Grandfather in my old Days, -- Egad, you shall have all mine too -- that is
when I Am dead. --


Dick. Charlotte, -- that will do rarely, and we may go to the Play as often as
we please --


Charlotte. O Gemini, it will be the purest Thing in the World, and we'll see
Romeo and Juliet every Time it is acted. --


Dick. Ay, and that will be a hundred Times in a Season at least. -- Besides,
it will be like a Play, if I reform at the End -- Hamlet.
Sir, free me so far in your most generous Thoughts, that I have shot my Arrow
over the House, and hurt my Brother --


Wingate. What do you say, Friend? --


Charlotte. Nay, but prithee now do it in plain English --


Dick. Well, well, I will -- He knows nothing of Metaphors -- Sir, you shall
find for the future, that we'll both endeavor to give you all the Satisfaction
in our Power. --


Wingate. Very well, that is right -- you may do very well -- Friend Gargle, I Am
overjoyed --


Gargle. Cheerfulness, Sir, is the principal Ingredient in the Composition of
Health. --


Wingate. Wounds! Man, let us hear no more of your Physic -- here, young Man,
put this Book in your Pocket, and let me see how soon you will be Master of
Vulgar Fractions. -- Mr. Catchpole, step home with me, and I Will pay you the
Money -- you seem to be a notable Sort of a Fellow, Mr. Catchpole, -- could you
nab a Man for me?


Catchpole. -- Fast enough, Sir, when I Have the Writ --


Wingate. Very well, come along -- I lent a young Gentleman a Hundred Pounds,
-- a cool Hundred he called it -- ha! ha! -- it did not stay to cool with him
-- I had a good Praemium; but I sha'n't wait a Moment for that -- come along,
young Man; -- what Right have you to twenty Pounds? -- give you twenty Pounds!
-- I never was obliged to my Family for twenty Pounds -- but I Will say no more
-- if you have a Mind to thrive in this World, make yourself useful is the
Golden Rule.


Dick. My dear Charlotte, as you are to be my Reward, I will be a new Man --


Charlotte. Well, now I shall see how much you love me --


Dick. It shall be my Study to deserve you -- and since we do'n't, go on the
Stage, it is some Comfort that the World's a Stage, and all the Men and Women
merely Players.


Some play the upper, some the under Parts,
And most assume what is foreign to their Hearts:
Thus, Life is but a Tragi-comic Jest,
And all is Farce and Mummery at best.
FINIS.

