THE LIVES OF THE POETS OF Great Britain and Ireland. By Mr. CIBBER, and other
Hands.

VOL. V.

LONDON: Printed for R. GRIFFITHS, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLIII.

CONTENTS.
A
AAron Hill Vol. V Page 252 Addison III 305 Amhurst V 335 Anne, Countess of
Winchelsea III 321
B
Bancks III 174 Banks V 310 Barclay I 30 Barton Booth IV 178 Beaumont I 154
Behn, Aphra III 17 Betterton III 156 Birkenbead II 178 Blackmore V 177 Booth.
Vid. Barton Boyce V 160 Boil, E. Orrery II 182 Brady IV 62 Brewer II 1 Brook,
Sir Fulk Greville I 173 Brown, Tom III 204 Buckingham, Duke of II 301 Budgell V
1 Butler II 233
C
Carew I 249 Cartwright W. I 277 Centlivre, Mrs IV 58 Chandler, Mrs V 346
Chapman I 229 Chaucer I 1 Chudleigh, Lady III 177 Churchyard I 63 Cleveland II
16 Cockaine II 216 Cockburne, Mrs V 104 Codrington IV 292 Concanen V 27
Congreve IV 83 Corbet I 220 Cotton III 301 Cowley II 42 Crashaw I 344 Creech
III 186 Crown III 104 Croxal V 288
D
Daniel I 145 Davenant II 63 Davies I 167 Dawes, Arch. of York Vol. IV Page 81
Day I 178 Decker I 152 De Foe IV 312 Denham III 1 Dennis IV 215 Done I 202
Dorset, Earl of I 55 Dorset, Earl of III 112 Drayton I 212 Drummond I 302
Dryden III 64 D'Urfey III 331
E
Eachard IV 198 Etheredge III 33 Eusden IV 193 Eustace Budgel V 1
F
Fairfax I 223 Fanshaw II 36 Farqubar III 124 Faulkland I 286 Fenton IV 164
Ferrars I 69 Flecknoe III 61 Fletcher I 154 Ford I 349 Frowde V 343
G
Garth III 263 Goy IV 250 Gildon III 326 Goff I 170 Goldsmith II 13 Gower I 20
Granville, Lord Landsdown IV 239 Green I 87 Grevills, Lord Brook I 173
Grierson V 101
H
Habington II 11 Hall, Bishop I 320 Hammond V 307 Hammond, Esquire IV 192 Harding I
25 Harrington I 149 Hausted I 300 Head II 199 Heywood, John I 66 Heywood,
Jasper I 106 Heywood, Thomas I 271 Hill V 252 Hinchliffe V 24 Hobbs II 202
Halliday II 20 Howard, Esquire III 14 Howard, Sir Robert III 57 Howel II 32 Hughes
IV 27
I
Johnson, Ben. I 235 Johnson, Charles V 341
K
Killegrew, Anne Vol. II Page 224 Killegrew, Thomas III 10 Killegrew, William
III 55 King, Bishop of Chichester II 90 King, Dr. William III 228
L
Lauderdale, Earl of V 143 Langland I 18 Lansdown, Lord Granville IV 239 Lee II
227 L'Estrange IV 295 Lillo V 338 Lilly I 110 Lodge I 164 Lydgate III 23
M
Main II 104 Manley, Mrs IV 4 Markham I 268 Marloe I 85 Marston I 120 Marvel IV
124 Massinger II 90 May II 5 Maynwaring III 193 Miller V 332 Middleton I 352
Milton II 108 Mitchel IV 347 Monk, the Hon. Mrs. III 201 Montagne, Earl of
Hallifax III 243 More, Sir Thomas I 32 More, Smyth, IV 210 Motteaux IV 1
Mountford III 40
N
Nabbes II 24 Nash I 347 Needler IV 23 Newcastle, Duchess of II 162 Newcastle,
Duke of II 169
O
Ogilby II 265 Oldham II 337 Oldmixon IV 200 Orrery, Boil, Earl of II 182
Otway II 324 Overbury I 113 Ozell IV 352
P
Pack IV 77 Phillips, Mrs. Katherine II 148 Phillips, John Vol. III Page 143
Phillips, Ambrose V 122 Pilkington V 315 Pit V 298 Pomfret III 218 Pope V 219
Prior IV 43
R
Raleigh I 180 Randolph I 226 Ravenscroft III 138 Rochester II 269 Roscommon,
Earl of III 344 Row, Nicholas, III 272 Row, Mrs. IV 326 Rowley I 346
S
Sackville, E. of Dorset I 55 Sandys I 282 Savage V 32 Sedley III 94 Settle III
345 Sewel IV 188 Shadwell III 48 Shakespeare I 123 Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham
III 285 Sheridan V 65 Shirley II 26 Sidney I 76 Skeleton I 27 Smith, Matthew II
323 Smith, Edmund IV 303 Smyth, More IV 220 Southern V 326 Spenser I 91 Sprat
III 236 Stapleton II 102 Steel IV 112 Stepney IV 72 Stirling, Earl of I 313
Suckling I 294 Surry, Earl of I 46 Swift V 73 Sylvester I 143
T
Tate III 258 Tailor II 9 Theobald V 276 Thomas, Mrs. IV 146 Thompson V 190
Tickell V 17 Trap V 146
V
Vanbrugh IV 99
W
Waller II 240 Walsh III 151 Ward IV 293 Welsted IV 205 Wharton II 219 Wharton,
Philip Duke of IV 260 Wycherley III 248 Winchelsea, Anne, Countess of III 321
Wotton I 252 Wyatt I 53
Y
Yalden IV 342
THE LIVES OF THE POETS.
EUSTACE BUDGELL, Esquire
WAS the eldest son of Gilbert Budgell, D. D. of St. Thomas near Exeter, by his
first wife Mary, the only daughter of Dr. William Gulston, bishop of Bristol;
whose sister Jane married dean Addison, and was mother to the famous Mr.
Addison the secretary of state. This family of Budgell is very old, and has
been settled, and known in Devonshire above 200 years See Budgell's Letter to
Cleomenes. Appendix p. 79.
.

Eustace was born about the year 1685, and distinguished himself very soon at
school, from whence he was removed early to Christ's Church College in Oxford,
where he was entered a gentleman commoner. He staid some years in that
university, and afterward went to London, where, by his father's directions,
he was entered of the Inner Temple, in order to be bred to the Bar, for which
his father had always intended him: but instead of the Law, he followed his own
inclinations, which carried him to the study of polite literature, and to the
company of the genteelest people in town. This proved unlucky; for the father,
by degrees, grew uneasy at his son's not getting himself called to the Bar, nor
properly applying to the Law, according to his r^^te^ated directions and
request; and the son complained of the strictness and insufficiency of his
father's allowance, and constantly urged the necessity of his living like a
gentleman, and of his spending a great deal of money. During this stay,
however, at the Temple, Mr. Budgell made a strict intimacy and friendship with
Mr. Addison, who was first cousin to his mother; and this last gentleman being
appointed, in the year 1710, secretary to lord Wharton, the lord lieutenant of
Ireland, he made an offer to his friend Eustace of going with him as one of the
clerks in his office. The proposal being advantageous, and Mr. Budgell being
then on bad terms with his father, and absolutely unqualified for the practice
of the Law, it was readily accepted. Nevertheless, for fear of his father's
disapprobation of it, he never communicated his design to him 'till the very
night of his setting out for Ireland, when he wrote him a letter to inform him
at once of his resolution and journey. This was in the beginning of April 1710,
when he was about twenty five years of age. He had by this time read the
classics, the most reputed historians, and all the best French, English, or
Italian writers. His apprehension was quick, his imagination fine, and his
memory remarkably strong; though his greatest commendations were a very genteel
address, a ready wit and an excellent elocution, which showed him to advantage
wherever he went. There was, notwithstanding, one principal defect in his
disposition, and this was an infinite vanity, which gave him so insufferable a
presumption, as led him to think that nothing was too much for his capacity,
nor any preferment, or favor, beyond his deserts. Mr. Addison's fondness for
him perhaps increased this disposition, as he naturally introduced him into all
the company he kept, which at that time was the best, and most ingenious in the
two kingdoms. In short, they lived and lodged together, and constantly followed
the lord lieutenant into England at the same time.

It was now that Mr. Budgell commenced author, and was partly concerned with
Sir Richard Steel and Mr. Addison in writing the Tatler. The Spectators being
set on foot in 1710-11, Mr. Budgell had likewise a share in them, as all the
papers marked with an X may easily inform the reader, and indeed the eighth
volume was composed by Mr. Addison and himself See The Be, vol. ii. p. 854.
, without the assistance of Sir Richard Steel. The speculations of our author
were generally liked, and Mr. Addison was frequently complimented upon the
ingenuity of his kinsman. About the same time he wrote an epilogue to the
Distressed Mother 'Till then it was usual to discontinue an epilogue after the
sixth night. But this was called for by the audience, and continued for the
whole run of this play: Budgell did not scruple to sit in the pit, and call for
it himself.
, which had a greater run than any thing of that kind ever had before, and has
had this peculiar regard shown to it since, that now, above thirty years
afterward, it is generally spoke at the representation of that play. Several
little epigrams and songs, which have a good deal of wit in them, were also
written by Mr. Budgell near this period of time, all which, together with the
known affection of Mr. Addison for him, raised his character so much, as to
make him be very generally known and talked of.

His father's death in 1711 threw into his hands all the estates of the family,
which were about 950 l. a year, although they were left incumbered with some
debts, as his sather was a man of pride and spirit, kept a coach and six, and
always lived beyond his income, notwithstanding his spiritual preferments, and
the money he had received with his wives. Dr. Budgell had been twice married,
and by his first lady left five children living after him, three of whom were
sons, Enstace, our author, Gilbert, a Clergyman, and William, the fellow of New
College in Oxford. By his last wife (who was Mrs. Fortescue, mother to the late
master of the rolls, and who survived him) he had no issue. Notwithstanding
this access of fortune, Mr. Budgell in no wise altered his manner of living; he
was at small expense about his person, stuck very close to business, and gave
general satisfaction in the discharge of his office.

Upon the laying down of the Spectator, the Guardian was set up, and in this
work our author had a hand along with Mr. Addison and Sir Richard Steel. In
the preface it is said, those papers marked with an asterisk are by Mr. Budgell.

In the year 1713 he published a very elegant translation of Theophrastus's
Characters, which Mr. Addison in the Lover says, 'is the best version extant of
any ancient author in the English language.' It was dedicated to the lord
Hallifax, who was the greatest patron our author ever had, and with whom he
always lived in the greatest intimacy.

Mr. Budgell having regularly made his progress in the secretary of state's
office in Ireland; upon the arrival of his late Majesty in England, was
appointed under secretary to Mr. Addison, and chief secretary to the Lords
Justices of Ireland. He was made likewise deputy clerk of the council in that
kingdom, and soon after chose member of the Irish parliament, where he became a
very good speaker. The post of under secretary is reckoned worth 1500 l. a
year, and that of deputy clerk to the council 250 l. a year. Mr. Budgell set
out for Ireland the 8th of October, 1714, officiated in his place in the privy
council the 14th, took possession of the secretary's office, and was
immediately admitted secretary to the Lords Justices. In the same year at a
public entertainment at the Inns of Court in Dublin, he, with many people of
distinction, was made an honorary bencher. At his first entering upon the
secretary's place, after the removal of the tories on the accession of his late
Majesty, he lay under very great difficulties; all the former clerks of his
office refusing to serve, all the books with the form of business being
secreted, and every thing thrown into the utmost confusion; yet he surmounted
these difficulties with very uncommon resolution, assiduity, and ability, to
his great honor and applause.

Within a twelvemonth of his entering upon his employments, the rebellion broke
out, and as, for several years (during all the absences of the lord lieutenant)
he had discharged the office of secretary of state, and as no transport office
at that time subsisted, he was extraordinarily charged with the care of the
embarkation, and the providing of shipping (which is generally the province of
a field-officer) for all the troops to be transported to Scotland. However, he
went through this extensive and unusual complication of business, with great
exactness and ability, and with very singular disinterestedness, for he took no
extraordinary service money on this account, nor any gratuity, or fees for any
of the commissions which passed through his office for the colonels and
officers of militia then raising in Ireland. The Lords Justices pressed him to
draw up a warrant for a very handsome present, on account of his great zeal,
and late extraordinary pains (for he had often sat up whole nights in his
office) but he very genteely and firmly refused it.

Mr. Addison, upon becoming principal secretary of state in England in 1717,
procured the place of accomptant and comptroller general of the revenue in
Ireland sor Mr. Budgell, which is worth 400 l. a year, and might have had him
for his under secretary, but it was thought more expedient for his Majesty's
service, that Mr. Budgell should continue where he was. Our author held these
several places until the year 1718, at which time the duke of Bolton was
appointed lord lieutenant. His grace carried one Mr. Edward Webster over with
him (who had been an under clerk in the Treasury) and made him a privy
counselor and his secretary. This gentleman, 'twas said, insisted upon the
quartering a friend on the under secretary, which produced a misunderstanding
between them; for Mr. Budgell positively declared, he would never submit to any
such condition whilst he executed the office, and affected to treat Mr. Webster
himself, his education, abilities, and family, with the utmost contempt. He was
indiscreet enough, prior to this, to write a lampoon, in which the lord
lieutenant was not spared: he would publish it (so fond was he of this brat of
his brain) in opposition to Mr. Addison's opinion, who strongly persuaded him
to suppress it; as the publication, Mr. Addison said, could neither serve h^s
interest, or reputation. Hence many discontents arose between them, 'till at
length the lord lieutenant, in support of his secretary, superseded Mr.
Budgell, and very soon after got him removed from the place of
accomptant-general. However, upon the first of these removals taking place, and
upon some hints being given by his private secretary, captain Guy Dickens (now
our minister at Stockholm) that it would not probably be safe for him to remain
any longer in Ireland, he immediately entrusted his papers and private concerns
to the hands of his brother William, then a clerk in his office, and set out
for England. Soon after his arrival he published a pamphlet representing his
case, entitled, A Letter to the Lord **** from Eustace Budgell, Esquire Accomptant
General of Ireland, and late Secretary to their Excellencies the Lords Justices
of that Kingdom; eleven hundred copies of which were sold off in one day, so
great was the curiosity of the public in that particular. Afterward too in the
Post-Boy of January 17, 1718-19, he published an Advertisement to justify his
character against a report that had been spread to his disadvantage: and he did
not scruple to declare in all companies that his life was attempted by his
enemies, or otherwise he should have attended his seat in the Irish Parliament.
His behavior, about this time, made many of his friends judge he was become
delirious; his passions were certainly exceeding strong, nor were his vanity
and jealousy less. Upon his coming to England he had lost no time in waiting
upon Mr. Addison, who had resigned the seals, and was retired into the country
for the sake of his health; but Mr. Addison found it impossible to stem the
tide of opposition, which was every where running against his kinsman, through
the influence and power of the duke of Bolton. He therefore dissuaded him in
the strongest manner from publishing his case, but to no manner of purpose,
which made him tell a friend in great anxiety, 'Mr. Budgell was wiser than any
man he ever knew, and yet he supposed the world would hardly believe he acted
contrary to his advice.' Our author's great and noble friend the lord Hallifax
was dead, and my lord Orrery, who held him in the highest esteem, had it not in
his power to procure him any redress. However, Mr. Addison had got a promise
from lord Sunderland, that as soon as the present clamor was a little abated,
he would do something for him.

Mr. Budgell had held the considerable places of under secretary to the Lord
Lieutenant, and secretary to the Lords Justices for four years, during which
time he had never been absent four days from his office, nor ten miles from
Dublin. His application was indefatigable, and his natural spirits capable of
carrying him through any difficulty. He had lived always genteelly, but
frugally, and had saved a large sum of money, which he now engaged in the
South Sea scheme. During his abode in Ireland, he had collected materials for
writing a History of that kingdom, for which he had great advantages, by having
an easy recourse to all the public offices; but what is become of it, and
whether he ever finished it, we are not certainly informed. It is undoubtedly a
considerable loss, because there is no tolerable history of that nation, and
because we might have expected a satisfactory account from so pleasing a writer.

He wrote a pamphlet, after he came to England, against the famous Peerage
Bill, which was very well received by the public, but highly offended the earl
of Sunderland. It was exceedingly cried up by the opposition, and produced some
overtures of friendship at the time, from Mr. Robert Walpole, to our author.
Mr. Addison's death, in the year 1719, put an end, however, to all his hopes of
succeeding at court, where he continued, nevertheless, to make several
attempts, but was constantly kept down by the weight of the duke of Bolton. In
the September of that year he went into France, through all the strong places
in Flanders and Brabant, and all the considerable towns in Holland, and then
went to Hanover, from whence he returned with his Majesty's retinue the
November following.

But the fatal year of the South Sea, 1720, ruined our author entirely, for he
lost above 20,000 l. in it; however he was very active on that occasion, and
made many speeches at the general courts of the South Sea Company in
Merchant-Taylors Hall, and one in particular, which was afterward printed both
in French and English, and run to a third edition. And in 1721 he published a
pamphlet with success, called, A Letter to a Friend in the Country, occasioned
by a Report that there is a Design still forming by the late Directors of the
South Sea Company, their Agents and Associates, to issue the Receipts of the 3d
and 4th Subscriptions at 1000 l. per Cent. and to extort about 10 Millions more
from the miserable People of Great Britain; with some Observations on the
present State of Affairs both at Home and Abroad. In the same year he published
A Letter to Mr. Law upon his Arrival in Great Britain, which run through seven
editions very soon. Not long afterward the duke of Portland, whose fortune had
been likewise destroyed by the South Sea, was appointed governor of Jamaica,
upon which he immediately told Mr. Budgell he should go with him as his
secretary, and should always live in the same manner with himself, and that he
would contrive every method of making the employment profitable and agreeable
to him: but his grace did not know how obnoxious our author had rendered
himself; for within a few days after this offer's taking air, he was acquainted
in form by a secretary of state, that if he thought of Mr. Budgell, the
government would appoint another governor in his room.

After being deprived of this last resource, he tried to get into the next
parliament at several places, and spent near 5000 l. in unsuccessful attempts,
which completed his ruin. And from this period he began to behave and live in
a very different manner from what he had ever done before; wrote libellous
pamphlets against Sir Robert Walpole and the ministry; and did many unjust
things with respect to his relations; being distracted in his own private
fortune, as, indeed, he was judged to be, in his senses; torturing his
invention to find out ways of subsisting and eluding his ill-stars, his pride
at the same time working him up to the highest pitches of resentment and
indignation against all courts and courtiers.

His younger brother, the fellow of New-College, who had more weight with him
than any body, had been a clerk under him in Ireland, and continued still in
the office, and who bad fair for rising in it, died in the year 1723, and after
that our author seemed to pay no regard to any person. Mr. William Budgell was
a man of very good sense, extremely steady in his conduct, and an adept in all
calculations and mathematical questions; and had besides great goodnature and
easiness of temper.

Our author as I before observed, perplexed his private affairs from this time
as much as possible, and engaged in numberless lawsuits, which brought him
into distresses that attended him to the end of his life.

In 1727 Mr. Budgell had a 1000 l. given him by the late Sarah, duchess dowager
of Marlborough, to whose husband (the famous duke of Marlborough) he was a
relation by his mother's side, with a view to his getting into parliament. She
knew he had a talent for speaking in public, and that he was acquainted with
business, and would probably run any lengths against the ministry. However this
scheme failed, for he could never get chosen.

In the year 1730 and about that time, he closed in with the writers against
the administration, and wrote many papers in the Craftsman. He likewise
published a pamphlet, entitled, A Letter to the Craftsman, from E. Budgell, Esquire
occasioned by his late presenting an humble complaint against the right
honorable Sir Robert Walpole, with a Postscript. This ran to a ninth edition.
Near the same time too he wrote a Letter to Cleomenes King of Sparta, from E.
Budgell, Esquire being an Answer Paragraph by Paragraph to his Spartan Majesty's
Royal Epistle, published some time since in the Daily Courant, with some
Account of the Manners and Government of the Ancient Greeks and Romans, and
Political Reflections thereon. And not long after there came out A State of one
of the Author's Cases before the House of Lords, which is generally printed
with the Letter to Cleomenes: He likewise published on the same occasion a
pamphlet, which he calls Liberty and Property, by E. Budgell, Esquire wherein he
complains of the seizure and loss of many valuable papers, and particularly a
collection of Letters from Mr. Addison, lord Hallifax, Sir Richard Steel, and
other people, which he designed to publish; and soon after he printed a sequel
or second part, under the same title.

The same year he also published his Poem upon his Majesty's Journey to
Cambridge and New Market, and dedicated it to the Queen. Another of his
performances is a poetical piece, entitled A Letter to his Excellency Ulrick
D'Ypres, and C --, in Answer to his excellency's two Epistles in the
Daily-Courant; with a Word or Two to Mr. Osborn the Hyp Doctor, and C --. These
several performances were very well received by the public.

In the year 1733 he began a weekly pamphlet (in the nature of a Magazine,
though more judiciously composed) called The Be, which he continued for about
100 Numbers, that bind into eight Volumes Octavo, but at last by quarrelling
with his booksellers, and filling his pamphlet with things entirely relating to
himself, he was obliged to drop it. During the progress of this work, Dr.
Tindall's death happened, by whose will Mr. Budgell had 2000 l. left him; and
the world being surprised at such a gift, immediately imputed it to his making
the will himself. This produced a paper-war between him and Mr. Tindall, the
continuator of Rapin, by which Mr. Budgell's character considerably suffered;
and this occasioned his Bee's being turned into a mere vindication of himself.

It is thought he had some hand in publishing Dr. Tind^ll's Christianity as old
as the Creation; and he often talked of another additional volume on the same
subject, but never published it. However he used to enquire very frequently
after Dr. Conybear's health (who had been employed by her late majesty to
answer the first, and had been rewarded with the dean^ry of Christ-Church for
his pains) saying he hoped Mr. Dean would live a little while longer, that he
might have the pleasure of making him a bishop, for he intended very soon to
publish the other volume of Tindall, which would do the business. Mr. Budgell
promised likewise a volume of several curious pieces of Tindall's, that had
been committed to his charge, with the life of the doctor; but never fulfilled
his promise Vide Be, Vol. II. page 1105.
.

During the publication of the Be a smart pamphlet came out, called A Short
History of Prime Ministers, which was generally believed to be written by our
author; and in the same year he published A Letter to the Merchants and
Tradesmen of London and Bristol, upon their late glorious behavior against the
Excise Law.

After the extinction of the Be, our author became so involved with lawsuits,
and so incapable of living in the manner he wished and affected to do, that he
was reduced to a very unhappy situation. He got himself called to the bar, and
attended for some time in the courts of law; but finding it was too late to
begin that profession, and too difficult for a man not regularly trained to it,
to get into business, he soon quitted it. And at last, after being cast in
several of his own suits, and being distressed to the utmost, he determined to
make away with himself. He had always thought very loosely of revelation, and
latterly became an avowed deist; which, added to his pride, greatly disposed
him to this resolution.

Accordingly within a few days after the loss of his great cause, and his
estates being decreed for the satisfaction of his creditors, in the year 1736
he took boat at Somerset-Stairs (after filling his pockets with stones upon the
beach) ordered the waterman to shoot the bridge, and whilst the boat was going
under it threw himself overboard. Several days before he had been visibly
distracted in his mind, and almost mad, which makes such an action the less
wonderful.

He was never married, but left one natural daughter behind him, who afterward
took his name, and was lately an actress at Drury Lane.

It has been said, Mr. Budgell was of opinion, that when life becomes uneasy to
support, and is overwhelmed with clouds, and sorrows, that a man has a natural
right to take it away, as it is better not to live, than live in pain. The
morning before he carried his notion of self-murder into execution, he
endeavored to persuade his daughter to accompany him, which she very wisely
refused. His argument to induce her was; life is not worth the holding. -- Upon
Mr. Budgell's beauroe was found a slip of paper; in which were written these
words. What Cato did, and Addison approved Alluding to Cato's destroying
himself.
,
Cannot be wrong. --


Mr. Budgell had undoubtedly strong natural parts, an excellent education, and
set out in life with every advantage that a man could wish, being settled in
very great and profitable employments, at a very early age, by Mr. Addison: But
by excessive vanity and indiscretion, proceeding from a false estimation of his
own weight and consequence, he overstretched himself, and ruined his interest
at court, and by the succeeding loss of his fortune in the South Sea, was
reduced too low to make any other head against his enemies. The unjustifiable
and dishonorable lawsuits he kept alive, in the remaining part of his life,
seem to be entirely owing to the same disposition, which could never submit to
the living beneath what he had once done, and from that principle he kept a
chariot and house in London to the very last.

His end was like that of many other people of spirit, reduced to great
streights; for some of the greatest, as well as some of the most infamous men
have laid violent hands upon themselves. As an author where he does not speak
of himself, and does not give a loose to his vanity, he is a very agreeable and
deserving writer; not argumentative or deep, but very ingenious and
entertaining, and his style is peculiarly elegant, so as to deserve being
ranked in that respect with Addison's, and is superior to most of the other
English writers. His Memoirs of the Orrery Family and the Boyle's, is the most
indifferent of his performances; though the translations of Phalaris's Epistles
in that work are done with great spirit and beauty.

As to his brothers, the second, Gilbert, was thought a man of deeper learning
and better judgment when he was young than our author, but was certainly
inferior to him in his appearance in life; and, it is thought, greatly inferior
to him in every respect. He was author of a pretty Copy of Verses in the VIIIth
Vol. of the Spectators, Numb. 591. which begins thus, Conceal, fond man,
conceal the mighty smart,
Nor tell Corinna she has fired thy heart.


And it is said that it was a repulse from a lady of great fortune, with whom
he was desperately in love whilst at Oxford, and to whom he had addressed these
lines, that made him disregard himself ever after, neglect his studies, and
fall into a habit of drinking. Whatever was the occasion of this last vice it
ruined him. A lady had commended and desired to have a copy of his Verses once,
and he sent them, with these lines on the first leaf -- Lucretius hence thy
maxim I abjure
Naught comes from naught, nothing can naught procure.
If to these lines your approbation's joined,
Something I Am sure from nothing has been coined.


This gentleman died unmarried, a little after his brother Eustace, at Exeter;
having lived in a very disreputable manner for some time, and having
degenerated into such excessive indolence, that he usually picked up some boy
in the streets, and carried him into the coffee-house to read the newspapers
to him. He had taken deacon's orders some years before his death, but had
always been averse to that kind of life; and therefore became it very ill, and
could never be prevailed upon to be a priest.

The third brother William, fellow of New-College in Oxford, died (as I
mentioned before) one of the clerks in the Irish secretary of state's office,
very young. He had been deputy accomptant general, both to his brother and his
successor; and likewise deputy to Mr. Addison, as keeper of the records in
Birmingham-Tower. Had he lived, it is probable he would have made a considerable
figure, being a man of sound sense and learning, with great prudence and
honor. His cousin Dr. Downs, then bishop of Londonderry, was his zealous
friend, and Dr. Lavington the present bishop of Exeter, his fellow-collegian,
was his intimate correspondent. Of the two sisters, the eldest married captain
Graves of Thanks, near Saltash in Cornwall, a sea-officer, and died in 1738,
leaving some children behind her; and the other is still alive, unmarried. The
father Dr. Gilbert Budgell, was esteemed a sensible man, and has published a
discourse upon Prayer, and some Sermons There is an Epigram of our author's,
which I don't remember to have seen published any where, written upon the death
of a very fine young lady. She was, she is,
(What can there more be said)
On Earth the first,
In Heaven the second Maid.


See a Song of our author's in Stee'e's Miscellanies, published in 1714. Page
210.

There is an Epigram of his printed in the same book and in many collections,
Upon a Company of had Dancers to good Music. How ill the motion with the music
suits!
So fiddled Orpheus -- and so danced the Brutes.



.

THOMAS TICKELL, Esquire
THIS Gentleman, well known to the world by the friendship and intimacy which
subsisted between him and Mr. Addison, was the son of the revd. Mr. Richard
Tickell, who enjoyed a considerable preferment in the North of England. Our
poet received his education at Queen's-College in Oxford, of which he was a
fellow.

While he was at that university, he wrote a beautiful copy of verses addressed
to Mr. Addison, on his Opera of Rosamond. These verses contained many elegant
compliments to the author, in which he compares his softness to Corelli, and
his strength to Virgil Jacob.
. The Opera first Italian masters taught,
Enriched with songs, but innocent of thought;
Britannia's learned theater disdains
Melodious trifles, and enervate strains;
And blushes on her injured stage to see,
Nonsense well-tuned with sweet stupidity.
No charms are wanting to thy artful song
Soft as Corelli, and as Virgil strong.


These complimentary lines, a few of which we have now quoted, so effectually
recommended him to Mr. Addison, that he held him in esteem ever afterward; and
when he himself was raised to the dignity of secretary of state, he appointed
Mr. Tickell his under-secretary. Mr. Addison being obliged to resign on account
of his ill-state of health, Mr. Craggs who succeeded him, continued Mr. Tickell
in his place, which he held till that gentleman's death. When Mr. Addison was
appointed secretary, being a diffident man, he consulted with his friends about
disposing such places as were immediately dependent on him. He communicated to
Sir Richard Steel, his design of preferring Mr. Tickell to be his
under-secretary, which Sir Richard, who considered him as a petulant man,
warmly opposed. He observed that Mr. Tickell was of a temper too enterprising
to be governed, and as he had no opinion of his honor, he did not know what
might be the consequence, if by insinuation and flattery, or by bolder means,
he ever had an opportunity of raising himself. It holds pretty generally true,
that diffident people under the appearance of distrusting their own opinions,
are frequently positive, and though they pursue their resolutions with
trembling, they never fail to pursue them. Mr. Addison had a little of this
temper in him. He could not be persuaded to set aside Mr. Tickell, nor even had
secrecy enough to conceal from him Sir Richard's opinion. This produced a great
animosity between Sir Richard and Mr. Tickell, which subsisted during their
lives.

Mr. Tickell in his life of Addison, prefixed to his own edition of that great
man's works, throws out some unmannerly reflections against Sir Richard, who was
at that time in Scotland, as one of the commissioners on the sorfeited estates.
Upon Sir Richard's return to London, he dedicates to Mr. Congreve, Addison's
Comedy, called the Drummer, in which he takes occasion very smartly to re^ort
upon Tickell, and clears himself of the imputation laid to his charge, namely
that of valuing himself upon Mr. Addison's papers in the Spectator.

In June 1724 Mr. Tickell was appointed secretary to the Lords Justices in
Ireland, a place says Mr. Coxeter, which he held till his death, which happened
in the year 1740.

It does not appear that Mr. Tickell was in any respect ungrateful to Mr.
Addison, to whom he owed his promotion; on the other hand we find him take
every opportunity to celebrate him, which he always performs with so much zeal,
and earnestness, that he seems to have retained the most lasting sense of his
patron's favors. His poem to the earl of Warwick on the death of Mr. Addison,
is very pathetic. He begins it thus, If dumb too long, the drooping Muse has
strayed,
And left her debt to Addison unpaid,
Blame not her silence, Warwick, but bemoan,
And judge, O judge, my bosom by your own.
What mourner ever felt poetic fires!
Slow comes the verse, that real woe inspires:
Grief unaffected suits but ill with art,
Or flowing numbers with a bleeding heart.


Mr. Tickell's works are printed in the second volume of the Minor Poets, and
he is by far the most considerable writer amongst them. He has a very happy
talent in versification, which much exceeds Addison's, and is inferior to few
of the English Poets, Mr. Dryden and Pope excepted. The first poem in this
collection is addressed to the supposed author of the Spectator.

In the year 1713 Mr. Tickell wrote a poem, called The Prospect of Peace,
addressed to his excellency the lord privy seal; which met with so favorable a
reception from the public, as to go through six editions. The sentiments in this
poem are natural, and obvious, but no way extraordinary. It is an assemblage of
pretty notions, poetically expressed; but conducted with no kind of art, and
altogether without a plan. The following exordium is one of the most shining
parts of the poem. Far hence be driven to Scythia's stormy shore
The drum's harsh music, and the cannon's roar;
Let grim Bellona haunt the lawless plain,
Where Tartar clans, and grizly Cossacks reign;
Let the steeled Turk be deaf to Matrons cries,
See virgins ravished, with relentless eyes,
To death, gray heads, and smiling infants doom,
Nor spare the promise of the pregnant womb:
Over wasted kingdoms spread his wide command,
The savage lord of an unpeopled land.
Her guiltless glory just Britannia draws
From pure religion, and impartial laws,
To Europe's wounds a mother's aid she brings,
And holds in equal scales the rival kings:
Her generous sons in choicest gifts abound,
Alike in arms, alike in arts renowned.


The Royal Progress. This poem is mentioned in the Spectator, in opposition to
such performances, as are generally written in a swelling style, and in which
the bombast is mistaken for the sublime. It is meant as a compliment to his
late majesty, on his arrival in his British dominions. An imitation of the
Prophesy of Nereus. Horace, Book I. Ode XV. -- This was written about the year
1715, and intended as a ridicule upon the enterprise of the earl of Mar; which
he prophesies will be crushed by the duke of Argyle. An Epistle from a Lady in
England, to a gentleman at Avignon. Of this piece five editions were sold; it
is written in the manner of a Lady to a Gentleman, whose principles obliged him
to be an exile with the Royal Wanderer. The great propension of the Jacobites
to place confidence in imaginary means; and to construe all extraordinary
appearances, into ominous signs of the restoration of their king is very well
touched. Was it for this the sun's whole luster failed,
And sudden midnight over the Moon prevailed!
For this did Heaven display to mortal eyes
Aerial knights, and combats in the skies!
Was it for this Northumbrian streams looked red!
And Thames driven backwards showed his secret bed!
False Auguries! the insulting victors scorn!
Even our own prodigies against us turn!
O portents construed, on our side in vain!
Let never Tory trust eclipse again!
Run clear, ye fountains! be at peace, ye skies;
And Thames; henceforth to thy green bordersrise!
An Ode, occasioned by his excellency the earl of Stanhope's Voyage to France.
A Prologue to the University of Oxford. Thoughts occasioned by the sight of an
original, picture of King Charles the Is It, taken at the time of his Trial. A
Fragment of a Poem, on Hunting. A Description of the Phoenix, from Claudian. To
a Lady; with the Description of the Phoenix. Part of the Fourth Book of Lucan
translated. The First Book of Homer's Iliad. Kensington-Gardens. Several
Epistles and Odes. This translation was published much about the same time with
Mr. Pope's. But it will not bear a comparison; and Mr. Tickell cannot receive a
greater injury, than to have his verses placed in contradistinction to Pope's.
Mr. Melmoth, in his Letters, published under the name of Fitz Os^orne, has
produced some parallel passages, little to the advantage of Mr. Tickell, who if
he fell greatly short of the elegance and beauty of Pope, has yet much exceeded
Mr. Congreve, in what he has attempted of Homer.


In the life of Addison, some farther particulars concerning this translation
are related; and Sir Richard Steel, in his dedication of the Drummer to Mr.
Congreve, gives it as his opinion, that Addison was himself the author.

These translations, published at the same time, were certainly meant as rivals
to one another. We cannot convey a more adequate idea of this, than in the
words of Mr. Pope, in a Letter to James Craggs, Esquire dated July the 15th, 1715.
'SIR,
'They tell me, the busy part of the nation are not more busy about Whig and
Tory; than these idle fellows of the feather, about Mr. Tickell's and my
translation. I (like the Tories) have the town in general, that is, the mob on
my side; but it is usual with the smaller part to make up in industry, what
they want in number; and that is the case with the little senate of Cato.
However, if our principles be well considered, I must appear a brave Whig, and
Mr. Tickell a rank Tory. I translated Homer, for the public in general, he to
gratify the inordinate desires of one man only. We have, it seems, a great Turk
in poetry, who can never bear a brother on the throne; and has his Mutes too, a
set of Medlers, Winkers, and Whisperers, whose business it is to strangle all
other offsprings of wit in their birth. The new translator of Homer, is the
humblest slave he has, that is to say, his first minister; let him receive the
honors he gives me, but receive them with fear and trembling; let him be proud
of the approbation of his absolute lord, I appeal to the people, as my rightful
judges, and masters; and if they are not inclined to condemn me, I fear no
arbitrary high-flying proceeding, from the Court faction at Button's. But after
all I have said of this great man, there is no rupture between us. We are each
of us so civil, and obliging, that neither thinks he is obliged: And I for my
part, treat with him, as we do with the Grand Monarch; who has too many great
qualities, not to be respected, though we know he watches any occasion to
oppress us.'




Thus we have endeavored to exhibit an Idea of the writings of Mr. Tickell, a
man of a very elegant genius: As there appears no great invention in his works,
if he cannot be placed in the first rank of Poets; yet from the beauty of his
numbers, and the real poetry which enriched his imagination, he has, at least,
an unexceptionable claim to the second.

Mr. WILLIAM HINCHLIFFE,
WAS the son of a reputable tradesman of St. Olave's in Southwark, and was born
there May 12, 1692; was educated at a private grammar school with his intimate
and ingenious friend Mr. Henry Needler. He made a considerable progress in
classical learning, and had a poetical genius. He served an apprenticeship to
Mr. Arthur Bettesworth, Bookseller in London, and afterward followed that
business himself near thirty years, under the Royal Exchange, with reputation
and credit, having the esteem and friendship of many eminent merchants and
gentlemen. In 1718 he married Jane, one of the daughters of Mr. William Leigh,
an eminent citizen. Mrs. Hinchliffe was sister of William Leigh, Esquire one of his
Majesty's justices of the peace for the county of Surry, and of the revd.
Thomas Leigh, late rector of Heyford in Oxfordshire, by whom he had two sons
and three daughters, of which only one son and one daughter are now living. He
died September 29, 1742, and was buried in the parish church of St. Margaret's
Lothbury, London.

In 1714 he had the honor to present an Ode to King George I. on his Arrival
at Greenwich, which is printed in a Collection of Poems, Amorous, Moral, and
Divine, which he published in octavo, 1718, and dedicated them to his friend
Mr. Needler.

He published a History of the Rebellion of 1715, and dedicated it to the late
Duke of Argyle.

He made himself master of the French tongue by his own application and study;
and in 1734 published a Translation of Boulainviller's Life of Mahomet, which
is well esteemed, and dedicated it to his intimate and worthy friend Mr.
William Duncombe, Esquire

He was concerned, with others, in the publishing several other ingenious
performances, and has left behind him in manuscript, a Translation of the nine
first Books of Telemachus in blank Verse, which cost him great labor, but he
did not live to finish the remainder.

He is the author of a volume of poems in 8vo. many of which are written with a
true poetical spirit.

The INVITATION This piece is not in Mr. Hinchliffe's works, but is assuredly
his.
.
1.
O come Lavinia, lovely maid,
Said Dion, stretched at ease,
Beneath the walnut's fragrant shade,
A sweet retreat! by nature made
With elegance to please.
2.
O leave the court's deceitful glare,
Loathed pageantry and pride,
Come taste our solid pleasures here,
Which angels need not blush to share,
And with blessed men divide.
3.
What raptures were it in these bowers,
Fair virgin, chaste, and wise,
With thee to lose the learned hours,
And note the beauties in these flowers,
Concealed from vulgar eyes.
4.
For thee my gaudy garden blooms,
And richly colored glows;
Above the pomp of royal rooms,
Or purpled works of Persian looms,
Proud palaces disclose.
5.
Haste, nymph, nor let me sigh in vain,
Each grace attends on thee;
Exalt my bliss, and point my strain,
For love and truth are of thy train,
Content and harmony.
Mr. MATTHEW CONCANEN.
THIS gentleman was a native of Ireland, and was bred to the Law. In this
profession he seems not to have made any great figure. By some means or other
he conceived an aversion to Dr. Swift, for his abuse of whom, the world taxed
him with ingratitude. Concanen had once enjoyed some degree of Swift's favor,
who was not always very happy in the choice of his companions. He had an
opportunity of reading some of the Dr's poems in MS. which it is said he
thought fit to appropriate and publish as his own.

As affairs did not much prosper with him in Ireland, he came over to London,
in company with another gentleman, and both commenced writers. These two
friends entered into an extraordinary agreement. As the subjects which then
attracted the attention of mankind were of a political cast, they were of
opinion that no species of writing could so soon recommend them to public
notice; and in order to make their trade more profitable, they resolved to
espouse different interests; one should oppose, and the other defend the
ministry. They determined the side of the question each was to espouse, by
tossing up a halfpenny, and it fell to the share of Mr. Concanen to defend the
ministry, which task he performed with as much ability, as political writers
generally discover.

He was for some time, concerned in the British, and London Journals, and a
paper called The Speculatist. These periodical pieces are long since buried in
neglect, and perhaps would have even sunk into oblivion, had not Mr. Pope, by
his satirical writings, given them a kind of disgraceful immortality. In these
Journals he published many scurrilities against Mr. Pope; and in a pamphlet
called, The Supplement to the Profound, he used him with great virulence, and
little candor. He not only imputed to him Mr. Brome's verses (for which he
might indeed seem in some degree accountable, having corrected what that
gentleman did) but those of the duke of Buckingham and others. To this rare
piece some body humorously persuaded him to take for his motto, De profundis
clamavi. He afterward wrote a paper called The Daily Courant, wherein he
showed much spleen against lord Bolingbroke, and some of his friends. All these
provocations excited Mr. Pope to give him a place in his Dunciad. In his second
book, l. 287, when he represents the dunces diving in the mud of the Thames for
the prize, he speaks thus of Concanen; True to the bottom see Concanen creep,
A cold, long winded, native of the deep!
If perseverance gain the diver's prize,
Not everlasting Blackmore this denies.


In the year 1725 Mr. Concanen published a volume of poems in 8vo. consisting
chiefly of compositions of his own, and some few of other gentlemen; they are
addressed to the lord Gage, whom he endeavors artfully to flatter, without
offending his modesty. 'I shall begin this Address, says he, by declaring that
the opinion I have of a great part of the following verses, is the highest
indication of the esteem in which I hold the noble character I present them to.
Several of them have authors, whose names do honor to whatever patronage they
receive. As to my share of them, since it is too late, after what I have
already delivered, to give my opinion of them, I Will say as much as can be said
in their favor. I Will affirm that they have one mark of merit, which is your
lordship's approbation; and that they are indebted to fortune for two other
great advantages, a place in good company, and an honorable protection.'

The gentlemen, who assisted Concanen in this collection, were Dean Swift, Mr.
Parnel, Dr. Delany, Mr. Brown, Mr. Ward, and Mr. Stirling. In this collection
there is a poem by Mr. Concanen, called A Match at Football, in three Cantos;
written, it is said, in imitation of The Rape of the Lock. This performance is
far from being despicable; the versification is generally smooth; the design is
not ill conceived, and the characters not unnatural. It perhaps would be read
with more applause, if The Rape of the Lock did not occur to the mind, and, by
forcing a comparison, destroy all the satisfaction in perusing it; as the
disproportion is so very considerable. We shall quote a few lines from the
beginning of the third canto, by which it will appear that Concanen was not a
bad rhimer. In days of yore a lovely country maid
Ranged over these lands, and through these forests strayed;
Modest her pleasures, matchless was her frame,
Peerless her face, and Sally was her name.
By no frail vows her young desires were bound,
No shepherd yet the way to please her found.
Thoughtless of love the beauteous nymph appeared,
Nor hoped its transpor^s, nor its torments feared.
But careful fed her flocks, and graced the plain,
She lacked no pleasure, and she felt no pain.
She viewed our motions when we tossed the ball,
And smiled to see us take, or ward, a fall;
Till once our leader chanced the nymph to spy,
And drank in poison from her lovely eye.
Now pensive grown, he shunned the long-lov'd plains.
His darling pleasures, and his favored swains,
Sighed in her absence, sighed when she was near,
Now big with hope, and now dismayed with fear:
At length with falt'ring tongue he pressed the dame,
For some returns to his unpitied flame;
But she disdained his suit, despised his care,
His form unhandsome, and his bristled hair:
Forward she sprung, and with an eager pace
The god pursued, nor fainted in the race;
Swi^t as the frighted hind the virgin flies,
When the woods ecchoe to the hunters cries:
Swi^t as the fleetest hound her flight she traced.
When over the lawns the frighted hind is chased.
The winds which sported with her flowing vest
Displayed new charms, and heightened all the rest:
Those charms displayed, increased the gods desire,
What cooled her bosom, set his breast on fire:
With equal speed, for diff^rent ends they move,
Fear lent the virgin wings, the shepherd love:
Panting at length, thus in her fright she prayed,
Be quick ye powers, and save a wretched maid,
Protect my honor, shelter me from shame,
Beauty and life with pleasure I disclaim.


Mr. Concanen was also concerned with the late Mr. Room, and a certain eminent
senator, in making The Jovial Crew, an old Comedy, into a Ballad Opera; which
was performed about the year 1730; and the profits were given entirely to Mr.
Concanen. Soon after he was preferred to be attorney general in Jamaica, a post
of considerable eminence, and attended with a very large income. In this island
he spent the remaining part of his days, and, we are informed made a tolerable
accession of fortune, by marrying a planter's daughter, who surviving him was
left in the possession of several hundred pounds a year. She came over to
England after his death, and married the honorable Mr. Hamilton.

RICHARD SAVAGE, Esquire
THIS unhappy gentleman, who led a course of life imbittered with the most
severe calamities, was not yet destitute of a friend to close his eyes. It has
been remarked of Cowley, who likewise experienced many of the vicissitudes of
fortune, that he was happy in the acquaintance of the bishop of Rochester, who
performed the last offices which can be paid to a poet, in the elegant Memorial
he made of his Life. Though Mr. Savage was as much inferior to Cowley in
genius, as in the rectitude of his life, yet, in some respect, he bears a
resemblance to that great man. None of the poets have been more honored in the
commemoration of their history, than this gentleman. The life of Mr. Savage was
written some years after his death by a gentleman, who knew him intimately,
capable to distinguish between his follies, and those good qualities which were
often concealed from the bulk of mankind by the abjectness of his condition.
From this account However slightly the author of Savage's life passes over the
less amiable characteristics of that unhappy man; yet we cannot but discover
therein, that vanity and ingratitude were the principal ingredients in poor
Savage's composition; nor was his veracity greatly to be depended on. No wonder
therefore, if the good-natured writer suffered his better understanding to be
misled, in some accounts relative to the poet we are now speaking of -- Among
many, we shall at present only take notice of the following, which makes too
conspicuous a figure to pass by entirely unnoticed. In this life of Savage it is
related, that Mrs. Oldfield was very fond of Mr. Savage's conversation, and
allowed him an annuity, during her life, of 50 l. -- These facts are equally
illgrounded: -- There was no foundation for them. That Savage's misfortunes
pleaded for pity, and had the desired effect on Mrs. Oldfield's compassion, is
certain: -- But she so much disliked the man, and disapproved his conduct, that
she never admitted him to her conversation, nor suffered him to enter her
house. She, indeed, often relieved him with such donations, as spoke her
generous disposition. -- But this was on the solicitation of friends, who
frequently set his calamities before her in the most piteous light; and from a
principle of humanity, she became not a little instrumental in saving his life.
we have compiled that which we now present to the reader.

In the year 1697 Anne countess of Macclesfield, having lived for some time on
very uneasy terms with her husband, thought a public confession of adultery the
most expeditious method of obtaining her liberty, and therefore declared the
child with which she then was big was begotten by the earl of Rivers. This
circumstance soon produced a separation, which, while the earl of Macclesfield
was prosecuting, the countess, on the 10th of January 1697-8, was delivered of
our author; and the earl of Rivers, by appearing to consider him as his own,
left no room to doubt of her declaration. However strange it may appear, the
countess looked upon her son, from his birth, with a kind of resentment and
abhorrence. No sooner was her son born, than she discovered a resolution of
disowning him, in a short time removed him from her sight, and committed him to
the care of a poor woman, whom she directed to educate him as her own, and
enjoined her never to inform him of his true parents. Instead of defending his
tender years, she took delight to see him struggling with misery, and continued
her persecution, from the first hour of his life to the last, with an
implacable and restless cruelty. His mother, indeed, could not affect others
with the same barbarity, and though she, whose tender sollicitudes should have
supported him, had launched him into the ocean of life, yet was he not wholly
abandoned. The lady Mason, mother to the countess, undertook to transact with
the nurse, and superintend the education of the child. She placed him at a
grammar school near St. Albans, where he was called by the name of his nurse,
without the least intimation that he had a claim to any other. While he was at
this school, his father, the earl of Rivers, was seized with a distemper which
in a short time put an end to his life. While the earl lay on h^s deathbed, he
thought it his duty to provide for him, amongst his other natural children, and
therefore demanded a positive account of him. His mother, who could no longer
refuse an answer, determined, at least, to give such, as should deprive him for
ever of that happiness which competency affords, and declared him dead; which
is, perhaps, the first instance of a falsehood invented by a mother, to deprive
her son of a provision which was designed him by another. The earl did not
imagine that there could exist in nature, a mother that would r^in her son,
without enriching herself, and therefore bestowed upon another son six thousand
pounds, which he had before in his will bequeathed to Savage. The same cruelty
which incited her to inte^cept this provision intended him, suggested another
project, worthy of such a disposition. She endeavored to rid herself from the
danger of being at any time made known to him, by sending him secretly to the
American Plantations; but in this contrivance her malice was defeated.

Being still restless in the persecution of her son, she f^^med another scheme
of burying him in poverty and obscurity; and that the state of his life, if not
the place of his residence, might keep him for ever at a distance from her, she
ordered him to be placed with a Sho^maker in Holbourn, that after the usual
time of trial he might become his apprentice. It is generally reported, that
this project was, for some time, successful, and that Savage was employed at
the awl longer than he was willing to confess; but an unexpected discovery
determined him to quit his occupation.

About this time his nurse, who had always treated him as her own son, died;
and it was natural for him to take care of those effects, which by her death
were, as he imagined, become his own. He therefore went to her house, opened
her boxes, examined her papers, and found some letters written to her by the
lady Mason, which informed him of his birth, and the reasons for which it was
concealed.

He was now no longer satisfied with the employment which had been allotted
him, but thought he had a right to share the affluence of his mother, and
therefore, without scruple, applied to her as her son, and made use of every
art to awake her tenderness, and attract her regard. It was to no purpose that
he frequently solicited her to admit him to see her, she avoided him with the
utmost precaution, and ordered him to be excluded from her house, by whomsoever
he might be introduced, and what reason soever he might give for entering it.

Savage was at this time so touched with the discovery of his real mother, that
it was his frequent practice to walk in the dark evenings for several hours
before her door, in hopes of seeing her by accident.

But all his assiduity was without effect, for he could neither soften her
heart, nor open her hand, and while he was endeavoring to ^o^se the affections
of a mother, he was reduced to the miseries of want. In this situation he was
obliged to find other means of support, and became by necessity an author.

His first attempt in that province was, a poem against the bishop of Bangor,
whose controversy, at that time, engaged the attention of the nation, and
furnished the curious with a topic of dispute. Of this performance Mr. Savage
was afterward ashamed, as it was the crude effort of a yet uncultivated
genius. He then attempted another kind of writing, and, while but yet eighteen,
offered a comedy to the stage, built upon a Spanish plot; which was refused by
the players. Upon this he gave it to Mr. Bullock, who, at that time rented the
Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields of Mr. Rich, and with messieurs Keen, Pack,
and others undertook the direction thereof. Mr. Bullock made some slight
alterations, and brought it upon the stage, under the title of Woman's a
Riddle, but allowed the real author no part of the profit. This occasioned a
quarrel between Savage and Bullock; but it ended without bloodshed, though not
without high words: Bullock insisted he had a translation of the Spanish play,
from whence the plot was taken, given him by the same lady who had bestowed it
on Savage. -- Which was not improbable, as that whimsical lady had given a copy
to several others.

Not discouraged, however, at this repulse, he wrote, two years after, Love in
a Veil, another Comedy borrowed likewise from the Spanish, but with little
better success than before; for though it was received and acted, yet it
appeared so late in the year, that Savage obtained no other advantage from it,
than the acquaintance of Sir Richard Steel, and Mr. Wilks, by whom, says the
author of his Life, he was pitied, caressed, and relieved. Sir Richard Steel
declared in his favor, with that genuine benevolence which constituted his
character, promoted his interest with the utmost zeal, and taking all
opportunities of recommending him; he asserted, ' that the inhumanity of his
mother had given him a right to find every good man his father.' Nor was Mr.
Savage admitted into his acquaintance only, but to his confidence and esteem.
Sir Richard intended to have established him in some settled scheme of life,
and to have contracted a kind of alliance with him, by marrying him to a
natural daughter, on whom he intended to bestow a thousand pounds. But Sir
Richard conducted his affairs with so little economy, that he was seldom able
to raise the sum, which he had offered, and the marriage was consequently
delayed. In the mean time he was officiously informed that Mr. Savage had
ridiculed him; by which he was so much exasperated that he withdrew the
allowance he had paid him, and never afterward admitted him to his house.

He was now again abandoned to fortune, without any other friend but Mr. Wilks,
a man to whom calamity seldom complained without relief. He naturally took an
unfortunate wit into his protection, and not only assisted him in any casual
distresses, but continued an equal and steady kindness to the time of his
death. By Mr. Wilks's interposition Mr. Savage once obtained of his mother
fifty pounds, and a promise of one hundred and fifty more, but it was the fate
of this unhappy man, that few promises of any advantage to him were ever
performed.

Being thus obliged to depended upon Mr. Wilks, he was an assiduous frequenter
of the theaters, and, in a short time, the amusements of the stage took such a
possession of his mind, that he was never absent from a play in several years.

In the year 1723 Mr. Savage brought another piece on the stage. He made choice
of the subject of Sir Thomas Overbury: If the circumstances in which he wrote
it be considered, it will afford at once an uncommon proof of strength of
genius, and an evenness of mind not to be ruffled. During a considerable part
of the time in which he was employed upon this performance, he was without
lodging, and often without food; nor had he any other conveniences for study
than the fields, or the street; in which he used to walk, and form his
speeches, and afterward step into a shop, beg for a few moments the use of pen
and ink, and write down what he had composed, upon paper which he had picked up
by accident.

Mr. Savage had been for some time distinguished by Aaron Hill, Esquire with very
particular kindness; and on this occasion it was natural to apply to him, as an
author of established reputation. He therefore sent this Tragedy to him, with a
few verses, in which he desired his correction. Mr. Hill who was a man of
unbounded humanity, and most accomplished politeness, readily complied with his
request; and wrote the prologue and epilogue, in which he touches the
cirumstances of the author with great tenderness.

Mr. Savage at last brought his play upon the stage, but not till the chief
actors had quitted it, and it was represented by what was then called the
summer-company. In this Tragedy Mr. Savage himself performed the part of Sir
Thomas Overbury, with so little success, that he always blotted out his name
from the list of players, when a copy of his Tragedy was to be shown to any of
his friends. This play however procured him the notice and esteem of many
persons of distinction, for some rays of genius glimmered through all the mists
which poverty and oppression had spread over it. The whole profits of this
performance, acted, printed, and dedicated, amounted to about 200 l. But the
generosity of Mr. Hill did not end here; he promoted the subseription to his
Miscellanies, by a very pathetic representation of the author's sufferings,
printed in the Plain-Dealer, a periodical paper written by Mr. Hill. This
generous effort in his favor soon produced him seventy-guineas, which were
left for him at Button's, by some who commiserated his misfortunes.

Mr. Hill not only promoted the subscription to the Miscellany, but furnished
likewise the greatest part of the poems of which it is composed, and
particularly the Happy Man, which he published as a specimen. To this
Miscellany he wrote a preface, in which he gives an account of his mother's
cruelty, in a very uncommon strain of humor, which the success of his
subscriptions probably inspired.

Savage was now advancing in reputation, and though frequently involved in very
perplexing nec^ssities, appeared however to be gaining on mankind; when both
his fame and his life were endangered, by an event of which it is not yet
determined, whether it ought to be mentioned as a crime or a calamity. As this
is by far the most interesting circumstance in the life of this unfortunate
man, we shall relate the particulars minutely.

On the 20th of November 1727 Mr. Savage came from Richmond, where he had
retired, that he might pursue his studies with less interruption, with an
intent to discharge a lodging which he had in Westminster; and accidentally
meeting two gentlemen of his acquaintance, whose names were Merchant and
Gregory, he went in with them to a neighbouting Coffee-House, and sat drinking
till it was late. He would willingly have gone to bed in the same house, but
there was not room for the whole company, and therefore they agreed to ramble
about the streets, and divert themselves with such amusements as should occur
till morning. In their walk they happened unluckily to discover light in
Robinson's Coffee-House, near Charing Cross, and went in. Merchant with some
rudeness demanded a room, and was told that there was a good fire in the next
parlour, which the company were about to leave, being then paying their
reckoning. Merchant not satisfied with this answer, rushed into the room, and
was followed by his companions. He then petulantly placed himself between the
company and the fire; and soon afterward kicked down the table. This produced
a quarrel, swords were drawn on both sides; and one Mr. James Sinclair was
killed. Savage having wounded likewise a maid that held him, forced his way
with Gregory out of the house; but being intimidated, and confused, without
resolution, whether to fly, or stay, they were taken in a back court by one of
the company, and some soldiers, whom he had called to his assistance.

When the day of the trial came on, the court was crowded in a very unusual
manner, and the public appeared to interest itself as in a cause of general
concern. The witnesses against Mr. Savage and his friends, were the woman who
kept the house, which was a house of ill-fame, and her maid, the men who were
in the room with Mr. Sinclair, and a woman of the town, who had been drinking
with them, and with whom one of them had been seen in bed.

They swore in general, that Merchant gave the provocation, which Savage and
Gregory drew their swords to justify; that Savage drew first, that he stabbed
Sinclair, when he was not in a posture of defense, or while Gregory commanded
his sword; that after he had given the thrust he turned pale, and would have
retired, but that the maid clung round him, and one of the company endeavored
to detain him, from whom he broke, by cutting the maid on the head.

Sinclair had declared several times before his death, for he survived that
night, that he received his wound from Savage; nor did Savage at his trial deny
the fact, but endeavored partly to extenuate it, by urging the suddenness of
the whole action, and the impossibility of any ill design, or premeditated
malice, and partly to justify it by the necessity of self-defence, and the
hazard of his own life, if he had lost that opportunity of giving the thrust.
He observed that neither reason nor law obliged a man to wait for the blow
which was threatened, and which if he should suffer, he might never be able to
return; that it was always allowable to prevent an assault, and to preserve
life, by taking away that of the adversary, by whom it was endangered.

With regard to the violence with which he endeavored his escape, he declared
it was not his design to fly from justice, or decline a trial, but to avoid the
expenses and severities of a prison, and that he intended to appear at the bar,
without compulsion. This defense which took up more than an hour, was heard by
the multitude that thro^ged the court, with the most attentive and respectful
silence. Those who thought he ought not to be acquitted, owned that applause
could not be refused him; and those who before pitied his misfortunes, now
reverenced his abilities.

The witnesses who appeared against him were proved to be persons of such
characters as did not entitle them to much credit; a common strumpet, a woman
by whom such wretches were entertained, and a man by whom they were supported.
The character of Savage was by s^veral persons of distinction asserted to be
that of a modest inoffensive man, not inclined to broils, or to insolence, and
who had to that time been only known by his misfortunes and his wit.

Had his audience been his judges, he had undoubtedly been acquitted; but Mr.
Page, who was then upon the bench, treated him with the most brutal severity,
and in summing up the evidence endeavored to exasperate the jury against him,
and misrepresent his defense. This was a provocation, and an insult, which the
prisoner could not bear, and therefore Mr. Savage resolutely asserted, that his
cause was not heartily explained, and began to recapitulate what he had before
said; but the judge having ordered him to be silent, which Savage treated with
contempt, he commanded that he should be taken by force from the bar. The jury
then heard the opinion of the judge, that good characters were of no weight
against positive evidence, though they might turn the scale, where it was
doubtful; and that though two men attack each other, the death of either is
only manslaughter; but where one is the aggressor, as in the case before them,
and in pursuance of his first attack kills the other, the law supposes the
action, however sudden, to be malicious. The jury determined, that Mr. Savage
and Mr. Gregory were guilty of murder, and Mr. Merchant who had no sword, only
manslaughter.

Mr. Savage and Mr. Gregory were conducted back to prison, where they were more
closely confined, and loaded with irons of fifty pound weight. Savage had now
no hopes of life but from the king's mercy, and can it be believed, that mercy
his own mother endeavored to intercept.

When Savage (as we have already observed) was first made acquainted with the
story of his birth, he was so touched with tenderness for his mother, that he
earnestly sought an opportunity to see her.

To prejudice the queen against him, she made use of an incident, which was
omitted in the order of time, that it might be mentioned together with the
purpose it was made to serve.

One evening while he was walking, as was his custom, in the street she
inhabited, he saw the door of her house by accident open; he entered it, and
finding no persons in the passage to prevent him, went up stairs to salute her.
She discovered him before he could enter her chamber, alarmed the family with
the most distressful outcries, and when she had by her screams gathered them
about her, ordered them to drive out of the house that villain, who had forced
himself in upon her, and endeavored to murder her.

This abominable falsehood his mother represented to the queen, or communicated
it to some who were base enough to relate it, and so strongly prepossessed her
majesty against this unhappy man, that for a long while she rejected all
petitions that were offered in his favor.

Thus had Savage perished by the evidence of a bawd, of a strumpet, and of his
mother; had not justice and compassion procured him an advocate, of a rank too
great to be rejected unheard, and of virtue too eminent to be heard without
being believed. The story of his sufferings reached the ear of the countess of
Hertford, who engaged in his support with the tenderness and humanity peculiar
to that amiable lady. She demanded an audience of the queen, and laid before
her the whole series of his mother's cruelty, exposed the improbability of her
accusation of murder, and pointed out all the circumstances of her unequalled
barbarity.

The interposition of this lady was so successful, that he was soon after
admitted to bail, and on the 9th of March 1728, pleaded the king's pardon Lord
Tyrconnel delivered a petition to his majesty in Savage's behalf: And Mrs.
Oldfield solicited Sir Robert Walpole on his account. This joint-interest
procured him his pardon.
.

Mr. Savage during his imprisonment, his trial, and the time in which he lay
under sentence of death, behaved with great fortitude, and confirmed by his
unshaken equality of mind, the esteem of those who before admired him for his
abilities. Upon weighing all the circumstances relating to this unfortunate
event, it plainly appears that the greatest guilt could not be imputed to
Savage. His killing Sinclair, was rather rash than totally dishonorable, for
though Merchant had been the aggressor, who would not procure his friend from
being overpowered by numbers?

Some time after he had obtained his liberty, he met in the street the woman of
the town that had swore against him: She informed him that she was in distress,
and with unparalleled assurance desired him to relieve her. He, instead of
insulting her misery, and taking pleasure in the calamity of one who had
brought his life into danger, reproved her gently for her perjury, and changing
the only guinea he had, divided it equally between her and himself.

Compassion seems indeed to have been among the few good qualities possessed by
Savage; he never appeared inclined to take the advantage of weakness, to attack
the defenseless, or to press upon the falling: Whoever was distressed was
certain at last of his good wishes. But when his heart was not softened by the
sight of misery, he was obstinate in his resentment, and did not quickly lose
the remembrance of an injury. He always harbored the sharpest resentment
against judge Page; and a short time before his death, he gratified it in a
satire upon that severe magistrate.

When in conversation this unhappy subject was mentioned, Savage appeared
neither to consider himself as a murderer, nor as a man wholly free from blood.
How much, and how long he regretted it, appeared in a poem published many years
afterward, which the following lines will set in a very striking light. Is
chance a guilt, that my disast'rous heart,
For mischief never meant, must ever smart?
Can self-defence be sin? -- Ah! plead no more!
What though no purposed malice stained thee over;
Had Heaven befriended thy unhappy side,
Thou had not been provoked, or thou had died.
Far be the guilt of home-shed blood from all,
On whom, unsought, imbroiling dangers fall.
Still the pale dead revives and lives to me,
To me through pity's eye condemned to see.
Remembrance veils his rage, but swells his fate,
Grieved I forgive, and am grown cool too late,
Young and unthoughtful then, who knows one day,
What ripening virtues might have made their way?
He might, perhaps, his country's friend have proved,
Been generous, happy, candid and beloved;
He might have saved some worth now doomed to fall,
And I, perchance, in him have murdered all.


Savage had now obtained his liberty, but was without any settled means of
support, and as he had lost all tenderness for his mother, who had thirsted for
his blood, he resolved to lampoon her, to extort that pension by satire, which
he knew she would never grant upon any principles of honor, or humanity. This
expedient proved successful; whether shame still survived, though compassion
was extinct, or whether her relations had more delicacy than herself, and
imagined that some of the darts which satire might point at her, would glance
upon them: Lord Tyrconnel, whatever were his motives, upon his promise to lay
aside the design of exposing his mother, received him into his family, treated
him as his equal, and engaged to allow him a pension of 200 l. a year.

This was the golden part of Mr. Savage's life; for some time he had no reason
to complain of fortune; his appearance was splendid, his expenses large, and
his acquaintance extensive. 'He was courted, says the author of his life, by
all who endeavored to be thought men of genius, and caressed by all that
valued themselves upon a fine taste. To admire Mr. Savage was a proof of
discernment, and to be acquainted with him was a title to poetical reputation.
His presence was sufficient to make any place of entertainment popular; and his
approbation and example constituted the fashion. So powerful is genius, when it
is invested with the glitter of affluence. Men willingly pay to fortune that
regard which they owe to merit, and are pleased when they have at once an
opportunity of exercising their vanity, and practicing their duty. This
interval of prosperity furnished him with opportunities of enlarging his
knowledge of human nature, by contemplating life from its highest gradation to
its lowest.'

In this gay period of life, when he was surrounded by the affluence of
pleasure, 1729, he published the Wanderer, a Moral Poem, of which the design is
comprised in these lines. I fly all public care, all venal strife,
To try the Still, compared with Active Life.
To prove by these the sons of men may owe,
The fruits of bliss to bursting clouds of woe,
That even calamity by thought refined
Inspirits, and adorns the thinking mind.


And more distinctly in the following passage: By woe the soul to daring
actions swells,
By woe in plaintless patience it excells;
From patience prudent, clear experience springs,
And traces knowledge through the course of things.
Thence hope is formed, thence fortitude, success,
Renown -- Whatever men covet or caress.


This performance was always considered by Mr. Savage as his masterpiece; but
Mr. Pope, when he asked his opinion of i^, told him, that he read it once over,
and was not displeased with it, that it gave him more pleasure at the second
perusal, and delighted him still more at the third. From a poem so successfully
written, it might be reasonably expected that he should have gained
considerable advantages; but the case was otherwise; he sold the copy only for
ten guineas. That he got so small a price for so finished a poem, was not to be
imputed either to the necessity of the writer, or to the avarice of the
bookseller. He was a slave to his passions, and being then in the pursuit of
some trifling gratification, for which he wanted a supply of money, he sold his
poem to the first bidder, and perhaps for the first price which was proposed,
and probably would have been content with less, if less had been offered. It
was addressed to the earl of Tyrconnel, not only in the first lines, but in a
formal dedication, filled with the highest strains of panegyric. These praises
in a short time he found himself inclined to retract, being discarded by the
man on whom he had bestowed them, and whom he said, he then discovered, had not
deserved them.

Of this quarrel, lord Tyrconnel and Mr. Savage assigned very different
reasons. Lord Tyrconnel charged Savage with the most licentious behavior,
introducing company into his house, and practicing with them the most irregular
frolics, and committing all the outrages of drunkenness. Lord Tyrconnel farther
alleged against Savage, that the books of which he himself had made him a
present, were sold or pawned by him, so that he had often the mortification to
see them exposed to sale upon stalls.

Savage, it seems, was so accustomed to live by expedients, that affluence
could not raise him above them. He often went to the tavern and trusted the
payment of his reckoning to the liberality of his company; and frequently of
company to whom he was very little known. This conduct indeed, seldom drew him
into much inconvenience, or his versation and address were so pleasing, that
few thought the pleasure which they received from him, dearly purchased by
paying for his wine. It was his peculiar happiness that he scarcely ever found
a stranger, whom he did not leave a friend; but it must likewise be added, that
he had not often a friend long, without obliging him to become an enemy.

Mr. Savage on the other hand declared, that lord Tyrconnel quarrelled with him
because he would not subtract from his own luxury and extravagance what he had
promised to allow him; and that his resentment was only a plea for the
violation of his promise: He asserted that he had done nothing which ought to
exclude him from that subsistence which he thought not so much a favor as a
debt, since it was offered him upon conditions, which he had never broken; and
that his only fault was, that he could not be supported upon nothing.

Savage's passions were strong, among which his resentment was not the weakest;
and as gratitude was not his constant virtue, we ought not too hastily to give
credit to all his prejudice asserts against (his once praised patron) lord
Tyrconnel.

During his continuance with the lord Tyrconnel, he wrote the Triumph of Health
and Mirth, on the recovery of the lady Tyrconnel, from a languishing illness.
This poem is built upon a beautiful fiction. Mirth overwhelmed with sickness
for the death of a favorite, takes a flight in quest of her sister Health,
whom she finds reclined upon the brow of a lofty mountain, amidst the fragrance
of a perpetual spring, and the breezes of the morning sporting about her. Being
solicited by her sister Mirth, she readily promises her assistance, flies away
in a cloud, and impregnates the waters of Bath with new virtues, by which the
sickness of Belinda is relieved.

While Mr. Savage continued in high life, he did not let slip any opportunity
to examine whether the merit of the great is magnified or diminished by the
medium through which it is contemplated, and whether great men were selected
for high stations, or high stations made great men. The result of his
observations is not much to the advantage of those in power.

But the golden era of Savage's life was now at an end, he was banished the
table of lord Tyrconnel, and turned again a-drift upon the world. While he was
in prosperity, he did not behave with a moderation likely to procure friends
amongst his inferiors. He took an opportunity in the sunshine of his fortune,
to revenge himself of those creatures, who, as they are the worshippers of
power, made court to him, whom they had before contemptuously treated. This
assuming behavior of Savage was not altogether unnatural. He had been avoided
and despised by those despicable sycophants, who were proud of his acquaintance
when raised to eminence. In this case, who would not spurn such mean Beings?
His degradation therefore from the condition which he had enjoyed with so much
superiority, was considered by many as an occasion of triumph. Those who had
courted him without success, had an opportunity to return the contempt they had
suffered.

Mean time, Savage was very diligent in exposing the faults of lord Tyrconnel,
over whom he obtained at least this advantage, that he drove him first to the
practice of outrage and violence; for he was so much provoked by his wit and
virulence, that he came with a number of attendants, to beat him at a
coffee-house; but it happened that he had left the place a few minutes before:
Mr. Savage went next day to repay his visit at his own house, but was prevailed
upon by his domestics to retire without insisting upon seeing him.

He now thought himself again at full liberty to expose the cruelty of his
mother, and therefore about this time published THE BASTARD, a Poem remarkable
for the vivacity in the beginning, where he makes a pompous enumeration of the
imaginary advantages of base birth, and the pathetic sentiments at the close;
where he recounts the real calamities which he suffered by the crime of his
parents.

The verses which have an immediate relation to those two circumstances, we
shall here insert. In gayer hours, when high my fancy ran,
The Muse exulting thus her lay began.
Blessed be the Bastard's birth! through wond'rous-ways,
He shines excentric like a comet's blaze.
No sickly fruit of faint compliance he;
He! stamped in nature's mint with ecstasy!
He lives to build, not boast a generous race,
No tenth transmitter of a foolish face.
His daring hope, no fire's example bounds;
His firstborn nights no prejudice confounds.
He, kindling from within requires no flame,
He glories in a bastard's glowing name.
-- Nature's unbounded son he stands alone,
His heart unbiased, and his mind his own.
-- O mother! yet no mother! -- It Is to you
My thanks for such distinguished claims are due.
-- What had I lost if conjugally kind,
By nature hating, yet by vows confined,
You had faint drawn me with a form alone,
A lawful lump of life, by force your own!
-- I had been born your dull domestic heir,
Load of your life and motive of your care;
Perhaps been poorly rich and meanly great;
The slave of pomp, a cipher in the state:
Lordly neglectful of a worth unknown,
And slumbering in a seat by chance my own.


After mentioning the death of Sinclair, he goes on thus: -- Where shall my
hope find rest? -- No mother's care
Shielded my infant innocence with prayer;
No father's guardian hand my youth maintained,
Called forth my virtues, and from vice restrained.


This poem had extraordinary success, great numbers were immediately dispersed,
and editions were multiplied with unusual rapidity.

One circumstance attended the publication, which Savage used to relate with
great satisfaction. His mother, to whom the poem with due reverence was
inscribed, happened then to be at Bath, where she could not conveniently retire
from censure, or conceal herself from observation; and no sooner did the
reputation of the poem begin to spread, than she heard it repeated in all
places of concourse; nor could she enter the assembly-rooms, or cross the
walks, without being saluted with some lines from the Bastard. She therefore
left Bath with the utmost haste, to shelter herself in the crowds of London.
Thus Savage had the satisfaction of finding, that though he could not reform, he
could yet punish his mother.

Some time after Mr. Savage took a resolution of applying to the queen, that
having once given him life, she would enable him to support it, and therefore
published a short poem on her birth day, to which he gave the odd title of
Volunteer-Laureat. He had not at that time one friend to present his poem at
court, yet the Quee^, notwithstanding this act of ceremony was wanting, in a
few days after publication, sent him a bank note of fifty-pounds, by lord North
and Guildford; and her permission to write annually on the same subject, and
that he should yearly receive the like present, till something better should be
done for him. After this he was permitted to present one of his annual poems to
her majesty, and had the honor of kissing her hand.

When the dispute between the bishop of London, and the chancellor, furnished
for some time the chief topic of conversation, Mr. Savage who was an enemy to
all claims of ecclesiastical power, engaged with his usual zeal against the
bishop. In consequence of his aversion to the dominion of superstitious
churchmen, he wrote a poem called The Progress of a Divine, in which he
conducts a profligate priest through all the gradations of wickedness, from a
poor curacy in the country, to the highest preferment in the church; and after
describing his behavior in every station, enumerates that this priest thus
accomplished, found at last a patron in the bishop of London.

The clergy were universally provoked with this satire, and Savage was censured
in the weekly Miscellany, with a severity he did not seem inclined to forget:
But a return of invective was not thought a sufficient punishment. The court of
King's Bench was moved against him, and he was obliged to return an answer to a
charge of obscenity. It was urged in his defense, that obscenity was only
criminal, when it was intended to promote the practice of vice; but that Mr.
Savage had only introduced obscene ideas, with a view of exposing them to
detestation, and of amending the age, by showing the deformity of wickedness.
This plea was admitted, and Sir Philip York, now lord Chancellor, who then
presided in that court, dismissed the information, with encomiums upon the
purity and excellence of Mr. Savage's writings.

He was still in his usual exigencies, having no certain support, but the
pension allowed him from the Queen, which was not sufficient to last him the
fourth part of the year. His conduct, with regard to his pension, was very
particular. No sooner had he changed the bill, than he vanished from the sight
of all his acquaintances, and lay, for some time, out of the reach of his most
intimate friends. At length he appeared again pennyless as before, but never
informed any person where he had been, nor was his retreat ever discovered.
This was his constant practice during the whole time he received his pension.
He regularly disappeared, and returned. He indeed affirmed that he retired to
study, and that the money supported him in solitude for many months, but his
friends declared, that the short time in which it was spent, sufficiently
confuted his own account of his conduct.

His perpetual indigence, politeness, and wit, still raised him friends, who
were desirous to set him above want, and therefore solicited Sir Robert
Walpole in his favor, but though promises were given, and Mr. Savage trusted,
and was trusted, yet these added but one mortification more to the many he had
suffered. His hopes of preferment from that statesman issued in a
disappointment; upon which he published a poem in the Gentleman's Magazine,
entitled, The Poet's Dependence on a Statesman; in which he complains of the
severe usage he met with. But to despair was no part of the character of
Savage; when one patronage failed, he had recourse to another. The Prince was
now extremely popular, and had very liberally rewarded the merit of some
writers, whom Mr. Savage did not think superior to himself; and therefore he
resolved to address a poem to him. For this purpose he made choice of a
subject, which could regard only persons of the highest rank, and greatest
affluence, and which was therefore proper for a poem intended to procure the
patronage of a prince; namely, public spirit, with regard to public works. But
having no friend upon whom he could prevail to present it to the Prince, he had
no other method of attracting his observation, than by publishing frequent
advertisements, and therefore received no reward from his patron, however
generous upon other occasions. His poverty still pressing, he lodged as much by
accident, as he dined; for he generally lived by chance, eating only when he
was invited to the tables of his acquaintance, from which, the meanness of his
dress often excluded him, when the politeness, and variety of his conversation,
would have been thought a sufficient recompense for his entertainment. Having
no lodging, he passed the night often in mean houses, which are set open for
any casual wanderers; sometimes in cellars, amongst the riot and filth of the
meanest and most pro^^igate of the rabble; and sometimes when he was totally
without money, walked about the streets till he was weary, and lay down in the
summer upon a bulk, and in the winter, with his associates in poverty, among
the ashes of a glass-house.

In this manner were passed those days and nights, which nature had enabled him
to have employed in elevated speculations. On a bulk, in a cellar, or in a
glass-house, among thieves and beggars, was to be found the author of The
Wanderer, the man, whose remarks in life might have assisted the statesman,
whose ideas of virtue might have enlightened the moralist, whose eloquence
might have influenced senates, and whose delicacy might have polished courts.
His distresses, however afflictive, never dejected him. In his lowest sphere he
wanted not spirit to assert the natural dignity of wit, and was always ready to
repress that insolence, which superiority of fortune incited, and to trample
that reputation which rose upon any other basis, than that of merit. He never
admitted any gross familiarity, or submitted to be treated otherwise than as an
equal.

Once, when he was without lodging, meat, or clothes, one of his friends, a man
indeed not remarkable for moderation in prosperity, left a message, that he
desired to see him about nine in the morning. Savage knew that his intention
was to assist him, but was very much disgusted, that he should presume to
prescribe the hour of his attendance; and therefore rejected his kindness.

The greatest hardships of poverty were to Savage, not the want of lodging, or
of food, but the neglect and contempt it drew upon him. He complained that as
his affairs grew desperate, he found his reputation for capacity visibly
decline; that his opinion in questions of criticism was no longer regarded,
when his coat was out of fashion; and that those, who in the interval of his
prosperity, were always encouraging him to great undertakings, by encomiums on
his genius, and assurances of success, now received any mention of his designs
with coldness, and, in short, allowed him to be qualified for no other
performance than volunteer-laureat. Yet even this kind of contempt never
depressed him, for he always preserved a steady confidence in his own capacity,
and believed nothing above his reach, which he should at any time earnestly
endeavor to attain.

This life, unhappy as it may be already imagined, was yet embittered in 1738
with new distresses. The death of the Queen deprived him of all the prospects
of preferment, with which he had so long entertained his imagination. But even
against this calamity there was an expedient at hand. He had taken a resolution
of writing a second tragedy upon the story of Sir Thomas Overbury, in which he
made a total alteration of the plan, added new incidents, and introduced new
characters, so that it was a new tragedy, not a revival of the former. With the
profits of this scheme, when finished, he fed his imagination, but proceeded
slowly in it, and, probably, only employed himself upon it, when he could find
no other amusement. Upon the Queen's death it was expected of him, that he
should honor her memory with a funeral panegyric: He was thought culpable for
omitting it; but on her birthday, next year, he gave a proof of the power of
genius and judgment. He knew that the track of elegy had been so long beaten,
that it was impossible to travel in it, without treading the footsteps of those
who had gone before him, and therefore it was necessary that he might
distinguish himself from the herd of encomists, to find out some new walk of
funeral panegyric.

This difficult task he performed in such a manner, that this poem may be
justly ranked the best of his own, and amongst the best pieces that the death
of Princes has produced. By transferring the mention of her death, to her
birthday, he has formed a happy combination of topics, which any other man
would have thought it difficult to connect in one view; but the relation
between them appears natural; and it may be justly said, that what no other man
could have thought on, now s^ems scarcely possible for any man to miss. In this
poem, when he takes occasion to mention the King, he modestly gives him a hint
to continue his pension, which, however, he did not receive at the usual time,
and there was some reason to think that it would be discontinued. He did not
take those methods of retrieving his interest, which were most likely to
succeed, for he went one day to Sir Robert Walpole's levee, and demanded the
reason of the distinction that was made between him and the other pensioners of
the Queen, with a degree of roughness which, perhaps, determined him to
withdraw, what had only been delayed. This last misfortune he bore not only
with decency, but cheerfulness, nor was his gaiety clouded, even by this
disappointment, though he was, in a short time, reduced to the lowest degree of
distress, and often wanted both lodging and food. At this time he gave another
instance of the insurmountable obstinacy of his spirit. His clothes were worn
out, and he received notice, that at a coffee-house some clothes and linen were
left for him. The person who sent them did not, we believe, inform him to whom
he was to be obliged, that he might spare the perplexity of acknowledging the
benefit; but though the offer was so far generous, it was made with some
neglect of ceremonies, which Mr. Savage so much resented, that he refused the
present, and declined to enter the house 'till the clothes, which were designed
for him, were taken away.

His distress was now publicly known, and his friends therefore thought it
proper to concert some measures for his relief. The scheme proposed was, that
he should retire into Wales, and receive an allowance of fifty pounds a year,
to be raised by subscription, on which he was to live privately in a cheap
place, without aspiring any more to affluence, or having any farther
solicitude for fame.

This offer Mr. Savage gladly accepted, though with intentions very different
from those of his friends; for they proposed that he should continue an exile
from London for ever, and spend all the remaining part of his life at Swansea;
but he designed only to take the opportunity which their scheme offered him, of
retreating for a short time, that he might prepare his play for the stage, and
his other works for the press, and then to return to London to exhibit his
tragedy, and live upon the profits of his own labor.

After many solicitations and delays, a subscription was at last raised, which
did not amount to fifty pounds a year, though twenty were paid by one
gentleman. He was, however, satisfied, and willing to retire, and was convinced
that the allowance, though scanty, would be more than sufficient for him, being
now determined to commence a rigid oeconomist.

Full of these salutary resolutions, he quitted London in 1739. He was
furnished with fifteen guineas, and was told, that they would be sufficient,
not only for the expense of his journey, but for his support in Wales for some
time; and that there remained but little more of the first collection. He
promised a strict adherence to his maxims of parsimony, and went away in the
stage coach; nor did his friends expect to hear from him, 'till he informed
them of his arrival at Swansea. But, when they least expected, arrived a letter
dated the 14th day after his departure, in which he sent them word, that he was
yet upon the road, and without money, and that he therefore could not proceed
without a remittance. They then sent him the money that was in their hands,
with which he was enabled to reach Bristol, from whence he was to go to Swansea
by water. At Bristol he found an embargo laid upon the shipping, so that he
could not immediately obtain a passage, and being therefore obliged to stay
there some time, he, with his usual felicity, ingratiated himself with many of
the principal inhabitants, was invited to their houses, distinguished at their
public feasts, and treated with a regard that gratified his vanity, and
therefore easily engaged his affection.

After some stay at Bristol, he retired to Swansea, the place originally
proposed for his residence, where he lived about a year very much dissatisfied
with the diminution of his salary, for the greatest part of the contributors,
irritated by Mr. Savage's letters, which they imagined treated them
co^temptuously, withdrew their subscriptions. At this place, as in every other,
he contracted an acquaintance with those who were most distinguished in that
country, among whom, he has celebrated Mr. Powel, and Mrs. Jones, by some
verses inserted in the Gentleman's Magazine. Here he completed his tragedy, of
which two acts were wanting when he left London, and was desirous of coming to
town to bring it on the stage. This design was very warmly opposed, and he was
advised by his chief benefactor, who was no other than Mr. Pope, to put it in
the hands of Mr. Thomson and Mr. Mallet, that it might be fitted for the stage,
and to allow his friends to receive the profits, out of which an annual pension
should be paid him. This proposal he rejected with the utmost contempt. He was
by no means convinced that the judgment of those to whom he was required to
submit, was superior to his own. He was now determined, as he expressed, to be
no longer kept in leading-strings, and had no elevated idea of his bounty, who
proposed to pension him out of the profits of his own labors. He soon after
this quitted Swansea, and, with an intent to return to London, went to Bristol,
where a repetition of the kindness which he had formerly sound; invited him to
stay. He was not only caressed, and treated, but had a collection made for him
of about thirty pounds, with which it bad been happy if he had immediately
departed for London; but he never considered that such proofs of kindness were
not often to be expected, and that this ardour of benevolence was, in a great
degree, the effect of novelty.

Another part of his misconduct was, the practice of prolonging his visits to
unseasonable hours, and disconcerting all the families into which he was
admitted. This was an error in a place of commerce, which all the charms of
conversation could not compenfate; for what trader would purchase such airy
satisfaction, with the loss of solid gain, which must be the consequence of
midhight merriment, as those hours which were gained at night were generally
lost in the morning? Distress at last stole upon him by imperceptible degrees;
his conduct had aheady wearied some of those who were at first enamoured of his
conversation; but he still might have devolved to others, whom he might have
entertained with equal success, had not the decay of his clothes made it no
longer consistent with decency to admit him to their tables, or to associate
with him in public places. He now began to find every man from home, at whose
house he called; and was therefore no longer able to procu^e the necessaries of
life, but wandered about the town, slighted and neglected, in quest of a
dinner, which he did not always obtain. To complete his mifery, he was obliged
to withdraw from the small number of friends from whom he had still reason to
hope for favors. His custom was to lie in bed the greatest part of the day,
and to go out in the dark with the utmost privacy, and after having paid his
visit, return again before morning to his lodging, which was in the garret of
an obscure inn.

Being thus excluded on one hand, and confined on the other, he suffered the
utmost extremities of poverty, and often fasted so long, that he was seized
with faintness, and had lost his appetite, not being able to bear the smell of
meat, 'till the action of his stomach was restored by a cordial.

He continued to bear these severe pressures, 'till the landlady of a
coffee-house, to whom he owed about eight pounds, completed his wretchedness.
He was arrested by order of this woman, and conducted to the house of a
Sheriff's Officer, where he remained some time at a great expense, in hopes of
finding bail. This expense he was enabled to support by a present from Mr. Nash
of Bath, who, upon hearing of his late misfortune, sent him five guineas. No
friends would contribute to release him from prison at the expense of eight
pounds, and therefore he was removed to Newgate. He bore this misfortune with
an unshaken fortitude, and indeed the treatment he met with from Mr. Dagg, the
keeper of the prison, greatly softened the rigours of his confinement. He was
supported by him at his own table, without any certainty of recompense; had a
room to himself, to which he could at any time retire from all disturbance; was
allowed to stand at the door of the prison, and sometimes taken out into the
fields; so that he suffered fewer hardships in the prison, than he had been
accustomed to undergo the greatest part of his life. Virtue is undoubtedly most
laudable in that state which makes it most difficult; and therefore the
humanity of the jailer certainly deserves this public attestation.

While Mr. Savage was in prison, he began, and almost finished a satire, which
he entitled London and Bristol Delineated; in order to be revenged of those who
had had no more generosity for a man, to whom they professed friendship, than
to suffer him to languish in a gaol for eight pounds. He had now ceased from
corresponding with any of his subscribers, except Mr. Pope, who yetcontinued to
remit him twenty pounds a year, which he had promised, and by whom he expected
to be in a very short time enlarged; because he had directed the keeper to
enquire after the state of his debts. However he took care to enter his name
according to the forms of the court, that the creditors might be obliged to
make him some allowance, if he was continued a prisoner; and when on that
occasion he appeared in the Hall, was treated with very unusual respect.

But the resentment of the City was afterward raised, by some accounts that
had been spread of the satire, and he was informed, that some of the Merchants
intended to pay the allowance which the law required, and to detain him a
prisoner at their own expense. This he treated as an empty menace, and had he
not been prevented by death, he would have hastened the publication of the
satire, only to show how much he was superior to their insults.

When he had been six months in prison, he received from Mr. Pope, in whose
kindness he had the greatest confidence, and on whose assistance he chiefly
depended, a letter that contained a charge of very atrocious ingratitude, drawn
up in such terms as sudden resentment dictated. Mr. Savage returned a very
solemn protestation of his innocence, but however appeared much disturbed at
the accusation. Some days afterward he was seized with a pain in his back and
side, which, as it was not violent, was not suspected to be dangerous; but
growing daily more languid and dejected, on the 25th of July he confined
himself to his room, and a fever seized his spirits. The symptoms grew every
day more formidable, but his condition did not enable him to procure any
assistance. The last time the keeper saw him was on July 31, when Savage,
seeing him at his bedside, said, with uncommon earnestness, I have something
to say to you, sir, but, after a pause, moved his hand in a melancholy manner,
and finding himself unable to recollect what he was going to communicate, said,
it is gone. The keeper soon after left him, and the next morning he died. He was
buried in the churchyard of St. Peter, at the expense of the keeper.

Such were the life and death of this unfortunate poet; a man equally
distinguished by his virtues and vices, and, at once, remarkable for his
weaknesses and abilities. He was of a middle stature, of a thin habit of body,
a long visage, coarse features, and a melancholy aspect; of a grave and manly
deportment, a solemn dignity of mien, but which, upon a nearer acquaintance,
softened into an engaging easiness of manners. His walk was slow, and his voice
tremulous and mournful. He was easily excited to smiles, but very seldom
provoked to laughter. His judgment was eminently exact, both with regard to
writings and to men. The knowledge of life was his chief attainment. He was
born rather to bear misfortunes greatly, than to enjoy prosperity with
moderation. He discovered an amazing firmness of spirit, in spurning those who
presumed to dictate to him in the lowest circumstances of misery; but we never
can reconcile the idea of true greatness of mind, with the perpetual
inclination Savage discovered to live upon the bounty of his friends. To
struggle for independence appears much more landable, as well as a higher
instance of spirit, than to be the pensioner of another.

As Savage had seen so much of the world, and was capable of so deep a
penetration into nature, it was strange he could not form some scheme of a
livelihood, more honorable than that of a poetical mendicaut: his prosecuting
any plan of life with disgence, would have thrown more luster on his character,
than all his works, and have raised our ideas of the greatness of his splrit,
much beyond the conduct we have already seen. If poverty is so great an evil as
to expose a man to commit actions, at which he afterward blushes, to avoid
this poverty should be the continual care of every man; and he, who lets slip
every opportunity of doing so, is more entitled to admiration than pity, should
he bear his sufferings nobly.

Mr. Savage's temper, in consequence of the dominion of his passions, was
uncertain and capricious. He was easily engaged, and easily disgusted; but he
is accused of retaining his hatred more tenaciously than his benevolence. He
was compassionate bosh by nature and principle, and always ready to perform
offices of humanity; but when he was provoked, and very small offenses were
sufficient to provoke him, he would prosecute his revenge with the utmost
acrimony, 'till his passion had subsided. His friendship was therefore of
little value, for he was zealous in the support, or vindication of those whom
he loved, yet it was always dangerous to trust him, because he considered
himself as discharged by the first quarrel, from all ties of honor and
gratitude. He would even betray those secrets, which, in the warmth of
confidence, had been imparted to him. His veracity was often questioned, and
not without reason. When he loved any man, he suppressed all his faults, and
when he had been offended by him, concealed all his virtues. But his characters
were generally true, so far as he proceeded, though it cannot be denied, but
his partiality might have sometimes the effect of falsehood.

In the words of the celebrated writer of his life, from whom, as we observed
in the beginning, we have extracted the account here given, we shall conclude
this unfortunate person's Memoirs, which were so various as to afford large
scope for an able biographer, and which, by this gentleman, have been
represented with so great a mastery, and force of penetration, that the Life of
Savage, as written by him, is an excellent model for this species of writing.
'This relation (says he) will not be wholly without its use, if those, who
languish under any part of his sufferings, should be enabled to fortify their
patience, by reflecting that they feel only those afflictions from which the
abilities of Savage did not exempt him; or those, who in confidence of superior
capacities, or seize, disregard the common maxims of life, shall be
reminded that nothing can supply the want of prudence, and that negligence and
irregularity long continued, will make knowledge useless, wit ridiculous, and
genius contemptible.'



Dr. THOMAS SHERIDAN
WAS born in the county of Cavan, where his father kept a public house. A
gentleman, who had a regard for his father, and who observed the son gave early
indications of genius above the common standard, sent him to the college of
Dublin, and contributed toward the finishing his education there. Our poet
received very great encouragement upon his setting out in life, and was
esteemed a fortunate man. The agreeable humor, and the unreserved pleasantry
of his temper, introduced him to the acquaintance, and established him in the
esteem, of the wits of that age. He set up a school in Dublin, which, at one
time, was so considerable as to produce an income of a thousand pounds a year,
and possessed besides some good livings, and bishops leases, which are
extremely lucrative.

Mr. Sheridan married the daughter of Mr. Macpherson, a Scots gentleman, who
served in the wars under King William, and, during the troubles of Ireland,
became possessed of a small estate of about 40 l. per annum, called Quilca.
This little fortune devolved on Mrs. Sheridan, which enabled her husband to set
up a school. Dr. Sheridan, amongst his virtues, could not number economy; on
the contrary, he was remarkable for profusion and extravagance, which exposed
him to such inconveniences, that he was obliged to mortgage all he had. His
school daily declined, and by an act of indiscretion, he was stripped of the best
living he then enjoyed. On the birthday of his late Majesty, the Dr. having
occasion to preach, chose for his text the following words, Sufficient for the
day is the evil thereof. This procured him the name of a Jaeobite, or a
disaffected person, a circumstance sufficient to ruin him in his ecclesiastical
capacity. His friends, who were disposed to think favorably of him, were for
softning the epithet of Jacobite into Tory, imputing his choice of that text,
rather to whim and humor, than any settled projudice against his Majesty, or
the government; but this unseasonable pleasantry was not so easily passed over,
and the Dr. had frequent occasion to repent the choice of his text.

Unhappy Sheridan! he lived to want both money and friends. He spent his money
and time merrily among the gay and the great, and was an example, that there
are too many who can relish a man's humor, who have not so quick a sense of
his misfortunes. The following story should not have been told, were it not
true.

In the midst of his misfortunes, when the demands of his creditors obliged him
to retirement, he went to dean Swift, and solicited a lodging for a few days,
'till by a proper composition he might be restored to his freedom. The dean
retired early to rest. The Dr. fatigued, but not inclinable to go so soon to
bed, sent the servant to the dean, desiring the key of the cellar, that he
might have a bottle of wine. The dean, in one of his odd humors, returned for
answer, he promised to find him a lodging, but not in wine; and refused to send
the key. The Dr. being thunderstruck at this unexpected incivility, the tears
burst from his eyes; he quitted the house, and we believe never after repeared
the visit.

Dr. Sheridan died in the year 1738, in the 55th year of his age. The following
epitaph for him was handed about. Beneath this marble stone here lies
Poor Tom, more merry much than wife;
Who only lived for two great ends,
To spend his cash, and lose his friends:
His darling wife of him bereft,
Is only grieved -- there is nothing left.


When the account of his death was inserted in the papers, it was done in the
following particular terms; 'September 10, died the revd. Dr. Thomas Sheridan
of Dublin. He was a great linguist, a most sincere friend, a delightful
companion, and the best Schoolmaster in Europe: He took the greatest care of
the morals of the young gentlemen, who had the happiness of being bred up under
him; and it was remarked, that none of his scholars ever was an Atheist, or a
Free-Thinker.'



We cannot more successfully convey to the reader a true idea of Dr. Sheridan,
than by the two following quotations from Lord Orrery in his life of Swift, in
which he occasionally mentions Swift's friend. 'Swift was naturally fond of
seeing his works in print, and he was encouraged in this fondness by his friend
Dr. Sheridan, who had the Cacoethes Scribendi, to the greatest degree, and was
continually letting off squibs, rockets, and all sorts of little fireworks
from the press; by which means he offended many particular persons, who,
although they stood in awe of Swift, held Shetidan at defiance. The truth is,
the poor doctor by nature the most peacable, inoffensive man alive, was in a
continual state of warfare with the Minor Poets, and they revenged themselves;
or, in the style of Mr. Bays, often gave him flash for flash, and singed his
feathers. The affection between Theseus and Perithous was not greater than the
affection between Swift and Sheridan: But the friendship that cemented the two
ancient heroes probably commenced upon motives very different from those which
united the two modern divines.'

'Dr. Sheridan was a schoolmaster, and in many instances, perfectly well
adapted for that station. He was deeply versed in the Greek and Roman
languages; and in their customs and antiquities. He had that kind of good
nature, which absence of mind, indolence of body, and carelessness of fortune
produce: And although not over-strict in his own conduct, yet he took care of
the morality of his scholars, whom he sent to the university, remarkably well
founded in all kind of classical learning, and not ill instructed in the social
duties of life. He was slovenly, indigent, and cheerful. He knew books much
better than men: And he knew the value of money least of all. In this
situation, and with this disposition, Swift fastened upon him as upon a prey,
with which he intended to regale himself, whenever his appetite should prompt
him. Sheridan was therefore certainly within his reach; and the only time he
was permitted to go beyond the limits of his chain, was to take possession of a
living in the county of Cork, which had been bestowed upon him, by the then
lord lieutenant of Ireland, the present earl of Granville. Sheridan, in one
fatal moment, or by one fatal text, effected his own ruin. You will find the
story told by Swift himself, in the fourth volume of his works [page 289. in a
pamphlet entitled a Vindication of his Excessency John Lord Carteret, from the
charge of favoring none but Tories, High-Churchmen, and Jacobites.] So that
here I need only tell you, that this il-starred, good-natured, improvident man
returned to Dublin, unhinged from all favor at court, and even banished from
the Castle: But still he remained a punster, a quibbler, a fiddler, and a wit.
Not a day passed without a rebus, an anagram, or a madrigal. His pen and his
fiddle-stick were in continual motion; and yet to little or no purpose, if we
may give credit to the following verses, which shall serve as the conclusion of
his poetical character.'

With mufic and poetry equally blessed Not a first rate genius, or
extraordinary proficient, in either.
,
A bard thus Apollo most humbly addressed,
Great author of poetry, music, and light,
Instructed by thee, I both fiddle and write:
Yet unheeded I scrape, or I scribble all day,
My tunes are neglected, my verse flung away.
Thy substantive here, Vice-Apollo Dr. Swift.
disdains,
To vouch for my numbers, or list to my strains.
Thy manual sign he refuses to put
To the airs I produce from the pen, or the gut:
Be thou then propitious, great Phoebus, and grant
Relief, or reward to my merit, or want,
Though the Dean and Delany Now Dean of Down.
transcendently shine,
O! brighten one solo, or sonnet of mine,
Make one work immortal, it is all I request;
Apollo looked pleased, and resolving to jest,
Replied -- Honest friend, I Have considered your case,
Nor disilke your unmeaning and innocent face.
Your petition I grant, the boon is not great,
Your works shall continue, and here is the receipt;
On Roundo's A Song, or peculiar kind of Poetry, which returns to the beginning
of the first verse, and continues in a perpetual rotation.
hereafter, your fiddle-strings spend,
Write verses in circles, they never shall end.


Dr. Sheridan gained some reputation by his Prose-translation of Persius; to
which he added a Collection of the best Notes of the Editors of this in^ricate
Satyrist, who are in the best esteem; together with many judicious Notes of his
own. This work was printed in 12mo. for A. Millar, 1739.

One of the volumes of Swift's Miscellanies consists almost entirely of Letters
between the Dean and the Dr.

The Revd. Dr. JONATHAN SWIFT.
WHEN the life of a person, whose wit and genius raised him to an eminence
among writers of the first class, is written by one of uncommon abilities: --
One possessed of the power (as Shakespeare says) of looking quite through the
deeds of men; we are furnished with one of the highest entertainments a man can
enjoy: -- Such an author also presents us with a true picture of human nature,
which affords us the most ample instruction: -- He discerns the passions which
play about the heart; and while he is astonished with the high efforts of
genius, is at the same time enabled to observe nature as it really is, and how
distant from perfection mankind are in this world, even in the most refined
state of humanity. Such an intellectual feast they enjoy, who peruse the life
of this great author, drawn by the masterly and impartial hand of lord Orrery.
We there discern the greatness and weakness of Dean Swift; we discover the
patriot, the genius, and the humourist; the peevish master, the ambitious
statesman, the implacable enemy, and the warm friend. His mixed qualities and
imperfections are there heartily marked: His errors and virtues are so strongly
represente^ that while we reflect upon his virtues, we forget he had so many
failings; and when we consider his errors, we are disposed to think he had
fewer virtues. With such candor and impartiality has lord Orrery drawn the
portrait of Swift; and, as every biographer ought to do, has shown us the man
as he really was.

Upon this account given by his lordship, is the following chiefly built. It
shall be our business to take notice of the most remarkable passages of the
life of Swift; to omit no incidents that can be found concerning him, and as
our proposed bounds will not suffer us to enlarge, we shall endeavor to
display, with as much conciseness as possible, those particulars which may be
most entertaining to the reader.

He was born in Dublin, November the 30th, 1667, and was carried into England
soon after his birth, by his nurse, who being obliged to cross the sea, and
having a nurse's fondness for the child at her breast, conveyed him a
shipboard without the knowledge of his mother or relations, and kept him with
her at Whitehaven in Cumberland, during her residence about three-years in that
place. This extraordinary event made his return seem as if he had been
transplanted to Ireland, rather than that he owed his original existence to
that soil. But perhaps he tacitly hoped to inspire different nations with a
contention for his birth; at least in his angry moods, when he was peevish and
provoked at the ingratitude of Ireland, he was frequently heard to say. 'I am
not of this vile country, I am an Englishman.' Such an assertion though meant
figuratively, was often received literally; and the report was still farther
propagated by Mr. Pope, who in one of his letters has this expression. 'Tho'
one, or two of our friends are gone, since you saw your native country, there
remain a few.' But doctor Swift, in his cooler hours, never denied his country:
On the contrary he frequently mentioned, and pointed out, the house where he
was born.

The other suggestion concerning the illegitimacy of his birth, is equally
false. Sir William Temple was employed as a minister abroad, from the year
1665, to the year 1670; first at Brussels, and afterward at the Hague, as
appears by his correspondence with the earl of Arlington, and other ministers
of state. So that Dr. Swift's mother, who never crossed the sea, except from
England to Ireland, was out of all possibility of a personal correspondence
with Sir William Temple, till some years after her son's birth. Dr. Swift's
ancestors were persons of decent and reputable characters. His grandfather was
the Revd. Mr. Thomas Swift, vicar of Goodridge, near Ross in Herefordshire. He
enjoyed a paternal estate in that county, which is still in possession of his
great-grandson, Dean Swift, Esquire He died in the year 1658, leaving five sons,
Godwin, Thomas, Dryden, Jonathan, and Adam.

Two of them only, Godwin and Jonathan, left sons. Jonathan married Mrs.
Abigail Erick of Leicestershire, by whom he had one daughter and a son. The
daughter was born in the first year of Mr. Swift's marriage; but he lived not
to see the birth of his son, who was born two months after his death, and
became afterward the famous Dean of St. Patrick's.

The greatest part of Mr. Jonathan Swift's income had depended upon agencies,
and other employments of that kind; so that most of his fortune perished with
him Lord Orrery, page 6.
, and the remainder being the only support that his widow could enjoy, the
care, tuition, and expense of her two children devolved upon her husband's
elder brother, Mr. Godwin Swift, who voluntarily became their guardian, and
supplied the loss which they had sustained in a father.

The faculties of the mind appear and shine forth at different ages in
different men. The infancy of Dr. Swift passed on without any marks of
distinction. At six years old he was sent to school at Kilkenny, and about
eight years afterward he was entered a student of Trinity-College in Dublin.
He lived there in perfect regularity, and under an entire obedience to the
statutes; but the moroseness of his temper rendered him very unacceptable to
his companions, so that he was little regarded, and less beloved, nor were the
academical exercises agreeable to his genius. He held logic and metaphysics in
the utmost contempt; and he scarce considered mathematics, and natural
philosophy, unless to turn them into ridicule. The studies which he followed
were history and poetry. In these he made a great progress, but to all other
branches of science, he had given so very little application, that when he
appeared as a candidate for the degree of bachelor of arts, he was set aside
on account of insufficiency. 'This, says lord Orrery, is a surprising incident
in his life, but it is undoubtedly true; and even at last he obtained his
admission Speciali Gratia. A phrase which in that university carries with it
the utmost marks of reproach. It is a kind of dishonorable degree, and the
record of it (notwithstanding Swift's present established character throughout
the learned world) must for ever remain against him in the academical register
at Dublin.'



The more early disappointments happen in life, the deeper impression they make
upon the heart. Swift was full of indignation at the treatment he received in
Dublin; and therefore resolved to pursue his studies at Oxford. However, that
he might be admitted Ad Eundem, he was obliged to carry with him the
testimonium of his degree. The expression Speciali Gratia is so peculiar to the
university of Dublin, that when Mr. Swift exhibited his testimonium at Oxford,
the members of the English university concluded, that the words Speciali Gratia
must signity a degree conferred in reward of extraordinary diligence and
learning. It as natural to imagine that he did not try to undeceive them; he
was entered in Hart-Hall, now Hartford-College, where he resided till he took
his degree of master of arts in the year 1691.

Dr. Swift's uncle, on whom he had placed his chief dependence, dying in the
Revolution year, he was supported chiefly by the bounty of Sir William Temple,
to whose lady he was a distant relation. Acts of generosity seldom meet with
their just applause. Sir William Temple's friendship was immediately construed
to proceed from a consciousness that he was the real father of Mr. Swift,
otherwise it was thought impossible he could be so uncommonly munificent to a
young man, so distantly related to his wife. 'I am not quite certain, (says his
noble Biographer) that Swift himself did not acquiesce in the calumny; perhaps
like Alexander, he thought the natural son of Jupiter would appear greater than
the legitimate son of Philip.'



As soon as Swift quitted the university, he lived with Sir William Temple as
his friend, and domestic companion. When he had been about two years in the
family of his patron, he contracted a very long, and dangerous illness, by
eating an immoderate quantity of fruit. To this surfeit he used to ascribe the
giddiness in his head, which, with intermissions sometimes of a longer, and
sometimes of a shorter continuance, pursued him till it seemed to complete its
conquest, by rendering him the exact image of one of his own STRULDBRUGGS; a
miserable spectacle, devoid of every appearance of human nature, except the
outward form.

After Swift had sufficiently recovered to travel, he went into Ireland to try
the effects of his native air; and he found so much benefit by the journey,
that pursuant to his own inclinations he soon returned into England, and was
again most affectionately received by Sir William Temple, whose house was now
at Sheen, where he was often visited by King William. Here Swift had frequent
opportunities of conversing with that prince; in some of which conversations
the king offered to make him a captain of horse: An offer, which in his
splenetic dispositions, he always seemed sorry to have refused; but at that
time he had resolved within his own mind to take orders, and during his whole
life his resolutions, like the decrees of fate, were immovable. Thus
determined, he again went over to Ireland, and immediately inlisted himself
under the banner of the church. He was recommended to lord Capel, then
Lord-Deputy, who gave him, the first vacancy, a prebend, of which the income
was about a hundred pounds a year.

Swift soon grew weary of a preferment, which to a man of his ambition was far
from being sufficiently considerable. He resigned his prebend in favor of a
friend, and being sick of solitude he returned to Sheen, were he lived
domestically as usual, till the death of Sir William Temple; who besides a
legacy in money, left to him the care and trust of publishing his posthumous
works.

During Swift's residence with Sir William Temple he became intimately
acquainted with a lady, whom he has distinguished, and often celebrated, under
the name of Stella. The real name of this lady was Johnson. She was the
daughter of Sir William Temple's steward; and the concealed but undoubted wife
of doctor Swift. Sir William Temple bequeathed her in his will 1000 l. as an
acknowledgment of her father's faithful services. In the year 1716 she was
married to doctor Swift, by doctor Ash, then bishop of Clogher.

The reader must observe, there was a long interval between the commencement of
his acquaintance with Stella, and the time of making her his wife, for which
(as it appears he was fond of her from the beginning of their intimacy) no
other cause can be assigned, but that the same unaccountable humor, which had
so long detained him from marrying, prevented him from acknowledging her after
she was his wife. 'Stella (says lord Orrery) was a most amiable woman both in
mind and person: She had an elevated understanding, with all the delicacy, and
softness of her own sex. Her voice, however sweet in itself, was still rendered
more harmonious by what she said. Her wit was poignant without severity: Her
manners were humane, polite, easy and unreserved. -- Wherever she came, she
attracted attention and esteem. As virtue was her guide in morality, sincerity
was her guide in religion. She was constant, but not ostentatious in her
devotions: She was remarkably prudent in her conversation: She had great skill
in music; and was perfectly well versed in all the lesser arts that employ a
lady's leisure. Her wit allowed her a fund of perpetual cheerfulness within
proper limits. She exactly answered the description of Penelope in Homer. ' A
woman, loveliest of the lovely kind,
' In body perfect, and complete in mind.'




Such was this amiable lady, yet, with all these advantages, she could never
prevail on Dr. Swift to acknowledge her openly as his wife. A great genius must
tread in unbeaten paths, and deviate from the common road of life; otherwise a
diamond of so much luster might have been publicly produced, although it had
been fixed within the collet of matrimony: But that which diminished the value
of this inestimable jewel in Swift's eye was the servile state of her father.

Ambition and pride, the predominant principles which directed all the actions
of Swift, conquered reason and justice; and the vanity of boasting such a wi^e
was suppressed by the greater vanity of keeping free from a low alliance. Dr.
Swift and Mrs. Johnson continued the same economy of life after marriage,
which they had pursued before it. They lived in separate houses; nothing
appeared in their behavior inconsistent in their decorum, and beyond the
limits of platonic love. However unaccountable this renunciation of marriage
rites might appear to the world, it certainly arose, not from any consciousness
of a too near consanguinity between him and Mrs. Johnson, although the general
voice of some was willing to make them both the natural children of Sir William
Temple. Dr. Swift, (says lord Orrery) was not of that opinion, for the same
false pride which induced him to deny the legitimate daughter of an obscure
servant, might have prompted him to own the natural daughter of Sir William
Temple The authors of the Monthly Review have justly remarked, that this
observation of his lordship's seems premature. 'The same public rumor, say
they, that made HER Sir William Temple's daughter, made HIM also Sir William's
son: Therefore he (Swift) could never with decency, have acknowledged Mrs.
Johnson as his wife, while that rumor continued to retain any degree of
credit; and if there had been really no foundation for it, surely it might have
been no very hard task to obviate its force, by producing the necessary proofs
and circumstances of his birth: Yet, we do not find that ever this was done,
either by the Dean or his relations.'
.

It is natural to imagine, that a woman of Stella's delicacy must repine at
such an extraordinary situation. The outward honors she received are as
frequently bestowed upon a mistress as a wife; she was absolutely virtuous, and
was yet obliged to submit to all the appearances of vice. Inward anxiety
affected by degrees the calmness of her mind, and the strength of her body. She
died toward the end of January 1727, absolutely destroyed by the peculiarity
of her fate; a fate which perhaps she could not have incurred by an alliances
with any other person in the world.

Upon the death of Sir William Temple, Swift came to London, and took the
earliest opportunity of delivering a petition to King William, under the claim
of a promise made by his majesty to Sir William Temple, that Mr. Swift should
have the first vacancy which might happen among the prebends of Westminster or
Canterbury. But this promise was either totally forgotten, or the petition
which Mr. Swift presented was drowned amidst the clamor of more urgent
addresses. From this first disappointment may be dated that bitterness toward
kings and courtiers, which is to be found so universally dispersed throughout
his works.

After a long and fruitless attendance at Whitehall, Swift reluctantly gave up
all thoughts of a settlement in England: Pride prevented him from remaining
longer in a state of servility and contempt. He complied therefore with an
invitation from the earl of Berkley (appointed one of the Lords Justices in
Ireland) to attend him as his chaplain, and private secretary. -- Lord Berkley
landed near Waterford, and Mr. Swift acted as secretary during the whole
journey to Dublin. But another of lord Berkley's attendants, whose name was
Bush, had by this time insinuated himself into the earl's favor, and had
whispered to his lordship, that the post of secretary was not proper for a
clergyman, to whom only church preferments could be suitable or advantageous.
Lord Berkley listened perhaps too attentively to these insinuations, and making
some slight apology to Mr. Swift, divested him of that office, and bestowed it
upon Mr. Bush.

Here again was another disappointment, and a fresh object of indignation. The
treatment was thought injurious, and Swift expressed his sensibility of it in a
short but satirical copy of verses, entitled the Discovery. However, during the
government of the Earls of Berkley and Galway, who were jointly Lords Justices
of Ireland, two livings, Laracor and Rathbeggan, were given to Mr. Swift. The
first of these rectories was worth about 200, and the latter about 60 l. a
year; and they were the only church preferments which he enjoyed till he was
appointed Dean of St. Patrick's, in the year 1713.

Lord Orrery gives the following instances of his humor and of his pride.

As soon as he had taken possession of his two livings, he went to reside at
Laracor, and gave public notice to his parishioners, that he would read prayers
on every Wednesday and Friday. Upon the subsequent Wednesday the bell was rung,
and the rector attended in his desk, when after having sat some time, and
finding the congregation to consist only of himself and his clerk Roger, he
began with great composure and gravity; but with a turn peculiar to himself. "
Dearly beloved Roger, the scripture moves you and me in sundry places, etc."
And then proceeded regularly through the whole service. This trifling
circumstance serves to show, that he could not resist a vein of humor,
whenever he had an opportunity of exerting it.

The following is the instance of his pride. While Swift was chaplain to lord
Berkley, his only sister, by the consent and approbation of her uncle and
relations, was married to a man in trade, whose fortune, character, and
situation were esteemed by all her friends, and suitable to her in every
respect. But the marriage was entirely disagreeable to her brother. It seemed
to interrupt those ambitious views he had long since formed: He grew outrageous
at the thoughts of being brother-in law to a tradesman. He utterly refused all
reconciliation with his sister; nor would he even listen to the entreaties of
his mother, who came over to Ireland under the strongest hopes of pacifying his
anger; having in every other instance found him a dutiful and obedient son: But
his pride was not to be conquered, and Mrs. Swift finding her son inflexible,
hastened back to Leicester, where she continued till her death.

During his mother's life time, he scarce ever failed to pay her an annual
visit. But his manner of traveling was as singular as any other of his
actions. He often went in a wagon, but more frequently walked from Holyhead to
Leicester, London, or any other part of England. He generally chose to dine
with waggoners, ostlers, and persons of that rank; and he used to lie at night
in houses where he found written over the door, Lodgings for a Penny. He
delighted in scenes of low life. The vulgar dialect was not only a fund of
humor for him; but seems to have been acceptable to his nature, as appears
from the many filthy ideas, and indecent expressions found throughout his works.

A strict residence in a country place was not in the least suitable to the
restless temper of Swift. He was perpetually making excursions not only to
Dublin, and other places in Ireland, but likewise to London; so rambling a
disposition occasioned to him a considerable loss. The rich deanery of Derry
became vacant at this time, and was intended for him by lord Berkley, if Dr.
King, then bishop of Derry, and afterward archbishop of Dublin, had not
interposed; entreating with great earnestness, that the deanery might be given
to some grave and elderly divine, rather than to so young a man; 'because
(added the bishop) the situation of Derry is in the midst of Presbyterians, and
I should be glad of a clergyman, who might be of assistance to me. I have no
objection to Mr. Swift. I know him to be a sprightly ingenious young man; but
instead of residing, I dare say he will be eternally flying backwards and
forwards to London; and therefore I entreat that he may be provided for in some
other place.'

Swift was accordingly set aside on account of youth, and from the year 1702,
to the change of the ministry in the year 1710, few circumstances of his life
can be found sufficiently material to be inserted here. From this last period,
'till the death of Queen Anne, we find him fighting on the side of the Tories,
and maintaining their cause in pamphlets, poems, and weekly papers. In one of
his letters to Mr. Pope he has this expression, 'I have conversed, in some
freedom, with more ministers of state, of all parties, than usually happens to
men of my level; and, I confess, in their capacity as ministers I look upon
them as a race of people, whose acquaintance no man would court otherwise, than
on the score of vanity and ambition.' A man always appears of more consequence
to himself, than he is in reality to any other person. Such, perhaps, was the
case of Dr. Swift. He knew how useful he was to the administration in general;
and in one of his letters he mentions, that the place of historiographer was
intended for him; but in this particular he flattered himself; at least, he
remained without any preferment 'till the year 1713, when he was made dean of
St. Patrick's. In point of power and revenue, such a deanery might be esteemed
no inconsiderable promotion; but to an ambitious mind, whose perpetual view was
a settlement in England, a dignity in any other country must appear only a
profitable and an honorable kind of banishment. It is very probable, that the
temper of Swift might occasion his English friends to wish him promoted at a
distance. His spirit was ever untractable. The motions of his genius were often
irregular. He assumed more of the air of a patron, than of a friend. He
affected rather to dictate than advise. He was elated with the appearance of
enjoying ministerial confidence. He enjoyed the shadow indeed, but the
substance was detained from him. He was employed, not entrusted; and at the
same time he imagined himself a subtle diver, who dexterously shot down into the
profoundest regions of politics, he was suffered only to sound the shallows
nearest the shore, and was scarce admitted to descend below the froth at the
top. Swift was one of those strange kind of Tories, who lord Bolingbroke, in
his letter to Sir William Wyndham, calls the Whimsicals, that is, they were
Tories attached to the Hanoverian succession. This kind of Tory is so
incongruous a creature, that it is a wonder ever such a one existed. Mrs.
Pilkington informs us, that Swift had written A Defense of the last Ministers
of Queen Anne, from an intention of restoring the Pretender, which Mr. Pope
advised him to destroy, as not one word of it was true. Bolingbroke, by far the
most accomplished man in that ministry (for Oxford was, in comparison of him, a
statesman of no compass) certainly aimed at the restoration of the exiled
family, however he might disguise to some people his real intentions, under the
masque of being a Hanoverian Tory. This serves to corroberate the observation
which lord Orrery makes of Swift: 'that he was employed, not trusted, etc.'

By reflections of this sort, says lord Orrery, we may account for his
disappointment of an English bishopric. A disappointment, which, be imagined,
he owed to a joint application made against him to the Queen, by Dr. Sharp,
archbishop of York, and by a lady of the highest rank and character. Archbishop
Sharp, according to Swift's account, had represented him to the Queen as a
person, who was no Christian; the great lady had supported the assertion, and
the Queen, upon such assurances, had given away the bishopric, contrary to her
Majesty's intentions. Swift kept himself, indeed, within some tolerable bounds
when he spoke of the Queen; but his indignation knew no limits when he
mentioned the archbishop, or the lady.

Most people are fond of a settlement in their native country, but Swift had
not much reason to rejoice in the land where his lot had fallen; for upon his
arrival in Ireland to take possession of the deanery, he found the violence of
party raging in that kingdom to the highest degree. The common people were
taught to consider him as a Jacobite, and they proceeded so far in their
detestation, as to throw stones and dirt at him as he passed through the streets.
The chapter of St. Patrick's, like the rest of the kingdom, received him with
great reluctance. They opposed him in every point he proposed. They avoided him
as a pestilence, and resisted him as an invader and an enemy to his country.
Such was his first reception, as dean of St. Patrick's. Fewer talents, and less
firmness must have yielded to so outrageous an opposition. He had seen enough
of human nature to be convinced that the passions of low, self-interested minds
ebb and flow continually. They love they know not whom, they hate they know not
why. They are captivated by words, guided by names, and governed by accidents.
But to show the strange revolutions in this world, Dr. Swift, who was now the
detestation of the Irish rabble, lived to be afterward the most absolute
monarch over them, that ever governed men. His first step was to reduce to
reason and obedience his revd. brethren the chapter of St. Patrick's; in which
he succeeded so perfectly, and so speedily, that, in a short time after his
arrival, not one member in that body offered to contradict him, even in
trifles: on the contrary, they held him in the highest respect and veneration,
so that he sat in the Chapter House, like Jupiter in the Synod of the Gods.

In the beginning of the year 1714 Swift returned to England. He found his
great friends, who sat in the seat of power, much disunited among themselves.
He saw the Queen declining in her health, and distressed in her situation;
while faction was exerting itself, and gathering new strength every day. He
exerted the utmost of his skill to unite the ministers, and to cement the
apertures of the state: but he found his pains fruitless, his arguments
unavailing, and his endeavors, like the stone of Sisyphus, rolling back upon
himself. He retired to a friend's house in Berkshire, where he remained 'till
the Queen died. So fatal an event terminated all his views in England, and made
him return as fast as possible to his deanery in Ireland, oppressed with grief
and discontent. His hopes in England were now crushed for ever. As Swift was
well known to have been attached to the Queen's last ministry, he met with
several indignities from the populace, and, indeed, was equally abused by
persons of all ranks and denominations. Such a treatment soured his temper,
confined his acquaintance, and added bitterness to his style.

From the year 1714, 'till he appeared in the year 1720 a champion for Ireland,
against Wood's halfpence, his spirit of politics and patriotism was kept almost
closely confined within his own breast. Idleness and trifles engrossed too many
of his leisure hours; fools and sycophants too much of his conversation. His
attendance upon the public service of the church was regular and uninterrupted;
and indeed regularity was peculiar to all his actions, even in the meerest
trifles. His hours of walking and reading never varied. His motions were guided
by his watch, which was so constantly held in his hand, or placed before him on
the table, that he seldom deviated many minutes in the revolution of his
exercises and employments. In the year 1720 he began to reassume, in some
degree, the character of a political writer. A small pamphlet in defense of the
Irish Manufactures was his first essay in Ireland in that kind of writing, and
to that pamphlet he owed the turn of the popular tide in his favor. It was
entitled. A Proposal for the Universal Use of Irish Manufacture in Clothes and
Furniture of Houses, etc. utterly rejecting and renouncing every thing wearable
that comes from England. This proposal immediately raised a very violent flame.
The Printer was prosecuted, and the prosecution had the same effect, which
generally attends those kind of measures. It added fuel to flame. But his
greatest enemies must confess, that the pamphlet is written in the style of a
man who had the good of his country nearest his heart, who saw her errors, and
wished to correct them; who felt her oppressions, and wished to relieve them;
and who had a desire to rouse and awaken an indolent nation from a lethargic
disposition; that might prove fatal to her constitution. This temporary
opposition but increased the stream of his popularity. He was now looked upon
in a new light, and was distinguished by the title of THE DEAN, and so high a
degree of popularity did he attain, as to become an arbitrator, in disputes of
property, amongst his neighbors; nor did any man dare to appeal from his
opinion, or murmur at his decrees.

But the popular effection, which the dean had hitherto acquired, may be said
not to have been universal, 'till the publication of the Drapier's Letters,
which made all ranks, and all professions unanimous in his applause. The
occasion of those letters was, a scarcity of copper coin in Ireland, to so
great a degree, that, for some time past, the chief manufacturers throughout
the kingdom were obliged to pay their workmen in pieces of ti^, or in other
tokens of suppositious value. Such a method was very disadvantageous to the
lower parts of traffic, and was in general an impediment to the commerce of the
state. To remedy this evil, the late King granted a patent to one Wood, to
coin, during the term of fourteen years, farthings and halfpence in England,
for the use of Ireland, to the value of a certain sum specified. These
halfpence and farthings were to be received by those persons, who would
voluntarily accept them. But the patent was thought to be of such dangerous
consequence to the public, and of such exorbitant advantage to the patentee,
that the dean, under the character of M. B. Drapier, wrot^ a Letter to the
People, warning them not to accept Wood's halfpence and farthings, as current
coin. This first letter was succeeded by several others to the same purpose,
all which are inserted in his works.

At the sound of the Drapier's trumpet, a spirit arose among the people.
Persons of all ranks, parties and denominations, were convinced that the
admission of Wood's copper must prove fatal to the commonwealth. The Papist,
the Fanatic, the Tory, the Whig, all listed themselves volunteers, under the
banner of the Drapier, and were all equally zealous to serve the common cause.
Much heat, and many fiery speeches against the administration were the
consequence of this union; nor had the flames been allayed, notwithstanding
threats and proclamations, had not the coin been totally suppressed, and Wood
withdrawn his patent. The name of Augustus was not bestowed upon Octavius
Caesar with more universal approbation, than the name of the Drapier was
bestowed upon the dean. He had no sooner assumed his new cognomen, than he
became the idol of the people of Ireland, to a degree of devotion, that in the
most superstitious country, scarce any idol ever obtained. Libations to his
health were poured out as frequent as to the immortal memory of King William.
His effigies was painted in every street in Dublin. Acclamations and vows for
his prosperity attended his footsteps wherever he passed. He was consulted in
all points relating to domestic policy in general, and to the trade of Ireland
in particular; but he was more immediately looked upon as the legislator of the
Weavers, who frequently came in a body, consisting of 40 or 50 chiefs of their
trade, to receive his advice in settling the rates of their manufactures, and
the wages of their journeymen. He received their address with less majesty than
sternness, and ranging his subjects in a circle round his parlour, spoke as
copiously, and with as little difficulty and hesitation, to the several points
in which they supplicated his assistance, as if trade had been the only study
and employment of his life. When elections were depending for the city of
Dublin, many Corporations refused to declare themselves, 'till they had
consulted his sentiments and inclinations, which were punctually followed with
equal cheerfulness and submission.

In this state of power, and popular admiration, he remained 'till he lost his
senses; a loss which he seemed to foresee, and prophetically lamented to many
of his friends. The total deprivation of his senses came upon him by degrees.
In the year 1736 he was seized with a violent fit of giddiness; he was at that
time writing a satirical poem, called The Legion Club; but he found the effects
of his giddiness so dreadful, that he left the poem unfinished, and never
afterward attempted a composition, either in verse or prose. However, his
conversation still remained the same, lively and severe, but his memory
gradually grew worse and worse, and as that decrea^ed, he grew every day more
sretful and impatient. In the year 1741, his friends found his passions so
violent and ungover^able, his memory so decayed, and his reason so depraved,
that they took the utmost precautions to keep all strangers from approaching
him; for, 'till then, he had not appeared totally incapable of conversation.
But early in the year 1742, the small remains of his understanding became
entirely confused, and the violence of his rage increased absolutely to a
degree of madness. In this miserable state he seemed to be appointed the first
inhabitant of his own Hospital; especially as from an outrageous lunatic, he
sunk afterward to a quiet speechless idiot, and dragged out the remainder of
his life in that helpless situation. He died toward the latter end of October
1745. The manner of his death was easy, without the least pang, or convulsion;
even the rattling of his throat was scarce sufficient to give an alarm to his
attendants, 'till within some very little time before he expired. A man in
possession of his reason would have wished for such a kind dissolution; but
Swift was totally insensible of happiness, or pain. He had not even the power
or expression of a child, appearing for some years before his death, reserved
only as an example to mortify human pride, and to reverse that fine description
of human nature, which is given us by the inimitable Shakespeare. 'What a piece
of work is man! how noble in reason! how infinite in faculty! in form and
moving how express and admirable! in action how like an angel! in apprehension
how like a God! the beauty of the world! the paragon of animals!' Swift's
friends often heard him lament the state of childhood and idiotism, to which
some of the greatest men of this nation were reduced before their death. He
mentioned, as examples within his own time, the duke of Marlborough and lord
Summers; and when he cited these melancholy instances, it was always with a
heavy sigh, and with gestures that showed great uneasiness, as if he felt an
impulse of what was to happen to him before he died. He left behind him about
twelve thousand pounds, inclusive of the specific legacies mentioned in his
will, and which may be computed at the sum of twelve hundred pounds, so that
the remaining ten thousand eight hundred pounds, is entirely applicable t^ the
Hospital for Idiots and Lunatics; an establishment remarkably generous, as
those who receive the benefit, must for ever remain ignorant of their
benefactor.

Lord O^erry has observed, that a propension to jocularity and humor is
apparent in the last works of Swift. His Will, like all his other writings, is
drawn up in his own peculiar manner. Even in so serious a composition, he
cannot help indulging himself in leaving legacies, that carry with them an air
of raillery and jest. He disposes of his three best hats (his best, his second
best, and his third best beaver) with an ironical solemnity, that renders the
bequests ridiculous. He bequeaths, 'To Mr. John Grattan a silver-box, to keep
in it the tobacco which the said John usually chewed, called pigtail.' But his
legacy to Mr. Robert Grattan, is still more extraordinary. 'Item, I bequeath to
the Revd. Mr. Robert Grattan, Prebendary of St. Audeon's, my strong box, on
condition of his giving the sole use of the said box to his brother, Dr. James
Grattan, during the life of the said Doctor, who has more occasion for it.'

These are so many last expressions of his turn, and way of thinking, and no
doubt the persons thus distinguished looked upon these instances as
affectionate memorials of his friendship, and tokens of the jocose manner, in
which he had treated them during his lifetime.

With regard to Dean Swift's poetical character, the reader will take the
following sketch of it in the words of Lord Orrery. 'The poetical performances
of Swift (says he) ought to be considered as occasional poems, written either
to pleasure We are assured, there was one while a misunderstanding subsisting
between Swift and Pope: But that worthy gentleman; the late general Dormer (who
had a great regard for both) reconciled them, ever it came to an open rupture:
-- Though the world might be deprived by the general's mediation of great
matter of entertainment, which the whetted wit of two such men might have
afforded; yet his goodnature, and sincere friendship, deserves to be
remembered with honor. -- This gentleman Mr. Cibber senior was very intimate
with, and once hinted to him, 'He was concerned to find he stood so (...) in
the Dean's opinion, whose great parts, wit, genius, etc. he held in the highest
estimation; nor could he easily account for the Dean's so frequently appearing
his enemy, as he never knowingly had offended him; and regretted the want of an
opportunity of being better acquainted with him.' -- The general had also a
great regard for Mr. Cibber, and wished to bring them together on an agreeable
footing: -- Why they were not so, came out soon after. -- The secret was, --
Mr. Pope was angry; [for the long-latent cause, look into Mr. Cibber's letter
to Mr. Pope.] Passion and prejudice are not always friends to truth; -- and the
soam of resentment never rose higher, than when it boiled and swelled in Mr.
Pope's bosom: No wonder then, that his misrepresentation might make the Dean
believe, Mr. Cibber was not unworthy of that satire and raillery (not always
just neither, and sometimes solicited) which is not ^nsparingly thrown on him
in the Dean's works: -- That this was the case, appears from the following
circumstance.

As soon as Mr. Cibber's Apology was first printed, it was immediately carried
over to Dublin, and given to Mr. Faulkner (an eminent printer and bookseller
there) by a gentleman, who wished to see an edition of it in Ireland; Mr.
Faulkner published it, and the success thereof was so great, some thousands
thereof were disposed of in a very short time: Just before the intended edition
appeared, the Dean (who often visited Mr. Faulkner) coming into the shop,
asked, 'What new pieces were likely to come forth? -- 'Mr. Faulkner gave Mr.
Cibber's Apology to him; -- The Dean's curosity was pretty strong to see a work
of that uncommon sort: -- In short, he stayed and dined there; and did not quit
the house, or the book, 'till he had read it through: He advised Faulkner, to
lose no time in printing it; and said, he would answer for it is success: -- He
declared, he had not perused any thing a long time that had pleased him so
much; and dwelt long in commendation of it: He added, that he almost envied the
author the pleasure he must have in writing it; -- That he was sorry he had
ever said any thing to his disadvantage; and was convinced Cibber had been very
much misrepresented to him; nor did he scruple to say, that, as it had been
formerly the fashion to abuse Cibber, he had unwarily been drawn into it by
Pope, and others. He often, afterward, spoke in praise of Mr. Cibber, and his
writings in general, and of this work in particular. -- He afterward told Mr.
Faulkner, he had read Cibber's Apology through three times; that he was more and
more pleased with it: That the style was not inferior to any English he had
ever read: That his words were properly adapted: His similes happy, uncommon,
and well chosen: He then in a pleasant manner said -- 'You must give me this
book, which is the first thing I ever begged from you.' To this, we may be sure
Mr. Faulkner readily consented. Ever after in company, the Dean gave this book
a great character. -- Let the reader make the application of this true and well
known fact.


, or to vex some particular persons. We must not suppose them designed for
posterity; if he had cultivated his genius that way, he must certainly have
excelled, especially in satire. We see fine sketches in several of his pieces;
but he seems more desirous to inform and strengthen his mind, than to indulge
the luxuriancy of his imagination. He chooses to discover, and correct errors in
the works of others, rather than to illustrate, and add beauties of his own.
Like a skilful artist, he is fond of probing wounds to their depth, and of
enlarging them to open view. He aims to be severely useful, rather than
politely engaging; and as he was either not formed, nor would take pains to
excel in poetry, he became in some measure superior to it; and assumed more the
air, and manner of a critic than a poet.' Thus far his lordship in his VIth
letter, but in his IXth, he adds, when speaking of the Second Volume of Swift's
Works, 'He had the nicest ear; he is remarkably chaste, and delicate in his
rhimes. A bad rhyme appeared to him one of the capital sins of poetry.'

The Dean's poem on his celebrated Vanessa, is numbered among the best of his
poetical pieces. Of this lady it will be proper to give some account, as she
was a character as singular as Swift himself.

Vanessa's real name was Esther Vanhomrich The name is pronounced Vannumery.
. She was one of the daughters of Bartholomew Vanhomrich, a Dutch merchant of
Amsterdam; who upon the Revolution went into Ireland, and was appointed by king
William a commissioner of the revenue. The Dutch merchant, by parsimony and
prudence, had collected a fortune of about 16,000 l. He bequeathed an equal
division of it to his wife, and his four children, of which two were sons, and
two were daughters. The sons after the death of their father traveled abroad:
The eldest died beyond sea; and the youngest surviving his brother only a short
time, the whole patrimony fell to his two sisters, Esther and Mary.

With this increase of wealth, and with heads and hearts elated by affluence,
and unrestrained by foresight or discretion, the widow Vanhomrich, and her two
daughters, quitted their native country for the more elegant pleasures of the
English court. During their residence at London, they lived in a course of
prodigality, that stretched itself far beyond the limits of their income, and
reduced them to great distress, in the midst of which the mother died, and the
two daughters hastened in all secresy back to Ireland, beginning their journey
on a Sunday, to avoid the interruption of creditors. Within two years after
their arrival in Ireland, Mary the youngest sister died, and the small remains
of the shipwrecked fortune centered in Vanessa.

Vanity makes terrible devastations in a female breast: Vanessa was excessively
vain. She was fond of dress; impatient to be admired; very romantic in her turn
of mind; superior in her own opinion to all her sex; full of pertness, gaiety,
and pride; not without some agreeable accomplishments, but far from being
either beautiful or genteel: Ambitious at any rate to be esteemed a wit; and
with that view always affecting to keep company with wits; a great reader, and
a violent admirer of poetry; happy in the thoughts of being reputed Swift's
concubine; but still aiming to be his wife. By nature haughty and disdainful,
looking with contempt upon her inferiors; and with the smiles of
self-approbation upon her equals; but upon Dr. Swift, with the eyes of love:
Her love was no doubt founded in vanity.

Though Vanessa had exerted all the arts of her sex, to entangle Swift in
matrimony; she was yet unsuccessful. She had lost her reputation, and the
narrowness of her income, and coldness of her lover contributed to make her
miserable, and to increase the phrensical disposition of her mind. In this
melancholy situation she remained several years, during which time Cadenus
(Swift) visited her frequently. She often pressed him to marry her: His answers
were rather turns of wit, than positive denials; till at last being unable to
sustain the weight of misery any longer, she wrote a very tender epistle to
him, insisting peremptorily upon a serious answer, and an immediate acceptance,
or absolute refusal of her as his wife. His reply was delivered by his own
hand. He brought it with him when he made his final visit; and throwing down
the letter upon the table with great passion, hastened back to his house,
carrying in his countenance the frown of anger, and indignation. Vanessa did
not survive many days the letter delivered to her by Swift, but during that
short interval she was sufficiently composed, to cancel a will made in his
favor, and to make another, wherein she left her fortune (which by a long
retirement was in some measure retrieved) to her two executors, Dr. Berkley the
late lord bishop of Cloyne, and Mr. Marshal one of the king's Sergeants at law.
Thus perished under all the agonies of despair, Mrs. Esther Vanhomrich; a
miserable example of an ill-spent life, fantastic wit, visionary schemes, and
female weakness.

It is strange that vanity should have so great a prevalence in the female
breast, and yet it is certain that to this principle it was owing, that Swift's
house was often a seraglio of very virtuous women, who attended him from
morning till night, with an obedience, an awe, and an assiduity that are seldom
paid to the richest, or the most powerful lovers. These ladies had no doubt a
pride in being thought the companions of Swift; but the hours which were spent
in his company could not be very pleasant, as his sternness and authority were
continually exerted to keep them in awe.

Lord Orrery has informed us, that Swift took every opportunity to expose and
ridicule Dryden, for which he imagines there must have been some affront given
by that great man to Swift. In this particular we can satisfy the reader from
authentic information.

When Swift was a young man, and not so well acquainted with the world as he
afterward became, he wrote some Pindaric Odes. In this species of composition
he succeeded ill; sublimity and fire, the indispensable requisites in a
Pindaric Ode not being his talent. As Mr. Dryden was Swift's kinsman, these
odes were shown to him for his approbation, who said to him with an unreserved
freedom, and in the candor of a friend, 'Cousin Swift, turn your thoughts some
other way, for nature has never formed you for a Pindaric poet.'

Though what Dryden observed, might in some measure be true, and Swift perhaps
was conscious that he had not abilities to succeed in that species of writing;
yet this honest dissuasive of his kinsman he never forgave. The remembrance of
it soured his temper, and heated his passions, whenever Dryden's name was
mentioned.

We shall now take a view of Swift in his moral life, the distinction he has
obtained in the literary world having rendered all illustrations of his genius
needless.

Lord Orrery, throughout his excellent work, from which we have drawn our
account of Swift, with his usual marks of candor, has displayed his moral
character. In many particulars, the picture he draws of the Dean resembles the
portrait of the same person as drawn by Mrs. Pilkington. 'I have beheld him
(says his lordship) in all humors and dispositions, and I have formed various
speculations from the several weaknesses to which I observed him liable. His
capacity, and strength of mind, were undoubtedly equal to any task whatsoever.
His pride, his spirit, or his ambition (call it by what name you please) was
boundless; but his views were checked in his younger years, and the anxiety of
that disappointment had a sensible effect upon all his actions. He was sour and
severe, but not absolutely illnatur'd. He was sociable only to particular
friends, and to them only at particular hours. He knew politeness more than he
practiced it. He was a mixture of avarice and generosity; the former was
frequently prevalent, the latter seldom appeared unless excited by compassion.
He was open to adulation, and would not, or could not, distinguish between low
flattery and just applause. His abilities rendered him superior to envy. He was
undisguised, and perfectly sincere. I am induced to think that he entered into
orders, more from some private and fixed resolution, than from absolute choice:
Be that as it may, he performed the duties of the church with great
punctual^ty, and a decent degree of devotion. He read prayers, rather in a
strong nervous voice, than in a graceful manner; and although he has been often
accused of irreligion, nothing of that kind appeared in his conversation or
behavior. His cast of mind induced him to think and speak more of politics
than religion. His perpetual views were directed toward power; and his chief
aim was to be removed to England: But when he found himself entirely
disappointed, he turned his thoughts to opposition, and became the Patron of
Ireland.'



Mrs. Pilkington has represented him as a tyrant in his family, and has
discovered in him a violent propension to be absolute in every company where he
was. This disposition, no doubt, made him more feared than loved; but as he had
the most unbounded vanity to gratify, he was pleased with the servility and awe
with which inferiors approached him. He may be resembled to an eastern monarch,
who takes delight in surveying his slaves, trembling at his approach, and
kneeling with reverence at his feet.

Had Swift been born to regal honors, he would doubtless have bent the necks
of his people to the yoke: As a subject, he was restless and turbulent; and
though as lord Orrery says, he was above corruption, yet that virtue was
certainly founded on his pride, which disdained every measure, and spurned
every effort in which he himself was not the principal.

He was certainly charitable, though it had an unlucky mixture of ostentation
in it. One particular act of his charity (not mentioned, except by Mrs.
Pilkington, in any account of him yet published) is well worthy of remembrance,
praise, and imitation: -- He appropriated the sum of five-hundred pounds
entirely to the use of poor tradesmen and handicraftsmen, whose honesty and
industry, he thought merited assistance, and encouragement: This he lent to
them in small loans, as their exigencies required, without any interest; and
they repaid him at so much per week, or month, as their different circumstances
best enabled them. -- To the wealthy let us say -- " Abi tu et fac similiter."

Mrs. CONSTANTIA GRIERSON.
THIS lady was born in Ireland; and, as Mrs. Barber judiciously remarks, was
one of the most extraordinary women that either this age, or perhaps any other,
ever produced. She died in the year 1733, at the age of 27, and was allowed
long before to be an excellent scholar, not only in Greek and Roman literature,
but in history, divinity, philosophy, and mathematics.

Mrs. Grierson (says she) 'gave a proof of her knowledge in the Latin tongue,
by her dedication of the Dublin edition of Tacitus to the lord Carteret, and by
that of Terence to his son, to whom she likewise wrote a Greek epigram. She
wrote several fine poems in English Mrs. Barber has preserved several specimens
of her talent in this way, which are printed with her own poems.
, on which she set so little value, that she neglected to leave copies behind
her of but very few. 'What makes her character the more remarkable is, that she
rose to this eminence of learning merely by the force of her own genius, and
continual application. She was not only happy in a fine imagination, a great
memory, an excellent understanding, and an exact judgment, but had all these
crowned by virtue and piety: she was too learned to be vain, too wise to be
conceited, too knowing and too clear-sighted to be in religious.

'If heaven had spared her life, and blessed her which health, which she wanted
for some years before her death, there is good reason to think she would have
made as great a figure in the learned world, as any of her sex are recorded to
have done.

'As her learning and abilities raised her above her own sex, so they left her
no room to envy any; on the contrary, her delight was to see others excel. She
was always ready to advise and direct those who applied to her, and was herself
willing to be advised.

'So little did she value herself upon her uncommon excellences, that it has
often recalled to my mind a fine reflection of a French author, That great
geniuses should be superior to their own abilities.

'I persuade myself that this short account of so extraordinary a woman, of
whom much more might have been said, will not be disagreeable to my readers;
nor can I omit what I think is greatly to the lord Carteret's honor, that when
he was lord lieutenant of Ireland, he obtained a patent for Mr. Grierson, her
husband, to be the King's Printer, and to distinguish and reward her uncommon
merit, had her life inserted in it.'

Thus far Mrs. Barber. We shall now subjoin Mrs. Pilkington's account of this
wonderful genius. 'About two years before this, a young woman (afterward
married to Mr. Grierson) of about eighteen years of age, was brought to my
father Dr. Van Lewen of Dublin, an eminent physician and man-midwife.
, to be by him instructed in Midwifry: she was mistress of Hebrew Her knowledge
of the Hebrew is not mentioned by Mrs. Barber.
, Greek, Latin, and French, and understood the mathematics as well as most men:
and what made those extraordinary talents yet more surprising was, that her
parents were poor, illiterate, country people: so that her learning appeared
like the gift poured out on the apostles, of speaking all languages without the
pains of study; or, like the intuitive knowledge of angels: yet inasmuch as the
power of miracles is ceased, we must allow she used human means for such great
and excellent acquirements. And yet, in a long friendship and familiarity with
her, I could never obtain a satisfactory account from her on this head; only
she said, she had received some little instruction from the minister of the
parish, when she could spare time from her needle work, to which she was
closely kept by her mother. She wrote elegantly both in verse and prose, and
some of the most delightful hours I ever passed were in the conversation of
this female philosopher.

'My father readily consented to accept of her as a pupil, and gave her a
general invitation to his table; so that she and I were seldom asunder. My
parents were well pleased with our intimacy, as her piety was not inferior to
her learning. Her turn was chiefly to philosophical or divine subjects; yet
could her heavenly muse descend from its sublime height to the easy epistolary
style, and suit itself to my then gay disposition Vide Mrs. PILKINGTON's
MEMOIRS, Vol. I.
.'



Mrs. CATHERINE COCKBURN.
THE Revd. Dr. Birch, who has prefixed a life of Mrs. Cockburn before the
collection he has made of her works, with great truth observes, that it is a
justice due to the public, as well as to the memory of Mrs. Cockburn, to
premise some account of so extraordinary a person. "Posterity, at least, adds
he, will be so sollicitous to know, to whom they will owe the most
demonstrative and perspicuous reasonings, upon subjects of eternal importance;
and her own sex is entitled to the fullest information about one, who has done
such honor to them, and raised our ideas of their intellectual powers, by an
example of the greatest extent of understanding and correctness of judgment,
united to all the vivacity of imagination. Antiquity, indeed, boasted of its
Female Philosophers, whose merits have been drawn forth in an elaborate
treatise of Menage Historia Mulierum Philosopharum. Svo. Lions. 1690.
. But our own age and country may without injustice or vanity oppose to those
illustrious ladies the defender of Lock and Clark; who, with a genius equal to
the most eminent of them, had the superior advantage of cultivating it in the
only effectual method of improvement, the study of a real philosophy, and a
theology worthy human nature, and its all-perfect author.

She was the daughter of captain David Trotter, a Scots gentleman, and
commander of the royal navy in the reign of Charles II. He was highly in favor
with that prince, who employed him as commodore in the demolition of Tangier,
in the year 1683. Soon after he was sent to convoy the fleet of the Turkey
company; when being seized by the plague, then raging at Scanderoon, he died
there. His death was an irreparable loss to his family, who were defrauded of
all his effects on board his ship, which were very considerable, and of all the
money which he had advanced to the seamen, during a long voyage: And to add to
this misfortune, the goldsmith, in whose hands the greatest part of his money
was lodged, became soon after a bankrupt. These accumulated circumstances of
distress exciting the compassion of king Charles, the captain's widow was
allowed a pension, which ended with that king's life; nor had she any
consideration for her losses in the two succeeding reigns. But queen Anne, upon
her accession to the throne, granted her an annual pension of twenty pounds.

Captain Trotter at his death, left only two daughters, the youngest of whom,
Catherine, our celebrated author, was born in London, August 16, 1679. She gave
early marks of her genius, and was not passed her childhood when she surprised
a company of her relations and friends with extemporary verses, on an accident
which had fallen under her observation in the street. She both learned to
write, and made herself mistress of the French language, by her own application
and diligence, without any instructor. But she had some assistance in the study
of the Latin Grammar and Logic, of which latter she drew up an abstract for her
own use. The most serious and important subjects, and espepecially those of
religion, soon engaged her attention. But notwithstanding her education, her
intimacy with several families of distinction of the Romish persuasion exposed
her, while very young, to impressions in favor of that church, which not being
removed by her conferences with some eminent and learned members of the church
of England, she followed the dictates of a misguided conscience, and embraced
the Romish communion, in which she continued till the year 1707.

She was but 14 years of age, when she wrote a copy of verses upon Mr. Bevil
Higgons's sickness and recovery from the small pox, which are printed in our
author's second volume. Her next production was a Tragedy called Agnes de
Castro, which was acted at the Theater Royal, in 1695, when she was only in her
seventeenth year, and printed in 1696. The reputation of this performance, and
the verses which she addressed to Mr. Congreve upon his Mourning Bride, in
1697, were probably the foundation of her acquaintance with that admirable
writer.

Her second Tragedy, entitled Fatal Friendship, was acted in School, at the new
Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. This Tragedy met with great applause, and is
still thought the most perfect of her dramatic performances. Among other copies
of verses sent to her upon occasion of it, and prefixed to it, was one from an
unknown hand, which afterward appeared to be from the elegant pen of Mr.
Hughs, author of the Siege of Damascus Dr. Birch mentions also Mr. Higgons's
verses on this occasion, and gives a copy of a complimentary letter to our
author, from Mr. George Farquhar.
.

The death of Mr. Dryden engaged her to join with several other ladies in
paying a just tribute to the memory of that great improver of the strength,
fullness, and harmony of English verse; and their performances were published
together, under the title of the Nine Muses; or Poems written by so many
Ladies, upon the Death of the late famous John Dryden, Esquire

Her dramatic talents not being confined to Tragedy, she brought upon the
stage, in 1701, a Comedy called Love at a Loss; or most Votes carry it,
published in May that year. In the same year she gave the public her third
Tragedy, entitled, The Unhappy Penitent, acted at the Theater Royal in
Drury Lane. In the dedication to Charles lord Hallifax, she draws the
characters of several of the most eminent of her predecessors in tragic poetry,
with great judgment and precision. She observes, that Shakespeare had all the
images of nature present to him, studied her thoroughly, and boldly copied all
her various features: and that though he chiefly exerted himself on the more
masculine passions, it was the choice of his judgment, not the restraint of his
genius; and he seems to have designed those few tender moving scenes, which he
has given us, as a proof that he could be every way equally admirable. She
allows Dryden to have been the most universal genius which this nation ever
bred; but thinks that he did not excel in every part; for though he is
distinguished in most of his writings, by greatness and elevation of thought,
yet at the same time that he commands our admiration of himself, he little
moves our concern for those whom he represents, not being formed for touching
the fofter passions. On the other hand, Otway, besides his judicious choice of
the fable, had a peculiar art to move compassion, which, as it is one of the
chief ends of Tragedy, he found most adapted to his genius; and never venturing
where that did not lead him, excelled in the pathetic. And had Lee, as she
remarks, consulted his strength as well, he might have given us more perfect
pieces; but aiming at the sublime, instead of being great, he is extravagant;
his style too swelling; and if we pursue him in his flight, he often carries us
out of nature. Had he restrained that vain ambition, and entirely applied
himself to describe the softest of the passions (for love, of all the passions,
he seems best to have understood, if that be allowed a proper subject for
Tragedy) he had certainly had fewer defects.

But poetry and dramatic writing did not so far engross the thoughts of our
author, but that she sometimes turned them to subjects of a very different
nature; and at an age when few of the other sex were capable of understanding
the Essay of Human Understanding, and most of them prejudiced against the
novelty of its principles; and though she was at that time engaged in the
profession of a religion not very favorable to so rational a philosophy as
that of Mr. Lock; yet she had read that incomparable book, with so clear a
comprehension, and so unbiassed a judgment, that her own conviction of the
truth and importance of the notions contained in it, led her to endeavor that
of others, by removing some of the objections urged against them. She drew up
therefore a Defense of the Essay, against some Remarks which had been published
against it in 1667. The author of these remarks was never known to Mr. Lock,
who animadverted upon them with some marks of chagrin, at the end of his reply
to Stillingfleet, 1697. But after the death of the ingenious Dr. Thomas Burnet,
master of the Charter House, it appeared from his papers, that the Remarks were
the product of his pen. They were soon followed by second Remarks, printed the
same year, in vindication of the first, against Mr. Lock's Answer to them; and
in 1699, by Third Remarks, addressed likewise to Mr. Lock. Mrs. Trotter's
Defense of the Essay against all these Remarks was finished so early as the
beginning of December 1701, when she was but 22 years old. But being more
apprehensive of appearing before the great writer whom she defended, than of
the public censure, and conscious that the name of a woman would be a prejudice
against a work of that nature, she resolved to conceal herself with the utmost
care. But her title to the reputation of this piece did not continue long a
secret to the world. For Mrs. Burnet, the late wife of Dr. Burnet, bishop of
Sarum, a lady of an uncommon degree of knowledge, and whose Method of Devotion,
which passed through several editions, is a proof of her exemplary piety, and
who, as well as that prelate, honored our author with a particular friendship,
notwithstanding the difference of her religion, being informed that she was
engaged in writing, and that it was not poetry, was desirous to know the
subject. This Mrs. Trotter could not deny a lady of her merit, in whom she
might safely confide, and who, upon being acquainted with it, showed an equal
solicitude that the author might not be known. But afterward finding the
performance highly approved by the bishop her husband, Mr. Norris of Bemmerton,
and Mr. Lock himself; she thought the reasons of secrecy ceased, and discovered
the writer; and in June 1707 returned her thanks to Mrs. Trotter, then in
London, for her present of the book, in a letter which does as much honor to
her own understanding, principles and temper, as to her friend, to whom she
addressed it. Dr. Birch has given a copy of this letter.

Mr. Lock likewise was so highly satisfied with the Defense, (which was perhaps
the only piece that appeared in favor of his Essay, except one by Mr. Samuel
Bold, rector of Steeple in Dorsetshire, 1699) that being in London, he desired
Mr. King, afterward lord high chancellor, to make Mrs. Trotter a visit, and a
present of books; and when she had owned herself, he wrote to her a letter of
compliment, a copy of which is inserted in these memoris.

But while our author continued to show the world so deep a penetration into
subjects of the most difficult and abstract kind, she was still incapable of
extricating herself from those subtilties and perplexities of argument, which
retained her in the church of Rome. And the sincerity of her attachment to it,
in all its outward severities, obliged her to so strict an observance of its
fasts, as proved extremely injurious to her health. Upon which Dr. Denton
Nicholas, a very ingenious learned physician of her acquai^tance, advised her
to abate of those rigours of absti^ence, as insupportable to a constitution
naturally infirm.

She returned to the exercise of her dramatic genius in 1703, and having fixed
upon the Revolution of Sweden under Gustavus Erickson (which has been related
in prose with so much force and beauty by the Abbe Vertot) for the subject of a
Tragedy, she sent the first draught of it to Mr. Congreve, who returned her an
answer, which, on account of the just remarks upon the conduct of the drama,
well deserves a place here, did it not exceed our proposed bounds, and
therefore we must refer the reader to Dr. Birch's account. This Tragedy was
acted in 1706, at the Queen's Theater in the Hay-Market, and was printed in
quarto.

By a letter from Mrs. Trotter to her friend George Burnet of Kemnay in
Scotland, Esquire then at Geneva, dated February 2, 1703-4, it appears that she
then began to entertain more moderate notions of religion, and to abate of her
zeal for the church of Rome. Her charitableness and latitude of sentiments
seems to have increased a-pace, from the farther examination which she was now
probably making into the state of the controversy between the church of Rome
and the Protestants; for in another letter to Mr. Burnet, of August 8, 1704,
she speaks to the subject of religion, with a spirit of moderation unusual in
the communion of which she still professed herself. 'I wish, (says she) there
was no distinction of churches; and then I doubt not there would be much more
real religion, the name and notion of which I am so sorry to observe con^ined
to the being of some particular community: and the whole of it, I am afraid,
placed by most in a zeal of those points, which make the differences between
them; from which mistaken zeal, no doubt, have proceeded all the massacres,
persecutions, and hatred of their follow christians, which all churches have
been inclined to, when in power. And I believe it is generally true, that those
who are most bigoted to a sect, or most rigid and precise in their forms and
outward discipline, are most negligent of the moral duties, which certainly are
the main end of religion. I have observed this so often, both-in private
persons and public societies, that I am apt to suspect it every where.'



The victory at Blenheim, which exercised the pens of Mr. Addison and Mr. John
Philips, whose poems on that occasion divided the admiration of the public,
tempted Mrs. Trotter to write a copy of verses to the duke of Marlborough, upon
his return from his glorious campaign in Germany, December, 1704. But being
doubtful with respect to the publication of them, she sent them in manuscript
to his grace; and received for answer, that the duke and duchess, and the lord
treasurer Godolphin, with several others to whom they were shown, were greatly
pleased with them; and that good judges of poetry had declared, that there were
some lines in them superior to any that had been written on the subject. Upon
this encouragement she sent the poem to the press.

The high degree of favor with which she was honored by these illustrious
persons, gave her, about this time, hopes of some establishment of her fortune,
which had hitherto been extremely narrow and precarious. But though she failed
of such an establishment, she succeeded in 1705, in another point, which was a
temporary relief to her. This particular appears from one of her letters
printed in the second volume; but of what nature or amount this relief was, we
do not find.

Her enquiries into the nature of true religion were attended with their
natural and usual effects, in opening and enlarging her notions beyond the
contracted pale of her own church. For in her letter of the 7th of July 1705,
to Mr. Burnet, she says, 'I am zealous to have you agree with me in this one
article, that all good christians are of the same religion; a sentiment which I
sincerely confess, how little soever it is countenanced by the church of Rome.'
And in the latter end of the following year, or the beginning of 1707, her
doubts about the Romish religion, which she had so many years professed, having
led her to a thorough examination of the grounds of it, by consulting the best
books on both fides of the question, and advising with men of the best
judgment, the result was a conviction of the falseness of the pretensions of
that church, and a return to that of England, to which she adhered during the
rest of her life. In the course of this enquiry, the great and leading question
concerning A Guide in Controversy, was particularly discussed by her; and the
two letters which she wrote upon it, the first to Mr. Bennet, a Romish priest,
and the second to Mr. H --, who had procured an answer to that letter from a
stranger, Mr. Bennet's indisposition preventing him from returning one, were
thought so valuable on account of the strength and perspicuity of reasoning, as
well as their conciseness, that she consented to the importunity of her
friends, for their publication in June 1707, under the following title, A
Discourse concerning a Guide in Controversies; in two Letters: Written to one
of the Church of Rome, by a Person lately converted from that Communion; a
later edition of them being since printed at Edinburgh in 1728 in 8vo. Bishop
Burnet wrote the preface to them, though without his name to it; and he
observes, that they might be of use to such of the Roman Catholics as are
persuaded, that those who deny the infallibility of their church, take away all
certainty of the Christian religion, or of the authority of the scriptures.
This is the main topic of those two letters, and the point was considered by
our author as of such importance, that she procured her friend Mrs. Burnet to
consult Mr. (afterward Dr.) Clark upon it, and to show him a paper, which had
been put into her hands, urging the difficulties on that article, on the side
of the Papists. The sentiments of that great man upon this subject are
comprised in a letter from Mrs. Burnet to Mrs. Trotter, of which our editor has
given a copy, to which we refer the reader in the 31st page of his account.

In 1708 our author was married to Mr. Cockburn, the son of Dr. Cockburn, an
eminent and learned divine of Scotland, at first attached to the court of St.
Germains, but obliged to quit it on account of his inflexible adherence to the
Protestant religion; then for some time minister of the Episcopal church at
Amsterdam, and at last collated to the rectory of Northaw in Middlesex, by Dr.
Robinson bishop of London, at the recommendation of Queen Anne. Mr. Cockburn
his son, soon after his marriage with our author, had the donative of Nayland
in Sussex, where he settled in the same year 1708; but returned afterward from
thence to London, to be curate of St. Dunstan's in Fleet Street, where he
continued 'till the accession of his late majesty to the throne, when falling
into a scruple about the oath of abjuration, though he always prayed for the
King and Royal Family by name, he was obliged to quit that station, and for ten
or twelve years following was reduced to great difficulties in the support of
his family; during which time he instructed the youth of the academy in
Chancery Lane, in the Latin tongue. At last, in 1726, by consulting the lord
chancellor King and his own father, upon the sense and intent of that oath, and
by reading some papers put into his hands, with relation to it, he was
reconciled to the taking of it. In consequence of this, being the year
following invited to be minister of the Episcopal congregation at Aberdeen in
Scotland, he qualified himself conformably to the law, and, on the day of his
present Majesty's accession, preached a sermon there on the duty and benefit of
praying for the government. This sermon being printed and animadverted upon, he
published a reply to the remarks on it, with some papers relating to the oath
of abjuration, which have been much esteemed. Soon after his settlement at
Aberdeen, the lord chancellor presented him to the living of Long-Horsely, near
Morpeth in Northumberland, as a means of enabling him to support and educate
his family; for which purpose he was allowed to continue his function at
Aberdeen, 'till the negligence and ill-behaviour of the curates, whom he
employed at Long-Horsely, occasioned Dr. Chandler, the late bishop of Durham,
to call him to residence on that living, 1737; by which means he was forced to
quit his station at Aberdeen, to the no small diminution of his income. He was
a man of considerable learning; and besides his sermon abovementioned, and the
vindication of it, he published, in the Weekly Miscellany, A Defense of Prime
Ministers, in the Character of Joseph; and a Treatise of the Mosaic Design,
published since his death.

Mrs. Cockburn, after her marriage, was entirely diverted from her studies for
many years, by attending upon the duties of a wife and a mother, and by the
ordinary cares of an increasing family, and the additional ones arising from
the reduced circumstances of her husband. However, her zeal for Mr. Lock's
character and writings drew her again into the public light in 1716, upon this
occasion.

Dr. Holdsworth, fellow of St. John's College in Oxford, had preached on
Easter-Monday, 1719 20, before that university, a fermon on John v. 20, 29,
which he published, professing in his title page to examine and answer the
Cavils, False Reasonings, and False Interpretations of Scripture, of Mr. Lock
and others, against the Resurrection of the Same Body. This sermon did not
reach Mrs. Cockburn's hands 'till some years after; when the perusal of it
forced from her some animadversions, which she threw together in the form of a
letter to the Dr. and sent to him in May 1724, with a design of suppressing it
entirely, if it should have the desired effect upon him. After nine months the
Dr. informed her, that he had drawn up a large and particular answer to it, but
was unwilling to trust her with his manuscript, 'till she should publish her
own. However, after a long time, and much difficulty, she at last obtained the
perusal of his answer; but not meeting with that conviction from it, which
would have made her give up her cause, she was prevailed on to let the world
judge between them, and accordingly published her Letter to Dr. Holdsworth, in
January 1726-7, without her name, but said in the title page to be by the
author of, A Defense of Mr. Lock's Essay of Human Understanding. The Dr. whose
answer to it was already finished, was very expeditious in the publication of
it in June 1727, in an 8vo volume, under the title of A Defense of the Doctrine
of the Resurrection of the same Body, etc.

Mrs. Cockburn wrote a very particular reply to this, and entitled it, A
Vindication of Mr. Lock's Principles, from the injurious Imputations of Dr.
Holdsworth. But though it is an admirable performance, and she was extremely
desirous of doing justice to Mr. Lock and herself, yet not meeting with any
Bookseller willing to undertake, nor herself being able to support the expense
of the impression, it continued in manuscript, and was reserved to enrich the
collection published after her death.

Her Remarks upon some Writers in the Controversy concerning the Foundation of
Moral Duty and Moral Obligation were begun during the winter of the year 1739,
and finished in the following one; for the weakness of her eyes, which had been
a complaint of many years standing, not permitting her to use, by candlelight,
her needle, which so fully employed her in the summer season, that she read
little, and wrote less; she amused herself, during the long winter-evenings, in
digesting her thoughts upon the most abstract subjects in morality and
metaphysics. They continued in manuscript till 1743, for want of a Bookseller
inclined to accept the publication of them, and were introduced to the world in
August that year, in The History of the Works of the Learned. Her name did not
go with them, but they were Inscribed with the utmost Deference to Alexander
Pope, Esquire by an Admirer of his moral Character; for which she shows a
remarkable zeal in her letters, whenever she has occasion to mention him. And
her high opinion of him in that respect, founded chiefly on his writings, and
especially his letters, as well as her admiration of his genius, inspired her
with a strong desire of being known to him; for which purpose she drew up a
pretty long letter to him about the year 1738: but it was never sent. The
strength, clearness, and vivacity shown in her Remarks upon the most abstract
and perplexed questions, immediately raised the curiosity of all good judges
about the concealed writer; and their admiration was greatly increased when her
sex and advanced age were known. And the worthy Dr. Sharp Author of an
excellent pamphlet, entitled, Two Dissertations concerning the Etymology and
Scripture-meaning of the Hebrew Words Elohim and Berith. Vide Monthly Review.
, archdeacon of Northumberland, who had these Remarks in manuscript, and
encouraged the publication of them, being convinced by them, that no person was
better qualified for a thorough examination of the grounds of morality, entered
into a correspondence with her upon that subject. But her ill state of health
at last interrupted her prosecution of it; a circumstance to be regretted,
since a discussion carried on with so much sagacity and candor on both sides,
would, in all probability, have left little difficulty remaining on the
question.

Dr. Rutherforth's Essay on the Nature and Obligations of virtue, published in
May 1744, soon engaged her thoughts, and notwithstanding the asthmatic
disorder, which had seized her many years before, and now left her small
intervals of ease, she applied herself to the confutation of that elaborate
discourse; and having finished it with a spirit, elegance, and perspicuity
equal, if not superior, to all her former writings, transmitted her manuscript
to Mr. Warburton, who published it in 8vo. with a Preface of his own, in April
1747, under the title of Remarks upon the Principles and Reasonings of Dr.
Rutherforth's Essay on the Nature and Obligations of Virtue, in Vindication of
the contrary Principles and Reasons enforced in the Writings of the late Dr.
Samuel Clark.

The extensive reputation which this and her former writings had gained her,
induced her friends to propose to her, the collecting and publishing them in a
body* And upon her consenting to the scheme, which was to be executed by
subscripti on, in order to secure to her the full benefit of the edition, it
met with a ready encouragement from all persons of true taste; but though Mrs.
Cockburn did not live to discharge the office of editor, yet the public has
received the acquisition by her death, of a valuable series of letters, which
her own modesty would have restrained her from permitting to see the light. And
it were to be wished that those two volumes, conditioned for by the terms of
subscription, could have contained all her dramatic writings, of which only one
is here published. But a that was impossible, the preference was, upon the
maturest deliberation, given to those in prose, as superior in their kind to
the most perfect of her poetical, and of more general and lasting use to the
world.

The loss of her husband on the 4th of January 1748, in the 71st year of his
age, was a severe shock to her; and she did not long survive him, dying on the
11th of May, 1749. in her 71st year, after having long supported a painful
disorder, with a resignation to the divine will, which had been the governing
principle of her whole life, and her support under the various trials of it.
Her memory and understanding continued unimpaired, 'till within a few days of
her death. She was interred near her husband and youngest daughter at
Long-Horsley, with this short sentence on their tomb: Let their works praise
them in the gates. Prove. xxxi. 31. They left only one son, who is clerk of the
chequ^ at Chatham, and two daughters.

Mrs. Cockburn was no less celebrated for her beauty, in her younger days, than
for her genius and accomplishments. She was indeed small of stature, but had a
remarkable liveliness in her eye, and delicacy of complexion, which continued
to her death. Her private character rendered her extremely amiable to those who
intimately knew her. Her conversation was always innocent, useful and
agreeable, without the least affectation of being thought a wit, and attended
with a remarkable modesty and diffidence of herself, and a constant endeavor
to adapt her discourse to her company. She was happy in an uncommon evenness
and cheerfulness of temper. Her disposition was generous and benevolent; and
ready upon all occasions to forgive injuries, and bear them, as well as
mi^fortunes, without interrupting her own ease, or that of others, with
complaints or reproaches. The prestures of a very contracted fortune were
supported by her with calmness and in silence; nor did she ever attempt to
improve it among those great personages to whom she was known, by
importunities; to which the best minds are most averse, and which her approved
merit and established reputation should have rendered unnecessary.

The collection now exhibited to the world is, says Dr. Birch, and we entirely
agree with him, so incontestable a proof of the superiority of our author's
genius, as in a manner supersedes every thing that can be said upon that head.
But her abilities as a writer, and the merit of her works, will not have full
justice done them, without a due attention to the peculiar circumstances, in
which they were produced: her early youth, when she wrote some, her very
advanced age, and ill state of health, when she drew up others; the uneasy
situation of her fortune, during the whole course of her life; and an interval
of near twenty years in the vigor of it, spent in the cares of a family,
without the least leisure for reading or contemplation: after which, with a
mind so long diverted and incumbered, resuming her studies, she instantly
recovered its entire powers, and in the hours of relaxation from her domestic
employments, pursued, to their utmost limits, some of the deepest enquiries of
which the human mind is capable!

CONTENTS of the First Volume of Mrs. COCKBURN's Works.
I. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Controversy. First published in 1707,
with a preface by bishop Burnet. II. A Defense of Mr. Lock's Essay of Human
Understanding. First published in 1702. III. A Letter to Dr. Holdsworth,
concerning the Resurrection of the same Body. First published in 1726. IV. A
Vindication of Mr. Lock's Christian Principles, from the injurious Imputations
of Dr. Holdsworth. Now first published. V. Remarks upon some Writers in the
Controversy, concerning the Foundation of Moral Virtue, and Moral Obligation.
With some Thoughts concerning Necessary Existence; the Reality and Infinity of
Space; the Extension and Place of Spirits; and on Dr. Watts's Notion of
Substance. First published in 1743.
CONTENTS of the Second Volume.
I. Remarks upon Dr. Rutherforth's Essay on the Nature and Obligations of
Virtue. First published in the year 1747. II. Miscellaneous Pieces. Now first
printed. Containing a Letter of Advice to her Son. -- Sunday's Journal. -- On
the Usefulness of Schools and Universities. -- On the Credibility of the
Historical Parts of Scripture. -- On Moral Virtue. -- Notes on Christianity as
old as the Creation. -- On the Infallibility of the Church of Rome. -- Answer
to a Question concerning the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate over the Life of
the Subject. -- Remarks on Mr. Seed's Sermon on Moral Virtue. -- Remarks upon
an Enquiry into the Origin of Human Appetites and Affections. III. Letters
between Mrs. Cockburn and several of her Friends. These take up the greatest
part of the volume. IV. Letters between the Rev. Dr. Sharp, Archdeacon of
Northumberland and Mrs. Cockburn, concerning the Foundation of Moral Virtue. V.
Fatal Friendship, a Tragedy. VI. Poems on several Occasions. There are very few
of these, and what there are, are of little note. Her poetical talent was the
smallest and least valuable of our author's literary accomplishments.
AMBROSE PHILLIPS, Esquire
THIS Gentleman was descended from a very ancient, and considerable family in
the county of Leicester, and received his education in St. John's college
Cambridge, where he wrote his Pastorals, a species of excellence, in which he
is thought to have remarkably distinguished himself. When Mr. Philips quitted
the university, and repaired to the metropolis, he-became, as Mr. Jacob phrases
it, one of the wits at Buttons; and in consequence of this, contracted an
acquaintance with those bright genius's who frequented it; especially Sir
Richard Steel, who in the first volume of his Tatler inserts a little poem of
this author's dated from Copenhagen, which he calls a winter piece; Sir Richard
thus mentions it with honor. 'This is as fine a piece, as we ever had from any
of the schools of the most learned painters; such images as these give us a new
pleasure in our sight, and fix upon our minds traces of reflection, which
accompany us wherever the like objects occur.'

This short performance which we shall here insert, was reckoned so elegant, by
men of taste then living, that Mr. Pope himself, who had a confirmed aversion
to Philips, when he affected to despise his other works, always excepted this
out of the number.

It is written from Copenhagen, addressed to the Earl of Dorset, and dated the
9th of May 1709

A WINTER PIECE.
FROM frozen climes, and endless tracks of snow,
From streams that northern winds forbid to flow;
What present shall the Muse to Dorset bring,
Or how, so near the Pole, attempt to sing?
The hoary winter here conceals from sight.
All pleasing objects that to verse invite.
The hills and dales, and the delightful woods,
The flowery plains, and silver streaming floods,
By snow disguised in bright confusion lie,
And with one dazzling waste, fatigue the eye.
No gentle breathing breeze prepares the spring,
No birds within the desert region sing.
The ships unmoved the boisterous winds defy,
While rattling chariots over the ocean fly.
The vast Leviathan wants room to play,
And spout his waters in the face of day.
The starving wolves along the main sea prowl,
And to the moon in icy valleys howl,
For many a shining league the level main,
Here spreads itself into a glassy plain:
There solid billows of enormous size,
Alps of green ice, in wild disorder rise.
And yet but lately have I seen even here,
The winter in a lovely dress appear.
Ere yet the clouds let fall the treasured snow,
Or winds begun through hazy skies to blow;
At evening a keen eastern breeze arose;
And the descending rain unsullied froze.
Soon as the silent shades of night withdrew.
The ruddy morn disclosed at once to view,
The face of nature in a rich disguise,
And brightened every object to my eyes:
And every shrub, and every blade of grass,
And every pointed thorn seemed wrought in glass.
In pearls and rubies rich, the hawthorns show,
While through the ice the crimson berries glow.
The thick sprung reeds, the watery marshes yield,
Seem polished lances in a hostile field.
The stag in limpid currents with surprise,
Sees crystal branches on his forehead rise.
The spreading oak, the beech, and towering pine,
Glazed over, in the freezing ether shine.
The frighted birds, the rattling branches shun,
That wave and glitter in the distant sun.
When if a sudden gust of wind arise,
The brittle forest into atoms flies:
The crackling wood beneath the tempest bends,
And in a spangled shower the prospect ends.
Or, if a southern gale the region warm,
And by degrees unbind the wintry charm,
The traveller, a miry country sees,
And journeys sad beneath the dropping trees.
Like some deluded peasant, Merlin leads
Through fragrant bowers, and through delicious meads;
While here enchanted gardens to him rise,
And airy fabrics there attract his eyes,
His wand ring feet the magic paths pursue;
And while he thinks the fair illusion true,
The trackless scenes disperse in fluid air,
And woods, and wilds, and thorny ways appear:
A tedious road the weary wretch returns,
And, as he goes, the transient vision mourns.
But it was not enough for Sir Richard to praise this performance of Mr.
Philips. He was also an admirer of his Pastorals, which had then obtained a
great number of readers: He was about to form a Critical Comparison of Pope's
Pastorals, and th^se of Mr. Philips; and giving in the conclusion, the
preference to the latter. Sir Richard's design being communicated to Mr. Pope,
who was not a little jealous of his reputation, he took the alarm; and by the
most artful and insinuating method defeated his purpose.

The reader cannot be ignorant, that there are several numbers in the Guardian,
employed upon Pastoral Poetry, and one in particular, upon the merits of
Philips and Pope, in which the latter is found a better versisier; but as a
true Arcadian, the preference is given to Philips. That we may be able to
convey a perfect idea of the method which Mr. Pope took to prevent the
diminution of his reputation, we shall transcribe the particular parts of that
paper in the Guardian, Number XL. Monday April the 27th.

I designed to have troubled the reader with no farther discourses of
Pastorals, but being informed that I am taxed of partiality, in not mentioning
an author, whose Eclogues are published in the same volume with Mr. Philips's,
I shall employ this paper in observations upon him, written in the free spirit
of criticism, and without apprehensions of offending that gentleman, whose
character it is, that he takes the greatest care of his works before they are
publisned, and has the least concern for them-afterwards. I have laid it down
as the first rule of Pastoral, that its idea should be taken from the manners
of the Golden Age, and the moral formed upon the representation of innocence;
it is therefore plain, that any deviations from that design, degrade a poem from
being true Pastoral.

So easy as Pastoral writing may seem (in the simplicity we have described it)
yet it requires great reading, both of the ancients and moderns, to be a master
of it. Mr. Philips has given us manifest proofs of his knowledge of books; it
must be confessed his competitor has imitated some single thoughts of the
ancients well enough, if we consider he had not the happiness of an university
education: but he has dispersed them here and there without that order and
method Mr. Philips observes, whose whole third pastoral, is an instance how
well he studied the fifth of Virgil, and how judiciously he reduced Virgil's
thoughts to the standard of pastoral; and his contention of Colin Clout, and
the Nightingale, shows with what exactness he has imitated Strada. When I
remarked it as a principal fault to introduce fruits, and flowers of a foreign
growth in descriptions, where the scene lies in our country, I did not design
that observation should extend also to animals, or the sensitive life; for
Philips has with great judgment described wolves in England in his first
pastoral. Nor would I have a poet slavishly confine himself, (as Mr. Pope has
done) to one particular season of the year, one certain time of the day, and
one unbroken scene in each Eclogue. It is plain, Spencer neglected this
pedantry, who in his Pastoral of November, mentions the mournful song of the
Nightingale, Sad Philomel, her song in tears does steep.


And Mr. Philips by a poetical creation, has raised up finer beds of flowers,
than the most industrious gardener; his roses, lilies, and daffadils, blow in
the same season.

But the better to discover the merit of our two cotemporary pastoral writers.
I shall endeavor to draw a parallel of them, by placing several of their
particular thoughts in the same light; whereby it will be obvious, how much
Philips has the advantage: With what simplicity he introduces two shepherds
singing alternately. HOBB. COME Rosalind, O come, for without thee
What pleasure can the country have for me?
Come Rosalind, O come; my brinded kine,
My snowy sheep, my farm and all is thine.

LANG. Come Rosalind, O come; here shady bowers.
Here are cool fountains, and here springing flowers.
Come Rosalind; here ever let us stay,
And sweetly waste our live-long time away.



Our other pastoral writer in expressing the same thought, deviates into
downright poetry. STREPHON. In spring the fields, in autumn hills I love,
At morn the plains, at noon the shady grove.
But Delia always; forced from Delia's sight,
Nor plains at morn, nor groves at noon delight.

DAPHNE. Sylvia's like autumn ripe, yet mild as May,
More bright than noon, yet fresh as early day;
Even spring displeases when she shines not here:
But blessed with her, it is spring throughout the year.



In the first of these authors, two shepherds thus innocently describe the
behavior of their mistresses. HOBB. As Marian bathed, by chance I passed by;
She blushed, and at me cast a side long eye:
Then swift beneath, the crystal waves she tried,
Her beauteous form, but all in vain, to hide.

LANG. As I to cool me bathed one sultry day,
Fond Lydia lurking in the sedges lay,
The wanton laughed, and seemed in haste to fly;
Yet often stopped, and often turned her eye.



The other modern (who it must be confessed has a knack at versifying) has it
as follows, STREPHON. Me gentle Delia beckons from the plain,
Thus, hid in shades, eludes her eager swain;
But feigns a laugh, to see me search around,
And by that laugh the willing fair is found.

DAPHNE. The sprightly Sylvia trips along the green;
She runs, but hopes she does not run unseen:
While a kind glance, at her pursuer flies,
How much at variance are her feet and eyes.



There is nothing the writers of this kind of peotry are fonder of, than
descriptions of pastoral presents.

Philips says thus of a Sheep-hook. Of seasoned elm, where studs of brass
appear,
To speak the giver's name, the month, and year:
The hook of polished steel, the handle turned,
And richly by the graver's skill adorned.


The other of a bowl embossed with figures, -- Where wanton ivy twines,
And swelling clusters bend the curling vines;
Four figures rising from the work appear,
The various seasons of the rolling year;
And what is that which binds the radiant sky,
Where twelve bright signs, in beauteous order lie.


The simplicity of the swain in this place who forgets the name of the Zodiac,
is no ill imitation of Virgil; but how much more plainly, and unaffectedly
would Philips have dressed this thought in his Doric. And what that height,
which girds the welkin sheen,
Where twelve gay signs in meet array are seen.


If the reader would indulge his curiosity any farther in the comparison of
particulars, he may read the first Pastoral of Philips, with the second of his
contemporary, and the fourth and sixth of the former, with the fourth and first
of the latter; where several parallel places will occur to every one.

Having now shown some parts, in which these two writers may be compared, it is
a justice I owe to Mr. Philips, to discover those in which no man can compare
with him. First, the beautiful rusticity, of which I shall now produce two
instances out of a hundred not yet quoted. O woeful day! O day of woe, quoth he,
And woeful I, who live the day to see!


That simplicity of diction, the melancholy flowing of the numbers, the
solemnity of the sound, and the easy turn of the words, are extremely elegant.

In another Pastoral, a shepherd utters a Dirge, not much inferior to the
former in the following lines. Ah me the while! ah me, the luckless day!
Ah luckless lad, the rather might I say;
Ah silly I! more silly than my sheep,
Which on the flowery plains I once did keep.


How he still charms the ear, with his artful repetition of the epithets; and
how significant is the last verse! I defy the most common reader to repeat
them, without feeling some motions of compassion. In the next place, I shall
rank his Proverbs in which I formerly observed he excels: For example, A
rolling stone is ever bare of moss;
And, to their cost, green years old proverbs cross.
-- He that late lies down, as late will rise,
And sluggard like, till noonday snoring lies.
Against ill-luck, all cunning foresight fails;
Whether we sleep or wake, it naught avails.
-- Nor fear, from upright sentence wrong,


Lastly, His excellent dialect, which alone might prove him the eldest born of
Spencer, and the only true Arcadian, etc.

Thus far the comparison between the merit of Mr. Pope and Mr. Philips, as
writers of Pastoral, made by the author of this paper in the Guardian, after
the publication of which, the enemies of Pope exulted, as in one particular
species of poetry, upon which he valued himself, he was shown to be inferior to
his contemporary. For some time they enjoyed their triumph; but it turned out
at last to their unspeakable mortification.

The paper in which the comparison is inserted, was written by Mr. Pope
himself. Nothing could have so effectually defeated the design of diminishing
his reputation, as this method, which had a very contrary effect. He laid down
some false principles, upon these he reasoned, and by comparing his own and
Philips's Pastorals, upon such principles it was no great compliment to the
latter, that he wrote more agreeable to notions which are in themselves false.

The subjects of pastoral are as various as the passions of human nature; nay,
it may in some measure partake of every kind of poetry, but with this
limitation, that the scene of it ought always to be laid in the country, and
the thoughts never contrary to the ideas of those who are bred there. The
images are to be drawn from rural life; and provided the language is
perspicuous, gentle, and flowing, the sentiments may be as elegant as the
country scenes can furnish. -- In the particular comparison of passages between
Pope and Philips, the former is so much superior, that one cannot help
wondering, that Steel could be thus imposed upon, who was in other respects a
very quick discerner. Though it is not impossible, but that Guardian might go to
the press without Sir Richard's seeing it; he not being the only person
concerned in that paper.

The two following lines so much celebrated in this paper, are sufficiently
convincing, that the whole criticism is ironical. Ah! silly I, more silly than
my sheep,
Which on the flowr'y plains I once did keep.


Nothing can be much more silly than these lines; and yet the author says, "How
he still charms the ear with the artful repetitions of epithets." SILLY I, MORE
SILLY THAN MY SHEEP.


The next work Mr. Philips published after his Pastorals, and which it is said
he wrote at the university, was his life of John Williams lord keeper of the
great-seal, bishop of Lincoln and archbishop of York, in the reigns of king
James and Charles the First, in which are related some remarkable occurrences
in those times, both in church and state, with an appendix, giving an account
of his benefactions to St. John's college.

Mr. Philips, seems to have made use of archbishop William's life, the better
to make known his own state principles, which in the course of that work he had
a fair occasion of doing. Bishop Williams was the great opposer of High-Church
measures, he was a perpetual antagonist to Land; and lord Clarendon mentions
him in his history with very great decency and respect, when it is considered
that they adhered to opposite parties.

Mr. Philips, who early distinguished himself in revolution principles, was
concerned with Dr. Boulter, afterward archbishop of Armagh, the right
honorable Richard West, Esquire lord chancellor of Ireland; the revd. Mr. Gilbert
Burnet, and the revd. Mr. Henry Stevens, in writing a paper called the
Free-Thinker; but they were all published by Mr. Philips, and since reprinted
in three volumes in 12mo. In the latter part of the reign of queen Anne, he was
secretary to the Hanover-Club, a set of noblemen and gentlemen, who associated
in honor of that succession. They drank regular toasts to the health of those
ladies, who were most zealously attached to the Hanoverian family; upon whom
Mr. Philips wrote the following lines, While these, the chosen beauties of our
isle,
Propitious on the cause of freedom smile,
The rash Pretender's hopes we may despise,
And trust Britannia's safety to their eyes.


After the accession of his late majesty, Mr. Philips was made a justice of
peace, and appointed a commissioner of the lottery. But though his
circumstances were easy, the state of his mind was not so; he fell under the
severe displeasure of Mr. Pope, who has satirized him with his usual keenness.

'Twas said, he used to mention Mr. Pope as an enemy to the government; and
that he was the avowed author of a report, very industriously spread, that he
had a hand in a paper called The Examiner. The revenge which Mr. Pope took in
consequence of this abuse, greatly reffled the temper of Mr. Philips, who as he
was not equal to him in wit, had recourse to another weapon; in the exercise of
which no great parts are requisite. He hung up a rod at Button's, with which he
resolved to chastise his antagonist, whenever he should come there. But Mr.
Pope, who got notice of this design, very prudently declined coming to a place,
where in all probability he must have felt the resentment of an enraged author,
as much superior to him in bodily strength, as inferior in wit and genius.

When Mr. Philips's friend, Dr. Boulter, rose to be archbishop of Dublin, he
went with him into Ireland, where he had considerable preferments; and was a
member of the House of Commons there, as representative of the county of Armagh.

Notwithstanding the ridicule which Mr. Philips has drawn upon himself, by his
opposition to Pope, and the disadvantageous light his Pastorals appear in, when
compared with his; yet, there is good reason to believe, that Mr. Philips was
no mean Arcadian: By endeavoring to imitate too servilely the manners and
sentiments of vulgar rustics, he has sometimes raised a laugh against him; yet
there are in some of his Pastorals a natural simplicity, a true Doric dialect,
and very graphical descriptions.

Mr. Gildon, in his complete Art of Poetry, mentions him with Theocritus and
Virgil; but then he defeats the purpose of his compliment, for by carrying the
similitude too far, he renders his panegyric hyperbolical.

We shall now consider Mr. Philips as a dramatic writer. The first piece he
brought upon the stage, was his Distressed Mother, translated from the French
of Monsieur Racine, but not without such deviations as Mr. Philips thought
necessary to heighten the distress; for writing to the heart is a secret which
the best of the French poets have not found out. This play was acted first in
the year 1711, with every advantage a play could have. Pyrrhus was performed by
Mr. Booth, a part in which he acquired great reputation. Orestes was given to
Mr. Powel, and Andromache was excellently personated by the inimitable Mrs.
Oldfield. Nor was Mrs. Porter beheld in Hermione without admiration. The
Distressed Mother is so often acted, and so frequently read, we shall not
trouble the reader with giving any farther account of it.

A modern critic speaking of this play, observes that the distress of
Andromache moves an audience more than that of Belvidera, who is as amiable a
wife, as Andromache is an affectionate mother; their circumstances though not
similar, are equally interesting, and yet says he, 'the female part of the
audience is more disposed to weep for the suffering mother, than the suffering
wife Vide the ACTOR.
.' The reason it is imagined is this, there are more affectionate mothers in the
world than wives.

Mr. Philips's next dramatic performance was

The Briton, a Tragedy; acted 1721. This is built on a very interesting and
affecting story, whether founded on real events I cannot determine. but they
are admirably fitted to raise the passion peculiar to tragedy. Vanoc Prince of
the Cornavians married for his second wife Cartismand, Queen of the
Brigantians, a woman of an imperious spirit, who proved a severe stepmother to
the King's daughter Gwendolen, betrothed to Yvor, the Prince of the Silurians.
The mutual disagreement between Vanoc and his Queen, at last produced her
revolt from him. She intrigues with Vellocad, who had been formerly the King's
servant, and enters into a league with the Roman tribune, in order to be
revenged on her husband. Vanoc fights some successful battles, but his affairs
are thrown into the greatest confusion, upon receiving the news that a party of
the enemy has carried off the Princess his daughter. She is conducted to the
tent of Valens the Roman tribune, who was himself in love with her, but who
offered her no violation. He went to Vanoc in the name of Didius the Roman
general, to offer terms of peace, but he was rejected with indignation. The
scene between Vanoc and Valens is one of the most masterly to be met with in
tragedy. Valens returns to his fair charge, while her father prepares for
battle, and to rescue his daughter by the force of arms. But Cartismand, who
knew that no mercy would be shown her at the hands of her stern husband, flies
to the Princess's tent, and in the violence of her rage stabs her. The King and
Yvor enter that instant, but too late to save the beauteous Gwendolen from the
blow, who expires in the arms of her betrothed husband, a scene wrought up with
the greatest tenderness. When the King reproaches Cartismand for this deed of
horror, she answers, Had thou been more forgiving, I had been less cruel.

VANOC. Wickedness! barbarian! monster --
What had she done, alas! -- Sweet innocence!
She would have interceded for thy crimes.

CARTISMAND. Too well I knew the purpose of thy soul. --
Did thou believe I would submit? -- resign my crown? --
Or that thou only had the power to punish?

VANOC. Yet I will punish; -- meditate strange torments! --
Then give thee to the justice of the Gods.

CARTISMAND. Thus Vanoc, do I mock thy treasured rage. --
My heart springs forward to the dagger's point.

VANOC. Quick, wrest it from her! -- drag her hence to chains.

CARTISMAND. There needs no second stroke --
Adieu, rash man! -- my woes are at an end: --
Thine's but begun; -- and lasting as thy life.



Mr. Philips in this play has shown how well he was acquainted with the stage;
he keeps the scene perpetually busy; great designs are carrying on, the
incidents rise naturally from one another, and the catastrophe is moving. He
has not observed the rules which some critics have established, of distributing
poetical justice; for Gwendolen, the most amiable character in the play is the
chief sufferer, arising from the indulgence of no irregular passion, nor any
guilt of hers.

The next year Mr. Philips introduced another tragedy on the stage called
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, acted 1721. The plot of this play is founded on
history. During the minority of Henry VI. his uncle, the duke of Gloucester,
was raised to the dignity of Regent of the Realm. This high station could not
but procure him many enemies, amongst whom was the duke of Suffolk, who, in
order to restrain his power, and to inspire the mind of young Henry with a love
of independence, effected a marriage between that Prince, and Margaret of
Anjou, a Lady of the most consummate beauty, and what is very rare amongst her
sex, of the most approved courage. This lady entertained an aversion for the
duke of Gloucester, because he opposed her marriage with the King, and
accordingly resolves upon his ruin.

She draws over to her party cardinal Beaufort, the Regent's uncle, a
supercilious proud churchman. They fell upon a very odd scheme to shake the
power of Gloucester, and as it is very singular, and absolutely fact, we shall
here insert it.

The duke of Gloucester had kept Eleanor Cobham, daughter to the lord Cobham,
as his concubine, and after the dissolution of his marriage with the countess
of Hainault, he made her his wife; but this did not restore her reputation: she
was, however, too young to pass in common repute for a witch, yet was arrested
for high treason, founded on a pretended piece of witchcraft, and after doing
public penance several days, by sentence of convocation, was condemned to
perpetual imprisonment in the Isle of Man, but afterward removed to
Killingworth-castle. The fact charged upon her, was the making an image of wax
resembling the King, and treated in such a manner by incantations, and
sorceries, as to make him waste away, as the image gradually consumed. John
Hume, her chaplain, Thomas Southwell, a canon of St. Stephen's Westminster,
Roger Bolingbroke, a clergyman highly esteemed, and eminent for his uncommon
learning, and merit, and perhaps on that account, reputed to have great skill
in necromancy, and Margery Jourdemain, commonly called The Witch of Eye, were
tried as her accomplices, and condemned, the woman to be burnt, the others to
be drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tyburn See Cart's History of England, Reign
of Henry VI.
. This hellish contrivance against the wife of the duke of Gloucester, was
meant to shake the influence of her husband, which in reality it did, as
ignorance and credulity co-operated with his enemies to destroy him. He was
arrested for high treason, a charge which could not be supported, and that his
enemies might have no further trouble with him, cardinal Beaufort hired
assassins to murder him. The poet acknowledges the hints he has taken from the
Second Part of Shakespeare's Henry VI. and in some scenes has copied several
lines from him. In the last scene, that pathetic speech of Eleanor's to
Cardinal Beaufort when he was dying in the agonies of remorse and despair, is
literally borrowed. WARWICK. See how the pangs of death work in his features.

YORK. Disturb him not -- let him pass peaceably.

ELEANOR. Lord Cardinal; -- if thou think of Heaven's bliss
Hold up thy hand; -- make signal of that hope.
He dies; -- and makes no sign! --



In praise of this tragedy, Mr. Welsted has prefixed a very elegant copy of
verses.

Mr. Philips by a way of writing very peculiar, procured to himself the name of
Namby Pamby. This was first bestowed on him by Harry Carry, who burlesqued some
little pieces of his, in so humorous a manner, that for a long while, Harry's
burlesque, passed for Swift's with many; and by others were given to Pope: It Is
certain, each at first, took it for the other's composition.

In ridicule of this manner, the ingenious Hawkins Brown, Esquire now a Member of
Parliament, in his excellent burlesque piece called The Pipe of Tobacco, has
written an imitation, in which the resemblance is so great, as not to be
distinguished from the original. This gentleman has burlesqued the following
eminent authors, by such a close imitation of their turn of verse, that it has
not the appearance of a copy, but an original. SWIFT, POPE, THOMSON, YOUNG,
PHILIPS, CIBBER.


As a specimen of the delicacy of our author's turn of versification, we shall
present the reader with his translation of the following beautiful Ode of
Sappho. HYMN to VENUS.
1.
OVENUS, beauty of the skies,
To whom a thousand temples rise,
Gayly false, in gentle smiles,
Full of love, perplexing wiles;
O Goddess! from my heart remove
The wasting cares and pains of love.
2.
If ever thou have kindly heard
A song in soft distress preferred,
Propitious to my tuneful vow,
O gentle goddess! hear me now.
Descend, thou bright immortal guest!
In all thy radiant charms confessed.
3.
Thou once did leave almighty Jove,
And all the golden roofs above;
The carr thy wanton sparrows drew,
Hovering in air, they lightly flew;
As to my bower they winged their way,
I saw their quivering pinions play.
4.
The birds dismissed (while you remain)
Bore back their empty car again;
Then you, with looks divinely mild,
In every heavenly feature smiled,
And asked what new complaints I made,
And why I called you to my aid?
5.
What frenzy in my bosom raged,
And by what cure to be asswag'd?
What gentle youth I would allure,
Whom in my artful toils secure?
Who does thy tender heart subdue,
Tell me, my Sappho, tell me who?
6.
Though now he shuns my longing arms,
He soon shall court thy slighted charms;
Though now thy offerings he despise,
He soon to thee shall sacrifice;
Though now he freeze, he soon shall burn,
And be thy victim in his turn.
7.
Celestial visitant once more,
Thy needful presence I implore.
In pity come, and ease my grief,
Bring my distempered soul relief,
Favor thy suppliant's hidden fires,
And give me all my heart's desires.


There is another beautiful ode by the same Grecian poetess, rendered into
English by Mr. Philips with inexpressible delicacy, quoted in the Spectator,
vol. iii. No. 229. 1.
Blessed, as the immortal Gods is he
The youth who fondly sits by thee,
And hears, and sees thee all the while
Softly speak, and ^weetly smile.
2.
'Twas this deprived my soul of rest,
And raised such tumults in my breast;
For while I gazed, in transport tossed,
My breath was gone, my voice was lost.
3.
My bosom glowed; the subtle flame
Ran quick through all my vital frame;
Over my dim eyes a darkness hung;
My ears with hollow murmurs rung.
4.
In dewy damps my limbs were chilled;
My blood with gentle horrors thrilled;
My feeble pulse forgot to play;
I fainted, sunk, and died away.


Mr. Philips having purchased an annuity of 400 l. per annum, for his life,
came over to England sometime in the year 1748: But had not his health; and
died soon after at his lodgings near Vauxhall.

RICHARD MAITLAND, Earl of LAUDERDALE.
THIS learned nobleman was nephew to John, the great duke of Lauderdale, who
was secretary of state to King Charles II. for Scotch affairs, and for many
years had the government of that kingdom entirely entrusted to him. Whoever is
acquainted with history will be at no loss to know, with how little moderation
he exercised his power; he ruled his native country with a rod of iron, and was
the author of all those disturbances and persecutions which have stained the
Annals of Scotland, during that inglorious period.

As the duke of Lauderdale was without issuemale of his own body, he took our
author into his protection as his immediate heir, and ordered him to be
educated in such a manner as to qualify him for the possession of those great
employments his ancestors enjoyed in the state. The improvement of this young
nobleman so far exceeded his years, that he was very early admitted into the
privy council, and made lord justice clerk; anno 1681. He married the daughter
of the earl of Argyle, who was tried for sedition in the state, and confined in
the castle of Edinburgh. When Argyle found his fate approaching, he meditated,
and effected his escape; and some letters of his being intercepted and
decyphered, which had been written to the earl of Lauderdale, his lordship fell
under a cloud, and was stripped of his preferments. These letters were only of a
familiar nature, and contained nothing but domestic business; but a
correspondence with a person condemned, was esteemed a sin in politics not to
be forgiven, especially by a man of the Duke of York's furious disposition.

Though the duke of Lauderdale had ordered our author to be educated as his
heir, yet he left all his personal estate, which was very great, to another,
the young nobleman having, by some means, disobliged him; and as he was of an
ungovernable implacable temper, could never again recover his favor Crawford's
Peerage of Scotland.
. Though the earl of Lauderdale was thus removed from his pla^es by the court,
yet he persisted in his loyalty to the Royal Family, and, upon the revolution,
followed the fortune of King James II. and some years after died in France,
leaving no surviving issue, so that the titles devolved on his younger brother.

While the earl was in exile with his Royal master, he applied his mind to the
delights of poetry, and, in his leisure hours, completed a translation of
Virgil's works. Mr. Dryden, in his dedication of the Aeneis, thus mentions it;
'The late earl of Lauderdale, says he, sent me over his new translation of the
Aeneis, which he had ended before I engaged in the same design. Neither did I
then intend it, but some proposals being afterward made me by my Bookseller, I
desired his lordship's leave that I might accept them, which he freely granted,
and I have his letter to show for that permission. He resolved to have printed
his work, which he might have done two years before I could have published
mine; and had performed it, if death had not prevented him. But having his
manuscript in my hands, I consulted it as often as I doubted of my author's
sense; for no man understood Virgil better than that learned nobleman. His
friends have yet another, and more correct copy of that translation by them,
which if they had pleased to have given the public, the judges might have been
convinced that I have not flattered him.'

Lord Lauderdale's friends, some years after the publication of Dryden's
Translation, permitted his lordship's to be printed, and, in the late editions
of that performance, those lines are marked with inverted commas, which Dryden
thought proper to adopt into his version, which are not many; and however
closely his lordship may have rendered Virgil, no man can conceive a high
opinion of that poet, contemplated through the medium of his Translation.

Dr. Trapp, in his preface to the Aeneis, observes, 'that his lordship's
Translation is pretty near to the original, though not so close as its brevity
would make one imagine; and it sufficiently appears, that he had a right taste
in poetry in general, and the Aeneid in particular. He shows a true spirit,
and, in many places, is very beautiful. But we should certainly have seen
Virgil far better translated, by a noble hand, had the earl of Lauderdale been
the earl of Roscommon, and had the Scottish peer followed all the precepts, and
been animated with the genius of the Irish.'

We know of no other poetical compositions of this learned nobleman, and the
idea we have received from history of his character, is, that he was in every
respect the reverse of his uncle, from whence we may reasonably conclude, that
^he possessed many virtues, since few statesmen of any age ever were tainted
with more vices than the duke of Lauderdale.

Dr. JOSEPH TRAPP.
THIS poet was second son to the rev. Mr. Joseph Trapp, rector of Cherington in
Gloucestershire, at which place he was born, anno 1679. He received the first
rudiments of learning from his father, who instructed him in the languages, and
superintended his domestic education Jacob.
. When he was ready for the university he was sent to Oxford, and was many
years scholar and fellow of Wadham-College, where he took the degree of master
of arts. In the year 1708 he was unanimously chosen professor of poetry, being
the first of that kind. This institution was founded by Dr. Henry Birkhead,
formerly fellow of All Souls, and the place of lecturer can be held only for
ten years.

Dr. Trapp was, in the early part of his life, chaplain to lord Bolingbroke,
the father of the famous Bolingbroke, lately deceased. The highest preferment
Dr. Trapp ever had in the church, though he was a man of extensive learning,
was, the rectory of Harlington, Middlesex, and of the united parishes of
Christ-Church, Newgate-Street, and St. Leonard's Foster-Lane, with the
lectureship of St. Lawrence Jewry, and St. Martin's in the Fields. The Dr's
principles were not of that cast, by which promotion could be expected. He was
attached to the High-Church interest, and as his temper was not sufficiently
pliant to yield to the prevalence of party, perhaps for that very reason, his
rising in the church was retarded. A gentleman of learning and genius, when
paying a visit to the Dr. took occasion to lament, as there had been lately
some considerable alterations made, and men less qualified than he, raised to
the mitre, that distinctions should be conferred with so little regard to
merit, and wondered that he (the Dr.) had never been promoted to a see. To this
the Dr. replied, 'I am thought to have some learning, and some honesty, and
these are but indifferent qualifications to enable a man to rise in the church.'

Dr. Trapp's action in the pulpit has been censured by many, as participating
too much of the theatrical manner, and having more the air of an itinerant
enthusiast, than a grave ecclesiastic. Perhaps it may be true, that his pulpit
gesticulations were too violent, yet they bore strong expressions of sincerity,
and the side on which he erred, was the most favorable to the audience; as the
extreme of over-acting any part, is not half so intolerable as a languid
indifference, whether what the preacher is then uttering, is true or false, is
worth attention or no. The Dr. being once in company with a person, whose
profession was that of a player, took occasion to ask him, 'what was the reason
that an actor seemed to feel his part with so much sincerity, and utter it with
so much emphasis and spirit, while a preacher, whose profession is of a higher
nature, and whose doctrines are of the last importance, remained unaffected,
even upon the most solemn occasion, while he stood in the pulpit as the
ambassador of God, to teach righteousness to the people?' the player replied,
'I believe no other reason can be given, sir, but that we are sincere in our
parts, and the preachers are insincere in theirs.' The Dr. could not but
acknowledge the truth of this observation in general, and was often heard to
complain of the coldness and unaffected indifference of his brethren in those
very points, in which it is their business to be sincere and vehement. Would
you move your audience, says an ancient sage, you must yourself be moved; and
it is a proposition which holds universally true. Dr. Trapp was of opinion,
that the highest doctrines of religion were to be considered as infallibly
true, and that it was of more importance to impress them strongly on the minds
of the audience, to speak to their hearts, and affect their passions, than to
bewilder them in disputation, and lead them through labyrinths of controversy,
which can yield, perhaps, but little instruction, can never tend to refine the
passions, or elevate the mind. Being of this opinion, and from a strong desire
of doing good, Dr. Trapp exerted himself in the pulpit, and strove not only to
convince the judgment, but to warm the heart, for if passions are the elements
of life, they ought to be devoted to the service of religion, as well as the
other faculties, and powers of the soul.

But preaching was not the only method by which, this worthy man promoted the
interest of religion; he drew the muses into her service, and that be might
work upon the hopes and fears of his readers, he has presented them with four
poems, on these important subjects; Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. The
reason of his making choice of those themes on which to write, he very fully
explains in his preface. He observes, that however dull, and ^ite it may be to
declaim against the corruption of the age one lives in, yet he presumes it will
be allowed by every body, that all manner of wickedness, both in principles and
practice, abounds amongst men. 'I have lived (says he) in six reigns, but for
about these twenty years last past, the English nation has been, and is so
prodigiously debauched, its very nature and genius so changed, that I scarce
know it to be the English nation, and am almost a foreigner in my own country.
Not only barefaced, impudent, immorality of all kinds, but often professed
infidelity and atheism. To stop these overflowings of ungodliness, much has
been done in prose, yet not so as to supersede all other endeavors: and
therefore the author of these poems was willing to try, whether any good might
be done in verse. This manner of conveyance may, perhaps, have some advantage,
which the other has not; at least it makes variety, which is something
considerable. The four last things are manifestly subjects of the utmost
importance. If due reflections upon Death. Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, will not
reclaim men from their vices, nothing will. This little work was intended for
the use of all, from the greatest to the least. But as it would have been
intolerably flat, and insipid to the former, had it been wholly written in a
style level to the capacities of the latter; to obviate inconveniences on both
sides, an attempt has been made to entertain the upper class of readers, and,
by notes, to explain such passages in divinity, philosophy, history, etc. as
might be difficult to the lower. The work (if it may be so called) being partly
argumentative, and partly descriptive, it would have been ridiculous, had it
been possible to make the first mentioned as poetical as the other. In long
pieces of music there is the plain recitativo, as well as the higher, and more
musical modulation, and they mutually recommond, and set off each other. But
about these matters the writer is little sollicitous, any otherwise, than as
they are subservient to the design of doing good.'

A good man would naturally wish, that such generous attempts, in the cause of
virtue, were always successful. With the lower class of readers, it is more
than probable that these poems may have inspired religious thoughts, have
awaked a solemn dread of punishment, kindled a sacred hope of happiness, and
fitted the mind for the four last important periods By ^is last Will he ordered
a copy of that book to be given to each of his parishioners, that when he could
no longer speak to them from the pulpit, he might endeavor to instruct them in
his writings.
; But with readers of a higher taste, they can have but little effect. There is
no doctrine placed in a new light, no descriptions are sufficiently emphatical
to work upon a sensible mind, and the perpetual flatness of the poetry is very
disgustful to a critical reader, especially, as there were so many occasions of
rising to an elevated sublimity.

The Dr. has likewise written a Paraphrase on the 104th Psalm, which, though
much superior in poetry to his Four Last Things, yet falls greatly short of
that excellent version by Mr. Blacklocke, quoted in the Life of Dr. Brady.

Our author has likewise published four volumes of sermons, and a volume of
lectures on poetry, writ^en in Latin.

Before we mention his other poetical compositions, we shall consider him as
the translator of Virgil, which is the most arduous province he ever undertook.
Dr. Trapp, in his preface, after stating the controversy, which has been long
held, concerning the genius of Homer and Virgil, to whom the superiority
belongs, has informed us, that this work was very far advanced before it was
undertaken, having been, for many years, the diversion of his leisure hours at
the university, and grew upon him, by insensible degrees, so that a great part
of the Aeneis was actually translated, before he had any design of attempting
the whole.

He further informs us, 'that one of the greatest geniuses, and best judges,
and critics, our age has produced, Mr. Smith of Christ Church, having seen the
first two or three hundred lines of this translation, advised him by all means
to go through with it. I said, he laughed at me, replied the Dr. and that I
should be the most impudent of mortals to have such a thought. He told me, he
was very much in earnest; and asked me why the whole might not be done, in so
many years, as well as such a number of lines in so many days? which had no
influence upon me, nor did I dream of such an undertaking, 'till being honored
by the university of Oxford with the public office of professor of poetry,
which I shall ever gratefully acknowledge, I thought it might not be improper
for me to review, and finish this work, which otherwise had certainly been as
much neglected by me, as, perhaps, it will now be by every body else.'

As our author has made choice of blank verse, rather than rhyme, in order to
bear a nearer resemblance to Virgil, he has endeavored to defend blank verse,
against the advocates for rhyme, and show its superiority for any work of
length, as it gives the expression a greater compass, or, at least, does not
clog and fetter the verse, by which the substance and meaning of a line must
often be mutilated, twisted, and sometimes sacrificed for the sake of the rhyme.

'Blank verse (says he) is not only more majestic and sublime, but more musical
and harmonious. It has more rhyme in it, according to the ancient, and true
sense of the word, than rhyme itself, as it is now used: for, in its o^iginal
signification, it consists not in the tinkling of vowels and consonants. but in
the metrical disposition of words and syllables, and the proper cadence of
numbers, which is more agreeable to the ear, without the jingling of like
endings, than with it. And, indeed, let a man consult his own ears. -- Him the
Almighty power
Hurled headlong, flaming from the aetherial sky,
With hideous ruin and combustion, down
To bottomless perdition; there to dwell
In adamantine chains, and penal fire;
Who durst de^y the Omnipotent to arms.
Nine times the space that measures day and night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf,
Confounded, though immortal --


Who that hears this, can think it wants rhyme to recommend it? or rather does
not think it sounds far better without it? We purposely produced a citation,
beginning and ending in the middle of a verse. because the privilege of resting
on this, or that foot, sometimes one, and sometimes another, and so
diversifying the pauses and cadences, is the greatest beauty of blank verse,
and perfectly agreeable to the practice of our masters, the Greeks and Romans.
This can be done but rarely in rhyme; for if it were frequent, the rhyme would
be in a manner lost by it; the end of almost every verse must be something of a
pause; and it is but seldom that a sentence begins in the middle. Though this
seems to be the advantage of blank verse over rhyme, yet we cannot entirely
condemn the use of it, even in a heroic poem; nor absolutely reject that in
speculation, which. Mr. Dryden and Mr. Pope have enobled by their practice. We
acknowledge too, that in some particular views, that way of writing has the
advantage over this. You may pick out more lines, which, singly considered,
look mean and low, from a poem in blank verse, than from one in rhyme,
supposing them to be in other respects equal. For instance, the following
verses out of Milton's Paradise Lost, b. ii. Of Heaven were falling, and these
elements --
Instinct with fire, and nitre hurried him --
taken singly, look low and mean: but read them in conjunction with others, and
then see what a different face will be set upon them. -- Or less than of this
srame
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements
In mutiny had from her axle torn
The steadfast earth. At last his sail-broad vans
He spreads for flight; and in the surging smoke
Uplifted spurns the ground --
-- Had not by ill chance
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed;
Quenched in a boggy syrtis, neither sea,
Nor good dry land: nigh foundered on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence.


Our author has endeavored to justify his choice of blank verse, by showing it
less subject to restraints, and capable of greater sublimity than rhyme. But
though this observation may hold true, with respect to elevated and grand
subjects, blank verse is by no means capable of so great universality. In
satire, in elegy, or in pastoral writing, our language is, it seems, so feebly
constituted, as to stand in need of the aid of rhyme; and as a proof of this,
the reader need only look upon the pastorals of Virgil, as translated by Trapp
in blank verse, and compare them with Dryden's in rhyme. He will then discern
how insipid and f^at the pastorals of the same poet are in one kind of
versification, and how excellent and beautiful in another. Let us give one
short example to illustrate the truth of this, from the first pastoral of
Virgil. MELIBAEUS. Beneath the covert of the spreading beech
Thou, Tityrus, reposed, art warbling over,
Upon a slender reed, thy sylvan lays:
We leave our country, and sweet native fields;
We fly our country: careless in the shade,
Thou teach, Tityrus, the sounding groves
To echo beauteous Amaryllis' name.

TITYRUS. O Melibaeus, 'twas a god to us
Indulged this freedom: for to me a god
He shall be ever: from my folds full often
A tender lamb his altar shall embrue:
He gave my heifers, as thou see, to roam;
And me permitted on my rural cane
To sport at pleasure, and enjoy my muse.

TRAPP. MELIBAEUS. Beneath the shade which beechen-boughs diffuse,
You, Tityrus, entertain your Silvan muse:
Round the wide world in banishment we roam,
Forced from our pleasing fields, and native home:
While stretched at ease you sing your happy loves:
And Amaryllis fills the shady groves.

TITYRUS. These blessings, friend, a deity bestowed:
For never can I deem him less than God.
The tender firstlings of my woolly breed:
Shall on his holy altar often bleed.
He gave my kine to graze the flowery plain:
And to my pipe renewed the rural strain.

DRYDEN.

Dr. Trapp toward the conclusion of his Preface to the Aeneid, has treated
Dryden with less reverence, than might have been expected from a man of his
understanding, when speaking of so great a genius. The cause of Trapp's disgust
to Dryden, seems to have been this: Dryden had a strong contempt sor the
priesthood, which we have from his own words, " Priests of all professions are
the same." and takes every opportunity to mortify the usurping superiority of
spiritual tyrants. Trapp, with all his virtues (for I think it appears he
possessed many) had yet much of the priest in him, and for that very reason,
perhaps, has shown some resentment to Dryden; but if he has with little candor
of criticism treated Mr. Dryden, he has with great se^vility flattered Mr.
Pope; and has insinuated, as if the Palm of Genius were to be yielded to the
latter. He observes in general, that where Mr. Dryden shines most, we often see
the least of Virgil. To omit many other instances, the description of the
Cyclops forging Thunder for Jupiter, and Armor for Aeneas, is elegant and
noble to the last degree in the Latin; and it is so to a great degree in the
English. But then is the English a translation of the Latin? Hither the father
of the fire by night,
Through the brown air precipitates his flight:
On their eternal anvil, here he found
The brethren beating, and the blows go round.


The lines are good, and truly poetical; but the two first are set to render
Hoc tunc ignipotens caelo descendit ab alto.


There is nothing of caelo ab alto in the version; nor by night, brown air, or
precipitates his flight, in the original. The two last are put in the room of
Ferrum exercebant vasto Cylopes in antro,
Brontesque, Steropesque, and nudus membra Pyracmon.


Vasto in antro, in the first of these lines, and the last line is entirely
left out in the translation. Nor is there any thing of eternal anvils, or here
be found, in the original, and the brethren beating, and the blows go round, is
but a loose version of Ferrum exercebant. Dr. Trapp has allowed, however, that
though Mr. Dryden is often distant from the original, yet he sometimes rises to
a more excellent height, by throwing out implied graces, which none but so
great a poet was capable of. Thus in the 1^th book, after the last speech of
S^^^^, Tantum effata, caput glauco contexit amictu,
Multa gemens, and se fluvio Dea condidit alto.
She drew a length of sighs, no more she said,
But with an azure mantle wrapped her head;
Then plunged into her stream with deep despair,
And her last Jobs came bubbling up in air.


Though the last line is not expressed in the original, it is yet in some
measure implied, and it is in itself so exceedingly beautiful, that the whole
passage can never be too much admired. These are excellencies indeed; this is
truly Mr. Dryden. The power of truth, no doubt, extorted this confession from
the Dr. and notwithstanding many objections may be brought against this
performance of Dryden, yet we believe most of our poetical readers upon
perusing it, will be of the opinion of Pope, 'that, excepting a few human
errors, it is the noblest and most spirited translation in any language.' To
whom it may reasonably be asked, has Virgil been most obliged? to Dr. Trapp who
has followed his footsteps in every line; has shown you indeed the design, the
characters, contexture, and moral of the poem, that is, has given you Virgil's
account of the actions of Aeneas, or to Mr. Dryden, who has not only conveyed
the general ideas of his author, but has conveyed them with the same majesty
and fire, has led you through every battle with trepidation, has soothed you in
the tender scenes, and enchanted you with the flowers of poetry? Virgil
con^emplated through the medium of Trapp, appears an accurate writer, and the
Aeneid a well conducted fable, but discerned in Dryden's page, he glows as with
fire from heaven, and the Aeneid is a continued series of whatever is great,
elegant, pathetic, and sublime.

We have already observed, in the Life of Dryden, that it is easier to discern
wherein the beauties of poetical composition consist, than to throw out th^se
beauties. Dr. Trapp, in his Praelectiones Poe^icae, has shown how much he was
master of every species of poetry; that is, how excellently he understood the
structure of a poem; what noble rules he was capable of laying down, and what
excellent materials he could afford, for building upon such a foundation, a
beautiful fabric. There are few better criticisms in any language, Dryden's
dedications and prefaces excepted, than are contained in these lectures. The
mind is enlarged by them, takes in a wide range of poetical ideas, and is
taught to discover how many amazing requisites are necessary to form a poet. In
his introduction to the first lecture, he takes occasion to state a comparison
between poetry and painting, and show how small pretensions the professors of
the latter have, to compare themselves with the former. 'The painter indeed
(says he) has to do with the passions, but then they are such passions only, as
discover themselves in the countenance; but the poet is to do more, he is to
trace the rise of those passions, to watch their gradations, to paint their
progress, and mark them in the heart in their genuine conflicts; and, continues
he, the disproportion between the soul and the body, is not greater than the
disproportion between the painter and the poet.

Dr. Trapp is author of a tragedy called Abramule, or Love and Empire, acted at
the New Theater at Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, 1704, dedicated to the Right
Honorable the Lady Harriot Godolphin. Scene Constantinople. The story is built
upon the dethronement of Mahomet IV.

Our au^hor has likewise written a piece called The Church of England Defended
against the False Reasoning of the Church of Rome. Several occasional poems
were written by him in English; and there is one Latin poem of his in the Musae
Anglicanae. He has translated the Paradise Lost into Latin Verse, with little
success, and, as he published it at his own risk, he was a considerable loser.
The capital blemish of that work, is, the unharmonious ver^ification, which
gives perpetual offense to the ear, neither is the language universally pure.

He died in the month of November 1747, and left behind him the character of a
pathetic and instructive preacher, a profound scholar, a discerning critic, a
benevolent gentleman, and a pious Christian.

We shall conclude the life of Dr. Trapp with the following verses of Mr.
Layng, which are expressive of the Dr's. character as a critic and a poet. The
author, after applanding Dryden's version, proceeds thus in favor of Trapp.
Behind we see a younger bard arise,
No vulgar rival in the grand emprize.
Hail! learned Trapp! upon whose brow we find
The poet's bays, and critic's ivy joined.
Blessed saint! to all that is virtuous ^ver dear,
Thy recent fate demands a friendly tear.
None was more versed in all the Roman store,
Or the wide circle of the Grecian lore,
Less happy, from the world recluse too long,
In all the sweeter ornaments of song;
Intent to teach, too careless how to please,
He boasts in strength, whatever he wants in ease.


Mr. SAMUEL BOYSE.
THIS Poet was the son of the Revd. Mr. Joseph Boyse, a Dissenting minister of
great eminence in Dublin. Our author's father was a person so much respected by
those immediately under his ministerial care, and whoever else had the
happiness of his acquaintance, that people of all denominations united in
esteeming him, not only for his learning and abilities, but his extensive
humanity and undissembled piety.

This Revd. Gentleman had so much dignity in his manner, that he obtained from
the common people the name of bishop Boyse, meant as a compliment to the
gracefulness of his person and mien. But though Mr. Boyse was thus reverenced
by the multitude, and courted by people of fashion, be never contracted the
least air of superciliousness: He was humane and affable in his temper, equally
removed from the stiffness of pedantry, and offensive levity. During his
ministerial charge at Dublin, he published many sermons, which compose several
folio volumes, a few Poems and other Tracts; but what chiefly distinguished him
as a writer, was the controversy he carried on with Dr. King, archbishop of
Dublin, and author of the Origin of Evil, concerning the office of a scriptural
bishop. This controverted point was managed on both sides with great force of
argument, and calmness of temper. The bishop asserted that the episcopal right
of jurisdiction had its foundation in the New Testament: Mr. Boyse, consistent
with his principles, denied that any ecclesiastical superiority appeared there;
and in the opinion of many, Mr. Boyse was more than equal to his antagonist,
whom he treated in the course of the controversy, with the greatest (...) and
good manners.

It has been reported that Mr. Boyse had two brothers, one a clergyman of the
church of England, and the other a cardinal at Rome; but of this circumstance
we have no absolute certainty: Be it as it may, he had, however, no brother so
much distinguished in the world as himself.

We shall now enter upon the life of our poet, who will appear while we trace
it, to have been in every respect the reverse of his father, genius excepted.
--

He was born in the year 1708, and received the rudiments of his education in a
private school in Dublin. When he was but eighteen years old, his father, who
probably intended him for the ministry, sent him to the university of Glasgow,
that he might finish his education there. He had not been a year at the
university, till be fell in love with one Miss Atchenson, the daughter of a
tradesman in that city, and was imprudent enough to interrupt his education, by
marrying her, before he had entered into his 20th year.

The natural extravagance of his temper soon exposed him to want, and as he had
now the additional charge of a wife, his reduced circumstances obliged him to
quit the university, and go over with his wife (who also carried a sister with
her) to Dublin; where they relied upon the old gentleman for support. His
behavior in this dependent state, was the very reverse of what it should have
been. In place of directing his studies to some useful acquisition, so as to
support himself and family, he spent his time in the most abject trifling, and
drew many heavy expenses upon his father, who had no other means of supporting
himself than what his congregation afforded, and a small estate of fourscore
pounds a year in Yorkshire.

Considerations of prudence never entered into the heart of this unhappy young
man, who ran from one excess to another, till an indulgent parent was reduced
by his means to very great embarrassments. Young Boyse was of all men the
farthest removed from a gentleman; he had no graces of person, and fewer still
of conversation. To this cause it was perhaps owing, that his wife, naturally
of a very volatile sprightly temper, either grew tired of him, or became
enamored of variety. It was however abundantly certain, that she pursued
intrigues with other men; and what is still more surprising, not without the
knowledge of her husband, who had either too abject a spirit to resent it; or
was bribed by some lucrative advantage, to which he had a mind mean enough to
stoop. Though never were three people of more libertine characters than young
Boyse, his wife, and sister-in-law; yet the two ladies wore such a mask of
decency before the old gentleman, that his fondness was never abated. He hoped
that time and experience would recover his son from his courses of
extravagance; and as he was of an unsuspecting temper, he had not the least
jea'ousy of the real conduct of his daughter-in-law, who grew every day in his
favor, and continued to blind him, by the seeming decency of her behavior,
and a performance of those acts of piety, he naturally expected from her. But
the old gentleman was deceived in his hopes, for time made no alteration in his
son. The estate his father possessed in Yorkshire was sold to discharge his
debts; and when the old man lay in his last sickness, he was entirely supported
by presents from his congregation, and buried at their expense.

We have no farther account of Mr. Boyse, till we find him soon after his
father's death at Edinburgh; but from what motives he went there we cannot now
discover. At this place his poetical genius raised him many friends, and some
patrons of very great eminence. He published a volume of poems in 1731, to
which is subjoined The Taolature of Cebes, and a Letter upon Liberty, inserted
in the Dublin Journal 1726; and by these he obtained a very great reputation.
They are addressed to the countess of Eglington, a lady of distinguished
excellencies, and so much celebrated for her beauty, that it would be difficult
for the best panegyrist to be too lavish in her praise. This amiable lady was
patroness of all men of wit, and very much distinguished Mr. Boyse, while he
resided in that country. She was not however exempt from the lot of humanity,
and her conspicuous accomplishments were yet chequered with failings: The chief
of which was too high a consciousness of her own charms, which inspired a
vanity that sometimes betrayed her into errors.

The following short anecdote was frequently related by Mr. Boyse. The countess
one day came into the bedchamber of her youngest daughter, then about 13 years
old, while she was dressing at her toilet. The countess observing the assiduity
with which the young lady wanted to set off her person to the best advantage,
'asked her, what she would give to be as handsome as her mamma?' To which Miss
replied; 'As much as your ladyship would give to be as young as me.' This smart
repartee which was at once pungent and witty, very sensibly affected the
countess; who for the future was less lavish in praise of her own charms. --

Upon the death of the viscountess Stormont. Mr. Boyse wrote an Elegy, which
was very much applauded by her ladyship's relations. This Elegy he entitled,
The Tears of the Muses, as the deceased lady was a woman of the most refined
taste in the sciences, and a great admirer of poetry. The lord Stormont was so
much pleased with this mark of esteem paid to the memory of his lady, that he
ordered a very handsome present to be given to Mr. Boyse, by his attorney at
Edinburgh.

Though Mr. Boyse's name was very well known in that city, ^et his person was
obscure; for as he was altogether unsocial in his temper, he had but few
acquaintances, and those of a cast much inferior to himself, and with whom he
ought to have been ashamed to associate. It was some time before he could be
found out; and lord Stormont's kind intentions had been defeated, if an
advertisement had not been published in one of their weekly papers, desiring
the author of the Tears of the Muses to call at the house of the attorney A
Profession, which in that City is denominated a Writer.
.

The personal obscurity of Mr. Boyse might perhaps not be altogether owing to
his habits of gloominess and retirement. Nothing is more difficult in that
city, than to make acquaintances; There are no places where people meet and
converse promiscuously: There is a reservedness and gravity in the manner of
the inhabitants, which makes a stranger averse to approach them. They naturally
love solitude; and are very slow in contracting friendships. They are generous;
but it is with a bad grace. They are strangers to affability, and they maintain
a haughtiness and an apparent indifference, which deters a man from courting
them. They may be said to be hospitable, but not complaisant to strangers:
Insincerity and cruelty have no existence amongst them; but if they ought not
to be hated, they can never be much loved, for they are incapable of
insinuation, and their ignorance of the world makes them unfit for entertaining
sensible strangers. They are public-spirited, but torn to pieces by factions. A
gloominess in religion renders one part of them very barbarous, and an
enthusiasm in politics so transports the genteeler part, that they sacrifice to
party almost every consideration of tenderness. Among such a people, a man may
long live, little known, and less instructed; for their reservedness renders
them uncommunicative, and their excessive haughtiness prevents them from being
solicitous of knowledge.

The Scots are far from being a dull nation; they are lovers of pomp and show;
but then there is an eternal stiffness, a kind of affected dignity, which
spoils their pleasures. Hence we have the less reason to wonder that Boyse
lived obscurely at Edinburgh. His extreme carelessness about his dress was a
circumstance very inauspicious to a man who lives in that city. They are such
lovers of this kind of decorum, that they will admit of no infringement upon
it; and were a man with more wit than Pope, and more philosophy than Newton, to
appear at their market place negligent in his apparel, he would be avoided by
his acquaintances who would rather risk his displeasure, than the censure of
the public, which would not fail to stigmatize them, for associating with a man
seemingly poor; for they measure poverty, and riches, understanding, or its
opposite, by exterior appearance. They have many virtues, but their not being
polished prevents them from shining.

The notice which lady Eglington and the lord Stormont took of our poet,
recommended him likewise to the patronage of the duchess of Gordon, who was a
lady not only distinguished for her taste; but cultivated a correspondence with
some of the most eminent poets then living. The duchess was so zealous in Mr.
Boyse's affairs, and so solicitous to raise him above necessity, that she
employed her interest in procuring the promise of a place for him. She gave him
a letter, which he was next day to deliver to one of the commissioners of the
customs at Edinburgh. It happened that he was then some miles distant from the
city, and the morning on which he was to have rode to town with her grace's
letter of recommendation proved to be rainy. This slender circumstance was
enough to discourage Boyse, who never looked beyond the present moment: He
declined going to town on account of the rainy weather, and while he let slip
the opportunity, the place was bestowed upon another, which the commissioner
declared he kept for some time vacant, in expectation of seeing a person
recommended by the duchess of Gordon.

Of a man of this indolence os temper, this sluggish meanness of spirit, the
reader cannot be surprised to find the suture conduct consist of a continued
serious of blunders, for he who had not spirit to prosecute an advantage put in
his hands, will neither bear distress with fortitude, nor struggle to surmount
it with resolution.

Boyse at last, having defeated all the kind intentions of his patrons toward
him, fell into a contempt and poverty, which obliged him to quit Edinburgh, as
his creditors began to solicit the payment of their debts, with an earnestness
not to be trifled with. He communicated his design of going to London to the
duchess of Gordon; who having still a very high opinion of his poetical
abilities, gave him a letter of recommendation to Mr. Pope, and obtained
another for him to Sir Peter King, the lord chancellor of England. Lord
Stormont recommended him to the sollicitor-general his brother, and many other
persons of the first fashion.

Upon receiving these letters, he, with great caution, quitted Edinburgh,
regretted by none but his creditors, who were so exasperated as to threaten to
prosecute him wherever he should be found. But these menaces were never carried
into execution, perhaps from the consideration of his indigence, which afforded
no probable prospect of their being paid.

Upon his arrival in London, he went to Twickenham, in order to deliver the
duchess of Gordon's letter to Mr. Pope; but that gentleman not being at home,
Mr. Boyse never gave himself the trouble to repeat his visit, nor in all
probability would Pope have been over-fond of him; as there was nothing in his
conversation which any wise indicated the abilities he possessed. He frequently
related, that he was graciously received by Sir Peter King, dined at his table,
and partook of his pleasures. But this relation, they who knew Mr. Boyse well,
never could believe; for he was so abject in his disposition, that he never
could look any man in the face whose appearance was better than his own; nor
likely had courage to sit at Sir Peter King's table, where every one was
probably his superior. He had no power of maintaining the dignity of wit, and
though his understanding was very extensive, yet but a few could discover that
he had any genius above the common rank. This want of spirit produced the
greatest part of his calamities, because he knew not how to avoid them by any
vigorous effort of his mind. He wrote poems, but those, though excellent in
their kind, were lost to the world, by being introduced with no advantage. He
had so strong a propension to grovelling, that his acquaintance were generally
of such a cast, as could be of no service to him; and those in higher life he
addressed by letters, not having sufficient confidence or politeness to
converse familiarly with them; a freedom to which he was entitled by the power
of his genius. Thus unfit to support himself in the world, he was exposed to
variety of distress, from which he could invent no means of extricating
himself, but by writing mendicant letters. It will appear amazing, but
impartiality obliges us to relate it, that this man, of so abject a spirit, was
voluptuous and luxurious: He had no taste for any thing elegant, and yet was to
the last degree expensive. Can it be believed, that often when he had received
half a guinea, in consequence of a supplicating letter, he would go into a
tavern, order a supper to be prepared, drink of the richest wines, and spend
all the money that had just been given him in charity, without having any one
to participate the regale with him, and while his wife and child were starving
home? This is an instance of base selfishness, for which no name is as yet
invented, and except by another poet Savage.
, with some variation of circumstances, was perhaps never practiced by the most
sensual epicure.

He had yet some friends, many of the most eminent dissenters, who from a
regard to the memory of his father, afforded him supplies from time to time.
Mr. Boyse by perpetual applications, at last exhausted their patience; and they
were obliged to abandon a man on whom their liberality was ill bestowed, as it
produced no other advantage to him, than a few days support, when he returned
again with the same necessities.

The epithet of cold has often been given to charity, perhaps with a great deal
of truth; but if any thing can warrant us to withhold our charity, it is the
consideration that its purposes are prostituted by those on whom it is bestowed.

We have already taken notice of the infidelity of his wife; and now her
circumstances were reduced, her virtue did not improve. She fell into a way of
life disgraceful to the sex; nor was his behavior in any degree more moral.
They were frequently covered with ignominy, reproaching one another for the
acquisition of a disease, which both deserved, because mutually guilty.

It was about the year 1740, that Mr. Boyse reduced to the last extremity of
human wretchedness, had not a shirt, a coat, or any kind of apparel to put on;
the sheets in which he lay were carried to the pawnbroker's, and he was obliged
to be confined to bed, with no other covering than a blanket. He had little
support but what he got by writing letters to his friends in the most abject
style. He was perhaps ashamed to let this instance of distress be known to his
friends, which might be the occasion of his remaining six weeks in that
situation. During this time he had some employment in writing verses for the
Magazines; and whoever had seen him in his study, must have thought the object
singular enough. He sat up in bed with the blanket wrapped about him, through
which he had cut a hole large enough to admit his arm, and placing the paper
upon his knee, scribbled in the best manner he could the verses he was obliged
to make: Whatever he got by those, or any of his begging letters, was but just
sufficient for the preservation of life. And perhaps he would have remained
much longer in this distressful state, had not a compassionate gentleman, upon
hearing this circumstance related, ordered his clothes to be taken out of pawn,
and enabled him to appear again abroad.

This six weeks penance one would imagine sufficient to deter him for the
future, from suffering himself to be exposed to such distresses; but by a long
habit of want it grew familiar to him, and as he had less delicacy than other
men, he was perhaps less afflicted with his exterior meanness. For the future,
whenever his distresses so pressed, as to induce him to dispose of his shirt,
he fell upon an artificial method of supplying one. He cut some white paper in
slips, which he tied round his wrists, and in the same manner supplied his
neck. In this plight he frequently appeared abroad, with the additional
inconvenience of want of breeches.

He was once sent for in a hurry, to the house of a printer who had employed
him to write a poem for his Magazine: Boyse then was without breeches, or
waistcoat, but was yet possessed of a coat, which he threw upon him, and in
this ridiculous manner went to the printer's house; where he found several
women, whom his extraordinary appearance obliged immediately to retire.

He fell upon many strange schemes of raising t^isting sums: He sometimes
ordered his wife to i^form people that he was just expiring, and by this
artifice work upon their compassion; and many of his friends were frequently
surprised to meet the man in the street to day, to whom they had yesterday
sent: ^lief, as to a person on the verge of death. At other times he would
propose subscriptions for poems, of which only the beginning and conclusion
were written; and by this expedient would relieve some present necessity. But
as he seldom was able to put any of his poems to the press, his veracity in
th^s particular suffered a diminution; and indeed in almost every other
particular he might justly be suspected; for if he could but gratify an
immediate appe^ite, he cared not at what expense, whether of the reputation, or
purse of another.

About the year 1745 Mr. Boyse's wife died. He was then at Reading, and
pretended much concern when he heard of her death.

It was an affectation in Mr. Boyse to appear very fond of a little lap-dog
which he always carried about with him in his arms, imagining it gave him the
air of a man of taste. Boyse, whose circumstances were then too mean to put
himself in mourning, was yet resolved that some part of his family should. He
stepped into a little shop; purchased half a yard of black ribbon, which he
fixed round his dog's neck by way of mourning for the loss of its mistress. But
this was not the only ridiculous instance of his behavior on the death of his
wife. Such was the sottishness of this man, that when he was in liquor, he
always indulged a dream of his wife's being still alive, and would talk very
spightfully of those by whom he suspected she was entertained. This he never
mentioned however, except in his cups, which was only as often as he had money
to spend. The manner of his becoming intoxicated was very particular. As he had
no spirit to keep g^od company, so he retired to some obscu^e alehouse, and
regaled himself with hot two-penny, which though he drank in very great
quantities, yet he had never more than a pennyworth at a time. -- Such a
practice rendered him so completely sottish, that even his abilities, as an
author, became sensibly impaired.

We have already mentioned his being at Reading. His business there was to
compile a Review of the most material transactions at home and abroad, during
the last war; in which he has included a short account of the late rebellion.
For this work by which he got some reputation, he was paid by the sheet, a
price sufficient to keep him from starving, and that was all. To such distress
must that man be driven, who is destitute of prudence to direct the efforts of
his genius. In this work Mr. Boyse discovers how capable he was of the most
irksome and laborious employment, when he maintained a power over his
appetites, and kept hims^^^ free from intemperance.

While he remained at Reading, he addressed, by supplicating letters, two Irish
noblemen, lord Kenyston, and lord Kingstand, who resided in Berkshire, and
received some money from them; he also met with another gentleman there of a
benevolent disposition, who, from the knowledge he had of the father, pitied
the distresses of the son, and by his interest with some eminent Dissenters in
those parts, raised a sufficient sum to cloth him, for the abjectness of his
appearance secluded our poet even from the table of his Printer During his
abode at Reading an accident had like to have put an end to his follies and his
life together; for he had the ill-luck to fall from his garret down the whole
flight of stairs; but being destined to lengthen out a useless life for some
time longer, he escaped with only a severe bruising.
.

Upon his return from Reading, his behavior was more decent than it had ever
been before, and there were some hopes that a reformation, though late, would be
wrought upon him. He was employed by a Bookseller to translate Fenelon on the
Existence of God, during which time he married a second wife, a woman in low
circumstances, but well enough adapted to his taste. He began now to live with
more regard to his character, and support a better appearance than usual; but
while his circumstances were mending, and his irregular appetites losing
ground, his health visibly declined: he had the satisfaction, while in this
lingering illness, to observe a poem of his, entitled The Deity, recommended by
two eminent writers, the ingenious Mr. Fielding, and the rev. Mr. James Harvey,
author of The Meditations. The former, in the beginning of his humorous History
of Tom Jones, calls it an excellent poem. Mr. Harvey styles it a pious and
instructive piece; and that worthy gentleman, upon hearing that the author was
in necessitous circumstances, deposited two guineas in the hands of a trusty
person to be given him, whenever his occasions should press. This poem was
written some years before Mr. Harvey or Mr. Fielding took any notice of it, but
it was lost to the public, as the reputation of the Bookseller consisted in
sending into the world abundance of trifles, amongst which, it was considered
as one. Mr. Boyse said, that upon its first publication, a gentleman acquainted
with Mr. Pope, took occasion to ask that poet, if he was not the author of it,
to which Mr. Pope replied, 'that he was not the author, but that there were
many lines in it, of which he should not be ashamed.' This Mr. Boyse considered
as a very great compliment. The poem indeed abounds with shining lines and
elevated sentiments on the several Attributes of the Supreme Being; but then it
is without a plan, or any connection of parts, for it may be read either
backwards or forwards, as the reader pleases.

While Mr. Boyse was in this lingering illness, he seemed to have no notion of
his approaching end, nor did he expect it, 'till it was almost past the
thinking of. His mind, indeed, was often religiously disposed; he frequently
talked upon that subject, and, probably suffered a great deal from the remorse
of his conscience. The early impressions of his good education were never
entirely obliterated, and his whole life was a continued struggle between his
will and reason, as he was always violating his duty to the one, while he fell
under the subjection of the other. It was in consequence of this war in his
mind, that he wrote a beautiful poem called The Recantation.

In the month of May, 1749, he died in obscure lodgings near Shoe-Lane. An old
acquaintance of his endeavored to collect money to defray the expenses of his
funeral, so that the scandal of being buried by the parish might be avoided.
But his endeavors were in vain, for the persons he solicited, had been so
troubled with applications during the life of this unhappy man, that they
refused to contribute any thing toward his funeral. The remains of this son of
the muses were, with very little ceremony, hurried away by the parish officers,
and thrown amongst common beggars; though with this distinction, that the
service of the church was performed over his corpse. Never was an exit more
shocking, nor a life spent with less grace, than those of Mr. Boyse, and never
were such distinguished abilities given to less purpose. His genius was not
confined to poetry only, he had a taste for painting, music and heraldry, with
the latter of which he was very well acquainted. His poetical pieces, if
collected, would make six moderate volumes. Many of them are seattered in the
Gentleman's Magazine, marked with the letter Y. and Alceus. Two volumes were
published in London, but as they never had any great sale, it will be difficult
to find them.

An ode of his in the manner of Spenser, entitled The Olive, was addresied to
Sir Robert Walpole, which procured him a present of ten guineas. He translated
a poem from the High Dutch of Van Haren, in praise of peace, upon the
conclusion of that made at Aix la Chapelle; but the poem which procured him the
greatest reputation, was, that upon the Attributes of the Deity, of which we
have already taken notice. He was employed by Mr. Ogle to translate some of
Chaucer's Tales into modern English, which he performed with great spirit, and
received at the rate of three pence a line for this trouble. Mr. Ogle published
a complete edition of that old poet's Canterbury Tales Modernized; and Mr.
Boyse's name is put to such, Tales as were done by him. It had often been urged
to Mr. Boyse to turn his thoughts toward the drama, as that was the most
profitable kind of poetical writing and as many a poet of inferior genius to
him has raised large contributions on the public by the success of their plays.
But Boyse never seemed to relish this proposal, perhaps from a consciousness
that he had not spirit to prosecute the arduous task of introducing it on the
stage; or that he thought himself unequal to the task.

In the year 1743 Mr. Boyse published without his name, an Ode on the ba^tle of
Dettingen, entitled Al^ion's Triumph; some Stanza's of which we shall give as a
specimen of Mr. Boyse's poetry. STANZA's from ALBION's Triumph. XIII.
But how, blessed sovereign! shall the unpracticed muse
These recent honors of thy reign rehearse!
How to thy virtues turn her dazzled views,
Or consecrate thy deeds in equal verse!
Amidst the field of horrors wide displayed,
How paint the calm The King gave his orders with the utmost calmness, though no
body was more exposed.
that smiled upon thy brow!
Or speak that thought which every part surveyed.
' Directing where the rage of war should glow:' Inspired repulsed battalions
to engage,
And taught the doubtful battle where to rage.
Mr. Addison's Campaign.

While watchful angels hovered round thy head,
And victory on high the palm of glory spread.
XIV.
Nor royal youth reject the artless praise,
Which due to worth like thine the Muse bestows,
Who with prophetic ecstasy surveys
These early wreaths of fame adorn thy brows.
Aspire like Nassau in the glorious strife,
Keep thy great sires' examples full in eye;
But oh! for Britain's sake, consult a life
The noblest triumphs are too mean to buy;
And while you purchase glory -- bear in mind,
A prince's truest fame is to protect mankind.
XV.
Alike in arts and arms acknowledged great,
Let Stair accept the lays he once could own!
Nor Carteret, thou the column of the state!
The friend of science! on the labor frown!
Nor shall, unjust to foreign worth, the Muse
In silence Austria's valiant chiefs conceal;
While Aremberg's heroic line she views,
And Neiperg's conduct strikes even envy pale:
Names Gallia yet shall further learn to fear,
And Britain, grateful still, shall treasure up as dear!
XIX.
But oh! acknowledged victor in the field,
What thanks, dread sovereign, shall thy toils reward!
Such honors as delivered nations yield,
Such for thy virtues justly stand prepared:
When erst on Oudenarde's decisive plain,
Before thy youth, the Gaul defeated fled,
The eye of fate His Majesty early distinguished himself as a volunteer at the
battle of Oudenarde, in 1708.
foresaw on distant Maine,
The laurels now that shine around thy head:
Oh should entwined with these fresh Olives bloom!
Thy Triumphs then would shame the pride of ancient Rome.
XX.
Mean time, while from this fair event we show
That British valor happily survives,
And cherished by the king's propitious view,
The rising plant of glory sweetly thrives!
Let all domestic faction learn to cease,
Till humbled Gaul no more the world alarms:
Till GEORGE procures to Europe solid peace,
A peace secured by his victorious arms:
And binds in iron fetters ear to ear,
Ambition, Rapine, Havoc, and Despair,
With all the ghastly fiends of desolating war.


Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE.
THIS eminent poet and physician was son of Mr. Robert Blackmore, an Attorney
at Law. He received his early education at a private country school, from
whence, in the 13th year of his age, he was removed to Westminster, and in a
short time after to the university of Oxford, where he continued thirteen years.

In the early period of our author's life he was a Schoolmaster, as appears by
a satirical copy of verses Dr. Drake wrote against him, consisting of upwards
of forty lines, of which the following are very pungent. By nature formed, by
want a pedant made,
Blackmore at first set up the whipping trade:
Next quack commenced; then fierce with pride he swore,
That toothache, gout, and corns should be no more.
In vain his drugs, as well as birch he tried;
His boys grew blockheads, and his patients died.


Some circumstances concurring, it may be presumed in Sir Richard's favor, he
traveled into Italy, and at Padua took his degrees in physic Jacob.
.

He gratified his curiosity in visiting France, Germany, and the Low Countries,
and after spending a year and a half in this delightful exercise, he returned
to England. As Mr. Blackmore had made physic his chief study, so he repaired to
London to enter upon the practice of it, and no long after he was chosen fellow
of the Royal College of Physicians, by the charter of King James II. Sir
Richard had seen too much of foreign slavery to be fond of domestic chains, and
therefore early declared himself in favor of the revolution, and espoused
those principles upon which it was effected. This zeal, recommended him to King
William, and in the year 1697 he was sworn one of his physicians in ordinary.
He was honored by that Prince with a gold medal and chain, was likewise
knighted by him, and upon his majesty's death was one of those who gave their
opinion in the opening of the king's body. Upon Queen Anne's accession to the
throne, he was appointed one of her physicians, and continued so for some time.

This gentleman is author of more original poems, of a considerable length,
besides a variety of other works, than can well be conceived could have been
composed by one man, during the longest period of human life. He was a chaste
writer; he struggled in the cause of virtue, even in those times, when vice had
the countenance of the great, and when an almost universal degeneracy
prevailed. He was not afraid to appear the advocate of virtue, in opposition to
the highest authority, and no luster of abilities in his opponents could deter
him from stripping vice of those gaudy colors, with which poets of the first
eminence had clothed her.

An elegant writer having occasion to mention the state of wit in the reign of
King Charles II. characterizes the poets in the following manner; The wits of
Charles found easier ways to fame;
Nor sought for Johnson's art, nor Shakespeare's flame:
Themselves they studied; as they lived, they writ,
Intrigue was p^ot, obscenity was wit.
Their cause was general, their supports were strong,
Their slaves were willing, and their reign was long.


Mr. Pope somewhere says, Unhappy Dryden -- in all Charles's days,
Roscommon only boasts unspotted lays.


He might likewise have excepted Blackmore, who was not only chaste in his own
writings, but endeavored to correct those who prostituted the gifts of heaven,
to the inglorious purposes of vice and folly, and he was, at least, as good a
poet as Roscommon.

Sir Richard had, by the freedom of his censures on the libertine writers of
his age, incurred the heavy displeasure of Dryden, who takes all opportunities
to ridicule him, and somewhere says, that he wrote to the rumbling of his
chariot wheels. And as if to be at enmity with Blackmore had been hereditary to
our greatest poets, we find Mr. Pope taking up the quarrel where Dryden left
it, and persecuting this worthy man with yet a severer degree of satire.
Blackmore had been informed by Curl, that Mr. Pope was the author of a
Travestie on the first Psalm, which he takes occasion to reprehend in his Essay
on Polite Learning, vol. ii. p. 270. He ever considered it as the disgrace of
genius, that it should be employed to burlesque any of the sacred compositions,
which as they speak the language of inspiration, tend to awaken the soul to
virtue, and inspire it with a sublime devotion. Warmed in this honorable
cause, he might, perhaps, suffer his zeal to transport him to a height, which
his enemies called enthusiasm; but of the two extremes, no doubt can be made,
that Blackmore's was the safest, and even dullness in favor of virtue (which,
by the way, was not the case with Sir Richard) is more tolerable than the
brightest parts employed in the cause of lewdness and debauchery.

The poem for which Sir Richard had been most celebrated, was, undoubtedly, his
Creation, now deservedly become a classic. We cannot convey a more amiable idea
of this great production, than in the words of Mr. Addison, in his Spectator,
Nuumber 339, who, after having criticized on that book of Milton, which gives
an account of the Works of Creation, thus proceeds, 'I cannot conclude this
book upon the Creation, without mentioning a poem which has lately appeared
under that title. The work was undertaken with so good an intention, and
executed with so great a mastery, that it deserves to be looked upon as one of
the most useful and noble productions in our English verse. The reader cannot
but be pleased to find the depths of philosophy, enlivened with all the charms
of poetry, and to see so great a strength of reason amidst so beautiful a
redundancy of the imagination. The author has shown us that design in all the
works of nature, which necessarily leads us to the knowledge of its first
cause. In short, he has illustrated, by numberless and incontestable instances,
that divine wisdom, which the son of Sirach has so nobly ascribed to the
Supreme Being in his formation of the world, when he tells us, that he created
her, and saw her, and numbered her, and poured her out upon all his works.'

The design of this excellent poem is to demonstrate the self-existence of an
eternal mind, from the created and dependent existence of the universe, and to
confute the hypothefis of the Epicureans and the Fatalists, under whom all the
patrons of impiety, ancient and modern, of whatsoever denomination may be
ranged. The first of whom affirm, the world was in time caused by chance, and
the other, that it existed from eternity without a cause. It Is true, both these
acknowledge the existence of Gods, but by their absurd and ridiculous
description of them, it is plain, they had nothing else in view, but to avoid
the obnoxious character of atheistical philosophers. To adorn this poem, no
embellishments are borrowed from the exploded and obsolete theology of the
ancient idolaters of Greece and Rome; no rapturous invocations are addressed to
their idle deities, nor any allusions to their fabulous actions. 'I have more
than once (says Sir Richard) publicly declared my opinion, that a Christian
poet cannot but appear monstrous and ridiculous in a Pagan dress. That though
it should be granted, that the Heathen religion might be allowed a place in
light and loose songs, mock heroic, and the lower lyric compositions, yet in
Christian poems, of the sublime and greater kind, a mixture of the Pagan
theology must, by all who are masters of reflection and good sense, be
condemned, if not as impious, at least, as impertinent and absurd. And this is
a truth so clear and evident, that I make no doubt it will, by degrees, force
its way, and prevail over the contrary practice. Should Britons recover their
virtue, and reform their taste, they could no more bear the Heathen religion in
verse, than in prose. Christian poets, as well as Christian preachers, the
business of both being to instruct the people, though the last only are wholly
appropriated to it, should endeavor to confirm, and spread their own religion.
If a divine should begin his sermon with a solemn prayer to Bacchus or Apollo,
to Mars or Venus, what would the people think of their preacher? and is it not
as really, though not equally absurd, for a poet in a great and serious poem,
wherein he celebrates some wonderful and happy event of divine providence, or
magnifies the illustrious instrument that was honored to bring the event
about, to address his prayer to false deities, and cry for help to the
abominations of the heathen?'

Mr. Gildon, in his Complete Art of Poetry, after speaking of our author in the
most respectful terms, says, 'that notwithstanding his merit, this admirable
author did not think himself upon the same footing with Homer.' But how
different is the judgment of Mr. Dennis, who, in this particular, opposes his
friend Mr. Gildon.

'Blackmore's action (says he) has neither unity, integrity, morality, nor
universality, and consequently he can have no fable, and no heroic poem. His
narration is neither probable, delightful, nor wonderful. His characters have
none of these necessary qualifications. -- The things contained in his
narrations, are neither in their own nature delightful nor numerous enough, nor
rightly disposed, nor surprising, nor pathetic;' nay he proceeds so far as to
say Sir Richard has no genius; first establishing it as a principle, 'That
genius is known by a furious joy, and pride of soul, on the conception of an
extraordinary hint. Many men (says he) have their hints without these motions
of fury and pride of soul; because they want fire enough to agitate their
spirits; and these we call cold writers. Others who have a great deal of fire,
but have not excellent organs. feel the fore mentioned motions, without the
extraordinary hints; and these we call fustian writers.'

And he declares, that Sir Richard has neither the hints nor the motions
Preface to Remarks on Prince Arthur, octavo 1696.
. But Dennis has not contented himself, with charging Blackmore with want of
genius; but has likewise the following remarks to prove him a bad Church of
England man: These are his words. 'All Mr. Blackmore's celestial machines, as
they cannot be defended so much as by common received opinion, so are they
directly contrary to the doctrine of the church of England, that miracles had
ceased a long time before prince Arthur come into the world. Now if the
doctrine of the church of England be true, as we are obliged to believe, then
are all the celestial machines of prince Arthur unsufferable, as wanting not
only human but divine probability. But if the machines are sufferable, that is,
if they have so much as divine probability, then it follows of necessity, that
the doctrine of the church is false; so that I leave it to every impartial
clergyman to consider.'

If no greater objection could be brought against Blackmore's Prince Arthur,
than those raised by Mr. Dennis, the Poem would be faultless; for what has the
doctrine of the church of England to do with an epic poem? It is not the
doctrine of the church of England, to suppose that the apostate spirits put the
power of the Almighty to proof, by openly resisting his will, and maintaining
an obstinate struggle with the angels commissioned by him, to drive them from
the mansions of the blessed; or that they attempted after their perdition, to
recover heaven by violence. These are not the doctrines of the church of
England; but they are conceived in a true spirit of poetry, and furnish those
tremendous descriptions with which Milton has enriched his Paradise Lost.

Whoever has read Mr. Dryden's ded^cation of his Juvenal, will there perceive,
that in that great man's opinion, celestial machines might with the utmost
propriety be introduced in an Epic Poem, built upon a christian model; but at
the same time he adds, 'The guardian angels of states and kingdoms are not to
be managed by a vulgar hand.' Perhaps it may be true, that the guardian angels
of states and kingdoms may have been too powerful for the conduct of Sir
Richard Blackmore; but he has had at least the merit of paving the way, and has
set an example how Epic Poems may be written, upon the principles of
christianity; and has enjoyed a comfort of which no bitterness, or raillery can
deprive him, namely the virtuous intention of doing good, and as he himself
expresses it, 'of rescuing the Muses from the hands of ravishers, and restoring
them again to their chaste and pure mansions.'

Sir Richard Blackmore died on the 9th of October 1729, in an advanced age; and
left behind him the character of a worthy man, a great poet, and a friend to
religion. Toward the close of his life, his business as a physician declined,
but as he was a man of prudent conduct, it is not to be supposed that he was
subjected to any want by that accident, for in his earlier years he was
considered amongst the first in his profession, and his practice was
consequently very extensive.

The decay of his employment might partly be owing to old age and infirmities,
which rendered him less active than before, and partly to the diminution his
character might suffer by the eternal war, which the wits waged against him,
who spared neither bitterness nor calumny; and, perhaps, Sir Richard may be
deemed the only poet, who ever s^ffered for having too much religion and
morality.

The fo^lowing is the most accurate account we could obtain of his writings,
which for the sake of distinction we have divided into classes, by which the
reader may discern how various and numerous his compositions are. -- To have
written so much upon so great a variety of subjects, and to have written
nothing contemptibly, must indicate a genius much superior to the common
standard. -- His versification is almost every where beautiful; and though he has
been ridiculed in the Treatise of the Bathos, published in Pope's works, for
being too minute in his descriptions of the objects of nature; yet it rather
proceeded from a philosophical exactness, than a penury of genius.

It is really astonishing to find Dean Swift, joining issue with less religious
wits, in laughing at Blackmore's works, of which he makes a ludicrous detail,
since they were all written in the cause of virtue, which it was the Dean's
business more immediately to support, as on this account he enjoyed his
preferment: But the Dean perhaps, was one of those characters, who chose to
sacrifice his cause to his joke. This was a treatment Sir Richard could never
have expected at the hands of a clergyman.

A LIST of Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE'S Works.
THEOLOGICAL.
I. Just Prejudices against the Arian Hypothesis, Octavo. 1725 II. Modern
Arians Unmasked, Octavo, 1721 III. Natural Theology; or Moral Duties considered
apart from positive; with some Observations on the Desirableness and Necessity
of a supernatural Revelation, Octavo, 1728 IV. The accomplished Preacher; or
an Essay upon Divine Eloquence, Octavo, 1731 This Tract was published after the
author's death, in pursuance of his express order, by the Reverend Mr. John
White of Nayland in Essex; who attended on Sir Richard during his last illness,
in which he manifested an elevated piety toward God, and faith in Christ, the
Savior of the World. Mr. White also applauds him as a person in whose
character great candor and the finest humanity were the prevailing qualities.
He observes also that he had the greatest veneration for the clergy of the
Church of England, whereof he was a member. No one, says he, did more highly
magnify our office, or had a truer esteem and honor for our persons,
discharging our office as we ought, and supporting the holy character we bear,
wi^h an unblameable conversation.


POETICAL.
I. Creation, a Philosophical Poem, demonstrating the ^xistence and Providence
of God, in seven Books, Octavo, 1712 II. The Redeemer, a Poem in six Books,
Octavo, 1721 III. Eliza, a Poem in ten Books, Folio, 1705 IV. King Arthur, in
ten Books, 1697 V. Prince Arthur, in ten Books, 1695 VI. King Alfred, in twelve
^ooks, Octavo, 1723 VII. A Paraphrase on the Book of Job; the Songs of Moses,
Deborah and David; the ii. viii. ciii. cxiv. cxlviii. Psalms. Four chapters of
Isaiah, and the third of Habbakkuk, Folio and Duodecimo, 1716 VIII. A New
Version of the Book of Psalms, Duodecimo, 1720 IX. The Nature of Man, a Poem in
three Books, Octavo, 1720 X. A Collection of Poems, Octavo, 1716 XI. Essays on
several Subjects, 2 vols. Octavo. Vol. I. On Epic Poetry, Wit, False Virtue,
Immortality of the Soul, Laws of Nature, Origin of Civil Power. Vol. II. On
Athesim, Spleen, Writing, Future Felicity, Divine Love. 1716 XII. History of
the Conspiracy against King William the IIId, 1696, Octavo, 1723
MEDICINAL.
I. A Discourse on the Plague, with a prep^ratory Account of Malignant Fevers,
in two Parts; containing an Explication of the Nature of those Diseases, and
the Method of Cure, Octavo, 1720 II. A Treatise on the Smallpox, in two Parts;
containing an Account of the Nature, and several Kinds of that Disease; with
the proper Methods of Cure: And a Dissertation upon the modern Practice of
Inoculation, Octavo, 1722 III. A Treatise on Consumptions, and other Distempers
belonging to the Breast and Lungs, Octavo, 1724 VI. A Treatise on the Spleen
and Vapors; or Hyppocondriacal and Hysterical Affections; with three
Discourses on the Nature and Cure of the Cholic, Melancholy and Palfy, Octavo,
1725 V. A Critical Dissertation upon the Spleen, so far as concerns the
following Question, viz. Whether the Spleen is necessary or useful to the
animal possessed of it? 1725 VI. Discourses on the Gout, Rheumatism, and the
King's Evil: containing an Explanation of the Nature, Causes, and different
Species of those Diseases, and the Method of curing them, Octavo, 1726 VII.
Dissertations on a Dropsy, a Tympany, the Jaundice, the Stone, and the
Diabetes, Octavo, 1727
Single POEMS by Sir Richard Blackmore.
I. His Satire against Wit, Folio, 1700 II. His Hymn to the Light of the World;
with a short Description of the Cartoons at Hampton Court, Folio, 1703 III. His
Advice to the Poets, Folio, 1706 IV. His Kit-Kats, Folio, 1708

It might justly be esteemed an injury to Blackmore, to dismiss his life
without a specimen from his beautiful and philosophical Poem on the Creation.
In his second Book he demonstrates the existence of a God, from the wisdom and
design which appears in the motions of the heavenly orbs; but more particularly
in the solar system. First in the situation of the Sun, and its due distance
from the earth. The fatal consequences of its having been placed otherwise than
it is. Secondly, he considers its diurnal motion, whence the change of the day
and night proceeds; which we shall here insert as a specimen of the elegant
versisication, and sublime energy of this Poem. Next see, Lucretian Sages, see
the Sun,
His course diurnal, and his annual run.
How in his glorious race he moves along,
Gay as a bridegroom, as a giant strong.
How his unweari'd labor he repeats,
Returns at morning, and at eve retreats;
And by the distribution of his light,
Now gives to man the day, and now the night:
Night, when the drowsy swain, and trav'ler cease
Their daily toil, and sooth their limbs with ease;
When all the weary sons of woe restrain
Their yielding cares with slumber's silken chain,
Solace sad grief, and lull reluctant pain.
And while the sun, never covetous of rest,
Flies with such rapid speed from east to west,
In tracks oblique he through the zodiac rolls,
Between the northern and the southern poles;
From which revolving progress through the skies,
The needful seasons of the year arise:
And as he now advances, now retreats,
Whence winter colds proceed, and summer heats,
He qualifies, and chears the air by turns,
Which winter freezes, and which summer burns.
Thus his kind rays the two extremes reduce,
And keep a temper fit for nature's use.
The frost and drought by this alternate power,
The earth's prolific energy restore.
The lives of man and beast demand the change;
Hence fowls the air, and fish the ocean range.
Of heat and cold, this just successive reign,
Which does the balance of the year maintain,
The gard'ner's hopes, and farmer's patience props,
Gives vernal verdure, and autumnal crops.


Mr. JAMES THOMSON.
THIS celebrated poet, from whom his country has derived the most distinguished
honor, was son of the revd. Mr. Thomson, a minister of the church of Scotland,
in the Presbytery of Jedburgh.

He was born in the place where his father was minister, about the beginning of
the present century, and received the rudiments of his education at a private
country school. Mr. Thomson, in the early part of his life, so far from
appearing to possess a sprightly genius, was considered by his schoolmaster,
and those which directed his education, as being really without a common share
of parts.

While he was improving himself in the Latin and Greek tongues at this country
school, he often visited a minister, whose charge lay in the same presbytery
with his father's, the revd. Mr. Ricker on, a man of such amazing powers, that
many persons of genius, as well as Mr. Thomson, who conversed with him, have
been astonished, that such great merit should be buried in an obscure part of
the country, where he had no opportunity to display himself, and, except upon
periodical meetings of the ministers, seldom an opportunity of conversing with
men of learning.

Though Mr. Thomson's schoolmaster could not discover that he was endowed with
a common portion of understanding, yet Mr. Rickerton was not so blind to his
genius; he distinguished our author's early propension to poetry, and had once
in his hands some of the first attempts Mr. Thomson ever made in that province.

It is not to be doubted but our young poet greatly improved while he continued
to converse with Mr. Rickerton, who, as he was a philosophical man, inspired
his mind with a love of the sciences, nor were the revd. gentleman's endeavors
in vain, for Mr. Thomson has shown in his works how well he was acquainted with
natural and moral philosophy, a circumstance which, perhaps, is owing to the
early impressions he received from Mr. Rickerton.

Nature, which delights in diversifying her gifts, does not bestow upon every
one a power of displaying the abilities she herself has granted to the best
advantage. Though Mr. Rickerton could discover that Mr. Thomson, so far from
being without parts, really possessed a very fine genius, yet he never could
have imagined, as he often declared, that there existed in his mind such
powers, as even by the best cultivation could have raised him to so high a
degree of eminence amongst the poets.

When Mr. Rickerton first saw Mr. Thomson's Winter, which was in a Bookseller's
shop at Edinburgh, he stood amazed, and after he had read the lines quoted
below, he dropped the poem from his hand in the ecstasy of admiration. The lines
are his induction to Winter, ter, than which few poets ever rose to a more
sublime height See winter comes to rule the varied year,
Sullen and sad, with all his rising train!
Vapors, and storms, and clouds; be these my theme;
These that exalt the soul to solemn thought,
And heavenly musing; welcome kindred glooms.
Congenial horrors hail! -- with frequent foot
Often have I in my pleasing calm of life,
When nursed by careless solitude I lived,
Often have I wandered through your rough domain;
Trod the pure virgin snows; my self as pure;
Heard the winds blow, or the big torrents burst,
Or seen the deep fermenting tempest brewed
In the red evening sky. Thus passed the time,
'Till from the lucid chambers of the south
Looked out the joyous spring, looked out and smiled.

.

After spending the usual time at a country school in the acquisition of the
dead languages, Mr. Thomson was removed to the university of Edinburgh, in
order to finish his education, and be fitted for the ministry. Here, as at the
country school, he made no great figure: his companions thought contemptuously
of him, and the masters under whom he studied, had not a higher opinion of our
poet's abilities, than their pupils. His course of attendance upon the classes
of philosophy being finished, he was entered in the Divinity Hall, as one of
the candidates for the ministry, where the students, before they are permitted
to enter on their probation, must yield six years attendance.

It was in the second year of Mr. Thomson's attendance upon this school of
divinity, whose professor at that time was the revd. and learned Mr. William
Hamilton, a person whom he always mentioned with respect, that our author was
appointed by the professor to write a discourse on the Power of the Supreme
Being. When his companions heard their task assigned him, they could not but
arraign the professor's judgment, for assigning so copious a theme to a young
man, from whom nothing equal to the subject could be expected. But when Mr.
Thomson delivered the discourse, they had then reason to reproach themselves
for want of discernment, and for indulging a contempt of one superior to the
brightest genius amongst them. This discourse was so sublimely elevated, that
both the professor and the students who heard it delivered, were astonished. It
was written in blank verse, for which Mr. Hamilton rebuked him, as being
improper upon that occasion. Such of his fellow-students as envied him the
success of this discourse, and the admiration it procured him, employed their
industry to trace him as a plagiary; for they could not be persuaded that a
youth ^eemingly so much removed from the appearance of genius, could compose a
declamation, in which learning, genius, and judgment had a very great share.
Their search, however, proved fruitless, and Mr. Thomson continued, while he
remained at the university, to possess the honor of that discourse, without
any diminution.

We are not certain upon what account it was that Mr. Thomson dropped the notion
of going into the ministry; perhaps he imagined it a way of life too severe for
the freedom of his disposition: probably he declined becoming a presbyterian
minister, from a consciousness of his own genius, which gave him a right, to
entertain more ambitious views; for it seldom happens, that a man of great
parts can be content with obscurity, or the low income of sixty pounds a year,
in some retired corner of a neglected country; which must have been the lot of
Thomson, if he had not extended his views beyond the sphere of a minister of
the established church of Scotland.

After he had dropped all thoughts of the clerical profession, he began to be
more sollicitous of distinguishing his genius, as he placed some dependence
upon it, and hoped to acquire such patronage as would enable him to appear in
life with advantage. But the part of the world where he then was, could not be
very auspicious to such hopes; for which reason he began to turn his eyes
toward the grand metropolis.

The first poem of Mr. Thomson's, which procured him any reputation from the
public, was his Winter, of which mention is already made, and further notice
will be taken; but he had private approbation for several of his pieces, long
before his Winter was published, or before he quitted his native country. He
wrote a Paraphrase on the 104th Psalm, which, after it had received the
approbation of Mr. Rickerton, he permitted his friends to copy. By some means
or other this Paraphrase fell into the hands of Mr. Auditor Benson, who,
expressing his admiration of it, said, that he doubted not if the author was in
London, but he would meet with encouragement equal to his merit. This
observation of Benson's was communicated to Thomson by a letter, and, no doubt,
had its natural influence in inflaming his heart, and hastening his journey to
the metropolis. He soon set out for Newcastle, where he took shipping, and
landed at Billinsgate. When he arrived, it was his immediate care to wait on
Mr. Mallet was his quondam schoolfellow (but much his junior) they contracted
an early intimacy, which improved with their years, nor was it ever once
disturbed by any casual mistake, ^n^y, or jealousy on either side: a proof that
two writers of merit may agree, in spite of the common observation to the
contrary.
Mr. Mallet, who then lived in Hanover-Square in the character of tutor to his
grace the duke of Montrose, and his late brother lord G. Graham. Before Mr.
Thomson reached Hanover-Square, an accident happened to him, which, as it may
divert some of our readers, we shall here insert. He had received letters of
recommendation from a gentleman of rank in Scotland, to some persons of
distinction in London, which he had carefully tied up in his
pocket-handkerchief. As he sauntered along the streets, he could not withhold
his admiration of the magnitude, opulence, and various objects this great
metropolis continually presented to his view. These must naturally have
diverted the imagination of a man of less reflection, and it is not greatly to
be wondered at, if Mr. Thomson's mind was so engrossed by these new presented
scenes, as to be absent to the busy crowds around him. He often stopped to
gratify his curiosity, the consequences of which he afterward experienced.
With an honest simplicity of heart, unsuspecting, as unknowing of guilt, he was
ten times longer in reaching Hanover-Square, than one less sensible and curious
would have been. When he arrived, he found he had paid for his curiosity; his
pocket was picked of his handkerchief, and all the letters that were wrapped up
in it. This accident would have proved very mortifying to a man less
philosophical than Thomson; but he was of a temper never to be agitated; he
then smiled at it, and frequently made his companions laugh at the relation.

It is natural to suppose, that as soon as Mr. Thomson arrived in town, he
showed to some of his friends his poem on Winter The Winter was first wrote in
detached pieces, or occasional descriptions; it was by the advice of Mr. Mallet
they were collected and made into one connected piece. This was finished the
first of all the seasons, and was the first poem he published. By the farther
advice, and at the earnest request, of Mr. Mallet, he wrote the other three
seasons.
. The approbation it might meet with from them, was not, however, a sufficient
recommendation to introduce it to the world. He had the mortification of
offering it to several Booksellers without success, who, perhaps, not being
qualified themselves to judge of the merit of the performance, refused to
r^sque the necessary expenses, on the work of an obscure stranger, whose name
could be no recommendation to it. These were severe repulses; but, at last, the
difficulty was surmounted Mr. Mallet, offered it to Mr. Millan, now Bookseller
at Charing Cross, who, without making any scruples, printed it. For some time
Mr. Millan had reason to believe, that he should be a lose^ by his frankness;
for the impression lay like as paper on his hands, few copies being sold, 'till
by an accident its merit was discovered Though it is possible this piece might
be offered to more Printers who could read, than could taste, nor is it very
surprising, that an unknown author might meet with a difficulty of this sort;
since an eager desire to peruse a new piece, with a fashionable name to it,
shall, in one day, occasion the sale of thousands of what may never reach a
second edition: while a work, that has only its intrinsic merit to depend on,
may lie long dormant in a Bookseller's shop, 'till some person, eminent for
taste, points out its worth to the many, declares the bullion sterling, stamps
its value with his name, and makes it pass current with the world. Such was the
fate of Thomson at this juncture: Such heretofore was Milton's, whose works
were only found in the libraries of the curious, or judicious few, 'till
Addison's remarks spread a taste for them; and, at length, it became even
unfashionable not to have read them.
. One Mr. Whatley, a man of some taste in letters, but perfectly enthusiastic
in the admiration of any thing which pleased him, happened to cast his eye upon
it, and finding something which delighted him, perused the whole, not without
growing astonishment, that the poem should be unknown, and the author obscure.
He learned from the Bookseller the circumstances already mentioned, and, in the
ecstasy of his admiration of this poem, he went from Coffee-house to
Coffee-house, pointing out its beauties, and calling upon all men of taste, to
exert themselves in rescuing one of the greatest geniuses that ever appeared,
from obscurity. This had a very happy effect, for, in a short time, the
impression was bought up, and they who read the poem, had no reason to complain
of Mr. Whatley's exaggeration; for they found it so completely beautiful, that
they could not but think themselves happy in doing justice to a man of so much
merit.

The poem of Winter is, perhaps, the most finished, as well as most
picturesque, of any of the Four Seasons. The scenes are grand and lively. It is
in that season that the c^^^tion appears in distress, and nature assumes a
melancholy air; and an imagination so poetical as Thomson's, could not but
furnish those awful and striking images, which siil the soul with a solemn
dread of those Vapors, and Storms, and Clouds, he has so well painted.
Description is the peculiar talent of Thomson; we tremble at his thunder in
summer, we shiver with his winter's cold, and we rejoice at the renovation of
nature, by the sweet influence of spring. But the poem deserves a further
illustration, and we shall take an opportunity of pointing out some of its most
striking beauties; but before we speak of these, we beg leave to relate the
following anecdote.

As soon as Winter was published, Mr. Thomson sent a copy of it as a present to
Mr. Joseph Mitchell, his countryman, and brother poet, who, not liking many
parts of it, enclosed to him the following couplet; Beauties and faults so
thick lie scattered here,
Those I could read, if these were not so near.


To this Mr. Thomson answered extempore. Why all not faults, injurious
Mitchell; why
Appears one beauty to thy blasted eye;
Damnation worse than thine, if worse can be,
Is all I ask, and all I want from thee.


Upon a friend's remonstrating to Mr. Thomson, that the expression of blasted
eye would look like a personal reflection, as Mr. Mitchell had really that
misfortune, he changed the epithet blasted, into blasting. But to return:

After our poet has represented the influence of Winter upon the face of
nature, and particularly described the severities of the frost, he has the
following beautiful transition; -- Our infant winter sinks,
Divested of its grandeur; should our eye
Astonished shoot into the f^igid zone;
Where, for relentless months, continual night
Holds over the glittering waste her starry reign:
There through the prison of unbounded wilds
^arr'd by the hand of nature from escape,
Wide roams the Russian exile. Naught around
Strikes his sad eye, but deserts lost in snow;
And heavy loaded groves; and solid floods,
That stretch athwart the solitary waste,
Their icy horrors to the frozen main;
And chearless towns far distant, never blessed
Save when its annual course, the caravan
Bends to the golden coast of rich Cathay The old name of China.

With news of human-kind. Yet there life glows;
Yet cherished there, beneath the shining waste,
The furry nations harbor: tipped with jet
Fair ermines, spotless as the snows they press;
Sables of glossy black; and dark embrown'd
Or beauteous, streaked with many a mingled hue,
Thousands besides, the costly pride of courts.


The description of a thaw is equally picturesque. The following lines
consequent upon it are excellent. -- Those sullen seas
That wash the ungenial pole, will rest no more
Beneath the shackles of the mighty North;
But rousing all their waves resistless heave. --
And hark! the lengthened roar continuous runs
Athwart the refted deep: at once it bursts
And piles a thousand mountains to the clouds.
Ill fares the bark, with trembling wretches charged,
That tossed amid the floating fragments, moors
Beneath the shelter of an icy isle,
While night o'erwhelms the sea, and horror looks
More horrible. Can human force endure
The assembled mischiefs that besiege 'em round!
Heart-gnawing hunger, fainting weariness,
The roar of winds and waves, the crush of ice,
Now ceasing, now renewed with louder rage,
And in dire echoes bellowing round the main.


As the induction of Mr. Thomson's Winter has been celebrated for its
sublimity, so the conclusion has likewise a claim to praise, for the tenderness
of the sentiments, and the pathetic force of the expression. It Is done! --
Dread winter spreads her latest glooms,
And reigns tremendous over the conquered year.
How dead the vegetable kingdom lies!
How dumb the tuneful! horror wide extends
Her desolate domain. Behold, fond man!
See here thy pictured life; pass some few years,
Thy flow'ring spring, thy summer's ardent strength,
Thy sober autumn fading into age,
And pale concluding winter comes at last,
And shuts the scene. --


He concludes the poem by enforcing a reliance on providence, which will in
proper time compensate for all those seeming severities, with which good men
are often oppressed. -- Ye good distressed!
Ye noble few! who here unbending stand
Beneath life's pressure, yet bear up awhile,
And what your bounded view which only saw
A little part, deemed evil, is no more:
The storms of Wintry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded Spring encircle all.


The poem of Winter meeting with such general applause, Mr. Thomson was induced
to write the other three seasons, which he finished with equal success. His
Autumn was next given to the public, and is the most unfinished of the four; it
is not however without its beauties, of which many have considered the story of
Lavinia, naturally and artfully introduced, as the most affecting. The story is
in itself moving and tender. It is perhaps no diminution to the merit of this
beautiful tale, that the hint of it is taken from the book of Ruth in the Old
Testament.

The author next published the Spring, the induction to which is very poetical
and beautiful. Come gentle Spring, etherial mildness come,
And from the bosom of yon dropping cloud,
While music wakes around, veiled in a shower
Of shadowing roses, on our plains descend.


It is addressed to the countess of Hertford, with the following elegant
compliment, O Hertford! fitted, or to shine in courts
With unaffected grace, or walk the plains,
With innocence and meditation joined,
In soft assemblage; listen to the song,
Which thy own season paints; while nature all
Is blooming, and benevolent like thee. --


The descriptions in this poem are mild, like the season they paint; but
toward the end of it, the poet takes occasion to warn his countrymen against
indulging the wild and irregular passion of love. This digression is one of the
most affecting in the whole piece, and while he paints the language of a
lover's breast agitated with the pangs of strong desire, and jealous
transports, he at the same time dissuades the ladies from being too credulous
in the affairs of gallantry. He represents the natural influence of spring, in
giving a new glow to the beauties of the fair creation, and firing their hearts
with the passion of love. The shining moisture swells into her eyes,
In brighter flow; her wishing bosom heaves,
With palpitations wild; kind tumults seize
Her veins; and all her yielding soul is love.
From the keen gaze her lover turns away,
Full of the dear extatic power, and s^ck
With sighing languishment. Ah then, ye fair!
Be greatly cautious of your sliding hearts:
Dare not the infectious sigh; the pleading look,
Down-cast, and low, in meek submission dressed,
But full of guile. Let not the servent tongue,
Prompt to deceive, with adulation smooth,
Gain on your purposed will. Nor in the bower,
Where woodbines flaunt, and roses shed a couch,
While evening draws her crimson curtains round,
Trust your soft minutes with betraying man.


Summer has many manly and striking beauties, of which the Hymn to the Sun, is
one of the sublimest and most masterly efforts of genius we have ever seen. --
There are some hints taken from Cowley's beautiful Hymn to Light. -- Mr.
Thomson has subjoined a Hymn to the Seasons, which is not inferior to the
foregoing in poetical merit.

The Four Seasons considered separately, each Season as a distinct poem has
been judged defective in point of plan. There appears no particular design; the
parts are not subservient to one another; nor is there any dependence or
connection throughout; but this perhaps is a fault almost inseparable from a
subject in itself so diversified, as not to admit of such limitation. He has
not indeed been guilty of any incongruity; the scenes described in spring, are
all peculiar to that season, and the digressions, which make up a fourth part
of the poem, flow naturally. He has observed the same regard to the appearances
of nature in the other seasons; but then what he has described in the beginning
of any of the seasons, might as well be placed in the middle, and that in the
middle, as naturally toward the close. So that each season may rather be
called an assemblage of poetical ideas, than a poem, as it seems written
without a plan.

Mr. Thomson's poetical diction in the Seasons is very peculiar to him: His
manner of writing is entirely his own: He has introduced a number of compound
words; converted substantives into verbs, and in short has created a kind of
new language for himself. His style has been blamed for its singularity and
stiffness; but with submission to superior judges, we cannot but be of opinion,
that though this observation is true, yet is it admirably fitted for
description. The object he paints stands full before the eye, we admire it in
all its luster, and who would not rather enjoy a perfect inspection into a
natural curiosity through a microscope capable of discovering all the minute
beauties, though its exterior form should not be comely, than perceive an
object but faintly, through a microscope ill adapted for the purpose, however
its outside may be decorated. Thomson has a stiffness in his manner, but then
his manner is new; and there never yet arose a distinguished genius, who had
not an air peculiarly his own. It Is true indeed, the towering sublimity of Mr.
Thomson's style is ill adapted for the tender passions, which will appear more
fully when we consider him as a dramatic writer, a sphere in which he is not so
excellent as in other species of poetry.

The merit of these poems introduced our author to the acquaintance and esteem
of several persons, distinguished by their rank, or eminent for their talents:
-- Among the latter Dr. Rundle, afterward bishop of Derry, was so pleased with
the spirit of benevolence and piety, which breathes throughout the Seasons,
that he recommended him to the friendship of the late lord chancellor Talbot,
who committed to him the care of his eldest son, then preparing to set out on
his travels into France and Italy.

With this young nobleman, Mr. Thomson performed (what is commonly called) The
Tour of Europe, and stayed abroad about three years, where no doubt he enriched
his mind with the noble monuments of antiquity, and the conversation of
ingenious foreigners. 'Twas by comparing modern Italy with the idea he had of
the ancient Romans, which furnished him with the hint of writing his Liberty,
in three parts. The first is Ancient and Modern Italy compared. The second
Greece, and the third Britain. The whole is addressed to the eldest son of lord
Talbot, who died in the year 1734, upon his travels.

Amongst Mr. Thomson's poems, is one to the memory of Sir Isaac Newton, of
which we shall say no more than this, that if he had never wrote any thing
besides, he deserved to enjoy a distinguished reputation amongst the poets.
Speaking of the amazing genius of Newton, he says, The aerial flow of sound was
known to him,
From whence it first in wavy circles breaks.
Nor could the darting beam of speed immense,
Escape his swift pursuit, and measuring eye.
Even light itself, which every thing displays,
Shone undiscovered, till his brighter mind
Untwisted all the shining robe of day;
And from the whitening undistinguished blaze,
Collecting every separated ray,
To the charmed eye educ'd the gorgeous train
Of parent colors. First, the flaming red,
Sprung vivid forth, the tawny orange next,
And next refulgent yellow; by whose side
Fell the kind beams of all-refreshing green.
Then the pure blue, that swells autumnal skies,
Aetherial played; and then of sadder hue,
Emerg'd the deepen'd indico, as when
The heavy skirted evening droops with frost,
While the last gleamings of refracted light,
Died in the fainting violet away.
These when the clouds distill the rosy shower,
Shine out distinct along the watr'y bow;
While over our heads the dewy vision bends,
Delightful melting in the fields beneath.
Myriads of mingling dies from these result,
And myriads still remain -- Infinite source
Of beauty ever-flushing, ever new.


About the year 1728 Mr. Thomson wrote a piece called Britannia, the purport of
which was to rouse the nation to arms, and excite in the spirit of the people a
generous disposition to revenge the injuries done them by the Spaniards: This
is far from being one of his best poems.

Upon the death of his generous patron, lord chancellor Talbot, for whom the
nation joined with Mr. Thomson in the most sincere inward sorrow, he wrote an
elegiac poem, which does honor to the author, and to the memory of that great
man he meant to celebrate. He enjoyed, during lord Talbot's life, a very
profitable place, which that worthy patriot had conferred upon him, in
recompense of the care he had taken in forming the mind of his son. Upon his
death, his lordship's successor reserved the place for Mr. Thomson, and always
expected when he should wait upon him, and by performing some formalities enter
into the possession of it. This, however, by an unaccountable indolence he
neglected, and at last the place, which he might have enjoyed with so little
trouble, was bestowed upon another.

Amongst the latest of Mr. Thomson's productions is his Castle of Indolence, a
poem of so extraordinary merit, that perhaps we are not extravagant, when we
declare, that this single performance discovers more genius and poetical
judgment, than all his other works put together. We cannot here complain of
want of plan, for it is artfully laid, naturally conducted, and the
descriptions rise in a beautiful succession: It is written in imitation of
Spenser's style; and the obsolete words, with the simplicity of diction in some
of the lines, which borders on the ludicrous, have been thought necessary to
make the imitation more perfect. 'The style (says Mr. Thomson) of that
admirable poet, as well as the measure in which he wrote, are, as it were,
appropriated by custom to all allegorical poems written in our language; just
as in French, the style of Marot, who lived under Francis the Is It, has been
used in Tales and familiar Epistles, by the politest writers of the age of
Louis the XIVth.'



We shall not at present enquire how far Mr. Thomson is justifiable in using
the obsolete words of Spenser: As Sir Roger de Coverley observed on another
occasion, much may be said on both sides. One thing is certain, Mr. Thomson's
imitation is excellent, and he must have no poetry in his imagination, who can
read the picturesque descriptions in his Castle of Indolence, without emotion.
In his LXXIst Stanza he has the following picture of beauty: Here languid
beauty kept her pale-faced court,
Bevies of dainty dames, of high degree,
From every quarter hither made resort;
Where, from gross mortal care, and business free,
They lay, poured out in ease and luxury:
Or should they a vain show of work assume,
Alas! and well-a-day! what can it be?
To knot, to twist, to range the vernal bloom;
But far is cast the distaff, spinning-wheel, and loom.


He pursues the description in the subsequent Stanza. Their only labor was to
kill the time;
And labor dire it is, and weary woe.
They sit, they loll, turn over some idle rhyme;
Then rising sudden, to the glass they go,
Or saunter forth, with tottering steps and slow:
This soon too rude an exercise they find;
Strait on the couch their limbs again they throw,
Where hours on hours they sighing lie reclined,
And court the vapoury God soft breathing in the wind.


In the two following Stanzas, the dropsy and hypochondria are beautifully
described. Of limbs enormous, but withal unsound,
Soft swollen and pale, here lay the Hydropsy:
Unwieldly man; with belly monstrous round,
For ever fed with watery supply;
For still he drank, and yet he still was dry.
And moping here did Hypochondria sit,
Mother of spleen, in robes of various die,
Who vexed was full often with ugly fit;
And some her frantic deemed, and some her deemed a wit.
A lady proud she was, of ancient blood,
Yet often her fear, her pride made crouchen low:
She felt, or fancied in her fluttering mood,
All the diseases which the spitals know,
And sought all physic which the shops bestow:
And still new leaches, and new drugs would try,
Her humor ever wavering too and fro;
For sometimes she would laugh, and sometimes cry,
And sudden waxed wroth, and all she knew not why.


The speech of Sir Industry in the second Canto, when he enumerates the various
blessings which flow from action, is surely one of the highest instances of
genius which can be produced in poetry. In the second stanza, before he enters
upon the subject, the poet complains of the decay of patronage, and the general
depravity of taste; and in the third breaks out into the following exclamation,
which is so perfectly beautiful, that it would be the greatest mortification
not to transcribe it, I care not, fortune, what you me deny:
You cannot rob me of free nature's grace;
You cannot shut the windows of the sky,
Through which Aurora shows her bright'ning face;
You cannot bar my constant feet to trace
The woods and lawns, by living stream at eve:
Let health my nerves, and finer fibers brace,
And I their toys to the great children leave;
Of fancy, reason, virtue, naught can me bereave.


Before we quit this poem, permit us, reader, to give you two more stanzas from
it: the first shows Mr. Thomson's opinion of Mr. Quin as an actor; of their
friendship we may say more hereafter. STANZA LXVII. Of the CASTLE of INDOLENCE.
Here whilom ligg'd the Aesopus Mr. Quin.
of the age;
But called by fame, in soul ypricked deep,
A noble pride restored him to the stage,
And roused him like a giant from his sleep.
Even from his slumbers we advantage reap:
With double force the enlivened scene he wakes,
Yet quits not nature's bounds. He knows to keep
Each due decorum: now the heart he shakes,
And now with well-urg'd sense the enlightened judgment takes.


The next stanza (wrote by a friend of the author's, as the note mentions) is a
friendly, though familiar, compliment; it gives us an image of our bard
himself, at once entertaining, striking, and just. STANZA LXVIII. A bard here
dwelt, more fat than bard beseems,
Who void of envy, guile, and lust of gain,
On virtue still, and nature's pleasing themes,
Poured forth his unpremeditated strain:
The world forsaking with a calm disdain.
Here laughed he, careless in his easy seat;
Here quas^'d, encircl'd with the joyous train,
Often moralizing sage: his ditty sweet
He loathed much to write, ne cared to repeat.


We shall now consider Mr. Thomson as a dramatic writer.

In the year 1730, about six years after he had been in London, he brought a
Tragedy upon the stage, called Sophonisba, built upon the Carthaginian history
of that princess, and upon which the famous Nathaniel Lee has likewise written
a Tragedy. This play met with a favorable reception from the public. Mrs.
Oldfield greatly distinguished herself in the character of Sophonisba, which
Mr. Thomson acknowledges in his preface. -- 'I cannot conclude, says he,
without owning my obligations to those concerned in the representation. They
have indeed done me more than justice: Whatever was designed as amiable and
engageing in Masinessa shines out in Mr. Wilks's action. Mrs. Oldfield, in the
character of Sophonisba, has excelled what even in the fondness of an author I
could either wish or imagine. The grace, dignity and happy variety of her
action, have been universally applauded, and are truly admirable.'

Before we quit this play, we must not omit two anecdotes which happened the
first night of the representation. Mr. Thomson makes one of his characters
address Sophonisba in a line, which some critics reckoned the false pathetic.
O! Sophonisba, Sophonisba Oh!


Upon which a smart from the pit cried out, Oh! Jamey Thomson, Jamey Thomson Oh!

However ill-natured this critic might be in interrupting the action of the
play for sake of a joke; yet it is certain that the line ridiculed does partake
of the false pathetic, and should be a warning to tragic poets to guard against
the swelling style; for by aiming at the sublime, they are often betrayed into
the bombast. -- Mr. Thomson who could not but feel all the emotions and
sollicitudes of a young author the first night of his play, wanted to place
himself in some obscure part of the house, in order to see the representation
to the best advantage, without being known as the poet. -- He accordingly
placed himself in the upper gallery; but such was the power of nature in him,
that he could not help repeating the parts along with the players, and would
sometimes whisper to himself, 'now such a scene is to open,' by which he was
soon discovered to be the author, by some gentlemen who could not, on account
of the great crowd, (...) in any other part of the house.

After an interval of four years, Mr. Thomson exhibited to the public his
second Tragedy called Agamemnon. Mr. Pope gave an instance of his great
affection to Mr. Thomson on this occasion: he wrote two letters in its favor
to the managers, and honou^ed the representation on the first night with his
presence. As he had not been for some time at a play, this was considered as a
very great instance of esteem. Mr. Thomson submitted to have this play
considerably shortened in the action, as some parts were too long, others
unnecessary, in which not the character but the poet spoke; and though not
brought on the stage till the month of April, it continued to be acted with
applause for several nights.

Many have remarked that his characters in his plays are more frequently
descriptive, than expressive, of the passions; but they all abound with
uncommon beauties, with fire, and depth of thought, with noble sentiments and
nervous writing. His speeches are often too long, especially for an English
audience; perhaps sometimes they are unnaturally lengthened: and it is certainly
a greater relief to the ear to have the dialogue more broken; yet our attention
is well rewarded, and in no passages, perhaps, in his tragedies, more so, than
in the affecting account Melisander The mention of this name reminds me of an
obligation I had to Mr. Thomson; and, at once, a^ opportunity offers, of
gratefully acknowledging the favor, and doing myself justice.

I had the pleasure of perusing the play of Agamemnon, before it was introduced
to the manager. Mr. Thomson was so thoroughly satisfied (I might say more) with
my reading of it; he said, he was confirmed in his design of giving to me the
part of Melisander. When I expressed my sentiments of the favor, he told me,
he thought it none; that my old acquaintance Savage knew, he had not forgot my
taste in reading the poem of Winter some years before: he added, that when
(before this meeting) he had expressed his doubt, to which of the actors he
should give this part (as he had seen but few plays since his return from
abroad) Savage warmly urged, I was the fittest person, and, with an oath
affirmed, that Theo. Cibber would taste it, feel it, and act it; perhaps he
might extravagantly add, 'beyond any one else.' It Is likely, Mr. Savage might
be then more vehement in this assertion, as some of his friends had been more
used to see me in a comic, than a serious light; and which was, indeed, more
frequent^y my choice. But to go on. When I read the play to the manager, Mr.
Quin, etc. (at which several gentlemen, intimate friends of the author, were
present) I was complimented by them all; Mr. Quin particularly declared, he
never heard a play done so much justice to, in reading, through all its various
parts. Mrs. Porter also (who on this occasion was to appear in the character of
Clytemnestra) so much approved my entering into the taste, sense, and spirit of
the piece, that she was pleased to desire me to repeat a reading of it, which,
at her request, and that of other principal performers, I often did; they all
confessed their approbation, with thanks.

When this play was to come forward into rehearsal, Mr. Thomson told me,
another actor had been recommended to him for this part in private, by the
manager (who, by the way) our author, or any one else, never esteemed as the
best judge, of either play, or player. But money may purchase, and interest
procure, a patent, though they cannot purchase taste, or parts) the person
proposed was, possibly, some favored flatterer, the partner of his private
pleasures, or humble admirer of his table ta^k: These little monarchs have
their little courtiers. Mr. Thomson insisted on my keeping the part. He said,
'Twas his opinion, none but myself, or Mr. Quin, could do it any justice; and,
as that excellent actor could not be spared from the part of Agamemnon (in the
persormance of which character he added to his reputation, though before justly
rated as the first actor of that time) be was peremptory for my appearing in
it; I did so, and acquitted myself to the satisfaction of the author and his
friends (men eminent in rank, in taste, and knowledge) and received testimonies
of approbation from the audience, by their attention and applause.

By this time the reader may be ready to cry out, 'to what purpose is all
this?' Have patience, sir. As I gained reputation in the forementioned
character, is there any crime in acknowledging my obligation to Mr. Thomson?
or, am I unpardonable, though I should pride myself on his good opinion and
friendship? may not gratitude, as well as vanity, be concerned in this
relation? but there is another reason that may stand as an excuse, for my being
led into this long narrative; which, as it is only an annotation, not made part
of our author's life, the reader, at his option, may peruse, or pass it over,
without being interrupted in his attention to what more immediately concerns
Mr. Thomson.

As what I have related is a truth, which living men of worth can testify; and
as it evidently shows that Mr. Savage's o^inion of me as an actor was, in this
latter part of his life, far from contemptible, of which, perhaps, in his
earlier days he had too lavishly spoke; I thought this no improper (nor
ill-timed) contradiction to a remark the writer of Published about the year
1743.
Mr. Savage's Life has been pleased, in his Gaite de Coeur, to make, which
almost amounts to an unhandsome innuendo, that Mr. Savage, and some of his
friends, thought me no actor at all.

I accidentally met with the book some years ago, and dipped into that part where
the author says, 'The preface (to Sir Thomas Overbu^y) contains a very liberal
encomium on the blooming excellences of Mr. Theophilus Cibber, which Mr. Savage
could not, in the latter part of his life, see his friends about to read,
without snatching the play out of their hands.' As poor Savage was well
remembered to have been as inconsiderate, inconsistent, and inconstant a mortal
as ever existed, what he might have said carried but little weight; and, as he
would blow both hot and cold, nay, too frequently, to gratify the company
present, would sacrifice the absent, though his best friend, I disregarded this
invidious hint, 'till I was lately informed, a person of distinction in the
learned world, had condescended to become the biographer of this unhappy man's
unimportant life: as the sanction of such a name might prove of prejudice to
me, I have since thought it worth my notice.

The truth is, I met Savage one summer, in a condition too melancholy for
description. He was starving; I supported him, and my father clothed him,
'till his tragedy was brought on the stage, where it met with success in the
representation, though acted by the young part of the company, in the summer
season; whatever might be the merit of hisplay, his necessities were too
pressing to wait 'till winter for its performance. When it was just going to be
published (as I met with uncommon encouragement in my young attempt in the part
of Somerset) he repeated to me a most extraordinary compliment, as he might
then think it, which, he said, he intended to make me in his preface. Neither
my youth (for I was then but 18) or vanity, was so devoid of judgment, as to
prevent my objecting to it. I told him, I imagined this extravagancy would have
so contrary an effect to his intention, that what he kindly meant for praise,
might be misinterpreted, or render him liable to censure, and me to ridicule; I
insisted on his omitting it: contrary to his usual obstinacy, he consented, and
sent his orders to the Printer to leave it out; it was too late; the sheets
were all worked off, and the play was advertised to come out (as it did) the
next day.


gives of his being betrayed, and left on the desolate island. -- It Is thus my
friend.
Whilst sunk in unsuspecting sleep I lay,
Some midnight ruffians rushed into my chamber,
Sent by Egisthus, who my presence deemed
Obstructive so I solve it) to his views,
Black views, I fear, as you perhaps may know,
Sudden they seized, and muffled up in darkness,
Strait bore me to the sea, whose instant prey
I did conclude myself, when first around
The ship unmoor'd, I heard the chiding wave.
But these fell tools of c^^el power, it seems,
Had orders in a desert isle to leave me;
There hopeless, helpless, comfortless. to prove
The utmost gall and bitterness of death.
Thus malice often overshoots itself,
And some unguarded accident betrays
The man of blood. -- Next night -- a dreary night!
Cast on the wildest of the Cyclad Isles,
Where never human foot had marked the shore,
These ruffians left me. -- Yet believe me, Arcas,
Such is the rooted love we bear mankind,
All ruffians as they were, I never heard
A sound so dismal as their parting oars. --
Then horrid silence followed, broke alone
By the low murmurs of the restless deep,
Mixed with the doubtful breeze that now and then
Sighed through the mournful woods. Beneath a shade
I sat me down, more heavily oppressed,
More desolate at heart, than ever I felt
Before. When, Philomela, over my head
Began to tune her melancholy strain,
As piteous of my woes, 'till, by degrees,
Composing sleep on wounded nature shed
A kind but short relief. At early morn,
Waked by the chant of birds, I looked around
For usual objects: objects found I none,
Except before me stretched the toiling main,
And rocks and woods in savage view behind.
Wrapped for a moment in amazed confusion,
My thought turned giddy round; when all at once,
To memory full my dire condition rushed --


In the year 1736 Mr. Thomson offered to the stage a Tragedy called Edward and
Eleonora, which was forbid to be acted, for some political reason, which it is
not in our power to guess.

The play of Tancred and Sigismunda was acted in the year 1744; this succeeded
beyond any other of Thomson's plays, and is now in possession of the stage. The
plot is borrowed from a story in the celebrated romance of Gil Blas: The fable
is very interesting, the characters are few, but active; and the attention in
this play is never suffered to wander. The character of Seffredi has been
justly censured as inconsistent, forced, and unnatural.

By the command of his royal highness the prince of Wales, Mr. Thomson, in
conjunction with Mr. Mallet, wrote the Masque of Alfred, which was performed
twice in his royal highness's gardens at Cliffden. Since Mr. Thomson's death,
this piece has been almost entirely new modelled by Mr. Mallet, and brought on
the stage in the year 1751, its success being fresh in the memory of its
frequent auditors, it is needless to say more concerning it.

Mr. Thomson's last Tragedy, called Coriolanus, was not acted till after his
death; the profits of it were given to his sisters in Scotland, one of whom is
married to a minister there, and the other to a man of low circumstances in the
city of Edinburgh. This play, which is certainly the least excellent of any of
Thomson's, was first offered to Mr. Garrick, but he did not think proper to
accept it. The prologue was written by Sir George Lyttleton, and spoken by Mr.
Quin, which had a very happy effect upon the audience. Mr. Qu^n was the
particular friend of Thomson, and when he spoke the following lines, which are
in themselves very tender, all the endearments of a long acquaintance, rose at
once to his imagination, while the tears gushed from his eyes. He loved his
friends (forgive this gushing tear:
Alas! I feel I am no actor here)
He loved his friends with such a warmth of heart,
So clear of interest, so devoid of art,
Such generous freedom, such unshaken zeal,
No words can speak it, but our tears may tell.


The beautiful break in these lines had a fine effect in speaking. Mr. Quin
here excelled himself; he never appeared a greater actor than at this instant,
when he declared himself none: 'twas an exquisite stroke to nature; art alone
could hardly reach it Pardon the digression, reader, but, we feel a desire to
say somewhat more on this head. The poet and the actor were friends, it cannot
then be quite foreign to the purpose to proceed. A deep-fetch'd sigh filled up
the heart felt pause; grief spread over all the countenance; the tear started
to the eye, the muscles fell, and, ' The whiteness of his cheek
' Was apter than his tongue to speak his tale.'
They all expressed the tender feelings of a manly heart, becoming a Thomson's
friend. His pause, his recovery were masterly; and he delivered the whole with
an emphasis and pathos, worthy the excellent lines he spoke; worthy the great
poet and good man, whose merits they painted, and whose loss they deplored.

The epilogue too, which was spoken by Mrs. Woffington, with an exquisite
humor, greatly pleased. These circumstances, added to the consideration of the
author's being no more, procured this play a run of nine nights, which without
these assistances it is likely it could not have had; for, without playing the
critic, it is not a piece of equal merit to many other of his works. It was his
misfortune as a dramatist, that he never knew when to have done; he makes every
character speak while there is any thing to be said; and during these long
interviews, the action too stands still, and the story languishes. His Tancred
and Sigismunda may be excepted from this general censure: But his characters
are too little distinguished; they seldom vary from one another in their manner
of speaking. In short, Thomson was born a descriptive poet; he only wrote for
the stage, from a motive too obvious to be mentioned, and too strong to be
resisted. He is indeed the eldest born of Spenser, and he has often confessed
that if he had any thing excellent in poetry, he owed it to the inspiration he
first received from reading the Fairy Queen, in the very early part of his life.

In August 1748 the world was deprived of this great ornament of poetry and
genius, by a violent fever, which carried him off in the 48th year of his age.
Before his death he was provided for by Sir George Littleton, in the profitable
place of comptroller of America, which he lived not long to enjoy. Mr. Thomson
was extremely beloved by his acquaintance. He was of an open generous
disposition; and was sometimes tempted to an excessive indulgence of the social
pleasures: A failing too frequently inseparable from men of genius. His
exterior appearance was not very engaging, but he grew more and more agreeable,
as he entered into conversation: He had a grateful heart, ready to acknowledge
every favor he received, and he never forgot his old benefactors,
notwithstanding a longabsence, new acquaintance, and additional eminence; of
which the following instance cannot be unacceptable to the reader.

Some time before Mr. Thomson's fatal illness, a gentleman enquired for him at
his house in Kew-Lane, near Richmond, where he then lived. This gentleman had
been his acquaintance when very young, and proved to be Dr. Gustard, the son of
a revd. minister in the city of Edinburgh. Mr. Gustard had been Mr. Thomson's
patron in the early part of his life, and contributed from his own purse (Mr.
Thomson's father not being in very affluent circumstances) to enable him to
prosecute his studies. The visitor sent not in his name, but only intimated to
the servant that an old acquaintance desired to see Mr. Thomson. Mr. Thomson
came forward to receive him, and looking steadfastly at him (for they had not
seen one another for many years) said, Troth Sir, I cannot say I ken your
countenance well -- Let me therefore crave your name. Which the gentleman no
sooner mentioned but the tears gushed from Mr. Thomson's eyes. He could only
reply, good God! are you the son of my dear friend, my old benefactor; and then
rushing to his arms, he tenderly embraced him; rejoicing at so unexpected a
meeting.

It is a true observation, that whenever gratitude is absent from a heart, it
is generally capable of the most consummate baseness; and on the other hand,
where that generous virtue has a powerful prevalence in the soul, the heart of
such a man is fraught with all those other endearing and tender qualities,
which constitute goodness. Such was the heart of this amiable poet, whose life
was as inoffensive as his page was moral: For of all our poets he is the
farthest removed from whatever has the appearance of indecency; and, as Sir
George Lyttleton happily expresses it, in the prologue to Mr. Thomson's
Coriolanus, -- His chaste muse employed her heav'n-taught lyre
None but the noblest passions to inspire,
Not one immoral, one corrupted thought,
One line, which dying he could wish to blot.


ALEXANDER POPE, Esquire
THIS illustrious poet was born at London, in 1688, and was descended from a
good family of that name, in Oxfordshire, the head of which was the earl of
Down, whose sole heiress married the earl of Lindsey. His father, a man of
primitive simplicity, and integrity of manners, was a merchant of London, who
upon the Revolution quitted trade, and converted his effects into money,
amounting to near 10,000 l. with which he retired into the country; and died in
1717, at the age of 75.

Our poet's mother, who lived to a very advanced age, being 93 years old when
she died, in 1733, was the daughter of William Turner, Esquire of York. She had
three brothers, one of whom was killed, another died in the service of king
Charles; and the eldest following his fortunes, and becoming a general officer
in Spain, left her what estate remained after sequestration, and forfeitures of
her family. To these circumstances our poet alludes in his epistle to Dr.
Arbuthnot, in which he mentions his parents. Of gentle blood (part shed in
honor's cause,
While yet in Britain, honor had applause)
Each parent sprang, -- What fortune pray? -- their own,
And better got than Bestia's from the throne.
Born to no pride, inheriting no strife,
Nor marrying discord in a noble wife;
Stranger to civil and religious rage,
The good man walked innoxious through his age:
No courts he saw, no suits would ever try;
Nor dared an oath, nor hazarded a lie:
Unlearned, he knew no schoolmen's sub^le art,
No language, but the language of the heart:
By nature honest, by experience wise,
Healthy by temperance, and by exercise;
His life though long, to sickness past unknown,
His death was instant and without a groan.


The education of our great author was attended with circumstances very
singular, and some of them extremely unfavourable; but the amazing force of his
genius fully compensated the want of any advantage in his earliest instruction.
He owed the knowledge of his letters to an aunt; and having learned very early
to read, took great delight in it, and taught himself to write by copying after
printed books, the characters of which he could imitate to great perfection. He
began to compose verses, farther back than he could well remember; and at eight
years of age, when he was put under one Taverner a priest, who taught him the
rudiments of the Latin and Greek tongues at the same time, he met with Ogilby's
Homer, which gave him great delight; and this was increased by Sandys's Ovid:
The raptures which these authors, even in the disguise of such translations,
then yielded him, were so strong, that he spoke of them with pleasure ever
after. From Mr. Taverner's tuition he was sent to a private school at Twiford,
near Winchester, where he continued about a year, and was then removed to
another near Hyde Park Corner; but was so unfortunate as to lose under his two
last masters, what he had acquired under the first.

While he remained at this school, being permitted to go to the playhouse,
with some of his school fellows of a more advanced age, he was so charmed with
dramatic representations, that he formed the translation of the Iliad into a
play, from several of the speeches in Ogilby's translation, connected with
verses of his own; and the several parts were performed by the upper boys of
the school, except that of Ajax by the master's gardener. At the age of 12 our
young poet, went with his father to reside at his house at Binfield, in Windsor
forest, where he was for a few months under the tuition of another priest, with
as little success as before; so that he resolved now to become his own master,
by reading those Classic Writers which gave him most entertainment; and by this
method, at fifteen he gained a ready habit in the learned languages, to which
he soon after added the French and Italian. Upon his retreat to the forest, he
became first acquainted with the writings of Waller, Spenser and Dryden; in the
last of which he immediately found what he wanted; and the poems of that
excellent writer were never out of his hands; they became his model, and from
them alone he learned the whole magic of his versification.

The first of our author's compositions now extant in print, is an Ode on
Solitude, written before he was twelve years old: Which, considered as the
production of so early an age, is a perfect master piece; nor need he have been
ashamed of it, had it been written in the meridian of his genius. While it
breathes the most delicate spirit of poetry, it at the same time demonstrates
his love of solitude, and the rational pleasures which attend the retreats of a
contented country life.

Two years after this he translated the first Book of Statius' Thebais, and
wrote a copy of verses on Silence, in imitation of the Earl of Rochester's poem
on Nothing See a Note in Warburton's Edition of Pope's Works.
. Thus we find him no sooner capable of holding the pen, than he employed it in
writing verses, " He lips'd in Numbers, for the Numbers came."


Though we have had frequent opportunity to observe, that poets have given
early displays of genius, yet we cannot recollect, that among the inspired
tribe, one can be found who at the age of twelve could produce so animated an
Ode; or at the age of fourteen translate from the Latin. It has been reported
indeed, concerning Mr. Dryden, that when he was at Westminster-School, the
master who had assigned a poetical task to some of the boys, of writing a
Paraphrase on our Savior's Miracle, of turning Water into Wine, was perfectly
astonished when young Dryden presented him with the following line, which he
asserted was the best comment could be written upon it. The conscious water saw
its God, and blushed.


This was the only instance of an early appearance of genius in this great man,
for he was turned of 30 before he acquired any reputation; an age in which Mr.
Pope's was in its full distinction.

The year following that in which Mr. Pope wrote his poem on Silence, he began
an Epic Poem, entitled Alcander, which he afterward very judiciously committed
to the flames, as he did likewise a Comedy, and a Tragedy; the latter taken
from a story in the legend of St. Genevieve; both of these being the product of
those early days. But his Pastorals, which were written in 1704, when he was
only 16 years of age, were esteemed by Sir William Trumbull, Mr. Granville, Mr.
Wycherley, Mr. Walsh and others of his friends, too valuable to be condemned to
the same sat.

Mr. Pope's Pastorals are four, viz. Spring. addressed to Sir William Trumbull,
Summer, to Dr. Garth. Autumn, to Mr. Wycherley. Winter, in memory of Mrs.
Tempest.


The three great writers of Pastoral Dialogue, which Mr. Pope in some measure
seems to imitate, are Theocritus, Virgil, and Spenser. Mr. Pope is of opinion,
that Theocritus excells all others in nature and simplicity.

That Virgil, who copies Theocritus, refines on his original; and in all points
in which judgment has the principal part is much superior to his master.

That among the moderns, their success has been greatest who have most
endeavored to make these ancients their pattern. The most considerable genius
appears in the famous Tasso, and our Spenser. Tasso in his Aminta has far
excelled all the pastoral writers, as in his Gierusalemme he has outdone the
Epic Poets of his own country. But as this piece seems to have been the
original of a new sort of poem, the Pastoral Comedy, in Italy, it cannot so
well be considered as a copy of the ancients. Spenser's Calendar, in Mr.
Dryden's opinion, is the most complete work of this kind, which any nation has
produced ever since the time of Virgil. But this he said before Mr. Pope's
Pastorals appeared.

Mr. Walsh pronounces on our Shepherd's Boy (as Mr. Pope called himself) the
following judgment, in a letter to Mr. Wycherly. 'The verses are very tender
and easy. The author seems to have a particular genius for that kind of poetry,
and a judgment that much exceeds the years, you told me he was of. It is no
flattery at all to say, that Virgil had written nothing so good at his age. I
shall take it as a favor if you will bring me acquainted with him; and if he
will give himself the trouble, any morning, to call at my house, I shall be
very glad to read the verses with him, and give him him my opinion of the
particulars more largely than I can well do in this letter.'



Thus early was Mr. Pope introduced to the acquaintance of men of genius, and
so improved every advantage, that he made a more rapid progress toward a
consummation in fame, than any of our former English poets. His Messiah; his
Windsor-Forest, the first part of which was written at the same time with his
pastorals; his Essay on Criticism in 1709, and his Rape of the Lock in 1712,
established his poetical character in such a manner, that he was called upon by
the public voice, to enrich our language with the translation of the Iliad;
which he began at 25, and executed in five years. This was published for his
own benefit, by subscription, the only kind of reward, which he received for
his writings, which do honor to our age and country: His religion rendering
him incapable of a place, which the lord treasurer, Oxford used to express his
concern for, but without offering him a pension, as the earl of Halifax, and
Mr. Secretary Craggs afterward did, though Mr. Pope declined it.

The reputation of Mr. Pope gaining every day upon the world, he was caressed,
flattered, and railed at; according as he was feared, or loved by different
persons. Mr. Wycherley was amongst the first authors of established reputation,
who contributed to advance his fame, and with whom he for some time lived in
the most unreserved intimacy. This poet, in his old age, conceived a design of
publishing his poems, and as he was but a very mperfect master of numbers, he
entrusted his manuscripts to Mr. Pope, and submitted them to his correction.
The freedom which our young bard was under a necessity to use, in order to
polish and refine what was in the original, rough, unharmonious, and
indelicate, proved disgustful to the old gentleman, then near 70, who, perhaps,
was a little ashamed, that a boy at 16 should so severely correct his works.
Letters of dissatisfaction were written by Mr. Wycherley, and at last he
informed him, in few words, that he was going out of town, without mentioning
to what place, and did not expect to hear from him 'till he came back. This
cold indifference extorted from Mr. Pope a protestation, that nothing should
induce him ever to write to him again. Notwithstanding this peevish behavior
of Mr. Wycherley, occasioned by jealousy and infirmities, Mr. Pope preserved a
constant respect and reverence for him while he lived, and after his death
lamented him. In a letter to Edward Blount, Esquire written immediately upon the
death of this poet, he has there related some anecdotes of Wycherly, which we
shall insert here, especially as they are not taken notice of in his life.
'DEAR SIR,
'I know of nothing that will be so interesting to you, at present, as some
circumstances of the last act of that eminent comic poet, and our friend,
Wycherley. He had often told me, as, I doubt not, he did all his acquaintance,
that he would marry, as soon as his life was despaired of: accordingly, a few
days before his death, he underwent the ceremony, and joined together those two
sacraments, which, wise men say, should be the last we receive; for, if you
observe, matrimony is placed after extreme unction in our catechism, as a kind
of hint of the order of time in which they are to be taken. The old man then
lay down, satisfied in the conscience of having, by this one act, paid hi^ just
debts, obliged a woman, who, he was told, had merit, and shown a heroic
resentment of the ill usage of his next heir. Some hundred pounds which he had
with the lady, discharged those debts; a jointure of four hundred a year made
her a recompense; and the nephew he left to comfort himself, as well as he
could, with the miserable remains of a mortgaged estate. I saw our friend twice
after this was done, less peevish in hi^ sickness, than he used to be in his
health, neither much afraid of dying, nor (which in him had been more likely)
much ashamed of marrying. The evening before he expired, he called his young
wife to the bedside, and earnestly entreated her not to deny him one request,
the last he should ever make. Upon her assurance of consenting to it, he told
her, my dear, it is only this, that you will never marry an old man again. I
cannot help remarking, that sickness, which often destroys both wit and wisdom,
yet seldom has power to remove that talent we call humor. Mr. Wycherley showed
this even in this last compliment, though, I think, his request a little hard;
for why should he bar her from doubling her jointure on the same easy terms.'




One of the most affecting and tender compositions of Mr. Pope, is, his Elegy
to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady, built on a true story. We are informed in
the Life of Pope, for which Curl obtained a patent, that this young lady was a
particular favorite of the poet, though it is not ascertained whether he
himself was the person from whom she was removed. This young lady was of very
high birth, possessed an opulent fortune, and under the tutorage of an uncle,
who gave her an education suitable to her titles and pretensions. She was
esteemed a match for the greatest peer in the realm, but, in her early years,
she suffered her heart to be engaged by a young gentleman, and in consequence
of this attachment, rejected offers made to her by persons of quality, seconded
by the solicitations of her uncle. Her guardian being surprised at this
behavior, set spies upon her, to find out the real cause of her indifference.
Her correspondence with her lover was soon discovered, and, when urged upon
that topic, she had too much truth and honor to deny it. The uncle finding,
that she would make no efforts to disengage her affection, after a little time
forced her abroad, where she was received with a ceremony due to her quality,
but restricted from the conversation of every one, but the spies of this severe
guardian, so that it was impossible for her lover even to have a letter
delivered to her hands. She languished in this place a considerable time, bore
an infinite deal of sickness, and was overwhelmed with the profoundest sorrow.
Nature being wearied out with continual distress, and being driven a^ last to
despair, the unfortunate lady, as Mr. Pope justly calls her, put an end to her
own life, having bribed a maidservant to procure her a sword. She was found
upon the ground weltering in her blood. The severity of the laws of the place,
where this fair unfortunate perished, denied her Christian burial, and she was
interred without solemnity, or even any attendants to perform the last offices
of the dead, except some young people of the neighborhood, who saw her put
into common ground, and strewed the grave with flowers.

The poet in the elegy takes occasion to mingle with the tears of sorrow, just
reproaches upon her cruel uncle, who drove her to this violation. But thou,
false guardian of a charge too good,
Thou base betrayer of a brother's blood!
See on those ruby lips the trembling breath,
Those cheeks now fading at the blast of death:
Lifeless the breast, which warmed the world before,
And those love-darting eyes must roll no more.


The conclusion of this elegy is irresistably affecting. So peaceful rests,
without a stone, a name,
Which once had beauty, titles, wealth and fame,
How loved, how honored once, avails thee not,
To whom related, or by whom begot;
A heap of dust alone remains of thee;
It Is all thou art, and all the proud shall be!


No poem of our author's more deservedly obtained him reputation, than his
Essay on Criticism. Mr. Addison, in his Spectator, No. 253, has celebrated it
with such profuse terms of admiration, that it is really astonishing, to find
the same man endeavoring afterward to diminish that fame he had contributed
to raise so high. "The art of criticism (says he) which was published some
months ago, is a masterpiece in its kind. The observations follow one another,
like those in Horace's Art of Poetry, without that methodical regularity, which
would have been requisite in a prose writer. They are some of them uncommon,
but such as the reader must assent to, when he sees them explained with that
elegance and perspicuity in which they are delivered. As for those which are
the most known, and the most received, they are placed in so beautiful a light,
and illustrated with such apt allusions, that they have in them all the graces
of novelty, and make the reader, who was before acquainted with them, still
more convinced of their truth and solidity. And here give me leave to mention,
what Monsieur Boileau has so well enlarged upon, in the preface to his works;
that wit and fine writing do not consist so much in advancing things that are
new, as in giving things that are known an agreeable turn. It is impossible for
us, who live in the latter ages of the world, to make observations in
criticism, morality, or any art and science, which have not been touched upon
by others. We have little else left us, but to represent the common sense of
mankind in more strong, more beautiful, or more uncommon lights. If a reader
examines Horace's Art of Poetry, he will find but few precepts in it, which he
may not meet with in Aristotle, and which were not commonly known by all the
poets of the Augustan age. His way of expressing, and applying them, not his
invention of them, is what we are chiefly to admire. --

"Longinus, in his Reflections, has given us the same kind of sublime, which he
observes in the several passages which occasioned them. I cannot but take
notice, that our English author has, after the same manner, exemplified several
of his precepts, in the very precepts themselves." He then produces some
instances of a particular kind of beauty in the numbers, and concludes with
saying, that we have three poems in our tongue of the same nature, and each a
masterpiece in its kind: The Essay on Translated Verse, the Essay on the Art
of Poetry, and the Essay on Criticism."



In the Lives of Addison and Tickell, we have thrown out some general hints
concerning the quarrel which subsisted between our poet and the former of these
gentlemen; here it will not be improper to give a more particular account of it.

The author of Mist's Journal positively asserts, 'that Mr. Addison raised Pope
from obscurity, obtained him the acquaintance and friendship of the whole body
of our nobility, and transferred his powerful influence with those great men to
this rising bard, who frequently levied by that means, unusual contributions on
the public. No sooner was his body lifeless, but this author reviving his
resentment, libelled the memory of his departed friend, and what was still more
heinous, made the scandal public.'

When this charge of ingratitude and dishonor was published against Mr. Pope,
to acquit himself of it, he called upon any nobleman, whose friendship, or any
one gentleman, whose subscription Mr. Addison had procured to our author, to
stand forth, and declare it, that truth might appear. But the whole libel was
proved a malicious story, by many persons of distinction, who, several years
before Mr. Addison's decease, approved those verses denominated a libel, but
which were, it is said, a friendly rebuke, sent privately in our author's own
hand, to Mr. Addison himself, and never made public, 'till by Curl in his
Miscellanies, 12mo. 1727. The lines indeed are elegantly satirical, and, in the
opinion of many unprejudiced judges, who had opportunities of knowing the
character of Mr. Addison, are no ill representation of him. Speaking of the
poetical triflers of the times, who had declared against him, he makes a sudden
transition to Addison. Peace to all such! But were there one whose fires
True genius kindles, and fair fame inspires,
Blessed with each talent, and each art to please,
And born to write, converse, and live with ease;
Should such a man, too ^ond to rule alone,
Bear, like the Turk, no rival near the throne,
View him with scornful, yet with jealous eyes,
And hate for arts, that caused himself to rise;
Damn with faint praise, assent with civil leer,
And, without sneering, others teach to sneer;
Willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike,
Just hint a fault, and hesitate dislike;
Alike reserved to blame or to commend,
A timorous foe, and a suspicious friend;
Dreading even fools; by flatt'rers besieged;
And so obliging, that he never obliged.
Like Cato give his little senate laws,
And sit attentive to his own applause;
While Wits and Templars every sentence raise,
And wonder with a foolish face of praise.
Who but must laugh, if such a man there be!
Who would not weep, if Atticus were he!


Some readers may think these lines severe, but the treatment he received from
Mr. Addison, was more than sufficient to justify them, which will appear when
we particularize an interview between these two poetical antagonists, procured
by the warm solicitations of Sir Richard Steel, who was present at it, as
well as Mr. Gay.

Mr. Jervas being one day in company with Mr. Addison, the conversation turned
upon Mr. Pope, for whom Addison, at that time, expressed the highest regard,
and assured Mr. Jervas, that he would make use not only of his interest, but of
his art likewise, to do Mr. Pope service; he then said, he did not mean his art
of poetry, but his art at court, and protested, notwithstanding many
insinuations were spread, that it shall not be his fault, if there was not the
best understanding and intelligence between them. He observed, that Dr. Swift
might have carried him too far among the enemy, during the animosity, but now
all was safe, and Mr. Pope, in his opinion, was escaped. When Mr. Jervas
communicated this conversation to Mr. Pope, he made this reply: 'The friendly
office you endeavor to do between Mr. Addison and me deserves acknowledgments
on my part. You thoroughly know my regard to his character, and my readiness to
testify it by all ways in my power; you also thoroughly knew the meanness of
that proceeding of Mr. Phillips, to make a man I so highly value suspect my
disposition toward him. But (...) after all, Mr. Addison must be judge in what
regards himself, and as he has seemed not to be a very just one to me, so I
must own to you, I expect nothing but civility from him, how much soever I wish
for his friendship; and as for any offers of real kindness or service which it
is in his power to do me, I should be ashamed to receive them from a man, who
has no better opinion of my morals, than to think me a party man, nor of my
temper, than to believe me capable of maligning, or envying another's
reputation as a poet. In a word, Mr. Addison is sure of my respect at all
times, and of my real friendship, whenever he shall think fit to know me for
what I am.'

Some years after this conversation, at the desire of Sir Richard Steel, they
met. At first, a very cold civility, and nothing else appeared on either side,
for Mr. Addison had a natural reserve and gloom at the beginning of an evening,
which, by conversation and a glass, brightened into an easy cheerfulness. Sir
Richard Steel, who was a most social benevolent man, begged of him to fulfill
his promise, in dropping all animosity against Mr. Pope. Mr. Pope then desired
to be made sensible how he had offended; and observed, that the translation of
Homer, if that was the great crime, was undertaken at the request, and almost
at the command of Sir Richard Steel. He entreated Mr. Addison to speak
heartily and freely, though it might be with ever so much severity, rather than
by keeping up forms of complaisance, conceal any of his faults. This Mr. Pope
spoke in such a manner as plainly indicated he thought Mr. Addison the
aggressor, and expected him to condescend, and own himself the cause of the
breach between them. But he was disappointed; for Mr. Addison, without
appearing to be angry, was quite overcome with it. He began with declaring,
that he always had wished him well, had often endeavored to be his friend, and
in that light advised him, if his nature was capable of it, to divest himself
of part of his vanity, which was too great for his merit; that he had not
arrived yet to that pitch of excellence he might imagine, or think his most
partial readers imagined; that when he and Sir Richard Steel corrected his
verses, they had a different air; reminding Mr. Pope of the amendment (by Sir
Richard) of a line, in the poem called The MESSIAH. He wipes the tears for ever
from our eyes. Which is taken from the prophet Isaiah, The Lord God will wipe
all tears from off all faces. From every face he wipes off every tear. And it
stands so altered in the newer editions of Mr. Pope's works. He proceeded to
lay before him all the mistakes and inaccuracies hinted at by the writers, who
had attacked Mr. Pope, and added many things, which he himself objected to.
Speaking of his translation in general, he said, that he was not to be blamed
for endeavoring to get so large a sum of money, but that it was an
ill-executed thing, and not equal to Tickell, which had all the spirit of
Homer. Mr. Addison concluded, in a low hollow voice of feigned temper, that he
was not sollicitous about his own fame as a poet; that he had quitted the muses
to enter into the business of the public, and that all he spoke was though
friendship to Mr. Pope, whom he advised to have a less exalted sense of his own
merit.

Mr. Pope could not well bear such repeated reproaches, but bol^ly told Mr.
Addison, that he appealed from his judgment to the public, and that he had long
known him too well to expect any friendship from him; upbraided him with being
a pensioner from his youth, sacrificing the very learning purchased by the
public money, to a mean thirst of power; that he was sent abroad to encourage
literature, in place of which he had always endeavored to suppress merit. At
last, the contest grew so warm, that they parted without any ceremony, and Mr.
Pope upon this wrote the foregoing verses, which are esteemed too true a
picture of Mr. Addison.

In this account, and, indeed, in all other accounts, which have been given
concerning this quarrel, it does not appear that Mr. Pope was the aggressor. If
Mr. Addison entertained suspicions of Mr. Pope's being carried too far among
the enemy, the danger was certainly Mr. Pope's, and not Mr. Addison's. It was
his misfortune, and not his crime. If Mr. Addison should think himself capable
of becoming a rival to Mr. Pope, and, in consequence of this opinion, publish a
translation of part of Homer; at the same time with Mr. Pope's, and if the
public should decide in favor of the latter by reading his translation, and
neglecting the other, can any fault be imputed to Mr. Pope? could he be blamed
for exerting all his abilities in so arduous a province? and was it his fault
that Mr. Addison (for the first book of Homer was undoubtedly his) could not
translate to please the public? Besides, was it not somewhat presumptuous to
insinuate to Mr. Pope, that his verses bore another face when he corrected
them, while, at the same time, the translation of Homer, which he had never
seen in manuscript, bore away the palm from that very translation, he himself
asserted wa^ done in the true spirit of Homer? In matters of genius the public
judgment seldom errs, and in this case posterity has confirmed the sentence of
that age, which gave the preference to Mr. Pope; for his translation is in the
hands of all readers of taste, while the other is seldom regarded but as a foil
to Pope's.

It would appear as if Mr. Addison were himself so immersed in party business,
as to contract his benevolence to the limits of a faction: Which was infinitely
beneath the views of a philosopher, and the rules which that excellent writer
himself established. If this was the failing of Mr. Addison, it was not the
error of Pope, for he kept the strictest correspondence with some persons,
whose affections to the Whig-interest were suspected, yet was his name never
called in question. While he was in favor with the duke of Buckingham, the
lords Bolingbroke, Oxford, and Harcourt, Dr. Swift, and Mr. Prior, he did not
drop his correspondence with the lord Hallifax, Mr. Craggs, and most of those
who were at the head of the Whig interest. A professed Jacobite one day
remonstrated to Mr. Pope, that the people of his party took it ill that he
should write with Mr. Steel upon ever so indifferent a subject; at which he
could not help smiling, and observed, that he hated narrowness of soul in any
party; and that if he renounced his reason in religious matters, he should
hardly do it on any other, and that he could pray not only for opposite
parties, but even for opposite religions. Mr. Pope considered himself as a
citizen of the world, and was therefore obliged to pray for the prosperity of
mankind in general. As a son of Britain he wished those councils might be
suffered by providence to prevail, which were most for the interest of his
native country: But as politics was not his study, he could not always
determine, at least, with any degree of certainty, whose councils were best;
and had charity enough to believe, that contending parties might mean well. As
taste and science are confined to no country, so ought they not to be excluded
from any party, and Mr. Pope had an unexceptionable right to live upon terms of
the strictest friendship with every man of parts, to which party soever he
might belong. Mr. Pope's uprightness in his conduct toward contending
politicians, is demonstrated by his living independent of either faction. He
accepted no place, and had too high a spirit to become a pensioner.

Many effects however were made to proselyte him from the Popish faith, which
all proved ineffectual. His friends conceived hopes from the moderation which
he on all occasions expressed, that he was really a Pro^e^tant in his heart,
and that upon the death of his mother, he would not scruple to declare his
sentiments, notwithstanding the reproaches he might incur from the Popish
party, and the public observation it would draw upon him. The bishop of
Rochester strongly advised him to read the controverted points between the
Protestant and the Catholic church, to suffer his unprejudiced reason to
determine for him, and he made no doubt, but a separation from the Romish
communion would soon ensue. To this Mr. Pope very heartily answered, 'Whether
the change would be to my spiritual advantage, God only knows: This I know,
that I mean as well in the religion I now profess, as ever I can do in any
other. Can a man who thinks so, justify a change, even if he thought both
equally good? To such an one, the part of joining with any one body of
Christians might perhaps be easy, but I think it would not be so to renounce
the other. 'Your lordship has formerly advised me to read the best
controversies between the churches. Shall I tell you a secret? I did so at 14
years old (for I loved reading, and my father had no other books) there was a
collection of all that had been written on both sides, in the reign of King
James II. I warmed my head with them, and the consequence was, I found myself a
Papist, or a Protestant by turns, according to the last book I read. I am
afraid most seekers are in the same case, and when they stop, they are not so
properly converted, as outwitted. You see how little glory you would gain by my
conversion: and after all, I verily believe, your lordship and I are both of
the same religion, if we were thoroughly understood by one another, and that
all honest and reasonable Christians would be so, if they did but talk enough
together every day, and had nothing to do together but to serve God, and live
in peace with their neighbors.

'As to the temporal side of the question, I can have no dispute with you; it
is certain, all the beneficial circumstances of life, and all the shining ones,
lie on the part you would invite me to. But if I could bring myself to fancy,
what I think you do but fancy, that I have any talents for active life, I want
health for it; and besides it is a real truth. I have, if possible, less
inclination, than ability. Contemplative life is not only my scene, but is my
habit too. I begun my life where most people end theirs, with all that the
world calls ambition. I don't know why it is called so, for, to me, it always
seemed to be stooping, or climbing. I Will tell you my politic and religious
sentiments in a few words. In my politics, I think no farther, than how to
preserve my peace of life, in any government under which I live; nor in my
religion, than to preserve the peace of my conscience, in any church with which
I communicate. I hope all churches, and all governments are so far of God, as
they are rightly understood, and rightly administered; and where they are, or
may be wrong, I leave it to God alone to mend, or reform them, which, whenever
he does, it must be by greater instruments than I am. I am not a Papist, for I
renounce the temporal invasions of the papal power, and detest their arrogated
authority over Princes and States. I am a Catholic in the strictest sense of
the word. If I was born under an absolute Prince, I would be a quiet subject;
but, I thank God, I was not. I have a due sense of the excellence of the
British constitution. In a word, the things I have always wished to see, are
not a Roman Catholic, or a French Catholic, or a Spanish Catholic, but a True
Catholic; and not a King of Whigs, or or a King of Tories, but a King of
England.'



These are the peaceful maxims upon which we find Mr. Pope conducted his life,
and if they cannot in some respects be justified, yet it must be owned, that
his religion and his politics were well enough adapted for a poet, which
entitled him to a kind of universal patronage, and to make every good man his
friend.

Dean Swift sometimes wrote to Mr. Pope on the topic of changing his religion,
and once humorously offered him twenty pounds for that purpose. Mr. Pope's
answer to this, lord Orrery has obliged the world by preserving in the life of
Swift. It is a perfect masterpiece of wit and pleasantry.

We have already taken notice, that Mr. Pope was called upon by the public
voice to translate the Iliad, which he performed with so much applause, and at
the same time, with so much profit to himself, that he was envied by many
writers, whose vanity perhaps induced them to believe themselves equal to so
great a design. A combination of inferior wits were employed to write The
Popiad, in which his translation is characterized, as unjust to the original,
without beauty of language, or variety of numbers. Instead of the justness of
the original, they say there is absurdity and extravagance. Instead of the
beautiful language of the original, there is solecism and barbarous English. A
candid reader may easily discern from this furious introduction, that the
critics were actuated rather by malice than truth, and that they must judge
with their eyes shut, who can see no beauty of language, no harmony of numbers
in this translation.

But the most formidable critic against Mr. Pope in this great undertaking, was
the celebrated Madam Dacier, whom Mr. Pope treated with less ceremony in his
Notes on the Iliad, than, in the opinion of some people, was due to her sex.
This learned lady was not without a sense of the injury, and took an
opportunity of discovering her resentment. 'Upon finishing (says she) the
second edition of my translation of Homer, a particular friend sent me a
translation of part of Mr. Pope's preface to his Version of the Iliad. As I do
not understand English, I cannot form any judgment of his performance, though I
have heard much of it. I am indeed willing to believe, that the praises it has
met with are not unmerited, because whatever work is approved by the English
nation, cannot be bad; but yet I hope I may be permitted to judge of that part
of the preface, which has been transmitted to me, and I here take the liberty
of giving my sentiments concerning it. I must freely acknowledge that Mr.
Pope's invention is very lively, though he seems to have been guilty of the
same fault into which he owns we are often precipitated by our invention, when
we depend too much upon the strength of it; as magnanimity (says he) may run up
to confusion and extravagance, so may great invention to redundancy and
wildness.

'This has been the very case of Mr. Pope himself; nothing is more
overstrained, or more false than the images in which his fancy has represented
Homer; sometimes he tells us, that the Iliad is a wild paradise, where, if we
cannot see all the beauties, as in an ordered garden, it is only because the
number of them is infinitely greater. Sometimes he compares him to a copious
nursery, which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind; and,
lastly, he represents him under the notion of a mighty tree, which rises from
the most vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes and produces the
finest fruit, but bears too many branches, which might be lopped into form, to
give it a more regular appearance.

'What! is Homer's poem then, according to Mr. Pope, a confused heap of
beauties, without order or symmetry, and a plot whereon nothing but seeds, nor
nothing perfect or formed is to be found; and a production loaded with many
unprofitable things which ought to be retrenched, and which choke and disfigure
those which deserve to be preserved? Mr. Pope will pardon me if I here oppose
those comparisons, which to me appear very false, and entirely contrary to what
the greatest of ancient, and modern critics ever thought.

'The Iliad is so far from being a wild paradise, that it is the most regular
garden, and laid out with more symmetry than any ever was. Every thing therein
is not only in the place it ought to have been, but every thing is fitted for
the place it has. He presents you at first with that which ought to be first
seen; he places in the middle what ought to be in the middle, and what would be
improperly placed at the beginning or end, and he removes what ought to be at a
greater distance, to create the more agreeable surprise; and, to use a
comparison drawn from painting, he places that in the greatest light which
cannot be too visible, and sinks in the obscurity of the shade, what does not
require a full view; so that it may be said, that Homer is the Painter who best
knew how to employ the shades and lights. The second comparison is equally
unjust; how could Mr. Pope say, 'that one can only discover seeds, and the
first productions of every kind in the Iliad?' every beauty is there to such an
amazing perfection, that the following ages could add nothing to those of any
kind; and the ancients have always proposed Homer, as the most perfect model in
every kind of poetry.

'The third comparison is composed of the errors of the two former; Homer had
certainly an incomparable fertility of invention, but his fertility is always
checked by that just sense, which made him reject every superfluous thing which
his vast imagination could offer, and to retain only what was necessary and
useful. Judgment guided the hand of this admirable gardener, and was the
pruning hook he employed to lop off every useless branch.'



Thus far Madam Dacier differs in her opinion from Mr. Pope concerning Homer;
but these remarks which we have just quoted, partake not at all of the nature
of criticism; they are mere assertion. Pope had declared Homer to abound with
irregular beauties. Dacier has contradicted him, and asserted, that all his
beauties are regular, but no reason is assigned by either of these mighty
geniuses in support of their opinions, and the reader is left in the dark, as
to the real truth. If he is to be guided by the authority of a name only, no
doubt the argument will preponderate in favor of our countryman. The French
lady then proceeds to answer some observations, which Mr. Pope made upon her
Remarks on the Iliad, which she performs with a warmth that generally attends
writers of her sex. Mr. Pope, however, paid more regard to this fair
antagonist, than any other critic upon his works. He confessed that he had
received great helps from her, and only thought she had (through a prodigious,
and almost superstitious, fondness for Homer) endeavored to make him appear
without any fault, or weakness, and stamp a perfection on his works, which is
no where to be found. He wrote her a very obliging letter, in which he
conf^ssed himself exceedingly sorry that he ever should have displeased so
excellent a wit, and she, on the other hand, with a goodness and frankness
prculiar to her, protested to forgive it, so that there remained no animosities
between those two great admirers and translators of Homer.

Mr. Pope, by his succes^ful translation of the Iliad, as we have before
remarked, drew upon him the envy and raillery of a whole tribe of writers.
Though he did not esteem any particular man amongst his enemies of consequence
enough to provoke an answer, yet when they were considered collectively, they
offered excellent materials for a general satire. This satire he planned and
executed with so extraordinary a mastery, that it is by far the most complete
poem of our author's; it discovers more invention, and a higher effort of
genius, toan any other production of his. The ^int was taken from Mr. Dryden's
Mac ^lecknoe, but as it is more general, so it is more pleasing. The Dunciad is
so universally read, that we reckon it superfiuous to give any further account
of it here; and it would be an unpleasing task to trace all the provocations
and resentments, which were mutually discovered upon this occasion. Mr. Pope
was of opinion, that next to praising good writers, there was a merit in
exposing bad ones, though it does not hold infallibly true, that each person
stigmatized as a dunce, was genuinely so. Something must be allowed to personal
resentment; Mr. Pope was a man of keen passions; he felt an injury strongly,
retained a long remembrance of it, and could very pungently repay it. Some of
the gentlemen, however, who had been more severely lashed than the rest,
meditated a revenge, which redounds but little to their honor. They either
intended to chastize him corporally, or gave it out that they had really done
so, in order to bring shame upon Mr. Pope, which, if true, could only bring
shame upon themselves.

While Mr. Pope enjoyed any leisure from severer applications to study, his
friends were continually soliciting him to turn his thoughts toward something
that might be of lasting use to the world, and engage no more in a war with
dunces who were now effectually humbled. Our great dramatic poet Shakespeare had
passed through several hands, some of whom were very reasonably judged not to
have understood any part of him tolerably, much less were capable to correct or
revise him.

The friends of Mr. Pope therefore strongly importuned him, to undertake the
whole of Shakespeare's plays, and, if possible, by comparing all the different
copies now to be procured, restore him to his ancient purity. To which our poet
made this modest reply, that not having attempted any thing in the Drama, it
might in him be deemed too much presumption. To which he was answered, that
this did not require great knowledge of the foundation and disposition of the
drama, as that must stand as it was, and Skakespear himself had not always paid
strict regard to the rules of it; but this was to clear the scenes from the
rubbish with which ignorant editors had filled them.

His proper business in this work was to render the text so clear as to be
generally understood, to free it from obscurities, and sometimes gross
absurdities, which now seem to appear in it, and to explain doubtful and
difficult passages of which there are great numbers. This however was an
arduous province, and how Mr. Pope has acquitted himself in it has been
differently determined: It is certain he never valued himself upon that
performance, nor was it a task in the least adapted to his genius; for it
seldom happens that a man of lively parts can undergo the servile drudgery of
collecting passages, in which more industry and labor are necessary than
persons of quick penetration generally have to bestow.

It has been the opinion of some critics, that Mr. Pope's talents were not
adapted for the drama, otherwise we cannot well account for his neglecting the
most gainful way of writing which poetry affords, especially as his reputation
was so high, that without much ceremony or mortification, he might have had any
piece of his brought upon the stage. Mr. Pope was attentive to his own
interest, and if he had not either been conscious of his inability in that
province, or too timid to wish the popular approbation, he would certainly have
attempted the drama. Neither was he esteemed a very competent judge of what
plays were proper or improper for representation. He wrote several letters to
the manager of Drury Lane Theater, in favor of Thomson's Agamemnon, which
notwithstanding his approbation, Thomson's friends were obliged to mutulate and
shorten; and after all it proved a heavy play. -- Though it was generally
allowed to have been one of the best acted plays that had appeared for some
years.

He was certainly concerned in the Comedy, which was published in Mr. Gay's
name, called Three Hours after Marriage, as well as Dr. Arbuthnot. This
illustrious triumvirate, though men of the most various parts, and extensive
understanding, yet were not able it seems to please the people, though the
principal parts were supported by the best actors in that way on the stage. Dr.
Arbuthnot and Mr Pope were no doubt solicitous to conceal their concern in it;
but by a letter which Gay wrote to Pope, published in Ayre's Memoirs, it
appears evident (if Ayre's authority may be depended on) that they both
assisted in the composition. DEAR POPE,
'Too late I see, and confess myself mistaken in relation to the Comedy; yet I
do not think, had I followed your advice, and only introduced the mummy, that
the absence of the crocodile had saved it. I cannot help laughing myself (though
the vulgar do not consider it was designed to look ridiculous) to think how the
poor monster and mummy were dashed at their reception, and when the cry was
loudest, I thought that if the thing had been written by another, I should have
deemed the town in some measure mistaken; and as to your apprehension that this
may do us future injury, do not think of it; the Dr. has a more valuable name
than can be hurt by any thing of this nature; and yours is doubly safe. I
will, if any shame there be, take it all to myself, and indeed I ought, the
motion being first mine, and never heartily approved by you.'




Of all our poet's writings none were read with more general approbation than
his Ethic Epistles, or multiplied into more editions. Mr. Pope who was a
perfect oeconomist, secured to himself the profits arising from his own works;
he was never subjected to necessity, and therefore was not to be imposed upon
by the art or fraud of publishers.

But now approaches the period in which as he himself expressed it, he stood in
need of the generous tear he paid, Poets themselves must fall like those they
sung,
Deaf the praised ear, and mute the tuneful tongue.
Even he whose soul now melts in mournful lays,
Shall shortly want the generous tear he pays.


Mr. Pope who had been always subjected to a variety of bodily infirmities,
finding his strength give way, began to think that his days, which had been
prolonged past his expectation, were drawing toward a conclusion. However, he
visited the Hot-Wells at Bristol, where for some time there were small hopes of
his recovery; but making too free with purges he grew worse, and seemed
desirous to draw nearer home. A dropsy in the breast at last put a period to
his life, at the age of 56, on the 30th of May 1744, at his house at
Twickenham, where he was interred in the same grave with his father and mother.

Mr. Pope's behavior in his last illness has been variously represented to the
world: Some have affirmed that it was timid and peevish; that having been fixed
in no particular system of faith, his mind was wavering, and his temper broken
and disturbed. Others have asserted that he was all cheerfulness and
resignation to the divine will: Which of these opinions is true we cannot now
determine; but if the former, it must be regretted, that he, who had taught
philosophy to others, should himself be destitute of its assistance in the most
critical moments of his life.

The bulk of his fortune he bequeathed to Mrs. Blount, with whom he lived in
the strictest friendship, and for whom he is said to have entertained the
warmest affection. His works, which are in the hands of every person of true
taste, and will last as long as our language will be understood, render
unnecessary all further remarks on his writings. He was equally admired for the
dignity and sublimity of his moral and philosophical works, the vivacity of his
satirical, the clearness and propriety of his didactic, the richness and
variety of his discriptive, and the elegance of all, added to an harmony of
versification and correctness of sentiment and language, unknown to our former
poets, and of which he has set an example which will be an example or a
reproach to his successors. His prose-stile is as perfect in its kind as his
poetic, and has all the beauties proper for it, joined to an uncommon force and
perspicuity.

Under the profession of the Roman-Catholic religion, to which he adhered to
the last, he maintained all the moderation and charity becoming the most
thorough and consistent Protestant. His conversation was natural, easy and
agreeable, without any affectation of displaying his wit, or obtruding his own
judgment, even upon subjects of which he was so eminently a master.

The moral character of our author, as it did not escape the lash of his
calumniators in his life; so have there been attempts since his death to
diminish his reputation. Lord Bolingbroke, whom Mr. Pope esteemed to almost an
enthusiastic degree of admiration, was the first to make this attack. Not many
years ago, the public were entertained with this controversy immediately upon
the publication of his lordship's Letters on the Spirit of Patriotism, and the
Idea of a Patriot King. Different opinions have been offered, some to extenuate
the fault of Mr. Pope, for printing and mutilating these letters without his
lordship's knowledge; others to blame him for it as the highest breach of
friendship, and the greatest mark of dishonor. It would exceed our proposed
bounds to enter into the merits of this controversy; the reader, no doubt, will
find it amply discussed in that account of the life of this great author, which
Mr. Warburton has promised the public.

This great man is allowed to have been one of the first rank amongst the poets
of our nation, and to acknowledge the superiority of none but Shakespeare,
Milton, and Dryden. With the two former, it is unnatural to compare him, as
their province in writing is so very different. Pope has never attempted the
drama, nor published an Epic Poem, in which these two distinguished genius's
have so wonderfully succeeded. Though Pope's genius was great, it was yet of so
different a cast from Shakespeare's, and Milton's, that no comparison can be
justly formed. But if this may be said of the former two, it will by no means
hold with respect to the la^ter, for between him and Dryden, there is a great
similarity of writing, and a very striking coincidence of genius. It will not
perhaps be unpleasing to our readers, if we pursue this comparison, and
endeavor to discover to whom the superiority is justly to be attributed, and
to which of them poetry owes the highest obligations.

When Dryden came into the world, he found poetry in a very imperfect state;
its numbers were unpolished; its cadences rough, and there was nothing of
harmony or mellifluence to give it a graceful of flow. In this harsh, unmusical
situation, Dryden found it (for the refinements of Waller were but puerile and
unsubstantial) he polished the rough diamond, he taught it to shine, and
connected beauty, elegance, and strength, in all his poetical compositions.
Though Dryden thus polished our English numbers, and thus harmonized
versification, it cannot be said, that he carried his art to perfection. Much
was yet left undone; his lines with all their smoothness were often rambling,
and expletives were frequently introduced to complete his measures. It was
apparent therefore that an additional harmony might still be given to our
numbers, and that cadences were yet capable of a more musical modulation. To
effect this purpose Mr. Pope arose, who with an ear elegantly delicate, and the
advantage of the finest genius, so harmonized the English numbers, as to make
them completely musical. His numbers are likewise so minutely correct, that it
would be difficult to conceive how any of his lines can be altered to
advantage. He has created a kind of mechanical versification; every line is
alike; and though they are sweetly musical, they want diversity, for he has not
studied so great a variety of pauses, and where the accents may be laid
gracefully. The structure of his verse is the best, and a line of his is more
musical than any other line can be made, by placing the accents elsewhere; but
we are not quite certain, whether the ear is not apt to be soon cloyed with
this uniformity of elegance, this sameness of harmony. It must be acknowledged
however, that he has much improved upon Dryden in the article of versification,
and in that part of poetry is greatly his superior. But though this must be
acknowledged, perhaps it will not necessarily follow that his genius was
therefore superior.

The grand characteristic of a poet is his invention, the surest distinction of
a great genius. In Mr. Pope, nothing is so truly original as his Rape of the
Lock, nor discovers so much invention. In this kind of mock-heroic, he is
without a rival in our language, for Dryden has written nothing of the kind.
His other work which discovers invention, fine designing, and admirable
execution, is his Dunciad; which, though built on Dryden's Mac Flecknoe, is yet
so much superior, that in satiric writing, the Palm must justly be yielded to
him. In Mr. Dryden's Absalom and Achitophel, there are indeed the most poignant
strokes of satire, and characters drawn with the most masterly touches; but
this poem with all its excellencies is much inferior to the Dunciad, though
Dryden had advantages which Mr. Pope had not; for Dryden's characters are men
of great eminence and figure in the state, while Pope has to expose men of
obscure birth and unimportant lives only distinguished from the herd of
mankind, by a glimmering of genius, which rendered the greatest part of them
more emphatically contemptible. Pope's was the hardest task, and he has
executed it with the greatest success. As Mr. Dryden must undoubtedly have
yielded to Pope in satyric writing, it is incumbent on the partisans of Dryden
to name a other species of composition, in which the former excells so as to
throw the balance again upon the side of Dryden. This species is the Lyric, in
which the warmest votaries of Pope must certainly acknowledge, that he is much
inferior; as an irresistible proof of this we need only compare Mr. Dryden's
Ode on St. Cecilia's Day, with Mr. Pope's; in which the cupasity is so
apparent, that we know not if the most finished of Pope's compositions has
discovered such a variety and command of numbers.

It has been generally acknowledged, that the Lyric is a more excellent kind
of writing than the Satiric; and consequently he who excells in the most
excellent species, must undoubtedly be esteemed the greatest poet. -- Mr. Pope
has very happily succeeded in many of his occasional pieces. such as Eloisa to
Abelard, his Elegy on an unfortunate young Lady, and a variety of other
performances deservedly celebrated. To these may be opposed Mr. Dryden's
Fables, which though written in a very advanced age, are yet the most perfect
of his works. In these Fables there is perhaps a greater variety than in Pope's
occasional pieces: Many of them indeed are translations, but such as are
original show a great extent of invention, and a large compass of genius.

There are not in Pope's works such poignant discoveries of wit, or such a
general knowledge of the humors and characters of men, as in the Prologues and
Epilogues of Dryden, which are the best records of the whims and capriclous
oddities of the times in which they are written.

When these two great genius's are considered in the light of translators, it
will indeed be difficult to determine into whose scale the balance should be
thrown: That Mr. Pope had a more arduous province in doing justice to Homer,
than Dryden with regard to Virgil is certainly true; as Homer is a more various
and diffuse poet than Virgil; and it is likewise true, that Pope has even
exceeded Dryden in the execution, and none will deny, that Pope's Homer's
Iliad, is a finer poem than Dryden's Aeneis of Virgil: Making a proper
allowance for the disproportion of the original authors. But then a candid
critic should reflect, that as Dryden was prior in the great attempt of
tendering Virgil into English; so did he perform the task under many
disadvantages, which Pope, by a happier situation in life, was enabled to
avoid; and could not but improve upon Dryden's errors, though the authors
translated were not the same: And it is much to be doubted, if Dryden were to
translate the Aeneid now, with that attention which the correctness of the
present age would force upon him, whether the preference would be due to Pope's
Homer.

But supposing it to be yielded (as it certainly must) that the latter bard was
the greatest translator; we are now to throw into Mr. Dryden's scale all his
dramatic works; which though not the most excellent of his writings, yet as
nothing of Mr. Pope's can be opposed to them, they have an undoubted right to
turn the balance greatly in favor of Mr. Dryden. -- When the two poets are
considered as critics, the comparison will very imperfectly hold. Dryden's
Dedications and Prefaces, besides that they are more numerous, and are the best
models for courtly panegyric, show that he understood poetry as an art, beyond
any man that ever lived. And he explained this art so well, that he taught his
antagonists to turn the tables against himself; for he so illuminaced the mind
by his clear and perspicuous reasoning, that dullness itself became capable of
discerning; and when at any time his performances fell short of his own ideas
of excellence; his enemies tried him by rules of his own establishing; and
though they owed to him the ability of judging, they seldom had candor enough
to spare him.

Perhaps it may be true that Pope's works are read with more appetite, as there
is a greater evenness and correctness in them; but in perusing the works of
Dryden the mind will take a wider range, and be more fraught with poetical
ideas: We admire Dryden as the greater genius, and Pope as the most pleasing
versifier.

ERRATA in the foregoing life, viz.

P. 237. l. 27. for with all that the world calls ambition, read with a disgust
of all, etc. And l. 29. for 'stooping or climbing' read, rather stooping than
climbing.

AARON HILL, Esquire This was sent us by an unknown hand.

WAS the son of George Hill, esquire of Malmsbury-Abbey in Wiltshire; a gentleman
possessed of an estate of about 2000 l. a year, which was entailed upon him,
and the eldest son, and to his heirs for many descents. (...) the unhappy
misconduct of Mr. George Hill, and the weakness of the trustees, entangled it
in such a manner as hitherto has rendered it of no advantage to his family;
for, without any legal title so to do, he sold it all, at different times, for
sums greatly beneath the value of it, and left his children to their mother's
care, and her mother's (Mrs. Ann Gregory) who took great pains with her
grandson's education. At nine years old she put him to school to Mr. Rayner at
Barnstable in Devonshire, from whence, he went to Westminster school; where
soon (under the care of Dr. Knipe) his genius showed itself in a distinguished
light, and often made him some amends for his hard fortune, which denied him
such supplies of pocketmoney as his spirit wished, by enabling him to perform
the tasks of many who had not his capacity.

Mr. Aaron Hill, was born in Beaufort-Buildings in the Strand, on February 10,
1684-5. At fourteen years of age he left Westminster school; and, shortly
after, hearing his grandmother make mention of a relation much esteemed (lord
Paget, then ambassador at Constantinople) he formed a resolution of paying him
a visit there, being likewise very desirous to see that empire.

His grandmother being a woman of uncommon understanding, and great
goodnature, would not oppose him in it; and accordingly he soon embarked on
board a ship, then going there, March 2, 1700, as appears by a Journal which he
kept during his voyage, and in his travels (though at so weak an age) wherein
he gave the most accurate account of every particular, in a manner much above
his years.

When he arrived, lord Paget received him with as much surprise, as pleasure,
wondering that so young a person as he was (but then in his fifteenth year)
^^uld choose to run the hazard of such a voyage to (...) a relation, whom he
knew but by character. The ambassador immediately provided for him a very
learned ecclesiastic in his own house, and, under his tuition, sent him to
travel, being desirous to improve, as far as possible, the education of a
person he found worthy of it. With this tutor he had the opportunity of seeing
Egypt, Palestine, and a great part of the Eastern country.

With lord Paget he returned home, about the year 1703, through great part of
Europe; in which tour he saw most of the courts.

He was in great esteem with that nobleman; insomuch, that in all probability
he had been still more distinguished by him at his death, than in his life
time, had not the envious fears and malice of a certain female, who was in high
authority and favor with that lord, prevented and supplanted his kind
disposition toward him: My lord took great pleasure in instructing him
himself, wrote him whole books in different languages, on which his student
placed the greatest value; which was no sooner taken notice of by jealous
observation, than they were stolen from his apartment, and suffered to be some
days missing, to the great displeasure of my lord, but still much greater
affliction of his pupil, whose grief for losing a treasure he so highly valued,
was more than doubled, by perceiving that from some false insinuation that had
been made, it was believed he had himself wilfully lost them: But young Mr.
Hill was soon entirely cleared on this head.

A few years after, he was desired both on account of his sobriety and
understanding, to accompany Sir William Wentworth, a worthy baronet of
Yorkshire, who was then going to make the tour of Europe; with whom he
traveled two or three years, and brought him home improved, to the
satisfaction of that gentleman's relations.

'Twas in those different travels he collected matter for the history he wrote
of Turkey, and published in 1709; a work he afterward often ^^pented having
printed; and (though his o^^) would criticize upon it with much severity. (But,
as he used to say, he was a very boy when he began and ended it; therefore
great allowance may be made on that account); and in a letter which has since
been printed in his works, wrote to his greatly valued friend, the worthy
author of Clarissa, he acknowledges his consciousness of such defects: where
speaking of obscurity, he says,

'Obscurity, indeed (if they had penetration to mean that) is burying sense
alive, and some of my rash, early, too affected, puerile scriblings must, and
should, have pleaded guilty to so just an accusation.'

The fire of youth, with an imagination lively as his was, seldom, if ever, go
hand in hand with solid judgment. Mr. Hill did not give himself indeed time for
correction, having wrote it so very expeditiously, as hardly would be credited.
But (as Dr. Sprat, then bishop of Rochester, used to observe) there is
certainly visible in that book, the seeds of a great writer. -- He seldom in
his riper years was guilty of the fault of non-correction; for he revised, too
strictly rather, every piece he purposed for the public eye (exclusive of an
author's natural fondness); and it has been believed by many, who have read
some of his pieces in the first copy, that had they never been by a revisal
deepned into greater strength, they would have pleased still more, at least
more generally.

About the year 1709 he published his first poem, called Camillus; in
vindication, and honor of the earl of Peterborough, who had been general in
Spain. After that nobleman had seen it, he was desirous to know who was the
author of it; which having found by enquiry, he complimented him by making him
his secretary, in the room of Mr. Furly, who was gon^ abroad with another
nobleman: And Mr. Hill was always held in high esteem with that great peer;
with whom, however, he did not continue long; for in the year 1710 he married
the only daughter of Edmund Morris, Esquire of Stratford, in Essex; with whom he
had a very handsome fortune: By her he had nine children, four of whom (a son,
and three daughters) are still living.

In 1709 he was made master of the Theater in Drury Lane; and then, at the
desire of Mr. Barton Booth, wrote his first Tragedy, (Elfrid, or the Fair
Inconstant) which from his first beginning of it he completed in a little more
than a week. -- The following year, 1710, he was master of the Opera House in
the Hay-Market; and then wrote an Opera called Rinaldo, which met with great
success: It was the first which that admirable genius Mr. Handel composed,
after he came to England; (this he dedicated to Queen Anne). -- His genius was
adapted greatly to the business of the stage; and while he held the management,
he conducted both Theaters, entirely to the satisfaction of the public. -- But
in a few months he relinquished it, from some misunderstanding with the then
lord chamberlain; and though he was soon after solicited to take that charge
again upon him (by a person the highest in command) he still declined it.

From that time he bent his thoughts on studies far more solid and desirable to
him; to views of public benefit: For his mind was ardently devoted to the
pursuit of general improvement. But, as one genius seldom is adapted to both
theory and practice; so in the execution of a variety of undertakings, the most
advantageous in themselves, by some mismanagement of those concerned with him,
he failed of the success his labors merited.

As in particular, in an affair he set on foot about the year 1715, and was the
sole discoverer of, for which he had a patent; the making of an Oil, as sweet
as that from Olives, from the Beech-Nuts: But this being an undertaking of a
great extent, he was obliged to work conjointly with other men's assistance,
and materials; whence arose disputes among them, which terminated in the
overthrowing the advantage then arising from it; which otherwise might have
been great and lasting.

This, has occasioned that affair to be misunderstood by many; it therefore may
not be thought improper, here, to set it in a juster light; and this cannot
more exactly be given, than from his own words, called, A fair state of the
Account, published in the year 1716.

'An impartial state of the case, between the patentee, annuitants, and
sharers, in the Beech-Oil-Company.' -- Some part of which is here recited.

'The disappointments of the Beech-Oil-Company this year have made abundance of
sharers peevish; the natural effect of peevishness is clamor, and clamor like
a tide will work itself a passage, where it has no right of flowing; some
gentlemen, misled by false conceptions both of the affair and its direction,
have driven their discontent through a mistaken chanel, and inclined abundance
who are strangers to the truth, to accuse the patentee of faults, he is not
only absolutely free from, but by which he is, of all concerned, the greatest
sufferer.

'But, he is not angry with the angry; he considers they must take things as
they hear them represented; he governs all his actions by this general maxim;
never to be moved at a reproach, unless it be a just one.

'In October 1713 the patentee procured a grant for fourteen years, to him and
his assigns, for the Beech-Oil invention.

'Anno 1714, he made and published proposals, for taking a subscription of
20,000 l. upon the following conditions;

'That every subscriber should receive, by half yearly payments, at Lady Day
and Michaelmas, during the continuance of the patent from Lady Day 1715,
inclusive, an annuity amounting to fifty-pound per cent. for any sum
subscribed, excepting a deduction for the payment of the directors.

'That nine directors should be chosen on midsummer-day, who should receive
complaints upon non-payments of annuities; and in such case, upon refusal, any
five of the nine directors had power to meet and choose a governor from among
themselves, enrolling that choice in chancery, together with the reasons for it.

'That after such choice and enrollment, the patentee should stand absolutely
excluded, the business be carried on, and all the right of the grant be vested
(not as a mortgage, but as a sale without redemption) in the governor so
chosen, for the joint advantage of the annuitants, in proportion to their
several interests.

'As a security for making good the articles, the patentee did, by indenture
enrolled in chancery, assign and make over his patent to trustees, in the
indenture named, for the uses above mentioned.

'In the mean time the first half yearly payments to the annuitants, amounting
to 3750 l. became due, and the company not being yet completed, the patentee
himself discharged it, and has never reckoned that sum to the account between
him and the company; which he might have done by virtue of the articles on
which he gave admission to the sharers.

'For the better explanation of this scheme it will be necessary to observe,
that while the shares were selling, he grew apprehensive that the season would
be past, before the fifty pounds per share they were to furnish by the articles
could be contributed: He therefore gave up voluntarily, and for the general
good, 20,000 l. of his own 25,000 guineas purchase money, as a loan to the
company till the expiration of the patent, after which it was again to be made
good to him, or his assigns; and this money so lent by the patentee, is all the
stock that ever has been hitherto employed by the company.

'But instead of making good the abovementioned conditional covenant, the
board proceeded to unnecessary warmth, and sound themselves involved still more
and more in animosities, and those irregularities which naturally follow
groundless controversy. He would therefore take upon himself the hazard and the
power of the whole affair, accountable however to the board, as to the money
part; and yet would bind himself to pay for three years to come, a profit of
forty shillings per annum upon every share, and then deliver back the business
to the general care, above the reach of future disappointments.

'What reasons the gentlemen might have to refuse so inviting an offer is best
known to themselves; but they absolutely rejected that part of it, which was to
fix the sole power of management in the patentee. Upon which, and many other
provocations afterward, becoming more and more dissatisfied, he thought sit to
demand repayment of five hundred pounds, which he had lent the company; as he
had several other sums before; and not receiving it, but, on the contrary,
being denied so much as an acknowledgment that it was due, withdrew himself
entirely from the board, and left them to their measures.

'Thus at the same time have I offered my defense, and my opinion: By the first
I am sure I shall be acquitted from all imputations; and confirmed in the good
thoughts of the concerned on either side, who will know for the future what
attention they should give to idle reflections, and the falsehood of rumor;
and from the last, I have hopes that a plan may be drawn, which will settle at
once all disputed pretensions, and restore that fair prospect, which the open
advantage of last year's success (indifferent as it was) has demonstrated to be
a view that was no way chimerical. --

'They know how to judge of malicious insinuations to my prejudice, by this one
most scandalous example, which has been given by the endeavors of some to
persuade the out-sharers that I have made an extravagant profit from the losses
of the adventurers. Whereas on the contrary, out of Twenty-five Thousand
Guineas, which was the whole I should have received by the sale of the shares,
I have given up Twenty Thousand Pounds to the use of the company, and to the
annuities afterward; and three thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds more I
paid to the annuitants, at Lady Day 1715, on the company's account; and have
never demanded it again, in consideration of their disappointments the first
year.

'So that it plainly appears, that out of twentyfive thousand guineas, I have
given away in two articles only, twenty-three thousand seven hundred and fifty
pounds for the public advantage. And I can easily prove, that the little
remainder has been short of making good the charges I have been at for their
service; by which means I am not one farthing a gainer by the company,
notwithstanding the clamor and malice of some unthinking adventurers: And for
the truth of all this, I appeal to their own Office-Books, and defy the most
angry among them to deny any article of it. See then what a grateful and
generous encouragement may be expected by men, who would dedicate their labors
to the profit of others.

November the 30th. 1716. A. HILL.'

This, and much more, too tedious to insert, serves to demonstrate that it was
a great misfortune, for a mind so fertile of invention and improvement, to be
embarrassed by a narrow power of fortune; too weak alone to execute such
undertakings.

About the same year he wrote another Tragedy, intiled the Fatal Vision This
play he made a present of to the patentee, and had several fine scenes painted
for it, at his own expense: He indeed gave all his pieces to the stage; never
taking any benefit, or gratuity from the managers, as an author -- 'till his
last piece, Merope, was brought on the stage; when (unhappy gentleman) he was
under the necessity of receiving his profits of the third nights; which 'till
then, his generosity, and spirit, had ever declined.
, or the Fall of Siam (which was acted the same year, in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields)
to which he gave this Motto out of Horace. I not for vulgar admiration write;
To be well read, not much, is my delight.


And to his death he would declare in favor of that choice. -- That year, he
likewise published the two first books of an Epic Poem, called Gideon (founded
on a Hebrew Story) which like its author, and all other authors, had its
enemies; but many more admirers.

But his poetic pieces were not frequent in their appearance. They were the
product of some leisure hours, when he relaxed his thoughts from drier study;
as he took great delight in diving into every useful science, viz. criticism,
history, geography, physic, commerce in general, agriculture, war, and law; but
in particular natural philosophy, wherein he has made many and valuable
discoveries.

Concerning poetry, he says, in his preface to King Henry the Vth, where he
laments the want of taste for Tragedy, 'But in all events I will be easy, who
have no better reason to wish well to poetry, than my love for a mistress I
shall never be married to: For, whenever I grow ambitious, I shall wish to
build higher; and owe my memory to some occasion of more importance than my
writings.'



He had acquired so deep an insight in law, that he has from his arguments and
demonstrations obliged some of the greatest council (formally) under their
hands, to retract their own first-given opinions.

He wrote part of a Tract of War; another upon Agriculture; but they are left
unfinished, with several other pieces.

In his younger days he bought a grant of Sir Robert Montgomery (who had
purchased it of the lords proprietors of Carolina) with whom, etc. he had been
concerned, in a design of settling a new plantation in the South of Carolina,
of a vast tract of land; on which he then designed to pursue the same
intention. -- But being not master of a fortune equal to that scheme, it never
proved of any service to him, though many years since, it has been cultivated
largely. Under the name of Georgia.
.

His person was (in youth) extremely fair, and handsome; his eyes were a dark
blue, both bright and penetrating; brown hair and visage oval; which was
enlivened with a smile, the most agreeable in conversation; where his address
was affably engageing; to which was joined a dignity, which rendered him at
once respected and admired, by those (of either sex) who were acquainted with
him -- He was tall, genteelly made, and not thin. -- His voice was sweet, his
conversation elegant; and capable of entertaining upon various subjects. -- His
disposition was benevolent, beyond the power of the fortune he was blessed
with; the calamities of those he knew (and valued as deserving) affected him
more than his own: He had fortitude of mind sufficient to support with calmness
great misfortune; and from his birth it may be truly said he was obliged to
meet it.

Of himself, he says in his epistle dedicatory to one of his poems, 'I am so
devoted a lover of a private and unbusy life, that I cannot recollect a time
wherein I wished an increase to the little influence I cultivate in the
dignified world, unless when I have felt the deficience of my own power, to
reward some merit that has charmed me:' --



His temper, though by nature warm (when injuries were done him) was as nobly
forgiving; mindful of that great lesson in religion, of returning good for
evil; and he fulfilled it often to the prejudice of his own circumstances. He
was a tender husband, friend, and father; one of the best masters to his
servants, deteiting the too common inhumanity, that treats them almost as if
they were not fellow creatures.

His manner of life was temperate in all respects (which might have promised
greater length of years) late hours excepted; which his indefatigable love of
study drew him into; night being not liable to interruptions like the day.

About the year 1718 he wrote a poem called the Northern-Star, upon the actions
of the Czar Peter the Great; and several years after he was complimented with a
gold medal from the empress Catherine (according to the Czar's desire before
his death) and was to have wrote his life, from papers which were to be sent
him of the Czar's: But the death of the Czarina, quickly after, prevented it.
-- In an advertisement to the reader, in the fifth edition of that poem,
published in 1739, the author says of it. 'Though the design was professed
panegyric, I may with modesty venture to say it was not a very politic,
perhaps, but an honest example of praise without flattery. -- In the verse, I
am afraid there was much to be blamed, as too low; but, I am sure there was
none of that fault in the purpose: The poem having never been hinted, either
before or after the publication, to any person (native or foreigner) who could
be supposed to have interest in, or concern for, its subject.

'In effect, it had for six years or more been forgot by myself -- and my
country, -- when upon the death of the prince it referred to, I was surprised
by the condescension of a compliment from the empress his relict, and immediate
successor; and thereby first became sensible that the poem had, by means of
some foreign translation, reached the eye and regard of that emphatically great
monarch, in justice to whom it was written.'



Soon after he finished six books more of Gideon; which made eight, of the
twelve he purposed writing; but did not live to finish it.

In 1723 he brought his Tragedy called King Henry the Vth, upon the stage in
Drury Lane; which is (as he declares in the preface) a new fabric, yet built on
Shakespeare's foundation.

In 1724, for the advantage of an unhappy gentleman (an old officer in the
army) he wrote a paper in the manner of the Spectators, in conjunction with Mr.
William Bond, etc. entitled the Plain Dealer; which were some time after
published in two volumes octavo. And many of his former writings were
appropriated to such humane uses; both those to which he has prefixed his name,
and several others which he wrote and gave away entirely. But, though the many
imagined authors are not living, their names, and those performances will be
omitted here; yet, in mere justice to the character of Mr. Hill, we mention
this particular.

In 1728, he made a journey into the North of Scotland, where he had been about
two years before, having contracted with the York-Buildings Company, concerning
many woods of great extent in that kingdom, for timber for the uses of the
navy; and many and various were the assertions upon this occasion: Some
thought, and thence reported, that there was not a stick in Scotland could be
capable of answering that purpose; but he demonstrated the contrary: For,
though there was not a great number large enough for masts to ships of the
greatest burden; yet there were millions, fit for all smaller vessels; and
planks and bauks, proper for every sort of building. -- One ship was built
entirely of it; and a report was made, that never any better timber was brought
from any part of the world: But he found many difficulties in this undertaking;
yet had sagacity to overcome them all (as far as his own management extended)
for when the trees were by his order chained together into floats, the ignorant
Highlanders refused to venture themselves on them down the river Spey; till he
first went himself, to make them sensible there was no danger. -- In which
passage however, he found a great obstacle in the rocks, by which that river
seemed impassible; but on these he ordered fires to be made, when by the
lowness of the river they were most exposed; and then had quantities of water
thrown upon them: Which method being repeated with the help of proper tools,
they were broke in pieces and thrown down, which made the passage easy for the
floats.

This affair was carried on to a very good account, till those concerned
thought proper to call off the men and horses from the woods of Abernethy, in
order to employ them in their lead mines in the same country; from which they
hoped to make greater advantage.

The magistrates of Inverness paid him the compliment of making him a present
of the freedom of that place (at an elegant entertainment made by them on that
occasion) a favor likewise offered him at Aberdeen, etc.

After a stay of several months in the Highlands, during which time he visited
the duke and duchess of Gordon, who distinguished him with great civilities, he
went to York, and other places in that country; where his wife then was, with
some relations, for the recovery of her health; but his staying longer there
(on that account) than he intended, had like to have proved of unhappy
consequence; by giving room for some, who imagined (as they wished) that he
would not return, to be guilty of a breach of trust that aimed at the
destruction of great part of what he then was worth; but they were disappointed.

In that retirement in the North, he wrote a poem entitled, The Progress of
Wit, a Caveat for the use of an eminent Writer. It was composed of the
genteelest praise, and keenest allegorical satire; and it gave no small
uneasiness to Mr. Pope: Who had indeed drawn it upon himself, by being the
aggressor in his Dunciad. -- This afterward occasioned a private paper-war
between those writers, in which it is generally thought that Mr. Hill had
greatly the advantage of Mr. Pope. For the particulars, the reader is referred
to a shilling pamphlet lately published by Owen, containing Letters between Mr.
Pope and Mr. Hill, etc.

The progress of wit begins with the eight following lines, wherein the
SNEAKINGLY APPROVES affected Mr. Pope extremely. Tuneful Alexis on the Thames'
fair side,
The Ladies play-thing, and the Muses pride,
With merit popular, with wit polite,
Easy though vain, and elegant though light:
Desiring, and deserving other's praise,
Poorly accepts a fame he never repays:
Unborn to cherish, SNEAKINGLY APPROVES,
And wants the soul to spread the worth he loves.


During their controversy, Mr. Pope seemed to express his repentance, by
denying the offense he had given; thus, in one of his letters, he says, 'That
the letters A. H. were applied to you in the papers I did not know (for I
seldom read them) I heard it only from Mr. Savage Savage was of great use to
Mr. Pope, in helping him to little stories, and idle tales, of many persons
whose names, lives, and writings, had been long since forgot, had not Mr. Pope
mentioned them in his Dunciad: -- This office was too mean for any one but
inconsistent Savage: Who, with a great deal of absurd pride, could submit to
servile offices; and for the vanity of being thought Mr. Pope's intimate, made
no scruple of frequently sacrificing a regard to sincerity or truth. He had
certainly, at one time, considerable influence over that great poet; but an
assuming arrogance at last tired out Mr. Pope's patience.
, as from yourself, and sent my assurances to the contrary: But I don't see how
the annotator on the D. could have rectified that mistake publicly, without
particularizing your name in a book where I thought it too good to be inserted,
etc. A lame come-off.
.'



And in another place he says, 'I should imagine the Dunciad meant you a real
compliment, and so it has been thought by many who have asked to whom that
passage made that oblique panegyric. As to the notes, I am weary of telling a
great truth, which is, that I am not author of them, etc.'



Which paragraph was answered by the following in Mr. Hill's reply. 'As to your
oblique panegyric, I am not under so blind an attachment to the goddess I was
devoted to in the Dunciad, but that I know it was a commendation; though a
dirtier one than I wished for; who am neither fond of some of the company in
which I was listed -- the noble reward, for which I was to become a diver; --
the allegorical muddiness in which I was to try my skill; -- nor the institutor
of the games you were so kind to allow me a share in, etc.'

-- A genteel severe reprimand.

Much about the same time he wrote another poem, called Advice to the Poets; in
praise of worthy poetry, and in censure of the misapplication of poetry in
general. The following lines here quoted, are the motto of it, taken from the
poem. Shame on your jingling, ye soft sons of rhyme,
Tuneful consumers of your reader's time!
Fancy's light dwarfs! whose feather-footed strains,
Dance in wild windings, through a waste of brains:
Yours is the guilt of all, who judging wrong,
Mistake tuned nonsense for the poet's song.


He likewise in this piece, reproves the above named celebrated author, for
descending below his genius; and in speaking of the inspiration of the Muse, he
says, I feel her now. -- The invader fires my breast:
And my soul swells, to suit the heavenly guest.
Hear her, O Pope! -- She sounds the inspired decree,
Thou great Archangel of wit's heaven! for thee!
Let vulgar genii, sour'd by sharp disdain,
Piqu'd and malignant, words low war maintain,
While every meaner art exerts her aim,
Over rival arts, to lift her questioned same;
Let half-soul'd poets still on poets fall,
And teach the willing world to scorn them all.
But, let no Muse, pre-eminent as thine,
Of voice melodious, and of force divine,
Stung by wits, wasps, all rights of rank forego,
And turn, and snarl, and bite, at every foe.
No -- like thy own Ulysses, make no stay:
Shun monsters -- and pursue thy streamy way.


In 1731 he brought his Tragedy of Athelwold upon the stage in Drury Lane;
which, as he says in his preface to it, was written on the same subject as his
Elfrid or the Fair Inconstant, which he there calls, 'An unprun'd wilderness of
fancy, with here and there a flower among the leaves; but without any fruit of
judgment. -- '

He likewise mentions it as a folly, having began and finished Elfrid in a
week; and both the difference of time and judgment are visible in favor of the
last of those performances.

That year he met the greatest shock that affliction ever gave him; in the loss
of one of the most worthy of wives, to whom he had been married above twenty
years.

The following epitaph he wrote, and purposed for a monument which he designed
to erect over her grave. Enough, cold stone! suffice her long-lov'd name;
Words are too weak to pay her virtues claim.
Temples, and tombs, and tongues, shall waste away,
And power's vain pomp, in mouldering dust decay.
But ever mankind a wife more perfect see,
Eternity, O Time! shall bury thee.


He was a man susceptible of love, in its sublimest sense; as may be seen in
that poetical description of that passion, which he has given in his poem
called the Picture of Love; wrote many years ago (from whence the following two
lines are taken) No wild desire can this proud bliss bestow,
Souls must be matched in heaven, though mixed below.


About the year 1735 he was concerned with another gentleman in writing a paper
called the Prompter; all those marked with a B. were his. -- This was meant
greatly for the service of the stage; and many of them have been regarded in
the highest manner. -- But, as there was not only instruction, but reproof, the
bitter, with the sweet, by some could not be relished.

In 1736 having translated from the French of Monsieur de Voltaire, the Tragedy
of Zara, he gave it to be acted for the benefit of Mr. William Bond; and it was
represented first, at the Long-Room in Villars-Street, York-Buildings; where
that poor gentleman performed the part of Lusignan (the old expiring king) a
character he was at that time too well suited to; being, and looking, almost
dead, as in reality he was before the run of it was over. -- Soon after this
play was brought upon the stage in Drury Lane, by Mr. Fleetwood, at the earnest
solicitation of Mr. Theophilus Cibber; the part of Zara was played by Mrs.
Cibber, and was her first attempt in Tragedy; of the performers therein he
makes very handsome mention in the preface. This play he dedicated to his royal
highness the Prince of Wales.

The same year was acted, at the Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, another
Tragedy of his translating from the same French author, called Alzira, which
was likewise dedicated to the Prince. -- His dedications generally wore a
different face from those of other writers; he there most warmly recommends
Monsieur de Voltaire, as worthy of his royal highness's partiality; disclaiming
for himself all expectations of his notice. But he was, notwithstanding,
particularly honored with his approbation.

These plays, if not a litteral translation, have been thought much better, for
their having past his hands; as generously was acknowledged by Monsieur de
Voltaire himself.

In 1737 he published a poem called, The Tears of the Muses; composed of
general satire: in the address to the reader he says (speaking of satire)
'There is, indeed, something so like cruelty in the face of that species of
poetry, that it can only be reconciled to humanity, by the general benevolence
of its purpose; attacking particulars for the public advantage.'



The following year he wrote (in prose) a book called, An Enquiry into the
Merit of Assassination, with a View to the Character of Caesar; and his Designs
on the Roman Republic.

About this time, he in a manner left the world, (though living near so
populous a part of it as London) and settled at Plaistow in Essex; where he
entirely devoted himself to his study, family, and garden; and the
accomplishment of many profitable views; particularly one, in which for years
he had labored through experiments in vain; and when he brought it to
perfection, did not live to reap the benefit of it: The discovery of the art of
making pot-ash like the Russian, which cost this nation, yearly, an immense sum
of money.

In the year 1743 he published The Fanciad, an Heroic Poem; inscribed to his
grace the duke of Marlborough: Who as no name was then prefixed to it, perhaps,
knew not the author by whom he was distinguished in it.

Soon after he wrote another, entitled the Impartial; which he inscribed, in
the same manner, to the lord Carteret (now earl of Granville). In the beginning
of it are the following lines, Burn, sooty slander, burn thy blotted scroll;
Greatness is greatness, spite of faction's soul.
Deep let my soul detest the adhesive pride,
That changing sentiment, unchanges side.


It would be tedious to enumerate the variety of smaller pieces he at different
times was author of.

His notions of the deity were boundlessly extensive; and the few lines here
quoted from his Poem upon faith, published in 1746, must give the best idea of
his sentiments upon that most elevated of all subjects. What then must be
believed? -- Believe God kind,
To fear were to offend him. Fill thy heart
With his felt laws; and act the good he loves.
Reverence his power. Judge him but by his works:
Know him but in his mercies. Reverence too
The most mistaken schemes that mean his praise.
Reverence his priests. -- for every priest is his, --
Who finds him in his conscience. --


This year he published his Art of Acting, a Poem, deriving Rules from a new
Principle, for touching the Passions in a natural Manner, etc. Which was
dedicated to the Earl of Chesterfield.

Having for many years been in a manner forgetful of the eight Books he had
finished of his Epic Poem called Gideon, -- in 1749 he re-perused that work,
and published three of the Books; to which he gave the name of Gideon, or the
Patriot. -- They were inscribed to the late lord Bolingbroke; to whom he
accounts as follows, for the alterations he had made since the first
publication of two Books. Erring, where thousands erred, in youth's hot smart,
Propulsive prejudice had warped his heart:
Bold, and too loud he sighed, for high distress,
Fond of the fallen, nor formed to serve success;
Partial to woes, had weighed their cause too light,
Wept over misfortune, -- and mis-nam'd it right:
Anguish, attracting, turned attachment wrong,
And pity's note mis-tun'd his devious song.


It Is much lamented by many who are admirers of that species of poetry, that
the author did not finish it.

The same year (after a length of different applications, for several seasons,
at both Theaters without success) his Tragedy, called Merope, was brought upon
the stage in Drury Lane by Mr. Garrick; to whom, as well as to another
gentleman he likewise highly both admired and esteemed, he was greatly obliged;
and his own words (here borrowed) will show how just a sense he had of these
obligations. -- They begin the preface to the play. 'If there can be a pride
that ranks with virtues, it is that we feel from friendships with the worthy.
Mr. Mallet, therefore, must forgive me, that I boast the honor he has done my
Merope -- I have so long been a retreater from the world, that one of the best
spirits in it told me lately, I had made myself an alien there. I must confess,
I owe so many obligations to its ornaments of most distinguished genius, that I
must have looked upon it as a great unhappiness to have made choice of
solitude, could I have judged society in general, by a respect so due to these
adorners of it.'



And in relation to this Tragedy he says, after very justly censuring Monsieur
de Voltaire, for representing in the preface to his Merope the English as
incapable of Tragedy,

'To such provoking stimulations I have owed inducement to retouch, for Mr.
Voltaire's use, the characters in his high boasted Merope; and I have done it
on a plan as near his own as I could bring it with a safe conscience; that is
to say, without distaste to English audiences.

This he likewise dedicated to lord Bolingbroke; and was the last he ever
wrote. -- There is a melancholy thread of fatal prophecy in the beginning of
it; of his own approaching dissolution. Covered in fortune's shade, I rest
reclined;
My griefs all silent; and my joys resigned.
With patient eye life's evening gloom survey:
Nor shake the out-hast'ning sands; nor bid 'em stay.
Yet, while from life my setting prospects fly,
Fain would my mind's weak offspring shun to die.
Fain would their hope some light through time explore;
The name's kind pasport -- When the man's no more.


From about the time he was soliciting the bringing on this play, an illness
seized him; from the tormenting pains of which he had scarce an hour's
intermission; and after making trial of all he thought could be of service to
him in medicine; he was desirous to try his native air of London (as that of
Plaistow was too moist a one) but he was then past all recovery, and wasted
almost to a skeleton, from some internal cause, that had produced a general
decay (and was believed to have been an inflammation in the kidneys; which his
intense attachment to his studies might probably lay the foundation of. -- When
in town, he had the comfort of being honored with the visits of the most
worthy and esteemed among his friends; but he was not permitted many weeks to
taste that blessing.

The same humane and generous Mr. Mallet, who had before aided his Merope,
about this time was making inter^st for its being played again, for the
advantage of its author: -- His royal highness the prince of Wales had the
great goodness to command it; and Mr. Hill just lived to express his grateful
acknowledgments (to those about him) upon hearing of it: -- But on the day
before it was to be represented he died, in the very minute of the earthquake,
February the eighth, 1749, which he seemed sensible of, though then deprived of
utterance. Had he lived two days longer, he had been sixty-five years old. --
He endured a twelvemonth's torment of the body with a calmness that confessed a
superiority of soul! He was interred in the same grave with her the most dear
to him when living, in the great cloister of Westminister-Abbey, near the lord
Godolphin's tomb.

It may be truly said of Mr. Hill, he was a great and general writer; and had
he been possessed of the estate he was entitled to, his liberality had been no
less extensive than his genius. But often do we see misfortune's clouds obscure
the brightest sunshine.

Besides his works which here have been enumerated, there are several other;
particularly two poems, entitled the Creation, and the Judgment-Day; which were
published many years ago. -- Another in blank verse he published in the time of
his retreat into Essex; it was called, Cleon to Lycidas, a Time Piece; the date
not marked by the printer.

Some years before his death, he talked of making a collection of his works for
publication; but postponed it for the finishing some pieces, which he did not
live to effect.

Since his death, four volumes of them have been published by subscription, for
his family. He left one Tragedy, never yet acted; which was wrote originally
about 1737, and entitled Caesar; but since, he has named it the Roman Revenge:
-- But as the author was avowedly a great admirer of Caesar's character, not in
the light he is generally understood (that of a tyrant) but in one much more
favorable, he was advised by several of the first distinction, both in rank
and judgment, to make such alterations in it as should adapt it more to the
general opinion; and upon that advice he in a manner new wrote the play: But as
most first opinions are not easily eradicated, it has been never able to make a
public trial of the success; which many of the greatest understanding have
pronounced it highly worthy of. -- The late lord Bolingbroke (in a letter wrote
to the author) has called it one of the noblest drama's, that our language, or
any age can boast.

These few little speeches are taken from the part of Caesar. It Is the great
mind's expected pain, Calphurnia,
To labor for the thankless. -- He who seeks
Reward in ruling, makes ambition guilt;
And living for himself disclaims mankind.
And thus speaking to Mark Anthony; If man were placed above the reach of
insult,
To pardon were no virtue. -- Think, warm Anthony,
What mercy is -- It Is, daring to be wronged,
Yet unprovoked by pride, persist, in pity.
This again to Calphurnia. No matter. -- Virtue triumphs by neglect:
Vice, while it darkens, lends but foil to brightness:
And juster times, removing slander's veil,
Wronged merit after death is helped to live.


Mr. LEWIS THEOBALD.
THIS gentleman was born at Sittingburn in Kent, of which place his father, Mr.
Peter Theobald, was an eminent attorney. His grammatical learning he received
chiefly under the revd. Mr. Ellis, at Isleworth in Middlesex, and afterward
applied himself to the study and practice of the law: but finding that study
too tedious and irksome for his genius, he quitted it for the profession of
poetry. He engaged in a paper called the Censor, published in Mist's Weekly
Journal; and by delivering his opinion with two little reserve, concerning some
eminent wits, he exposed himself to their lashes, and resentment. Upon the
publication of Pope's Homer, he praised it in the most extravagant terms of
admiration; but afterward thought proper to retract his opinion, for reasons
we cannot guess, and abused the very performance he had before hyperbollically
praised.

Mr. Pope at first made Mr. Theobald the hero of his Dunciad, but afterward,
for reasons best known to himself, he thought proper to disrobe him of that
dignity, and bestow it upon another: with what propriety we shall not take upon
us to determine, but refer the reader to Mr. Cibber's two letters to Mr. Pope.
He was made hero of the poem, the annotator informs us, because no better was
to be had. In the first book of the Dunciad, Mr. Theobald, or Tibbald, as he is
there called, is thus stigmatized, -- Dullness her image full expressed,
But chief in Tibbald's monster-breeding breast;
Sees Gods with Demons in strange league engage,
And Earth, and heaven, and hell her battles wage.
She eyed the bard, where supperless he sat,
And pined unconscious of his rising fate;
Studious he sat, with all his books around,
Sinking from thought to thought, a vast profound!
Plunged for his sense, but found no bottom there;
Then writ, and flounder'd on, in mere despair.
He rolled his eyes, that witnessed huge dismay,
Where yet unpawn'd much learned lumber lay.


He describes Mr. Theobald as making the following address to Dullness. -- For
thee
Old puns restore, lost blunders nicely seek,
And crucify poor Shakespeare once a-week.
For thee I dim these eyes, and stuff this head,
With all such reading as was never read;
For thee, supplying in the worst of days,
Notes to dull books, and prologues to dull plays;
For thee explain a thing till all men doubt it,
And write about it, goddess, and about it;
So spins the silkworm small its slender store,
And labors till it clouds itself all over.


In the year 1726 Mr. Theobald published a piece in octavo, called Shakespeare
Restored: Of this it is said, he was so vain as to aver, in one of Mist's
Journals, June the 8th, 'That to expose any errors in it was impracticable;'
and in another, April the 27th, 'That whatever care might for the future be
taken, either by Mr. Pope, or any other assistants, he would give above
five-hundred emendations, that would escape them all.'

During two whole years, while Mr. Pope was preparing his edition, he published
advertisements, requesting assistance, and promising satisfaction to any who
would contribute to its greater perfection. But this restorer, who was at that
time soliciting fa^ours of him, by letters, did wholly conceal that he had any
such design till after its publication; which he owned in the Daily Journal of
November 26, 1728: and then an outery was made, that Mr. Pope had joined with
the bookseller to raise an extravagant subscription; in which he had no share,
of which he had no knowledge, and against which he had publicly advertised in
his own proposals for Homer.

Mr. Theobald was not only thus obnoxious to the resentment of Pope, but we
find him waging war with Mr. Dennis, who treated him with more roughness,
though with less satire. Mr. Theobald in the Censor, Vol. II. No. XXXIII. calls
Mr. Dennis by the name of Furius. 'The modern Furius (says he) is to be looked
upon as more the object of pity, than that which he daily provokes, laughter,
and contempt. Did we really know how much this poor man suffers by being
contradicted, or which is the same thing in effect, by hearing another praised;
we should in compassion sometimes attend to him with a silent nod, and let him
go away with the triumphs of his ill nature. Poor Furius, where any of his
cotemporaries are spoken well of, quitting the ground of the present dispute,
steps back a thousand years, to call in the succor of the ancients. His very
panegyric is spiteful, and he uses it for the same reason as some ladies do
their commendations of a dead beauty, who never would have had their good word;
but that a living one happened to be mentioned in their company. His applause
is not the tribute of his heart, but the sacrifice of his revenge.'

Mr. Dennis in resentment of this representation made of him, in his remarks on
Pope's Homer, page 9. 10. thus mentions him. 'There is a notorious idiot, one
HIGHT WHACHUM, who from an Under-spur-leather to the law, is become an Under
strapper to the playhouse, who has lately burlesqued the Metamorphoses of
Ovid, by a vile translation, etc. This fellow is concerned in an impertinent
paper called the Censor.' Such was the language of Mr. Dennis, when enflamed by
contradiction.

In the year 1729 Mr. Theobald introduced upon the stage a Tragedy called the
Double Falsehood; the greatest part of which he asserted was Shakespeare's. Mr.
Pope insinuated to the town, that it was all, or certainly the greatest part
written, not by Shakespeare, but Theobald himself, and quotes this line, None
but thyself can be thy parallel.


Which he calls a mavelous line of Theobald, 'unless (says he) the play
called the Double Falsehood be (as he would have it thought) Shakespeare's; but
whether this line is his or not, he proves Shakespeare to have written as bad.'
The arguments which Mr. Theobald uses to prove the play to be Shakespeare's are
indeed far from satisfactory; -- First, that the MS. was above sixty years old;
-- Secondly, that once Mr. Betterton had it, or he has heard so; -- Thirdly,
that some body told him the author gave it to a bastard daughter of his; -- But
fourthly, and above all, that he has a great mind that every thing that is good
in our tongue should be Shakespeare's.

This Double Falsehood was vindicated by Mr. Theobald, who was attacked again
in the art of sinking in poetry. Here Mr. Theobald endeavors to prove false
criticisms, want of understanding Shakespeare's manner, and perverse cavelling
in Mr. Pope: He justifies himself and the great dramatic poet, and essays to
prove the Tragedy in question to be in reality Shakespeare's, and not unwor^hy
of him. We cannot set this controversy in a clearer light, than by transcribing
a letter subjoined to the Double Falsehood. DEAR SIR,
You desire to know, why in the general attack which Mr. Pope has lately made
against writers living and dead, he has so often had a fling of satire at me. I
should be very willing to plead guilty to his indictment, and think as meanly
of myself as he can possibly do, were his quarrel altogether upon a sair, or
unbiassed nature. But he is angry at the man; and as Juvenal says -- Facit
indignatio versum. He has been pleased to reflect on me in a few quotations
from a play, which I had lately the good fortune to usher into the world; I am
there concerned in reputation to enter upon my defense. There are three
passages in his Art of Sinking in Poetry, which he endeavors to bring into
disgrace from the Double Falsehood.

One of these passages alleged by our critical examiner is of that stamp,
which is certain to include me in the class of profound writers. The place so
offensive for its cloudiness, is, -- The obscureness of her birth
Cannot eclipse the luster of her eyes,
Which make her all one light.


I must own, I think, there needs no great Oedipus to solve the difficulty of
this passage. Nothing has ever been more common, than for lovers to compare
their mistresses eyes to suns and stars. And what does Henriquez say more here
than this, 'That though his mistress be obscure by her birth; yet her eyes are
so refulgent, they set her above that disadvantage, and make her all over
brightness.' I remember another rapture in Shakespeare, upon a painter's drawing
a fine lady's picture, where the thought seems to me every whit as magnified
and dark at the first glance, -- But her eyes --
How could he see to do them! having done one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his,
And leave itself unfinished. --


This passage is taken from the Merchant of Venice, which will appear the more
beautiful, the more it is considered.

Another passage which Mr. Pope is pleased to be merry with, is in a speech of
Violante's; Wax! render up thy trust. --

This, in his English is open the letter; and he facetiously mingles it with
some pompous instances, most I believe of his own framing; which in plain terms
signify no more than, See, whose there; snuff the candle; uncork the bottle;
chip the bread; to show how ridiculous actions of no consequence are, when too
much exalted in the diction. This he brings under a figure, which he calls the
Buskin, or Stately. But we'll examine circumstances fairly, and then we shall
see which is most ridiculous; the phrase, or our sagacious censurer.

Violante is newly debauched by Henriquez, on his solemn promise of marrying
her: She thinks he is returning to his father's court, as he told her, for a
short time; and expects no letter from him. His servant who brings the letter,
contradicts his master's going for court; and tells her he is gone some two
months progress another way, upon a change of purpose. She who knew what
concessions she had made to him, declares herself by starts, under the greatest
agonies; and immediately upon the servant leaving her, expresses an equal
impatience, and fear of the contents of this unexpected letter. To hearts like
mine, suspense is misery.
Wax! render up thy trust, -- Be the contents
Prosperous, or fatal, they are all my due.


Now Mr Pope shows us his profound judgment in dramatical passions; thinks a
lady in her circumstances cannot without absurdity open a letter that seems to
her as surprise, with any more preparation than the most unconcerned person
alive should a common letter by the penny-post. I am aware Mr. Pope may reply,
his cavil was not against the action itself of addressing to the wax, but of
exalting that action in the terms. In this point I may fairly shelter myself
under the judgment of a man, whose character in poetry will vie with any rival
this age shall produce.

Mr. Dryden in his Essay on Dramatic Poetry, tells us. 'That when from the most
elevated thoughts of verse, we pass to those which are most mean, and which are
common with the lowest household conversation; yet still there is a choice to be
made of the best words, and the least vulgar (provided they be apt) to express
such thoughts. Our language, says he, is noble, full, and significant; and I
know not, why he who is master of it, may not cloth ordinary things in it, as
decently as the Latin, if we use the same diligence in the choice of words.'

I come now to the last quotation, which in our examiner's handling, falls
under this predicament of being a thought astonishingly out of the way of
common sense. None but himself can be his parallel.

This, he hints, may seem borrowed from the thought of that master of a show in
Smithfield, who wrote in large letters over the picture of his Elephant. This
is the greatest Elephant in the world except himself. I like the pleasantry of
the banter, but have no great doubt of getting clear from the severity of it.
The lines in the play stand thus. Is there a treachery like this in baseness,
Recorded any where? It is the deepest;
None but itself can be its parallel.


I am not a little surprised, to find that our exaaminer at last is dwindled
into a word-catcher. Literally speaking, indeed, I agree with Mr. Pope, that
nothing can be the parallel to itself; but allowing a little for the liberty of
expression, does it not plainly imply, that it is a treachery which stands
single for the nature of its baseness, and has not its parallel on record; and
that nothing but a treachery equal to it in baseness can parallel it? If this
were such nonsense as Pope would willingly have it, it would be a very bad plea
for me to allege, as the truth is, that the line is in Shakespeare's old copy;
for I might have suppressed it. But I hope it is defensible; at least if
examples can keep it in countenance. There is a piece of nonsense of the same
kind in the Amphytrio of Plautus: Sofia having surveyed Mercury from top to
toe, finds him such an exact resemblance of himself, in dress, shape, and
features, that he cries out, Tam consimil' est, atque ego.

That is, he is as like me, as I am to myself. Now I humbly conceive, in
strictness of expression a man can no more be like himself, than a thing its
own parallel. But to confine myself to Shakespeare. I doubt not but I can
produce some similar passages from him, which literally examined, are stark
nonsense; and yet taken with a candid latitude have never appeared ridiculous.
Mr. Pope would scarce allow one man to say to another. 'Compare and weigh your
mistress with your mistress; and I grant she is a very fair woman; but compare
her with some other woman that I could name, and the case will be very much
altered.' Yet the very substance of this, is said by Shakespeare, in Romeo and
Juliet; and Mr. Pope has not degraded it as any absurdity, or unworthy of the
author. Pho! pho! you saw her fair, none else being by;
HERSELF poised with HERSELF in either eye.
But, etc.


Or, what shall we say of the three following quotations. ROMEO and JULIET. --
Oh! so light a foot
Will never wear out the everlasting flint.
WINTER'S TALE. -- For Cogitation
Resides not in the man that does not think.
HAMLET. -- Try what repentance can, what can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent.


Who does not see at once, the heaviest foot that ever trod cannot wear out the
everlasting flint? or that he who does not think has no thoughts in him? or
that repentance can avail nothing when a man has not repentance? yet let these
passages appear, with a casting weight of allowance, and their absurdity will
not be so extravagant, as when examined by the literal touchstone. --

Yours, etc. LEWIS THEOBALD.




By perusing the above, the reader will be enabled to discern whether Mr. Pope
has wantonly ridiculed the passages in question; or whether Mr. Theobald has,
from a superstitious zeal for the memory of Shakespeare, defended absurdities,
and palliated extravagant blunders.

The ingenious Mr. Dodd, who has lately favored the public with a judicious
collection of the beauties of Shakespeare, has quoted a beautiful stroke of Mr.
Theobald's, in his Double Falsehood, upon music. -- Strike up, my masters;
But touch the strings with a religious softness;
Teach sounds to languish through the night's dull ear,
'Till Melancholy start from her lazy couch,
And carelessness grow concert to attention.
ACT I. SCENE III.

A gentleman of great judgment happening to commend these lines to Mr.
Theobald, he assured him he wrote them himself, and only them in the whole play.

Mr. Theobald, besides his edition of all Shakespeare's plays, in which he
corrected, with great pains and ingenuity, many faults which had crept into
that great poet's writings, is the author of the following dramatic pieces. I.
The Persian Princess, or the Royal Villain; a Tragedy, acted at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane, printed in the year 1715. The author observes in
his preface, this play was written and acted before he was full nineteen years
old. II. The Perfidious Brother; a Tragedy acted at the Theater in Little
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, 1716. This play is written on the model of Otway's
Orphan; the scene is in a private family in Brussels. III. Pan and Syrinx; an
Opera of one act, performed on the Theater in Little Lincoln's Inn-Fields,
1717. IV. Decius and Paulina, a Masque; to which is added Musical
Entertainments, as performed at the Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, in the
Dramatic Opera of Circe. V. Electra, a Tragedy; translated from the Greek of
Sophocles, with notes, printed in the year 1714, dedicated to Joseph Addison,
Esquire VI. Oedipus King of Thebes; a Tragedy translated from Sophocles, with
notes, translated in the year 1715, dedicated to the earl of Rockingham. VII.
Plutus, or the World's Idol; a Comedy translated from the Greek of
Aristophanes, with notes, printed in the year 1715. The author has to this
Translation prefixed a Discourse, containing some Account of Aristophanes, and
his two Comedies of Plutus and the Clouds. VIII. The Clouds, a Comedy;
translated from Aristophanes, with notes, printed in the year 1715. IX. The
Rape of Proserpine; a Farce acted at the Theater Royal in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,
1727. X. The Fatal Secret; a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal in
Covent Garden, 1725. XI. The Vocal Parts of an Entertainment, called Apollo and
Daphne, or the Burgo-Master Tricked; performed at the Theater in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, 1726. XII. Double Falsehood; which we have already
mentioned.


Mr. Theobald's other Works are chiefly these. The Gentleman's Library,
containing Rules for Conduct in all Parts of Life, in 1zmo. 1722. The first
Book of Homer's Odyssey translated, with notes, 8vo. 1716. The Cave of Poverty,
written in imitation of Shakespeare. Pindaric Ode on the Union, 1707. A Poem
sacred to the Memory of Queen Anne, Folio 1714. Translations from Ovid's
Metamorphoses. Lives of Antiochus, and Berenice, from the French, 1717.


The Revd. Dr. SAMUEL CROXALL,
THE celebrated author of the Fair Circassian, was son of the revd. Mr. Samuel
Croxall, rector of Hanworth, Middlesex, and vicar of Walton upon Thames in
Surry, in the last of which places our author was born. He received his early
education at Eton school, and from thence was admitted to St. John's College,
Cambridge. Probably while he was at the university, he became enamoured of Mrs.
Anna Maria Mordaunt, who first inspired his breast with love, and to whom he
dedicates the poem of the Circassian, for which he has been so much
distinguished. This dedication is indeed the characteristic of a youth in love,
but then it likewise proves him altogether unacquainted with the world, and
with that easiness of address which distinguishes a gentleman. A recluse
scholar may be passionately in love, but he discovers it by strains of bombast,
and forced allusions, of which this dedication is a very lively instance.

'The language of the Fair Circassian, says he, like yours, was natural poetry;
her voice music, and the excellent coloring and formation of her features,
painting; but still, like yours, drawn by the inimitable pencil of nature, life
itself; a pattern for the greatest master, but copying after none; I will not
say angels are not cast in the same mould.' And again in another place,
'Pardon, O lovely deity, the presumption of this address, and favor my weak
endeavors. If my confession of your divine power is any where too faint,
believe it not to proceed from a want of due respect, but of a capacity more
than human. Whoever thinks of you can no longer be himself; and if he could,
ought to be something above man to celebrate the accomplishment of a goddess.
To you I owe my creation as a lover, and in the beams of your beauty only I
live, move, and exist. If there should be a suspension of your charms, I should
fall to nothing. But it seems to be out of your power to deprive us of their
kind influence: wherever you shine they fill all our hearts, and you are
charming out of necessity, as the author of nature is good.' We have quoted
enough to show the enthusiasm, or rather phrenzy, of this address, which is
written in such a manner as if it were intended for a burlesque on the False
Sublime, as the speeches of James I. are upon pedantry.

Mr. Croxall, who was intended for holy orders, and, probably, when he
published the Circassian, had really entered into them, was cautious lest he
should be known to be the author of this piece, since many divines have
esteemed the Song of Solomon, from which it is taken, as an inspired poem,
emblematic of the Messiah and the Church. Our author was of another opinion,
and with him almost all sensible men join, in believing that it is no more than
a beautiful poem, composed by that Eastern monarch, upon some favorite lady in
his Seraglio. He artfully introduces it with a preface, in which he informs us,
that it was the composition of a young gentleman, his pupil, lately deceased,
executed by him, while he was influenced by that violent passion with which
Mrs. Mordaunt inspired him. He then endeavors to ascertain who this Eastern
beauty was, who had charms to inflame the heart of the royal poet. He is of
opinion it could not be Pharaoh's daughter, as has been commonly conjectured,
because the bride in the Canticles is characterised as a private person, a
shepherdess, one that kept a vineyard, and was ill used by her mother's
children, all which will agree very well with somebody else, but cannot,
without great straining, be drawn to sit the Egyptian Princess. He then
proceeds, 'seeing we have so good reason to conclude that it was not Pharaoh's
daughter, we will next endeavor to show who she was: and here we are destitute
of all manner of light, but what is afforded us by that little Arabian
manuscript, mentioned in the Philosophical Transactions of Amsterdam, 1558,
said to be found in a marble chest among the ruins of Palmyra, and presented to
the university of Leyden by Dr. Hermanus Hoffman. The contents of which are
something in the nature of Memoirs of the Court of Solomon; giving a sufficient
account of the chief offices and posts in his household; of the several funds of
the royal revenue; of the distinct apartments of his palace there; of the
different Seraglios, being fifty two in number in that one city. Then there is
an account given of the Sultanas; their manner of treatment and living; their
birth and country, with some touches of their personal endowments, how long
they continued in favor, and what the result was of the King's fondness for
each of them. Among these, there is particular mention made of a slave of more
exceeding beauty than had ever been known before; at whose appearance the
charms of all the rest vanished like stars before the morning sun; that the
King cleaved to her with the strongest affection, and was not seen out of the
Seraglio, where she was kept, for about a month. That she was taken captive,
together with her mother, out of a vineyard, on the Coast of Circassia, by a
Corsair of Hiram King of Tire, and brought to Jerusalem. It is said, she was
placed in the ninth Seraglio, to the east of Palmyra, which, in the Hebrew
tongue, is called Tadmor; which, without further particulars, are sufficient to
convince us that this was the charming person, sung with so much rapture by the
Royal poet, and in the recital of whose amor he seems so transported. For she
speaks of herself as one that kept a vineyard, and her mother's introducing her
in one of the gardens of pleasure (as it seems she did at her first presenting
her to the King) is here distinctly mentioned. The manuscript further takes
notice, that she was called Saphira, from the heavenly blue of her eyes.'

Notwithstanding the caution with which Mr. Croxall published the Fair
Circassian, yet it was some years after known to be his. The success it met
with, which was not indeed above its desert, was perhaps too much for vanity
(of which authors are seldom entirely divested) to resist, and he might be
betrayed into a confession, from that powerful principle, of what otherwise
would have remained concealed.

Some years after it was published, Mr. Cragg, one of the ministers of the city
of Edinburgh, gave the world a small volume of spiritual poems, in one of which
he takes occasion to complain of the prostitution of genius, and that few poets
have ever turned their thoughts toward religious subjects; and mentions the
author of the Circassian with great indignation, for having prostituted his
Muse to the purposes of lewdness, in converting the Song of Solomon (a work, as
he thought it, of sacred inspiration) into an amorous dialogue between a King
and his mistress. His words are, Curss'd be he that the Circassian wrote,
Perish his fame, contempt be all his lot,
Who basely durst in execrable strains,
Turn holy mysteries into impious scenes.


The revd. gentleman met with some remonstrances from his friends, for
indulging so splenetic a temper, when he was writing in the cause of religion,
as to wish any man accursed. Of this censure he was not insensible; in the next
edition of his poems, he softened the sarcasm, by declaring, in a note, that he
had no enmity to the author's person, and that when he wished him accursed, he
meant not the man, but the author, which are two very distinct considerations;
for an author may be accursed, that is, damned to same, while the man may be in
as fair a way to happiness as any body; but, continues he, I should not have
expected such profanation from a clergyman.

The Circassian, however, is a beautiful poem, the numbers are generally
smooth, and there is a tender delicacy in the dialogue, though greatly inferior
to the noble original.

Mr. Croxall had not long quitted the university, ever he was instituted to the
living of Hampton in Middlesex; and afterward to the united parishes of St.
Mary Somerset, and St. Mary Mounthaw, in the city of London, both which he held
'till his death. He was also chancellor, prebend, and canon residentiary and
portionist of the church of Hereford. Toward the latter end of the reign of
Queen Anne he published two original Cantos, in imitation of Spenser's Fairy
Queen, which were meant as a satire on the earl of Oxford's administration. In
the year 1715 he addressed a poem to the duke of Argyle, upon his obtaining a
Victory over the Rebels, and the same year published The Vision, a poem,
addressed to the earl of Halifax. He was concerned, with many others, in the
translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses, of which the following were performed by
him: The Story of Nisus and Scylla, from the sixth Book. The Labyrinth, and
Daedalus and Icarus, from the eighth Book. Part of the Fable of Cyparissus from
the tenth Book. Most part of the eleventh Book, and The Funeral of Memnon, from
the thirteenth Book.


He likewise performed an entire Translation of Aesop's Fables.

Subjoined to the Fair Circassian are several Poems addressed to Sylvia; Naked
Truth, from the second Book of Ovid's Fastorum; Heathen Priestcraft, from the
first Book of Ovid's Fastorum; A Midsummer's Wish; and an Ode on Florinda, seen
while she was Bathing. He is also author of a curious work, in one Volume
Octavo, entitled Scripture Politics: being a view of the original constitution,
and subsequent revolutions in the government of that people, out of whom the
Savior of the World was to arise: As it is contained in the Bible.

In consequence of his strong attachment to the Whig interest, he was made
archdeacon of Salop 1732, and chaplain in ordinary to his present Majesty.

As late as the year 1750, Dr. Croxall published a poem called The Royal
Manual, in the preface to which he endeavors to show, that it was composed by
Mr. Andrew Marvel, and found amongst his MSS. but the proprietor declares, that
it was written by Dr. Croxall himself. This was the last of his performances,
for he died the year following, in a pretty advanced age. His abilities, as a
poet, we cannot better display, than by the specimen we are about to quote. On
FLORINDA, Seen while she was Bathing.
'TWAS summer, and the clear resplendent moon
Shedding far over the plains her full-orb'd light,
Among the lesser stars distinctly shone,
Despoiling of its gloom the scanty night,
When, walking forth, a lonely path I took
Nigh the fair border of a purling brook.
Sweet and resreshing was the midnight air,
Whose gentle motions hushed the silent grove;
Silent, unless when pricked with wakeful care
Philomel warbled out her tale of love:
While blooming flowers, which in the meadow, grew,
Over all the place their blended odours threw.
Just by, the limpid river's crystal wave,
Its eddies gilt with Phoebe's silver ray,
Still as it flowed a glittering luster gave
With glancing gleams that emulate the day;
Yet oh! not half so bright as those that rise
Where young Florinda bends her smiling eyes.
Whatever pleasing views my senses meet,
Her intermingled charms improve the theme;
The warbling birds, the flowers that breath so sweet,
And the soft surface of the dimpled stream,
Resembling in the nymph some lovely part,
With pleasures more exalted seize my heart.
Rapt in these thoughts I negligently roved,
Imagined transports all my soul employ,
When the delightful voice of her I loved
Sent through the Shades a sound of real joy.
Confused it came, with giggling laughter mixed,
And echo from the banks replied betwixt.
Inspired with hope, upborn with light desire,
To the dear place my ready footsteps tend,
Quick, as when kindling trails of active fire
Up to their native firmament ascend:
There shrouded in the briers unseen I stood,
And through the leaves surveyed the neighboring stood.
Florinda, with two sister nymphs, undrest,
Within the channel of the cooly tide,
By bathing sought to sooth her virgin breast,
Nor could the night her dazzling beauties hide;
Her seatures, glowing with eternal bloom,
Darted, like Hesper, through the dusky gloom.
Her hair bound backward in a spiral wreath
Her upper beauties to my sight betrayed;
The happy stream concealing those beneath,
Around her waste with circling waters played;
Who, while the fair one on his bosom sported,
Her dainty limbs with liquid kisses courted.
A thousand Cupids with their infant arms
Swam padling in the current here and there;
Some, with smiles innocent, remarked the charms
Of the regardless undesigning fair;
Some, with their little Eben bows full-bended,
And levelled shafts, the naked girl desended.
Her eyes, her lips, her breasts exactly round,
Of lilly hue, unnumber'd arrows sent;
Which to my heart an casy passage sound,
Thrilled in my bones, and through my-marrow went:
Some bubb^ing upward through the water came,
Prepared by fancy to augment my siame.
Ah love! how ill I bore thy pleasing pain!
For while the tempting scene so near I viewed,
A fierce impatience throb'd in every vein,
Discretion fled and reason lay subdued;
My blood beat high, and with its trembling made
A strange commotion in the rustling shade.
Fear seized the timorous Naiads, all aghast
Their boding spirits at the omen sink,
Their eyes they wildly on each other cast,
And meditate to gain the farther brink;
When in I plunged, resolving to assuage
In the cool gulf love's importuning rage.
Ah, stay Florinda (so I meant to speak)
Let not from love the loveliest object fly!
But ere I spoke, a loud combining squeak
From shrilling voices pier^'d the distant sky:
When straight, as each was their peculiar care,
The immortal powers to bring relief prepare.
A golden cloud descended from above,
Like that which whilom hung on Ida's brow,
Where Juno, Pallas, and the queen of love,
As then to Paris, were conspicuous now.
Each goddess seized, her fav^rite charge, and threw
Around her limbs a robe of azure hue.
But Venus, who with pity saw my flame
Kindled by her own Amoret so bright,
Approved in private what she seemed to blame,
And blessed me with a vision of delight:
Careless she dropped Florinda's veil aside,
That nothing might her choicest beauties hide.
I saw Elysium and the milky way
Fair-opening to the shades beneath her breast;
In Venus' lap the struggling wanton lay,
And, while she strove to hide, revealed the rest.
A mole, embrown'd with no unseemly grace,
Grew near, embellishing the sacred place.
So pleased I viewed, as one fatigued with heat,
Who near at hand beholds a shady bower,
Joyful, in hope amidst the kind retreat
To shun the day star in his noontide hour;
Or as when parched with droughty thirst he spies
A mossy grot whence purest waters rise.
So I Florinda -- but beheld in vain:
Like Tantalus, who in the realms below
Sees blushing fruits, which to increase his pain,
When he attempts to eat, his taste forego.
O Venus! give me more, or let me drink
Of Lethe's fountain, and forget to think.


The Revd. Mr. CHRISTOPHER PIT,
THE celebrated translater of Virgil, was born in the year 1699. He received
his ea^ly education in the college near Winchester; and in 1719 was removed
from thence to new college in Oxford. When he had studied there four years, he
was preferred to the living of Pimperne in Dorsetshire, by his friend and
relation, Mr. George Pit; which he held during the remaining part of his life.
While he was at the university, he possessed the affection and esteem of all
who knew him; and was particularly distinguished by that great poet Dr. Young,
who so much admired the early displ^^^s of his genius, that with an engaging
familiarity he used to call him his son.

Amongst the first of Mr. Pitt's performances which saw the light, were a
panegyrie on lord Stanhope, and a poem on the Plague of Marseilles: But he had
two large Folio's of MS. Poems, very fairly written ou^, while he was a
schoolboy, which at the time of election were delivered to the examiners. One
of these volumes contained an entire translation of Lucan; and the other
consisted of Miscellaneous pieces. Mr. Pitt's Lucan has never been published;
perhaps from the consideration of its being the production of his early life,
or from a consciousness of its not equalling the translation of that author by
Row, who executed this task in the meridian of his genius. Several of his
other pieces were published afterward, in his volume of Miscellaneous Poems.

The ingenious writer of the Student has obliged the world by inserting in
that work several original pieces by Mr. Pit; whose name is prefixed to them.

Next to his beautiful Translation of Virgil, Mr. Pit gained the greatest
reputation by rendering into English, Vida's Art of Poetry, which he has
executed with the strictest attention to the author's sense, with the utmost
elegance of versification, and without suffering the noble spirit of the
original to be lost in his translation.

This amiable poet died in the year 1748, without leaving one enemy behind him.
On his tombstone were engraved these words, " He lived innocent, and died
beloved."

Mr. Auditor Benson, who in a pamphlet of his writing, has treated Dryden's
translation of Virgil with great contempt, was yet charmed with that by Mr.
Pit, and found in it some beauties, of which he was fond even to a degree of
enthusiasim. Alliteration is one of those beauties Mr. Benson so much admired,
and in praise of which he has a long dissertation in his letters on translated
verse. He once took an opportunity, in conversation with Mr. Pit, to magnify
that beauty, and to compliment him upon it. Mr. Pit thought this article far
less considerable than Mr. Benson did; but says he, 'since you are so fond of
alliteration, the following couplet upon Cardinal Woolsey will not displease
you, ' Begot by butchers, but by bishops bred.
' How high his honor holds his haughty head.
Benson was no doubt charmed to hear his favorite grace in poetry so
beautifully exemplified, which it certainly is, without any affectation or
stiffness.

Waller thought this a beauty; and Dryden was very fond of it. Some late
writers, under the notion of imitating these two great versifiers in this
point, run into downright affectation, and are g^ilty of the most improper and
ridiculous expressions, p^ovided there be but an alliteration. It is very
remarkable, that an affectation of this beauty is ridiculed by Shakespeare, in
Love's Labor Lost, Act II. where the Pedant Holofernes says, I will something
affect the letter, for it argues facility. -- The praiseful princess pierced,
and pricked. --

Mr. Upton, in his letter concerning Spencer, observes, that alliteration is
ridiculed too in Chaucer, in a passage which every reader does not understand.

The Ploughman's Tale is written, in some measure, in imitation of Pierce's
Ploughman's Visions; and runs chiefly upon some one letter, or at least many
stanza's have this affected iteration, as A full stern striefe is stirred now,
--
For some be great grown on ground.


When the Parson therefore in his order comes to tell his tale, which reflected
on the clergy, he says, -- I am a southern man,
I cannot jest, rum, ram, ruff, by letter,
And God wot, rhyme hold I but little better.


Ever since the publication of Mr. Pitt's version of the Aeneid, the learned
world has been divided concerning the just proportion of merit, which ought to
be ascribed to it. Some have made no scruple in defiance of the authority of a
name, to prefer it to Dryden's, both in exactness, as to his author's sense,
and even in the charms of poetry. This perhaps, will be best discovered by
producing a few shining passages of the Aeneid, translated by these two great
masters.

In biographical writing, the first and most essential principal is candor,
which no reverence for the m^mory of the dead, nor affection for the virtues of
the living should violate. The impartiality which we have endeavored to
observe through this work, obliges us to declare, that so far as our judgment
may be trusted, the latter poet has done most justice to Virgil; that he shines
in Pit with a luster, which Dryden wanted not power, but leisure to bestow;
and a reader, from Pitt's version, will both acquire a more intimate knowledge
of Virgil's meaning, and a more exalted idea of his abilities. -- Let not this
detract from the high representations we have endeavored in some other places
to make of Dryden. When he undertook Virgil, he was stooping with age,
oppressed with wants, and conflicting with infirmities. In this situation, it
was no wonder that much of his vigor was lost; and we ought rather to admire
the amazing force of genius, which was so little depressed under all these
calamities, than industriously to dwell on his imperfections.

Mr. Spence in one of his chapters on Allegory, in his Polymetis, has
endeavored to show, how very little our poets have understood the allegories
of the ancients, even in their translations of them; and has instanced Mr.
Dryden's translation of the Aeneid, as he thought him one of our most
celebrated poets. The mistakes are very numerous, and some of them
unaccountably gross. Upon this, says Mr. Warton, "I was desirous to examine Mr.
Pitt's translation of the same passages; and was surprised to find near fifty
instances which Mr. Spence has given of Dryden's mistakes of that kind, when
Mr. Pit had not sallen into above three or four." Mr. Warton then produces
some instances, which we shall not here transcribe, as it will be more
entertaining to our readers to have a few of the most shining passages
compared, in which there is the highest room for rising to a blaze of poetry.

There are few strokes in the whole Aeneid, which have been more admired than
Virgil's description of the Lake of Avernus, Book VI. Spelunca alta suit,
vastoque immanis hiatu,
Scrupea, tuta lacu nigro, nemorumque tenebris;
Quam super haud ullae poterant impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis; talis sese halitus atris,
Faucibus effundens supera ad convexa ferebat:
Unde locum Graii dixerunt nomine Aornon.
Quatuor hic primum nigrantes terga juvencos
Constituit, frontique invergit vina sacerdos;
Et, summas carpens media inter cornua setas,
Igmbus imponit sacris libamina prima,
Voce vocans Hecaten, caeloque ereboque potentem.
DRYDEN. Deep was the cave; and downward as it went,
From the wide mouth, a rocky wide descent;
And here the access a gloomy grove defends;
And there the innavigable lake extends.
Over whose unhappy waters, void of light,
No bird presumes to steer his airy flight;
Such deadly stenches from the depth arise,
And steaming sulphur that infects the skies.
From hence the Grecian bards their legends snake,
And give the name Aornus to the lake.
Four sable bullocks in the yoke untaught,
For sacrifice, the pious hero brought.
The priestess pours the wine betwixt their horns:
Then euts the curling hair, that first oblation burns,
Invoking Hecate hither to repair;
(A powerful name in hell and upper air.)
PIT. Deep, deep, a cavern lies, devoid of light,
All rough with rocks, and horrible to sight;
Its dreadful mouth is fenced with sable floods,
And the brown horrors of surrounding woods.
From its black jaws such baleful vapors rise,
Blot the bright day, and blast the golden skies,
That not a bird can stretch her pinions there,
Through the thick poisons, and encumbered air,
But struck by death, her flagging pinions cease;
And hence Aornus was it called by Greece.
Hither the priestess, four black heifers led,
Between their horns the hallowed ^^ine she shed;
From their high front the topmost hairs she drew,
And in the flames the first oblations threw.
Then calls on potent Hecate, renowned
In Heaven above, and Erebus profound.


The next instance we shall produce, in which, as in the former, Mr. Pit has
greatly exceeded Dryden, is taken from Virgil's description of Elysium, which
says Dr. Trap is so charming, that it is almost Elysium to read it. His demum
exactis, perfecto munere divae,
Devenere locos laetos, and amoena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas.
Largior hic campos ether and lumine vestit
Purpureo; solemque suum, sua fidera norunt.
Pars in gramineis exercent membra palaestris,
Contendunt ludo, and fulva luctantur arena:
Pars pedibus plaudunt choreas, and carmina dicunt.
Necnon Threicius longa cum vest sacerdos
Obloquitur numeris septem discrimina vocum:
Jamque eadem digitis, jam pectine pulsat eburno.
PIT. These rites complete, they reach the flowery plains,
The verdant groves, where endless pleasure reigns.
Here glowing Ether shoots a purple ray,
And over the region pours a double day.
From sky to sky the unwearied splendor runs,
And nobler planets roll round brighter suns.
Some wrestle on the sands, and some in play
And games heroic pass the hours away.
Those raise the song divine, and these advance
In measured steps to form the solemn dance.
There Orpheus graceful in his long attire,
In seven divisions strikes the sounding lyre;
Across the chords the quivering quill he fiings,
Or with his flying fingers sweeps the strings.
DRYDEN. These holy rites performed, they took their way,
Where long extended plains of pleasure lay.
The verdant fields with those of heaven may vie;
With Ether vested, and a purple sky:
The blissful seats of happy souls below;
Stars of their own, and their own suns they know.
Their airy limbs in sports they exercise,
And on the green contend the wrestlers prize.
Some in heroic verse divinely sing,
Others in artful measures lead the ring.
The Thracian bard surrounded by the rest,
There stands conspicuous in his flowing vest.
His flying fingers, and harmonious quill,
Strike seven distinguished notes, and seven at once they fill.


In the celebrated description of the swiftness of Camilla in the VIIth Aeneid,
which Virgil has labored with so much industry, Dryden is more equal to Pit
than in the foregoing instances, though we think even in this he falls short of
him. Illa vel intactae segetis per summa volaret
Gramina, nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas:
Vel mare per medium, fluctu suspensa tumenti
Ferret iter; celeres nec tingeret aequore plantas.
DRYDEN. -- The fierce virago fought, --
Outstrip'd the winds, in speed upon the plain,
Flew over the fields, nor hurt the bearded grain:
She swept the seas, and as she skim'd along,
Her flying feet, unbath'd, on billows hung.
PIT. She led the rapid race, and left behind,
The flagging floods, and pinions of the wind;
Lightly she flies along the level plain,
Nor hurts the tender grass, nor bends the golden grain;
Or over the swelling surge suspended sweeps,
And smoothly skims unbath'd along the deeps.


We shall produce one passage of a very different kind from the former, that
the reader may have the pleasure of making the comparison. This is the
celebrated simile in the XIth Book, when the siery eagerness of Turnus panting
for the battle, is resembled to that of a Steed; which is perhaps one of the
most picturesque beauties in the whole Aeneid. Qualis, ubi abruptis sugit
praesepia vinc'lis,
Tandem liber equus, campoque potitus aperto;
Aut^^le in pastus armentaque tendit equarum,
Aut assuetus aquae perfundi flumine noto
Emicat; arrectisque fremit cervicibus alte
Luxurians, luduntque jubae per colla, per armos.
DRYDEN. Freed from his keepers, thus with broken reins,
The wanton courser prances over the plains:
Or in the pride of youth, o'erleaps the mounds,
And snuffs the females in forbidden grounds.
Or seeks his wat'ring in the well-known flood,
To quench his thirst, and cool his fiery blood:
He swims luxuriant in the liquid plain;
And over his shoulders flows his waving main.
He neighs, he snorts, he bears his head on high;
Before his ample chest, the frothy waters fly.
PIT. So the gay pampered steed with loosened reins,
Breaks from the stall, and pours along the plains;
With large smooth strokes he rushes to the slood,
Bathes his bright sides, and cools his fiery blood;
Neighs as he flies, and tossing high his head,
Snuffs the fair females in the distant mead;
At every motion over his neck reclined,
Plays his redandaut main, and dances in the wind.


From the above specimens, our readers may determine for themselves to whose
translation they would give the preference. Critics, like historians, should
divest themselves of prejudice: they should never be misguided by the authority
of a great name, nor yield that tribute to prescription, which is only due to
merit. Mr. Pit, no doubt, had many advantages above Dryden in this arduous
province: As he was later in the attempt, he had consequently the version of
Dryden to improve upon. He saw the errors of that great poet, and avoided them;
he discovered his beauties, and improved upon them; and as he was not impelled
by necessity, he had leisure to revise, correct, and finish his excellent work.

The Revd. and ingenious Mr. Joseph Warton has given to the world a complete
edition of Virgil's works made English. The Aeneid by Mr. Pit: The Eclogues,
Georgics, and notes on the whole, by himself; with some new observations by Mr.
Holdsworth, Mr. Spence, and others. This is the compleatest English dress, in
which Virgil ever appeared. It is enriched with a dissertation on the VIth Book
of the Aeneid, by Warburton. On the Shield of Aeneas, by Mr. William Whitehead.
On the Character of Japis, by the late Dr. Atterbury bishop of Rochester; and
three Essays on Pastoral, Didactic, and Epic Poetry, by Mr. Warton.

Mr. HAMMOND.
THIS Gentleman, known to the world by the Love Elegies, which some years after
his death were published by the Earl of Chesterfield, was the son of a Turkey
merchant, in the city of London. We cannot ascertain where he received his
education; but it does not appear that he was at any of the universities. Mr.
Hammond was early preferred to a place about the person of the late Prince of
Wales, which he held till an unfortunate accident stripped him of his reason, or
at least so affected his imagination, that his senses were greatly disordered.
The unhappy cause of his calamity was a passion he entertained for one Miss
Dashwood, which proved unsuccessful. Upon this occasion it was that he wrote
his Love Elegies, which have been much celebrated for their tenderness. The
lady either could not return his passion with a recip^ocal fondness, or
entertained too ambitious views to settle her affections upon him, which he
himself in some of his Elegies seems to hint; for he frequently mentions her
passion for gold and splendor, and justly treats it as very unworthy a fair
one's bosom. The chief beauty of these Elegies certainly consists in their
being written by a man who intimately felt the subject; for they are more the
language of the heart than of the head. They have warmth, but little poetry,
and Mr. Hammond seems to have been one of those poets, who are made so by love,
not by nature.

Mr. Hammond died in the year 1743, in the thirty-first year of his age, at
Stow, the seat of his kind patron, the lord Cobham, who honored him with a
particular intimacy. The editor of Mr. Hammond's Elegies observes, that he
composed them before he was 21 years of age; a period, says he, when fancy and
imagination commonly riot at the expense of judgment and correctness. He was
sincere in his love, as in his friendship; he wrote to his mistress, as he
spoke to his friends, nothing but the true genuine sentiments of his heart.
Tibullus seems to have been the model our author judiciously preferred to Ovid;
the former writing directly from the heart to the heart, the latter too often
yielding and addressing himself to the imagination.

As a specimen of Mr. Hammond's turn for Elegiac Poetry, we shall quote his
third Elegy, in which he upbraids and threatens the avarice of Neaera, and
resolves to quit her. Should Jove descend in floods of liquid ore,
And golden torrents stream from every part,
That craving bosom still would heave for more,
Not all the Gods could satisfy thy heart.
But may thy folly, which can thus disdain
My honest love, the mighty wrong repay,
May midnight-fire involve thy sordid gain,
And on the shining heaps of rapine prey.
May all the youths, like me, by love deceived,
Not quench the ruin, but applaud the doom,
And when thou dy'st, may not one heart be grieved:
May not one tear bedew the lonely tomb.
But the deserving, tender, generous maid,
Whose only care is her poor lover's mind,
Though ruthless age may bid her beauty fade,
In every friend to love, a friend shall find.
And when the lamp of life will burn no more,
When dead, she seems as in a gentle sleep,
The pitying neighbor shall her loss deplore;
And round the bier assembled lovers weep.
With flowery garlands, each revolving year
Shall strew the grave, where truth and softness rest,
Then home returning drop the pious tear,
And bid the turff lie easy on her breast.


Mr. JOHN BANKS.
THIS poet was the son of Mr. John Banks of Sunning in Berkshire, in which
place he was born in 1709. His father dying while our author was very young,
the care of his education devolved upon an uncle in law, who placed him at a
private school, under the tuition of one Mr. Belpene, an Anabaptist. This
schoolmaster, so far from encouraging young Banks to make a great progress in
classical learning, exerted his influence with his relations to have him taken
from school, and represented him as incapable of receiving much erudition. This
conduct in Mr. Belpene proceeded from an early jealousy imbibed against this
young man, who, so far from being dull, as the schoolmaster represented him,
possessed extraordinary parts, of which he gave very early proofs.

Mr. Belpene was perhaps afraid, that as soon as Mr. Banks should finish his
education, he would be preferred to him as minister to the congregation of
Anabaptists, which place he enjoyed, independent of his school. The
remonstrances of Mr. Belpene prevailed with Mr. Banks's uncle, who took him
from school, and put him apprentice to a Weaver at Reading. Before the
expiration of the apprenticeship, Mr. Banks had the misfortune to break his
arm, and by that accident was disqualified from pursuing the employment to
which he was bred. How early Mr. Banks began to write we cannot determine, but
probably the first sallies of his wit were directed against this schoolmaster,
by whom he was injuriously treated, and by whose unwarrantable jealousy his
education, in some measure, was ruined. Our author, by the accident already
mentioned, being rendered unfit to obtain a livelihood, by any mechanical
employment, was in a situation deplorable enough. His uncle was either unable,
or unwilling to assist him, or, perhaps, as the relation between them was only
collateral, he had not a sufficient degree of tenderness for him, to make any
efforts in his favor. In this perplexity of our young poet's affairs, ten
pounds were left him by a relation, which he very oeconomically improved to the
best advantage. He came to London, and purchasing a parcel of old books, he set
up a stall in Spital-Fields.

Much about this time Stephen Duck, who had wrote a poem called The Thresher,
reaped very great advantages from it, and was caressed by persons in power,
who, in imitation of the Royal patroness, heaped favors upon him, perhaps more
on account of the extraordinary regard Queen Caroline had shown him, than any
opinion of his merit. Mr. Banks considered that the success of Mr. Duck was
certainly owing to the peculiarity of his circumstances, and that the novelty
of a thresher writing verses, was the genuine cause of his being taken notice
of, and not any intrinsic excellence in the verses themselves. This reflection
inspired him with a resolution of making an effort of the same kind; but as
curiosrty was no more to be excited by novelty, the attempt was without
success. He wrote, in imitation of The Thresher, The Weaver's Miscellany, which
failed producing the intended effect, and, it is said, never was reckoned by Mr.
Banks himself as any way worthy of particular distinction. His business of
selling books upon a stall becoming disagreeable to him, as it demanded a
constant and uncomfortable attendance, he quitted that way of life, and was
received into the shop of one Mr. Montague a bookbinder, and bookseller, whom
he served some time as a journeyman. During the time he lived with Mr.
Montague, he employed his leisure hours in composing several poems, which were
now swelled to such a number, that he might solicit a subscription for them
with a good grace. He had taken care to improve his acquaintance, and as he had
a power of distinguishing his company, he found his interest higher in the
world than he had imagined. He addressed a poem to Mr. Pope, which he
transmitted to that gentleman, with a copy of his proposals enclosed. Mr. Pope
answered his letter, and the civilities contained in it, by subscribing for two
setts of his poems, and it is said he wrote to Mr. Banks the following
compliment, ' May this put money in your purse:
' For, friend, believe me, I Have seen worse.'


The publication of these poems, while they, no doubt, enhanced his interest,
added likewise something to his reputation; and quitting his employment at Mr.
Montague's, he made an effort to live by writing only. He engaged in a large
work in folio, entitled, The Life of Christ, which was very acceptable to the
public, and was executed with much piety and precision.

Mr. Banks's next prose work, of any considerable length, was A Critical Review
of the Life of Oliver Cromwell. We have already taken notice that he received
his education among the Anabaptists, and consequently was attached to those
principles, and a favourer of that kind of constitution which Cromwell, in the
first period of his power, meant to establish. Of the many Lives of this great
man, with which the biography of this nation has been augmented, perhaps not
one is written with a true dispassionate candor. Men are divided in their
sentiments concerning the measures which, at that critical Era, were pursued
by contending factions. The writers, who have undertaken to review those
unhappy times, have rather struggled to defend a party, to which they may have
been swayed by education or interest, than, by stripping themselves of all
partiality, to dive to the bottom of contentions in search of truth. The heats
of the Civil War produced such animosities, that the fervor which then
prevailed, communicated itself to p^sterity, and, though at the distance of a
hundred years, has not yet subsided. It will be no wonder then if Mr. Banks's
Review is not sound altogether impartial. He has, in many cases, very
successfully defended Cromwell; he has yielded his conduct, in others, to the
just censure of the world. But were a Whig and a Tory to read this book, the
former would pronounce him a champion for liberty, and the latter would declare
him a subverter of truth, an enemy to monarchy, and a friend to that chaos
which Oliver in^roduced.

Mr. Banks, by his early principles, was, no doubt, biassed to the Whig
interest, and, perhaps, it may be true, that in tracing the actions of
Cromwell, he may have dwelt with a kind of increasing pleasure on the bright
side of his character, and but slightly hinted at those facts on which the
other party fasten, when they mean to traduce him as a pa^ricide and an
usurper. But supposing the allegation to be true, Mr. Banks, in this
particular, has only discovered the common failing of humanity: prejudice and
partiality being blemishes from which the mind of man, perhaps, can never be
entirely purged.

Toward the latter end of Mr. Banks's life, he was employed in writing two
weekly newspapers, the Old England, and the Westminster Journals. Those papers
treated chiefly on the politics of the times, and the trade and navigation of
England. They were carried on by our author, without offense to any party, with
an honest regard to the public interest, and in the same kind of spirit, that
works of that sort generally are. These papers are yet continued by other hands.

Mr. Banks had from nature very considerable abilities, and his poems
deservedly hold the second rank. They are printed in two volumes 8vo. Besides
the poems contained in these volumes, there are several other poetical pieces
of his scattered in newspapers, and other periodical works to which he was an
occasional contributer. He had the talent of relating a tale humorously in
verse, and his graver poems have both sorce of thinking, and elegance of
numbers to recommend them.

Toward the spring of the year 1751 Mr. Banks, who had long been in a very
indifferent state of health, visibly declined. His disorder was of a nervous
sort, which he bore with great patience, and even with a cheerful resignation.
This spring proved fatal to him; he died on the 19th of April at his house at
Islington, where he had lived several years in easy circumstances, by the
produce of his pen, without leaving one enemy behind him.

Mr. Banks was a man of real good nature, of an easy benevolent disposition,
and his friends ever esteemed him as a most agreeable companion. He had none of
the petulance, which too frequentl renders men of genius unacceptable to their
acquaintance. He was of so composed a temper, that he was seldom known to be in
a passion, and he wore a perpetual cheerfulness in his countenance. He was
rather bashful, than forward; his address did not qualify him for gay company,
and though he poss^ssed a very extensive knowledge of things, yet, as he had
not much grace of delivery, or elegance of manner, he could not make so good a
figure in conversation, as many persons of less knowledge, with a happier
appearance. Of all authors Mr. Banks was the farthest removed from envy or
malevolence. As he could not bear the least whisper of detraction, so he was
never heard to express uneasiness at the growing reputation of another; nor was
he ever engaged in literary contests. We shall conclude this article in the
words of lord Clarendon. 'He that lives such a life, need be less anxious at
how short warning it is taken from him See lord Clarendon's character of the
lord Falkland.
.'

Mrs. LAETITIA PILKINGTON.
THIS unfortunate poetess, the circumstances of whose life, written by herself,
have lately entertained the public, was born in the year 1712. She was the
daughter of Dr. Van I ewen, a gentleman of Dutch extraction; who settled in
Dublin. Her mother was descended of an ancient and honorable family, who have
frequently intermarried with the nobility.

Mrs. Pilkington, from her earliest infancy, had a st ong disposition to
letters, and particularly to poetry. All her leisure hours were dedicated to
the muses; from a reader she quickly became a writer, and, as Mr. Pope
expresses it, ' She lisp'd in numbers, for the numbers came.'


Her performances were considered as extraordinary for her years, and drew upon
her the admiration of many, who found more pleasure in her conversation, than
that of girls generally affords. In consequence of a poetical genius, and an
engaging sprightliness peculiar to her, she had many wooers, some of whom
seriously addressed her, while others meant no more than the common gallantries
of young people. After the usual ceremony of a courtship, she became the wife
of Mr. Matthew Pilkington, a gentleman in holy orders, and well known in the
poetical world by his volume of Miscellanies, revised by dean Swift. As we have
few materials for Mrs. Pilkington's life, beside those furnished by herself in
her Memoirs published in 1749, our readers must depend upon her veracity for
some facts which we may be obliged to mention, upon her sole authority.

Our poetess, says she, had not been long married, ever Mr. Pilkington became
jealous, not of her person, but her understanding. She was applauded by dean
Swift, and many other persons of taste; every compliment that was paid her,
gave a mortal stab to his peace. Behold the difference between the lover and
the husband! When Mr. Pilkington courted her, he was not more enamoured of her
person, than her poetry, he showed her verses to every body in the enthusiasm
of admiration; but now he was become a husband, it was a kind of treason for a
wife to pretend to literary accomplishments.

It is certainly true, that when a woman happens to have more understanding
than her husband, she should be very industrious to conceal it; but it is
likewise true, that the natural vanity of the sex is difficult to check, and
the vanity of a poet still more difficult: wit in a female mind can no more
cease to sparkle, than she who possesses it, can cease to speak. Mr. Pilkington
began to view her with scornful, yet with jealous eyes, and in this situation,
nothing but mis^ry was likely to be their lot. While these jealousies
subsisted, Mr. Pilkington, contrary to the advice of his friends, went into
England, in order to serve as chaplain to alderman Barber during his mayoralty
of the city of London.

While he remained in London, and having the strange humor of loving his wife
best at a distance, he wrote her a very kind letter, in which he informed her,
that her verses were like herself, full of elegance and beauty An extravagant
compliment; for Mrs. Pilkington was far from being a beauty.
; that Mr. Pope and others, to whom he had shown them, longed to see the
writer, and that he heartily wished her in London. This letter set her heart on
flame. London has very attractive charms to most young people, and it cannot be
much wondered at if Mrs. Pilkington should take the only opportunity she was
ever likely to have, of gratifying her curiosity: which however proved fatal to
her; for though we cannot find, that during this visit to London, her conduct
was the least reproachable, yet, upon her return to Ireland; she underwent a
violent persecution of tongues. They who envied her abilities, fastened now
upon her morals; they were industrious to trace the motives of her going to
London; her behavior while she was there; and insinuated suspicions against
her chastity. These detracters were chiefly of her own sex, who supplied by the
bitterest malice what they wanted in power.

Not long after this an accident happened, which threw Mrs. Pilkington's
aff^irs into the utmost confusion. Her father was stabbed, as she has related,
by an accident, but many people in Dublin believe, by his own wife, though some
say, by his own hand. Upon this melancholy occasion, Mrs. Pilkington has given
an account of her father, which places her in a very amiable light. She
discovered for him the most filial tenderness; she watched ^ound his bed, and
seems to have been the only relation then about him, who deserved his blessing.
From the death of her father her sufferings begin, and the subsequent part of
her life is a continued series of misfortunes.

Mr. Pilkington having now no expectation of a fortune by her, threw off all
reserve in his behavior to her. While Mrs. Pilkington was in the country for
her health, his dislike of her seems to have increased, and, perhaps, he
resolved to get rid of his wife at any rate: nor was he long waiting for an
occasion of parting with her. The story of their separation may be found at
large in her Memoirs. The substance is, that she was so indiscreet as to permit
a gentleman to be found in her bedchamber at an unseasonable hour; for which
she makes this apology. 'Lovers of learning I am sure will pardon me, as I
solemnly declare, it was the attractive charms of a new book, which the
gentleman would not lend me, but consented to stay till I read it through, that
was the sole motive of my detaining him.' This indeed is a poor evasion; and as
Mrs. Pilkington has said no more in favor of her innocence, they must have
great charity indeed with whom she can stand exculpated.

While the gentleman was with her, the servants let in twelve men at the
kitchen window, who, though they might, as she avers, have opened the chamber
door, chose rather to break it to pieces, and took both her and the gentleman
prisoners. Her husband now told her, that she must turn out of doors; and
taking hold of her hand, made a present of it to the gentleman, who could not
in honor refuse to take her, especially as his own liberty was to be procured
upon no other terms. It being then two o'clock in the morning, and not knowing
where to steer, she went home with her gallant: but she sincerely assures us,
that neither of them entertained a thought of any thing like love, but sat like
statues 'till break of day.

The gentleman who was found with her, was obliged to fly, leaving a letter and
five guineas enclosed in it for her. She then took a lodging in some obscure
street, where she was persecuted by infamous women, who were panders to men of
fortune.

In the mean time Mr. Pilkington carried on a vigorous prosecution against her
in the Spiritual Court; during which, as she says, he solemnly declared, he
would allow her a maintenance, if she never gave him any opposition: but no
sooner had he obtained a s^paration, than he retracted every word he had said
on that subject. Upon this she was advised to lodge an appeal, and as every one
whom he consulted, assured him he would be cast, he made a proposal of giving
her a small annuity, and thirty pounds Of which, she says, she received only
1^d.
in money; which, in regard to her children, she chose to accept, rather than
ruin their father. She was with child at the time of her separatior, and when
her labor came on, the woman where she lodged insisted upon doubling her rent:
whereupon she was obliged to write petitionary letters, which were not always
successful.

Having passed the pains and peril of childbirth, she begged of Mr. Pilkington
to send her some money to carry her to England; who, in hopes of getting rid of
her, sent her nine pounds. She was the more desirous to leave Ireland, as she
found her character sinking every day with the public. When she was on board
the yacht, a gentleman of figure in the gay world took an opportunity of making
love to her, which she rejected with some indignation. 'Had I (said she)
accepted the offers he made me, poverty had never approached me. I dined with
him at Parkgate, and I hope virtue will be rewarded; for though I had but five
guineas in the world to carry me to London, I yet possessed chastity enough to
refase fifty for a night's lodging, and that too from a handsome well-bred man.
I shall scarcely ever forget his words to me, as they seemed almost prophetic.'
"Well, madam, said he, you do not know London; you will be undone there." "Why,
sir, said I, I hope you don't imagine I will go into a bad course of life?"
"No, madam, said he, but I think you will sit in your chamber and starve;"
which, upon my word. I have been pretty near doing; and but that the Almighty
raised me one worthy friend, good old Mr. Cibber, to whose humanity I am
indebted, under God, both for liberty and life, I had been quite lost.'

When Mrs. Pilkington arrived in London, her conduct was the reverse of what
prudence would have dictated. She wanted to get into favor with the great,
and, for that purpose, took a lodging in St. James's street, at a guinea a
week; upon no other prospect of living, than what might arise from some poems
she intended to publish by subscription. In this place she attracted the notice
of the company frequenting White's Chocolate-House; and her story, by means of
Mr. Cibber, was made known to persons of the first distinction, who, upon his
recommendation, were kind to her.

Her acquaintance with Mr. Cibber began by a present she made him of The Trial
of Constancy, a poem of hers, which Mr. D^dsley published. Mr. Cibber, upon
this, visited her, and, ever after, with the most unwearied zeal, promoted her
interest. The reader cannot expect that we should swell this volume by a minute
relation of all the incidents which happened to her, while she continued a
poetical mendicant. She has not, without pride, related all the little tattle
which passed between her and persons of distinction, who, through the abundance
of their idleness, thought proper to trifle an hour with her.

Her virtue seems now to have been in a declining state; at least, her
behavior was such, that a man must have extraordinary faith, who can think her
innocent. She has told us, in the second volume of her Memoirs, that she
received from a noble person a present of fifty pounds. This, she says, was the
ordeal, or fiery trial; youth, beauty, nobility of birth, attacking at once the
most desolate person in the world. However, we find her soon after this thrown
into great distress, and making various applications to persons of distinction
for subscriptions to her poems. Such as favored her by subscribing, she had
repaid with most lavish encomiums, and those that withheld that proof of their
bounty, she has sacrificed other resentment, by exhibiting them in the most
hideous light her imagination could form.

From the general account of her characters, this observation results, That
such as she has stigmatized for want of charity, ought rather to be censured
for want of decency. There might be many reasons, why a person benevolent in
his nature, might yet refuse to subseribe to her; but, in general, such as
refused, did it (as she says) in a rude manner, and she was more piqued at
their deficiency in complaisance to her, than their want of generosity.
Complaisance is easily shown; it may be done without expense; it often procures
admirers, and can never make an enemy. On the other hand, benevolence itself,
accompanied with a bad grace, may lay us under obligations, but can never
command our affection. It is said of King Charles I. that he bestowed his
bounty with so bad a grace, that he disobliged more by giving, than his son by
refusing; and we have heard of a gentleman of great parts, who went to Newgate
with a greater satisfaction, as the judge who committed him accompanied the
sentence with an apology and a compliment, than he received from his releasment
by another, who, in extending the King's mercy to him, allayed the Royal
clemency by severe invectives against the gentleman's conduct.

We must avoid entering into a detail of the many addresses, disappointments,
and encouragements, which she met with in her attendance upon the great: her
characters are naturally, sometimes justly, and often strikingly, exhibited.
The incidents of her life while she remained in London were not very important,
though she has related them with all the advantage they can admit of. They are
such as commonly happen to poets in distress, though it does not often fall
out, that the insolence of wealth meets with such a bold return as this lady
has given it. There is a spirit of keenness, and freedom runs through her book,
she spares no man because he is great by his station, or famous by his
abilities. Some knowledge of the world may be gained from reading her Memoirs;
the d^fferent humors of mankind she has shown to the life, and whatever was
ridiculous in the characters she met with, is exposed in very lively terms.

The next scene which opens in Mrs. Pilkington's l^fe, is the ^rison of the
Marshalsea. The horrors and misenes of this jail she has pathetically
described, in such a manner as should affect the heart ^f every rigid creditor.
In favor of her sellow-prisoners, she wrote a very moving memorial, which, we
are told, excited the legislative power to grant an Act of Grace for them.
After our poetess had remained nine weeks in this prison, the was at last
released by the goodness of Mr. Cibber, from whose representation of her
distress, no less than sixteen dukes contributed a guinea apiece toward her
enlargement. When this news was brought her, she fainted away with excess of
joy. Some time after she had tasted liberty, she began to be weary of that
continued attendance upon the great; and therefore was resolved, if ever she
was again favored with a competent sum, to turn it into trade, and quit the
precarious life of a poetical mendicant. Mr. Cibber had five guineas in reserve
for her, which, with ten more she received from the duke of Marlborough,
enabled her to take a shop in St. James's Street, which she filled with
pamphlets and prints, as being a business better suited to her taste and
abilities, than any other. Her adventures, while she remained a shopkeeper, are
not extremely important. She has neglected to inform us how long she continued
behind the counter, but has told us, however, that by the liberality of her
friends, and the bounty of her subscribers, she was set above want, and that
the autumn of her days was like to be spent in peace and serenity.

But whatever were her prospects, she lived not long to enjoy the comforts of
competence, for on the 29th of August, 1750, a few years after the publication
of her second volume, she died at Dublin, in the thirty ninth year of her age.

Considered as a writer, she holds no mean rank. She was the author of The
Turkish Court, or The London Apprentice, acted at the theater in Caple-street,
Dublin, 1748, but never printed. This piece was poorly performed, otherwise it
promised to have given great satisfaction. The first act of her tragedy of the
Roman Father, is no ill specimen of her talents that way, and throughout her
Memoirs there are scattered many beautiful little pieces, written with a true
spirit of poetry, though under all the disadvantages that wit can suffer. Her
memory seems to have been amazingly great, of which her being able to repeat
almost all Shakespeare is an astonishing instance.

One of the prettiest of her poetical performances, is the following Address to
the reverend Dr. Hales, with whom she became acquainted at the house of captain
Mead, near Hampton Court. To the Revd. Dr. HALES.
Hail, holy sage! whose comprehensive mind,
Not to this narrow spot of earth confined,
Through numerous worlds can nature's laws explore,
Where none but Newton ever trod before;
And, guided by philosophy divine,
See through his works the Almighty Maker shine:
Whether you trace him through you rolling spheres,
Where, crowned with boundless glory, he appears;
Or in the orient sun's resplendent rays,
His setting luster, or his noontide blaze,
New wonders still thy curious search attend,
Begun on earth, in highest Heaven to end.
O! while thou do those God-like works pursue,
What thanks, from human-kind to thee are due!
Whose error, doubt, and darkness, you remove,
And charm down knowledge from her throne above.
Nature to thee her choicest secrets yields,
Unlocks her springs, and opens all her fields;
Shows the rich treasure that her breast contains,
In azure fountains, or enameled plains;
Each healing stream, each plant of virtuous use,
To thee their medicinal powers produce.
Pining disease and anguish wing their flight,
And rosy health renews us to delight.
When you, with art, the animal dissect,
And, with the microsopic aid, inspect,
Where, from the heart, unnumbered rivers glide,
And faithful back return their purple tide;
How fine the mechanism, by thee displayed!
How wonderful is every creature made!
Vessels, too small for sight, the fluids strain,
Concoct, digest, asiimilate, sustain;
In deep attention, and surprise, we gaze,
And to life's author, raptured, pour out praise.
What beauties do thou open to the sight,
Untwisting all the golden threads of light!
Each parent color tracing to its source,
Distinct they live, obedient to thy sorce!
Naught from thy penetration is concealed,
And light, himself, shines to thy soul revealed.
So when the sacred writings you display,
And on the mental eye shed purer day;
In radiant colors truth arrayed we see,
Consess her charms, and guided up by thee;
Soaring sublime, on contemplation's wings,
The fountain seek, whence truth eternal springs.
Fain would I wake the consecrated lyre,
And sing the sentiments thou did inspire!
But find my strength unequal to a theme,
Which asks a Milton's, or a Seraph's flame!
If, through weak words, one ray of reason shine,
Thine was the thought, the errors only mine.
Yet may these numbers to thy soul impart
The humble incense of a grateful heart.
Trifles, with God himself, acceptance find,
If offered with sincerity of mind;
Then, like the Deity, indulgence show,
Thou, most like him, of all his works below.


Mr. THOMAS SOUTHERN.
THIS eminent poet was born in Dublin, on the year of the Restoration of
Charles the Ild, and received his early education at the university there. In
the 18th year of his age, he quitted Ireland, and as his intention was to
pursue a lucrative profession, he entered himself in the Middle Temple. But the
natural vivacity of his mind overcoming considerations of advantage, he quitted
that state of life, and entered into the more agreeable service of the Muses
Jacob.
.

The first dramatic performance of Mr. Southern, his Persian Prince, or Loyal
Brother, was acted in the year 1682. The story is taken from Thamas Prince of
Persia, a Novel; and the scene is laid in Ispahan in Persia. This play was
introduced at a time when the Tory interest was triamphant in England, and the
character of the Loyal Brother was no doubt intended to compliment James Duke
of York, who afterward rewarded the poet for his service. To this Tragedy Mr.
Dryden wrote the Prologue and Epilogue, which furnished Mr. Southern with an
opportunity of saying in his dedication, 'That the Laureat's own pen secured
me, maintaining the outworks, while I lay safe entrenched within his lines;
and malice, ill nature, and censure were forced to grin at a distance.'

The Prologue is a continued invective against the Whigs, and whether
considered as a party libel, or an induction to a new play, is in every respect
unworthy of the great hand that wrote it. His next play was a Comedy, called
the Disappointment, or the Mother in Fashion; performed in the year 1684. --
After the accession of king James the IId to the throne, when the duke of
Monmouth made an unfortunate attempt upon his uncle's crown, Mr. Southern went
into the army, in the regiment of foot raised by the lord Ferrers, afterward
commanded by the duke of Berwick; and he had three commissions, viz. ensign,
lieutenant, and captain, under King James, in that regiment.

During the reign of this prince, in the year before the Revolution, he wrote a
Tragedy called the Spartan Dame, which however was not acted till the year
1721. The subject is taken from the Life of Agis in Plutarch, where the
character of Chelonis, between the duties of a wife and daughter was thought to
have a near resemblance to that of King William's Queen Mary. 'I began this
play, says Mr. Southern, a year before the Revolution, and near four acts
written without any view. Many things interfering with those times, I laid by
what I had written for seventeen years: I showed it then to the late duke of
Devonshire, who was in every regard a judge; he told me he saw no reason why it
might not have been acted the year of the Revolution: I then finished it, and
as I thought cut out the exceptionable parts, but could not get it acted, not
being able to persuade myself to the cutting off those limbs, which I thought
essential to the strength and life of it. But since I found it must pine in
obscurity without it, I consented to the operation, and after the amputation of
every line, very near to the number of 400, it stands on its own legs still,
and by the favor of the town, and indulging assistance of friends, has come
successfully forward on the stage.' This play was inimitably acted. Mr. Booth,
Mr. Wilks, Mr. Cibber, Mr. Mills, sen. Mrs. Oldsield, and Mrs. Porter, all
performed in it, in their height of reputation, and the full vigor of their
powers.

Mr. Southern acknowledges in his preface to this play, that the last scene of
the third Act, was almost all written by the honorable John Stafford, father
to the earl of Stafford. Mr. Southern has likewise acknowledged, that he
received from the bookseller, as a price for this play, 150 l. which at that
time was very extraordinary. He was the first who raised the advantage of play
writing to a second and third night, which Mr. Pope mentions in the following
manner, -- Southern born to raise,
The price of Prologues and of Plays.


The reputation which Mr. Dryden gained by the many Prologues he wrote, induced
the players to be sollicitous to have one of his to speak, which were generally
well received by the public. Mr. Dryden's price for a Prologue had usually been
five guineas, with which sum Mr. Southern presented him when he received from
him a Prologue for one of his plays. Mr. Dryden returned the money, and said to
him; 'Young man this is too little, I must have ten guineas.' Mr. Southern on
this observed, that his usual price was five guineas. 'Yes answered Dryden, it
has been so, but the players have hitherto had my labors too cheap; for the
future I must have ten guineas From the information of a gentleman personally
acquainted with Mr. Southern, who desires to have his name concealed.
.'

Mr. Southern was industrious to draw all imaginable profits from his poetical
labors. Mr. Dryden once took occasion to ask him how much he got by one of his
plays; to which he answered, that he was really ashamed to inform him. But Mr.
Dryden being a little importunate to know, he plainly told him, that by his
last play he cleared seven hundred pounds; which appeared astonishing to Mr.
Dryden, as he himself had never been able to acquire more than one hundred by
any of his most successful pieces. The secret is, Mr. Southern was not beneath
the drudgery of solicitation, and often sold his tickets at a very high price,
by making applications to persons of distinction: a degree of servility which
perhaps Mr. Dryden thought was much beneath the dignity of a poet; and too much
in the chara^ter of an under-player..

That Mr. Dryden entertained a very high, opinion of our author's abilities,
appears from his many expressions of kindness toward him. He has prefixed a
copy of verses to a Comedy of his, called the Wife's Excuse, acted in the year
1692, with very indifferent success: Of this Comedy, Mr. Dryden had so high an
opinion, that he bequeathed to our poet, the care of writing half the last act
of his Tragedy of Cleomenes, 'Which, says Mr. Southern, when it comes into the
world will appear to be so considerable a trust, that all the town will pardon
me for defending this play, that preferred me to it.'

Our author continued from time to time to entertain the public with his
dramatic pieces, the greatest part of which met with the success they deserved.
The night on which his Innocent Adultery was first acted, which is perhaps the
most moving play in any language; a gentleman took occasion to ask Mr. Dryden,
what was his opinion of Southern's genius? to which that great poet replied,
'That he thought him such another poet as Otway.' When this reply was
communicated to Mr. Southern, he considered it as a very great compliment,
having no ambition to be thought a more considerable poet than Otway was.

Of our author's Comedies, none are in possession of the stage, nor perhaps
deserve to be so; for in that province he is less excellent than in Tragedy.
The present Laureat, who is perhaps one of the best judges of Comedy now
living, being ask^d his opinion by a gentleman, of Southern's comic dialogue,
answered, That it might be denominated Whip-Syllabub, that is, flashy and
light, but indurable; and as it is without the Sal Atticum of wit, can never
much delight the intelligent part of the audience.

The most finished, and the most pathetic of Mr. Southern's plays, in the
opinion of the critics, is his Oroonoko, or the Royal Slave. This drama is
built upon a true story, related by Mrs. Behn, in a Novel; and has so much the
greater influence on the audience, as they are sensible that the representation
is no fiction. In this piece, Mr. Southern has touched the tender passions with
so much skill, that it will perhaps be injurious to his memory to say of him,
that he is second to Otway. Besides the tender and delicate strokes of passion,
there are many shining and manly sentiments in Oroonoko; and one of the
greatest genius's of the present age, has often observed, that in the most
celebrated play of Shakespeare, so many striking thoughts, and such a glow of
animated poetry cannot be furnished. This play is so often acted, and admired,
that any illustration of its beauties here, would be entirely superfluous. His
play of The Fatal Marriage, or The Innocent Adultery, met with deserved
success; the affecting incidents, and interesting tale in the tragic part,
sufficiently compensate for the low, trifling, comic part; and when the
character of Isabella is acted, as we have seen it, by Mrs. Porter, and Mrs.
Wossington, the ladies seldom fail to sympathise in grief.

Mr. Southern died on the 26th of May, in the year 1746, in the 86th year of
his age; the latter part of which he spent in a peaceful serenity, having by
his commission as a soldier, and the profits of his dramatic works, acquired a
handsome fortune; and being an exact oeconomist, he improved what fortune he
gained, to the best advantage: He enjoyed the longest life of all our poets,
and died the richest of them, a very few excepted.

A gentleman whose authority we have already quoted, had likewise informed us,
that Mr. Southern lived for the last ten years of his life in Westminster, and
attended very constant at divine service in the Abbey, being particularly fond
of church music. He never staid within doors while in heal^h, two days
together, having such a circle of acquaintance of the best rank, that he
constantly dined with one or other, by a kind of rotation.

The Revd. Mr. JAMES MILLER.
THIS gentleman was born in the year 1703. He was the son of a clergyman, who
poss^ssed two considerable livings in Dorsetshire The account of this gentleman
is taken from the information of his widow.
. He recei^ed his education at Wadham-College in Oxford, and while he was
resident in that university he composed part of his famous Comedy called the
Humors of Oxford, acted in the year 1729, by the particular recommendation of
Mrs. Oldfield.

This piece, as it was a lively representation of the follies and vices of the
students of that place, procured the author many enemies.

Mr. Miller was designed by his relations to be bred to business, which he
declined, not being able to endure the servile drudgery it demanded. He no
sooner quitted the university than he entered into holy orders, and was
immediately preferred to be lecturer in Trinity-College in Conduit-Street, and
preacher of Roehampton-Chapel. These livings were too inconsiderable to afford
a genteel subsistence, and therefore it may be supposed he had recourse to
dramatic writing to increase his finances. This kind of composition, however,
being reckoned by some very foreign to his profession, if not inconsistent with
it, was thought to have retarded his preferment in the church. Mr. Miller was
likewise attached to the High-Church interest, a circumstance in the times in
which he lived, not very favorable to preferment. He was so honest however in
these principles, that upon a large offer being made him by the agents for the
ministry in the time of a general opposition, he had virtue sufficient to
withstand the temptation, though his circumstances at that time were far from
being easy. Mr. Miller often confessed to some of his friends, that this was
the fiery trial of his constancy. He had received by his wife a very genteel
fortune, and a tenderness for her had almost overcome his resolutions; but he
recovered again to his former firmness, when upon hinting to his wife, the
terms upon which preferment might be procured, she rejected them with
indignation; and he became ashamed of his own wavering. This was an instance of
honor, few of which are to be met with in the Lives of the Poets, who have
been too generally of a time-serving temper, and too pliant to all the follies
and vices of their age. But though Mr. Miller would not purchase preferment
upon the terms of writing for the ministry, he was content to stipulate, never
to write against them, which proposal they rejected in their turn.

About a year before Mr. Miller's death, which happened in 1743, he was
presented by Mr. Carry of Dorsetshire, to the profitable living of Upsun, his
father had before possessed, but which this worthy man lived not long to enjoy;
nor had he ever an opportunity of making that provision for his family he so
much solicited; and which he even disdained to do at the expense of his honor.

Mr. Miller's dramatic works are, I. Humors of Oxford, which we have already
mentioned. II. The Mother-in-Law, or the Doctor the Disease; a Comedy, 1733.
III. The Man of Taste, a Comedy; acted in the year 1736, which had a run of 30
nights These two pieces were brought on the stage, without the author's name
being known; which, probably, not a little contribut^d to their success; the
care of the rehearsals being left to Mr. Theo. Cibber, who played the
characters of the Man of Taste, and Squire Headpiece.
. IV. Universal Passion, a Comedy, 1736. V. Art and Nature, a Comedy, 1737. VI.
The Coffee-House, a Farce, 1737. VII. An Hospital for Fools, a Farce, 1739.
VIII. The Picture, or Cuckold in Conceit. IX. Mahomet the Impostor, a Tragedy;
during the run of this play the author died. X. Joseph and his Brethren; a
sacred Drama.


Mr. Miller was author of many occasional pieces in poetry, of which his
Harlequin Horace is the most considerable. This Satire is dedicated to Mr.
Rich, the present manager of Covent Garden Theater, in which with an ironical
severity he lashes that gentleman, in consequence of some offense Mr. Rich had
given him.

Mr. Miller likewise published a volume of Sermons, all written with a
distinguished air of piety, and a becoming zeal for the interest of true
religion; and was principally concerned in the translation of Moliere's
comedies, published by Watts.

Our author left behind him a son, whose profession is that of a sea surgeon.
Proposals for publishing his Poems have been inserted in the Gentleman's
Magazine, with a specimen, which does him honor. The profits of this
subscription are to be appropriated to his mother, whom he chiefly supported,
an amiable instance of ^^lial piety.

Mr. NICHOLAS AMHURST.
THIS gentleman, well known to the world, by the share he had in the celebrated
anticourt paper called The Craftsman, was born in Marden in Kent, but in what
year we cannot be certain. Mr. Amhurst's grandfather was a clergyman, under
whose protection and care he received his education at Merchant-Taylors school.
Having received there the rudiments of learning, he was removed to St. John's
College, Oxford, from which, on account of the libertinism of his principles,
and some offense he gave to the head of that college, it appears, he was
ejected. We can give no other account of this affair, than what is drawn from
Mr. Amhurst's dedication of his poems to Dr. Delaune, President of St. John's
College in Oxford. This dedication abounds with mirth and pleasantry, in which
he rallies the Dr. with very pungent irony, and hints at the causes of his
disgrace in that famous college. In page 10, of his dedication, he says,
'You'll pardon me, good sir, if I think it necessary for your honor to mention
the many heinous crimes for which I was brought to shame. None were indeed
publicly alleged against me at that time, because it might as well be done
afterward; sure old Englishmen can never forget that there is such a thing as
hanging a man for it, and trying him afterward: so fared it with me; my
prosecutors first proved me, by an undeniable argument, to be no fellow of St.
John's College, and then to be -- the Lord knows what.

'My indictment may be collected out of the faithful annals of common same,
which run thus,

'Advices from Oxford say, that on the 29th of June, 1719, one Nicholas Amhurst
of St. John's College was expelled for the following reasons:

'Imprimis, For loving foreign turnips and Presbyterian bishops.

'Item, For ingratitude to his benefactor, that spotless martyr, Sir William
Laud.

'Item, For believing that steeples and organs are not necessary to salvation.

'Item, For preaching without orders, and praying without a commission.

'Item, For lampooning priestcraft and petticoatcraft.'

'Item, For not lampooning the government and the revolution.

'Item, For prying into secret history.

'My natural modesty will not permit me, like other apologists, to vindicate
myself in any one particular, the whole charge is so artfully drawn up, that no
reasonable person would ever think the better of me, should I justify myself
'till doomsday.'

Toward the close of the dedication, he takes occasion to complain of some
severities used against him, at the time of his being excluded the college.
'But I must complain of one thing, whether reasonable or not, let the world
judge. When I was voted out of your college, and the nuisance was thereby
removed, I thought the resentments of the holy ones would have proceeded no
further; I am sure the cause of virtue and found religion I was thought to
offend, required no more; nor could it be of any possible advantage to the
church, to descend to my private affairs, and stir up my creditors in the
university to take hold of me at a disadvantage, before I could get any money
returned; but there are some persons in the world, who think nothing unjust or
inhuman in the prosecution of their implacable revenge.'

It is probable, that upon this misfortune happening to our author, he repaired
to the capital, there to retrieve his ruined affairs. We find him engaged
deeply in the Craftsman, when that paper was in its meridian, and when it was
more read and attended to than any political paper ever published in England,
on account of the assistance given to it by some of the most illustrious and
important characters of the nation. It is said, that ten thousand of that paper
have been sold in one day.

The Miscellanies of Mr. Amhurst, the greatest part of which were written at
the university, consist chiefly of poems sacred and profane, original,
paraphrased, imitated, and translated; tales, epigrams, epistles, love-verses,
elegies, and satires, The Miscellany begins with a beautiful paraphrase on the
Mosaic Account of the Creation; and ends with a very humorous tale upon the
discovery of that useful utensil, A Bottle-Screw.

Mr. Amhurst died of a fever at Twickenham, April 27, 1742. Our poet had a
great enmity to the exorbitant demands, and domineering spirit of the
High-Church clergy, which he discovers by a poem of his, called, The
convocation, in five cantos; a kind of satire against all the writers, who
showed themselves enemies of the bishop of Bangor. He translated The
Resurrection, and some other of Mr. Addison's Latin pieces.

He wrote an epistle (with a petition in it) to Sir John Blount, Bart. one of
the directors of the South Sea Company, 1710.

Oculus Britanniae, an Heroi-panegyrical Poem, on the University of Oxford,
8vo. 1724.

In a poem of Mr. Amhurst's, called, An Epistle from the Princess Sobiesky to
the Chevalier de St. George, he has the following nervous lines, strongly
expressive of the passion of love. Relentless walls and bolts obstruct my way,
And guards as careless, and as deaf as they;
Or to my James through whirlwinds I would go,
Through burning deserts, and over alps of snow,
Pass spacious roaring oceans undismayed,
And think the mighty dangers well repaid.


Mr. GEORGE LILLO,
WAS by profession a jeweller. He was born in London, on the 4th of Feb. 1693.
He lived, as we are informed, near Moorgate, in the same neighborhood where he
received his birth, and where he was always esteemed as a person of unblemished
character. It Is said, he was educated in the principles of the dissenters: be
that as it will, his morals brought no disgrace on any sect or party. Indeed
his principal attachment was to the muses.

His first piece, brought on the stage, was a Ballad Opera, called Sylvia; or,
The Country Burial; performed at the Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields, but
with no extraordinary success, in the year 1730. The year following he brought
his play, called The London Merchant; or, The True Story of George Barnwell, to
Mr. Cibber junior, (then manager of the summer company, at the Theater Royal in
Drury Lane) who originally played the part of Barnwell. -- The author was not
then known. As this was almost a new species of tragedy, wrote on a very
uncommon subject, he rather chose it should take its fate in the summer, than
run the more hazardous fate of encountering the winter critics. The old ballad
of George Barnwell (on which the story was founded) was on this occasion
reprinted, and many thousands sold in one day. Many gaily-disposed spirits
brought the ballad with them to the play, intending to make their pleasant
remarks (as some afterward owned) and ludicrous comparisons between the
ancient ditty and the modern drama. But the play was very carefully got up, and
universally allowed to be well performed. The piece was thought to be well
conducted, and the subject well managed, and the diction proper and natural;
never low, and very rarely swelling above the characters that spoke. Mr. Pope,
among other persons, distinguished by their rank, or particular public merit,
had the curiosity to attend the performance, and commended the actors, and the
author; and remarked, if the latter had erred through the whole play, it was
only in a few places, where he had unawares led himself into a poetical
luxuriancy, affecting to be too elevated for the simplicity of the subject. But
the play, in general, spoke so much to the heart, that the gay persons before
mentioned confessed, they were drawn in to drop their ballads, and pull out
their handkerchiefs. It met with uncommon success; for it was acted above
twenty times in the summer season to great audiences; was frequently bespoke by
some eminent merchants and citizens, who much approved its moral tendency: and,
in the winter following, was acted often to crowded houses: And all the royal
family, at several different times, honored it with their appearance. It
gained reputation, and brought money to the poet, the managers, and the
performers. Mr. Cibber, jun. not only gave the author his usual profits of his
third days, etc. but procured him a benefit-night in the winter season, which
turned out greatly to his advantage; so that he had four benefit-nights in all
for that piece; by the profits whereof, and his copy-money, he gained several
hundred pounds. It continued a stock-play in Drury Lane Theater till Mr. Cibber
left that house, and went to the Theater in Covent Garden. It was often acted
in the Christmas and Easter holidays, and judged a proper entertainment for the
apprentices, etc. as being a more instructive, moral, and cautionary drama,
than many pieces that had been usually exhibited on those days, with little but
farce and ribaldry to recommend them.

A few years after, he brought out his play of The Christian Hero at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

And another Tragedy called Elmerick.

His tragedy of three acts, called Fatal Curiosity, founded on an old English
story, was acted with success at the Hay-Market, in 1737.

He wrote another tragedy, never yet acted, called Arden of Feversham.

He was a man of strict morals, great goodnature, and sound sense, with an
uncommon share of modesty.

He died Sept. 3. 1739. and was buried in the vault of Shoreditch church.

Mr. CHARLES JOHNSON.
MR. Charles Johnson was designed for the law; but being an admirer of the
muses, turned his thoughts to dramatic writing; and luckily being an intimate
of Mr. Wilks, by the assistance of his friendship, Mr. Johnson had several
plays acted, some of which met with success. He was a constant attendant at
Will's and Button's coffee-houses, which were the resort of most of the men of
taste and literature, during the reigns of queen Anne and king George the
first. Among these he contracted intimacy enough to entitle him to their
patronage, etc. on his benefit-nights; by which means he lived (with economy)
genteelly. At last he married a young widow, with a tolerable fortune, and set
up a tavern in Bow-street, which he quitted on his wife's dying, and lived
privately on the small remainder of his fortune.

He died about the year 1744. His parts were not very brilliant; but his
behavior was generally thought inoffensive; yet he escaped not the satire of
Mr. Pope, who has been pleased to immortalize him in his Dunciad.

His dramatic pieces are, 1. The Gentleman Cully, a Comedy; acted at the
Theater Royal, Covent Garden, 1702. 2. Fortune in her Wits, a Comedy; 1705. It
is a very indifferent translation of Mr. Cowley's Naufragium Joculare. 3. The
Force of Friendship, a Tragedy, 1710. 4. Love in a Chest, a Farce, 1710. 5. The
Wife's Relief; or, the Husband's Cure; a Comedy. It is chiefly borrowed from
Shirley's Gamester, 1711. 6. The Successful Pirate, a Tragi-Comedy, 1712. 7.
The Generous Husband; or, the Coffee-house Politician; a Comedy, 1713. 8. The
Country Lasses; or, the Custom of the Manor; a Comedy, 1714. 9. Love and
Liberty; a Tragedy, 1715. 10. The Victim; a Tragedy, 1715. 11. The Sultaness; a
Tragedy, 1717. 12. The Cobbler of Preston; a Farce of two Acts, 1717. 13. Love
in a Forest; a Comedy, 1721. Taken from Shakespeare's Comedy, As you like it.
14. The Masquerade; a Comedy, 1723. 15. The Village Opera, 1728. 16. The
Ephefian Matron; a Farce of one Act, 1730. 17. Celia; or, the Perjured Lovers;
a Tragedy, 1732.


PHILIP FROWDE, Esquire
THIS elegant poet was the son of a gentleman who had been post-master-general
in the reign of queen Anne. Where our author received his earliest instructions
in literature we cannot ascertain; but, at a proper time of life, he was sent
to the university of Oxford, where he had the honor of being particularly
distinguished by Mr. Addison, who took him under his immediate protection.
While he remained at that university, he became author of several poetical
performances; some of which, in Latin, were sufficiently elegant and pure, to
entitle them to a place in the Musae Anglicanae, published by Mr. Addison; an
honor so much the more distinguished, as the purity of the Latin poems
contained in that collection, furnished the first-hint to Boileau of the
greatness of the British genius. That celebrated critic of France entertained
a mean opinion of the English poets, till he occasionally read the Musae
Anglicanae; and then he was persuaded that they who could write with so much
elegance in a dead language, must greatly excel in that which was native to
them.

Mr. Frowde has likewise obliged the public with two tragedies; the Fall of
Saguntum, dedicated to sir Robert Walpole; and Philotas, addressed to the earl
of Chesterfield. The first of these performances, so far as we are able to
judge, has higher merit than the last. The story is more important, being the
destruction of a powerful city, than the fall of a single hero; the incidents
rising out of this great event are likewise of a very interesting nature, and
the scenes in many places are not without passion, though justly subject to a
very general criticism, that they are written with too little. Mr. Frowde has
been industrious in this play to conclude his acts with similes, which however
exceptionable for being too long and tedious for the situations of the
characters who utter them, yet are generally just and beautiful. At the end of
the first act he has the following simile upon sedition: Sedition, thou art up;
and, in the ferment,
To what may not the madding populace,
Gathered together for they scarce know what,
Now loud proclaiming their late, whispered grief,
Be wrought at length? Perhaps to yield the city.
Thus where the Alps their airy ridge extend,
Gently at first the melting snows descend;
From the broad slopes, with murmuring lapse they glide
In soft meanders, down the mountain's side;
But lower fallen streams, with each other crossed,
From rock to rock impetuously are tossed;
'Till in the Rhone's capacious bed they are lost.
United there, roll rapidly away,
And roaring, reach, over rugged rocks, the sea.


In the third act, the poet, by the mouth of a Roman hero, gives the following
concise definition of true courage. True courage is not, where fermenting
spirits
Mount in a troubled and unruly stream;
The soul's its proper seat; and reason there
Presiding, guides its cool or warmer motions.


The representation of besiegers driven back by the impetuosity of the
inhabitants, after they had entered a gate of the city, is strongly pictured by
the following simile. Imagine to thyself a swarm of bees
Driven to their hive by some impending storm,
Which, at its little pest, in clustering heaps,
And climbing over each other's backs they enter.
Such was the people's flight, and such their haste
To gain the gate.


We have observed, that Mr. Frowde's other tragedy, called Philotas, was
addressed to the earl of Chesterfield; and in the dedication he takes care to
inform his lordship, that it had obtained his private approbation, before it
appeared on the stage. At the time of its being acted, lord Chesterfield was
then ambassador to the states general, and consequently he was deprived of his
patron's countenance during the representation. As to the fate of this play, he
informs his lordship, it was very particular: "And I hope (says he) it will not
be imputed as vanity to me, when I explain my meaning in an expression of
Juvenal, Laudatur and alget." But from what cause this misfortune attended it,
we cannot take upon us to say.

Mr. Frowde died at his lodgings in Cecil-street in the Strand, on the 19th of
Dec. 1738. In the London Daily Post 22d December, the following amiable
character is given of our poet: "But though the elegance of Mr. Frowde's
writings has recommended him to the general public esteem, the politeness of
his genius is the least amiable part of his character; for he esteemed the
talents of wit and learning, only as they were, conducive to the excitement and
practice of honor and humanity. Therefore, with a soul cheerful, benevolent,
and virtuous, he was in conversation genteelly delightful; in friendship
punctually sincere; in death christianly resigned. No man could live more
beloved; no private man could die more lamented."



Mrs. MARY CHANDLER,
WAS born at Malmsbury in Wiltshire, in the year 1687, of worthy and reputable
parents; her father, Mr. Henry Chandler, being minister, many years, of the
congregation of protestant dissenters in Bath, whose integrity, candor, and
catholic spirit, gained him the esteem and friendship of all ranks and
parties. She was his eldest daughter, and trained up carefully in the
principles of religion and virtue. But as the circumstances of the family
rendered it necessary that she should be brought up to business, she was very
early employed in it, and incapable of receiving that polite and learned
education which she often regretted the loss of, and which she afterward
endeavored to repair by diligently reading, and carefully studying the best
modern writers, and as many as she could of the ancient ones, especially the
poets, as far as the best translations could assist her.

Amongst these, Horace was her favorite; and how just her sentiments were of
that elegant writer, will fully appear from her own words, in a letter to an
intimate friend, relating to him, in which she thus expresses herself: "I have
been reading Horace this month past, in the best translation I could procure of
him. O could I read his fine sentiments clothed in his own dress, what would
I, what would I not give! He is more my favorite than Virgil or Homer. I like
his subjects, his easy manner. It is nature within my view. He does not lose me
in fable, or in the clouds amidst gods and goddesses, who, more brutish than
myself, demand my homage, nor hurry me into the noise and confusion of battles,
nor carry me into enchanted circles, to conjure with witches in an unknown
land, but places me with persons like myself, and in countries where every
object is familiar to me. In short, his precepts are plain, and morals
intelligible, though not always so perfect as one could have wished them. But
as to this, I consider when and where he lived."

The hurries of life into which her circumstances at Bath threw her, sat
frequently extremely heavy upon a mind so entirely devoted to books and
contemplation as hers was; and as that city, especially in the seasons, but too
often furnished her with characters in her own sex that were extremely
displeasing to her, she often, in the most passionate manner, lamented her
fate, that tied her down to so disagreeable a situation; for she was of so
extremely delicate and generous a soul, that the imprudences and faults of
others gave her a very sensible pain, though she had no other connection with,
or interest in them, but what arose from the common ties of human nature. This
made her occasional retirements from that place to the countryseats of some of
her peculiarly intimate and honored friends, doubly delightful to her, as she
there enjoyed the solitude she loved, and could converse, without interruption,
with those objects of nature, that never failed to inspire her with the most
exquisite satisfaction. One of her friends, whom she highly honored and loved,
and of whose hospitable house, and pleasant gardens, she was allowed the freest
use, was the late excellent Mrs. Stephens, of Sodbury in Gloucestershire, whose
seat she celebrated in a poem inscribed to her, inserted in the collection she
published. A lady, that was worthy of the highest commendation her muse could
bestow upon her. The fine use she made of solitude, the few following lines she
wrote on it, will be an honorable testimony to her. Sweet solitude, the Muses
dear delight,
Serene thy day, and peaceful is thy night!
Thou nurse of innocence, fair virtue's friend,
Silent, though rapturous, pleasures thee attend.
Earth's verdant scenes, the all-surrounding skies
Employ my wondering thoughts, and feast my eyes
Nature in every object points the road,
Whence contemplation wings my soul to God.
He Is all in all. His wisdom, goodness, power,
Spring in each blade, and bloom in every flower,
Smile over the meads, and bend in every hill,
Glide in the stream, and murmur in the rill
All nature moves obedient to his will.
Heaven shakes, earth trembles, and the forests nod,
When awful thunders speak the voice of God.


However, notwithstanding her love of retirement, and the happy improvement she
knew how to make of it, yet her firm belief that her station was the
appointment of providence, and her earnest defire of being useful to her
relations, whom she regarded with the warmest affection, brought her to submit
to the fatigues of her business, to which, during thirty-five years, she
applied herself with the utmost diligence and care.

Amidst such perpetual avocations, and constant attention to business, her
improvements in knowledge, and her extensive acquaintance with the best
writers, are truly surprising. But she well knew the worth of time, and eagerly
laid hold of all her leisure hours, not to lavish them away in fashionable
unmeaning amusements, but in the pursuit of what she valued infinitely more,
those substantial acquisitions of true wisdom and goodness, which she knew were
the noblest ornaments of the reasonable mind, and the only sources of real and
permanent happiness: and she was the more desirous of this kind of
accomplishments, as she had nothing in her shape to recommend her, being grown,
by an accident in her childhood, very irregular in her body, which she had
resolution enough often to make the subject of her own pleasantry, drawing this
wise inference from it, "That as her person would not recommend her, she must
endeavor to cultivate her mind, to make herself agreeable."

And indeed this she did with the greatest care; and she had so many excellent
qualities in her, that though her first appearance could never create any
prejudice in her favor, yet it was impossible to know her without valuing and
esteeming her.

Wherever she professed friendship, it was sincere and cordial to the objects
of it; and though she admired whatever was excellent in them, and gave it the
commendations it deserved, yet she was not blind to their faults, especially if
such as she apprehended to be inconsistent with the character of integrity and
virtue. As she thought one of the noblest advantages of real friendship, was
the rendering it serviceable mutually to correct, polish, and perfect the
characters of those who professed it, and as she was not displeased to be
kindly admonished herself for what her friends thought any little disadvantage
to her character, so she took the same liberty with others; but used that
liberty with such a remarkable propriety, tenderness, and politeness, as made
those more sincerely esteem her, with whom she used the greatest freedom, and
has lost her no intimacy but with one person, with whom, for particular
reasons, she thought herself obliged to break off all correspondence.

Nor could one, who had so perfect a veneration and love for religion and
virtue, fail to make her own advantage of the admonitions and reproofs she gave
to others: and she often expressed a very great pleasure, that the care she had
of those young persons, that were frequently committed to her friendship, put
her upon her guard, as to her own temper and conduct, and on a review of her
own actions, lest she should any way give them a wrong example, or omit any
thing that was really for their good. And if she at any time reflected, that
her behavior to others had been wrong, she, with the greatest ease and
frankness, asked the pardon of those she had offended; as not daring to leave
to their wrong construction any action of hers, lest they should imagine that
she indulged to those faults for which she took the liberty of reproving them.
Agreeable to this happy disposition of mind, she gave, in an off-hand manner,
the following advice to an intimate friend, who had several children, whom she
deservedly honored, and whom she could not esteem and love beyond his real
merits. To virtue strict, to merit kind,
With temper calm, to trifles blind,
Win them to mend the faults they see,
And copy prudent rules from thee,
Point to examples in their sight,
TO avoid, and scorn, and to delight.
Then love of excellence inspire,
By hope their emulation fire,
You Will gain in time your own desire.


She used frequently to complain of herself, as naturally eager, anxious, and
peevish. But, by a constant cultivation of that benevolent disposition, that
was never inwrought in any heart in a stronger and more prevailing manner than
in hers, she, in a good measure, dispossessed herself of those inward sources of
uneasiness, and was pleased with the victory she had gained over herself, and
continually striving to render it more absolute and complete.

Her religion was rational and prevalent. She had, in the former part of her
life, great doubts about christianity, during which state of uncertainty, she
was one of the most uneasy and unhappy persons living. But her own good sense,
her inviolable attachment to religion and virtue, her impartial inquiries, her
converse with her believing friends, her study of the best writers in defense
of christianity, and the observations she made on the temper and conduct, the
fall and ruin of some that had discarded their principles, and the
irregularities of others, who never attended to them, fully at last released
her from all her doubts, and made her a firm and established christian. The
immediate consequence of this was, the return of her peace, the possession of
herself, the enjoyment of her friends, and an entire freedom from the terror of
any thing that could befall her in the future part of her existence. Thus she
lived a pleasure to all who knew her, and being, at length, resolved to
disengage herself from the hurries of life, and wrap herself up in that
retirement she was so fond of, after having gained what she thought a
sufficient competency for one of her moderate desires, and in that station that
was allotted her, and settled her affairs to her own mind, she finally quitted
the world, and in a manner agreeable to her own wishes, without being suffered
to lie long in weakness and pain, a burden to herself, or those who attended
her: dying after about two days illness, in the 58th year of her age, Sept. 11,
1745.

She thought the disadvantages of her shape were such, as gave her no
reasonable prospect of being happy in a married state, and therefore chose to
continue single. She had, however, an honorable offer from a country gentleman
of worth and large fortune, who, attracted merely by the goodness of her
character, took a journey of an hundred miles to visit her at Bath, where he
made his addresses to her. But she convinced him that such a match could
neither be for his happiness, or her own. She had, however, something extremely
agreeable and pleasing in her face, and no one could enter into any intimacy of
conversation with her, but he immediately lost every disgust toward her, that
the first appearance of her person tended to excite in him.

She had the misfortune of a very valetudinary constitution, owing, in some
measure, probably to the irregularity of her form. At last, after many years
illness, she entered, by the late ingenious Dr. Cheney's advice, into the
vegetable diet, and indeed the utmost extremes of it, living frequently on
bread and water; in which she continued so long, as rendered her incapable of
taking any more substantial food when she afterward needed it; for want of
which she was so weak as not to be able to support the attack of her last
disorder, and which, I doubt not, hastened on her death. But it must be added,
in justice to her character, that the ill state of her health was not the only
or principal reason that brought her to, and kept her fixed in her resolution,
of attempting, and persevering in this mortifying diet. The conquest of
herself, and subjecting her own heart more entirely to the command of her
reason and principles, was the object she had in especial view in this change
of her manner of living; as being firmly persuaded, that the perpetual free use
of animal food, and rich wines, tends so to excite and inflame the passions, as
scarce to leave any hope or chance, for that conquest of them which she thought
not only religion requires, but the care of our own happiness, renders
necessary. And the effect of the trial, in her own case, was answerable to her
wishes; and what she says of herself in her own humorous epitaph, That time and
much thought had all passion extinguished, was well known to be true, by those
who were most nearly acquainted with her. Those admirable lines on Temperance,
in her Bath poem, she penned from a very feeling experience of what she found
by her own regard to it, and can never be read too often, as the sense is equal
to the goodness of the poetry. Fatal effects of luxury and ease!
We drink our poison, and we eat disease,
Indulge our senses at our reason's cost,
Till sense is pain, and reason hurt, or lost.
Not so, O temperance bland! when ruled by thee,
The brute's obedient, and the man is free.
Soft are his slumbers, balmy is his rest,
His veins not boiling from the midnight feast.
Touched by Aurora's rosy hand, he wakes
Peaceful and calm, and with the world partakes,
The joyful dawnings of returning day,
For which their grateful thanks the whole creation pay,
All but the human brute. It Is he alone,
Whose works of darkness fly the rising sun.
It Is to thy rules, O temperance, that we owe
All pleasures, which from health and strength can flow,
Vigor of body, purity of mind,
Unclouded reason, sentiments refined,
Unmixt, untained joys, without remorse,
The intemperate sinner's never-failing curse.


She was observed, from her childhood, to have a fondness for poetry, often
entertaining her companions, in a winter's evening, with riddles in verse, and
was extremely fond, at that time of life, of Herbert's poems. And this
disposition grew up with her, and made her apply, in her riper years, to the
study of the best of our English poets; and besore she attempted any thing
considerable, sent many small copies of verses, on particular characters and
occasions, to her peculiar friends. Her poem on the Bath had the full
approbation of the public; and what sets it above censure, had the
commendation of Mr. Pope, and many others of the first rank, for good sense and
politeness. And indeed there are many lines in it admirably penned, and that
the finest genius need not to be ashamed of. It has ran through several
editions; and, when first published, procured her the personal acknowledgments
of several of the brightest quality, and of many others, greatly distinguished
as the^ best judges of poetical performances.

She was meditating a nobler work, a large poem on the Being and Attributes of
God, which was her favorite subject; and, if one may judge by the imperfect
pieces of it, which she left behind her in her papers, would have drawn the
public attention, had she lived to finish it.

She was peculiarly happy in her acquaintance, as she had good sense enough to
discern that worth in others she justly thought was the foundation of all real
friendship, and was so happy as to be honored and loved as a friend, by those
whom she would have wished to be connected with in that sacred character. She
had the esteem of that most excellent lady, who was superior to all
commendation, the late duchess of Somerset, then countess of Hertford, who
has done her the honor of several visits, and allowed her to return them at
the Mount of Marlborough. Mr. Pope favored her with his at Bath, and
complimented her for her poem on that place. Mrs. Row, of ^room, was one of
her particular friends, 'Twould be endless to name ^ll the persons of
reputation and fortune whom she had the pleasure of being intimately acquainted
with. She was a good woman, a kind relation, and a saithful friend. She had a
real genius for poetry, was a most agreeable correspondent, had a large fund of
good sense, was unblemished in her character, lived highly esteemed, and died
greatly lamented.

FINIS.

