A SERMON Preached to the People, AT THE Market Cross OF Edinburgh; On the
Subject of the Union.

Eccles. Chap. 10. Ver. 27. Printed in the Year MDCCVL.

A SERMON Preached to the People, At the Market Cross of Edinburgh.
Eccles. Chap. X. Ver. 27. Better is he that Labors and abounds in all
Things, than he that boasts himself and wants Bread.
DEarly Beloved Countrymen and fellow Citizens, suffer me to stop you a little
in the furious Carreer of your Passion, to hear a few Words of sober and
unprejudiced Reason; I hope they will not be the less grateful, if I accost
you in that manner of Rhetoric, which your Ears are most accustomed to: I have
chosen an Apocryphal Text, because my Subject is not Sacred, but Secular, but
if it has not the Stamp of divine Inspiration; it is taken from a Book, which
of all that are not Canonical, contains the most sublime, most useful, and most
approved Maxims of Wisdom, whether private OEconomical or Political; and as all
Wisdom and Truth comes from God, in that Sense my Text may be said to be of
divine Authority.

Dearly beloved Countrymen, a Generous, Powerful and Victorious Nation,
invites you to an intimate Union with themselves, a Nation whose Laws are more
Just, whose Government is more Mild, whose People are more Free, Easy and
Happy, than any other in Europe; a Nation who by their Wealth, Wisdom and
Valor, have broke the most formidable Power that ever threatened Christendom;
To whose victorious Arms even you your selves owe your present Security; this
Nation I say, invites you to a Co-partner-ship of all the Advantages they
presently Enjoy, or may reasonably hope for: A gracious Queen of the ancient
Line of our own Monarchs, desires nothing more than that the People from whom
she derives her Blood, should enjoy the same Liberty and Plenty with others
whom Providence has called her to Govern. It might justly have been expected,
that such a generous Proposal would have been wellcom'd with the universal
Acclamations of all Ranks and Degrees of People, instead of that you have
received it with Riots, Mobs and Tumults; if the offer had not been Profitable,
it was at least Civil, and deserved a friendly Reception, and a courteous
Answer: A Treaty that was entered into at the desire of your own Parliament, as
well as that of your Neighbors, and carried on by the Authority of the common
Sovereign of both, such a Treaty I say, was a matter of that weight as made it
a very unfit Subject for the Judgment (much more for the Scorn and Contempt) of
Boys, Apprentices, and Tradesmen: But since the transcendent Wisdom of your
Leaders have thought otherways, let me beseech you in the words of my Author,
Eccles. 11. and 7. Blame not before thou have examined the Truth, understand
first and then Rebuke: To enable you in some measure to make such an Enquiry, I
have chosen the words of my Text, Better is he that Labors and abounds in
all Things, than he that boasts himself and wants Bread.

From the words you may Observe, a very intimate Conjunction betwixt three
dismal Companions, Pride, Poverty and Idleness; this is a worse Union a great
deal than that which we are to Discourse of at present, these three love
extremely to keep Company, and I could never guess for what reason, unless it
be to Teaze and Vex one another: Poverty does what she can to starve Pride, and
Pride eats out the Heart, Blood, and Gutts of Poverty, and Laziness will not
stir an Inch to relieve either: That these three fatal Sisters may not only be
separated, but eternally Banished this Kingdom, it shall be the Subject of my
following Discourse to show, that it is better to Increase our Trade,
Manufacture, and Riches, by an Union with England, than to boast of our
Sovereignty and Starve; For better is he that Labors and abounds in all
Things, than he that boasts himself and wants Bread.

And here indeed it must be Proved, that an Union with England will Increase
our Trade and Manufacture, in order to which, I will ask the greatest Zealote
against the Union, a few Questions, and let him answer me if he can. Whether
the great difference betwixt the Wealth of Scotland and England is entirly
Owing to the Natural Advantages of England, as of fruitfulness of Soil
Situation, etc. Or, if it does not in some measure proceed from political
causes? Scotland is equal at least in Extent to a Third of England, its People
more healthful, more Prolifick and more Temperate, why has England then seven
times the Number of People, every Acre in Scotland is not Barren, nor every
Acre in England fruitful, how comes it then that England has Fifty times the
Riches of Scotland? For Example; why does Oxfordshire, not so big as Fiffe,
pay to a Land Tax; near as much as all Scotland? Are there not many places on
each side the Firth of Forth which exceed the Town of Newcastle, in Soil,
Situation, Products Natural and Artificial; How comes it to pass then that the
Town of Newcastle has more Trade, more Rich Merchants and pays more Customs,
than all the Towns in Scotland put together. It is plain, these great
differences do not proceed merely from natural, but likewise from Political
Causes, nay lt's easy to Assign a piece of England equal in extent, much
Inferior to the Gifts of Nature of some part of Scotland, and yet Triple in
Value, I know Wales is brought by some as an Instance to Prove that an Union
will not increase the Trade and Riches of a Mountanous Country, that their
Condition is not bettered by an Union with England: To this I Answer, that the
matter of Fact is false, if the Objection has any Strength, it ought to Prove,
that Wales would not be the worse to be deprived of the Benefit of the Trade
of England, a Paradox too sublime for any Welch-Man, but most obvious to the
Elevated understandings of some of our worthy Patriots. 2dly, I say, the
Comparison is not fairly stated betwixt the worst part of England and the best
of Scotland, Wales in many places does not Exceed the Highlands of Scotland, in
any thing except the height of the Mountains; But setting aside all these
things, let us State the Comparison; The Twelve very small Countys of Wales
contain 917 Parishes, 58 Market Towns, 316000 People, and Pay 43752 lib. sterling.
to the Land Tax, which shows they are almost Equal to half the Number of People
in Scotland, and Pay near as much Taxes as the whole, And it is known, that
Wales is more Under-Rated in their Taxes, and easier in the Excise than
Scotland, Thus you see it would be hard to find 12 of the Richest Counties in
Scotland to compare with an equal Number and less extent of the worst in
England, which is, as I said, a Demonstration that the Riches of England is the
Effect of Policy as much as of Nature; And is it not as plain, that the
Protection of the same Laws, the influence of the same Government, the
partnership of the same Plantations, and of all other Privileges, Foregin and
Domestic, will much Better the Condition of Scotland, There is hardly any
subject of Trade of the Growth of England, which we are totally deprived of,
and we have one Peculiar, which kind Providence and Nature has afforded us, tho
we never had the Grace, nor Industry to make use of it, I mean our Fish, thus
we starve with that Commodity at our Doors, from which our Neighbors the Dutch
draw the very Foundations of their Wealth and Maritime Power; Will you then
still be fond of that ill Government and Management which even deprives you of
the Provision that Indulgent Nature has thrown into your Mouths, But some will
say, has not our Convention of Burrows Chosen Men, Skilled in the deepest
Mysteries of Trade, of Eminent Abilities and greater Integrity, have not they
told us that the Trade of England is Unsupportable, that is, Untollerable, not
to be endured, which is as much as if they had said, we have not Grandeur of
Soul to Support so great Wealth and Prosperity, we must be Contented to Live
like Pedlers, whilst English Merchants Live like Princes? Where is now your
Pride? Where is now your boastings? But say you again, the same Convention of
Burrows, not not less Skilled in Politics than in Trade; have told us that the
Trade of England is Precarious. It is hard to Answer all the Unreasonable Fears
and Jealousies of People. Has Wales since their Union, ever Complained of the
Breach of one Article? Is there any one Privilege that an Englishman Enjoy's,
which a Welchman is Deprived off? Do all the other Counties Unite to Oppress
Yorkshire? There are indeed some unequalities of Taxes amongst themselves,
wherein they have thought fit not to depart from a Rule once Established; But
this is so sar from being a Discouragement to Scotland, That it is their
greatest Security, it shows how unwilling and incapable a Parliament is, to
Recede from Quota's already Settled, though unequal: Besides Matters in a free
Government never go with that Unanimity, nor in a British Parliament, will
Parties ever be so unequally trimmed, that it will not be in the Power of a
lesser Number than the Scots Members, to Cast the Balance, and if necessary,
so to preserve themselves from Oppression, and it is highly probable, that the
Party of the North and West who are under Taxed, after an Union will be much
Strengthn'd. I shall add no more on this head, but that England has Oppressed
Scotland Ten times more, since the Union of the Two Crowns, than ever they will
be able to do after the Union of the Two Parliaments, But says the same
Ingenious Convention to show their Skill in Political Arthmetick, the Taxes of
England are Unsupportable; To this I Answer, That it was hardly ever known,
that a Nation was afraid of high Customs upon their Import and Consumpt; when
did that ever ruin any People? That is just as if a Man should complain that he
could not be Rich because he has not leave to spend his Money; or that he will
not accept of a Lairdship for fear of paying two Months Cess. With those
intolerable Customs the English Merchants live higher, and acquire much greater
Riches than ours do. As for the Land Tax, it can hardly ever be higher, and
will be often nothing or much lower than what we now pay. Indeed the Increase
of Trade will be attended with an Increase of Excise, and the Benefit of the
one will be much greater than the Damage of the other; but then the Effect will
not exceed the Cause, with this advantage, that all that is raised by the
Public beyond the present Sum, by the Articles of the Treaty, is to remain in
the Country: If after all you should want Money to pay your Taxes, I can
propose no better Expedient than that of the Gospel, Launcb out into the Deep
and let down your Nets, and you may fetch your Tribute Money out of your
Fishes; for after an Union you will have Stock to Employ your People to Catch
them, and Vent for them when they are Catched.

Another Objection is, That an Union with England will draw our People out of
Scotland, to the Metropolis of the Government, and to the Plantations; To which
I answer, That after an Union there are many Reasons, and Inducements for our
People to stay at Home, that do not subsist in the present State, but not any
one (saving their attendance in the British Parliament) to draw them Abroad;
how many People at present leave their Country for want of Employment, (I may
say for want of Bread) is evident to every body that knows either Scotland, or
other Countries where multitudes of Scots are to be met with; nay I appeal to
every Family in the Kingdom, if they have not Relations abroad, some where, or
another, and this is the chief Cause, why Scotland, notwithstanding the Health,
Temperance and Fruitfulness of the Inhabitants, is under Peopled: Now is it not
extremely probable that the Increase of Trade, would employ and keep many at
Home, that are now forced to seek their Bread in foreign Countries, and not
only so, but when the restraint of the Laws of Trade, is taken off, the
cheapness of Living and Manufacture, will invite People from other Parts into
Scotland; particularly the Scots who are now settled in the West Indies, would
choose to purchase and establish their Families in their own Country, not being
any more restrained by Acts of Navigation, from the returning their Effects
thither. 2 dly. If any Scotsman at present has a mind to settle in England, the
minute he sets his Foot on English ground, he has the Privileges of an
Englishman: What then can entice him to leave his own Country after an Union,
more than before? I should imagine he would be less tempted to do so, because
he can then have the same Privileges of Trade, and all other Immunities in
staying at Home, which now he cannot have without going into England. If you
say, that after an Union, his access to Preferment in the public Stations of
the Government, and consequently his Temptations to go to London, will be
greater? That, is an advantage, for then he goes to get an Estate, and not to
spend one, and he will readily Purchase in his own Country. If our Gentry and
Nobility have a mind to spend their Estates at London, I know no Law at present
that restrains them, only necessity which has no Law? That indeed after an
Union may be less, many of our Nobility and Gentry, are now continually at
London, a few to Govern, some to Oppress, many to Complain, and all for Strife
and Contention; and suppose by their attendance on a British Parliament, the
Numbers of those should be doubled, Scotland gets little by an Union, if it is
not able to discharge the Expense of Thirty Noblemen and Gentlemen, at the rate
of 2000 l. sterling. a Man, and perhapes the times may not be so hard, but some of
them will carry more down than they brought up

Thus, I think, I have fully Answered this Objection, which is so far from
being of any weight, that I must entreat you, by the Kindness and natural
Affection you bear to your dear Children and Relations, by the Comfort of their
Society, and having them established amongst your selves in a flowrishing
Condition; by the Casualties and Dangers, and by the unfortunate and fatal End,
which their strowling into foreign Countries often exposes them to: By all
these moving Arguments, I beseech you to Embrace so fair an Opportunity of
making them and your selves Happy for Ages to come; for as the wise Man says,
Eccl. 29. and 24. It is a miserable life to go from House to House, for where
thou art a Stranger thou dare not opea thy Mouth; thou shall Entertain and
Feast and have no Thanks: Moreover thou shall hear bitter Words, these things
are grieveous to a Man of Understanding. Thus I have gone throw my first Head,
and have proved that as clearly as the Sun shines at Noonday, and I call the
same Sun to Witness against your matchless Ignorance and Stupidity, if you
reject so favorable an offer of Liberty, Peace and Plenty.

I proceed now to the second Part of my Text, which is, your boasting of your
Sovereignty, must we loose That? must we be no more a Kingdom? In the first
place, I would ask any reasonable Man, Do we lose our Sovereignty in any other
Sense, than England does? Is there not a new Title, new Seal, new Arms; and the
same changes for them as for us: For I take an Incorporating Union to be, as if
two pieces of Metal, were melted down into one Mass, neither can be said to
retain its former Form or Substance, as it did before the Mixture. We can never
be so unreasonable as to pretend to an equal Number of Representatives in a
British Parliament, when two Nations join in a common Assembly, the most
Powerful and most Numerous, still will be the most Powerful and most Numerous;
whatever Metal exceeded before the Mixture, the same will exceed in the Mass.
It is impossible to change the Nature of Things; according to this way of
reasoning, it is not only impossible for Scotland ever to Unite with England,
but for any lesser Nation ever to Unite with a greater: Why is it more
Dishonorable for Scotland to Unite with England, than it is for England to
Unite with Scotland? What is it that Scotland looses? The Country, the People,
are not Annihilated, nor does an Union cause that all the worthy Deeds, that
have been done at any time by the Scots Nation, or Scotsman, are undone. A
Welchman, would take it very unkindly, if we should tell him that by his Union
with England, he has sulli'd the Glory and Antiquity of the ancient British
Race: None can have a greater value for noble Achievements and Honor of our
Ancestors, than I have; but as for our Independency, so much boasted of, tho it
be most certainly true in it self, and undeniable in Law, as well as
justifiable from History, yet at present, it is in effect only Precarious
Imaginary and Fantastical, and is no more than the Privilege to be Governed by
a Ministry under foreign Influence; which I say not to insinuate the least
Reflection on our present Ministry, who have the Honor to Act a great part, in
putting an end to a Grievance so much complained of, a Blessing perhaps in vain
to be expected or looked for at another time: Can any Man be so destitude of
common Sense, as to think his Liberty and Property, more safely and more
honorably lodged in such Hands, than in those of a British Parliament: Now in
lieu of this titular Sovereignty, and imaginary Independency, by an Union you
acquire true and solid Power and Dominion, to have Sixty Members in a British
Parliament; the twelfth share of disposing of 6000000 l. of Money, which is the
same with the sole Power of disposing of 500000, to have your Fleets and Armies
Conquering Abroad, the Arbitration of the Affairs of Europe, your selves
Represented in foreign Courts and Assemblies; when had Sixty Scotsmen Affairs
of that Importance laid before them? To have your Nobility Peers of
Great Britain, with their Persons and Reputations Sacred over the Island, and
their Lives only subject to the Inquest of a British House of Lords; to have
your Quota of the most eminent Posts of the Government of Great Britain; are
not these things Substantial, Power and Dominion, preferable to the Triffles
you now enjoy, besides that the value of those will be increased, and is it not
more eligible to have such a share, both of the Government of your selves, and
of England, than to be managed by Favorites, often contrary to your most
apparent Interests.

But all these Advantages may be obtained by a Faederal Union some say; it is
an amazing thing, to consider how People are Banter'd out of their Common
Sense, with mere Names and Chimeras, to avoid Multiplicity of Words, by a
Faederal Union, I suppose is meant that the English should Barter their Trade,
for our Settling of their Successor, I would desire any Man who thinks such a
bargain feazible to make the following Reflections; in any Vote that ever past
yet in Scotland against the Settling the Succession, whether he thinks that
England could not Purchase the Majority of that Difference, at a Cheaper Rate,
than the Liberty of their Trade and Plantations, let them ask the Consciences
of those who Voted against the Settlement of the Succession, if the hopes of a
Faederal Union, was the Motive that induced them to do so? Let them ask those
that Voted for it, if they will Vote so no more till they have obtained it, to
show how un-sincerly they deal, who make this their pretense. Many of these
very Gentlemen will be Contented to Settle the Succession on any Terms; But 2
ly. Where is there such a Faederal Union betwixt two Nations, without a Common
Assembly? The Confederated Provinces, and the Confederated Cantons have one
where the Representatives of all the particular Bodies meet, 3 dly. Can any Man
believe, that the English will mantain Plantations, Garrison them, and Defend
them with their Fleets and Armies, to let Scots who are at none of these
Charges reap the Profit of the Trade, will they Establish Customs and Duties,
as the Rule of their Export Abroad, and Consumption at Home, and suffer the
Scots to Trade without any Rule of Customs, or no Customs, High, or Low as they
please, if they would do this, it were no hard matter to have the Monopoly of
their Trade, this were a most Precious Jewel indeed, and very well worth
contending for. But if such a Concession should be thought unreasonable, I
would desire in the next place to know, how a commone expense, in Mantaining
and Providing for Forts, Plantations and Factories, can be Carried on, without
a common Thesaury and Government. And Lastly, if the English should allow us
such a Privilege, can we be secure of it, without we have our Representatives
in their Parliament, to take care of our Interest? And can any man of Sense
think, that we should be more unsecure of our Privileges, when we have Members
in their Assembly, than when we have none, when we are Domestics, than when we
are Strangers? In the former case, nothing destroies our Privileges but what
dissolves the Union, for it is hardly possible to conceive, that all the other
Counties should Unite to hinder a York Shire Man to Trade to the Plantations,
when the Riches he acquires by his Trade, goes to the Support of the
Government, of which they themselves are Members, in the case of one Nation,
and one People, it is indifferent to the Supreme Power, in what part of Great
Britain their Riches ly.

I shall conclude this Article, with the words of the wise Man, Eccl 54. 1. The
hopes of a Man void of Understanding are Vain and False, and Dreams lift up
Fools. I have set before you to day, on one hand Industry and Riches, on the
other Pride and Poverty, I have not required a blind assent, to what I affirm,
I have not Imposed my opinion because it is fashionable, or because such a Lord
who is my Friend and Patron thinks so, or because Mess. John or Mess. James
said so, or because my Drunken Companions Swear Damn them it is so? I deal with
you as reasonable Men, and have purposely insisted on such Arguments, as are
obvious to the meanest Understanding. I Conclude with a general Exhortation to
all Ranks and Degrees of People, to promote this Good Work, it is manifestly
the Interest of you Landed-Men for the Increase of Trade and Manufacture, will
double, yea triple, the value of your Estates, by raising the Price of the
Product, and the number of the Purchassers; besides, your Lands being generally
in the worst Repair, that is, the most improveable Condition, and your Security
by the use of a Register, the best in the Island. No doubt after the restraint
of Laws is taken off, Strangers will be encouraged to Purchase among you: Why
then will you choose to live in a miserable moyling Condition, paying high
Interest for Money, which Land-Rents cannot Discharge, having no way to dispose
of your younger Children, but by sending them abroad into the wide World to
seek their Fortunes; whereas after the Conclusion of this great Affair, you
will have opportunities to employ them in Trade and Business, and access
(according to Merit) to the best Posts of Great Britain. As for you Tennents,
the Necessity of your Masters, is the occasion of your Poverty, Trade will
enable them to let longer Leases and you to take them, and conform you in time
to English Customs, where Masters govern a free People, and are duly paid
their Rents, and Tennents enjoy what remains with equal Security. As for you
Tradesmen, the value of your Manufacture will be raised, you will have the
opportunity to dispose of it, not only over all the Island, but over all the
World, you are Ingenious, Industrious, and live Cheap; what then can hinder you
to be more Rich, than those who have less of all these Qualities? Where there
are Hands to Work, and Simples to work upon, and Vent for the Manufacture, it
is impossible but there must be Trade, if our own Stock is not sufficient, you
will be assisted by that of England, the very novelty of the thing will in some
measure contribute to this, for all the Branches of Traffic in England, being
Traded bare, where there are new Subjects of Trade, Merchants will try new
Projects, their Interest will never suffer them to be partial to this, or that
Country, but will send their Money where they can have the best Bargain. And
you Poor Laborers, shall raise your Wages from Twopence to Twelve-pence, from
Ten Pounds to a Hundred Pounds.

You see the Objections used by the Opposers of an Union, are either frivolous,
founded upon gross Falsehoods, or do plainly prove the contrary of what they are
adduced for; and I have that opinion of the Underderstanding of several of the
Anti-Uniters, that they do not so much as convince themselves, they are only a
Vail drawn over your Eyes to hide from you your present Poverty and Slavery,
and the glorious Prospect which an Union with England presents you with; you
are used only as Tools and Machines, to bring about their factious and
ambitious Designs: However I shall beseech all such Gentlemen and Persons of
Quality, to consider that it is not a slight Matter to sacrifice the present
and future Prosperity of their Country, to an unreasonable Humor, to make a
numerous People and their Posterity, Beggars and Slaves for Ages to come, and
perhapes their Country a field of Blood, by endeavoring to entall this upon
their Neighbors, as well as themselves; or if they are swayed with some Reason
of less importance, as the Treaty not being of their own Framing, I desire them
to consider, that this is so very Childish, that a Senator should be ashamed to
own it, if the pretty little Masters, their Children should take their Fathers
places in Parliament, such a Reason would hardly be allowed to pass current
among them: An Union is a Matter of great Weight and Importance, and very Good,
or Bad, in it self; if it is a bad Thing, our most intimate Friends the
Treaters, can never recommend it? If it is a good Thing, it is so great a Good,
that we ought not to refuse it, from those against whom our personal
Resentments run highest. Among the Opposers of the Union, I know a great many
Persons of Honor, who have as true a Sense of Liberty, and as great a concern
for the Well are of their Country, as any such need, only lay aside some sew
Prejudices and Reflections, their Judgments will quickly inform them of the
true value of the Proposal. To such as are afraid of the Church and Religion,
I shall only say, that the Religion of the Church of England is imposed upon no
Man within the Dominions of England; as for the squeemishness of sitting in
Parliament with Prelates, and the fear of being Disarmed of all other Weapons
but what are allowed by the Gospel; these are such unchristian Dissuasives from
an Union, that to mention them only, is to refute them. The putting an end to
uncharitable and unreasonable Divisions about our triffling Differences in
Religion, is one of the great Benefits Scotland will reap by this Union: I am
not so much terrified at the Vision, of a noble Lord, as he is himself, but
heartily wish to see a Plantation of as Rich Jews as any in Amsterdam, as Rich
Independents, Quakers and Anabaptisms, as any in England, settled in all the
Trading Towns of the Kingdom; not but that I think all Motives that are not
Penal, ought to be used for their Conversion, but would not have Churchmen
afraid of the increase of their Manufacture; for Heretics are properly the
Subject which they are to work upon, to be afraid to live among Heretics, is
to refuse the Task their Master has imposed upon them: Their Predecessors the
Apostles used to go at the hazard of their Persons, to Preach the Gospel to the
Jews; they are afraid the Jews should come to them, where they run no risque
at all, in attempting their Conversion. In a word, if any unjust Tyranny over
the Persons, Estates, or Consciences of Men, be the Motive, which prevail with
some to oppose this Union, I would have such consider, that to Govern a free
People, is a more noble and honorable Character, than to Insult over Slaves
and Beggars, and if any such there be, who hug their Chains, and are fond of
their Rags, and as a wretched People once did by the Romans refuse their
Liberty when offered, they are unworthy of so generous and beneficial a
Proposal. Lastly, if this is only a Scuffle raised by the consederated Force of
the Skillin and Louis d' Or; let such consider, that both of them are not to be
put in the balance with the Guinea, which they may get by their Industry:
Consider then in this your Day, the happy Condition of your Neighboring
Nation; survey their verdant Fields, beautiful Plantations, and sumptuous
Gardens, where Culture, Art and Expenses reign; their populous and flowrishing
Cities, view the Magnificence of their public Structures; the neatness,
cleanliness, convenience and costly Furniture of their private Houses; consider
the Liberty and Plenty of their meanest Commons, the comfortable Estates which
even the basest of their Tradesmen leave to their Families; the immense Riches
of their Merchants, the Grandeur and Magnificence of their Learned Societies;
the prodigious Stocks of their Trading-Companies; the unconquerable Force of
their Fleets and Armies; the Justice and exact Execution of their Laws, and the
wise Administration of their Government: Ponder all these things, and then sure
you will not reckon them your Enemies, who offer you a Partnership in so great
Blessings; but will conclude with the wise Man in my Text, Better is he that
Labors and abounds in all Things, than he that boasts himself and
wants Bread.

FINIS.

