portrait of Mark Akenside AKENSIDE
C^ Sc.

Printed for John Bell British Library Strand London. Jany. 21st. 178^



BELL'S EDITION. The POETS of GREAT BRITAIN COMPLETE FROM CHAUCER to CHURCHILL.
AKENSIDE, VOL. I. Indulgent Fancy! from the fruitful banks
Fresh flowers and dews to sprinkle on the turf
Where Shakespeare lies.
Page ^^
S^ del.

D^ Sc.

Printed for John Bell, British Library Strand, London. Jany. 25th. 1782.



THE POETICAL WORKS OF MARK AKENSIDE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

Genius of ancient Greece! whose faithful steps
Have led us to these awful solitudes
Of Nature and of Science; Nurse revered
Of generous counsels and heroic deeds.
O let some portion of thy matchless praise
Dwell in my breast, and teach me to adorn
This unattempted theme! -- Let me
With blameless hand from thy unenvious fields
Transplant some living blossoms to adorn
My native clime -- while to my compatriot youth
I point the great example of thy sons,
And tune to Attick themes the British lyre.
PLEAS. OF IMAG. ENLARGED. Come, AKENSIDE! come with thine Attick urn,
Filled from Ilissus by the Naiad's hand.
Thy harp was tuned to Freedom -- Strains like thine,
When Asia's lord bored the huge mountain's side
And bridg'd the sea, battle roused the tribes
Of ancient Greece. --
ANONYM. VOL. I.

EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1781.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF MARK AKENSIDE.

VOL. I.

CONTAINING HIS PLEASURES OF THE IMAGINATION, etc. etc. etc.

With what enchantment Nature's goodly scene
Attracts the sense of mortals; how the mind
For its own eye does objects nobler still
Prepare; how men by various lessons learn
To judge of Beauty's praise; what raptures fill
The breast with Fancy's native arts endowed,
And what true culture guides it to renown,
My Verse unfolds. Ye Gods or godlike Powers!
Ye Guardians of the sacred task! attend
Propitious: hand in hand around your Bard
Move in majestic measures. -- Be great in him,
And let your favor make him wise to speak
Of all your wondrous empire, with a voice
So tempered to his theme that those who hear
May yield perpetual homage to yourselves. --
O! attend, whoever thou art whom these delights can touch,
Whom Nature's aspect, Nature's simple garb,
Can thus command: O! listen to my song,
And I will guide thee to her blissful walks,
And teach thy solitude her voice to hear,
And point her gracious features to thy view.
PLEAS. OF IMAG. ENLARGED. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno
1781.

THE LIFE OF MARK AKENSIDE.
MARK AKENSIDE, an eminent poet and physician, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne
the 9th Nov. 1721. He was second son of Mark Akenside, a substantial butcher of
that town: his mother's name was Mary Lumsden. At the freeschool of Newcastle
young Akenside received the first part of his education; he was next committed
to the care of Mr. Wilson, a dissenting clergyman who kept a private academy at
Newcastle.

About the eighteenth year of his age our Author was sent to the university of
Edinburgh, in the view of qualifying himself for the duties of a Presbyterian
pastor, his parents and relations in general being of the Presbyterian sect.
Mr. Akenside received some assistance from the funds which the English
Dissenters employ in educating young men of no opulent fortunes; but his views
as to the ministry altering, he bent his studies toward physic, and honestly
repaid to his benefactors the money they had advanced for him, which being
contributed for a different purpose than promoting the study of physic he
thought it dishonorable to retain. Whether in relinquishing his design of
being a Dissenting clergyman he also ceased to be a Dissenter is not certainly
known.

Akenside's genius and taste for poetry displayed themselves early when at
Newcastle school, and during his continuance at Mr. Wilson's academy. His
Pleasures of Imagination, with several other poems, (...) said, were first
written by him at Morpeth while upon a visit to his relations, and before he
went to the university of Edinburgh, where he also distinguished himself by his
poetical compositions. His Ode on the Winter Solstice, which is dated 1740, was
certainly composed at that place.

After three years study at Edinburgh Mr. Akenside went (1741) to Leyden, where
on 16th May 1744 he took his degree of Doctor in Physic. Same year appeared
his Pleasures of Imagination, a poem which procured him some emolument and much
reputation. This poem was followed by An Epistle to Curio, an acrimonious
attack on the political conduct of William Pulteney Earl of Bath, whom he
stigmatizes under the name of Curio as the betrayer of his country, also
published in the 1744. Akenside dissatisfied with this performance altered it
exceedingly: he converted the Epistle into an Ode, and reduced it to less than
half the number of lines of which it originally consisted. In the 1745 he
published his first Collection of Odes, ten in number. In 1748 came out his Ode
to the Earl of Huntingdon; and in 1758 he attempted to rouse the national
spirit by An Ode to the Country Gentlemen of England. Few of his remaining
poems were published separately, excepting the Ode to Thomas Edwards, Esquire.
which though written in 1751 was not printed till the year 1766. The rest of
Dr. Akenside's poems which appeared in his lifetime were given, at least for
the most part, in the sixth volume of Dodsley's Collection.

Soon after his return from Leyden he commenced physician at Northampton, where
Dr. Stonehouse then practiced with reputation and success. Whilst here he
carried on an amicable debate with Dr. Doddridge concerning the opinions of the
ancient philosophers with regard to a future state of rewards and punishments,
in which Dr. Akenside supported the firm belief of Cicero in particular in this
great article of natural religion. Not meeting with sufficient encouragement at
Northampton, or being ambitious of a larger field in which to display his
talents, he removed to Hampstead, where he resided upwards of two years, and
then finally fixed himself in London.

At London he was well known as a poet, but had still to force his way as a
physician. At first he had but little practice, and would probably have been
reduced to difficulties had not Mr. Dyson, his intimate friend, generously
allowed him 300 l. a year, which enabled him to make a proper appearance in the
world. In time the Doctor acquired considerable reputation and practice, and
arrived at most of the honors incident to his profession: he became a Fellow
of the Royal Society, a Physician to St. Thomas's Hospital, was admitted by
mandamus to the degree of Doctor in Physic in the university of Cambridge, and
elected a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in London, and upon the
settlement of the Queen's household was appointed one of the Physicians to her
Majesty. He perhaps might have still rose to a greater elevation of character
had not his studies ended with his life by a putrid fever 23d June 1770, in the
49th year of his age. He was buried in the parish of St. James's Westminster.

Dr. Akenside was much devoted to the study of ancient literature, and was a
great admirer of Plato, Cicero, and the best philosophers of antiquity. His
knowledge and taste in this respect are conspicuous in his poems, and in the
Notes and Illustrations which he has annexed to them. That he had a sincere
reverence for the great and fundamental principles of religion is apparent from
numberless passages in his writings. His high veneration for the Supreme Being,
his noble sentiments of the wisdom and benevolence of the Divine Providence,
and his zeal for the cause of virtue, are conspicuous in all his poems. His
regard to the Christian revelation, and his solicitude to have it preserved in
its native purity, are displayed in the Ode to the Bishop of Winchester, His
attachment to the cause of civil and religious liberty is a distinguished
feature in the character of his poetical writings: he embraces every occasion
of displaying his ardour concerning this subject; and two of his Odes, those to
the Earl of Huntingdon and the Bishop of Winchester, are directly consecrated
to it.

Dr. Akenside is to be considered as a didactick and lyrick poet. His chief
work, The Pleasures of Imagination, was received with great applause, and
raised the Author's reputation high in the poetical world. Pope, on looking
into the manuscript before publication, is reported to have said "That the
Author was no every-day writer." Mr. Cooper, in his Letters concerning Taste,
speaks of Akenside in the following strain of commendation: "For my part I am
of opinion that there is now living a poet of as genuine a genius as this
kingdom ever produced, Shakespeare alone excepted. By poetical genius I do not
mean the mere talent of making verses, but that glorious enthusiasm of soul,
that fine phrensy, in which the poet's eye rolling glances from heaven to
earth, from earth to heaven, as Shakespeare feelingly describes it. This alone
is poetry; aught else is a mechanical art of putting syllables harmonicusly
together. The gentleman I mean is Dr. Akenside, the worthy Author of The
Pleasures of Imagination, the most beautiful didactick poem that ever adorned
the English language." On the other hand the late Mr. Gray, in a letter to Mr.
Wharton of Old Park near Durham, dated Peterhouse 26th April 1744, (Mason's 4to
edit. of Gray, p. 178.) says, "You desire to know, it seems, what character the
poem of your young friend (Dr. Akenside) bears here. I wonder that you ask the
opinion of a nation where those who pretend to judge do not judge at all, and
the rest (the wiser part) wait to catch the judgment of the world immediately
above them, that is, Dick's and the Rainbow coffeehouses. Your readier way
would be to ask the ladies who keep the bars in those two theaters of
criticism. However, to show you that I am a judge as well as my countrymen, I
will tell you, though I have rather turned it over than read it, (Pleasures of
Imagination) but no matter, no more have they, that it seems to me above the
middling, and now and then, for a little while, rises even to the best,
particularly in description. It is often obscure, and even unintelligible, and
too much infected with the Hutchinson jargon. In short, its great fault is that
it was published at least nine years too early. And so methinks, in a few
words, a la mode du Temple. I have very prettily dispatched what perhaps may
for several years have employed a very ingenious man worth fifty of myself."

"As these observations were hastily delivered in a private letter, before the
poem had been maturely examined, we may be allowed (say the writers of The
Biographia to think them too severe, and to steer a middle course between Mr.
Gray and Mr. Cooper. The obscurity of The Pleasures of Imagination, when read
with attention, will chiefly be found in the allegory of the second book, which
we freely confess we could never understand. It might likewise have been better
if the peculiar language of Hutchinson, or rather of Shaftesbury, had sometimes
been omitted. Nevertheless we cannot but regard it as a noble and beautiful
poem, exhibiting many bright displays of genius and fancy, and holding out
sublime views of Nature, Providence, and morality. We concur with Mr. Gray in
thinking it was published too early: the Author himself became afterward of
the same sentiment; he was convinced that the poem was defective in some
respects, and redundant in others." "That it wanted revision and correction,"
says Mr. Dyson, his editor, "he was sufficiently sensible; but so quick was the
demand for several successive republications, that in any of the intervals to
have completed the whole of his corrections was utterly impossible; and yet to
have gone on from time to time in making farther improvements in every new
edition would, he thought, have had the appearance at least of abusing the
favor of the public: he chose therefore to continue for some time reprinting
it without alteration, and to forbear publishing any corrections or
improvements until he should be able at once to give them to the public
complete: and with this view he went on for several years to review and correct
his poem at leisure, till at length he found the task grow so much upon his
hands, that despairing of ever being able to execute if sufficiently to his own
satisfction he abandoned the purpose of correcting, and resolved to write the
poem over anew, upon a somewhat different and an enlarged plan."

Dr. Akenside did not live to finish the whole of his plan: that part of it
which is carried into execution occurs next in this edition, and the reader may
judge of the Doctor's intentions by having recourse to the General Argument
prefixed to the poem. He designed at first to compromise the whole of his
subject, according to a new plan, in four books; but he afterward changed his
purpose, and determined to distribute The Pleasures of Imagination into a
greater number of books. How far his scheme would have carried him, if he had
lived to complete it, is uncertain, for at his death he had only finished the
first and second books, a considerable part of the third, and the introduction
to the fourth. The first book of the improved work bears a nearer resemblance
to the first book of the former editions than any of the rest do to each other:
there are nevertheless in this book a great number of corrections and
alterations, and several considerable additions. Dr Akenside has introduced a
tribute of respect and affection to his friend Mr. Dyson; he has referred The
Pleasures of Imagination to two sources only, Greatness and Beauty, and not to
three, as he had heretofore done: his delineation of beautiful objects is much
enlarged; and, upon the whole, the first book seems to have received no small
degree of improvement. The second book is very different from the second book
of the preceding editions: the difference indeed is so great that they cannot
be compared together. The Author enters into a display of Truth and its three
classes, matter of Fact, experimental or scientifical Truth, and universal
Truth. He treats likewise of Virtue, as existing in the Divine Mind, of human
virtue, of Vice and its origin, of Ridicule, and of the Passions. What he has
said upon the subject of ridicule is greatly and advantageously reduced from
what it was in the former copies. The enumeration of the different sources of
ridicule is left out, and consequently somelines which had given offense to Dr.
Warburton. The allegorical Vision which heretofore constituted a principal part
of the second book is likewise omitted. The poetical character of the second
book, as it now stands, is, that it is correct, moral, and noble. The third
book is an episode, in which Solon the Athenian lawgiver is the chief
character; and the design of it seems to be, to show the great influence of
poetry in enforcing the cause of Liberty. This part is entirely new, and if it
had been finished would have proved a beautiful addition to the poem. It is
greatly to be regretted that Dr. Akenside did not live to complete his design;
nevertheless we should have been sorry to have had the original poem entirely
superseded. Whatever may be its faults there is in it a certain brightness and
brilliancy of imagination, and a certain degree of enthusiasm, which the Doctor
did not seem to have possessed in equal vigor in the latter part of his life.
Years, and an application to scientifick studies, appear in some measure to
have turned his mind from sound to things, from fancy to the understanding.

Dr. Johnson, in his life of Akenside, says of this poem, "It has undoubtedly a
just claim to very particular notice, as an example of great felicity of
genius, and uncommon amplitude of acquisitions, of a young mind stored with
images, and much exercised in combining and comparing them." Of the altered
work he adds, "He seems to have somewhat contracted his diffusion; but I know
not whether he has gained in closeness what he has lost in splendor."

"To The Pleasures of Imagination," continue the authors of The Biographia,
"succeed two books of Odes, the first containing eighteen, the second fifteen
odes. It was Dr. Akenside's intention, if he had lived, to have made each book
consist of twenty odes. Those which had been formerly published are greatly
altered and improved. The Doctor's odes are not equal to the beautiful
productions of Mr Gray, nor perhaps to those of one or two living writers; but
still there is in them a noble vein of poetry, united with manly sense, and
applied to excellent purposes. This encomium cannot be extended to the whole of
the odes without exception: Dr. Akenside does not always preserve the dignity
of the lyrick Muse: he is defective in the pathetick even upon a subject which
peculiarly required it, and where it might have been most expected, the death
of his mistress, we mean his Ode to the Evening Star. However, his Hymn to
Cheerfulness, and his Odes on leaving Holland, on Lyrick Poetry, to the Earl of
Huntingdon, and on Recovering from a sit of Sickness, justly entitle him to a
place among the principal Lyrick writers of this country."

"Of his Odes," says Dr. Johnson, "nothing favorable can be said. -- To
examine such compositions singly cannot be required; they have doubtless
brighter and darker parts; but when they are once found to be generally dull
all further labor may be spared: for to what use can the work be criticized
that will not be read?" In this diversity of opinions the reader will determine
for himself.

Dr. Akenside's principal medical performance was, 1. His Dissertatio de
Dysenteria, published in 1764, which has been commended as an elegant specimen
of Latinity: it was twice translated into English. He also wrote, 2.
Observations on the Origin and Use of the Lymphatick Vessels in Animals. 3. An
Account of a Blow on the Heart, and its Effects. 4. Oration Anniversaria, ex
Instituto Harveii, in Theatro Collegii Regalis Modicorum Londinensis habita,
Anno 1759. 5. Observations on Cancers. 6. Of the Use of Ipecacuanha in Asthmas.
7. A Method of treating White Swellings of the Joints. Besides these he read at
the College some Practical Observations made at St. Thomas's Hospital on the
putrid Erysipelas, which he intended forth second volume of The Medical
Transactions. This paper he carried home with a design to correct it, but it
was not returned at the time of his death. Being appointed Cronian Lecturer he
chose for his subject "The History of the Revival of Learning," and read three
lectures on it before the College, but from which he soon desisted, it was
supposed in disgust, some one of the College having objected that he had chosen
a subject foreign to the institution. Most of the above pieces were published
in The Philosophical and Medical Transactions.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE EDITION 1772.
THIS volume contains a complete collection of the poems of the late Dr.
Akenside, either reprinted from the original editions, or faithfully published
from copies which had been prepared by himself for publication.

That the principal poem should appear in so disadvantageous a state may
require some explanation. The first publication of it was at a very early part
of the Author's life; that it wanted revision and correction he was
sufficiently sensible; but so quick was the demand for several successive
republications, that in any of the intervals to have completed the whole of his
corrections was utterly impossible; and yet to have gone on from time to time
in making farther improvements in every new edition would, he thought, have had
the appearance at least of abusing the favor of the public: he chose
therefore to continue for some time reprinting it without alteration, and to
forbear publishing any corrections or improvements until he should be able at
once to give them to the public complete: and with this view he went on for
several years to review and correct his poem at leisure, till at length he
found the task grow so much upon his hands, that despairing of ever being able
to execute it sufficiently to his own satisfaction he abandoned the purpose of
correcting, and resolved to write the poem over anew upon a somewhat different
and an enlarged plan: and in the execution of this design he had made a
considerable progress. What reason there may be to regret that he did not live
to execute the whole of it will best appear from the perusal of the plan
itself, as stated in the General Argument, and of the parts which he had
executed, and which are here published: for the person The Right Hon. Jeremiah
Dyson, by whom this Advertisement was written.
to whom he entrusted the disposal of his papers would have thought himself
wanting as well to the service of the public as to the fame of his friend if
he had not produced as much of the work as appeared to have been prepared for
publication. In this light he considered the entire first and second books, of
which a few copies had been printed for the use only of the Author and certain
friends; also a very considerable part of the third book, which had been
transcribed in order to its being printed in the same manner; and to these is
added the introduction to a subsequent book, which in the manuscript is called
the fourth, and which appears to have been composed at the time when the Author
intended to comprise the whole in four books; but which, as he had afterward
determined to distribute the poem into more books, might perhaps more properly
be called the last book. And this is all that is executed of the new work,
which although it appeared to the editor too valuable, even in its imperfect
state, to be withholden from the public, yet (he conceives) takes in by much
too small a part of the original poem to supply its place, and to supersede the
republication of it; for which reason both the poems are inserted in this
Collection.

Of Odes the Author had designed to make up two books, consisting of twenty
odes each, including the several odes which he had before published at
different times.

The Hymn to the Naiads is reprinted from the sixth volume of Dodsley's
Miscellanies, with a few corrections, and the addition of some Notes. To the
Inscriptions, taken from the same volume, three new Inscriptions are added, the
last of which is the only instance wherein a liberty has been taken of
inserting any thing in this Collection which did not appear to have been
intended by the Author for publication In the present edition a few pieces are
added which are known to be genuine, and which certainly are no discredit to
their Author.
, among whose papers no copy of this was found, but it is printed from a copy
which he had many years since given to the editor.

THE DESIGN.
THERE are certain powers in human nature which seem to hold a middle place
between the organs of bodly sense and the faculties of moral perception: they
have been called by a very general name "The Powers of Imagination." Like the
external senses they relate to matter and motion, and at the same time give the
mind ideas analogous to those of moral approbation and dislike. As they are the
inlets of some of the most exquisite Pleasures with which we are acquainted, it
has naturally happened that men of warm and sensible tempers have sought means
to recall the delightful perceptions which they afford, independent of the
objects which originally produced them. This gave rise to the imitative or
designing arts, some of which, as painting and sculpture, directly copy the
external appearances which were admired in nature; others, as music and
poetry, bring them back to remembrance by signs universally established and
understood.

But these arts as they grew more correct and deliberate were of course led to
extend their imitation beyond the peculiar objects of the imaginative powers
especially poetry, which making use of language a^ the instrument by which it
imitates, is consequently become an unlimited representative of every speci^
and mode of being; yet as their intention was only to express the objects of
Imagination, and as they still abound chiefly in ideas of that class, they of
cours^ retain their original character, and all the differen^ Pleasures which
they excite are termed in general Pleasures of Imagination.

The Design of the following Poem is to give a view of these in the largest
acceptance of the term, so that whatever our Imagination feels from the
agreeable appearances of nature, and all the various entertainment we meet with
either in poetry, painting, music, or any of the elegant arts, might be
deducible from one or other of those principles in the constitution of the
human mind which are here established and explained.

In executing this general plan it was necessary first of all to distinguish
the Imagination from our other faculties, and in the next place to characterize
those original forms or properties of being about which it is conversant, and
which are by nature adapted to it, as light is to the eyes, or truth to the
understanding. These properties Mr. Addison had reduced to the three general
classes of Greatness, Novelty, and Beauty; and into these we may analyze every
object, however complex, which, properly speaking, is delightful to the
imagination. But such an object may also include many other sources of
Pleasure, and its beauty, or novelty, or grandeur, will make a stronger
impression by reason of this concurrence. Besides which the imitative arts,
especially poetry, owe much of their effect to a similar exhibition of
properties quite foreign to the imagination, insomuch that in every line of the
most applauded poems we meet with either ideas drawn from the external senses,
or truths discovered to the understanding, or illustrations of contrivance and
final causes, or, above all the rest, with circumstances proper to awaken and
engage the passions; it was therefore necessary to enumerate and exemplify
th^se different species of Pleasure, especially that from the passions, which
as it is supreme in the noblest work of human genius, so being in some
particulars not a little surprising, gave an opportunity to enliven the
didactick turn of the poem by introducing an allegory to account for the
appearance.

After these parts of the subject which hold chiefly of admiration, or
naturally warm and interest the mind, a Pleasure of a very different nature,
that which arises from Ridicule, came next to be considered. As this is the
foundation of the comic manner in all the arts, and has been but very
imperfectly treated by moral writers, it was thought proper to give it a
particular illustration, and to distinguish the general sources from which the
ridicule of characters is derived. Here too a change of style became necessary,
such a one as might yet be consistent, if possible, with the general taste of
composition in the serious parts of the subject; nor is it an easy task to give
any tolerable force to images of this kind without running either into the
gigantick expressions of the mock heroic, (...) the familiar and poetical
raillery of professed satire^ neither of which would have been proper here.

The materials of all imitation being thus laid open^ nothing now remained but
to illustrate some particular Pleasures which arise either from the relations
of different objects one to another, or from the nature of imitation itself. Of
the first kind is that various and complicated resemblance existing between
several parts of the material and immaterial worlds, which is the foundation of
metaphor and wit. As it seems in a great measure to depend on the early
association of our ideas, and as this habit of associating is the source of
many Pleasures and pains in life, and on that account bears a great share in
the influence of poetry and the other arts, it is therefore mentioned here, and
its effects described: then follows a general account of the production of
these elegant arts, and of the secondary Pleasure, as it is called, arising
from the resemblance of their imitations to the original appearances of nature:
after which the work concludes with some reflections on the general conduct of
the powers of Imagination, and on their natural and moral usefulness in life.

Concerning the manner or turn of composition which prevails in this piece
little can be said with propriety by the Author. He had two models; that
ancient and simple one of the first Grecian poets, as it is refined by Virgil
in the Georgicks, and the familiar epistolary way of Horace. This latter has
several advantages: it admits of a greater variety of style; it more readily
engages the generality of readers, as partaking more of the air of
conversation, and especially with the assistance of rhyme leads to a closer and
more concise expression. Add to this the example of the most perfect of modern
poets, who has so happily applied this manner to the noblest parts of
philosophy that the public taste is in a great measure formed to it alone.
Yet, after all, the subject before us, tending almost constantly to admiration
and enthusiasm, seemed rather to demand a more open, pathetick, and figured
style. This too appeared more natural, as the Author's aim was not so much to
give formal precepts, or enter into the way of direct argumentation, as by
exhibiting the most engaging prospects of nature to enlarge and harmonize the
Imagination, and by that means insensibly dispose the minds of men to a similar
taste and habit of thinking in religion, morals, and civil life. It is on this
account that he is so careful to point out the benevolent intention of the
Author of Nature in every principle of the human constitution here insisted on,
and also to unite the moral excellencies of life in the same point of view with
the mere external objects of good taste; thus recommending them in common to
our natural propensity for admiring what is beautiful and lovely. The same
views have also led him to introduce some sentiment^ which may perhaps be
looked upon as not quite direct to the subject; but since they bear an obvious
relation to it the authority of Virgil, the faultless model of didactick
poetry, will best support him in the particular: for the sentiments themselves
he make^ no apology.

THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
(...)
EPICT. apud Arrian. II. 23.
BOOK I.
The Argument.
THE subjet proposed: difficulty of treating it poetically. The ideas of the
Divine Mind the origin of every quality pleasing to the Imagination. The
natural variety of constitution in the minds of men, with its final cause. The
idea of a fine Imagination, and the state of the mind in the enjoyment of those
Pleasures which it affords. All the primary Pleasures of the Imagination (...)
from the perception of greatness, or wonderfulness, or beauty, in objects. The
Pleasure from greatness, with its final cause: Pleasure from novelty or
wondefulness, with its final cause: Pleasure from beauty, with its final cause.
The connection of beauty with truth and good, applied to the conduct of life.
Invitation to the study of moral philosophy. The different degrees of beauty in
different species of objects; color, shape, natural concretes, vegetables,
animals; the mind^ The sublime, the fair, the wonderful, of the mind. The
connection of the Imagination and the moral faculty. Conclusion.

WITH what attractive charms this goodly frame
Of Nature touches the consenting hearts
Of mortal men, and what the pleasing stores
Which beauteous imitation thence derives
To deck the poet's or the painter's toil,
My Verse unfolds. Attend, ye gentle Powers
Of Musical delight! and while I sing
Your gifts, your honors, dance around my strain.
Thou, smiling queen of every tuneful breast,
Indulgent Fancy! from the fruitful banks
Of Avon, whence thy rosy ^ingers cull
Fresh flowers and dews to sprinkle on the turf
Where Shakespeare lies, be present; and with thee
Let Fiction come, upon her vagrant wings
Wafting ten thousand colors through the air,
Which by the glances of her magic eye
She blends and shifts at will through countless forms,
Her wild creation. Goddess of the Lyre,
Which rules the accents of the moving sphere,
Will thou, eternal Harmony! descend
And join this festive train? for with thee comes
The guide the guardian of their lovely sports,
Majestic Truth! and where Truth deigns to come
Her sister Liberty will not be far.
Be present all ye Genii! who conduct
The wandering footsteps of the youthful bard
New to your springs and shades, who touch his ear
With finer sounds, who heighten to his eye
The bloom of Nature, and before him turn
The gayest, happiest, attitude of things.
Often have the laws of each poetic strain
The critic verse employed; yet still unsung
Lay this prime subject, though importing most
A Poet's name: for fruitless is the attempt
By dull obedience and by creeping toil
Obscure to conquer the severe ascent
Of high Parnassus. Nature's kindling breath
Must fire the chosen genius; Nature's hand
Must string his nerves, and imp his eagle wings,
Impatient of the painful steep, to soar
High as the summit, there to breathe at large
Ethereal air with bards and sages old,
Immortal sons of praise! These flattering scenes
To this neglected labor court my song;
Yet not unconscious what a doubtful task
To paint the finest features of the mind,
And to most subtle and mysterious things
Give color, strength, and motion. But the love
Of Nature and the Muses bids explore,
Through secret paths erewhile untrod by man,
The fair poetic region, to detect
Untasted springs, to drink inspiring draughts,
And shade my temples with unfading flowers
Culled from the laureate vale's profound recess,
Where never poet gained a wreath before.
From Heaven my strains begin; from Heaven descends
The flame of genius to the human breast,
And love, and beauty, and poetic joy,
And inspiration. Ere the radiant sun
Sprang from the east, or 'mid the vault of night
The moon suspended her serener lamp,
Ere mountains, woods, or streams, adorned the globe,
Or Wisdom taught the sons of men her lore,
Then lived the Almighty One; then deep-retir'd
In his unsathom'd essence viewed the forms,
The forms eternal, of created things;
The radiant sun, the moon's nocturnal lamp,
The mountains, woods, and streams, therowling globe,
And Wisdom's mien celestial. From the first
Of days on them his love divine he fixed,
His admiration, till in time complete
What he admired and loved his vital smile
Unfolded into being. Hence the breath
Of life informing each organick frame,
Hence the green earth and wild resounding waves,
Hence light and shade alternate, warmth and cold,
And clear autumnal skies and vernal showers,
And all the fair variety of things.
But not alike to every mortal eye
Is this great scene unveiled; for since the claims
Of social life to different labors urge
The active powers of man, with wise intent
The hand of Nature on peculiar minds
Imprints a different bias, and to each
Decrees its province in the common toil.
To some she taught the fabric of the sphere,
The changeful moon, the circuit of the stars,
The golden zones of heaven: to some she gave
To weigh the moment of eternal things,
Of time, and space, and Fate's unbroken chain,
And will's quick impulse: others by the hand
She led over vales and mountains, to explore
What healing virtue swells the tender veins
Of herbs and flowers, or what the beams of morn
Draw forth, distilling from the clifted rind
In balmy tears. But some to higher hopes
Were destined; some within a finer mould
She wrought, and tempered with a purer flame:
To these the Sire Omnipotent unfolds
The world's harmonious volume, there to read
The transcript of himself. On every part
They trace the bright impressions of his hand:
In earth or air, the meadow's purple stores,
The moon's mild radiance, or the virgin's form,
Blooming with rosy smiles, they see portray'd
That uncreated beauty which delights
The mind supreme: they also feel her charms
Enamored; they partake the eternal joy.
For as old Memnon's image, long renowned
By fabling Nilus, to the quivering touch
Of Titan's ray with each repulsive string
Consenting founded through the warbling air
Unbidden strains; even so did Nature's hand
To certain species of external things
Attune the finer organs of the mind:
So the glad impulse of congenial powers,
Or of sweet sound or fair proportioned form,
The grace of motion, or the bloom of light,
Thrills through Imagination's tender frame
From nerve to nerve: all naked and alive
They catch the spreading rays, till now the soul
At length discloses every tuneful spring,
To that harmonious movement from without
Responsive. Then the inexpressive strain
Diffuses its enchantment; Fancy dreams
Of sacred fountains, and Elysian groves,
And vales of bliss: the intellectual power
Bends from his awful throne a wondering ear,
And smiles: the passions, gently soothed away,
Sink to divine repose, and love and joy
Alone are waking; love and joy serene
As airs that fan the summer. O! attend,
Whoever thou art whom these delights can touch,
Whose candid bosom the refining love
Of Nature warms; O! listen to my Song,
And I will guide thee to her favorite walks,
And teach thy solitude her voice to hear,
And point her loveliest features to thy view.
Know then, whatever of Nature's pregnant stores,
Whatever of mimick Art's reflected forms,
With love and admiration thus inflame
The powers of fancy, her delighted sons
To three illustrious orders have referred,
Three sister Graces whom the painter's hand,
The poet's tongue, confesses: the Sublime,
The Wonderful, the Fair. I see them dawn!
I see the radiant visions where they rise,
More lovely than when Lucifer displays
His beaming foreheed through the gates of morn
To lead the train of Phoebus and the spring.
Say, why was man so eminently raised. 151. Say, why was man, etc.] In
apologizing for the frequent negligences of the sublimest authors of Greece,
"(...) godlike geniuses," says Longinus, "were well assured that Nature had not
intended man for a low-spirited or ignoble being, but bringing us into life and
the midst of this wide universe as before a multitude assembled at some heroic
solemnity that we might be spectators of all her magnificence, and candidates
high in emulation for the prize of glory; she has therefore implanted in our
souls an inextinguishable love of every thing great and exalted, of every thing
which appears divine beyond our comprehension: whence it comes to pass that
even the whole world is not an object sufficient for the depth and rapidity of
human Imagination, which often sallies forth beyond the limits of all that
surrounds us. Let any man cast his eye through the whole circle of our existence,
and consider how especially it abounds in excellent and grand objects, he will
soon acknowledge for what enjoyments and pursuits we were destined. Thus by the
very propensity of Nature we are led to admire not little springs or shallow
rivulets, however clear and delicious, but the Nile, the Rhine, the Danube,
and, much more than all, the ocean," etc. Dionys. Longin. de Sublim. sect. xxiv.

Amid the vast creation? why ordained
Through life and death to dart his piercing eye,
With thoughts beyond the limit of his frame,
But that the Omnipotent might send him forth,
In sight of mortal and immortal powers,
As on a boundless theater, to run
The great career of justice, to exalt
His generous aim to all diviner deeds,
To chase each partial purpose from his breast,
And through the mists of passion and of sense,
And through the tossing tide of chance and pain,
To hold his course unfault'ring, while the voice
Of Truth and Virtue up the steep ascent
Of Nature calls him to his high reward,
The applauding smile of Heaven? else wherefore burns
In mortal bosoms this unquenched hope
That breathes from day to day sublimer things,
And mocks possession? wherefore darts the mind
With such resistless ardour to embrace
Majestic forms, impatient to be free
Spurning the gross control of wilful might,
Proud of the strong contention of her toils,
Proud to be daring? Who but rather turns
To heaven's broad fire his unconstrained view
Than to the glimmering of a waxen flame?
Who that from Alpine heights his laboring eye
Shoots round the wide horizon to survey
Nilus or Ganges rolling his bright wave
Through mountains, plains, through empires black with shade,
And continents of sand, will turn his gaze
To mark the windings of a scanty rill
That murmurs at his feet? The highborn soul
Disdains to rest her heav'n-aspiring wing
Beneath its native quarry. Tired of earth
And this diurnal scene, she springs aloft
Through fields of air, pursues the flying storm,
Rides on the volly'd lightning through the heavens,
Or yoked with whirlwinds and the northern blast
Sweeps the long track of day. Then high she soars
The blue profound, and hovering round the Sun
Beholds him pouring the redundant stream
Of light, beholds his unrelenting sway
Bend the reluctant planets to absolve
The fated rounds of time: thence far effus'd
She darts her swiftness up the long career
Of devious comets, through its burning signs
Exulting measures the perennial wheel
Of Nature, and looks back on all the stars,
Whose blended light as with a milky zone
Invests the orient. Now amazed she views
The empyreal waste, where happy spirits hold. 202. The empyreal waste, etc.]
"Ne se peut-il point qu'il y a un grand espace au dela de la region des
etoiles? Que se soit le ciel empyree, ou non, toujours cet espace immense qui
environne toute cette region, pourra etre rempli de bonheur et de gloire. Il
pourra etre concu comme l'ocean, ou se rendent les fleuves de toutes les
creatures bienheureuses, quand else seront venues a leur perfection dans le
systeme des etoiles." Leibnitz dans la Theodicee, part. I. sect. 19.

Beyond this concave heaven their calm abode,
And fields of radiance whose unfading light. 204. -- whose unfading light,
etc.] It was a notion of the great Mr. Huygens that there may be fixed stars at
such a distance from our solar system as that their light should not have had
time to reach us even from the creation of the world to this day.

Has traveled the profound six thousand years,
Nor yet arrives in sight of mortal things.
Even on the barriers of the world untir'd
She meditates the eternal depth below,
Till half recoiling down the headlong steep
She plunges, soon overwhelmed and swallowed up
In that immense of being. There her hopes
Rest at the fated goal: for from the birth
Of mortal man the Sovran Maker said
That not in humble nor in brief delight,
Not in the fading echoes of renown,
Powers purple robes nor Pleasure's flowery lap,
The soul should find enjoyment; but from these
Turning disdainful to an equal good
Through all the ascent of things enlarge her view,
Till every bound at length should disappear,
And infinite perfection close the scene.
Call now to mind what high capacious powers
Lie folded up in man; how far beyond
The praise of mortals may the eternal growth
Of Nature to perfection half divine
Expand the blooming soul: what pity then
Should sloth's unkindly fogs depress to earth
Her tender blossom, choke the streams of life,
And blast her spring! Far otherwise designed
Almighty Wisdom; Nature's happy cares
The obedient heart far otherwise incline;
Witness the sprightly joy when aught unknown
Strikes the quick sense, and wakes each active power
To brisker measures; witness the neglect
Of all familiar prospects, though beheld. 234. -- the neglect -- Of all familiar
prospects, etc.] It is here said that in consequence of the love of novelty
objects which at first were highly delightful to the mind lose that ^sect by
repeated attention to them; but the instance of (...) is opposed to this
observation, for there objects at first distasteful are in time rendered
entirely agreeable by repeated attention.

The difficulty in this case will be removed if we consider that, when objects
at first agreeable lose that influence by frequently recurring, the mind is
wholly passive and the perception involuntary; but habit on the other hand
generally supposes choice and activity accompanying it; so that the pleasure
arises here not from the object but from the mind's conscious determination of
its own activity, and consequently increases in proportion to the frequency of
that determination.

It will still be urged perhaps that a familiarity with disagreeable objects
renders them at length acceptable, even when there is no room for the mind to
resolve or act at all: in this case the appearance must be accounted for one of
these ways:

The pleasure from habit may be merely negative. The object at first gave
uneasiness; this uneasiness gradually wears off as the object grows familiar;
and the mind finding it at last entirely removed, reckons its situation really
pleasureable compared with what it had experienced before.

The dislike conceived of the object at first might be owing to prejudice or
want of attention; consequently the mind being necessitated to review it often
may at length perceive its own mistake, and be reconciled to what it had looked
on with aversion; in which case a sort of instinctive justice naturally leads
it to make amends for the injury by running toward the other extreme of
fondness and attachment.

Or, lasly, though the object itself should always continue disagreeable, yet
circumstances of pleasure or good fortune may occur along with it: thus an
association may arise in the mind and the object never be remembered without
those pleasing circumstances attending it, by which means the disagreeable
impression which it at first occasioned will in time be quite obliterated.



With transport once, the fond attentive gaze
Of young Astonishment, the sober zeal
Of Age commenting on prodigious things.
For such the bounteous providence of Heaven,
In every breast implanting this desire. 240. -- this desire -- Of objects new
and sstrange, etc.] These two ideas are often confounded, though it is evident
the mere novelty of an object makes it agreeable, even where the mind is not
affected with the least degree of wonder; whereas wonder indeed always implies
novelty, being never excited by common or wellknown appearances. But the
pleasure in both cases is explicable from the same final cause, the acquisition
of knowledge and enlargement of our views of Nature: on this account it is
natural to treat of them together.

Of objects new and strange, to urge us on
With unremitted labor to pursue
Those sacred stores that wait the ripening soul
In Truth's exhaustless bosom. What need words
To paint its power? For this the daring youth
Breaks from his weeping mother's anxious arms
In foreign climes to rove; the pensive sage,
Heedless of sleep or midnight's harmful damp,
Hangs over the sickly taper; and untir'd
The virgin follows, with enchanted step,
The mazes of some wild and wondrous tale
From morn to eve, unmindful of her form,
Unmindful of the happy dress that stole
The wishes of the youth when every maid
With envy pined. Hence, finally, by night
The village matron round the blazing hearth
Suspends the infant audience with her tales,
Breathing astonishment! of witching rhymes
And evil spirits, of the deathbed call
Of him who robbed the widow and devoured
The orphan's portion, of unquiet souls
Risen from the grave to ease the heavy guilt
Of deeds in life concealed, of shapes that walk
At dead of night and clank their chains, and wave
The torch of hell around the murd'rer's bed:
At every solemn pause the crowd recoil,
Gazing each other speechless, and congealed
With shivering sighs till, eager for the event,
Around the beldame all erect they hang,
Each trembling heart with grateful terrors quelled.
But lo! disclosed in all her smiling pomp,
Where Beauty onward moving claims the verse
Her charms inspire: the freely flowing verse
In thy immortal praise, O form divine!
Smooths her mellifluent stream. Thee Beauty! thee
The regal dome and thy enlivening ray
The mossy roofs adore: thou, better sun!
For ever beamest on the enchanted heart
Love, and harmonious wonder, and delight
Poetic. Brightest progeny of Heaven!
How shall I trace thy features? where select
The roseate hues to emulate thy bloom?
Haste then, my Song! through Nature's wide expanse,
Haste then, and gather all her comeliest wealth,
Whatever bright spoils the florid earth contains,
Whatever the waters or the liquid air,
To deck thy lovely labor. Will thou fly
With laughing Autumn to th'Atlantick isles,
And range with him the Hesperian field, and see
Wherever his fingers touch the fruitful grove
The branches shoot with gold, wherever his step
Marks the glad soil the tender clusters grow
With purple ripeness, and invest each hill
As with the blushes of an evening sky?
Or will thou rather stoop thy vagrant plume
Where gliding through his daughter's honored shades
The smooth Peneus from his glassy flood
Reflects purpureal Tempe's pleasant scene?
Fair Tempe! haunt beloved of sylvan powers,
Of Nymphs and Fauns, where in the Golden Age
They played in secret on the shady brink
With ancient Pan, while round their choral steps
Young Hours and genial gales with constant hand
Shower'd blossoms, odours, shower'd ambrosial dews,
And spring's Elysian bloom. Her flowery store
To thee nor Tempe shall refuse nor watch
Of winged Hydra guard Hesperian fruits
From thy free spoil. O! bear then unreprov'd
Thy smiling treasures to the green recess
Where young Dione stays: with sweetest airs
Entice her forth to lend her angel form
For Beauty's honored image. Hither turn
Thy graceful footsteps; hither, gentle Maid!
Incline thy polished forehead: let thy eyes
Effuse the mildness of their azure dawn,
And may the fanning breezes waft aside
Thy radiant locks, disclosing as it bends
With airy softness from the marble neck
The cheek fair-blooming and the rosy lip,
Where winning Smiles and Pleasures sweet as Love
With sanctity and wisdom temp'ring blend
Their soft allurement: then the pleasing force
Of Nature, and her kind parental care,
Worthier I Would sing; then all the enamored youth,
With each admiring virgin, to my lyre
Should throng attentive, while I point on high
Where Beauty's living image, like the Morn
That wakes in Zephyr's arms the blushing May,
Moves onward, or as Venus when she stood
Effulgent on the pearly car and smiled
Fresh from the deep, and conscious of her form,
To see the Tritons tune their vocal shells,
And each cerulean sister of the flood
With loud acclaim attend her over the waves
To seck the Idalian bower. Ye smiling band
Of Youths and Virgins! who through all the maze
Of young desire with rival steps pursue
This charm of beauty, if the pleasing toil
Can yield a moment's respite hither turn
Your favorable ear, and trust my words.
I do not mean to wake the gloomy form
Of Superstition dressed in Wisdom's garb
To damp your tender hopes; I do not mean
To bid the jealous Thund'rer fire the heavens,
Or shapes insernal rend the groaning earth,
To fright you from your joys: my cheerful Song
With better omens calls you to the field,
Pleased with your generous ardour in the chase,
And warm like you. Then tell me, for ye know,
Does Beauty ever deign to dwell where health
And active use are strangers? is her charm
Confessed in aught whose most peculiar ends
Are lame and fruitless? or did Nature mean
This pleasing call the herald of a lie,
To hide the shame of discord and disease,
And catch with fair hypocrisy the heart
Of idle Faith? O no! with better cares
The indulgent mother, conscious how infirm
Her offspring tread the paths of good and ill,
By this illustrious image, in each kind
Still most illustrious where the object holds
Its native powers most perfect, she by this
Illumes the headstrong impulse of Desire,
And sanctifies his choice. The generous glebe
Whose bosom smiles with verdure, the clear track
Of streams delicious to the thirsty soul,
The bloom of nectar'd fruitage ripe to sense,
And every charm of animated things,
Are only pledges of a state sincere,
The integrity and order of their frame
When all is well within, and every end
Accomplished. Thus was Beauty sent from Heaven
The lovely ministress of Truth and Good
In this dark world; for Truth and Good are one,. 374. -- Truth and Good are
one, -- And Beauty dweils in them. etc.] "Do you imagine," says Socrates to
Aristippus, "that what is good is not beautiful? have you not observed that
these appearances always coincide? Virtue, for instance, in the same respect as
to which we call it good is ever acknowledged to be beautiful also. In the
characters of men we always join the two denominations together This the
Athenians did in a peculiar manner by the words (...).
. The beauty of human bodies corresponds in like manner with that economy of
parts which constitutes them good, and in every circumstance of life the same
object is constantly accounted both beautiful and good, inasmuch as it answers
the purposes for which it was designed." Xenoph. Memorab. Socrat. lib. iii.
cap. 8.

This excellent observation has been illustrated and extended by the noble
restorer of ancient philosophy. See The Characteristicks, vol. ii. p. 339 and
422, and vol. iii. p. 181. And another ingenious author has particularly shown
that it holds in the general laws of Nature, in the works of art, and the
conduct of the sciences. Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and
Virtue, Treat. i. sect. 8. As to the connection between beauty and truth, there
are two opinions concerning it. Some philosophers assert an independent and
invariable law in Nature, in consequence of which "all rational beings must
alike perceive beauty in some certain proportions, and deformity in the
contrary." And this necessity being supposed the ^ame with that which commands
the assent or dissent of the understanding, it follows of course that beauty is
founded on the universal and unchangeable law of truth.

But others there are who believe beauty to be merely a relative and arbitrary
thing; that indeed it was a benevolent provision in Nature to annex so
delightful a sensation to those objects which are best and most perfect in
themselves, that so we might be engaged to the choice of them at once, and
without having to infer their usefulness from their structure and effects; but
that it is not impossible, in a physical sense, that two beings of equal
capacities for truth should perceive one of them beauty and the other deformity
in the same proportions. And upon this supposition, by that truth which is
always connected with beauty, nothing more can be meant than the conformity of
any object to those proportions upon which after careful examination the beauty
of that species is found to depend. Polycietus, for instance, a famous ancient
sculptor, from an accurate mensuration of the several parts of the most perfect
human bodies deduced a canon or system of proportions which was the rule of all
succeeding artists. Suppose a statue modelled according to this, a man of mere
natural taste upon looking at it, without entering into its proportions,
confesses and admires its beauty; whereas a professor of the art applies his
measures to the head, the neck, or the hand, and without attending to its
beauty pronounces the workmanship to be just and true.



And Beauty dwells in them and they in her
With like participation: wherefore then,
O Sons of Earth! would ye dissolve the tie?
O! wherefore with a rash impetuous aim
Seek ye those flowery joys with which the hand
Of lavish Fancy paints each flattering scene
Where Beauty seems to dwell, nor once inquire
Where is the sanction of eternal truth,
Or where the seal of undeceitful good,
To save your search from folly! Wanting these
Lo! Beauty withers in your void embrace,
And with the glittering of an idiot's toy
Did fancy mock your vows. Nor let the gleam
Of youthful hope that shines upon your hearts
Be chilled or clouded at this awful task
To learn the lore of undeceitful good
And truth eternal. Though the poisonous charms
Of baleful superstition guide the feet
Of servile numbers through a dreary way
To their abode, through deserts, thorns, and mire,
And leave the wretched pilgrim all forlorn
To muse at last amid the ghostly gloom
Of graves, and hoary vaults, and cloistered cells,
To walk with specter through the midnight shade,
And to the screaming owl's accursed song
Attune the dreadful workings of his heart,
Yet be not ye dismayed; a gentler star
Your lovely search illumines. From the grove
Where Wisdom talked with her Athenian sons
Could my ambitious hand intwine a wreath
Of Plato's olive with the Mantuan bay,
Then should my powerful Verse at once dispel
Those monkish horrors, then in light divine
Disclose the Elysian prospect, where the steps
Of those whom Nature charms through blooming walks,
Through fragrant mountains and poetic streams,
Amid the train of sages, heroes, bards.
Led by their winged Genius and the choir
Of laurell'd Science and harmonious Art,
Proceed exulting to the eternal shrine
Where Truth conspic'ous with her sister twins,
The undivided partners of her sway,
With Good and Beauty reigns. O let not us,
Lulled by luxurious Pleasure's languid strain,
Or crouching to the frowns of bigot Rage,
O let us not a moment pause to join
That godlike band! and if the gracious power
Who first awakened my untutored song
Will to my invocation breathe anew
The tuneful spirit, then through all our paths
Never shall the sound of this devoted lyre
Be wanting; whether on the rosy mead,
When summer smiles, to warn the melting heart
Of Luxury's allurement, whether firm
Against the torrent and the stubborn hill
To urge bold Virtue's unremitted nerve,
And wake the strong divinity of soul
That conquers Chance and Fate, or whether struck
For sounds of triumph to proclaim her toils
Upon the lofty summit, round her brow
To twine the wreath of incorruptive praise,
To trace her hallowed light through future worlds,
And bless Heaven's image in the heart of man.
Thus with a faithful aim have we presumed
Adventurous to delineate Nature's form,
Whether in vast majestic pomp arrayed,
Or dressed for pleasing wonder, or serene
In Beauty's rosy smile. It now remains
Through various Being's fair proportioned scale
To trace the rising luster of her charms
From their first twilight, shining forth at length
To full meridian splendor. Of degree
The least and lowliest in the effusive warmth
Of colors mingling with a random blaze
Does Beauty dwell; then higher in the line
And variation of determined shape,
Where Truth's eternal measures mark the bound
Of circle, cube, or sphere: the third ascent
Unites this varied symmetry of parts
With colour's bland allurement, as the pearl
Shines in the concave of its azure bed,
And painted shells indent their speckled wreath.
Then more attractive rise the blooming forms
Through which the breath of Nature has infused
Her genial power to draw with pregnant veins
Nutricious moisture from the bounteous earth
In fruit and seed prolisick; thus the flowers
Their purple honors with the spring resume,
And such the stately tree which autumn bends
With blushing treasures. But more lovely still
Is Nature's charm where to the full consent
Of complicated members, to the bloom
Of color and the vital change of growth
Life's holy flame and piercing sense are given,
And active motion speaks the tempered soul:
So moves the bird of Juno, so the steed
With rival ardour beats the dusty plain,
And faithful dogs with eager airs of joy
Salute their fellows. Thus does Beauty dwell
There most conspic'ous, even in outward shape,
Where dawns the high expression of a mind,
By steps conducting our enraptured search
To that Eternal Origin whose power
Through all the unbounded symmetry of things,
Like rays effulging from the parent sun,
This endless mixture of her charms diffused.
Mind, mind alone, (bear witness Earth and Heav'nl)
The living fountains in itself contains
Of beauteous and sublime: here hand in hand
Sit paramount the Graces, here enthroned
Celestical Venus with divinest airs
Invites the soul to never fading joy.
Look then abroad through Nature, to the range
Of planets, suns, and adamantine spheres,
Wheeling unshaken through the void immense,
And speak, O Man! does this capacious scene
With half that kindling majesty dilate
Thy strong conception as when Brutus rose. 492. As when Brutus rose, etc.]
Cicero himself describes this fact -- "Caesare interfecto -- statim cruentum
alte extollens M. Brutus pugionem, Ciceronem nominatim exclamavit, atque ei
recuperatam libertatem est gratulatus." Cic. Philipp. ii. 12.

Refulgent from the stroke of Caesar's fate
Amid the crowd of patriots, and his arm
Aloft extending, like eternal Jove
When guilt brings down the thunder, called aloud
On Tully's name, and shook his crimson steel,
And bad the father of his country Hail!
For lo the tyrant prostrate on the dust!
And Rome again is free? Is aught so fair
In all the dewy landscapes of the spring,
In the bright eye of Hesper or the Morn,
In Nature's fairest forms, is aught so fair
As virtuous friendship? as the candid blush
Of him who strives with Fortune to be just?
The graceful tear that streams for others' woes?
Or the mild majesty of private life,
Where Peace with ever-blooming olive crowns
The gate, where Honor's liberal hands effuse
Unenvied treasures, and the snowy wings
Of Innocence and Love protect the scene?
Once more search undismayed the dark profound
Where Nature works in secret, view the beds
Of mineral treasure, and the eternal vault
That bounds the hoary ocean; trace the forms
Of atoms moving with incessant change
Their elemental round, behold the seeds
Of being, and the energy of life
Kindling the mass with ever active flame,
Then to the secrets of the working Mind
Attentive turn; from dim oblivion call
Her fleet ideal band, and bid them go;
Break through time's barrier, and overtake the hour
That saw the heavens created; then declare
If aught were found in those external scenes
To move thy wonder now. For what are all
The forms which brute unconscious matter wears,
Greatness of bulk, or symmetry of parts?
Not reaching to the heart soon feeble grows
The superficial impulse; dull their charms,
And satiate soon, and pall the languid eye.
Not so the moral species, nor the powers
Of genius and design: the ambitious Mind
There sees herself; by these congenial forms
Touched and awakened, with intenser act
She bends each nerve, and meditates wellpleas'd
Her features in the mirror: for of all
The inhabitants of earth to man alone
Creative Wisdom gave to lift his eye
To truth's eternal measures, thence to frame
The sacred laws of action and of will,
Discerning justice from unequal deeds,
And temperance from folly. But beyond
This energy of truth, whose dictates bind
Assenting reason, the benignant Sire,
To deck the honored paths of just and good,
Has added bright Imagination's rays,
Where Virtue rising from the awful depth. 548. Where Virtue rising from the
awful depth -- Of Truth^ mys^erious bosom, etc.] According to the opinion of
those who a^ert moral obligation to be founded on an immutable and universal
law, and that which is usually called the moral (...) to be determined by the
peculiar temper of the Imaginat^ the earliest associations of ideas.

Of Truth's mysterious bosom does forsake
The unadorned condition of her birth,
And dressed by Fancy in ten thousand hues
Assumes a various feature, to attract
With charms responsive to each gazer's eye
The hearts of men. Amid his rural walk
The ingenuous youth, whom solitude inspires
With purest wishes, from the pensive shade
Beholds her moving like a virgin Muse
That wakes her lyre to some indulgent theme
Of harmony and wonder, while among
The herd of servile minds her strenuous form
Indignant flashes on the patriot's eye,
And through the rolls of memory appeals
To ancient honor, or, in act serene
Yet watchful, raises the majestic sword
Of public power, from dark Ambition's reach
To guard the sacred volume of the laws.
Genius of ancient Greece! whose faithful steps
Wellpleas'd I follow through the sacred paths
Of Nature and of Science; Nurse divine
Of all heroic deeds and fair desires!
O let the breath of thy extended praise
Inspire my kindling bosom to the height
Of this untempted theme! Nor be my thoughts
Presumptuous counted if amid the calm
That sooths this vernal evening into smiles
I steal impatient from the sordid haunts
Of Strife and low Ambition to attend
Thy sacred presence in the sylvan shade,
By their malignant footsteps never profaned.
Descend propitious to my favored eye!
Such in thy mien, thy warm exalted air,
As when the Persian tyrant foiled, and stung
With shame and desperation, gnash'd his teeth
To see thee rend the pageants of his throne,
And at the lightning of thy lifted spear
Crouch'd like a slave. Bring all thy martial spoils,
Thy plams, thy laurels, thy triumphal songs,
Thy smiling band of arts, thy godlike sires
Of civil wisdom, thy heroic youth,
Warm from the schools of glory. Guide my way
Through fair Lyceum's walk, the green retreats. 591. Lyceum.] The school of
Aristotle.

Of Academus, and the thymy vale. 592. Academus.] The school of Plato.

Where o^ enchanted with Socratick sounds
Ilissus pure devolved his tuneful stream. 594. Ilissus.] One of the rivers on
which Athens was s^tuated. Plato in some of his finest Dialogues lays the scene
the conversation with Socrates on its banks.

In gentler murmurs. From the blooming store
Of th^se a aspicious fields may I unblam'd
Transplant some living blossoms to adorn
My native clime; while sar above the flight
Of fancy's plume aspiring I unlock
The springs of ancient wisdom; while I join
Thy name, thrice honored! with the immortal praise
Of Nature; while to my compatriot youth
I point the high example of thy sons,
And tune to Attick themes the British lyre.
END OF BOOK FIRST.
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK II.
The Argument.
THE separation of the works of Imagination from philosophy the cause of their
abuse among the Moderns. Prospect of their reunion under the influence of
public liberty. Enumeration of accidental Pleasures, which increase the effect
of objects delightful to the Imagination. The Pleasures of sense. Particular
circumstances of the mind. Discovery of truth. Perception of contrivance and
design. Emotion of the passions. All the natural passions partake of a pleasing
sensation; with the final cause of this constitution illustrated by an
Allegorical Vision, and exemplified in sorrow, pity, terror, and indignation.

WHEN shall the laurel and the vocal string
Resume their honors? when shall we behold
The tuneful tongue, the Promethean hand,
Aspire to ancient praise? Alas! how saint,
How slow, the dawn of beauty and of truth
Breaks the reluctant shades of Gothic night
Which yet involve the nations! Long they groaned
Beneath the furies of rapacious Force
Often as the gloomy North with iron swarms
Tempest'ous pouring from her frozen caves
Blasted the Italian shore, and swept the works
Of Liberty and Wisdom down the gulf
Of alldevouring Night. As long immured
In noontide darkness by the glimmering lamp
Each Muse and each fair Science pined away
The sordid hours, while foul Barbarian hands
Their mysteries prosan'd, unstrung the lyre,
And chained the soaring pinion down to earth.
At last the Muses rose and spurned their bonds,. 19. At last the Muses rose,
etc.] About the age of Hugh Capet, founder of the third race of French kings,
the poets of Provence were in high reputation, a sort of strolling bards or
rhapodists, who went about the courts of princes and noblemen entertaining them
at festivals with music and poetry. They attempted both the epick, ode, and
satire, and abounded in a wild and fantastic vein of fable, partly
allegorical, and partly founded on traditionary legends of the Saracen wars.
These were the rudiments of Italian poetry. But their taste and composition
must have been extremely barbarous, as we may judge by those who followed the
turn of their fable in much politer times, such as Bolardo, Bernardo, Tasso,
Ariosto, etc.

And wildly warbling scattered as they flew
Their blooming wreaths from fair Valclusa's bowers. 21. Valclusa.] The famous
retreat of Francisco Petrarcha, the father of Italian poetry, and his mistress
Laura, a lady of Avignon.

To Arno's myrtle border and the shore. 22. Arno.] The river which runs by
Florence, the birthplace of Dante and Boccacio.

Of soft Parthenope. But still the rage. 23. Parthenope.] Or Naples, the
birthplace of Sannazaro. The great Torquato Tasso was born at Sorrento in the
kingdom of Naples.
Ibid. -- the rage -- Of dire Ambition, etc.] This relates to the cruel wars
among the republics of Italy, and abominable politics of its little princes,
about the fifteenth century. These at last, in conjunction with the Papal
power, entirely extinguished the spirit of liberty in that country, and
established that abuse of the fine arts which has been since propagated over
all Europe.

Of dire Ambition and gigantick Power
From public aims and from the busy walk
Of civil commerce drove the bolder train
Of penetrating Science to the cells
Where studious Ease consumes the silent hour
In shadowy searches and unfruitful care.
Thus from their guardians torn the tender arts. 30. Thus from their guardians
torn the tender arts, etc.] Nor were they only losers by the separation; for
philosophy itself, to use the words of a noble philosopher, "being thus severed
by the sprightly arts and sciences, must consequently grow dronish, insipid,
pedantick, useless, and directly opposite to the real knowledge and practice of
the world." Insomuch that "a gentleman," says another excellent writer, "cannot
easily bring himself to like so austere and ungainly a form; so greatly is it
changed from what was once the delight of the finest gentlemen of Antiquity,
and their recreation after the hurry of public affairs!" From this condition
it cannot be recovered but by uniting it once more with the works of
Imagination; and we have had the pleasure of observing a very great progress
made toward their union in England within these few years. It is hardly
possible to conceive them at a greater distance from each other than at the
Revolution, when Lock stood at the head of one party and Dryden of the other.
But the general spirit of liberty which has ever since been growing naturally
invited our men of wit and genius to improve that influence which the arts of
persuasion gave them with the people, by applying them to subjects of
importance to society. Thus poetry and eloquence became considerable, and
philosophy is now of course obliged to borrow of their embellishments in order
even to gain audience with the public.

Of mimick fancy and harmonious joy
To priestly domination and the lust
Of lawless courts their amiable toil
For three inglorious ages have resigned,
In vain reluctant, and Torquato's tongue
Was tuned for slavish Paeans at the throne
Of tinsel Pomp, and Raphael's magic hand
Effus'd its fair creation to enchant
The fond adoring herd in Latian ^anes
To blind belief, while on their prostrate necks
The sable tyrant plants his heel secure.
But now, behold! the radiant era dawns
When Freedom's ample fabric, fixed at length
For endless years on Albion's happy shore,
In full proportion once more shall extend
To all the kindred powers of social bliss
A common mansion, a parental roof:
There shall the Virtues, there shall Wisdom's train,
Their long-lost friends rejoining, as of old,
Embrace the smiling family of Arts,
The Muses and the Graces. Then no more
Shall Vice, distracting their delicious gifts
To aims abhorred, with high distaste and scorn
Turn from their charms the philosophic eye,
The patriot bosom; then no more the paths
Of public care or intellectual toil
Alone by footsteps haughty and severe
In gloomy state be trod: the harmonious Muse
And her persuasive sisters then shall plant
Their sheltering laurels over the bleak ascent,
And scatter flowers along the rugged way.
Armed with the lyre already have we dared
To pierce divine Philosophy's retreats
And teach the Muse her lore, already strove
Their long divided honors to unite,
While temp'ring this deep argument we sang
Of Truth and Beauty. Now the same glad task
Impends; now urging our ambitious toil
We hasten to recount the various springs
Of adventitious Pleasure, which adjoin
Their grateful influence to the prime effect
Of objects grand or beauteous, and enlarge
The complicated joy. The sweets of sense
Do they not often with kind accession flow
To raise harmonious Fancy's native charm?
So while we taste the fragrance of the rose
Glows not her blush the fairer? while we view
Amid the noontide walk a limpid rill
Gush through the trickling herbage, to the thirst
Of summer yielding the delicious draught
Of cool refreshment, over the mossy brink
Shines not the surface clearer, and the waves
With sweeter music murmur as they flow?
Nor this alone. The various lot of life
Often from external circumstance assumes
A moment's disposition to rejoice
In those delights which at a different hour
Would pass unheeded. Fair the face of spring
When rural songs and odours wake the Morn
To every eye; but how much more to his
Round whom the bed of sickness long diffused
Its melancholy gloom! how doubly fair
When first with fresh-born vigor he inhales
The balmy breeze, and feels the blessed sun
Warm at his bosom, from the springs of life
Chasing oppressive damps and languid pain!
Or shall I mention where celestial Truth
Her awful light discloses, to bestow
A more majestic pomp on Beauty's frame?
For man loves knowledge, and the beams of truth
More welcome touch his understanding's eye
Than all the blandishments of sound his ear,
Than all of taste his tongue. Nor ever yet
The melting rainbow's vernal-tinctur'd hues
To me have shone so pleasing as when first
The hand of Science pointed out the path
In which the sunbeams gleaming from the west
Fall on the watery cloud whose darksome veil
Involves the orient, and that trickling shower
Piercing through every crystalline unequal
Of clust'ring dewdrops to their flight opposed
Recoil at length where concave all behind
The internal surface of each glassy orb
Repels their forward passage into air
That thence direct they seek the radiant goal
From which their course began, and as they strike
In different lines the gazer's obvious eye
Assume a different luster through the bread
Of colors changing from the splendid rose
To the pale violet's dejected hue.
Or shall we touch that kind access of joy
That springs to each fair object while we trace
Through all its fabric Wisdom's artful aim
Disposing every part, and gaining still
By means proportioned her benignant end?
Speak ye the pure delight whose favored steps
The lamp of Science through the jealous maze
Of Nature guides when happily you reveal
Her secret honors, whether in the sky,
The beauteous laws of light, the central powers
That wheel the pensile planets round the year,
Whether in wonders of the rolling deep,
Or the rich fruits of allsustaining earth,
Or fine-adjusted springs of life and sense,
Ye scan the counsels of their Author's hand.
What, when to raise the meditated scene
The flame of passion through the struggling soul
Deep-kindled shows across that sudden blaze
The object of its rapture, vast of size,
With fiercer colors and a night of shade?
What? like a storm from their capacious bed
The sounding seas o'erwhelming, when the might
Of these eruptions working from the depth
Of man's strong apprehension shakes his frame
Even to the base, from every naked sense
Of pain or pleasure dissipating all
Opinion's feeble cov'rings, and the veil
Spun from the cobweb fashion of the times
To hide the feeling heart? then Nature speaks
Her genuine language, and the words of men,
Big with the very motion of their souls,
Declare with what accumulated force
The impetuous nerve of passion urges on
The native weight and energy of things.
Ye^ more her honors: where nor beauty claims
Nor shows of good the thirsty sense allure
From passion's power alone our nature holds. 157. From passion's power alone,
etc.] This very mysterious kind of Pleasure, which is often found in the
exercise of passions generally counted painful, has been taken notice of by
several authors. Lucretius resolves it into selflove: "Suave mari magno," etc.
lib. ii. 1. As if a man was never pleased in being moved at the distress of a
tragedy without a cool reflection that though these fictitious personages were
so unhappy yet he himself was perfectly at ease and in safety. The ingenious
author of the Reflections Critiques sur la Poesy et sur la Peinture, accounts
for it by the general delight which the mind takes in its own activity, and the
abhorrence it feels of an indolent and inattentive state: and this joined with
the moral approbation of its own temper, which attends these emotions when
natural and just, is certainly the true foundation of the pleasure, which as it
is the origin and basis of tragedy and epick deserved a very particular
consideration in this poem.

Essential Pleasure. Passion's fierce illapse
Rouses the mind's whole fabric, with supplies
Of daily impulse keeps the elastick powers
Intensely poised, and polishes anew,
By that collision, all the fine machine;
Else rust would rise, and foulness, by degrees
Incumb'ring, choke at last what Heaven designed
For ceaseless motion and a round of toil.
-- But say, does every passion thus to man
Administer delight? That name indeed
Becomes the rosy breath of Love, becomes
The radiant smiles of Joy, the applauding hand
Of Admiration; but the bitter shower
That Sorrow sheds upon a brother's grave,
But the dumb palsy of nocturnal Fear,
Or those consuming fires that gnaw the heart
Of panting Indignation, find we there
To move delight? -- Then listen while my tongue
The unaltered will of Heaven with faithful awe
Reveals, what old Harmodius wont to teach
My early age; Harmodius! who had weighed
Within his learned mind whatever the schools
Of Wisdom or thy lonely-whisp'ring voice
O faithful Nature! dictate of the laws
Which govern and support this mighty frame
Of universal being: often the hours
From morn to eve have stolen unmarked away
While mute attention hung upon his lips;
As thus the sage his awful tale began:
"'It Was in the windings of an ancient wood,
"When spotless youth with solitude resigns
"To sweet philosophy the studious day,
"What time pale Autumn shades the silent eve,
"Musing! roved. Of good and evil much,
"And much of mortal man, my thought revolved;
"When starting full on Fancy's gushing eye
"The mournful image of Parthenia's fate
"That hour, O long beloved and long deplored!
"When blooming youth nor gentlest Wisdom's arts,
"Nor Hymen's honors gathered for thy brow,
"Nor all thy lover's, all thy father's tears,
"Availed to snatch thee from the cruel grave,
"Thy agonizing looks, thy last farewell,
"Struck to the inmost feeling of my soul
"As with the hand of Death! At once the shade
"More horrid nodded over me, and the winds
"With hoarser murmuring shook the branchess. Dark
"As midnight storms the scene of human things
"Appeared before me; deserts, burning sands,
"Where the parched adder dies; the frozen south,
"And desolation blasting all the west
"With rapine and with murder: tyrant Power
"Here sits enthroned with blood; the baleful charms
"Of Superstition there infect the skies,
"And turn the sun to horror. Gracious Heaven!
"What is the life of man? or cannot these,
"Not these portents, thy awful will suffice?
"That propagated thus beyond their scope
"They rise to act their cruelty anew
"In my afflicted bosom, thus decreed
"The universal sensitive of pain,
"The wretched heir of evils not its own!
"Thus I impatient; when at once effus'd
"A flashing torrent of celestial day
"Burst through the shadowy void. With slow descent
"A purple cloud came floating through the sky,
"And poised at length within the circling trees
"Hung obvious to my view, till opening wide
"Its lucid orb a more than human form
"Emerging leaned majestic over my head,
"And instant thunder shook the conscious grove;
"Then melted into air the liquid cloud,
"And all the shining vision stood revealed.
"A wreath of palm his ample forehead bound,
"And over his shoulder mantling to his knee
"Flowed the transparent robe, around his waist
"Collected with a radiant zone of gold
"Ethereal; there in mystic signs engraved
"I read his office high and sacred name,
"Genius of Humankind. Appalled I gazed
"The godlike presence, for athwart his brow
"Displeasure tempered with a mild concern
"Looked down reluctant on me, and his words
"Like distant thunders broke the murmuring air."
"Vain are thy thoughts, O Child of mortal birth!
"And impotent thy tongue. Is thy short span
"Capacious of this universal frame?
"Thy wisdom allsufficient? Thou, alas!
"Do thou aspire to judge between the Lord
"Of Nature and his works? to lift thy voice
"Against the sovran order he decreed,
"All good and lovely? to blaspheme the bands
"Of tenderness innate and social love,
"Holiest of things! by which the general orb
"Of being, as by adamantine links,
"Was drawn to perfect union, and sustained
"From everlasting? Have thou felt the pangs
"Of softening sorrow, of indignant zeal,
"So grievous to the soul as thence to wish
"The ties of Nature broken from thy frame,
"That so thy selfish unrelenting heart
"Might cease to mourn its lot no longer then
"The wretched heir of evils not its own?
"O fair benevolence of generous minds!
"O man by Nature formed for all mankind!"
"He spoke; abashed and silent I remained,
"As conscious of my tongue's offense, and awed
"Before his presence, though my secret soul
"Disdained the imputation. On the ground
"I fixed my eyes, till from his airy couch
"He stooped sublime, and touching with his hand
"My dazzling forehead, "Raise thy sight," he cried,
"And let thy sense convince thy erring tongue."
"I looked, and lo! the former scene was changed,
"For verdant alleys and surrounding trees
"A solitary prospect wide and wild
"Rushed on my senses. 'Twas an horrid pile
"Of hills with many a shaggy forest mixed,
"With many a sable cliff and glittering stream.
"Most recumbent over the hanging ridge
"The brown woods waved, while ever-trickling springs
"Washed from the naked roots of oak and pine
"The crumbling soil, and still at every fail
"Down the steep windings of the channell'd rock
"Remurm'ring rushed the congregated floods
"With hoarser inundation, till at last
"They reached a grassy plain which from the skirts
"Of that high desert spread her verdant lap,
"And drank the gushing moisture, where confined
"In one smooth current over the lilied vale
"Clearer than glass it flowed. Autumnal spoils
"Luxuriant spreading to the rays of morn
"Blushed over the cliffs, whose half-encircling mound
"As in a sylvan theater enclosed
"That flowery level. On the river's brink
"I spied a fair pavilion, which diffused
"Its floating umbrage 'mid the silver shade
"Of osiers. Now the western sun revealed
"Between two parting cliffs his golden orb,
"And poured across the shadow of the hills
"On rocks and floods a yellow stream of light
"That cheered the solemn scene. My listening powers
"Were awed, and every thought in silence hung
"And wondering expectation^ then the voice
"Of that celestial power the mystic show
"Declaring, thus my deep attention called:"
"Inhabitant of earth, to whom is given. 304. Inhabitant of earth, etc] The
account of the ^nomy of Providence here introduced, as the most (...) and
satisfy the mind when under the compunction (...) private evils, seems to have
come originally from the Pythagorean school; but of the ancient philosophers
Plato (...) largely insisted upon it, has established it with all the (...)
capacious understanding, and ennobled it with (...) magnificence of his divine
imagination. He has one passage (...) full and clear on this head that I am
persuaded the reader (...) be pleased to see it here though somewhat long.
Addressing (...) self to such as are not satisfied concerning divine Provide^;
"The being who presides over the whole," says he, "^posed and complicated all
things for the happiness and ^tue of the whole, every part of which, according
to the extent of its influence, does and suffers what is fit and proper. One of
these parts is yours, O unhappy man! which (...) itself most inconsiderable
and minute, yet being connected with the universe ever seeks to cooperate with
that supreme order. You in the mean-time are ignorant of the very end for which
all particular natures are brought into existence, that the all-comprehending
nature of the whole may be perfect and happy; existing as it does not for your
sake, but the cause and reason of your existence, which, as in the symmetry of
every artificial work, must of necessity con^ with the general design of the
artist, and be subservient to the whole, of which it is a part. Your complaint
therefore is ignorant and groundless, since according to the v^ (...) energy of
creation and the common laws of Nature there^ a constant provision of that
which is best at the same time for you and for the whole. -- For the governing
Intelligen^ clearly beholding all the actions of animated and ^ving creatures,
and that mixture of good and evil which (...) versifies them, considered first
of all by what disposition of things, and by what situation of each individual
in the general system, vice might be depressed and subdued, and virtue made
secure of victory and happiness, with the greatest facility, and in the highest
degree possible: in this manner he ordered through the entire circle of being
the internal constitution of every mind, where should be its station in the
universal fabric, and through what variety of circumstances it should proceed
in the whole tenor of its existence." He goes on in his sublime manner to
assert a future state of retribution, "as well for those who by the exercise of
good dispositions being harmonized and assimilated into the divine virtue, are
consequently removed to a place of unblemished sanctity and happiness, as of
those who by the most flagitious arts have risen from contemptible beginnings
to the greatest affluence and power, and whom you therefore look upon as
unanswerable instances of negligence in the gods, because you are ignorant of
the purposes to which they are subservient, and in what manner they contribute
to that supreme intention of good to the whole." Plato de Leg. x. 16.

This theory has been delivered of late especially abroad, in a manner which
subverts the freedom of human actions; whereas Plato appears very careful to
preserve it, and has been in that respect imitated by the best of his followers.



"The gracious ways of Providence to learn,
"Receive my sayings with a steadfast ear. --
"Know then the Sovran Spirit of the world,
"Though self-collected from eternal time
"Within his own deep essence he beheld
"The bounds of true felicity complete,
"Yet by immense benignity inclined
"To spread around him that primeval joy
"Which filled himself, he raised his plastic arm
"And sounded through the hollow depth of space
"The strong creative mandate; straight arose
"These heavenly orbs, the glad abodes of life
"Effusive kindled by his breath divine
"Through endless forms of being: each inhal'd
"From him its portion of the vital flame,
"In measure such that from the wide complex
"Of coexistent orders one might rise,. 321. -- one might rise -- One order,
etc.] See The Meditations of Antoninus, and The Characteristicks, passim.

"One order, all-involving and entire.
"He too beholding in the sacred light
"Of his essential reason all the shapes
"Of swift contingence, all successive ties
"Of action propagated through the sum
"Of possible existence, he at once
"Down the long series of eventful time
"So fixed the dates of being, so disposed
"To every living soul of every kind
"The field of motion and the hour of rest,
"That all conspired to his supreme design,
"To universal good; with full accord
"Answ'ring the mighty model he had chosen,
"The best and fairest of unnumber'd worlds. 335. The best and fairest, etc.]
This opinion is so old that Timaeus Locrus calls the Supreme Being (...), "The
Artificer of that which is best;" and represents him as resolving in the
beginning to produce the most excellent work, and as copying the world most
exactly from his own intelligible and essential idea; "so that it yet remain,
as it was at first, perfect in beauty, and will never stand (...) need of any
correction or improvement." There can be no room for a caution here to
understand the expressions not of any particular circumstances of human life
separately considered, but of the sum or universal system of life and being.
See also The Vision at the end of The Theodicee of Leibnitz.

"That lay from everlasting in the store
"Of his divine conceptions. Nor content
"By one exertion of creative power
"His goodness to reveal, through every age,
"Through every moment up the track of time,
"His parent hand with ever-new increase
"Of happiness and virtue has adorned
"The vast harmonious frame: his parent hand
"From the mute shellfish gasping on the shore
"To men, to angels, to celestial minds,
"For ever leads the generations on
"To higher scenes of being, while supplied
"From day to day with his enlivening breath
"Inferior orders in succession rise
"To sill the void below. As flame ascends,. 350. As flame ascends, etc.] This
opinion, though not held by Plato nor any of the Ancients, is yet a very
natural cousequence of his principles: but the disquisition is too complex and
extensive to be entered upon here.

"As bodies to their proper center move,
"As the poised ocean to the attracting moon
"Obedient swells, and every headlong stream
"Devolves its winding waters to the main,
"So all things which have life aspire to God,
"The sun of being, boundless, unimpair'd,
"Center of souls! Nor does the faithful voice
"Of Nature cease to prompt their eager steps
"Aright, nor is the care of Heaven withheld
"From granting to the task proportioned aid,
"That in their stations all may persevere
"To climb the ascent of being, and approach
"For ever nearer to the life divine.
"That rocky pile thou see, that verdant lawn,
"Fresh watered from the mountains. Let the scene
"Paint in thy fancy the primeval seat
"Of man, and where the Will Supreme ordained
"His mansion, that pavilion fair diffused
"Along the shady brink, in this recess
"To wear the appointed season of his youth,
"Till riper hours should open to his toil
"The high communion of superior minds,
"Of consecrated heroes and of gods.
"Nor did the Sire Omnipotent forget
"His tender bloom to cherish, nor withheld
"Celestial footsteps from his green abode:
"Often from the radiant honors of his throne
"He sent whom most he loved, the Sovran Fair,
"The effluence of his glory, whom he placed
"Before his eyes for ever to behold,
"The goddess from whose inspiration flows
"The toil of patriots, the delight of friends,
"Without whose work divine in heaven or earth
"Naught lovely, naught propitious, comes to pass,
"Nor hope, nor praise, nor honor. Her the Sire
"Gave it in charge to reap the blooming mind,
"The folded powers to open, to direct
"The growth luxuriant of his young desires,
"And from the laws of this majestic world
"To teach him what was good. As thus the nymph
"Her daily care attended, by her side
"With constant steps her gay companion stayed,
"The fair Euphrosyne! the gentle queen
"Of smiles, and graceful gladness, and delights
"That cheer alike the hearts of mortal men
"And powers immortal. See the shining Pair!
"Behold where from his dwelling now disclosed
"They quit their youthful charge and seek the skies."
"I looked, and on the flowery turf there stood
"Between two radiant forms a smiling youth
"Whose tender cheeks displayed the vernal flower
"Of beauty, sweetest innocence illum'd
"His bashful eyes, and on his polished brow
"Sat young Simplicity. With fond regard
"He viewed the associates as their steps they moved;
"The younger chief his ardent eyes detained,
"With mild regret invoking her return:
"Bright as the star of evening she appeared
"Amid the dusky scene: eternal youth
"Over all her form its glowing honors breathed,
"And smiles eternal from her candid eyes
"Flowed like the dewy luster of the morn
"Effusive trembling on the placid waves:
"The spring of heaven had shed its blushing spoils
"To bind her sable tresses; full diffused
"Her yellow mantle floated in the breeze,
"And in her hand she waved a living branch
"Rich with immortal fruits of power to calm
"The wrathful heart, and from the bright'ning eyes
"To chase the cloud of sadness. More sublime
"The heavenly partner moved: the prime of age
"Composed her steps: the presence of a god,
"High on the circle of her brow enthroned,
"From each majestic motion darted awe,
"Devoted awe! till cherished by her looks,
"Benevolent and meek, confiding love
"To filial rapture softened all the soul.
"Free in her graceful hand she poised the sword
"Of chaste dominion: an heroic crown
"Displayed the old simplicity of pomp
"Around her honored head: a matron's robe
"White as the sunshine streams through vernal clouds
"Her stately form invested. Hand in hand
"The immortal pair forsook the enameled green,
"Ascending slowly: rays of limpid light
"Gleam'd round their path; celestial sounds were heard,
"And through the fragrant air ethereal dews
"Distilled around them, till at once the clouds
"Disparting wide in midway sky withdrew
"Their airy veil, and left a bright expanse
"Of empyrean flame, where spent and drowned
"Afflicted vision plunged in vain to scan
"What object it involved. My feeble eyes
"Endured not. Bending down to earth I stood
"With dumb attention. Soon a female voice,
"As watery murmurs sweet or warbling shades,
"With sacred invocation thus began:"
"Father of gods and mortals! whose right arm
"With reins eternal guides the moving heavens,
"Bend thy propitious ear: behold wellpleas'd
"I seek to finish thy divine decree.
"With frequent steps I visit yonder seat
"Of man, thy offspring, from the tender seeds
"Of justice and of wisdom to evolve
"The latent honors of his generous frame,
"Till thy conducting hand shall raise his lot
"From earth's dim scene to these ethereal walks,
"The temple of thy glory. But not me,
"Not my directing voice, he often requires,
"Or hears delighted: this enchanting maid,
"The associate thou have given me, her alone
"He loves, O Father! absent her he craves;
"And but for her glad presence ever joined
"Rejoices not in mine; that all my hopes
"This thy benignant purpose to fulfill
"I deem uncertain, and my daily cares
"Unfruitful all and vain, unless by thee
"Still farther aided in the work divine."
"She ceased; a voice more awful thus replied:"
"O thou! in whom for ever I delight,
"Fairer than all the inhabitants of heaven,
"Best image of thy Author! far from thee
"Be disappointment, or distaste, or blame,
"Who soon or late shall every work fulfill,
"And no resistance find. If man refuse
"To hearken to thy dictates, or allured
"By meaner joys to any other power
"Transfer the honors due to thee alone,
"That joy which he pursues he never shall taste,
"That power in whom delights never behold.
"Go then once more, and happy be thy toil;
"Go then, but let not this thy smiling friend
"Partake thy footsteps. In her stead, behold
"With thee the son of Nemesis I send,
"The fiend abhorred! whose vengeance takes account
"Of sacred Order's violated laws.
"See where he calls thee, burning to be gone,
"Fierce to exhaust the tempest of his wrath
"On yon' devoted head. But thou, my Child!
"Control his cruel phrensy, and protect
"Thy tender charge, that when despair shall grasp
"His agonizing bosom he may learn,
"Then he may learn, to love the gracious hand
"Alone sufficient in the hour of ill
"To save his feeble spirit; then confess
"Thy genuine honors, O excelling Fair!
"When all the plagues that wait the deadly will
"Of this avenging demon, all the storms
"Of night infernal, serve but to display
"The energy of thy superior charms
"With mildest awe triumphant over his rage,
"And shining clearer in the horrid gloom."
"Here ceased that awful voice, and soon I felt
"The cloudy curtain of refreshing eve
"Was closed once more, from that immortal fire
"Sheltering my eyelids. Looking up I viewed
"A vast gigantick spectre striding on
"Through murmuring thunders and a waste of clouds
"With dreadful action. Black as night his brow
"Relentless frowns involved: his savage limbs
"With sharp impatience violent he writhed
"As through convulsive anguish; and his hand,
"Armed with a scorpion lash, full often he raised
"In madness to his bosom; while his eyes
"Rained bitter tears, and bellowing loud he shook
"The void with horror. Silent by his side
"The virgin came; no discomposure stirred
"Her features; from the glooms which hung around
"No stain of darkness mingled with the beam
"Of her divine effulgence. Now they stoop
"Upon the river bank, and now to hail
"His wonted guests with eager steps advanced
"The unsuspecting inmate of the shade.
"As when a famished wolf that all night long
"Had ranged the Alpine snows by chance at morn
"Sees from a cliff incumbent over the smoke
"Of some lone village a neglected kid
"That strays along the wild for herb or spring,
"Down from the winding ridge he sweeps amain,
"And thinks he tears him; so with tenfold rage
"The monster sprung remorseless on his prey.
"Amazed the stripling stood; with panting breast
"Feebly he poured the lamentable wail
"Of helpless consternation, struck at once
"And rooted to the ground. The queen beheld
"His terror, and with looks of tenderest care
"Advanced to save him. Soon the tyrant felt
"Her awful power: his keen tempest'ous arm
"Hung nerveless, nor descended where his rage
"Had aimed the deadly blow, then dumb retired
"With sullen rancour. Lo! the sovran maid
"Folds with a mother's arms the fainting boy
"Till life rekindles in his rosy cheek,
"Then grasps his hands and cheers him with her tongue.
"O wake thee, rouse thy spirit! shall the spite
"Of yon' tormentor thus appal thy heart
"While I thy friend and guardian am at hand
"To rescue and to heal? O let thy soul
"Remember what the will of Heaven ordains
"Is ever good for all, and if for all
"Then good for thee. Nor only by the warmth
"And soothing sunshine of delightful things
"Do minds grow up and flourish. Often misled
"By that bland light the young unpracticed views
"Of reason wander through a fatal road,
"Far from their native aim, as if to lie
"Inglorious in the fragrant shade, and wait
"The soft access of ever-circling joys,
"Were all the end of being. Ask thyself,
"This pleasing error did it never lull
"Thy wishes? has thy constant heart refused
"The silken fetters of delicious ease?
"Or when divine Euphrosyne appeared
"Within this dwelling, did not thy desires
"Hang far below the measure of thy fate
"Which I revealed before thee? and thy eyes
"Impatient of my counsels turn away
"To drink the soft effusion of her smiles?
"Know then for this the Everlasting Sire
"Deprives thee of her presence, and instead,
"O wise and still benevolent! ordains
"This horrid visage hither to pursue
"My steps, that so thy nature may discern
"Its real good, and what alone can save
"Thy feeble spirit in this hour of ill
"From folly and despair. O yet beloved!
"Let not this headlong terror quite overwhelm
"Thy scattered powers, nor fatal deem the rage
"Of this tormentor, nor his proud assault,
"While I am here to vindicate thy toil,
"Above the generous question of thy arm.
"Brave by thy fears, and in thy weakness strong,
"This hour he triumphs; but confront his might
"And dare him to the combat, then, with ease
"Disarmed and quelled, his fierceness he resigns
"To bondage and to scorn; while thus inured,
"By watchful danger, by unceasing toil,
"The immortal mind superior to his fate,
"Amid the outrage of external things
"Firm as the solid base of this great world,
"Rests on his own foundations. Blow ye Winds!
"Ye Waves! ye Thunders! roll your tempest on,
"Shake ye old Pillars of the marble sky!
"Till all its orbs and all its worlds of fire
"Be loosened from their seats; yet still serene
"The unconquered mind looks down upon the wreck,
"And ever stronger as the storms advance
"Firm through the closing ruin holds his way
"Where Nature calls him, to the destined goal."
"So spoke the goddess, while through all her frame
"Celestial raptures ^low'd, in every word,
"In every motion, kindling warmth divine
"To seize who listened. Vehement and swift
"As lightning fires the aromatic shade
"In Ethiopian fields the stripling felt
"Her inspiration catch his fervid soul,
"And starting from his languor thus exclaimed:"
"Then let the trial come! and witness thou
"If terror be upon me, if I shrink
"To meet the storm, or faulter in my strength
"When hardest it besets me. Do not think
"That I am fearful and infirm of soul,
"As late thy eyes beheld, for thou have changed
"My nature; thy commanding voice has waked
"My languid powers to bear me boldly on
"Wherever the will divine my path ordains
"Through toil or peril; only do not thou
"Forsake me: O! be thou for ever near,
"That I may listen to thy sacred voice,
"And guide by thy decrees my constant feet.
"But say, for ever are my eyes bere^t?
"Say, shall the fair Euphrosyne not once
"Appear again to charm me? Thou in heaven,
"O thou Eternal Arbiter of things!
"Be thy great bidding done; for who am I
"To question thy appointment? Let the frowns
"Of this avenger every morn overcast
"The cheerful dawn, and every evening damp
"With double night my dwelling; I will learn
"To hail them both, and unrepining bear
"His hateful presence; but permit my tongue
"One glad request, and if my deeds may find
"Thy awful eye propitious, O restore
"The rosy-featur'd maid again to cheer
"This lonely ^eat, and bless me with her smiles!"
"He spoke; when instant through the sable glooms
"With which that furious presence had involved
"The ambient air a flood of radiance came
"Swift as the lightning flash; the melting clouds
"Flew diverse, and amid the blue serene
"Euphrosyne appeared. With sprightly step
"The nymph alighted on the irrig'ous lawn,
"And to her wondering audience thus began:"
"Lo! I am here to answer to your vows,
"And be the meeting fortunate! I come
"With joyful tidings; we shall part no more. --
"Hark how the gentle Echo from her cell
"Talks through the cliffs, and murmuring over the stream
"Repeats the accents, We shall part no more!
"O my delightful Friends! wellpleas'd on high
"The Father has beheld you while the might
"Of that stern foe with bitter trial proved
"Your equal doings; then for ever spoke
"The high decree, that thou, celestial Maid!
"However that grisly phantom on thy steps
"May sometimes dare intrude, yet never more
"Shall thou descending to the abode of man
"Alone endure the rancour of his arm,
"Or leave thy loved Euphrosyne behind."
"She ended, and the whole romantic scene
"Immediate vanished; rocks, and woods, and rills,
"The mantling tent, and each mysterious form
"Flew like the pictures of a morning dream
"When sunshine fills the bed. A while I stood
"Perplexed and giddy, till the radiant power
"Who bad the visionary landscape rise,
"As up to him I turned with gentlest looks,
"Preventing my inquiry thus began:"
"There let thy soul acknowledge its complaint
"How blind, how impious! there behold the ways
"Of Heaven's eternal destiny to man
"For ever just, benevolent, and wise,
"That Virtue's awful steps, however pursued
"By vexing Fortune and intrusive Pain,
"Should never be divided from her chaste,
"Her fair, attendant Pleasure. Need I urge
"Thy tardy thought through all the various round
"Of this existence, that thy softening soul
"At length may learn what energy the hand
"Of Virtue mingles in the bitter tide
"Of passion swelling with distress and pain,
"To mitigate the sharp with gracious drops
"Of cordial pleasure? Ask the faithful youth
"Why the cold urn of her whom long he loved
"So often fills his arms, so often draws
"His lonely footsteps at the silent hour
"To pay the mournful tribute of his tears?
"O! he will tell thee that the wealth of worlds
"Should never seduce his bosom to forego
"That sacred hour when, stealing from the noise
"Of care and envy, sweet remembrance sooths
"With Virtue's kindest looks his aching breast,
"And turns his tears to rapture. -- Ask the crowd
"Which flies impatient from the village walk
"To climb the neighboring cliffs when far below
"The cruel winds have hurled upon the coast
"Some helpless bark, while sacred Pity melts
"The general eye, or Terrour's icy hand
"Smites their distorted limbs and horrent hair,
"While every mother closer to her breast
"Catches her child, and pointing where the waves
"Foam through the shattered vessel, shrieks aloud
"As one poor wretch that spreads his piteous arms
"For succor swallowed by the roaring surge,
"As now another dashed against the rock
"Drops lifeless down! O! deemst thou indeed
"No kind endearment here by Nature given
"To mutual terror and Compassion's tears?
"No sweetly melting softness which attracts,
"Over all that edge of pain, the social powers
"To this their proper action and their end?
"Ask thy own heart when at the midnight hour
"Slow through that studious gloom thy pausing eye,
"Led by the glimmering taper, moves around
"The sacred volumes of the dead, the songs
"Of Grecian bards, and records writ by Fame
"For Grecian heroes, where the present power
"Of heaven and earth surveys the immortal page,
"Even as a father blessing while he reads
"The praises of his son, if then thy soul,
"Spurning the yoke of these inglorious days,
"Mix in their deeds and kindle with their flame?
"Say, when the prospect blackens on thy view,
"When rooted from the base heroic states
"Mourn in the dust, and tremble at the frown
"Of cursed Ambition; when the pious band
"Of youths who fought for freedom, and their sires,
"(...) side by side in gore; when ru^^ian Pride
"Usurps the throne of Justice, turns the pomp
"Of public power, the majesty of rule,
"The sword, the laurel, and the purple robe,
"To slavish empty pageants, to adorn
"A tyrant's walk, and glitter in the eyes
"Of such as bow the knee; when honored urns
"Of patriots and of chiefs, the awful bust
"And story'd arch, to glut the coward-rage
"Of regal envy strew the public way
"With hallowed ruins; when the Muses' haunt,
"The marble Porch where Wisdom wont to talk
"With Socrates or Tully, hears no more
"Save the hoarse jargon of contentious monks,
"Or female Superstition's midnight prayer;
"When ruthless Rapine from the hand of Time
"Tears the destroying sith, with surer blow
"To sweep the works of glory from their base,
"Till Desolation over the grass-grown street
"Expands his raven wings, and up the wall,
"Where senates once the price of monarchs doomed
"Hisses the gliding snake through hoary weeds
"That clasp the mouldering column: thus defaced,
"Thus widely mournful when the prospect thrills
"Thy beating bosom, when the patriot's tear
"Starts from thine eye, and thy extended arm
"In fancy hurls the thunderbolt of Jove
"To fire the impious wreath on Philip's brow,. 755. Philip.] The Macedonian.

"Or dash Octavius from the trophy'd car,
"Say, does thy secret soul repine to taste
"The big distress? or would thou then exchange
"Those heart-ennobling sorrows for the lot
"Of him who sits amid the gaudy herd
"Of mute Barbarians bending to his nod,
"And bears alost his gold-invested front,
"And says within himself, "I am a king,
"And wherefore should the clamorous voice of Woe
"Intrude upon mine ear?" -- The baleful dregs
"Of these late ages, this inglorious draught
"Of servitude and solly, have not yet,
"Blessed be the Eternal Ruler of the world!
"Defiled to such a depth of sordid shame
"The native honors of the human soul,
"Nor so effaced the image of its Sire."
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK III.
The Argument.
PLEASURE in observing the tempers and manners of men, even where (...) or
absurd. The origin of vice, from false representations of the fancy producing
false opinions concerning good and evil. Inquiry into ridicule. The general
sources of ridicule in the minds and characters of men enumerated. Final cause
of the sense of ridicule. The resemblance of certain aspects of inanimate
things to the sensations and properties of the mind. The operations of the mind
in the production of the works of Imagination described. The secondary Pleasure
from imitation. The benevolent order of the world illustrated in the arbitrary
connection of these Pleasures with the objects which excite them. The nature and
conduct of taste. Concluding with an account of the natural and moral
advantages resulting from a sensible and wellformed Imagination.

WHAT wonder therefore since the endearing ties
Of passion link the universal kind
Of man so close, what wonder if to search
This common nature through the various change
Of sex, and age, and fortune, and the frame
Of each peculiar, draw the busy mind
With unresisted charms? The spacious west
And all the teeming regions of the south
Hold not a quarry to the curious flight
Of knowledge half so tempting or so fair
As man to man; nor only where the smiles
Of love invite, nor only where the applause
Of cordial honor turns the attentive eye
On Virtue's graceful deeds; for since the course
Of things external acts in different ways
On human apprehensions, as the hand
Of Nature tempered to a different frame
Peculiar minds, so happily where the powers. 18. -- where the powers -- Of
fancy, etc.] The influence of the Imagination on the conduct of life is one of
the most important points in moral philosophy. It were easy by an induction of
facts to prove that the Imagination directs almost all the passions, and mixes
with almost everycircumstance of action or pleasure. Let any man, even of the
coldest head and soberest industry, analyze the idea of what he calls his
Interest, he will find that it consists chiefly of certain degrees of decency,
beauty, and order, variously combined into one system, the idol which he seeks
to enjoy by labor, hazard, and selfdenial. It is on this account of the last
consequence to regulate these images by the standard of Nature and the general
good, otherwise the Imagination, by heightening some objects beyond their real
excellence and beauty, or by representing others in a more odious or terrible
shape than they deserve, may of course engage us in pursuits utterly
inconsistent with the moral order of things.

If it be objected that this account of things supposes the passions to be
merely accidental, whereas there appears in some a natural and hereditary
disposition to certain passions, prior to all circumstances of education or
fortune, it may be answered, that though no man is born ambitious or a miser,
yet he may inherit from his parents a peculiar temper or complexion of mind
which shall render his Imagination more liable to be struck with some
particular objects, consequently dispose him to form opinions of good and ill,
and entertain passions of a particular turn. Some men, for instance, by the
original frame of their minds are more delighted with the vast and magnificent,
others, on the contrary, with the elegant and gentle aspects of Nature: and it
is very remarkable that the disposition of the moral powers is always similar
to this of the Imagination; that those who are most inclined to admire
prodigious and sublime objects in the physical world are also most inclined to
applaud examples of fortitude and heroic virtue in the moral; while those who
are charmed rather with the delicacy and sweetness of colors, and forms, and
sounds, never fail, in like manner, to yield the preference to the softer
scenes of virtue and the sympathies of a domestic life. And this is sufficient
to account for the objection.

Among the ancient philosophers though we have several hints concerning this
influence of the Imagination upon morals among the remains of the Socratick
school, yet the Stoics were the first who paid it a due attention. Zeno their
founder thought it impossible to preserve any tolerable regularity in life
without frequently inspecting those pictures or appearances of things which the
Imagination offers to the mind. Diog. Laert. l. vii. The Meditations of M.
Aurelius, and The Discourses of Epictetus, are full of the same sentiment,
insomuch that the latter makes the (...), or "right management of the fancies,"
the only thing for which we are accountable to Providence, and without which a
man is no other than stupid or frantic. Arrian. l. i. c. 12. and l. ii. c. 22.
See also The Characteristicks, vol. I. from p. 313 to 321. where this stoical
doctrine is embellished with all the elegance and graces of Plato.



Of fancy neither lessen nor enlarge
The images of things, but paint in all
Their genuine hues the features which they wore
In Nature, there opinion will be true
And action right; for Action treads the path
In which Opinion says he follows good
Or flies from evil; and Opinion gives
Report of good or evil as the scene
Was drawn by Fancy, lovely or deformed:
Thus her report can never there be true
Where Fancy cheats the intellectual eye
With glaring colors and distorted lines.
Is there a man who at the sound of death
Sees ghastly shapes of terror conjured up
And black before him, naught but deathbed groans
And fearful prayers, and plunging from the brink
Of light and being down the gloomy air
An unknown depth? Alas! in such a mind
If no bright forms of excellence attend
The image of his country, nor the pomp
Of sacred senates, nor the guardian voice
Of Justice on her throne, nor aught that wakes
The conscious bosom with a patriot's flame,
Will not Opinion tell him that to die
Or stand the hazard is a greater ill
Than to betray his country? and in act
Will he not choose to be a wretch and live?
Here vice begins then. From the enchanting cup
Which Fancy holds to all the unwary thirst
Of youth often swallows a Circean draught
That sheds a baleful tincture over the eye
Of Reason, till no longer he discerns,
And only guides to err; then revel forth
A furious band that spurn him from the throne,
And all is uproar. Thus Ambition grasps
The empire of the soul; thus pale Revenge
Unsheaths her murderous dagger; and the hands
Of Lust and Rapine with unholy arts
Watch to o'erturn the barrier of the laws
That keeps them from their prey: thus all the plagues
The wicked bear, or over the trembling scene
The Tragic Muse discloses, under shapes
Of honor, safety, pleasure, ease, or pomp,
Stole first into the mind. Yet not by all
Those lying forms which Fancy in the brain
Engenders are the kindling passions driven
To guilty deeds, nor Reason bound in chains,
That Vice alone may lord it: often adorned
With solemn pageants Folly mounts the throne,
And plays her idiot anticks like a queen.
A thousand garbs she wears, a thousand ways
She wheels her giddy empire. -- Lo! thus far
With bold adventure to the Mantuan lyre
I sing of Nature's charms, and touch wellpleas'd
A stricter note: now happily must my song
Unbend her serious measure, and reveal
In lighter strains how Folly's awkward arts. 75. -- how Folly's awkward arts,
etc.] Notwithstanding the general influence of ridicule on private and civil
life, as well as on learning and the sciences, it has been almost constantly
neglected or misrepresented, by divines especially. The manner of treating
these subjects in the science of human nature should be precisely the same as
in natural philosophy, from particular facts to investigate the stated order in
which they appear, and then apply the general law thus discovered to the
explication of other appearances and the improvement of useful arts.

Excite impetuous Laughter's gay rebuke,
The sportive province of the Comic Muse.
See in what crowds the uncouth forms advance!
Each would outstrip the other, each prevent
Our careful search, and offer to your gaze
Unasked his motley features. Wait a while
My curious Friends! and let us first arrange
In proper order your promisc'ous throng.
Behold the foremost band, of slender thought. 84. Behold the foremost band,
etc.] The first and most general source of ridicule in the characters of men is
vanity or selfapplause for some desirable quality or possession which evidently
does not belong to those who assume it.

And easy faith, whom flattering Fancy sooths
With lying specter, in themselves to view
Illustrious forms of excellence and good,
That scorn the mansion. With exulting hearts
They spread their spurious treasures to the sun,
And bid the world admire! but chief the glance
Of wishful Envy draws their joy-bright eyes,
And lifts with selfapplause each lordly brow.
In number boundless as the blooms of spring
Behold their glaring idols, empty shades
By Fancy gilded over, and then set up
For adoration: some in Learning's garb,
With formal band, and sable-cinctur'd gown,
And rags of moldy volumes; some, elate
With martial splendor, steely pikes and swords
Of costly frame, and gay Phoenician robes
Inwrought with flowery gold, assume the port
Of stately Valor; listening by his side
There stands a female form; to her with looks
Of earnest import, pregnant with amaze,
He talks of deadly deeds, of breaches, storms,
And sulfurous mines, and ambush! then at once
Breaks off, and smiles to see her look so pale,
And asks some wondering question of her fears!
Others of graver mien; behold adorned
With holy ensigns how sublime they move,
And bending often their sanctimonious eyes
Take homage of the simple-minded throng;
Ambassadors of Heaven! nor much unlike
Is he whose visage in the lazy mist
That mantles every feature hides a brood
Of politic conceits, of whispers, nods,
And hints deep omen'd with unwieldy schemes,
And dark portents of state! Ten thousand more
Prodigious habits and tumult'ous tongues
Pour dauntless in and swell the boastful band.
Then comes the second order, all who seek. 121. Then comes the second order,
etc.] Ridicule from the same vanity, where though the possession be real yet no
merit can arise from it, because of some particular circumstances which, though
obvious to the spectator, are yet overlooked by the ridiculous character.

The debt of praise, where watchful Unbelief
Darts through the thin pretense her squinting eye
On some retired appearance which belies
The boasted virtue, or annuls the applause
That Justice else would pay. Here side by side
I see two leaders of the solemn train
Approaching, one a female old and gray,
With eyes demure and wrinkle-furrow'd brow,
Pale as the cheeks of Death; yet still she stuns
The sickening audience with a nauseus tale:
How many youths her myrtle-chains have worn,
How many virgins at her triumphs pined!
Yet how resolved she guards her cautious heart!
Such is her terror at the risks of love
And man's seducing tongue! the other seems
A bearded sage, ungentle in his mien,
And sordid all his habit; peevish Want
Grins at his heels, while down the gazing throng
He stalks, resounding in magnisick praise
The vanity of riches, the contempt
Of pomp and power. Be prudent in your zeal
Ye grave Associates! let the silent grace
Of her who blushes at the fond regard
Her charms inspire more eloquent unfold
The praise of spotless honor: let the man
Whose eye regards not his illustrious pomp
And ample store but as indulgent streams
To cheer the barren soil and spread the fruits
Of joy, let him by juster measures fix
The price of riches and the end of power.
Another tribe succeeds; deluded long. 152. Another tribe suceeds, etc.]
Ridicule from a notion of ex^ence in particular objects disproportioned to
their intrinsic value, and inconsistent with the order of Nature.

By Fancy's dazzling optics these behold
The images of some peculiar things
With brighter hues resplendent, and portray'd
With features nobler far than ever adorned
Their genuine objects: hence the fever'd heart
Pants with delirious hope for tinsel charms,
Hence often obtrusive on the eye of Scorn
Untimely Zeal her witless pride betrays,
And serious Manhood from the towering aim
Of Wisdom stoops to emulate the boast
Of childish Toil. Behold yon' mystic form
Bedecked with feathers, insects, weeds, and shells!
Not with intenser view the Samian sage
Bent his fixed eye on heaven's intenser fires,
When first the order of that radiant scene
Swelled his exulting thought, than this surveys
A muckworm's entrails or a spider's fang.
Next him a youth with flowers and myrtles crowned
Attends that virgin form, and blushing kneels,
With fondest gesture and a supplia^t's tongue,
To win her coy regard. Adieu for him
The dull engagements of the bustling world!
Adieu the sick impertinence of praise,
And hope and action! for with her alone
By streams and shades to steal these sighing hours
Is all he asks, and all that Fate can give!
Thee too, facetious Momion! wandering here,
Thee, dreaded Censor! often have I beheld
Bewildered unawares: alas! too long
Flushed with thy comic triumphs and the spoils
Of sly Derision! till on every side
Hurling thy random bolts offended Truth
Assigned thee here thy station with the slaves
Of Folly. Thy once formidable name
Shall grace her humble records, and be heard
In scoffs and mock'ry bandy'd from the lips
Of all the vengeful brotherhood around,
So often the patient victims of thy scorn.
But now ye Gay! to whom indulgent Fate. 191. But now ye Gay! etc.] Ridicule
from a notion of excellence, when the object is absolutely odious or
contemptible. This is the highest degree of the ridiculous, as in the a^^tation
of diseases or vices.

Of all the Muses' empire has assigned
The fields of folly, hither each advance
Your sickles; here the teeming soil affords
Its richest growth. A favorite brood appears,
In whom the demon with a mother's joy
Views all her charms reflected, all her cares
At full repaid. Ye most illustr'ous Band!
Who, scorning Reason's tame pedantick rules
And Order's vulgar bondage, never meant
For souls sublime as yours, with generous zeal
Pay Vice the reverence Virtue long usurped,
And yield Deformity the fond applause
Which Beauty wont to claim, forgive my song,
That for the blushing diffidence of youth
It shuns the unequal province of your praise.
Thus far triumphant in the pleasing guile. 207. Thus far triumphant, etc.]
Ridicule from false shame or groundless fear.

Of bland Imagination Folly's train
Have dared our search; but now a dastard kind
Advance reluctant, and with falt'ring feet
Shrink from the gazer's eye: enfeebled hearts!
Whom Fancy chills with visionary fears,
Or bends to servile tameness with conceits
Of shame, of evil, or of base defect,
Fantastic and delusive. Here the slave
Who droops abashed when sullen Pomp surveys
His humbler habit; here the trembling wretch,
Unnerv'd and struck with Terrour's icy bolts,
Spent in weak wailings, drowned in shameful tears,
At every dream of danger; here, subdued
By frontless Laughter and the hardy scorn
Of old unfeeling Vice, the abject soul
Who, blushing, half resigns the candid praise
Of temperance and honor, half disowns
A freeman's hatred of tyrannick pride,
And hears with sickly smiles the venal mouth
With foulest license mock the patriot's name.
Last of the motley bands on whom the power. 228. Last of the, etc.] Ridicule
from the ignorance of such things as our circumstances require us to know.

Of gay Derision bends her hostile aim
Is that where shameful Ignorance presides.
Beneath her sordid banners, lo! they march
Like blind and lame. Whatever their doubtful hands
Attempt Confusion straight appears behind
And troubles all the work. Through many a maze
Perplexed they struggle, changing every path,
O'erturning every purpose, then at last
Sit down dismayed, and leave the entangled scene
For Scorn to sport with. Such then is the abode
Of Folly in the mind, and such the shapes
In which she governs her obsequious train.
Through every scene of ridicule in things
To lead the tenor of my devious lay,
Through every swift occasion which the hand
Of Laughter points at when the mirthful sting
Distends her sallying nerves and chokes her tongue,
What were it but to count each crystal drop
Which Morning's dewy fingers on the blooms
Of May distill? Suffice it to have said. 248. -- Suffice it to have said etc.]
By comparing these general sources of ridicule with each other, and examining
the ridiculous in other objects, we may obtain a general de^^tion of it equally
applicable to every species. The most important circumstance of this de^ition
is laid down in the lines referred to, but others more minute we shall subjoin
here. Aristotle's account of the matter seems both imperfect and false; (...),
says he, (...): "The ridiculous is some certain fault or turpitude without
pain, and not destructive to its subject." Poet. c. 5. For allowing it to be
true, as it is not, that the ridiculous is never accompanied with pain, yet we
might produce many instances of such a fault or turpitude which cannot with any
tolerable propriety be called ridiculous, so that the definition does not
distinguish the thing designed. Nay, farther, even when we perceive the
turpitude tending to the destruction of its subject we may still be sensible of
a ridiculous appearance till the ruin become imminent, and the keener
sensations of pity or terror banish the ludicrous apprehension from our minds;
for the sensation of ridicule is not a bare perception of the agreement or
disagreement of ideas, but a passion or emotion of the mind consequential to
that perception; so that the mind may perceive the agreement or disagreement,
and yet not feel the ridiculous, because it is engrossed by a more violent
emotion. Thus it happens that some men think those objects ridiculous to which
others cannot endure to apply the name, because in them they excite a much
intenser and more important feeling: and this difference, among other causes,
has brought a good deal of confusion into this question.

"That which makes objects ridiculous is some ground of admiration or esteem
connected with other more general circumstances comparatively worthless or
deformed; or it is some circumstance of turpitude or deformity connected with
what is in general excellent or beautiful; the inconsistent properties existing
either in the objects themselves, or in the apprehension of the person to whom
they relate, belonging always to the same order or class of being, implying
sentiment or design, and exciting no acute or vehement emotion of the heart."

To prove the several parts of this definition: "The appearance of excellence
or beauty connected with a general condition comparatively sordid or deformed"
is ridiculous: for instance, pompous pretensions of wisdom, joined with
ignorance or folly, in the Socrates of Aristophanes, and the ostentations of
military glory with cowardice and stupidity, in the Thraso of Terence.

"The appearance of deformity or turpitude in conjunction with what is in
general excellent or venerable" is also ridiculous: for instance, the personal
weaknesses of a magistrate appearing in the solemn and public functions of his
station.

"The incongruous properties may either exist in the objects themselves, or in
the apprehension of the person to whom they relate:" in the last mentioned
instance they both exist in the objects; in the instances from Aristophanes and
Terence one of them is objective and real, the other only ^ounded in the
apprehension of the ridiculous character.

"The inconsistent properties must belong to the same order or class of being."
A coxcomb in fine clothes bedaubed by accident in foul weather is a ridiculous
object; because his general apprehension of excellence and esteem is referred
to the splendor and expense of his dress. A man of sense and merit in the same
circumstances is not counted ridiculous, because the general ground of
excellence and esteem in him is, both in fact and in his own apprehension, of a
very different species.

"Every ridiculous object implies sentiment or design." A column placed by an
architect without a capital or base is laughed at; the same column in a ruin
causes a very different sensation.

And, lastly, "the occurrence must excite no acute or vehement emotion of the
heart," such as terror, pity, or indignation; for in that case, as was
observed above, the mind is not at leisure to contemplate the ridiculous.

Whether any appearance not ridiculous be involved in this description, and
whether it comprehend every species and form of the ridiculous, must be
determined by repeated applications of it to particular instances.



Wherever the power of Ridicule displays
Her quaint-ey'd visage some incongr'ous form,
Some stubborn dissonance of things combined,
Strikes on the quick observer, whether Pomp,
Or Praise, or Beauty, mix their partial claim,
Where sordid fashions, where ignoble deeds,
Where foul Deformity, are wont to dwell,
Or whether these with violation loathed
Invade resplendent Pomp's imperious mien,
The charms of Beauty or the boast of Praise.
Ask we for what fair end The Almighty Sire. 259. Ask we for what fair end,
etc.] Since it is beyond all contradiction evident that we have a natural sense
or feeling of the ridiculous, and since so good a reason may be assigned to
justify the Supreme Being for bestowing it, one cannot without astonishment
reflect on the conduct of those men who imagine it is for the service of true
religion to vilify and blacken it without distinction, and endeavor to
persuade us that it is never applied but in a bad cause. Ridicule is not
concerned with mere speculative truth or falsehood. It is not in abstract
propositions or theorems, but in actions and passions, good and evil, beauty
and deformity, that we find materials for it; and all these terms are relative,
implying approbation or blame. To ask them whether ridicule be a test of truth
is, in other words, to ask whether that which is ridiculous can be morally
true, can be just and becoming; or whether that which is just and becoming can
be ridiculous: a question that does not deserve a serious answer; for it is
most evident that, as in a metaphysical proposition offered to the
understanding for its assent, the faculty of reason examines the terms of the
proposition, and finding one idea which was supposed equal to another to be in
fact unequal, of consequence rejects the proposition as a falsehood: so in
objects offered to the mind for its esteem or applause the faculty of ridicule
finding an incongruity in the claim urges the mind to reject it with laughter
and contempt. When therefore we observe such a claim obtruded upon mankind, and
the inconsistent circumstances carefully concealed from the eye of the public,
it is our business, if the matter be of importance to society, to drag out
those latent circumstances, and by setting them in full view to convince the
world how ridiculous the claim is: and thus a double advantage is gained, for
we both detect the moral falsehood sooner than in the way of speculative
inquiry, and impress the minds of men with a stronger sense of the vanity and
error of its authors. And this and no more is meant by the application of
ridicule.

But it is said the practice is dangerous, and may be inconsistent with the
regard we owe to objects of real dignity and excellence. I answer, the practice
fairly managed can never be dangerous: men may be dishonest in obtruding
circumstances foreign to the object, and we may be inadvertent in allowing
those circumstances to impose upon us; but the sense of ridicule always judges
right. The Socrates of Aristophanes is as truly ridiculous a character as ever
was drawn: -- true; but it is not the character of Socrates, the divine
moralist, and father of ancient wisdom. What then? did the ridicule of the poet
hinder the philosopher from detecting and disclaiming those foreign
circumstances which he had falsely introduced into his character, and thus
rendered the sat^ doubly ridiculous in his turn? No; but it nevertheless had an
ill influence on the minds of the people. And so has the reasoning of Spinoza
made many Atheists: he has founded it indeed on suppositions utterly false; but
allow him these and his conclusions are unavoidably true. And if we must reject
the use of ridicule because by the imposition of false circumstances things may
be made to seem ridiculous which are not so in themselves, why we ought not in
the same manner to reject the use of reason, because by proceeding on false
principles conclusions will appear true which are impossible in nature, let the
vehement and obstinate declaimers against ridicule determine.



In mortal bosoms wakes this gay contempt,
These grateful stings of laughter, from disgust
Educing pleasure? Wherefore but to aid
The tardy steps of Reason, and at once
By this prompt impulse urge us to depress
The giddy aims of Folly? Though the light
Of truth slow dawning on the inquiring mind
At length unfolds through many a subtle tie
How these uncouth disorders end at last
In public evil, yet benignant Heaven;
Conscious how dim the dawn of truth appears
To thousands, conscious what a scanty pause
From labors and from care the wider lot
Of humble life affords for studious thought
To scan the maze of Nature, therefore ^amp'd
The glaring scenes with characters of scorn
As broad, as obvious, to the passing clown
As to the lettered sage's curious eye.
Such are the various aspects of the mind. --
Some heavenly genius whose unclouded thoughts
Attain that secret harmony which blends
The ethereal spirit with its mould of clay,
O! teach me to reveal the grateful charm
That searchless Nature over the sense of man
Diffuses, to behold in lifeless things
The inexpressive semblance of himself,. 285. The inexpressive semblance, etc.]
This similitude is the foundation of almost all the ornaments of poetic
diction.

Of thought and passion; mark the sable woods
That shade sublime yon' mountain's nodding brow;
With what religious awe the solemn scene
Commands your steps! as if the reverend form
Of Minos or of Numa should forsake
The Elysian seats and down the embow'ring glade
Move to your pausing eye! behold the expanse
Of yon' gay landscape, where the silver clouds
Flit over the heavens before the sprightly breeze;
Now their gray cincture skirts the doubtful sun,
Now streams of splendor through their opening veil
Effulgent sweep from off the gilded lawn
The aerial shadows on the curling brook
And on the shady margin's quivering leaves
With quickest luster glancing: while you view
The prospect, say, within your cheerful breast
Plays not the lively sense of winning Mirth
With clouds and sunshine checkered, while the round
Of social converse to the inspiring tongue
Of some gay nymph amid her subject train
Moves all obsequious? Whence is this effect,
This kindred power of such discordant things?
Or flows their semblance from that mystic tone
To which the newborn mind's harmonious powers
At first were strung? or rather from the links
Which artful Custom twines around her frame?
For when the different images of things
By Chance combined have struck the attentive soul
With deeper impulse, or connected long
Have drawn her frequent eye, however distinct
The external scenes, yet often the ideas gain
From that conjunction an eternal tie
And sympathy unbroken. Let the mind
Recall one partner of the various league,
Immediate, lo! the firm confed'rates rise,
And each his former station straight resumes,
One movement governs the consenting throng,
And all at once with rosy pleasure shine,
Or all are sadden'd with the glooms of care.
'Twas thus, if ancient Fame the truth unfold,
Two faithful needles from the informing touch. 326. Two faithful needles,
etc.] See the elegant poem recited by Cardinal Bembo in the character of
Lucretius, (...) vi. (...) 2. c. v.

Of the same parent-stone together drew
Its mystic virtue, and at first conspired
With fatal impulse quivering to the pole;
Then though disjoined by kingdoms, though the main
Rolled its broad surge betwixt, and different stars
Beheld their wakeful motions, yet preserved
The former friendship, and remembered still
The alliance of their birth: whatever the line
Which one possessed nor pause nor quiet knew
The sure associate ere with trembling speed
He four d its path, and fixed unerring there.
Such is the secret union when we feel
A song, a flower, a name, at once restore
Those long-connected scenes where first they moved
The attention, backward through her mazy walks
Guiding the wanton fancy to her scope,
To temples, courts, or fields, with all the band
Of painted forms, of passions and designs
Attendant, whence if pleasing in itself
The prospect from that sweet accession gains
Redoubled influence over the listening mind.
By these mysterious ties the busy power. 348. By these mysterious ties, etc.]
The act of remembering seems almost wholly to depend on the association of
ideas.

Of Memory her ideal train preserves
Entire, or when they would elude her watch
Reclaims their fleeting footsteps from the waste
Of dark oblivion; thus collecting all
The various forms of being to present
Before the curious aim of mimick Art
Their largest choice, like spring's unfolded blooms,
Exhaling sweetness that the skilful be
May taste at will from their selected spoils
To work her dulcet food: for not the expanse
Of living lakes in summer's noontide calm
Reflects the bord'ring shade and sunbright heavens
With fairer semblance, not the sculptured gold
More faithful keeps the graver's lively trace,
Than he whose birth the sister powers of Art
Propitious viewed, and from his genial star
Shed influence to the seeds of fancy kind,
Than his attemper'd bosom must preserve
The seal of Nature; there alone unchanged
Her form remains; the balmy walks of May
There breathe perennial sweets, the trembling chord
Resounds for ever in the abstracted ear
Melodious, and the virgin's radiant eye,
Superior to disease, to grief and time,
Shines with unbating luster. Thus at length
Endowed with all that Nature can bestow
The child of Fancy often in silence bends
Over these mixed treasures of his pregnant breast
With conscious pride; from them he often resolves
To frame he knows not what excelling things,
And win he knows not what sublime reward
Of praise and wonder. By degrees the Mind
Feels her young nerves dilate, the plastic powers
Labor for action, blind emotions heave
His bosom, and with loveliest frenzy caught
From earth to heaven he rowls his daring eye,
From heaven to earth. Anon ten thousand shapes,
Like specter trooping to the wizard's call,
Flit swift before him: from the womb of earth,
From ocean's bed, they come: the eternal heavens
Disclose their splendours, and the dark abyss
Pours out her births unknown. With fixed gaze
He marks the rising phantoms, now compares
Their different forms, now blends them, now divides,
Enlarges and extenuates by turns;
Opposes, ranges in fantastic bands,
And infinitely varies: hither now,
Now thither, fluctuates his inconstant aim,
With endless choice perplexed. At length his plan
Begins to open, lucid order dawns,
And as from Chaos old the jarring seeds
Of Nature at the voice divine repaired
Each to its place, till rosy earth unveiled
Her fragrant bosom, and the joyful sun
Sprung up the blue serene, by swift degrees
Thus disentangled his entire design
Emerges. Colors mingle, features join,
And lines converge; the fainter parts retire,
The fairer eminent in light advance,
And every image on its neighbor smiles.
A while he stands, and with a father's joy
Contemplates, then with Promethean art
Into its proper vehicle he breathes. 411. Into its proper vehicle, etc.] This
relates to the different sorts of corporeal mediums by which the ideas of the
artists are rendered palpable to the senses, as by sounds in music, by lines
and shadows in painting, by diction in poetry, etc.

The fair conception, which imbody'd thus
And permanent becomes to eyes or ears
An object ascertained; while thus informed
The various organs of his mimick skill,
The consonance of sounds, the featured rock,
The shadowy picture and impassioned verse,
Beyond their proper powers attract the soul
By that expressive semblance, while in sight
Of Nature's great original we scan
The lively child of Art, while line by line
And feature after feature we refer
To that sublime exemplar whence it stole
Those animating charms. Thus beauty's palm
Betwixt them wavering hangs, applauding love
Doubts where to choose, and mortal man aspires
To tempt creative praise. As when a cloud
Of gathering hail with limpid crusts of ice
Enclosed, and obvious to the beaming sun,
Collects his large effulgence, straight the heavens
With equal flames present on either hand
The radiant visage, Persia stands at gaze
Appalled, and on the brink of Ganges doubts
The snowy vested seer, in Mithra's name,
To which the fragrance of the south shall burn,
To which his warbled orisons ascend.
Such various bliss the welltun'd heart enjoys
Favored of Heaven, while plunged in sordid cares
The unfeeling vulgar mocks the boon divine,
And harsh Austerity, from whose rebuke
Young Love and smiling Wonder shrink away,
Abashed and chill of heart, with sager frowns
Condemns the fair enchantment. On my strain
Perhaps even now some cold fastidious judge
Casts a disdainful eye, and calls my toil,
And calls the love and beauty which I sing,
The dream of Folly. Thou, grave Censor! say,
Is beauty then a dream, because the glooms
Of dullness hang too heavy on thy sense
To let her shine upon thee? So the man
Whose eye never opened on the light of heaven
Might smile with scorn while raptured Vision tells
Of the gay colored radiance flushing bright
Over all creation. From the wise be far
Such gross unhallowed pride! Nor needs my song
Descend so low, but rather now unfold,
If human thought could reach or words unfold,
By what mysterious fabric of the mind
The deep-felt joys and harmony of sound
Result from airy motion, and from shape
The lovely phantoms of sublime and fair.
By what fine ties has God connected things,
When present in the mind, which in themselves
Have no connection? Sure the rising sun
Over the cerulean unequal of the sea
With equal brightness and with equal warmth
Might roll his fiery orb, nor yet the soul
Thus feel her frame expanded, and her powers
Exulting in the splendor she beholds,
Like a young conq'ror moving through the pomp
Of some triumphal day. When joined at eve
Soft-murm'ring streams and gales of gentlest breath
Melodious Philomela's wakeful strain
Attempter, could not man's discerning ear
Through all its tones the sympathy pursue,
Nor yet this breath divine of nameless joy
Steal through his veins and fan the awakened heart,
Mild as the breeze yet rapturous as the song?
But were not Nature still endowed at large
With all which life requires though unadorned
With such enchantment? Wherefore then her form
So exquisitely fair? her breath persum'd
With such ethereal sweetness? whence her voice
Informed at will to raise or to depress
The impassioned soul? and whence the robes of light
Which thus invest her with more lovely pomp
Than Fancy can describe? Whence but from thee,
O Source Divine of everflowing love!
And thy unmeasured goodness? Not content
With every sood of life to nourish man,
By kind illusions of the wondering sense
Thou make all Nature beauty to his eye
Or music to his ear: wellpleas'd he scans
The goodly prospect, and with inward smiles
Treads the gay verdure of the painted plain,
Beholds the azure canopy of heaven,
And living lamps that over-arch his head
With more than regal splendor; bends his ears
To the full choir of water, air, and earth;
Nor heeds the pleasing error of his thought,
Nor doubts the painted green or azure arch,
Nor questions more the musick's mingling sounds
Than space or motion, or eternal time;
So sweet he feels their influence to attract
The sixed soul, to brighten the dull glooms
Of care, and make the destined road of life
Delightful to his feet. So fables tell
The adventurous hero bound on hard exploits
Beholds with glad surprise, by secret spells
Of some kind sage the patron of his toils,
A visionary paradise disclosed
Amid the dubious wild; with streams, and shades,
And airy songs, the enchanted landscape smiles,
Cheers his long labors, and renews his frame.
What then is taste, but these internal powers
Active, and strong, and feelingly alive
To each fine impulse? a discerning sense
Of decent and sublime, with quick disgust
From things deformed, or disarrang'd, or gross
In species? This nor gems, nor stores of gold,
Nor purple state, nor culture, can bestow,
But God alone, when first his active hand
Imprints the secret bias of the soul.
He, mighty Parent! wise and just in all,
Free as the vital breeze or light of heaven,
Reveals the charms of Nature. Ask the swain
Who journeys homeward from a summer day's
Long labor, why forgetful of his toils
And due repose he loiters to behold
The sunshine gleaming as through amber clouds
Over all the western sky? full soon, I ween,
His rude expression and untutored airs
Beyond the power of language will unfold
The form of Beauty smiling at his heart,
How lovely, how commanding! But though Heaven
In every breast has sown these early seeds
Of love and admiration, yet in vain
Without fair culture's kind parental aid,
Without enlivening suns and genial showers,
And shelter from the blast, in vain we hope
The tender plant should rear its blooming head,
Or yield the harvest promised in its spring.
Nor yet will every soil with equal stores
Repay the tiller's labor, or attend
His will obsequious, whether to produce
The olive or the laurel. Different minds
Incline to different objects; one pursues
The vast alone, the wonderful, the wild;. 547. -- one pursues -- The vast
alone, etc] See the note to. 18. of this book.

Another sighs for harmony, and grace,
And gentlest beauty. Hence when lightning fires
The arch of heaven, and thunders rock the ground,
When furious whirlwinds rend the howling air,
And ocean groaning from his lowest bed
Heaves his tempest'ous billows to the sky,
Amid the mighty uproar while below
The nations tremble, Shakespeare looks abroad
From some high cliff superior, and enjoys
The elemental war; but Waller longs. 558. Waller longs, etc.] "O! how I long
my careless limbs to lay
"Under the plantain shade, and all the day
"With amorous airs my fancy entertain," etc.
Waller. Battle of the Summer Islands, Canto I. And again, "While in the Park I
sing the listening deer,
"Attend my passion and forget to fear," etc.
At Penshurst.

All on the margin of some flowery stream
To spread his careless limbs amid the cool
Of plantane shades, and to the listening deer
The tale of slighted vows and love's disdain
Resound soft-warbling all the livelong day:
Consenting Zephyr sighs, the weeping rill
Joins in his plaint melodious, mute the groves,
And hill and dale with all their echoes mourn.
Such and so various are the tastes of men!
Oh blessed of Heaven! whom not the languid songs
Of Luxury the Siren, not the bribes
Of sordid Wealth, nor all the gaudy spoils
Of pageant Honor, can seduce to leave
Those ever-blooming sweets which from the store
Of Nature fair Imagination culls
To charm the enlivened soul! What though not all
Of mortal offspring can attain the heights
Of envied life, though only few possess
Patrician treasures or imperial state?
Yet Nature's care, to all her children just,
With richer treasures and an ampler state
Endows at large whatever happy man
Will deign to use them. His the city's pomp,
The rural honors his: whatever adorns
The princely dome, the column and the arch,
The breathing marbles and the sculptured gold,
Beyond the proud possessor's narrow claim,
His tuneful breast enjoys. For him the spring
Distills her dews, and from the silken gem
Its lucid leaves unfolds; for him the hand
Of Autumn tinges every fertile branch
With blooming gold and blushes like the Morn.
Each passing Hour sheds tribute from her wings,
And still new beauties meet his lonely walk,
And loves unfelt attract him. Not a breeze. 593. -- Not a breeze, etc.] That
this account may not appear rather poetically extravagant than just in
philosophy, it may be proper to produce the sentiment of one of the greatest,
wisest, and best of men on this head; one so little to be suspected to
partiality in the case, that he reckons it among those ^avours for which he was
especially thankful to the gods, that they had not suffered him to make any
great proficiency in the arts of eloquence and poetry, lest by that means he
should have been diverted from pursuits of more importance to his high station.
Speaking of the beauty of universal Nature, he observes that "there is a
pleasing and graceful aspect in every object we perceive" when once we consider
its connection with that general order. He instances in many things which at
first sight would be thought rather deformities, and then adds, "that a man who
enjoys a sensibility of temper, with a just comprehension of the universal
order -- will dscern many amiable things, not credible to every mind, but to
those alone who have entered into an honorable familiarity with Nature and her
works." M. Ant. iii. 2.

I lies over the meadow, not a cloud imbibes
The setting sun's effulgence, not a strain
From all the tenants of the warbling shade
Ascends, but whence his bosom can partake
Fresh pleasure unreprov'd: nor thence partakes
Fresh pleasure only, for the attentive mind
By this harmonious action on her powers
Becomes herself harmonious: wont so often
In outward things to meditate the charm
Of sacred order, soon she seeks at home
To find a kindred order, to exert
Within herself this elegance of love,
This fair inspired delight: her tempered powers
Refine at length, and every passion wears
A chaster, milder, more attractive, mien.
But if to ampler prospects, if to gaze
On Nature's form, where negligent of all
These lesser graces she assumes the port
Of that Eternal Majesty that weighed
The world's foundations; if to these the mind
Exalts her daring eye, then mightier far
Will be the change and nobler. Would the forms
Of servile custom cramp her generous powers?
Would sordid policies, the barbarous growth
Of Ignorance and Rapine, bow her down
To tame pursuits, to indolence and fear?
Lo! she appeals to Nature, to the winds
And rolling waves, the sun's unwearied course,
The elements and seasons. All declare
For what the Eternal Maker has ordained
The powers of man: we feel within ourselves
His energy divine: he tells the heart
He meant, he made, us to behold and love
What he beholds and loves, the general orb
Of life and being; to be great like him,
Beneficent and active. Thus the men
Whom Nature's works can charm with God himself
Hold converse, grow familiar day by day
With his conceptions, act upon his plan,
And form to his the relish of their souls.
END OF BOOK THIRD.
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
The General Argument.
THE Pleasures of the Imagination proceed either from natural objects, as from
a flourishing grove, a clear and murmuring fountain, a calm sea by moonlight,
or from works of art, such as a noble edifice, a musical tune, a (...), a
picture, a poem. In treating of th^se Pleasures we must begin with the former
class, they being original to the other; and nothing more being necessary in
order to explain them than a view of our natural inclination toward greatness
and beauty, and of those appearances in the world around us to which that
inclination is adapted. This is the subject of the first book of the following
poem.

But the Pleasures which we receive from the elegant arts, from music,
sculpture, painting, and poetry, are much more various and complicated. In them
(besides greatness and beauty, or forms proper to the Imagination) we find
interwoven frequent representations of truth, of virtue and vice, of
circumstances proper to move us with laughter, or to encite in us pity, fear,
and the other passions. Th^se moral and intellectual objects are described in
the second book, to which the third properly belongs as an episode, though too
large to have been included in it.

With the abovementioned causes of Pleasure, which are universal in the course
of human life, and appertain to our higher faculties, many others do generally
concur, more limited in their operation, or of an inferior origin; such are
the novelty of objects, the association of ideas, affections of the bodily
senses, influences of education, national habits, and the like. To illustrate
these, and from the whole to determine the character of a perfect taste, is the
argument of the fourth book.

Hitherto the Pleasures of the Imagination belong to the human species in
general; but there are certain particular men whose Imagination is endowed with
powers and susceptible of Pleasures which the generality of mankind never
participate: these are the men of genius, destined by Nature to excel in one or
other of the arts already mentioned. It is proposed therefore in the last
place, to delineate that genius which in some degree appears common to them
all, yet with a more peculiar consideration of poetry, inasmuch as poetry is
the most extensive of those arts, the most philosophical, and the most useful.

THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK I.
MDCCLVII.
The Argument.
THE subject proposed. Dedication. The ideas of the Supreme Being the exemplar^
of all things. The variety of constitution in the minds of men, with its final
cause. The general character of a fine Imagination. All the immediate Pleasures
of the human Imagination proceed either from greatness or beauty in external
objects. The Pleasure from greatness, with its final cause. The natural
connection of beauty with truth Truth is here taken not in a logical but in a
mixed and popular sense, or for what has been called the truth of things,
denoting as well their natural and regular condition as a proper estimate or
judgment concerning them.
and good. The different orders of beauty in different objects. The infinite
and allcomprehending form of beauty, which belongs to the Divine Mind. The
partial and artificial forms of beauty which belong to inferior intellectual
beings. The origin and general conduct of beauty in man. The subordination of
local beauties to the beauty of the universe. Conclusion.

WITH what enchantment Nature's goodly scene
Attracts the sense of mortals; how the mind
^or its own eye does objects nobler still
Prepare; how men by various lessons learn
To judge of Beauty's praise; what raptures fill
The breast with Fancy's native arts endowed,
And what true culture guides it to renown,
My Verse unfolds. Ye gods or godlike Powers!
Ye Guardians of the sacred task! attend
Propitious: hand in hand around your Bard
Move in majestic measures, leading on
His doubtful step through many a solemn path,
Conscious of secrets which to human sight
Ye only can reveal. Be great in him,
And let your favor make him wise to speak
Of all your wondrous empire, with a voice
So tempered to his theme that those who hear
May yield perpetual homage to yourselves.
Thou chief, O daughter of eternal Love!
Whatever thy name, or Muse or Grace, adored
By Grecian prophets, to the sons of Heaven
Known while with deep amazement thou do there
The perfect counsels read, the ideas old
Of thine Omniscient Father, known on earth
By the still horror and the blissful tear
With which thou seizest on the soul of man,
Thou chief, Poetic Spirit! from the banks
Of Avon, whence thy holy singers cull
Fresh flowers and dews to sprinkle on the turf
Where Shakespeare lies, be present; and with thee
Let Fiction come, on her aerial wings
Wasting ten thousand colors, which in sport
By the light glances of her magic eye
She blends and shifts at will through countless forms,
Her wild creation. Goddess of the Lyre,
Whose awful tones control the moving sphere,
Will thou, eternal Harmony! descend
And join this happy train? for with thee comes,
The guide the guardian of their mystic rites,
Wise Order; and where Order deigns to come
Her sister Liberty will not be far.
Be present all ye Genii! who conduct
Of youthful bards the lonely wandering step
New to your springs and shades, who touch their ear
With finer sounds, and heighten to their eye
The pomp of Nature, and before them place
The fairest loftiest countenance of things.
Nor thou, my Dyson! to the lay refuse
Thy wonted partial audience. What though first
In years unseason'd, happily ere the sports
Of childhood yet were over, the advent rous lay
With many splendid prospects, many charms,
Allured my heart, nor conscious whence they sprung,
Nor heedful of their end? yet serious Truth
Her empire over the calm sequestered theme
Asserted soon, while Falsehood's evil brood,
Vice and deceitful Pleasure, she at once
Excluded, and my fancy's careless toil
Drew to the better cause. Maturer aid
Thy friendship added, in the paths of life,
The busy paths, my unaccustomed feet
Preserving; nor to truth's recess divine
Through this wide argument's unbeaten space
Withholding surer guidance, while by turns
We traced the sages old, or while the queen
Of Sciences, (whom manners and the mind
Acknowledge) to my true companion's voice
Not unattentive, over the wintry lamp
Inclined her scepter favoring. Now the Fates
Have other tasks imposed. To thee, my Friend!
The ministry of freedom and the faith
Of popular decrees in early youth
Not vainly they committed. Me they sent
To wait on pain, and silent arts to urge
Inglorious, not ignoble, if my cares
To such as languish on a grievous bed
Ease and the sweet forgetfulness of ill
Conciliate; nor delightless, if the Muse
Her shades to visit and to taste her springs,
If some distinguished hours the bounteous Muse
Impart, and grant (what she and she alone
Can grant to mortals) that my hand those wreaths
Of fame and honest favor which the blessed
Wear in Elysium, and which never felt
The breath of Envy or malignant tongues,
That these my hand for thee and for myself
May gather. Meanwhile, O my faithful Friend!
O early chosen, ever found the same,
And trusted and beloved! once more the verse
Long destined, always obvious to thine ear,
Attend indulgent: so in latest years,
When Time thy head with honors shall have clothed
Sacred to even Virtue, may thy mind
Amid the calm review of seasons past,
Fair offices of friendship, or kind peace
Or public zeal, may then thy mind wellpleas'd
Recall these happy studies of our prime!
From Heaven my strains begin, from Heaven descends
The flame of genius to the chosen breast,
And beauty, with poetic wonder joined
And inspiration. Ere the rising sun
Shone over the deep, or 'mid the vault of night
The moon her silver lamp suspended, ere
The vales with springs were watered, or with groves
Of oak or pine the ancient hills were crowned,
Then the Great Spirit, whom his works adore,
Within his own deep essence viewed the forms,
The forms eternal, of created things,
The radiant sun, the moon's nocturnal lamp,
The mountains and the streams, the ample stores
Of earth, of heaven, of Nature. From the first
On that full scene his love divine he fixed,
His admiration, till in time complete
What he admired and loved his vital power
Unfolded into being. Hence the breath
Of life informing each organick frame,
Hence the green earth, and wild resounding waves,
Hence light and shade alternate, warmth and cold,
And bright autumnal skies and vernal showers,
And all the fair variety of things.
But not alike to every mortal eye
Is this great scene unveiled; for while the claims
Of social life to different labors urge
The active powers of man, with wisest care
Has Nature on the multitude of minds
Impressed a various bias, and to each
Decreed its province in the common toil.
To some she taught the fabric of the sphere,
The changeful moon, the circuit of the stars,
The golden zones of heaven: to some she gave
To search the story of eternal thought,
Of space and time, of Fate's unbroken chain,
And will's quick movement: others by the hand
She led over vales and mountains, to explore
What healing virtue dwells in every vein
Of herbs or trees. But some to nobler hopes
Were destined; some within a finer mould
She wrought, and tempered with a purer flame:
To these the Sire Omnipotent unfolds
In fuller aspects and with fairer lights
This picture of the world. Through every part
They trace the lofty sketches of his hand;
In earth or air, the meadow's flowery store,
The moon's mild radiance, or the virgin's mien,
Dressed in attractive smiles, they see portray'd
(As far as mortal eyes the portrait scan)
Those lineaments of beauty which delight
The mind supreme: they also feel their force
Enamored; they partake the eternal joy.
For as old Memnon's image, long renowned
Through fabling Egypt, at the genial touch
Of morning from its inmost frame sent forth
Spontaneous music, so does Nature's hand
To certain attributes which matter claims
Adapt the finer organs of the mind;
So the glad impulse of those kindred powers
(Of form, of colour's cheerful pomp, of sound
Melodious, or of motion aptly sped)
Detains the enlivened sense, till soon the soul
Feels the deep concord, and assents through all
Her functions. Then the charm by Fate prepared
Diffuseth its enchantment; Fancy dreams,
Rapt into high discourse with prophets old,
And wandering through Elysium, Fancy dreams
Of sacred fountains, of o'ershadowing groves,
Whose walks with godlike harmony resound,
Fountains which Homer visits, happy groves
Where Milton dwells. The intellectual power
On the mind's throne suspends his graver cares,
And smiles: the passions to divine repose
Persuaded yield, and love and joy alone
Are waking; love and joy, such as await
An angel's meditation. O! attend,
Whoever thou art whom these delights can touch,
Whom Nature's aspect, Nature's simple garb,
Can thus command: O! listen to my Song,
And I will guide thee to her blissful walks,
And teach thy solitude her voice to hear,
And point her gracious features to thy view.
Know then whatever of the world's ancient store,
Whatever of mimick art's reflected scenes,
With love and admiration thus inspire
Attentive Fancy, her delighted sons
In two illustrious orders comprehend
Selftaught. From him whose rustic toil the lark
Cheers warbling, to the bard whose daring thoughts
Range the full orb of being, still the form
Which Fancy worships or sublime or fair
Her votaries proclaim. I see them dawn!
I see the radiant visions where they rise,
More lovely than when Lucifer displays
His glittering forehead through the gates of morn
To lead the train of Phoebus and the spring!
Say, why was man so eminently raised
Amid the vast creation? why empowered
Through life and death to dart his watchful eye,
With thoughts beyond the limit of his frame,
But that the Omnipotent might send him forth,
In sight of angels and immortal minds,
As on an ample theater, to join
In contest with his equals, who shall best
The task achieve, the course of noble toils,
By wisdom and by mercy preordain'd?
Might send him forth the sovran good to learn,
To chase each meaner purpose from his breast,
And through the mists of passion and of sense,
And through the pelting storms of chance and pain,
To hold straight on, with constant heart and eye
Still fixed upon his everlasting palm,
The approving smile of Heaven? Else wherefore burns
In mortal bosoms this unquenched hope
That seeks from day to day sublimer ends,
Happy though restless? why departs the soul
Wide from the track and journey of her times
To grasp the good she knows not? in the field
Of things which may be, in the spacious field
Of science, potent arts, or dreadful arms,
To raise up scenes in which her own desires
Contented may repose, when things which are
Pull on her temper like a twice told tale;
Her temper, still demanding to be free,
Spurning the rude control of wilful Might,
Proud of her dangers braved, her griefs endured,
Her strength severely proved? To these high aims
Which reason and affection prompt in man
Not adverse nor unapt has Nature framed
His bold Imagination; for amid
The various forms which this full world presents
Like rivala to his choice, what human breast
Ever doubts before the transient and minute
To prize the vast, the stable, the sublime?
Who that from heights aerial sends his eye
Around a wild horizon, and surveys
Indus or Ganges rolling his broad wave
Through mountains, plains, through spacious cities old,
And regions dark with woods, will turn away
To mark the path of some penurious rill
Which murm'reth at his feet? Where does the Soul
Consent her soaring fancy to restrain,
Which bears her up as on an eagle's wings
Destined for highest heaven? or which of Fate's
Tremend'ous barriers shall confine her flight
To any humbler quarry? The rich earth
Cannot detain her, nor the ambient air
With all its changes. For a while with joy
She hovers over the sun, and views the small
Attendant orbs beneath his sacred beam
Emerging from the deep, like clustered isles,
Whose rocky shores to the glad sailor's eye
Reflect the gleams of morning; for a while
With pride she sees his firm paternal sway
Bend the reluctant planets to move each
Round its perpetual year; but soon she quits
That prospect; meditating lostier views
She darts adventurous up the long career
Of comets, through the constellations holds
Her course, and now looks back on all the stars,
Whose blended flames as with a milky stream
Part the blue region. Empyrean tracks,
Where happy souls beyond this concave heaven
Abide, she then explores, whence purer light
For countless ages travels through the abyss,
Nor has in sight of mortals yet arrived:
Upon the wide creation's utmost shore
At length she stands, and the dread space beyond
Contemplates, half recoiling; nathless down
The gloomy void astonished yet unquell'd
She plungeth, down the unfathomable gulf
Where God alone has being; there her hopes
Rest at the fated goal: for from the birth
Of humankind the Sovran Maker said
That not in humble nor in brief delight,
Not in the fleeting echoes of Renown,
Powers purple robes, nor Pleasure's flowery lap,
The soul should find contentment, but from these
Turning disdainful to an equal good,
Through Nature's opening walks enlarge her aim
Till every bound at length should disappear
And infinite perfection fill the scene.
But lo! where Beauty dressed in gentler pomp
With comely steps advancing claims the verse
Her charms inspire. O Beauty! source of praise,
Of honor, even to mute and lifeless things;
O thou that kindlest in each human heart
Love and the wish of poets, when their tongue
Would teach to other bosoms what so charms
Their own! O child of Nature and the Soul
In happiest hour brought forth, the doubtful garb
Of words, of earthly language, all too mean,
Too lowly, I account in which to clothe
Thy form divine! for thee the mind alone
Beholds, nor half thy brightness can reveal
Through those dim organs whose corporeal touch
O'ershadoweth thy pure essence. Yet my Muse!
If Fortune call thee to the task, wait thou
Thy favorable seasons; then while fear
And doubt are absent through wide Nature's bounds
Expatiate with glad step, and choose at will
Whatever bright spoils the florid earth contains,
Whatever the waters or the liquid air,
To manifest unblemished Beauty's praise,
And over the breasts of mortals to extend
Her gracious empire. Will thou to the isles
Atlantic, to the rich Hesperian clime,
Fly in the train of Autumn, and look on
And learn from him, while as he roves around
Wherever his fingers touch the fruitful grove
The branches bloom with gold, wherever his foot
Imprints the soil the ripening clusters swell,
Turning aside their foliage, and come forth
In purple lights, till every hillock glows
As with the blushes of an evening sky?
Or will thou that Thessalian landscape trace
Where slow Peneus his clear glassy tide
Draws smooth along, between the winding cliffs
Of Ossa and the pathless woods unshorn
That wave over huge Olympus? Down the stream
Look how the mountains with their double range
Embrace the vale of Tempe, from each side
Ascending steep to heaven a rocky mound
Covered with ivy and the laurel boughs
That crowned young Phoebus for the Python slain.
Fair Tempe! on whose primrose banks the morn
Awoke most fragrant, and the noon reposed
In pomp of lights and shadows most sublime;
Whose lawns, whose glades, ere human footsteps yet
Had traced an entrance, were the hallowed haunt
Of sylvan powers immortal, where they sat
Often in the Golden Age, the Nymphs and Fauns,
Beneath some arbor branching over the flood,
And leaning round hung on the instructive lips
Of hoary Pan, or over some open dale
Danced in light measures to his sev'nfold pipe,
While Zephyr's wanton hand along their path
Flung showers of painted blossoms, fertile dews,
And one perpetual spring. But if our task
More lofty rites demand, with all good vows
Then let us hasten to the rural haunt
Where young Melissa dwells; nor thou refuse
The voice which calls thee from thy loved retreat,
But hither, gentle Maid! thy sootsteps turn;
Here to thy own unquestionable theme
O fair! O graceful! bend thy polished brow,
Assenting, and the gladness of thy eyes
Impart to me, like morning's wished light
Seen through the vernal air. By yonder stream,
Where beech and elm along the bord'ring mead
Send forth wild melody from every bough
Together let us wander, where the hills
Covered with fleeces to the lowing vale
Reply, where tidings of content and peace
Each echo brings. Lo how the western fun
Over fields and floods, over every living soul,
Diffuseth glad repose! There while I speak
Of Beauty's honors thou, Melissa! thou
Shall hearken, not unconscious, while I tell
How first from heaven she came, how after all
The works of life, the elemental scenes,
The hours, the seasons, she had often explored,
At length her favorite mansion and her throne
She fixed in woman's form; what pleasing ties
To virtue bind her, what effectual aid
They lend each other's power, and how divine
Their union, should some unambitious maid
To all the enchantment of the Idalian queen
Add sanctity and wisdom. While my tongue
Prolongs the tale, Melissa! thou may feign
To wonder whence my rapture is inspired;
But soon the smile which dawns upon thy lip
Shall tell it, and the tend'rer bloom over all
That soft cheek springing to the marble neck,
Which bends aside in vain, revealing more
What it would thus keep silent, and in vain
The sense of praise dissembling. Then my song
Great Nature's winning arts, which thus inform
With joy and love the ragged bread of man,
Should sound in numbers worthy of such a theme;
While all whose souls have ever felt the force
Of those enchanting p^ons to my lyre
Should throng attentive, and receive once more
Their influence, unobscur'd by any cloud
Of vulgar care, and purer than the hand
Of Fortune can bestow: nor to confirm
Their sway should awful Contemplation scorn
To join his dictate^ to the genuine strain
Of Pleasure's tongue, nor yet ^ould Pleasure's ear
Be much averse. Ye chiefly, gentle band
Of Youths and Virgins! who through many a wish
And many a fond pursuit, as in some scene
Of magic bright and fleeting are allured
By various beauty, if the pleasing toil
Can yield a moment's respite, hither turn
Your favorable ear, and trust my words.
I do not mean on blessed Religion's seat
Presenting Superstition's gloomy form
To dash your soothing hopes; I do not mean
To bid the jealous Thund'rer fire the heavens,
Or shapes infernal rend the groaning earth,
And scare you from your joys. My cheerful song
With happier omens calls you to the field,
Pleased with your generous ardour in the chase,
And warm like you. Then tell me, (for ye know)
Does Beauty ever deign to dwell where use
And aptitude are strangers? is her praise
Confes'd in aught whose most peculiar ends
Are lame and fruitless? or did Nature mean
This pleasing call the herald of a lie,
To hide the shame of discord and disease,
And win each fond admirer into s^ares,
Foiled, bassled? No: with better providence
The general Mother, conscious how infirm
Her offspring tread the paths of good and ill,
Thus to the choice of credulous desire
Does objects the completest of their tribe
Distinguish and commend. Yon' flowery bank
Clothed in the soft magnificence of spring
Will not the flocks approve it? will they ask
The reedy fen for pasture? That clear rill
Which trickleth murmuring from the mossy rock,
Yields it less wholesome bev'rage to the worn
And thirsty trav'ller than the standing pool
With muddy weeds o'ergrown? Yon' ragged vine,
Whose lean and sullen clusters mourn the rage
Of Eurus, will the winepress or the bowl
Report of her as of the swelling grape
Which glitters through the tendrils like a gem
When first it meets the sun? Or what are all
The various charms to life and sense adjoin'd?
Are they not pledges of a state entire,
Where native order reigns, with every part
In health and every function well performed?
Thus then at first was Beauty sent from heaven,
The lovely ministress of Truth and Good
In this dark world; for Truth and Good are one,
And Beauty dwells in them and they in her
With like participation. Wherefore then,
O Sons of Earth! would ye dissolve the tie?
O! wherefore with a rash and greedy aim
Seek ye to rove through every flattering scene
Which Beauty seems to deck, nor once inquire
Where is the suffrage of eternal Truth,
Or where the seal of undeceitful good,
To save your search from folly? Wanting these
Lo! Beauty withers in your void embrace,
And with the glittering of an idiot's toy
Did fancy mock your vows. Nor yet let hope,
That kindliest inmate of the youthful breast,
Be hence appalled, be turned to coward sloth,
Sitting in silence with dejected eyes,
Incurious, and with folded hands: far less
Let scorn of wild fantastic folly's dreams,
Or hatred of the bigot's savage pride,
Persuade you ever that Beauty, or the love
Which waits on Beauty, may not brook to hear
The sacred lore of undeceitful good
And truth eternal. From the vulgar crowd^
Though Superstition, tyranness abhorred!
The reverence due to this majestic pair
With threats and execration still demands;
Though the tame wretch who asks of her the way
To their celestial dwelling she constrains
To quench or set at naught the lamp of God
Within his frame; through many a cheerless wild
Though forth she leads him credulous and dark,
And awed with dubious notion; though at length
Happily she plunge him into cloistered cells
And mansions unrelenting as the grave,
But void of quiet, there to watch the hours
Of midnight, there amid the screaming owl's
Dire song with specter or with guilty shades
To talk of pangs and everlasting woe;
Yet be not ye dismayed; a gentler star
Presides over your adventure. From the bower
Where Wisdom sat with her Athenian sons
Could but my happy hand intwine a wreath
Of Plato's olive with the Mantuan bay,
Then (for what need of cruel fear to you,
To you whom godlike love can well command?)
Then should my powerful voice at once dispel
Those monkish horrors; should in words divine
Relate how favored minds like you inspired,
And taught their inspiration to conduct
By ruling Heaven's decree, through various walks,
And prospects various, but delightful all,
Move onward; while now myrtle groves appear
Now arms and radiant trophies, now the rods
Of empire with the curule throne, or now
The domes of Contemplation and the Muse.
Led by that hope sublime whose cloudless eye
Through the fair toils and ornaments of earth
Discerns the nobler life reserved for heaven,
^eat'd alike they worship round the shrine
Where Truth conspic'ous with her sister-twins,
The undivided partners of her sway,
With Good and Beauty reigns. O! let not us
By Pleasure's lying blandishments detained,
Or crouching to the frowns of bigot Rage,
O! let not us one moment pause to join
That chosen band: and if the gracious Power
Who first awakened my untutored song
Will to my invocation grant anew
The tuneful spirit, then through all our paths
Never shall the sound of this devoted lyre
Be wanting, whether on the rosy mead
When summer smiles to warn the melting heart
Of Luxury's allurement, whether firm
Against the torrent and the stubborn hill
To urge free Virtue's steps, and to her side
Summon that strong divinity of soul
Which conquers Chance and Fate, or on the height,
The goal assigned her, happily to proclaim
Her triumph, on her brow to place the crown
Of uncorrupted praise, through future worlds
To follow her interminated way,
And bless Heaven's image in the heart of man.
Such is the worth of Beauty, such her power,
So blameless, so revered. It now remains
In just gradation through the various ranks
Of being to contemplate how her gifts
Rise in due measure, watchful to attend
The steps of rising Nature. Last and least
In colors mingling with a random blaze
Does Beauty dwell: then higher in the forms
Of simplest easiest measure, in the bounds
Of circle, cube, or sphere: the third ascent
To symmetry adds color: thus the pearl
Shines in the concave of its purple bed,
And painted shells along some winding shore
Catch with indented folds the glancing sun.
Next as we rise appear the blooming tribes
Which clothe the fragrant earth, which draw from her
Their own nutrition, which are born and die,
Yet in their seed immortal: such the flowers
With which young Maia pays the village maids
That hail her natal morn, and such the groves
Which blithe Pomona rears on Vaga's bank
To seed the bowl of Ariconian swains
Who quaff beneath her branches. Nobler still
Is Beauty's name where to the full consent
Of members and of features, to the pride
Of color and the vital change of growth,
Life's holy flame with piercing sense is given,
While active motion speaks the tempered soul:
So moves the bird of Juno, so the steed
With rival swiftness heats the dusty plain,
And faithful dogs with eager airs of joy
Salute their fellows. What sublimer pomp
Adorns the seat where Virtue dwells on earth
And Truth's eternal daylight shines around;
What palm belongs to man's imperial front,
And woman, powerful with becoming smiles,
Chief of terrestrial natures! need we now
Strive to inculcate? Thus has Beauty there
Her most conspic'ous praise to Matter lent
Where most conspic'ous through that shadowy (...)
Breaks forth the bright expression of a mind
By steps directing our enraptured search
To him the first of minds, the chief, the sole,
From whom through this wide complicated world
Did all her various lineaments begin;
To whom alone, consenting and entire,
At once their mutual influence all display.
He, God most high, (bear witness Earth and Heaven!)
The living fountains in himself contains
Of beauteous and sublime. With him enthroned
Ere days or years trod their ethereal way,
In his supreme intelligence enthroned,
The queen of Love holds her unclouded state,
Urania. Thee, O Father! this extent
Of matter, thee the sluggish earth and track
Of seas, the heavens and heavenly splendours, feel
Pervading, quickening, moving. From the depth
Of thy great essence forth did thou conduct
Eternal Form, and there where Chaos reigned
Gav'st her dominion to erect her seat
And sanctify the mansion. All her works
Wellpleas'd thou did behold; the gloomy fires
Of storm or earthquake, and the purest light
Of summer; soft Campania's newborn rose,
And the slow weed which pines on Russian hills,
Comely alike to thy full vision stand;
To thy surrounding vision, which unites
All essences and powers of the great world
In one sole order, fair alike they stand,
As features well consenting, and alike
Required by Nature ere she could attain
Her just resemblance to the perfect shape
Of universal Beauty, which with thee
Dwelt from the first. Thou also, Ancient Mind!
Whom love and free beneficence await
In all thy doings, to inferior minds
Thy offspring, and to man thy youngest son,
Refusing no convenient gift nor good,
Their eyes did open in this earth, yon' heaven,
Those starry worlds, the countenance divine
Of Beauty to behold: but not to them
Did thou her awful magnitude reveal
Such as before thine own unbounded sight
She stands, (for never shall created soul
Conceive that object) nor to all their kinds
The same in shape or features did thou frame
Her image. Measuring well their different spheres
Of sense and action, thy paternal hand
Has for each race prepared a different test
Of Beauty, owned and reverenced as their guide
Most apt, most faithful. Thence informed they scan
The objects that surround them, and select,
Since the great whole disclaims their scanty view,
Each for himself selects, peculiar parts
Of Nature, what the standard fixed by Heaven
Within his breast approves; acquiring thus
A partial beauty which becomes his lot,
A beauty which his eye may comprehend,
His hand may copy; leaving, O Supreme!
O thou whom none has uttered! leaving all
To thee that infinite consummate form
Which the great powers, the gods around thy throne
And nearest to thy counsels, know with thee
For ever to have been, but who she is
Or what her likeness know not. Man surveys
A narrower scene, where by the mixed effect
Of things corporeal on his passive mind
He judges what is fair. Corporeal things
The mind of man impel with various powers,
And various features to his eye disclose.
The powers which move his sense with instant joy,
The features which attract his heart to love,
He marks, combines, reposits. Other powers
And features of the selfsame thing (unless
The beauteous form, the creature of his mind,
Request their close alliance) he o'erlooks
Forgotten, or with self-beguiling zeal
Whenever his passions mingle in the work
Half alters, half disowns. The tribes of men
Thus from their different functions, and the shapes
Familiar to their eye, with art obtain,
Unconscious of their purpose, yet with art
Obtain the Beauty fitting man to love,
Whose proud desires from Nature's homely toil
Often turn away fastidious, asking still
His mind's high aid to purify the form
From matter's gross communion, to secure
For ever from the meddling hand of Change
Or rude Decay her features, and to add
Whatever ornaments may suit her mien
Whatever he finds them scattered through the paths
Of Nature or of Fortune; then he seats
The accomplished image deep within his breast,
Reviews it, and accounts it good and fair.
Thus the one Beauty of the world entire,
The universal Venus, far beyond
The keenest effort of created eyes
And their most wide horizon dwells enthroned
In ancient silence: at her footstool stands
An altar burning with eternal fire
Unsullied, unconsum'd. Here every hour,
Here every moment, in their turns arrive
Her offspring, an innumerable band
Of sisters, comely all, but differing far
In age, in stature, and expressive mien,
More than bright Helen from her newborn babe.
To this maternal shrine in turns they come,
Each with her sacred lamp, that from the source
Of living flame which here immortal slows
Their portions of its luster they may draw
For days, or months, or years, for ages some,
As their great parent's discipline requires;
Then to their several mansions they depart,
In stars, in planets, through the unknown shores
Of yon' ethereal ocean. Who can tell
Even on the surface of this rolling earth
How many make abode? The fields, the groves,
The winding rivers, and the azure main,
Are rendered solemn by their frequent feet,
Their rites sublime. There each her destined home
Informs with that pure radiance from the skies
Brought down, and shines throughout her little sphere
Exulting. Straight as travelers by night
Turn toward a distant flame, so some fit eye
Among the various tenants of the scene
Discerns the heaven-born phantom seated there,
And owns her charms: hence the wide universe
Through all the seasons of revolving worlds
Bears witness with its people, gods and men,
To Beauty's blissful power, and with the voice
Of grateful admiration still resounds;
That voice to which is Beauty's frame divine
As is the cunning of the master's hand
To the sweet accent of the welltun'd lyre.
Genius of ancient Greece! whose faithful steps
Have led us to these awful solitudes
Of Nature and of Science; Nurse revered
Of generous counsels and heroic deeds!
O let some portion of thy matchless praise
Dwell in my breast, and teach me to adorn
This unattempted theme! Nor be my thoughts
Presumpt'ous counted if amid the calm
Which Hesper sheds along the vernal heaven
If I from vulgar Superstition's walk
Impatient steal, and from the unseemly rites
Of splendid Adulation, to attend
With hymns thy presence in the sylvan shade,
By their malignant footsteps unprofan'd.
Come, O renowned Power! thy glowing mien
Such, and so elevated all thy form,
As when the great barbarick lord, again
And yet again diminished, hid his face
Among the herd of satraps and of kings,
And at the lightning of thy lifted spear
Crouch'd like a slave. Bring all thy martial spoils,
Thy palms, thy laurels, thy triumphal songs,
Thy smiling band of arts, thy godlike sires
Of civil wisdom, thy unconquered youth,
After some glorious day rejoicing round
Their new-erected trophy. Guide my feet
Through fair Lyceum's walk, the olive shades
Of academus, and the sacred vale
Haunted by steps divine, where once beneath
That ever-living platane's ample boughs
Ilissus, by Socratick sounds detained,
On his neglected urn attentive lay,
While Boreas lingering on the neighboring steep
With beauteous Orithyia his lovetale
In silent awe suspended: there let me
With blameless hand from thy unenvious fields
Transplant some living blossoms to adorn
My native clime, while far beyond the meed
Of Fancy's toil aspiring I unlock
The springs of ancient wisdom, while I add
(What cannot be disjoined from Beauty's praise)
Thy name and native dress, thy works beloved
And honored, while to my compatriot youth
I point the great example of thy sons,
And tune to Attick themes the British lyre.
END OF BOOK FIRST.
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK II.
The Argument.
INTRODUCTION to this more difficult part of the subject. Of truth and its
three classes, matter of fact, experimental or scientifical truth, (cont^
distinguished from opinion) and universal truth; which last is either
metaphysical or geometrical, either purely intellectual or perfectly a^acted.
On the power of discerning truth depends that of acting with the view of an
end, a circumstance essential to virtue. Of virtue, considered in the Divine
Mind as a perpetual and universal beneficence. Of human virtue, considered as a
sysem of particular sentiments and actions, suitable to the design of
Providence and the condition of man, to whom it constitutes the chief good and
the first beauty. Of vice and its origin. Of ridicule; its general nature and
final cause^ Of the passions, particularly of those which relate to evil
natural or moral, and which are generally accounted painful, though not always
unattended with Pleasure.

THUS far of Beauty and the pleasing forms
Which man's untutored fancy from the scenes
Imperfect of this ever-changing world
Creates and views enamored. Now my song
Severer themes demand, mysterious truth,
And virtue, sovran good; the spells, the trains,
The progeny, of Error; the dread sway
Of Passion, and whatever hidden stores
From her own lofty deeds and from herself
The mind acquires. Severer argument,
Not less attractive nor deserving less
A constant ear: for what are all the forms
Educ'd by fancy from corporeal things,
Greatness, or pomp, or symmetry of parts?
Not tending to the heart soon seeble grows,
As the blunt arrow against the knotty trunk,
Their impulse on the sense, while the palled eye
Expects in vain its tribute, asks in vain
Where are the ornaments it once admired?
Not so the moral species, nor the powers
Of passion and of thought The ambitious mind
With objects boundless as her own desires
Can there converse: by these unfading forms
Touched and awakened still, with eager act
She bends each nerve, and meditates wellpleas'd
Her gifts, her godlike fortune. Such the seenes
Now opening round us: may the destined Verse
Maintain its equal tenor, though in tracks
Obscure and ard'ous! may the Source of Light,
Allpresent, allsufficient, guide our steps
Through every maze! and whom in childish years
From the loud throng, the beaten paths of wealth
And power, thou did apart send forth to speak
In tuneful words concerning highest things,
Him still do thou, O Father! at those hours
Of pensive freedom, when the human soul
Shuts out the rumor of the world, him still
Touch thou with secret lessons; call thou back
Each erring thought, and let the yielding strains
From his full bosom like a welcome rill
Spontaneous from its healthy fountain flow!
But from what name, what favorable sign,
What heavenly auspice, rather shall I date
My perilous excursion than from truth,
That nearest inmate of the human soul,
Estranged from whom the countenance divine
Of man dissigur'd and dishonored, sinks
Among inferior things? for to the brutes
Perception and the transient boons of sense
Has Fate imparted, but to man alone
Of sublunary beings was it given
Each fleeting impulse on the sensual powers
At leisure to review, with equal eye
To sean the passion of the stricken nerve,
Or the vague object striking, to conduct
From sense, the portal turbulent and loud,
Into the mind's wide palace one by one
The frequent, pressing, fluctuating, forms,
And question and compare them. Thus he learns
Their birth and fortunes, how allied they haunt
The avenues of sense, what laws direct
Their union, and what various discords rise
Or fixed or casual; which when his clear thought
Retains, and when his faithful words express,
That living image of the external scene,
As in a polished mirror held to view,
Is truth; wherever it varies from the shape
And hue of its exemplar, in that part
Dim error lurks. Moreover, from without
When often the same society of forms
In the same order have approached his mind,
He deigns no more their steps with curious heed
To trace; no more their features or their garb
He now examines, but of them and their
Condition, as with some diviner's tongue,
Affirms what Heaven in every distant place
Through every future season will decree:
This too is truth: wherever his prudent lips
Wait till experience diligent and flow
Has authorized their sentence, this is truth;
A second higher kind; the parent this
Of Science, or the losty power herself,
Science herself, on whom the wants and cares
Of social life depend, the substitute
Of God's own wisdom in this toilsome world,
The providence of man. Yet ost' in vain
To earn her aid with fixed and anxious eye
He looks on Nature's and on Fortune's course,
Too much in vain: his duller visual ray
The stillness and the persevering acts
Of Nature often elude, and Fortune often
With step fantastic from her wonted walk
Turns into mazes dim: his sight is foiled,
And the crude sentence of his falt'ring tongue
Is but Opinion's verdict half believed,
And prone to change. Here thou who feelst thine ear
Congenial to my lyre's profounder tone
Pause and be watchful. Hitherto the stores
Which feed thy mind and exercise her powers
Partake the relish of their native soil,
Their parent earth: but know a nobler dower
Her sire at birth decreed her, purer gifts
From his own treasure, forms which never deigned
In eyes or ears to dwell within the sense
Of earthly organs, but sublime were placed
In his essential reason, leading there
That vast ideal host which all his works
Through endless ages never will reveal.
Thus then endowed the feeble creature man,
The slave of hunger and the prey of Death,
Even now, even here, in earth's dim prison bound,
The language of intelligence divine
Attains, repeating often concerning one
And many, past and present, parts and whole,
Those sovran dictates which in farthest heaven,
Where no orb rowls, Eternity's fixed ear
Hears from coeval truth, when Chance nor Change,
Nature's loud progeny, nor Nature's self,
Dares intermeddle or approach her throne.
Ere long over this corporeal world he learns
TO extend her sway, while calling from the deep,
From earth and air, their multitudes untold
Of figures and of motions round his walk,
For each wide family some single birth
He sets in view, the impartial type of all
Its brethren, suffering it to claim beyond
Their common heritage no private gift,
No proper fortune. Then whatever his eye
In this discerns his bold unerring tongue
Pronounces of the kindred without bound,
Without condition. Such the rise of forms
Sequestered far from sense, and every spot
Peculiar in the realms of space or time;
Such is the throne which man for Truth amid
The paths of mutability has built
Secure, unshaken, still, and whence he views
In matter's mouldering structures the pure forms
Of triangle or circle, cube or cone,
Impassive all, whose attributes nor Force
Nor Fate can alter: there he first conceives
True being and an intellectual world,
The same this hour and ever: thence he deems
Of his own lot above the painted shapes
That fleeting move over this terrestrial scene,
Looks up, beyond the adamantine gates
Of death expatiates, as his birthright claims
Inheritance in all the works of God,
Prepares for endless time his plan of life,
And counts the universe itself his home.
Whence also but from truth, the light of minds,
Is human fortune gladden'd with the rays
Of virtue? with the moral colors thrown
On every walk of this our social scene,
Adorning for the eye of gods and men
The passions, actions, habitudes of life,
And rend'ring earth like heaven, a sacred place
Where Love and Praise may take delight to dwell?
Let none with heedless tongue from Truth disjoin
The reign of Virtue. Ere the dayspring flowed
Like sisters linked in Concord's golden chain
They stood before the great Eternal Mind,
Their common parent, and by him were both
Sent forth among his creatures hand in hand,
Inseparably joined; nor ever did Truth
Find an apt ear to listen to her lore
Which knew not Virtue's voice; nor save where Truth's
Majestic words are heard and understood
Does Virtue deign to inhabit. Go, inquire
Of Nature, not among Tartarean rocks,
Whither the hungry vulture with its prey
Returns, not where the lion's sullen roar
At noon resounds along the lonely banks
Of ancient Tigris, but her gentler scenes,
The dovecote and the shepherd's fold at morn
Consult; or by the meadow's fragrant hedge,
In springtime when the woodlands first are green,
Attend the linnet singing to his mate
Couched over their tender young. To this fond care
Thou do not Virtue's honorable name
Attribute; wherefore, save that not one gleam
Of truth did ever discover to themselves
Their little hearts, or teach them by the effects
Of that parental love the love itself
To judge, and measure its officious deeds?
But man, whose eyelids Truth has filled with day,
Discerns how skilfully to bounteous ends
His wise affections move, with free accord
Adopts their guidance, yields himself secure
To Nature's prudent impulse, and converts
Instinct to duty and to sacred law:
Hence right and fit on earth, while thus to man
The Almighty Legislator has explained
The springs of action fixed within his breast,
Has given him power to slacken or restrain
Their effort, and has shown him how they join
Their partial movements with the master-wheel
Of the great world, and serve that sacred end
Which he the Unerring Reason keeps in view.
For (if a mortal tongue may speak of him
And his dread ways) even as his boundless eye
Connecting every form and every change
Beholds the perfect beauty, so his will
Through every hour producing good to all
The family of creatures is itself
The perfect virtue. Let the grateful swain
Remember this as often with joy and praise
He looks upon the falling dews which clothe
His lawns with verdure, and the tender seed
Nourish within his surrows; when between
Dead seas and burning skies, where long unmoved
The bark had languish'd, now a rustling gale
Lifts over the fickle waves the dancing prow,
Let the glad pilot bursting out in thanks
Remember this, lest blind o'erweening pride
Pollute their offerings, lest their selfish heart
Say to the heavenly Ruler "At our call
"Relents thy power; by us thy arm is moved."
Fools! who of God as of each other deem,
Who his invariable acts deduce
From sudden counsels transient as their own,
No^ farther of his bounty than the event,
Which happily meets their loud and eager prayer,
Acknowledge, nor beyond the drop minute,
Which happily they have tasted, heed the source
That flows for all, the fountain of his love,
Which from the summit where he sits enthroned
Pours health and joy, un^ailing streams, throughout
The spacious region flourishing in view,
The goodly work of his eternal day,
His own fair universe, on which alone
His counsels ^ix, and whence alone his will
Assumes her strong direction. Such is now
His sovran purpose, such it was before
All multitude of years: for his right arm
Was never idle; his bestowing love
Knew no beginning; was not as a change
Of mood that woke at last and started up
After a deep and solitary sloth
Of boundless ages: no; he now is good;
He ever was. The feet of hoary Time
Through their eternal course have traveled over
No speechless lifeless desert, but through scenes
Cheerful with bounty still, among a pomp
Of worlds for gladness round the Maker's throne
Loud shouting, or in many dialects
Of hope and filial trust imploring thence
The fortunes of their people, where so fixed
Were all the dates of being, so disposed
To every living soul of every kind
The field of motion and the hour of rest,
That each the general happiness might serve,
And by the discipline of laws divine
Convinced of folly or chastised from guilt
Each might at length be happy. What remains
Shall be like what is passed, but fairer still,
And still increasing in the godlike gifts
Of life and truth. The same paternal hand
From the mute shellfish gasping on the shore
To men, to angels, to celestial minds,
Will ever lead the generations on
Through higher scenes of being, while supplied
From day to day by his enlivening breath
Inferior orders in succession rise
To fill the void below. As flame ascends,
As vapors to the earth in showers return,
As the poised ocean towered the attracting moon
Swells, and the ever listening planets charmed
By the sun's call their onward pace incline,
So all things which have life aspire to God,
Exhaustless fount of intellectual day,
Center of souls! Nor does the mast'ring voice
Of Nature cease within to prompt aright
Their steps, nor is the care of Heaven withheld
From sending to the toil external aid,
That in their stations all may persevere
To climb the ascent of being, and approach
For ever nearer to the life divine.
But this eternal fabric was not raised
For man's inspection. Though to some be given
To catch a transient visionary glimpse
Of that majestic scene which boundless power
Prepares for perfect goodness, yet in vain
Would human life her faculties expand
TO imbosom such an object, nor could ever
Virtue or praise have touched the hearts of men
Had not the Sovran Guide through every stage
Of this their various journey pointed out
New hopes, new toils, which to their humble sphere
Of sight and strength might such importance hold
As does the wide creation to his own:
Hence all the little charities of life,
With all their duties, hence that favorite palm
Of human will when duty is sufficed,
And still the liberal soul in ampler deeds
Would manifest herself, that sacred sign
Of her revered affinity to him
Whose bounties are his own, to whom none said
"Create the wisest, fullest, fairest, world,
"And make its offspring happy;" who intent
Some likeness of himself among his works
To view, has poured into the human breast
A ray of knowledge and of love which guides
Earth's feeble race to act their Maker's part,
Self-judging, self-oblig'd, while from before
That godlike function the gigantick pow'r^
Necessity, though wont to curb the force
Of Chaos and the savage elements,
Retires abashed, as from a scene too high
For her brute tyranny, and with her bears
Her scorned followers Terror and base Awe,
Who blinds herself, and that ill-suited pair,
Obedience linked with Hatred. Then the soul
Arises in her strength, and looking round
Her busy sphere, whatever work she views,
Whatever counsel, bearing any trace
Of her Creator's likeness, whether apt
To aid her fellows or preserve herself
In her superior functions unimpair'd,
Thither she turns exulting; that she claims
As her peculiar good; on that through all
The fickle seasons of the day she looks
With reverence still; to that as to a sense
Against affliction and the darts of pain
Her drooping hopes repair; and once opposed
To that all other pleasure, other wealth,
Vile as the dross upon the molten gold
Appears, and loathsome as the briny sea
To him who languishes with thirst and sighs
For some known fountain pure. For what can strive
With virtue? which of Nature's regions vast
Can in so many forms produce to sight
Such powerful beauty? beauty which the eye
Of Hatred cannot look upon secure,
Which Envy's self contemplates, and is turned
Ere long to tenderness, to infant smiles,
Or tears of humblest love. Is aught so fair
In all the dewy landscapes of the spring,
The summer's noontide groves, the purple eve
At harvest-home, or in the frosty moon
Glittering on some smooth sea, is aught so fair
As virtuous friendship? as the honored roof
Whither from highest heaven immortal Love
His torch ethereal and his golden bow
Propitious brings, and there a temple holds
To whose unspotted service gladly vowed
The social band of parent, brother, child,
With smiles and sweet discourse and gentle deeds
Adore his power? What gift of richest clime
Ever drew such eager eyes, or prompted such
Deep wishes, as the zeal that snatcheth back
From Slander's poisonous tooth a foe's renown,
Or crosses danger in his lion walk
A rival's life to rescue? as the young
Athenian warrior sitting down in bonds
That his great father's body might not want
A peaceful, humble, tomb? the Roman wife
Teaching her lord how harmless was the wound
Of death, how impotent the tyrant's rage,
Who nothing more could threaten to afflict
Their faithful love? Or is there in the abyss,
Is there among the adamantine spheres
Wheeling unshaken through the boundless void
Aught that with half such majesty can fill
The human bosom as when Brutus rose
Refulgent from the stroke of Caesar's sat
Amid the crowd of patriots, and his arm
Aloft extending, like eternal Jove
When guilt brings down the thunder, called aloud
On Tully's name, and shook the crimson sword
Of justice in his rapt astonished eye,
And bad the father of his country Hail!
For lo the tyrant prostrate on the dust,
And Rome again is free? Thus through the paths
Of human life, in various pomp arrayed,
Walks the wise daughter of the Judge of Heaven,
Fair Virtue! from her Father's throne supreme
Sent down to utter laws such as on earth
Most apt he knew, most powerful, to promote
The weal of all his works, the gracious end
Of his dread empire. And though happily man's
Obscurer sight so far beyond himself
And the brief labors of his little home
Extends not, yet by the bright presence won
Of this divine instructress, to her sway
Pleased he assents, nor heeds the distant goal
To which her voice conducts him. Thus has God,
Still looking towered his own high purpose, fixed
The virtues of his creatures, thus he rules
The parent's fondness and the patriot's zeal,
Thus the warm sense of honor and of shame,
The vows of gratitude, the faith of love,
And all the comely intercourse of praise,
The joy of human life, the earthly heaven.
How far unlike them must the lot of guilt
Be found! or what terrestrial woe can match
The self-convicted bosom which has wrought
The bane of others, or enslaved itself
With shackles vile? Not poison nor sharp fire,
Nor the worst pangs that ever monkish hate
Suggested, or despotick Rage imposed,
Were at that season an unwish'd exchange,
When the soul loathes herself, when flying thence
To crowds on every brow she sees portray'd
Fell demons, Hate or Scorn, which drive her back
To solitude, her Judge's voice divine
To hear in secret, happily sounding through
The troubled dreams of midnight, and still, still
Demanding for his violated laws
Fit recompense, or charging her own tongue
To speak the award of justice on herself;
For well she knows what faithful hints within
Were whispered to beware the lying forms
Which turned her footsteps from the safer way,
What cautions to suspect their painted dress,
And look with steady eyelid on their smiles,
Their frowns, their tears. In vain: the dazzling hues
Of Fancy and Opinion's eager voice
Too much prevailed; for mortals tread the path
In which Opinion says they follow good
Or fly from evil; and Opinion gives
Report of good or evil as the scene
Was drawn by Fancy, pleasing or deformed:
Thus her report can never there be true
Where Fancy cheats the intellectual eye
With glaring colors and distorted lines.
Is there a man to whom the name of death
Brings terrour's ghastly pageants conjured up
Before him, deathbed groans and dismal vows,
And the frail soul plunged headlong from the brink
Of life and daylight down the gloomy air
An unknown depth to gulfs of torturing sire
Unvisited by mercy? then what hand
Can snatch this dreamer from the fatal toils
Which Fancy' and Opinion thus conspire
To twine around his heart? or who shall hush
Their clamor when they tell him that to die,
To risk those horrors, is a direr curse
Than basest life can bring? Though Love with prayers
Most tender, with Affliction's sacred tears,
Beseech his aid, though Gratitude and Faith
Condemn each step which loiters, yet let none
Make answer for him that if any frown
Of danger thwart his path he will not stay
Content, and be a wretch to be secure.
Here vice begins then: at the gate of life,
Ere the young multitude to diverse roads
Part, like fond pilgrims on a journey unknown,
Sits Fancy, deep enchantress! and to each
With kind maternal looks presents her bowl,
A potent bev'rage. Heedless they comply,
Till the whole soul from that mysterious draught
Is tinged, and every transient thought imbibes
Of gladness or disgust, desire or fear,
One homebred color, which not all the lights
Of science ever shall change, not all the storms
Of adverse fortune wash away, nor yet
The robe of purest virtue quite conceal,
Thence on they pass, where meeting frequent shapes
Of good and evil, cunning phantoms apt
To fire or freeze the breast, with them they join
In dangerous parley, listening often, and often
Gazing with reckless passion, while its garb
The spectre heightens, and its pompous tale
Repeats with some new circumstance to suit
That early tincture of the hearer's soul.
And should the guardian Reason but for one
Short moment yield to this illusive scene
His ear and eye, the intoxicating charm
Involves him, till no longer he discerns,
Or only guides to err. Then revel forth
A furious band that spurn him from the throne,
And all is uproar: hence Ambition climbs
With sliding feet and hands impure to grasp
Those solemn toys which glitter in his view
On Fortune's rugged steep; hence pale Revenge
Unsheaths her murderous dagger; Rapine hence,
And envious Lust, by venal Fraud upborne,
Surmount the reverend barrier of the laws,
Which kept them from their prey: hence all the crimes
That ever defiled the earth, and all the plagues
That follow them for vengeance, in the guise
Of honor, safety, pleasure, ease, or pomp,
Stole first into the fond believing mind.
Yet not by Fancy's witchcraft on the brain
Are always the tumult'ous passions driven
To guilty deeds, nor Reason bound in chains
That Vice alone may lord it: often adorned
With motley pageants Folly mounts his throne,
And plays her idiot anticks like a queen.
A thousand garbs she wears, a thousand ways
She whirls her giddy empire. -- Lo! thus far
With hold adventure to the Mantuan lyre
I sing for contemplation linked with love
A pensive theme: now happily should my song
Unbend that serious countenance, and learn
Thalia's tripping gait, her shrill-ton'd voice,
Her wiles familiar, whether scorn she darts
In wanton ambush from her lip or eye,
Or whether with a sad disguise of care
O'ermantling her gay brow she acts in sport
The deeds of Folly, and from all sides round
Calls forth impetuous Laughter's gay rebuke,
Her province. But through every comic scene
To lead my Muse with her light pencil armed,
Through every swift occasion which the hand
Of Laughter points at when the mirthful sting
Distends her laboring sides and chokes her tongue,
Were endless as to sound each grating note
With which the rooks and chatt'ring daws, and grave
Unwieldy inmates of the village pond,
The changing seasons of the sky proclaim
Sun, cloud, or shower. Suffice it to have said
Where'r the power of Ridicule displays
Her quaint-ey'd visage some incongr'ous form,
Some stubborn dissonance of things combined,
Strikes on her quick perception, whether Pomp,
Or Praise, or Beauty, be dragged in and shown
Where sordid fashions, where ignoble deeds,
Where foul Deformity, is wont to dwell,
Or whether these with shrewd and wayward spite
Invade resplendent Pomp's imperious mien,
The charms of Beauty or the boast of Praise.
Ask we for what fair end the Almighty Sire
In mortal bosoms stirs this gay contempt,
These grateful pangs of laughter, from disgust
Educing pleasure? Wherefore but to aid
The tardy steps of Reason, and at once
By this prompt impulse urge us to depress
Wild Folly's aims? for though the sober light
Of Truth slow dawning on the watchful mind
At length unfolds through many a subtle tie
How these uncouth disorders end at last
In public evil, yet benignant Heaven,
Conscious how dim the dawn of truth appears
To thousands, conscious what a scanty pause
From labor and from care the wider lot
Of humble life affords for studious thought
To scan the maze of Nature, therefore stamped
These glaring scenes with characters of scorn
As broad, as obvious, to the passing clown
As to the lettered sage's curious eye.
But other evils over the steps of man
Through all his walks impend, against whose might
The slender darts of laughter naught avail;
A trivial warfare. Some like cruel guards
On Nature's ever-moving throne attend,
With mischief armed for him whoever shall thwart
The path of her inexorable wheels,
While she pursues the work that must be done
Through ocean, earth, and air: hence frequent forms
Of woe, the merchant with his wealthy bark
Buried by dashing waves, the traveller
Pierced by the pointed lightning in his haste,
And the poor husbandman with folded arms
Surveying his lost labors and a heap
Of blasted chaff, the product of the field,
Whence he expected bread. But worse than these
I deem, far worse, that other race of ills
Which humankind rear up among themselves,
That horrid off^pring which misgovern'd Will
B^s to fantastic Error; Vices, Crimes,
Furies that curse the earth, and make the blows,
The heaviest blows, of Nature's innocent hand
Seem sport; which are indeed but as the care
Of a wise parent, who solicits good
To all her house, though happily at the price
Of tears, and froward wailing, and reproach,
From some unthinking child, whom not the less
Its mother destines to be happy still.
These sources then of pain, this double lot
Of evil in the inheritance of man,
Required for his protection no slight force,
No careless watch, and therefore was his breast
Fenced round with passions quick to be alarmed,
Or stubborn to oppose; with fear more swift
Than beacons catching flame from hill to hill
Where armies land, with anger uncontrolled
As the young lion bounding on his prey,
With sorrow that locks up the struggling heart,
And shame that overcasts the drooping eye
As with a cloud of lightning. These the part
Perform of eager monitors, and goad
The soul more sharply than with points of steel
Her enemies to shun or to resist:
And as those passions that converse with good
Are good themselves, as hope, and love, and joy,
Among the fairest and the sweetest boons
Of life we rightly count, so these which guard
Against invading evil still excite
Some pain, some tumult; these within the mind
Too often admitted or too long retained
Shock their frail ^eat, and by their uncurb'd rage
To savages more fell than Libya breeds
Transform themselves, till human thought becomes
A gloomy ruin, haunt of shapes unblessed,
Of self-tormenting fiends, Horror, Despair,
Hatred, and wicked Envy, foes to all
The works of Nature and the gifts of Heaven.
But when through blameless paths to righteous ends
Those keener passions urge the awakened soul,
I would not as ungracious violence
Their sway describe, nor from their free career
The fellowship of Pleasure quite exclude:
For what can render to the self-approv'd
Their temper void of comfort though in pain?
Who knows not with what majesty divine
The forms of Truth and Justice to the mind
Appear, ennobling often the sharpest woe
With triumph and rejoicing? Who that bears
A human bosom has not often felt
How dear are all those ties which bind our race
In gentleness together, and how sweet
Their force, let Fortune's wayward hand the while
Be kind or cruel? Ask the faithful youth
Why the cold urn of her whom long he loved
So often fills his arms, so often draws
His lonely footsteps silent and unseen
To pay the mournful tribute of his tears?
Oh! he will tell thee that the wealth of worlds
Should never seduce his bosom to forego
Those sacred hours when, stealing from the noise
Of care and envy, sweet remembrance sooths
With virtue's kindest looks his aching breast,
And turns his tears to rapture. Ask the crowd
Which flies impatient from the village walk
To climb the neighboring cliffs when far below
The savage winds have hurled upon the coast
Some helpless bark, while holy Pity melts
The general eye, or Terrour's icy hand
Smites their distorted limbs and horrent hair,
While every mother closer to her breast
Catches her child, and pointing where the waves
Foam through the shattered vessel, shrieks aloud
As one poor wretch who spreads his piteous arms
For succor swallowed by the roaring surge,
As now another dashed against the rock
Drops lifeless down. O! deemest thou indeed
No pleasing influence here by Nature given
To mutual terror and Compassion's tears?
No tender charm mysterious which attracts
Over all that edge of pain the social powers
To this their proper action and their end?
Ask thy own heart when at the midnight hour
Slow through that pensive gloom thy pausing eye,
Led by the glimmering taper, moves around
The reverend volumes of the dead, the songs
Of Grecian hards, and records writ by Fame
For Grecian heroes, where the Sovran Power
Of heaven and earth surveys the immortal page,
Even as a father meditating all
The praises of his son, and bids the rest
Of mankind there the fairest model learn
Of their own nature, and the noblest deeds
Which yet the world has seen: if then thy soul
Join in the lot of those diviner men,
Say, when the prospect darkens on thy view,
When sunk by many a wound heroic states
Mourn in the dust, and tremble at the frown
Of hard Ambition; when the generous band
Of youths who fought for freedom and their fires
Lie side by side in death; when brutal Force
Usurps the throne of Justice, turns the pomp
Of guardian power, the majesty of rule,
The sword, the laurel, and the purple robe,
To poor dishonest pageants, to adorn
A robber's walk, and glitter in the eyes
Of such as bow the knee; when beauteous works,
Rewards of virtue, sculptured forms, which decked
With more than human grace the warriour's arch
Or patriot's tomb now victims to appease
Tyrannick Envy strew the common path
With awful ruins; when the Muses' haunt,
The marble Porch where Wisdom wont to talk
With Socrates or Tully, hears no more
Save the hoarse jargon of contentious monks,
Or f^ale Supe^tion's midnight prayer;
When ruthless Havoc from the hand of Time
Tears the destroying sith, with surer stroke
To mow the monuments of glory down,
Till Desolation over the grass-grown street
Expands her raven wings, and from the gate
Where senates once the weal of nations planned
Hisseth the gliding snake through hoary weeds
That clasp the mouldering column: thus when all
The widely mournful scene is fixed within
Thy throbbing bosom, when the patriot's tear
Starts from thine eye, and thy extended arm
In fancy, hurls the thunderbolt of Jove
To fire the impious wreath on Philip's brow,
Or dash Octavius from the trophy'd car,
Say, does thy secret soul repine to taste
The big distress? or would thou then exchange
Those heart-ennobling sorrows for the lot
Of him who sits amid the gaudy herd
Of silent flatt'rers bending to his nod,
And over them like a giant casts his eye,
And says within himself, "I am a king,
"And wherefore should the clamorous voice of Woe
"Intrude upon mine ear?" The dregs corrupt
Of barbarous ages, that Circean draught
Of servitude and folly, have not yet,
Blessed be the Eternal Ruler of the world!
Yet have not so dishonored, so deformed,
The native judgment of the human soul,
Nor so effaced the image of her Sire.
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK III.
MDCCLXX.
WHAT tongue then may explain the various fate
Which reigns over earth? or who to mortal eyes
Illustrate this perplexing labyrinth
Of joy and woe through which the feet of man
Are doomed to wander? That Eternal Mind,
From passions, wants, and envy, far estranged;
Who built the spacious universe, and decked
Each part so richly with whatever pertains
To life, to health, to pleasure, why bad he
The viper Evil creeping in pollute
The goodly scene, and with insidious rage,
While the poor inmate looks around and smiles,
Dart her fell sting with poision to his soul?
Hard is the question, and from ancient days
Has still oppressed with care the sage's thought,
Has drawn forth accents from the poet's lyre
Too sad, too deeply plaintive; nor did ever
Those chiefs of humankind from whom the light
Of heavenly truth first gleam'd on barbarous lands
Forget this dreadful secret when they told
What wondrous things had to their favored eyes
And ears on cloudy mountain been revealed,
Or in deep cave by nymph or power divine,
Portentous often and wild: yet one I know,
Could I the speech of lawgivers assume,
One old and splendid tale I would record
With which the Muse of Solon in sweet strains
Adorned this theme profound, and rendered all
Its darkness, all its terrors, bright as noon,
Or gentle as the golden star of eve.
Who knows not Solon? last and wisest far
Of those whom Greece triumphant in the height
Of glory styled her Fathers? him whose voice
Through Athens hushed the storm of civil wrath,
Taught envious Want and cruel Wealth to join
In friendship, and with sweet compalsion tamed
Minerva's eager people to his laws,
Which their own goddess in his breast inspired?
'Twas now the time when his heroic task
Seemed but performed in vain, when soothed by years
Of satt'ring service the fond multitude
Hung with their sudden counsels on the breath
Of great Pisistratus, that chief renowned
Whom Hermes and the Idalian queen had trained
Even from his birth to every powerful art
Of pleasing and persuading, from whose lips
Flowed eloquence which like the vows of love
Could steal away suspicion from the hearts
Of all who listened. Thus from day to day
He won the general suff'rage, and beheld
Each rival overshadow'd and depressed
Beneath his ampler state, yet often complained
As one less kindly treated who had hoped
To merit favor, but submits perforce
To find another's services preferred,
Nor yet relaxeth aught of faith or zeal.
Then tales were scattered of his envious foes,
Of snares that watched his fame, of daggers aimed
Against his life. At last with trembling limbs,
His hair diffused and wild, his garments loose,
And stained with blood from self-inflicted wounds,
He burst into the public place, as there,
There only, were his refuge, and declared
In broken words, with sighs of deep regret,
The mortal danger he had scarce repelled.
Fired with his tragic tale the indignant crowd
To guard his steps forthwith a menial band
Arrayed beneath his eye for deeds of war
Decree: O still too liberal of their trust
And often betrayed by over-grateful love
The generous people! Now behold him fenced
By mercenary weapons, like a king
Forth issuing from the city gate at eve
To seek his rural mansion, and with pomp
Crowding the public road. The swain stops short,
And sighs, the officious townsmen stand at gaze,
And shrinking give the sullen pageant room.
Yet not the less obsequious was his brow,
Nor less profuse of courteous words his tongue,
Of gracious gifts his hand, the while by stealth,
Like a small torrent fed with evening showers,
His train increased; till at that satal time,
Just as the public eye with doubt and shame
Startled began to question what it saw,
Swift as the sound of earthquakes rushed a voice
Through Athens that Pisistratus had filled
The rocky citadel with hostile arms,
Had barred the steep ascent, and sat within
Amid his hirelings meditating death
To all whose stubborn necks his yoke resus'd.
Where then was Solon? After ten long years
Of absence full of haste from foreign shores
The sage, the lawgiver, had now arrived;
Arrived, alas! to see that Athens, that
Fair temple raised by him, and sacred called
To Liberty and Concord, now profaned
By savage hate, or sunk into a den
Of slaves who crouch beneath the master's scourge,
And deprecate his wrath and court his chains.
Yet did not the wise patriot's grief impede
His virt'ous will, nor was his heart inclined
One moment with such womanlike distress
To view the transient storms of civil war
As thence to yield his country and her hopes
To all-devouring bondage. His bright helm,
Even while the traitor's impious act is told,
He buckles on his hoary head, he girds
With mail his stooping breast, the shield, the spear,
He snatcheth, and with swift indignant strides
Wh^ assembled people seeks, proclaims aloud
It was no time for counsel, in their spears
Lay all their prudence now; the tyrant yet
Was not so firmly seated on his throne
But that one shock of their united force
Would dash him from the summit of his pride
Headlong and grov'lling in the dust. What else
Can reassert the lost Athenian name,
So cheaply to the laughter of the world
Betrayed, by guile beneath an infant's faith
So mocked and scorned? Away then; Freedom now
And Safety dwell not but with fame in arms;
Myself will show you where their mansion lies,
And through the walks of danger or of death
Conduct you to them. While he spoke through all
Their crowded ranks his quick sagacious eye
He darted, where no cheerful voice was heard
Of social daring, no stretched arm was seen
Hastening their common task, but pale mistrust
Wrinkled each brow: theyshook their heads and down
Their slack hands hung: cold sighs and whispered doubts
From breath to breath stole round. The sage mean-time
Looked speechless on, while his big bosom heaved
Struggling with shame and sorrow, till at last
A tear broke forth; and "O immortal Shades!
"O Theseus!" he exclaimed, "O Codrus! where,
"Where are ye now? behold for what ye toiled
"Through life! behold for whom ye chose to die!"
No more he added, but with lonely steps
Weary and slow, his silver beard depressed,
And his stern eyes bent heedless on the ground,
Back to his silent dwelling he repaired;
There over the gate his armor, as a man
Whom from the service of the war his chief
Dismisseth after no inglorious toil,
He fixed in general view: one wishful look
He sent unconscious towered the public place
At parting, then beneath his quiet roof
Without a word, without a sigh, retired.
Scarce had the morrow's sun his golden rays
From sweet Hymettus darted over the fanes
Of Cecrops to the Salaminian shores
When lo! on Solon's threshold met the feet
Of four Athenians, by the same sad care
Conducted all, than whom the state beheld
None nobler. First came Megacles, the son
Of great Alemeon, whom the Lydian king,
The mild unhappy Croesus, in his days
Of glory had with costly gifts adorned,
Fair vessels, splendid garments, tinctured webs,
And heaps of treasured gold beyond the lot
Of many sovrans, thus requiting well
That hospitable favor which erewhile
Alemeon to his messengers had shown,
Whom he with offerings worthy of the god
Sent from his throne in Sardis to revere
Apollo's Delphick shrine. With Megacles
Approached his son, whom Agarista bore,
The virtuous child of Clisthenes, whose hand
Of Grecian sceptres the most ancient far
In Sicyon swayed; but greater fame he drew
From arms controlled by justice, from the love
Of the wise Muses, and the unenvied wreath
Which gla^ Olympia gave; for thither once
His warlike steeds the hero led, and there
Contended through the tumult of the course
With skilful wheels. Then victor at the goal
Amid the applauses of assembled Greece
High on his car he stood, and waved his arm:
Silence ensued, when straight the herald's voice
Was heard inviting every Grecian youth,
Whom Clisthenes content might call his son,
To visit ere twice thirty days were passed
The towers of Sicyon. There the chief decreed
Within the circuit of the following year
To join at Hymen's altar hand in hand
With his fair daughter him among the guests
Whom worthiest he should deem. Forthwith from all
The bounds of Greece the ambitious wooers came;
From rich Hesperia, from the Illyrian shore,
Where Epidamnus over Adria's surge
Looks on the setting sun, from those brave tribes
Chaonian or Molossian whom the race
Of great Achilles governs, glorying still
In Troy overthrown, from rough Aetolia, nurse
Of men who first among the Greeks threw off
The yoke of kings, to commerce and to arms
Devoted, from Thessalia's fertile meads,
Where flows Peneus near the lofty walls
Of Cranon old, from strong Eretria, queen
Of all Euboean cities, who sublime
On the steep margin of Euripus views
Across the tide the Marathonian plain,
Not yet the haunt of glory; Athens too,
Minerva's care, among her graceful sons
Found equal lovers for the princely maid;
Nor was proud Argos wanting, nor the domes
Of sacred Elis, nor The Arcadian groves
That overshade Alpheus, echoing often
Some shepherd's song. But through the illustrious band
Was none who might with Megacles compare
In all the honors of unblemished youth.
His was the beauteous bride; and now their son,
Young Clisthenes, betimes at Solon's gate
Stood anxious, leaning forward on the arm
Of his great sire, with earnest eyes that asked
When the slow hinge would turn, with restless feet,
And cheeks now pale, now glowing; for his heart
Throbb'd, full of bursting passions, anger, grief,
With scorn embittered, by the generous boy
Scarce understood, but which, like noble seeds,
Are destined for his country and himself
In riper years to bring forth fruits divine
Of liberty and glory. Next appeared
Two brave companions, whom one mother bore
To different lords, but whom the better ties
Of firm esteem and friendship rendered more
Than brothers; first Miltiades, who drew
From godlike Aeacus his ancient line,
That Aeacus whose unimpeach'd renown
For sanctity and justice won the lyre
Of elder bards to celebrate him throned
In Hades over the dead, where his decrees
The guilty soul within the burning gates
Of Tartarus compel, or send the good
TO inhabit with eternal health and peace
The valleys of Elysium. From a stem
So sacred never could worthier scion spring
Than this Miltiades, whose aid ere long
The chiefs of Thrace, already on their ways
Sent by the inspired foreknowing maid who sits
Upon the Delphick tripod, shall implore
To wield their scepter, and the rural wealth
Of fruitful Chersonesus to protect
With arms and laws: but nothing careful now
Save for his injured country, here he stands
In deep solicitude with Cimon joined,
Unconscious both what widely different lots
Await them, taught by Nature as they are
To know one common good, one common ill:
For Cimon not his valor, not his birth,
Derived from Codrus, not a thousand gifts
Dealt round him with a wise benignant hand,
No, not the Olympic olive, by himself
From his own brow transferred to sooth the mind
Of this Pisistratus, can long preserve
From the sell envy of the tyrant's sons
And their assassin dagger. But if death
Obscure upon his gentle steps attend;
Yet Fate an ample recompense prepares
In his victorious son, that other great
Miltiades who over the very throne
Of glory shall with Time's assiduous hand
In adamantine characters engrave
The name of Athens, and by Freedom armed
Against the gigantick pride of Asia's king
Shall all the achievements of the heroes old
Surmount, of Hercules, of all who sailed
From Thessaly with Jason, all who fought
For empire or for fame at Thebes or Troy.
Such were the patriots who within the porch
Of Solon had assembled: but the gate
Now opens, and across the ample floor
Straight they proceed into an open space
Bright with the beams of morn, a verdant spot,
Where stands a rural altar pil'd with sods
Cut from the grassy turf, and girt with wreaths
Of branching palm. Here Solon's self they found
Clad in a robe of purple pure, and decked
With leaves of olive on his reverend brow.
He bowed before the altar, and over cakes
Of barley from two earthen vessels poured
Of honey and of milk a plenteous stream,
Calling mean-time the Muses to accept
His simple offering, by no victim tinged
With blood, nor sullied by destroying fire,
But such as for himself Apollo claims
In his own Delos, where his favorite haunt
Is thence the altar of the Pious named.
Unseen the guests drew near, and silent viewed
That worship, till the hero priest his eye
Turned towered a seat on which prepared there lay
A branch of laurel; then his friends confessed
Before him stood. Backward his step he drew,
As loath that care or tumult should approach
Those early rites divine; but soon their looks
So anxious, and their hands held forth with such
Desponding gesture, bring him on perforce
To speak to their affliction. "Are ye come,"
He cried, "to mourn with me this common shame?
"Or ask ye some new effort which may break
"Our fetters? Know then of the public cause
"Not for yon' traitor's cunning or his might
"Do I despair; nor could I wish from Jove
"Aught dearer than at this late hour of life
"As once by laws so now by strenuous arms
"From impious violation to assert
"The rights our fathers left us. But, alas!
"What arms? or who shall wield them? Ye beheld
"The Athenian people. Many bitter days
"Must pass, and many wounds from cruel Pride
"Be felt, ere yet their partial hearts find room
"For just resentment, or their hands endure
"To smite this tyrant brood, so near to all
"Their hopes, so often admired, so long beloved.
"That time will come however. Be it yours
"To watch its fair approach, and urge it on
"With honest prudence: me it ill beseems
"Again to supplicate th unwilling crowd
"To rescue from a vile deceiver's hold
"That envied power which once with eager ze^l
"They offered to myself; nor can I plunge
"In counsels deep and various, nor prepare
"For distant wars, thus falt'ring as I tread
"On life's last verge, ere long to join the shades
"Of Minos and Lycurgus. But behold
"What care employs me now. My vows I pay
"To the sweet Muses, teachers of my youth,
"And solace of my age. If right I deem^
"Of the still voice that whispers at my heart
"The immortal Sisters have not quite withdrawn
"Their old harmonious influence. Let your tongues
"With sacred silence favor what I speak,
"And happily shall my faithful lips be taught
"TO unfold celestial counsels, which may arm
"As with impenetrable steel your breasts
"For the long strife before you, and repel
"The darts of adverse Fate." He said, and snatched
The laurel bough, and sat in silence down,
Fixed, wrapped in solemn musing, full before
The sun, who now from all his radiant orb
Drove the gray clouds, and poured his genial light
Upon the breast of Solon. Solon raised
Aloft the leasy rod, and thus began:
"Ye beauteous offspring of Olympian Jove
"And Memory divine, Pierian Maids!
"Hear me propitious. In the morn of life,
"When hope shone bright and all the prospect smiled,
"To your sequestered mansion often my steps
"Were turned, O Muses! and within your gate
"My offerings paid. Ye taught me then with strains
"Of flowing harmony to soften War's
"Dire voice, or in fair colors that might charm
"The public eye to clothe the form austere
"Of civil counsel. Now my feeble age
"Neglected, and supplanted of the hope
"On which it leaned, yet sinks not, but to you,
"To your mild wisdom, flies, refuge beloved
"Of solitude and silence Ye can teach
"The visions of my bed whatever the gods
"In the rude ages of the world inspired,
"Or the first herdes acted; ye can make
"The morning light more gladsome to my sense
"Than ever it appeared to active youth
"Pursuing careless pleasure; ye can give
"To this long leisure, these unheeded hours,
"A labor as sublime as when the sons
"Of Athens thronged and speechless round me stood
"To hear pronounced for all their future deeds
"The bounds of right and wrong. Celestial Powers!
"I feel that ye are near me; and behold
"To meet your energy divine I bring
"A high and sacred theme, not less than those
"Which to the eternal custody of Fame
"Your lips entrusted, when of old ye deigned
"With Orpheus or with Homer to frequent
"The groves of Hemus or the Chian shore.
"Ye know, harmonious Maids! (for what of all
"My various life was ever from you estranged?)
"Often has my solitary song to you
"Revealed that duteous pride which turned my steps
"To willing exile, earnest to withdraw
"From envy and the disappointed thirst
"Of lucre, lest the bold familiar strife
"Which in the eye of Athens they upheld
"Against her legislator should impair
"With trivial doubt the reverence of his laws:
"To Egypt therefore through the Aegean isles
"My course I steered, and by the banks of Nile
"Dwelt in Canopus: thence the hallowed domes
"Of Sais, and the rites to Isis paid,
"I sought, and in her temple's silent courts
"Through many changing moons attentive heard
"The venerable Sonchis, while his tongue
"At morn or midnight the deep story told
"Of her who represents whatever has been,
"Or is, or shall be, whose mysterious veil
"No mortal hand has ever yet removed.
"By him exhorted southward to the walls
"Of On I passed, the city of the Sun,
"The ever youthful god: 't was there amid
"His priests and sages, who the livelong night
"Watch the dread movements of the starry sphere,
"Or who in wondrous fables half disclose
"The secrets of the elements, it was there
"That great Psenophis taught my raptured ears
"The same of old Atlantis, of her chiefs,
"And her pure laws, the first which earth obeyed.
"Deep in my bosom sunk the noble tale,
"And often while I listened did my mind
"Foretell with what delight her own free lyre
"Should some time for an Attick audience raise
"Anew that losty scene, and from their tombs
"Call forth those ancient demigods to speak
"Of justice and the hidden providence
"That walks among mankind. But yet mean-time
"The mystic pomp of Ammon's gloomy sons
"Became less pleasing: with contempt I gazed
"On that tame garb and those unvarying paths
"To which the double yoke of king and priest
"Had cramped the sullen race. At last with hymns
"Invoking our own Pallas and the gods
"Of cheerful Greece, a glad farewell I gave
"To Egypt, and before the southern wind
"Spread my full fails. What climes I then surveyed,
"What fortunes I encountered in the realm
"Of Croesus, or upon the Cyprian shore,
"The Muse who prompts my bosom does not now
"Consent that I reveal. But when at length
"Ten times the sun returning from the south
"Hadstrow'dwith flowers the verdant earth, and filled
"The groves with music, pleased I then beheld
"The term of those long errors drawing nigh.
"Nor yet, I said, will I sit down within
"The walls of Athens till my seet have trod
"The Cretan soil, have pierced those reverend haunts
"Whence Law and civil Concord issued forth
"As from their ancient home, and still to Greece
"Their wisest loftiest discipline proclaim.
"Straight where Amnisus, mart of wealthy ships,
"Appears beneath sam'd Gnossus and her towers,
"Like the fair handmaid of a stately queen,
"I checked my prow, and thence with eager steps
"The city' of Minos entered. O ye Gods!
"Who taught the leaders of the simpler time
"By written words to curb the untow'rd will
"Of mortals, how within that generous isle
"Have ye the triumphs of your power displayed
"Munificent! Those splendid merchants, lords
"Of traffic and the sea, with what delight
"I saw them at their public meal, like sons
"Of the same household, join the plainer sort,
"Whose wealth was only freedom! whence to those
"Vile envy and to those fantastic pride
"Alike was strange, but noble concord still
"Cherished the strength untamed, the rustic faith,
"Of their first fathers. Then the growing race
"How pleasing to behold them in their schools,
"Their sports, their labors, ever placed within
"O shade of Minos! thy controlling eye?
"Here was a docile band in tuneful tones
"Thy laws pronouncing, or with lofty hymns
"Praising the bounteous gods, or to preserve
"Their country's heroes from oblivious night
"Resounding what the Muse inspired of old:
"There on the verge of manhood others met
"In heavy armor through the heats of noon
"To march, the rugged mountain's height to climb
"With measured swiftness, from the hardbent bow
"To send resistless arrows to their mark,
"Or for the fame of prowess to contend,
"Now wrestling, now with fists and staves opposed,
"Now with the biting falchion, and the fence
"Of brazen shields, while still the warbling flute
"Presided over the combat, breathing strains
"Grave, solemn, soft, and changing headlong spite
"To thoughtful resolution cool and clear.
"Such I beheld those islanders renowned,
"So tutored from their birth to meet in war
"Each bold invader, and in peace to guard
"That living flame of reverence for their laws
"Which nor the storms of Fortune nor the flood
"Of foreign wealth diffused over all the land
"Could quench or slacken. First of human names
"In every Cretan's heart was Minos still,
"And holiest far of what the sun surveys
"Through his whole course were those primeval seats
"Which with religious footsteps he had taught
"Their sires to approach, the wild Dictean cave
"Where Jove was born, the ever verdant meads
"Of Ida, and the spacious grotto where
"His active youth he passed, and where his throne
"Yet stands mysterious, whither Minos came
"Each ninth returning year the king of gods
"And mortals there in secret to consult
"On justice, and the tables of his law
"TO inscribe anew: often also with like zeal
"Great Rhea's mansion from the Gnossian gates
"Men visit, nor less often the antic fane
"Built on that sacred spot along the banks
"Of shady Thereon where benignant Jove
"And his majestic consort joined their hands
"And spoke their nuptial vows. Alas! it was there
"That the dire same of Athens sunk in bonds
"I first received, what time an annual feast
"Had summoned all the genial country round
"By sacrifice and pomp to bring to mind
"That first great spousal, while the enamored youths
"And virgins with the priest before the shrine
"Observe the same pure ritual, and invoke
"The same glad omens. There among the crowd
"Of strangers from those naval cities drawn
"Which deck like gems the island's northern shore
"A merchant of Aegina I descried,
"My ancient host; but forward as I sprung
"To meet him he with dark dejected brow
"Stopped half averse; and "O Athenian guest!"
"He said, "art thou in Crete these joyful rites
"Partaking? Know thy laws are blotted out;
"Thy Country kneels before a tyrant's throne."
"He added names of men, with hostile deeds
"Disastrous, which obscure and indistinct
"I heard, for while he spoke my heart grew cold
"And my eyes dim; the altars and their train
"No more were present to me: how I fared
"Or whither turned I know not, nor recall
"Aught of those moments other than the sense
"Of one who struggles in oppressive sleep,
"And from the toils of some distressful dream
"To break away, with palpitating heart,
"Weak limbs, and temples bathed in deathlike dew,
"Makes many a painful effort. When at last
"The sun and Nature's face again appeared
"Not far I found me, where the public path
"Winding through cypress groves and swelling meads
"From Gnossus to the cave of Jove ascends:
"Heedless I followed on till soon the skirts
"Of Ida rose before me, and the vault
"Wide-op'ning pierced the mountain's rocky side.
"Entering within the threshold on the ground
"I slung me, sad, faint, overworn with toil.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
THE BEGINNING OF THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
MDCCLXX.
ONE effort more, one cheerful sally more,
Our destined course will finish; and in peace
Then for an offering sacred to the powers
Who lent us gracious guidance we will then
Inscribe a monument of deathless praise,
O my adventurous Song! With steady speed
Long have thou, on an untried voyage bound,
Sailed between earth and heaven; have now surveyed
Stretched out beneath thee all the mazy tracks
Of passion and opinion, like a waste
Of sands, and flowery lawns, and tangling woods,
Where mortals roam bewildered; and have now
Exulting soared among the worlds above,
Or hovered near the eternal gates of heaven,
If happily the discourses of the gods
A curious but an unpresuming guest
Thou might partake, and carry back some strain
Of divine wisdom lawful to repeat
And apt to be conceived of man below.
A different task remains, the secret paths
Of early genius to explore, to trace
Those haunts where Fancy her predestined sons,
Like to the demigods of old, does nurse
Remote from eyes profane. Ye happy Souls!
Who now her tender discipline obey,
Where dwell ye? what wild river's brink at eve
Imprint your steps? what solemn groves at noon
Use ye to visit, often breaking forth
In rapture 'mid your dilatory walk,
Or musing as in slumber on the green?
-- Would I again were with you! -- O ye Dales
Of Tyne! and ye most ancient Woodlands! where
Often as the giant flood obliquely strides
And his banks open and his lawns extend
Stops short the pleased traveller to view
Presiding over the scene some rustic tower
Founded by Norman or by Saxon hands;
O ye Northumbrian Shades! which overlook
The rocky pavement and the mossy falls
Of solitary Wensbeck's limpid stream,
How gladly I recall your wellknown seats
Beloved of old, and that delightful time
When all alone for many a summer's day
I wandered through your calm recesses, led
In silence by some powerful hand unseen.
Nor will I ever forget you; nor shall ever
The graver tasks of manhood or the advice
Of vulgar wisdom move me to disclaim
Those studies which possessed me in the dawn
Of life, and fixed the color of my mind
For every future year; whence even now
From sleep I rescue the clear hours of morn,
And while the world around lies overwhelmed
In idle darkness am alive to thoughts
Of honorable fame, of truth divine
Or moral, and of minds to virtue won
By the sweet magic of harmonious verse,
The themes which now expect us. For thus far
On general habits, and on arts which grow
Spontaneous in the minds of all mankind,
Has dwelt our argument; and how selftaught,
Though seldom conscious of their own employ,
In Nature's or in Fortune's changeful scene
Men learn to judge of beauty, and acquire
Those forms set up as idols in the soul
For love and zealous praise. Yet indistinct
In vulgar bosoms and unnotic'd lie
These pleasing stores, unless the casual force
Of things external prompt the heedless mind
To recognize her wealth. But some there are
Conscious of Nature and the rule which man
Over Nature holds; some who within themselves
Retiring from the trivial scenes of chance
And momentary passion can at will
Call up these fair exemplars of the mind,
Review their features, scan the secret laws
Which bind them to each other, and display
By forms, or sounds, or colors, to the sense
Of all the world, their latent charms display;
Even as in Nature's frame (if such a word,
If such a word, so bold, may from the lips
Of man proceed) as in this outward frame
Of things the Great Artificer portrays
His own immense idea. Various names
Th^se among mortals bear, as various signs
They use, and by peculiar organs speak
To human sense. There are who by the flight
Of air through tubes with moving stops distinct,
Or by extended chords in measure taught
To vibrate, can assemble powerful sounds
Expressing every temper of the mind
From every cause, and charming all the soul
With passion void of care: others mean-time
The rugged mass of metal, wood, or stone,
Patiently taming, or with easier hand
Describing lines, and with more ample scope
Uniting colors, can to general sight
Produce those permanent and perfect forms,
Those characters of heroes and of gods,
Which from the crude materials of the world
Their own high minds created. But the chief
Are poets, eloquent men, who dwell on earth
To clothe whatever the soul admires or loves
With language and with numbers: hence to these
A field is opened wide as Nature's sphere,
Nay wider; various as the sudden acts
Of human wit, and vast as the demands
Of human will. The bard nor length, nor depth,
Nor place, nor form, controls. To eyes, to ears,
To every organ of the copious mind,
He offers all its treasures. Him the hours,
The seasons him, obey; and changeful Time
Sees him at will keep measure with his flight,
At will outstrip it. To enhance his toil
He summoneth from the uttermost extent
Of things which God has taught him every form
Auxiliar, every power, and all beside
Excludes imperious. His prevailing hand
Gives to corporeal essence life and sense,
And every stately function of the soul.
The soul itself to him obsequious lies,
Like matter's passive heap, and as he wills
To reason and affection he assigns
Their just alliances, their just degrees;
Whence his peculiar honors, whence the race
Of men who people his delightful world,
Men genuine and according to themselves,
Transcend as far the uncertain sons of earth
As earth itself to his delightful world
The palm of spotless beauty does resign.
* * * * * * * * *
CONTENTS.
The Life of the Author, Page 5 Advertisement, 17 The Design, 20 The Pleasures
of Imagination, Book I. 25 The Pleasures of Imagination, Book II. 51 The
Pleasures of Imagination, Book III. 83 General Argument to the Pleasures of
Imagination enlarged, 114 The Pleasures of Imagination enlarged, Book I. 116
The Pleasures of Imagination enlarged, Book II. 143 The Pleasures of
Imagination enlarged, Book III. 168 Beginning of Book IV. 187
From the APOLLO PRESS, by the MARTINS, Nov. ^. 1781.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
BELL'S EDITION. The POETS of GREAT BRITAIN COMPLETE FROM CHAUCER to CHURCHILL.
AKENSIDE, VOL. II. Who, Sappho, wounds thy tender breast
Say, flies he?

S^ del.

D^ Sc.

Printed for John Bell British Library Strand London. Feby. 7th. 1782.




