THE Great Advantage OF THE USE of the BARK IN MORTIFICATIONS.

With several ADDITIONS.

By JOHN RUSHWORTH, Surgeon.

LONDON: Printed for LAWTON GILLIVER at Homer's Head against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street, 1732.

TO THE MASTERS or GOVERNORS OF THE Mystery and Commonalty of BARBERS and
SURGEONS of London.
NOT doubting but you will be very ready to join in any Thing that may be of
Use to Mankind; and I having practiced Surgery many Years, and also been
acquainted with the Practice of many of the most eminent of our Profession, who
honestly and successfully practiced it: Yet, being of Opinion, that Surgery
might still be very much improved, by publishing such Cases as deserve it; and
thinking you the most proper Persons to encourage it; therefore am desirous,
and should be glad, you would appoint some of your Members to receive, and
fairly and favorably examine and consider such Cases as shall be offered to
them by long experienced Practitioners, and give your Approbation of such as
deserve to be made public. This, I conceive, would very much contribute to the
Reputation of Surgery, and be of great Advantage to Patients. And, to show how
sincere I am in what I propose, I here offer to your serious Consideration a
Case I formerly communicated to some Physicians and Surgeons, and Sir Hans
Sloan desiring me, I, in the Year 1721, left the following Account in his Hands.

IN the Year 1715, I was sent for to a Man who had a Mortification on the Foot,
from an internal Cause, the Fever very high, attended with the irregular Pulse
that is usual in the Case; I made deep Incisions into the Part mortified to the
Bone, and scarified all round as far as there was any Inflammation, and used the
common Applications; upon which the Fever abated, the Pulse became not only
calm, but also regular, and in a few Days I had a Digestion at the Edges: I was
obliged to leave it to the Care of an Apothecary: But in a short Time I was
sent for again, the Fever being returned, and the Part mortified higher, I used
the same Method as before, with the same Success; but all the former Symptoms
returned the third Time; but upon repeating the same Method again, ceased: I
thought it to no Purpose to take off the Leg, having too often found Returns
after it, the Fault being in the Blood and Juices. But Providence now first
directed me to order the Bark in this Case, whilst there was a Remission of the
Fever; it answered beyond what I expected; the Fever no more returned; the Leg
was taken off, and I saw the Person well and lusty many Years afterward; and I
have since several times had the Experience of the good Effects of it in the
like Case, which has been no small Satisfaction to me.

I think it as much my Duty to make a public Acknowledgement of an Error of my
Judgment for very many Years, because (others also of greater Eminency giving
the same Judgment) I do verily believe it has been the Occasion of several
unfortunate Women, not only to continue in a deplorable State, but also often
to have a miserable Exit, which by my too late Practice, attended with Success,
I have now Reason to believe, might have been prevented, if their Breasts had
been taken off in Time. This I think is worthy to be compassionately considered
by all Surgeons, least the too long Omission of it, may some Time become an
Uneasiness to them, as it now is to me, when I reflect of it. I hope none can
put that Construction upon this, as if I expected, that in all Degrees of
Cancers, taking off the Tumor, would be effectual; for some are of that
Malignancy, even to so poisonous a Nature, which, if blended with the Blood and
Juices, nothing will answer; but I would not have any too much discouraged by
the ill Aspect of them; for two I had Success in, appeared as ill and
threatening as most I have seen; and therefore I would not have taken them off,
if the Patients had not earnestly desired it. I think fit to intimate, that the
fewer Medicines have been taken, whilst the Tumor remains on, the better; for
any Thing that causes the least Fermentation of the Humors, does the more
contaminate, and spoil the Blood and Juices.

If you should think fit to encourage any Thing of this Nature, in the Way I
propose, or any Way you shall think more proper; I have several Observations to
offer to you, which I hope may be of Use:

From a Brother that heartily wishes Prosperity to your Society, and is

Your very humble Servt.John Rushworth.
Northampton, October 18, 1731.
POSTSCRIPT.
IT is to me a very melancholy Consideration, that in a Nation so happy in its
Laws and Government, there should be so little Care taken to prevent the great
Misfortunes that are very often brought upon the miserable Subjects, by
suffering those to practice Surgery (the ancientest and certainest Part of
Physic) with Impunity, that are so very ill qualified for it. Though I hope as
far as your Power extends, this Mischief is in a great Measure prevented. But
for the Sake of the Country People, so numerous and necessary a Part of our
Fellow Subjects; it is certainly the Duty of all those that are sensible of it,
to use their best Endeavors to get it put upon a better Regulation.

And if you can propose a Method to do it, if your Charter gave you Power
sufficient, you can never have a more favorable Opportunity to obtain the
Enlargement of it for so good a Use; their present Majesty's having always
shown a humane Tenderness and Compassion for all their Subjects.

And if any new Law should be wanting to complete so necessary a Work; it is
not to be doubted, but that a Parliament that has made so great Improvements in
the Law, for the Preservation of the Estates and Rights of the Subjects; will
also, if it be properly laid before them, take the same Care for the
Preservation of the Lives, Limbs, etc. of the People, in which a particular
Provision may be made for the Advantage of the Poor of the Parishes, by
erecting an Infirmary in the Center of every County, to receive such Poor as
have Occasion for the Assistance of a good Surgeon; and for want of it, in some
Cases, become Cripples, and in others, lie long in a languid and miserable
Condition, to the great Expense of the Parishes.

The following is a Letter from the Master of the Surgeons Company.

SIR,
WHEN your printed Letter directed to the Governors of our Company was read in
February last, before a Court of Assistants, our Clerk was then ordered to
return you our Thanks for the Same, and to desire you to send us such other
curious Cases, as you were then pleased to promise, and at the same time to
second your Intention for the Advancement of Surgery, 'twas ordered, to print
four times a Year, the Court of Assistants Order, which you have or will read
from Time to Time, in several of the public Papers, to encourage every Surgeon
to follow your laudable Example; all these Cases, together with such as will be
found in the Sea-Surgeons Journals, being entered in a Book, will from Time to
Time be perused by the Court of Examiners, and printed at the Company's
Expense, as the Gentlemen who send them shall approve: I wish your other
Proposal in the printed Letter, for establishing an Hospital or Infirmary in
the several Counties, could take effect, but at present I cannot find out any
Parliament Men that will undertake so beneficial an Undertaking. I am now to
acknowledge yours of the 17th Instant, and to acquaint you, that from your
Example I have given the Bark in all Mortifications with such Success as has
encouraged the Gentlemen you mention to administer it. I have now under my Care
a Gentleman of 78, who owes his Life to that Medicine; his Case was at first a
Gangreen after a Phlegmon; the usual Means seemed to have removed the Danger,
but the Fever continuing without Remission or Intermission, a Sphacelus soon
appeared, which nothing did stop the Progress of till the Bark was used, and in
Twenty four Hours and less, the Separation began, with a laudable Pus. The same
thing happened to a Jew whose Sphacelus had got ground for three Weeks in
spite of all Means, where several Surgeons were concerned some Years ago, and
to another Patient of mine, I have now used it in seven Cases, the
Circumstances in each being different, and yet in all the Bark has taken
Effect: Even within these few Days to Mr. Delenor, who kept the Bagnio in St.
James's Street, in whom a Mortification happened, after several punctures in
Dropsical Legs, the Bark stopped the Progress in less than twenty four Hours, and
the Sluffs began to separate, but the Patient having a Jaundice, and spent with
Evacuations, it revived and came into the other Leg, of which though he died, yet
the Power of the Bark was so plain, that from this and the other Cases, I think
it evident that we may be as sure of getting the Better of, or at least of
stopping a Mortification, from any internal Cause, by the Bark, as conquering
an Ague thereby.

As to the Cure of Cancers by Amputation, there are but few Surgeons here that
flatter themselves of it; of late we recommend them to the Drinking about two
Quarts a Day of the Water at the Dog and Duck in St. George's Fields,
Southwark, which I can aver, stops the Progress of, and likely will get the
Better of that Noli me tangere. I am with all Esteem, Sir,

Your most obedient humble Servant, Claud. Amyand.
Gerard-street, London, July 29, 1732.

To Claud. Amyand, Esquire; Sergeant Surgeon to His Majesty, and Master of the
Surgeons Company.
SIR,
I Heartily thank you for the Favor of yours, for until now, I had reason to
believe, that our Company slighted my Letter, for your Clerk never wrote any
thing to me about it, nor did I hear any thing of it before your kind Letter
informed me, for no public Papers that come into these Parts (that I ever saw)
mention any thing of the good Method, the Company has taken. But if at the same
time, care be not taken, to get Surgery not to be suffered to be practiced by
any, but those that are regularly brought up and sufficiently examined, the
Country People will be the more imposed upon by Quacks being made (if possible)
more bold and impudent, by putting into their Hands what they are not capable
of making a good Use of, and Surgeons of Value (who have the Misfortune to live
in the Country) will be much injured by it, which I should be very sorry any
ways to contribute to. This cannot appear so plainly to you, as to those that
live in the Country, but I doubt not but your Goodness will have regard to it,
by seriously considering it, in order to prevent so ill a Consequence. I hope I
shall not tire your Patience, by giving you an account of a Case of a Patient
of mine this Spring, who was far gone in a Dropsy and Asthma, attended with
very many ill Symptoms, which daily increased, though he had a very good
Physician (Dr. Freeman) who made use of all proper internal Means, but they not
answering I was consulted; his Legs and Thighs were grown to a very great Bulk,
and did appear to me (and also to the Doctor) as if they would soon mortify; I
told the Doctor I had never found that Punctures would be sufficient to relieve
in so dangerous a Case, but I was of Opinion that nothing but making many large
Incisions into the Legs could be of Use, though I was unwilling to begin such a
Work; but in a few Days we plainly saw that he could not continue long, if not
soon relieved; the Doctor encouraging me, I was resolved to venture my
Reputation, rather than the Patient should be lost, though I knew the censorious
Age, did not spare to reflect on Surgeons, when they used any new Method
without Success; but I can with Pleasure tell you, that the Patient was soon
relieved by it, and by often using Fomentations, and as often changing the
Cataplasms, I not only preserved the Tone of the Parts, but also constantly
discharged vast Quantities of the watery Humor for more than two Months, until
it was all carried off, from all Parts of the Body; and the Legs have recovered
their true Tone, and are as small as they were before he was ill, and do not so
much as swell at Night, though he daily goes about his Business performing it
with cheerfulness, and is better in every respect than he has been for many
Years.

I am very glad to hear, that you have had so many demonstrations of the good
Effect of the Bark, though certainly a great deal ought to be imputed to your
good and proper directing of it: I beg leave just to mention, that leaving off
the Bark too soon, a Patient of mine had a Return of the Mortification, in
about five Days time, but scarifying and repeating it, I presently had the good
Effect of it again, and she is now perfectly recovered; and though she had a very
ill Habit of Body before, is now better than she has been for several Years,
and her Looks show it to all that knew her before, though she is fifty Years of
Age.

I rejoice to hear of any thing that gives Relief in Cancers; but if the Tumor
be not perfectly reduced by it, I fear no Cure will continue, unless the Tumor
be first removed; but I shall wave this, until I have the Happiness to see you,
which I hope to do at the beginning of the next Sessions of Parliament; for I
am very desirous to gain the Point of having Infirmaries, and though my Interest
be but small, yet joined with yours and others that I hope we shall meet with,
I do not despair; and I flatter my self that you will excuse the length of this
from,

Honored SIR, Your most obedient, and very humble Servant, John Rushworth.
Northampton, August 5, 1732.

The following was inserted in the Norhampton Mercury, December 20, 1731.
WHereas in a Postscript to a Letter to the Surgeons Company (Oct. 18, 1731.)
mention is made of the erecting of an Infirmary in the Center of every County,
for the Reception of such Poor as shall have Occasion for the Assistance of a
good Surgeon, and for want of it, in some Cases, become Cripples, and in
others, lie long in a languid and miserable Condition, to the no small Expense
of the Parishes: This Design the Proposer thinks himself particularly obliged
(and by Judgment and Inclination is led) to promote to the utmost of his Power;
but knowing his own Insufficiency (upon several Accounts) to do any Thing
considerable toward it, therefore does humbly offer it to the Consideration of
the Gentlemen of England, and hopes that those who think it may prove a good
Charity, will afford their Assistance for bring it to Perfection. The Proposer
forbears to offer any Method for the regulating of it, because he is in Hopes
that those that are better qualified will do it to a greater Advantage; and it
will be more regarded, if done by Persons of Character, and not of so low a
Station of Life. In order to make this Design the more public, the following
Advertisement was put into the Gazette, Nov. 20, 1731. viz.

" John Rushworth of Northhampton, Surgeon, having sent a Proposal to the
Surgeons Company of London, for the Improvement of Surgery, in the Postscript
to which he proposes the erecting an Infirmary in the Center of every County,
for the receiving such Poor as shall want the Assistance of a good Surgeon; but
thinking that not sufficient to promote it, he humbly offers it to the
Consideration of the Gentlemen of England, conceiving it would be a great and
as extensive a Charity as any that has been done since the Reformation, and
hopes it may require no great Expense more than the Parishes are already
obliged to do for their Poor, and doubts not but what is further wanting will
be supplied by charitable disposed Persons, and shall be glad to have an
Opportunity to subscribe fifty Pounds toward it in the Country where he
lives."

Therefore he hopes that the Gentlemen of this County will excuse him in humbly
desiring them that are for the promoting this Charity, to meet at the County
Sessions, or at what proper Time they shall think fit to appoint, for the
taking it into Consideration; and if they approve of it, he doubts not but they
may put it upon such a Foundation, as may be an Example to other Counties.

Though I am sensible I may be censured for this, yet if the giving this Hint
does in the least contribute to the bringing to Perfection what I do so much
desire, I shall value that more than any other Consideration.

Instead of an Encomium upon that great Christian Duty, CHARITY, to enforce
this, I shall only mention the following Words of our Savior, as wrote by St.
Luke, the beloved Physician; When thou make a feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, the blind; and thou shall be blessed, for they cannot
recompense thee; for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
And if an Infirmary can be made capable to receive the Incurables also, it will
be making a continual Feast for those poor miserable People.


For the Satisfaction of those that gave themselves the Trouble of reading
Rushworth's printed Letter to the Surgeons Company, the following Letter is
inserted.
London, July 3, 1732. SIR,
ABout two Months ago, I was sent for to a Gentleman about 50 Years of Age, who
had a Mortification on the back of his Foot, from an internal Cause. Upon sight
of it, I scarified it and dressed it up, S. A. and his Physicians ordered him
the Conf. Raleigh. Rad. Serpt. There. V. etc. of the established Medicines. Next
Day Mr. Sergeant Dickins and Mr. Chesselden were consulted, and they confirmed
what we had done, and desired us to go on, which we did to no manner of
Purpose, for eight Days, for the Mortification increased, and the Fever did not
abate, upon which we had another Consulation, in which we agreed, that in all
probability he would not hold out 24 Hours longer: Then Mr. Dickins proposed
the Bark, not upon his own Experience, but upon your Authority, and Mr.
Sergeant Amyand (who had also made several successful Experiments with it)
which was with some Difficulty agreed to. Upon taking the Bark the Fever soon
left him, the Mortification stopped, the Wound digested, and the Sloughs cast
off, to the great Surprise of every one that ever saw or heard of it. I think
this new Use of the Bark (for which we are more obliged to you, than to him who
first showed the Use of it in Intermitting Fevers) is of too much Consequence,
not to be communicated to the Fraternity; therefore I beg the Favor of you to
fend me a farther Account of the send me a farther Account of the Experience
you have had of the Use of the Bark in Mortifications, than you gave in your
printed Letter to our Company, (which Mr. Sergeant Amyand, our present Master,
was so kind as to show me) and it shall be inserted in your own Words and the
Favor gratefully acknowledged, by, Sir,

Your most obedient humble Servant, Jo. Douglas.


As this gives me Reason to desire the Surgeons Company farther to take my
Letter into Consideration; so I take this Opportunity once again, to desire the
Gentlemen of England, to consider what I before proposed, (in an Advertisement
in the Gazette, Nov. 20, 1731.) for erecting an Infirmary in every County; for
I shall be very sorry if I must own, (excepting London) in this Kingdom there
does not appear, that generous Regard to the Health, and Life of Man, as in
several Foreign Parts; and if their Charitable Care of the poor Sick and
Maimed, be an Effect of their Religion. I blush to think, that we (who call our
selves the Reformed) should come so far short of them in this great Christian
Duty: And as the Gentlemen of this County, did not think fit to take any Notice
of what I proposed to them, I shall be very ready to subscribe fifty Pounds, if
an Infirmary be erected in any neighboring County, that the Poor may not
suffer for Want of Advice and Medicines, as the Rich often do, by having too
much.

It is necessary that I intimate to all Surgeons, what I have mentioned to our
Company (in a Letter the 17th of this Month) that I would not be understood by
my printed Letter, as if the Bark would answer in Mortifications from all
internal Causes, for in some it is not proper, as Surgeons may easily suggest
to themselves.

And that the Aspersion of the Adage of Tres; Duo; may not be cast upon
Surgeons, as it is upon the Practicers of the other Branch of Physic: I shall
conclude with heartily wishing, that we may endeavor to prove our selves
Christians, by being kindly affectioned one toward another, and also public
Spirited; not seeking merely our own Things, but every one also the Things of
others, i. e. The Common Good.

Having within these few Days met with an Account formerly given (by an
ingenious Physician in his Time) of great Cures (in Surgery) done by Mineral
Waters; (it has given me great Satisfaction, in hopes that the Water at the Dog
and Duck in Southwark, mentioned in the Letter of our worthy Master, Mr.
Sergeant Amyand, may prove of great Use in Cancers) among many rational
Thoughts how this is performed, he takes notice, That as the Juice of delicious
Fruit, plays upon the Organs of Taste, so does the right Healing Waters upon the
Ulcers: at first touch, it seems to tear the Flesh off deeper, but immediately
changes the beginning of deep Pain into a deeper Pleasure; and after many
Assaults and quick Slidings, the Rugosities of the Wounds, or of the Liquor, or
of both, are by their dancing Vibrations smoothed into a delightful Accord; and
we may perceive, how some Waters, may by their rolling Particles, be the
greatest Probes, and yet the surest Searchers, Cleansers, and Healers. And
hence also on the contrary, we may see, how some Waters, which cure Ulcers and
Cancers by outward Application, may be too busily corrosive and dangerous, if
taken inwardly.

He mentions several of the old Holy-wells, so called; one he says he can
affirm upon his own knowledge, has done many Cures, upon putrid and faetid
Ulcers, which were many Years deplored for incurable, he had seen it tried
often, and always to good effect, sometimes considerably wonderful; it is
somewhat asperous, but pleasing to malignant Ulcers.

Now I fear the Monks and Priests making an ill Use of these Wells, by
pretending they had their sanative Virtues given to them by their Saints, and
by leading the People to Superstition thereby, has been a great Means to bring
them out of Credit, by which many miserable People may have been deprived of
the great Benefit they might have received by them; and therefore it may be
necessary at this time to take them again into consideration, by comparing some
of the Waters, of the old Holy-wells, with those at the Dog and Duck; and also
that they may with diligent and strict Observation (by some neighboring
Surgeon) be tried upon Cancers; that no Care may be wanting to promote so great
and good a Work, as the Cure of Cancers.

ERRATA.
PAge 10. line the last, for Sub- read Subjects. p. 26. l. 11. for bring r.
bringing, p. 31. l. 4. for Pher r. There.


