MORAL TALES IN VERSE, FOUNDED ON REAL EVENTS.

VOL. I.

MORAL TALES IN VERSE, FOUNDED ON REAL EVENTS.

WRITTEN BY THOMAS HULL, OF THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

DEDICATED, BY PERMISSION, TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF LEEDS.

-- O! these flaws and starts would well become
A woman's story, at a winter's fire,
Authorized by her grandam.
Shakespeare's Macbeth. VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR, AND UNDER THE DIRECTION OF, GEORGE CAWTHORN, BRITISH
LIBRARY, STRAND.

1797.

TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF LEEDS.
A FRUIT, a Flower, a Feather, have been accepted by persons of superior
station, when tendered as tributes of affection and respect: as such only can
the following trifles hope to be accepted; and that they are truly such, is the
only apology the Author can make, for having wished to address them to him,
whose qualities ennoble rank, and adorn both public and private life. -- That
this is not the style of Dedication, but the language of Truth, the world can
attest, or the Writer would blush to use it. He is equally sensible of, and
grateful for the honor of being permitted to subscribe himself

His Grace's highly obliged, and very obedient, humble servant, THOMAS HULL.

PREFACE.
THE following little Compositions, which I have dignified with the title of
Moral Tales, have been the employment of several leisure hours, at different
periods of time. Some of them have been written many years, as the respective
dates specify, but none of them printed till now, except the last in the second
volume, of which further mention shall be made in its proper place.

Mr. ADDISON describes himself, as always being possessed of a disposition to
examine such old prints and ballads as he saw pasted upon the walls of
cottages, etc. I have not only discovered the same turn in myself, (and I would
I could find something else more similar to that excellent writer!) but I have
ever, even from childhood, felt my attention peculiarly engaged by stories
related in company, which have contained in them any thing of the mavelous
and supernatural. Hence it is, probably, that I have so long retained many of
the singular events whereon the ensuing compositions are founded.

I have been (I can say it with great truth) repeatedly urged to publish them
by friends, who have seen the manuscripts. -- The Reader, perhaps, will call
them very partial friends: it may be so. And I am ready to acknowledge that,
after a careful revisal, they are much better calculated to elicit the
approbation of a kind heart, than to obtain the commendation of a critical
judgment.

HENRY; OR, VIRTUE ITS OWN REWARD.

ADDRESSED TO JOHN BEARD, ESQUIRE.

1771.

MUSA NEC IMMEMORES NOS SINIT ESSE TUI. From an Inscription in the Cloisters in
Westminster Abbey. ADDRESS TO JOHN BEARD, ESQUIRE.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1771. The event, whereon this Tale is founded, occurred at
Margate, in Kent, in the year 1765. It was related to the Author by his worthy
friend, Mr. BEARD, immediately on his return from that place. The singularity
of the occurrence induced the author to attempt giving it a poetical dress, and
dedicate it to his friend.

THE Tale, from thee received, to thee I send,
With all the warmest wishes of a friend,
That through life's stream thy private skiff may sail
With easy current, and with quiet gale.
Now calmly moored where beauteous Hampton sees
Thames' silver current dimpling with the breeze;
(Where genuine GARRICK, in his fair retreat,
To our loved Bard erects the hallowed seat,)
O! never may Sorrow's envious cloud annoy
Thy private comfort, or convivial joy:
But soft content protect thy chosen haunt,
Till thou no more can wish, or Time no more can grant!
VIRTUE ITS OWN REWARD.
TALE I.
I.
Lo! to the North dark scouls the rising storm,
It swells, it bursts with wide-resounding roar,
Quick-gathering clouds the face of day deform,
And the big wave incessant beats the shore.
II.
Now all the caves that hold the winds, unbarr'd,
Each death-denouncing blast at once outflies,
Tremendous sounds, on every side, are heard;
One universal gloom obscures the skies:
III.
One universal and unvarying gloom,
Save where with momentary cleave it breaks,
To give the flashing lightning's terror room,
While bellowing thunder air, earth, ocean, shakes.
IV.
The shudd'ring peasant from yon distant cot
Views with astonishment the upturned main,
ThanksHeav'n, which granted him a tranquil lot,
And shields him in his homely thatch again.
V.
Ah! sad ELIZA, what was then thy pain!
What anguish did thy gentle bosom tear!
Did thou not tortures in each sound sustain,
And all Death's horrors in each object fear?
VI.
Did thou not frequent turn thy woe-struck eye
Where the drenched casement pointed to the main,
Reprove, implore the unrelenting sky,
With sobs that heaved, and tears that streamed in vain?
VII.
Did thou not thus the unpitying storm upbraid?
"Why now your cruel terrors send abroad,
"Why with destructive fires the port invade,
"Where HENRY's vessel seeks a quiet road?
VIII.
"Where HENRY seeks his traffic and his toil,
"To crown with home-felt bliss and soft repose,
"Yet ye, unkind, his honest hopes beguile,
"And bid ELIZA's bosom teem with woes.
IX.
"Perhaps, ye ruthless messengers of Fate,
"Ye mean my HENRY shall no more return,
"Ye mean that here our loves shall close their date,
"The child a sire, the wise a husband mourn.
X.
Her blooming boy, whom now ten suns had cheered,
Pitying the first sad sigh his mother heaved,
Forth to the beach impetuous had repaired,
Nor felt the blast, nor at the thunder grieved.
XI.
Still the relentless storm dealt forth its wrath,
Still the swollen sky its streaming torrents poured,
Still the blue lightning menaced frequent death,
Louder and louder still vexed Ocean roared.
XII.
And was it, HENRY, in that ruthless hour,
Thy beating vessel sought the port to gain,
By every dangerous gust at random tore,
In that dread conflict 'twixt the heavens and main?
XIII.
It was. -- Ah! hapless man, thy skill is vain!
The Pilot's hand no more the helm obeys,
The sails are rent; the mainmast splits in twain
Heart-piercing yells thewretched suff'rers raise.
XIV.
But Heaven, regardful of thy virtuous love,
Thy genuine truth, and honest industry,
Bade the disabled hulk self-guided move,
And make her harbor through the per'lous sea.
XV.
It Is done -- thy native cliffs appear in view,
The lightnings pause, the thunders cease to roar;
Down to the boat descend the eager crew,
And through tumultuous billows seek the shore.
XVI.
Joy, rapture, gratitude, devotion -- all
That goodness feels our HENRY's heart possessed;
He sighed, he wept, he wondered, he adored;
Unutterable transport swelled his breast.
XVII.
Near, and more near, the plying oars advance,
HENRY devours the land with eager eye;
Now thinks with forward haste the surges dance,
Now thinks with loit'ring pace they backward hye:
XVIII.
When from the Pier, before his startled look,
A Child falls headlong in the foaming wave;
HENRY's prompt heart, with instant anguish struck,
Bleeds for the hapless boy, and yearns to save.
XIX.
While he pervades the place, with eye intent,
Where the dividing flood the child received,
The upturning waves the struggling form present --
Again with mighty woe his bosom heaved.
XX.
All that humanest Pity could persuade,
All that instinctive Piety enjoin,
In one great thought his glowing mind invade,
And swift he plunges in the foaming brine:
XXI.
He plunges, and he grasps -- one arm upheaves,
Above the waters, the declining head,
While, with the other combating the waves,
He ploughs his passage through the surfy bed.
XXII.
His toil is over -- his prize he brings to land,
His prize, no victim yet to hungry Death,
With softest care he lays him on the strand,
Chafes the chill form, to soothe back wandering breath.
XXIII.
Cleared from the dripping locks, the unclosing eyes
With languid sweetness now on HENRY shine,
When, with wild look, and voice suppressed, he cries,
"It is -- Oh! gracious God! -- the Boy is mine!
XVIV.
The landed crew the Man of Virtue hail,
The Man of Virtue gathering crowds proclaim,
Each to his neighbor gives the wondrous tale,
And panting rumor labors with his fame.
XXV.
The buzzing train attend with eager pace,
As HENRY speeds to chase ELIZA's tears,
Close to his bosom locked in fond embrace,
His rescued treasure to her arms he bears.
XXVI.
The speechless joys of their encount'ring loves
What skill can paint, what language can record?
Replete with bliss the Man of Virtue proves,
THAT DEEDS OF VIRTUE ARE THEIR OWN REWARD.
TALE THE SECOND.

FOSCUE; OR, VICE ITS OWN PUNISHMENT.

ADDRESSED TO * * * * * *

Latius regnes, avidum domando
Spiritum, quam si Libyam remotis
Gadibus jungas.
HORAT. Lib. ii. Od. 2. ADDRESS TO * * * * * * * *
SPRUNG from an ancient, noble line,
Wherein illustrious heroes shine,
Why by unworthy deeds debase
The honors of that splendid race?
Endowed with Fortune's boundless store,
Whence this absurd desire for more?
Beyond what Avarice could desire,
Or wild Ambition's thirst inspire,
Is poured around, in lavish waste,
To please thine eye, and tempt thy taste:
Why honorable equals shun,
And to inglorious circles run?
Thy time and talents to profane,
With unremitting search of gain?
Proud parks enclose thee, manors fair,
Prolific meads, and waters clear,
And shall thou, negligent of fame,
From Tenants hard exactions claim,
Industrious Peasantry oppress,
And make their little po^its less?
Young Miser, cease -- aspire to know
The godlike pleasure -- to bestow.
Seek not for wealth by wealth's abuse,
But place it to its noblest use:
Search where the laboring poor abide,
Unshelter'd, by thy forest-side;
Relieve their wants, their spirits cheer,
And bid them bless the coming year.
When hovering mildews rot the soil,
And cheat the Farmer's honest toil,
Or when the Engrosser's churlish door
Withholds the portion of the poor,
Then thy full garners wide expand,
And fill the needy Rustic's hand.
Or seek, beneath the humble shed,
Where modest merit hides his head;
Redeem him from his dark retreat,
And hail him with a happier state.
So may thou (by bestowing, blessed)
Find boundless treasure in thy breast:
So may thou, ere old Time shall spread
His reverend honors over thy head,
Unperishable stores create,
And hear (unblushing) FOSCUE's fate.
THE TALE OF FOSCUE.
WRITTEN IN IMITATION OF THE OLD ENGLISH BALLAD.
IN TWO PARTS.
PART I.
I.
WHILE France her character maintained
For elegance and arts,
What time a lineal Monarch reigned
Within his people's hearts:
II.
Ere yet the servile foot had learned
On Nobles' necks to tread,
Or Anarchy a blinded land
With lawless fury swayed;
III.
Ere yet a foul Iscariot-band
Profanely had imbrued
Their impious, sacrilegious hands
In their mild master's blood, Alluding to the Massacre of LOUIS XVI. King of
France, on Monday, January 21, 1793.

IV.
FOSCUE, on LANGUEDOC'S fair plain,
In avarice grown old,
Whose only zeal was thirst of gain,
Whose only God was Gold:
V.
FOSCUE, on LANGUEDOC'S fair plain,
Full long abode had held,
And there, by many a cruel deed,
His sordid bags had filled:
VI.
For his the usage was to farm
The Province from the State, This man, FOSCUE, was one of the Farmers-General.
The event, whereon this Tale is founded, happened about the year 1761.

And to himself from laboring hinds
Foul profit to create:
VII.
And his the usage, to exact
Whatever might ravaged be,
To the extent of hard-earn'd gains,
From honest industry.
VIII.
Yet many a meadow, fair and wide,
And many a fertile field,
Had wont to Tenant, as to Lord,
An ample tribute yield;
IX.
And many a thrifty family,
Beneath their humble shed,
By daily culture of the soil,
In peace and comfort fed,
X.
Till FOSCUE's avaricious hand
Oppressed the toiling poor,
Nor heeded he what they endured,
So he increased his store.
XI.
VALMONT, to better prospects born
Than laboring for his bread,
Through strange misfortune here was doomed
To hide his drooping head;
XII.
Where Patience, the enduring child
Of calm Philosophy,
Had taught him to abide his lot,
Whatever that lot might be.
XIII.
Three Children, and a virtuous Wife,
His age's only store,
He daily toiled to keep from want,
Nor did he covet more.
XIV.
Protector, lab'rer, tutor, all,
Yet grudged he not the toil,
So by his little fire at eve
He could but see them smile.
XV.
Ah! woe the while! -- a sudden blight
Spread desolation round,
And VALMONT's labors were bereft
The harvest of his ground.
XVI.
FOSCUE the season's dues demands,
Demands with speech severe,
Nor him the kneeling children move,
Nor him the mother's tear.
XVII.
Their humble furniture he seized,
Their vestments, and their bed,
Nor left them wherewithal to buy
The wretched morrow's bread.
XVIII.
"Have thou no pity?" VALMONT says,
"Thy end, fell fiend, beware,
"Lest thou, in turn, should wail and cry,
"Where none thy cries shall hear."
XIX.
The door rapacious FOSCUE closed,
Withdrew, nor looked behind,
But left the suppliants to endure,
The coming winter's wind.
PART II.
I.
NOT many months were gone and past,
When State-necessities,
Through every Province in the land,
Exacted large supplies.
II.
Strait the penurious FOSCUE hears,
And trembles for his store;
He veils his avarice with a lie,
And pleads that he is poor.
III.
Pleads, "How should he, alas! have means
"The public wants to aid?
"How scrape together more than serves
"To purchase daily bread?"
IV.
Such were the mean evasions sent
To the State Deputies,
In hope from him they would not claim
A share of the supplies.
V.
Yet, lest a general search be made,
He frames a secret hold,
Wherein he craftily conceals
His heap of treasured gold.
VI.
Some few short days elapsed, they come,
To FOSCUE's they repair,
Suspecting much some mean deceit,
But FOSCUE is not there.
VII.
They search the dwelling high and low,
They search the land around;
But vain their search, enquiry vain,
No FOSCUE can be found.
VIII.
Some few days more are now elapsed,
When FOSCUE's house and lands,
Together with the post he filled,
Are given to other hands.
IX.
Lo! now the ancient edifice
Repair immediate asks,
And the new substitute himself
O'erlooks the workman's tasks.
X.
As the foundation, dangerous grown,
With caution they explore,
Within the cellar's depth they find
A close-concealed door.
XI.
A key, within its fixture placed,
Then challenges amaze,
Which, turning in a sliding lock,
The weighty door they raise.
XII.
Descending, by the taper's light,
Astounded they behold
Old FOSCUE's famished carcass stretched
Amid his hoarded gold.
XIII.
There hoping to conceal his pelf,
The ponderous, self-lock'd door,
In vengeance over his head had closed,
To open for him no more.
XIV.
Debarred, at once, all hope to view
The light of Heaven again,
What dreadful, complicated pangs
Did FOSCUE not sustain?
XV.
Might not prophetic VALMONT's words
Return upon his ear,
While there condemned to "wail and cry,
"Where none his cries could hear?"
XVI.
The Miser's lacerated limbs
Disgusted they survey,
The flesh from either shrivelled arm
Through hunger gnawed away.
XVII.
Thus, self-devoted FOSCUE died,
Most strange, but righteous doom!
Since all his hoarded, ill-got wealth
But served to build his tomb.
TALE THE THIRD.

ELDRED; OR, THE JUSTICE OF RETALIATION.

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1783.

ADDRESSED TO MISS M * * * * * * * *

With whatsoever measure ye mete, it shall be measured to ye again. ST. MATT.
chap. vii. v. 3. Christ's Sermon on the Mount. ADDRESS TO MISS M * * * * * * * *
I KNOW, my fair, thy early breast
With love of virtue is possessed;
Be then a steady zeal for Truth
The system of thy rising youth.
If duty to that Providence,
Who gave thee being, strength, and sense,
Within thy heart retain its seat,
Truth will not quit the dear retreat.
An unremitting love of God,
Is thy best guide through life's dim road.
To gild reflection with delight,
As time advances in his flight,
Let duty to thy parent sway
The conduct of each rising day;
On the soft tablet of thy breast
Be this dear precept deep impressed!
Observe it chief, when age or care
Shall silver over her ebon hair:
If testy pain unkindly speak,
Thy swelling temper duteous check.
Ah! do not thou augment that pain;
She may, but thou may not complain.
Oh! cursed, above all others, he,
Who, hardened in impiety,
Transgresses duty's holy bound,
And dares a parent's bosom wound.
Oh! let him tremble, lest he want
That comfort he refused to grant!
List, list, my child, with awful ear,
And shudder at the tale you hear.
THE TALE OF ELDRED.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1773.
I.
WELL-nigh consumed with malady and years,
Now totters ELDRED on life's latest stage,
Down his pale cheek distill incessant tears,
And want and sorrow wear his failing age.
II.
Deep in its hollow cell now fades the eye,
Which once on life's gay prospect brightly shone,
In his shrunk veins the loit'ring pulses die,
Their active course impaired, their vigor flown.
III.
Where Is now the glowing heart that wont to beat
At rapture's call, and warm the expanding breast?
Chill is the glowing heart, the vital heat;
And life's repairing sources near suppressed.
IV.
Who, but would melt, as they behold those hairs,
Which erst with burnished auburn wont to glow,
Now changed by grief and soul-corroding cares,
All whitened over like winter's drizzled snow?
V.
A beauteous consort blessed his noon of life,
Who in that noon of life was snatched away,
When most he knew to prize, he lost, the wife,
To their first pledge of love an early prey.
VI.
Yet Heaven ordained the infant pledge to live --
O! what a soothing to a father's breast!
His loss to lighten, and his woe relieve,
Were filial duty on his soul impressed!
VII.
But ELDRED's shameless son, in early youth,
Gave tokens of a thwart, disnatur'd mind,
To froward malice, sullenness, untruth,
And every opposite to good inclined.
VIII.
In manhood's prime, now flies he far astray,
From filial duty, gratitude, and love,
Leaves a sick sire to pain and want a prey,
In lawless pleasures impious paths to rove.
IX.
Wealth, jewels, leases, each paternal right,
His plund'ring hand from his sad father drained,
The mansion (once so goodly to the sight)
Disfurnish'd, unrepair'd, alone remains.
X.
Bedrid, and restless, hark! the parent cries;
From morn to eve makes unavailing moan;
Round the bare chamber casts his hopeless eyes,
Where cold winds pierce, and echo groan for groan.
XI.
Ah! miserable man, and are there yet
Severer ills in hard Affliction's store?
Can a son's hand yet greater crimes commit,
Can he inflict, and must thou suffer more?
XII.
Yes, miserable man, there yet remain
Severer ills in hard Affliction's store;
From a son's hand thou yet must more sustain;
He can inflict, and thou must suffer more.
XIII.
For now returning, with distempered soul,
From loose associates of his luxury,
Intoxicated with the madd'ning bowl,
And beggared by the false bewitching dye,
XIV.
With rage inflamed, he seeks his father's bed,
That bed, which he himself had robbed of rest,
There, with wild looks, that scattered horrid dread,
He thus unfolds his unrelenting breast.
XV.
"My gold is gone -- Have thou no more, old sire?
"Have thou no precious gems, no hidden store?
"Be quick to gratify my keen desire."
The parent sighs, "My son, I have no more.
XVI.
"Yet cast not such unduteous looks on me,
"Let not displeasure on a father frown,
"While I had wealth, I gave that wealth to thee;
"All my possessions were they not thine own?
XVII.
"In times less wretched than the present hour,
"Did not a sparing meal my board supply?
"While thou in wanton riot did devour
"My lavished gold in wasteful luxury?
XVIII.
"In all the sickness, all the griefs I bore,
"When almost fainting in the arms of death,
"Thou never wast nigh, my spirits to restore,
"Or raise my laboring breast, when scant of breath.
XIX.
"Leave, leave me now, my son, to sigh my last;
"To dye alone -- I perish now through want;
"No more thy prodigality can waste,
"Thou have no more to seek, nor I to grant.'
XX.
"Yes, thou have more; this mansion yet is left,
"This mansion, which by heritage is mine."
"Let me not yet, my son, of this be 'reft,
"Some few short strugglings more, and this is thine.
XXI.
"While painful life remains, O! do not tear
"This only covering from my wretched head;
"No, no, my son; I must, will perish here;
"Then patient wait, till thou shall see me dead.
XXII.
"The awful moments may yet remain,
"I would employ in peace and pious prayer;
"That my sad soul some mercy may obtain,
"For, O! my son, guilt, guilt sits heavy there.
XXIII.
"Then from thy brow those frowns and scoulings chase,
"And leave me not with anger in thine eye;
"With one kind glance thank me for what I was,
"So may thy father bless thee ere he die."
XXIV.
"Peace, dotard, peace! rejoins the unnat'ral son,
"Thy counsel I despise, thy age I scorn;
"Too long old ELDRED's wretched date has run,
"And wretched I, because of ELDRED born!"
XXV.
This said, the fiend, with fury unrestrained,
Twists round his grasp his father's silver hairs,
And drags him, pleading with out stretched hand,
Far as the passage opening to the stairs.
XXVI.
When thus the sire's heart-rending screams implore,
"In pity cease; enough thy hand has done;
"Drag not thy father past this guilty floor,
"Thus far, and but thus far I dragged my own."
XXVII.
The astonished wretch foregoes his impious hold,
The storm of rage is in an instant still;
With cruelty and wine no longer bold,
Quick-darting horrors all his senses chill.
XXVIII.
While thus the sire, with falt'ring voice pursues --
"Behold, my son, thy father stretched in dust;
"Thus Vengeance claims from me its righteous dues,
"I own, I own my punishment is just.
XXIX.
"Thus did I on my father's sorrows scoul,
"Thus to the ground his hallowed person cast:
"But Heaven so deal with my distracted soul,
"As here I pardon thee!" He sighed his last.
XXX.
By reason waked, the culprit lives to woe;
The mansion now his sickening eyes detest,
Over his foul hands unceasing torrents flow,
And unremitting tortures gnaw his breast.
TALE THE FOURTH.

THE EXCELLENCE OF SELF-DENIAL.

EXEMPLIFIED IN SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1762.

ADDRESS TO THE HON. WILLIAM KEPPEL, ON HIS RETURN FROM THE CONQUEST OF THE
HAVANNAH, IN 1762.
OH! thou, whose bosom glows with love of arms,
Whom patriot zeal, and patriot glory charms,
Who kindling courage love, yet love to see
That courage tempered by humanity;
Whose eye relenting views the crimson'd-blade,
And mourns the slaughter thine own arm has made;
Whose feeling bosom can the chain beguile
Of half its weight, and bid the captive smile,
Relieve the needy, give the wounded rest,
And share the anguish of the meanest breast,
To noble SIDNEY's Tale incline thine ear,
And praise the British Worthy with a tear.
THE TALE OF SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.
Now front to front the embattled legions stand,
And chide the loit'ring trumpet's slowcommand;
Thy turrets, ZUTPHEN, Zutphen, a City of the County of Zutphen, in the
Province of Gelderland, situated on the River Yssel.
the dread scene beheld,
Each toil, each horror of the desperate field,
When his stout bands, to hardy dangers bred,
Before thy walls courageous DUDLEY ROBERT DUDLEY, Earl of Leicester, Uncle to
Sir PHILIP SIDNEY.
led,
To vindicate against imperious SPAIN
The power and honor of ELIZA's reign.
There fell the pride of fair BRITANNIA's host,
The scholar's, poet's, soldier's, statesman's boast.
There SIDNEY fell, while BERGEL's The River Bergel, which crosses the Province
of Munster, runs through the center of the City of Zutphen, and falls into the
Yssel.
rolling flood
Died Yssel's copious stream with noble blood;
There SIDNEY fell; whom Cam's and Isis' shore
Heard their learned sons in plaintive verse deplore;
Him PENSHURST still laments through all her groves,
And all her Graces mourn, and all her Loves;
And every shepherd, burdened with the tale,
With sighs of sorrow fills the passing gale.
Arcadia still, through all her beauties moans,
The lawns still sigh, and still the forest groans,
In murmurs soft the streams lament him still,
Each fount laments, and every rippling rill,
Each plant, each shrub, and ev'ryop'ning flower,
And every infant bud, that decks the bower;
The very genius of the place complains,
For him, their first, their last, their best of swains.
Say, Muse, when panting for the battle's heat,
First in each danger, and each glorious feat,
What palm was left for SIDNEY then to claim,
To shine superior in the lists of fame?
What wondrous mark was left, what sacred sign,
To prove his soul of origin divine?
At length the trumpet gives the dread command,
Forth rush the leaders of each adverse band;
Nearer and nearer now the troops advance,
Sword clashes sword, and lance engages lance;
And, side by side, over Zutphen's bloody plains,
Big horror strides, and death despotic reigns.
Keen hope of glory flashing from his eyes,
Forth to the hottest press brave SIDNEY flies;
The fiery steed, by the great chief bestrode,
Neighs, proudly conscious of his noble load.
Ah! what avails his strength, his martial strain,
His crested beauty, and wide-flowing mane?
The whirring bullet gives the deadly wound,
The proud beast falls, and shakes the echoing ground.
A second steed the rising hero tries,
A second steed in welt'ring slaughter lies.
A third is brought -- but while, with active bound,
The undaunted warrior, vaulting, spurns the ground,
The thundering cannon deals its fellest stroke;
His thigh is torn; the strong-knit bone is broke;
Life's gushing stream its bursting cells forsakes,
The shattered splinters jar, the nerves relax.
The furious steed perceives the sclacken'd rein,
And wildly prances over the crimson plain.
Torn from his station'd rank, great SIDNEY's heart
Yet pants for fame, he scorns his body's smart,
Clings to his seat, fit bier to hold the brave,
And bear their relicts to the laureled grave.
His streaming wound, at length, bold DUDLEY spies,
And mourns his SIDNEY's fate with gushing eyes;
His sinking body the surrounding bands
Receive, obedient to their Lord's commands.
Faint with a waste of blood, on earth they lay
Their noble load, and mournful duty pay;
Friends weep aloud, and even the pausing foe
Regrets the stroke, which laid that hero low.
The suff'rer thus -- "O! thou, allied in worth,
"As joined in blood to him that gave me birth,
"The blow is dealt, the fatal ball has sped,
"Which numbers SIDNEY with the hallowed dead.
"For England's weal my life is nobly spent,
"For England's weal my latest prayer is sent,
"Be she victorious, and I die content.
"One slender service I alone in treat,
"I faint, I sicken, with excess of heat;
"A burning fever rages through my veins,
"And scorching thirst each vital moisture drains.
"One cooling drop to my parched lips extend,
"The last sad kindness thou can show thy friend."
A scanty portion the nigh-wasted spring
Alone supplies, the cask with speed they bring:
He sees, and blesses the approaching band,
And eager seizes it, with trembling hand --
When, straight before his view, sad soldiers bear
A dying comrade from the ranks of war,
Who, struggling in extremest torment, lies,
And views the sparkling draught with earnest eyes.
SIDNEY beholds the wretch, and inly grieves,
The untasted fluid from his lips he gives,
And thus -- "The draught I willingly resign:
"Take it -- thy wants are greater still than mine."
Ye, who luxuriate in unbounded store,
On penury unbounded comforts pour --
And ye, possessed but of a slender share
Of Fortune's gifts, yet heed the poor man's prayer:
From you more meritorious comes the dole,
Than from their hands who in abundance roll;
From out your scanty cup one drop bestow
On him who sinks in poverty and woe,
And say, like SIDNEY, with a soul benign,
"Take it, thy wants are greater still than mine."
TALE THE FIFTH.

THE UNCONSCIOUS AVENGER: OR, THE TALE OF ALLEYNE.

IN THE ANCIENT BALLAD STYLE.

IN TWO PARTS.

Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
HORAT. INTRODUCTION.
AND do ye not the story know
Of ALLEYNE, the good Boy,
Who worked the murderer mickle woe,
And lived his mother's joy?
I Will tell ye then -- in Cestrian Plains,
The tale full well is known,
Delivered down, for many a year,
From parent to the son.
I learned it from a mother's tongue,
Who "strok'd my youthful head,"
While on her honey'd words I hung,
Yet heard with silent dread.
A mother, whose maternal care
Few mothers could surpass,
And she was graceful, good, and fair,
And kind as fair she was.
And, as the due her virtues claim,
These filial thanks I pay,
And with her ever-honour'd name
Thus dignify my lay.
THE TALE OF ALLEYNE.
PART I.
I.
THE noontide sun with fervid beams
Now gilded every hill,
When MARIAN sought the willow shade
Beside the ripling rill;
II.
There, as she plied the needle's task,
Her bosom throbb'd with woe,
And down her faded cheek full often
Tears trickled soft and slow.
III.
And often, as she raised her eyes
Athwart the distant mead,
And marked the entrance of the wood,
Her heart with anguish bled;
IV.
For there she traced her WILLIAM's steps,
As he pursued his way,
Full lightly to the neighboring town,
By morning's ruddy ray,
V.
To sell the produce of his land,
Of grain a plenteous store;
She saw him enter in the wood,
But never saw him more.
VI.
Now five afflicting years had past,
Since she began to mourn
The father of her ALLEYNE dear,
Who never did return.
VII.
ALLEYNE, who knew his mother's wont,
When morn's hard toil was over,
Would duly, to appease her grief,
Her pensive haunts explore.
VIII.
Full fifteen years had crowned the youth,
His form of promise rare,
And comely was he to the view,
And dutiful as fair.
IX.
Daily he grew in the esteem
Of Pastor, Knight, and Squire,
And often a casual dole obtained,
To mend his scanty hire.
X.
Soon as beneath the willow's shade
His mother he descries,
And views her pond'ring over the stream
With swollen and watery eyes,
XI.
He seats him gently by her side,
And thus he soothes her woe:
"Must then this trickling tide of grief
"For ever, ever flow?
XII.
"And never will the hand of Time
"Abate my mother's pain?
"Never shall the smiles she used to wear
"On ALLEYNE shine again?"
XIII.
"Ah! can thou marvel," MARIAN cries,
"That thus my sorrows flow?
"Too well, thou know, my dearest son,
"My cause for constant woe;
XIV.
"Just such a bright and fervid sun
"As this, enriched the plain,
"When WILLIAM left thy mother's side,
"But never returned again.
XV.
"With him we lost the richest crop,
"That ever our glebe bestowed,
"Since when, thou know, bleak indigence
"Has made with us abode."
XVI.
"Too well, I know," the boy replies,
"Why thus thy sorrows flow,
"Young as I am, I sore regret
"And I partake thy woe:
XVII.
"Yet these continual streaming tears
"My mother's health consume;
"And lillies sit upon that cheek,
"Where once the rose did bloom.
XVIII.
"Assuage thy grief, nor let despair
"Thy gentle heart invade,
"Since God does give me daily strength
"To lend my mother aid:
XIX.
"And late and early will I toil,
"So thou may peace enjoy."
Through tears she smiled, and close embraced
Her ALLEYNE, her good Boy.
XX.
Smiles were the only answer made,
She had not power to speak,
But, in complacent silence, wiped
The drops from off her cheek.
XXI.
And duteous ALLEYNE kept his word,
He early tolled and late,
And God bestowed him daily strength
To mend their poor estate.
XXII.
His toils were blessed; each harvest home
Increased their little store,
And in his twentieth year he saw
Want banished from their door.
XXIII.
Now (woe the while!) his honest heart
Played truant from his breast,
And sore he longed in nuptial tie
With LUCY to be blessed.
XXIV.
LUCY, a neighbor farmer's pride,
Who loved alike the youth,
For she had long with pleasure marked
His early grace and truth.
XXV.
Each guessed the pain the other felt,
Yet each that pain concealed,
For ALLEYNE made his own desires
To filial duty yield.
PART II.
I.
'TWAS now the morning that precedes
The boly of the year, The abolition of that barbarous custom of throwing at
Cocks annually on Shreve Tuesday, which too long prevailed in this Island, and
has been often witnessed even in the streets of London, reflects much credit on
the humane care of the Magistracy.

When from the cottage to the green
The rustic tribes repair.
II.
And what their aim! -- Oh! glorious orb!
Withhold thy radiance bright,
Nor view the sons of Christian land
In barbarous deeds delight.
III.
More fell than all the savage race,
That roam the pathless wood,
Is man, who, tyrant-like, imbrues
His hands in harmless blood.
IV.
Was it, when this fair world arose,
At GOD's almighty word,
Was it for this that man was made
Over all creation lord?
V.
No, monster, no -- GOD needs must view,
With anger and disdain,
His fair and useful creatures feel
Unnecessary pain.
VI.
O! ye, my brethren, ye, who boast
Of gentle hearts, forbear
To come yon ruthless rabble nigh,
Whose shoutings rend the air.
VII.
Restrain, unfeeling crew, restrain
The more than savage sound,
Nor with that feathered victim's blood
Pollute the verdant ground.
VIII.
Remember how with cheerful strain
He hailed each opening morn,
And called the peasant from his bed,
To reap his ripened corn.
IX.
How was he wont around yon barn
To lead his speckled train,
And from the thresher's lofty stroke
Select each scattered grain!
X.
How would he watch his broodlings feed
With true parental pride,
And proudly range the adjacent field,
His feathered dames beside!
XI.
Now brought to glut an impious crew,
With cordage harsh oppressed,
Mute is that throat that crow'd so loud,
And shrunk that martial crest.
XII.
Exulting madly over their prey,
The senseless rabble roar,
Loud as the prowling wolves that stray
Over Afric's torrid shore.
XIII.
The wolf, at hunger's call alone
Destroys the fleecy brood,
But man, the delegate of heaven,
In sport sheds guiltless blood.
XIV.
Oh! if our HEAVENLY FATHER's breast
A sorrow can pervade,
It is, when he beholds his trust
So impiously betrayed.
XV.
Now throng the boorish tribes apace,
To view the ruthless play,
And clownish HOBBINOL was there,
And OLIVER the gay.
XVI.
And sullen RUSTAN in the rout
Enjoyed the savage scene;
RUSTAN with cruel temper framed,
And gloomy, lowering mien.
XVII.
Time was, that he was known to all
The poorest of the poor,
When suddenly the hind appeared
Possessed of wondrous store:
XVIII.
Yet tranquil thought, or cheerful look
No treasure could impart,
Some strange reflection lurked within,
And preyed upon his heart.
XIX.
Among the neighboring village-swains
As one forlorn he moved,
Alike, by aged and by young,
Unsought, and unbelov'd.
XX.
Aloof from the devoted bird
His station RUSTAN took,
Yet at the feathered victim leer'd
With fell malicious look.
XXI.
Ah! grievous task! -- and must the Muse
Unwillingly declare,
(However averse to cruel scenes)
That ALLEYNE too was there!
XXII.
ALLEYNE, in every rural sport
The boldest and the best,
False shame and strong request impelled
To mingle with the rest.
XXIII.
False shame, that often the wisest wight
Betrays with subtle art,
And with despotic power perverts
The graces of the heart.
XXIV.
Lo! now, the hapless bird is placed
Amid the rout accursed,
And ALLEYNE, the pernicious cast,
By lot must level first.
XXV.
But gentle pity bids him scorn
To meditate a harm
Against dejected Chanticleer,
Once tenant of the farm.
XXVI.
Wide from the bird the weapon took
A vague and random course,
And surly RUSTAN's leg received
Its full collected force.
XXVII.
He roars -- he screams -- the shattered limb
With blood deep-stains the ground;
"I sink -- I die;" the suff'rer cries,
"And ALLEYNE gives the wound."
XXVIII.
In sad variety of pain,
(Full many a tedious day)
Alike of body and of mind,
Tormented RUSTAN lay.
XXIX.
At closing night in vain he calls
On sleep to seal his eyes,
That medicine to the pious heart,
To guilt its balm denies.
XXX.
Each moment in his haggard sight
The spectre, Death, appears,
With more than common terror armed,
His pointed dart he rears.
XXXI.
The holy Priest, to RUSTAN called,
With pitying eye beholds
His dying pangs, while thus the wretch
His hidden guilt unfolds.
XXXII.
"The dreadful hour of just revenge
"At length, I see, is come;
"'It Is GOD, not ALLEYNE, gives the blow,
"And calls me to my doom.
XXXIII.
"Long since, his honest father's steps
"I, guilty wretch, pursued,
"Despoiled him of his well-earn'd gold,
"And slew him in the wood.
XXXIV.
"The torments of this wasting heart,
"Since then, no tongue can tell;
"Remembrance of the bitter deed
"Still made my mind a hell.
XXXV.
"But ALLEYNE here my heir I make,
"Be his my ill-got store!
"This poor atonement, Lord, accept!"
He groaned, and spoke no more.
XXXVI.
Thenceforth unclouded happiness
In ALLEYNE'S dwelling reigned,
For soon, by fair and honest suit,
His LUCY'S hand he gained.
XXXVII.
And many years of mutual love
This couple did enjoy,
And years of bliss his mother shared,
With ALLEYNE, her GOOD BOY!
TALE THE SIXTH.

THE NEEDY MAN'S SECURITY; OR, THE TALE OF ALCON.

ADDRESSED TO MY LONG BELOVED FRIEND THOMAS KING, ESQUIRE.

Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days.
ECCLES, Chap. ^i. V. 1. ADDRESS TO THOMAS KING, ESQUIRE.
QUICK let me snatch the pliant quill,
Ere time his destined course fulfill;
Ere all-impairing age shall drain
The vivid juices of the brain,
Quick let me snatch the means to tell,
What memory yet recalls so well.
Now many rolling years have shed
Their various changes over my head,
Since, by instinctive ardour caught,
Thy converse and esteem I sought.
O! blessed be that propitious hour,
And blessed that sympathetic power,
Which my unpracticed heart inclined
To court the union of thy mind!
For Reason now approves the plan,
Which youthful instinct then began.
What precious hours have we enjoyed,
Though veiled by distance, not destroyed!
How often, in those eccentric days,
When Fancy traced her vagrant maze;
How often did SHAKESPEARE's matchless fire
Our converse and our hearts inspire!
How would we fly, with rapture fraught,
From phrase to phrase, from thought to thought!
Now chuckle over FALSTAFF's mirth,
Which found in QUIN a second birth --
Now glow with noble sympathy
At HOTSPUR's martial ecstacy! --
Sometimes through ARDEN's forest rove
With Taste, Simplicity, and Love;
Then follow, over the blasted heath,
The bloody footsteps of MACBETH --
Admire the Bard's creative art
In this, or that peculiar part;
Then gaze on the stupendous whole,
And marvel at his boundless soul!
How often with transport did we trace
The nameless, sweet, electric grace,
The fascinating charms that shone
In still-unequall'd WOFFINGTON!
The various beauties re-peruse,
(Embellishing the Comic Muse)
When PRITCHARD's polished taste conveyed
What FARQUHAR, CONGREVE, SHAKESPEARE said!
Recall the sentiment that broke
From GARRICK's eye, ere GARRICK spoke!
Or recollect the frantic glance,
The nobly-wild extravagance,
Of CIBBERS energy, when sir'd
With all ALICIA's rage inspired;
Or her mellifluous tones of love,
When BARRY's plainings waked the grove! Alluding to the time when Mr. BARRY
and Mrs. CIBBER delighted the Public, for an uninterrupted length of time, in
the characters of ROMEO and JULIET.

And have we not, in sportive vein,
To Whim sometimes resigned the rein,
Letting the giddy rambler run
Through all the devious cranks of sun,
Till laughter, in loud peals, would rise,
Termed folly by the over-wise?
Yet never may we, such Cynics grown,
Prove tasteless to the joys we have known,
But beg of Fortune, "long to use
"The toy that can so well amuse!"
But I digress -- Accept the verse,
Nor let the wonders I rehearse
Awake distrust; but mark the tale,
Which, in a lonely western vale,
Recorded is from sire to son,
And when the narrative is done,
If it attract a generous tear,
Grudge not the graceful tribute here;
Admire the worth in ALCON shown,
And love a heart so like your own.
THE TALE OF ALCON.
THE morn was calm, a gentle gale
Scarce filled the boatman's scanty sail;
The sky its brightest splendor gave,
In various beauties, to the wave;
While in the breeze the dancing spray,
Like liquid lightning, seemed to play.
Long on the beach had HOWEL stood,
Contemplating the placid flood;
At length, the melancholy man
In plaintive accents thus began:
"O! had thou, treacherous Ocean, worn
"A look thus mild, on that sad morn,
"When I endeavored (all in vain!)
"To land secure my hard-earn'd gain,
"I should not now, from day to day,
"Upon thy naked confines stray,
"And thus recall, with watery eye,
"The date of my calamity.
"What ardour did my mind inflame,
"When near you haven's mouth we came!
"What hope within my bosom grew,
"When yonder point arose to view!
"With premature belief elate,
"I fondly thought indulgent Fate
"Would spare the produce of my toil,
"To make my homely dwelling smile.
"Presumptuous thought! -- I could not save
"The scantiest pittance from the wave.
"Afresh I feel each throb, each fear,
"Each horror of the former year;
"Again I see the day overcast
"Again I hear the hollow blast,
"Again I hear the billows roar,
"Again they burst upon the shore,
"Again I see my vessel lost,
"And all my earthly wishes crossed.
"All, that should be the means of life,
"Of comfort to a faithful wife,
"All, that an infant race should save,
"Deep buried in a watery grave.
"Yet conscious rectitude of heart
"Can mavelous relief impart
"To the endurings of that breast,
"Where guilt was never known a guest,
"And innocence precludes despair,
"Though woe, a while, may harbor there.
"O! had I but the means again,
"To 'tempt the fortune of the main,
"Hope whispers still, I could remove
"The sorrows of the hearts I love."
"And know thou not?" old EDMUND cried,
Who had his pensive course descried,
And often had listened to the tale,
Which HOWEL squandered in the gale --
"Have thou not heard to whom pertain
"The acres of that rich domain,
"Which over yon fertile summit spreads,
"And wide commands the adjacent meads?
"There daily charities proclaim
"To all around good ALCON's name.
"When have the friendless, or the poor,
"Passed, unreliev'd, from ALCON's door?
"When did the orphan's piteous cry,
"Or plaining age, in vain, apply?
"Freely to each afflicted soul
"He deals a charitable dole;
"But, chief, over industry oppressed,
"He pours the fullness of his breast,
"Pleased the laborious to sustain,
"Whose honest hands have toiled in vain;
"To set the active spirit free
"From scorn, that curse of penury,
"And bid the well-intending mind
"Regain its rank among mankind.
"His bounteous deeds I often hear,
"His name and virtues I revere,
"But, even a stranger to his eye,
"How can a wretch, like me, apply?
"My lineage, and the name I own,
"Alike to ALCON are unknown.
"And why should ALCON condescend
"An alien-suff'rer to befriend,
"While hundreds near him daily stand,
"Who claim the blessings of his hand;
"Whose toil has dressed his pastures fair,
"Or made his herds their duteous care?
"While life's adventurous scene was new,
"And golden prospects round me grew,
"What numbers did my friendship court,
"What numbers proffer me support?
"But now the flattering dream is over,
"Now means and prospects are no more;
"Nor have I (should thy Lord extend
"His bounteous help) one single friend
"Who would my guarantee become,
"Should I return successless home.
"No! GOD, and GOD alone, must be
"The needy man's security."
Within his eyes big sorrow's tide
Swelled high, and further speech denied,
Old EDMUND of his woe partook,
And left the beach with grieved look;
But, ere the fall of evening shade,
In sorrow to his Lord conveyed
Afflicted HOWEL's fallen state,
His various strokes of adverse fate,
Which ALCON pondered in his breast,
While darkness lulled the world to rest.
Soon as the sun with gladsome ray
Illumines the ensuing day,
ALCON, obscured in mean disguise,
With EDMUND to the sea-beach hies.
Poor HOWEL, as was wont, they find
Sighing his sorrows to the wind;
EDMUND his pensive steps pursues,
And the preceding theme renews,
While ALCON slowly loit'ring near,
Partakes it, with attentive ear.
"Why will thou not," old EDMUND cries,
"Pursue the measure I advise?
"To ALCON thy distress reveal,
"He may repair, for he can feel."
Again poor HOWEL's doubts outweigh
His hopes, as on the former day;
He lays anew each sorrow bare,
His diffidence, and his despair;
And, as before his plainings end --
"I must not to thy words attend,
"Not having now one single friend
"Who would my guarantee become,
"Lest I return successless home.
"No! GOD, and GOD alone must be
"The needy man's security."
"I take thy surety," ALCON cries,
"(Doffing in haste his rough disguise)
"From me thou shall have means again,
"To try thy fortunes on the main,
"And GOD, and GOD alone shall be
"The needy man's security."
Poor HOWEL tries, in vain, to speak,
Convulsive sobs his utt'rance check;
With bursting tears, at length, bedewed,
Tears only spoke his gratitude:
When ALCON, (O! how meek the mind
Thus by benevolence refined!)
The generous ALCON turned aside,
As though his grace he strove to hide;
While such a joy dilates his heart,
As goodness only can impart;
Such joy as they alone can know,
"Who feel the blessings they bestow."
Not only stores of merchandise
His large munificence supplies,
But to console the advent'rer's mind
For his dear mourners left behind,
He vows their guardian to become,
Till HOWEL shall review his home.
Their parting sigh, their sad embrace,
Allayed by such transcendant grace,
Once more the merchant rears the sail,
Greeting with smiles the rising gale,
And as he quits the lessening shores,
Repeated prayers for ALCON pours.
Five tedious years have now gone over,
And blessed him with a wondrous store,
Beyond even hope's extent, his gains
Have recompensed his anxious pains.
Now his return his thought employs,
Now he anticipates the joys
At honored ALCON's foot to lay
His bounteous loan -- to wipe away
The tears a sorrowing wife had shed,
To raise her sad, declining head,
And with returning comfort cheer
His little ones, now doubly dear.
His new-accumulated hoard,
Within one precious casket stored,
With care he seals, and on the case
(That nothing might the mark efface,
Not even the brine of dashing waves)
His benefactor's name engraves.
This done, the crew with joy behold
The canvas to the wind unfold;
Serenely placid is the air,
The point for England fresh and fair,
Smoothly the vessel cuts the seas,
And HOWEL's mind is wrapped in ease.
Thus gently sunk each closing day,
Thus brightly beamed each dawning ray,
Till one sad morn! -- When HOWEL, scared
From slumber, to the deck repaired;
And saw, alas! the twilight gray,
Presage of rising storms betray.
The struggling light in vain essays
TO advance -- thick clouds obstruct its rays,
A second midnight seems to reign,
The blast howls dire athwart the main,
And, in one mighty torrent tossed,
The vessel bulges on the coast;
The wished for coast, the precious bay,
Where all his dearest comforts lay:
Quick springs the leak, it swells amain,
And hope of human aid is vain.
Lo! HOWEL (of his wealth possessed,
With dread of instant death oppressed)
Kneels, and with supplicating eye --
"Oh! wonder-working Power, on high,
"Grant this last prayer! this store command,
"Secure to reach the blessed strand,
"Where ALCON dwells!" then frantic gave
The precious casket to the wave;
When roaring floods, with instant sweep,
Whelmed vessel -- all -- within the deep.
Soon as the tempest's rage was over,
And Ocean ceased his hideous roar,
What time the yielding gloom made way
For the faint beams of opening day,
ALCON, whose sympathizing mind
Shared in the woes of all mankind,
Had to the blustering sea-beach hied,
As wont, (his servants by his side)
From sacrilegious hands to save
What wreck-deliver'd want might crave.
Such objects straight the seas unfold,
As wound his feelings to behold;
For every new-advancing wave
Some added sight of horror gave,
Here, human bodies, swollen in death,
There, gasping in their latest breath,
Who sore their dimming eye balls strain
Towered land, they never must reach again.
While ALCON, with Compassion's eye,
Roams over this scene of misery,
The sculptured casket strikes the shore,
Which held the ship-wreck'd HOWEL's store,
And as the ebbing waves retreat,
The casket lies at ALCON's seet,
With eager haste, and wild surprise,
Into the strange contents he pries;
Scarce had he spied the mass within,
And HOWEL's grateful tribute seen,
When a new-rising billow waft
That suff'rer, clinging to a raft.
Raised, and recovered on the strand,
He views his store in ALCON's hand:
Equal amazement, equal joy,
Alternately their minds employ.
When HOWEL thus, with eyes uprear'd,
"Was then my supplication beard?
"Involved in danger and despair,
"I breathed one short but fervent prayer,
"My all then trusted to the sea:
"That all, the waves have brought to thee,
"And, rescued from the threatening main,
"I bathe thy honored hand again.
ALCON replies, "Thy tears give over,
"In silence wonder, and adore;
"Of this thy wealth I claim no part,
"My payment is thy greatful heart.
"With whatsoever you are here possessed,
"Go bless thy dear ones, and be blessed!
"'T was not the wildly-rolling sea,
"A HAND UNSEEN brought this to me,
"HIS, WHO WAS THY SECURITY."
TALE THE SEVENTH.

WHAT IS, IS BEST; OR, THE TALE OF ALVAREZ.

What can make a Man so much in constant good humor, and shine, (as we call
it) as to be supported by what can never fail him? and to believe, that
whatever happens to him is the best thing that could possibly befall him? or
else HE, on whom it depends, would not have permitted it to have befallen him
at all? SPECT. Vol. 1. No. 75. A quelque chose malheur est bon. French Proverb.
ADDRESS TO A DEPARTED FRIEND.
SHADE of the man by blood allied,
By bonds of friendship nearer tied,
If (wafted to a world unknown)
On us it is given thee to look down,
Approve reflections, that review
The early scenes of life we knew,
While, trained in learning's infant class,
We saw the day in rapture pass:
Kenna The poetical name for Kensington.
(often graced with mien august
Of GEORGE II. Grandfather to his present Majesty, who generally made
Kensington Palace his summer residence.
GEORGE, the valiant and the just)
Attested then each boyish sport,
Her walks The Palace Gardens.
our Sabbath-day's resort.
Well can my memory retrace
Each cranny of that lovely place;
Where, on each licensed holiday,
We spent the hours in harmless play,
Till, vanquished by the pastime sweet,
The mount relieved our weary feet:
The root of friendship then began,
And vegetated strong in man.
When was the hour, the moment known,
(So truly were our likings one)
When either of us disapproved,
Or thwarted, what the other loved?
The time seems present with me still,
When loit'ring over Beechen-Hill, Beechen Cliff, near Bath.

The tale, whereon I build my lay,
(To thee well known) thou did convey.
What though a while, by Fortune's spite,
Fonchale Principal situation in the Island of Madeira.
deprived me of thy sight,
Our hearts, by distance, not disjoined,
Were in communion sweet combined.
Friendship and Love! it is ye endear
This transient sublunary sphere,
"And since your choice is always free,
"I bless you for your smiles on me." Dr. COTTON's Visions in Verse.

Sweet co-mates! may ye never decay
With this our perishable clay,
But bloom triumphant over time,
Improved, immortal, and sublime!
O! be it then our blessed fate
(Translated to a happier state)
In recompense for earthly pain,
To know departed friends again!
THE TALE OF ALVAREZ.
WHAT IS, IS BEST! a maxim wise,
Wherein our dearest comfort lies;
Which gives us spirit to abide,
Whatever mischances may betide,
Care, disappointment, pain, or woe,
In our precarious state below.
This keeps the meek and pious mind
Collected, patient, and resigned;
This dries the momentary tear
That falls for short afflictions here,
And bids our hopes and wishes rest
On Him, who knows our welfare best;
Who can life's heaviest ills repair
With joys in a sublimer sphere.
Shame to the man who would remove
This basis of our trust above!
Who dares deride, with impious jest,
The refuge of the sorrowing breast!
Shame and contrition be his share!
Shame to the libertine VOLTAIRE! Alluding to VOLTAIRE's licentious Publication
of Candide, or All for the Best; which (with some others of a similar nature)
cast an indelible stain on many excellent productions.

In famed Madeira's woody Isle, Madeira, in the Portuguese language, signifies
wood. This Island was therefore so called, because it consisted of nothing but
woods when the Portuguese first discovered it.

That rocky, but prolific soil,
From noble Portuguese derived,
In wealth and rank ALVAREZ lived.
For (all the pious tributes paid
Due to his father's honored shade)
He finds with gold his coffers filled,
His fields their plenteous harvests yield;
His board with plate abundant shines,
And purple clusters load his vines.
To filial love and duty true,
His father's rules he kept in view,
Freely he succored old and poor,
But chased the slothful from his door:
To those who might deserve his grace,
He strove to fill his father's place;
Servants of zeal and honesty
He held as friends in low degree.
Often as he traversed wood or plain,
Contemplating his menial train,
Possessed of sentiments refined,
Thus would he commune with his mind:
"Ah! should not they, whom fortunes rude
"Doom to a life of servitude,
"At least, receive a courteous smile,
"To mitigate their sense of toil?
"Ye, for whose pleasures others groan,
"One moment, make their state your own;
"What they deserve with grace requite,
"And make their weary labor light."
Innately good, ALVAREZ' mind
By education was refined;
Devout instruction, in his youth,
Had trained him in the paths of truth,
And various maxims sound and sage
Were written clear on mem'ry's page;
But graven chief, over all the rest,
This golden rule, WHAT IS, IS BEST.
To a pure mind and gentle heart
What more could Heaven itself impart,
Than that which tranquilizes life,
And sweetens all -- a virtuous wife?
Among the rival fair, who then
Upheld in Fonchale beauty's reign,
Rich SANCHIO's daughter, ISABEL,
By all was granted to excel;
Yet not the beauteous form alone,
Or dimpled smiles distinction won,
Not outward symmetry of feature,
But the instinctive spark of nature,
The glance, with fire electric fraught,
The eye that spoke, the brow that thought;
These were the graces, that impressed
With ardent passion every breast.
No wonder all essayed to move
Bright ISABELLA's heart to love;
On her each youth's attention hung,
And GUZMAN danced, and FLORIO sung;
And VASQUEZ tried her taste to hit
With modes of dress, and strokes of wit.
Not always let the Fop suppose
It Is the embroidery on his clothes,
The ogled glance, or forward air,
Or servile flattery wins the fair:
Females there are of taste refined,
Who see the features in the mind: I saw OTHELLO's visage in his mind.

ALVAREZ' manners, modest grace,
His fair soul beaming in his face,
Alone had prevalence to move
Fair ISABELLA's heart to love.
The sire approved the daughter's choice,
And, with benign parental voice,
SHAKESPEARE.
His ISABELLA's dower and charms
Consigned to good ALVAREZ' arms.
HENRIQUEZ, amongst the suitor train,
Vindictive, arrogant, and vain,
Enraged his rival's bliss beheld,
And black revenge his bosom swelled;
But, coward-like, in treach'ry's veil
He sought his rancour to conceal,
Till precious mischief might destroy
Their mutual bliss, their bridal joy.
Now by the dearest tie combined
The sacred union of the mind,
Their tastes alike, their wishes one,
Each for the other lived alone;
With hearts elate, and prospects gay,
The rapturous hours danced swift away.
Alas! how soon can fate severe
Our brightest hopes disperse in air!
Lo! black descends the evening cloud,
The northern blast is strong and loud,
And all the hemisphere around
Seems in a sable mantle bound:
A summons, of unusual sort,
Cites good ALVAREZ to the port,
Its purport but in part revealed,
Part in mysterious hints concealed.
Soft ISABEL the mandate reads,
And the required compliance dreads,
For angry gusts now louder rage,
And an increasing storm presage;
The billet firm ALVAREZ hears,
And, smiling, tries to chance her sears.
As to the call ALVAREZ speeds,
And in his haste incautious treads,
The marble stair his step betrays,
And, from the summit to the base,
Headlong he dashes -- snapp'd in twain
Each tibia The Shin-bone.
strong, he smiles in pain,
Smiles, on revolving in his breast,
His great support -- WHAT IS, IS BEST.
Relief obtained, upon his bed
The patient sufferer gently laid,
Kindly solicitous to seize
The first short interval of ease,
Thus sooths the circle of his friends,
Which round the mournful couch attends.
"My wife! my kindred! nay, restrain
"Those tears, they aggravate my pain.
"O! rather let your thanks arise,
"In grateful tribute, to the skies,
"That, by indulgent Heaven's award,
"In such extremes, my life was spared!
"That graciously he deigns extend
"The bliss I have so newly gained.
"My dearer self, my sorrowing wife,
"She teaches me to value life.
"Though transient suffering I sustain,
"Ought I -- nay, dare I to complain?
"Shall we at God's great hand receive
"The comforts he vouchsafes to give,
"And shall we not, with patience due,
"Receive, and bear affliction too?
"Perhaps the pain I suffer here,
"(However tiresome and severe)
"Though unperceived by our weak eyes,
"Is but a blessing in disguise. Dr. COTTON's Visions in Verse.

"'It Is so; there is a voice within,
"Tells me repining is a sin:
"Unable to explore the ends,
"All-guiding Providence intends,
"With holy confidence I rest
"On this great truth -- WHAT IS, IS BEST."
The Power on high vouchsafed an ear,
And smiled propitious on his prayer;
The fractur'd members were replac'd
With more, far more, than usual haste,
Which time and temperance restore
Firm, straight, and useful as before.
Now daily thanks, and fervent praise,
To heaven devout ALVAREZ pays,
For spirits, health, and strength, repaired,
By late affliction more endeared;
His kindred, friends, once more he sees
With looks of joy, and hearts at ease,
And hallows, with an annual fast,
The date of his misfortune past.
One doubt alone disturbs his mind,
His best enquiries fail to find
From whence that summons could have come,
That urged him to forsake his home,
On that tempestuous close of day,
Which doomed him to mischance a prey.
When ten revolving seasons more
Of nuptial comfort had flown over,
And Heaven ordained a blooming race
Should rise in goodness, as in grace,
Their parent's ardent hopes to crown
With truth and virtue, like their own,
A murderer (doomed to expiate
A life of crimes) in awful state
Before ALVAREZ dwelling passed,
That morn, that wretched morn his last!
The culprit cast a conscious look,
And thus his confessor bespoke:
"Father, thou tell me that, in vain,
"Heaven's pardon I attempt to gain,
"Unless I freely here confess
"Each meditated wickedness;
"Let me then to ALVAREZ kneel,
"And one oppressive crime reveal."
ALVAREZ comes! the murderer straight
With shame relieves his bosom's weight.
"Hear, good ALVAREZ, and forgive;
"Recall to mind that fatal eve,
"(Some years o'er-past) when gloom profound
"Obscured the whole horizon round,
"A treacherous billet reached thy hand,
"Contrived to lure thee towered the strand;
"Mine was the mischievous intent,
"This impious hand the mandate sent.
"Had thou thereto obedience paid,
"And from thy happy mansion strayed,
"Ere twenty paces thou had past,
"That fatal eye had been thy last:
"Lured by the cursed thirst of gain,
"This arm had good ALVAREZ slain.
"HENRIQUEZ sought to have imbrued
"My soul in thy devoted blood;
"He instant fled to INDIA's land,
"Dreading the law's vindictive hand;
"Or keen compunction and remorse
"Might urge him to that devious course.
"One crime may have been his alone,
"I for variety atone:
"He may, with hope, for grace apply,
"Reform, and live; but I must dye."
'My free remission thus receive,
'I bless, lament thee, and forgive.'
So spoke the Sire, then sped away
To his dear inmates to convey
What the sad culprit had confessed,
Then his sweet offspring thus addressed:
"My children, ever bear in thought
"The lesson I so often have taught;
"Declared I not, then when I lay
"To sad mischance a crippled prey,
"That stroke, (though hid from our weak eyes)
"Might be a "blessing in disguise?"
"And was it not? what had I lost,
"Had not the murd'rer's aim been crossed!
"I had not now, with rapture, pressed
"The best of consorts to my breast;
"Nor poured upon my offspring's head
"Such tears, as only fathers shed.
"Oh, as ye journey on in life,
"Through paths of labor, woe or strife,
"Unshrinking, unrepining, bear
"Whatever afflictions interfere,
"Be ever on your minds impres'd,
"This sacred truth, WHAT IS, IS BEST!
END OF VOL. 1.

