THE VISION. A POEM ON THE DEATH of the QUEEN.

[Price Sixpence.]

THE VISION.

A POEM ON THE DEATH Of Her Most Gracious MAJESTY Queen CAROLINE.

By STEPHEN DUCK.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane, and J. JACKSON, in St.
James's Street. M.DCC.XXXVII.

THE VISION. A POEM.
'TWAS on the fatal Day that claims a Sigh
From every Heart, a Tear from every Eye;
Ere Albion's Joys were wholly snatched away,
Or Britons for their Queen forbid to pray:
While Hope and Fear contended in my Breast,
Intruding Sleep my weary Eyes oppressed:
Wrapped in a Vision, -- where I cannot say,
Nor can the Muse the glorious Place display:
It seemed some blessed Angel's happy Sphere,
(Or blessed Angels might inhabit there;)
For sure the beauteous Scene did far excel,
What Heathen Bards of blessed Elysium tell.
A Cloud of Glory shone before my Face,
Which shed refulgent Rays around the Place,
And scattered Colors, various to behold,
Here blushing Rubies, there the burnished Gold.
As, wondering at the Scene, I gazing stood,
(Struck with religious Awe, that chilled my Blood)
I saw BRITANNIA, with dejected Air,
Pale was her Face, dishevelled was her Hair:
Her trembling Hand had dropped the Laurel Bough,
A mournful Cypress wreathed her pensive Brow:
Before the shining Cloud she prostrate lay,
And thus she prayed, or seemed, at least, to pray.
" ALMIGHTY Father! whose Commanding Power,
Can hasten, or adjourn, the fatal Hour;
Can lengthen, or contract, a Monarch's Reign,
Or raise the silent Dead to Life again:
Oh! stop thy threatening Arm, and spare awhile
One sacred Life, so precious to my Isle.
For Royal CAROLINA'S Health I sue,
The best of Sov'reigns, and of Subjects too;
In every State her Goodness has been proved,
When ruled, obedient; and when ruling, loved.
Securely blessed, beneath her gentle Sway,
It Is Happiness to serve, and Pleasure to obey.
NOR fewer Charms adorn her private Life,
The tenderest Mother, most submissive Wife;
Who never yet her Consort disobeyed,
By Honor, Duty, Love, and Virtue swayed:
In Virtue's Path she constantly proceeds,
By Virtue's Rule she measures all her Deeds.
Even now, though tortured with severest Pains,
Her patient Tongue adores Thee, not complains.
To Thee her ardent Prayers and Praises tend,
On Thee, on Thee alone, her Hopes depend;
Firm Faith and Patience fortify her Mind,
To live, indiff'rent; or to die, resigned.
Yet spare her longer from her heavenly Throne;
Spare her, for others Good, though not her own.
Look down, and see her duteous Children's Tears;
Look down, and hear the best of Monarch's Prayers:
See, round her Bed her tender Offspring kneels,
While every Pang her Royal Consort feels.
Nor only They entreat Thee for her Breath,
Three Kingdoms beg Thee to avert her Death:
Religion, Learning, Art, and Science fear
To find a Period, and a Grave with Her.
For Her, the Widows weep a briny Tide;
For Her, whose Bounty has their Loss supplied:
For Her, unhappy, helpless Orphans mourn,
And shed more Tears than over their Parents Urn;
Their Parents Death they need no longer grieve,
Might CAROLINE, their better Parent, live;
Who feeds the Hungry, succors the Distressed;
And from Oppression rescues the Oppressed.
Even in the Height of Power her Power was shown
In Acts of Love and Mercy like Thy own.
Oh! were She like Thee more in every State;
Oh! were She, were She, like Thee, free from Fate!
But That, alas! is not to Mortals given;
Yet surely This is in the Grant of Heaven:
Increase her Days, restore her native Bloom,
Nor crop the Royal Fruit till Autumn come.
Few are the Years to Mortal Man assigned,
Ah! let not Her -- to fewer be confined:
But stop thy threatening Arm, and spare awhile
Her sacred Life, so precious to my Isle."
She said: The Tears ran trickling as she spoke;
While from the radiant Cloud these Accents broke.
" BRITANNIA, cease thy fruitless Tears, and know,
One certain Day is fixed for all below:
That Day permit to Heaven; for Heaven alone
Knows when the noble Work of Virtue's done.
Few are the Years, you say, of human Kind;
But Years add nothing to the perfect Mind.
Improperly, by Time, you count the Date;
It Is virtuous Actions make a Life complete.
Suppose the Sun, that chears your earthly Clime,
Should run his destined Course in half the Time,
Performing all the Offices of Light,
Of Heat, of circling Seasons, Day and Night:
Say, Could you think his Race too swiftly run?
Or, Could you call him an imperfect Sun?
Heaven's greatest Lord, that over All presides;
Who rules that Sun, and all his Motions guides;
In Length of Years an Equal never surveyed;
But is not therefore worshipped, or obeyed:
His Goodness only claims that Tribute due;
His Goodness, not his Age, though ever New.
If then, your gracious Queen, though few her Days,
Has practiced every Virtue worthy Praise,
Worthy immortal Bliss: What can she more,
Though Heaven again her former Health restore?
Though Heaven a Thousand added Years bestow,
Her Soul can be no perfecter below.
It Is Time She now should quit her mortal Throne,
To change an Earthly for a Heavenly Crown.
And, see! She mounts Triumphant to the Skies,
Of all her Virtues reaps the glorious Prize!"
STARTING to hear the fatal Sentence spoke,
With trembling Joints, and streaming Eyes, I 'woke.
When strait I hear Complaints from every Tongue,
On every Face a Cloud of Sorrow hung:
Sad Sighs and Floods of fruitless Tears bemoan
The Noblest Queen that ever graced a Throne.
FINIS

