OSRIC THE LION!

A ROMANCE.

London:

PRINTED IN THE YEAR, M,DCC,XC,VII.

OSRIC -- THE LION!
A ROMANCE.
SWIFT roll the Rhine's billows, and water the plains,
Where Falkenstein Castle's majestic remains,
Their moss-cover'd turrets still rear;
Often loves the gaunt wolf midst the ruins to prowl,
What Time from the battlements pours the lone owl
Her plaints in the passenger's ear.
No longer resound through the vaults of yon hall
The song of the minstrel, and mirth of the ball;
Those pleasures for ever are fled;
There now dwells the bat with her light-shunning brood;
There ravens and vultures now clamor for food,
And all is dark, silent, and dread!
Ha! Do thou not see by the Moon's trembling light,
Directing his steps, where advances a Knight,
His eye big with vengeance and fate?
It Is Osric -- the Lion, his Nephew who leads,
And swift up the crackling old staircase proceeds,
Gains the hall, and quick closes the gate.
Now round him young Carloman casting his eyes,
Surveys the sad scene with dismay and surprise,
And fear steals the rose from his cheeks;
His spirits forsake him, his courage is flown;
The hand of Sir Osric he clasps in his own,
And while his voice falters he speaks: --
"Dear Uncle," he murmurs, "why linger we here?
It Is late, and these chambers are damp and are drear;
Keen blows through the ruins the blast!
Oh! let us away and our journey pursue;
Fair Blumenberg's Castle will rise on our view,
Soon as Falkenstein Forest is past.
"Why roll thus your eye balls? Why glare they so wild?
Oh! chide not my weakness, nor frown, that a child
Should view these apartments with dread;
For know, that full often have I heard from my Nurse,
There still on this Castle has rested a curse,
Since innocent blood here was shed.
"She said, too, bad spirits, and ghosts all in white,
Here use to resort at the dead time of night,
Nor vanish till breaking of day;
And still at their coming is heard the deep tone
Of a bell -- loud and awful -- Hark! hark! 'twas a groan!
Good Uncle, oh! let us away!"
"Peace, serpent!" thus Osric -- the Lion, replies,
While rage and malignity gloom in his eyes;
"Thy journey and life here must close:
Thy Castle's proud turrets no more shall thou see;
No more betwixt Blumenberg's Lordship and me
Shall thou stand, and my greatness oppose.
"My Brother lies breathless on Palestine's plains,
And though once removed, to his noble domains
My right can no rival deny:
Then, stripling, prepare on my dagger to bleed;
No succor is near, and thy fate is decreed;
Commend thee to Jesus, and die!"
Thus saying, he seizes the boy by the arm,
Whose grief rends the vaulted hall's roof, while alarm
His heart of all fortitude robs:
His limbs sink beneath him; distracted with fears,
He falls at his Uncle's feet, bathes them with tears,
And -- "Spare me! Oh! spare me!" he sobs.
But ah! it is in vain that he strives to appease
The miscreant; in vain does he cling round his knees,
And sue in soft accents for life:
Unmoved by his sorrow -- unmoved by his prayer,
Fierce Osric has twisted his hand in his hair,
And aims at his bosom a knife.
But ever the steel blushes with blood, strange to tell!
Self-struck, does the tongue of the hollow-ton'd bell
The presence of midnight declare:
And while, with amazement, his hair bristles high,
Hears Osric a voice, loud and terrible, cry,
In sounds heart appalling -- "Forbear!"
Straight curses and shrieks through the chambers resound,
With hellish mirth mingled; the walls shake around;
The groaning roof threatens to fall;
Loud bellows the thunder; blue lightnings still flash;
The casements they clatter; chains rattle; doors clash,
And flames spread their waves through the hall.
The clamor increases; the portals expand;
Over the pavement's black marble now rushes a band
Of demons all dropping with gore;
In visage so grim, and so monstrous in height,
That Carloman screams, as they burst on his sight,
And sinks without sense on the floor.
Not so his fell Uncle: he sees that the throng
Impels, loudly shrieking, a female along,
And well the sad spectre he knows:
The demons with curses her steps onward urge;
Her shoulders with whips formed of serpents they scourge,
And fast from her wounds the blood flows.
"Oh! welcome," she cried, and her voice spoke despair;
Oh! welcome, Sir Osric, the torments to share,
Of which thou have made me the prey:
Twelve years have I languish'd thy coming to see;
Ulrilda, who perished dishonored by thee,
Now calls thee to anguish away!
My ruin completed, thy love became hate;
Thy hand gave the draught which consigned me to Fate;
Nor thought I death lurked in the bowl;
Unfit for the grave, stained with guilt, swelled with pride,
Unblest, unabsolv'd, unrepenting I died,
And demons straight seized on my soul!
"Thou come, and with transport I feel my breast swell!
Full long I have suffered the torments of hell,
And now shall its pleasures be mine!
See, see, how the fiends are athirst for thy blood!
Twelve years has my panting heart furnished their food,
Come, wretch, let them feast upon thine!"
She said, and the demons their prey flocked around;
They dashed him with horrible yell on the ground,
And blood down his limbs trickl'd fast:
His eyes from their sockets with fury they tore;
They fed on his entrails, all reeking with gore,
And his heart was Ulrilda's repast.
But now the gray cock told the coming of day;
The fiends with their victim straight vanished away,
And Carloman's heart throbb'd again:
With terror recalling the deeds of the night,
He rose, and from Falkenstein speeding his flight,
Soon reached his paternal domain.
Since then all with horror the ruins behold;
No shepherd, though strayed be a lamb from his fold,
No mother, though lost be her child,
The fugitive dares in these chambers to seek,
Where fiends nightly revel, and guilty ghosts shriek,
In accents most fearful and wild!
Oh! shun them, ye pilgrims, though late be the hour,
Though loud howl the tempest, and fast fall the shower,
From Falkenstein Castle be gone!
There still their said banquet Hell's denizens share;
There Osric -- the Lion, still raves in despair;
Breathe a prayer for his soul, and pass on!

