A RATIONAL ACCOUNT OF THE CAUSES OF CHRONIC DISEASES.

WHEREIN A NATURAL, EASY, AND SAFE WAY OF PREVENTING, AS WELL AS CURING, THOSE
DISEASES, IS POINTED OUT; AND THE TRUE ORIGIN OF THE HIPPOCRATIC METHOD OF
PRACTICE BRIEFLY EXPLAINED.

THE SECOND EDITION.

TO WHICH ARE ANNEXED, NEW STRICTURES on the THEORY OF FEVERS, and on the
SANCTORIAN DOCTRINE OF PERSPIRATION.

WITH AN APPENDIX ON DIET AND EXERCISE.

BY JOHN MORLAND, M. D.

Irrideat si quis vult; plus tamen semper apud me valebit vera ratio, quam
vulgi opinio.

CICERO. LONDON, Printed for S. HOOPER, No. 25, Ludgate Hill.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
TO prevent the unfavourable impressions which Gentlemen, of the profession,
might otherwise be induced to entertain of him, in consequence of this mode of
publication; the author thinks it proper to declare, with his hand on his heart
-- That the DIVINE ART of HEALING has not, cannot have, a more disinterestedly
zealous advocate than he is, nor one that more truly honors every worthy
professor of it, who knows his Art, but not his Trade.

FARTHER -- That the most valuable part of his life has been employed, (...),
in painful, laborious (he might add, very expensive) researches, and
experiments, with a sole view to the improvement of that art: whereby many
individuals have been enriched; some indeed very unworthily -- who are at this
time accumulating thousands annually, by converting to private emolument his
discoveries, originally intended for public good.

To conclude -- The most benevolent, the most public spirited member of the
faculty of physic, cannot more pathetically bewail than he does, the present
alarming growth of licentious quackery; that consequential minister in the
train of modern riot and intemperance -- which he cannot help looking upon,
with heartfelt concern, as the ominous antitype of that luxury, which first
betrayed the people of ancient Rome to the murderous havoc of empiricism, and
finally effected the ruin and destruction of that once glorious republic.

SYNOPSIS OF THE CAUSES OF CHRONIC DISEASES.
ALL arts, whether plastic, mathematical, mechanical, or physical, are but the
handmaids and imitators of Nature. Most successful is the practitioner who can
happily trace her path, and can copy nearest to the divine original: Who,
knowing her ways, is able to lend a hand when she is obstructed; or can render
her propitious by gentle and well timed invitations. In the healing art
particularly, it was observed two thousand years ago by Hippocrates, the great
father of medical science (...).
, that, NATURE is the sovereign curer of diseases, and that physicians are, or
ought to be, her humble imitators (...).
and servants (...).
. By unceasing attendance on the sick, invincible patience, and the most
vigilant observation of every action and motion of NATURE, that illustrious
Archiater acquired a wonderful knowledge of the genuine nature of diseases, --
of the (...), and of the gradual, uniform, consentient operations (...). L. de
Aliment.
of that exquisite mechanism, and innate, energetic principle of self
preservation, with which the CREATOR of man has been pleased to endow our
bodies: And, by carefully comparing the same sort of distempers, and their
various minute motions, in different patients, and all the circumstances
[(...)] and accidents [(...)] which usually preceded and attended them, he
could readily foretell an approaching disease, and after its invasion, give a
right judgment of the progress and event of it.

This surprising skill of his, in foretelling the approach, successive changes,
and event, of discases, and that of other succeeding physicians who carefully
studied and pursued his method, procured them a kind of religious veneration
among the people, who were wont to look upon them as prophets inspired by the
Gods, and even as arbiters of life and death.

But as this old method of acquiring the (...) is extremely tedious, crabbed,
and severe, it has been little regarded for many ages, except by certain
particular retainers to the Coan school; such, for instance, as Sydenham and
his truly ingenious and singularly modest translator Mapletoft From an
authenticated copy of the original manuscript (which the writer had, some years
ago, and he believes has still, in his possession) of Doctor Sydenham's
dedication of his works to Doctor Mapletoft, it appears, that this modest
translator has, in his Latin version, suppressed many high encomiums paid to
himself. A further instance of Doctor Mapletoft's singular delicacy, as
related, with other anecdotes of him, to the author by his grandson, a
gentleman of distinguished probity and learning, now living, is, that after
having exercised the profession of physic, with reputation and success, to the
age of forty-eight, he then left off practice, purely on account of the
insuperable solicitude of mind his fellow-feeling for the sick under his care
constantly produced.
, Bagtivi, Boerbaave, Mead, Huxham, etc.

In later times, a much easier and more compendious way to fame and opulence
has been happily discovered: And we can now, with singular propriety, apply to
the ancient practice of observation, what that lucky son of fortune Gnatho (in
Terence) told an honest, simple, half-starved brother of his, on a similar
occasion -- -- "Olim isti fuit
Generi quondam quaestus, apud seclum prius --
-- HOC NOVUM EST AUCUPIUM."


This Prince of Physicians first observed in what manner the symptoms in acute
diseases [(...),] when not interrupted by art, or by any external cause [(...)]
succeeded one another, and by what evacuations, NATURE, when left to herself,
got rid of those diseases (...).
: And on this solid basis of observation, he originally erected that noblest
production of human genius and sagacity, (monumentum aere perennius) the art of
presaging; and formed from thence a method of curing natural diseases, by means
of such artificial ones as NATURE, when too languid and remiss herself, never
failed to point out or reveal to this her faithful minister. He had frequently
observed, in the practice of his divine mistress, that a spontaneous
haemorrhage of blood from the nose always mitigated, and oftentimes carried
off, certain kinds of fevers, and other violent disorders. This suggested to
him the practice of artificial haemorrhages by bleeding, scarification, etc.
which he likewise used, on certain occasions, prophylactically, or by way of
prevention: For experience had taught this consummate artist, that those means
which were wont to assuage bad symptoms after they appeared, would prevent
their coming on, if used in proper time. He had likewise observed, that NATURE
frequently cured certain diseases by spontaneous abscesses in different parts
of the body. When he found NATURE prevented from working her own way, by such
salutary operations, he substituted in their room artificial abscesses, such as
issues, setons, etc.

It became farther obvious to him, that some violent disorders were carried off
by a spontaneous diarrhoea, or vomiting; others by plentiful warm sweats, or a
gentle moisture of the skin; others again by a critical discharge of urine, and
some by expectoration, etc. Hence his practice Of his method of practice in
general, compared with our modern improvements, one of the most accomplished
physicians [(...), Phoebo ante alios dilectus] now living, scruples not to say
-- "Ob cultum Hippocraticae curationis neglectum, magis quam ullam aliam
causam, accidisse videtur, quod licet humani corporis compages et facultates
long melius intellectae fuerint, et morborum abditae causae altius
investigatae, et medicamentorum copia plurimum aucta, et eorum vires novis
experimentis exploratae; nihilominus tamen, rei medicae, in tollendis morbis
acutis utilitas a temporibus usque Hippocratis haud increvit, si modo non
sucrit imminuta."
, (...), of exciting artificial diarrhoeas by purging medicines; -- vomits;
sudorifics; diaphoretics; diuretics; expectorants, etc.

That a medicine, which, consonant to this rational and truly physical
doctrine of Hippocrates, the prime minister of NATURE, would constantly operate
with equal safety, ease, and efficacy, in all, even the most opposite
constitutions, and uniformly answer every intention of an universal evacuant,
by attenuating, dissolving, and carrying off, the viscid concretions, and
foulnesses, of the stomach and intestines; thereby cleansing and deterging
those concoctive organs, and restoring them to their pristine natural action;
or, by a milder gradual operation (...).
, in proper doses, removing obstructions in the remoter vessels, and carrying
off any morbid or excrementitious humors, by insensible perspiration (...).
, sweat, and urine. -- That such a medicine is one important desideratum in
physic, the learned and judicious professors of the faculty, who have
sacrificed at the shrine of NATURE, will readily acknowledge -- That the
subject of this discourse is such a medicine, the author dares, with
undesigning confidence, assert; after a thousand successful trials made of it,
by himself, and his medical acquaintances in different countries: Under the
sanction of which impartial experience, he can now safely recommend it to the
public, as an universal purgative, -- not as an universal medicine, -- nor even
as a specific one, that, 'by its peculiar operation on the animal fluids, can
transform any morbific matter, or preternatural ferment, into good blood and
humors.' -- He knows none such: Nor can he, on this occasion, forbear
expressing a real and honest concern, that the (...) -- by specific remedies,
is not yet wholly confined to the mountebank professions of empirics; to whom
promises cost nothing but the health and lives of those who trust them. That
the opinion of the specific operations, or, which is the same thing, the occult
qualities, of medicines, in the cure of diseases, continues to be a prevailing
principle in physic, the publications of the current century, and shop records,
mutually evince: Though it is evident, that, agreeably to this doctrine, and
method of procedure, it will be impossible ever to fix any bounds to the
materia medica, (and consequently to the still growing, though already
insupp^rtable expense of physic) or to reduce the praxis medica to any rational
general principles; whilst the whole vegetable, animal, and mineral kingdoms
are ransacked and tortured, in order to find out those occult qualities and
specific operations. -- Hence, such is the felicity of the present times, and
so wonderfully is the world now enriched with specifics, simple and compound,
(under the conjuring titles of alexipharmics, cardiacs, cephalics, neurotics,
stomachics, etc. antifebrifics, antihysterics, antepileptics, anticterics,
antiscorbutics, etc.) that there is not a family in the kingdom which can spare
a few shillings, but may purchase a dispensatory, containing several hundreds
of those choice appropriated remedies, for the cure of all diseases. -- Nor is
it of less utility to the junior part of the faculty, or sucking practitioners,
[(...),] as the learned Doctor Gideon Harvey quaintly titles them: Since, by
this means, they are accommodated with an elegant set of extemperaneous
prescriptions, and a competent number of those most approved specifics,
recommended by the authority and experience of the greatest names, are always
kept ready prepared in the shops, such as may answer all cases (...), to avoid
the needless trouble of making a right judgment (...).
upon any case in particular.

With regard to this specific practice, (the constant political subterfuge of
physic-craft) it is well known to every judicious experienced physician, that
the artful pretense of curing diseases by the occult qualities of specific
remedies, is now, as it always has been, the principal source of all the
knavery, impudence, and ignorance, that we meet with in the profession.

Any semicrude practitioner in this way, who is possessed of a tolerable share
of cunning and address, can never want a specious pretext for making a property
of his patient, almost as long as he pleases, by flattering his hopes from time
to time; though the patient finds himself never the better, but perhaps still
grows worse: If one specific succeed not, another is tried, and, if that fails,
a third, and so on (...).
; as long as the poor infatuated believing sufferer has any money, strength, or
patience left.

Suffice it here to quote one instance, out of a multitude that might be
produced, of this medicina politica; and be that the specific treatment of
those chronical disorders commonly distinguished by the technical epithets of
arthritic, rheumatic, scorbutic, hysteric, and hypocondriac. Several hundred
volumes (without counting those petit essays (...).
that are daily spewing out of the press) have been professedly written (...).
on the causes, etc. of these maladies: Though their whole aetiology may be
comprised in a few words. -- Ease, indolence, intemperance, indulged pleasure,
irregular gratifications of the natural appetites, and the want of pure, fresh
air The greatest master in physic looks upon air as the fountain of life and
health to man; and moreover ascribes to it, in a great measure, the different
size, shape, complexion, manners, disposition, government, and genius, of
different nations. For instance, in the fertile regions of Asia, which approach
nearest of any, in his opinion, to the original nature and temperature of the
seasons. [(...)] moderate heat and moisture render the men plump [(...)],
extremely handsome, and of the largest size. -- From the extraordinary mildness
of their air and climate, the manners of the eastern Asiatics are more easy,
gentle, and unactive [(...)], than those of the northern Asiatics and
Europeans. From the same cause, their dispositions are soft, cowardly, and
effeminate, impatient of labor and hardship. Whatever, says he, is manly,
laborious, painful, or bold and daring, [(...)] can find no place in such a
constitution; but pleasure is the governing principle: And hence proceeds the
great variety of forms amongst their wild beasts -- Neither is the mind, in
such a constitution, subject to surprises [(...)], nor the body to violent
changes; circumstances that are apt to give a sharper edge to the passions, and
a higher degree of understanding, and sprightly vigor, than where things
remain continually in the same state: For the mind of man is always roused, and
not suffered to rest, by frequent and sudden changes. Upon these accounts, the
eastera Astatics are weak, timorous, and servile, easily sliding into
monarchies: With reluctance they leave their ease and families, and hazard
their lives for despotic masters. On the other hand, in Greece, and the
northern parts of Asia, where the temperature of the seasons is less mild, and
less uniform, the men are bold, hardy, and warlike: Without compulsion they
quit their ease, and voluntarily expose themselves to toil and danger, animated
with the hopes, and rewarded with the fruits, of conquest.

In countries abounding with certain mines, travelers find the frame and
temper of their minds suddenly altered; their intellectual faculties more
sprightly and vigorous, conceptions clearer, imagination more brisk and lively;
and on passing to another soil, an universal relaxation, idea, gloomy,
confused, and indistinct, immediately succeed. Thus, consonant to the
philosophic notions of the DIVINE OLD MAN, the discovery, and improvement, of
arts and sciences may, in some measure, depend upon the air and climate; some
succeeding best, where a sprightliness of fancy, others, where intense
application of mind, is required.

In a medicinal intention, the vivifying spirit of pure, fresh air is
admirable: In acute diseases of the putrid and epidemic kind, millions of lives
have been lost for want of it.

In a pharmaceutic intention, air, or the humid part of it, acts as a true
dissolvent, in the same manner as water in its grosser form. The cathartic and
astringent virtues of certain vegetables neither volatile nor exhalable by
heat, but of the fixed kind and dissoluble by menstrua alone, have been
observed to be diffused through the air. Hence it appears, that the atmosphere
may be impregnated with all the medicinal powers of vegetables which aqueous
menstrua are capable of extracting. And upon this account it is, that, in
standing, walking, or sleeping, under several kind of trees, people have found
themselves variously affected.

The peculiar medicinal powers of certain vegetables exhalable by heat, are, by
the bye, equally remarkable and curious. In obstinate watchings, and deliriums,
the author has, by the steams of one of this kind, procured ease, rest, and
sleep, after all the usual internal sedative medicines had been tried in vain.

In acute diseases of the malignant kind, where sweating was indicated, but
could not be procured by any internal means, the effluvia of a vegetable,
applied in a certain manner to the external surface of the body, have proved an
efficacious sudorific.

From a variety of similar experiments, and certain observations on the
economy of Nature, respecting cuticular inhalations, a physiological
conjecture is drawn, namely, that the human body is endued with some secret
energetic power of attracting such salutary particles as it may be in immediate
need of, from surrounding bodies which contain them. -- Hence, old persons, and
those whom long and tedious indispositions had brought to the last stage of
life, have, by the effluvia of young, sound, and healthy animals, been
surprizingly recruited, strengthened, and invigorated.

In Persia, Arabia, and other eastern countries, at certain seasons of the
year, the people are obliged, by the excessive heat of the weather, to lie down
at night to sleep, on the tops of their houses, in balconies, turrets, etc.
exposed to the open air, and dews, which are so copious, notwithstanding the
excessive heat, during the time of sleep, that the body is cooled, preserved
from thirst, and refreshed by its absorbent power of attracting or inhaling the
dews; provided there be any perceivable saltness in the taste of those dews: On
the contrary, if the dews have not a saline taste, it is then found dangerous
to sleep in the open air, and frequently attended with pernicious, and
sometimes fatal consequences.


, and habitual exercise, are the genuine original causes of these disorders
amongst us; and, in short, of all our national constitutional complaints -- of
our growing weaknesses, increasing scurvies, multiplying rheumatisms, universal
wandering gouts, and the most obstinate chronic and hereditary diseases fixing
and radicating themselves still more and more in our natural habits and
constitutions. -- Hence it is, that the natural evacuations become obstructed
and diminished; the secreted humors are thickened, and rendered viscous,
adhesive, and clammy; the solids, especially the nervous system, weakened and
relaxed; the fluids necessarily contract ill qualities; and an acrid, saline,
corrosive serum is produced: This serum, wherever it is thrown, or happens to
be deposited, lacerates or erodes and ulcerates the solids, and occasions per
(...).
all the symptoms of a true and genuine land scurvy. And this name of scurvy it
commonly receives, and is distinguished by, as often as it proves effluent
(...).
, in pimples, blotches, scaly leprous scurf, scabs, tetters, and other such
eruptions on the skin: But when it happens to prove influent (...).
, and is thrown upon the stomach, bowels, lungs, liver, spleen, mesentery,
kidneys, bladder, womb, or any internal part, it sometimes passes under the
more polite appellation of nervous or spasmodic complaints; but chiefly under
the technical names of febricula, cholic, cachexy, dysentery, dropsy, asthma,
atrophy, jaundice, diabetes, dysury, gonorrhaea, fluor albus, or white flux: A
complaint, this last, the most disagreeable of all others to the natural
delicacy of the sex, and, on account of its increasing prevalency, the most
alarming in a national light; as being the greatest, however generally
unheeded, enemy to conception, and, in its consequences, more fatal to
population than the sword itself. -- From the same serose or scorbutic
cacochymy, in like manner originate (...).
, in different constitutions, the cancer; St. Anthony's fire; gout; sciatica;
rheumatism; palsy, etc.

Now, the orthodox medical processes, and formulae, of our specific
practitioners, in those, commonly denominated, arthritic, scorbutic, hysteric,
and hypocondriac disorders, consist chiefly of hot vegetable aromatics,
bitters, and astringents, infused in strong wines or spirits; the volatile oils
and spirits of vegetables and animals; spirituous solutions of the foetid and
oily gums, and vegetable resins; tinctures and infusions of castor,
contrayerva, cochineal, saffron, snake-root, valerian, and the like;
chalybeates, opiates, and various sorts of pharmaceutic drams heated and raised
still higher with the volatile oils, spirits, and salts. -- But, if this
original morbid constitution, as already observed, should consist in the
tenacity and viscidity of the blood and animal fluids, occasioning a diminution
of the secretions, and a consequent distention and relaxation of the nervous
system; it is evident, that the foregoing heating, rarifying method, by
aggravating all the symptoms, must strengthen the morbid habit, and confirm the
disease still more and more. -- And thus it is, in fact, that patients under
these complaints are, by our specificians, kept on from year to year, living
and dying by turns; being strictly interdicted the use of all strong malt
liquors, wine, and common drams; at the same time that they are continually
loaded with prescriptions of liquid Fire out of the shops.

But, passing unnoticed, for brevity sake, the intermediate acts of this
politico-medical drama, proceed we directly to the catastrophe.

When the constitutions of the patients are, in this manner, nearly exhausted,
and life worn out to its bare threads (...).
; our specific practitioners immediately put them under the regulations of
diet, riding, change of air, bathing, and water-drinking, at Bath, Bristol,
Buxton, or some other distant mineral spring; where they may die decently, with
a favorable salvo to the doctor's reputation, as having then used the last
remedies -- which, in all medical propriety, ought to have been the first.

Now, it is in chief as a friendly cooperating auxiliary to these truly
appropriate remedies (...).
, (the dernier ressort of our specificians) that the author of the Universal
Purgative, cordially, conscientiously, recommends the occasional use of it, to
every native of Britain laboring under any of the above national chronical
maladies. Not but that this medicine will always be found, when properly
administered, a more salutary assistant to the same remedies, in the
prevention, than in the cure, of those maladies: Forasmuch as NATURE is ever in
some degree weakened, by the invasion of an enemy; even though she alone, or
judiciously assisted, may have expelled him out of her dominions.

The immediate or first efficient cause (the praeincipient causes (...).
have been already given) of all our arthritic, rheumatic, scorbutic, hysteric,
and hypocondriac complaints; and, in short, of the whole gloomy catalogue of
nervous disorders, seems to be an acrid serous humor, produced as above
described, and lodged either in the glands, minute vessels, or vascular coats,
or interstices of the vessels, of the stomach; occasioning, by its irritation,
a preternatural laxity and debility of the fibers of the alimentary canal; a
vitiated secretion in the glands of the stomach, and a consequent depraved
state of the gastric juices; a laesion (with the naturally consequent spasmodic
affections) of the nerves of that concoctive organ; an imperfect digestion; a
generation of wind and phlegm; an irregular and less vigorous and uniform
motion of the blood in the vena portae, and, of consequence, an inert, viscid,
peccant bile, which, in its natural healthy state, is the most highly
animalized of all the juices, and the most conducive toward promoting all the
secretions and excretions of the human body, particularly those of the
alimentary tube -- The principal seat of all nervous, hysteric, and
hypocondriac affections.

That this rationale is just, the really learned and indefatigable inquirers
into the human pathology will allow; and consequently, that the true curative
intention will consist wholly, at first, in correcting, attenuating, resolving,
and expelling, this acrid humor, by some of the natural evacuations (...).
.

In this first capital intention, the medicine here recommended, properly
dosed, and properly administered (for on this (...) depends the success of
every appropriate remedy) has been found, in a long and extensive experience,
to produce very salutary effects, even in persons of the most opposite natural
habits and constitutions.

Nor will these ascribed effects appear exaggerated to the judicious and
experienced practitioner, when he is informed, that this medicine is composed
of near a dozen of the most powerful known deobstruents, besides two mineral
preparations of the author's own discovery, which two alone, united (...), have
been found to perform, in fact, what that indefatigable physician the late
Doctor Huxham peculiarly ascribes to his favorite Tincture, in the following
words -- "It passes through and scours even the very smallest tubuli of the
whole human frame, and is besides sufficiently powerful to give a strong
irritation to the great alimentary canal, and therefore more surely to affect
the small canaliculi of the body; and yet, from the exceeding tenuity of its
minute particles, it by no means lacerates the vessels."

In a similar manner Per (...).
, this medicine operates, in properly adapted doses; removing obstructions in
the remoter vessels, and promoting (...) the secretions in general,
particularly those of urine and perspiration.

For the universal promptitude, ease, and efficacy (...).
, of its operation, as a purgative, even in the most delicate and irritable
habits, the author has the concurrent testimony of many judicious
practitioners, some of them physicians of eminence; not only in England, but in
Holland, Germany, and Switzerland: And, in this intention, the like uniform
operation has been found to attend its use, in different, and even in opposite
climates; without any of those injurious colliquative effects (...).
so generally ascribed by physicians to the preparations of aloes, and
particularly to that long popular one originally known by the name of Francfurt
Pills, first invented and described by Hartman Beyer; of which feveral spurious
sorts have been since vended, in different countries, under various names --
Pilulae Angelicae, Aloes Rosata, Pilulae Tartareae, Grana Angelica, etc. -- At
Rome, (notwithstanding the observation of that distinguished Roman physician
Giorgio Baglivi, in his Praxis Medica; where, treating of the cure of diseases
in that city, he says -- "No sort of remedies afford so much benefit to the
inhabitants of Rome, as exercise, and a prudent repetition of gentle purgatives
-- but purgatives, given in the form of pills, have no successful or plentiful
operation,") it has been found, by the experience of several travelers, the
author's friends, to operate with all desirable efficacy: And, on the like
authentic evidence, in a much greater variety of instances, he can safely
warrant, in the same intention, effects equally salutary, from its use, in both
Indies:

In occasional, or habitual costiveness, it will be found an effectual remedy,
free from the inconveniences ascribed to aloetic, rhabarbarine, and saline
preparations, in that intention; as it neither produces sickness nor gripes,
and leaves no astriction in the bowels.

But, in no one intention will this medicine prove more universally salutary
and beneficial, than in that of a frequent family purge, on the so justly
celebrated prophylactic plan of that happy explorer of Nature Lord Verulam --
to cleanse the stomach and bowels from those viscid, or slimy, and vitiated
bilious, humors which are so frequently collected in them, constituting the
source and fomes of various diseases, as well chronic as acute, to which people
of every rank are liable; but the delicate, the polite, the studious, and the
sedentary, more particularly so: It being past all doubt with the author, that
thousands even of valuable lives are yearly cut off, by prematurity of death,
which an exact practical observance of this plan (including, in its full
extent, exercise (...), Hippocr.
, with alacrity, temperance, and simplicity of diet) might have happily
conducted, with tranquillized passions (...) laborum innocuae vitae.
, to the placid (...) of old age -- when death becomes ultimately a necessity
and no pain, the blessing and not the evil of Nature.

Notwithstanding the here recited, and other valuable properties of this
medicine; the author has not the ridiculous presumption to offer it to the
public as a Specific Remedy in any particular disease. -- In the above
mentioned chronical disorders, he is warranted, by the indisputable sanction of
experience, to recommend it as an efficacious assistant to those peculiarly
appropriated remedies -- An early well masticated crust or biscuit; a regulated
diet; riding; friction This remedy was in the highest esteem with the ancients,
for the preservation of health, and the cure of CHRONICAL DISEASES: Scarce any
man of condition amongst them passed a day, either in sickness or in health,
without this cutaneous exercise. Hippocrates makes a right knowledge of its use
and efficacy one essential requisite in a physician. -- "A physician (says he
-- de articulis) ought to be skilled in many things -- and particularly in the
nature of friction," the effects of which he thus explains -- "Strong friction
braces, soft or gentle friction loosens, [h. e. resolves those parts that are
constringed or obstructed] much friction diminishes, and moderate friction
increases the flesh." -- "The part you would nourish must be moved: For motion
excites heat, and attracts nourishment to the part." -- Aretaeus too, the most
skilful and judicious of his followers, (our own immortal Sydenham, H^ppocrati
secundus pene par, excepted) insists largely on the use and efficacy of this
remedy, in his admirable history of Chron^c Diseases. The almost total disuse,
in modern practice, of a remedy so strongly recommended by the universal
experience of ancient Greece and Rome, as well as by its perfect agreement with
our later discoveries in the economy of Nature, respecting the cutaneous
discharges, can only be ascribed to the unreasonable impatience of people, in
every rank of life, who can hardly be persuaded to think well of any method
which does not surprise with some sudden alteration, or of any remedy that does
not promise to cure like a charm. Strange infatuation -- to expect immediate
relief in Chronic Diseases which, perhaps, have been many years contracting,
and, by an inveterate habit, are incorporated into the very vitals of the
constitution. This precipitate impatience for a cure, by prompting people to
trust to the delusive promises of tawdry, boasting medicasters [(...)], has
ultimately occasioned the destruction of more lives than war or pestilence.


; change of air; seasonable bathing Among the ancient Romans (says an admired
philosophical writer) there were four things much in use, whereof some are so
far out of practice in ours, and other late ages, as to be hardly known but by
their names; these were bathing, fumigation, friction, and jactation: The
first, though not wholly disused by us, yet is turned out of the service of
health to that of pleasure, but may be of excellent effect in both: It not only
opens the pores, provokes sweat, and thereby allays heat, supples the joints
and sinews, unwearies and resreshes more than any thing after too great labor
and exercise; but is of great effect in some acute pains, as of the stone and
cholic, and disposes to sleep, when many other remedies fail. Nor is it
improbable that all the good effects of any natural baths may be imitated by
the artificial, if compounded with care, and the skill of able naturalists or
physicians." Thus, for instance, our Harrowgate waters (which have been found
so efficacious in cutaneous foulnesses, blotches, scabs, scrophulas, leprosies,
etc.) are strongly impregnated with sulphur and a kind of lixivial salt, as
has been proved by mixing a certain quantity of sulphur with salt of tartar,
melting them over a gentle fire till perfectly incorporated, and then
dissolving the mass in pure water. -- If then we know the component parts of
these waters, why should we not expect the same good effects from the
artificial as from the natural baths made of them, agreeably to this ingenious
writer's observation? Medicated baths must have been of very high antiquity;
since we find, by the best authenticated accounts, that the ancient Jews and
Egyptians made use of them in curing the most obstinate and desperate maladies.
-- Virgil, singing the praises of his favorite Iapis -- 'Phoebo ante alios
dilectus,' (who was cotemporary with the sons of Esculapius) introduces him
using a medicated bath in the cure of father Aeneas; and says of him, that
being greatly beloved by Apollo, he offered to teach him augury, to play on the
harp, and to draw the bow well; but that he rather chose to prolong: he dying
father's life, to learn the virtues of plants, and to cure diseases --

-- "Scire potestates herbarum, usumque medendi

Maluit, et mutas agitare inglorius arts Here, by the bye, the learned tribe
of critics are miserably perpiexed in accounting for Virgil's (the most chaste,
pure, and correct of all poets) calling physic ars muta, or a dumb art; and
after a prosusion of sagacious conjectures, have left the matter at last, as a
true schoolman would have done by a theological problem, where the devil left
the friar. -- To instance in a few -- Some of these emuncti naris bomines will
have it, that the words mutas arts, in this place, allude directly to that
sect of physicians distinguished by the name of empirics, who, depending upon
matter of fact and experience alone, had no occasion to recommend themselves by
prating and puffing -- Others think, that Iapis is called inglorius, because
this empirical sect, rejecting all theory and reasoning, became shamefully
illiterate -- Others, that the word inglorius alludes to the physicians at
Rome, in Virgil's time, being generally slaves. Others again contend, that the
word mutas relates to inglorius; and that Virgil thereby intimated, that physic
was an art of no great renown in the world, and brought its professors no great
glory or reputation. But unfortunately none of these opinions will pass muster:
For, 1st. The sect of empirics had no existence till many ages after the time
of Iapis. 2dly. In the time of Iapis, physic could not be a contemptible or
inglorious art, nor of small renown or reputation, since it procured to its
professors whilst living the highest veneration, and after death divine
honors. Nay, Homer tells us, that a physician, even in those times, was
counted of more value than a world of other men -- (...). Iliad. (...). This
Herculean difficulty might, perhaps, be better solved, by supposing the word
mutas to be opposed to citheram, which Apollo offered him, whereby the poet
might not only mean music, but poetry too, for which it is often put; and that
by the word inglorius the poet signifies no more than unaspiring or
unambitious; as one who for the knowledge of physic renounced those other gifts
or talents, to which the poet, as such, was obliged to give the preference --
For this reason Virgil might call physic ars muta, in opposition to poetry and
music, which were properly vocales.


."

That the wonderful power of absorbency in all the external (as well as
internal) parts of the human body was well known to Hippocrates, appears from
the following passage in the sixth book of his Epidemics -- (...). -- Galen,
quoting this very passage, and in direct allusion to the doctrine of cuticular
absorption, says -- (...) -- "But they [the pores or absorbent orisices of the
bibulous veins] attract no small part from the circumambient air." -- Upon this
principle, Hippocrates recommended bathing where the body wanted moistening,
and to be cooled: In hot weather he prescribed warm baths, and in cold weather
cold ones. -- The intense thirst accompanying certain acute diseases, in hot
climates, is assuaged immediately by immersion of the body in warm water. --
After continuing twenty minutes in a bath of warm water, the author of this
has, during a course of statical experiments, frequently found himself from
forty to fifty ounces heavier than he was before immersion. By the same means
he has found an extreme thirst removed almost immediately. Bathing in seawater
has been found, by experiment, to produce the same refreshing effect. -- And
hence, perhaps, the deplorable calamities, to which the seafaring part of
mankind are frequently exposed (burning like a ship on fire, in a deluge of
surrounding waters) by the extreme want of fresh water, might be mitigated at
least, by repeated immersion in the seawater. All chronic diseases, proceeding
from a redundancy of saline or acrimonious particles floating in the vital
juices, or accumulated upon the glands appointed to separate them from those
juices, are relieved by sea-bathing; as the solvent parts of the seawater are
thereby imbibed through the pores of the skin, and carried into immediate
action upon those saline or acrimonious particles; and there is not, perhaps,
any menstruum, natural or artificial, hitherto known, that is so perfect and
immediate a solvent for saline bodies as the aqueous vehicle of the sea salt in
its pure and divested simplicity.


; medicinal water-drinking The old maxim, that 'what can do much good may also
do much harm,' is not, perhaps, so truly applicable to any one popular remedy,
as to the natural medicinal waters. Those of the acidulous or purging kind, by
means of the neutral salt with which they abound, are of excellent service in
certain constitutions, where the first passages want cleansing; but this
service is done by only a few repetitions: If they are long continued, (and
many who drink them, without proper advice, are apt to think, the more they
purge, the farther they are from being sick) the remedy often proves worse than
the disease: For it is well known to physicians, that all fevers which come
after long purging, and especially those which supervene the imprudent use of
purging waters, are of the worst kind, and frequently prove fatal.

There is not in the whole compass of medicine, a more efficacious remedy, in
certain cases, than the natural chalybeate waters, that is, such as receive
their medicinal properties from iron: For, as the learned Boerhaave observes,
where the powers of the body are debilitated by a preternatural relaxation of
the solids, and an indolent, cold, aqueous indisposition of the fluids, no
virtue of any vegetable or animal substance, no diet, or regimen, can effect
that, which is effected by iron and its preparations. Yet how many fevers are
every year occasioned by an imprudent use of them, as well as vertigos,
epilepsies, and apoplexies, (frequently ascribed to other causes) in plethoric
habits?

From this just and candid information, the intelligent reader will naturally
conclude, that he ought never to meddle with any of those waters, without the
previous advice of some skilful physician, who will not fail, on so peculiarly
proper an occasion, to inculcate and explain to him that golden precept
(equally applicable to every human undertaking) of our divine master
Hippocrates -- (...).


; and summer voyages at sea Amongst the more moderate exercises [(...), as
Galen descriptively titles them] prescribed by the ancients, to supply the
defects of their pharmacy, which, in general, was rude and barbarous, the
sea-carriage was held in high esteem. Even so low down as the eve of the
commonwealth of Rome, properly so called, (before the butchery of despotism had
made the life of a Roman scarce worth preserving, by destroying, or driving
into corners, all that was great and valuable) the Roman physicians used
frequently, and with very good effect, to send their patients, laboring under
certain chronic diseases, to Alexandria in Egypt, partly for the sake of the
exercise by the motion of the ship, but chiefly upon account of the vomiting it
occasioned; that they might thereby supply their want of gentle emetics: For it
was a distinguishing part of the exquifite diligence and sagacity of the
ancients, to make good what they wanted in the pharmaceutic art, by other
means. -- And here the author cannot deny himself the pleasure of informing his
readers, that this succedaneous vomitive of the ancients is, at this time, a
noted vulgar remcdy, in the beginning of certain infections diseases, and
particularly of that most dreadful one the jail distemper; and that where it
can be used soon after the appearance of the symptoms, and repeated several
days successively, it will be found the most efficacious one, perhaps, hitherto
discovered; several very remarkable instances of its efficacy in carrying off
the jail-distemper caught at the Old-Bailey in May, 1750, and in September,
1772, having, on these two melancholy occasions, come under his immediate
notice. -- In some consumptive disorders they prescribed the exercise of
sailing, as a sovereign remedy to fortify the lungs, remove obstructions, and
determine the quantity and force of the fluids toward the surface of the body;
that is, to promote perspiration -- "Si vera phthisis est, says Celsus, opus
est longa navigatione, etc." -- This practice of the ancients probably took its
rise from an old vulgar observation, namely, that ' sailors were, in general,
much less subject than other people to a consumption of the lungs:' For, having
remarked, that discoveries and improvements, which would have done honor to
the most enlightened understandings, were sometimes stumbled upon by persons of
more confined abilities, they thought it no discredit to their own superior
talents to insorm themselves, even by means of the lower class of people, of
simple remedies conlirmed by experience; agreeably to the advice of the great
father of physic [(...).] Being sensible that the art of healing took its rise
from natural sagacity improving upon accidental discoveries, and unforeseen
events, they did not employ their time in writing imaginary theories, and
mingling false philosophy with intrinsic truth; but in carefully collecting the
simple observations, experiments, and casual discoveries of others, even the
most obscure and illiterate people, and afterward sul jecting them to the
rigid scrutiny of variously repeated trials; in making diligent observations
and cautious experiments themselves, and in writing pure and accurate histories
of diseases which came under their cognizance; i. e. in diligently collecting
the laws enacted by Nature, and describing them in the very manner Nature spoke
them. And if this direct though difficult route to medical certainty had been
steadily and uniformly pursued by succeeding physicians, without deviating into
the uncertain though smoother paths of fanciful philosophy, or hypothesis,
(that specious image of truth, that idol to which the learned still bow down)
or being seduced by the love of ease, and the facility of playing with the
passions of mankind to their own private emolument, from the age of
Hippocrates, down to our time, physic in general would have made a different
appearance from what it does at present ["Si jam inde ab Hippocratis temporibus
ad hanc nostram usque aetatem, (to use the more expressive language of the
learned and judicious Baglivi) praestantissimae artis Studiosi, hanc quidem
promovendae artis rationem constanter retinuissent, dici vix potest, quot
quantique progressus hac hodie part haberentur. Cum vero rem alioqui adeo
necessariam, tam praeclaram, atque ita feliciter institutam reliquerint, ut se
infinitis, et (ut apostoli verbis utar) interminatis quaestionibus, et (...)
implicarent, aliam afferre causam non possum, quam offensi, ac ulciscentis
Numinis iram. Hoc sane, vel invitus fatebitur, quisquis in aetatem hanc nostram
oculos conjecerit; cum enim caeterae omnes qua disciplinae, qua^ arts, non
solum in pristinum splendorem restitutae suerint, sed in dies magis magisque
excultae, novisque inventis ornatae floreant; sola Medicinae praxis, nescio quo
sato, maxim sui part jaceat, et, quod maxim dolendum, vilior quotidie apud
indoctos evadat Quod cur ita sit, (proceeds this Hippocratic physician) id unum
in causa esse arbitror, quod objervationum unde ^rs praestantissima effecta
fuerat, ratione contemplata, lystematis, et hypothesibus prorsus indulserint;
non tam de cognoscendis, curandisque morbis, quam quo pacto eorum probabilem
rationem redderent, solliciti. Ex quo fit, ut, in maximam humani generis
perniciem, et Medic^nae dedecus, non jam tutissima Artis praescripta, sed
proprii ingenii commenta consulant."] and the Materia Medica, one of the most
essential parts of it, in particular, would not have now been, what every
experienced, honest physician knows and laments, more confused, precarious, and
uncertain, than any other branch of science.

During a course of experimental inquiries into the peculiar and distinct
medicinal properties of vegetables, that is, their real effects, disting uished
from the operations of Nature unassisted, in the human body, (prosecuted for
upwards of twenty years, in the manner originally, and hitherto almost solely,
practiced by Dioscorides) the author is not ashamed to own, that he has, with
uncommon assiduity, and no inconsiderable trouble and expense, sought every
possible means of informing himself of the traditional knowledge, and empirical
practice, of the common people; and from this source alone he has drawn more
real assistances, in ascertaining the medicinal powers of simples, than from
the most famous modern herbals; in which, not one in forty (innumerable
experiments warrant the assertion) will answer the character it beart, and many
are still celebrated for a thousand divine virtues, that are scarcely endued
with one valuable property. -- The merit of Dioscorides's Herbal (meaning his
GENUINE work; for the writer has abundant reason to suspect, that many spurious
articles, misnomers, and false de^riptions hitherto unnoticed, have been
foisted into it since his time) must have been of a very different complexion.
-- What Petronius says of the celebrated philosopher Democritus, namely, that
he lived and died in the midst of experiments, may, with strict truth, be
applied to this indefatigable author of medical botany: For, we are assured,
that he advanced nothing in his Materia Medica, but what was confirmed to him
by real experiments. The last experiment he made was upon an highly deleterious
plant: The dose proved too strong for his constitution; and he expired in the
very act of describing its effects upon himself, and the symptoms it produced.
-- If this poisonous plant was, as has been supposed, a species of the wolf's
bane, it was most probably that with the blue belmet flower, -- universally
deemed by the ancients one of the rankest vegetable poisons.

The industrious Linnaeus, speaking of the yellow wolf's bane -- Flor. Lappon.
p. 179. No. 221. -- tells the following story -- "As I was traveling in the
northern parts of Sweden, early in the spring, I met with a poor woman who was
gathering the leaves of this plant [aconitum folits peltatis multifidis
lispidis, petalo supremo cylindracio]: When I asked her for what use she
gathered those leaves, she replied, that they were to be caten. Being desirous
to advise her better, for I thought she was not acquainted with the herb, and
might mistake it for a species of the geranium or crane's-bill, called gratia
Dei, which it greatly resembles; I entreated her, in a very serious manner, not
to destroy herself by eating a most deadly poison. She smiled at my
apprehensions for her, and told me that she was very well assured of being
right in her choice of the herb, and that she with the rest of her neighbors
had eaten of it for a great many years. I went to her cottage, where she cut
the plant she had gathered into small shreds, and boiled it with a little piece
of fat meat, and made a soup with the ingredients, on which herself, her
husband, two children, and an old woman, made an hearty meal; and, what I own
greatly surprised me, without any damage or bad consequence. And thus it
happens, says this diligent explorer of Nature, that THINGS ARE FREQUENTLY
DISCOVERED BY TEMERITY, WHICH REASON MIGHT NEVER HAVE INVESTIGATED."

Notwithstanding this remarkable instance of the harmless effects of the leaves
of this plant when young and tender, it appears from the real experiments made
by Matthiolus upon condemned malefactors with its root alone, that the fatal
effects of it could not be prevented by any antidotes he was acquainted with.
-- The most effectual corrector of vegetable poisons in general the writer has
yet found out, in the course of his experiments, is a pure vegetable acid, or
vinegar of wood; the process for obtaining which was originally published by
Glauber, (an ingenious chemist, but a wretched philosopher) in the first part
of his Philosophical Furnaces, where he shows professedly how to distill an acid
spirit or vinegar from all vegetables, in great quantity, and at a small
expense.


: By which last alone, under a proper dietetic regimen, and the occasional use
of these pills, he has known inveterate chronic diseases cured, which had
baffled all the powers of medicine.

Nor is it irrational to suppose, from the known antiscorbutic properties of
this composition, that it might prove a salutary prophylactic, or preventive of
the marine scurvy, in seafaring people: -- The propriety of this supposition
is, in fact, confirmed by attested successful experiments made of it, by two
very able sea-surgeons -- But, on this head, the author can say nothing from
his own experience -- his sole criterion of the real powers of medicine: And by
this criterion, he honestly confesses, he has found several elaborate
preparations of his own, (for he too was formerly an indefatigable labourer in
the curious (...) of medicine, searching after a succedaneum to the tree of
life) as well as the most pompously authenticated secifics, in chronic
diseases, that have been exhibited to the public, for thirty years past,
deplorably wanting, and inadequate, not only to the particular ends proposed,
but to the genuine ultimate end of physic in general -- (...); not excepting
even those of the learned Vienna Austrian school -- to which the distinguishing
palm -- the supreme eclat of working wonders, in regular practice, has, by the
united suffrage of the faculty in Europe, been deservedly given of late years.

By the same criterion, he is convinced of the possibility of discovering a
remedy, which would immediately cure a fever, the most violent and dangerous
symptom attending certain acute discases.

The celebrated professor Pitcairn long ago published to the world his notion
of such a remedy, as a grand desideratum in physic: And an illustrious
successor of his, in the same professorial chair, Boerhaave, used often, in his
public lectures, to speak of the possibility of discovering a remedy that might
cure most or all acute febrile diseases; and actually recommended the trial of
medicines composed of antimony and mercury, ("ad magnam penetrabilitatem art
deductis") for that purpose. -- The author is in possession of a remedy,
without antimony, mercury, or any other mineral, in its composition, which he
believes will immediately cure a fever, in its incipient state: That it has
been used, with great success, at Constantinople, and other places in Turkey, in
carrying off the plague itself, when administered on the first appearance of
the symptoms, he is assured by a traveller, of great learning and curiosity, to
whose friendly communication he owes his knowledge of it.

The prevailing hypothesis, that a fever is 'NATURE'S instrument to expel an
enemy;' or, in other words, that 'every fever is its own cure,' and
consequently, that no medicine can be said, in strict propriety, to cure a
fever, was originally invented by Asclepiades, (that finished master in the
(...)) above eighteen hundred years ago The very learned and ingenious Dr.
Middleton, in his 'Dissertation on the state of physicians among the old
Romans,' makes Asclepiades cotemporary with Cicero; who, in his first dialogue
de Oratore, introduces Lucius Crassus speaking of him as his intimate friend
and physician -- "Neque vero Asclepiades, is, says he, quo nos medico amicoque
usi sumus, tum, cum eloquentia vincebat caeteros medicos, in eo ipso quod
ornate dicebat, medicinae facultate utebatur, non eloquentiae." -- He likewise
asserts, that when Asclepiades came first to Rome, he knew nothing of physic;
contrary to the express testimony of Caelius Aurelianus, Oribasius, and other
authentic documents, from which it plainly appears, that he practiced physic at
Parium, and other cities bordering upon the Hellespont, and even at Athens,
(where we find him treated with particular marks of distinction by the
celebrated philosopher Antiochus Academicus, afterward preceptor to Cicero)
long before he settled at Rome. The Doctor's other assertion, respecting the
friendship and intimacy between Asclepiades and Cicero, includes a manifest
anachronism, really surprising in so great a critic, more especially in one who
has elsewhere given such ample proofs of his knowledge in the biographical
history of those times; and what adds to our wonder on this occasion is, that
he quotes the above passage from Cicero's Orator in support of it: But whoever
will be at the trouble of comparing the genuine memoirs antiquity has given of
the life, social connexions, and death, of L. Crassus, one of the principal
interlocutors in the Orator, and the ingenious account the Doctor himself gives
of those highly finished and truly admirable dialogues, in his history of
Cicero's life, with that remarkable quotation of Sextus Empiricus -- adversus
Logicos, sect. 201 -- from a celebrated work of the just-mentioned Antiochus,
published much about the same time the scene of these dialogues was laid at the
Tusculanum of Crassus, [i. e. in the year of Rome 66z, when Crassus, who died
soon after, was 56 years old, and Cicero but a youth of sixteen] in which he
makes honorable mention of Asclepiades, but as who had been some time dead --
I say, whoever collates these several accounts, will presently discover Doctor
Middleton's palpable misinterpretation of this passage in Cicero. -- This
Asclepiades was indisputably the greatest master antiquity can count in the
medicina politica: By a peculiar attention to the passions, and foibles of
human nature, he was enabled to discover an universal propension in mankind to
be deceived -- From thence he took the hint of advancing his fortune, by
cultivating this ductile propension to the highest pitch it was capable of; and
in defense of this practice the following argument was originally invented, and
occasionally urged -- Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur; which has been used,
on similar occasions, ever since. He first invented the lecti pensiles, or
hanging beds, in which the sick might, with great facility, be rocked to sleep.
These anodyne machines of his took prodigiously: Many of his noble patients had
them made of silver; and they afterward became a considerable part of the
Roman luxury. Notwithstanding the boundless strife of opinions that unhappily
attended physic after the death of its great parent Hippocrates, the ancient
pharmacy still preserved its footing, in some degree, as likewise the
Hippocratic doctrine, till this arch-craftsman of the profession had the
cunning and address to demolish the whole, calling it, in derision, 'a
meditation upon death.' -- He made the whole materia medica to consist only of
such things as would give ease, and exhilerate the spirits of the patient: Nay,
in certain cases he administered to the luxury of his patients, and indulged
them in the use of wine, even to intoxication. This flattering of the palate,
in conjunction with his new amusive inventions, and a lucky accident of his
discovering some signs of life in a man that was carrying to be buried, whom he
soon recovered, and whom the people were persuaded to believe he had raised
from the dead, conspired to make him the supreme archiater of those times; and
what still farther contributed to establish him in this elevated station, was
his having publicly challenged the Fates, by constantly declaring that he
should never be visited by any bodily distemper. Nay, Pliny the historian
informs us, he held diseases and prematurity of death so much in defiance, that
he would frequently, amongst his acquaintances, offer to lay any wager, and
even to stake his whole fortune, that he should never be sick, as in fact he
never was, not even at the time of his death; for that he broke his neck by a
fall down a pair of stairs.


. But this hypothesis, however specious, however recommended, by the sanction
of antiquity, and the later authority of great names, has always appeared to
the author unsupported by Reason and FACTS. -- The most plausible argument he
has met with, in favor of this theory, is, that in acute diseases of the
eruptive kind, and particularly in the smallpox, 'as soon as the morbific
matter is expelled to the surface of the body, the fever ceases:" therefore,
'the fever is an effort of NATURE to relieve herself.' But it is well known to
every experienced practitioner, that the less the fever is in the natural
smallpox, the fewer will be the pustules, and the variolous matter more
happily expelled; or, according to our great Sydenbam, [Angliae lumen, artis
Phaebum] "Quo sedatior est sanguis eo melius erumpent pustulae."

It has indeed been a received opinion, almost ever since the first appearance
of the smallpox The smallpox was first described, and treated of by Aaron of
Alexandria, in his Pandects of physic, which he published about the middle of
the seventh century, according to Haly Abbas's account. But as the original
works of this author, in the Syriac tongue, and the Arabic translation of them
by Maserjawaihus, are both lost, and nothing of them now remains, but some
extracts, which Mohamed Rhazes has left us in his Continens; we have no certain
account extant of the precise era of this disease, nor in what country it
first appeared. The most probable opinion is, that it had its rise in Arabia
Faelix, and was brought from thence to Alexandria by the Arabs, when they took
that city, A. D. 640, in the reign of Omar Ebnol Chatab, the second successor
to Mohamed: For Paulus of Aegina, who lived at Alexandria about twenty years
before, makes no mention of it in his works; though he assures us, in his
preface, that he had treated of every disease then known. From this time, the
smallpox spread, with amazing rapidity, wherever the Saracens extended their
conquests: Westward into Spain, about 30 years after, according to Ockley; and
eastward as far as Japan, whither it was carried near the same time, as
Kaempfer informs us. -- Respecting the practice of the celebrated Rhazes
abovementioned, it may not be impertinent to remark, on this occasion, that he
carried the cold regimen farther than it has been ever carried since, even by
Mr. Sutton himself, as evidently appears from his method of treating the
smallpox and measles.
in Europe, that 'a certain degree of fever is always required, to concoct,
separate, and expel, the vitiated and infectious matter.' But Mr. Sutton (the
reputed author of the new method of inoculation; though, by the bye, the very
same method, in every essential point, was practiced by Mr. Glass, an eminent
surgeon in the university of Oxford, long before Mr. Sutton was known) has
fully demonstrated, by many thousands of successful experiments, that the fever
in this disease is so far from being 'NATURE'S instrument to expel an enemy,'
that itself is her greatest enemy; and consequently ought to be prevented, or
extinguished [(...). Hippocr.]
immediately. And, in his peculiar attention to this single point, the author
has sufficient reason to believe Mr. Sutton's SUPERIOR success wholly consists:
For, having had many favorable opportunities, during several years, of
ascertaining, by means of a most accurately-made pyranthropometer, the natural
heat of the body, in Mr. Sutton's patients, when in perfect health, immediately
before their entering on his preparatory course, and afterward during the
progress of the disease; he found, in a variety of instances of a complete and
regular small pox, the bodily heat, when at the highest, from six to fourteen
degrees below that of perfect health.

The most distinguished ancient physicians of the Hippocratic school, had no
other idea of a fever than that of their great master -- viz. a fiery or
preternatural heat. This preternatural heat they conceived of, as a symptom,
the cure of which was the province of the physician; whilst the removing, and
carrying off, the primary cause of this symptom, that is, the cure of the
disease, was considered chiefly as the work of NATURE. Now, the primary cause
of every fever is, as the author conceives, some stimulant or acrid matter
spasmodically affecting the vascular and nervous system: Whether this matter
be, 1st. A foreign substance lodged in the flesh -- 2dly, A putrid fomes
absorbed into the habit, from gunshot wounds, etc. in removing these two
causes, NATURE may often require the surgeon's helping hand -- 3dly,
Deleterious miasmata residing in the air -- 4thly, A putrid fomes of any kind,
producing an acrimonious state of the fluids -- 5thly, Purulent matter lodged
in the body, from internal suppurations -- Or, 6thly, external cold, or, what
is usually called catching of cold. This last mentioned, and, perhaps, most
frequent cause of fevers, has been generally supposed to be the materia
perspirabilis of Sanctorius The doctrine of perspiration, though it owes its
name, and present establishment, to Sanctorius, was not unknown to the ancient
Greek physicians. Hippocrates believed all the surfaces of the parts of a human
body, as well those of the muscles and viscera, as of the skin, to be naturally
in a continual state of perspiration. -- The following remarkable observation
is Galen's ( Lib. 6. de tuenda sanitate) "Prospiciendum est, ut eorum quae
eduntur et bibuntur, respectu eorum quae expelluntur, conveniens mediocritas
servetur: Sane is modus servabitur, si ponderabitur a nobis in utrisque
quantitas." From this passage in Galen, Sanctorius undoubtedly took the first
hint of his statical experiments for ascertaining the daily waste of the animal
fluids, made by the outlets of the external superficies of the body, and by the
lungs: But it is impossible to ascertain the quantity of this waste, without
knowing, at the same time, the quantity of moisture, etc. absorbed or imbibed
by the pores of the skin and lungs; which Sanctorius did not advert to: For the
author of this, after violent exercise in riding, notwithstanding a great
expense of perspirable matter, and no food taken, has, in certain constitutions
of the air and atmosphere, facilitating the cutaneous immissions, often found
himself, by most exact statical experiments, many ounces, sometimes twenty and
upwards heavier than he was before. Hence it appears, that all we can with
certainty discover, respecting the quantity of sanctorian perspiration, by
experiments of this kind, is, the difference between the exhalata and the
inhalata, that is, between the perspirable matter we exhale from the pores of
the skin and lungs, and whatever we imbibe or inhale through the same: For
exhalation and inhalation so confound each other as to render it impossible to
ascertain the exact quantity of either; as the author purposes, in a short
time, to demonstrate more at large to the medical reader.


, retained in the body, or, as it is commonly expressed, obstructed
perspiration: But a course of statical experiments instituted principally with
a view to ascertain this doctrine, and regularly prosecuted with a most
scrupulous exactness, for eighteen months, fully convinced the author, many
years ago, (as a similar course of experiments, prosecuted, for one year, at
Charlestown, South Carolina, in like manner convinced his ingenious friend and
fellow laborer Dr. Lining) that no fever is caused merely by obstructed
perspiration.

APPENDIX.
OF all the branches of medical knowledge, the most highly interesting, and
subservient to health, long life, and happiness in this world, is the
prophylactic, founded upon the two great preventive principles, DIET and
HABITUAL EXERCISE By habitual exercise the author means not such as is
frequently undertaken, but seldom gone through with; but such as is brought to
a habit, by being closely repeated, with moderation, and without any irregular
intermission. It Is the want of a right conception of a habit that has
occasioned the abuse and neglect of this sovereign preventive of diseases, as
well as common aid to physic. -- By continual dropping, even so soft a body as
water can act upon a stone; by incessantly pursuing his blow, the smith can
bring heat into his bar of iron: The act itself, simply considered, is weak and
trifling; but the habit is of wonderful efficacy. -- 'By temperance, and a
singular perseverance in the virtuous toil of martial exercises,' Socrates (the
light and glory of the heathen world) is said to have acquired a constitution
superior to the inclemency of the elements, and to the attacks of disease;
striking instances of which we find recorded by Plato (Conviv. and Phaed. where
it appears, that he had brought himself, by the force of habit, to use the same
clothing, and to go barefooted, all the year round), by Diogenes Laertius in
his life of that prince of philosophers, and by Aelian in his various history:
The following is one of them -- "When an almost universal pestilence had seized
upon the camp, at the siege of Potidaea, insomuch that eleven hundred men in
the army were carried off, and Athens was half depopulated, by the contagion,
he escaped the distemper in both places, and was the only one, before Potidaea,
who, during the two years blockade of that city, did not in some measure feel
the severity of it [(...).]
-- THE ONLY SURE MEANS OF PRESERVING TO THE BLOOD ITS ORIGINAL PURITY, TO THE
SECRETIONS THEIR FREE COURSE, TO THE NERVES THEIR DUE TONE, TO THE MUSCLES
THEIR STRENGTH AND FIRMNESS, AND TO THE TASTE ITS NATIVE RELISH FOR GENUINE
SIMPLICITY.

On this preservative branch of medicine, and particularly on the dietetic part
of it, a multitude of books have been written; many of them by physicians of
eminence, with a spirit of philanthropy that does honor to the profession.
But, as those productions consist chiefly of general rules laid down for
mankind without distinction, to preserve their health, and prolong their lives,
they have not proved in any degree adequate to the proposed end: For, so
infinite is the variety of constitutions, (in respect of which all food acts,
by a certain immutable law of Nature, relatively and secundum quid, as
logicians express it, not absolutely and per se) that any general rule laid
down to any number of men, for this purpose, must be hurtful or destructive to
the greatest part of them at least, if they all comply with it. Happily for
mankind, all the needful directions, on this head, universally conducive to
health and long life, may be comprised in a very small compass, without
overloading the memory, or confounding the judgment. -- If people would only
follow the dictates of that most beneficent of all legislators, Nature, by
letting the stomach always take the lead of the palate, and by feeding
moderately upon such things as they find they can digest with the least trouble
and inconvenience (...). -- Vid. Galen. lib. vi. de sanitat. tuend. c. 9.
, they would need no other practical rule of diet: So far as this extends,
every reasonable man, of competent age and experience, must infallibly be a
better judge of what he ought to do, for the benefit of his health, than any
physician can be, who is not intimately acquainted with all the circumstances
of his constitution.

As for those whimsical hypocondriacs who, like their brainsick brother in the
comedy of Moliere, are eternally making an outcry, though nothing ails them, and
those more especially who have been persuaded to purchase health and longevity
by eating and drinking exactly by weight and measure, as if they could supply
the various and alterable exigences of Nature just as they fill a tub, the
capacity and discharges of which are always uniform and the same; they are in
imminent danger of falling into the doctors hands It would seem, that this sort
of (...) must have been very badly off for a physician, in the time of honest
Esculapius, [(...) -- so the prince of poets titles him] of venerable memory,
if what Plato tells us of him, in his Republic, be true; namely, that it was
his deliberate opinion -- "That in all well regulated societies, where every
man has his station affigned him, no man can, or ought to have leisure to be a
valetudinarian all his life, and bestow his whole care upon his carcass." He
farther informs us, that his two sons, Podalirius and Machaon, were of the same
opinion, and maintained, "that physic was not made for such people, and that it
was not their duty to prescribe for them, even though they were as rich as
Midas!!"
. An oeconomist of this sort might, with equal propriety, impose upon himself
the critical task of standing or sitting continually in the same place, of
lying always in the same bed, of wearing constantly the same weight of clothes,
and of riding or walking every day precisely the same number of feet and
inches; nay farther, he must compound with Providence for continual wet
weather, or continual dry, for the same immutable degree of heat and cold, and
the same invariable constitution of the air in which he breathes: For it is
certain that all these may, some way or other, affect the constitution,
appetite, and digestion, so as to require sometimes larger, and sometimes more
sparing meals, and the occasional use of weaker or stronger liquors.

In general, the best rule, perhaps, that can be laid down, for preserving
health, and prolonging life, is (what the most elegant Celsus recommended to
the world sixteen hundred years ago) to observe strictly no particular rule at
all; but, upon the rational principle of moderation and temperance [noverca
medicorum], to follow the sober dictates of Nature; who has not ordained a
single want to man, the reasonable satisfaction of which, (besides its manifest
subserviency to health) does not afford a pleasure every way superior to what
can be found in any unnatural gratification of the appetities: For true
pleasure is the bounty of Nature, and Reason her dispenser of it.

To conclude -- In spite of all the false refinements of art, the true sublime
of taste, and the sweet simplicity of Nature, will for ever continue
inseparable. In diet, SHE is so far from objecting to variety, that she
delights in it: Her protest is only against that, which is produced by the
destruction of Simplicity; against that, by which the palate is debauched from
its natural taste, the appetite irrecoverably depressed through the cloying
repetition of preventive viands (...). Hippocr.
, [such, for instance, are the infernal compounds of French cookery] the
functions of the body robbed of their sprightly vigor, and all its powers for
the true relish of pleasure enervated; in short, against that, whereby the
votaries of luxury are prematurely cut off from her richest inheritance, HEALTH
and LENGTH OF DAYS.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ONE of the most troublesome and obstinate complaints, to which children are
liable, is the HOOPING COUGH. The methods of treating it hitherto in use, have
generally been found ineffectual to stop its progress, or to suppress it with
safety, before it has run its natural course. --

OUR great master in physic, DR. SYDENHAM, in his account of it says -- "What
others may be able to do in this disease, I know not: as for myself, I have
used abundance of all sorts of medicines, and still lost my labor."

THE author of the foregoing discourse, whose practice is much among children,
therefore informs the public, that by a long series of experimental inquiries
into the nature and causes of the diseases of children in general, and of this
hitherto intractable, and frequently fatal one in particular, he has discovered
a safe and easy method of treating it with success.


