AN ACCOUNT OF THE Nature and excellent Properties and Virtues OF THE Pyrmont
Waters; Dedicated to the ROYAL SOCIETY, and COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS; Which are
imported in Flasks by Mr. Burges, at the Blue Anchor in Fleetstreet, Druggist.

LONDON, Printed by J. DOWNING; and Sold by TIM. GOODWIN, at the Queen's Head,
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1717.

THIS ACCOUNT OF Pyrmont Waters Is Dedicated To the most Excellent Sr. Isaac
Newton, President of the ROYAL SOCIETY; And to the Excellent Dr. John Bateman,
President of the College of Physicians; By FREDERICK SLARE, M. D. Fellow of the
College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society.
SO great and so just is the Fame and Wisdom of Sir Isaac Newton, that his
Approbation of any Subject in Physic or Philosophy suffices to recommend it to
the World, without the Necessity of superadding Arguments, Reasons, or
Experiments, to give it more Credit or Authority: But we have also the
concurring Testimony of another Person, eminent for solid Erudition, President
of the Facultas Medica, or College of Physicians. It was in your Presence,
Sirs, and not in yours alone, but together with several Fellows of both these
illustrious Societies, before whom the Pyrmont Waters were brought, and have
been examined by several Experiments, and were tasted, and by You were highly
commended for their Strength and grateful Taste, and promising Virtue, and
granted, That they did much exceed the Spa Waters, with which they were
compared.

Upon this Approbation of Yours, together with my own Experience of the good
these Waters had done to my self, and also to several of my Friends of late and
formerly, I thought I had Reason enough to undertake this Province, of
publishing this Account of Pyrmont Waters.

The Design of this Tract is not to depreciate or undervalue the Spa Waters;
for they have doubtless been of considerable Benefit to Mankind, and will, I
hope, continue to do much good; but yet since a kind Providence opens a richer
or more salubrious Treasure of Waters, shall we not thankfully embrace this
Gift of God? The Spa Waters have had a great Advantage above these, they have
been longer and more applied to than other Waters of that Kind. Much perhaps
may be due to the happy Situation, and good Accommodation of the Place, which
invited and caused a more copious and numerous Resort of rich and populous
Neighboring Nations, such as Flanders, Germany, France, and Holland. The
Pyrmont Waters lie more North, have been most frequented by the Northern
Inhabitants of Germany; and of late Years Persons of the highest Birth and
Quality, even Princes of the Illustrious Houses of Hanover and of Saxony, have
graced these Waters with their Presence, and have discerned their Virtue and
good Effects, and have given them a greater Fame than formerly: But England,
which has been so unfortunate as to have known nothing of them hitherto, is now
like to be supplied by wise Methods taken to furnish this Country with
considerable Quantity, of these Waters, at whose Arrival (which is daily
expected) their own Virtue will suffice to give them Reputation.

But that I may crown, and give the finishing Stroke to this Recommendation of
Pyrmont Waters, we have the Experience and Example of our Gracious Sovereign, a
Wise and Judicious Prince, who has chosen and preferred these, before any of
that vast Variety of Steel Waters which Germany abounds with. You have a lively
Evidence and Attestation of the Health-preserving Virtue of these Waters,
visible in his Majesty's healthful Countenance, who not only the last Year, but
in many preceding Years, drank these cordial and animating Waters. Nor will it
displease a Prince endowed with so much Bounty and Benevolence, to have been a
happy Occasion of recommending this salutiferous Fountain, or Source of Water,
to his English Subjects. It was a Present made by one of his Majesty's Family,
which enabled me to make the several Trials and Experiments mentioned in this
little Treatise. But amongst the rest, that which gave me the greatest
Satisfaction and Comfort was this, That they could be brought in so great a
Perfection, as to contain and carry their Virtue entirely good to us, perhaps,
with less Diminution than a Bottle of Burgundy, or old Rhenish do bring theirs.
And may our most Clement and Merciful King, the Glorious Instrument of so much
Good and Happiness to us, Himself enjoy a Succession of many Years in perfect
Health, Peace, and Prosperity, is the constant and fervent Prayer of,

His Majesty's Most Humble and Most Obedient Subject and Servant, THE AUTHOR.

THE CONTENS.
THE Pyrmont Waters give a, stronger Chalybeat Taste than the Spa do, page 1
The Pyrmont Waters, upon the opening the Cork and letting in Air, did as it
were instantly ferment or bubble like seething Water, and do sparkle much when
poured into the Glass, page 2 They had a better Effect upon the Author than the
Spa had, who tried them both, page 3 Pyrmont Waters (called Acidulae) proved to
have no acid, or sour Quality, but are Correctors of Acids, do belong to
Alkalies, page 4 Experiment made with a very little Gall, shows this Water to
abound with Iron or Vitriol, page 5 Experiment made with five Leaves of Green
Tea, do give a glorious blue, page 5 These Waters of Pyrmont being tried before
the President and Fellows of the Royal Society, were highly approved, page 7
This Water kept its Chalybeat Quality, did tinge with Galls, after it had been
poured out into a Pint Bottle and stopped seven Days, page 9 Attestation of the
President, Doctor Bateman, and some of the Electors of the College, who
preferred these Waters before the Spa, page 10 That the Chalybeat Waters are
altering, strengthening, and not purging, but restringent, page 12, 13, 14
Purging Salts are of a fixed Nature, so as not to evaporate or lose by Carriage,
page 16 Pyrmont Waters drank soberly in England do not purge, page 17 Purging
at the Condusion of the Course of the Waters condemned by the sagacious
Practitioner Dr. Sydenham, page 17 Quick and hasty Motion in walking, etc.
prescribed as necessary for passting the Waters, censured in an Instance of the
late Queen Ann, P. M. and of others who could only pass them in Bed, page 19
The erect Posture not so fit to pass off Waters, as the Horizontal, page 20
Whatever causes Sweat, hinders the Transition of the Waters, page 21 Large
Quantities of Waters may spoil the Tone of the Stomach, cause Head-achs,
Vertigo's, Apoplexies, etc. page 21 The fixed Parts or Recrements of the Waters
considered, page 22 Sea Salt to be found in most of these Mineral Waters in a
small Quantity, page 22 Chemists take much Pains to prove Iron an Ingredient of
these Waters, whereas to these two Senses the Taste and Eye, with little Pains
they are demonstrated Chalybeat, page 23, 24 Piety and Charity recommended to
the Physicians, page 25 These Waters are a proper Remedy for most Diseases of
the Stomach, and for many Diseases of the Bowels; are of excellent Use in the
Jaundice, in some Dropsies, in the Scurvy, in hypocondriack and vapour'd Cases,
and in a Diabetes, etc. page 27 The Pyrmont Well has a great flow of Water to
it, is well situated for Transportation to us, page 30 It is of such a
Strength, that some weak Constitutions must have common Water to be mixed with
it, page 31 An ingenious Propesition of His Majesty's Learned Physician Dr.
Steigerthal, how we may drink the Waters warmed to Advantage in the coldest
Winter, page 33 An Examen of the Chalybeat Waters in general, culled by the
Germans Acidulae, or sour Wells, are proved to be Alkalies, by Dr. Slare. This
was Printed in the Transations of the Royal Society, 1713. page 36 Henricus ab
Heers, Helmont, do run into this Error; page 37 Dr. Jordis gives not
Satisfaction about an Acid in Swalbac Water, page 38 Experiments from Iron do
prove these Chalybeat Waters to be highly alkalizate, or dulcifying, page 40
Acids are destructive of the Virtues of these Waters; a Caution not to use
them, page 43 Alkalies recover the lost Virtue by Acids, page 45
POSTSCRIPT.
An Account of Doctor Cunaeus his Book, Printed 7 Years since, of the Waters of
Pyrmont, where he practiced many Years.

He directs large Quantities of Water, to begin with 2 Quarts. He forbids the
Use of inn^ce^t Things, as Sugar, Milk, or a Glass of Wine. He highly applauds
his own Arcanums; we find little Instruction from this' Author, and do briefly
consider a more noble and useful Genius, page 47, 48 Doctor Seipp. He inclines
to ascribe an Acid Principle to these Waters, derived from Sulphur he found in
these Contents, page 44 This Argument we prove to be erroneous; that Sulphur or
Brimstone is just contrary to Acid, or is a true Alkaly. See Experiment with
Milk. That Mineral Acids are Creatures of the Fire, page 51, 52, 53 Among other
Experiments, our Author proves the Alkaly, or ante-acid Nature of his Waters,
that when fresh taken from the Fountain they ferment with Vinegar, Rhenish
Wine, or any Acid: He also makes one Experiment with Milk, owns that it
prevents Coagulations. He confesses, the Waters are demonstrated a strong
Alkaly: He is the first German Convert to this Principle, page 54 We correct
his Mistake about our Sal Catharricum Amarum, which he was informed to be only
a Chemical Composition, page 55 He prudently condemns, toward the latter End
of his Book, large Quantities of Water and much Motion, page 57
He has formerly conversed with our Virtuoso's and Physicians in England,
learned our Language, reads English Books, and the Transactions, and gives us
Pledges and Hopes of yet greater Performances.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Nature and Excellent Properties and Virtues of the Pyrmont
Waters, etc.
HAVING procured a Quantity of Pyrmont Waters, I made some Trials with them,
both internal and external, by Drinking them, and by other Experiments which
are here related. By the Taste I manifestly discovered that they contained a
rich Chalybeat Ingredient, far exceeding that of the best Spa Water I ever
tasted: The Spa Waters have justly the Preference, not only to our English
Steel Waters, but to all the Foreign Waters that are brought over, which made
me compare these with the Spa.

The Spa Waters are then looked upon to be most excellent, when they sparkle in
the Glass, and give a brisk Taste to the Palate. The Pyrmont Waters gave this
Proof of their Briskness, as soon as the Cork was opened, and the Air was
admitted, did make a notable Ebullition, like bottled Cider, and gave a smart,
spirituous, and pleasant Taste, and continued the brisk and high chalybeat
Relish to the last Glass, though we were some Hours about the drinking off a
Bottle of Two Quarts.

In Reference to the internal Use of these Waters, I prosecuted the following
Method: I got some excellent good Spa Waters, I drank them for 6 or 7 Days, a
Flask at a Time; I then drank the same Quantity of Pyrmont Water for 4 Days,
and afterward continued the Use of both these Waters alternately, until I had
drank about 20 Days: The Result of this Experiment was so plain and manifest to
me, that the Pyrmont Waters gave me more Spirit and Strength those Days I drank
them, than when I used the others; and I have good Reason to hope, that many
Persons will confirm this Experience of mine, when they shall be so happy as to
obtain these Waters.

The Pyrmont Water is by the Foreign Physicians reckoned amongst the Acidulae,
or sour Wells or Waters; I take the more Notice of this, because I gave a Glass
of it to more than one of my Friends, who were surprised at the Quickness of
the Taste, and called it sharp or acid; but when I made them drink another
Glass, and consider it better, they were forced to recant, and confess that the
smart and brisk Taste had misled them to call it acid or sour. Thus Cider and
soft Ale when bottled, may give a smart and acute Impression to the Palate,
though very far from being sour; and even Spirits, or volatile Alkalies of Sal
Ammoniac or of Hartshorn, when mixed with Water, do cause a smart and pungent
Affection on the Tongue; which is far from being acid.

But to bring this to a yet further Trial, whether an Acidity was prevalent, or
so much as to be found in these Waters, we dropped a good Proportion of Spirit of
Hartshorn and Spirit of Sal Ammoniac into these Waters, and did not find the
least Luctation or Motion appear, as they usually do with an acid.

I made a yet more critical and certain Examen of the Acidity said to be found
in Pyrmont Waters, by mixing them with Milk in various Measures and
Proportions, and I also gave various Degrees of Heat to them, some were tried
in a tepid or lukewarm, others in a boiling Heat, but did not curdle the Milk
at all; on the contrary, the Waters preserved the Milk for 4 or 5 Days from
curdling, or being sour; which strong Alkalies will do in like Manner. These
Experiments do sufficiently prove, that our Pyrmont Waters do not contain an
acid.

I often made these following Experiments to prove the chalybeat Properties or
Virtues of these Waters in my own private Room, and showed them to some
Friends: According to the common way of trying chalybeat Waters, I put a small
Quantity of powdered Gall, about half a Grain or less, to half a Pint of
Pyrmont Water, and stirred it about so as to make a sudden Mixture, and it did
in a Moment give a deep Purple Color; but if you drop the Powder gently on the
Surface of the Water, it will make a very fine Blue Tincture, more pleasant to
the Spectator, but far from being so curious as the following Tincture.

We took 4 or 5 Leaves of strong Green Tea, placed them in the Bottom of a
Glass, holding a quarter of a Pint, and pouring on the Pyrmont Water, and
stirred it not at all, we observed these Leaves to unfold themselves, and
gradually tinge these Waters with a fine caeruleous azure Blue, few Vegetables
do afford the like: Note, that if these, or any other Stipticks, (which are the
Praecipitators) do continue long in the Water, they give a deeper Purple, and
even at length an Atramentarius Color.

There is another Property in these Waters, which makes them more useful to us
than any Foreign Chalybeat Waters we yet know, that is, they do carry better,
and keep their Virtue longer, are not so soon spoiled by any accidental
Insinuations of the Air, as Spa, and other Iron or Chalybeat Waters are apt to
be. The Mineral is here thoroughly well united and mixed with this Water, so
that it does not easily precipitate, or separate from the Water; it carries
also a much greater Quantity of the Steel, or (as some call it) Vitriolic
Quality in it; and for these Reasons does the better pass the Vasa Lactea, and
communicate with the Blood it self, and work the more considerable Effects.

That these Pyrmont Waters do hold their Virtue beyond any other we know of,
appeared to me, because there was not one of those I opened, (some of which
were kept the whole Winter,) that diminished any Thing of the strong Iron or
Steel Taste. Moreover, I made this Experiment; I suffered a Bottle, or Flask of
Spa Waters, being about half full, to be unstopp'd, and exposed to the Air for
12 Hours; I examined it, and it did neither tinge nor taste of the Mineral, but
was insipid; but the Pyrmont Waters, exposed just after the same Manner, did
taste strong of the Mineral, nay, they continued to do so, and to give the
Tincture to Galls for 2 Days, and perhaps might have done so longer, but I
thought that sufficed.

In Order to the making good, or proving what has been asserted in the Account
of the Pyrmont Waters, These Experiments were made at a full Meeting of the
Fellows of the Royal Society, February the 28th, 17 16/17. Sir Isaac Newton,
President, being in the Chair.

1. THAT I might the better convince the worthy Members of the Royal Society,
of the promising Excellencies and Virtues of these Waters, (for very few had
ever tasted them before,) I brought a Bottle full of Pyrmont Waters that held
above Two Quarts, which I had kept since August last; The Weather being very
cold, I placed the Bottle so near the Fire, as to give it a little Warmth, or
to damask it, as they do to Wine; The Bottle being opened, the Water
immediately made a visible Ebullition, but not so much as it did in Summer, and
being poured out, did sparkle in the Glass: I presented a Glass of it to the
President, he said it was highly Chalybeat, and of a brisk and grateful Taste.
Most, if not all the Gentlemen present, tasted the Waters, did all agree with
the President, That they were a strong Chalybeat, or Steel Water, and of a
pleasant Taste; but amongst the rest, Doctor Douglas, a learned Physician,
declared, that his Glass of Water (which was a good large one) did give a very
kind and comfortable Warmth to his Stomach, which made him infer, that it would
prove of great Use, and be a notable Stomachick Medicine. I often found it to
affect my Stomach, much as it did his; but he proves a better Judge, because he
has avoided drinking Wine for many Years past. This being done,

2. I opened a Flask of the best Spa Waters I could get, which being poured
into the Glass, was presented also to the President, but had a very small and
low Taste of the Chalybeat, (and was judged so not only by him, but the rest who
tasted it) when compared with the Pyrmont Waters.

3. I also demonstrated in their Presence the Experiments abovementioned, by
putting 4 or 5 Leaves of Tea to a Glass of these Waters, and about half a Grain
of Galls to another, which presented them with a curious Blue or Purple Color;
that with Tea exceeded in Beauty the other.

In Reference to the Experiment abovementioned, as to the way of preserving
these Waters, it is now performed to more Advantage after this Manner: I filled
a Pint Bottle of Pyrmont Waters out of my great Bottle, which being well
stopped, was put into the Custody of the Curator, who brought it forth the next
Meeting, being full 7 Days, and then was found to hold a strong Chalybeat Taste,
and did tinge with Galls. It will prove a hard Matter to make the Spa Water
hold 7 Hours after this way of Management; So that on this Account these Waters
have some considerable Advantage, because many Persons cannot drink above half
a Flask at a Time of the Spa Water, by the next Morning the Remainder does lose
all its Virtue, and will taste much like common Water.

The Testimony of the President and some of the Fellows of the College of
Physicians.
IN the College of Physicians, at a Meeting of the Electors, a Bottle of
Pyrmont Waters was opened and tasted, and much commended for its promising
Virtue, and was allowed much to excel the Spa Water, (being examined at the
same time) both as to a more vigorous and medicinal Taste, and other Experiments
made before them.

This was attested By the most Learned Dr. Bateman, President, And by several
of the Electors then present.
March 4. 17 16/17

At the reading my first Account which I gave of the Virtue of the Pymour
Waters, it was discoursed and argued, that they contained a purging Quality in
them, which is not only asserted by Authors, but even by those that have
actually drank them, who have positively assured me, that they did purge them.
For my Part, I much questioned this general Effect of any Chalybeat Water, and
so soon as I drank them my self, I found the contrary, which was more agreeable
to the several Sorts of Steel Waters, whose Nature and Properties I have
examined, and are Printed by Sir Hans Sloan, in, the Transactions. See Vol. 28.
p. 247


Now to bring this to a fair Trial, whether any purging Ingredient can be found
in these Waters, I made this Experiment.

I evaporated a Quart of these Waters ad siccitatem, and then poured upon this
Remainder some Rain Water, enough to dissolve and take up the Salts; and then
having filtered this Solution, I then by a moderate Heat exhaled the Water,
which contained about 4 Grains of a brackish Salt, more like Sea Salt, than
that of the purging Waters. We may safely conclude, that so small a Quantity of
Salt in a Quart of Water, can by no Means be imagined to cause the least
Purgation, no not in an Infant; For since we have separated the Salts out of
the Purging Waters, and brought them into common Practice, we do find by
Experience, that 2 Drams, or 120 Grains, dissolved in a Quart of common Water,
purges very little; and that a whole Ounce of the true genuine Salts, is but a
usual Dose.

I have made it more than probable, in a former Examen of Steel Waters; (...)
for 1713. p. 249.
That Chalybeat Waters do contain stiptic and restringent Qualities in them,
and that they are derived from Iron Minerals, and more particularly the
Pyrites, which Doctor Lister suggests, (not without Reason) to be the Parent of
all Iron Oar. I have often examined at Deptford the Solution of the Pyrites by
Rain Water, out of which Copperas or Vitriol is made, and found it to be a very
strong Chalybeat Water: From this Mineral of Iron we have our strong stiptic
Powders and Waters to stop Bleedings, etc. for external and internal Use. A
judicious Use of Tunbridge and Spa Waters has cured obstinate and inveterate
Diarraeas, which did not yield to the Force of all other Medicines.

But notwithstanding our arguing to the contrary, it will De retorted upon us,
that there is Matter of Fact and Experience against us, that they really do
purge at Pyrmont, where they are drank: This Effect I soon conjectured to be
due to some irregular, or immoderate Use of these Waters; for I found above
Thirty Years past, the same Effect at Tunbridge, on those that drank the Waters
hastily and in profuse Quantities; they caused Giddiness, Sickness, Vomitings,
and Purgings; but since our Physicians have corrected these Irregularities, we
hear of no such Complaint; for all agree that these Waters are binding, and often
require opening Medicines. Now I am well informed at Pyrmont, that they are
ordered to drink large Quantities, often three or four Quarts or more of our
English Measure, and that pretty hastily; which makes it no Wonder that their
Weight presses and forces them thorough the Bowels, because a much less
Quantity of Rain, Pump, or Spring Water, do purge of themselves, as I have
experienced in my self a few Days past for the Cure of a Cardialgia, two Quarts
being drank hastily gave me about six Dejections; whereas if you drink these or
any Chalybeat Waters leisurely, and in just Quantities, they will pass off as
they should, by Urine only. And herein lies the Intention and great Use of
these altering Waters, which is to temper and meliorate the State of the Blood,
for they ought to prove a Cordial, and give Strength to the weak and depressed
Spirits; but if they chance to purge, the Patient will soon complain that he
loses Ground, and must use Means to check any Diarraea, and to make the Waters
go the right way by Urine, which he then finds will do him good, and produce
the desired Effect.

I am informed by a learned Physician, an English Archiater to our Sovereign,
That it seemed strange to several of the Pyrmont Water Drinkers of his
Acquaintance at Court, that any one should doubt of the purging Quality of
those Waters: I have my self also been told by more than one Physician, that
have been there upon the Place, That if they do not purge with us here, ^hey
must have lost that Quality by Carriage. But this I can further prove ^o be a
Mistake from manifest Argu^ents.

Only let me first premise, that Eng^and abounds with Purging Waters more ^han
other Countries; for there is scarce County that has not some of them; and I am
confident, that within Twen^y Miles of London, we have at least a Dozen I could
name; and there may ^e twice as many for ought I know. (...) do also premise,
that since the happy ^oundation of the Royal Society, (whose Motto is, Nullius
in Verba) all Sorts of Waters have been more carefully ex^erimented, and their
Properties discovered, and this has been done so ^icely by Dr. Lister, a great
Virtuoso, that he has found the Purging Salts ^o differ from all other Species
of Salts, and to be the same in all Purging Wa^ers, to have their own proper
and ^eculiar Figure, to be a Sal sui Generis. Doctor Grew, by its bitter Taste,
calls it ^al Catharticum Amarum; and it plainly ^ppears to be the only purging
Salt ^f our English Springs. The last named Dr. Grew, an ancient and early
Fellow of the Royal Society, has ushered this Medicine into the World, by
bringing it into a dry Salt; and recommending it into the Materia Media, which
is now of great Use to Mankind, is carried into remote Countries, even to the
East and West Indies, is the cheapest and most general Purge of this Kingdom.

This premised, I have hinted above, that a Quart of Pyrmont Water has very
little real Salt of any Kind, not enough to purge a Sparrow, and has little or
none at all of the Purging Cathartick Salt to be found in it, so that it cannot
purge, no, not even when drawn fresh out of the Well, and drank rationally,
that is, moderately: Nor is the Argument of any Validity, that it loses its
purging Faculty by Carriage; because the purging Salt is a fixed Salt, and will
carry as far as the Indies, as well as Salt Petre, or our common Kitchen Salt
will do; nay, will carry all the World over, and lose nothing of its Virtue,
though it be exposed to -the open Air, or dissolved in Water, being dried up it
recovers again.

If I may be any tolerable Judge my self, who am easily wrought upon by any
Lenitives, I do vouch, that the Pyrmont Waters have no laxative Operation at
all on me. The same Account I have from a learned Divine, who assured me, that
he found no purging Quality in the Use of them; We both drank them the last
Year. I do farther venture to prognostic, (and to my great Satisfaction of
their greater Virtue) That they will not purge them who shall drink a Flask of
these Waters, containing the Quantity of a Spa Flask; nay, I may venture to
say, two of those Flasks, if not drank hastily, nor with too much Motion.

Since I am upon the Topic of Purging, and we are mighty apt amongst us, I
mean the Ignorant, to talk much of carrying off some Relics of Diseases,
perhaps of Fevers; which, I fear, are often done precipitantly, and do bring on
Relapses. This brings to my Mind the Practice at Tunbridge for about 40 Years
past, when I frequented those Waters, That they did not only prepare the
Patient by Purges, for his Course of Drinking, which was very convenient, but
they did give strong Purges at the Conclusion of their Drinking. That sagacious
and considering Physician, Dr. Sydenham, (in whose Favor I had some Interest)
charged me to have a Care of being misled into that Error; assuring me, That
this Practice would destroy and carry off all the Strength and Virtue the
Patient gained in a Month's Drinking. He gave me a parallel Instance in the
Peruvian Bark, which sustained the same Damage by Purging, and it is disallowed
of every where by the Skilful; and yet we have in both these Cases, some very
ignorant, but confident Pretenders to Physic, who aver, That the Bark, as well
as Steel Waters, do leave behind them malignant and dangerous Qualities, if not
carried off by Purging Medicines: Which Practice is generally laid aside by the
Learned Physicians in England, and I hope in other Countries.

There is one Method also has been made Use of at Pyrmont, and other of the
Mineral Waters, which to me seems erroneous and dangerous, and ought to be
considered and examined, whether it does not cause some very bad Effects, and
that is, as I am told, the Physicians do order their Patients, with their
Bellies full of Water, to walk up and down hastily, and to bestir themselves
very nimbly: And I am also told from very good Authority, That it is common to
forbid such the Use of the Waters, who through Lameness, or other Impediments,
are disabled from Action or nimble Motion: But in England we often find the
contrary Method necessary, especially in tender and infirm Constitutions, in
whom the Operations of Medicines are most conspicuous and distinguished, for
these do feel the good Effects of being very still and sedate, of being quiet
both in Body and Mind: Of this the late Queen Anne was an eminent Instance, who
could never drink Tunbridge, Bath, or any other Diuretic Waters, but in her
Bed; which has been the Case of many others of my own Friends, with whom they
would not agree, nor pass off, if they walked with them, or took them in any
other Posture than lying. I am far from prescribing this Way promiscuously, and
to all Sorts of People, doubtless moderate walking may agree with many; I have
known where riding, after the Waters have been pretty well gone off, has done
no Harm; but I found in my self, when young and strong, very ill Effects in
Riding too soon after I had drank a Quantity of Mineral Waters, that my Legs
swelled, and an Erysipelas attended that Swelling.

An Anatomist, who well considers, that the Waters must circulate through the
Heart with the Blood, and from thence up and down through an Abundance of
ascending as well as descending Windings and Turnings, he will say, that the
upright or erect Posture will appear less likely to facilitate the Circulation
of the Blood, now loaded with Water, than the Horizontal Posture of lying on a
Couch or a Bed does: Experience it self confirms the Truth of this, not only of
my own, but of many other Water-Drinkers, of Tunbridge as well as of the Bath,
etc. whose Waters have not passed to any Degree in the Daytime, but these have
gone off very plentifully at Night in their Beds. I have for many Years past
recommended a large Glass of Bath Waters to my Friends, to be constantly taken
in their Beds every Night; for which Draught I have had the Thanks of many, but
never heard of any Harm received.

As a farther Argument against much Morion, when we drink the Chalybeat Waters,
(especially since they are generally used in hot Weather) we must avoid all
Methods that provoke Sweat, or dispose us to a quick Perspiration through the
cutaneous Glands, which we plainly feel and observe to be caused by much
Agitation or Walking, and by that Means the Current of the Waters is diverted
from its natural and proper Channel, and hindered from passing by Urine, which
ought to be encouraged.

I now appeal to the Judgment of the most wise and learned Persons of this
Honorable Society, who have been the Authors of so much Good to Mankind;
whether these Arguments for regulating the Use of these noble medical Waters,
have not some Weight, and may not deserve to be considered, and not condemned
untried: This I am sure, that this Method is no wise hazardous to the Lives of
Men; whereas the great Weight and Load of Water in the Blood, (for all Persons
cannot throw them off per Sedem) must needs produce some ill Effects. The great
Quantity may too much extend and spoil the Stomach, may cause Diseases of the
Head, Vertigo's, Apoplexies, break down the Lymphaeducts, and make an Ascitis,
the worst of Dropsies; and cause those very Diseases, which a moderate Use
would certainly cure.

It may perhaps be looked upon as an Omission, for having taken no mow Notice
of the fixed Parts, or of the Ingredients which are to be found in all
Chalybeat Waters, and therefore in the Pyrmont. For I mention only a small
Quantity of Water evaporated ad siccitatem, and I have made Use only of the
watery Element to dissolve the Salts, and examine their Figure and Taste, that I
might reduce them to their proper Species of Salts. As to the Salts, I never
failed of a Sal Marine, but found it in all Sorts of Mineral Waters, (though in
some in very small Quantity,) which is not to be wondered at, since it is very
probable, that our Fountains and Wells may owe their Original to the Sea; and
so may not altogether strain off all, and clear themselves, by Transcolation
through the Earth, of every saline Particle. Moreover, the Earth it self does
not only furnish whole Hills or Rocks of Salt, but has smaller Veins, and even
Grains of Salt scattered up and down, which are again absorbed by small
Rivulets, or Currents of Water, and do in more or less Quantity impregnate
stagnating Wells, or flowing Fountains.

I have indeed formerly examined the Remains or fixed Parts of many of our
ferruginous Waters; I have generally found them much the same, for all of them
do contain Iron Particles; but those that abounded most with Sediment, held a
crude gross Ocre, and would give the deepest and blackest Tincture to the
Water, and had the least Virtue in them. The Chemist having collected a good
deal of this Substance, makes it pass through many a fiery Trial by
Calcination, Reverberation, etc. at length he brings forth a Powder of a
Reddish or deep Yellow, and shall adorn it with a fine Name, perhaps he will
call it a Crocus Martis, or a Saffron of Steel; (this Name he borrows from one
of our most excellent Vegetables, Saffron,) or else his Fancy shall run upon
another Notion, and shall call it a Sulphur of Mars; and not rest here, but
endeavor to make up the Three Chemical Principles, namely, Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury; he will call it Sulphur, though it be incombustible; it must be a
Salt, though it be undissolvable; and a Mercury, although it look like a Gravel
Stone. To what Purpose all this Labor and Pains? whereas,

1. The very Taste tells us, that the Spa Waters are impregnated with Chalybeat
or Iron Particles.

2. Our Eyes will tell us, that we may see Iron in these Waters to a
Demonstration; if you put a little Powder or Solution of Galls to these Waters,
it gives a black Color, and will make Ink. Now since we have in England not
any one Thing that gives a black Color, or is dyed black, but what comes from
Iron; none will doubt at first Sight of this Experiment, whether the Waters do
belong to the Iron Original or no. In England we abound much with the Pyrites,
or Copperas Stone, out of this we make great Quantity of this Copperas, which
is almost all Iron. The Dyers make Use of it to give the black to Woollen,
Linen, Silks, etc. by boiling it in Water with Galls, and without it we cannot
give a good black to one Yard of Cloth.

To me these two easy and sensible Experiments, made with little Cost and
Trouble, do as plainly exhibit the Iron Quality, as if I had evaporated some
Gallons of these Waters, and had passed the Recrements through Chemical Fires,
and had with a Loadstone (as I have done formerly in the like Case) taken up
the very Substance of Iron.

But after all these pompous and elaborate Experiments, by which we pretend to
examine and analize these excellent Waters, we must return to the Waters
themselves, whose Virtue lies in their Synthesi, or natural Constitution in the
Form of Waters: As such, let us endeavor to make them as useful as possible;
for without all doubt, they do contain Medicines adapted to the Cure of many
Diseases, which will succeed more effectually, if the Physicians, especially he
that practices at the Fountain Head, do abound in Piety and Charity.

1. Let him not disparage the munificent Author of this great Medicine, for its
not being made by the Hands of proud or weak Man: Let him not say, as some
Wretches have done, that these Waters are only a good Vehicle for his own wiser
and better Compositions; but rather let him ascribe to the great Founder of
these noble Medicines, the due Tribute of Thanks and Praise.

2. Let his Charity be expressed to his Neighbor, by applying these Waters
with the utmost Care and Skill he can, by giving them after a due Manner, in
just Proportion and Quantity, and not pour into the Stomach whole Deluges of
Water, to break down Nature's Boundaries; but setting aside all Prejudices and
Self Ends, let him regard what Symptoms they best relieve, and what stubborn
Diseases they most effectually cure. Let him not, from a vain and ambitious
Conceit, pretend to improve these Waters, by adding some Chemical Drops or
Fancies of his own; for these often give a nauseous Taste to the grateful
Waters, and may not only defraud the Drinker of his pleasant Draught, but also
of the superior Virtue inherent in the Waters themselves. This Method is too
much practiced amongst us, and often injuriously, and deserves to be censured.

A List of some of those Diseases, which Chalybeat Waters are prescribed to
cure.
1. THEY are a proper Remedy for most Diseases of the Stomach, as Want of
Appetite, or Defects of Digestion from Weakness or Relaxation of the Fibers of
the Stomach; also canine and excessive Appetites, sour and bitter Vomitings,
Heart-burning, or Cardialgia, and many other Stomach Distempers.

2. Diseases of the Bowels, such as painful and griping Colicks proceeding from
corrosive or fretting Salts, contained in the bilious, or other glandulous
Juices of the Bowels; these are diluted, altered, or sweetened by the Chalybeat
Virtue of these healing Waters; and the Chyle it self is better prepared and
elaborated in the Region of the Bowels, and being freed from distempered
Qualities, is conveyed into the Blood, better adapted for Sanguification. In
Hypocondriack Diseases, where pent up Vapors and flatulent Humors rack and
lacerate the tender Fibers and Membranes of the Stomach and Bowels, these
salutiferous Waters are esteemed specific.

3. Their Virtue is not confined to those Parts called the primae viae, or
first apparatus of the Chyle, but extends farther, even penetrates the Mass of
Blood, and is of manifest Use to cure the Jaundice, and even Dropsies, (if not
too far gone.) It dilutes and washes the Scorbutic Salts out of the Blood, and
at the same time washes off the Gravel, and smaller Stones collected in the
Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder, and prevents their Concretions in those Parts
again. By them the latent Seeds of many Diseases fixed in the Organisk Parts,
such as the most sagacious Physician cannot perceive, are carried off, or
obliterated in their Original. Sickly and squalid Countenances, visible
Indications of a depraved State of Health, shall, after a convenient Use of
these Waters, look healthful and sanguine: By these the very Texture of the
Blood is mended, drooping Spirits are cheered, exhilirated, and enabled to do
the various Offices of Nature more strenuously, and they affect our Spirits
with a much more ^ind and benign Influence, without ^eating, ruffling, or
inflaming them, which Wine and Artificial Spirits are apt to do. I should
rather trust to these for the Cure of a Diabetes, by what I have seen in my
self, than to the insipid and scarce tepid Waters of Bristol.

I have now given a short Hint only of some few of those Diseases for which
these Waters are proper; Time would fail me to enumerate them all.

This gives a great Reputation unto the Excellency of these Waters, that when
Physicians have in vain applied their own Preparations to obtain a Cure, they
are forced to fly to these Divine Remedies, and do very often find their
Account here.

Since it is agreed, by the general Consent and Experience of Nations, to
ascribe extraordinary Virtues to these Sorts of Fountains that are impregnated
with Chalybeat Particles, and therefore are called Steel Waters; I hope I have
done this my Native Country, not only a Piece of Justice, but an acceptable
Service, in these my Endeavors to recommend to them these particular Waters of
Pyrmont, especially since it appears, that they do in many Degrees surpass any
of our own Waters, in their Medicinal Properties, or any others that are
brought to us from Foreign Parts.

There are some particular Advantages and Privileged which belong to this
Chalybeat Fountain, for this Spring abounds with a vast Quantity of Water, it
is more portable, carries, and holds its Virtue better than any other; I have
kept it a Summer and Winter without Decay; it is situated as near the Sea Side
as any Foreign Water, and requires less Land Carriage; and, I doubt not in
Time, so soon as a Trade is settled, it will be brought over much cheaper than
any Sort of Foreign Water from Abroad.

It can be no Objection to me against these Pyrmont Waters, which I find some
have complained of beyond the Sea, that these are too heavy and too strong of
the Mineral. I do allow them to contain a very great Proportion of that
Ingredient in them, as a Proof of their Excellency; for the Mineral here is not
a gross and heavy Ocre, but finely rectified and exalted; a Vitriol (not to be
matched by humane Art) well dissolved in its watery Vehicle. For Want of
Instruments, I could not make the Experiment so very nice, but yet I found that
^he Waters of this Spring were not at ^ll more (but rather less) ponde^ous ^han
common Rain Water, as to the Specific Gravity.

We may allow that these Waters may ^e too strong for some weak Stomachs, ^his
is easily remedied by mixing a just Proportion of good fair Water with it. We
must not condemn good strong Wine because some Constitutions cannot ^ear it by
its self, but when mixed with Water it proves a great Cordial.

It was a great Satisfaction to me to have this Notion confirmed by the most
Learned Archiater to King George, Dr. Steigerthall, a Fellow of the Royal
Society, and of the College of Physician; who cured a tender Lady laboring
under se^eral desperate Distempers, (when, she could not bear the Water of the
Well) ^y mixing equal Parts of simple Water with the Pyrmontane. He further
recommends this Method to be made Use of by others, if they have any Reason to
^uspect these Waters to disagree with them as being too strong. For my Part,
(...) think it a great Benefit to us in Eng^and, that we are directed to a
Water of a Strength superior to any in Use amongst us, which I hope, and am
persuaded, will rejoice the Hearts, and animate the drooping Spirits of many a
sad and hypocondriack Soul; for whom most of our Chalybeats are found too weak.

It is a strong Argument that Chalybeat Waters, particularly the Spa, have
given great Satisfaction, and done much good, because they have been much more
prescribed and used amongst us of late Years than formerly; and they would
still be in greater Vogue if they were not adulterated, or if the true Waters
from the Spa could be brought to us in Perfection with their original Strength,
which (I am sorry to say) can rarely be brought to pass. On the other Hand,
those of Pyrmont, with but a very moderate Care in stopping, can scarce fail of
being delivered to us in their full Strength. I am fully persuaded that
Experience will soon evince and demonstrate the Truth of this Assertion.

It is another Misfortune, that the Chalybeat Fountains of Water, such as
Tunbridge, etc. can be only applied to in the warm Weather, for four or five
Months in the Year; but since these Waters, (which were brought before the
Royal Society in Winter) after they were a little warmed by the Fire, did then
give very good Proof of their admirable Virtue, we may hence be secured of
their being like to be brought into Use, even in the severest Winters.

I cannot pass by a Proposition of the abovenamed Learned Physician, Dr.
Steigerthall, my worthy Friend, who, in a curious Tract of his, gives an
Account of great Variety of Waters in Germany and other Places, and
particularly mentions this, That at Swalbach, when the Weather is cold, they
bring the Waters to the Fire, and warm them before they drink them: He proposes
the making these Waters warm by an ignited Rod or Gad of Iron; the Doctor
confesses with great Modesty that he never made the Experiment, but to me it
seems so rational, that it ought to be taken Notice of; and that it may be made
practical, give me leave to add these Directions. Take a small Bar or Rod of
Iron, about a Foot long, fit a wooden Handle to one End, to be put on or off at
Discretion, pour off half a Pint of Water out of the Flask, into a convenient
Vessel of Silver or China, not of Glass, plunge the ignited Iron into the
Water, bring the Water to a very low Degree of Heat; when you pour off more out
of the Flask, get your Heaters always ready. In this Experiment you lose none
of the Chalybeat Virtue of the Waters, but rather receive an Addition from the
heated Iron. You obviate another Inconvenience, when a whole Flask is warmed in
boiling Water, as we use the Bath Waters, it will be apt to despirit and make
the whole Bottle flat and lifeless. But this Way may these Pyrmont Waters in
the coldest Seasons of the Year be drank, with the same Virtue, and therefore
with as much Benefit as in Summer, nay, perhaps with many People to better
Advantage; The Waters being more likely to pass off by Urine in cold Weather,
than in the hot Summer.

Whereas I have animadverted above upon the great Quantity of Waters that are
drank, at the sour Brunns or Acidulae (so called) abroad, it seemed to me
incredible that any Person should drink for several Days successively, such an
extravagant Quantity as that of six or seven Quarts of our English Measure,
which I now no more doubt of, having read it in Dr. Steigerthall's ingenious
Treatise; though I am very well assured, that it was never done with his
Advice, nor with his Approbation. It is the more surprising to us, because we
do see very good Effects of a single Flask of Spa Waters, (when they are good,
that is, brisk and vigorous) in recovering Health, provided they are continued
for near a Month more or less. One of these Flasks does not fully contain a
Quart and half of English Measure. It must be allowed, that there may be now
and then a Case extraordinary, which will require greater Quantities than what
is usual, but rarely any Thing so excessive as what is here mentioned: Amongst
our Bath Patients, the Quantity of Two of our Quarts is esteemed a large
Proportion; and most abide at One, or Three Pints: And Two Quarts of the
Chalybeat are reckoned a large Dose, and to be allowed to only very strong
Persons.

An Examen of the Chalybeat or Spa Waters, called by the Germans Acidulae, or
sour Brunns or Wells, are proved to be of a contrary Nature, that is, Alkalies:
By Dr. Fred. Slare.
This was Printed in the Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. 28. for the
Year, 1713. Now, at the Request of some Friends, is placed here.

I Have for many Years past, had more than a bare Suspicion, that Physicians
and Learned Persons had imposed upon themselves and others, erroneous Notions
about the Nature and Properties of those Mineral Waters which are of the
Chalybeat or Iro^ Species. Germany abounds much with these Waters, and they
bestow one general Name upon them, and call them sour Brunns, that is, sour
Wells o^ Springs of Water. The Learned Germans, when they name them, or writ^
of them, do call them Acidulae, Ex. gr^ Spadenses, Swalbaccenses, vel
Pyrmontanae, etc. Henricus ab Heers agrees with Vitruvius, Fallopius, and the
sagacious Helmont, and other Men of great Fame, in justifying the Acidity of
several Sorts of Spa and Chalybeat Waters; but not being satisfied with their
Reasons, assigns others; and after a tedious and obscure Harangue, concludes,
that they owe their Birth and great Virtues to Vitriol and Sulphur. He
observes, that Vitriol and Sulphur are found in the Glebe or Earth, from whence
these Waters do spring, but yet does not give us one Proof or Experiment of his
having found any real Vitriol, or true Sulphur, or any Acidity in those Waters.
He fills his Book with Imaginations and Quotations, exposing other Men's
Ignorance, whilst he himself is plunged in the same common vulgar Error.

Doctor Jordis, an eminent Physician at Francford, and a Fellow of the Royal
Society, did formerly visit the famous Well or sour Brunn at Swalbach in Summer
time, and practiced there during the Season: I was my self then examining the
Nature of all Sorts of Waters, Cathartick and Chalybeat, or Steel Waters, and
the other which contain the bitter purging Salts; my Request to this very
Learned Physician was, That he would give me an Account of the Contents of the
said Water, numbered amongst the Acidulae; particularly, whether by
Distillation he could obtain any Thing sour or acid, as Vinegar and Juice of
Oranges will do this Way; but he could not satisfy me that the least Drop of
acid did rise, or distill over. He also evaporated a great Quantity of this
Water ad siccitatem, and thought that he found some Sulphurous Parts in it;
but Sulphur it self is far from being an acid, but the contrary. He also found
Ocre and other ferrugineous Particles contained in it, but these we find in all
Chalybeat Waters, which do truly belong to the Nature of Alkalis, and not of
Acids.

That which gave me the first Suspicion, that the Chalybeat Waters did not
contain any rough or acid Salts in them, proceeded from an accidental Use of a
very strong Iron Water, which happened to me above Thirty Years ago, in such a
Place, where I could get no other: In this Water I dissolved my Soap, washed my
Hands, and found it to lather beyond my Expectation, I also shaved with it. I
afterward tried some other Chalybeat Waters, which did the same, that is, much
better than Pump Water did.

I. I consulted my Palate, and tried whether I could discover any Sharpness or
Acidity in our English Steel Waters at Tunbridge, at the Black-Boy in the
Parish of Franfield in Sussex, at Hampstead, Sunning-Hill in Berkshire, and
other Places; But I was so far from discovering any such Thing, that these
Waters seemed rather to leave a sweetish Flavor or Farewell behind: Thus many
Alkaly Salts, if nicely examined, (of the fixed Kind) have affected my Taste.

II. I made Experiments with several Sorts of such Spirits as are apt to
ferment with Acids, such as Spirit of Hartshorn, of Sal Ammoniac, etc. but
these made no Ferment, nor any Motion, or Effervescence in these Waters.

III. I considered the Diseases in Humane Bodies, which those Waters were
prescribed by Physicians to cure; That they were often such as proceeded from
sharp, acid, or acrimonious Causes, as Cardialgia, or Heart Burnings, sour
Vomitings, corrosive Diarraea's, Colicks from Scurvies and Stranguries; and
that for these Distempers sweetning and alkalisate Remedies are made Use of.

IV. I considered these Waters as containing in them the Properties of Iron,
and I find by Experience, that it is most opposite to Acids, being one of their
great Correctors; and therefore rather to be esteemed an Alkaly.

1. Take some Filings of Iron, perhaps a Dram, and pour on them about an Ounce
of the milder Acids, such as Vinegar, Verjuice, or the Juice of Limons, and it
will destroy the Sharpness of these Juices: Or if you pour on these Filings,
Mineral Acids, as the very corrosive Spirit of Nitre, or of Salt, or what is
called Oil of Vitriol, they will immediately lose their Acidity, be disarmed of
their sharp Points, and by Evaporation give a Salt that will taste sweetish, and
is by Chemists called Saccharum Martis, if duly prepared, which is safely given
inwardly, and is esteemed a good altering Medicine.

2. Steel beaten to a fine Powder, is without any farther Preparation given
inwardly with great Success for Stomachick Diseases, as in the Green Sickness,
Hypocondriack, and various other acid and acrimonious Disaffections.

V. I considered Milk to be a very proper and obvious Subject to bring this
Controversy to a plain and unquestionable Decision. I made this Experiment with
all possible Exactness: I first proved the Chalybeat Waters, more particularly
the Spa Waters, by trying whether, they tinged with Galls. These being very
good, I put Part of the Waters to cold Milk, some I only made Lukewarm, and
some I boiled together in equal Proportions; But they were so far from
affording any Curd or Coagulation, that they continued several Days without
being sour. Since Mineral Waters, especially those that are Chalybeat, are of
such important Use in Physic, and have gained amongst us so just a Reputation
for their excellent Virtues, and are the greatest Refuge in very potent and
obstinate Diseases; This has made me judge it a Work not unacceptable to
Virtuoso's, especially those of the Faculty of Physic, to have this Medicine
fairly examined, its genuine Properties asserted, and what was called an Acid,
to be demonstrated an Alkaly. Is it not a Sort of Justice due to the World,
that the Germans, who sent us over these Waters, with this false Character of
sour Waters, should banish this misguiding Term from their Spa's?

It is from this Mistake, that their Physicians do prohibit the Use of all
Manner of Lacticinia, as if they were as noxious as deadly Poisons, whilst they
are in a Course of their Medicinal Waters, unjustly called Sour Brunns.

Since this Prejudice has prevailed very much amongst most of our Water
Drinkers in England, I do attest, that I have frequently advised in some Cases,
Milk to be given daily in the Evening, through a whole Course of Steel Waters,
with good Effect: Nay, I do affirm, that some others could not bear these
Waters without having a Third Part of Milk or more, mixed with them; and have
continued them so for many Weeks with good Advantage: Nor do I find the least
Reason to prohibit the Use of Milk in a Course of Bath Waters, having been
there above a Year and half, making the best Scrutiny I could into the
Properties; Virtues, and Vices (if they have any) of those Waters: Here we use
Asses Milk Morning and Afternoon in the Use of Bath Waters; nor did I ever
forbid Cows Milk, where it agreed with that Person, at any other Time.

VI. Since our Experiments discover, that those Things which are of a sweetning
Alkalisate Nature, do so very well agree with these Mineral Waters, it will
appear by the following Experiment, that Acids do very much disagree.

1. I put but one Drop of Oil of Vitriol to a large Glass full of strong Spa
Waters, which, before the Addition of this Acid, did give a deep Purple to the
Solution of Galls, but now would not give the least Tincture, though I put in
Four Times, as much of the Galls: From hence I conclude, That the Virtues of
the Chalybeat Ingredients, which I take to be the Life and Soul of these
Waters, were so far bound up or destroyed, as to have lost their Cordial, or
corroborating Faculty, and that the Bile or Gall in the Humane Bowels, could
not be able to separate the Chalybeat (which are the only medical) Particles,
and mix them with the Chyle, in order to answer any End in Physic.

Let this be a Caution to those that design to make these Waters pass better by
Urine, that they do not make Use of any Acids, it being a common Practice to
use Spirit of Vitriol, Spiritus Nitri dulcis, etc. as a Diuretic, unless it
should so happen, that they have a Design to take off and divest them of their
warm Cordial or altering Power, and so to bring them near to common Water;
which I must confess we are forced to do, especially in the Use of Bath Waters,
in some hot inflammatory Cases.

2. I shall conclude with one short Experiment in Favor of our Alkalies; That
if you put any Alkaly Salt, volatile or fixed, such as volatile Salt of
Hartshorn, or of Sal Ammoniac, or fixed Salt of Tartar, of Wormwood, or any
other true Alkaly, you will then destroy the abovenamed acid Spirit which was
dropped into the Water, and will recover the Virtue of the Waters, and dispose
them to give their Tincture as they used to do in their natural State.

POSTSCRIPT
AFter many fruitless Attempts to get a Book from Germany, which treated of
these Waters ex professo, at length I obtained these Two, of which I shall give
a short Account; they did not come to my Hand until my little Tract was
finished, and my Papers were actually with the Printer.

The First I shall take Notice of, is one Dr. Cunaeus, whose Book was Printed
about Seven Years since; of whom I shall have Occasion to say very little,
because he treats of many Niceties and Impertinencies to the Cure of Diseases;
he enumerates an Abundance of his Arcanum's and Nostrum's, and imputes such
extraordinary Virtues to them, which make these sanative Waters, and all other
Materia Medica, needless. As to the Nature of the Waters, he had not the least
Imagination of their being any Thing else, but an Acidula, or sour Brunn; but
this mistaken Notion will do less Harm than his Practice did, who, Page 17.
directs the Patient at his first Drinking to begin with Two Quarts of the
Waters; in another Place he gives a great Charge to the Water-Drinker, to have
a great Care of meddling with that dangerous Thing Milk, and remarks, that
several Children having drank these Waters, upon eating Milk, did fall into
Convulsions and other Diseases. He also observes, That several Persons who did
put Sugar into these sour Waters, and others, who drank a Glass of Wine betwixt
their Draughts of Waters, did by this Means fall into dangerous Distempers. As
to Milk, not only my own Experience of many Years standing, discharges it from
causing any bad Effects if used the same Day, wherein the Patient drinks
Chalybeat Waters, but I have the concurring Testimony of the best of our
Physicians now alive, as well as of many that are lately dead, that they have
put their Patients into a Course of joining Milk with our Steel Waters at
Tunbridge, and other Places, and have had the good Success of making the Waters
agree better with the Patient, and have cured that Disease this Way, which they
could not do by by the Waters alone. His judging and censuring Sugar for having
had malignant Influences on those that dissolve it in these Waters, is
absolutely intolerable. Is it possible, that so innocent and pleasant a Balsam
can do any Harm? I have several Times caused my Patients at the Bath to mix
fine white Sugar Candy with their Waters with very good Success. I little
suspected to have a Glass of Wine forbid by a German, which I have found a
necessary Diuretic for some. The Prohibition of mixing Wine with Chalybeat
Waters to be drank at Meals will never take Place in England, because both
strong and weak, the healthy and sickly, do conspire with us here to drink it
mixed at Meals, and declare it to be both pleasant and beneficial. But it is
high Time to pass over such Trifles, and to look into the following Author.

Doctor Seippius, appointed by Prince Waldeck, (the Proprietor of these Watess)
to be the only Physician to practice at Pyrmont, has published his Book this
Year, 1717.

This ingenious and very industrious Person has taken much Pains to examine and
enquire into the Principles and Operations of these Waters. He has made many
curious and useful Experiments, which have led him nearer the Standard of
Truth, than any of his Predecessors. For those Contents or Ingredients which he
found in the Sediment of the Water, he is forced to con^ess, that they are all
Alkalies, and that hey cannot exert the least acid Effect in the Waters, but
rather owns them to have a healing and balsamic Quality; so that in reality he
ought to declare himself a Proselyte to my new Notion, that even this Pyrmont
sour Brunn, is a sweet dulcifying Water, and a true Alkaly.

But yet such is the Prejudice of Custom and common Opinion, that even this
candid Author cannot altogether in the first Part of his Tract clear himself of
this wrong Notion, of these Waters having an acid or sour Taste, which does ^ot
appear to me, nor to any of my Friends, who attentively consider it. He also
thinks, that there is a latent Acid concealed in these Waters, and that it
comes from the Sulphur of the Pyrites, from which these medicated Waters are
derived; but still he confesses, that this Acid can exert no manner of Effect,
being quite subject to those Alkalies contained in the Water.

The Contents of these Waters, he says, are a sweet, subtle, Alkaly Earth, have
the Selenites, or somewhat like a transparent Crystal, a small Quantity of
Salt, Iron and Sulphur. We do even in our Mineral Waters, especially in that of
the Bath, find a Sort of a Cretaceous Substance, which we say is from the Lapis
Calcarius; (with which our Earth in England does much abound) and seems to be
that very transparent Substance which he calls Selenites, and the sweet Alkaly
Earth. Iron is indeed a very great Alkaly, absorbs and corrects all Acids, as
we have proved to a Demonstration in this Tract. See Page 40, 41.
It is from the Sulphur or Brimstone which he discovers in those Waters, that
an Acidity or Sourness is thought to be derived to these Waters, which still is
only imaginary, because the contrary Quality appears to be there.

I must own, That I formerly never so much as doubted Sulphur to be other than
an Acid, having always heard so much Talk of the very sharp Oil of Sulphur, and
Gas of Sulphur, besides the very suffocating and acrimonious Vapor of
Brimstone, when kindled or made to flame, might easily impose such a false
Opinion upon the unwary; but Experiment will prove just the contrary, and we
shall find it rather to belong to the Alkalies, and not to have the least Show
or Footstep of an Acid in it: No, not to have so much of the Acid in it, as the
pleasant and sweetest Wine of Italy, or the Canaries contain in them; for
these, when boiled with Milk, make a strong Curd, which Sulphur will not do.

The Experiment. We took a Dram of Flowers of Brimstone, and a quarter of a
Pint of Milk, and boiled them together, they did not in the least curdle the
Milk, but made it taste more soft and balsamic than it did before. If you taste
Sulphur, it lies soft upon the Tongue, does not give the least subacid Relish;
on the contrary, from hence are our healing and pectoral Balsams made, and many
cutaneous and itching Distempers of the Skin, where the Humors do tare and
lacerate the superficial Parts, Sulphur is made Use of as a vulnerary, and
cures beyond most other Applications. It is true it has a strong offensive
Smell, but not the least of an acid Smell, Taste, or Quality, unless you reduce
it to Flame; and then it is no longer Sulphur, but what proceeds from it is
actually a Creature of the Fire. Let me give one common Instance, to show the
Difference between a Substance in its natural State, and when brought to an
actual Flame, viz. good Oil of Olives may be swallowed for a healing, pleasant,
inward Medicine, and is outwardly applied to ease an Inflammation or heal a
Sore; in like manner the Tallow of a Candle may be applied to a sore Part, but
if you touch the Flame of either of these, you will be made sensible, that they
have lost all their Properties, and that what was a vulnerary, is become now of
a corrosive and devouring Nature.

I perceive, that this sedulous Author has by strong Fires distilled some acid
Spirits out of great Quantities of the Sediment of the Pyrmont Waters, which
may well be obtained from those Salts and Sulphurs, he says, are contained in
them; but whatever they are, I do positively assert these acid Spirits to be
Creatures of the Fire, and not to have been originally in the Water; Thus Oil
of Vitriol (which our Author truly asserts to be the same with Oil of Sulphur)
is only Fire wrapped up, or incorporated in a little moist Vehicle, will burn
your Flesh, raise Blisters, heat Water, and give many other Proofs of its fiery
Nature; which it may well do, having been perhaps 24 Hours a constant ignited
Body of Fire.

Having proved Sulphur to be an Alkaly, this will furnish our Author with one
Argument more, and a very strong one, to establish the Opinion, that our
Chalybeat Waters are Alkalies, not Acidulae; for what Refuge can the Acidist
fly to in order to the supporting the Notion of these Waters being an Acidula,
or a sour Brunn; since even Brimstone it self (contained in these Waters, and
judged an unquestionable Acid) proves to be the Reverse, or just contrary?

I must acknowledge my self very much indebted to him for this following
Experiment, which alone would suffice to put a finishing, decisive Stroke to
all this Controversy: In Page 109. he says, That these Waters do make a pretty
strong Effervescence with all Sorts of Sours, as with Vinegar, Wine, Spirit of
Nitre, of Salt, of Vitriol: This Experiment outdoes all I ever met with, for
none of our Waters (though some of them seem full of Iron) do in the least
pretend to such an Alkaly, as in the least to ferment with Acids. But if this
should fail, as I can scarce think it will, because it is so positively
asserted, that when fresh taken up at the Fountain Head it does ferment; yet
the following Experiment exhibits as certain, though not so sudden a
Demonstration. He makes Use of Milk, and boils it with his Waters, and
declares, that they will not curdle, but rather that they do preserve the Milk
from coagulating: See Page 148, 248. of this Author. He makes the same
Experiment and Observation with mine Printed in the Transaction above 3 Years
since, and since reprinted here. Page 41.
And infers as we do, that this is a strong Argument of the Alkalies contained
in these Waters.

Our Author takes Notice of a Quantity of Salt he finds in these Waters, at the
utmost 14 Grains in a Quart, to which he would ascribe the same purging Virtue;
that our purging Salts have; but having had a Desire to satisfy my self in this
Matter, I caused a very ingenious Chemist to make an accurate Examen of these
Waters new brought over, and he obtained about Ten Grains of Salt which one
Quart afforded; this Salt consisted of a considerable Proportion of Sea Salt
mixed with a bitter Salt; but had the Water held ten times the Quantity of that
Compound Salt, it could not have caused one Purge, especially since these
Waters are in themselves restringent, and guarded with stiptick Ingredients.

Now we are giving due Praises to the Pyrmont Waters, we may also expect that
Justice be done to our English purging Salts, which are deservedly introduced
and received in our Materia Medica: This Author wrong represents them as a
Chemical Composition of some Alkaly or other, joined with an Acid: To my
certain Knowledge many Centners of Pounds have been made out of our Purging
Waters; but now indeed they have found out another Sort of a Minera, which
produces this very particular Salt, and is of the very same Figure, Taste, and
Operation; but after this Way it can be made at less Expense, which still
contributes more Good to Mankind. There is no more Art used in making this
admirable Salt, than in making our common Sea Salt, there is nothing added to
it, only other Mixtures are separated from it. Our Sea Salt may more
pertinently be styled an Artificial Chemical Composition than this purging
Salt, because there are more Things added to make that Granulat than are
required for this, though they are both hewn from off the same Rock, or dug out
of the same Mine. I do not think it the worst Action of my Life for having been
an early Instrument in preparing and bringing this purging Salt into Practice;
having made and used it before Doctor Grew, that excellent Physician, published
it to the World: It was once at 20 s. the Pound, he brought it to 8 s. I
rejoice to see it, for the good of the Poor, at 12 d. the Pound: So that now
they may have 16 Purges for one Shilling.

I have remarked above, that of late our Practice condemns the giving large
Quantities of our ferruginous Waters. Our Author here goes on somewhat fast in
advancing so high as to direct Three Quarts of Water to be given to the Drinker
the Third Day, but he makes a Stand at Four Quarts: I know it is a hard Matter,
where the Practice of Drinking great Quantities has been continued so long, not
to be born down with the Torrent of ancient Custom; but yet I must say in his
Commendation, that though he be yet a young Man, he sees the Error, and will
doubtless shake off the Prejudice of Custom and Education: For in Page 203. he
confesses, that it were safer and better to drink the Waters more moderately,
and, as he says, not to offer Violence to Nature, but to allow more Time for a
Cure.

This very Method would prevent another Inconvenience of Purging so much as
they do; for if they did not overcharge the Drinker with such Abundance of
Water, there would generally speaking) be no need of Catharticks to discharge
that Burden.

Both later and former Drinkers of the mentioned Waters at P^^mont, have
related to me, that they were advised by the Learned, and compelled by the
Example of most Drinkers, to use much Motion to make their Waters pass the
better; but surely in the Heat of Summer it must necessarily make them sweat,
and hinder the right Evacuation by Urine. This is censured above, and I am
pleased to find this Physician prudently recommend a less violent Motion to his
Patient, such as shall create no Sweat; I am in good Hopes, that the discreet
Conduct of so worthy a Person, will correct and cure some of those Errors,
which Length of Time has fixed and rooted; and that he will make these Waters
still more beneficial to those that drink them there.

I will conclude with a Quotation he has furnished me with, from Professo^
Hoffman's Dissertation: Upon whose Testimony I set a great Value, because he is
a most excellent and consummate Physician, and a curious Chemist: He says,
Optimi qui virtute omnes, nostro quidem judicio, antecellunt, sunt fontes
Pyrmontani. And farther: That upon a^ Examen he had made of many Waters the
Pyrmont excelled all in the Subtilt^ and Plenty of Spirits. I have now obtained
a Parcel of these Waters, which are come to my Hands, and are ver^ good, and do
answer the Character given of them.

A short Examen of a Treatise of Iron Waters, but especially of Ipswich Spa;
Dedicated to the College of Physicians, 1717.
THE unknown, or concealed Author, will doubtless be found out at Ipswich,
especially at this Fountain Head, with a vast Train of Patients daily crouding
about these All-healing Waters; to which he ascribes such superlative Virtues,
as far exceed all other Waters, but especially German Spa Waters: We are very
severely chid and censured for our great Vanity and Folly in buying, and Cheats
in selling these Waters; and that we may be sure not to overlook this Censure,
it is put in the Title Page of this Book.

The Characters or Encomiums he gives, or attributes to these newfound Waters,
are very great. That they do excel other Waters, in their pleasant and brisk,
or spirituous Taste, in the Property of keeping many Months without Loss of
Strength, in their Volatility, and doing great Cures, and in many other
super-excellent Qualities he assigns them, sufficient to make any credulous
Person forthwith to take the Flying Coach, and to hasten to this Well, to
consult the Doctor, which he directs, p. 28. to be very necessary.

For my Part, I am persuaded that he would soon have Numbers of Patrons and
Advocates, to join with him in extolling and recommending his Waters, provided
they could be assured of the Truth of their assumed Virtue. Nor would he have
Cause to be jealous of the Faculty it self, of being such Fools and Asses as he
seems to describe them, page 82. Stiff Zealots, adhering to their own Opinions,
like Asses being once led to Water; will drink at the same Place if possible.

There are several hard Censures denounced somewhat hastily, if not unmannerly
too; he might have waited some Months, and have seen whether the World would
not have been proselyted by fair Means, good Words or his strong Arguments,
which, he says, he has laid down to Demonstration, before he used such a
satirical and harsh Method. Nor do I think thi^ Anonymous Author to be ignorant
tha^ we live in an inquisitive Age, and that the Faculty will not admit into
their Materials of Physic such new Medicines, of which they have no
Experience. Wherefore the Author must expect some Queries, or Remarks, or
Postulata, will be proposed: I ask leave only for some very few, having no Room
for many.

Q. 1. Let me heartily expostulate with our Author, whether be has taken the
best Way to convince us of the pretended Excellency of his Waters, by
depreciating others, and so dogmatically asserting the Value of his own? Why
did he not send a Hamper of his Waters to the President and Electors of the
College, and that in Time, before his Book had been delivered to them. This was
easy for him to do, because his Waters may be dipped in the Morning, and be
delivered at London in the Even; This was done by me before I presumed to give
my Account of P^rmont Water; I obtained the Approbation of the Two famous
Societies, having brought a Quantity of these Waters for them to taste, and to
examine by other Experiments: This Water is often kept back by contrary Winds,
and so came not to my Hands before it had been dipped at least Two Months, and
at least 8 Months before either of the Societies had it presented to them.

Q. 2. Does he think, That an upstart Spring of Water, which he says, page 126.
is lately discovered at Ipswich, and that has but six Weeks obtained its full
Perfection, should so suddenly gain such Authority and Power, as to prohibit or
proscribe the Use of those celebrated German Waters, which Physicians of the
preceding, as well as the present Age, have successfully prescribed to their
Patients?

Q. 3. Is it not more likely that he aims at his own Interest more than at the
Good of Mankind? What is the Meaning of his taking Care to have an Arcanum of
his to be also mixed with these Waters, he gives it the Name of Tinctura
Basilica; which it seems is sold up and down the Town of Ipswich as Daphy's
Elixir, or Stoughton's Drops? Altogether considered, it, makes one shrewdly
suspect, that the Doctor and Proprietor have a great Regard to self and
by-Ends: when convinced of the contrary, I shall soon retract.

In the Title Page we are told, that he has made several curious Experiments
and nice Observations, such as were never before made. Give me leave to
challenge 2 or 3 of these nice Things.

1. He endeavors to prove an Acidity in these Waters, and is led into the old
German Error of the Acidulae. In Page 121. he says, Having taken about a
quarter of a Pint of Milk, and caused it to be heated, I poured into it whilst
it was warm about four Spoonfuls of the Ipswich Spa, and it immediately turned
it to Curds, as if Beer, or some mild Acid had been poured in. For my Part, I
should much less esteem his Water, if it were so as he says, that it would turn
Milk, and proved it self an Acid; for Acids cause many Diseases, and we fly to
Alkalies for the Cure. But I stand amazed at this Assertion of his, when I am
morally certain of the contrary, and that there is no Chalybeat Water in
England that is Acid, or produces this Effect on Milk.

But to give my self more Satisfaction, I procured some Bottles from the
Ipswich Fountain, which came to my Hands full, well cork'd, and carefully
sealed. I made the Experiment as above directed, but could not make any Curd to
rise: I made farther Experiments in Favor of the Water, I doubled and trebled
the Quantity of the Water, to see if by any Means I could curdle the Milk, but
nothing succeeded: Have a Care that you use new Milk, and do not mistake a few
Creamy, or Oily Particks, that will stick to the Side of any Glass, and call
that Curd. Interest and Prejudice can discover what they have a Mind to.

2. He runs much upon a volatile Acid, as if it were one of the grand
Principles of his own, and even all martial Waters. See Page 52. and in many
other Places. Is it not strange, that the Promiser of such curious Experiments
in the Title Page, should not put it upon this most natural and easy Experiment
in the World, which a very ordinary Chemist may perform? Why did he not (since
he lives near the Spring) put a Quart or two of this Water into a Glass Limbec,
(called Head and Body) or any other Still, and by a very gentle Fire receive
the Liquor that came over, and so taste and try it whether it held any Acidity
or no? Does not this Omission put a Man justly upon the Question, whether this
Author has really a Mind to find out Truth or no? For my Part, I can tell him
the Fate of this Experiment, that he will certainly distill over an insipid
Water, even from the first to the last Drop in the Still, because I have tried
many such Waters as his this way, and none of them ever gave the least Drop of
an Acid.

3. He also asserts, and takes it for granted, that the fixed Salts that remain
after Evaporation are Acid. It is strange that this must also be suppposed, and
not tried. I found in his Waters, which is the Condition of most of our English
Chalybeat Waters, that they contain very little Salt. Out of his Ipswich Water
I could only get Two Grains from a Pint; I tried it with Milk, but it would not
curdle half a Spoonful of Milk after several Days standing in a Window: I
gained Five Grains out of a Pint of Pyrmont Waters, (which Waters do hold more
Salt than any other of the true Chalybeat Waters. I have seen or heard of) I
put these Grains to one Spoonful of Milk, which did keep the Milk, from
curdling full Seven Days in September.

4. He says he has experimented this, that his Waters have not only 14 Days,
but as many Weeks, kept their entire Virtue. I wish he had tried them whether
they would carry to London, as far as the College of Physicians, because those
which I sent for did not carry Four Days, so as to hold their Virtue; and truly
by the course Ocra I found at the Bottom, they seem to me to resemble Islington
Waters, which will lose their Virtue in 24 Hours.

What I have said in the high Praise of the Pyrmont Waters, being a Foreign
German Water, must certainly expose me to the Displeasure of this Author;
especially since I have also in some lower Degree justified the Virtue of the
Spa, when brought to us in a good Condition; and this I must acknowledge, that
this last Year they have been brought us better than formerly; though I am sure
it is not in their Nature to preserve their Virtue as the Pyrmont will do.

Now I conclude with my hearty Wishes, that this Endeavor of mine to serve my
Neighbor may have some good Effect. I can assure the Reader, that a sincere
Love of Truth, divested of all Manner of private Interest, has been the only
Motive of this Undertaking.

I pretend not to Infallibility, some Errors and Mistakes, and some unjust
Censures will attend every Writer; he that heartily convinces me of the former,
shall always have the Thanks of

His humble S^rvant, F. S.

Advertisement.
EXperiments which prove BEZOAR to have no Use in Physic. Gascoign's Powder
examined and censured. Dedicated to the Royal Society.

A Vindication of Sugar, against the Charge of Dr. Willis, other Physicians,
and common Prejudice. Dedicated to the Ladies. By Dr. FRED. SLARE, Fellow of
the College of Phycians, and of the Royal Society.

Sold by Tim. Goodwin, at the Queen's-Head, against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet.


