MISCELLANY POEMS, ON Several Occasions.

Written by the Right Honble ANNE, Countess of WINCHILSEA.

LONDON: Printed for J. B. and Sold by Benj. Took at the Middle-Temple-Gate,
William Tailor in Paternoster Row, and James Round in Exchange-Alley, Cornhil.
1713.

THE BOOKSELLER To the READER.
THE Town having already done Justice to the Ode on the SPLEEN, and some few
Pieces in this Volume, when scattered in other Miscellanies: I think it will be
sufficient (now that Permission is at last obtained for the Printing this
Collection) to acquaint the Reader, that they are of the same Hand; which I
doubt not will render this Miscellany an acceptable Present to the Public.

THE TABLE.
MErcury and the Elephant Page 1 All is Vanity 4 The Prevalence of Custom 22
The Mussulman's Dream 24 The Shepherd Piping to the Fishes 27 Love, Death, and
Reputation 29 There Is no To Morrow 32 The Petition for an absolute Retreat 33
Jupiter and the Farmer 49 The Decision of Fortune 51 The Brass-Pot and
Stone-Jugg 55 Fanscomb Barn 58 A Description of a Piece of Tapistry at
Long-Leat 66 The Poor-Man's Lamb 73 Part of the fifth Scene of the second Act
of Athalia 84 The Spleen 88 Alexander's Epistle to Hephaestion 97 On the
Marriage of Edw. and Eliz. Herbert 102 La Passion vaincue 103 The Owl
describing her Young ones 104 The Philosopher, the Young Man, and his Statue
109 The Hog, the Sheep, and the Goat, etc. 110 The Shepherd and the Calm 113
The Lord and the Bramble 116 The Cautious Lovers 118 To Death 122 Adam posed
123 The House of Socrates 124 The Equipage 125 The young Rat and his Dam, the
Cock and the Cat 126 The Wit and the Beau 17 The Executor Cupid and Folly For
the Better 137 On the King of Sweden's Picture 140 On the Birthday of Lady
Cath. Tufton 141 The Miser and the Poet 145 The Change 151 Enquiry after Peace
154 On the Death of the Hon. James Thynne 156 The Critic and Fable-Writer 162
The King and the Shepherd 166 Epistle to Madam Deshouliers 171 To Edw.
Jenkinson, Esquire 174 Cleone ill-Painted 176 A Dialogue between two Shepherdesses
179 Alcidor 184 Five Pieces out of the Aminta of Tasso 187 The Nightingale 200
The Atheist and the Acorn 202 The Tradesman and the Scholar 204 (...)'s
Injustice toward Providence 208 (...) Eagle, the Sow, and the Cat 212 In
Praise of Writing Letters 215 The Miller, his Son, and their Ass 218 The Man
bitten by Fleas 223 Reformation 227 At Tunbridge-Wells 229 On the Hurricane 230
Hymn 248 Ephelia to Ardelia 252 The Lion and the Gnat 254 The Man and his Horse
257 Life's Progress 259 Hope 262 A Moral Song 263 Glass 264 The Dog and his
Master 265 The Phoenix 266 A Song 268 Jealousy 269 Three Songs 270 To Mr. F.
now Earl of W -- 272 A Letter to the same 278 A Fragment 280 Psalm 137
Paraphrased to the 7th Verse 282 A Battle between the Rats and the Weazles 283
Democritus and his Neighbors 285 The Tree 289 A Nocturnal Reverie 291
Aristomenes, etc, A Tragedy 295
ERRATA.
PAge ^ line 5. read lost Clytus. P. 106. l. 1. for veiled r. waved. P. ^ l. 8.
r. Conquests. P. 177. l. 9. r. gentlest. P. 195. l. 9. r. There. P. 219. l. 7.
r. these. P. 235. l. 10 for Where ^ while. P. 243. l. 1. r. th'awaken'd. P.
296. In the Dramatis Personae for Theata r. Thoeta (and so through the Play.)
P. 301. ^ r. Lamia. P. 312. l. 15. r. Bonds. l. 26. r. Man. P. 331. l. 1.
Others. l. 5. r. Groecian Race. P. 337. l. 9. for Camp r. (...) P. 346. l. 1.
for bleeds r. breeds.

Miscellany POEMS.
MERCURY and the ELEPHANT.
A Prefatory FABLE.
AS Merc'ry traveled through a Wood,
(Whose Errands are more Fleet than Good)
An Elephant before him lay,
That much encumbered had the Way:
The Messenger, who is still in haste,
Would fain have bowed, and so have past;
When up arose the unweildy Brute,
And would repeat a late Dispute,
In which (he said) he would gained the Prize
From a wild Boar of monstrous Size:
But Fame (quoth he) with all her Tongues,
Who Lawyers, Ladies, Soldiers wrongs,
Has, to my Disadvantage, told
An Action thoroughly Bright and Bold;
Has said, that I foul Play had used,
And with my Weight the Opposer bruised;
Had laid my Trunk about his Brawn,
Before his Tushes could be drawn;
Had stunned him with a hideous Roar,
And twenty-thousand Scandals more:
But I defy the Talk of Men,
Or Voice of Brutes in every Den;
The impartial Skies are all my Care,
And how it stands Recorded there.
Amongst you Gods, pray, What is thought?
Quoth Mercury -- Then have you Fought!
Solicitous thus should I be
For what is said of my Verse and Me;
Or should my Friends Excuses frame,
And beg the Critics not to blame
(Since from a Female Hand it came)
Defects in Judgment, or in Wit;
They Would but reply -- Then has she Writ!
Our Vanity we more betray,
In asking what the World will say,
Than if, in trivial Things like these,
We wait on the Event with ease;
Nor make long Prefaces, to show
What Men are not concerned to know:
For still untouched how we succeed,
It Is for themselves, not us, they Read;
Whilst that proceeding to requite,
We own (who in the Muse delight)
It Is for our Selves, not them, we Write.
Betrayed by Solitude to try
Amusements, which the Prosperous fly;
And only to the Press repair,
To six our scattered Papers there;
Though whilst our Labors are preserved,
The Printers may, indeed, be starved.
All is Vanity.
I.
HOW vain is Life! which rightly we compare
To flying Posts, that haste away;
To Plants, that fade with the declining Day;
To Clouds, that sail amidst the yielding Air;
Till by Extention into that they flow,
Or, scattering on the World below,
Are lost and gone, ere we can say they were;
To Autumn-Leaves, which every Wind can chase;
To rising Bubbles, on the Waters Face;
To fleeting Dreams, that will not stay,
Nor in the abused Fancy dance,
When the returning Rays of Light,
Resuming their alternate Right,
Break on the ill-order'd Scene on the fantastic Trance:
As weak is Man, whilst Tenant to the Earth;
As frail and as uncertain all his Ways,
From the first moment of his weeping Birth,
Down to the last and best of his few restless Days;
When to the Land of Darkness he retires
From disappointed Hopes, and frustrated Desires;
Reaping no other Fruit of all his Pain
Bestowed whilst in the vale of Tears below,
But this unhappy Truth, at last to know,
That Vanity's our Lot, and all Mankind is Vain.
II.
If past the hazard of his tendrest Years,
Neither in thoughtless Sleep oppressed,
Nor poisoned with a tainted Breast,
Loosed from the infant Bands and female Cares,
A studious Boy, advanced beyond his Age,
Wastes the dim Lamp, and turns the restless Page;
For some loved Book prevents the rising Day,
And on it, stolen aside, bestows the Hours of Play;
Him the observing Master does design
For search of darkened Truths, and Mysteries Divine;
Bids him with unremitted Labor trace
The Rise of Empires, and their various Fates,
The several Tyrants over the several States,
To Babel's lofty Towers, and warlike Nimrod's Race;
Bids him in Paradise the Bank survey,
Where Man, new-moulded from the tempered Clay,
(Till fired with Breath Divine) a helpless Figure lay:
Could he be led thus far -- What were the Boast,
What the Reward of all the Toil it cost,
What from that Land of ever-blooming Spring,
For our Instruction could he bring,
Unless, that having Humane Nature found
Unseparated from its Parent Ground,
(However we vaunt our Elevated Birth)
The Epicure in soft Array,
The loathsome Beggar, that before
His rude unhospitable Door,
Unpitied but by Brutes, a broken Carcass lay,
Were both alike derived from the same common Earth?
But ere the Child can to these Heights attain,
Ere he can in the Learned Sphere arise;
A guiding Star, attracting to the Skies,
A Fever, seizing the o'er-labour'd Brain,
Sends him, perhaps, to Death's concealing Shade;
Where, in the Marble Tomb now silent laid,
He better does that useful Doctrine show,
(Which all the sad Assistants ought to know,
Who round the Grave his short continuance mourn)
That first from Dust we came, and must to Dust return.
III.
A bolder Youth, grown capable of Arms,
Bellona courts with her prevailing Charms;
Bids the enchanting Trumpet sound,
Loud as Triumph, soft as Love,
Striking now the Poles above,
'Then descending from the Skies,
Soften every falling Note;
As the harmonious Lark that sings and flies,
When near the Earth, contracts her narrow Throat,
And warbles on the Ground:
Shows the proud Steed, impatient of the Check,
Against the loudest Terrors Proof,
Pawing the Valley with his steeled Hoof,
With Lightning armed his Eyes, with Thunder clothed his Neck;
Who on the advanced Foe, (the Signal given)
Flies, like a rushing Storm by mighty Whirlwinds driven;
Lays open the Records of Fame,
No glorious Deed omits, no Man of mighty Name;
Their Stratagems, their Tempers she will repeat,
From Alexander's, (truly styled the GREAT)
From Caesar's on the World's Imperial Seat,
To Turenne's Conduct, and to Conde's Heat.
It Is done! and now the ambitious Youth disdains
The safe, but harder Labors of the Gown,
The softer Pleasures of the Courtly Town,
The once loved rural Sports, and Chaces on the Plains;
Does with the Soldier's Life the Garb assume,
The gold Embroid'ries, and the graceful Plume;
Walks haughty in a Coat of Scarlet Die,
A Color well contrived to cheat the Eye,
Where richer Blood, alas! may undistinguisht lie.
And oh! too near that wretched Fate attends;
Hear it ye Parents, all ye weeping Friends!
Thou fonder Maid! won by those gaudy Charms,
(The destined Prize of his Victorious Arms)
Now sainting Dye upon the mournful Sound,
That speaks his hasty Death, and paints the fatal Wound!
Trail all your Pikes, dispirit every Drum,
March in a slow Procession from afar,
Ye silent, ye dejected Men of War!
Be still the Hautboys, and the Flute be dumb!
Display no more, in vain, the lofty Banner;
For see! where on the Bier before ye lies
The pale, the fallen, the untimely Sacrifice
To your mistaken Shrine, to your false Idol Honor!
IV.
As Vain is Beauty, and as short her Power;
Though in its proud, and transitory Sway,
The coldest Hearts and wisest Heads obey
That gay fantastic Tyrant of an Hour.
On Beauty's Charms, (although a Father's Right,
Though grave Seleucus! to thy Royal Side
By holy Vows fair Stratonice be tied)
With anxious Joy, with dangerous Delight,
Too often gazes thy unwary Son,
Till past all Hopes, expiring and undone,
A speaking Pulse the secret Cause impart;
The only time, when the Physician's Art
Could ease that laboring Grief, or heal a Lover's Smart.
See Great Antonius now impatient stand,
Expecting, with mistaken Pride,
On Cydnus crowded Shore, on Cydnus fatal Strand,
A Cleopatra's coming down the Cydnus, exactly agreeing with the Description of
it in Plutarch.
Queen, at his Tribunal to be tried,
A Queen that armed in Beauty, shall deride
His feeble Rage, and his whole Fate command:
Over the still Waves her burnisht Galley moves,
Rowed by the Graces, whilst officious Loves
To silken Cords their busy Hands apply,
Or gathering all the gentle Gales that fly,
To their fair Mistress with those Spoils repair,
And from their purple Wings disperse the balmy Air.
Hovering Perfumes ascend in odorous Clouds,
Curl over the Barque, and play among the Shrouds;
Whilst gently dashing every Silver Oar,
Guided by the Rules of Art,
With tuneful Instruments designed
To soften, and subdue the stubborn Mind,
A strangely pleasing and harmonious Part
In equal Measures bore.
Like a new Venus on her native Sea,
In midst of the transporting Scene,
(Which Pen or Pencil imitates in vain)
On a resplendent and conspicuous Bed,
With all the Pride of Persia loosely spread,
The lovely Syrene lay.
Which but discerned from the yet distant Shore,
The amazed Emperor could hate no more;
No more a baffled Vengeance could pursue;
But yielding still, still as she nearer drew,
When Cleopatra anchored in the Bay,
Where every Charm could all its Force display,
Like his own Statue stood, and gazed the World away.
Where ends alas! this Pageantry and State;
Where end the Triumphs of this conquering Face,
Envied of Roman Wives, and all the Female Race?
Oh swift Vicissitude of Beauty's Fate!
Now in her Tomb withdrawn from public Sight,
From near Captivity and Shame,
The vanquished, the abandoned Dame
Proffers the Arm, that held another's Right,
To the destructive Snake's more just Embrace,
And courts deforming Death, to mend his Leaden Pace.
V.
But Wit shall last (the vaunting Poet cries)
The immortal Streams that from Parnassus flow,
Shall make his never-fading Laurels grow,
Above this mouldring Earth to flourish in the Skies:
" And The two Lines with these Marks " before them, are thus Translated by
Ben. Johnson from Ovid.
when his Body falls in Funeral Fire,
When late revolving Ages shall consume
The very Pillars, that support his Tomb,
" His Name shall live, and his best Part aspire.
Deluded Wretch! grasping at future Praise,
Now planting, with mistaken Care,
Round thy enchanted Palace in the Air,
A Grove, which in thy Fancy time shall raise,
A Grove of soaring Palms, and everlasting Bays;
Could Thou alas! to such Renown arrive,
As thy Imaginations would contrive;
Should numerous Cities, in a vain contest,
Struggle for thy famous Birth;
Should the sole Monarch of the conquered Earth,
His wreathed Head upon thy Volume rest;
Like Maro, could thou justly claim,
Amongst the inspired tuneful Race,
The highest Room, the undisputed Place;
And after near Two Thousand Years of Fame,
Have thy proud Work to a new People shown;
The unequaled Poems made their own,
In such a Dress, in such a perfect Style
As on his Labors Dryden now bestows,
As now from Dryden's just Improvement flows,
In every polished Verse throughout the British Isle;
What Benefit alas! would to thee grow?
What Sense of Pleasure would thou know?
What swelling Joy? what Pride? what Glory have,
When in the Darkness of the abject Grave,
Insensible, and Stupid laid below,
No Atom of thy Heap, no Dust would move,
For all the airy Breath that formed thy Praise above?
VI.
True, says the Man to Luxury inclined;
Without the Study of uncertain Art,
Without much Labor of the Mind,
Mere uninstructed Nature will impart,
That Life too swiftly flies, and leaves all good behind.
Sieze then, my Friends, (he cries) the present Hour;
The Pleasure which to that belongs,
The Feasts, the overflowing Bowls, the Mirth, the Songs,
The Orange-Bloom, that with such Sweetness blows,
Anacreon's celebrated Rose,
The Hyacinth, with every beauteous Flower,
Which just this happy Moment shall disclose,
Are out of Fortune's reach, and all within our Power.
Such costly In the Life of Demetrius in Plutarch, there is a Description of a
Garment ordered to be made for him; wherein was expressed, in precious Stones,
and other costly Materials, the Elements as here described.
Garments let our Slaves prepare,
As for the gay Demetrius were designed;
Where a new Sun of radiant Diamonds shined,
Where the enameled Earth, and scarce-discerned Air,
With a transparent Sea were seen,
A Sea composed of the Em'rald's Green,
And with a golden Shore encompassed round;
Where every Orient Shell, of wondrous shape was found.
The whole Creation on his Shoulders hung,
The whole Creation with his Wish complied,
Did swiftly, for each Appetite provide,
And fed them all when Young.
No less, the Sardanapalus.
Assyrian Prince enjoyed,
Of Bliss too soon deprived, but never cloyed.
Whose Counsel let us still pursue,
Whose Monument, did this Inscription show
To every Passenger, that trod the way,
Where, with a slighting In Sardanapalus's Statue upon his Monument (as
described by several Authors, and upon Medals) his right Hand is held up, with
his Fingers in a Posture as giving a Filip to the World.
Hand, and scornful Smile
The proud Essigies, on the instructive Pile,
A great Example lay.
I, here Entombed, did mighty Kingdoms sway,
Two Cities raised Anchialus and Tarsus.
in one prodigious Day:
Thou wandering Traveller, no longer gaze,
No longer dwell upon this useless Place;
Go Feed, and Drink, in Sports consume thy Life;
For All that else we gain's not worth a Moment's Strife.
Thus! talks the Fool, whom no Restraint can bound,
When now the Glass has gone a frequent round;
When soaring Fancy lightly swims,
Fancy, that keeps above, and dances over the Brims;
Whilst weighty Reason sinks, and in the bottom's drowned:
Adds to his Own, an artificial Fire,
Doubling every hot Desire,
Till the auxiliary Spirits, in a Flame,
The Stomach's Magazine defy,
That standing Pool, that helpless Moisture nigh
Through every Vital part impetuous fly,
And quite consume the Frame;
When to the Under world despised he goes,
A pampered Carcass on the Worms bestows,
Who rioting on the unusual Cheer,
As good a Life enjoy, as he could boast of here.
VII.
But hold my Muse! thy farther Flight restrain,
Exhaust not thy declining Force,
Nor in a long, pursued, and breathless Course,
Attempt, with slackened speed, to run
Through every Vanity beneath the Sun,
Lest thy o'erweary'd Reader, should complain,
That of all Vanities beside,
Which thine, or his Experience ever have tried,
Thou art, too tedious Muse, most frivolous and vain:
Yet, tell the Man, of an aspiring Thought,
Of an ambitious, restless Mind,
That can no Ease, no Satisfaction find,
Till neighboring States are to Subjection brought,
Till Universal Awe, enslaved Mankind is taught;
That, should he lead an Army to the Field,
For whose still necessary Use,
The extended Earth could not enough produce,
Nor Rivers to their Thirst a full Contentment yield;
Yet, must their dark Reverse of Fate
Roll round, within that Course of Years,
Within the short, the swift, and fleeting Date
Prescribed by Xerxes, Xerxes reviewing his most numerous Army, wept upon the
Reflection that within 100 Years not One of them would be left Alive.
when his falling Tears
Bewailed those Numbers, which his Sword employed,
And false, Hyena-like, lamented and destroyed.
Tell Him, that does some stately Building raise,
A Windsor, or Versailles erect,
And thorough all Posterity expect,
With its unshaken Base, a firm unshaken Praise;
Tell Him, Judea's Temple is no more,
Upon whose Splendor, Thousands heretofore
Spent the astonished Hours, forgetful to Adore:
Tell him, into the Earth again is hurled,
That most stupendous Wonder of the World,
Justly presiding over the boasted Seven,
By humane Art and Industry designed,
This! the rich Draught of the Immortal Mind,
The Architect of Heaven.
Remember then, to fix thy Aim on High,
Project, and build on the other side the Sky,
For, after all thy vain Expense below,
Thou can no Fame, no lasting Pleasure know;
No Good, that shall not thy Embraces fly,
Or thou from that be in a Moment caught,
Thy Spirit to new Claims, new Interests brought,
Whilst unconcerned thy secret Ashes lie,
Or stray about the Globe, O Man ordained to Dye!
The Prevalence of Custom.
A Female, to a Drunkard married,
When all her other Arts miscarried,
Had yet one Stratagem to prove him,
And from good Fellowship remove him;
Finding him overcome with Tipple,
And weak, as Infant at the Nipple,
She to a Vault transports the Lumber,
And there expects his breaking Slumber.
A Table she with Meat provided,
And robbed in Black, stood just beside it;
Seen only, by one glim'ring Taper,
That blewly burnt through misty Vapor.
At length he wakes, his Wine digested,
And of her Phantomship requested,
To learn the Name of that close Dwelling,
And what offends his Sight and Smelling;
And of what Land she was the Creature,
With outspread Hair, and ghastly Feature?
Mortal, quoth she, (to Darkness hurried)
Know, that thou art both Dead and Buried;
Conveyed, last Night, from noisie Tavern,
To this thy still, and dreary Cavern.
What strikes thy Nose, springs from the Shatters
Of Bodies killed with Cordial Waters,
Stronger than other Scents and quicker,
As urged by more spirituous Liquor.
My self attend on the Deceased,
When all their Earthly Train's released;
And in this Place of endless Quiet,
My Business is, to find them Diet;
To show all sorts of Meats, and Salades,
Till I Am acquainted with their Palates;
But that once known, then less suffices.
Quoth he (and on his Crupper rises)
Thou Guardian of these lower Regions,
Thou Providor for countless Legions,
Thou dark, but charitable Crony,
Far kinder than my Tisiphony,
Who of our Victuals thus art Thinking,
If thou have Care too of our Drinking,
A Bumper fetch: Quoth she, a Halter,
Since nothing less thy Tone can alter,
Or break this Habit thou'st been getting,
To keep thy Throat in constant wetting.
THE Mussulman's Dream OF THE VIZIER and DERVIS.
WHere is that World, to which the Fancy flies,
When Sleep excludes the Present from our Eyes;
Whose Map no Voyager could ever design,
Nor to Description its wild Parts confine?
Yet such a Land of Dreams We must allow,
Who nightly trace it, though we know not how:
Unfettered by the Days obtruded Rules,
We All enjoy that Paradise of Fools;
And find a Sorrow, in resuming Sense,
Which breaks some free Delight, and snatches us from thence.
Thus! in a Dream, a Mussulman was shown
A Vizir, whom he formerly had known,
When at the Port he bore deputed Sway,
And made the Nations with a Nod obey,
Now all serene, and splendid was his Brow,
Whilst ready Waiters to his Orders bow;
His Residence, an artful Garden seemed,
Adorned with all, that pleasant he esteemed;
Full of Reward, his glorious Lot appeared,
As with the Sight, our Dreamer's Mind was cheered;
But turning, next he saw a dreadful Sight,
Which filled his Soul with Wonder and Affright,
Pursued by Friends, a wretched Dervis sled
Through scorching Plains, which to wide Distance spread;
Whilst every Torture, gloomy Poets paint,
Was there prepared for the reputed Saint.
Amazed at this, the sleeping Turk enquires,
Why He that lived above, in soft Attires,
Now rolled in Bliss, while the other rolled in Fires?
We Are taught the Sufferings of this Future State,
The Excess of Courts is likeliest to create;
Whilst solitary Cells, o'ergrown with Shade,
The readiest way to Paradise is made.
True, quoth the Phantom (which he dreamed replied
The lonely Path is still the surest Guide,
Nor is it by these Instances denied.
For, know my Friend, whatever Fame report,
The Vizier to Retirements would resort,
The Ambitious Dervis would frequent the Court.
The Shepherd Piping to the Fishes.
Shepherd seeking with his Lass,
To shun the Heat of Day;
Was seated on the shadowed Grass,
Near which a flowing Stream did pass,
And Fish within it play.
To Phillis he an Angle gave,
And bid her toss the Line;
For sure, quoth he, each Fish must have,
Who does not seek to be thy Slave,
A harder Heart than mine.
Assemble here you watery Race,
Transportedly he cries;
And if, when you behold her Face,
You ever desire to quit the Place,
You see not with my Eyes.
But you, perhaps, are by the Ear,
More easy to be caught;
If so, I have my Bagpipe here,
The only Music that is not dear,
Nor in great Cities bought.
So sprightly was the Tune he chose,
And often did repeat;
That Phillis, though not up she rose,
Kept time with every thrilling Close,
And jigg'd upon her Seat.
But not a Fish would nearer draw,
No Harmony or Charms,
Their frozen Blood, it seems, could thaw,
Nor all they heard, nor all they saw,
Could woo them to such Terms.
The angry Shepherd in a Pett,
Gives over his wheedling Arts,
And from his Shoulder throws the Net,
Resolved he would a Supper get
By Force, if not by Parts.
Thus stated Laws are always best
To rule the vulgar Throng,
Who grow more Stubborn when Carest,
Or with soft Rhetoric addressed,
If taking Measures wrong.
Love, Death, and Reputation.
REputation, Love, and Death,
(The Last all Bones, the First all Breath,
The Amidst composed of restless Fire)
From each other would Retire;
Through the World resolved to stray,
Every One a several Way;
Exercising, as they went,
Each such Power, as Fate had lent;
Which, if it united were,
Wretched Mortals could not bear:
But as parting Friends do show,
To what Place they mean to go,
Correspondence to engage,
Nominate their utmost Stage;
Death declared, he would be found
Near the fatal Trumpet's sound;
Or where Pestilences reign,
And Quacks the greater Plagues maintain;
Shaking still his sandy Glass,
And mowing Human Flesh, like Grass.
Love, as next his Leave he took,
Cast on both so sweet a Look,
As their Tempers near disarmed,
One relaxed, and the other warmed;
Shades for his Retreat he chose,
Rural Plains, and soft Repose;
Where no Dowry ever was paid,
Where no Jointure ever was made;
No Ill Tongue the Nymph perplexed,
Where no Forms the Shepherd vexed;
Where Himself should be the Care,
Of the Fond and of the Fair:
Where that was, they soon should know,
Au Revoir! then turned to Go.
Reputation made a Pause,
Suiting her severer Laws;
Second Thoughts, and Third she used,
Weighing Consequences mused;
When, at length to both she cried:
You Two safely may Divide,
To the Antipodes may fall,
And re-ascend the encompast Ball;
Certain still to meet again
In the Breasts of tortured Men;
Who by One (too far) betrayed,
Call in the other to their Aid:
Whilst I Tender, Coy, and Nice,
Raised and ruined in a Trice,
Either six with those I grace;
Or abandoning the Place,
No Return my Nature bears,
From green Youth, or hoary Hairs;
If through Guilt, or Chance, I sever,
I once Parting, Part for ever.
There Is No Tomorrow,
A FABLE imitated from Sir Roger L'Estrange.
TWO long had Loved, and now the Nymph desired,
The Cloak of Wedlock, as the Case required;
Urged that, the Day he wrought her to this Sorrow,
He Vowed, that he would marry her Tomorrow.
Again he Swears, to shun the present Storm,
That he, Tomorrow, will that Vow perform.
The Morrows in their due Successions came;
Impatient still on Each, the pregnant Dame
Urged him to keep his Word, and still he swore the same.
When tired at length, and meaning no Redress,
But yet the Lie not caring to confess,
He for his Oath this Salvo chose to borrow,
That he was Free, since there was no Tomorrow;
For when it comes in Place to be employed,
It Is then Today; Tomorrow's never enjoyed.
The Tale's a Jest, the Moral is a Truth;
Tomorrow and Tomorrow, cheat our Youth:
In riper Age, Tomorrow still we cry,
Not thinking, that the present Day we Dye;
Vnpractis'd all the Good we had Designed;
There Is No Tomorrow to a Willing Mind.
The Petition for an Absolute Retreat.
Inscribed to the Right Honble CATHARINE Countess of THANET, mention^d in the
Poem under the Name of ARMINDA.
GIVE me O indulgent Fate!
Give me yet, before I Dye,
A sweet, but absolute Retreat,
Amongst Paths so lost, and Trees so high,
That the World may never invade,
Through such Windings and such Shade,
My unshaken Liberty.
No Intruders thither come!
Who visit, but to be from home;
None who their vain Moments pass,
Only studious of their Glass,
News, that charm to listening Ears;
That false Alarm to Hopes and Fears;
That common Theme for every Fop,
From the Statesman to the Shop,
In those Coverts never be spread,
Of who is Deceased, or who is to Wed,
Be no Tidings thither brought,
But Silent, as a Midnight Thought,
Where the World may never invade,
Be those Windings, and that Shade:
Courteous Fate! afford me there
A Table spread without my Care,
With what the neighboring Fields impart,
Whose Cleanliness be all it is Art,
When, of old, the Calf was dressed,
(Though to make an Angel's Feast)
In the plain, unstudied Sauce
Nor Treufle, nor Morillia was;
Nor could the mighty Patriarch's Board
One far-fetched Ortolane afford.
Courteous Fate, then give me there
Only plain, and wholesome Fare.
Fruits indeed (would Heaven bestow)
All, that did in Eden grow,
All, but the Forbidden Tree,
Would be coveted by me;
Grapes, with Juice so crowded up,
As breaking through the native Cup;
Figs (yet growing) candy'd over,
By the Sun's attracting Power;
Cherries, with the downy Peach,
All within my easy Reach;
Whilst creeping near the humble Ground,
Should the Strawberry be found
Springing wheresoe'er I strayed,
Through those Windings and that Shade.
For my Garments; let them be
What may with the Time agree;
Warm, when Phoebus does retire,
And is ill-supply'd by Fire:
But when he renews the Year,
And verdant all the Fields appear;
Beauty every thing resumes,
Birds have dropped their Winter-Plumes;
When the Lilly full displayed,
Stands in purer White arrayed,
Than that Vest, which heretofore
The Luxurious Josephus says, that every Monday Solomon went to the House of
Lebanon in an open Chariot, clothed in a Robe most dazzling White, which makes
that Allusion not improper, and may give us Grounds to believe that the Lilly
mentioned by our Savior (compared to Solomon in his Glory) might really be the
common white Lilly, although the Commentators seem in doubt what Flowers are
truly meant by the Lillies, as thinking the plain Lilly not gay enough for the
Comparison; whereas this Garment is noted by Josephus to be wonderfully
Beautiful though only White; nor can any Flower, I believe, have a greater Luster
than the common White Lilly.
Monarch wore,
When from Salem's Gates he drove,
To the soft Retreat of Love,
Lebanon's all burnished House,
And the dear Egyptian Spouse.
Cloth me, Fate, though not so Gay;
Cloth me light, and fresh as May:
In the Fountains let me view
All my Habit cheap and new;
Such as, when sweet Zephyrs fly,
With their Motions may comply;
Gently waving, to express
Unaffected Carelessness:
No Perfumes have there a Part,
Borrowed from the Chemists Art;
But such as rise from flowery Beds,
Or the falling Jasmin Sheds!
'Twas the Odor of the Field,
Esau's rural Coat did yield,
That inspired his Father's Prayer,
For Blessings of the Earth and Air:
Of Gums, or Pouders had it smelt;
The Supplanter, then unfelt,
Easily had been descried,
For One that did in Tents abide;
For some beauteous Handmaids Joy,
And his Mother's darling Boy.
Let me then no Fragrance wear,
But what the Winds from Gardens bear,
In such kind, surprising Gales,
As gathered from These Circumstances are related by Plutarch in the Life of
Sylla.
Fidentia's Vales,
All the Flowers that in them grew;
Which intermixing, as they flew,
In wreathen Garlands dropped again,
On Lucullus, and his Men;
Who, cheered by the victorious Sight,
Trebl'd Numbers put to Flight.
Let me, when I must be fine,
In such natural Colors shine;
Wove, and painted by the Sun,
Whose resplendent Rays to shun,
When they do too fiercely beat,
Let me find some close Retreat,
Where they have no Passage made,
Through those Windings, and that Shade.
Give me there (since Heaven has shown
It was not Good to be alone)
A Partner suited to my Mind,
Solitary, pleased and kind;
Who, partially, may something see
Preferred to all the World in me;
Slighting, by my humble Side,
Fame and Splendour, Wealth and Pride.
When but Two the Earth possessed,
'Twas their happiest Days, and best;
They by Business, nor by Wars,
They by no Domestic Cares,
From each other ever were drawn,
But in some Grove, or flowery Lawn,
Spent the swiftly flying Time,
Spent their own, and Nature's Prime,
In Love; that only Passion given
To perfect Man, whilst Friends with Heaven.
Rage, and Jealousy, and Hate,
Transports of his fallen State,
(When by Satan's Wiles betrayed)
Fly those Windings, and that Shade!
Thus from Crowds, and Noise removed,
Let each Moment be improved;
Every Object still produce,
Thoughts of Pleasure, and of Use:
When some River slides away,
To increase the boundless Sea;
Think we then, how Time does haste,
To grow Eternity at last,
By the Willows, on the Banks,
Gathered into social Ranks,
Playing with the gentle Winds,
Strait the Boughs, and smooth the Rinds,
Moist each Fiber, and each Top,
Wearing a luxurious Crop,
Let the time of Youth be shown,
The time alas! too soon outgrown;
Whilst a lonely stubborn Oak,
Which no Breezes can provoke,
No less Gusts persuade to move,
Than those, which in a Whirlwind drove,
Spoiled the old Fraternal Feast,
And left alive but one poor Guest;
Rivell'd the distorted Trunk,
Sapless Limbs all bent, and shrunk,
Sadly does the Time presage,
Of our too near approaching Age.
When a helpless Vine is found,
Unsupported on the Ground,
Careless all the Branches spread,
Subject to each haughty Tread,
Bearing neither Leaves, nor Fruit,
Living only in the Root;
Back reflecting let me say,
So the sad Ardelia lay;
Blasted by a Storm of Fate,
Felt, through all the British State;
Fallen, neglected, lost, forgot,
Dark Oblivion all her Lot;
Faded till Arminda's Love,
(Guided by the Powers above)
Warmed anew her drooping Heart,
And Life diffused through every Part;
Mixing Words, in wise Discourse,
Of such Weight and wondrous Force,
As could all her Sorrows charm,
And transitory Ills disarm;
Chearing the delightful Day,
When disposed to be more Gay,
With Wit, from an unmeasured Store,
To Woman never allowed before.
What Nature, or refining Art,
All that Fortune could impart,
Heaven did to Arminda send;
Then gave her for Ardelia's Friend:
To her Cares the Cordial drop,
Which else had overflowed the Cup.
So, when once the Son of Jess,
Every Anguish did oppress,
Hunted by all kinds of Ills,
Like a Partridge on the Hills;
Trains were laid to catch his Life,
Baited with a Royal Wife,
From his House, and Country torn,
Made a Heathen Prince's Scorn;
Fate, to answer all these Harms,
Threw a Friend into his Arms.
Friendship still has been designed,
The Support of Human-kind;
The safe Delight, the useful Bliss,
The next World's Happiness, and this.
Give then, O indulgent Fate!
Give a Friend in that Retreat
(Though withdrawn from all the rest)
Still a Clue, to reach my Breast.
Let a Friend be still conveyed
Through those Windings, and that Shade!
Where, may I remain secure,
Waste, in humble Joys and pure,
A Life, that can no Envy yield;
Want of Affluence my Shield.
Thus, had The Description of this Cave, is exactly taken from Plutarch in the
Life of Crassus.
Crassus been content,
When from Marius Rage he went,
With the Seat that Fortune gave,
The commodious ample Cave,
Formed, in a divided Rock,
By some mighty Earthquake's Shock,
Into Rooms of every Size,
Fair, as Art could ever devise,
Leaving, in the marble Roof,
('Against all Storms and Tempests proof)
Only Passage for the Light,
To refresh the cheerful Sight,
Whilst Three Sharers in his Fate,
On the Escape with Joy dilate,
Beds of Moss their Bodies bore,
Canopy'd with Ivy over;
Rising Springs, that round them played,
Over the native Pavement strayed;
When the Hour arrived to Dine,
Various Meats, and sprightly Wine,
On some neighboring Cliff they spied;
Every Day anew supplied
By a Friend's entrusted Care;
Had He still continued there,
Made that lonely wondrous Cave
Both his Palace, and his Grave;
Peace and Rest he might have found,
(Peace and Rest are under Ground)
Nor have been in that Retreat,
Famed for a Proverbial Fate;
In pursuit of Wealth been caught,
And punished with a golden Draught.
Nor had Sertorius.
He, who Crowds could blind,
Whispering with a snowy Hind,
Made 'em think that from above,
(Like the great Impostor's Dove)
Tidings to his Ears she brought,
Rules by which he marched and fought,
After Spain he had o'er-run,
Cities sacked, and Battles won,
Drove Rome's Consuls from the Field,
Made her darling Pompey yield,
At a fatal, treacherous Feast,
Felt a Dagger in his Breast;
Had he his once-pleasing Thought
Of Solitude to Practice brought;
Had no wild Ambition swayed;
In those Islands had he stayed,
Justly called the Seats of Rest,
Truly The Canary Islands, called by the Ancients the Fortunate Islands, and
taken by some of the Poets for Elysium.
Fortunate, and Blessed,
By the ancient Poets given
As their best discovered Heaven.
Let me then, indulgent Fate!
Let me still, in my Retreat,
From all roving Thoughts be freed,
Or Aims, that may Contention breed;
Nor be my Endeavors led
By Goods, that perish with the Dead!
Fitly might the Life of Man
Be indeed esteemed a Span,
If the present Moment were
Of Delight his only Share;
If no other Joys he knew
Than what round about him grew:
But as those, who Stars would trace
From a subterranean Place,
Through some Engine lift their Eyes
To the outward, glorious Skies;
So the immortal Spirit may,
When descended to our Clay,
From a rightly governed Frame
View the Height, from whence she came;
To her Paradise be caught,
And Things unutterable taught.
Give me then, in that Retreat,
Give me, O indulgent Fate!
For all Pleasures left behind,
Contemplations of the Mind.
Let the Fair, the Gay, the Vain
Courtship and Applause obtain;
Let the Ambitious rule the Earth;
Let the giddy Fool have Mirth;
Give the Epicure his Dish,
Every one their several Wish;
Whilst my Transports I employ
On that more extensive Joy,
When all Heaven shall be surveyed
From those Windings and that Shade.
Jupiter and the Farmer.
WHen Poets gave their God in Crete a Birth,
Then Jupiter held Traffic with the Earth,
And had a Farm to Let: the Fine was high,
For much the Treas'ry wanted a Supply,
By Danae's wealthy Shower exhausted quite, and dry.
But Merc'ry, who as Steward kept the Court,
So racked the Rent, that all who made Resort
Unsatisfied returned, nor could agree
To use the Lands, or pay his secret Fee;
'Till one poor Clown (thought subt'ler than the rest,
Through various Projects rolling in his Breast)
Consents to take it, if at his Desire
All Weathers toward his Harvest may conspire;
The Frost to kill the Worm, the brooding Snow,
The filling Rains may come, and Phoebus glow.
The Terms accepted, signed and sealed the Lease,
His Neighbors Grounds afford their due Increase
The Care of Heaven; the Owner's Cares may cease.
Whilst the new Tenant, anxious in his Mind,
Now asks a Shower, now craves a rustling Wind
To raise what That had lodged, that he the Sheaves may bind.
The Sun, th'o'er-shadowing Clouds, the moistning Dews
He with such Contrariety does choose;
So often and so oddly shifts the Scene,
Whilst others Load, he scarce has what to Glean.
O Jupiter! with Famine pinched he cries,
No more will I direct the unerring Skies;
No more my Substance on a Project lay,
No more a sullen Doubt I will betray,
Let me but live to Reap, do Thou appoint the way.
The Decision of Fortune.
A FABLE.
FOrtune well-Pictur'd on a rolling Globe,
With waving Locks, and thin transparent Robe,
A Man beholding, to his Neighbor cried,
Whoever would catch this Dame, must swiftly ride.
Mark, how she seems to Fly, and with her bears,
All that is worth a busy Mortal's Cares:
The gilded Air about her Statue shines,
As if the Earth had lent it all her Mines;
At random Here a Diadem she slings,
And There a scarlet Hat with dangling Strings,
And to ten Thousand Fools ten Thousand glorious Things.
Shall I then stay at Home, Dull and Content
With Quarter-Days, and hard extorted Rent?
No, I Will to Horse, to Sea, to utmost Isles,
But I Will encounter her propitious Smiles:
Whilst you in slothful Ease may choose to Sleep,
And scarce the few Paternal Acres keep.
Farewell, replied his Friend, may you advance,
And grow the Darling of this Lady Chance:
Whilst I indeed, not courting of her Grace,
Shall dwell content, in this my Native Place,
Hoping I still shall for your Friend be known:
But if too big for such Acquaintance grown,
I shall not be such a fond mistaken Sot,
To think Remembrance should become my Lot;
When you Exalted, have your self Forgot.
Nor me Ambitious ever shall you find,
Or hunting Fortune, who, they say, is Blind:
But if her Want of Sight should make her Stray,
She should be Welcome, if she came this Way.
It Is very like (the Undertaker cried)
That she her Steps to these lost Paths should guide:
But I lose Time, whilst I such Thoughts deride.
Away he goes, with Expectation cheered,
But when his Course he round the World had steered,
And much had borne, and much had hoped and feared,
Yet could not be informed where he might find
This fickle Mistress of all Human-kind:
He quits at length the Chase of flying Game,
And back as to his Neighbor's House he came,
He there encounters the uncertain Dame;
Who lighting from her gaudy Coach in haste,
To him her eager Speeches thus addressed.
Fortune behold, who has been long pursued,
Whilst all the Men, that have my Splendors viewed,
Madly enamored, have such Flatt'ries forged,
And with such Lies their vain Pretensions urged,
That Hither I am fled to shun their Suits,
And by free Choice conclude their vain Disputes;
Whilst I the Owner of this Mansion bless,
And he unseeking Fortune shall possess.
Though rightly charged as something Dark of Sight,
Yet Merit, when it is found, is my Delight;
To Knaves and Fools, when I Have some Grace allowed,
'Thas been like scattering Money in a Crowd,
To make me Sport, as I beheld them strive,
And some observed (through Age) but Half-alive;
Scrambling amongst the Vigorous and Young,
One proves his Sword, and One his wheedling Tongue,
All striving to obtain me right or wrong:
Whilst Crowns, and Crosiers in the Contest hurled,
Showed me a Farce in the contending World.
Thou were deluded, whilst with Ship, or Steed,
Thou lately did attempt to reach my Speed,
And by laborious Toil, and endless Pains,
Did sell thy Quiet for my doubtful Gains
Whilst He alone my real Favorite rises,
Who every Thing to its just Value prizes,
And neither courts, nor yet my Gifts despises.
The Brass-Pot, and Stone-Jugg.
A FABLE.
A Brazen Pot, by scouring vexed,
With Beef and Pudding still perplexed,
Resolved to attempt a nobler Life,
Urging the Jugg to share the Strife:
Brother, quoth he, (Love to endear)
Why should We Two continue here,
To serve and cook such homely Cheer?
Who though we move with awkward pace,
Your stony Bowels, and my Face,
Abroad cannot miss of Wealth and Place.
Then let us instantly be going,
And see what in the World is Doing.
The bloated Jugg, supine and lazy,
Who made no Wish, but to be easy,
Nor, like it is Owner, ever did think
Of ought, but to be filled with Drink;
Yet something moved by this fine Story,
And frothing higher with Vainglory,
Replied, he never wanted Metal,
But had not Sides, like sturdy Kettle,
That in a Crowd could shove and bustle,
And to Preferment bear the Justle;
When the first Knock would break His Measures,
And stop his Rise to Place and Treasures.
Sure (quoth the Pot) thy Scull is thicker,
Than ever was thy muddiest Liquor:
Go I not with thee, for thy Guard,
To take off Blows, and Dangers ward?
And have thou never heard, that Cully
Is borne through all by daring Bully?
Your self (replied the Drink-conveigher)
May be my Ruin and Betrayer:
A Superiority you boast,
And dress the Meat, I but the Toast:
Than mine your Constitution's stronger,
And in Fatigues can hold out longer;
And should one Bang from you be taken,
I into Nothing should be shaken.
A d'autre cried the Pot in scorn,
Do think, there is such a Villain born,
That, when he proffers Aid and Shelter,
Will rudely sall to Helter-Skelter?
No more, but follow to the Road,
Where Each now drags his ponderous Load,
And up the Hill were almost clamber'd,
When (may it ever be remembered!)
Down rolls the Jugg, and after rattles
The most perfidious of all Kettles;
At every Molehill gives a Jump,
Nor rests, till by obdurate Thump,
The Pot of Stone, to shivers broken,
Sends each misguided Fool a Token:
To show them, by this fatal Test,
That Equal Company is best,
Where none Oppress, nor are Oppressed.
Fanscomb Barn.
In Imitation of MILTON.
IN Fanscomb Barn (who knows not Fanscomb Barn?)
Seated between the sides of rising Hills,
Whose airy Tops o'er-look the Gallick Seas,
Whilst, gentle Stower, thy Waters near them flow,
To beautify the Seats that crown thy Banks.
-- In this Retreat
(1) Through Ages passed consigned for Harbor meet,
And Place of sweet Repose to Wand'rers poor,
The weary Strolepedon felt that Ease,
Which many a dangerous Borough had denied
To him, and his Budgeta loved Compeer;
Nor Food was wanting to the happy Pair,
Who with meek Aspect, and precarious Tone,
Well suited to their Hunger and Degree,
Had moved the Hearts of hospitable Dames,
To furnish such Repast as Nature craved.
Whilst more to please the swarthy Bowl appears,
Replete with Liquor, globulous to sight,
And threatening Inundation over the Brim;
Yet, ere it to the longing Lips was raised
Of him who held it at its due Desert,
And more than all entreated Bounty prized,
Into the strong Profundity he throws
The floating Healths of Females, blithe and young,
Who there had rendezvouz'd in past Delight,
And to stolen Plenty added clamorous Mirth,
With Song and Dance, and every jovial Prank
Befitting buxom Crew, untied by Forms:
Whilst kind Budgeta named such sturdy Youths,
As next into her tender Thoughts revolved,
And now were straggling East, and West, and South,
Hoof-beating, and at large, as Chance directs,
Still shifting Paths, lest Men (though styled of Peace)
Should urge their calmer Thoughts to Iron War,
Or force them to promote coercive Laws,
Beating that Hemp which often entraps their Lives;
Or into Cordage pleated, and amassed,
Deprives unruly Flesh of tempting Skin.
Thus kind Remembrance brought the Absent near
And hastened the Return of either's Pledge:
Brown were the Toasts, but not unsav'ry found
To Fancies cleared by Exercise and Air,
Which the spirituous Nectar still improves,
And gliding now through every cherished Vein,
New Warmth diffused, new Cogitations bred,
With Self-conceit of Person, and of Parts.
When Strolepedon (late distorted Wight,
Limb-wanting to the View, and all mis-shap'd)
Permits a pinioned Arm to fill the Sleeve,
Erst pendant, void, and waving with the Wind,
The Timber-Leg obsequiously withdraws,
And gives to that of Bone Precedence due.
Thus undisguis'd that Form again he wears,
Which Damsel fond had drawn from household Toils,
And strict Behests of Parents, old and scorned;
Whilst farther yet his Intellects confess
The bouzy Spell dilated and inhans'd,
Ripe for Description, and set Turns of Speech,
Which to Conjugal Spouse were thus addressed.
My Wife (acknowledged such through maunding Tribes,
As long as mutual Love, the only Law,
Of Hedge or Barn, can bind our easy Faiths)
Be thou observant of thy Husband's Voice,
Sole Auditor of Flights and Figures bold;
Know, that the Valley which we hence descry
Richly adorned, is Fanscomb-Bottom called:
But whether from these Walls it takes the Name,
Or they from that, let Antiquaries tell,
And Men, well-read in Stories obsolete,
Whilst such Denomination either claims,
As speaks Affinity contiguous --
Thence let thy scattered Sight, and oft-griev'd Smell
Engulf the Sweets, and Colors free disposed
To Flowers promiscuous, and redundant Plants.
And (if the drouzy Vapor will admit,
Which from the Bowl soon triumphs over thy Lidds,
And Thee the weaker Vessel still denotes)
With Looks erect observe the verdant Slope
Of graceful Hills, fertile in Bush and Brake,
Whose Height attained, the expatiated Downs
Shall wider Scenes display of rural Glee;
Where banner'd Lords, and fair escutcheon'd Knights,
With gentle Squires, and the Staff-griping Clown,
Pursue the trembling Prey impetuous;
Which yet escaping, when the Night returns,
And downy Beds enfold their careless Limbs,
More wakeful Trundle (Knapsack-bearing Cur)
Follows the Scent untrac'd by nobler Hounds,
And brings to us the Fruit of all their Toil.
Thus sung the Bard, whom potent Liquor raised,
Nor so contented, wished sublimer Aid.
Ye Wits! (he cried) ye Poets! (Loiterers vain,
Who like to us, in Idleness and Want
Consume fantastic Hours) hither repair,
And tell to listening Mendicants the Cause
Of Wonders, here observed but not discussed:
(2) Where, the White Sparrow never soiled her Plumes,
(2) Nor the dull Russet Clothes the Snowy Mouse.
To Helicon you might the Spring compare,
(3) That flows near Pickersdane renowned Stream,
Which, for Disport and Play, the Youths frequent,
Who, trained in Learned School of ancient Wye,
First at this Fount suck in the Muses Lore,
When mixed with Product of the Indian Cane,
They drink delicious Draughts, and part inspired,
Fit for the Banks of Isis, or of Cham,
(For Cham and Isis to the Bard were known,
A Servitor, when young in College-Hall,
Though vagrant Liberty he early chose,
Who yet, when Drunk, retained Poetic Phrase.)
(4) Nor should (quoth he) that Well, o'erhung with Shade,
Mysterious, deep, and hid from Mortals Kenn,
A midst those neighboring Trees of dateless growth, Who
Who thence could extricate a thousand Charms,
Or to oblivious Lethe might convert
The stagnant Waters of the sleepy Pool.
But most unhappy was that Morphean Sound
For lulled Budgeta, who had long desired
Dismission fair from Tales, not thoroughly scanned,
Thinking her Love a Sympathy confessed,
When the Word Sleepy parted from his Lips,
Sunk affable and easy to that Rest,
Which Straw affords to Minds, unvex'd with Cares.
EXPLANATORY NOTES.
(1) Fanscomb-Barn, near Wye in Kent, is a privileged Retreat for Beggars.

(2) Fanscomb-Barn is famous for Breeding White Sparrows and White Mice.

(3) Pickersdane, is a Point of Wye-Downs, where there is an excellent Spring,
much frequented by the Scholars of the Free School at Wye; who meet there, to
drink the Water with Sugar; which has been an ancient Custom, and a great
Diversion to them.

(4) A very deep Well, within a little Wood near Fanscomb-Barn.

A Description of One of the Pieces of Tapistry at Long-Leat, made after the
famous Cartons of Raphael; in which, Elymas the Sorcerer is miraculously struck
Blind by St. Paul before Sergius Paulus, the Proconsul of Asia.
Inscribed to the Honble HENRY THYNNE, under the Name of THEANOR.
THUS Tapistry of old, the Walls adorned,
Ere noblest Dames the artful Shuttle scorned:
Arachne, then, with Pallas did contest,
And scarce the Immortal Work was judged the Best.
Nor valorous Actions, then, in Books were sought;
But all the Fame, that from the Field was brought,
Employed the Loom, where the kind Consort wrought:
Whilst sharing in the Toil, she shared the Fame,
And with the Heroes mixed her interwoven Name.
No longer, Females to such Praise aspire,
And seldom now We rightly do admire.
So much, All Arts are by the Men engrossed,
And Our few Talents unimprov'd or crossed;
Even I, who on this Subject would compose,
Which the famed Vrbin for his Pencil chose,
(And here, in tinctured Wool we now behold
Correctly followed in each Shade, and Fold)
Should prudently from the Attempt withdraw,
But Inclination proves the stronger Law:
And though the Censures of the World pursue
These hardy Flights, whilst his Designs I view;
My burdened Thoughts, which labor for a Vent,
Urge me t'explain in Verse, what by each Face is meant.
Of SERGIVS first, upon his lofty Seat,
With due Regard our Observations treat;
Who, whilst he thence on ELYMAS looks down,
Contracts his pensive Brow into a Frown,
With Looks inquisitive he seeks the Cause
Why Nature acts not still by Natures Laws.
'Twas but a Moment, since the Sorcerer's Sight
Received the Day, and blazed infernal Light:
Untouched, the Optiques in a Moment failed,
Their sierce Illumination quenched, or veiled;
Throughout the Extention of his ample Sway,
No Fact, like this, the Roman could survey,
Who, with spread Hands, invites Mankind to gaze,
And sympathize in the profound Amaze.
To share his Wonder every one combines,
By different Aspects shown, and different Signs.
A comely Figure, near the Consul placed,
With serious Mildness and Instruction graced,
To Others seems imparting what he saw,
And shows the Wretch with reverential Awe:
Whilst a more eager Person next we find,
Viewing the Wizard with a Sceptick's Mind;
Who his fixed Eyes so near him does apply,
We think, enlivening Beams might from them ^ly
To re-inkindle, by so just an Aim,
The radial Sparks, but lately checked and tame,
As Tapers new put-out will catch approaching Flame.
But dire Surprise the Enquiry does succeed,
Whilst full Conviction in his Face we read,
And He, who questioned, now deplores the Deed.
To sacred PAVL a younger Figure guides,
With seeming Warmth, which still in Youth presides;
And pointing forward, Elder Men directs,
In Him, to note the Cause of these Effects,
Upon whose Brow does evidently shine
Deputed Power, to inflict the Wrath Divine
Whilst sad and solemn, suited to their Years,
Each venerable Countenance appears,
Where, yet we see Astonishment revealed,
Though by the Aged often it is concealed;
Who the Emotions of their Souls disguize,
Lest by admiring they should seem less Wise.
But to thy Portrait, ELYMAS, we come
Whose Blindness almost strikes the Poet dumb;
And whilst She vainly to Describe thee seeks,
The Pen but traces, where the Pencil speaks.
Of Darkness to be felt, our Scriptures write,
Thou Darkened seem, as thou would feel the Light;
And with projected Limbs, betray'st a Dread,
Of unseen Mischiefs, levelled at thy Head.
Through all thy Frame such Stupefaction reigns,
As Night it self were sunk into thy Veins:
Nor by the Eyes alone thy Loss we find,
Each Lineament helps to proclaim thee Blind.
An artful Dimness far diffused we grant,
And failing seem all Parts through One important Want.
Oh! mighty RAPHAEL, justly sure renowned!
Since in thy Works such Excellence is found;
No Wonder, if with Nature You Are at strife,
Who thus can paint the Negatives of Life;
And Deprivation more expressive make,
Than the most perfect Draughts, which Others take.
Whilst to this Chiefest Figure of the Piece,
All that surround it, Heightnings do increase:
In some, Amazement by Extremes is shown,
Who viewing his closed Lids, extend their Own.
Nor can, by that, enough their Thoughts express,
Which opening Mouths seem ready to confess.
Thus stand the LICTORS gazing on a Deed,
Which does all humane Chastisements exceed;
Enseebl'd seem their Instruments of smart,
When keener Words can swifter Ills impart.
Thou, BARNABAS, though Last, not least our Care,
Seem equally employed in Praise, and Prayer,
Acknowledging the Omnipotent Decree,
Yet soft Compassion in thy Face we see:
Whilst lifted Hands implore a kind Relief,
Though no Impatience animates thy Grief;
But mild Suspense and Charity benign,
Do all the excesses of thy Looks confine.
Thus far, our slow Imagination goes:
Would the more skilled THE ANOR his disclose;
Expand the Scene, and open to our Sight
What to his nicer Judgment gives Delight;
Whose soaring Mind does to Perfections climb,
Nor owns a Relish, but for Things sublime:
Then, would the Piece fresh Beauties still present,
Nor Length of Time would leave the Eye content:
As Moments, Hours; as Hours the Days would seem,
Observing here, taught to observe by HIM.
The Poor Man's Lamb: OR, Nathan's Parable to David after the Murder of Uriah,
and his Marriage with Bathsheba.
Turned into Verse and Paraphrased.
NOW spent the altered King, in amorous Cares,
The Hours of sacred Hymns and solemn Prayers:
In vain the Altar waits his slow returns,
Where unattended Incense faintly burns:
In vain the whispering Priests their Fears express,
And of the Change a thousand Causes guess.
Heedless of all their Censures He retires,
And in his Palace feeds his secret Fires;
Impatient, till from Rabbah Tidings tell,
That near those Walls the poor Vriah fell,
Led to the Onset by a Chosen Few,
Who at the treacherous Signal, soon withdrew,
Nor to his Rescue ever returned again,
Till by fierce Ammon's Sword they saw the Victim slain.
It Is passed, it is done! the holy Marriage-Knot,
Too strong to be untied, at last is cut.
And now to Bathsheba the King declares,
That with his Heart, the Kingdom too is hers;
That Israel's Throne, and longing Monarch's Arms
Are to be filled but with her widowed Charms.
Nor must the Days of formal Tears exceed,
To cross the Living, and abuse the Dead.
This she denies; and signs of Grief are worn;
But mourns no more than may her Face adorn,
Give to those Eyes, which Love and Empire fired,
A melting Softness more to be desired;
Till the fixed Time, though hard to be endured,
Was passed, and a sad Consort's Name procured:
When, with the Pomp that suits a Prince's Thought,
By Passion swayed, and glorious Woman taught,
A Queen she is made, than Michal seated higher,
Whilst light unusual Airs profane the hallowed Lyre.
Where art thou Nathan? where is that Spirit now,
Given to brave Vice, though on a Prince's Brow?
In what low Cave, or on what Desert Coast,
Now Virtue wants it, is thy Presence lost?
But lo! he comes, the Reverend Bard appears,
Defiled with Dust his awful silver Hairs,
And his rough Garment, wet with falling Tears.
The King this marked, and conscious would have fled,
The healing Balm which for his Wounds was shed:
Till the more wary Priest the Serpents Art,
Joined to the Dove-like Temper of his Heart,
And thus retards the Prince just ready now to part.
Hear me, the Cause betwixt two Neighbors hear,
Thou, who for Justice do the Scepter bear:
Help the Oppressed, nor let me weep alone
For him, that calls for Succor from the Throne.
Good Princes for Protection are Adored,
And Greater by the Shield, than by the Sword.
This clears the Doubt, and now no more he fears
The Cause his Own, and therefore stays and hears:
When thus the Prophet: --
-- In a flowery Plain
A King-like Man does in full Plenty reign;
Casts round his Eyes, in vain, to reach the Bound,
Which Jordan's Flood sets to his fertile Ground:
Countless his Flocks, whilst Lebanon contains
A Herd as large, kept by his numerous Swains,
That fill with morning Bellowings the cool Air,
And to the Cedar's shade at scorching Noon repair.
Near to this Wood a lowly Cottage stands,
Bullt by the humble Owner's painful Hands;
Fenced by a Stubble-roof, from Rain and Heat,
Secured without, within all Plain and Neat.
A Field of small Extent surrounds the Place,
In which One single Ewe did sport and graze:
This his whole Stock, till in full time there came,
To bless his utmost Hopes, a snowy Lamb;
Which, lest the Season yet too Cold might prove,
And Northern Blasts annoy it from the Grove,
Or towering Fowl on the weak Prey might sieze,
(For with his Store his Fears must too increase)
He brings it Home, and lays it by his Side,
At once his Wealth, his Pleasure and his Pride;
Still bars the Door, by Labor called away,
And, when returning at the Close of Day,
With One small Mess himself, and that sustains,
And half his Dish it shares, and half his slender Gains.
When to the great Man's Table now there comes
A Lord as great, followed by hungry Grooms:
For these must be provided sundry Meats,
The Best for Some, for Others coarser Cates.
One Servant, diligent above the rest
To help his Master to contrive the Feast,
Extols the Lamb was nourished with such Care,
So fed, so lodged, it must be Princely Fare;
And having this, my Lord his own may spare.
In haste he sends, led by no Law, but Will,
Not to entreat, or purchase, but to Kill.
The Messenger's arrived; the harmless Spoil,
Unused to fly, runs Bleating to the Toil:
Whilst for the Innocent the Owner feared,
And, sure would move, could Poverty be heard.
Oh spare (he cries) the Product of my Cares,
My Stock's Increase, the Blessing on my Prayers;
My growing Hope, and Treasure of my Life!
More was he speaking, when the murdering Knife
Showed him, his Suit, though just, must be denied,
And the white Fleece in its own Scarlet died;
Whilst the poor helpless Wretch stands weeping by,
And lifts his Hands for Justice to the Sky.
Which he shall find, the incensed King replies,
When for the proud Offense the Oppressor dies.
O Nathan! by the Holy Name I swear,
Our Land such Wrongs unpunished shall not bear
If, with the Fault, the Offender thou declare.
To whom the Prophet, closing with the Time,
Thou art the Man replies, and thine the ill-natured Crime.
Nor think, against thy Place, or State, I err;
A Power above thee does this Charge prefer;
Urged by whose Spirit, hither am I brought
TO expostulate his Goodness, and thy Fault;
To lead thee back to those forgotten Years,
In Labor spent, and lowly Rustic Cares,
When in the Wilderness thy Flocks but few,
Thou did the Shepherd's simple Art pursue
Through crusting Frosts, and penetrating Dew:
Till wondering Jesse saw six Brothers past,
And Thou Elected, Thou the Least and Last;
A Scepter to thy Rural Hand conveyed,
And in thy Bosom Royal Beauties laid;
A lovely Princess made thy Prize that Day,
When on the shaken Ground the Giant lay
Stupid in Death, beyond the Reach of Cries
That bore thy shouted Fame to listening Skies,
And drove the flying Foe as fast away,
As Winds, of old, Locusts to Egypt's Sea.
Thy Heart with Love, thy Temples with Renown,
The All-giving Hand of Heaven did largely crown,
Whilst yet thy Cheek was spread with youthful Down.
What more could craving Man of God implore
Or what for favored Man could God do more?
Yet could not These, nor Israel's Throne, suffic
Intemp'rate Wishes, drawn through wandering Eyes
One Beauty (not thy own) and seen by chance,
Melts down the Work of Grace with an alluring Glance;
Chases the Spirit, fed by sacred Art,
And blots the Title AFTER GOD's OWN HEART;
Black Murder breeds to level at his Head,
Who boasts so fair a Part'ner of his Bed,
Nor longer must possess those envied Charms,
The single Treasure of his House, and Arms:
Giving, by this thy Fall, cause to Blaspheme
To all the Heathen the Almighty Name.
For which the Sword shall still thy Race pursue,
And, in revolted Israel's scornful View,
Thy captived Wives shall be in Triumph led
Unto a bold Usurper's shameful Bed;
Who from thy Bowels sprung shall seize thy Throne,
And scourge thee by a Sin beyond thy own.
Thou have thy Fault in secret Darkness done;
But this the World shall see before the Noonday's Sun.
Enough! the King, enough! the Saint replies,
And pours his swift Repentance from his Eyes;
Falls on the Ground, and tears the Nuptial Vest,
By which his Crime's Completion was expressed:
Then with a Sigh blasting to Carnal Love,
Drawn deep as Hell, and piercing Heaven, above
Let Me (he cries) let Me attend his Rod,
For I have sinned, for I have lost my God.
Hold! (says the Prophet) of that Speech beware,
God never was lost, unless by Man's Despair.
The Wound that is thus willingly revealed,
The Almighty is as willing should be healed.
Thus washed in Tears, thy Soul as fair does show
As the first Fleece, which on the Lamb does grow,
Or on the Mountain's top the lately fallen Snow.
Yet to the World that Justice may appear
Acting her Part impartial, and severe,
The Offspring of thy Sin shall soon resign
That Life, for which thou must not once repine;
But with submissive Grief his Fate deplore,
And bless the Hand, that does inflict no more.
Shall I then pay but Part, and owe the Whole?
My Body's Fruit, for my offending Soul?
Shall I no more endure (the King demands)
And 'scape thus lightly his offended Hands?
Oh! let him All resume, my Crown, my Fame;
Reduce me to the Nothing, whence I came;
Call back his Favors, faster than he gave;
And, if but Pardoned, strip me to my Grave:
Since (though he seems to Lose) He surely Wins,
Who gives but earthly Comforts for his Sins.
Part of the Fifth Scene in the Second Act of Athalia, a Tragedy, written in
French by Monsieur Racine.
Enter, as in the Temple of Jerusalem, ATHALIA, MATHAN, ABNER. Mathan. WHY, to
our Wonder, in this Place is seen,
Thus discomposed, and altered, Juda's Queen?
May we demand, what Terrors seize your Breast,
Or, why your Steps are to this House addressed,
Where your unguarded Person stands exposed
To secret Foes, within its Walls enclosed?
Can it be thought that you remit that Hate?

Athalia. No more! but Both observe what I relate:
Not, that I mean (recalling Times of Blood)
To make you Judges of the Paths I trod,
When to the emptied Throne I boldly rose,
Treating all Intercepters as my Foes.
'Twas Heavens Decree, that I should thus succeed,
Whose following Favor justifies the Deed,
Extending my unlimited Command
From Sea to Sea over the obedient Land:
Whilst your Jerusalem all Peace enjoys,
Nor now the encroaching Philistine destroys,
Nor wandering Arab his Pavilion spreads,
Near Jordan's Banks, nor wastes his flowery Meads.
The great Assyrian, Terror of your Kings,
Who bought his Friendship with their holiest Things,
Yields that a Sister, of his powerful Race,
Should sway these Realms, and dignify the Place.
Nor need we add the late insulting Foe,
The furious Jehu does this Scepter know,
And sinks beneath the Load of conscious Fears,
When in Samaria he my Actions hears.
Distressed by Foes, which I Have against him raised,
He sees me unmolested, six'd, and pleased;
At least, till now thus glorious was my State;
But something's threatened from relaxing Fate,
And the last Night, which should have brought me Rest,
Has all these great Ideas dispossessed.
A Dream, a Vision, an apparent View
Of what, methinks, does still my Steps pursue,
Hangs on my pensive Heart, and bears it down
More than the weight of an objected Crown,
My Mother (be the Name with Reverence spoke!)
Ere cheerful Day through horrid Shades had broke,
Approached my Bed, magnificent her Dress,
Her Shape, her Air did Jesabel confess:
Nor seemed her Face to have refused that Art,
Which, in despite of Age, does Youth impart,
And which she practiced, scorning to decay,
Or to be vanquished even in Nature's way.
Thus all arrayed, in such defying Pride
As when the injurious Conqu'ror she descried,
And did in height of Power for ill-got Power deride.
To me she spoke, these Accents to me came:
" Thou worthy Daughter of my soaring Fame,
" Though with a more transcendent Spirit filled,
" Though struggling Powers attempt thy Life to shield,
" The Hebrew's God (Oh, tremble at the sound!)
" Shall Thee and Them, and all their Rights confound.
A pitying Groan concludes, no Word of Aid.
My Arms I thought to throw about the Shade
Of that loved Parent, but my troubled Sight
No more directed them to aim aright,
Nor ought presented, but a heap of Bones,
For which fierce Dogs contended on the Stones,
With Flakes of mangled Flesh, that quivering still
Proclaimed the Freshness of the suffered Ill;
Distained with Blood the Pavement, and the Wall,
Appeared as in that memorable Fall --

Abner. Oh! just avenging Heaven! -- [aside.

Mathan. Sure, Dreams like these, are for Prevention given.

The SPLEEN.
A Pindarick Poem.
WHat art thou, SPLEEN, which every thing do ape?
Thou Proteus to abused Mankind,
Who never yet thy real Cause could find,
Or fix thee to remain in one continued Shape.
Still varying thy perplexing Form,
Now a Dead Sea thou wilt represent,
A Calm of stupid Discontent,
Then, dashing on the Rocks wilt rage into a Storm.
Trembling sometimes thou do appear,
Dissolved into a Panick Fear;
On Sleep intruding do thy Shadows spread,
Thy gloomy Terrors round the silent Bed,
And crowd with boading Dreams the Melancholy Head:
Or, when the Midnight Hour is told,
And drooping Lids thou still do waking hold,
Thy fond Delusions cheat the Eyes,
Before them antic Specter dance,
Unusual Fires their pointed Heads advance,
And airy Phantoms rise.
Such was the monstrous Vision seen,
When Brutus (now beneath his Cares oppressed,
And all Rome's Fortunes rolling in his Breast,
Before Philippi's latest Field,
Before his Fate did to Octavius lead)
Was vanquished by the Spleen.
Falsely, the Mortal Part we blame
Of our deprest, and ponderous Frame,
Which, till the First degrading Sin
Let Thee, its dull Attendant, in,
Still with the Other did comply,
Nor clogged the Active Soul, disposed to fly,
And range the Mansions of it is native Sky.
Nor, whilst in his own Heaven he dwelt,
Whilst Man his Paradise possessed,
His fertile Garden in the fragrant East,
And all united Odours smelt,
No armed Sweets, until thy Reign,
Could shock the Sense, or in the Face
A flusht, unhandsom Color place.
Now the Jonquille o'ercomes the feeble Brain;
We faint beneath the Aromatic Pain,
Till some offensive Scent thy Powers appease,
And Pleasure we resign for short, and nauseous Ease.
In every One thou do possess,
New are thy Motions, and thy Dress:
Now in some Grove a listening Friend
Thy false Suggestions must attend,
Thy whispered Griefs, thy fancied Sorrows hear,
Breathed in a Sigh, and witnessed by a Tear;
Whilst in the light, and vulgar Crowd,
Thy Slaves, more clamorous and loud,
By Laughters unprovoked, thy Influence too confess.
In the Imperious Wife thou Vapors art,
Which from o'erheated Passions rise
In Clouds to the attractive Brain,
Until descending thence again,
Through the o'er-cast, and show'ring Eyes,
Upon her Husband's softened Heart,
He the disputed Point must yield,
Something resign of the contested Field;
Till Lordly Man, born to Imperial Sway,
Compounds for Peace, to make that Right away,
And Woman, armed with Spleen, does servilely Obey.
The Fool, to imitate the Wits,
Complains of thy pretended Fits,
And Dullness, born with him, would lay
Upon thy accidental Sway;
Because, sometimes, thou do presume
Into the ablest Heads to come:
That, often, Men of Thoughts refined,
Impatient of unequal Sense,
Such slow Returns, where they so much dispense,
Retiring from the Crowd, are to thy Shades inclined.
Over me alas! thou do too much prevail:
I feel thy Force, whilst I against thee rail;
I feel my Verse decay, and my crampt Numbers fail.
Through thy black Jaundice I all Objects see,
As Dark, and Terrible as Thee,
My Lines decry'd, and my Employment thought
An useless Folly, or presumptuous Fault:
Whilst in the Muses Paths I stray,
Whilst in their Groves, and by their secret Springs
My Hand delights to trace unusual Things,
And deviates from the known, and common way;
Nor will in fading Silks compose
Faintly the inimitable Rose,
Fill up an ill-drawn Bird, or paint on Glass
The Sov'reign's blurred and undistinguished Face,
The threatening Angel, and the speaking Ass.
Patron thou art to every gross Abuse,
The sullen Husband's feigned Excuse,
When the ill Humor with his Wife he spends,
And bears recruited Wit, and Spirits to his Friends.
The Son of Bacchus pleads thy Power,
As to the Glass he still repairs,
Pretends but to remove thy Cares,
Snatch from thy Shades one gay, and smiling Hour,
And drown thy Kingdom in a purple Shower.
When the Coquette, whom every Fool admires,
Would in Variety be Fair,
And, changing hastily the Scene
From Light, Impertinent, and Vain,
Assumes a soft, a melancholy Air,
And of her Eyes rebates the wandering Fires,
The careless Posture, and the Head reclined,
The thoughtful, and composed Face,
Proclaiming the withdrawn, the absent Mind,
Allows the Fop more liberty to gaze,
Who gently for the tender Cause inquires;
The Cause, indeed, is a Defect in Sense,
Yet is the Spleen alleged, and still the dull Pretense.
But these are thy fantastic Harms,
The Tricks of thy pernicious Stage,
Which do the weaker Sort engage;
Worse are the dire Effects of thy more powerful Charms.
By Thee Religion, all we know,
That should enlighten here below,
Is veiled in Darkness, and perplexed
With anxious Doubts, with endless Scruples vexed,
And some Restraint implied from each perverted Text.
Whilst Touch not, Taste not, what is freely given,
Is but thy niggard Voice, disgracing bounteous Heaven.
From Speech restrained, by thy Deceits abused,
To Deserts banished, or in Cells reclus'd,
Mistaken Vot'ries to the Powers Divine,
Whilst they a purer Sacrifice design,
Do but the Spleen obey, and worship at thy Shrine.
In vain to chase thee every Art we try,
In vain all Remedies apply,
In vain the Indian Leaf infuse,
Or the parched Eastern Berry bruise;
Some pass, in vain, those Bounds, and nobler Liquors use.
Now Harmony, in vain, we bring,
Inspire the Flute, and touch the String.
From Harmony no help is had;
Music but soothes thee, if too sweetly sad,
And if too light, but turns thee gayly Mad.
Though the Physicians greatest Gains,
Although his growing Wealth he sees
Daily increased by Ladies Fees,
Yet do thou baffle all his studious Pains.
Not skilful Lower thy Source could find,
Or through the well-dissected Body trace
The secret, the mysterious ways,
By which thou do surprise, and prey upon the Mind.
Though in the Search, too deep for Humane Thought,
With unsuccessful Toil he wrought,
'Till thinking Thee to have caught, Himself by thee was caught,
Retained thy Prisoner, thy acknowledged Slave,
And sunk beneath thy Chain to a lamented Grave.
An EPISTLE from Alexander to Hephaestion in his Sickness.
WITH such a Pulse, with such disordered Veins,
Such laboring Breath, as thy Disease constrains;
With failing Eyes, that scarce the Light endure,
(So long unclos'd, they have watched thy doubtful Cure)
To his Hephaestion Alexander writes,
To soothe thy Days, and wing thy sleepless Nights.
I send thee Love: Oh! that I could impart,
As well my vital Spirits to thy Heart!
That, when the fierce Distemper thine would quell,
They might renew the Fight, and the cold Foe repel.
As on Arbela's Plains we turned the Day,
When Persians through our Troops had mowed their way,
When the rough Scythians on the Plunder run,
And barbarous Shouts proclaimed the Conquest won,
'Till over my Head (to stop the swift Despair)
The Bird of Jove fans the supporting Air,
Above my Plume does his broad Wings display,
And follows wheresoe'er I force my way:
Whilst Aristander, in his Robe of White,
Shows to the wavering Host the auspicious Sight;
New Courage it inspires in every Breast,
And wins at once the Empire of the East.
Could He, but now, some kind Presage afford,
That Health might be again to Thee restored;
Thou to my Wishes, to my fond Embrace;
Thy Looks the same, the same Majestic Grace,
That round thee shone, when we together went
To cheer the Royal Captives in their Tent,
Where Sysigambis, prostrate on the Floor,
Did Alexander in thy Form adore;
Above great Aesculapius should he stand,
Or made immortal by Apelles Hand.
But no reviving Hope his Art allows,
And such cold Damps invade my anxious Brows,
As, when in Cydnus plunged, I dared the Flood
TO o'er-match the Boilings of my youthful Blood.
But Philip to my aid repaired in haste;
And whilst the proffered Draught I boldly taste,
As boldly He the dangerous Paper views,
Which of hid Treasons does his Fame accuse.
More thy Physician's Life on Thine depends,
And what he gives, his Own preserves, or ends.
If thou expir'st beneath his fruitless Care,
To Rhadamanthus shall the Wretch repair,
And give strict Answer for his Errors there.
Near thy Pavilion listening Princes wait,
Seeking from thine to learn their Monarch's State.
Submitting Kings, that post from Day to Day,
To keep those Crowns, which at my Feet they lay,
Forget the ambitious Subject of their Speed,
And here arrived, only Thy Dangers heed.
The Beauties of the Clime, now You Are away,
Droop, and retire, as if their God of Day
No more upon their early Prayers would shine,
Or take their Incense, at his late Decline.
Thy Parisatis whom I fear to name,
Lest to thy Heat it add redoubled Flame;
Thy lovely Wife, thy Parisatis weeps,
And in her Grief a solemn Silence keeps.
Stretched in her Tent, upon the Floor she lies,
So pale her Looks, so motionless her Eyes,
As when they gave thee leave at first to gaze
Upon the Charms of her unguarded Face;
When the two beauteous Sisters lowly knelt,
And su'd to those, who more than Pity felt.
To cheer her now Statira vainly proves,
And at thy Name alone she sighs, and moves.
But why these single Griefs should I expose?
The World no Mirth, no War, no Business knows,
But, hushed with Sorrow, stands, to favor thy Repose.
Even I my boasted Title now resign,
Not Ammon's Son, nor born of Race Divine,
But Mortal all, oppressed with restless Fears,
Wild with my Cares, and Womanish in Tears.
Though Tears, before, I for old Clytus shed,
And wept more Drops, than the old Hero bled;
Even now, methinks, I see him on the Ground,
Now my dire Arms the wretched Corpse surround,
Now the fled Soul I woo, now rave upon the Wound.
Yet He, for whom this mighty Grief did spring,
Not Alexander valued, but the King.
Then think, how much that Passion must transcend,
Which not a Subject raises but a Friend;
An equal Partner in the vanquished Earth,
A Brother, not imposed upon my Birth,
Too weak a Tie unequal Thoughts to bind,
But by the generous Motions of the Mind.
My Love to thee for Empire was the Test,
Since him, who from Mankind could choose the best,
The Gods thought only fit for Monarch over the rest.
Live then, my Friend; but if that must not be,
Nor Fate will with my boundless Mind agree,
Affording, at one time, the World and Thee;
To the most Worthy I Will that Sway resign,
And in Elysium keep Hyphaestion mine.
The following Lines occasioned by the Marriage of Edward Herbert Esquire, and
Mrs. Elizabeth Herbert.
CUPID one day asked his Mother,
When she meant that he should Wed?
You're too Young, my Boy, she said:
Nor has Nature made another
Fit to match with Cupid's Bed.
Cupid then her Sight directed
To a lately Wedded Pair;
Where Himself the Match effected;
They as Youthful, they as Fair.
Having by Example carried
This first Point in the Dispute;
WORSELEY next he said's not Married:
Here Is with Cupid's Charms may suit.
La Passion Vaincue.
Done into English with Liberty.
ON the Banks of the Severn a desperate Maid
(Whom some Shepherd, neglecting his Vows, had betrayed,)
Stood resolving to banish all Sense of the Pain,
And pursue, through her Death, a Revenge on the Swain.
Since the Gods, and my Passion, at once he defies;
Since his Vanity lives, whilst my Character dies;
No more (did she say) will I trifle with Fate,
But commit to the Waves both my Love and my Hate.
And now to comply with that furious Desire,
Just ready to plunge, and alone to expire,
Some Reflections on Death, and its Terrors untried,
Some Scorn for the Shepherd, some Flashings of Pride
At length pulled her back, and she cried, Why this Strife,
Since the Swains are so Many, and I Have but One Life?
The Owl Describing her Young Ones.
WHY was that baleful Creature made,
Which seeks our Quiet to invade,
And screams ill Omens through the Shade?
'Twas, sure, for every Mortals good,
When, by wrong painting of her Brood,
She doomed them for the Eagle's Food:
Who proffered Safety to her Tribe,
Would she but show them or describe,
And serving him, his Favor bribe.
When thus she did his Highness tell:
In Looks my Young do all excel,
Nor Nightingales can sing so well.
You Would joy to see the pretty Souls,
With wadling Steps and frowzy Poles,
Come creeping from their secret Holes.
But I never let them take the Air,
The Fortune-hunters do so stare;
And Heiresses indeed they are.
This ancient Yew three hundred Years,
Has been possessed by Lineal Heirs:
The Males extinct, now All is Theirs.
I hope I Have done their Beauties right,
Whose Eyes outshine the Stars by Night;
Their Muffs and Tippets too are White.
The King of Cedars veiled his Power,
And swore he would fast even from that Hour,
Ere he would such Lady Birds devour.
The Agreement sealed, on either part,
The Owl now promised, from her Heart,
All his Night-Dangers to divert;
As Sentinel to stand and whoop,
If single Fowl, or Shoal, or Troop
Should at his Palace aim or stoop.
But home, one Evening without Meat,
The Eagle comes, and takes his Seat,
Where they did these Conditions treat.
The Mother-Owl was prol'd away,
To seek abroad for needful Prey,
And forth the Misses came to play.
What Is here! the hungry Monarch cried,
When near him living Flesh he spied,
With which he hoped to be supplied.
But recollecting, 'twas the Place,
Where he would so lately promised Grace
To an enchanting, beauteous Race;
He paused a while, and kept his Maw,
With sober Temperance, in awe,
Till all their Lineaments he saw.
What are these Things, and of what Sex,
At length he cried, with Vultur's Becks,
And Shoulders higher than their Necks?
These wear no Palatines, nor Muffs,
Italian Silks, or Doyley Stuffs,
But motley Callicoes, and Ruffs.
Nor Brightness in their Eyes is seen,
But through the Film a dusky Green,
And like old Margery is their Mien.
Then for my Supper they are designed,
Nor can be of that lovely Kind,
To whom my Pity was inclined.
No more Delays; as soon as spoke,
The Plumes are strippd, the Grisles broke,
And near the Feeder was to choke.
When now returned the grizly Dame,
(Whose Family was out of Frame)
Against League-Breakers does exclaim.
How! quoth the Lord of soaring Fowls,
(Whilst horribly she wails and howls)
Were then your Progeny but Owls?
I thought some Phoenix was their Sire,
Who did those charming Looks inspire,
That you would prepared me to admire.
Upon your self the Blame be laid;
My Talons you have to Blood betrayed,
And ly'd in every Word you said.
Faces or Books, beyond their Worth extolled,
Are censured most, and thus to pieces pulled.
The Philosopher, the Young Man, and his Statue.
A Fond Athenian Mother brought
A Sculptor to indulge her Thought,
And carve her Only Son;
Who to such strange perfection wrought,
That every Eye the Statue caught,
Nor ought was left undone.
A youthful Smile adorned the Face,
The polish gave that Smile a Grace;
And through the Marble reigns
(Which well the Artist's Skill could trace,
And in their due Positions place)
A Thread of purple Veins.
The Parasites about it came,
(Whose Praises were too large to name)
And to each other said;
The Man so well had reached his Aim,
The Original could over it claim
Only a native Red.
Mean while a Sage, amidst the Crowd,
Thus, with a Precept wise and loud,
Checked the Vainglorious Boy;
By telling him, who now grew proud,
That though with Beauty 'twas endowed,
The Figure was a Toy:
Of no Advantage to the State,
'Twou'd neither combat, nor debate,
But idly stand alone;
Bids him beware, whilst Men create
In Stone thus his Resemblance great,
He proves not like the Stone.
The Hog, the Sheep, and Goat carrying to a FAIR.
WHO does not wish, ever to judge aright.
And, in the Course of Life's Affairs,
To have a quick, and far extended Sight,
Though it too often multiplies his Cares?
And who has greater Sense, but greater Sorrow shares?
This felt the Swine, now carrying to the Knife;
And whilst the Lamb and silent Goat
In the same fatal Cart lay void of Strife,
He widely stretches his foreboding Throat,
Deaf'ning the easy Crew with his outrageous Note.
The angry Driver chides the unruly Beast,
And bids him all this Noise forbear;
Nor be more loud, nor clamorous than the rest,
Who with him traveled to the neighboring Fair,
And quickly should arrive, and be unfettered there.
This, quoth the Swine, I do believe, is true,
And see we are very near the Town;
Whilst these poor Fools of short, and bounded View,
Think 'twill be well, when you have them dow^
And eased One of her Milk, the Other of ^ Gow^
But all the dreadful Butchers in a Row,
To my far-searching Thoughts appear,
Who know indeed, we to the Shambles go,
Whilst I, whom none but Beelzebub wo^ she^
Nor but his Dam would milk, must for ^ Carcass fe^
But tell me then, will it prevent thy Fate^
The rude unpitying Farmer cries;
If not, the Wretch who tastes his Sufferings l^
Not He, who through the unhappy Future p^
Must of the Two be held most Fortunate ^ W^
The Shepherd and the Calm.
SOothing his Passions with a warb'ling Sound,
A Shepherd-Swain lay stretched upon the Ground;
Whilst all were moved, who their Attention lent,
Or with the Harmony in Chorus went,
To something less than Joy, yet more than dull Content.
(Between which two Extremes true Pleasure lies,
O'er-run by Fools, unreach'd-at by the Wise)
But yet, a fatal Prospect to the Sea
Would often draw his greedy Sight away.
He saw the Barques unlading on the Shore,
And guessed their Wealth, then scorned his little Store,
Then would that Little lose, or else would make it more
To Merchandise converted is the Fold,
The Bag, the Bottle, and the Hurdles sold;
The Dog was changed away, the pretty Skell
Whom he had fed, and taught, and loved so well.
In vain the Phillis wept, which heretofore
Received his Presents, and his Garlands wore.
False and upbraided, he forsakes the Downs,
Nor courts her Smiles, nor fears the Ocean's Frown
For smooth it lay, as if one single Wave
Made all the Sea, nor Winds that Sea could heav^
Which blew no more than might his Sails supply
Clear was the Air below, and Phoebus laughed ^ hig^
With this Advent'rer every thing combines,
And Gold to Gold his happy Voyage joins;
But not so prosperous was the next Essay,
For rugged Blasts encountered on the way,
Scarce could the Men escape, the Deep had all their Prey.
Our broken Merchant in the Wreck was throw
Upon those Lands, which once had been his own
Where other Flocks now pastur'd on the Grass,
And other Corydons had wooed his Lass.
A Servant, for small Profits, there he turns,
Yet thrives again, and less and less he mourns;
Re-purchases in time th'abandon'd Sheep,
Which sad Experience taught him now to keep.
When from that very Bank, one Halcyon Day,
On which he leaned, when tempted to the Sea,
He notes a Calm; the Winds and Waves were still,
And promised what the Winds nor Waves fulfill,
A settled Quiet, and Conveyance sure,
To him that Wealth, by Traffic, would procure.
But the rough part the Shepherd now performs,
Reviles the Cheat, and at the Flattery storms.
Even thus (quoth he) you seemed all Rest and Ease,
You sleeping Tempests, you untroubl'd Seas,
That never to be forgot, that luckless Hour,
In which I put my Fortunes in your Power;
Quitting my slender, but secure Estate,
My undisturbed Repose, my sweet Retreat,
For Treasures which you ravished in a Day,
But swept my Folly, with my Goods, away.
Then smile no more, nor these false Shows employ,
Thou momentary Calm, thou fleeting Joy;
No more on me shall these fair Signs prevail,
Some other Novice may be won to Sail,
Give me a certain Fate in the obscurest Vale.
The LORD and the BRAMBLE
TO view his stately Walks and Groves,
A Man of Power and Place
Was hastening on; but as he roves,
His Foe the slighted Bramble proves,
And stops his eager Pace.
That Shrub was qualified to Bite;
And now there went a Tale,
That this injurious partial Wight
Had bid his Gardener rid it quite,
And throw it over the Pail.
Often the Bry'r had wished to speak,
That this might not be done;
But from the Abject and the Weak,
Who no important Figure make,
What Statesman does not run?
But clinging now about his Waste,
Ere he had time to fly,
My Lord (quoth he) for all your haste,
^ll know why I must be displaced,
And amongst the Rubbish lie.
Must none but buffle-headed Trees
Within your Ground be seen?
^r tap'ring Yews here court the Breeze,
that, like some Beaux whom Time does freeze,
At once look Old and Green?
^narl, it is true, and sometimes scratch
A tender-footed Squire;
^ho does a rugged Tartar catch,
^hen me he thinks to over-match,
And jeers for my Attire.
As to Yourself, who against me fret,
Even give this Project over:
For know, wherever my Root is set,
These rambling Twigs will Passage get,
And vex you more and more.
No Wants, no Threatenings, nor the Jail
Will curb an angry Wit:
Then think not to chastise, or rail;
Appease the Man, if you would prevail,
Who some sharp Satire writ.
The CAUTIOUS LOVERS.
SIlvia, let us from the Crowd retire;
For, What to you and me
(Who but each other do desire)
Is all that here we see?
Apart we'll live, though not alone;
For, who alone can call
Those, who in Deserts live with One,
If in that One they have All?
The World a vast Meander is,
Where Hearts confusedly stray;
Where Few do hit, whilst Thousands miss
The happy mutual Way:
Where Hands are by stern Parents tied,
Who often, in Cupid's Scorn,
Do for the widowed State provide,
Before that Love is born:
Where some too soon themselves misplace;
Then in Another find
The only Temper, Wit, or Face,
That could affect their Mind.
Others (but oh! avert that Fate!)
A well-chose Object change:
Fly, Silvia, fly, ere it is too late;
Fallen Nature's prone to range.
And, though in heat of Love we swear
More than perform we can;
No Goddess You, but Woman are,
And I no more than Man.
The impatient Silvia heard thus long;
Then with a Smile replied:
Those Bands could never be very strong,
Which Accidents divide.
Who ever was moved yet to go down,
By such o'er-cautious Fear;
Or for one Lover left the Town,
Who might have Numbers here?
Your Heart, it is true, is worth them all,
And still preferred the first;
But since confessed so apt to fall,
'T is good to fear the worst.
In ancient History we meet
A flying Nymph betrayed;
Who, had she kept in fruitful Crete,
New Conquest might have made.
And sure, as on the Beach she stood,
To view the parting Sails;
She cursed her self, more than the Flood,
Or the conspiring Gales.
False Theseus, since thy Vows are broke,
May following Nymphs beware:
Methinks I hear how thus she spoke,
And will not trust too far.
In Love, in Play, in Trade, in War
They best themselves acquit,
Who, though their Interests shipwreckt are,
Keep unreprov'd their Wit.
To DEATH.
O King of Terrors, whose unbounded Sway
All that have Life, must certainly Obey
The King, the Priest, the Prophet, all are Thin^
Nor would even God (in Flesh) thy Stroke declin^
My Name is on thy Roll, and sure I must
Increase thy gloomy Kingdom in the Dust.
My Soul at this no Apprehension feels,
But trembles at thy Swords, thy Racks, thy Wheels
Thy scorching Fevers, which distract the Sense
And snatch us raving, unprepared from hence;
At thy contagious Darts, that wound the Hea^
Of weeping Friends, who wait at dying Beds.
Spare these, and let thy Time be when it will;
My Business is to Dye, and Thine to Kill.
Gently thy fatal Scepter on me lay,
And take to thy cold Arms, insensibly, thy Prey.
ADAM Posed.
Could our First Father, at his toilsome Plough,
Thorns in his Path, and Labor on his Brow,
Clothed only in a rude, unpolished Skin,
Could he a vain Fantastic Nymph have seen,
In all her Airs, in all her antic Graces,
Her various Fashions, and more various Faces;
How had it posed that Skill, which late assigned
Just Appellations to Each several Kind!
A right Idea of the Sight to frame;
To Have guest from what New Element she came;
To Have hit the wavering Form, or given this Thing a Name.
The House of Socrates.
FOR Socrates a House was built,
Of but inferior Size;
Not highly Arched, nor Carved, nor Gilt;
The Man, it is said, was Wise.
But Mob despised the little Cell,
That struck them with no Fear;
Whilst Others thought, there should not dwell
So great a Person there.
How should a due Recourse be made
To One, so much Admired?
Where should the spacious Cloth be laid,
Or where the Guests retired?
Believe me, quoth the listening Sage,
'T was not to save the Charge;
That in this over-building Age,
My House was not more large.
But this for faithful Friends, and kind,
Was only meant by me;
Who fear that what too straight you find,
Must yet contracted be.
The EQUIPAGE.
Written Originally in FRENCH by L'Abbe Reigner.
SInce the Road of Life's so ill;
I, to pass it, use this Skill,
My frail Carriage driving home
To its latest Stage, the Tomb.
Justice first, in Harness strong,
Marches steadfastly along:
Charity, to smooth the Pace,
Fills the next adjoining Trace:
Independance leads the Way,
Whom no heavy Curb does sway;
Truth an equal Part sustains,
All indulged the loosened Reins:
In the Box sits vigorous Health,
Shunning miry Paths of Wealth:
Gaiety with easy Smiles,
Every harsher Step beguiles;
Whilst of Nature, or of Fate
Only This I would entreat:
The Equipage might not decay,
Till the worn Carriage drops away.
The Young RAT and his DAM, t^ COCK and the CAT.
NO Cautions of a Matron, Old and Sage
Young Rattlehead to Prudence cou^ engage
But forth the Offspring of her Bed would go,
Nor reason gave, but that he would do so.
Much Counsel was, at parting, thrown away,
Even all, that Mother-Rat to Son could say;
Who followed him with utmost reach of Sight,
Then, lost in Tears, and in abandoned Plight,
Turned to her mournful Cell, and bid the World Goodnight.
But Fortune, kinder than her boding Thought,
In little time the Vagrant homewards brought,
Raised in his Mind, and mended in his Dress,
Who the Bel-air did every way confess,
Had learnt to flower his Wigg, nor brusht away
The falling Meal, that on his Shoulders lay;
And from a Nutshell, wimbl'd by a Worm,
Took Snuff, and could the Government reform.
The Mother, weeping from Maternal Love,
To see him thus prodigiously improve,
Expected mighty Changes too, within,
And Wisdom to avoid the Cat, and Gin.
Whom did you chiefly note, Sweetheart, quoth she,
Of all the Strangers you abroad did see?
Who graced you most, or did your Fancy take?
The younger Rat then cursed a noisy Rake,
That barred the best Acquaintance he could make;
And scared him so, he trembled every Part;
Nor to describe him, scarce could have the Heart
High on his Feet (quoth he) himself he bore,
And terribly, in his own Language, swore;
A feathered Arm came out from either Side,
Which loud he clapped, and Combatants defied,
And to each Leg a Bayonette was tied:
And certainly his Head with Wounds was sore;
For That, and both his Cheeks a Sanguine Colou^ wore.
Near Him there lay the Creature I admired,
And for a Friend by Sympathy desired:
His Make, like Ours, as far as Tail and Feet,
With Coat of Furr in parallel do meet;
Yet seeming of a more exalted Race,
Though humble Meekness beautified his Face:
A purring Sound composed his gentle Mind,
Whilst frequent Slumbers did his Eyelids bind;
Whose soft, contracted Paw lay calmly still,
As if unused to prejudice, or kill.
I paused a while, to meditate a Speech,
And now was stepping just within his reach;
When that rude Clown began his hect'ring Cry,
And made me for my Life, and from the Attempt to fly.
Indeed 'twas Time, the shivering Beldame said,
To scour the Plain, and be of Life afraid.
Thou base, degenerate Seed of injured Rats,
Thou veriest Fool (she cried) of all my Brats;
Would thou have shaken Hands with hostile Cats,
And do not yet thine Own, and Country's Foe,
At this expense of Time, and Travel know?
Alas! that swearing, staring, bullying Thing,
That tore his Throat, and bluster'd with his Wing,
Was but some paltry, Dunghill, Craven Cock,
Who serves the early Household for a Clock.
And We his Oats, and Barley often steal,
Nor sear, he should revenge the pilfer'd Meal:
Whilst that demure, and seeming harmless Puss
Herself, and mewing Chits regales with Us.
If then, of useful Sense thou'st gained no more
Than ere thou would past the Threshold of ^ Do^
Be here, my Son, content to Dress and Dine,
Steeping the List of Beauties in thy Wine,
And neighboring Vermin with false Gloss outshine
Amongst Mankind a Thousand Fops we see,
Who in their Rambles learn no more than The^
Cross over the Alps, and make the Tour of Fra^
To learn a paltry Song, or antic Dance;
Bringing their Noddles, and Valizes packed
With Mysteries, from Shops and Tailors wrecked
But what may prejudice their Native Land;
Whose Troops are raising, or whose Fleet ^ manned
Never moves their Thoughts, nor do they understand
Thou, my dear Rattlehead, and such as These
Might keep at home, and brood on Sloth ^ E^
Whilst Others, more adapted to the Age,
May vig'rously in Warlike Feats engage,
And live on foreign Spoils, or dying thin the Stage.
The Wit and the Beau.
STrephon, whose Person every Grace
Was careful to adorn;
Thought, by the Beauties of his Face,
In Silvia's Love to find a place,
And wondered at her Scorn.
With Bows, and Smiles he did his Part.
But Oh! 'twas all in vain:
A Youth less Fine, a Youth of Art
Had talked himself into her Heart,
And would not out again.
Strephon with change of Habits pressed,
And urged her to admire;
His Love alone the Other dressed,
As Verse, or Prose became it best,
And moved her soft Desire.
This found, his courtship Strephon ends,
Or makes it to his Glass;
There, in himself now seeks amends,
Convinced, that where a Wit pretends,
A Beau is but an Ass.
The EXECUTOR.
A Greedy Heir long waited to fulfill,
As his Executor, a Kinsman's Will;
And to himself his Age repeated over,
To his Infirmities still adding more;
And nicely kept the Account of the expected Store:
When Death, at last, to either gave Release,
Making One's Pains, the Other's Longings cease;
Who to the Grave must decently convey,
Ere he Possession takes the kindred Clay,
Which in a Coach was placed, wherein he rides,
And so no Hearse, or following Train provides;
Rejecting Russel, who would make the Charge
Of one dull tedious Day, so vastly Large.
When, at his Death, the humble Man declared,
He wished thus privately to be Interred.
And now, the Luggage moves in solemn State,
And what it wants in Number, gains in Weight.
The happy Heir can scarce contain his Joy,
Whilst sundry Musings do his Thoughts employ,
How he shall act, now Every thing's his Own,
Where his Revenge, or Favor shall be shown;
Then recollecting, draws a counterfeited Groan.
The A venues, and Gardens shall be changed,
Already he the Furniture has ranged,
To ransack secret Draw'rs his Fancy flies,
Nor can the appearing Wealth his Mind suffice.
Thus he an Age runs over betwixt the Porch
Of his Friend's House, and the adjacent Church
Whilst the slow Driver, who no reckoning kept
Of what was left, indulging Nature, slept;
Till on a Bank, so high, the Wheel was borne
That in a Moment All must overturn:
Whilst the rich Heir now finds the giving Dead
Less weighty in his Gold, than in his Lead;
Which falling just on his contriving Breast,
Expelled the Soul, leaving the Corpse to rest
In the same Grave, intended for his Friend.
Then why should We our Days in Wishes spend
Which, ere we see fulfilled, are often at an End
Cupid and Folly.
Imitated from the FRENCH.
CUPID, ere deprived of Sight,
Young and apt for all Delight,
Met with Folly on the way,
As Idle, and as fond of Play.
In gay Sports the time they pass;
Now run, now wrestle on the Grass;
Their painted Wings then nimbly ply,
And every way for Mast'ry try:
'Till a Contest does arise,
Who has won the appointed Prize.
Gentle Love refers the Cafe
To the next, that comes in Place;
Trusting to his flattering Wiles,
And softens the Dispute with Smiles.
But Folly, who no Temper knows,
Words pursues with hotter Blows:
'Till the Eyes of Love were lost,
Which has such Pain to Mortals cost.
Venus hears his mournful Cries,
And repeats 'em, in the Skys,
To Jupiter in Council set,
With Peers for the Occasion met;
In her Arms the Boy she bears,
Bathing him in falling Tears;
And whilst his want of Eyes is shown,
Secures the Judges by her Own.
Folly to the Board must come,
And hear the Trial and the Doom;
Which Cytherea loudly prays
May be as heavy as the Case:
Which, when All was justly weighed,
Cupid's Wings now useless made,
That a Staff, his Feet must guide,
Which would still be apt to slide;
This Decree at last was read,
That Love by Folly should be lead.
For the Better.
Imitated from Sir Roger L'Estrange.
A Quack, to no true Skill in Physic bred,
With frequent Visits cursed his Patient's Bed;
Enquiring, how he did his Broths digest,
How chim'd his Pulse, and how he took his Rest:
If shudd'ring Cold by Burnings was pursued,
And at what time the Aguish Fit renewed.
The waining Wretch, each day become more faint,
In like proportion doubles his Complaint;
Now swooning Sweats he begs him to allay,
Now give his Lungs more liberty to play,
And take from emptied Veins these scorching Heats away:
Or if he saw the Danger did increase,
To warn him fair, and let him part in Peace.
My Life for yours, no Hazard in your Case
The Quack replies; your Voice, your Pulse, your Face,
Good Signs afford, and what you seem to feel
Proceeds from Vapors, which we'll help with Steel.
With kindled Rage, more than Distemper, burns
The suffering Man, who thus in haste returns:
No more of Vapors, your beloved Disease,
Your Ignorance's Skreen, your What-you-please,
With which you cheat poor Females of their Lives,
Whilst Men dispute not, so it rid their Wives.
For me, I Will speak free as I Have paid my Fees;
My Flesh consumes, I perish by degrees:
And as through weary Nights I count my Pains,
No Rest is left me, and no Strength remains.
All for the Better, Sir, the Quack rejoins:
Exceeding promising are all these Signs.
Falling-away, your Nurses can confirm,
Was never in Sickness thought a Mark of Harm.
The want of Strength is for the Better still;
Since Men of Vigor Fevers soonest kill.
Even with this Gust of Passion I am pleased;
For they are most Patient who the most are seized.
But let me see! here is that which all repels:
Then shakes, as he some formal Story tells,
The Treacle-water, mixed with powdered Shells.
My Stomach's gone (what do you infer from thence?)
Nor will with the least Sustenance dispense.
The Better; for, where Appetite endures,
Meats intermingle, and no Medicine cures.
The Stomach, you must know, Sir, is a Part --
But, sure, I feel Death's Pangs about my Heart.
Nay then Farewell! I need no more attend
The Quack replies. A sad approaching Friend
Questions the Sick, why he retires so fast;
Who says, because of Fees I Have paid the Last,
And, whilst all Symptoms toward my Cure agree,
Am, for the Better, Dying as you see.
VERSES
Written under the King of Sweden's Picture.
OBserve this Piece, which to our Sight does bring
The fittest Posture for the Swedish King;
(Encompassed, as we think, with Armies round,
Though not expressed within this narrow Bound)
Who, whilst his warlike and extended Hand
Directs the foremost Ranks to Charge or Stand,
Reverts his Face, lest That, so Fair and Young,
Should call in doubt the Orders of his Tongue:
Whilst the excited, and emboldened Rear
Such Youth beholding, and such Features there,
Devote their plainer Forms, and are ashamed to Fear.
Thus! every Action, every Grace of thine,
O latest Son of Fame, Son of Gustavus Line!
Affects thy Troops, with all that can inspire
A blooming Sweetness, and a martial Fire,
Fatal to none, but thy invading Foe.
So Lightnings, which to all their Brightness show,
Strike but the Man alone, who has provoked the Blow.
A POEM for the Birthday of the Right Honble the Lady CATHARINE TUFTON.
Occasioned by sight of some Verses upon that Subject for the preceding Year,
composed by no Eminent Hand.
IT IS fit SERENA should be sung.
Highborn SERENA, Fair and Young,
Should be of every Muse and Voice
The pleasing, and applauded Choice.
But as the Meanest of the Show
Do First in all Processions go:
So, let my Steps pursue that Swain
The humblest of the inspired Train;
Whose well-meant Verse did just appear,
To lead on the preceding Year:
So let my Pen, the next in Fame,
Now wait on fair SERENA's Name;
The second Tribute gladly pay,
And hail this blessed returning Day.
But let it not attempt to raise
Or rightly speak SERENA's Praise:
Since with more ease we might declare
How Great her Predecessors were;
How Great that more distinguished Peer,
To whom she owes her Being here;
In whom our Britain lets us see
What once they were, and still should be;
As, when the earliest Race was drowned,
Some Patterns, from amongst them found,
Were kept to show succeeding Times
Their Excellence without their Crimes:
More easily we might express
What Virtues do her Mother dress;
What does her Form and Mind adorn,
Of whom the engaging Nymph was born;
What Piety, what generous Love,
Does the enlarged Bosom move
Of The Lady Coventry.
Her, whose Favorite she appears,
Who more than as a Niece endears.
Such full Perfections obvious lie,
And strike, at first, a Poet's Eye.
Deep Lines of Honor all can hit,
Or mark out a superior Wit;
Consummate Goodness all can show,
And where such Graces shine below:
But the more tender Strokes to trace,
TO express the Promise of a Face,
When but the Dawnings of the Mind
We from an Air unripen'd find;
Which alt'ring, as new Moments rise,
The Pen or Pencil's Art defies;
When Flesh and Blood in Youth appears,
Polished like what our Marble wears;
Fresh as that Shade of opening Green,
Which first upon our Groves is seen;
Enlivened by a harmless Fire,
And brightened by each gay Desire;
These nicer Touches would demand
A Cowley's or a Waller's Hand,
TO explain, with undisputed Art,
What it is affects the enlightened Heart,
When every darker Thought gives way,
Whilst blooming Beauty we survey;
To show how All, that is soft and sweet,
Does in the fair SERENA meet;
To tell us, with a sure Presage,
The Charms of her maturer Age.
When Hothfeild shall (as heretofore
From its far-sought and virtuous Store
It Families of great Renown
Did with illustrious Hymen's crown)
When Hothfeild shall such Treasure know,
As fair SERENA to bestow:
Then should some Muse of lo^tier Wing
The Triumphs of that Season sing;
Describe the Pains, the Hopes, the Fears
Of noble Youths, the ambitious Cares
Of Fathers, the long-fram'd Design,
To add such Splendor to their Line,
Whilst all shall strive for such a Bride
So Educated, and Allied.
A Tale of the Miser, and the Poet.
Written about the Year 1709.
A WIT, transported with Inditing,
Unpay'd, unprais'd, yet ever Writing;
Who, for all Fights and Favorite Friends,
Had Poems at his Fingers Ends;
For new Events was still providing;
Yet now desirous to be riding,
He pack'd-up every Ode and Ditty,
And in Vacation left the City;
So rapt with Figures, and Allusions,
With secret Passions, sweet Confusions;
With Sentences from Plays well-known,
And thousand Couplets of his own;
That even the chalky Road looked gay,
And seemed to him the Milky Way.
But Fortune, who the Ball is tossing,
And Poets ever will be crossing,
Misled the Steed, which ill he guided,
Where several gloomy Paths divided.
The steepest in Descent he followed,
Enclosed by Rocks, which Time had hollowed;
Till, he believed, alive and booted,
He Would reached the Shades by Homer quoted.
But all, that he could there discover,
Was, in a Pit with Thorns grown over,
Old Mammon digging, straining, sweating,
As Bags of Gold he thence was getting;
Who, when reproved for such Dejections
By him, who lived on high Reflections,
Replied; Brave Sir, your Time is ended,
And Poetry no more befriended.
I hid this Coin, when Charles was swaying;
When all was Riot, Masking, Playing;
When witty Beggars were in fashion,
And Learning had o'er-run the Nation.
But, since Mankind is so much wiser,
That none is valued like the Miser,
I draw it hence, and now these Sums
In proper Soil grow up to A Plumb is a Cant word, signifying a Hundred
Thousand Pound.
Plumbs;
Which gathered once, from that rich Minute
We rule the World, and all that is in it.
But, quoth the Poet, can you raise,
As well as Plumb-trees, Groves of Bays?
Where you, which I would choose much rather,
May Fruits of Reputation gather?
Will Men of Quality, and Spirit,
Regard you for intrinsic Merit?
And seek you out, before your Betters,
For Conversation, Wit, and Letters?
Fool, quoth the Churl, who knew no Breeding;
Have these been Times for such Proceeding?
Instead of Honored, and Rewarded,
Are you not Slighted, or Discarded?
What have you met with, but Disgraces?
Your PRIOR could not keep in Places;
And your VAN-BRUG had found no Quarter,
But for his dabbling in the Mortar.
ROW no Advantages could hit on,
Till Verse he left, to write North-Briton.
PHILIPS, who is by the Shilling known,
Never saw a Shilling of his own.
Meets Mrs. Singo^, Author of several excellent Poems.
PHILOMELA, in the Town
Her due Proportion of Renown?
What Pref'rence has ARDELIA seen,
TO expel, though she could write the Spleen?
Of Coach, or Tables, can you brag,
Or better Clothes than Poet RAG?
Do wealthy Kindred, when they meet you,
With Kindness, or Distinction, greet you?
Or have your lately flattered Heroes
Enriched you like the Roman Maroes?
No -- quoth the Man of broken Slumbers:
Yet we have Patrons for our Numbers;
There are Mecaenas's among 'em.
Quoth Mammon, pray Sir, do not wrong 'em;
But in your Censures use a Conscience,
Nor charge Great Men with thriftless Nonsense:
Since they, as your own Poets sing,
Now grant no Worth in any thing
But so much Money as 'twill bring.
Then, never more from your Endeavors
Expect Preferment, or less Favors.
But if you will 'scape Contempt, or worse,
Be sure, put Money in your Purse;
Money! which only can relieve you
When Fame and Friendship will deceive you.
Sir, (quoth the Poet humbly bowing,
And all that he had said allowing)
Behold me and my airy Fancies
Subdued, like Giants in Romances.
I here submit to your Discourses;
Which since Experience too enforces,
I, in that solitary Pit,
Your Gold withdrawn, will hide my Wit
Till Time, which hastily advances,
And gives to all new Turns and Chances
Again may bring it into use;
Roscommons may again produce;
New Augustean Days revive,
When Wit shall please, and Poets thrive.
Till when, let those converse in private,
Who taste what others don't arrive at;
Yielding that Mammonists surpass us,
And let the Bank out-swell Parnassus.
The CHANGE.
POOR River, now you are almost dry,
What Nymph, or Swain, will near thee lie?
Since brought, alas! to sad Decay,
What Flocks, or Herds, will near thee stay?
The Swans, that sought thee in thy Pride,
Now on new Streams forgetful ride:
And Fish, that in thy Bosom lay,
Choose in more prosperous Floods to play.
All leave thee, now thy Ebb appears,
To waste thy sad Remains in Tears;
Nor will thy mournful Murmurs heed.
Fly, wretched Stream, with all thy speed,
Amongst those solid Rocks thy Griefs bestow;
For Friends, like those alas! thou never did know.
And thou, poor Sun! that sat'st on high;
But late, the Splendor of the Sky;
What Flower, though by thy Influence born,
Now Clouds prevail, will toward thee turn'
Now Darkness sits upon thy Brow,
What Persian Votary will bow?
What River will her Smiles reflect,
Now that no Beams thou can direct?
By watery Vapors overcast,
Who thinks upon thy Glories past?
If present Light, nor Heat we get,
Unheeded thou may rise, and set.
Not all the past can one Adorer keep,
Fall, wretched Sun, to the more faithful Deep
Nor do thou, lofty Structure! boast,
Since undermined by Time and Frost:
Since thou can no Reception give,
In untrod Meadows thou may live.
None from his ready Road will turn,
With thee thy wretched Change to mourn.
Not the soft Nights, or cheerful Days
Thou have bestowed, can give thee Praise.
No lusty Tree that near thee grows,
(Though it beneath thy Shelter rose)
Will to thy Age a Staff become.
Fail, wretched Building! to thy Tomb.
Thou, and thy painted Roofs, in Ruin mixed,
Fall to the Earth, for That alone is fixed.
The same, poor Man, the same must be
Thy Fate, now Fortune frowns on thee.
Her Favor every one pursues,
And losing Her, thou all must lose.
No Love, sown in thy prosperous Days,
Can Fruit in this cold Season raise:
No Benefit, by thee conferred,
Can in this time of Storms be heard.
All from thy troubled Waters run;
Thy stooping Fabric all Men shun.
All do thy clouded Looks decline,
As if thou never did on them shine.
O wretched Man! to other World's repair;
For Faith and Gratitude are only there.
Enquiry after Peace.
A Fragment.
PEACE! where art thou to be found?
Where, in all the spacious Round,
May thy Footsteps be pursued?
Where may thy calm Seats be viewed?
On some Mountain do thou lie,
Screnely near the ambient Sky,
Smiling at the Clouds below,
Where rough Storms and Tempests grow?
Or, in some retired Plain,
Undisturbed do thou remain?
Where no angry Whirlwinds pass,
Where no Floods oppress the Grass.
High above, or deep below,
Fain I thy Retreat would know.
Fain I thee alone would find,
Balm to my o'er-weary'd Mind.
Since what here the World enjoys,
Or our Passions most employs,
Peace opposes, or destroys.
Pleasure's a tumultuous thing,
Busy still, and still on Wing;
Flying swift, from place to place,
Darting from each beauteous Face;
From each strongly mingled Bowl
Through the inslam'd and restless Soul.
Sovereign Power who fondly craves,
But himself to Pomp enslaves;
Stands the Envy of Mankind,
Peace, in vain, attempts to find.
Thirst of Wealth no Quiet knows,
But near the Deathbed siercer grows;
Wounding Men with secret Stings,
For Evils it on Others brings.
War who not discreetly shuns,
Thorough Life the Gauntlet runs.
Swords, and Pikes, and Waves, and Flames,
Each their Stroke against him aims.
Love (if such a thing there be)
Is all Despair, or Ecstasy.
Poetry's the feav'rish Fit,
The o'erslowing of unbounded Wit. etc.
On the Death of the Honorable Mr. Jam^ Thynne, younger Son to the Right
Honorable the Lord Viscount Weymouth.
Farewell, loved Youth! since 'twas the Will of Heaven
So soon to take, what had so late been given;
And thus our Expectations to destroy,
Ra^ing a Grief, where we had formed a Joy;
Who once believed, it was the Fates Design
In Him to double an Illustrious Line,
And in a second Channel spread that Race
Where every Virtue shines, with every Grace.
But we mistook, and 'twas not here below
That this engrafted Scion was to grow;
The Seats above required him, that each Sphere
Might soon the Offspring of such Parents share
Resign him then to the supreme Intent,
You, who but Flesh to that blessed Spirit lent.
Again disrobed, let him to Bliss retire,
And only bear from you, amidst that Choir,
What, Precept or Example did inspire,
A Title to Rewards, from that rich store
Of Pious Works, which you have sent before.
Then lay the fading Relics, which remain,
In the still Vault (excluding farther Pain);
Where Kings and Counselors their Progress close,
And his renowned Ancestors repose;
Where Lord Keeper Coventry.
COVENTRY withdrew All but in Name,
Leaving the World his Benefits and Fame;
Where his Paternal Predecessor lies,
Once large of Thought, and ranked among the Wise;
Whose Genius in Long-Leat we may behold
(A Pile, as noble as if he would been told
By WEYMOVTH, it should be in time possessed,
And strove to suit the Mansion to the Guest.)
Nor favored, nor disgraced, there ESSEX sleeps,
Nor SOMERSET his Master's Sorrows weeps,
Who to the shelter of the unenvied Grave
Conveyed the Monarch, whom he could not save;
Though, Roman-like, his own less-valu'd Head
He proffered in that injured Martyr's stead.
Nor let that matchless The Lady Packington, supposed by many to be the Author
of The Whole Duty of Man.
Female 'scape my Pen,
Who their Whole Duty taught to weaker Men,
And of each Sex the Two best Gifts enjoyed,
The Skill to write, the Modesty to hide;
Whilst none should that Performance disbelieve,
Who led the Life, might the Directions give.
With such as These, whence He derived his Blood,
Great on Record, or eminently Good,
Let Him be laid, till Death's long Night shall cease,
And breaking Glory interrupt the Peace.
Meanwhile, ye living Parents, ease your Grief
By Tears, allowed as Nature's due Relief.
For when we offer to the Powers above,
Like You, the dearest Objects of our Love;
When, with that patient Saint in Holy Writ,
We Have learnt at once to Grieve, and to Submit;
When contrite Sighs, like hallowed Incense, rise
Bearing our Anguish to the appeased Skies;
Then may those Showers, which take from Sorrow birth,
And still are tending towered this baleful Earth,
Over all our deep and parching Cares diffuse,
Like Eden's Springs, or Hermon's softening Dews.
But lend your Succors, ye Almighty Powers,
For as the Wound, the Balsam too is Yours.
In vain are Numbers, or persuasive Speech,
What Poets write, or what the Pastors teach,
Till You, who make, again repair the Breach.
For when to Shades of Death our Joys are fled,
When for a Loss, like This, our Tears are shed
None can revive the Heart, but who can raise the Dead.
But yet, my Muse, if thou had softer Verse
Than ever bewailed the melancholy Hearse;
If thou had Power to dissipate the Gloom
Inherent to the Solitary Tomb;
To rescue thence the Memory and Air
Of what we lately saw so Fresh, so Fair;
Then should this Noble Youth thy Art engage
To show the Beauties of his blooming Age,
The pleasing Light, that from his Eyes was cast,
Like hasty Beams, too Vigorous to last;
Where the warm Soul, as one the Confines, lay
Ready for Flight, and for Eternal Day.
Gently disposed his Nature should be shown,
And all the Mother's Sweetness made his Own.
The Father's Likeness was but faintly seen,
As ripened Fruits are figured by the Green.
Nor could we hope, had he fulfilled his Days,
He should have reached WEYMOVTH's unequaled Praise.
Still One distinguished Plant each Lineage shows,
And all the rest beneath it is Stature grows.
Of Tully's Race but He possessed the Tongue,
And none like Julius from the Caesar's sprung.
Next, in his harmless Sports he should be drawn
Urging his Courser, over the flowery Lawn;
Sprightly Himself, as the enlivened Game,
Bold in the Chase, and full of generous Flame;
Yet in the Palace, Tractable and Mild,
Perfect in all the Duties of a Child;
Which fond Reflection pleases, whilst it pains,
Like penetrating Notes of sad Harmonious Stra^
Selected Friendships timely he began,
And siez'd in Youth that best Delight of Man.
Leaving a growing Race to mourn his End,
Their earliest and their Ages promised Friend.
But far away alas! that Prospect moves,
Lost in the Clouds, like distant Hills and (...)
Whilst with increasing Steps we all pursue
What Time alone can bring to nearer View,
That Future State, which Darkness yet invol^.
Known but by Death, which every Doubt resol^
The Critic and the Writer of FABLE
WEary, at last, of the Pindarick way,
Through which advent'rously the (...) would st^
To Fable I descend with soft Delight,
Pleased to Translate, or easily Endite:
Whilst aerie Fictions hastily repair
To fill my Page, and rid my Thoughts of Care,
As they to Birds and Beasts new Gifts impart,
And Teach, as Poets should, whilst they Divert.
But here, the Critic bids me check this Vein.
Fable, he cries, though grown the affected Strain,
But dies, as it was born, without Regard or Pain.
Whilst of his Aim the lazy Trifler fails,
Who seeks to purchase Fame by childish Tales.
Then, let my Verse, once more, attempt the Skies,
The easily persuaded Poet cries,
Since meaner Works you Men of Taste despise.
The Walls of Troy shall be our loftier Stage,
Our mighty Theme the fierce Achilles Rage.
The Strength of Hector, and Ulysses Arts
Shall boast such Language, to adorn their Parts,
As neither Hobbes, nor Chapman could bestow
Or did from Congreve, or from Dryden flow.
Amidst her Towers, the dedicated Horse
Shall be received, big with destructive Force;
Till Men shall say, when Flames have brou^ her do^
" Troy is no more, and Ilium was a Town.
Is this the way to please the Men of Taste,
The Interrupter cries, this old Bombast?
I Am sick of Troy, and in as great a Fright,
When some dull Pedant would her Wars recit^
As was soft Paris, when compelled to Fight.
To Shades and Springs shall we awhile repai^
The Muse demands, and in that milder Air
Describe some gentle Swain's unhappy Smart
Whose folded Arms still press upon his Heart,
And deeper drive the too far entered Dart?
Whilst Phillis with a careless pleasure reigns
The Joy, the Grief, the Envy of the Plains;
Heightens the Beauty of the verdant Woods,
And softens all the Murmurs of the Floods.
Oh! stun me not with these insipid Dreams,
^h' Eternal Hush, the Lullaby of Streams.
Which still, he cries, their even Measures keep,
Till both the Writers, and the Readers sleep.
But urge thy Pen, if thou wou'd'st move our Thoughts,
To show us private, or the public Faults.
Display the Times, High-Church or Low provoke;
We'll praise the Weapon, as we like the Stroke,
And warmly sympathizing with the Spite
Apply to Thousands, what of One you write.
Then, must that single Stream the Town supply,
The harmless Fable-writer does reply,
And all the Rest of Helicon be dry?
And when so many choice Productions swarm,
Must only Satire keep your Fancies warm?
Whilst even there, you praise with such Reserve,
As if you would in the midst of Plenty starve,
Though never so liberally we Authors carve.
Happy the Men, whom we divert with Ease,
Whom Opera's and Panegyricks please.
The King and the Shepherd.
Imitated from the French.
THrough every Age some Tyrant Passion reigns:
Now Love prevails, and now Ambition gains
Reason's lost Throne, and sovereign Rule maintains.
Though beyond Love's, Ambition's Empire goes;
For who feels Love, Ambition also knows,
And proudly still aspires to be possessed
Of Her, he thinks superior to the rest.
As could be proved, but that our plainer Task
Does no such Toil, or Definitions ask;
But to be so rehearsed, as first 'twas told,
When such old Stories pleased in Days of old.
A King, observing how a Shepherd's Skill
Improved his Flocks, and did the Pastures fill,
That equal Careth' assaulted did defend,
And the secured and grazing Part attend,
Approves the Conduct, and from Sheep and Curs
Transfers the Sway, and changed his Wool to Furrs.
Lord Keeper now, as rightly he divides
His just Decrees, and speedily decides;
When his sole Neighbor, whilst he watched the Fold,
A Hermit poor, in Contemplation old,
Hastes to his Ear, with safe, but lost Advice,
Tells him such Heights are levelled in a trice,
Preferments treacherous, and her Paths of Ice:
And that already sure 't had turned his Brain,
Who thought a Prince's Favor to retain.
Nor seemed unlike, in this mistaken Rank,
The sightless Wretch, who froze upon a Bank
A Serpent found, which for a Staff he took,
And used as such (his own but lately broke)
Thanking the Fates, who thus his Loss supplied,
Nor marking one, that with amazement cried,
Throw quickly from thy Hand that sleeping Ill
A Serpent it is, that when awaked will kill.
A Serpent this! the uncaution'd Fool replies:
A Staff it feels, nor shall my want of Eyes,
Make me believe, I have no Senses left,
And through thy Malice be of this bereft;
Which Fortune to my Hand has kindly sent
To guide my Steps, and stumbling to prevent.
No Staff, the Man proceeds; but to thy harm
A Snake 'twill prove: The Viper, now grown warm
Confirmed it soon, and fastened on his Arm.
Thus will thou find, Shepherd believe it true,
Some Ill, that shall this seeming Good ensue;
Thousand Distastes, t'allay thy envied Gains,
Unthought of, on the parcimonious Plains.
So proved the Event, and Whisp'rers now defame
The candid Judge, and his Proceedings blame.
By Wrongs, they say, a Palace he crects,
The Good oppresses, and the Bad protects.
To view this Seat the King himself prepares,
Where no Magnificence or Pomp appears,
But Moderation, free from each Extreme,
Whilst Moderation is the Builder's Theme.
Ashamed yet still the Sycophants persist,
That Wealth he had concealed within a Chest,
Which but attended some convenient Day,
To face the Sun, and brighter Beams display.
The Chest unbarr'd, no radiant Gems they find,
No secret Sums to foreign Banks designed,
But humble Marks of an obscure Recess,
Emblems of Care, and Instruments of Peace;
The Hook, the Scrip, and for unblam'd Delight
The merry Bagpipe, which, ere fall of Night,
Could sympathizing Birds to tuneful Notes invite.
Welcome ye Monuments of former Joys!
Welcome! to bless again your Master's Eyes,
And draw from Courts, the instructed Shepherd cries.
No more dear Relics! we no more will part,
You shall my Hands employ, who now revive my Heart.
No Emulations, or corrupted Times
Shall falsely blacken, or seduce to Crimes
Him, whom your honest Industry can please,
Who on the barren Down can sing from inward Ease.
How Is this! the Monarch something moved rejoins.
With such low Thoughts, and Freedom from Designs,
What made thee leave a Life so fondly prized,
To be in Crowds, or envied, or despised?
Forgive me, Sir, and Humane Frailty see,
The Swain replies, in my past State and Me;
All peaceful that, to which I vow return.
But who alas! (though mine at length I mourn)
Was ever without the Curse of some Ambition born.
An EPISTLE from a Gentleman to Madam Deshouliers, returning Money she had lent
him at Bassette, upon the first Day of their Acquaintance.
Translated with Liberty from the French.
URANIA, whom the Town admires,
Whose Wit and Beauty share our Praise,
This fair URANIA who inspires
A thousand Joys a thousand ways,
She, who could with a Glance convey
Favors, that had my Hopes outdone,
Has lent me Money on that Day,
Which our Acquaintance first begun.
Nor with the Happiness I taste,
Let any jealous Doubts contend:
Her Friendship is secure to last,
Beginning where all others end.
And thou, known Cheat! upheld by Law,
Thou Disappointer of the craving Mind,
BASSETTE, who thy Original do draw
From Venice (by uncertain Seas confined);
Author of Murmurs, and of Care,
Of pleasing Hopes, concluding in Despair:
To thee my strange Felicity I owe,
From thy Oppression did this Succor flow.
Less had I gained, had thou propitious been,
Who better by my Loss have taught me how to Win.
Yet tell me, my transported Brain!
(whose Pride this Benefit awakes)
Know thou, what on this Chance depends?
And are we not exalted thus in vain,
Whilst we observe the Money which she lends,
But not, alas! the Heart she takes,
The fond Engagements, and the Ties
Her fatal Bounty does impose,
Who makes Reprisals, with her Eyes,
For what her generous Hand bestows?
And though I quickly can return
Those useful Pieces, which she gave;
Can I again, or would I have
That which her Charms have from me borne?
Yet let us quit the obliging Score;
And whilst we borrowed Gold restore,
Whilst readily we own the Debt,
And Gratitude before her set
In its approved and fairest Light;
Let her effectually be taught
By that instructive, harmless Slight,
That also in her turn she ought
(Repaying every tender Thought)
Kindness with Kindness to requite.
To Edward Jenkinson, Esquire a very young Gentleman, who writ a Poem on PEACE.
FAir Youth! who wish the Wars may cease,
We own you better formed for Peace.
Nor Pallas you, nor Mars should follow;
Your Gods are Cupid and Apollo;
Who give sweet Looks, and early Rhimes,
Bespeaking Joys, and Halcyon Times.
Your Face, which We, as yet, may praise,
Calls for the Myrtle, and the Bays.
The Martial Crowns Fatigues demand,
And laurell'd Heroes must be tanned;
A Fate, we never can allow
Should reach your pleasing, polished Brow.
But granting what so young you have writ,
From Nature flowed, as well as Wit;
And that indeed you Peace pursue,
We must begin to Treat with you.
We Females, Sir, it is I mean:
Whilst I, like BRISTOL for the QUEEN,
For all the Ladies of your Age
As Plenipo' betimes engage;
And as first Article declare,
You shall be Faithful as you're Fair:
No Sighs, when you shall know their Use,
Shall be discharged in Love's Abuse;
Nor kindling Words shall undermine,
Till you in equal Passion join.
Nor Money be alone your Aim,
Though you an Over-weight may claim,
And fairly build on your Desert,
If with your Person goes your Heart.
But when this Barrier I have gained,
And trust it will be well maintained;
Who knows, but some imprudent She
Betraying what is secured by me,
Shall yield through Verse, or stronger Charms,
To Treat anew on easier Terms?
And I be negligently told --
You was too Young, and I too Old,
To have our distant Maxims hold.
To the Painter of an ill-drawn Picture of CLEONE, the Honorable Mrs. Thynne.
SOoner I Would praise a Cloud which Light beguiles,
Than thy rash Hand which robs this Face of Smiles;
And does that sweet and pleasing Air control,
Which to us paints the fair CLEONE's Soul.
It Is vain to boast of Rules or labored Art;
I miss the Look that captivates my Heart,
Attracts my Love, and tender Thoughts inspires;
Nor can my Breast be warmed by common Fires;
Nor can ARDELIA love but where she first admires.
Like Jupiter's, thy Head was sure in Pain
When this Virago struggled in thy Brain;
And strange it is, thou have not made her wield
A mortal Dart, or penetrating Shield,
Giving that Hand of disproportioned size
The Power, of which thou have disarmed her Eyes:
As if, like Amazons, she must oppose,
And into Lovers force her vanquished Foes.
Had to THEANOR thus her Form been shown
To gain her Heart, he had not lost his own;
Nor, by the gentle Bands of Human Life,
At once secured the Mistress and the Wife.
For still CLEONE's Beauties are the same,
And what first lightened, still upholds his Flame.
Fain his Compassion would thy Works approve,
Were pitying thee consistent with his Love,
Or with the Taste which Italy has wrought
In his refined and daily heightened Thought,
Where Poetry, or Painting find no place,
Unless performed with a superior Grace.
Could but my Wish some Influence infuse,
Never should the Pencil, or the Sister-Muse
Be tried by those who easily excuse:
But strictest Censors should of either judge,
Applaud the Artist, and despise the Drudge.
Then never would thy Colors have debased
CLEONE's Features, and her Charms defaced:
Nor had my Pen (more subject to their Laws)
Assayed to vindicate her Beauty's Cause.
A rigid Fear had kept us both in Awe,
Nor I composed, nor thou presumed to draw;
But in CLEONE viewing with Surprise
That Excellence, to which we never could rise,
By less Attempts we safely might have gained
That humble Praise which neither has obtained,
Since to thy Shadowings, or my ruder Verse,
It is not given to show, or to rehearse
What Nature in CLEONE's Face has writ,
A soft Endearment, and a cheerful Wit,
That all-subduing, that enlivening Air
By which, a sympathizing Joy we share,
For who forbears to smile, when smiled on by the Fair?
A Pastoral DIALOGUE between Two Shepherdesses.
Silvia. PRetty Nymph! within this Shade,
Whilst the Flocks to rest are laid,
Whilst the World dissolves in Heat,
Take this cool, and flowery Seat
And with pleasing Talk a while
Let us two the Time beguile;
Though thou here no Shepherd see,
To incline his humble Knee,
Or with melancholy Lays
Sing thy dangerous Beauty's Praise.

Dorinda. Nymph! with thee I here would stay,
But have heard, that on this Day,
Near those Beeches, scarce in view,
All the Swains some Mirth pursue:
To whose meeting now I haste.
Solitude does Life but waste.

Silvia. Prithee, but a Moment stay.

Dorinda. No! my Chaplet would decay;
Every drooping Flower would mourn,
And wrong the Face, they should adorn.

Silvia. I can tell thee, though so Fair,
And dressed with all that rural Care,
Most of the admiring Swains
Will be absent from the Plains.
Gay Sylvander in the Dance
Meeting with a shrewd Mischance,
To his Cabin's now confined
By Mopsus, who the Strain did bind:
Damon through the Woods does stray,
Where his Kids have lost their way:
Young Narcissus ivory Brow
Rac'd by a malicious Bough,
Keeps the girilish Boy from sight.
Till Time shall do his Beauty right.

Dorinda. Where Is Alexis?

Silvia. -- He, alas!
Lies extended on the Grass;
Tears his Garland, raves, despairs,
Mirth and Harmony forswears;
Since he was this Morning shown,
That Delia must not be his Own.

Dorinda. Foolish Swain! such Love to place.

Silvia. On any but Dorinda's Face.

Dorinda. Hasty Nymph! I said not so.

Silvia. No -- but I thy Meaning know.
Every Shepherd thou wou'd'st have
Not thy Lover, but thy Slave;
To increase thy captive Train,
Never to be loved again.
But, since all are now away,
Prithee, but a Moment stay.

Dorinda. No; the Strangers, from the Vale,
Sure will not this Meeting fail;
Graceful one, the other Fair.
He too, with the pensive Air,
Told me, ere he came this way
He was wont to look more Gay.

Silvia. See! how Pride thy Heart inclines
To think, for Thee that Shepherd pines;
When those Words, that reached thy Ear,
Chloe was designed to hear;
Chloe, who did near thee stand,
And his more speaking Looks command.

Dorinda. Now thy Envy makes me smile.
That indeed were worth his while:
Chloe next thyself decayed,
And no more a courted Maid.

Silvia. Next myself! Young Nymph, forbear.
Still the Swains allow me Fair,
Though not what I was that Day,
When Colon bore the Prize away;
When --

Dorinda. -- Oh, hold! that Tale will last,
Till all the Evening Sports are past;
Till no Streak of Light is seen,
Nor Footstep prints the flowery Green.
What thou were, I need not know,
What I am, must haste to show.
Only this I now discern
From the things, thou'd'st have me learn,
That Woman-kind's peculiar Joys
From past, or present Beauties rise,

ALCIDOR.
WHile Monarchs in stern Battle strove
For proud Imperial Sway;
Abandoned to his milder Love,
Within a silent peaceful Grove,
Alcidor careless lay.
Some termed it cold, unmanly Fear;
Some, Nicety of Sense,
That Drums and Trumpets could not hear,
The sullying Blasts of Powder bear,
Or with foul Camps dispense.
A patient Martyr to their Scorn,
And each ill-fashion'd Jest;
The Youth, who but for Love was born,
Remained, and thought it vast Return,
To reign in Cloria's Breast.
But oh! a ruffling Soldier came
In all the Pomp of War:
The Gazettes long had spoke his Fame;
Now Hautboys his Approach proclaim,
And draw in Crowds from far.
Cloria unhappily would gaze;
And as he nearer drew,
The Man of Feather and of Lace
Stopped short, and with profound Amaze
Took all her Charms to view.
A Bow, which from Campaigns he brought,
And to his Holsters low,
Herself, and the Spectators taught,
That Her the fairest Nymph he thought,
Of all that formed the Row.
Next day, ere Phoebus could be seen,
Or any Gate unbarr'd;
At hers, upon the adjoining Green,
From Ranks, with waving Flags between,
Were softened Trumpets heard.
The Noon does following Treats provide,
In the Pavilion's Shade;
The Neighborhood, and all beside,
That will attend the amorous Pride,
Are welcomed with the Maid.
Poor Alcidor! thy Hopes are crossed,
Go perish on the Ground;
Thy Sighs by stronger Notes are tossed,
Drove back, or in the Passage lost;
Rich Wines thy Tears have drowned.
In Women's Hearts, the softest Things
Which Nature could devise,
Are yet some harsh, and jarring Strings,
That, when loud Fame, or Profit rings,
Will answer to the Noise.
Poor Alcidor! go Fight or Dye;
Let thy fond Notions cease:
Man was not made in Shades to lie,
Or his full Bliss, at ease, enjoy,
To Live, or Love in peace.
Some Pieces out of the first ACT of the AMINTA of TASSO.
Daphne's Answer to Sylvia, declaring she should esteem all as Enemies, who
should talk to her of LOVE.
THEN, to the snowy Ewe, in thy esteem,
The Father of the Flock a Foe must seem;
The faithful Turtles to their yielding Mates.
The cheerful Spring, which Love and Joy creates,
That reconciles the World by soft Desires,
And tender Thoughts in every Breast inspires,
To you a hateful Season must appear,
Whilst Love prevails, and all are Lovers here.
Observe the gentle Murmurs of that Dove,
And see, how billing she confirms her Love!
For this, the Nightingale displays her Throat,
And Love, Love, Love, is all her Evening Note.
The very Tigers have their tender Hours,
And prouder Lions bow beneath Love's Powers.
Thou, prouder yet than that imperious Beast,
Alone deny'st him Shelter in thy Breast.
But why should I the Creatures only name
That Sense partake, as Owners of this Flame?
Love farther goes, nor stops his Course at these:
The Plants he moves, and gently bends the Trees.
See how those Willows mix their amorous Boughs;
And, how that Vine clasps her supporting Spouse!
The silver Firr dotes on the stately Pine;
By Love those Elms, by Love those Beeches join.
But view that Oak; behold his rugged Side:
Yet that rough Bark the melting Flame does hide.
All, by their trembling Leaves, in Sighs declare
And tell their Passions to the gathering Air.
Which, had but Love over Thee the least Command,
Thou, by their Motions, too might understand.
AMINTOR, being asked by THIRSIS Who is the Object of his Love? speaks as
follows.
Amint. THIRSIS! to Thee I mean that Name to show,
Which, only yet our Groves, and Fountains know:
That, when my Death shall through the Plains be told,
Thou with the wretched Cause may that unfold
To every-one, who shall my Story find
Carved by thy Hand, in some fair Beeches rind;
Beneath whose Shade the bleeding Body lay:
That, when by chance she shall be led that way,
Over my sad Grave the haughty Nymph may go.
And the proud Triumph of her Beauty show
To all the Swains, to Strangers as they pass;
And yet at length she may (but Oh! alas!
I fear, too high my flattering Hopes do soar)
Yet she at length may my sad Fate deplore;
May weep me Dead, may over my Tomb recline
And sighing, wish were he alive and Mine!
But mark me to the End --

Their. Go on; for well I do thy Speech attend,
Perhaps to better Ends, than yet thou know.

Amint. Being now a Child, or but a Youth ^ mo^
When scarce to reach the blushing Fruit I knew
Which on the lowest bending Branches grew;
Still with the dearest, sweetest, kindest Maid
Young as myself, at childish Sports I played.
The Fairest, sure, of all that Lovely Kind,
Who spread their golden Tresses to the Wind;
Cydippe's Daughter, and Montano's Heir,
Whose Flocks and Herds so numerous do appear;
The beauteous Sylvia; She, it is She I love,
Warmth of all Hearts, and Pride of every Grove.
With Her I lived, no Turtles ever so fond.
Our Houses met, but more our Souls were joined.
Together Nets for Fish, and Fowl we laid;
Together through the spacious Forest strayed;
Pursued with equal Speed the flying Deer,
And of the Spoils there no Divisions were.
But whilst I from the Beasts their Freedom won,
Alas! I know not how, my Own was gone.
By unperceived Degrees the Fire increased,
Which filled, at last, each corner of my Breast;
As from a Root, though scarce discerned so small,
A Plant may rise, that grows amazing tall.
From Sylvia's Presence now I could not move,
And from her Eyes took in full Draughts of Love,
Which sweetly through my ravished Mind distilled;
^et in the end such Bitterness would yield,
That often I sighed, ere yet I knew the cause,
And was a Lover, ere I dreamed I was.
But Oh! at last, too well my State I knew;
And now, will show thee how this Passion grew.
Then listen, while the pleasing Tale I tell.

THIRSIS persuades AMINTOR not to despair upon the Predictions of Mopsus
discov'ring him to be an Impostor.
Thirsis. WHY do thou still give way to such Despair

Amintor. Too just, alas! the weighty Causes are
Mopsus, wise Mopsus, who in Art excels,
And of all Plants the secret Virtue tells,
Knows, with what healing Gifts our Spring a bound
And of each Bird explains the mystic Sound;
'Twas He, even He! my wretched Fate foretold

Their. Do thou this Speech then of that Mops^ hold
Who, whilst his Smiles attract the easy View,
Drops flattering Words, soft as the falling Dew;
Whose outward Form all friendly still appears,
Though Fraud and Daggers in his Thoughts he wears,
And the unwary Labors to surprise
With Looks affected, and with riddling Lies.
If He it is, that bids thy Love despair,
I hope the happier End of all thy Care.
So far from Truth his vain Predictions fall.

Amint. If ought thou know, that may my Hopes recall,
Conceal it not; for great I Have heard his Fame,
And feared his Words --

Their. -- When hither first I came,
And in these Shades the false Impostor met,
Like Thee I prized, and thought his Judgment great;
On all his studied Speeches still relied,
Nor feared to err, whilst led by such a Guide:
When on a Day, that Business and Delight
My Steps did to the Neighboring Town invite,
Which stands upon that rising Mountain's side,
And from our Plains this River does divide,
He checked me thus -- Be warned in time, My Son,
And that new World of painted Mischiefs shun,
Whose gay Inhabitants thou shall behold
Plumed like our Birds, and sparkling all in Gold
Courtiers, that will thy rustic Garb despise,
And mock thy Plainness with disdainful Eyes.
But above all, that Structure see thou fly,
Where hoarded Vanities and Witchcrafts lie;
To shun that Path be thy peculiar Care.
I ask, what of that Place the Dangers are:
To which he soon replies, there shall thou meet
Of soft Enchantresses the Enchantments sweet,
Who subt'ly will thy solid Sense bereave,
And a false Gloss to every Object give.
Brass to thy Sight as polished Gold shall seem,
And Glass thou as the Diamond shall esteem.
Huge Heaps of Silver to thee shall appear,
Which if approached, will prove but shining Air.
The very Walls by Magic Art are wrought,
And Repetition to all Speakers taught:
Not such, as from our Echoes we obtain,
Which only our last Words return again;
But Speech for Speech entirely there they give,
And often add, beyond what they receive.
Their downy Couches to false Rest invite,
The Lawn is charmed, that faintly bars the Light.
No gilded Seat, no ivory Board is there,
But what thou may for some Delusion fear:
Whilst, farther to abuse thy wondering Eyes,
Strange antic Shapes before them shall arise;
Fantastic Fiends, that will about thee flock,
And all they see, with Imitation mock.
Nor are these Ills the worst. Thyself may be
Transformed into a Flame, a Stream, a Tree;
A Tear, congealed by Art, thou may remain,
'Till by a burning Sigh dissolved again.
Thus spoke the Wretch; but could not shake my Mind.
My way I take, and soon the City find,
Where above all that lofty Fabric stands,
Which, with one View, the Town and Plains commands.
Here was I stopped, for who could quit the Ground,
That heard such Music from those Roofs resound!
Music! beyond the enticing Syrene's Note;
Music! beyond the Swan's expiring Throat;
Beyond the softest Voice, that charms the Grove,
And equaled only by the Spheres above.
My Ear I thought too narrow for the Art,
Nor fast enough conveyed it to my Heart:
When in the Entrance of the Gate I saw
A Man Majestic, and commanding Awe;
Yet tempered with a Carriage, so refined
That undetermined was my doubtful Mind,
Whether for Love, or War, that Form was most designed.
With such a Brow, as did at once declare
A gentle Nature, and a Wit severe;
To view that Palace me he asked to go,
Though Royal He, and I Obscure and Low.
But the Delights my Senses there did meet,
No rural Tongue, no Swain can c'er repeat.
Celestial Goddesses, or Nymphs as Fair,
In unveiled Beauties, to all Eyes appear
Sprinkled with Gold, as glorious to the View,
As young Aurora, decked with pearly Dew;
Bright Rays dispensing, as along they passed,
And with new Light the shining Palace graced.
Phabus was there by all the Muses met,
And at his Feet was our Elpino set.
Even humble Me their Harmony inspired,
My Breast expanded, and my Spirits fired.
Rude Past'ral now, no longer I rehearse,
But Heroes crown with my exalted Verse.
Of Arms I sung, of bold adventurous Wars;
And though brought back by my too envious Stars,
Yet kept my Voice and Reed those lofty Strains,
And sent loud Music through the wondering Plains:
Which Mopsus hearing, secretly malign'd,
And now to ruin Both at once designed.
Which by his Sorceries he soon brought to pass;
And suddenly so clogged, and hoarse I was,
That all our Shepherds, at the Change amazed,
Believed, I on some Ev'ning-Wolf had gazed:
When He it was, my luckless Path had crossed,
By whose dire Look, my Skill awhile was lost.
This have I told, to raise thy Hopes again,
And render, by distrust, his Malice vain.

From the AMINTA of TASSO.
THOUGH we, of small Proportion see
And slight the armed Golden Be;
Yet if her Sting behind she leaves,
No Ease the envenomed Flesh receives.
Love, less to Sight than is this Fly,
In a soft Curl concealed can lie;
Under an Eyelid's lovely Shade,
Can form a dreadful Ambuscade;
Can the most subtle Sight beguile,
Hid in the Dimples of a Smile.
But if from thence a Dart he throw,
How sure, how mortal is the Blow
How helpless all the Power of Art
To bind, or to restore the Heart!
From the AMINTA of TASSO.
Part of the Description of the Golden Age.
THEN, by some Fountains flowery side
The Loves unarmed, did still abide.
Then, the loosed Quiver careless hung,
The Torch extinct, the Bow unstrung.
Then, by the Nymphs no Charms were worn,
But such as with the Nymphs were born.
The Shepherd could not, then, complain,
Nor told his amorous Tale in vain.
No Veil the Beauteous Face did hide,
Nor harmless Freedom was denied.
Then, Innocence and Virtue reigned
Pure, unaffected, unconstrained.
Love was their Pleasure, and their Praise,
The soft Employment of their Days.
To the NIGHTINGALE.
EXert thy Voice, sweet Harbinger of Spring!
This Moment is thy Time to Sing,
This Moment I attend to Praise,
And set my Numbers to thy Lays.
Free as thine shall be my Song;
As thy Music, short, or long.
Poets, wild as thee, were born,
Pleasing best when unconfined,
When to Please is least designed,
Soothing but their Cares to rest;
Cares do still their Thoughts molest,
And still the unhappy Poet's Breast,
Like thine, when best he sings, is placed against a Thorn.
She begins, Let all be still!
Muse, thy Promise now fulfill!
Sweet, oh! sweet, still sweeter yet
Can thy Words such Accents fit,
Can thou Syllables refine,
Melt a Sense that shall retain
Still some Spirit of the Brain,
Till with Sounds like these it join.
'Twill not be! then change thy Note;
Let Division shake thy Throat.
Hark! Division now she tries;
Yet as far the Muse outslies.
Cease then, prithee, cease thy Tune;
Trifler, will thou sing till June?
Till thy Business all lies waste,
And the Time of Building's past!
Thus we Poets that have Speech,
Unlike what thy Forests teach,
If a fluent Vein be shown
That Is transcendent to our own,
Criticize, reform, or preach,
Or censure what we cannot reach.
The ATHEIST and the ACORN.
MEthinks this World is oddly made,
And every thing's amiss,
A dull presuming Atheist said,
As stretched he lay beneath a Shade;
And instanced in this:
Behold, quoth he, that mighty thing,
A Pumpkin, large and round,
Is held but by a little String,
Which upwards cannot make it spring,
Or bear it from the Ground.
Whilst on this Oak, a Fruit so small,
So disproportioned, grows;
That, who with Sense surveys this All,
This universal Casual Ball,
Its ill Contrivance knows.
My better Judgment would have hung
That Weight upon a Tree,
And left this Mast, thus slightly strung,
Amongst things which on the Surface sprung,
And small and feeble be.
No more the Caviller could say,
Nor farther Faults descry;
For, as he upwards gazing lay,
An Acorn, loosened from the Stay,
Fell down upon his Eye.
The offended Part with Tears ran over,
As punished for the Sin:
Fool! had that Bough a Pumpkin bore,
Thy Whimseys must have worked no more,
Nor Scull had kept them in.
The Tradesman and the Scholar.
A Citizen of mighty Pelf,
But much a Blockhead, in himself
Disdained a Man of shining Parts,
Master of Sciences and Arts,
Who left his Book scarce once a day
For sober Coffee, Smoke, or Tea;
Nor spent more Money in the Town
Than bought, when need required, a Gown;
Which way of Living much offends
The Alderman, who gets and spends,
And grudges him the Vital Air,
Who drives no Trade, and takes no Care.
Why Bookworm! to him once he cried,
Why, setting thus the World aside,
Do thou thy useless Time consume,
Enclosed within a lonely Room,
And poring damnify thy Wit,
'Till not for Men, or Manners fit?
Hop'st thou, with urging of thy Vein,
To spin a Fortune from thy Brain?
Or gain a Patron, that shall raise
Thy solid State, for empty Praise?
No; trust not to your Soothings vile,
Received per me's the only Style.
Your Book's but frowned on by My Lord;
If Mine Is uncross'd, I reach his Board.
In slighting Yours, he shuts his Hand;
Protracting Mine, devolves the Land.
Then let Advantage be the Test,
Which of us Two even Writes the best.
Besides, I often Scarlet wear,
And strut to Church, just next the Mayor.
Whilst rusty Black, with Inch of Band,
Is all the Dress you understand;
Who in the Pulpit thresh to Please,
Whilst I below can snore at Ease.
Yet, if you prove me there a Sinner,
I let you go without a Dinner.
This Prate was so beneath the Sense
Of One, who Wisdom could dispense,
Unheard, or unreturn'd it past:
But War now lays the City waste,
And plundered Goods profusely sell
By length of Pike, not length of Ell.
Abroad the Inhabitants are forced,
From Shops, and Trade, and Wealth divorced.
The Student leaving but his Book,
The Tumult of the Place forsook.
In foreign Parts, One tells his Tale,
How Rich he would been, how quick his Sale,
Which does for scanty Alms prevail.
The Chance of War whilst he deplores,
And dines at Charitable Doors;
The Man of Letters, known by Fame,
Was welcomed, wheresoe'er he came.
Still, Potentates entreat his Stay,
Whose Coaches meet him on the Way:
And Universities contest
Which shall exceed, or use him best.
Amazed the Burgomaster sees
On Foot, and scorned such Turns as these;
And sighing, now deplores too late
His cumb'rous Trash, and shallow Pate:
Since loaded but with double Chest
Of learned Head, and honest Breast,
The Scholar moves from Place to Place,
And finds in every Climate Grace.
Wit and the Arts, on that Foundation raised,
(However the Vulgar are with Shows amazed)
Is all that recommends, or can be justly praised.
Man's Injustice toward Provide^
A Thriving Merchant, who no Loss sustained
In little time a mighty Fortune gained.
No Pyrate seized his still returning Freight;
Nor foundring Vessel sunk with its own Weight
No Ruin entered through disserver'd Planks;
No Wreck at Sea, nor in the Public Banks.
A loft he sails, above the Reach of Chance,
And does in Pride, as fast as Wealth, advance.
His Wife too, had her Town and Country-Seat,
And rich in Purse, concludes her Person Great.
A Duchess wears not so much Gold and Lace;
Then it is with Her an undisputed Case,
The finest Petticoat must take the Place.
Her Rooms, anew at every Christ'ning dressed,
Put down the Court, and vex the City-Guest.
Grinning Malottos in true Ermin stare;
The best Japan, and clearest China Ware
Are but as common Delft and English Laquar there.
No Luxury's by either unenjoy'd,
Or cost withheld, though awkwardly employed.
How comes this Wealth? a Country Friend demands,
Who scarce could live on Product of his Lands.
How is it that, when Trading is so bad
That some are Broke, and some with Fears run Mad,
You can in better State yourself maintain,
And your Effects still unimpair'd remain!
My Industry, he cries, is all the Cause;
Sometimes I interlope, and slight the Laws:
I wiser Measures, than my Neighbors, take,
And better speed, who better Bargains make.
I knew, the Smyrna-Fleet would fall a Prey,
And therefore sent no Vessel out that way:
My busy Factors prudently I choose,
And in straight Bonds their Friends and Kindred noose:
At Home, I to the Public Sums advance,
Whilst, underhand in Fee with hostile France,
I care not for your Tourvills, or Du-Barts,
No more than for the Rocks, and Shelves in Charts:
My own sufficiency creates my Gain,
Raised, and secured by this unfailing Brain.
This idle Vaunt had scarcely past his Lips,
When Tidings came, his ill-provided Ships
Some through the want of Skill, and some of Care,
Were lost, or back returned without their Fare.
From bad to worse, each Day his State declined,
'Till leaving Town, and Wife, and Debts behind,
To his Acquaintance at the Rural Seat
He Sculks, and humbly sues for a Retreat.
Whence comes this Change, has Wisdom left that Head,
(His Friend demands) where such right Schemes were bred?
What Phrenzy, what Delirium mars the Scull,
Which filled the Chests, and was it self so full?
Here interrupting, sadly he Replied,
In Me's no Change, but Fate must all Things guide;
To Providence I attribute my Loss.
Vainglorious Man does thus the Praise engross,
When Prosperous Days around him spread their Beams:
But, if revolved to opposite Extremes,
Still his own Sense he fondly will prefer,
And Providence, not He, in his Affairs must Err!
The Eagle, the Sow, and the Cat.
THE Queen of Birds, t'encrease the Regal Stock,
Had hatched her young Ones in a stately Oak,
Whose Middle-part was by a Cat possessed,
And near the Root with Litter warmly dressed,
A teeming Sow had made her peaceful Nest.
(Thus Palaces are crammed from Roof to Ground.
And Animals, as various, in them found.)
When to the Sow, who no Misfortune feared,
Puss with her fawning Compliments appeared,
Rejoicing much at her Deliv'ry past,
And that she 'scap'd so well, who bred so fast.
Then every little Piglin she commends,
And likens them to all their swinish Friends;
Bestows good Wishes, but with Sighs implies,
That some dark Fears do in her Bosom rise.
Such tempting Flesh, she cries, will Eagles spare?
Methinks, good Neighbor, you should live in Care:
Since I, who bring not forth such dainty Bits,
Tremble for my unpalatable Chits;
And had I but foreseen, the Eagle's Bed
Was in this fatal Tree to have been spread;
I sooner would have kitten'd in the Road,
Than made this Place of Danger my abode.
I heard her young Ones lately cry for Pig,
And pitied you, that were so near, and big.
In Friendship this I secretly reveal,
Lest Pettitoes should make the ensuing Meal;
Or else, perhaps, Yourself may be their aim,
For a Sow's Paps has been a Dish of Fame.
No more the sad, affrighted Mother hears,
But overturning all with boisterous Fears,
She from her helpless Young in haste departs,
Whilst Puss ascends, to practice farther Arts.
The Antichamber passed, she scratched the Door:
The Eagle, never alarmed so before,
Bids her come in, and look the Cause be great,
That makes her thus disturb the Royal Seat;
Nor think, of Mice and Rats some pest'ring Tale
Shall, in excuse of Insolence, prevail.
Alas! my Gracious Lady, quoth the Cat,
I think not of such Vermin; Mouse, or Rat
To me are tasteless grown; nor dare I stir
To use my Phangs, or to expose my Fur.
A Foe intestine threatens all around,
And even this lofty Structure will confound;
A Pestilential Sow, a meazel'd Pork
On the Foundation has been long at work,
Helped by a Rabble, issued from her Womb,
Which she has fostered in that lower Room;
Who now for Acorns are so madly bent,
That soon this Tree must fall, for their Content.
I would have fetched some for the unruly Elves;
But it is the Mob's delight to help Themselves:
Whilst your high Brood must with the meanest drop,
And steeper be their Fall, as next the Top;
Unless you soon to Jupiter repair,
And let him know, the Case demands his Care.
Oh! may the Trunk but stand, 'till you come back!
But hark! already sure, I hear it crack.
Away, away -- The Eagle, all aghast,
Soars to the Sky, nor falters in her haste:
Whilst crafty Puss, now over the Eyry reigns,
Replenishing her Maw with treacherous Gains.
The Sow she plunders next, and lives alone;
The Pigs, the Eaglets, and the House her Own.
Cursed Sycophants! How wretched is the Fate
Of those, who know you not, till it is too late!
To a Friend, in Praise of the Invention of Writing Letters.
Blessed be the Man! his Memory at least,
Who found the Art, thus to unfold his Breast;
And taught succeeding Times an easy way
Their secret Thoughts by Letters to convey;
To bassle Absence, and secure Delight,
Which, till that Time, was limited to Sight.
The parting Farewell spoke, the last Adieu,
The lessening Distance past, then loss of View,
The Friend was gone, which some kind Mome^ ga^
And Absence separated, like the Grave.
The Wings of Love were tender too, till then
No Quill, thence pulled, was shaped into a Pen
To send in Paper-sheets, from Town to Town,
Words smoothas they, and softer than his Down
Over such he reigned, whom Neighborhood ^ joi^
And hopt, from Bough to Bough, supported the Wi^
When for a Wife the youthful Patriarch sent,
The Camels, Jewels, and the Steward went,
A wealthy Equipage, though grave and slow;
But not a Line, that might the Lover show.
The Rings and Bracelets wooed her Hands ^ Ar^
But had she known of melting Words, the Cha^
That under secret Seals in Ambush lie,
To catch the Soul, when drawn into the Eye,
The Fair Assyrian had not took this Guide,
Nor her soft Heart in Chains of Pearl been tied.
Had these Conveyances been then in Date,
Joseph had known his wretched Father's State,
Before a Famine, which his Life pursues,
Had sent his other Sons, to tell the News.
Oh! might I live to see an Art arise,
^s this to Thoughts, indulgent to the Eyes;
That the dark Powers of distance could subdue,
And make me See, as well as Talk to You;
That tedious Miles, nor Tracts of Air might prove
Bars to my Sight, and shadows to my Love!
Yet were it granted, such unbounded Things
Are wandering Wishes, born on Phancy's Wings,
They Would stretch themselves beyond this happy Case,
And ask an Art, to help us to Embrace.
A Miller, his Son, and their Ass.
A FABLE Translated from Monsieur de la Fontaine.
THOUGH to Antiquity the Praise we yield
Of pleasing Arts; and Fable's earli'st Field
Own to be fruitful Greece; yet not so clean
Those Ears were reaped, but still there is some to glean:
And from the Lands of vast Invention come
Daily new Authors, with Discov'ries home.
This curious Piece, which I shall now impart,
Fell from Malherbe, a Master in his Art,
To Racan, filled with like poetic Fire,
Both tuneful Servants of Apollo's Choir,
Rivals and Heirs to the Horatian Lyre:
Who meeting him, one Day, free and alone,
(For still their Thoughts were to each other known)
Thus asked his Aid -- Some useful Counsel give,
Thou who, by living long, have learnt to live;
Whose Observation nothing can escape;
Tell me, how I my course of Life shall shape:
To something I would fix ere't be too late.
You know my Birth, my Talents, my Estate:
Shall I with thee content, all Search resign,
And to the Country my Desires consine?
Or in the Court, or Camp, advancement gain?
The World's a mixture of Delight and Pain:
Though rough it seems, there is Pleasure in the Wars,
And Hymen's Joys are not without their Cares.
I need not ask, to what my Genius tends,
But would content the World, the Court, my Friends.
Please all the World (in haste) Malherbe replies?
How vain the Attempt will prove in him, that tries,
Learn from a Fable, I have somewhere found,
Before I answer all that you propound.
A Miller and his Son (the Father old,
The Boy about some fifteen Years had told)
Designed their Ass to sell, and for the Fair,
Some distance off, accordingly prepare.
But lest she in the walk should lose her Flesh,
And not appear, for Sale, so full and fresh,
Her Feet together tied; between them two
They heaved her up; and on the Rusticks go:
Till those, who met them bearing thus the Ass,
Cried, Are these Fools about to act a Farce?
Surely the Beast (however it seem to be)
Is not the greatest Ass of all the Three.
The Miller in their Mirth his Folly finds,
And down he sets her, and again unbinds;
And though her grumbling showed, she liked m^ me.
The lazy way, she traveled in before,
He minds her not; but up the Boy he sets
Upon her Back, and on the Crupper gets.
Thus on they jog, when of Three Men that passed.
The eldest thinking Age to be disgraced,
Called to the Youth, ho! you, young Man for shame!
Come down, lest Passengers your Manners blame,
And say, it ill becomes your tender Years
To ride before a Grandsire with gray Hairs.
Truly, the Gentlemen are in the right,
The Miller cries, and makes the Boy alight;
Then forward slides himself into his place,
And with a Mind content, renews his pace:
But much he had not gained upon his way,
Before a Troop of Damsels, neat and gay,
(Partial to Youth) to one another cried,
See, how with walking by that Dotard's side,
The Boy is tired; whilst with a Prelate's state
He rides alone, and dangling in the Seat,
Hangs like a Calf thrown up, across the Beast.
The Miller, thinking to have spoiled that Jest,
Replied, he was too Old for Veal to pass,
But after more on him, and on his Ass,
He stands convinced, and takes his Son again
To ride at ease himself, still next the Mane.
Yet ere he would thirty Paces borne the Lad,
The next they met, cried -- Are these Fellows mad
Have they no Pity thus t'o'erload the Jade!
Sure, at the Fair, they for her Skin may trade.
See, how is she spent, and sinks beneath their strokes
The Miller, whom this most of all provokes,
Swears by his Cap, he shows his want of Brains,
Who thus to please the World, bestows his Pains
However we'll try, if this way't may be done;
And off he comes, and fetches down his Son.
Behind they walk, and now the Creature drive,
But could no better in their Purpose thrive;
Nor escape a Fellow's Censure, whom they meet,
That cries, to spare the Ass they break their Feet;
And whilst unladen at her ease she goes,
Trudge in the Dirt, and batter out their Shoes;
As if to burden her they were afraid,
And Men for Beasts, not Beasts for Men were mad^
The Proverb right, the Cart before the Horse.
The Miller, finding things grow worse and worse,
Cries out, I am an Ass, it is agreed,
And so are all, who would in this succeed.
Hereafter, though Reproof or Praise I find,
I Will neither heed, but follow my own Mind,
Take my own Counsel, how my Beast to sell.
This he resolved, and did it, and did well.
For you, Sir, Follow Love, the Court, the War;
Obtain the Crosier, or the City's Furr;
Live single all your Days, or take a Wife;
Trust me, a Consure waits each state of Life.
The Man bitten by Fleas.
A Peevish Fellow laid his Head
On Pillows, stuffed with Down;
But was no sooner warm in Bed,
With hopes to rest his Crown,
But Animals of slender size,
That feast on humane Gore,
From secret Ambushes arise,
Nor suffer him to snore;
Who starts, and scrubs, and frets, and swe^
'Till, finding all in vain,
He for Relief employs his Prayers
In this old Heathen strain.
Great Jupiter! thy Thunder send
From out the pitchy Clouds,
And give these Foes a dreadful End,
That lurk in Midnight Shrouds:
Or Hercules might with a Blow,
If once together brought,
This Crew of Monsters overthrow,
By which such Harms are wrought.
The Strife, ye Gods! is worthy You,
Since it our Blood has cost;
And scorching Fevers must ensue,
When cooling Sleep is lost.
^trange Revolutions would abound,
Did Men never close their Eyes;
Whilst those, who wrought them would be found
At length more Mad, than Wise.
Passive Obedience must be used,
If this cannot be Cured;
But whilst One Flea is slowly bruised,
Thousands must be endured.
Confusion, Slavery, Death and Wreck
Will on the Nation seize,
^f, whilst you keep your Thunders back,
We Are massacr'd by Fleas.
Why, prithee, shatter-headed Fop,
The laughing Gods reply;
Have thou forgot thy Broom, and Mop,
And Wormwood growing nigh?
Go sweep, and wash, and strew thy Floor,
As all good Housewives teach;
And do not thus for Thunders roar,
To make some fatal Breach:
Which You, nor your succeeding Heir,
Nor yet a long Descent
Shall find out Methods to repair,
Though Prudence may prevent.
For Club, and Bolts, a Nation called of late,
Nor would be eased by Engines of less Weight:
But whether lighter had not done as well,
Let their Great-Grandsons, or their Grandsons tell.
REFORMATION.
A Gentleman, most wretched in his Lot,
A wrangling and reproving Wife had got,
Who, though she curbed his Pleasures, and his Food,
Called him My Dear, and did it for his Good,
Ills to prevent; She of all Ills the worst,
So wisely Froward, and so kindly Cursed.
The Servants too experiment her Lungs,
And find they have Breath to serve a thousand Tongues.
Nothing went on; for her eternal Clack
Still rectifying, set all Matters back;
Nor Town, nor Neighbors, nor the Court could please,
But furnished Matter for her sharp Disease.
To distant Plains at length he gets her down,
With no Affairs to manage of her own;
Hoping from that unactive State to find
A calmer Habit, grown upon her Mind:
But soon returned he hears her at his Door,
As noisy and tempestuous as before;
Yet mildly asked, How she her Days had spent
Amidst the Quiet of a sweet Content,
Where Shepherds 'tend their Flocks, and Maids their Pails,
And no harsh Mistress domineers, or rails?
Not rail! she cries -- Why, I that had no share
In their Concerns, could not the Trollops spare;
But told 'em, they were Sluts -- And for the Swains.
My Name a Terror to them still remains;
So often I reproved their slothful Faults,
And with such Freedom told 'em all my Thoughts,
That I no more amongst them could reside.
Has then, alas! the Gentleman replied,
One single Month so much their Patience tried?
Where you by Day, and but at Seasons due,
Could with your Clamours their Defects pursue;
How had they shrunk, and justly been afraid,
Had they with me one Curtain-Lecture heard!
Yet enter Madam, and resume your Sway;
Who cannot Command, must silently Obey.
In secret here let endless Faults be found,
Till, like Reformers who in States abound,
You all to Ruin bring, and every Part confound.
Fragment at Tunbridge-Wells.
FOR He, that made, must new create us,
Ere Seneca, or Epictetus,
With all their serious Admonitions,
Can, for the Spleen, prove good Physicians.
The Heart's unruly Palpitation
Will not be laid by a Quotation;
Nor will the Spirits move the lighter
For the most celebrated Writer.
Sweats, Swoonings, and convulsive Motions
Will not be cured by Words, and Notions.
Then live, old Brown! with thy Chalybeats,
Which keep us from becoming Idiots.
At Tunbridge let us still be Drinking,
Though it is the Antipodes to Thinking:
Such Hurry, whilst the Spirit's flying,
Such Stupefaction, when it is dying:
Yet these, and not sententious Papers,
Must brighten Life, and cure the Vapors, etc.
A Pindarick Poem
Upon the Hurricane in November 1703, referring to this Text in Psalm 148. ver.
8. Winds and Storms fulfilling his Word.
With a HYMN composed of the 148th PSALM Paraphrased.
YOU have obeyed, you WINDS, that must fulfill
The Great Disposer's righteous Will;
Throughout the Land, unlimited you flew,
Nor sought, as heretofore, with Friendly Aid
Only, new Motion to bestow
Upon the sluggish Vapors, bred below,
Condensing into Mists, and melancholy Shade.
No more such gentle Methods you pursue,
But marching now in terrible Array,
Undistinguished was your Prey:
In vain the Shrubs, with lowly Bent,
Sought their Destruction to prevent;
The Beech in vain, with out-stretch'd Arms,
Deprecates the approaching Harms;
In vain the Oak (so often stormed)
Relied upon that native Force,
By which already was performed
So much of his appointed Course,
As made him, fearless of Decay,
Wait but the accomplished Time
Of his long-wish'd and useful Prime,
To be removed, with Honor, to the Sea.
The strait and ornamental Pine
Did in the like Ambition join,
And thought his Fame should ever last,
When in some Royal Ship he stood the planted Mast.
And should again his Length of Timber rear
And new engrafted Branches wear
Of fibrous Cordage and impending Shrouds,
Still trimmed with human Care, and watered b^ the Clouds
But oh, you Trees! who solitary stood;
Or you, whose Numbers formed a Wood;
You, who on Mountains chose to rise,
And drew them nearer to the Skies;
Or you, whom Valleys late did hold
In flexible and lighter Mould;
You numerous Brethren of the Leafy Kind,
To whatsoever Use designed,
Now, vain you found it to contend
With not, alas! one Element; your Friend
Your Mother Earth, through long preceding Rains,
(Which undermining sink below)
No more her wonted Strength retains;
Nor you so fixed within her Bosom grow,
That for your sakes she can resolve to bear
These furious Shocks of hurrying Air;
But finding All you Ruin did conspire,
She soon her beauteous Progeny resigned
To this destructive, this imperious Wind,
That checked your nobler Aims, and gives you to the Fire.
Thus! have thy Cedars, Libanus, been struck
As the lythe Oziers twisted round;
Thus! Cadez, has thy Wilderness been shook,
When the apalling, and tremendous Sound
Of rattl'ing Tempests over you broke,
And made your stubborn Glories bow,
When in such Whirlwinds the Almighty spoke,
Warning Judea then, as our Britannia now.
Yet these were the remoter Harms,
Foreign the Care, and distant the Alarms:
Whilst but sheltring Trees alone,
Mastered soon, and soon overthrown,
Felt those Gusts, which since prevail,
And loftier Palaces assail;
Whose shaken Turrets now give way,
With vain Inscriptions, which the Freeze h^ born;
Through Ages past, t'extol and to adorn,
And to our latter Times convey;
Who did the Structures deep Foundation lay,
Forcing his Praise upon the gazing Crowd,
And, whilst he moulders in a scanty Shroud,
Telling both Earth and Skies, he when al^ was proud
Now down at once comes the superfluous Load
The costly Fret-work with it yields,
Whose imitated Fruits and Flowers are strewn
Like those of real Growth over the Autumn Field
The present Owner lifts his Eyes,
And the swift Change with sad Affrightment spies:
The Cieling gone, that late the Roof concealed;
The Roof untyl'd, through which the Heavens revealed,
Exposes now his Head, when all Defense has failed.
What alas, is to be done!
Those, who in Cities would from Dangers run,
Do but increasing Dangers meet,
And Death, in various shapes, attending in the Street;
Where some, too tardy in their Flight,
O'ertaken by a worse Mischance,
Their upward Parts do scarce advance,
When on their following Limbs the extending Ruins light,
One half's interred, the other yet survives,
And for Release with fainting Vigor striv^s;
Implores the Aid of absent Friends in vain^
With fault'ring Speech, and dying Wishes call,
Those, whom perhaps, their own Domestic Wall,
By parallel Distress, or swifter Death retains.
(1) O Wells! thy Bishop's Mansion we lament,
So tragical the Fall, so dire the Event!
But let no daring Thought presume
To point a Cause for that oppressive Doom.
Yet strictly pious KEN! had Thou been there.
This Fate, we think, had not become thy share,
Nor had that awful Fabric bowed,
Sliding from its loosened Bands;
Nor yielding Timbers been allowed
To crush thy ever-lifted Hands,
Or interrupt thy Prayer.
Those Orizons, that nightly Watches keep,
Had called thee from thy Bed, or there secured thy Sleep.
Whilst you, bold Winds and Storms! his Word obeyed,
Whilst you his Scourge the Great Jehova made,
And into ruined Heaps our Edifices laid.
You South and West the Tragedy began,
As, with disordered haste, you over the Surface ran;
Forgetting, that you were designed
(Chiefly thou Zephyrus, thou softest Wind!)
Only our Heats, when sultry, to allay,
And chafe the odorous Gums by your dispersing Play.
Now, by new Orders and Decrees,
For our Chastisement issued forth,
You on his Confines the alarmed North
With equal Fury sees,
And summons swiftly to his Aid
Eurus, his Confederate made,
His eager Second in the opposing Fight,
That even the Winds may keep the Balance right,
Nor yield increase of Sway to arbitrary Might.
Meeting now, they all contend,
Those assail, while These defend;
Fierce and turbulent the War,
And in the loud tumultuous Jar
Winds their own Fifes, and Clarions are.
Each Cavity, which Art or Nature leaves,
Their Inspiration hastily receives;
Whence, from their various Forms and Size,
As various Symphonies arise,
Their Trumpet every hollow Tube is made,
And, when more solid Bodies they invade,
Enraged, they can no farther come,
The beaten Flatt, whilst it repels the Noise,
Resembles but with more outrageous Voice
The Soldier's threatening Drum:
And when they compass thus our World around,
When they our Rocks and Mountains rend,
When they our Sacred Piles to their Foundations send,
No wonder if our ecchoing Caves rebound;
No wonder if our listening Sense they wound,
When armed with so much Force, and ushered with such Sound.
Nor scarce, amidst the Terrors of that Night,
When you, fierce Winds, such Desolations wrought,
When you from out his Stores the Great Commander brought,
Could the most Righteous stand upright;
Scarcely the Holiest Man performs
The Service, that becomes it best,
By ardent Vows, or solemn Prayers addressed;
Nor finds the Calm, so usual to his Breast,
Full Proof against such Storms.
How should the Guilty then be found,
The Men in Wine, or looser Pleasures drowned,
To six a steadfast Hope, or to maintain their Ground!
When at his Glass the late Companion feels,
That Giddy, like himself, the tottering Mansion reels!
The Miser, who with many a Chest
His gloomy Tenement oppressed,
Now fears the over-burthen'd Floor,
And trembles for his Life, but for his Treasure mo^
What shall he do, or to what Powers apply?
To those, which threaten from on High,
By him never called upon before,
Who also will suggest the impossible Restore?
No; Mammon, to thy Laws he will be true,
And, rather than his Wealth, will bid the Wo^ adie^
The Rafters sink, and buried with his Coin
That Fate does with his living Thoughts combine;
For still his Heart's enclosed within a Golden Mine.
Contention with its angry Brawls
By Storms o'er-clamour'd, shrinks and fall
Nor WHIG, nor TORY now the rash C^ tender ca^
Those, who but Vanity allowed,
Nor thought, it reached the Name of Sin,
To be of their Perfections proud,
Too much adorned without, or too much raised within,
Now find, that even the lightest Things,
As the minuter parts of Air,
When Number to their Weight addition brings,
Can, like the small, but numerous Insects Stings,
Can, like the assembled Winds, urge Ruin and Despair.
Thus You Have obeyed, you Winds, that must fulfill
The Great disposer's Righteous Will:
Thus did your Breath a strict Enquiry make,
Thus did you our most secret Sins awake,
And thus chastis'd their Ill.
Whilst vainly Those, of a rapacious Mind,
Fields to other Fields had laid,
By Force, or by injurious Bargains joined,
With Fences for their Guard impenetrable made;
The juster Tempest mocks the wrong,
And sweeps, in its directed Flight,
The Enclosures of another's Right,
Driving at once the Bounds, and licensed Herds along.
The Earth again one general Scene appears;
No regular distinction now,
Betwixt the Grounds for Pasture, or the Plough,
The Face of Nature wears.
Free as the Men, who wild Confusion love,
And lawless Liberty approve,
Their Fellow-Brutes pursue their way,
To their own Loss, and disadvantage stray,
As wretched in their Choice, as unadvised as They.
The timorous Deer, whilst he forsakes the Park,
And wanders on, in the misguiding Dark,
Believes, a Foe from every unknown Bush
Will on his trembling Body rush,
Taking the Winds, that vary in their Notes,
For hot pursuing Hounds with deeply bellowing Throats.
The awaked Birds, shook from their nightly Seats,
Their unavailing Pinions ply,
Repulsed, as they attempt to fly
In hopes they might attain to more secure Retreats.
But, Where ye wilder'd Fowls would You repair?
When this your happy Portion given,
Your upward Lot, your Firmament of Heaven,
Your unentail'd, your undivided Air,
Where no Proprietor was ever known,
Where no litigious Suits have ever grown,
Whilst none from Star to Star could call the space his Own;
When this no more your middle Flights can bear,
But some rough Blast too far above conveighs,
Or to unquitted Earth confines your weak Essays.
Nor You, nor wiser Man could find Repose,
Nor could our Industry produce
Expedients of the smallest Use,
To ward our greater Cares, or mitigate your Woes.
(2) Ye Clouds! that pitied our Distress,
And by your pacifying Showers
(The soft and usual methods of Success)
Kindly assayed to make this Tempest less;
Vainly your Aid was now alas! employed,
In vain you wept over those destructive Hours,
In which the Winds full Tyranny enjoyed,
Nor would allow you to prevail,
But drove your scorned, and scattered Tears to wail
The Land that lay destroyed.
Whilst You obeyed, you Winds! that must fulfill
The just Disposer's Righteous Will;
Whilst not the Earth alone, you disarray,
But to more ruined Seas winged your impetuous Way.
(3) Which to foreshew, the still portentous Sun
(4) Beamless, and pale of late, his Race begun,
Quenching the Rays, he had no Joy to keep,
In the obscure, and sadly threatened Deep.
Farther than we, that Eye of Heaven discerns,
And nearer placed to our malignant Stars,
Our brooding Tempests, and approaching Wars Anticipating learns.
When now, too soon the dark Event
Shows what that faded Planet meant;
Whilst more the liquid Empire undergoes,
More she resigns of her entrusted Stores,
The Wealth, the Strength, the Pride of different Shores
In one Devoted, one Recorded Night,
Than Years had known destroyed by generous Fight,
Or Privateering Foes.
All Rules of Conduct laid aside,
No more the baffled Pilot steers,
Or knows an Art, when it each moment veers,
To vary with the Winds, or stem th'unusual Tide.
Dispersed and loose, the shattered Vessels stray,
Some perish within sight of Shore,
Some, happier thought, obtain a wider Sea,
But never to return, or cast an Anchor more!
Some on the Northern Coasts are thrown,
And by congealing Surges compassed round,
To fixed and certain Ruin bound,
Immovable are grown:
The fatal Goodwin swallows All that come
Within the Limits of that dangerous Sand,
Amphibious in its kind, nor Sea nor Land;
Yet kin to both, a false and faithless Strand,
Known only to our Cost for a devouring Tomb.
Nor seemed the HURRICANE content,
Whilst only Ships were wreckt, and Tackle rent;
The Sailors too must fall a Prey,
Those that Command, with those that did Obey;
The best Supporters of thy pompous Style,
Thou far Renowned, thou powerful BRITISH Isle!
Foremost in Naval Strength, and Sovereign of the Sea!
These from thy Aid that wrathful Night divides,
Plunged in those Waves, over which this Title rides.
What art thou, envied Greatness, at the best,
In thy deluding Splendors dressed?
What are thy glorious Titles, and thy Forms?
Which cannot give Security, or Rest
To favored Men, or Kingdoms that contest
With Popular Assaults, or Providential Storms!
Whilst on th'Omnipotent our Fate depends,
And They are only safe, whom He alone defends.
Then let to Heaven our general Praise be sent,
Which did our farther Loss, our total Wreck prevent.
And as our Aspirations do ascend,
Let every Thing be summoned to attend;
And let the Poet after God's own Heart
Direct our Skill in that sublimer part,
And our weak Numbers mend!
Explanatory NOTES.
(1) The Bishop's Palace at Wells was blown down, and killed Bishop Kidder with
his Lady.

(2) We had a great Shower of Rain in the amidst of the Storm.

(3) The Ancients looked repon the Sun (or Phoebus) as Prophetic.

(4) One Day of the Summer before the Storm, we had an unusual Appearance of
the Sun (which was observed by many People in several Parts of Kent, It was of
a pale dead Color, without any Beams or Brightness for some Hours in the
Morning, although obstructed by no Clouds; for the Sky was clear.

The HYMN.
TO the Almighty on his radiant Throne,
Let endless Hallelujas rise!
Praise Him, ye wondrous Heights to us unknown,
Praise Him, ye Heavens unreach'd by mortal Eye^
Praise Him, in your degree, ye sublunary Skies!
Praise Him, you Angels that before him bow,
You Creatures of Celestial frame,
Our Guests of old, our wakeful Guardians now,
Praise Him, and with like Zeal our Hearts inflame,
Transporting then our Praise to Seats from whence you came!
Praise Him, thou Sun in thy Meridian Force;
Exalt Him, all ye Stars and Light!
Praise Him, thou Moon in thy revolving Course,
Praise Him, thou gentler Guide of silent Night,
Which does to solemn Praise, and serious Thoughts invite.
Praise Him, ye humid Vapors, which remain
Unfrozen by the sharper Air;
Praise Him, as you return in Showers again,
To bless the Earth and make her Pastures fair:
Praise Him, ye climbing Fires, the Emblems of our Prayer.
Praise Him, ye Waters petrified above,
Ye shredded Clouds that fall in Snow,
Praise Him, for that you so divided move;
Ye Hailstones, that you do no larger grow,
Nor, in one solid Mass, oppress the World below.
Praise Him, ye soaring Fowls, still as you fly,
And on gay Plumes your Bodies raise;
You Insects, which in dark Recesses lie,
Although the extremest Distances you try,
Be reconciled in This, to offer mutual Praise.
Praise Him, thou Earth, with thy unbounded Store;
Ye Depths which to the Center tend:
Praise Him ye Beasts which in the Forests roar;
Praise Him ye Serpents, though you downwards bend,
Who made your bruised Head our Ladder to ascend.
Praise Him, ye Men whom youthful Vigor warms;
Ye Children, hastening to your Prime;
Praise Him, ye Virgins of unfullied Charms,
With beauteous Lips becoming sacred Rhyme:
You Aged, give Him Praise for your increase of Time.
Praise Him, ye Monarchs in supreme Command,
By Anthems, like the Hebrew Kings;
Then with enlarged Zeal throughout the Land
Reform the Numbers, and reclaim the String,
Converting to His Praise, the most Harmonious Things.
Ye Senators presiding by our Choice,
And You Hereditary Peers!
Praise Him by Union, both in Heart and Voice;
Praise Him, who your agreeing Council steers,
Producing sweeter Sounds than the according Spheres.
Praise Him, ye native Altars of the Earth!
Ye Mountains of stupendous size!
Praise Him, ye Trees and Fruits which there have birth,
Praise Him, ye Flames that from their Bowels rise,
All fitted for the use of grateful Sacrifice.
He spoke the Word; and from the Chaos rose
The Forms and Species of each Kind:
He spoke the Word, which did their Law compose,
And all, with never ceasing Order joined,
Till ruffl'd for our Sins by his chastising Wind.
But now, you Storms, that have your Fu^ spent.
As you his Dictates did obey,
Let now your loud and threatening Notes relent.
Tune all your Murmurs to a softer Key,
And bless that Gracious Hand, that did your Progress stay
From my contemned Retreat, obscure and low,
As Grots from whence the Winds disperse,
May this His Praise as far extended flow;
And if that future Times shall read my Verse.
Though worthless in it self, let them his Prai^ rehearse.
Friendship between EPHELIA and ARDELIA.
Ephesians. WHat Friendship is, ARDELIA show

Ard. It Is to love, as I love You.

Ephesians. This Account, so short (though kind)
Suits not my enquiring Mind.
Therefore farther now repeat;
What is Friendship when complete?

Ard. It Is to share all Joy and Grief;
It Is to lend all due Relief
From the Tongue, the Heart, the Hand;
It Is to mortgage House and Land;
For a Friend be sold a Slave;
It Is to die upon a Grave,
If a Friend therein do lie.

Ephesians. This indeed, though carried high,
This, though more than ever was done
Underneath the rolling Sun,
This has all been said before.
Can ARDELIA say no more?

Ard. Words indeed no more can show:
But it is to love, as I love you.

The LION and the GNAT.
TO the still Covert of a Wood,
About the prime of Day,
A Lion, satiated with Food,
With stately Pace, and sullen Mood,
Now took his lazy way.
To Rest he there himself composed,
And in his Mind revolved,
How Great a Person it enclosed,
How free from Danger he reposed,
Though now in Ease dissolved!
Who Guard, nor Sentinel did need,
Despising as a Jest
All whom the Forest else did feed,
As Creatures of an abject Breed,
Who durst not him molest.
^ut in the Air a Sound he heard,
That gave him some dislike;
^t which he shook his grisly Beard,
Enough to make the Woods affeard,
And stretched his Paw to strike.
^hen on his lifted Nose there fell
A Creature, slight of Wing,
^ho neither feared his Grin, nor Yell,
^or Strength, that in his Jaws did dwell,
But gores him with her Sting.
Transported with the Affront and Pain,
He terribly exclaims,
Protesting, if it comes again,
^s guilty Blood the Grass shall stain,
And to surprise it aims.
The scoffing Gnat now laughed aloud,
And bids him upwards view
The Jupiter within the Cloud,
That humbl'd him, who was so proud,
And this sharp Thunder threw.
That Taunt no Lyon's Heart could bear;
And now much more he raves,
Whilst this new Perseus in the Air
Does War and Strife again declare,
And all his Terror braves.
Upon his haughty Neck she rides,
Then on his lashing Tail;
(Which need not now provoke his Sides)
Where she her slender Weapon guides,
And makes all Patience fail.
A Truce at length he must propose,
The Terms to be her Own;
Who likewise Rest and Quiet chose,
Contented now her Life to close,
When she would such Triumph known.
(...) mighty Men, who meaner ones despise,
Learn from this Fable to become more Wise;
You see the Lion may be vexed with Flies.
The MAN and his HORSE.
WIthin a Meadow, on the way,
A fordid Churl resolved to stay,
And give his Horse a Bite;
Purloining so his Neighbors Hay,
That at the Inn he might not pay
For Forage all the Night.
With Heart's content the unloaded Steed
Began to neigh, and frisk, and feed;
For nothing more he cared,
Since none of all his Master's breed
Ever sound such Pasture, at their need,
Or half so well had fared.
When, in the turning of a Hand,
Out comes the Owner of the Land,
And does the Trespass eye;
Which puts poor Bayard to a Stand,
For now his Master does command
Him to return and fly.
But Hunger quickening up his Wit,
And Grass being sweeter than the Bit,
He to the Clown replied:
Shall I for you this Dinner quit,
Who to my Back hard Burdens sit,
And to the Death would ride?
No; should I as a Stray be found,
And seized upon forbidden Ground,
I Will on this Spot stand still;
For though new Riders should abound,
(Or did Mankind this Field surround)
They could but use me ill.
Urge no Man to despair; lest in the Fit
He with some Counterblow thy Head may hit.
LIFE's Progress.
HOW gayly is at first begun
Our Life's uncertain Race!
Whilst yet that sprightly Morning Sun,
With which we just set out to run
Enlightens all the Place.
How smiling the World's Prospect lies
How tempting to go through!
Not Canaan to the Prophet's Eyes,
From Pisgah with a sweet Surprise,
Did more inviting show.
How promising's the Book of Fate,
Till thoroughly understood!
Whilst partial Hopes such Lots create,
As may the youthful Fancy treat
With all that is Great and Good.
How soft the first Ideas prove,
Which wander through our Minds!
How full the Joys, how free the Love,
Which does that early Season move;
As Flowers the Western Winds!
Our Sighs are then but Vernal Air;
But April-drops our Tears,
Which swiftly passing, all grows Fair,
Whilst Beauty compensates our Care,
And Youth each Vapor clears.
But oh! too soon, alas, we climb;
Scarce feeling we ascend
The gently rising Hill of Time,
From whence with Grief we see that Prime,
And all its Sweetness end.
The Die now cast, our Station known,
Fond Expectation past;
The Thorns, which former Days had sown,
To Crops of late Repentance grown,
Through which we toil at last.
Whilst every Care's a driving Harm,
That helps to bear us down;
Which faded Smiles no more can charm,
But every Tear's a Winter-Storm,
And every Look's a Frown.
Till with succeeding Ills oppressed,
For Joys we hoped to find;
By Age too, rumpl'd and undrest,
We gladly sinking down to rest,
Leave following Crowds behind.
HOPE.
THE Tree of Knowledge we in Eden proved
The Tree of Life was thence to Heav^ removed
Hope is the growth of Earth, the only Plant,
Which either Heaven, or Paradise could want.
Hell knows it not, to Us alone confined,
And Cordial only to the Human Mind.
Receive it then, t'expel these mortal Cares,
Nor wave a Medicine, which thy God prepares.
Moral SONG.
WOuld we attain the happiest State,
That is designed us here;
No Joy a Rapture must create,
No Grief beget Despair.
No Injury fierce Anger raise,
No Honor tempt to Pride;
No vain Desires of empty Praise
Must in the Soul abide.
No Charms of Youth, or Beauty move
The constant, settled Breast:
Who leaves a Passage free to Love,
Shall let in, all the rest.
In such a Heart soft Peace will live,
Where none of these abound;
The greatest Blessing, Heaven does give,
Or can on Earth be found.
GLASS.
O Man! what Inspiration was thy Guide,
Who taught thee Light and Air thus to divide;
To let in all the useful Beams of Day,
Yet force, as subtle Winds, without thy Shash to stay;
TO extract from Embers by a strange Device,
Then polish fair these Flakes of solid Ice;
Which, silvered over, redouble all in place,
And give thee back thy well or ill-complexion'd Face.
To Vessels blown exceed the gloomy Bowl,
Which did the Wine's full excellence control,
These show the Body, whilst you taste the Soul.
Its Color sparkles Motion, lets thee see,
Though yet the Excess the Preacher warns to flee,
Lest Men at length as clearly spy through Thee.
The DOG and his MASTER.
NO better Dog ever kept his Master's Door
Than honest Snarl, who spared nor Rich nor Poor;
But gave the Alarm, when any one drew nigh,
Nor let pretended Friends pass fearless by:
For which reproved, as better Fed than Taught,
He rightly thus expostulates the Fault.
To keep the House from Rascals was my Charge;
The Task was great, and the Commission large.
Nor did your Worship ever declare your Mind,
That to the begging Crew it was confined;
Who shrink an Arm, or prop an able Knee,
Or turn up Eyes, till they are not seen, nor see.
To Thieves, who know the Penalty of Stealth,
And fairly stake their Necks against your Wealth,
These are the known Delinquents of the Times,
And Whips and Tyburn testify their Crimes.
But since to Me there was by Nature lent
An exquisite Discerning by the Scent;
I trace a Flatt'rer, when he fawns and leers,
A rallying Wit, when he commends and jeers:
The greedy Parasite I grudging note,
Who praises the good Bits, that oil his Throat;
I mark the Lady, you so fondly toast,
That plays your Gold, when all her own is lost:
The Knave, who fences your Estate by Law,
Yet still reserves an undermining Flaw.
These and a thousand more, which I could tell,
Provoke my Growling, and offend my Smell.
The PHOENIX.
A SONG.
A Female Friend advised a Swain
(Whose Heart she wished at ease)
Make Love thy Pleasure, not thy Pain,
Nor let it deeply seize.
Beauty, where Vanities abound,
No serious Passion claims;
Then, 'till a Phoenix can be found,
Do not admit the Flames.
But grieved She finds, that his Replies
(Since prepossessed when Young)
Take all their Hints from Silvia's Eyes,
None from ARDELIA's Tongue.
Thus, Cupid, of our Aim we miss,
Who would unbend thy Bow;
And each slight Nymph a Phoenix is,
When Love will have it so.
A SONG.
PErsuade me not, there is a Grace
Proceeds from Silvia's Voice or Lute,
Against Miranda's charming Face
To make her hold the least Dispute.
Music, which tunes the Soul for Love,
And stirs up all our soft Desires,
Does but the growing Flame improve,
Which powerful Beauty first inspires.
Thus, whilst with Art she plays, and sings,
I to Miranda, standing by,
Impute the Music of the Strings,
And all the melting Words apply.
JEALOUSY.
A SONG.
VAIN Love, why do thou boast of Wings,
That cannot help thee to retire!
When such quick Flames Suspicion brings,
As do the Heart about thee fire.
Still Swift to come, but when to go
Thou shou'd'st be more -- Alas! how Slow.
Lord of the World must surely be
But thy bare Title at the most;
Since Jealousy is Lord of Thee,
And makes such Havoc on thy Coast,
As does thy pleasant Land deface,
Yet binds thee faster to the Place.
A SONG.
LOVE, thou art best of Human Joys,
Our chiefest Happiness below;
All other Pleasures are but Toys,
Music without Thee is but Noise,
And Beauty but an empty Show.
Heaven, who knew best what Man would move,
And raise his Thoughts above the Brute;
Said, Let him Be, and let him Love;
That must alone his Soul improve,
However Philosophers dispute.
A SONG.
QUickly, Delia, Learn my Passion,
Lose not Pleasure, to be Proud;
Courtship draws on Observation,
And the Whispers of the Crowd.
Soon or late you will hear a Lover,
Nor by Time his Truth can prove;
Ages will not a Heart discover,
Trust, and so secure my Love.
A SONG.
IT IS strange, this Heart within my breast,
Reason opposing, and her Powers,
Cannot one gentle Moment rest,
Unless it knows what is done in Yours.
In vain I ask it of your Eyes,
Which subt'ly would my Fears control;
For Art has taught them to disguise,
Which Nature made to explain the Soul.
In vain that Sound, your Voice affords,
Flatters sometimes my easy Mind;
But of too vast Extent are Words
In them the Jewel Truth to find.
Then let my fond Enquiries cease,
And so let all my Troubles end:
For, sure, that Heart shall never know Peace,
Which on Another does depend.
To Mr. F. now Earl of W.
Who going abroad, had desired ARDELIA to write some Verses upon whatever
Subject she thought fit, against his Return in the Evening.
Written in the Year 1689.
NO sooner, FLAVIO, was you gone,
But, your Injunction thought upon,
ARDELIA took the Pen;
Designing to perform the Task,
Her FLAVIO did so kindly ask,
Ere he returned again.
Unto Parnassus strait she sent,
And bid the Messenger, that went
Unto the Muses Court,
Assure them, she their Aid did need,
And begged they would use their utmost Speed,
Because the Time was short.
The hasty Summons was allowed;
And being well-bred, they rose and bowed,
And said, they would post away;
That well they did ARDELIA know,
And that no Female's Voice below
They sooner would obey:
That many of that rhiming Train,
On like Occasions, sought in vain
Their Industry t'excite;
But for ARDELIA all they would leave:
Thus flattering can the Muse deceive,
And wheedle us to write.
Yet, since there was such haste required;
To know the Subject 'twas desired,
On which they must infuse;
That they might temper Words and Rules,
And with their Counsel carry Tools,
As Country -Doctors use.
Wherefore to cut off all Delays,
'Twas soon replied, a Husband's Praise
(Though in these looser Times)
ARDELIA gladly would rehearse
A Husband's, who indulg'e her Verse,
And now required her Rimes.
A Husband! echoed all around:
And to Parnassus sure that Sound
Had never yet been sent;
Amazement in each Face was read,
In haste the affrighted Sisters The Mus^s -- Erato, Melpomene, Thalia, Urania,
etc.
fled,
And unto Council went.
Erato cried, since Grizel's Days,
Since Troy-Town pleased, and Chivey-chace,
No such Design was known;
And 'twas their Business to take care,
It reached not to the public Ear,
Or got about the Town:
Nor came where Evening Beaux were met
Over Billet-doux and Chocolate,
Lest it destroyed the House;
For in that Place, who could dispense
(That wore his Clothes with common Sense)
With mention of a Spouse?
'Twas put unto the Vote at last,
And in the Negative it past,
None to her Aid should move;
Yet since ARDELIA was a Friend,
Excuses 'twas agreed to send,
Which plausible might prove:
That Pegasus of late had been
So often rid through thick and thin,
With neither Fear nor Wit;
In Panegyric been so spurred,
He could not from the Stall be stirred,
Nor would endure the Bit.
Melpomene had given a Bond,
By the new House alone to stand,
And write of War and Strife;
Thalia, she had taken Fees,
And Stipends from the Patentees,
And durst not for her Life.
Urania Urania is the Heavenly Muse, and supposed to inspire Thoughts of Virtue.
only liked the Choice;
Yet not to thwart the public Voice,
She whispering did impart:
They need no Foreign Aid invoke,
No help to draw a moving Stroke,
Who dictate from the Heart.
Enough! the pleased ARDELIA cried;
And slighting every Muse beside,
Consulting now her Breast,
Perceived that every tender Thought,
Which from abroad she would vainly sought,
Did there in Silence rest:
And should unmoved that Post maintain,
Till in his quick Return again,
Met in some neighboring Grove,
(Where Vice nor Vanity appear)
Her FLAVIO them alone might hear,
In all the Sounds of Love.
For since the World does so despise
Hymen's Endearments and its Ties,
They should mysterious be;
Till We that Pleasure too possess
(Which makes their fancied Happiness)
Of stolen Secrecy.
A LETTER to the same Person.
SUre of Success, to You I boldly write,
Whilst Love does every tender Line endite;
Love, who is justly President of Verse,
Which all his Servants write, or else rehearse.
Phoebus (however mistaken Poets dream)
Never used a Verse, till Love became his Theme.
To his strayed Son, still as his Passion rose,
He raised his hasty Voice in clamorous Prose:
But when in Daphne he would Love inspire,
He wooed in Verse, set to his silver Lyre.
The Trojan Prince did powerful Numbers join
To sing of War; but Love was the Design:
And sleeping Troy again in Flames was dressed,
To light the Fires in pitying Dido's Breast.
Love without Poetry's refining Aid
Is a dull Bargain, and but coarsely made;
Nor ever could Poetry successful prove,
Or touch the Soul, but when the Sense was Love.
Oh! could they both in Absence now impart
Skill to my Hand, but to describe my Heart;
Then should you see impatient of your Stay
Soft Hopes contend with Fears of sad Delay;
Love in a thousand fond Endearments there,
And lively Images of You appear.
But since the Thoughts of a Poetic Mind
Will never be to Syllables confined;
And whilst to fix what is conceived, we try,
The purer Parts evaporate and dye:
You must perform what they want force to do,
And think what your ARDELIA thinks of you.
October 21. 1690.
FRAGMENT.
SO here confined, and but to female Clay,
ARDELIA's Soul mistook the rightful Way:
Whilst the soft Breeze of Pleasure's tempting Air
Made her believe, Felicity was there;
And basking in the warmth of early Time,
To vain Amusements dedicate her Prime.
Ambition next allured her towering Eye;
For Paradise she heard was placed on high,
Then thought, the Court with all its glorious Show
Was sure above the rest, and Paradise below.
There placed too soon the flaming Sword appeared,
Removed those Powers, whom justly she revered,
Adhered too in their Wreck, and in their Ruin shared.
Now by the Wheels inevitable Round,
With them thrown prostrate to the humble Ground,
No more she takes (instructed by that Fall)
For fixed, or worth her thought, this rolling Ball:
Toward a more certain Station she aspires,
Unshaken by Revolts, and owns no less Desires.
But all in vain are Prayers, extatick Thoughts,
Recovered Moments, and retracted Faults,
Retirement, which the World Moroseness calls,
Abandoned Pleasures in Monastic Wye College in Kent, formerly a Priory.
Walls:
These, but at distance, toward that purpose tend,
The lowly Means to an exalted End;
Which He must perfect, who allots her Stay,
And That, accomplished, will direct the way.
Pity her restless Cares, and weary Strife,
And point some Issue to escaping Life;
Which so dismissed, no Pen or Human Speech
The ineffable Recess can ever teach:
The Expanse, the Light, the Harmony, the Throng,
The Bride's Attendance, and the Bridal Song,
The numerous Mansions, and the immortal Tree,
No Eye, unpurg'd by Death, must ever see,
Or Waves which through that wondrous City roll.
Rest then content, my too impatient Soul;
Observe but here the easy Precepts given,
Then wait with cheerful hope, till Heaven be known in Heaven.
PSALM the 137th, Paraphrased to the 7th Verse.
PRoud Babylon! Thou saw us weep;
Euphrates, as he passed along,
Saw, on his Banks, the Sacred Throng
A heavy, solemn Mourning keep.
Sad Captives to thy Sons, and Thee,
When nothing but our Tears were Free!
A Song of Sion they require,
And from the neighboring Trees to take
Each Man his dumb, neglected Lyre,
And cheerful Sounds on them awake:
But cheerful Sounds the Strings refuse,
Nor will their Masters Griefs abuse.
How can We, Lord, thy Praise proclaim,
Here, in a strange unhallowed Land!
Lest we provoke them to Blaspheme
A Name, they do not understand;
And with rent Garments, that deplore
Above whatever we felt before.
But, Thou, Jerusalem, so Dear!
If thy loved Image ever depart,
Or I forget thy Sufferings here;
Let my right Hand forget her Art;
My Tongue her vocal Gift resign,
And Sacred Verse no more be mine!
The Battle between the Rats and the Weazles.
IN dire Contest the Rats and Weazles met,
And Foot to Foot, and Point to Point was set^
An ancient Quarrel had such Hatred wrought,
That for Revenge, as for Renown, they fought.
Now bloody was the Day, and hard the Strife,
Wherein bold Warriors lost neglected Life:
But as, some Errors still we must commit,
Nor Valor always balanced is by Wit;
Among the Rats some Officers appeared,
With lofty Plumage on their Foreheads reared,
Unthinking they, and ruined by their Pride:
For when the Weazels proved the stronger Side,
A general Rout befell, and a Retreat,
Was by the Vanquished now implored of Fate;
To slender Crannies all repaired in haste,
Where easily the undressed Vulgar past:
But when the Rats of Figure would have fled,
So wide those branching Marks of Honor spread,
The Feather in the Cap was fatal to the Head.
Democritus and his Neighbors.
Imitated from Fontaine.
IN Vulgar Minds what Errors do arise!
How differing are the Notions, they possess,
From theirs, whom better Sense does bless,
Who justly are enrolled amongst the Learned and Wise!
Democritus, whilst he all Science taught,
Was by his foolish Neighbors thought
Distracted in his Wits;
Who call his speculative Flights,
His solitary Walks in starry Nights,
But wild and frantic Fits.
Bless me, each cries, from such a working Brain!
And to Hippocrates they send
The Sage's long-acquainted Friend,
To put in Tune his jarring Mind again,
And Pericranium mend.
Away the Skilful Doctor comes
Of Recipes and Medicines full,
To check the giddy Whirl of Nature's Fires,
If so the unruly Case requires;
Or with his Cobweb-cleansing Brooms
To sweep and clear the over-crouded Scull,
If settled Spirits flag, and make the Patient dull.
But asking what the Symptoms were,
That made 'em think he was so bad?
The Man indeed, they cried, is wondrous Man
You, at this Distance, may behold him there
Beneath that Tree in open Air,
Surrounded with the Engines of his Fate,
The Gimcracks of a broken Pate.
Those Hoops a Sphere he calls,
That Ball the Earth;
And when into his raving Fit he falls,
'Twou'd move at once your Pity, and your Mir^
To hear him, as you will do soon,
Declaring, there is a Kingdom in the Moon;
And that each Star, for ought he knows,
May some Inhabitants enclose:
Philosophers, he says, may there abound,
Such Jugglers as himself be in them found;
Which if there be, the World may well turn round;
At least to those, whose Whimsies are so strange,
That, whilst they are fixed to one peculiar Place,
Pretend to measure far extended Space,
And amongst the Planets range.
Behold him now contemplating that Head,
From which long-since both Flesh, and Brains are fled;
Questioning, if that empty, hollow Bowl
Did not ere while contain the Human Soul:
Then starts a Doubt, if 'twere not to the Heart
That Nature rather did that Gift impart.
Good Sir, employ the utmost of your Skill,
To make him Wiser, though against his Will;
Who thinks, that he already All exceeds,
And laughs at our most solemn Words and Deeds:
Though once amongst us he would try a Cause,
And Business of the Town discuss,
Knowing, as well as one of us,
The Price of Corn, and standing Market-Laws;
Would bear an Office in his Turn,
For which good Purposes all Men were born;
Not to be making Circles in the Sand,
And scaling Heaven, till they have sold their Land.
Or, when unstock'd below their Pasture lies,
To find out Bulls and Rams, amidst the Skies.
From these Mistakes his Madness we conclude;
And hearing, you was with much Skill endu'd,
Your Aid we sought. Hippocrates amazed,
Now on the Sage, now on the Rabble gazed;
And whilst he needless finds his artful Rules,
Pities a Man of Sense, judged by a Crowd of Fools
Then how can we with their Opinions join,
Who, to promote some Interest, would define
The Peoples Voice to be the Voice Divine?
The TREE.
FAir Tree! for thy delightful Shade
It Is just that some Return be made:
Sure, some Return is due from me
To thy cool Shadows, and to thee.
When thou to Birds do Shelter give,
Thou Music do from them receive;
If Travelers beneath thee stay,
Till Storms have worn themselves away,
That Time in praising thee they spend,
And thy protecting Power commend:
The Shepherd here, from Scorching freed,
Tunes to thy dancing Leaves his Reed;
Whilst his loved Nymph, in Thanks, bestows
Her flowery Chaplets on thy Boughs.
Shall I then only Silent be,
And no Return be made by me?
No; let this Wish upon thee wait,
And still to flourish be thy Fate,
To future Ages may thou stand
Untouched by the rash Workman's hand;
'Till that large Stock of Sap is spent,
Which gives thy Summer's Ornament;
'Till the fierce Winds, that vainly strive
To shock thy Greatness whilst alive,
Shall on thy lifeless Hour attend,
Prevent the Axe, and grace thy End;
Their scattered Strength together call,
And to the Clouds proclaim thy Fall;
Who then their Ev'ning-Dews may spare,
When thou no longer art their Care;
But shall, like ancient Heroes, burn,
And some bright Hearth be made thy Urn.
A Nocturnal Reverie.
IN such a Night, when every louder Wind
Is to its distant Cavern safe confined;
And only gentle Zephyr fans his Wings,
And lonely Philomel, still waking, sings;
Or from some Tree, famed for the Owl's delight,
She, hollowing clear, directs the Wanderer right:
In such a Night, when passing Clouds give place,
Or thinly vail the Heavens mysterious Face;
When in some River, overhung with Green,
The waving Moon and trembling Leaves are seen;
When freshen'd Grass now bears it self upright,
And makes cool Banks to pleasing Rest invite,
Whence springs the Woodbind, and the Bramble-Rose,
And where the sleepy Cowslip sheltered grows;
Whilst now a paler Hue the Foxglove takes,
Yet checquers still with Red the dusky brakes:
When scattered Glowworms, but in Twilight fine,
Show trivial Beauties watch their Hour to shine;
Whilst Salisb'ry stands the Test of every Light,
In perfect Charms, and perfect Virtue bright:
When Odours, which declined repelling Day,
Through temperate Air uninterrupted stray;
When darkened Groves their softest Shadows wear,
And falling Waters we distinctly hear;
When through the Gloom more venerable shows
Some ancient Fabric, awful in Repose,
While Sunburnt Hills their swarthy Looks conceal,
And swelling Haycocks thicken up the Vale:
When the loosed Horse now, as his Pasture leads,
Comes slowly grazing through the adjoining Meads,
Whose stealing Pace, and lengthened Shade we fear
Till torn up Forage in his Teeth we hear:
When nibbling Sheep at large pursue their Food,
And unmolested Kine rechew the Cud;
When Curlews cry beneath the Village-walls,
And to her straggling Brood the Partridge calls
Their shortliv'd Jubilee the Creatures keep,
Which but endures, whilst Tyrant -Man does sleep
When a sedate Content the Spirit feels,
And no fierce Light disturbs, whilst it reveals;
But silent Musings urge the Mind to seek
Something, too high for Syllables to speak;
Till the free Soul to a compos'dness charmed,
Finding the Elements of Rage disarmed,
Over all below a solemn Quiet grown,
Joys in the inferior World, and thinks it like her Own
In such a Night let Me abroad remain,
Till Morning breaks, and All Is confused again;
Our Cares, our Toils, our Clamours are renewed.
Or Pleasures, seldom reached, again pursued.
ARISTOMENES: OR, THE Royal Shepherd.
A TRAGEDY.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Aristomenes, Prince of the Messenians and Arcadians. Aristor, Son to
Aristomenes. Alcander, a Principal Officer under Aristomenes. Demagetus, Or the
Royal Shepherd, Son to the Prince of Rhodes, under the Disguise of a Shepherd
called Climander. Arcasius, An old Lord, under the Habit of a Shepherd,
Counselor to Demagetus. Anaxander, One of the Kings of Lacedemon (for they had
always Two) and Leader of their Forces against Aristomenes. Clarinthus, Chief
Counselor to Anaxander, a Lord of Sparta. Clinias, A Shepherd keeping his
Flock on the Plains of Messenia, close to the Walls of Phaerea, with other
Shepherds.
WOMEN.
Herminia, Daughter to Aristomenes. Barina, Her Woman and Confident. Amalintha,
Daughter to Anaxander. Phila, Her Woman and Confident. Theata, and Lamia,
Shepherdesses on the Plains of Messenia.
Soldiers, Officers, Guards, and Attendants, several Lords of the Spartan
Council.
The general SCENES are Aristomenes's Camp near the Walls of Phaerea; sometimes
the Town of Phaerea, and sometimes the Plains among the Shepherds. ARISTOMENES.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A pleasant Plain by a Wood-side; beyond it are seen, on one side, some of the
Shepherds Hamlets; on the other (at a distance) the Walls of Phaerea, a
Garrison of the Lacedaemonians. Enter Climander meeting Arcasius; both dressed
like Shepherds. Clim. Have thou provided me a Horse and Arms,
A Sword, Arcasius, that when Time has freed me
From the severe Injunctions of a Father,
May fill my Hand, instead of this vile Hook,
And fit it for the Work, a Prince is born to?

Arca. Unwillingly, I have obeyed your Orders;
But, 'till tomorrow's, and the next day's Sun
Shall light the angry, and contentious World,
Your Promise to your Father is in Force;
As well as the assurance, which you gave,
That in my Custody these Arms should rest,
Until that fatal Time demands their Use.

Clim. Call it not Fatal; Oh! that 'twere arrived!
That Aristomenes, the Spartan Terror,
Were leading me, this moment, bravely on
Through Dangers, equal to the Cause he fights for,
Preserving these free Plains from foreign Bondage!
Though in the Strife this Body strewn the Ground,
To Fame, and Public Good an early Victim.

Arca. O wretched Rhodes! Thy Ruin is pronounced,
And thou beneath the impending Plagues may perish;
Since He, whom Oracles appoint to Aid thee,
Thus wishes with his Own, to sell Thy Safety,
For the rash Praise of an intruding Warrior.

Clim. No more of Oracles!
Which oftener we fulfill by heedless Chance,
Than the vain Study to pursue their Meaning;
Which makes me banish, from my laboring Thoughts,
Those Mystic Words, which serve but to perplex them.

Arc. From Mine they will not part, nor should from Yours;
Which to prevent, even now I will repeat them:
The Isle of Rhodes shall be of Peace bereft,
Unless it by the Heir thereof be left,
And that He wed, ere he returns again,
The Beauteous Daughter of the Best of Men;
Whose Father's presence there shall save the State,
And smooth the threatening Brow of angry Fate.

Clim. But, Who this Man, or, Where his Daughter is,
Was left in Darkness, to employ our Search:
Yet, in Obedience, Hither did I come
To feed a Flock, and mix with simple Swains;
Because the Priests, who sway in Princes Courts,
Declared, that perfect Innocence, and Virtue
Was to be found but in their lowly Rank,
And There, the Best of Men was to be sought for.

Arc. It Is True, they did; and therefore urged our Prince;
That stighting (in a Case of such Importance)
The Pride of Titles, and of equal Birth,
You might espouse One of these Rural Maids,
Whose Parents harmless Presence in our Land
Might bring the Blessings of the Gods upon us;
And, lest the Wars (which still infest these Countries)
Should tempt you from the Fates, and his Design,
How strictly did He Charge it on your Duty,
That, 'till the Time, which now, Two Days must end,
You should not leave these Plains, to seek the Camp!

Clim. Nor have I done it, as Thyself can witness,
But here have spent the long and lazy Hours,
Carelessly stretched beneath some Sylvan Shade,
And only sent my Wishes to their Tents:
But ere the Battle (which is soon intended)
Shall meet in glorious Trial of their Right,
I will be there, and side with the Messenians.

Arc. Oh! that you would not!
That first your Native Country might be served,
Think on her Danger, and your Sovereign's Will:
'Twas to the Reed, and not the wrangling Trumpet
He bid you listen, to secure his Peace;
Nor have you looked with Love, as he required,
On any Shepherdess, though never so Fair,
Or born of Parents, harmless as their Flocks.
Low on my Knees, my Lord, let me prevail,
[He Kneels. That, when the Time decreed you, does expire,
You will not prosecute this rash Design;
But go with me yet farther on these Plains,
And seek to please your Father, and the Gods,
In such safe, humble ways, as they direct us.

Clim. Nay, prithee, do not kneel; it grates my Nature:
[Raises him. But trust me, when we have subdued these Countries,
When Lacedemon's Kings shall sue for Peace,
And make great Aristomenes Returns
Agreeing to his Merits, and their Wrongs,
And I have gained such Honor as becomes me;
Whatever thou do request shall be observed:
And though my Soul finds such vast disproportion
Betwixt the Thoughts, with which she is inspired,
And those, that lodge in these poor Country Maids;
Yet shall my Duty over my Temper rise,
I Will trust (like Others) only to my Eyes,
And think, that Women in Perfection are,
Tho never so Ignorant, if Young and Fair,

Arc. Ha!
[A Noise is heard of distant Drums. Sure I hear the distant Sound of Drums.
[Aside.
Heaven grant what I Have been told, and kept so secret,
Of a Design this Day to end the War,
Be not a Truth too tempting for my Reasons!

Enter frighted, Theata and Lamia, Shepherdesses. Thea. Oh! may we here be
safe, tell us Climander?
For all the Lawns, that lie beyond the Hill,
Where still our Flocks were used to feed in peace,
Are filled with War, and dark with flying Arrows:
The Sheep disperse, whilst none regard their Safety,
But call on Pan, to shield th'advent'rous Chief,
The noble Aristomenes from Danger.

Clim. Hear me, Arcasius, hear and do not thwart me; [Aside to Arc.
Nor tie me to a few remaining Hours:
For, by the horrid Shield, that bears the Gorgon,
I Swear; if thou refuse to arm me now
With what I sent thee lately to provide,
These Feet shall bear me sandal'd to the Battle,
This flowery Wreath shall mix with their stern Helmets,
And Death I Will take, if not empowered to give it.

Arc. Oh! do not ask my Aid; but in this Trial,
Call all your fainting Virtue to assist
And help you keep your Promise to your Father.

Clim. I did not Promise him to be a Coward,
To let the Sound of War thus strike my Sense,
Yet keep my Heart in a cool, even Temper.
Hark! this way comes the Noise, and I will meet it.
[As he is going, a confused Noise and Cry is heard within.
Arc. They Are Cries of Grief, and not the Shouts of Battle.
I hope All Is past, lest He and Rhodes should perish.

Enter meeting, Climander, Clinias, and other Shepherds. 1st Shep. Ruined,
Undone!

Clin. Let every Shepherd weep!
Turn their sweet Harmony to Sighs and Groans!
To the fierce Wolves deliver up their Flocks,
And leave Messenia to the cruel Victor!

Clim. The Victor, Clinias! is the Fight then over?

Clin. It is, and We again the Slaves of Sparta.

Clim. Then Aristomenes must sure be breathless,
And, if he is Dead, fallen in his Country's Cause:
The Gods have given Him Fame, whilst We are Wretched.

Clin. Oh! He Is not Dead, but Living in their Power,
Which, it is believed, they will use with utmost Rigor:
Pressing too far on the Auxiliary Troops,
The Foe surrounding bore him from his Horse,
Then with the Thongs of their cursed Cretan Bows
Bound his strong Arms, and lead him off, in Triumph.

Clim. Convert, ye Powers, to Blood and Tears that Triumph!
Rescue from their vile Hands the noble Prey,
And send him warmer Friends than Demagetus, [Aside.
Who, knowing not his Person, loved his Valor!
O ill-timed Duty, how have thou betrayed me!
Where is Aristor? Where Is the brave Alcander? [To them.

Clin. The first may share in his great Father's Fate,
For ought, as yet, the Army can discover:
Alcander heads, but cannot lead them on,
And it is believed they quickly will forsake him;
Such cold Dismay and Terror has possessed 'em!
Yet ere we part forever part from hence,
(If so the cruel Tyrant should Decree)
Let us appoint one sad and solemn Meeting,
Where all the Ensigns of our former Mirth
May be defaced and offered to His Praise,
That made our Nights secure, and blessed our Days.

1st Shep. So let it be!
Again, one Evening on these Plains we'll meet,

2d Shep. But never tread them more with cheerful Feet.
[Exeunt Shepherds and Shepherdesses.
Clim. Cruel Arcasius! How have thou und one me,
Charming me, with thy Tears, to this soft Circle,
Whilst the bright Spirit, Honor is gone by,
And borne away on never-turning Pinions!
Why wou'd'st thou thus contrive against my Fame,
And rob my fiery Youth of this first War,
(For which it languish'd with a Lover's Fondness)
By saying still 'twou'd last, 'till Time had freed me?
But I will yet pursue it through Despair,
And share their Ruin, though denied their Glory.
[As he is going Arc. kneels.
Arc. Yet, this last time, behold my bended Knees,
Which if you slight shall of the Gods implore
A hasty Death, to fall on old Arcasius:
Nor think, this Posture means to cross your way;
For, by those Powers I swear; if they will Fight
As much, we hear it is doubted by the Shepherds,
I will not sue, to keep you from the Army,
Or bring on me your future Life's Reproaches.
Let me obtain but This, for all my Service,
To be first sent to sound their Disposition,
Which I Will relate with Truth, and help your Purpose:
In this Attempt Two Hours will not be lost;
Oh! give so much, to save his Life, that loves you.

Clim. Thou have obtained it, by thy promised Aid,
And my long Knowledge of the Truth that guides thee.
About it then, whilst, in that shady Grove,
I with impatience wait for thy Return.

Arca. Which shall not be prolonged, my Lord, believe me.
[Exeunt severally.
Enter several Soldiers, running over the Stage, and throwing away their Arms.
1st Sold. Away, away, haste to the Woods for Shelter.

2d Sold. Do they begin to sally from the Town?

3d Sold. I know not; look behind him, he that will.
Here lies my Way --
[They run into the Wood.
Enter more, doing as the former. 1st Sold. Farewell the Wars! Oh! never such a
General!

2d Sold. Never such Sorrow! never such a General!

Enter more. 2d Sold. What, is the Army all dispersed, and broken! [To them.

3d Sold. No, but the Wisest of them do as We do.
Away, away --

Enter Alcander meeting them. Alcand. Why do ye fly my Friends, and cast these
from ye?
For shame! like Men, that once have known their Use,
Take 'em again, and wait, or seek the Foc.

3d Sold. Seek 'em, for what?
We cannot find our General out amongst 'em:
It Is thought they have made sure Work with him already;
And now you would have us run upon their Swords.
We thank you, Captain. Come away, away!
[Exit followed by some others.
Alc. Oh! yet my Fellow Soldiers, stay and hear me;
Can ye so soon forget your Noble General,
Your Aristomenes, whose Courage fed ye,
And by whose Conduct, ye have slept securely
In reach of Foes, that trebled ye in Number!
Can ye forget the Care, that healed your Wounds;
The Tongue, that praised them; or those Liberal Hands,
That poured down Gold, faster than they your Blood!

1st Sold. No; were he but amongst us, well Dye with him.

2d Sold. We are no Cowards, Captain, nor Ungrateful.
But, since they say, He Is Dead, What can we do?

Alcand. Go back, and keep a little while together;
At least, 'till there are Tidings from the Town:
Then, if he lives, we may attempt his rescue;
Or, if he is Dead, in a most just despair
Burn their accursed Phaerea over their Heads,
And then disperse, when we are so far revenged.
Do this my Friends; Come, come, I know you will:
You loved the General --

1st Sold. Cursed be He, that did not!

2d Sold. We will go back, but never shall see him more.

3d Sold. Then we will Fight no more, that is sure enough.

4th Sold. However, let us follow the brave Captain here,
And stay, 'till we are informed as he advises.

Alcand. Come, I will march before you.
Take up your Arms and trust, my Friends, to me
Your Lives shall not be set on idle Hazards;
Lose no more time, but let us join the Army.
[They take up their Arms, and Exeunt.
Enter Herminia and Barina, Disguised like Shepherdesses. Herm. Alas! Barina,
whither will thou lead me?

Bar. To Safety, Madam, poor and humble Safety,
Which in those Hamlets, now within our Sight,
The Shepherds find, with whom we may partake it.

Herm. Thus far indeed thou'st brought me on to seek it,
Urging the Danger of a Virgin's Honor,
When left defenseless to the Conqueror's Will:
But do thou think, we may not through these Woods
Find out some gloomy Cave to Men unknown,
And there expiring, sleep secure for ever?

Bar. Why should we Dye,
Since Aristomenes may yet be Living?

Herm. Oh! that thou had not named him!
[She starts and weeps. 'Till we were lodged, where Grief
Might have its Course; for now 'twill flow
And stop our farther Passage, barring the Sight
Which should conduct our Steps.

Bar. It must not Madam, nor must you indulge it,
But put on cheerful Looks to suit this Habit,
And make the World believe you what you seem.

Herm. I cannot do it.
In the midst of Sports
I should forget the gay, fantastic Scene,
And drop these Tears, when Smiles were most expected.

Bar. Then it is in vain farther to seek for Shelter:
Let us return and wait in your Pavilion,
Till Anaxander shall command you thence
To serve the base Delight of some proud Spartan.

Herm. Oh! yet avert that Fate, ye angry Powers!
I yield, Barina; make me what thou will:
See, I no more am Sad, look on this Brow;
Can thou read there that I have lost a Father,
The best, the fondest, and the dearest Father?
Forgive the tender Thought, that breeds this Change;
I Will weep it off, and smile again to please thee.

Bar. No; I Will weep too, for his, that is past,
And your approaching Ruin.

Herm. Alas! I had forgot, but now am Calm:
What must I do? indeed I will observe thee.

Bar. Then not far hence, concealed within this Grove
Wait my Return, who must go find the Shepherds,
And frame some Story; that when you appear,
Through no Enquiries we become suspected:
And in my absence, be your Thoughts employed
To bend your Mind to what the Times require.

Herm. To Fate and thy Advice I will submit,
Suit to my altered State my low Desire;
My Fare be plain, and homely my Attire,
My Tresses with a simple Fillet bind,
Face the hot Sun, and wither in the Wind;
In my parched Hand a rural Crook be found,
The Trees my Curtains, and my Bed the Ground:
That Fortune (who at Greatness aims her Blow)
When thus disguised may not a Princess know.
[Exeunt.
The SCENE changes to a Street in the Town of Phaerea (the Lacedemonian
Garrison) a Rabble and many common Soldiers in the Street. 1st Sold. All Is
done, all is done my Fellows.
We may now go home to our Wives, and our Shops.

1st Rabble. Ay, that we may; we have caught him at last,
That has been our Back-friend so long.
As one may say --

2d Sold. Nay, I Will be sworn,
Thou never look'd'st him in the Face:
But we shall have the tossing, and the tumbling of him
As Soon as ever the sowre-fac'd Senators
Have dismissed their Judgments upon him.

3d Rabble. Ay, I Will warrant ye, shall we;
Here, here he comes; bear back, bear back.
[ Aristomenes bound and guarded is conducted over the Stage, the Rabble
crouding and following him with confused Cries and Shouts, Exeunt.
The SCENE changed, discovers a Council Chamger in Anaxander's Palace:
Anaxander, Clarinthus, and several Lords of Sparta. Anax. Most happily, my
Lords, we now are met,
To see those Hands in servile Fetters tied
Which broke the Bondage of the proud Messenians,
Whom Sparta long had held in hard Subjection.
Ere yet their Captive General does appear,
Be it amongst your selves, My Lords, resolved
What Course will answer best our Ends upon them.
Speak you, Clarinthus, for'most of the Assembly;
And then, let every one add what he pleases.

Clar. Short be my Speech, and plain, as is the way
Which must secure what Lacedemon toils for:
Let him resign that Country, kept by him
From the entire Subjection, to our Yoke;
Or let his speedy Death deliver to Us
What his too active Life has long kept back.

Anax. What say the rest? --

All the Sen. All, all agree to this.

Clar. No middle Course can be of use to Sparta.

Anax. It is enough; Call for the Prisoner there.

A Lord. Bring in the Prisoner; it is the King's Command.

Aristomenes is brought in by the Guard. Aristor in a Spartan Dress presses in
amongst the Crowd, whilst Phila appears at the Door. Anax. At last, we see the
Hero can be Conquered. [To Clar.

Clar. Not in his Looks; for they are haughty still,
And so his Mind will prove, if I mistake not.

Anax. That you, our Prisoner now, of late our Foe,
Have urged that Country, where you rule in Chief,
To break our Yoke, and make Incursions on us,
Since known to all, will justify our Sentence
Which is; That you shall meet the Death deserved,
Unless to keep our Quiet for the future,
You bring again Messenia to our Sway,
Paying such Tribute, as shall be imposed
By Us, the Lords of that offensive State.
This is the Choice, we kindly set before you,
And wish, that you would take the safest Part.

Aristom. Enslave my Country, to secure my Life!
That Power forbid it, under whose Protection
I Have often fought her Battles with Success,
And drove the ill-grounded War home to your Sparta!

Clar. He braves us in his Bond: then you would Dye.

Aristom. I do not say, I would;
I am a Man, and Nature bars that saying:
Yet I dare Dye; no Spartan here, but knows it.
But since the Fates (whose Wills we best can read,
When thus unfolded in their dire Events)
Tell me by these vile Bonds I must submit;
Propose the gentlest Bargain you can make,
And if I find my Life bears equal Weight,
I am content to take it, else it is Yours.

Anax. It Is not for Us to wave, or change our Terms,
Mistaken Men, who think not of our Power,
And that we may command what we propose:
Since the first Sally, now, must take Possession
Of what your frighted Rout will soon abandon.

Aristom. My frighted Rout!
Ye basely wrong with foul reproachful Names
Those valiant Troops, which yet ye cannot Conquer:
For know, thou proud insulting Anaxander,
There Is at their Head a resolute young Man,
That will not 'bate thee in his strict Account
One Sigh or Groan, thy Tortures or thy Dungeons
Shall wrest in Dying from his Father's Bosom.
Anaxander and the Senate talk among themselves, whilst Aristor comes forward
upon the Stage. But there he stands! [Aside seeing Aristor.
Aristor through that Spartan Dress I view,
And never, till now, wished not to see my Son.
Protect him from their Knowledge, some kind Power,
If Youth, or Virtue ever engaged your Pity!

Clar. Let it be so, and speedily performed, [Aloud.
For He Will never yield to what has been demanded.

Anax. You named the Dungeon, with a Threaten too
Of swift Revenge, thinking to fright our Justice:
But we'll take care, first, to perform our Part,
Then, venture what your daring Son can offer.
The Dungeon is his Sentence, thither bear him.

Aristor. Not till this Hand has done a swifter Justice.
[Draws and runs at Anax.
Anax. Ha! what means this, my Guards!
[He avoids the thrust: Phila runs in.
Phila. Help, Soldiers, help; seize that distracted Spartan,
Who now has got a Sword; Disarm, and take him.
[They disarm him.
Aristor. It Is false; stand off, ye Slaves, and know I am --

Phila. Oh! stop his Mouth; for if he raves, he Dies.
[They stop his Mouth with a Handkerchief.
Aristom. As sure as now he Lives, had he spoke more [Aside.
Therefore be blessed the Stratagem that stopped him!

Anax. What means this, Phila; speak, Who is this Madman?

Phila. One by a Friend entrusted to my Care,
Sent from the Country here to find a Cure;
But hearing, as the Crowd passed by his Lodgings,
That Aristomenes would soon be Sentenced,
He broke his Ward, and fancied He must save him.
I have pursued him, 'till I Am faint with Crying,
And am confounded at his frantic Passion.
Oh! Royal Sir, forgive it --

Anax. We do, and pity him: remove him hence,
Then, to thy Mistress, my dear Daughter, Go
And say we now again shall soon see Sparta.

Phila. I shall, my Lord!
Now follow me, I Will lead ye to his Lodgings. [To the Guards.
[Exit Phila with the Guards bearing off Aristor.
Aristom. Whoever she be,
May Heaven reward her, if she means his Safety. [Aside.
Now I can meditate on my own Fortunes,
And slight the worst can reach me.

Anax. He Is deep in Thought, which may produce a Change.
Again I Will try him -- [To Clar.
Now, Aristomenes, that this wild Chance
Has given you time to think upon our Sentence,
Have you enough considered of it is Horror,
To bend your stubborn Will to our Demands?

Aristom. Yes, Anaxander, I have weighed it well:
That active Faculty, which we call Fancy,
Soon as you spoke, dragged me thus bound by Slaves
Through the thronged Streets, exciting several Passions;
The Barbarous Crowd shouted their clamorous Joy,
Because unpunished they might sport with Blood;
Old Men and Matrons, destined long for Death,
With envious Pleasure saw me forced before them
To tread that Path, in spite of vigorous Nature,
Whilst tender Virgins turned aside their Heads,
And dropped, in Silence, the soft Tears of Pity:
But, Oh! the Soldiers; from the Soldier's hands
Methoughts I saw their Swords neglected thrown,
When Fortune showed they could not save the Bravest
(If once she frowned) from such a Fate as mine.

Clar. He Will move the Crowd; urge him to speak directly.

Anax. All this is from the purpose; plainly tell
Whether you will meet our Mercy, or the Dungeon.

Aristom. My Train of Thoughts to that dark Cave had led me;
I stood reclined upon the horrid Brim,
And gazed into it, 'till my baffled Sight
Piercing beyond the many jetting Rocks
That help to break by turns the falling Body,
Was lost in Shades, where it must rest for-ever:
And ready now to be pushed rudely off,
This was my last, and best Reflection on it,
That there dwelt Peace, which is not to be found
In his dark Bosom, that has sold his Country.

Anax. Away with him to instant Trial of it:
See this obeyed, and plunge him headlong down;
There, he will have Time, if Life, for such fine Thoughts.
Away, and bring me word it is performed.
[Exeunt Anax. and Lords.
Aristomenes born off. Rabble and Sold. Away, away; the Dungeon, the Dungeon.
Peace and Prosperity to Lacedemon!
[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Room in the Palace. Aristor alone. Arist. I Have torn with Cries the Roof of
this vile Mansion,
And from that Window, barred too closely up
To give me leave to leap upon their Heads,
Have cursed the Crowd, and told'em whose I am:
At which they laugh, and cry it is Phila's Madman.
[He attempts but cannot force the Door. Confusion! that she dares confine me
thus!
Whilst my free Thoughts, unfollow'd by my Hand,
Must see that cursed Deed, they cannot prevent.
Oh! Aristomenes, my noble Father!
Hear me, ye Fates, and let me but Revenge him;
Give me Revenge; and now, methinks, I grasp it,
Broke through his Guards, I seize upon the Tyrant,
And stab him thus, and thus --
[He acts all this. Then bear him to the Ground, thus falling on him,
And to his Heart thus tearing my wide way.
Oh! OF, OF, OF, --
[Throws himself upon the Ground.
Enter Amalintha, the Door by one without immediately locked after her. Amal.
Where is this wretched Mourner?
Oh! let me find him, though to raise his Sorrows
With the sad Sound of my repeated Groans.
Ha! on the Ground! then be it too my Seat!
[Sits on the Ground by him. For I will share in this Excess of Grief,
As well as in the Days of milder Fortune,
I bore a part in Love, that knew no Measure.
O Aristomenes! oh! my Aristor!
[She puts her Handkerchief before her Eyes weeping.
Aristor. Whoever thou art, repeat again that Sound:
Such Groans shall hourly issue from his Dungeon,
And fright the bloody Spartans into Madness.
[He looks up. Ha! sure I should know that Form, that Shape, those Limbs,
That laboring Bosom, and those Locks disshevel'd:
But take not from thy Face that friendly Cloud;
Do not expose it, lest through all it is Charms
My deep Revenge find out whose Stamp it bears,
And urge me on to something Dark and Fatal.

Amal. This from Aristor! this to Amalintha!
[She rises and shows her Face.
Aristor. Why wou'd'st thou tempt me thus adventurous Maid,
And bring the Blood of Anaxander near me? [Coming up fiercely to her.
Can thou too sondly think, that Love's soft Bands,
His gentle Cords of Hyacinths and Roses,
Wovein the dewy Spring, when Storms are silent,
Can tie these Islands, provoked by horrid Murder!
Oh! do not trust it --
But fly this Ground, while I have Power to bid thee.

Amal. Aristor, no; my Flight shall not preserve me:
The Life, I Have kept but to indulge your Love,
Now to this loud, mistaken Rage I offer.
Take it, Oh! take it; Means cannot be wanting,
Although no Instrument of Death be near you:
This Hair, these slatter'd Locks, these once-lov'd Tresses
Round my sad Neck thus knit will soon perform it;
Or, on these trembling Lips your Hand but pressed
Will send the rising Breath down to my Heart,
And break it, telling who denied it Passage.

Aristor. Trial beyond the Strength of Man and Lover!

Amal. Or, if you would be quicker in Dispatch,
Speak but a few such Words, as now you uttered,
And my poor hovering Soul will fly before 'em.
Farewell Aristor, see! the Work is done:
I did but think I heard their killing Sound,
And the bare Fancy saves you farther Study.
[She faints, he catches her in his Arms.
Aristor. Oh! stop the glorious Fugitive a moment;
And I will whisper to it such Repentance,
Such Love, such Fondness, such unheard of Passion,
As shall confine it to it is beauteous Mansion.
Thus let me hug, and press thee into Life,
And lend thee Motion from my beating Heart,
To set again the Springs of thine in working.

Amal. I hear your Summons, and my Life returns:
But tell me, ere again so firm it is fixed
That it must cost an Agony like this,
To let it out to Liberty and Ease,
Will you not hate me for my Father's Guilt?

Aristor. By the soft Fires of Love, that fill my Breast,
And dart through all the Horrors of my Soul,
Like Heaven's bright Flashes in a Night of Shadows,
I will not hate, or ever reproach thee more:
Yet let me breathe so gently one Complaint,
So gently, that it may not break thy Peace,
Though it for ever has discarded mine,
And ask, why you thus cruelly would use me,
Why, have me seized, and bound with frantic Fetters,
Snatched from my Duty by a Woman's wile,
And here confined, whilst my great Father perished?

Amal. 'Twas none of mine, by your dear self I swear;
It was the Fates design and Phila's action:
She saw you thus disguised amongst the Crowd,
And, ere she would acquaint me with you Danger,
Followed to watch the means how to prevent it.

Aristor. I will believe you to my Heart's relief.
Which must have broke, had your Consent beer with her.
But, Amalintha, now my Rage is gone,
And Love through this mistake has forced his way,
It spreads before my Thoughts the gaudy Scene
Of those Delights, which have been once allowed it;
Brings to my Fancy in their softest Dress
The gentle Hours, that told our private Meetings;
Shows me the Grove, where, by the Moon's pale Light
We Have breathd out tender Sighs, 'till coming Day
Has drawn them deeper, warning us to part,
Which never we did, 'till some new Time was set
For the return of those transporting Pleasures.

Amal. And so again, Aristor, we'll contrive,
And so again, we'll meet, and sigh, and love.

Aristor. Oh! OF, OF, -- Amalintha!

Amal. Oh! why that Groan, that deep, that deathlike Groan!

Aristor. When Soul and Body part, it cannot be softer;
And I must leave thee, Soul to sad Aristor,
With all those Pleasures which I but repeated,
As Dying Friends will catch one last Embrace
Of what they know, they must forego forever.

Amal. Indeed, you have called my wandering Fancy back
From those Delights, where 'twou'd have endless strayed:
But, my Aristor! (for I Will call you mine,
Though all the Stars combine against my Title,
And bar fulfilling of the Vows they have witnessed)
Tell me, though we must never in Nuptials join,
May we not meet, and at this distance sigh?
And when I Have hoarded up a Stock of Tears,
Which in the Spartan's sight I dare not lavish,
Oh! tell me, if I may not seek you out,
And in large Showers thus pour them down before you?
[She weeps.
Arictor. Cease to oppress me more; thou weeping Beauty,
And think with what vast Storms my Soul is tossed!
[Comes up to hear earnestly. Think too, that but to gaze upon thee thus,
To stand in reach of thy Ambrosial Breath,
And hear thy Voice sweet as the Evening Notes,
When in still Shades the Shepherds sooth their Loves,
I would not mind an Army in my way,
Or stop at raging Seas, or brazen Towers.
Yet, Amalintha, though I Dye to speak it,
Yet, we must part, we must, my Amalintha!

Amal. Never to meet again? Tell me but that.

Aristor. Alas! not I, the Fates can only tell it:
Let them make even one Account betwixt us,
And give this Hand the Liberty to seal it.
And we'll in spite of vengeful Thunder join,
If then, thy Heart be as resolved as mine.

Amal. No: on those Terms you mean, we must not meet:
But since those Fates deny it to your Power,
The Will I to your mighty Wrongs forgive, [From without the Door.

Phila. Madam, you will be surpised; haste to return:
Your Father's now just going to your Lodgings.

Aristor. All Plagues and Curses meet him! [Aside.

Amal. Oh! then I must be gone.
A little time will call the State to Council;
And when the Crowd by that is thither drawn,
One I will send to wait on your Escape:
And if you tempt new Dangers, know Aristor
That Amalintha too will perish in them.

Aristor. Fear not, my Love.

Phila. Haste, Madam, haste, or we are all Undone. [From without.

Amal. So from his few short Moments calls away
A gasping Wretch, the cruel Bird of Prey;
Bids him make haste the Eternal Shades to find,
And leave like me, all that is Dear behind.

Aristor. Whilst, like the Friend that is sadly weeping by,
I see the much loved Spirit from me fly;
And with vain Cries pursue it to that Coast,
Where it must land, and my weak Hopes be lost.
[He leads her to the Door, and returns speaking as he is going out at the
Other. Now, let Revenge a while sustain my Heart,
And Fate yet close my Life with some exalted Part!
[Exit.
The Stage darkened represents the Inside of a Dungeon, Aristomenes lying down
in it, and struggling as coming out of a Swoon. Aristom. At last it is
vanquished; and my soaring Spirits
Dispel the gloomy Vapors, that oppressed them,
And clothed my Dreams with more than mortal Horror.
So low in my deep Fancy was I plunged,
That over my Head impetuous Rivers rushed,
And Mountains grew betwixt our World and me:
Hungry and Cold, methought I wandered on
Through fruitless Plains, that Food nor Comfort nourished,
'Till hideous Serpents twisted me about,
And drew me to their Den all foul and loathsome;
But I will quit the Bed, that breeds such Visions,
And summon all my Officers to Council;
For with tomorrow's Dawn we'll storm Phaerea.
[He walks about feeling for the Door. Ha! where is the Door, my Tent is sure
transformed,
And all I touch is Rock that streams with Dew.
Oh! that I Would slept, that I had slept for ever!
[He starts. Yes, Anaxander, yes! thou worst of Furies!
I know thy Dungeon now, and my dark Ruin:
Yet why, ye Fates, since fallen below your Succor,
Would ye thus cruelly restore my Senses,
To make me count my Woes by tedious Moments,
Dye over again, choked by unwholesome Damps,
Parched up with Thirst, or clung with pining Hunger,
Borne piecemeal to the Holes of lurking Adders,
Or mouldering to this Earth, where thus I cast me?
[Throws himself on the Ground. Music is heard without the SCENE, after it has
played awhile and ceases, He speaks. How, Harmony! nay then the Fiends deride
me:
For who, but they, can strike Earth's sounding Entrails,
Or with low Winds thus fill her tuneful Pores?
Oh! that some Words of horrid Sense would join it,
To tell me where I might conclude my Sorrows!

A Voice within Sings. 1st Voice. Fallen Wretch! make haste, and Dye!
To that last Asylum fly,
Where no anxious Drops of Care,
Where no sighing Sorrows are,
Friends or Fortune none deplore,
None are Rich, and none are Poor,
Nor can Fate oppress them more.
To this last Asylum sly,
Fallen Wretch! make haste and Dye!
[The Voice ceases.


Aristom. Thou counsell'st rightly; show me but the way,
And with the Speed thou urgest I Will obey thee.
[He rises.
The Voice Sings again. 1 st Voice. A pointed Rock with little pains
Will split the Circle of thy Brains.
To thy Freedom I persuade thee,
To a watery Pit will lead thee,
Which has no glorious Sunbeam seen,
No Footsteep known, or bord'ring Green,
For thousand rolling Ages past.
Fallen Wretch! to this make haste,
To this last Asylum fly.
Fallen Wretch! make haste and Dye!



Aristom. I come, thou kind Provoker of Despair,
Which still is nearest Cure, when at the Highest.
I come, I come --

Going toward the Voice, another Sings at the other side, upon which He stops
and listens. 2d Voice. Stay, oh! stay; it is all Delusion,
And would breed thee more Confusion.
I, thy better Genius, move thee,
I, that guard, and I, that love thee;
I, who in thy rocky way,
Clothed in Eagles Feathers lay,
And in safety brought thee down,
Where none living ever was known.
Cheerful Hope I bring thee now,
Cheerful Hope the Gods allow.
Mortal, on their Pleasures wait,
Nor rush into the Arms of Fate.
[The Voice ceases.


Aristom. To hope, is still the Temper of the Brave:
And though a just Despair had dispossessed it,
Yet, thus encouraged, will I trust the Gods
With those few Moments, Nature has to spare me;
Nor follow thee, thou bad persuading Spirit.
Yet tell me, who thou art, and why thou tempt'st me?

1st Voice. I thy evil Genius am,
To Phaerea with thee came;
Hung over thee in the murdering Crowd,
And clapped my dusky Wings aloud;
Now endeavored to deceive thee,
And will never, never, leave thee.

2d Voice. I Will protect him from thy Power.

1st Voice. I shall find a careless Hour.

2d Voice. Laurels He again shall wear,
War and Honor's Trumpet hear.

1st Voice. For one fatal, famous Day,
He his dearest Blood shall pay.
Hear it ye repeating Stones,
And confirm it by your Groans!
[A dismal Groan is heard round the Dungeon.


Aristom. What all this Bellowing for a Conqueror's Death!
The Field of Honor is his Bed of Ease;
He toils for it all the Day of his hard Life,
And lays him there at Night, renowned and happy:
Therefore this Threat was vain malicious Fury.

1st Voice. Now away, away I fly;
For hated Good is rushing by.
[Here the Voice ceases quite.


A Machine, like a Fox, runs about the Dungeon smelling, and rushes against
Aristomenes, who taking it for his evil Genius, catches at it, and speaks.
Aristom. What! have thou Substance too, and dare assault me!
Nay then, thou shall not 'scape; I Will seize and grapple with thee,
And by my conquering Arm overcome thy Influence.
Fool that I was! to think, it could be vanquished,
This is some rav'ning Beast; the Fur betrays it.
A Fox, I think, teach me to be as subtle,
Extremity, thou Mother of Invention!
[He catches it. I have it now; and where it leads, will follow.
My better Genius does this Hour preside:
Be strong that Influence, and thou my Guide.
[Exit. led out by the Fox
The SCENE changes to the Plains by the Woodside Enter from the Wood Herminia
alone and faint. Herm. Here 'twas she left me; but so far I Have strayed,
Unheeding every thing, but my sad Thoughts,
That my faint Limbs no longer can support me.
Oh! let me rest; and if it is Death I feel,
A Guest more welcome none yet entertained.
[She sits down, leaning against a Tree.
Enter Climander looking toward the Camp, as expecting the return of Arcasius.
Clim. He has exceeded much the time prefixed;
And yet, I would not doubt him:
I Have climbed the Hill, better to view the Camp;
And all are fixed, and motionless as Death.
Therefore a while I will command my Patience:
He cannot now be long --
[He turns and sees Herm. and gazes earnestly on her. -- Ha! Who lies there?
A lovely Shepherdess; but faint she seems.
Say, beauteous Maid, if so much Strength is left,
How best a Stranger, may assist, or serve you!
[He kneels down by her. She does not speak; but looks into my Heart,
And melts it to the softness of her Eyes.
Hard by, a Spring clear as the Tears she drops,
Runs bubbling under a delicious Shade:
Water, thence fetched in a Pomegranate's rind,
May call her fainting Spirits to their office.
[He goes out.
Herm. He Is gone, but quickly will return again;
Yet he is so gentle sure I need not fear him:
Though at his first approach my Heart beat high,
Till Halcyon sounds, and words of Pity calmed it;
Nay, something courtly in them was implied:
And if the Swains are polished, all like him,
Their humble Sheds may scorn our ruder Greatness.

Enter again Climander with Water in a Pomgranate-Shell. Clim. Pan! if thou
ever did hear a Shepherd's Prayer,
Endue this Water, sacred to thy Name,
With all the Virtues, needful to restore her.
[She drinks.
Herm. Your Prayer is heard; kind Shepherd take my Thanks,
And He, whom you invoked, reward you largely!

Clim. Oh! You may far outdo all He can grant,
In but declaring where you feed your Flocks,
And to what Shade, when Phoebus hottest shines,
You lead those happy Sheep, to 'scape his Fury;
That I, exposing mine to the wide Plains,
May seek you out, and sigh till Night before you.

Herm. Alas! I have no Flocks, or Skill to guide them;
No leafy Hamlet, strewn with painted Flowers;
Or mossy Pillow, to repose my Head:
But wander from a distant, fatal Place,
Where I have lost my Parents, and my Succor,
And now, in such a Habit as becomes it,
Seek the low Plains, to learn the Art you practice.

Clim. She may be Noble then; and for her Form,
It Is sure the fairest that my Eyes ever fixed on. [Aside.
Who were your Parents, gentle Maid, declare?

Herm. They were not mean, and yet I must conceal them:
My Mother early Died; but Fame has told me,
She Would all Perfections, which make other Proud,
Yet wore them, as she knew not they adorned her.
And be, in this, my Father's Praise expressed:
That by an Oracle He was confessed
Of all the Race of Men to be the Best.

Clim. The Best of Men! and you the Fairest Woman!
And in a Moment I the greatest Lover!
[He speaks this transportedly and seizes her Hand, which he kisses. Whilst to
complete my Bliss, by Heavens decree
These Beauties all are mine, and thus I claim them.

Herm. Protect me all ye Powers, that wait on Virtue,
From the dark Ends of such unruly Transports!
[She takes her Hand away hastily and rises. Nor dare, presumptuous Swain, once
to renew them,
Or tempt more Dangers than a Crook can answer!

Clim. A Man there lives not, should have urged that to me,
Built round with Steel, or plunged all over in Styx.
Then, let your Beauty's Triumphs be complete,
Which, after such a Threat, can bend my Knee,
And make me sue for Pardon, as for Life.

Herm. I can forgive, whilst I forbid such Language;
Since She, who yields to have her Beauty worshipped,
Must pay too much to him, that brings the Incense.

Clim. To Me you cannot, it is a Debt to Fate.
Your Heart is mine; the amorous Stars ordain it,
Which smiling, hung over my auspicious Birth,
And not an angry Planet crossed their Influence:
They bid me Love, and the Harmonious God
When asked, what Path should lead me on to Glory,
Sent forth a Sound, that charmed the hoary Priest,
And said, a Passion, soft as that, must bless me.
Then, do not strive to disappoint their Purpose,
Or quench Celestial Flames with Scorn or Coldness.
Oh! that a Smile might tell me, that you would not,
A gentle Word, a Look, a Sigh confirm it,
Or any sign, that bears the stamp of Love!
But it is in vain, and some more happy Youth
Has drawn my Lot, and mocked foretelling Phabus.

Herm. I must not leave you with a Thought that wrongs me:
For know, no Passion ever possessed this Breast,
Nor will the mighty Griefs, that now have seized it,
Ever yield to give a softer Guest admittance.
But my Companion comes; Shepherd farewell!
When next we meet, if Heaven that Moment sends,
For your Assistance lent, we may be Friends.

Clim. Heaven cannot be true, if it no more affords,
Nor Oracles explain themselves by Words.
Let talking Age the Joys of Friendship prove,
Beauty for Youth was made, and Youth alone for Love.
[Exeunt severally.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A Myrtle-Grove with a Fountain belonging to Anaxander's Palace. Enter
Amalintha and Phila. Amal. WHY had not I a barbarous Spartan Soul,
Unapt for Love, and harsh, as our rude Customs!
Or why, ye cruel Fates! did you deny
My Birth to be among the neighboring Swains,
Where, on the flowery Banks of smooth Panisus
I might have fat, and heard the gentle Vows
Of some protesting Shepherd, uncontrolled!

Phila. 'Twas on those fatal Plains, I well remember,
That first your Eyes encountered with Aristor's.

Amal. Yes, in a Chase we met, when Truce allowed it,
Where the young Prince, whom I too much had marked
Through all the graceful Toils of that blessed Day,
Redeemed my Life, with Hazard of his own,
From the chafed Boar, that now had almost seized me.

Phila. When I arrived the first of all your Train,
I heard you thank him for the generous Rescue.

Amal. I did; yes Phila, with my Heart I thanked him,
And paid it down a Ransom for my Life:
Since when, how often in this Place we have met,
And with what Pleasure, thou alone can tell,
The only Friend, and witness of our Passion.
But, prithee go, and keep off all Intruders,
[Exit Phila. Whilst with my Sorrows now I tread this Grove,
Which should not thrive, when all our Hopes are blasted.
[She walks into the Grove.
From the other Door, the Fox runs over the Stage, followed soon after by
Aristomenes, his Hands foul with Earth. Aristom. Farewell my wild Companion,
and my Leader! [Pointing to the Fox.
Henceforth thy figure, in my Ensigns borne,
Shall tell the World (if ever I 'scape these Walls)
That 'twas thy Conduct drew me from my Bondage.
How fair this Grove appears to my loathed Dungeon!
[He sees the Fountain. Oh! welcome to my Sight, thou gentle Spring!
Never did thou cool a Thirst, that raged like mine:
I bow my Knees upon thy mossy Brim,
[He kneels and lays his Mouth to the Stream. And, as they drank, ere Art had
worsted Nature,
Draw thy refreshing Stream to my scorched Entrails.
[Drinks agen^ Again, O Nectar, most delicious!
This favor more, and then I quit thy Borders.
[Washes the Earth off his Hands, and rises.
Re-enter Amalintha. Amal. Oh! it is all dismal, now that Love is absent,
Faded the Flowers, and withering every Branch:
Whilst through the Leaves the sad, and sighing Winds,
Methinks, all say, the Hours of Bliss are past;
And here, we never shall meet each other more.
[ Aristom. comes toward her. Ha! what Intruder do my Eyes behold?
A Stranger, and invade my private Walks,
The Doors too all secured! Tell how you came.

Aristom. As comes the Mole, by painful working upwards,
Will the sweet Air beat on my clammy Brows.

Amal. There Is something mystical in what you utter;
Which (though offended with your Presence here)
^wou'd be glad farther to have Unriddl'd.
[Draws her Dagger. This be my Guard; and now you may proceed,
And, if you dare, discover who you are.

Aristom. I Would not deny my Name, to 'scape that Dungeon, [Pointing behind the
Scenes.
^om whence these Hands have dug my way to Light.
It Is Aristomenes that stands before you.

Amal. O blessed and strange Surprise! [Aside.

Aristom. Now, if you have a Soul for noble Deeds,
(...) it is reported of you Spartan Ladies,
(...) my Escape your Fame shall rise so high,
that never an ancient Heroes shall outsoar it:
^f not, I know the Place from whence I came,
^d 'twill be told with more uncommon Things,
which shall make up the Story of my Fortunes,
that I alone lived to be there twice Buried.
[She looks about. Nay, look not round; for if you fear you wrong me,
I would not injure you, to gain my Safety.

Amal. Nor would I fail to help you to secure it,
For all that Lacedemon holds most Precious.
I gazed about, lest any were in sight,
That might prevent my dear Design to save you.
Support me, as I walk, like one that served me,
And when they have unlocked that Postern-door,
I Will give you some Command before the Guard,
Which to perform they shall admit your Passage.
Or this must force it, if your evil Stars
[Gives him her Dagger. Have placed such there, as know and would detain you.

Aristom. As long as Life, I Will proudly wear this Favor.

Amal. Oh! haste, my Lord, lose not this precious moment.

Aristom. No, stay; and ere I take one step toward Freedom,
Let me be told, to whose blessed Aid I owe it;
And how I may discharge so vast a Debt:
Though I, and all that is dear to me should perish,
I would not stir, 'till satisfied in this.

Amal. Know then, my Lord --
Though whilst I speak, I tremble for your Danger,
That to declare my Name, might work my Ruin:
But since such Gratitude crowns your great Virtues,
I have a Blessing to implore from you,
When the full Time shall ripen and reveal it;
Harder, I fear, to grant, and much more dear
Than what I now assist you to preserve.

Aristom. By Liberty, which none like me can value,
By new-recovered Light, and what it shows me,
Your brighter Form, with yet a fairer Mind,
By all the ties of Honor, here I swear;
Be that untouched, and your Request is granted.

Amal. Of you, my Lord, and of the listening Gods
I ask no more -- but, that you haste to 'scape:
Without that Camp the open Champain lies.
May Fortune, which the hardest Part has done,
Crown her great Work, and lead you safely on!
[Exit Aristom, leading her.
Enter Phila weeping. Phila. What shall I say, or how reveal this to her?
Is It not enough, ye Gods, we bear our own,
That thus you suffer the vain trifler Love
To bring the Griefs of others too upon us!

Amalintha returns. Amal. Oh! Phila, I such Tidings have to tell thee,
But thou have chilled them in a Moments space
With that cold dew that trickles from thine Eyes.
Is not Aristor safe? --
Thou say he is not, in that weeping silence:
But lives he yet? if this thou do not answer,
My Death shall free thee from all farther Questions.

Phila. Yet he does live:
But oh! that some free Tongue, that loved you less,
Could tell how little time that Life must last
To you so precious, and I fear so fatal!

Amal. Go on; and if thou kill'st me with the Story,
Believe thou'st crowned the Kindness of thy Life,
By giving endless Rest to her that wants it.

Phila. I cannot speak -- [Weeping.

Amal. Then one, that can, I instantly must seek for. [Going out.

Phila. Public Enquiry pulls his Ruin on her.
Stay, Madam, stay, and since it must be told,
Know that Aristor, soon as free to do it,
Again into your Father's presence rushed,
And makes a new attempt upon his Person,
But missed his Blow, was seized, and in Confinement
Now waits but the assembling of the Council,
Thoroughly to be examined, and discovered.

Amal. Darkness, and Night surround me.
With this Relief to my sad Bed I go,
[Siezes Phila's Dagger. There wrapped in horrid Shades will lay me down,
And, when thou come charged with the heavy News,
Beware, no tedious Circumstance deta in,
No fruitless Prayer, or word of Comfort 'scape thee;
But with a Voice, such as the Dying use,
Bid me expire --
-- Then to my Father go,
And say, he killed his Daughter in his Foe;
Who knowing, she his Temper could not move,
The excess of Hate paid with the excess of Love.
[Exit weeping and leaning on Philas
The SCENE changes to the Plains. Enter Climander. Clim. All Patience this
would tire --
I will not wait the Trifler's slow return,
But go my self (though thus unarmed) amongst them.
[He is going and meets Arcasius. Art thou at length come back!
If 'twou'd not waste more time to blame thy stay,
Old loit'ring Man! I should reprove thee for it.

Arcas. 'Twas vain to move, 'till I had seen the utmost,

Clim. The utmost! What was that, will they not Fight?
Not Dye for such a General!

Arcas. My Lord, they will not --
Though brave Alcander tries to urge their Fury,
And wastes his own, to put new Life into them:
Sometimes he weeps, and throws his Helmet from him,
Kneels to his Troops, and wooes them to Compassion,
Which draws a general sympathizing Shower,
And makes him think, he has obtained his Purpose:
Then on his fiery Steed in haste he leaps,
And cries, Come on; but not an Ensign waves,
Or any Motion seconds the Design:
The Meaner sort cry out aloud for Pay,
And mutiny to be discharged the Service.

Clim. Base, mercenary Slaves! Yet these I Will use:
The Gold and Jewels which my Father gave,
Will fire their Souls, insensible of Duty;
And by it is aid, I Will gain what most I thirst for.
A King his Claim but to one Kingdom lays,
Wide as the Universe is boundless Praise.
This shining Mass shall buy a glorious Name,
They purchase all the World, who purchase Fame.
[He is going.
Arcas. Since you're determined to attempt these Dangers,
Let me declare the Time to be expired,
Which bound you in your Promise to your Father:
By Artifice I wrought you to believe
Those Days remained, which are indeed run out.
Your Soul may now be free, and Heaven protect you!

Clim. For this discov'ry I Will return another
Worthy thy knowledge, when we meet again:
But now make haste, and from its deep concealment,
In the low Earth, fetch me the Wealth I mentioned.
About these Woods thy quick Return shall find me.
[Exeunt.
Enter Herminia and Barina. Bar. See we are come to soon; I said 'twou'd prove
so.

Herm. It is no matter, long we shall not wait.
[ Bar. looks out for the Shepherds. I dare not tell her, that I like this
Shepherd,
Nor yet indeed scarce own it to my self.
It Is strange, my Mind should sink thus with my Fortunes;
Yet he did talk above their humble strain,
And, as he knew that Nature had supplied
What Fortune had denied him for Attraction,
Claimed my weak Heart, and said he must possess it.

Bar. Sure, they have put off this melancholy Meeting
Designed in Honor of their lost Protector,
In which our share (though secret) must be greatest.
I see none move, nor hear their mournful Notes.

Herm. Be not impatient: Where can we be better?
Have I not heard thee say sometimes, Barina,
That in a Dream, formed by the Day's discourse
Of the sweet Life, that here they led in safety,
My Mother saw me wed one of these Swains,
And smiled, though I had made a Choice below me?

Bar. She did; and therefore never would consent
That you, like others, should behold their Revels:
Nor have I, since her Death left you my Charge,
Allowed it, till worse Dangers forced us hither;
Though of my self, I never observe such Trifles,

Herm. Do You call those nightly Visions then but Trifles?

Bar. No doubt our Dreams are so; the work of Fancy,
Where things of Yesterday are odly piec'd
With what had passed some twenty Years before,
Knit in a weak and disproportioned Chain,
Which cannot hold to lead us to the Future.
Whatever I Have said, I wish this had no meaning, [Aside.
And that some other Place could give us shelter.

Herm. We'll walk a while --
Great Aristomenes, now could I meet thee!
But that is a Blessing which I must not know, [Aside.
'Till where thine is, my Spirit too shall go.
Oh! that my Grief would force it to retire,
And Tears for him quench this new-kindl'd Fire!
[They go off the Stage.
Enter at the other Door Climander. Clim. Either my Eyes, indulgent to my Love,
Deceive my Hopes; or now, within their reach
That unknown Beauty moves, which lately charmed them.
It Is she! and with the speed that suits my Passion,
I will overtake, and farther urge it to her.
[Exit.
Re-enter Herminia. Herm. She fears my Fate, and fain would have me go,
Before the assembling Shepherds are arrived;
And having met one that can give her tidings,
Is busy to enquire about their coming.
Untimely Caution! --
-- It Is too late to move,
When once o'ertaken by the wings of Love.

Enter Climander behind her. Clim. From those fair Lips no sooner fell that
word,
But all the neighboring Echoes caught the Sound,
And sent it doubled to Climander's Bosom:
The amorous Streams have borne it down their Banks,
And the glad Plains breathe nothing, since, but Love.
Oh! speak it once again, and the fond Vine
Shall with a stricter grasp embrance the Elm,
Whilst joyful Birds shall hail it from the Branches.

Herm. No; I have spoke too much --
Since on these Plains no syllable is secret,
Hereafter my close Thoughts shall be confined,
And in this Breast locked up from all Men's Knowledge.

Clim. Oh! not if Love be there; it cannot be:
Silence can never last long, nor yet conceal it,
A thousand ways 'twill speak without a Voice,
And, whilst it struggles to obtain that Freedom,
Betraying Sighs will 'scape, and more declare it;
'T will speak in listening to the Lover's Tale,
And say, it is Sympathy that makes it pleasant.

Herm. He shakes my Soul, whilst thus he does describe it:
For all he speaks I feel, and he must find. [Aside.
Oh! yet, let me reflect upon my Birth,
And quit, in time, the Ground I cannot maintain!
[She's going.
Clim. Nay, do not fly me, and I will be Speechless:
For if I speak, whilst on your Eyes I gaze,
It must be all of Love, and that offends you;
Yet since, perhaps, I never may meet you more,
I would have told the Story of my Heart,
And ever it breaks, have moved you to Compassion

Herm. Meet him no more! then, what can Crowns afford me,
Amidst the noisie Pomp, that waits their Luster?
Still should I vainly listen for the Sound [Aside.
Of such soft Words which charm my Sorrows from me.
Oh! that our Births were equal, as our Thoughts!
Yet I will pity him, and Fate be guilty.
[She stops and turns toward him.
Clim. Blessed be the Thought, that thus retards your steps,
And turns again those gentle Lights upon me!
If Pity 'twas; Oh! yet indulge that warmth,
And Love'twill soon produce, to meet my Wishes.
[She looks kindly on him. It Is done, it is done! be witness ye still Skies,
That all her Looks are calm, and smooth as yours,
And not one Frown forbids my forward Hopes:
Let this fair Hand be added to confirm them,
And case the mighty longings of my Passion.
[Kneels and kisses her Hand
Herm. Take, freely take this first and last of Favors.
Now, Shepherd rise, and hear what I Have to say;
And if a Sigh mix with the fatal Sentence,
Believe, it is from the Grief, with which I give it.
You must not love me --
[She sighs.
Clim. I must not love you, though you Sigh to speak it!
Should Pan pronounce it, in a Voice so loud
'Twou'd rive the knotty Oaks, that shade his Altars,
I would to Syrinxes oppose your Beauties,
And ask the Gods, whose Loves had best Foundation?

Herm. Those Gods, who made our Births so disproportioned,
Would say, they never designed our Hands should join.
But see! the Swains are gathering toward this Place:
Yet, Shepherd, know, that if a Prince would Love,
It Is in your Form he must successful prove.

Enter Arcasius with a Casket. Clim. Then in this happy Form, since you approve
it,
Behold --
[She interrupts him.
Herm. No more! as you would keep th'Esteem I Have shown you.
[Exit.
Clim. Another time must tell this Secret to her.
The Ambition of her Mind charms like her Person, [Aside.
Nor can the Blood, that bleeds such Thoughts be abject.
But welcome good Arcasius with that Bait,
Which shall be soon dispersed among the Soldiers:
And if it win them to my great Design,
It Is worth the Kingdoms which its Price might ransom.
[Exeunt with the Casket followed by Arcasius.
Enter Theata and Lamia. Lamia. The Dews are falling, and the Sun declined,
Whilst from this neighboring Grove are heard the Notes
Of that sweet Bird, that warbles to the Night,
Now telling us her Shadows are approaching:
And yet the tardy Shepherds are not come.

Theata. When all our Hours were gay, it was not thus:
But who can haste to break his cheerful Pipe,
Tear the sweet Garland, made by her he sighs for,
And sing of Death, when Love is all his Passion?

Lamia. Now thou do talk of Love, yet ere we part,
Or fall into our melancholy Strains,
Lend to that Echo, greedy of thy Voice,
Some moving Words, upon so soft a subject.

Theata. Rather that Song I Would choose, which does prefer
To all things else the Joys of these sweet Plains;
Since, now perhaps, we must too soon forsake them.

Lamia. A better cannot be chose; haste to perform it,
Lest the sad Ceremony break our purpose.

The SONG.
(1.)
She Sings. A young Shepherd his Life
In soft Pleasure still leads,
Tunes his Voice to his Reed,
And makes Love in the Shades.
To be Great, to be Wise,
To be Rich, to be Proud,
To be loaded with Business
Or lost in a Crowd,
He never seeks, or desires:
Let but Silvia be won,
He is Great, he is Rich,
And his Business is done.
(2.)
Whilst their Nymphs are as happy,
As Happy as Fair;
For who has most Beauty,
Has of Lovers most share.
Some will stay, some will sly,
Some be false, some be true:
For the Lost we never grieve,
But still cherish the New.
[Shouts. It Is vain of their Frailties,
Or Falsehoods to mind 'em:
Mankind we must take,
We must take, as we find 'em.



Theala. What Shouts are these!
[Shouts.
Lamia. They Are loud, and speak some Joy; and still repeated.

Enter Herminia and Barina. Lamia. Fair Stranger, know you whence these Shouts
proceed?

Herm. I do not; but these coming, sure, can tell us.

Enter with great Signs of Joy Clinias with other Shepherds and Shepherdesses,
etc. Clim. Swell, swell, Panisus, over thy spacious Bounds,
Flow like our Joy, and cheer the Meads about thee.
Pan, take in thankful Sacrifice; our Flocks,
And every rural Swain proclaim his Praises!

Lamia. Such Sounds, as these, meet with a general welcome:
But yet, the Cause we wish to hear explained.
Good Clinias, tell the Cause --

Clin. He is returned, and stands, like Fate, amongst 'em,
The Plain's Protector, and the Army's Genius,
The Virgin's Refuge, when the Town's in Flames,
And Shield to those whom Fortune makes his Vassals.

Herm. It Is Aristomenes thou have described:
No other ever could fill a Praise like this.

Clin. It Is He indeed, next to the Gods, our Succor.

Herm. Transporting News! how did the Army meet him?

Clin. Just as a long stopped Current meets the Sea,
And rushes on, when once 't has forced a Passage.

2d Shep. Heaven has their Plumes; for high as that they toss 'em:
And not a dusty Soldier in the Host,
That has not hugged him to his swarthy Bosom.

Clin. No Voice is what it was an Hour ago;
And their hoarse Joy sounds like their distant Drums:
His Hands, as if the Cretan Thongs still held them,
Are useless made, and fettered now with Kisses;
Whilst neighing Steeds think that the War surrounds them,
And prance in Air light as their Master's Minds.

2d Shep. How he escaped, all ask in such Confusion,
That their loud Questions drive his Answers back,
And will not let them reach the nearest to him.

Herm. It is enough, ye Powers that guard Messenia!
We now must change our Habits, and return. [Aside to Bar.
What did I say, return! O yes! I must,
And never hope to see Climander more: [To herself.
Yet will I give my Heart this last Relief
(Since Fate will have it bear the unequal Passion)
To let him know my Love, and endless Flight,
And live on the dear Thought that he laments it.
[Exit with Bar.
Lam. Where is Aristor? Is he too returned?

Clin. That question did the General ask aloud;
And 'twas the only one that could be heard:
But no reply was made; I think he is not.

Theata. Then we are but half restored --
For he so heavily will take that Loss,
Our Joys will not be long, nor he amongst us.

La^. (...) not the worst --

2d Shep. I met a rumor of a stranger Prince,
That with large Sums new fired the trembling Host,
And from the Camp had led on some Design
A Party, that for Wealth would risque their Lives,
Though cold and dull to Thoughts of generous Duty.

Clin. It Is true; of Rhodes they say,
And some I heard that called him Demagetus.
Thick flew his Gold, as swarms of Summer-Bees,
And 'twas to succor or revenge the General.
He asked their Aid --
But whither he has led them, none can tell.
Ere Aristomes returned, he went
And is not heard of since.

2d Shep. The Gen'ral's safe, and that is enough for us:
Now therefore Clinias, you that guide our Sports,
Tell us what we are to do to show our Joy.

Clin. To Laugh, to Sing, to Dance, to Play,
To rise with new appearing Day;
And ere the Sun has kissed 'em dry,
With various Rubans Nosegays tie.
Decked with Flowers, and clothed in Green,
Every Shepherdess be seen:
Every Swain with Heart and Voice
Meet him, meet him, and rejoice:
With redoubled Paeans sing him,
To the Plains, in Triumph bring him:
And let Pan and Mars agree,
That none's so kind and brave as He.

[Exeunt.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
The General's Pavilion. Enter Dressed in the Habit of an Officer Demagetus with
Arcasius. Dema. SH' has left the Plains, and is not to be found.
How cou'd'st thou bring this cruel Story to me,
Ere thou had searched Messenia's utmost Bound,
And traveled over the spacious World of Shepherds?
She must be yet amongst their Shades concealed;
And through them will I pierce, like prying Phoebus,
To find my Love, or lose myself for ever.

Arca. You will not hear (so much your Passion sways)
The Reasons, why I chose to see you first,
Ere I proceeded to pursue her Paths.

Dema. There spoke the sixty Winters, that have froze thee,
And turned swift eager Love to Icy Reasons.
I must be Cold as thou art, if I hear thee,
Or lose one moment more in doting Questions.
[He's going.
Arca. Behold these Tokens, and let them retard you.

Dema. Tokens of Love, sent to the fond Climander.
Oh! thou have found a way indeed to stay me.

Arca. Take that, to you directed; [A Letter.
And 'twas my Hopes from thence of some Discovery,
That kept me here 'till you had broke and read it.

Dema. Then thou shall hear it.
[Reads the Direction. This to Climander from the Nymph that leaves him
To everlasting Grief, should have been added:
For so 'twill prove, if no more Comfort's here.
[He reads it. To love, yet from the Object fly,
Harder is, than it is to Dye:
Yet, for ever I remove,
Yet, for ever will I love.
Shepherd, seek no more to find;
Fate, not I, has been Unkind.
We pluck on Fate, by striving to avoid it.
To shun the low Addresses of a Swain,
For ever has she left a Prince despairing.
Why did thou not, as I at parting bid thee,
Find out, and let her know my fair Intentions,
And that my Birth was Noble as her Wishes?

Arca. I was not negligent, nor would be thought so:
But full of Transports when I heard your Story,
Thinking the Fates would now fulfill their Promise
Through her the Daughter to the best of Men,
Fled to discover what you gave in Charge,
Traversed the Plains in a long fruitless Search,
But could not find that Beauty born to Bless us.

Dema. I showed thee, as we passed, her new raised Hamlet.

Arca. Thither at last I went, but Oh! too late:
For ere I reached it, the fair Guest was vanished;
Upon the Floor lay her neglected Hook,
And over the Door hung Boughs of fading Willow,
To show, as Shepherds use, the Place forsaken.
That Paper there I found, and near it lay
This precious Gemm, that bears a well-cut Signet,
[Shews him a Ring. By chance sure dropped, yet may assist your Purpose.

Dema. Give me that Emblem of my fatal Passion:
For without End is that, as is this Circle.
Oh! that my way to Bliss should seem so plain,
Yet in a moment thus be lost and wilder'd!
Now in the midst of Crowds and loud Applauses,
That greet me for restoring them Aristor,
Must wretched Demagetus sigh for Love,
And hang his drooping Head, though wreathed with Laurels.
[A sound of Drums and Trumpets. But hark! the General comes --
To him the Oracle I have revealed,
And all the Story of my rural Life.
I Will tell him too the Cause of my new Grief,
Which to relieve, I instantly must leave him.

A FLOURISH. Enter Aristomenes, Aristor, Alcander, and other Attendants.
Aristom. Why, Demagetus, art thou from my Sight,
From these fond Arms, that ever thus would hold thee! [Embracing him.
Thou kind Restorer of my loved Aristor.
Come to the Camp, and hear them shout thy Name,
Whilst I declare thee equal in Command
With him, who owes his Life to thy young Valor.

Dema. Alas! my Lord --

Aristom. A Soldier sigh, when courting Fame attends him!
I know you Love, by your own kind Confession:
But that too must succeed, since now your Birth
Is known to answer all the great Desires,
Which, to my Wonder, did possess the Breast
Of that fair rural Maid, whose Beauty charmed you.
We'll send, and with the Pomp that suits a Princess,
(Since such your generous Passion means to make her)
Have her conducted to a rich Pavilion,
And join your Hands, as Heaven has joined your Hearts.
This, my Aristor, be your pleasing Task.

Enter an Attendant to Aristomenes. Attend. The Princess is without, and waits
your Pleasure.

Aristom. Conduct her in --
I sent for her, to see the generous Stranger. [To Alcander.

Enter behind the Company Herminia and Barina. Aristor. My Lord, what you
command, I take in charge. [To Aristomenes.
Tell me, my best of Friends, the way to serve you. [To Demagetus.

Dema. I know it not my self, and that is the Torture.
Hear me, my Lord, nor think my Sorrows light: [To Aristomenes.
For Love, the only Comfort of fond Youth,
Is lost for ever to the poor Climander.

Herm. Climander -- [To Barina.
That Name and Voice bears down my fainting Spirits.
I shall be known, yet have not Strength to fly:
Where will this end, and where is Herminia's Honor! [To herself.

Aristom. So sad a Pause still keeps us in Suspense:
Proceed, and if there is help on Earth, we'll find it.

Dema. At my return, made joyful by Success,
With hasty Steps, and in my Heart soft Wishes,
Love, and a thousand flattering Expectations,
I sled the clamorous Praise prepared to meet me,
And sought the Path that led to my Desires:
But ere I was advanced beyond the Camp,
The Voice of this Old Man
Crossed my sad way, and cried, She Is gone for ever.

Aristom. Perhaps it is some Mistake,
If other Proofs are wanting to confirm it.

Dema. Oh! far too many for Climander's Peace.
She owned her Love, and with this Signet bound it,
And in the Folds of this dear Paper left
At once the Tokens of my Joy and Ruin.
[Gives the Letter and Ring to Aristomenes.
Herm. The Character and Signet will betray me;
And now Necessity must make me Bold. [Aside.
Oh! yet, ere you proceed to view that Paper,
[She throws her self at Aristomenes Feet. (Wrapped in Confusion) hear your
Daughter speak, [As he is opening the Letter.
And pity in her Fate all Women's Frailty.

Aristom. Ha! Thou do much surprise me; but go on,
And, 'till she has finished, let no Word be uttered.

Dema. By all my fleeting Sorrows it is my Love:
Nor could I, but to hear her speak, be Silent. [Aside.

Aristom. Proceed, and 'bate those Tears, that stay thy Speech.

Herm. That I have stooped below the Blood you gave me,
And cast my doting Love upon that Shepherd,
(For such he is, although a Plume adorns him)
My wretched Hand, and now my Tongue confesses:
For by that Paper, indiscreetly penned,
The Secret would be told, should I conceal it.
But Oh! my Lord, since you can never forgive me;
A sad Recluse for ever let me live,
Or Dye for Love, to do my Birth more Justice.

Aristom. Be comforted, and farther yet unfold
How first you came acquainted with this Shepherd.

Herm. To 'scape the Fury of prevailing Foes,
Disguised, I in your absence sought the Plains,
And in that Habit heard the powerful Sighs
Of one that knew not then his own Presumption.

Aristom. Were he a Prince, and still would urge his Suit
Wou'd'st thou receive 't, and bless the Powers that sent him?

Herm. I should not hide my Thoughts, or blush to own them.
Yes, I could bless those Powers which now undo me.
[ Demagetus comes forward.
Demag. I cannot wait these Forms; Love plead my Pardon,
When, Sir, I disobey your ordered Silence,
And haste to tell her it is a Prince adores her,
That would have sought her on the lowly Plains,
And for her Favor quitted all Dominion.

Aristom. Then take her, thou most worthy Prince of Rhodes! [Giving her to him.
And know, Herminia, to increase thy Passion,
Thou hold'st that noble Hand, that saved thy Brother,
And give thy Father, in this new Alliance,
More Joy, than when he first received and blessed thee.

Dema. Let all the Joys of Earth give place to mine,
Whilst in deep, silent Raptures I possess them: [Taking her from Aristomenes.
For Demagetus is above Discourse,
And will not wrong his Love with faint Expressions.

Herm. So let mine flow, and O Barina, see
I smiling give my Hand now to a Shepherd,
Yet fear not to offend my Mother's Ghost.

Bar. No; that smiles too, and all that love and serve you.

Arca. The Fate of Rhodes is clear and cheerful now;
And old Arcasius has outlived his Cares.

Aristor. Now as a Brother, take this new Embrace; [To Demagetus.
Though all the Love, it shows, you had before.

Aristom. Conduct her, Demagetus, to her Tent:
I Will soon be there, and see those Rites performed,
That shall confirm her Yours; be Kind and Happy.
[Exeunt Herminia and Demagetus leading her followed by Arcasius, Barina and
others. Aristor is going too but is called back by his Father. Come back
Aristor, and the rest withdraw:
For something I would say to you in private.
[The Attendants go off. Free from the Crowd, and unobserved my Transports,
I would embrace, and welcome thee to Life,
And with a loud repeated Blessing pay
The pious Care, that brought it to such Dangers.
Oh! that the Love of Women should be thought
To pass the Fondness which a Father feels,
When thus he grasps a Son of thy Perfections, [Embracing him.
My Dear, my Loved Aristor!

Aristor. My Prince, my General, and the Best of Fathers!

Aristom. Thy Heart speaks loud, and knocking at my Breast
Seems as 't would close in conference with mine.

Aristor. It would, my Lord, and strives to force its Passage.
[ Aristomenes looses his Arms from embracing him.
Aristom. Oh, no my Son! for now I must be plain,
And tell thee, thou do lock some Secret there
Which all my depth of Kindness never could fathom:
I see it in the Cloud, that shades thy Brow.
And still thy pensive Eyes are downwards cast,
As thou wou'd'st seek the Grave, or something lower:
Long have I this observed --
And thought whole Nights away, to find the Cause,
Which now, my Son, I urge thee to reveal:
And think that He who best can love thee asks it.

Aristor. Oh! that you did not love, or would not ask it!
I cannot speak, for speaking must offend:
Yet should my Silence grieve such mighty Goodness,
'Twou'd break that Heart, which thus you seek to succor.
Upon my Knees a strange Request I make, [Offering to Kneel but his Father
takes him up.
That you would quite forget, and think me Dead;
Which the approaching Battle should confirm,
And leave you to possess your other Comforts.

Aristom. My other Comforts! All are light to Thee:
And when I would have shared amongst my Race
Impartial Kindness, as their Birthrights claimed,
Still to my Heart Aristor would be nearest,
Still, with a Merit not to be withstood,
Would press beyond my cool and equal Purpose,
And seize a double Portion of my Love:
And will thou lose it now, to keep thy Silence?

Aristor. My Life I rather would; but Oh! my Lord!
[Sighs.
Aristom. Another Sigh, another yet, my Son!
And then, let Words relieve this mighty Passion:
They will, they will; the Sweetness of thy Temper
Will melt before a just and warm Persuasion.
Now, let me know it --

Aristor. Believe that if 'twere fit, it should be told:
But Oh! my Lord, it is what you must not know.

Aristom. Not I, Aristor! if thy Soul were bare
As is thy faded Cheek now to thy Father,
It were most fit --
Oh! think, my Son, who 'twas that made it Noble,
And trained it in the Paths of Truth and Honor:
Else, what had hindered, but thou might have been
(In spite of all the Virtues with thee born,
For Education is the stronger Nature)
A bragging Coward, or a base Detractor,
A Slave to Wealth, or false to Faith or Friendship,
Lulled in the common Arms of some Seducer,
And lost to all the Joys of Virtuous Love.

Aristor. Ha! Virtuous Love!

Aristom. What, do thou start? why, so I meant thou shou'd'st.
When hastily I pressed that Word upon thee,
To catch that flushing Witness in thy Face,
Was all this Bait contrived; no more, my Son,
No more dissembling of a Truth so plain:
I see it is Love, the best of all our Passions,
And framed like Thee; sure none could ever Despair,
Nor can I fear thou'd'st make a vulgar Choice.

Aristor. On Ida's Top not Paris made a nobler,
When of three Goddesses he chose the Fairest.

Aristom. Will she not hear thy Love?

Aristor. Oh yes! with all the softness of her Sex,
And answers it with Vows, more strong than Ours.

Aristom. If thus it be, what have thou then to fear?

Aristor. A Father's Wrath, more dreadful to Aristor
Than is the frown of Jove, that shakes the Poles,
And makes the Gods forget they are Immortal.

Aristom. Thou wrong'st my Love in that mistaken Terror.
By all those Powers I swear, I will not cross thee;
Be she a Spartan Dame, 'bate me but One,
And though a Foe, I yield thou shou'd'st possess her.

Aristor. I dare not ask; my trembling Love forbids it.
Who is that One, so fatally excepted?

Aristom. Then, I Will by telling thee prevent that Trouble.
It is the Tyrant Anaxander's Daughter,
Whom, though I never beheld, I must abhor,
As borrowing her Blood from such a Fountain.

Aristor. Take mine, my Lord, then to wash out that Stain
[Offers his Breast. You Will think it has contracted by her Love:
For it is that Tyrant's Daughter I adore,
And never, while Life is here, will change my Purpose.

Aristom. Confusion seize those Words, and Her that caused 'em!
Not Groans of Earthquakes, or the Burst of Thunder,
The Voice of Storms urging the dangerous Billows,
Ever struck the Sense with sounds of so much Horror.
It must not, Oh! it must not, shall not be:
Sooner this Dagger, though my Soul lives in thee, [Drawing Amalintha's Dagger.
Should let out thine with this prepost'rous Passion,
Than I would yield, it ever should meet Success.

Aristor. Of all the Instruments by Vulcan formed,
That Poinard best is fitted to my Heart,
Since Here Is it was, whose Eyes have deeper pierced it:
Quickly, my Lord, let me receive it here,
And see me proud in Death to wear that Favor.
[ Aristomenes amazed looks on the Dagger, and speaks to himself.
Aristom. This Dagger Here Is, this Anaxander's Daughter's!
Fate then is practicing upon my Soul
What sudden Turns, and Trials Man can bear.

Aristor. Oh! do not pause --
Lest fainting with the Weight of what I feel,
I poorly fall, unlike your Son or Soldier.

Aristom. If this were Here Is, Here Is were the grateful Vows,
With which I rashly charged the Life she gave me. [Still to himself.

Aristor. Ha! not a Look, not one sad parting Word!
Then my own Hand thus sets me free for ever.
[Offers to Stab himself, but is stayed by Aristomenes.
Aristom. Hold! by Love and Duty yet a moment hold!

Aristor. My Life they have swayed, and must command a Moment
But let it not exceed, lest both I cancel,
And only listen to my wild Despair.

Aristom. Shall I perform them? shall I hear her plead?
And to a Woman's Claim resign my Vengeance?
No; let my Ear still sly the fatal Suit,
And from her Tears be turned my hardened Face.
What did I say! a hasty Blush has seized it,
For but imagining a Thing so vile.
Turn back my Face from Her that shunned not mine,
When it was Death to know, and to preserve me!
No; let the Fiends be obstinate in Ill,
Revenge be their's, while Godlike Man is grateful.

Enter an Attendant. Attend. Pardon, my gracious Lord, this bold Intrusion.
Two Ladies veiled, escaping from Phaerea,
Ask with such earnestness for Prince Aristor,
That, sure, their Business is of mighty Moment.
From one this Ring at her entreaty, Sir, I must deliver.
[Gives it to Aristor and Exit.
Aristom. Retire, and if not called, return no more.

Aristor. It Is Amalintha's Ring, my Amalintha's: She Is come in time, to see me
fall her Victim.

Aristom. No; to receive her from my Hand, my Son;
Since 'twas from here is, I took this healing Weapon,
That has cut off the Hate in which I held her.
'Twas she that met me rising from my Grave,
And fearless freed the Foe to her and Sparta:
Then in a grateful Promise was I bound
Not to deny whatever she should request;
And sure thy Love, before the Pomp of Crowns,
Is what a Maid must ask, that knows its Value.

Aristor. The Transports of my Soul be thus expressed;
Then let me Dye, for having grieved such Goodness. [Embracing his Father's
Knees.

Aristom. No; rise my Son, go meet and cheer thy Love;
And to this Tent conduct the Royal Maid,
Whilst in that inner Part I stand concealed,
And hear her tell, why thus she comes to seel us:
Thence will I issue, as occasion calls,
And giving thee, give all I hold most precious.
[He goes into the inner Tent. Aristor goes out at the other Door and reenters
immediately leading Amalintha veiled followed by Phila.
Aristor. Dismiss that Cloud, and with it all your Fears,
Safe in this Camp, and in Aristor's Love,
Which never was truly blessed, 'till this glad Moment.
Now Amalintha, let my Joys overflow;
And ere I ask what brought thee to my sight,
Let it be filled with thy amazing Beauties,
And with this Hand my longing Lips be closed.
[Kisses her Hand.
Amal. Thus, after each short absence, may we meet,
Thus pleased, thus wrapped in Love, thus dying fond.
But Oh Aristor! since I last beheld you,
So has this Life been threatened by the Fates,
That to your Arms it is forced for Peace and Sa fety.

Aristor. Still may they prove a Haven for my Love,
Too strong for all the Shocks of rig'rous Fortune.
But what beneath thy Father's Roof could fright thee?
Or what bold Danger break through his Protection?

Amal. 'Twas from Himself, and all the Lords of Sparta.
When Aristomenes they found escaped,
High was their Rage as Billows in a Tempest;
And all the Arts of State were put in use
To find who had assisted in his Flight:
But still in vain, 'till subtle, vile Clarinthus --

Aristor. That Villain will be first in Blood and Mischief.
But could he pry into thy generous Heart,
And find it there, that you had nobly done it?
And are not secret Thoughts secure against him?

Amal. I did believe them so, 'till he disproved it:
For 'twas his Counsel, when all others failed,
To know by speaking Gods the deep Contrivance;
And from the Oracle, in some few Moments,
The full Discov'ry will have reached Phaerea,
Which ere it does, I was advised to leave,
By one that heard the horrid Voice accuse me,
And with a Speed unmarked outflew the rest.

Aristor. As swiftly may the bounteous Gods reward him.

Amal. This, my Aristor, brings me to your Tents,
But not to save my Life, or 'scape their Fury:
For should your Heart, which boldly I will claim,
Be yet denied me by your injured Father,
Not all his Army should retard my Steps
From leading to the Town, and certain Ruin:
For they have sworn it (with this Imprecation,
That 'till it is done, no Victory may bless them)
To sacrifice the Soul that saved the General.

Enter Aristomenes from the inward Tent. Aristom. That Army you have named,
shall first in Flames
Consume the utmost Town of Lacedemon.
Take your Security, and softest Wishes,
Your dear Aristor take, and if ought more
The fair Preserver of his Father claims,
Be it but named, and at that instant granted.

Amal. Beyond Aristor's Heart there is no Request,
No longing Thought, no Hope for Amalintha:
For still his Love prescribed their tender Limits.

Aristor. Oh! let it not be thought irrev'rent Passion,
If in the awful Presence of a Father
I run upon my Joys, and grasp 'em thus.
[Embraces her.
Aristom. Thou well do intimate I should retire;
For Privacy is only fit for Lovers.

Aristor. Pardon my Transport, Sir, nor thus mistake it.

Aristom. No more, my Son! but when the Trumpet calls,
Which must be soon, remember you are a Soldier,
And that the Battle, we shall lead to morrow,
Will ask our best of Care and Preparation.

Aristor. Never was I yet wanting to my Charge.
But give me leave here to attend that Summons.
[Exit Aristomenes. For Oh! my Amalintha, since you are mine,
Since I can tell my Heart that darling Truth;
The Moments that must take me from thy sight,
Will pass for lost, and useless to Aristor.
And this War done, which now we soon shall finish
(For You not there, what God will fight for Sparta?)
I Will swear the Sun and radiant Light shall part,
Ere I will once be found from this loved Presence.

Amal. Confirm it, all ye soft and gentle Powers!
And let the pattern of a Love so perfect
Reform Mankind, and bless believing Women.
But can I think it is Aristor speaks?
That I behold, and hear you safe from Danger,
Whom late I saw assaulted so with Death,
When from the Guard a Weapon you had snatched,
And but that brave Swords length could keep him from you?
Hope and fond Expectation all had left me:
Armed with this Dagger full I stood in vain,
And from my Window watched the fatal Stroke,
Which soon was to be copied on my Heart;
Then, had I meant to own your noble Love,
And told mine Dying, whilst the Crowd had trembled.

Aristor. I saw your dire Intent, and that preserved me:
For 'twas to stop your Arm, that mine performed
What else had been above the Force of Nature;
And when the Drums of Demagetus thundered,
As through the shivered Gates he rushed to save me,
You may remember, that I would not meet him,
Till I had told my Love what meant the Tumult,
Which since has given me Fears, cold as pale Death,
Lest some Observer might have charged it on you.
[Trumpets sound.
Amal. No; for too much their own Concern engaged them.
But Oh! already hark! the Trumpet calls,
And jealous Fame no longer lets me keep you.
Must you be gone, must you obey this Summons?

Aristor. Oh! yes, I must; it is the Voice of Honor.
Yet, do not weep --
Be this Embrace the Earnest of a Thousand.
Now let me lead you to Herminia's Tent:
Then think, I go more to secure your Charms,
And fight to rest with Peace in these fair Arms.
[He leads her off.
ACT V. SCENE I.
The SCENE is the Camp. A Noise of Drums and Trumpets. Enter Aristomenes,
Aristor, Demagetus, Alcander, several Officers and Soldiers. Enter an Officer
from the other Door, and speaks to the General. Officer. MY Lord! I Am from
Alcander bid to say,
The Battle he has marshalled as you ordered;
And that your Presence now is only wanted.

Aristom. Tell him we come; and let the Drums beat higher.
Now, my brave Followers, be your selves to Day,
And more I need not ask, that know your Valor;
Who Have seen you at the backs of Spartans ride,
Till their long Flight, and not your Conquest, tired you.
[The Soldiers shout. And Oh! my Sons, since they who bravely seek it,
May meet with Death, when all his Darts are flying,
Let me Embrace, and breathe my Blessings on ye.
[Embraces Demagetus. Yet, Demagetus, if I 'scape him now,
And Victory attends my great Endeavor,
Thou shall Thriumphant lead me into Rhodes,
Where we'll obey the Gods, and save thy Country.

Them. Still you're the Best of Men, as they declared you.

Aristom. Now let me fold thee thus, my Life's best Treasure!
[He Embraces Aristor, but seems disordered, and not to feel him in his Arms,
which he often clasps about him. Thou do not fill my Arms, it is Air I grasp:
Nor do my Eyes behold thee --
Where is my Son, ha! where is my Aristor?

Aristor. Here my dear Lord, here pressing to your Bosom.
[His Voice seems to Aristomenes (still under his disorder) to be low and
different to what it was usually.
Aristom. From what far distant Valley comes thy Voice?
It sounds so hollow, scarce my Ear receives it.

Aristor. What means my noble Father!

Aristom. Till now, my faithful Senses never failed me.
They talk of Omens, ha! I must not think on it;
Such chilling Damps would blast a Day of Battle: [Aside.
Yet let my evil Genius but be true,
And a famed End is all it can portend me.

Aristor. You reason with your self, and turn from us.
May we not know what thus disturbs your Thoughts?

Aristom. Nothing -- a Vapor crossed me, but it is gone:
And now the Field, the dusty Field, my Sons,
Must be the Scene, where we shall nobly act
What our great Spirits, and our Country urges.
The Trumpet calls, with the impatient Drum;
And He that loves his Honor, let him come.
[He draws his Sword and goes off followed by the rest with their Swords drawn,
Drums and Shouts of Battle immediately succeed.
The Noise continues, the SCENE changes to a fine Tent. Enter Amalintha
followed by Phila. Amal. Not yet enough! when will this Discord end!
Is there no happy Land,
Where only Love, and its kind Laws prevail?
Where the false Trumpet slatters not to Death,
Nor the more noisy Drum outcries the Dying?
Oh! Phila, why should Men with Hearts unmoved
Seek the bold War, and leave ours trembling for them?
Now whilst I speak, a chilling Fear surrounds me;
And every Tread I hear, is hastening on,
Methinks, to tell me, all my Hopes are perished.

Phila. Why should you, Madam, who have passed already,
Unhurt by Fortune, through more threatening Dangers,
Now faint, when Reason bids you think the best?
The Sound goes from us, and the lucky War
(Since you have the Promise of your Father's Life)
Proceeds, as we could wish, for the Messenians.

Amal. So does it seem; but yet my failing Spirits
Sink to my Heart, and bid it think of Ruin.
Last Night my Dreams showed me Aristor bleeding;
And over my Head a screaming Voice proclaimed
That Amalintha's hasty Fate had killed him:
I closed my Eyes to catch another Vision,
That might interpret, or prevent the first;
But all in vain, no Help or Comfort found me,
And wrapped in Fears, I waked and still continue
For what is foretold so fatal to my Love.

Phila. Your Fate work his? it rather will protect him.
But here come Tidings, and the Bearer smiles;
Good let them be, and these vain Fears will vanish.

Enter an Officer. Amal. From Prince Aristor? Does he live, and send you?

Officer. Madam he does --
And bids me say, what I my self can witness,
That Lacedemon's Battle breaks to pieces,
And soon will give him leave to find you here.

Amal. Take this, and wear it, Soldier, for your News;
[Gives him a Jewel. And may your Honors still outshine its Luster.
Stay here, whilst I report this to Herminia,
If Demagetus too be yet in safety.

Officer. He is; and near Aristor did I leave him.

Amal. Come with me, Phila; yet my Heart is heavy,
And would be forcing Tears to my sad Eyes:
But I Will repel them with this welcome Message,
And put on all the smiles of Love to meet him.
[Exit with Phila into the Tent.
Officer. The Sentinels have all forsook the Tents,
In hopes to share the Plunder of the Foe,
Finding by their retiring we prevail:
But I Will report it loudly to the General.
Oh! here are some returning; are they Messenians?
They wear the Habit, yet no Face I know;
Their Haste and Looks do seem to point at Mischief:
I will conceal my self, and watch their Purpose.
[He conceals himself.
Enter Clarinthus with others disguised like Messenian Soldiers. Clar. You
heard the King, and the chief Lords of Sparta
Wish, that no Victory might bless our Arms,
Till we had sacrificed the Traytor's Life,
That freed this Lion, which devours us all.

Sold. We did, we did --

Clar. You Have also heard, 'twas Amalintha's Action.

Sold. Yes, and the King then said, his Vow should stand:
And she had Died, I think, had she not fled for it.

Clar. It Is true; therefore when I reflected on our Curse,
And saw that Conquest would no more attend us
Till we performed what to the Gods we swore,
I moved the King --
To let me with your Aid attempt the Camp,
Which if I found unguarded,
I would to Sparta soon convey the Traytress,
Where she should meet the Rigor of the Law.
These are the Royal Tents, where she must be;
Therefore no more remains, but to secure her.
[They follow him into the inner Tent and the concealed Officer comes out.
Officer. Cursed Conspiration, not to be prevented
With but my single Arm against their Numbers!
But to the Battle, and Aristor's Ear I Will fly for Help;
That may overtake, and cross the bloody Purpose.
[Exit.
The Women shriek in the inner Tent, and Re-enter Clarintha, etc. leading in
Amalintha and Phila. Amal. Messenians are ye, and yet treat met thus!
Restrain those Hands, that gave your General to you.
Let me but hear you speak, and name the Cause;
Which, if a just one, I Will submit to Fortune.

Clar. It Is but too just, and does not ask explaining.

Amal. Oh! now Clarinthus in your Voice I read
The cruel Sentence of an angry Father.
Turn not a way that Face, but hear your Princess;
I cannot resist, no Force, no Help is near me:
Therefore command, that but my Arms be freed,
And let me not be dragged, where I must follow,

Clar. Will you, relying then on me for Safety,
Forbear to cry for Help, as we conduct you?

Amal. By Castor's Soul I swear it.

Clar. Then taking first her Dagger, free her Arms.
Give me your Hand, and now perform your Promise,
To follow where I Will lead you --
[Just as Clarinthus is offering to take her Hand, she snatches Phila's Dagger,
and then answers Clarinthus.
Amal. No, stay Clarinthus; that I did not Promise.
My Voice, and not my Feet, my Word engaged;
And whilst my Hand holds this, I will not follow.

Clar. So swift and subtle? yet disarm and take her.

Amal. Hear me but speak, Clarinthus:
My Father's Life already I Have secured;
And if you yet will quit this dangerous Purpose,
Yours with Rewards, as great as your Desires,
Shall too be given you, and all Wrongs lie buried.

Clar. More than I love Rewards, I hate Messenia;
Therefore alive or dead will bear you from 'em.
[He offers to seize her, she keeping him off with her Dagger kneels.
Amal. Oh! Pity yet my Youth, and wretched Fortunes;
A Princess at your Feet behold in Tears,
And spare the Blood, the Royal Blood of Sparta.

Clar. Yes, and be lost our selves to save a Trayt'ress?
For, such you have been to that high Blood you have boasted.
I will not spare nor pity, but thus seize you.
[He wrests the Dagger from her, she rises hastily and followed by Phila
escapes into the Tent, Clarinthus pursues her, and immediately the Cries of
Women are heard.
Enter at the other Door Aristor and Soldiers. Aristor. Oh! we are come in
time. Detested Villains,
Your Deaths are all that you shall meet with here.
[They fight.
Re-enter Clarinthus. Clar. The Victim's struck which could not be borne off.
Now my next Task
Must be to rescue those, who shared the Danger.
[He runs at Aristor who kills him, he speaks falling. Thou'st killed
Clarinthus; And
The Fiends reward thee.

Aristor. Dye; and those Fiends thou call'st on, meet thy Spirit.
I asked but that, to crown the War we have ended.
[He and his Men fall on the rest, fighting off the Stage.
Enter Amalintha wounded and supported by Phila. Amal. Phila thy Hand; help me
to reach that Couch,
The dying Bed of wretched Amalintha!
Nay, do not weep, since it is the Fate's Decree,
Who let one luckless Moment interpose
Betwixt Aristor's coming, and my Ruin.
Here, set me down; and let this last Embrace
[Sits down. Reward the Cares and Fears, my Life has cost thee.
Now leave me, Phila, to perform a Part,
Which must not be prevented by thy Tears.

Phila. Thus pale, thus faint, thus dying must I leave you!

Amal. Yes; if thou will obey, thou must retire:
But be not far, and when thou see me fallen
Dead in Aristor's Arms, who will soon return,
Come forth, and tell him 'twas my last Request
(By all our Love, by all our Sighs and Sorrows,
By our new Vows, and swiftly faded Joys)
That He would yet survive his Amalintha;
Nor let my fatal Vision prove a Truth,
That 'twas my Fate, my hasty Fate that killed him.

Phila. Let me but stay, at least 'till he is arrived.

Amal. 'Twou'd cross my Purpose, hark! I hear him coming.
Quickly retire, and let me hide this Stream,
Lest he should swell it with a Flood of Tears,
And waste in Grief my small remaining Life,
Which I design to lavish out in Love.
[ Phila goes off. Amalintha pulls her Garment over her Wound. About him let my
dying Arms be thrown,
Whilst I deny my parting Life one Groan.
My failing Breath shall in soft Sighs expire,
And tender Words spend my last vital Fire;
That of my Death Men this Account may give,
She ceased to Love, as others cease to Live.

Enter Aristor hastily, and sits down by her. Aristor. How fares my Love? sink
not beneath your Fears,
When this most lucky Hand has made them groundless,
Securing to my Life its greatest Blessing,
Your matchless Love, and all its dying Transports.

Amal. Its dying Transports, did you say Aristor?
I would be glad to know, that Death has Transports.
But are there none, none that do Live and Love?
That early meet, and in the Spring of Youth,
Uncross'd, nor troubled in the soft Design,
Set sweetly out, and travel on to Age
In mutual Joys, that with themselves expire?

Aristor. Indeed, there are but few, that are thus Happy.
But since our Lot it is, t'encrease the number,
Let us not lose a Thought on other's Fortunes,
But keep them still employed upon our own;
For in no Hearts, sure, Love ever wrought more Wonders.

Amal. Oh! no, to mine I gladly did admit it
Through the stern hazards of a Father's Wrath,
And all the Hate of Sparta and Messenia.
If ever I wept, 'twas Love that forced the Dew,
And not my Country, or my colder Friendships;
And on my Face (when Lacedemon mourned)
Suspected Smiles were seen to mock her Losses;
Because that Love was on the adverse Party.
Thus fond, thus doting have I passed my Hours,
And with their dear remembrance will I close
My Life's last Scene, and grasp you thus in Dying.
[She embraces him.
Aristor. Far be that Hour; but Oh! my Amalintha,
Proceed thus to describe thy tender Soul,
And charm me with thy mighty Sense of Passion:
For know, 'twas that which fixed me ever thine,
When with a Pleasure, not to be expressed,
I found no Language of my Love escaped thee,
Though wrapped in Mystery to delude the Crowd;
When every longing Look could raise a Blush,
And every Sigh I breathed, heave this loved Bosom,
Which held such soft Intelligence with mine,
And now overflows with a like Tide of Pleasure.

Amal. Oh! Yes, it does; it meets the vast Delight,
And takes the Thoughts even of Elysium from me,
Nor will I, as some peevish Beauty might,
Take light offense, that mine you did not mention;
Since it is my equalling Aristor's Love
Is all the Charm, I would be proud to boast of.

Aristor. Believe not, that I slighted such Perfections.
I saw you Fair, beyond the Fame of Helen;
But Beauty's vain, and fond of new Applause,
Leaving the last Adorer in Despair
At his approach, who can but praise it better:
Whilst Love, Narcissus-like, courts his Reflection,
And seeks itself, gazing on other's Eyes.
When this I found in yours, it bred that Passion,
Which Time, nor Age, nor Death, shall ever diminish.

Amal. For Time, or Age, I think not of their Power.
But, after Death, Aristor, could you love me,
Still call to me your Thoughts, when so far absent,
And mourn me sleeping in that Rival's Arms?

Aristor. Yes; if I could outlive my Amalintha,
Still should I turn my Eyes to that cold Grave,
Still love thee there, and wish to lie as low.
But why does every Period of thy Speech
Thus sadly close with that too mournful Subject?
Why, now I press this Question, do thou weep,
Yet in my Bosom strive to hide thy Tears?
Paleness is on thy Cheek, and thy damp Brow
Strikes to my Heart such sympathizing Cold,
As quenches all its Fire, but that of Love.
Oh! speak my Life, my Soul, my Amalintha;
Speak, and prevent the boding Fears that tell me
Eternal Separation is at hand,
And after this, I never shall clasp thee more.
[Embraces her, and she starts and groans.
Amal. Oh! OF, OF, OF.

Aristor. Nay, if the gentle foldings of my Love,
The tender circling of these Arms can wound,
It Is sure some inward Anguish does oppress thee,
Which too unkindly thou will still keep secret.

Amal. Secret it should have been, 'till Death had sealed it;
Had not that Groan, and my weak Tears betrayed me:
[Speaks faintly. For Death, which from Clarinthus I received,
Is come to snatch my Soul from these Embraces.

Aristor. Oh fatal sound! but let me not suppose it,
Till Art is wearied for thy Preservation.
Haste to procure it Phila: all that hear me
Fly to her Aid; or you more speedy Gods
The Cure be yours, and Hecatombs attend you.
But none approach: then let me haste to bring it,
Though thus to leave her is an equal Danger.
[Endeavours to go.
Amal. Aristor stay; nor let my closing Eyes
One Moment lose the Sight that ever charmed them.
No Art can bring relief; and melting Life
But lingers till my Soul receives the Impression
Of that loved Form, which ever shall be lasting,
Though in new Worlds, new Objects would efface it.

Aristor. No, Amalintha; if it must be so,
Together we'll expire, and trace those Worlds,
As fond, and as united as before:
For know, my Love, the Sword of War has reached me;
And none would I permit to bind the Wound,
Till to thy gentle Hand I could reveal it.
The Blood uncheck'd shall now profusely flow,
And Art be scorned, that could but half restore me.

Amal. Oh! let me plead in Death against that Purpose,
Employ my Hand, yet warm, to close the Wound,
And with my suppling Tears disperse the Anguish.
Your Country asks your stay, and more your Father:
This Blood is his, allied to all his Virtues,
By him more prized, than what supports his Frame,
Nor should be lavished thus without his License.
Oh! Aristomenes haste to preserve it,
Since Life from me departs, and Love is useless
Aristor --
[She Dies.
Aristor. Her fleeting Breath has borne far hence my Name:
But soon my following Spirit shall overtake her.
My Godlike Father gave her to my Arms,
And then resigned to her more powerful Claim
This purple Stream, which wafts me to possess her.
May every Power, that shields paternal Goodness,
Enfold his Person, and support his Sway:
His dear remembrance take these parting drops,
[He weeps. And then be free, my Soul, for ties more lasting,
Eternal Love, the faithful Lovers due,
In those blessed Fields, which stand displayed before me.
My Amalintha --
[He takes her in his Arms and dies.
Enter Phila. Phila. I should have come, and urged his Preservation,
If when I saw her fall my Strength had served me:
But all my Cares departed with her Life,
And mine I hope is now for ever going.
[She falls in a Swoon at Amalintha's Feet.
Shouts of Victory. Enter Demagetus, Arcasius, Alcander, and several Officers,
their Swords drawn as coming from Battle. Demag. A glorious Day, and warmly was
in sought:
Nor ever did a Victory more complete
Stoop to the General's Valor --
Some Troops are ordered to secure Phaerea;
And with tomorrow's Sun he enters there
To take the Homage of the conquered Spartans.

Alcand. They say, that Anaxander he has freed
As generously, as he would never known the Dungeon.

Demag. He did, at Prince Aristor's kind Request;
And now, with the high Marks of Conquest crowned,
Is coming to declare to Amalintha
That all her Wishes, and her Fears are ended.
[Turning to go into the Tent, he sees the Bodies. They are indeed; for ever,
ever ended.
Oh! turn and see where that pale Beauty lies,
And faithful, dead Aristor, bleeding by her!

Alcand. O sudden Horror! where is our Conquest now,
Our lofty Boasts, and brave expected Triumphs?
Lie there, my Sword, beneath my Leader's Feet;
[Lays his Sword at Aristor's Feet. For under him I fought, and now weep for
him.

Dema. We'll all join to increase the mournful Shower.
A Soldier for a Soldier's Fall may weep,
And shed these Drops without unmanly Weakness.
[A Sound of Trumpets. But hark! the General, how shall we receive him?
A while we'll with our Bodies shade this Prospect,
And tell him by our Looks, some Grief attends him:
Lest all his Fortitude should not support
A Change so sudden in his wretched Fortune.
Nor can we learn from whence this Loss proceeds.

Phila. Yes, that you may from me: Life yet remains,
And will admit of the too dire Relation.

Demag. Then gently bear her hence, and hear it from her;
[They lead off Phila. That when the Sorrow, which at first must bar
All cold Enquiries, shall a while be past,
The General may be told to what he owes it.
But see! he enters; be we Sad and Silent:
For Oh! too soon this fading Joy must vanish.
[They stand all together before the Bodies.
A FLOURISH of Drums and Trumpets, with Shouts of Joy. Enter several Officers
and Soldiers, the Shepherds and Shepherdesses strewing Flowers, followed by
Aristomenes, his Sword drawn in his Hand, and a Wreath of Victory on his Head.
Aristom. Enough my Friends! enough my Fellow Soldiers!
And you kind Shepherds, and your gentle Nymphs,
Receive my Thanks for the Perfumes you scatter,
Which yet shall flourish under our Protection.

Shepherds, etc. Great Aristomenes! Live long and happy!

Others. Live long and happy, Father of Messenia!

Aristom. Now to fair Amalintha would I speak
The joyful Tidings of this Day's Achievements:
Therefore let her be told, we wish her presence.
[Seeing none move. Ha! what none stir! perhaps Aristor's with her:
Why let him tell it; from a Lover's mouth,
'Twill bear a Sound more welcome and harmonious.
And sure in Love and Battle none exceeds him,
The last you all can witness; you saw him Fight,
Saw the young Warrior with his Beaver up
Dart like the Bolt of Jove amongst their Ranks,
And scatter 'em like an Oak's far-shooting Splinters.
Will none confirm it? this is envious Silence.
[Walks up and down. Thou Demagetus, ha! you are all in Tears,
And so are these that make a Wall about thee:
The Cause deliver, Oh! declare it quickly.

Demag. Enquire it not, my Lord; too soon 'twill find you.

Aristom. I must prevent it by my hasty Search.
Reveal it you, or you, since all partake it: [To Alcander, etc.
What silent still! --
If yet ye do not speak, ye do not love me;
I find ye do not, since ye all are Speechless.
Aristor would have spoke, had he been here.

Demag. Aristor's here, but Oh! he cannot speak.
You have it now, my Lord, and must weep with us.

Aristom. Thy Tongue has warned my Eyes to seek the Center:
[Looks down. For round this Place I dare not let them stray,
Lest they explain, too soon, thy fatal meaning.
Oh! Anaxander, had such Trembling seized me,
When at the Army's Head I met thy Fury;
The poorest of thy Troops had cried me Coward.
Why so we are all, there is not a Man that is not;
We all dread something, and can shrink with Terror:
Yet he that comes a Conqu'ror from the Field,
Shall find a vain Applause to crown his Valor,
Though fainting thus, and sweating cold with Fear.
[Pauses and leans on an Officer. But did thou say, Aristor could not speak?
Oh! that I live to ask it! not answer to his Father!

Demag. Oh! never more!

Aristom. The Sun will keep his Pace, and Time revolve,
Rough Winters pass, and Springs come smiling on;
But Thou do talk of Never, Demagetus:
Yet ere Despair prevails, retract that Word
Whose cloudy distance bars the reach of Thought,
Nor lets one Ray of Hope ever dawn beyond it.
Never, Oh never!

Demag. This Passion must rise higher, ere it falls.
Divide, and let him know the worst. [To the Officers.

Aristom. Where is my Son? my Grief has passed all Bounds,
All dallying Circumstance, and vain Delusion,
And will be told directly where to find him.

Demag. Oh! then behold him there!
[They divide. He seeing the Bodies stands awhile amazed and speechless, drops
his Sword, then speaks.
Aristom. So looked the World to Pyrrha, and her Mate;
So gloomy, waste, so destitute of Comfort,
When all Mankind besides lay drowned in Ruin.
Oh! thou were well informed, my evil Genius;
And the complaining Rocks mourned not in vain:
For here my Blood, my dearest Blood I pay
For this poor Wreath, and Fame that withers like it;
[Tears the Wreath, and throws himself upon his Son. The Ground, that bore it,
take the slighted Toy,
Whilst thus I throw me on his breathless Body,
And groan away my Life on these pale Lips.
Oh! OF, OF, OF, --
Thus did I clasp him, ere the Battle joined,
When Fate, which then had Doomed him, mocked my Arms,
Nor in their folds would let me feel my Son.
Oh! that his Voice (though low as then it seemed)
Could reach me now! -- But the fond Wish is vain,
And all but this too weak to ease my Pain.
[He takes the Sword that lay at Aristor's Feet, and goes to fall upon it,
Demagetus takes hold of it.
Demag. Oh! hold, my Lord; nor stab at once your Army.
[All the Officers and Soldiers kneel, Alcander speaks.
Alcand. We Are all your Sons; and if you strike, my Lord,
The Spartans may come back, and take our Bodies;
For when yours goes, our Spirits shall attend it.
[They all prepare to fall on their Swords.
Aristom. Would you then have me live, when thus unbowell'd,
Without the Charms of my Aristor's presence,
Without his Arm to second me in Fight,
And in still Peace his Voice to make it perfect?
[He rises in a Passion and comes forward on the Stage. Yes, I will live, ye
Sovereign Powers, I will:
You Have put my Virtue to its utmost Proof;
Yet thus chastis'd, I own superior Natures,
And all your fixed Decrees this Sword shall further,
'Till Rhodes is rescued, and my Task completed.
Who knows, but that the Way to your Elysium
Is Fortitude in Ills, and brave Submission;
Since Heroes whom your Oracles distinguish,
Are often here amidst their Greatness wretched?
But yet my Heart! my loved, my lost Aristor!

Demag. Let me succeed him in his active Duty,
And join with all the Earth to bring you Comfort.

Aristom. Comfort on Earth! Oh! it is not to be found.
My Demagetus, thou have far to travel;
The Bloom of Youth sits graceful on thy Brow,
And bids thee look for Days of mighty Pleasures,
For prosperous Wars, and the soft Smiles of Beauty,
For generous Sons, that may reflect thy Form,
And give thee Hopes, as I had, of their succor.

Demag. With these indeed my Thoughts have still been flattered.

Aristom. Then let me draw this flattering Veil aside,
And bid thee here, here in this Face behold
How biting Cares have done the work of Age,
And in my best of Strength marked me a Dotard.
Defeated Armies, slaughtered Friends are here;
Disgraceful Bonds, and Cities laid in Ashes:
And if thou find'st, that Life will yet endure it,
Since what I here have lost --
So bowed, so waining shall thou see this Carcass,
That scarce thou will recall what once it was.
Then be instructed Thou, and All that hear me,
Not to expect the compass of soft Wishes,
Or constant Joys, which fly the fond Possessor.
Since Man, by swift returns of Good and Ill,
In all the Course of Life's uncertain still;
By Fortune favored now, and now oppressed,
And not, 'till Death, secure of Fame, or Rest.

FINIS.

