CARACTACUS, A Dramatic Poem.

CARACTACUS, A Dramatic Poem: Written on the MODEL of The Ancient GREEK Tragedy.

By the Author of ELFRIDA.

Misimus and lectas Druidum de gente Choreas. LONDON: Printed for J. KNAPTON in
Ludgate Street; and R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall. MDCCLIX.

TO The Revd Mr HURD.
ELEGY.
FRIEND of my youth, who, when the willing Muse
Streamed over my breast her warm poetic rays,
Saw the fresh seeds their vital powers diffuse,
And fed'st them with the fost'ring dew of praise!
Whatever the produce of the unthrifty soil,
The leaves, the flowers, the fruits, to thee belong:
The labourer earns the wages of his toil;
Who formed the Poet, well may claim the song.
Yes, it is my pride to own, that taught by thee
My conscious soul superior flights essayed;
Learnt from thy lore the Poet's dignity,
And spurned the hirelings of the rhyming trade.
Say, scenes of Science, say, thou haunted stream!
[For often my Muse-led steps did thou behold]
How on thy banks I rifled every theme,
That Fancy fabled in her age of gold.
How often I cried, " O come, thou tragic Queen!
" March from thy Greece with firm majestic tread!
" Such as when Athens saw thee fill her scene,
" When Sophocles thy choral Graces led;
" Saw thy proud pall it is purple length devolve,
" Saw thee uplift the glittering dagger high,
" Ponder with fixed brow thy deep resolve
" Prepared to strike, to triumph, and to die.
" Bring then to Britain's plain that choral throng,
" Display thy buskined pomp, thy golden lyre,
" Give her historic forms the soul of song,
" And mingle Attic art with Shakespeare's fire."
" Ah what, fond Boy, do thou presume to claim?"
The Muse replied. " Mistaken suppliant, know,
" To light in Shakespeare's breast the dazzling flame
" Exhausted all Parnassus could bestow.
" True; Art remains; and, if from his bright page
" Thy mimic power one vivid beam can seize,
" Proceed; and in that best of tasks engage,
" Which tends at once to profit, and to please."
She spoke; and Harewood's Towers spontaneous rose;
Soft virgin warblings echoed through the grove;
And fair Elfrida poured forth all her woes,
The hapless pattern of connubial Love.
More awful scenes old Mona next displayed;
Her caverns gloom'd, her forests waved on high,
While flamed within their consecrated shade
The Genius stern of British liberty.
And see, my HURD! to thee those scenes consigned;
O! take and stamp them with thy honored name.
Around the page be friendship's chaplet twined;
And, if they find the road to honest Fame,
Perchance the candor of some nobler age
May praise the Bard, who bad gay Folly bear
Nil equidem feci (tu scis hoc ipse) Theatris;
Musa nec in plausus ambitiosa mea est
OVID. Trist. Lib. V. El. vii. 23.
Her cheap applauses to the busy stage
And leave him pensive Virtue's silent tear;
Chose too to consecrate his favorite strain
To Him, who graced by every liberal art,
That best might shine amid the learned train,
Yet more excelled in morals, and in heart:
Whose equal mind could see vain fortune shower
Her flimzy favors on the fawning crew,
While in low Thurcaston's sequestered bower
She fixed him distant from Promotion's view:
Yet, sheltered there by calm Contentment's wing;
Pleased he could smile, and with sage HOOKER's eye
Part of a sentence in a letter of Hooker to Archbishop Whitgift. See his Life
in the Biographia Britannica.
" See from his mother earth God's blessings spring
" And eat his bread in peace and privacy."
20 March 1759. W. MASON.

Persons of the DRAMA.
AULUS DIDIUS, the Roman General. VELLINUS, ELIDURUS, Sons of Cartismandua. The
dramatic part of the Chorus is supposed to be spoken by the chief Druid; the
lyrical part sung by the Bards.
CHORUS of Druids and Bards. CARACTACUS. EVILINA, Daughter to Caractacus.
ARVIRAGUS, Son to Caractacus.
Scene, MONA. CARACTACUS, A Dramatic Poem.
AULUS DIDIUS, with Romans. THIS is the secret center of the isle:
Here, Romans, pause, and let the eye of wonder
Gaze on the solemn scene; behold yon oak,
How stern he frowns, and with his broad brown arms
Chills the pale plain beneath him: mark yon altar,
The dark stream brawling round it is rugged base,
These cliffs, these yawning caverns, this wide circus,
Skirted with unhewn stone: they awe my soul,
As if the very Genius of the place
Himself appeared, and with terrific tread
Stalked through his drear domain. And yet, my friends,
(If shapes like his be but the fancy's coinage)
Surely there is a hidden power, that reigns
'Mid the lone majesty of untamed nature,
Controuling sober reason; tell me else,
Why do these haunts of barbarous superstition
Overcome me thus? I scorn them, yet they awe me.
Call forth the British Princes: in this gloom
I mean to school them to our enterprise.
Enter Vellinus and Elidurus.
AULUS DIDIUS, VELLINUS, ELIDURUS. Ye pledges dear of Cartismandua's faith,
Approach! and to my uninstructed ear
Explain this scene of horror.

ELIDURUS. Daring Roman,
Thy footsteps press on consecrated ground:
These mighty piles of magic-planted rock,
Thus ranged in mystic order, mark the place
Where but at times of holiest festival
The Druid leads his train.

AULUS DIDIUS. Where dwells the seer?

VELLINUS. In yonder shaggy cave; on which the moon
Now sheds a side-long gleam. His brotherhood
Possess the neighboring cliffs.

AULUS DIDIUS. Yet up the hill
Mine eye descrys a distant range of caves,
Delv'd in the ridges of the craggy steep:
And this way still another.

ELIDURUS. On the left
Refide the Sages skilled in Nature's lore:
The changeful universe, it is numbers, powers,
Studious they measure, save when meditation
Gives place to holy rites: then in the grove
Each has his rank and function. Yonder grots
Are tenanted by Bards, who nightly thence,
Robbed in their flowing vests of innocent white,
Descend, with harps that glitter to the moon,
Hymning immortal strains. The spirits of air,
Of earth, of water, nay of heaven itself,
Do listen to their lay: and often, it is said,
In visible shapes dance they a magic round
To the high minstrelsy. Now, if thine eye
Be sated with the view, haste to thy ships;
And ply thine oars; for, if the Druids learn
This bold intrusion, thou will find it hard
To foil their fury.

AULUS DIDIUS. Prince, I did not moor
My light-armed shallops on this dangerous strand,
To sooth a fruitless curiosity:
I come in quest of proud Caractacus;
Who, when our veterans put his troops to flight,
Found refuge here.

ELIDURUS. If here the Monarch rests,
Presumptuous Chief! thou might as well essay
To pluck him from yon stars: Earth's ample range
Contains no surer refuge: underneath
The soil we tread, a hundred secret paths,
Scoopt through the living rock in winding maze,
Lead to as many caverns, dark, and deep:
'Mid which the hoary sages act their rites
Mysterious, rites of such strange potency,
As, done in open day, would dim the sun,
Though throned in noontide brightness. In such dens
He may for life lie hid.

AULUS DIDIUS. We know the task
Most difficult: yet has thy royal mother
Furnished the means.

ELIDURUS. My mother say thou, Roman?

AULUS DIDIUS. In proof of that firm faith she lends to Rome,
She gave ye up her honor's hostages.

ELIDURUS. She did: and we submit.

AULUS DIDIUS. To Rome we bear ye;
From your dear country bear ye; from your joys,
Your loves, your friendships, all your souls hold precious.

ELIDURUS. And do thou taunt us, Roman, with our fate?

AULUS DIDIUS. No, Youth, by heaven, I would avert that fate.
Wish ye for liberty?

VELLINUS, ELIDURUS. More than for life.

AULUS DIDIUS. And would do much to gain it?

VELLINUS. Name the task.

AULUS DIDIUS. The task is easy. Haste ye to these Druids;
Tell them ye come, commissioned by your Queen,
To seek the great Caractacus; and call
His valor to her aid, against the Legions,
Which, led by our Ostorius, now assail
Her frontiers. The late treaty she has sealed
Is yet unknown: and this her royal signet,
Which more to mask our purpose was obtained,
Shall be your pledge of faith. The eager king
Will gladly take the charge; and, he consenting,
What else remains, but to the Meinai's shore
Ye lead his credulous step? there will we seize him:
Bear him to Rome, the substitute for you,
And give you back to freedom.

VELLINUS. If the Druids. --

AULUS DIDIUS. If they, or he, prevent this artifice,
Then force must take it is way: then flaming brands,
And biting axes, weilded by our soldiers,
Must level these thick shades; and so unlodge
The lurking savage.

ELIDURUS. Gods, shall Mona perish?

AULUS DIDIUS. Princes, her every trunk shall on the ground
Measure it is magnitude; unless ere dawn,
Ye lure this untamed lion to our toils.
Go then, and prosper; I shall to the ships,

CARACTACUS. And there expect his coming. Youths, remember,
He must to Rome to grace great Caesar's triumph:
Caesar and Fate demand him at your hands.
Exit Aulus Didius, and Romans.
ELIDURUS, VELLINUS. And will heaven suffer it? Will the just gods,
That tread yon spangled pavement over our heads,
Look from their sky and yield them? Will these Druids,
Their sage vicegerents, not call down the thunder;
And will not instant it is hot bolts be darted
In such a righteous cause? Yes, good old king,
Yes, last of Britons, thou art heavens own pledge;
And shall be such 'till death.

VELLINUS. What means my brother,
Do thou refuse the charge?

ELIDURUS. Do thou accept it?

VELLINUS. It gives us liberty.

ELIDURUS. It makes us traitors.
Gods, would Vellinus do a deed of baseness?

VELLINUS. Will Elidurus scorn the profer'd boon
Of freedom?

ELIDURUS. Yes, when such it is guilty price,
Brother, I spurn it.

VELLINUS. Go then, foolish boy!
I Will do the deed myself.

ELIDURUS. It shall not be:
I will proclaim the fraud.

VELLINUS. Will thou? it is well.
Hie to you cave; call loudly on the Druid;
And bid him drag to ignominious death
The partner of thy blood. Yet hope not thou
To 'scape; for thou did join my impious steps:
Therefore his wrath shall curse thee: thou shall live;
Yet shall thou live an interdicted wretch,
All rights of nature cancelled.

ELIDURUS. O Vellinus!
Rend not my soul: by heaven thou know I love thee,
As fervently as brother ever loved brother:
And, loving thee, I thought I loved mine honor.
Ah! do not wake, dear youth, in this true breast
So fierce a conflict.

VELLINUS. Honor's voice commands
Thou should obey thy mother, and thy queen.
Honor and sage religion both conspire
To bid thee save these consecrated groves
From Roman devastation.

ELIDURUS. Horrid thought!
Hence let us haste, even to the furthest nook
Of this wide isle; nor view the sacrilege.

VELLINUS. No, let us stay, and by our prosperous art
Prevent the sacrilege. Mark me, my brother,
More years, and more experience have matur'd
My sober thought; I will convince thy youth,
That this our deed has every honest sanction
Cool reason may demand.

ELIDURUS. To Rome with reason:
Try if 'twill bring her deluging ambition
Into the level course of right and justice:
Try if 'twill tame these insolent invaders;
Who thus, in savageness of conquest, claim
Whom chance of war has spared. Do this, and prosper.
But, pray thee, do not reason from my soul
It Is inbred honesty: that holy flame
How ever eclipsed by Rome's black influence
In vulgar minds, ought still to glow in ours.

VELLINUS. Vain talker leave me.

ELIDURUS. No, I will not leave thee:
I must not, dare not, in these perilous shades.
Think, if thy fraud should fail, these holy men,
How will their justice rend thy traitrous limbs?
If thou succeed'st, the fiercer pangs of conscience,
How will they ever goad thy guilty soul?
Mercy, defend us! see, the awful Druids
Are issuing from their caves: hear'st thou yon signal?
Lo, on the instant all the mountain whitens
With slow-descending Bards. Retire, retire;
This is the hour of sacrifice: to stay
Is death.

VELLINUS. I Will wait the closing of their rites
In yonder vale: do thou, as likes thee best,
Betray, or aid me.

ELIDURUS. To betray thee, youth,
That love forbids; honor, alas! to aid thee.
Exeunt.
Enter CHORUS. SEMICHORUS. Sleep and Silence reign around;
Not a night-breeze wakes to blow;
Circle, sons, this holy ground;
Circle close, in triple row;
And, if masked in vapors drear,
Any earth-born Spirit dare
To hover round this sacred space,
Haste with light spells the murky foe to chase.
Lift your boughs of vervain blue,
Dipped in cold September dew;
And dash the moisture chaste, and clear,
Over the ground, and through the air.
Now the place is purged and pure.
Brethren! say, for this high hour
Are the milk-white steers prepared?
Whose necks the rude yoke never scared,
To the furrow yet unbroke?
For such must bleed beneath yon oak.

SEMICHORUS. Druid, these, in order meet,
Are all prepared.

SEMICHORUS. But tell me yet,
Cadwall! did thy step profound
Dive into the cavern deep,
Twice twelve fathom under ground,
Where our sage forefathers sleep?
Thence with reverence have thou born,
From the consecrated chest,
The golden sickle, scrip, and vest,
Whilom by old Belinus worn?

SEMICHORUS. Druid, these, in order meet,
Are all prepared.

SEMICHORUS. But tell me yet,
From the grot of charms and spells,
Where our matron sister dwells,
Brennus! has thy holy hand
Safely brought the druid wand?
And the potent adder-stone,
Gender'd before the autumnal moon?
When, in undulating twine,
The foaming snakes prolific join;
When they hiss, and when they bear
Their wondrous egg aloof in air;
Thence, before to earth it fall,
The Druid, in his hallowed pall,
Receives the prize;
And instant flys,
Followed by the envenomed brood,
'Till he cross the crystal flood.

SEMICHORUS. Druid, these, in order meet,
Are all prepared.

SEMICHORUS. Then all is complete.
And now let nine of the selected band,
Whose greener years befit such station best,
With wary circuit pace around the grove:
And guard each inlet; watchful, lest the eye
Of busy curiosity profane
Pry on our rites: which now must be as close
As done in the very central womb of earth.
Occasion claims it; for Caractacus
This night demands admission to our train.
He, once our king, while ought his power availed
To save his country from the rod of tyrants;
That duty past, does wisely now retire
To end his days in secrecy and peace;
Druid with Druids, in this chief of groves,
Even in the heart of Mona. See, he comes!
How awful is his port! mark him, my friends!
He looks, as does the tower, whose nodding walls,
After the conflict of heaven's angry bolts,
Frown with a dignity unmarked before,
Even in it is prime of strength. Health to the king!

CARACTACUS, EVILINA, CHORUS. This holy place, methinks, does this night wear
More than it is wonted gloom: Druid, these groves
Have caught the dismal coloring of my soul,
Changing their dark dun garbs to very sable,
In pity to their guest. Hail, hallowed oaks!
Hail, British born! who, last of British race,
Hold your primaeval rights by nature's charter;
Not at the nod of Caesar. Happy foresters,
Ye wave your bold heads 'mid the liberal air;
Nor ask, for privilege, a praetor's edict.
Ye, with your tough and intertwisted roots,
Grasp the firm rocks ye sprung from; and, erect
In knotty hardihood, still proudly spread
Your leafy banners against the tyrannous north,
Who Roman like assails you. Tell me, Druid,
Is it not better to be such as these,
Than be the thing I am?

CHORUS. To be the thing,
Eternal wisdom wills, is ever best.

CARACTACUS. But I am lost to that predestined use
Eternal wisdom willed, and fitly therefore
May wish a change of being. I was born
A king; and Heaven, who bade these warrior oaks
Lift their green shields against the fiery sun,
To fence their subject plain, did mean, that I
Should, with as firm an arm, protect my people,
Against the pestilent glare of Rome's ambition.
I failed; and how I failed, thou know too well;
So does the babbling world: and therefore, Druid,
I would be any thing save what I am.

CHORUS. See, to thy wish, the holy rites prepared,
Which, if heaven frown not, consecrate thee Druid:
See to the altar's base the victims led,
From whose free-gushing blood ourself shall read
Its high behests; which if assenting found,
These hands around thy chosen limbs shall wrap
The vest of sanctity; while at the act
Yon white-rob'd bards, sweeping their solemn harps,
Shall lift their choral warblings to the skies,
And call the gods to witness. Meanwhile, Prince,
Bethink thee well if ought on this vain earth
Still holds too firm an union with thy soul,
Estranging it from peace.

CARACTACUS. I had a queen:
Bear with my weakness, Druid! this tough breast
Must heave a sigh, for she is unrevenged.
And can I taste true peace, she unrevenged?
So chaste, so loved a queen? ah, Evilina!
Hang not thus weeping on the feeble arm
That could not save thy mother.

EVILINA. To hang thus
Softens the pang of grief; and the sweet thought,
That a fond father still supports his child,
Sheds, on my pensive mind, such soothing balm,
As does the blessing of these pious seers,
When most they wish our welfare. Would to heaven
A daughter's presence could as much avail,
To ease her father's woes, as his does mine.

CARACTACUS. Ever most gentle! come unto my bosom:
Dear pattern of the precious prize I lost,
Lost, so inglorious lost; my friends, these eyes
Did see her torn from my defenseless camp;
Whilst I, hemmed round by squadrons, could not save her:
My boy, still nearer to the darling pledge,
Beheld her shrieking in the ruffian's arm;
Beheld, and fled.

EVILINA. Ah! Sir, forbear to wound
My brother's fame; he fled, but to recall
His scattered forces to pursue and save her.

CARACTACUS. Daughter, he fled. Now, by yon gracious moon,
That rising saw the deed, and instant hid
Her blushing face in twilight's dusky veil,
The flight was parricide.

EVILINA. Indeed, indeed,
I know him valiant; and not doubt he fell
'Mid slaughtered thousands of the haughty foe,
Victim to filial love. Arviragus,
Thou had no sister near the bloody field,
Whose sorrowing search, led by yon orb of night,
Might find thy body; wash with tears thy wounds;
And wipe them with her hair.

CHORUS. Peace, virgin, peace:
Nor thou, sad prince, reply; whatever he is,
Be he a captive, fugitive, or corse,
He is what heaven ordained: these holy groves
Permit no exclamation. against heaven's will
To violate their echoes: Patience, here,
Her meek hands folded on her modest breast,
In mute submission lifts the adoring eye,
Even to the storm that wrecks her.

EVILINA. Holy Druid,
If ought my erring tongue has said pollutes
This sacred place, I from my soul abjure it.
And will these lips bar with eternal silence,
Rather than speak a word, or act a deed
Unmeet for thy sage daughters; blessing first
This hallowed hour, that takes me from the world,
And joins me to their sober sisterhood.

CHORUS. It Is wisely said. See, prince, this prudent maid,
Now, while the ruddy flame of sparkling youth
Glows on her beauteous cheek, can quit the world
Without a sigh, whilst thou --

CARACTACUS. Would save my queen
From a base ravisher; would wish to plunge
This falchion in his breast, and so avenge
Insulted royalty. O holy men!
Ye are the sons of piety and peace;
Ye never felt the sharp vindictive spur,
That goads the injured warrior; the hot tide,
That flushes crimson on the conscious cheek
Of him, who burns for glory; else indeed
Ye much would pity me: would curse the fate
That coops me here inactive in your groves,
Robs me of hope, tells me this trusty steel
Must never cleave one Roman helm again,
Never avenge my queen, nor free my country.

CHORUS. It Is heaven's high will --

CARACTACUS. I know it, reverend fathers!
It Is heaven's high will, that these poor aged eyes
Shall never more behold that virtuous woman,
To whom my youth was constant, 'twas heaven's will
To take her from me at that very hour,
When best her love might sooth me; that black hour,
[May memory ever raze it from her records]
When all my squadrons fled, and left their king
Old and defenseless: him, who nine whole years
Had stemmed all Rome with their firm phallanx: yes,
For nine whole years, my friends, I bravely led
The valiant veterans, often to victory,
Never 'till then to shame. Bear with me, Druid,
I Have done: begin the rites.

CHORUS. O would to heaven
A frame of mind, more fitted to these rites,
Possessed thee, Prince! that Resignation meek,
That dove-ey'd Peace, handmaid of Sanctity,
Approached this altar with thee: 'stead of these,
See I not gaunt Revenge, ensanguin'd Slaughter,
And mad Ambition, clinging to thy soul,
Eager to snatch thee back to their domain,
Back to a vain and miserable world;
Whose misery, and vanity, though tried,
Thou still hold'st dearer than these solemn shades,
Where Quiet reigns with Virtue? Try we yet
What Holiness can do; for much it can:
Much is the potency of pious prayer:
And much the sacred influence conveyed
By sage mysterious office: when the soul,
Snatched by the power of music from her cell
Of fleshly thraldom, feels herself upborn
On plumes of ecstasy, and boldly springs,
'Mid swelling harmonies and pealing hymns,
Up to the porch of heaven. Strike, then, ye Bards!
Strike all your strings symphonious; wake a strain
May penetrate, may purge, may purify,
His yet unhallowed bosom; call ye hither
The airy tribe, that on yon mountain dwell,
Even on majestic Snowdon: they, who never
Deign visit mortal men, save on some cause
Of highest import, but, fublimely shrin'd
On it is hoar top in domes of crystaline ice,
Hold converse with those spirits, that possess
The skies pure sapphire, nearest heaven itself.

ODE.
I. 1.
MONA on Snowdon calls:
Hear, thou King of mountains, hear;
Hark, she speaks from all her strings;
Hark, her loudest echo rings;
King of mountains, bend thine ear:
Send thy spirits, send them soon,
Now, when Midnight and the Moon
Meet upon thy front of snow:
See, their gold and ebon rod,
Where the sober sisters nod,
And greet in whispers sage and slow.
Snowdon mark! it is Magic's hour;
Now the muttered spell has power;
Power to rend thy ribs of rock,
And burst thy base with thunder's shock;
But to thee no ruder spell
Shall Mona use, than those that dwell
In music's secret cells, and lie
Steeped in the stream of harmony.
I. 2.
Snowdon has heard the strain:
Hark, amid the wondering grove
Other harpings answer clear,
Other voices meet our ear,
Pinnions flutter, shadows move,
Busy murmurs hum around,
Rustling vestments brush the ground;
Round, and round, and round they go,
Through the twilight, through the shade,
Mount the oak's majestic head,
And gild the tufted misseltoe.
Cease, ye glittering race of light,
Close your wings, and check your flight:
Here, arrang'd in order due,
Spread your robes of saffron hue;
For lo, with more than mortal fire,
Mighty Mador smites the lyre:
Hark he sweeps the master-strings;
Listen all --

CHORUS. Break off; a sullen smoke involves the altar;
The central oak does shake; I hear the sound
Of steps profane: Caractacus, retire;
Bear off the victims; Mona is polluted.

SEMICHORUS. Father, as we did watch the eastern side,
We spied and instant seized two stranger youths,
Who, in the bottom of a shadowy dell,
Held earnest converse: Britons do they seem,
And of Brigantian race.

CHORUS. Haste, drag them hither.

VELLINUS, ELIDURUS, CHORUS. O spare, ye sage and venerable Druids!
Your countrymen and sons.

CHORUS. And are ye Britons?
Unheard of profanation! Rome herself,
Even impious Rome, whom conquest makes more impious,
Would not have dared so rashly. O! for words,
Big with the fiercest force of execration,
To blast the deed, and doers.

ELIDURUS. Spare the curse,
Oh spare our youth!

CHORUS. Is it not now the hour,
The holy hour, when to the cloudless height
Of yon starr'd concave climbs the full-orb'd moon,
And to this nether world in solemn stillness
Gives sign, that to the listening ear of Heaven
Religion's voice should plead; the very babe
Knows this, and, chance awaked, his little hands
Lifts to the gods, and on his innocent couch
Calls down a blessing. Shall your manly years
Plead ignorance, and impiously presume
To press, with vile unconsecrated feet,
On Mona's hallowed plain? know, wretches, know,
At any hour such boldness is a crime,
At this it is sacrilege.

VELLINUS. Were Mona's plain
More hallowed still, hallowed as is Heaven's self,
The cause might plead our pardon.

ELIDURUS. Mighty Druid!
True, we have rashly dared, yet, forced by duty,
Our sov'reign's mandate --

VELLINUS. Elder by my birth,
Brother, I claim, in right of eldership,
To open our high embassy.

CHORUS. Speak then;
But see thy words answer in honest weight
To this proud prelude. Youth! they must be weighty,
TO atone for such a crime.

VELLINUS. If then to give
New nerves to vanquished valor, if to do,
What, with the blessing of the Gods, may save
A bleeding country from oppression's sword,
Be weighty business, know, on our commission,
And on it is hoped success, that weight depends.

CHORUS. Declare it then at once, briefly and boldly.

VELLINUS. Caractacus is here.

CHORUS. Say thou, proud boy?
It Is boldly said, and, grant 'twere truly said,
Think thou he were not here from fraud or force
As safe as 'midst a camp of conquerors?
Here, youth, he would be guarded by the gods;
Their own high hostage; and each sacred hair
Of his selected head, would in these caverns
Sleep with the unsunn'd silver of the mine,
As precious and as safe; record the time,
When Mona ever betrayed the hapless wretch,
That made her groves his refuge.

VELLINUS. Holy Druid!
Think not so harshly of our enterprise.
Can force, alas! dwell in our unarmed hands?
Can fraud in our young bosoms? No, dread seer,
Our business told, I trust thou wilt soon disclaim
The vain suspicion; and thy holy ear
(Be brave Caractacus or here or absent)
Shall instant learn it. From the north we come;
The sons of her, whose heav'n-intrusted sway
Blesses the bold Brigantes; men who firmly
Have three long moons withstood those Roman powers,
Which, led by fell Ostorius, still assail
Our frontiers: yet so often have our stout swords
Repelled their hot assault, that now, like falcons,
They hang suspended, loath to quit their prey,
Nor daring yet to seize it. Such the state
Of us and Rome; 'mid which our prudent mother,
Revolving what might to her people's weal
Best sink the dubious scale, gave us swift charge
To seek the great Caractacus, and call
His valor to her aid, to lead her bands,
To fight the cause of liberty and Britain,
And quell these ravagers.
Caractacus starts from behind the altar.
CARACTACUS, VELLINUS, ELIDURUS, CHORUS. And ye have found me;
Friends, ye have found me: lead me to your Queen,
And the last purple drop in these old veins
Shall fall for her and Britain.

CHORUS. Rash, rash Prince!

VELLINUS. Ye blessed immortal powers! is this the man,
The more than man, who for nine bloody years
Withstood all Rome? He is; that warlike front,
Seam'd over with honest scars, proclaims he is:
Kneel, brother, kneel, while in his royal hand
We lodge the signet: this, in pledge of faith,
Great Cartismandua sends, and with it tells thee
She has a nobler pledge than this behind;
Thy Queen --

CARACTACUS. Guideria!

VELLINUS. Safely with our mother.

CARACTACUS. How, when, where rescued? mighty Gods, I thank ye.
For it is true, this signet speaks it true.
O tell me briefly.

VELLINUS. In a sally, Prince,
Which, wanting abler chiefs, my gracious mother
Committed to my charge, our troops assailed
One outwork of the camp; the mask of night
Favored our arms, and there my happy hand
Was doomed 'mid other prisoners to release
The captive matron.

CARACTACUS. Let me clasp thee, youth,
And thou shall be my son; I had one, stranger,
Just of thy years; he looked like thee right honest;
Had just that freeborn boldness on his brow,
And yet he failed me. Were it not for him,
Who, as thou see, even at this hour of joy,
Draws tears down mine old cheek, I were as blessed
As the great gods. Oh, he has all disgraced
His highborn ancestry! But I Will forget him.
Haste, Evelina, barb my knotty spear,
Bind fast this trusty falchion to my thigh,
My bow, my target --

CHORUS. Rash Caractacus!
What have thou done? What do thou mean to do?

CARACTACUS. To save my country.

CHORUS. To betray thyself.
That thou have done; the rest thou can not do,
If Heaven forbids; and of it is awful will
Thy fury recks not: Has the bleeding victim
Poured a propitious stream? the milk-white steeds
Unrein'd and neighing pranc'd with favoring steps?
Say, when these youths approached, did not a gust
Of livid smoke involve the bickering flame?
Did not the forest tremble? every omen
Led thee to doubt their honesty of purpose;
And yet, before their tongues could tell that purpose,
Ere I had tendered, as our laws ordain,
Their test of faith, thy rudeness rushed before me,
Infringing my just rights.

CARACTACUS. Druid, methinks,
At such a time, in such a cause, Reproof
Might bait it is sternness. Now, by Heaven, I feel,
Beyond all omens, that within my breast,
That marshals me to conquest; something here
That snatches me beyond all mortal fears,
Lifts me to where upon her jasper throne
Sits flame-rob'd Victory, who calls me son,
And crowns me with a palm, whose deathless green
Shall bloom when Caesar's fades.

CHORUS. Vain confidence!

CARACTACUS. Yet I submit in all --

CHORUS. It Is meet thou should.
Thou art a King, a sovereign over frail man;
I am a Druid, servant of the Gods;
Such service is above such sov'reignty,
As well thou know: if they should prompt these lips
To interdict the thing thou dare to do,
What would avail thy daring?

CARACTACUS. Holy man!
But thou will bless it; Heaven will bid thee bless it;
Thou know that, when we fight to save our country,
We fight the cause of Heaven. The man that falls,
Falls hallowed; falls a victim for the Gods;
For them and for their altars.

CHORUS. Valiant Prince?
Think not we lightly rate our country's weal,
Or thee our country's champion. Well we know
The glorious meed of those exalted souls,
Who flame like thee for freedom: mark me, Prince.
The time will come, when Destiny and Death,
Throned in a burning car, the thundering wheels
Armed with gigantic scythes of adamant,
Shall scour this field of life, and in their rear
The fiend Oblivion: kingdoms, empires, worlds
Melt in the general blaze: when, lo, from high
Andraste darting, catches from the wreck
The roll of fame, claps her ascending plumes,
And stamps on orient stars each patriot name,
Round her eternal dome.

CARACTACUS. Speak ever thus,
And I will hear thee, 'till attention faint
In heedless ecstasy.

CHORUS. This though we know,
Let man beware with headlong zeal to rush
Where slaughter calls; it is not courage, Prince,
No nor the pride and practiced skill in arms,
That gains this meed: the warrior is no patriot,
Save when, obsequious to the will of Heaven,
He draws the sword of vengeance.

CARACTACUS. Surely, Druid,
Such fair occasion speaks the will of Heaven --

CHORUS. Monarch, perchance thou have a fair occasion:
But, if thou have, the Gods will soon declare it:
Their sovereign will thou know not; this to learn
Demands our search. Ye mortals all retire!
Leave ye the grove to us and Inspiration;
Nor let a step, or even one glance profane,
Steal from your caverns: stay, my holy brethren,
Ye time-ennobled Seers, whose reverend brows
Full eighty winters whiten; you, ye Bards,
Leoline, Cadwall, Hoel, Cantaber,
Attend upon our slumbers: Wondrous men,
Ye, whose skilled fingers know how best to lead,
Through all the maze of sound the wayward step
Of Harmony, recalling often, and often
Permitting her unbridled course to rush
Through dissonance to concord, sweetest then
Even when expected harshest. Mador, thou
Alone shall lift thy voice; no choral peal
Shall drown thy solemn warblings; thou best know
That opiate charm which lulls corporeal sense:
Thou have the key, great Bard! that best can open
The portal of the soul; unlock it strait,
And lead the pensive pilgrim on her way,
Through the vast regions of futurity.
Exeunt Caractacus, Vellinus, etc. etc.
ODE.
I. 1.
HAIL, thou harp of Phrygian frame!
In years of yore that Camber bore
From Troy's sepulchral flame;
With ancient Brute, to Britain's shore
The mighty minstrel came:
Sublime upon the burnished prow,
He bad thy manly modes to flow;
Britain heard the descant bold,
She flung her white arms over the sea;
Proud in her leafy bosom to unfold
The freight of harmony.
I. 2.
Mute 'till then was every plain,
Save where the flood 'mid mountains rude
Tumbled his tide amain;
And echo from the impending wood
Resounded the hoarse strain;
While from the north the sullen gale
With hollow whistlings shook the vale;
Dismal notes, and answered soon
By savage howl the heaths among,
What time the wolf does bay the trembling moon,
And thin the bleating throng.
I. 3.
Thou spak'st, imperial Lyre,
The rough roar ceased, and airs from high
Lapt the land in ecstasy:
Fancy, the fairy, with thee came;
And Inspiration, bright-ey'd dame,
Often at thy call would leave her sapphire sky;
And, if not vain the verse presumes,
Even now some chaste Divinity is near:
For lo! the sound of distant plumes
Pants through the pathless desert of the air.
It Is not the flight of her;
It Is Sleep, her dewy harbinger.
Change, my harp, O change thy measures;
Cull, from thy mellifluous treasures,
Notes that steal on even feet,
Ever slow, yet never pausing,
Mixed with many a warble sweet,
In a lingering cadence closing,
While the pleased power sinks gently down the skies,
And seals with hand of down the Druids slumbering eyes.
II. 1.
Thrice I pause, and thrice I sound
The central string, and now I ring
(By measured lore profound)
A sevenfold chime, and sweep, and swing
Above, below, around,
To mix thy music with the spheres,
That warble to immortal ears.
Inspiration hears the call;
She rises from her throne above,
And, sudden as the glancing meteors fall,
She comes, she fills the grove.
II. 2.
High her port; her waving hand
A pencil bears; the days, the years,
Arise at her command,
And each obedient coloring wears.
So, where Time's pictured band
In hues ethereal glide along;
O mark the transitory throng;
Now they dazzle, now they die,
Instant they flit from light to shade,
Mark the blue forms of faint futurity,
O mark them ere they fade.
II. 3.
Whence was that inward groan?
Why bursts through closed lids the tear?
Why uplifts the bristling hair
It Is white and venerable shade,
Why down the consecrated head
Courses in chilly drops the dews of fear?
All is not well, the pale-ey'd moon
Curtains her head in clouds, the stars retire,
Save from the sultry south alone
The swart star flings his pestilential fire;
Even Sleep herself will fly,
If not recalled by harmony.
Wake, my lyre! thy softest numbers,
Such as nurse ecstatic slumbers,
Sweet as tranquil virtue feels
When the toil of life is ending,
While from earth the spirit steals,
And, on newborn plumes ascending,
Hastens to lave in the bright fount of day,
'Till Destiny prepare a shrine of purer clay.
The Druid waking, speaks.
CHORUS. It may not be. Avaunt terrific ax!
Why hangs thy bright edge glaring over the grove?
O for a giant's nerve to ward the stroke!
It bows, it falls.
Where am I? hush, my soul!
'Twas all a dream. Resume no more the strain:
The hour is past: my brethren! what ye saw,
(If what ye saw, as by your looks I read,
Bore like ill-omen'd shape) hold it in silence.
The midnight air falls chilly on my breast;
And now I shiver, now a fev'rish glow
Scorches my vitals. Hark, some step approaches.

EVELINA, CHORUS. Thus, with my wayward fears, to burst unbidden
On your dread synod, rousing, as ye seem,
From holy trance, appears a desperate deed,
Even to the wretch who dares it.

CHORUS. Virgin! quickly
Pronounce the cause.

EVELINA. Bear with a simple maid
Too prone to fear, perchance my fears are vain.

CHORUS. But yet declare them.

EVELINA. I suspect me much
The faith of these Brigantes.

CHORUS. Say thou, Virgin?
Heed what thou say; Suspicion is a guest
That in the breast of man, of ireful man,
Too often his welcome finds; yet seldom sure
In that submissive calm that smooths the mind
Of maiden innocence.

EVELINA. I know it well:
Yet must I still distrust the elder stranger:
For while he talks, (and much the flatterer talks)
His brothers silent carriage gives disproof
Of all his boast; indeed I marked it well;
And, as my father with the elder held
Bold speech and warlike, as is still his wont
When fired with hope of conquest, often I saw
A sigh unbidden heave the younger's breast,
Half checked as it was raised; sometimes, methought,
His gentle eye would cast a glance on me,
As if he pitied me; and then again
Would fasten on my father, gazing there
To veneration; then he would sigh again,
Look on the ground, and hang his modest head
Most pensively.

CHORUS. This may demand, my brethren,
More serious search: Virgin! proceed.

EVELINA. It Is true,
My father, rapt in high heroic zeal,
His every thought big with his country's freedom,
Heeds not the different carriage of these brethren,
The elder takes him wholly; yet, methinks,
The younger's manners have I know not what,
That speaks him far more artless. This besides,
Is it not strange, if, as the tale reports,
My mother sojourns with this distant queen,
She should not send or to my sire, or me,
Some fond remembrance of her love? ah! none,
With tears I speak it, none, not her dear blessing
Has reached my longing ears.

CHORUS. The gods, my brethren,
Have waked these doubts in the untainted breast
Of this mild maiden; often to female softness,
Often to the purity of virgin souls
Does heaven it is voluntary light dispense,
When victims bleed in vain. They must be spies.
Hie thee, good Cantaber, and to our presence
Summon the young Brigantian.

EVILINA. Do not that,
Or, if ye do, yet treat him nothing sternly:
The softest terms from such a tender breast
Will draw confession, and, if ye shall find
The treason ye suspect, forbear to curse him.
(Not that my weakness means to guide your wisdom)
Yet, as I think he would not wittingly
Ever do a deed of baseness, were it granted
That I might question him, my heart forbodes
It more could gain by gentleness and prayers,
Than will the fiercest threats.

CHORUS. Perchance it may:
And quickly shall thou try. But see the King!
And with him both the youths.

EVILINA. Alas! my fears
Forewent my errand, else had I informed thee
That therefore did I come, and from my father
To gain admission. Mark the younger, Druid,
How sad he seems; often did he in the cave
So fold his arms --

CHORUS. We mark him much, and much
The elder's free and dreadless confidence.
Virgin, retire a while in yonder vale,
Nor, 'till thy royal father quits the grove,
Resume thy station here.
Exit Evilina.
CARACTACUS, CHORUS, VELLINUS, ELIDURUS. Forgive me, Druid!
My eager soul no longer could sustain
The pangs of expectation; hence I sent
The virgin innocence of Evilina,
Safest to break upon your privacy:
She not returned, O pardon! that uncalled
I follow: the great cause, I trust, absolves me:
It Is yours, it is freedom's, it is the cause of heaven;
And sure heaven owns it such.

CHORUS. Caractacus,
All that by sage and sanctimonious rites
Might of the gods be asked, we have essayed,
And yet, nor to our wish, nor to their wont,
Gave they benign assent.

CARACTACUS. Death to our hopes!

CHORUS. While yet we lay in sacred slumber tranc'd,
Sullen and sad to fancy's frighted eye
Did shapes of dun and murky hue advance,
In train tumultuous, all of gesture strange,
And passing horrible; starting we waked,
Yet felt no waking calm; still all was dark,
Still rang our tinkling ears with screams of woe.
Suspicious tremors still --

VELLINUS. Of what suspicious?
Druid, our Queen --

CHORUS. Restrain thy way-ward tongue,
Insolent youth! in such licentious mood
To interupt our speech ill suits thy years,
And worse our sanctity.

CARACTACUS. It Is his distress
Makes him forget, what else his reverent zeal
Would pay ye holily. Think what he feels,
Poor youth! who fears yon moon, before she wanes,
May see his country conquered; see his mother
The victor's slave, her royal blood debased,
Dragging her chains through the thronged streets of Rome,
To grace oppression's triumph. Horrid thought!
Say, can it be that he, whose strenuous youth
Adds vigor to his virtue, ever can bear
This patiently? he comes to ask my aid,
And, that witheld, (as now he needs must fear)
What means, alas! are left? search Britain round,
What chief dares cope with Rome? what king but holds
His loan of power at a Proconsul's will,
At best a sceptered slave?

VELLINUS. Yes, Monarch, yes,
If Heaven restrains thy formidable sword,
Or to it is stroke denies that just success
Which Heaven alone can give, I fear me much
Our Queen, ourselves, nay Britain's self, must perish.

CARACTACUS. But is not this a fear makes Virtue vain?
Tears from yon ministering regents of the sky
Their right? Plucks from firm-handed Providence,
The golden reins of sublunary sway,
And gives them to blind Chance? If this be so,
If Tyranny must lord it over the earth,
There Is Anarchy in Heaven. Nay, frown not, Druid,
I do not think it is thus.

CHORUS. We trust thou do not.

CARACTACUS. Masters of Wisdom! No: my soul confides
In that all-healing and all-forming Power,
Who, on the radiant day when Time was born,
Cast his broad eye upon the wild of ocean,
And calmed it with a glance: then, plunging deep
His mighty arm, plucked from it is dark domain
This throne of Freedom, lifted it to light,
Girt it with silver cliffs, and called it Britain:
He did, and will preserve it.

CHORUS. Pious Prince,
In that all-healing and all-forming power
Still let thy soul confide; but not in men,
No, not in these, ingenuous as they seem,
'Till they are tried by that high test of faith
Our ancient laws ordain.

VELLINUS. Illustrious Seer,
Methinks our Sov'reign's signet well might plead
Her envoy's faith. Thy pardon, mighty Druid,
Not for ourselves, but for our Queen we plead;
Mistrusting us, ye wound her honor.

CHORUS. Peace;
Our will admits no parley. Thither, Youths,
Turn your astonished eyes; behold yon huge
And unhewn sphere of living adamant,
Which, poised by magic, rests it is central weight
On yonder pointed rock: firm as it seems,
Such is it is strange and virtuous property,
It moves obsequious to the gentlest touch
Of him, whose breast is pure; but to a traitor,
Tho even a giant's prowess nerv'd his arm,
It stands as fixed as Snowdon. No reply;
The Gods command that one of you must now
Approach and try it: in your snowy vests,
Ye Priests, involve the lots, and to the younger,
As is our wont, tender the choice of Fate.

ELIDURUS. Heavens! is it fallen on me?

CHORUS. Young Prince, it is;
Prepare thee for thy trial.

ELIDURUS. Gracious Gods!
Who may look up to your tremendous thrones,
And say his breast is pure? All-searching Powers,
Ye know already how and what I am;
And what ye mean to publish me in Mona,
To that I yield and tremble.

CARACTACUS. Rouse thee, Youth!
And, with that courage honest Truth supplies,
(For sure ye both are true) haste to the trial;
Behold I lead thee on.

CHORUS. Prince, we arrest
Thy hasty step; to witness this high test
Pertains to us alone. Awhile retire,
And in yon cave his brother be thy charge;
The trial past, again will we confer,
Touching that part which Heaven's deciding choice
Wills thee to act.
Exeunt Caractacus and Vellinus.
CHORUS, ELIDURUS. Now be the rites prepared:
And now, ye Bards, chaunt ye that custom'd hymn,
The prelude of this famed solemnity.

ODE.
I. 1.
THOU Spirit pure, that spread'st unseen
Thy pinions over this ponderous sphere,
And, breathing through each rigid vein,
Fill'st with stupendous life the marble mass,
And bid'st it bow upon it is base,
When sovereign Truth is near;
Spirit invisible! to thee
We swell the solemn harmony;
Hear us, and aid:
Thou, that in Virtue's cause
O'er-rulest Nature's laws,
O hear, and aid with influence high
The sons of Peace and Piety.
I. 2.
Firstborn of that ethereal tribe
Called into birth ere time or place,
Whom wave nor wind can circumscribe,
Heirs of the liquid liberty of Light,
That float on rainbow pennons bright
Through all the wilds of space,
Yet thou alone of all thy kind
Can range the regions of the mind,
Thou only know
That dark meandring maze,
Where wayward Falsehood strays,
And, seizing swift the lurking sprite,
Forces her forth to shame and light.
I. 3.
Thou can enter the dark cell
Where the vulture Conscience slumbers,
And, unarmed by charming spell,
Or magic numbers,
Can rouse her from her formidable sleep,
And bid her dart her raging talons deep;
Yet, ah! too seldom does the furious fiend
Thy bidding wait; vindictive, self-prepar'd,
She knows her torturing time; too sure to rend
The trembling heart, when Virtue quits her guard.
Pause then, celestial guest!
And, brooding on thine adamantine sphere,
If fraud approach, Spirit, that fraud declare;
To Conscience and to Mona leave the rest.

CHORUS. Heard'st thou the awful invocation, Youth,
Wrapped in those holy harpings?

ELIDURUS. Sage, I did;
And it came over my soul as does the thunder,
While distant yet, it, with expected burst
Threatens the trembling ear. Now to the trial.

CHORUS. Ere that, bethink thee well what rig'rous doom
Threatens thine act, if failing, certain death:
So certain, that in our absolving tongues
Rests not that power may save thee: Thou must die.

EVILINA, ELIDURUS, CHORUS. Die, say thou? Druid!

ELIDURUS. Evilina here!
Lead to the rock.

CHORUS. No, youth, a while we spare thee;
And, in our stead, permit this royal maiden
To urge thee first with virgin gentleness;
Respect our clemency, and meet her questions
With answers prompt and true; so may thou 'scape
A sterner trial.

ELIDURUS. Rather to the rock --

EVILINA. Do thou disdain me, Prince? Lost as I am,
Methinks the daughter of Caractacus
Might merit milder treatment: I was born
To royal hopes and promise, nursed in the lap
Of soft prosperity, alas the change!
I meant but to address a few brief words
To this young Prince, and he does turn his eye,
And scorns to answer me.

ELIDURUS. Scorn thee, sweet Maid?
No, it is the fear --

EVILINA. And can thou fear me, Youth?
Even while I led a life of royalty,
I bore myself to all with meek deportment,
In nothing harsh, or cruel: and, however
Misfortune works upon the minds of men,
(For some they say it turns to very stone)
Mine I am sure it softens. Were thou guilty.
Yet I should pity thee; nay, were thou leagued
To load this suffering heart with more misfortunes,
Still should I pity thee; nor ever believe
Thou would, on free and voluntary choice,
Betray the innocent.

ELIDURUS. Indeed I would not.

EVILINA. No, gracious Youth, I do believe thou would not:
For on thy brow the liberal hand of Heaven
Has portray'd Truth as visible and bold,
As were the pictured suns that decked the brows
Of our brave ancestors. Say then, young Prince,
(For therefore have I wished to question thee)
Bring ye no token of a mother's fondness
To her expecting child? Gentle thou seem,
And sure that gentleness would prompt thine heart
To visit, and to sooth with courteous office,
Distress like here is. A captive and a queen
Has more than common claim for pity, Prince,
And, even the ills of venerable age
Were cause enough to move thy tender nature.
The tears o'er-charge thine eye. Alas, my fears!
Sickness or sore infirmity had seized her,
Before thou left'st the palace, else her lips
Had to thy care entrusted some kind message,
And blessed her hapless daughter by thy tongue.
Would she were here!

ELIDURUS. Would Heaven she were!

EVILINA. Ah why?

ELIDURUS. Because you wish it.

EVILINA. Thanks, ingenuous youth,
For this thy courtesy. Yet, if the queen
Thy mother shines with such rare qualities,
As late thy brother boasted, she will calm
Her woes, and I shall clasp her aged knees
Again, in peace and liberty. -- Alas!
He speaks not; all my fears are just.

ELIDURUS. What fears?
The Queen Guideria is not dead.

EVILINA. Not dead!
But is she in that sacred state of freedom,
Which we were taught to hope? Why sigh'st thou, Youth?
Thy years have yet been prosperous. Did thy father
Ever lose his kingdom? Did captivity
Ever seize thy shrieking mother? thou can go
To yonder cave, and find thy brother safe:
He is not lost, as mine is. Youth, thou sigh'st
Again; thou have not sure such cause for sorrow;
But if thou have, give me thy griefs, I pray thee;
I have a heart can softly sympathize,
And sympathy is soothing.

ELIDURUS. O gods! gods!
She tears my soul. What shall I say?

EVILINA. Perchance,
For all in this bad world must have their woes,
Thou too have thine; and may, like me, be wretched
Happily amid the ruinous waste of war,
'Mid that wild havoc, which these sons of blood
Bring on our groaning country, some chaste maid,
Whose tender soul was linked by love to thine,
Might fall the trembling prey to Roman rage,
Even at the golden hour, when holy rites
Had sealed your virtuous vows. If it were so,
Indeed I pity her!

ELIDURUS. Not that: not that.
Never 'till now did beauty's matchless beam --
But I am dumb.

EVILINA. Why that dejected eye?
And why this silence? that some weighty grief
O'erhangs thy soul, thy every look proclaims.
Why then refuse it words? The heart, that bleeds
From any stroke of fate or human wrongs,
Loves to disclose itself, that listening pity
May drop a healing tear upon the wound.
It Is only, when with inbred horror smote
At some base act, or done, or to be done,
That the recoiling soul, with conscious dread,
Shrinks back into itself. But thou, good youth --

ELIDURUS. Cease, royal maid! permit, me to depart. --

EVILINA. Yet hear me, stranger! Truth and Secrecy,
Though friends, are seldom necessary friends --

ELIDURUS. I go to try my truth --

EVILINA. O! go not hence,
In wrath; think not, that I suspect thy virtue:
Yet ignorance may often make virtue slide,
And if --

ELIDURUS. In pity spare me.

EVILINA. If thy brother --
Nay, start not, do not turn thine eye from mine;
Speak, I conjure thee, is his purpose honest?
I know the guilty price, that barbarous Rome
Sets on my father's head; and gold, vile gold,
Has now a charm for Britons: Bribed by this,
Should he betray him -- Yes, I see thou shudder'st
At the dire thought; yet not, as if 'twere strange;
But as our fears were mutual. Ah, young stranger;
That open face scarce needs a tongue to utter
What works within. Come then, ingenuous Prince,
And instant make discovery to the Druid,
While yet it is not too late.

ELIDURUS. Ah! what discover?
Say, whom must I betray?

EVILINA. Thy brother.

ELIDURUS. Ha!

EVILINA. Who is no brother, if his guilty soul
Teems with such perfidy. O all ye stars!
Can he be brother to a youth like thee,
Who would betray an old and honored King,
That King his countryman, and one whose prowess
Once guarded Britain against the assailing world?
Can he be brother to a youth like thee,
Who from a young, defenseless, innocent maid,
Would take that King her father? Make her suffer
All that an orphan suffers? More perchance:
The ruffian foe. -- O tears, ye choke my utterance!
Can he be brother to a youth like thee,
Who would defile his soul by such black deeds?
It cannot be -- And yet, thou still are silent.
Turn, youth, and see me weep. Ah, see me kneel:
I am of royal blood, not wont to kneel,
Yet will I kneel to thee. O save my father!
Save a distressful maiden from the force
Of barbarous men! Be thou a brother to me,
For mine alas! hah!
[Sees Arviragus entering.
ARVIRAGUS, EVILINA, ELIDURUS, CHORUS. Evilina rise!
Know, maid, I never will tamely see thee kneel,
Even at the foot of Caesar

EVILINA. It Is himself:
And he will prove my father's fears were false,
False, as his son is brave. Thou best of brothers.
Come to my arms. Where have thou been, thou wanderer?
How were thou saved? indeed, Arviragus,
I never shed such tears, since thou were lost,
For these are tears of rapture.

ARVIRAGUS. Evelina!
Fain would I greet thee, as a brother ought:
But wherefore did thou kneel?

EVELINA. O! ask not now.

ARVIRAGUS. By heaven I must, and he must answer me,
Who'er he be. What art thou, sullen stranger?

ELIDURUS. A Briton.

ARVIRAGUS. Brief and bold.

EVELINA. Ah, spare the taunt:
He merits not thy wrath. Behold the Druids;
Lo, they advance: with holy reverence first
Thou must address their sanctity.

ARVIRAGUS. I will.
But see, proud Boy, thou do not quit the grove,
Till Time allows us parley.

ELIDURUS. Prince, I mean not.

ARVIRAGUS. Sages, and Sons of Heaven! Illustrious Druids!
Abruptly I approach your sacred Presence:
Yet such dire tidings --

CHORUS. On thy peril peace!
Thou standst accused, and by a Father's voice,
Of crimes abhorred, of Cowardice and Flight;
And therefore may not in these sacred groves
Utter polluted accents. Quickly say,
Wherefore thou fledst? For that base fact unclear'd
We hold no further converse.

ARVIRAGUS. O ye Gods!
Am I the Son of your Caractacus?
And could I fly?

CHORUS. Waste not or Time or Words:
But tell us, why thou fledst?

ARVIRAGUS. I fled not, Druid!
By the great Gods I fled not! Save to stop
Our dastard troops, that bafely turned their backs.
I stopped, I rallied them, when lo a shaft
Of random cast did level me with Earth,
Where pale and senseless, as the slain around me,
I lay till midnight: Then, as from long trance
Awoke, I crawled upon my feeble Limbs
To a lone cottage, where a pitying Hind
Lodged me and nourished me. My strength repaired,
It boots not that I tell, what humble arts
Compelled I used to screen me from the foe.
How now a peasant from a beggarly scrip
I sold cheap food to slaves, that named the price,
Nor after gave it. Now a Minstrel poor
With ill-tun'd Harp and uncouth descant shrill
I plied a thriftless trade, and by such shifts
Did win Obscurity to shroud my name.
At length to other conquests in the north
Ostorius led his legions: Safer now,
Yet not secure, I to some valiant Chiefs,
Whom War had spared, discovered, what I was;
And with them plan'd, how surest we might draw
Our scattered forces to some rocky fastness
In rough Caernarvon, there to breathe in freedom,
If not with brave incursion to oppress
The thinly-station'd foe. And soon our art
So well availed, that now at Snowdon's foot
Full twenty troops of hardy veterans wait
To call my Sire their leader.

CHORUS. Valiant Youth --

EVELINA. He is -- I said, he was a valiant Youth,
Nor has he shamed his race.

CHORUS. We do believe
Thy modest tale: And may the righteous Gods
Thus ever shed upon thy noble breast
Discretion's cooling dew. When nurtured so,
Then, only then, does Valor bloom mature.

ARVIRAGUS. Yet vain is Valor howsoe'er it bloom:
Druid, the Gods frown on us. All my hopes
Are blasted; I shall never rejoin my Friends
Never bless them with my Father. Holy Men,
I have a tale to tell, will shake your Souls.
Your Mona is invaded, Rome approaches,
Even to these Groves approaches.

SEMICHORUS. Horror! Horror!

ARVIRAGUS. Late, as I landed on you highest beach,
Where nodding from the rocks the Poplars fling
Their scattered arms, and dash them in the wave,
There were their Vessels moored, as if they sought
Concealment 'mid the shade, and as I past
Up you thick-planted ridge, I spied their helms
'Mid brakes and boughs trench'd in the heath below
Where like a nest of night-worms did they glitter,
Sprinkling the plain with brightness. On I sped
With silent step, yet often did pass so near,
'Twas next to prodigy, I 'scap'd unseen.

CHORUS. Their number, Prince?

ARVIRAGUS. Few, if mine hasty Eye
Did find, and count them all.

CHORUS. O Brethren, Brethren,
Treason and sacrilege, worse foes than Rome,
Have led Rome hither. Instant seize that wretch,
And bring him to our presence.

CHORUS, ELIDURUS, ARVIRAGUS. Say thou, false one!
What doom befits the slave, who sells his country?

ELIDURUS. Death, sudden death!

CHORUS. No, lingering peace-meal death;
And to such death thy brother and thyself
We now devote. Villain, thy deeds are known,
It Is known, ye led the impious Romans hither
To slaughter us even on our holy Altars.

ELIDURUS. That on my soul does lie some secret grief,
These looks perforce will tell: It is not fear,
Druids, it is not fear, that shakes me thus;
The great Gods know, it is not: Ye can never:
For, what though Wisdom lifts ye next those Gods,
Ye cannot, like to them, unlock Men's breasts,
And read their inmost thoughts. Ah! that ye could.

ARVIRAGUS. What have thou done?

ELIDURUS. What, Prince, I will not tell.

CHORUS. Wretch, there are means --

ELIDURUS. I know, and terrible means;
And it is both fit, that you should try those means,
And I endure them: Yet I think, my patience
Will for some space baffle your torturing fury.

CHORUS. Be that best known, when our inflicted goads
Harrow thy flesh!

ARVIRAGUS. Stranger, ever this is tried,
Confess the whole of thy black perfidy;
So black, that when I look upon thy youth,
Read thy mild eye, and mark thy modest brow,
I think indeed, thou durst not.

ELIDURUS. Such a crime
Indeed, I durst not; and would rather be
The very wretch, thou see. I Will speak no more.

CHORUS. Brethren it is so. The Virgins thoughts were just:
This Youth has been deceived.

ELIDURUS. Yes, one Word more.
You say, the Romans have invaded Mona.
Give me a sword and twenty honest Britons,
And I will quell those Romans. Vain demand!
Alas! you cannot: Ye are Men of Peace:
Religion's self forbids. Lead then to torture.

ARVIRAGUS. Now on my Soul this Youth does move me much.

CHORUS. Think not, Religion and our holy Office
Does teach us tamely, like the bleating Lamb,
To crouch before Oppression, and with neck
Outstretch'd await the stroke. Mistaken Boy!
Did not strict Justice claim thee for her Victim,
We might full safely send thee to these Romans,
Inviting their hot charge. Know, when I blow
That sacred Trumpet bound with sable fillets
To yonder branching Oak, the awful sound
Calls forth a thousand Britons trained alike
In holy and in martial exercise,
Not by such mode and rule, as Romans use,
But of that fierce potentous horrible sort,
As shall appall even Romans.

ELIDURUS. Gracious Gods!
Then there are hopes indeed. O call them instant
This Prince will lead them on: I Will follow him,
Though in my Chains, and some way dash them round
To harm the haughty foe.

ARVIRAGUS. A thousand Britons,
And armed! O instant blow the sacred trump,
And let me head them. Yet methinks this Youth. --

CHORUS. I know, what thou would say, might join thee, Prince.
True, were he free from crime, or had confessed.

ELIDURUS. Confessed. Ah, think not, I will ever --

ARVIRAGUS. Reflect.
Either thyself or brother must have wronged us:
Then why conceal --

ELIDURUS. Have thou a Brother? no!
Else had thou spared the word; and yet a sister
Lovely as thine might more than teach thee, Prince,
What it is to have a Brother. Hear me, Druids,
Though I would prize an hour of Freedom now,
Before an age of any after date:
Though I would seize it, as the gift of heaven,
And use it as heaven's gift: yet do not think,
I so will purchase it. Give it me freely,
I yet will spurn the boon, and hug my Chains,
Till you do swear by your own hoary heads,
My Brother shall be safe.

CHORUS. Excellent Youth!
Thy words do speak thy soul, and such a soul,
As wakes our wonder. Thou art free; thy Brother
Shall be thine honor's pledge; so will we use him,
As thou art false, or true.

ELIDURUS. I ask no other.

ARVIRAGUS. Thus then, my fellow soldier, to thy clasp
I give the hand of Friendship. Noble Youth,
We'll speed, or die together

CHORUS. Hear us Prince!
Mona permits not, that he fight her battles,
Till duly purified: For, tho his Soul
Took up unwittingly this deed of baseness,
Yet is Lustration meet. Learn, that in Vice
There is a noisome rankness unperceived
By gross corporeal sense, which so offends
Heaven's pure Divinities, as us the stench
Of vapor wafted from sulphurous pool,
Or poisonous weed obscene. Hence does the Man,
Who even converses with a villain, need
As much purgation, as the pallid wretch
'Scap'd from the walls, where frowning Pestilence
Spreads wide her livid Banners. For this cause
Ye Priests, conduct the Youth to yonder grove,
And do the needful rites.
[Exeunt Priests with Elidurus. Mean while ourself
Will lead thee, Prince, unto thy Father's presence.
-- But hold, the King comes forth.

CARACTACUS, ARVIRAGUS, CHORUS, EVELINA. My son! My son!
What joy, what transport, does thine aged sire
Feel in these filial foldings! Speak not, boy,
Nor interrupt that heartfelt ecstacy
Should strike us mute. I know, what thou would say,
Yet prithee, peace. Thy sister's voice has cleared thee,
And could excuse find words at this blessed moment,
Trust me, I Would give it vent. But, it is enough,
Thy father welcomes thee to him and honor:
Honor, that now with rapturous certainty
Calls thee his own true offspring. Do thou weep?
Ah, if thy tears swell not from joy's free spring,
I beg thee, spare them: I have done thee wrong,
Can make thee no atonement: None, alas!
Thy father scarce can bless thee, as he ought;
Unblest himself, beset with Foes around,
Bereft of queen, of kingdom, and of soldiers,
He can but give thee portion of his dangers,
Perchance and of his chains: Yet droop not, boy,
Virtue is still thine own.

ARVIRAGUS. It is, my father;
Pure as from thine illustrious fount it came;
And that unsullied, let the world oppress us;
Let Fraud and Falsehood rivet fetters on us;
Still shall our souls be free: Yet Hope is ours,
As well as Virtue.

CARACTACUS. Spoken like a Briton.
True, Hope is ours, and therefore let us prepare:
The moments now are precious. Tell us, Druid,
Is it not meet, we see the bands drawn out,
And mark their due array?

CHORUS. Monarch, even now
They skirt the grove.

CARACTACUS. Then let us to their front. --

CHORUS. But is the traitor-youth in safety lodged?

CARACTACUS. Druid, he fled --

CHORUS. O fatal flight to Mona!

CARACTACUS. But what of that? Arviragus is here,
My son is here, then let the traitor go,
By this he has joined the Romans: Let him join them,
A single arm, and that a villain's arm,
Can lend but little aid to any powers
Opposed to Truth and Virtue. Come, my son,
Let Us to the troops, and marshall them with speed.
That done, we from these venerable men
Will claim their ready blessing: Then to battle;
And the swift sun even at his purple dawn
Shall spy us crowned with conquest, or with death.
[Exeunt Caractacus and Arviragus.
CHORUS, EVELINA. What may his flight portend! Say, Evelina,
How came this youth to 'scape?

EVELINA. And that to tell
Will fix much blame on my impatient folly:
For, ere your hallowed lips had given permission,
I flew with eager haste to bear my father
News of his son's return. Enflamed with that,
Think, how a sister's zealous breast must glow!
Your looks give mild assent. I glowed indeed
With the dear tale, and sped me in his ear
To pour the precious tidings: But my tongue
Scarce named Arviragus, ere the false stranger
(As I bethink me since) with stealthy pace
Fled to the cavern's mouth.

CHORUS. The king pursued?

EVELINA. Alas! he marked him not, for 'twas the moment,
When he had all to ask and all to fear,
Touching my brother's valor. Hitherto
His safety only, which but little moved him,
Had reached his ears: But when my tongue unfolded
The story of his bravery and his peril,
O how the tears cours'd plenteous down his cheeks!
How did he lift unto the heavens his hands
In speechless transport! Yet he soon bethought him
Of Rome's invasion, and with fiery glance
Surveyed the cavern round; then snatched his spear,
And menaced to pursue the flying traitor:
But I with prayers (O pardon, if they erred)
Witheld his step, for to the left the youth
Had winged his way, where the thick underwood
Afforded sure retreat. Besides, if found,
Was age a match for youth?

CHORUS. Maiden, enough.
Better perchance for us, if he was captive:
But in the justice of their cause, and heaven,
Do Mona's sons confide.

BARD, CHORUS, ELIDURUS, EVELINA. Druid, the rites
Are finished, all save that which crowns the rest,
And which pertains to thy blessed hand alone:
For that he kneels before thee.

CHORUS. Take him hence,
We may not trust him forth to fight our cause.

ELIDURUS. Now by Andraste's throne --

CHORUS. Nay, swear not, youth,
The tie is broke, that held thy fealty:
Thy brother's fled.

ELIDURUS. Fled!

CHORUS. To the Romans fled.
Yes, thou have cause to tremble.

ELIDURUS. Ah, Vellinus!
Does thus our love, does thus our friendship end!
Was I thy brother, youth, and have thou left me!
Yes; and how left me, cruel, as thou art,
The victim of thy crimes!

CHORUS. True, thou must die.

ELIDURUS. I pray ye then on your best mercy, Fathers,
It may be speedy. I would fain be dead,
If this be life. Yet I must doubt even that,
For falsehood of this strange stupendous sort
Sets firm-ey'd Reason on a gaze, mistrusting,
That what she sees in palpable plain form,
The stars in yon blue arch, these woods, these caverns,
Are all mere tricks of cozenage, nothing real,
The vision of a vision. If he is fled,
I ought to hate this brother.

CHORUS. Yet thou do not.

ELIDURUS. But when Astonishment will give me leave,
Perchance I shall. -- And yet he is my brother,
And he was virtuous once. Yes, ye vile Romans,
Yes, I must die, before my thirsty sword
Drinks one rich drop of vengeance. Yet, ye robbers,
Yet will I curse you with my dying lips:
'Twas you, that stole away my brother's virtue.

CHORUS. Now then prepare to die.

ELIDURUS. I am prepared.
Yet, since I cannot now (what most I wished)
By manly prowess guard this lovely maid:
Permit, that on your holiest earth I kneel,
And pour one fervent prayer for her protection.
Allow me this, for though you think me false,
The gods will hear me.

EVELINA. I can hold no longer!
O Druid, Druid, at thy feet I fall:
Yes, I must plead (away with virgin-blushes)
For such a youth must plead. I Will die to save him,
O take my life, and let him fight for Mona.

CHORUS. Virgin, arise. His virtue has redeemed him,
And he shall fight for thee and for his country.
Youth, thank us with thy deeds. The time is short,
And now with reverence take our high lustration:
Thrice do we sprinkle thee with daybreak dew
Shook from the May-thorn blossom; twice and thrice
Touch we thy forehead with our holy wand:
Now thou art fully purged. Now rise restored
To virtue and to us. Hence then my son,
Hie thee to yonder altar, where our Bards
Shall arm thee duly both with helm and sword
For warlike enterprise.
[Exit Elidurus.
CARACTACUS, CHORUS, ARVIRAGUS, EVELINA. It Is true, my Son,
Bold are their bearings, and I fear me not
But they have hearts will not belie their looks.
I like them well. Yet would to righteous heaven
Those valiant Veterans, that on Snowdon guard
Their scanty pittance of bleak Liberty,
Were here to join them: we would teach these wolves,
Though we permit their rage to prowl our coasts,
That Vengeance waits them ere they rob our altars.
Druid, all hail! we find thy valiant guards
Accoutred so, as well bespeaks the wisdom,
That framed their phalanx. We but wait thy blessing
To lead them against the foe.

CHORUS. Caractacus!
Behold this sword: The sword of old Belinus,
Stained with the blood of giants, and its name
TRIFINGUS. Many an age its charmed blade
Has slept within you consecrated trunk.
Lo, I unsheath it, king; I wave it over thee;
Mark, what portentous streams of scarlet light
Flow from the brandished falchion. On thy knee
Receive the sacred pledge. -- And mark our words.
By the bright circle of the golden Sun,
By the brief courses of the errant Moon,
By the dread potency of every Star
In the mysterious Zodiac's burning girth,
By each, and all of these supernal signs,
We do adjure thee with this trusty blade,
To guard yon central oak, whose holy stem
Involves the spirit of high Taranis:
This be thy charge; to which in aid we join
Ourselves, and our sage brethren. With our vassals
Thy son and the Brigantian prince shall make
Incursion on the foe.

CARACTACUS. In this, and all,
Your holy will be done. Yet surely, Druid,
The fresh and active vigor of these youths
Might better suit with this important charge.
Not that my heart shrinks at the glorious task,
But will with ready zeal pour forth its blood
Upon the sacred roots, my firmest courage
Might fail to save. Think, Fathers, I am old;
And if I fell the foremost in the onset,
Should leave a son behind, might still defend you.

CHORUS. The sacred adjuration we have uttered
May never be recalled.

CARACTACUS. Then be it so.
Yet do not think, I counsel this through fear:
Old as I am, I trust with half our powers
I could drive back these Romans to their ships;
Dastards, that come as does the cow'ring fowler
To tangle me with snares and take me tamely;
Slaves, they shall find, that ere they gain their prey,
They have to hunt it boldly with barb'd spears,
And meet such conflict, as the chafed boar
Gives to his stout assailants. O ye gods!
That I might instant face them.

CHORUS. Be thy son's
The onset.

ARVIRAGUS. From his soul that son does thank ye,
Blessing the wisdom, that preserves his father
Thus to the last. O if the favoring gods
Direct this arm, if their high will permit,
I pour a prosperous vengeance on the foe,
I ask for life no longer, than to crown
The valiant task. Steel then, ye powers of heaven,
Steel my firm soul with your own fortitude,
Free from alloy of passion. Give me courage,
That knows not rage; revenge, that knows not malice;
Let me not thirst for carnage, but for conquest:
And, conquest gained, sleep vengeance in my breast,
Ere in its sheath my sword.

CARACTACUS. O hear his father!
If ever rashness spurred me on, great gods,
To acts of danger thirsting for renown;
If ever my eager soul pursued its course
Beyond just reason's limit, visit not
My faults on him. I am the thing, you made me,
Vindictive, bold, precipitate, and fierce:
But as you gave to him a milder mind,
O bless him, bless him with a milder fate!

EVELINA. Nor yet unheard let Evelina pour
Her prayers and tears. O hear a hapless maid,
That even through half the years, her life has numbered,
Even nine long years has dragged a trembling being,
Beset with pains and perils. Give her peace;
And, to endear it more, be that blessed peace
Won by her brother's sword. O bless his arm,
And bless his valiant followers, One, and all.

ELIDURUS entering armed. Hear heaven! and let this pure and virgin prayer
Plead even for Elidurus, whose sad soul
Cannot look up to your immortal thrones,
And urge his own request: Else would he ask,
That all the dangers of the approaching fight
Might fall on him alone: That every spear
The Romans wield might at his breast be aimed;
Each arrow darted on his rattling helm;
That so the brother of this beauteous maid,
Returning safe with victory and peace,
Might bear them to her bosom.

CHORUS Now rise all,
And heaven, that knows, what most ye ought to ask,
Grant all, ye ought to have. The stars on high
Are faded now, and darkness reigns over all.
Now is the dreadful hour, now will our torches
Glare with more livid horror, now our shrieks
And clanking arms will more appall the foe.
But heed, ye Bards, that for the sign of onset
Ye sound the antientest of all your rhymes,
Whose birth tradition notes not, nor who framed
Its lofty strains: The force of that high air
Did Julius feel, when, fired by it, our fathers
First drove him recreant to his Ships; and ill
Had fared his second landing, but that Fate
Silenced the master Bard, who led the song.
Now forth, brave Pair! Go, with our blessing go;
Mute be the march, as ye ascend the hill:
Then, when ye hear the sound of our shrill trumpet,
Fall on the foe.

CARACTACUS. Now glory be thy guide;
Pride of my soul, go forth and conquer.

EVELINA. Brother,
Yet one embrace. O thou much honored Stranger,
I charge thee fight by my dear brother's side,
And shield him from the foe; for he is brave,
And will with bold and well-directed arm
Return thy succor.
[Exeunt Arviragus and Elidurus.
CHORUS. Now, ye Priests,
Strew on the altar's height your sacred leaves,
And light the morning flame. But why is this?
Why does our brother Mador snatch his harp
From yonder bough? why this way bend his step?

CARACTACUS. He is entranced. The fillet bursts, that bound
His liberal locks; his snowy vestments fall
In ampler folds; and all his floating form
Does seem to glisten with divinity!
Yet is he speechless. Say, thou Chief of Bards,
What is there in this airy vacancy,
That thou with fiery and irregular glance
Should scan thus wildly? wherefore heaves thy breast?
Why starts --

ODE.
1. 1.
Hark! heard ye not yon footstep dread,
That shook the earth with thundering tread?
'Twas Death. -- In haste
The Warrior past;
High tower'd his helmed head:
I marked his mail, I marked his shield,
I 'spi'd the sparkling of his spear,
I saw his giant-arm the falchion wield;
Wide waved the bick'ring blade, and fired the angry air.
1. 2.
On me (he cried) my Britons, wait.
To lead you to the field of fate
I come: Yon car,
That cleaves the air,
Descends to throne my state:
I mount your Champion, and your God.
My proud steeds neigh beneath the thong:
Hark! to my wheels of brass, that rattle loud!
Hark! to my Here one of the Druids blows the sacred trumpet.
clarion shrill, that brays the woods among!
1. 3.
Fear not now the fever's fire,
Fear not now the deathbed groan,
Pangs that torture, pains that tire,
Bedridden age with feeble moan:
These domestic terrors wait
Hourly at my palace gate;
And when over slothful realms my rod I wave,
These on the tyrant king and coward slave Rush with vindictive rage, and drag
them to their grave.
2. 1.
But you, my Sons, at this high hour
Shall share the fullness of my power:
From all your bows,
In levelled rows,
My own dread shafts shall shower.
Go then to conquest, gladly go,
Deal forth my dole of destiny,
With all my fury dash the trembling foe
Down to those darksome dens, where Rome's pale specter lie.
2. 2.
Where creeps the ninefold stream profound.
Her black inexorable round,
And on the bank,
To willows dank,
The shivering ghosts are bound.
Twelve thousand crescents all shall swell
To full-orb'd pride, and all decline,
Ere they again in life's gay mansions dwell:
Not such the meed that crowns the sons of freedom's line.
2. 3.
No, my Britons! battle-slain,
Rapture gilds your parting hour:
I, that all despotic reign,
Claim but there a moment's power.
Swiftly the soul of British flame
Animates some kindred frame,
Swiftly to life and light triumphant flies,
Exults again in martial ecstacies,
Again for freedom fights, again for freedom dies.

CARACTACUS. It does, it does! unconquered, undismaid,
The British soul revives -- Champion, lead on,
I follow -- give me way. Some blessed shaft
Will rid me of this clog of cumb'rous age;
And I again shall in some happier mould
Rise to redeem my country.

CHORUS. Stay thee, Prince,
And mark what clear and amber-skirted clouds
Rise from the altar's verge, and cleave the skies:
O it is a prosperous omen! Soon expect
To hear glad tidings.

CARACTACUS. I will send them to thee.

CHORUS. But see, a Bard approaches, and he bears them:
Else is his eye no herald to his heart.

BARD, CHORUS, CARACTACUS, CARACTACUS. Speedily tell thy tale.

BARD. A tale like mine,
I trust your ears will willingly pursue
Through each glad circumstance. First, Monarch, learn,
The Roman troop is fled.

CHORUS. Great gods, we thank ye!

CARACTACUS. Fought they not ere they fled? O tell me all.

BARD. Silent, as night, that wrapped us in her veil,
We paced up yonder hill, whose woody ridge
O'erhung the ambush'd foe. No sound was heard,
Step felt, or sight descried: for safely hid,
Beneath the purple pall of sacrifice
Did sleep our holy fire, nor saw the air,
Till to that pass we came, where whilom Brute
Planted his five hoar altars. To our rites
Then swift we hasted, and in one short moment
Each rocky pile was clothed with livid flame.
Near each a white-rob'd Druid, whose stern voice
Thundered deep execrations on the foe.
Now waked our horrid symphony, now all
Our harps terrific rang: Meanwhile the grove
Trembled, the altars shook, and through our ranks
Our sacred sisters rushed in sable robes,
With hair disheveled and funereal brands
Hurled round with menacing fury. On they rushed
In fierce and frantic mood, as is their wont
Amid the magic rites, they do to night
In our deep dens below. Motions like these
Were never dared before in open air!

CHORUS. Did I not say we had a power within us,
That might appall even Romans?

BARD. And it did.
They stood aghast, and to our vollied darts,
That thick as hail fell on their helms and corslets,
Scarce raised a warding shield. The sacred trumpet
Then rent the air, and instant at the signal
Rushed down Arviragus with all our vassals;
A hot, but short-lived, conflict then ensued:
For soon they fled. I saw the Romans fly,
Before I left the field.

CARACTACUS. My son pursued?

BARD. The prince and Elidurus, like twin lions,
Did side by side engage. Death seemed to guide
Their swords, no stroke fell fruitless, every wound
Gave him a victim.

CARACTACUS. Thus my friend Ebrancus!
Ill-fated prince! did thou and I in youth
Unite our valors. In his prime he fell,
On Conway's banks. I saw him fall, and slew
His murderer. -- But how far did they pursue?

BARD. Even to the ships: For I descried the rout,
Far as the twilight gleam would aid my sight.

CARACTACUS. Now, thanks to the bright star, that ruled his birth;
Yes, he will soon return to claim my blessing,
And he shall have it poured in tears of joy
On his bold breast! methought, I heard a step:
Is it not his?

BARD. It Is some of our own train,
And, as I think, they lead six Romans captive.

CHORUS, CARACTACUS, CAPTIVES. My brethren, bear the prisoners to the cavern,
Till we demand them.

CARACTACUS. Pause ye yet a while.
They seem of bold demeanor, and have helms,
That speak them leaders. Hear me, Romans, hear.
That you are captives, is the chance of war:
Yet captives as ye are, in Britain's eye
You are not slaves. Barbarians though you call us,
We know the native rights, man claims from man,
And therefore never shall we gall your necks
With chains, or drag you at our scythed cars
In arrogance of triumph. Nor, till taught
By Rome (what Britain sure should scorn to learn)
Her avarice, will we barter ye for gold.
True ye are captives, and our country's safety
Forbids, we give you back to liberty:
We give ye therefore to the immortal gods,
To them we lift ye in the radiant cloud
Of sacrifice. They may in limbs of freedom
Replace your freeborn souls, and their high mercy
Happily shall to some better world advance you;
Or else in this restore that golden gift,
Which lost, leaves life a burden. Does there breathe
A wretch so 'pall'd with the vain fear of death
Can call this cruelty? it is love, it is mercy,
And grant, ye gods, if ere I Am made a captive
I meet the like fair treatment from the foe,
Whose stronger star quells mine. Now lead them on,
And, while they live, treat them, as men should men,
And not, as Rome treats Britain.
[Exeunt Captives. Druid, these,
Even should their chief escape, may blaze tomorrow
Our gratitude -- Whence was that shriek?

EVELINA, CARACTACUS, CHORUS. My father,
Support me, take me trembling to your arms;
All is not well. Ah me, my fears overcome me!

CARACTACUS. What means my child?

EVELINA. Alas! we are betrayed.
Even now, as wandering in yon eastern grove
I called the gods to aid us, the dread sound
Of many hasty steps did meet mine ear:
This way they pressed.

CARACTACUS. Daughter, thy fears are vain.

EVELINA. Methought I saw the flame of lighted brands,
And what did glitter to my dazzled sight,
Like swords and helms.

CARACTACUS. All, all the feeble coinage
Of maiden fear.

EVELINA. Nay, if mine ear mistook not,
I heard the traitor's voice, who that way 'scap'd,
Calling to arms.

CARACTACUS. Away with idle terrors!
Know, thy brave brother's crest is crowned with conquest,
The Romans fled, their leaders are our captives.
Smile, my loved child, and imitate the sun,
That rises ruddy from behind yon oaks
To hail him victor.

CHORUS. That the rising sun!
O horror! horror! sacrilegious fires
Devour our groves: They blaze, they blaze! O sound
The trump again; recall the prince, or all
Is lost!

CARACTACUS. Druid, where is thy fortitude?
Do not I live? Is not this holy sword
Firm in my grasp? I will preserve your groves.
Britons, I go: Let those, that dare die nobly,
Follow my step.
[Exit Caractacus.
EVELINA. O whither does he go?
Return, return: Ye holy men, recall him.
What is his arm against a host of Romans?
O I have lost a father!

CHORUS. Ruthless gods!
Ye take away our souls: A general panic
Reigns through the grove. O fly, my brethren, fly,
To aid the king, fly to preserve your altars!
Alas! it is all in vain; our fate is fixed.
Look there, look there, thou miserable maid!
Behold thv bleeding brother.

ARVIRAGUS, ELIDURUS, EVELINA, CHORUS. Thanks, good youth:
Safe have thou brought me to that holy spot,
Where I did wish to die. Support me still.
O, I am sick to death. Yet one step more:
Now lay me gently down. I would drag out
This life, though at some cost of throbs and pangs,
Just long enough to claim my father's blessing,
And sigh my last breath in my sister's arms.
-- And here she kneels, poor maid! all dumb with grief.
Restrain thy sorrow, gentlest Evelina,
True thou do see me bleed; I bleed to death.

EVELINA. Say thou to death? O gods! the barbed shaft
Is buried in his breast. Yes, he must die;
And I, alas! am doomed to see him die.
Where are your healing arts, medicinal herbs,
Ye holy men, your wonder-working spells?
Pluck me but out this shaft, staunch but this blood,
And I will call down blessings on your heads
With such a fervency. -- And can ye not!
Then let me beg you on my bended knee,
Give to my misery some opiate drug,
May shut up all my senses. -- Yes, good fathers,
Mingle the potion so, that it may kill me
Just at the instant, this poor languisher
Heaves his last sigh.

ARVIRAGUS. Talk not thus wildly, sister,
Think on our father's age. --

EVELINA. Alas! my brother!
We have no father now; or if we have,
He is a captive.

ARVIRAGUS. Captive! O my wound!
It stings me now. -- But is it so? [turning to the Chorus.

CHORUS. Alas!
We know no more, save that he sallied single
To meet the foe, whose unexpected host
Round by the east had wound their fraudful march,
And fired our groves.

ELIDURUS. O fatal, fatal valor!
Then is he seized, or slain.

ARVIRAGUS. Too sure he is!
Druid, not half the Romans met our swords;
We found the fraud too late: the rest are yonder.

CHORUS. How could they gain the pass?

ARVIRAGUS. The wretch, that fled
That way, returned, conducting half their powers;
And -- But thy pardon, youth, I will not wound thee,
He is thy brother.

ELIDURUS. Thus my honest sword
Shall force the blood from the detested heart,
That holds alliance with him.

ARVIRAGUS. Elidurus,
Hold, on our friendship, hold. Thou noble youth,
Look on this innocent maid. She must to Rome,
Captive to Rome. Thou see warm life flow from me,
Ere long she will have no brother. Heaven's my witness,
I do not wish, that thou should live the slave
Of Rome: But yet she is my sister.

ELIDURUS. Prince,
Thou urgest that, might make me drag an age
In fetters worse than Roman. I will live,
And while I live --

Enter BARD. Fly to your caverns, Druids,
The grove's beset around. The chief approaches.

CHORUS. Let him approach, we will confront his pride,
The chief that rules amid the groves of Mona
Has not to fear his fury. What though age
Slackens our sinews; what though shield, and sword
Give not their iron aid to guard our body;
Yet virtue arms our soul, and against that panoply
What 'vails the rage of robbers. Let him come.

ARVIRAGUS. I faint apace. -- Ye venerable men,
If ye can save this body from pollution,
If ye can tomb me in this sacred place,
I trust, ye will. I fought to save these groves,
And, fruitless though I fought, some grateful oak,
I trust, will spread its reverential gloom
Over my pale ashes. -- Ah! that pang was death!
My sister, Oh! --
[dies.
ELIDURUS. She faints! Ah raise her! --

EVELINA. Yes,
Now he is dead. I felt his spirit go
In a cold sigh, and as it past, methought
It paused a while, and trembled on my lips!
Take me not from him: Breathless as he is,
He is my brother still, and if the gods
Do please to grace him with some happier being,
They never can give to him a fonder sister.

CHORUS. Brethren, surround the corse, and, ere the foe
Approaches, chaunt with meet solemnity
That grateful dirge your dying champion claims.

SEMICHORUS. Lo, where incumbent over the shade
Rome's ravening eagle bows her beaked head!
Yet while a moment fate affords,
While yet a moment freedom stays,
That moment, which outweighs
Eternity's unmeasured hoards,
Shall Mona's grateful Bards employ
To hymn their godlike Hero to the sky.

SEMICHORUS. Ring out, ye mortal strings;
Answer thou heavenly harp, instinct with spirit all,
That over the jasper arch self-warbling swings
Of blessed Andraste's throne:
Thy sacred sounds alone
Can celebrate the fall
Of bold Arviragus --
[Enter Aulus Didius and Romans.
AULUS DIDIUS, CHORUS, EVELINA, ELIDURUS. Ye bloody priests,
Behold, we burst on your infernal rites,
And bid ye pause. Instant restore our soldiers,
Nor hope that superstition's ruthless step
Shall wade in Roman gore. Ye savage men,
Did not our laws give license to all faiths,
We would o'erturn your altars, headlong heave
These shapeless symbols of your barbarous gods,
And let the golden sun into your caves.

CHORUS. Servant of Caesar, has thine impious tongue
Spent the black venom of thy blasphemy?
It has. Then take our curses on thine head,
Even his fell curses, who does reign in Mona
Vicegerent of those gods thy pride insults.

AULUS DIDIUS. Bold priest, I scorn thy curses, and thyself.
Soldiers, go search the caves, and free the prisoners.
Take heed, you seize Caractacus alive.
Arrest yon youth; load him with heaviest irons.
He shall to Caesar answer for his crime.

ELIDURUS. I stand prepared to triumph in my crime!

AULUS DIDIUS. It Is well, proud boy. --
Look to the beauteous maid, [to the soldiers.
That tranc'd in grief bends over yon bleeding corse,
Respect her sorrows.

EVELINA. Hence, ye barbarous men,
Ye shall not take him weltring thus in blood
To show at Rome, what British virtue was.
Avaunt! The breathless body that you touch
Was once Arviragus!

AULUS DIDIUS. Fear us not, princess,
We reverence the dead.

CHORUS. Would too to heaven,
Ye reverenced the gods but even enough
Not to debase with slavery's cruel chain,
What they created free.

AULUS DIDIUS. The Romans fight
Not to enslave, but humanize the world.

CHORUS. Go too, we will not parley with thee, Roman:
Instant pronounce our doom.

AULUS DIDIUS. Hear it, and thank us.
This once our clemency shall spare your groves,
If at our call ye yield the British king:
Yet learn, when next ye aid the foes of Caesar,
That each old oak, whose solemn gloom ye boast,
Shall bow beneath our axes.

CHORUS. Be they blasted,
Whenever their shade forgets to shelter virtue.

Enter BARD. Mourn, Mona, mourn. Caractacus is captive!
And do thou smile, false Roman? do not think
He fell an easy prey. Know, ere he yielded,
Thy bravest veterans bled. He too, thy spy,
The base Brigantian prince, has sealed his fraud
With death. Bursting through armed ranks, that hemmed
The caitiff round, the brave Caractacus
Seized his false throat; and as he gave him death
Indignant thundered, 'Thus is my last stroke
'The stroke of justice.' Numbers then oppressed him:
I saw the slave, that cowardly behind
Pinioned his arms; I saw the sacred sword
Writhed from his grasp; I saw, what now ye see,
Inglorious sight! those barbarous bonds upon him.

CARACTACUS, AULUS DIDIUS, CHORUS, etc. Romans, methink the malice of your
tyrant
Might furnish heavier chains. Old as I am
And withered as ye see these war-worn limbs,
Trust me, they shall support the weightiest load
Injustice dares impose.
Proud-crested soldier! [to Didius.
Who seemst the master-mover in this business,
Say, do thou read less terror on my brow,
Than when thou met'st me in the fields of war
Heading my nations? No, my freeborn soul
Has scorn still left to sparkle through these eyes,
And frown defiance on thee.
Is it thus! [seeing his Son's body.
Then I Am indeed a captive. Mighty gods!
My soul, my soul submits: Patient it bears
The pondrous load of grief ye heap upon it.
Yes, it will grovel in this shattered breast,
And be the sad tame thing, it ought to be
Coopt in a servile body.

AULUS DIDIUS. Droop not, king.
When Claudius, the great master of the world.
Shall hear the noble story of thy valor,
His pity --

CARACTACUS. Can a Roman pity, soldier?
And if he can, gods! must a Briton bear it?
Arviragus, my bold, my breathless boy,
Thou have escaped such pity: thou art free.
Here in high Mona shall thy noble limbs
Rest in a noble grave; posterity
Shall to thy tomb with annual reverence bring
Sepulchral stones, and pile them to the clouds:
Whilst mine --

AULUS DIDIUS. The morn does hasten our departure.
Prepare thee, king, to go: A favoring gale
Now swells our sails.

CARACTACUS. Inhuman, that thou art!
Do thou deny a moment for a father
To shed a few warm tears over his dead son?
I tell thee, chief, this act might claim a life
To do it duly; even a longer life,
Than sorrow ever suffered. Cruel man!
And thou deniest me moments. Be it so.
I know you Romans weep not for your children;
You triumph over your tears, and think it valor:
I triumph in my tears. Yes, best-lov'd boy,
Yes, I can weep, can fall upon thy corse,
And I can tear my hairs, these few gray hairs,
The only honors war and age have left me.
Ah son! thou might have ruled over many nations,
As did thy royal ancestry: But I,
Rash that I was, never knew the golden curb,
Discretion hangs on brav'ry: Else perchance
These men, that fasten fetters on thy father,
Had sued to him for peace, and claimed his friendship.

AULUS DIDIUS. But thou wast still implacable to Rome,
And scorned her friendship.

CARACTACUS starting up from the body. Soldier, I had arms,
Had neighing steeds to whirl my iron cars,
Had wealth, dominion. Do thou wonder, Roman,
I fought to save them? What if Caesar aims
To lord it universal over the world,
Shall the world tamely crouch at Caesar's footstool?

AULUS DIDIUS. Read in thy fate our answer. Yet if sooner
Thy pride had yielded --

CARACTACUS. Thank thy gods, I did not.
Had it been so, the glory of thy master,
Like my misfortunes, had been short and trivial,
Oblivion's ready prey: Now after struggling
Nine years, and that right bravely against a tyrant,
I am his slave to treat as seems him good;
If cruelly, 'twill be an easy task
To bow a wretch, alas! how bowed already!
Down to the dust: If well, his clemency,
When tricked and varnished by your glossing penmen,
Will shine in honor's annals, and adorn
Himself; it boots not me. Look there, look there,
The slave, that shot that dart, left not a hope
For lost Caractacus! Arise, my daughter.
Alas! poor prince; art thou too in vile fetters? [to Elidurus.
Come hither, youth: Be thou to me a son,
To her a brother. Thus with trembling arms
I lead ye forth; children, we go to Rome.
Weepst thou, my girl? I prithee hoard thy tears
For the sad meeting of thy captive mother:
For we have much to tell her, much to say
Of these good men, who nurtured us in Mona;
Much of the fraud and malice, that pursued us;
Much of her son, who poured his precious blood
To save his sire and sister: Think thou, maid,
Her gentleness can hear the tale, and live?
And yet she must. O gods, I grow a talker!
Grief and old age are ever full of words:
But I Will be mute. Adieu! ye holy men;
Yet one look more -- Now lead us hence for ever.

THE END.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
THE few following quotations, from ancient authors, are here thrown together,
in order to support and explain some passages in the Drama, that respect the
manners of the Druids; and which, the general account of their customs, to be
found in our histories of Britain, does not include.

Page 2.. 15.
On the left.
Beside the *sages skilled in nature's lore:
* i.e. The Euvates; one of the three classes of the Druids, according to Am.
Marcellinus. Studia liberalium doctrinarum inchoata per Bardos, Euvates, and
Druidas. This class, Strabo tells us, had the care of the sacrifices, and
studied natural philosophy; which here, by the changeful universe, is shown to
be on Pythagorean principles. Whenever the Priests are mentioned in the
subsequent parts of the Drama, this order of men is intended to be meant, as
distinguished from the Druids and Bards.

Page 7.. 7.
Thou shall live;
Yet shall thou live an interdicted wretch,
All rights of nature cancelled.
Alluding to the Druidical power of excommunication, mentioned by Caesar. Si
quis aut privatus, aut publicus, eorum decreto non stetit, sacrificiis
interdicunt. Haec poena apud eos est gravissirra. Quibus ita est interdictum,
ii numero impiorum ac sceleratorum habentur -- neque iis petentibus jus
redditur, neque honos ullus communicatur. C. Comment. Lib. vi.

P. 10.. 2.
Are the milk-white steers prepared?
In the minute description which Pliny gives us of the ceremony of gathering
the misletoe, he tells us, they sacrificed two white bulls. See Pliny's Natural
History, L. 16. c. 44. which Drayton, in his Polyolbion, thus versifies.
Sometimes within my shades, in many an ancient wood,
Whose often-twined tops great Phoebus' fires withstood,
The fearless British priests, under an aged oak,
Taking a milk-white bull, unstrained with the yoke,
And with an ax of gold, from that Jove-sacred tree
The misletoe cut down; then with a bended knee
On the unhew'd altar laid, put to the hallowed fires;
And whilst in the sharp flame the trembling flesh expires,
As their strong fury moved (when all the rest adore)
Pronouncing their desires the sacrifice before,
Up to the eternal heaven their bloodied hands did rear:
And whilst the murmuring woods even shudder'd as with fear,
Preached to the beardless youth the soul's immortal state;
To other bodies still how it should transmigrate,
That to contempt of death them strongly did excite.
Ninth Song.

Page 10.. 19.
Where our matron sister dwells.
The existence of female Druids seems ascertained by Taeitus, in his
description of the final destruction of Mona by Paulinus Suetonius. Stabat pro
litore diversa acies densa armis virisque intercursantibus faeminis, etc. Also
by the known story of Dioclesian, on which Fletcher formed a play, called the
Prophetess.

Page 10.. 21.
And the potent adder-stone.
The ovum anguinum, or serpent's egg; a famous Druidical amulet, thus
circumstantially described by Pliny. -- Praeterea est ovorum genus in magna
Galliarum fama, omissum Graecis. Angues innumeri aestate convoluti, salivis
faucium corporumque spumis artifici complexu glomerantur; anguinum appellatur.
Druidae sibilis id dicunt in sublime jactari, sagoque oportere intercipi, ne
tellurem attingat. Profugere raptorem equo, serpents enim insequi, donec
arceantur amnis alicujus interventu, etc. Not. Hist. Lib. xxix. c. 3.

There are remains of this superstition still, both in the north and west parts
of our island. For Lhwyd, the author of the Archeologia, writes thus to
Rowland; see Mona Antiqua, p. 338. "The Druid doctrine about the Glain Neidr,
obtains very much through all Scotland, as well lowlands as highlands; but there
is not a word of it in this kingdom (Ireland); where, as there are no snakes,
they could not propagate it. Besides snake-stones, the highlanders have their
snail-stones, paddock-stones, etc. to all which they attribute their several
virtues, and wear them as amulets." And in another letter he writes, "The
Cornish retain variety of charms, and have still, toward the land's-end, the
amulet of Maen Magal, and Glain Neidr, which latter they call a Milpreu, or
Melpreu, and have a charm for the snake to make it, when they have found one
asleep, and struck a hazel wand in the center of her spires."

Page 25.. 5.
Have the milk white steeds
Unrein'd, and, neighing, pranc'd with favoring steps.
The few and imperfect accounts antiquity gives us of ceremonies, etc. which
are unquestionably Druidical, makes it necessary in this, and in other places
of the Drama, to have recourse to Tacitus's account of the Germans, amongst
whom, if there were really no established Druids, there was certainly a great
correspondency, in religious opinions, with the Gauls and Britons. The passage
here alluded to is taken from his 10th chapter. Proprium gentis, equorumque
quoque praesagia ac monitus experiri. Public aluntur iisdem nemoribus ac
lucis, candidi and nullo mortali opere contacti, quos pressos sacro curru,
sacerdos ac rex, vel princeps civitatis comitantur, hinnitus and fremitus
observant, nec ulli auspicio major sides non solum apud plebem, sed apud
proceres, apud sacerdotes.

Page 26.. 2.
Thou art a king, a sovereign over frail man:
I am a Druid, servant of the gods.
Such service is above such sovereignty.
The supreme authority of the Druids over their kings, is thus ascertained by
Dion. Chrysostom. (...). Helmodus also de Slavis, l. ii. c. 12. asserts, Rex
apud eos modicae est aestimationis in comparatione flaminis.

Page 26.. 17.
The time shall come, when destiny and death,
Throned in a burning car.
Strabo, and other writers, tell us, the Druids taught, that the world was
finally to be destroyed by fire; upon which this allegory is founded.

Page 34.. 1.
The gods, my brethren,
Have waked these doubts in the untained breast
Of this mild maiden.
Inesse enim sanctum quid and providum foeminis putant. Nec aut consilia
ipsorum aspernantur, aut responsa negant. Tac. de morib. Germ. and Strabo to
the like purpose, l. vii. (...).

Page 38.. 13.
Behold yon huge
And unhewn sphere of living adamant.
This is meant to describe the rocking-stone, of which there are several still
to be seen in Wales, Cornwall, and Derbyshire. They are universally thought, by
antiquarians, to be Druid monuments; and Mr. Toland thinks, "that the Druids
made the people believe that they only could move them, and that by a miracle,
by which they condemned or acquitted the accused, and often brought criminals
to confess what could in no other way be extorted from them." 'Twas this
conjecture which gave the hint for this piece of machinery. The reader may find
a description of one of these rocking-stones in Camden's Britannia, in his
account of Pembrokeshire; and also several in Borlase's history of Cornwall.

Page 63.. 19.
-- And its name
TRIFINGUS.
The name of the enchanted sword in the Hervarer Saga.

Page 63.. 25.
By the bright circle of the golden sun.
This adjuration is taken from the literal form of the old Druidical oath,
which they administered to their disciples; and which the learned Seldom, in
Prolog. de Diis Sir. gives us from Vettius Valens Antiochenus, l. vii. It is as
follows: (...), etc.

Page 71.. 20.
Near each a white-rob'd Druid, whose stern voice
Thundered deep execrations on the foe.
This account is taken from what history tells us did really happen some years
after, when the groves of Mona were destroyed by Suetonius Paulinus. Igitur
Monam insulam incolis validam, and receptaculum perfugarum aggredi parat,
navesque fabricatur plano alveo, adversus breve litus and incertum. Sic Pedes;
equites vado secuti, aut altiores inter undas, adnantes equis transmisere.
Stabat pro litore diversa acies densa armis virisque, intercursantibus
foeminis: in modum Furiarum, vest ferali crinibus dejectis faces praeferebant.
Druidae circum, preces diras sublatis ad coelum manibus fundentes, novitate
aspectus perculere milites ut quasi haerentibus membris, immobile corpus
vulneribus praeberent. Dein cohortationibus ducis, and se ipsi stimulantes ne
muliebre and fanaticum agmen pavescerent, inferunt signa, sternuntque obvios
and igni suo involvunt. Tac. Ann. l. xiv. c. 29.

Page 81.. 19.
These shapeless symbols of your barbarous gods.
The Druids did not really worship the divinity under any symbol. But this is
put intentionally into the mouth of the Roman, as mistaking the rude stones
placed round the grove, for idols. Thus Lucan in his beautiful description of a
Druid grove, -- simulacraque moesta deorum
Art carent caesisque extant informia truncis.
Phar. Lib. iii.

Some imagery from the same description is also borrowed in the opening of the
Drama.

Page 86.. 3.
-- Soldier I had arms.
This passage, and some others in this scene, are taken from Caractacus's
famous speech in Tacitus, before the throne of Claudius; but here adapted to
his dramatic character.


