THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH INSECTS; EXPLAINING THEM IN THEIR SEVERAL
STATES, WITH THE PERIODS OF THEIR TRANSFORMATIONS, THEIR FOOD, ECONOMY, etc.

TOGETHER WITH THE HISTORY OF SUCH MINUTE INSECTS AS REQUIRE INVESTIGATION BY
THE MICROSCOPE.

THE WHOLE ILLUSTRATED BY COLORED FIGURES, DESIGNED AND EXECUTED FROM LIVING
SPECIMENS.

BY E. DONOVAN, F. L. S.

IN TEN VOLUMES. VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED BY BYE AND LAW, ST. JOHN'S SQUARE, CLERKENWELL, FOR THE
AUTHOR, And for F. and C. RIVINGTON, No 62, ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD.

MDCCCII.

TO T. MARSHAM AND A. M'LEAY, ESQRS. TREASURER, AND SECRETARY, OF THE LINNAEAN
SOCIETY.
MY DEAR SIRS,
IF I were not anxious to acknowledge you amongst the number of those, whose
useful information has in various instances tended to improve this Work,
motives of esteem would alone induce me to inscribe it to you. The reflection,
that for ten years past, it has been sanctioned with no inconsiderable share of
public approbation, will not allow me to believe it unworthy of your attention,
and its conclusion affords me the best opportunity to testify the favor, as
well as the respect, with which

I remain, Most sincerely yours, E. DONOVAN.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AT the conclusion of a Work which has been published in a progressive manner,
and either in the form of Monthly Numbers or Annual Volumes has already passed
the ordeal of public criticism, the Author can have little to advance in favor
of the design, or the manner in which it has been executed. His chief object
was to illustrate the science of Entomology on a more extensive scale than had
been previously attempted in this Country, and he trusts, upon the whole, his
endeavors in this respect have not been fruitless.

As a general History of the Insect Productions of Great Britain, it is
presumed this Work will be found sufficiently copious and instructive; for
though the Author has purposely avoided entering too deeply amongst the
minutiae of the Insect race, he has been careful to include whatever is
interesting. The selection of Papiliones or Butterflies is extremely ample, as
well as that of the Sphinges or Hawk Moths: none of the larger kinds of
Phalaeuae or Moth tribes have been over-looked, and the number of those of an
inferior size that are extremely rare, or particularly beautiful, are
altogether considerable. Those are chiefly alluded to, because general
observers are more immediately interested with the uncommon elegance of the
Lepidopterous tribes than any others. In general, however, the reader will meet
with some information in every department, as nothing material in any cabinet
to which he has access has been omitted.

The arrangement of the subjects is for the most part conformable to the system
of Linnaeus, with occasional reference to the writings of Fabricius. This is
designed to assist the labors of the practical Entomologist, and by combining
novelty with beauty, and scientific information, may induce many other
attentive observers of nature to pursue this pleasing and interesting study.

The Author cannot but feel some degree of satisfaction in having at least
fulfilled the chief object of his first design, and after the labor of ten
years completed a Work, perhaps the most extensive that may ever appear in this
form on the subject of British Entomology; but this consideration will not
permit him to entirely abandon his favorite pursuit: his attention will be
still directed to a science in which the past indulgence of a liberal public,
have induced him to believe he may still be useful, and though he cannot,
consistently with the conditions of this undertaking, extend it further at this
time, should a sufficient number of new and valuable species occur, he will
certainly be tempted to transgress, and make some addition to the present
selection.

ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS.
ABSINTHII, Phalaena Plate. 304 Aceris, Phalaena Plate. 330 acervorum, Apis
Plate. 108 Fig. 2. acuminatus, Cimex Plate. 118 Fig. 2. aedilis, Cerambyx
Plate. 72 aenea, Cantharis Plate. 96 Fig. 2. aequatus, Curculio Plate. 121 Fig.
1. 2. Aesculi, Phalaena Plate. 152 Aglaja, Papilio Plate. 302 albicillata,
Phalaena Plate. 202 Fig. 2. albinus, Curculio Plate. 348 Fig. 3. alni, Curculio
Plate. 249 Fig. 2. Alni, Phalaena Plate. 327 Fig. 2. alniaria, Phalaena Plate.
275 Alsus, Papilio Plate. 322 Fig. 1. 1. amatoria, Phalaena Plate. 33 Fig. 2.
anastomosis, Phalaena (reclusa? Linn.) Plate. 124 -- Plate. 129 annulata,
Coccinella Plate. 243 Fig. 2. 2. Antiopa, Papilio Plate. 89 antiqua, Phalaena
Plate. 16 apiarius, Attelabus Plate. 231 Fig. 1. apicella, Phalaena Plate. 57
Fig. 3. apiformis, Sphinx Plate. 25 aprilina, Phalaena Plate. 347 Fig. 1.
aquatica, Leptura Plate. 86 Fig. 3. aquaticus, Oniscus Plate. 159 Arbuti,
Phalaena Plate. 343 argus, Papilio Plate. 143 arcuata, Leptura Plate. 86 Fig.
1. argentatus, Curculio Plate. 107 Fig. 1. 2. arietis, Leptura Plate. 27 Arion,
Papilio Plate. 184 asparagi, Chrysomela Plate. 28 Atalanta, Papilio Plate. 260
atomaria, Phalaena Plate. 248 Fig. 1. 2. atralis, Phalaena Plate. 266 Fig. 4.
atriplicis, Phalaena Plate. 262 Fig. 1. 1. Atropos, Sphinx Plate. 289 -- larva
Plate. 290 avellanae, Curculio Plate. 205 Fig. 3. avicularia, Hippobosca Plate.
261 Fig. 2. aurana, Phalaena Plate. 57 Fig. 2. aurantiago, Phalaena Plate. 150
Fig. 2. aurata, Musca Plate. 142 Fig. 1. Bachus, Curculio Plate. 34 Fig. 1.
Bankii, Chrysomela Plate. 138 Fig. 4. Batis, Phalaena Plate. 33 Fig. 1.
Bentleiana, Phalaena Plate. 357 Bergmanniana, Phalaena Plate. 157 Fig. 1. 6.
Betulae, Curculio Plate. 74 Betulae, Papilio Plate. 250 betularia, Phalaena
Plate. 237 bicincta, Musca Plate. 346 Fig. 2. bicolor, Cimex Plate. 297
bidentata, Chrysis Plate. 19 bisasciana, Phalaena Plate. 357 bisasciatum,
Rhagium Plate. 94 Fig. 1. biguttulus, Gryllus Plate. 79 Fig. 1. bilineata,
Phalaena Plate. 287 Fig. 3. biliturata, Chrysomela Plate. 99 bimaculatum,
Phalangium Plate. 156 Fig. 4. boleti, Chrysomela Plate. 78 Fig. 1. 2. bomba,
Trichoda Plate. 47 Fig. 2. bombylans, Musca Plate. 151 Fig. 4. brassicaria,
Musca Plate. 151 Fig. 1. Bucephala, Phalaena Plate. 3 caecutiens, Tabanus
Plate. 131 caeruleocephala, Phalaena Plate. 100 Caja, Phalaena Plate. 15
c-album, Papilio Plate. 199 calmariensis? Chrysomela Plate. 185 camelina,
Phalaena Plate. 183 Camilla, Papilio Plate. 244 campestris, Cicindela Plate. 12
cancroides, Phalangium Plate. 215 capreae, Curculio Plate. 121 Fig. 5. 6.
cardammes, Papilio Plate. 169 cardui, Papilio Plate. 199 carnella, Phalaena
Plate. 153 Fig. 5. cassidoides, Coccinella Plate. 243 Fig. 3. Celerio, Sphinx
Plate. 190 -- larva and pupa Plate. 191 centuncularis, Apis Plate. 120
cerealis, Chrysomela Plate. 115 Cervus, Lucanus Plate. 13 ceruina, Chrysomela
Plate. 78 Fig. 3. 4. chamaeleon, Musca Plate. 31 -- larva Plate. 35
chaerophyllata, Phalaena Plate. 233 Fig. 4. Christiernana, Phalaena Plate. 20
chrysitis, Phalaena Plate. 137 chrysops, Hemorobius Plate. 188 chrysoglossa,
Phalaena Plate. 350 Fig. 2. chrysorrhoea, Phalaena Plate. 10 chrysorrhoea,
Sphinx Plate. 116 cinerea, Nepa Plate. 18 cinerea, Aranea Plate. 156 Fig. 3.
cinxia, Papilio Plate. 242 Fig. 1. circumflexus, Ichneumon Plate. 93 Fig. 2.
citrina, Phalaena Plate. 340 Fig. 2. clavis, Phalaena Plate. 340 Fig. 3.
clathrata, Phalaena Plate. 248 Fig. 3. coccinea, Pyrochroa Plate. 56 Fig. 1.
coccinea, Chrysomela Plate. 111 Fig. 5. 6. coleoptratorum, Acarus Plate. 11
colonella, Phalaena Plate. 263 Fig. 2. Columbae, Pediculi Plate. 191 cometa,
Trichoda Plate. 26 comma, Papilio (Pleb. Urb.) Plate. 295 communis, Panorpa
Plate. 201 complanatus, Julus Plate. 344 compressa, Phalaena Plate. 239 Fig. 2.
conchaceus, Monoculus Plate. 5 conflagratus, Scarabaeus Plate. 70 Fig. 2.
consortaria, Phalaena Plate. 333 Fig. 2. convolvuli, Sphinx Plate. 228 -- larva
Plate. 229 cornuta, Cicada Plate. 83 Fig. 1. 2. 3. Corydon, Papilio Plate. 236
Fig. 1. 1. Coryli, Phalaena Plate. 309 coryli, Chrysomela Plate. 321 Fig. 1. 1.
cossus, Phalaena Plate. 114 craboniformis, Asilus Plate. 180 Crataegi, Phalaena
Plate. 117 cristatalana, Phalaena Plate. 77 Fig. 1. 2. crocata, Tipula Plate.
48 Fig. 1. cruentata, Cassida Plate. 63 Fig. 2. 3. cuculla, Phalaena Plate. 338
Fig. 1. curculionoides, Attelabus Plate. 149 Curtisella, Phalaena Plate. 65
Fig. 4. cyanea, Chrysis Plate. 235 cyanocephalus, Carabus Plate. 86 Fig. 1. 2.
3. cynosbana, Phalaena Plate. 355 Fig. 3. Daplidice, Papilio Plate. 200
Delphinii, Phalaena Plate. 331 decussata, Phalaena Plate 266 Fig. 3.
Degeerella, Phalaena Plate 267 Fig. 1. 2. depressa, Libellula Plate 24
depressa, Libellula Plate 81 derasa, Phalaena Plate 223 Fig. 1. Diadema, Aranea
Plate 49 Diadema, Aranea Plate 50 didactylus, Phalaena Plate 318 diffluens,
Proteus Plate 47 dilatata, Cicada Plate. 138 Fig. 5. dipsacea, Phalaena Plate
327 Fig. 3. dispar, (Phalaena) Plate 163 ditaria, Phalaena Plate 202 Fig. 1.
Dives, Phalaena Plate 352 dolabraria, Phalaena Plate 349 Fig. 1. Dominula,
Phalaena Plate 141 Dromedarius, Phalaena Plate 350 dubitata, Phalaena Plate 246
Fig. 2. duplicata, Phalaena Plate 233 Fig. 2. Edusa, Papilio, female Plate 238
Fig. 2. -- male Plate 43 elongata, Leptura Plate 86 Fig. 1. Elpenor, Sphinx
Plate 122 emargana, Phalaena Plate 106 Fig. 1. evonymela, Phalaena Plate 335
Fig. 4. equina, Hippobosca Plate 261 Fig. 1. erythropterus, Staphilinus Plate
308 Euphorbiae, Sphinx Plate 92 -- Caterpillar Plate 91 euphorbiata, Phalaena
Plate 153 Fig. 1. Euphrosyne, Papilio Plate 312 Europaea, Fulgora Plate 203
Europea, Mutilla Plate 212 exoleta, Phalaena Plate 187 extensa, Aranea Plate
156 Fig. 1. fagana, Phalaena Plate 281 Fagi, Phalaena Plate 328 falcatella,
Phalaena Plate 355 Fig. 5. fasciatus, Scarabaeus Plate 140 fastuosa, Chrysomela
Plate 194 ferrugineus, Elater Plate 356 Fig. 1. ferrugineus, Dytiscus Plate 68
Fig. 3. 4. festivus, Cimex Plate 101 Fig. 4. Festucae, Phalaena Plate 46
Filipendulae, Sphinx Plate 6 fimbria, Phalaena Plate 208 flavo-cincta, Phalaena
Plate 334 flavo-marginatus, Cimex Plate 245 flavo-striata, Cicada Plate 288
Fig. 2. flavago, Phalaena Plate 338 forficata, Scolopendra Plate 198
formicarius, Attelabus Plate 231 Fig. 2. Francillana, Phalaena Plate 355 Fig.
1. Fraxini, Phalaena Plate 171 -- Larva and pupa Plate 172 fuciformis, Sphinx
Plate 87 Fuliginosa, Phalaena Plate 80 Fullo, Scarabaeus Plate 112 funalis,
Phalaena Plate 76 Furcula, Phalaena Plate 272 Galathea, Papilio Plate 258
gamma, Phalaena Plate 265 Fig. 2. gemina, Phalaena Plate 347 gemmatus, Carabus
Plate 222 Fig. 2, Germanica, Blatta Plate 341 Germanus, Curculio Plate 34 Fig.
2. gigas, Sirex Plate 197 glauca, notonecta Plate 75 globosa, Aranea Plate 156
Fig. 2. Goettingensis, Chrysomela Plate 286 Fig. 2. gonymelas, Cimex Plate 218
Fig. 2. gonostigma, Phalaena Plate 316 grandis, Libellula Plate 166 -- variety
with yellow wings Plate 237 Fig. 2. grandis, Phalaena Plate 345 granulatus,
Carabus Plate 222 Fig. 3. grossa, Musca Plate 346 grossulariata, Phalaena Plate
4 gryllotalpa, Gryllus Plate 147 guttata (14) Coccinella Plate ^43 Fig. 1. ^1.
hastata, Phalaena Plate 129 Fig. 1, 2. 3, Haemoroidalis, Cimex Plate 218 Fig.
2. Hecta, Phalaena Plate 274 Fig. 3. Hero, Papilio Plate 186 hexadactyla,
Phalaena Plate 136 hexapterata, Phalaena Plate 192 Hippothoe?, Papilio Plate
217 hirtus, Hemerobius Plate 113 hirundinis, Hippobosca Plate 268 Fig. 2.
hispidus, Cerambyx Plate 64 Fig. 2, 3. hortulanus, Curculio Plate 205 Fig. 2.
humeralis, Necydalis Plate 358 Fig. 1. humuli, Phalaena Plate 274 Fig. 1. 2.
Hyale, Papilio Plate 238 Fig. 1. Hyperanthus, Papilio Plate 271 hypoleon, Musca
Plate 146 Fig. 2. 3. Jacobaea, Phalaena Plate 45 Janira, Papilio Plate 320
Janthina, Papilio Plate 347 Idas Papilio Plate 323 Fig. 2. 2. ignita, Chrysis
Plate 7 interrogatiana, Phalaena Plate 65 Fig. 1. Io, Papilio Plate 206 Iota,
Phalaena Plate 265 Fig. 1. Iris, Papilio Plate 37 lacertinaria, Phalaena Plate
251 Fig. 2. lacustris, Cimex Plate 118 Fig. 1. lambdella, Phalaena Plate 57
Fig. 1. lanestris, Phalaena Plate 210 lapathi, Curculio Plate 205 Fig. 1.
lapidaria, Apis Plate 108 Fig. 2. -- Plate 88 Fig. 2. Lappaae, Phalaena Plate
340 Lapponica, Blatta Plate 352 lateralis, Musca Plate 31 Fig. 3. Lathonia,
Papilio Plate 73 Leeana, Phalaena Plate 347 Fig. 4. lemnata, Phalaena Plate 266
Fig. 1. 2. leporina, Phalaena Plate. 327 Fig. 1. Libatrix, Phalaena Plate 216
Lichenaria, Phalaena Plate. 342 Fig. 1. Lichenes, Phalaena Plate. 223 Fig. 3.
Ligustri, Sphinx Plate. 284 Linea, Papilio Plate. 236 Fig. 2. 2. linearis, Nepa
Plate. 105 Fig. 1. 2. linearis, Sphinx Plate. 204 Fig. 1. lineato-collis,
Cerambyx Plate. 209 lineola, Phalaena Plate. 360 Fig. 2. litterana, Phalaena
Plate. 353 Loeflingiana, Phalaena Plate. 90 longicanda, Trichoda Plate. 26
Loti, Sphinx Plate. 319 lucidata, Phalaena Plate. 97 Lucina Papilio Plate. 242
Fig. 2. lucipara, Phalaena Plate. 230 Fig. 2. ludio, Himantopus Plate. 20
lunaria, Phalaena Plate. 132 lunaris, Scarabaeus Plate. ^54 Fig. 4. lunaris,
Vorticella Plate. 8 luridus, Cimex Plate. 98 Fig. 1. 2. luridus, Scarabaeus
Plate. 323 lusoria, Phalaena Plate. 354 Fig. 2. lutea, Tenthredo Plate. 234
lynceata, Phalaena Plate. 349 Fig. 3. lynceus, Trichoda Plate. 41 Fig. 3.
Maegera, Papilio Plate. 279 Machaon, Papilio Plate. 211 maculata, Phalaena
Plate. 251 Fig. 3. maculata, Cassida Plate. 285 major, Bombylius Plate. 66
marginalis, Dytiscus Plate. 161 marginata, Phalaena (Geometra) Plate. 293 Fig.
2. marginella, Phalaena Plate. 58 Fig. 1. 2. marginella, Chrysomela Plate. 335
marginata, Phalaena (Noctua) Plate. 150 Mappa, Phalaena Plate. 360 Marshami,
Chrysomela Plate. 286 Fig. 1. Maura, Phalaena Plate. 230 Fig. 1. maxillosus,
Staphilinus Plate. 96 Fig. 3. medius, Bombylius Plate. 146 Melolontha,
Scarabaeus Plate. 264 Fig. 2. melonella, Phalaena Plate. 283 melitea, Trichoda
Plate. 29 menthrastri, Phalaena Plate. 189 meticulosa, Phalaena Plate. 139
migratorius, Gryllus Plate. 270 meleagris, Colpoda Plate. 32 minuta, Buprestis
Plate. 256 minutus, Dytiscus Plate. 68 Fig. 1. 2. monacha, Phalaena Plate. 227
monoceros, Meloe Plate. 182 moschatus, Cerambyx Plate. 94 Fig. 2. Myrtilli,
Phalaena Plate. 221 mystica, Leptura Plate. 86 Fig. 2. Napi, Papilio Plate. 280
Fig. 1. nasuta, Vorticella Plate. 29 neustria, Phalaena Plate. 95
nigro-lineata, Leptura Plate. 353 Fig. 1. nitens, Carabus Plate. 313 nitidula,
Chrysomela Plate. 273 nitidula, Cicada Plate. 288 Fig. 1. nobilis, Cassida
Plate. 138 Fig. 1. 2. 3. nobilis, Scarabaeus Plate. 154 Fig. 1. 2. 3.
noctiluca, Musca Plate. 346 nuchicornis, Scarabaeus Plate. 255 Fig. 2. nupta,
Phalaena Plate. 224 nutans, Scarabaeus Plate. 255 Fig. 1. obscura, Silpha
Plate. 63 Fig. 4. ocellata, Sphinx Plate. 269 oculatus, Saperda Plate. 305
olor, vibrio Plate. 32 onopordinis, Musca Plate. 62 oo, Phalaena Plate. 179
ophiopsis, Raphidia Plate. 315 orbona, Phalaena Plate. 345 Fig. 2. ovina,
Hippobosoca Plate. 268 Fig. 2. oxyacanthae, Phalaena Plate. 165 padella,
(Linn.) Phalaena Plate. 9 pallescens, Cimex Plate. 101 Fig. 5. 6. -- Larva
Plate. 102 paniscus, Papilia Plate. 254 Fig. 1. 1. Panzerella, Phalaena Plate.
106 Fig. 4. papilionaria, Phalaena Plate. 287 Fig. 1. paphia, Papilio Plate.
247 paraple^ticus, Curculio Plate. 348 Fig. 2. paralelepipedus, Lucanus Plate.
264 Fig. 1. Par, Phalaena Plate. 338 Fig. 3. parthenias, Phalaena Plate. 246
Fig. 1. patella, Kerona Plate. 41 Fig. 4. Pavonana, Phalaena Plate. 58 Fig. 3.
-- magnified Plate. 59 Pavonia Phalaena, male Plate. 1 -- female Plate. 253
pectinicornis, Elater Plate. 356 Fig. 2. pectinicornis, Ptinus Plate. 326
pendula, Musca Plate. 31 Fig. 2. pennaria, Phalaena Plate. 287 Fig. 2.
pentadactyla, Phalaena Plate. 110 pellio, Dermestes Plate. 231 Fig. 3. perla,
Hemorobius Plate. 277 Fig. 2. Persicariae, Phalaena Plate. 317 Pinastri
Phalaena Plate. 347 Fig. 2. Pinastri, Sphinx Plate. 296 pinetella, Phalaena
Plate. 263 Fig. 1. Pini, Phalaena Plate. 178 -- Larva Plate. 177 piniaria,
Phalaena Plate. 336 pisi, Phalaena Plate. 51 plantaginis, Phalaena Plate. 134
plumosa, Tipula Plate. 22 pluvialis, Tabanus Plate. 151 Fig. 3. pocillum,
Trichoda Plate. 14 Podaella, Phalaena Plate. 267 Fig. 3. Podalirius, Papilio
Plate. 109 Polychloros, Papilio Plate. 278 polygoni, Chrysomela Plate. 96 Fig.
1. polymorpha Vorticella Plate. 41 Fig. 1. polypoda, Lepisma Plate. 162
pomonae, Tipula Plate. 300 Populi, Sphinx Plate. 241 populi, Cimex Plate. 252
Fig. 2. 2. populi, Phalaena Plate. 307 porcellus, Sphynx Plate. 341 porcellata,
Phalaena Plate. 202 Fig. 3. potatoria, Phalaena Plate. 148 Praecox, Phalaena
Plate. 213 prasinana, Phalaena Plate. 40 Fig. 2. prasinus, Cimex Plate. 123
prodomaria, Phalaena Plate. 219 pronuba, Phalena Plate. 311 proscarabaeus,
Meloc Plate. 43 Fig. 2. prunaria, Phalaena, male Plate. 21 -- female Plate. 293
Fig. 3. prunata, Phalaena Plate. 233 Fig. 1. pruniella, Phalaena Plate. 58 Fig.
1. 1. Psi, Phalaena Plate. 133 puella, Libellula Plate. 36 punctata (4)
Chrysomela Plate. 111 Fig. 1. 2. punctata (14) Coccinella Plate. 39 Fig. 2.
punctata (22) Coccinella Plate. 39 Fig. 1. 4. punctata (17) Coccinella Plate.
39 Fig. 5. punctatus (4) Cimex Plate. 101 Fig. 1. 3. 3. punctatus (2) Dytiscus
Plate. 303 pudibunda, Phalaena Plate. 160 purpuralis, Phalaena Plate. 339 Fig.
2. pustulata, (6) Coccinella Plate. 39 Fig. 3. pygmea Buprestis Plate. 282
pygmea Dytiscus Plate. 202 pyramidea, Phalaena Plate. 193 pyri, Curculio Plate.
121 Fig. 3. 4. quadricornis, Monoculus Plate. 2 quadra, Phalaena Plate. 306
quadrimaculatus, Mycetophagus Plate. 185 Fig. 2. quadrimaculatus, Scarabaeus
Plate. 70 Fig. 3. quadripunctata, Silpha Plate. 56 Fig. 2. quercana, Phalaena
Plate. 106 Fig. 3. quercifolia, Phalaena Plate. 232 Quercus, Phalaena, larva
Plate. 103 -- winged state Plate. 104 radiatella, Phalaena Plate. 77 Fig. 3. 4.
ramidulus, Ichneumon Plate. 42 Fig. 1. raptorius, Ichneumon Plate. 42 Fig. 2.
repandaria, Phalaena Plate. 333 Fig. 1. Rhamni, Papilio Plate. 145 rhombica,
Phryganea Plate. 220 riparia, Cicindela Plate. 301 riparius, Staphylinus Plate.
167 rivosa, Tipula Plate. 48 Fig. 2. roboris, Phalaena Plate. 299 rosae,
Tenthredo Plate. 164 rosea, Phalaena Plate. 40 Fig. 1. rotatoria, Vorticella
Plate. 41 Fig. 2. rubago, Phalaena Plate. 338 Fig. 2. rubi, Phalaena Plate. 69
rufus, Curculio Plate. 249 Fig. 1. rumicis, Phalaena Plate. 126 runica,
Phalaena Plate. 354 Fig. 1. russula, Phalaena Plate. 214 sabulosa, Sphex Plate.
93 Fig. 1. salicis, Buprestis Plate. 127 salicis, Phalaena Plate. 30
sambucaria, Phalaena Plate. 170 sanguinolenta, Cicada Plate. 54 Fig. 1.
sanguinolenta, Chrysomela Plate. 111 Fig. 3. 4. satellitia, Phalaena Plate. 168
scarabaeoides, Dermestes Plate. 23 Fig. 1. 4. Schaefferella, Phalaena Plate.
175 scrophulariae, Curculio Plate. 60 sericea, Chrysomela Plate. 321 Fig. 2. 2.
scybalaria, Musca Plate. 346 Fig. 5. Semele, Papilio Plate. 259
semi-argentella, Phalaena Plate. 65 Fig. 2. 3. semi-argentata, Musca Plate. 142
Fig. 2. 3. seminationis, Musca Plate. 125 sex-maculata, Leptura Plate. 353 Fig.
2. simplex, Necydalis Plate. 358 Fig. 2. Sinapis, Papilio Plate. 280 Fig. 2.
solstitialis, Musca Plate. 294 spartiata, Phalaena Plate. 342 spectrum, Sirex
Plate. 225 spicicornis, Cimex Plate. 135 spinula, Phalaena Plate. 345 sponsa,
Phalaena Plate. 324 spumaria, Cicada Plate. 54 Fig. 2. sputator, Elater Plate.
96 Fig. 4. squamana, Phalaena Plate. 157 Fig. 7. stagnorum, Cimex Plate. 38
statices, Sphinx Plate. 204 Fig. 2. stellatarum, Sphinx Plate. 155
stercorarius, Scarabaeus Plate. 264 Fig. 3. straminea, Phalaena Plate. 61
striata, Notonecta Plate. 176 suberaria, Phalaena Plate. 251 Fig. 1. sulcatus,
Dytiscus Plate. 68 Fig. 5. sulphuralis, Phalaena Plate. 339 Fig. 1. Sylvanus,
Papilio Plate. 254 Fig. 2. syringaria, Phalaena Plate. 181 tecta, Meloc Plate.
240 tenax, Proteus Plate. 32 Fig. 3. 4. tenebricosa, Chrysomela Plate. 276
tenuirostris, Curculio Plate. 249 Fig. 3. terrestris, Apis Plate. 88 Fig. 1.
terrestris, Julus Plate. 207 testudinarius, Scarabaeus Plate. 70 Fig. 1.
thoracica, Silpha Plate. 63 Fig. 1. Tiliae, Sphinx Plate. 325 Tipuliformis,
Sphinx Plate. 52 -- magnified, Plate. 53 tragopoginis, Phalaena Plate. 223 Fig.
2. trepida? Phalaena Plate. 239 Fig. 1. trilineata, Musca Plate. 151 Fig. 5.
trimacula, Phalaena Plate. 352 triplacia, Phalaena Plate. 298 Tritophus,
Phalaena Plate. 359 trochiformis nigra, Vorticella Plate. 26 tumulorum, Apis,
Plate. 151 Fig. 2. varia, Phryanea Plate. 277 Fig. 1. varia, Gryllus, Plate. 79
Fig. 2. variegatus, Meloe Plate. 67 Verbasci, Phalaena Plate. 257 vermicularis,
Trichoda Plate. 17 Vernaria, Phalaena Plate. 310 versicolora, Phalaena Plate.
158 vespertaria, Phalaena Plate. 233 Fig. 3. Vespilio, Silpha Plate. 23
vibrans, Musca Plate. 346 vidua, Phalaena Plate. 246 Fig. 1. villica, Phalaena
Plate. 71 vinula, Phalaena Plate. 85 violaceus, Carabus Plate. 222 Fig. 1.
violaceus, Cerambyx Plate. 64 Fig. 1. virgaureae, Papilio Plate. 173 virgo,
Libellula Plate. 36 viridana, Phalaena Plate. 144 viridis, Cicada Plate. 54
Fig. 3. viridis, vorticella Plate. 29 viridis, Buprestis Plate. 174
viridissimus, Gryllus Plate. 130 vitellinae, Tenthredo Plate. 88 Fig. 3.
vitellinae, Cicada Plate. 54 Fig. 3. vittatus, Cimex Plate. 252 Fig. 1. 1.
vulgaris, Vespa Plate. 226 vulgata, Ephemera Plate. 128 vulgata, Libellula
Plate. 237 Fig. 1. Uddmanniana, Phalaena Plate. 154 Fig. 2, 3, 4. ulmata,
Phalaena Plate. 293 Umbratica, Phalaena Plate. 262 Fig. 2. undulata, Phalaena
Plate. 342 urceolaris vorticella, (Branchionus) Plate. 117 Urticae, Papilio
Plate. 55 urticata, Phalaena Plate. 349 Fig. 2. ustularia, Phalaena Plate. 82
uvula, Trichoda Plate. 8 Wavaria, Phalaena Plate. 196 Zic-zac, Phalaena Plate.
119 zoegana, Phalaena Plate. 106 Fig. 2. zonata, Sphinx. Plate. 195
A SLIGHT SKETCH OF THE ANIMAL SYSTEM.
LINNAEUS divided the Animal System into six classes.

Class I. MAMMALIA. Suckle their young. II. AVES. (Birds) covered with
feathers. III. AMPHIBIA. Lungs arbitrary. IV. PISCES. (Fishes) breath by gills
not arbitrarily. V. INSECTA. (Insects) two antennae, or feelers Those feelers
are the two horns that are affixed to the head.
. VI. VERMES. No head.
Insects therefore compose the fifth Class in the System, and are divided into
seven Orders.

Order I. COLEOPTERA. Wings two, covered by two shells divided by a
longitudinal future. II. HEMIPTERA. Shells or covers of the wings, somewhat
soft, and incumbent on each other. III. LEPIDOPTERA. Wings four, imbricated
with minute scales. IV. NEUROPTERA. Wings four, naked, transparent,
reticulated, with veins or nerves. Tail without sting. V. HYMENOPTERA. Wings
four. Membraneous. Tail of the female armed with a sting. VI. DIPTERA. Wings
two. VII. APTERA. No wings.
TRANSFORMATIONS OF INSECTS.
Many of our readers are no doubt acquainted with the singular transformations
Insects undergo, but we trust those will pardon a digression which may be
useful to those who have not that knowledge; and without premising farther we
proceed to inform them, that Insects in general undergo a material change in
their form at stated periods of their lives; there are some, though few, which
burst forth from the egg perfectly formed, as Spiders, etc. but the greater
part exist in four several states: the first that of the egg, whence the Larva,
or Caterpillar is produced; it is at first very minute, but in this state it
feeds, some kinds on one or two plants only, others promiscuously on many, they
therefore continue to increase in size, moulting several times the outer skin,
until the destined period of their dormant state approaches; they then spin a
web more or less strong according to the species, and are converted into the
aurelia, or chrysalis; and lastly they burst forth in due season perfectly
formed. It is under this form they propagate a future race, and themselves
perish, as they rarely survive the inclemencies of the winter.

The ancient naturalists held suppositions very imperfect and erroneous
relative to those transformations, but Malpighi and Swammerdam proved by many
accurate examinations clearly, that those changes were not suddenly effected,
but gradual; and that under the form of the Caterpillar they could distinguish
the future changes the Insect would undergo.


PLATE I. PHALAENA PAVONIA, EMPEROR MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
Insects of the LEPIDOPTERA ORDER are divided into three Genera, PAPILIO,
SPHINX, and PHALAENA, Butterflies, Hawk Moths, and Moths. The characters of the
two former hereafter: those of the Phalaena are

GENERIC CHARACTER. The antennae setaceous, decreasing in size from the base to
the apex. The wings, when at rest, are generally contracted. They fly in the
night.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae feathered. No trunk. Wings expanded, horizontal,
rounded, entire, with a large eye in the center of each; the first red-brown
waved; the second orange. The antennae of the male are broader, and the wings
of the female larger, waved with black and white and bordered with yellow.
Caterpillar green or yellow, spinous, on thorns and brambles. Length of the
moth one inch. -- Berken. Out.

The conformity and likeness which prevails between the male and female
throughout the greater part of the animal system, cannot however in Insects be
implicitly depended on; the difference in many is such as even to mislead some
very accurate Entomologists, the illustrious Linnaeus not excepted. In this
species it is not so great as in many, but such as entitles the female to a
figure in a future plate: Our figure is of the male.

Albin, ( Plate 25, Subject 37,) has given a figure of the male and female on
the same plate, and describes a male to have changed to the aurelia state as in
our plate represented July 16, and March 18 following to have produced the Fly.
But the time of their appearance depends on the proportion of heat or cold; as
the author's subject was preserved from the severity of winter, in a warm room.
The usual time to find them in the caterpillar state is August, and in April
the Fly.

The singular provision which nature makes for the protection of this Fly
deserves particular notice; when the time of its continuation in the
caterpillar state is expired, by much labor it forms a kind of bag or purse,
of a very tough substance; this it fixes against the trunks of trees, etc. by a
number of hairs or filaments, which remain on the external surface. It lines
the outer case by one of a finer texture, the top of which is closed by several
bristles that unite in the center, exactly representing a cap, and excludes
almost the possibility of its receiving an injury during this defenseless
state. In this bag it passes to the aurelia, and remains until the birth of the
perfect insect. -- Our figure represents the chrysalis or aurelia in the bag;
part appears torn away to exhibit its situation therein.

Were we to unite the several accounts of authors respecting its food, it would
appear to be a general feeder; it will live on the rose, the elm, and the
willow; and on thorns and brambles particularly.


PLATE II.
FIG. I. MONOCULUS QUARICORNIS. APTERA.
Apterous insects are distinguished chiefly by having no wings in either male
or female.

GENERIC CHARACTER. The feet are formed for swimming. The body is covered with
a crustaceous case or shell. The eyes fixed in the shell very near each other.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Gray brown. One eye. Antennae four. Body diminishes
toward the tail, which is long and bifid, with three or four strong hairs on
each side. A bag of eggs on each side of the tail. Length half a line. -- Berk.
Out.

Although this insect may have been noticed by many, swimming, or rather
darting swiftly in various directions in water; its minuteness is such, that
the most attentive could never have comprehended precisely its component parts;
but the microscope discovers it to be an animal of such singular formation as
highly to deserve the attention of the naturalist. It is covered by a firm
crustaceous substance, divided into annulations, and armed in several parts
with spines and bristles; notwithstanding which, this shell is so transparent
that the whole motion of the intestines is very visible by a good magnifier.

It must be granted that, but for the microscope, the wonders of the minute
creation, would be to us entirely unknown; our ideas could never suppose the
existence of those animated forms which occupy the immeasurable space between
an apparent atom and nothing. The myriads of animals, thousands of times
smaller than a mite, must evade our cognizance, and be an actual conviction of
their nonexistence.

But with all the utility that the microscope can boast, no instrument is so
likely to mislead the most accurate observer, particularly if not in the habit
of using it; the variations of light, the difference of the magnifying powers,
or the damage the glasses may meet with by accident, such as requires every one
to examine with the greatest care; one degree of light may bring an object to
view, whilst another may entirely blend it with the fluid it exists in; or one
glass may discover spines on an object, another glass might have represented
perfectly smooth; it is therefore necessary to begin with a small power, in
proportion to the size of the object, and to proceed to deeper magnifiers after.

There is some difference in our figure, and those either of Barbut, or of
Baker, which appears chiefly from our using a single lens nearly of the deepest
power convenient to use. Our glasses were the 20th and 30th of an inch focus.

We very attentively examined the eyes, and found, not one, but two, placed
near each other, on a scale or plate of a black color; hence arises the
appearance of a single eye by a small magnifying power.

The tail presents a forked appearance by a deep power, and the eggs are
contained in two bags, one on each side the tail. The color varies probably in
proportion to the nature of its food, to pale green, more or less of a red, or
of a gray brown color.

FIG. II.
This minute animalcula is frequent in stagnant water, or in infusions of
vegetables, and is one species of those whose existence can only be discovered
by a good microscope. It is very difficult, considering the power those
creatures have to distort their true form at pleasure, to fix their
distinguishing character: therefore where the definition appears dubious, we
prefer being silent rather than hazard an error.

FIG. 2. Represents them (magnified) as they sometimes seem to follow the
leader in herds; but perhaps it is only the scent of the prey that induces each
to follow the foremost, as they frequently swim or whirl in the water
separately, with great swiftness, devouring the smaller kinds of animalculae.

FIG. 3. Two, magnified by a deep power, when they appear to have feet or sins.

FIG. 4. Shows the strange form it assumes whilst depositing its eggs.

FIG. 5. The eggs deeper magnified.


PLATE III. PHALAENA BUCEPHALA, BUFF-TIP MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae taper from the base to the apex, and are
setaceous. Wings in general deflected when at rest. Fly by night. No Trunk.
Wings reversed, i. e. first Wings horizontal and second erect.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae feathered. First Wings gray, with two double
transverse brown waves, and a large yellowish brown spot at the extreme angle.
Second Wings plain, light yellow, length scarce one inch. Caterpillar hairy,
yellow with black spots. On Oaks, Ash, etc. -- Berkenhout.

The delicate assemblage of beautiful down which cloth the upper wings of the
Buff-tip Moth is its chief recommendation; the history affords but little for
observation, it is hatched from the egg in August, and in June following the
Fly is perfect.

Its beauty preserves it not from the race of birds who pursue it from
necessity, or from an innate desire of cruelty and devastation, and whilst
happy in its apparent security, ranging the plain to experience the pleasures
of liberty, or to banquet in the nectareous profusion of the vegetable kingdom,
he becomes a dupe to his happiness, his pleasures at once sully, and he falls
an unresisting victim into the devouring jaws of death.


PLATE IV. PHALAENA GROSSULARIATA. MAGPYE, or CURRANT-MOTH.
GENERIC CHARACTER. The antennae setaceous, decreasing in size from the base to
the point. The Wings, when at rest, generally deflected. Fly by night.

Antennae taper, like bristles.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae and Legs black. Body yellow, with black spots.
Wings white, with many black patches, and a transverse yellow wave on the first
pair. Caterpillar white, with black spots on the Back; Belly yellow. Berk. Out.

The Magpye-Moth is one of the geometrae; and feeds on Goose-berry and
Currant-bushes, as the name indicates. The Caterpillar is found in May; and in
July, the Fly.

The Caterpillar, previous to its change to the Chrysalis state, spins a web of
a very slight and delicate texture, by which it is suspended horizontally
against the branches of trees, etc. as in our Plate represented.


PLATE V.
FIG. I. MONOCULUS CONCHACEUS. APTERA.
Without wings.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Body covered with a crust or shell. Feet made for swimming.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Enclosed in a bivalve, ash-colored shell, from the
aperture of which it puts forth a number of capillary antennae, which it
retracts when taken out of the water.

To acquire a proper knowledge of the formation of this minute insect, it is
necessary to use a microscope with a glass stage for objects, or rather such as
admit of nicely adjusting a talc as occasion may require: the insect to be
taken from the water with a camel-hair pencil, and carefully placed on the
talc; after which it may be examined by a magnifier of 1/10 of an inch focus;
but in proceeding to a deeper power, let the talc be turned the upper surface
with the insect in the drop of the fluid from the lens, and thereby the lens
may approach the object to its proper focus; without this caution the lens
would be frequently immerged in the water, and entirely obstruct the sight.

In the adult state, the opacity of the bivalve shell, its external covering,
so entirely obscures the internal motion, that nothing, except the filaments it
throws from the aperture or opening, is visible by the microscope.

It breaks from the egg perfectly formed, but very minute and transparent; this
is therefore the best time to discover its structure, and from one in this
state we have taken our figure

By the antennae it directs its course, as does the Monoculus Quadricornis; and
like it also it has two eyes fixed in the shell, but it can completely envelop
its head in its bivalve covering; its mouth is beneath, but the numerous
filaments it darts forth, causes such a violent motion in the water, that the
minuter insects are unresistingly drawn between them, and forced to the mouth.

The motion of its lungs is very visible, as are also the vesse ram^lsfying
thence. Its food is carried to, and digested in the deep-coloured tube, or
intestine, and the refuse is discharged by a sudden jerk from the extremity of
the tube, or anus.

Thus it exists, a life of rapine and destruction, enjoyed at the expense of
the lives of thousands; and as the objects of its ravenous disposition are
defenseless, so are they the sport of their conqueror: the few moments of
intermission its craving appetite grants them, is occupied equally in the
spoil, first pressing them to death, and then tossing them undevoured into the
fluid.

But should a more powerful insect oppose him, he immediately contracts his
parts, and nothing more than the external covering is open to his antagonist's
violence, and he will sooner die ignobly than offer the least opposition.

FIG. II.
This animalcule is very minute, and appears like a fine membrane without
intestines before the microscope; from the appearance of its winged sides, it
is supposed to resemble a bird. It is called Bursaria Hirundinella.

FIG. III.
The back and side view of an animalcule found in ditch-water on duck-weed,
very pellucid, and singularly marked in the intestines; tail moveable, and
thereby it directs its course.


PLATE VI. SPHINX FILIPENDULAE. BURNET MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Sphinx, Antennae thickest in the middle. Wings, when at
rest deflexed. Fly slow, morning and evening only.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae, Legs, and Body black. Second Wings red, with a
greenish border. First Wings bluish green, with six red spots, in pairs, length
eight lines. Caterpillar yellow, with black spots.

Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 805. 34. Fn. Sv. 1097.

Papilio Phalaena Aries. Degeer Ins. 7. 591. 1 Tab. 44. Fig. 1.

We have two kinds of Burnet-Sphinx, distinguished by the appellations of
Five-spot, and Six-spot, Burnets; though often considered only as varieties, or
difference of sex, they appear to be two distinct species; not only that they
are commonly found in parts of the country very remote from each other, but the
number and situation of the small red spots which adorn the Superior Wings,
constitute a material distinction. The Six-spot is taken near the environs of
London, where the other is rarely if ever found, and in some parts of
Bedfordshire the Five-spot is very common.

As all Lepidopterous Insects undergo some trifling alterations from attendant
circumstances, so specimens of the female Sp. Filipendulae has been taken with
the two spots near the base of the Wing closely united; and hence arose some
doubt as to the existence of any other Five-spot Burnet; the two kinds must
not, however, be compared to entertain this supposition, as the Five-spot is
not only smaller, the margin of the Inferior Wings deeper, but wants that spot
of red nearest the Apex of the Superior Wings, and which must immediately
appear on the slightest inspection.

The Caterpillars of most Insects of this genus are armed with a spine, or
horn, above the anus, in which particular the Caterpillars of our species, does
not agree. It feeds on the Genista Anglica, needle furze; on the Ulex
Europaeus, common furze; and on the Filipendula; those plants flourish in a
sandy soil, where the Caterpillars are to be sought, in May, and June: the
Sphinx appears in July.


PLATE VII. CHYSIS IGNITA. HYMENOPTERA.
Wings four, generally membraneous. Tail of the females armed with a sting.

GENERIC CHARACTER. The abdomen has three annulations exclusive of the anus,
the antennae has twelve articulations, exclusive of the first joint which is
longer than the rest. The body shines like polished metal. A kind of collar is
very distinct in this genus. The anus is dentated, having one, two, or more
teeth.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. The antennae are black, the thorax a fine mazarine blue,
having in some positions a greenish cast, the abdomen a fine gold color with
shades of crimson and yellow green; the anus has four teeth or denticulations.
-- Syst. Ent. 358. 6. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 947. 1. Fn. Sv. 1665.

Exotic Insects, or at least those of the East, and West Indies, for the
effulgence, and beauty, of their coloring in general, claim a superiority over
the natives of this climate; but the appearance of this Chrysis before the
speculum of an opake microscope, may vie with many of the most favorite
foreigners hitherto discovered: the richness of changeable colors blending
into each other, according to the variations of the light reflected on the
surface, is such that we freely confess our inability, or even the inability of
art, to equal; though we trust our figure will give some idea of the delightful
appearance of the original.

The Fly of the natural size is given on the fore ground, the magnified figure
above.

It commonly constructs its habitation in the chinks of old walls, or decayed
trees, but prefers a situation near the entrance of woods where it may reside
in silent security. If attacked by any Insect of equal size, it is generally
victorious, for such is the amazing strength of its almost impenetrable coat,
that it will encounter the spider without much apprehension of danger; and as
its strength protects it from many injuries which Insects with tender bodies
are exposed to; the species multiplies, and is not uncommon in several parts of
the country. It rarely appears from its retreat until the middle of the day,
and is then only invited by the piercing rays of the sun.


PLATE VIII. VORTICELLA LUNARIS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. A worm capable of contracting or extending itself, naked,
with rotatory cilia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Simple, hemispherical, with a twisted pedicle.

The small head of this animalculum is crater-form, the margin of the orifice
protuberant, ciliated on both sides, the hairs undulating, the pedicle eight or
ten times the length of the body. As often as the mouth is opened, the pedicle
extends itself; when it is shut, this is twisted up spirally, and their motions
are often reiterated in a short space.

FIG. 1. the head, expanded. -- FIG. 2. when shut. -- FIG. 3. the undulated
edge.

Muller. Any. Inf. -- Adams's Essays on the Microscope.

FIG. 4. found in infusions of hay, and is called Trichoda Uvuia.


PLATE IX. PHALAENA EVONYMELLA. SMALL ERMINE MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae taper like bristles.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. First Wings silver-white, with fifty black spots in three
or four rows. Second wings lead-colour.

Syst. Ent. 656. 4. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 885. 350. Fn. Sv. 1363*

Phalaena Evonymella feeds on the white-thorn, black-thorn, and on fruit trees.
In May the caterpillars are hatched, and as they live in societies of hundreds,
or even thousands, by their united industry they spin a web spacious enough to
contain the family, and therein they assume their several forms; early in June
they become chrysalides, and in about fourteen days the Flies are perfect.

The caterpillars of the Pha. Padella and Evonymella are ever found in the same
society, and many circumstances may be advanced to prove them either varieties
of each other, or difference of sex only, although Linnaeus considered them as
distinct species. They differ in color, the Caterpillars of one being light
yellow brown, the other black, and the upper wings of the Evonymella are less
of a lead color than those of the Padella.

To gain information on this subject, we, this season, put the eggs of several
females into different glasses; the eggs of each female produced both kinds of
Caterpillars, they became Chrysalides, and a number of each sort of the Flies
came forth.


PLATE X. PHALAENA CHRYSORRHOEA. YELLOW TAIL MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. No trunk. Wings depressed, deflexed. Back smooth.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae feathered. Entirely white, except the extremity
of the abdomen, which is yellow. Caterpillar black and red, hairy. -- Syst.
Entom. 577. 74. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 822. 45. Fn. Sv. 1128.

Linnaeus in the Systema Naturae, has confounded the Yellow Tail, with the
Brown Tail Moth, nor was it generally considered as an error till some time
after; but the immense increase of the Caterpillars of the Brown Tail Moth in
the year 1780, afforded an opportunity of determining them to be distinct
species.

Though foreign to our purpose, and properly under the history of the Brown
Tail Moth, we cannot pass over such remarkable circumstances as attended the
uncommon increase of this species in the above winter. The fears of the public
must have been great indeed, when prayers were offered to avert the famine
supposed to be threatened by the appearance of those insects in the state of
the Caterpillar.

In July the Caterpillar is found feeding on the white-thorn, fallow,
apple trees, and on fruit trees in general, about the latter end of the same
month, it spins a web of a tough texture against the branches of trees, etc.
becomes an aurelia, and in August the Fly comes forth.


PLATE XI. ACARUS COLEOPTRATORUM. BEETLE-TICK. APTERA.
No wings.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Legs eight. Eyes two, lateral. Tentaculae two, jointed.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Tawny. Anus whitish.

Syst. Ent. 814. 24. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 1026. 27. Fn. Sv. 1973.

This Tick is one of those detestable race of animals whose miuteness secures
it from danger, while it draws nutriment from the blood, and frequently from
the vitals of larger insects. Every animal is tormented by those cruel and
blood-thirsty beings, varying in size, in shape, and in color, but whether
they be distinguished by the name of lice, bugs, fleas, or mites, they fall
under one point of view, when considered as a pest to the societies of other
animals.

Beetles are in general infested and severely injured by those vermin. I found
about a month since one of the Scarabaeus Stercorarius, Common Dor, or Clock,
almost devoured alive by them, little except his shell remaining; yet, in this
state it lived several days. There were a number of small brown bags affixed by
pedicles to its breast, thighs, and even feet; the microscope discovered those
to contain each an embryo, and the pedicle, no doubt, answered the part of an
umbilical chord, to extract nourishment from the living creature. I perceived
on further inspection their base penetrated the shell, or entered the apertures.

FIG. 1. Natural size of the Ticket and Embryo.

FIG. 2. The upper side, and Fig. 3. under side, magnified.

GRADUAL, from these what numerous kinds descend,
Evading even the microscopic eye!
All Nature swarms with life; one wondrous mass
Of Animals or Atoms organized,
Waiting the vital breath, when PARENT HEAVEN
Shall bid his Spirit blow. --
--
-- These, concealed
By the kind art of forming HEAVEN, escape
The grosser eye of man: for, if the worlds
In worlds enclosed, should on his senses burst,
From cates ambrosial, and the nectar'd bowl
He would abhorrent turn: and in dead night
When silence sleeps over all, be stunned with noise.
THOMSON'S SEASONS.
PLATE XII. CICINDELA CAMPESTRIS. SPARKLER. COLEOPTERA.
Wings two, covered by two shells, divided by a longitudinal future.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae taper. Jaws prominent, denticulated. Eyes
prominent, Thorax margined. Five joints in each foot.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Above green-gold. Beneath copper tinged. Eyes large.
Thorax angular and narrower than the head. Six spots on each shell. An oval
substance at the base of each thigh. Legs long and slender.

Syst. Ent. 224. 1. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 657. 1. Fn. Sv. 746. Scop. carn. 181.

Those beautiful Insects vary something in size and color, the spots on the
elytra are generally white, but are often found with spots of yellow; they fly
or run quick, are carnivorous, and live in dry sandy places. In the spring its
larva is found, which resembles a long, soft, whitish worm, with six legs and a
brown scaly head; it perforates the sand perpendicularly, and rests near the
surface to ensnare smaller insects.

It very difficult, if at all possible, to breed those insects and observe
their metamorphoses; we have tried various methods, but have not yet been so
fortunate as to succeed.


PLATE XIII. LUCANUS CERVUS. STAG BEETLE. COLEOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae clavated, compressed, pectinato-fissile. Maxillae
extended so as to resemble horns. Five joints in each foot.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Head and Thorax black. Shells dark brown. Horns resembling
those of a Stag, forked at the end, a small branch near the middle on the
inside, moveable. Shells plain.

The Stag-Beetle is the largest coleopterous insect we possess, but its size is
insignificant, when compared with those of the same kind that inhabit hot
countries or woodlands, as instanced in the Scarabaeus Hercules, etc.

It is sufficiently distinguished in this country by the moveable maxillae, or
jaws, that project from the head; they are of a dark red color, and though
brighter in some specimens, are rarely of the beautiful coral appearance Barbut
and other authors have described.

Coleopterous insects in general are endowed with amazing strength, and their
arms are equally serviceable for the assault or defense. The antlers of this
Beetle are carefully to be avoided by such as attempt to deprive it of liberty;
with them it strips off the bark of oak trees, and attaches itself firmly to
the trunk, thence extracting the liquor that oozes with its tongue.

They are plentiful in June and July, in Kent and Essex, and in many other
parts of Britain.

The females are known by their maxillae being much shorter than those of the
males; they deposit their eggs under the bark of old trees, either oak or ash,
and the food of the larvae, or grubs, is the internal substance of the trunk,
first reduced to a fine powder; they undergo transformation in this cell, and
force a passage through the bark when perfect beetles.


PLATE XIV. TRICHODA POCILLUM. TRICHODA.
An invisible, pellucid, hairy worm.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Oblong trichoda, the forepart truncated and hairy, the
tail articulated, and divided into two bristles.

This invisible animalculum is common in marshy places, particularly in the
swamps near the banks of the river Thames.

When magnified, the body is pellucid, and appears as two separate bodies, one
enclosing the other; the interior part is filled with molecules, and the
exterior is membranaceous: they are capable of extension or dilation, and of
folding in various directions. At the extremity of the interior part is a
muscular orbicular membrane, which is opened or shut at pleasure, and forms the
mouth.

FIG. 1. The interior part protruded with the mouth open.

FIG. 2. The jaws shut.


PLATE XV. PHALAENA CAJA. GREAT TIGER MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae taper from the base. No trunk. Wings depressed,
deflexed. Back smooth.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae feathered. First wings whitish, with large
irregular dark brown spots. Abdomen and second wings orange, with black spots.

The superior wings in some of this species have smaller brown (...), and more
of the cream color; in others the spots are larger, and ^^^quently two are
united to form one. The inferior wings also admit of equal variety; the spots
near the thorax are often united, and the small black stripes on the back are
fewer in the present specimen than are common to the Moth.

The caterpillars feed on lettuces, or nettles. When he is apprehensive of
danger, he rolls himself up like a hedgehog. He becomes a chrysalis in May;
and the latter end of June, or early in July, it produces the Moth.


PLATE XVI. PHALAENA ANTIQUA. WHITE SPOT TUSSOCK MOTH, OR VAPOURER. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae taper from the base. No trunk. Wings depressed.
Back hairy.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae feathered. First wings cloudy, orange, waved and
spotted with brown, and a white spot on the posterior angle. Female without
wings.

The female Vapourer Moth at first sight perfectly resembles an apterous
insect; but on inspection, very small wings are seen at the extremity of the
Thorax, and the antennae determine it to be a phalaena. It creeps in a sluggish
manner, and lays an abundance of eggs.

FIG. 1. the Female. FIG. 2. the Male.

The Caterpillars feed on white thorn, and on trees in general. It has been
known to live on the deadly nightshade, and other poisonous plants. The
Caterpillars are found in July, and the Moth in September.


PLATE XVII.
VORTICELLA URCEOLARIS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. A small animal, with a vascular cup; the mouth is at one
end cili^^ed, and capable of being contracted; the stem fixed.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Single, with a short tail, and toothed mouth.

This Animalcum is but perceptible to the naked eye, appearing as a small white
speck; the microscope discovers the external covering to be so transparent,
that all the motions of the animal within are perfectly distinct. It has a
double rotatory instrument, which, however, it can conceal or show at pleasure;
and it has power to protrude the head and tail as at FIG. 1. or to contract
them within the external coat or covering, as at FIG. 2. -- When the animal
intends to display its rotatory instrument, it forces its tail through the hole
at the extremity of the outer coat, and affixes it to whatever substance is
near; but when it swims, it moves its tail backwards and forwards to assist it.

They are found in river, or stagnant, water.

FIG. III. TRICHODA VERMICULARIS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. An invisible, pellucid, hairy worm.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Long cylindrical trichoda, with a short neck, the apex
hairy.

Is found in river water, and can assume various forms, as in our figure shown.


PLATE XVIII. NEPA CINEREA. WATER SCORPION. HEMIPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae, or fore legs, cheliform, wings crossed and
complicated; fore part coriaceous.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Black brown. Head small. Antennae cheliform. Thorax almost
square. Target large, brown. Shells large. One joint in each foot. Length near
an inch. In the female the abdomen terminates in two long appendices. Four legs
only.

There are three species only of this genus common to our waters, though the
waters of hot countries abound with various kinds, some considerably exceeding
in size even our Sphinx Atropos.

The Insect sinks its eggs into the cavity of a rush, or other aquatic plant,
whence the larvae are hatched. The perfect insect is found in June, and thence
to September or later; they are voracious, and feed on other aquatic animals,
grasping their prey between their fore feet, and tearing them to pieces with
their sharp rostrum. -- They fly in the evening, and thus remove in herds from
one pool to another when danger approaches.

It is supposed by some authors, that the fore feet of the nepa are the
antennae, and if this be admitted, the Insect has only four feet; but if
considered destitute of its antennae, it has six.


PLATE XIX. CHRYSIS BIDENTATA. HYMENOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Thorax joined to the abdomen by a short pedicle. Abdomen
divided into three segments. Sting simple. Wings not folded. Antennae filiform
of one long and eleven short joints each.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Head and last segment of the body, sky blue, changeable.
Thorax, and two first annulations of the abdomen, crimson with gold spots.
Thorax with two teeth.

The Chrysis Bidentata is scarcely so large, and by no means so common as the
Chrysis Ignita, (not exceeding one-third of an inch in length) but is equal, if
not superior in beauty and richness of color. The head, but more particularly
the last segment of the body, appears in one direction of light, blue, in
another green, in another purple, etc. and the thorax, and two first segments
of the abdomen are far more enriched with a golden appearance; the ground
color is deep crimson, but the metallic appearance on the lighter parts, and
the number of small gold spots which besprinkle it, greatly diminish the
strength of color, and renders it, even before it is magnified, a superb
little insect.

It is found in May or June in some parts of Kent and Essex.


PLATE XX.
FIG. I. PHALAENA CHRISTIERNANA. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Pyralis.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. First wings yellow, with rose-coloured marks. Under wings
flossy, brownish gray.

The natural history of this Phalaena is so little known, that we freely
confess our inability to show its transformations; and although a deviation
from our first intention, we trust the scarcity of the Fly will plead our
excuse. We shall occasionally introduce figures of some rare and non-descript
subjects, which we hope will be highly satisfactory to many of our subscribers.

Our specimen was taken at Feversham; they are sometimes met with about
Darnwood in June or July.

FIG. II. HIMANTOPUS LUDIO.
GENERIC CHARACTER. A pellucid, invisible, cirrated worm.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Curled Himantopus; the upper part hairy, the tail extended
upwards.


PLATE XXI. PHALAENA PRUNARIA. ORANGE MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Geometrae. Antennae feathered.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Wings orange, sprinkled with brown, and a semi-lunar spot
on the first pair. Female paler than the male. Caterpillar yellow brown, with
two spines before and two behind.

The caterpillars of this Moth feed on fruit trees, or on thorns, in the month
of May; the Chrysalis is commonly found, rolled up in a decayed leaf, inwardly
protected by the web, in June; and in July the Moth.

The present figure is of the male.


PLATE XXII. TIPULA PLUMOSA. SEA TIPULA. DIPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Head long. Palpi four, curved. Trunk very short.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Brown. Thorax greenish. Eyes black. Fore legs longest.
Wings shorter than the abdomen.

Is found in the month of April near marshes, and has been frequently mistaken
for the common Gnat.


PLATE XXIII. SILPHA VESPILLO. COLEOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae clavated, foliated. Head prominent. Thorax
margined.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Margin of the thorax broad. Shells abbreviated, black,
with two orange belts. Thigh of the hind legs large, with a spine near their
origin; length one inch.

This species, like most of the Coleopterous Insects, delights in filth and
putrescence, and are rarely found except in the dung, or dead bodies of larger
animals, whose entrails they devour; they prey on the larvae of smaller insects
beneath the surface of the earth, or they will destroy each other. Their Grubs
are secreted in perforations made in the earth by the female, and therein they
change to their last or perfect state in June or July: those Grubs are to be
found by following the track of a plough.

They fly well with the transparent wings, which are concealed beneath the
Elytra or upper Shells. The male is rather smaller than the female, and the
orange belts are of a deeper hue: though both male and female vary in the
strength of color when alive, and yet more when preserved in cabinets, as they
sometimes become almost brown. All insects are subject to this change, whatever
may be the care of the collector.


PLATE XXIV. LIBELLULA DEPRESSA. DRAGON FLY. NEUROPTERA.
Wings four, naked, transparent, reticulated with veins or nerves. Tail without
a sting.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Mouth with two long lateral jaws. Antennae very short. Tail
of the male forked. Wings extended.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Eyes brown. Thorax greenish, with two yellow transverse
bands. A large black spot at the base of each Wing, and a small dark mark on
their exterior margin. Body depressed, lance-shaped.

All the species of Libellula, but particularly the larger kinds, are
considered by many rather as objects of terror, than subjects worthy
inspection; and the vulgar denomination of Horse-stinger, contributes to this
abhorrence: although it has no power over animals of such magnitude, it is
perfectly a Vulture among lepidopterous, or other defenseless Insects,
destroying more for its sport than for its voracious appetite.

The Fly is on the wing in May, and June, in almost every marshy situation; the
female lays her eggs near the roots of Osiers on the banks of ditches, or sinks
them into the stalks of Rushes in the water; they hatch, and an ugly apterous
insect, of a brown color, comes forth; it has a long body like the Fly, six
Legs, and a forked Head, a sharp spine at the extremity of the abdomen, and a
row of spines on each side, one at every joint; it plunges into the water, and
immediately devours such of the inhabitants, or their eggs, as comes within its
reach, and it continues this life of depredation until its next change. They
are to be taken with a small hand-net.

All transparent objects, in a certain direction before a microscope, reflect
the colors of the prism. The Tipula Plumosa exhibits, in this situation, an
effulgence of coloring, which its natural size conveys but small vestiges of;
and the colors on the wing of this Libellula appears far more vivid when
magnified.

The body of the male is bluish gray; the present specimen is the female.


PLATE XXV. SPHINX API-FORMIS. BE HORNET SPHINX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae thickest in the middle. Wings, when at rest,
deflexed.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Wings transparent, with brown veins. Abdomen yellow, the
first and fourth division from the thorax dark, purplish. Thorax brown, with
two yellow patches in front. Head yellow. Antennae dark brown. Linn. Syst. Not.

The Caterpillar of the Sphinx Api-formis is an internal feeder, and found only
by making an incision into the innermost substance of the Poplar, the only tree
the female commonly deposits her Eggs on; it i^ to us unknown, as is also the
time of continuing within the trunk of the tree; but in June, early in the
morning, or in the evening, the Chrysalis is seen issuing through the bark,
from a perforation in the trunk, which the Caterpillar had formed previous to
its change, generally to the depth of six or eight inches, or more. Nature has
furnished every segment of the Chrysalis with a double row of sharp teeth, or
spines, therewith it firmly attaches itself to the sides of the cavity, and, by
repeated exertions to break from its prison, gradually (...) forth; thus, when
it has extricated itself from the tree, and the Chrysalis is supported as in
our Plate represented, the upper parts burst asunder with violence, and the
insect rushes forth to enjoy "the temperature of the summer season." It is
rarely found except in Essex.

There is another Sphinx, which differs in so few particulars, that it has
been mistaken for the present subject; notwithstanding, it may be easily
distinguished by a crescent of yellow in the fore part of the thorax, and
thence entitled the Lunar Hornet Sphinx; a Drawing of which Insect, with the
larva, has been presented to the Linnaean Society. This larva is nearly the
size of the Buff-tip Caterpillar, and of an obscure brown color; probably the
larva of the Sp. Api-formis may much resemble it.

It is arranged in many cabinets under the title of Sphinx Vespiformis; but the
Sp. Vespiformis, in the Linnaean Collection, now in the possession of Dr.
Smith, scarcely exceeds half the size of this subject, and is probably unique.
The Lunar Hornet-Sphinx had no place in that cabinet.


PLATE XXVI.
FIG. I. TRICHODA COMETA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. An invisible, pellucid, hairy Worm.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Spherical, the fore part hairy, with an appendant globule.

FIG. II. TRICHODA LONGICAUDA.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Cylindrical, the first part truncated, and set with hairs.
The tail long, with two joints, and terminated by two bristles.

FIG. III. VORTICELLA TROCHIFORMIS NIGRA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. A Worm, capable of contracting or extending itself, naked,
with rotatory cilia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Top-shaped black vorticella.

This species of Vorticella appears, without the assistance of a microscope, as
small black specks, swimming on the water, particularly in meadows which are
inundated. They are constantly in motion; and two small white hooks are
perceptible by glasses at 1 -- 1; by the help of those it is supposed to swim,
or they may enclose some rotatory organ. The insect is opaque.


PLATE XXVII. LEPTURA ARIETIS. COMMON WASP BEETLE. COLEOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae tapering to the end. Shells narrower at the apex.
Thorax somewhat cylindrical.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Black. Anterior and posterior margin of the Corslet
yellow. Four yellow lines on each elytra or Shell. Lin. Syst. Not.

They fly well, and are sometimes found on aquatic plants. They are exceedingly
numerous in Kent, in the pease and bean-fields, in May, or on the
currant-bushes, and not unfrequently are taken on the fern.


PLATE XXVIII. CHRYSOMELA ASPARAGI. COLEOPTERA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae knotted, enlarging toward the ends. Corslet
margined, and body oblong. Thorax narrow.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Head, Antennae, and under side of the Body black. Thorax
red, with two black spots. Shells dark green, with six yellow spots. Length one
line. Lin. Syst. Not.

This pretty Cloeopterous Insect is found in June on the Asparagus, when in
seed. Linnaeus calls it Asparagi, from the larvae feeding on the leaves of that
plant. It is a common insect, but forms a beautiful opaque object for the
microscope. The natural size is given at Fig. I. and the magnified appearance
above.


PLATE XXIX.
FIG. I. TRICHODA MELITEA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. An invisible, pellucid, hairy Worm.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Oblong ciliated trichoda, with a dilatable neck, the apex
globular, and surrounded with hairs. Muller's Animalcula Infusoria, etc.

Invisible to the naked eye, and rarely found except in salt-waters, although
we have met with one specimen in the water of the Thames.

FIG. II. VORTICELLA NASUTA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. A Worm, capable of contracting or extending itself, naked,
with rotatory cilia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Cylindrical, with a prominent point in the middle of the
cup. Muller's Anim. Infus.

Is invisible to the naked eye, and appears of an unequal size before the
microscope is pellucid, with the fore part truncated and ciliated, and moves in
the water with great alertness, by the assistance of the circle of hairs which
encompass the body.

FIG. III. VORTICELLA VIRIDIS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. A worm capable of contracting or extending itself, naked,
with rotatory cilia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Cylindrical uniform, green, and opake. Muller's Anim.
Infus.

The naked eye discovers this species as a mere point: when magnified it is of
a dark green color, almost opake, nearly cylindrical, obtuse at the
extremities, and destitute of limbs. It moves circularly, or in a strait
direction, and causes such an agitation of the water, that notwithstanding its
appearance, some rotatory instrument must be concealed within the body, which
the insect can put forth at pleasure.


PLATE XXX. PHALAENA SALICIS. WHITE SATIN MOTH.
GENERIC CHARACTER. ** No trunk, wings depressed, deflexed, back smooth.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Antennae feathered. Body and wings white.

Caterpillar black, with red and white spots.

Are very numerous in the adjacent parts of London, and are found in the state
of Caterpillar, Chrysalis and Moth, at the same time, though commonly the
Caterpillar changes to Chrysalis in June, and to a Fly in July.

It feeds on the Willow, the Ozier, the Poplar, etc.


PLATE XXXI.
FIG. I. MUSCA CHAMAELEON. DIPTERA.
Two Wings.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Musca, a soft flexible Trunk with lateral Lips at the end.
No palpi.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Dark brown or black. Antennae taper, broken. Eyes large.
Abdomen nearly circular, with three triangular yellow spots on each Side, and
one at the extremity.

Linnaeus, in a former edition of the Fauna Suecica gave this insect the name
of Oestrus Aquae, but he afterward discovered it to be a Musca, and called it
Musca Chamaeleon. It is one of the most common Dipterous, or two-winged Insects
we have; yet though so well known in its perfect state, few have attended so
minutely to its changes as to discover that; they form the most singular part
of its history. -- The female deposits her eggs in the hollow stalks of aquatic
plants, or broken reeds, or so provides for them that they cannot, but by some
unforeseen accident, be carried away. The egg, in due time ripening, produces a
Larva, no way resembling the Parent, but rather a Worm of a most singular
structure. This happens about the latter end of May, or beginning of June, if
the weather proves favorable; they will then be found in shallow standing
waters, crawling on the grass or plants which grow there, or they may be taken
floating on the surface of the water. The Body consists of twelve annular
divisions, whereof the Head and Tail are two; the Tail has a verge of hairs,
which, when entirely expanded, support the creature on the surface, with its
head downwards. If it wishes to descend, it contracts the hairs in the form of
a wine glass, or entirely closes them at the end; and when again it is rising
to the surface, it forces a bubble from a small aperture in the center, which
immediately makes a passage for its ascension. -- It changes to the Pupa state,
and about the middle of July to the Fly. It subsists at this time on the nectar
and other juices it extracts from the bottom of the corolla in flowers.

FIG. II. MUSCA PENDULA. DIPTERA. MUSCA.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Head black. Thorax yellow, with three longitudinal black
lines. Abdomen yellow, with transverse black marks.

Its habits nearly correspond with those of the Musca Chamaeleon. Like that
Insect it once wore the appearance of an Aquatic, and like it also in its last
or perfect state, exists by extracting with its Trunk the nectar from flowers.
It is to be taken in June.

FIG. III. MUSCA LATERALIS. DIPTERA. MUSCA.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. * Thorax black. Abdomen bright red or brown, with a line
of black from the Thorax; the last segment black, with hairs or spines.

Visits flower gardens in the month of June.


PLATE XXXII.
FIG. I. VIBRIO OLOR.
GENERIC CHARACTER. An invisible Worm, very simple, round, and rather long.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Elliptical, with a very long Neck, and a knob on the Apex.
-- Muller's Any. Inf.

The Neck of this Creature is in continual motion, and the whole Body is
dilatable. It is found in water, replete with decayed vegetables.

FIG. II. KOLPODA MILEAGRIS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. An invisible, very simple, pellucid, flat, crooked Worm.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Changeable, with the fore part like a hook, the hind part
folded up. -- Muller' Any. Inf.

FIG. III. and FIG. IV. PROTEUS TENAX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. An invisible, very simple, pellucid Worm, of a variable
form.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Running out into a fine point. -- Muller.

A gelatinous pellucid body, stored with black molecules; it changes its form
in a regular order, first extending itself out in a strait line, the lower part
terminating in an acute bright point, without any intestines, and the globules
being all collected in the upper part, it next draws the pointed end up toward
the middle of the body, swelling it into a round form. The contraction goes on
for some time, after which the lower part is swelled as in Fig. IV. The point
is afterward projected from this ventricose part. It passes through five
different forms before it arrives at that represented at Fig. IV. It scarcely
moves from one spot, only bending about sideways. It is to be found in river
water, where the Nitida grows. -- Adams on the Microscope.


PLATE XXXIII.
FIG. I. PHALAENA BATIS. PEACH-BLOSSOM MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA. PHALAENA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae taper from their apex. Wings in general contracted
when at rest. Fly by night.

* NOCTUA.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. First pair of Wings brown, with five peach-coloured spots
on each. Second pair light brown.

The Peach-blossom Moth at first sight so evidently distinguishes itself, that
it can scarcely be mistaken. The upper or first pair of Wings have the ground
of a brown color, which in some directions of light assume a golden
appearance; and on each Wing are five elegantly disposed spots of white, having
each a center of the most beautiful bloom, or blossom color, which blend into
the white with the most exquisite softness. The under Wings are of a simple
color, and have only a transverse shade of a darker hue across the middle of
each Wing.

Its truly elegant appearance would alone be sufficient to claim our attention;
but when we add that it is one of the rarest and most valuable specimens of
British entomology, it will be considered as a compensation for those more
common subjects occasionally introduced; and which the nature of our plan
cannot permit us to refuse.

Our endeavors to procure the Caterpillar have hitherto been ineffectual,
although it is very probably to be taken early in the season, feeding on the
bramble. It is described to be a brown larva, naked, or without hairs, with a
gibbosity or rising on the back, near the extremity.

Our Fly was taken in Essex, July 14th.

FIG. II. PHALAENA AMATORIO. BLOOD VEIN, or BUFF ARGOS MOTH. LEPIDOPTERA.
PHALAENA.
** Antennae feathered.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Wings angulated, buff, sprinkled with brown, and a red
transverse line across each. Margin of each Wing edged with red.

The Caterpillars of this Phalaena feed on the oak leaves. They are green, with
yellow rings. The Fly is found in Essex very commonly in the month of July.


PLATE XXXIV.
FIG. I. CURCULIO BACHUS. COLEOPTERA.
Wings two, covered by two shells, divided by a longitudinal future.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Antennae clavated, elbowed in the middle, and fixed in the
Snout, which is prominent and horny. Joints four to each foot.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shells, and Thorax purple with gold shades; snout long,
black. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 611. 38. Sckaeff. Icon. Tab. 37. Fig. 13. Geoff.
Ins. 1. 270. 4. Sul. Hist. Ins. Tab. 4. Fig. 4.

Our figure represents the Curculio Bachus, as it appears before the Speculum
of an Opake Microscope with a lens magnifying times.

It is with this, as with many other species of insects, and particularly those
of the Coleopterous Order, that unless they are in some measure magnified, much
of their beauty will remain hidden, and much of their structure be enveloped in
obscurity. It is not perfectly agreeable to our plan, and may admit of some
blame from our subscribers; but when objects so diminutive in size, and so
complex in color, offer to our attention, and it is not possible to represent
them in their natural appearance, or in a manner satisfactory to ourselves, we
must have recourse to the Microscope for assistance. We consider the confidence
at present reposed in our accuracy, and attention, to the natural subjects,
evident from the general patronage bestowed on our attempt; it is a spur to our
exertions, and we will endeavor, as well by our future, as present
correctness, to deserve a continuation of that esteem, and encouragement, so
liberally showered on our once arduous undertaking.

C. Bachus is near (...) in length, the Shells and Thorax appear of a deep
glossy purple, with much inclination to gold; a green and golden hue is seen on
every part of the body as it moves in various directions of light. The whole
appears before the microscope besprinkled, and spotted with gold and purple;
gold in those parts where the light is most powerful, and purple in the
shadows. The Snout is black, or of a dark color, as are also the Eyes; and the
singular structure of the jointed Antennae, which are thereon, deserve
particular notice. This beautiful insect is as rare, as it is superb, and the
larva is scarcely, if at all known. -- Our specimen was taken in the middle of
June, in a field near Kent.

FIG. II. CUCULIO GERMANUS. BLACK CURCULIO. COLEOPTERA. Curculio.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Snout long, black Head, Thorax, Shells and Body black. Two
small spots of yellowish white on the sides of the Thorax.

Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 613. 58. Scopol. Ann. Hist. Not. 5. 91. 44. Frisch. Ins.
13. 28. Tab. 26.

An Insect found in abundance in Germany, and by no means uncommon in this and
every other part of Europe. It is generally taken in June.


PLATE XXXV.
FIG. I.
Shows the natural size of the larva, of the MUSCA CHAMAELEON, Described in
Plate XXXI of this work.

FIG. II.
As it appears magnified. We have taken it since that plate was finished, or we
would have introduced it with the Fly. Being unacquainted with any perfect
representation of this aquatic larva, we are happy to give it before the
completion of the first volume.


PLATE XXXVI.
FIG. I. LIBELLULA PUELLA. NEUROPTERA.
Wings four, naked, transparent, reticulated. With Veins or Nerves. Tail
without a sting.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Mouth with two long lateral Jaws. Antennae very short, tail
of the male forked. Wings extended.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Body Saxon-greenish blue, Eyes distant, remote. Wings of
equal length, with a cloud of brown in the middle, and without marginal spot.
Length two inches.

Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 904. 20. Fan. Sv. 1470.

It is neither so large as to infuse terror by its appearance, or so beautiful
as to claim the first place in a collection of British insects: notwithstanding
there are many inferior to it both in elegance, and color. The whole of the
body is a deep purplish blue, which reflects on one part, a most brilliant
color with a greenish cast, and the clouds on the wings contribute much to its
luster. The Thorax and Head are nearly the same, some few shades of green
excepted.

It is found in May and June, sporting on the waters, or among the bushes which
overgrow the sides of pools, or gently flowing streams; at noon, or after a
shower, when the sun breaks from its watery prison, and penetrates the
thickets, and the groves with inviting warmth, they are seen issuing from the
dark retreat, and overhanging shrubbery; to bask and wanton in its effulgent
beams, and fan the gently rising breeze with their lucid Wings. In many parts
on the banks of the Thames they heighten the scene by the glow and richness of
their coloring; the green, the blue, and the red; the yellow, purple, and the
brown, in their richest teints, according to the species; and as they fly in
various directions, display themselves in all their native elegance and
splendour.

FIG. II. LIBELLULA PUELLA. NEUROPTERA. LIBELLULA.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Body red with yellow and black lines at each segment;
thorax green with yellow stripes. Wings clear, with marginal spots.

The body is red, with a yellow band and black mark at every segment; the
Thorax green, with longitudinal lines of yellow; the Wings are perfectly
transparent, except a marginal spot on each. It is voracious, as are all the
species of Libellula, whether in the larva or the winged state; it appears
about the same time as the preceding, and is the produce of an aquatic larva.

INDEX TO VOL. I.
COLEOPTERA. FIRST ORDER.
Cervus Lucanus. Stag Beetle Plate 13 Silpha Vespillio Plate 23 Chrysomela
Asparagi Plate 30 Curculio Bachus Plate 34 Curculio Germanus ib. Leptura
Arietis. Common Wasp Beetle Plate 27 Cicindela Campestris Plate 12
HEMIPTERA. SECOND ORDER.
Nepa Cinerea. Water Scorpion Plate 18
LEPIDOPTERA. THIRD ORDER.
Sphinx Apiformis. Hornet Sphinx Plate 25 Sphinx Filipendulae. Burnet Moth
Plate 6 Phalaena Pavonia. Emperor Moth Plate 1 Phalaena Bucephala. Buff Tip
Moth Plate 3 Phalaena Caja. Great Tiger Moth Plate 15 Phalaena Salicis. White
Satin Moth Plate 28 Phalaena Chrysorrhoea. Yellow-Tail Moth Plate 10 Phalaena
Antiqua. White Spot Tussock Moth Plate 16 Phalaena Amataria. Buff Argos Moth
Plate 33 Phalaena Prunaria. Orange Moth Plate 21 Phalaena Grossulariata.
Current Moth Plate 4 Phalaena Batis. Peach Blossom Plate 33 Phalaena
Christiernana Plate 20 Phalaena Evonymella. Ermine Moth Plate 9
NEUROPTERA. FOURTH ORDER.
Libellula Depressa. Dragon Fly Plate 24 Libellula Virgo Plate 36 Libellula
Puella Plate 36
HYMENOPTERA. FIFTH ORDER.
Chrysis Ignita Plate 7 Chrysis Bidentata Plate 19
DIPTERA. SIXTH ORDER.
Tipula Plumosa Plate 22 Musca Chamaeleon Plate 31 Musca Pendula ib. Musca
Lateralis ib.
APTERA. SEVENTH ORDER.
Acarus Coleoptratorum. Beetle Tick Plate 11 Monculus Quadricornis Plate 2
Monoculus Conchaceus Plate 5 Proteus Tenax Plate 32 Vibro Olor ib. Kolpoda
Mileagris ib. Bursaria Hirundinella Plate 5 Trichoda Cometa Plate 26 Trichoda
Longicauda ib. Trichoda Melitea Plate 29 Trichoda Pocillum Plate 14 Trichoda
Uvula Plate 8 Trichoda Vermicularis Plate 17 Himantopus Ludio Plate 20
Vorticella Lunaris Plate 8 Vorticella trochi formis Nigra Plate 26 Vorticella
Nasuta Plate 29 Vorticella Urceolaris Plate 17 Vorticella Viridis Plate 29
INDEX. SPECIFIC NAMES, ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED, TO VOL. I.
Amataria, Phalaena Plate 33 Antiqua, Phalaena Plate 16 Api-formis, Sphinx
Plate 25 Arietis, Leptura Plate 27 Asparagi, Chrysomela Plate 30 Batis,
Phalaena Plate 33 Bidentata, Chrysis Plate 19 Bucephala, Phalaena Plate 2 Caja,
Phalaena Plate 15 Campestris, Cincindela Plate 12 Chamaeleon, Musca Plate 31
Christiernana, Phalaena Plate 20 Chrysorrhoea, Phalaena Plate 10 Cinerea, Nepa
Plate 18 Coleoptratorum, Acarus Plate 11 Cometa, Trichoda Plate 26 Conchaceus,
Monoculus Plate 5 Evonymella, Phalaena Plate 9 Filipendulae, Sphinx Plate 6
Grossulariata, Phalaena Plate 4 Ignita, Chrysis Plate 7 Lateralis, Musca Plate
31 Longicauda, Trichoda Plate 26 Lucanus, Cervus Plate 13 Ludio, Himantopus
Plate 20 Lunaris, Vorticella Plate 8 Melitea, Trichoda Plate 29 Mileagris,
Kolpoda Plate 32 Nasuta, Vorticella Plate 29 Olor, Vibrio Plate 32 Pavonia,
Phalaena Plate 1 Pendula, Musca Plate 31 Plumosa, Tipula Plate 22 Pocillum,
Trichoda Plate 14 Prunaria Phalaena Plate 21 Quadricornis, Monoculus Plate 2
Salicis, Phalaena Plate 28 Tenax, Proteus Plate 32 Trochiformis Nigra,
Vorticella Plate 26 Vermicularis, Trichoda Plate 17 Vespillio, Silpha Plate 23
Viridis, Vorticella Plate 29 Urceolaris, Vorticella Plate 17 Uvula, Trichoda
Plate 8
ERRATA TO VOL. I.
PLATE XXXIV. for magnifying times, read magnifying four times for 6. Bachus is
near in length, read C. Bachus is near four Lines in length FIG. II. for
Cuculio, read Curculio



