LEONIDAS, A POEM.

-- -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
PIND. OLYMP. OD. 1.

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY, at Tully's Head in Pallmall. M.DCC.XXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
TO illustrate the following poem, to vindicate the subject from the censure of
improbability, and to show by the concurring evidence of the best historians,
that such disinterested public virtue did once exist, I have thought, it would
not be improper to prefix the subsequent narration.

WHILE Darius, the father of Xerxes, was yet on the throne of Persia, Cleomenes
and Demaratus were kings in Lacedaemon, both descended from Hercules. Demaratus
was unfortunately exposed by an uncertain rumor, which rendered his legitimacy
suspected, to the malice and treachery of his colleague, who had conceived a
personal resentment against him; for Cleomenes taking advantage of this report,
persuaded the Spartans to examine into the birth of Demaratus, and refer the
difficulty to the oracle of Delphi; and was assisted in his perfidious designs
by a near relation of Demaratus, named Leotychides, who aspired to succeed him
in his dignity. Cleomenes found means to corrupt the priestess of Delphi, who
declared Demaratus not legitimate. Thus by the base practices of his colleague
Cleomenes, and his kinsman Leotychides, Demaratus was expelled from his office
of king in the commonwealth, after having frequently signalized his valor in
its service. He went into voluntary banishment, and retiring to Asia was there
protected by Darius; while Leotychides succeeded to the regal authority in
Sparta. Upon the death of Cleomenes Leonidas was made king, who ruled in
conjunction with this Leotychides, when Xerxes, the son of Darius, invaded
Greece. The number of land and naval forces, which accompanied that monarch,
together with the servants, women, and other usual attendants on the army of an
eastern prince, amounted to upwards of five millions, as reported by Herodotus,
who wrote within a few years after the event, and publicly recited his history
at the Olympic games. In this general assembly not only from Greece itself, but
from every part of the world, wherever a colony of Grecians was planted, had
he greatly exceeded the truth, he must certainly have been detected, and
censured by some among so great a multitude, and such a voluntary falsehood must
have entirely destroyed that merit and authority, which have procured to
Herodotus the veneration of all posterity, with the appellation of the father
of history. On the first news of this attempt upon their liberty a convention
was immediately held at the Isthmus of Corinth, composed of deputies from the
several states of Greece, to consult on proper measures for the public safety.
The Spartans also sent messengers to enquire of the oracle at Delphi into the
event of the war, who returned with an answer from the priestess of Apollo,
that either a king descended from Hercules must die, or Lacedaemon would be
entirely destroyed. Leonidas immediately offered to sacrifice his life for the
safety of Lacedaemon, and marching to Thermopylae possessed himself of that
important pass with three hundred of his countrymen; who with the forces of
some other cities in the Peloponnesus, together with the Thebans, Thespians,
and the troops of those states, which adjoin'd to Thermopylae, composed an army
of near eight thousand men.

XERXES was now advanced as far, as Thessalia; when hearing, that a small body
of Grecians was assembled at Thermopylae, with some Lacedaemonians at their
head, and among the rest Leonidas, a descendant of Hercules, he dispatched a
single horseman before to observe their numbers, and discover their designs.
When this horseman approached, he could not take a view of the whole camp,
which lay concealed behind a rampart formerly raised by the Phocians at the
entrance of Thermopylae; so that his whole attention was employed on those, who
were on guard before the wall, and who at that instant chanced to be the
Lacedaemonians. Their manner and gestures greatly astonished the Persian; some
were amusing themselves in gymnastic exercises; others were combing their hair;
and all discovered a total disregard of him, whom they suffered to depart
without molestation, and report to Xerxes, what he had seen: which appearing to
that prince quite ridiculous, he sent for Demaratus, who was with him in the
camp, and required him to explain this strange behavior of his countrymen.
Demaratus informed him, that it was a custom among the Spartans to comb down
and adjust their hair, when they were determined to fight till the last
extremity. Xerxes notwithstanding in the confidence of his power sent
ambassadors to the Grecians to demand their arms, to bid them disperse, and
become his friends and allies; which proposals being received with disdain, he
commanded the Medes and Saces to seize on the Grecians, and bring them alive
into his presence. These nations immediately attacked the Grecians, and were
soon repulsed with great slaughter; fresh troops still succeeded, but with no
better fortune than the first, being opposed to an enemy not only superior in
valor and resolution, but who had the advantage of discipline, and were
furnished with better arms both offensive and defensive.

PLUTARCH in his Laconic apothegms reports, that the Persian king offered to
invest Leonidas with the sovereignty of all Greece, provided he would join his
arms to those of Persia. This offer was too considerable a condescension to
have been made before a trial of their force, and must therefore have been
proposed by Xerxes, after such a series of ill success, as might probably have
depressed the insolence of his temper; and it may be easily supposed, that the
virtue of Leonidas was proof against any temptations of that nature. Whether
this be a fact, or not, thus much is certain, that Xerxes was reduced to
extreme difficulties by this resolute defense of Thermopylae; till he was
extricated from his distress by a Malian named Epialtes, who conducted twenty
thousand of the Persian army into Greece through a pass, which lay higher up
the country among the mountains of Oeta: whereas the passage at Thermopylae was
situated on the seashore between the end of those mountains and the Malian
bay. The defense of the upper pass had been committed to a thousand Phocians,
who upon the first sight of the enemy inconsiderately abandoned their station,
and put themselves in array upon a neighboring eminence; but the Persians
wisely avoided an engagement, and with the utmost expedition marched to
Thermopylae. Leonidas no sooner received information, that the Barbarians had
passed the mountains, but he commanded the allies to retreat, reserving the
three hundred Spartans, and four hundred Thebans, whom, as they followed him
with reluctance at first, he now compelled to stay. But the Thespians, whose
number amounted to seven hundred, would not be persuaded by Leonidas to forsake
him. Their commander was Demophilus, and the most eminent amongst them for his
valor was Dithyrambus. Among the Spartans the most conspicuous next to
Leonidas was Dieneces, who being told, that the multitude of Persian arrows
would obscure the sun, replied, the battle would then be in the shade. Two
brothers named Alpheus and Maron are also recorded for their valor, and were
Lacedaemonians. Megistias a priest, by birth an Acarnanian, refused to desert
Leonidas, though entreated by him to consult his safety, and retire; but sent
away his only son, and remained himself behind to die with the Lacedaemonians.
Among the three hundred Spartans were two called Eurytus and Aristodemus, who
being almost blind were dismissed by Leonidas. Of these Aristodemus returned
home; but Eurytus waited, till the Persians descended from the hills, and then
commanding his slave to lead him among the combatants was slain with the rest
of his countrymen.

HERODOTUS relates, that Leonidas drew up his men in the broadest part of
Thermopylae; where, being surrounded by the Persians, they fell with great
numbers of their enemies: but Plutarch, Diodorus Siculus, and others affirm,
that the Grecians attacked the very camp of Xerxes in the night. The action is
thus described by Diodorus. "The Grecians having now rejected all thoughts of
safety, preferring glory to life, unanimously called on their general to lead
them against the Persians, before they could be appris'd, that their friends
had passed round the mountains. Leonidas embraced the occasion, which the ready
zeal of his soldiers afforded, and commanded them forthwith to dine, as men,
who were to sup in Elysium. Himself in consequence of this command took a
repast, as the means to furnish strength for a long continuance, and to give
perseverance in danger. After a short refreshment the Grecians were now
prepared, and received orders to assail the enemies camp, to put all, they met,
to the sword, and force a passage to the royal pavilion; when, formed into one
compact body with Leonidas himself at their head, they marched against the
Persians, and entered their camp at the dead of night. The Barbarians wholly
unprepared, and blindly conjecturing, that their friends were defeated, and
themselves attacked by the united power of Greece, hurry together from their
tents with the utmost disorder and consternation. Many were slain by Leonidas
and his party, but much greater multitudes by their own troops, to whom in the
midst of this blind confusion they were not distinguishable from enemies: for
as night took away the power of discerning truly, and the tumult was spread
universally over the camp, a prodigious slaughter must naturally ensue. The
want of command, of a watchword, and of confidence in themselves reduced the
Persians to such a state of confusion, that they destroyed each other without
distinction. Had Xerxes continued in the royal pavilion, the Grecians without
difficulty might have brought the war to a speedy conclusion by his death; but
he at the beginning of the tumult betook himself to flight with the utmost
precipitation; when the Grecians rushing into the tent, put to the sword most
of those, who were left behind: then, while night lasted, they ranged through
the whole camp in diligent search of the tyrant. When morning appeared, the
Persians perceiving the true state of things, held the inconsiderable number of
their enemies in contempt; yet were so terrified at their valor, that they
avoided a near engagement; but enclosing the Grecians on every side shower'd
their darts and arrows upon them at a distance, and in the end destroyed their
whole body. Such was the period of their lives, who under the conduct of
Leonidas defended the pass of Thermopylae. Who can refrain from admiring the
virtue of these men, who with one consent maintaining the post allotted by
their country cheerfully renounced their lives for the common safety of Greece,
and esteemed a glorious death more eligible than to live with dishonor? Nor is
the consternation of the Persians incredible. Who among those Barbarians could
have conjectured such an event? who could have expected, that five hundred men
would have dared to attack a million? Wherefore shall not all posterity from
that day reflect on the virtue of these men as the object of imitation, who,
though the loss of their lives was the necessary consequence of their
undertaking, were yet unconquered in their spirit; and among all the great
names delivered down to remembrance are the only heroes, who obtained more
glory in their fall than others from the brightest victories? With justice may
they be deemed the preservers of the Grecian liberty, even preferably to those,
who were conquerors in the battles fought afterward with Xerxes; for the
memory of their valor, who fell at Thermopylae, for ever dejected the
Barbarians, while the Greeks were fired with emulation to equal such a pitch of
magnanimity. Upon the whole there never were any before these, who attained to
immortality through the mere excess of virtue; whence the praise of their
fortitude has not been recorded by historians only, but has been celebrated by
numbers of poets, among others by Simonides the lyric."

PAUSANIAS in his Laconics considers the defense of Thermopylae, as an action
superior to any achieved by their cotemporaries, and to all the exploits of
preceding ages. "Never (says he) had Xerxes beheld Greece, or laid in ashes the
city of Athens, had not his forces under Hydarnes been conducted through a path
over Oeta, and by that means incompassing the Greeks overcome and slain
Leonidas." Nor is it improbable, that Leonidas should have maintained his post
in so narrow a pass, till the whole army of Xerxes had perished by famine. At
the same time the Persian navy had been miserably shattered by a storm, and
worsted in an engagement with the Athenians at Artemisium.

To conclude, the fall of Leonidas and his brave companions, so meritorious to
their country, and so glorious to themselves, has obtained such an high degree
of veneration and applause from past ages, that few among the ancient compilers
of history have been silent on this amazing instance of magnanimity and zeal
for liberty; and many are the epigrams and inscriptions now extant, some on the
whole body, others on particulars, who died at Thermopylae, still preserving
their memory in every nation conversant with learning, and at this distance of
time still rendering their virtue the object of admiration and praise.

I SHALL now detain the reader no longer, than to take this public occasion of
expressing my sincere regard for the LORD VISCOUNT COBHAM, and the sense of my
obligations for the early honor of his friendship. To him I inscribe the
following poem; and herein might I be justified, independent of all personal
motives, from his Lordship's public conduct so highly distinguished by his
disinterested zeal, and unshaken fidelity to his country, not less in civil
life than in the field: and to whom a poem founded on a character eminent for
military glory, and love of liberty is due from the nature of the subject.

R. GLOVER.

LEONIDAS.
BOOK I.
The argument.
Xerxes king of Persia having drawn together the whole force of his empire, and
passed over the Hellespont into Thrace with a design to conquer Greece; the
deputies from the several states of that country, who had some time before
assembled themselves at the Isthmus of Corinth to deliberate on proper measures
for resisting the invader, were no sooner appris'd of his march into Thrace,
than they determined without further delay to dispute his passage at the
straits of Thermopylae, the most accessible part of Greece on the side of
Thrace and Thessaly. Alpheus, one of the deputies from Sparta, repairs to that
city, and communicates this resolution to his countrymen; who chanced that day
to be assembled in expectation of receiving an answer from Apollo, to whom they
had sent a messenger to consult about the event of the war. Leotychides, one of
their two kings, counsels the people to advance no further, than the Isthmus of
Corinth, which separates the Peloponnesus, where Lacedaemon was situated, from
the rest of Greece; but Leonidas, the other king, dissuades them from it. Agis,
the messenger, who had been deputed to Delphi, and brother to the queen of
Leonidas, returns with the oracle; which denounces ruin to the Lacedaemonians,
unless one of their kings lays down his life for the public. Leonidas offers
himself for the victim. Three hundred Spartans are chosen to accompany him to
Thermopylae, and Alpheus returns to the Isthmus. Leonidas, after an interview
with his queen, departs from Lacedaemon. At the end of six days, he encamps
near the Isthmus, when he is joined by Alpheus; who describes the auxiliaries,
that wait at the Isthmus, those, who are already possessed of Thermopylae, as
also the pass itself; and concludes with a relation of the captivity of his
brother Polydorus in Persia.

REHEARSE, O Muse, the deeds and glorious death
Of that famed Spartan, who withstood the power
Of Xerxes near Thermopylae, and fell
To save his country. When from Asia's coast
With half the nations of the peopled globe
The Persian king the Hellespont had passed,
And now in Thrace his boundless camp was spread;
Soon to the Isthmus, where th'assembled chiefs
Of Greece in anxious council long had sat,
How best their menaced liberties to guard,
The dreadful tidings reached. The near approach
Of Asia's lord determines their resolves.
These they convey to all the Grecian states.
Back to Eurotas' shores, where Sparta rose,
Laconian Alpheus speeds: in council there
He finds the Spartan people with their kings;
Their kings, who boast an origin divine,
From Hercules descended. They the sons
Of Lacedaemon had convened to learn
The sacred mandates of the immortal Gods,
That morn expected from the Delphian dome;
But in their presence Alpheus first appeared,
And thus addressed them. For immediate war
Prepare, O Spartans. Xerxes' numerous powers
Already fill the trembling bounds of Thrace.
The Isthmian council has decreed to guard
The strait and rocky entrance into Greece,
Thermopylae; where even a slender force
May stem the torrent of unnumber'd foes.
HE said, when Leotychides, who shared
The rule with great Leonidas, bespake
The Spartans thus. My countrymen give ear.
Why from her bosom should Laconia send
Her valiant sons to wage a distant war
For others' safety; why exhaust her strength
And thin her numbers in defense of those,
Who far remote from Lacedaemon dwell
Beyond the Isthmus? there the Gods have placed
Our native ramparts, there our empire's bound;
And there alone our country claims our swords.
HE ceased. The people with assenting shouts
Replied, when thus Leonidas began.
O MOST ungen'rous counsel! most unjust,
And base desertion of the Grecian weal!
What! shall th'Athenians, whose assiduous fleets
Undaunted watch the innumerable foes,
Wherever they menace our affrighted shores,
And trust the impending dangers of the field
To Sparta's well-known valor; shall they hear,
That we, disowning thus the general cause,
Maintain the Isthmus only, and expose
The rest of Greece, even Athens, while she guards
Our naked coasts, to all the waste of war,
Her walls to ruin, and her fields to flames,
Her sons, her matrons, and her hoary sires
To violation, servitude, and shame?
O should they hear such counsels guide our state,
Would they not court the first propitious gale
To waft them far from such perfidious friends,
And raise new seats in other climes remote,
Safe from insulting foes, and false allies?
Then should we soon behold the proud array
Of Xerxes' navy with their hostile beaks
Affront our shores, and deluge all our fields
With inexhausted numbers. Half the Greeks,
By us betrayed to bondage, would support
The Persian king, and lift the avenging spear
For our destruction. But my friends reject
Such mean and dangerous counsels, which will blast
Your long established glories, and assist
The proud invader. O eternal king
Of Gods and mortals elevate our minds!
Each low and partial passion thence dispel!
Till this great truth in every heart be known,
That none, but those, who aid the public cause,
Can shield their countries, or themselves from chains.
HE said, by shame suppressed each clamorous voice
Was lost in silence; till a general shout
Proclaimed the approach of Agis from the fane,
Where, taught by Phoebus on the Delphic hill,
The Pythian maid his oracles revealed.
He came; but discontent and grief overcast
His anxious brow. Reluctant he advanced,
And now prepared to speak. The impatient throng
Was gathered round him; motionless they stood
With expectation; not a whisper told
The silent fear, but all on Agis gaze;
And still as death attend the solemn tale.
As over the western waves, when every storm
Is hushed within its cavern, and a breeze
Soft-breathing lightly with its wings along
The slackened cordage glides, the sailor's ear
Perceives no sound throughout the vast expanse;
None, but the murmurs of the sliding prowe,
Which slowly parts the smooth and yielding main:
So through the wide and listening crowd no sound,
No voice, but thine, O Agis, broke the air,
Declaring thus the oracle divine.
I WENT to Delphi; I inquired what fate
Was doomed to Sparta from the impending war;
When thus the all-seeing deity replied.
"Inhabitants of Sparta, Persia's arms
"Shall lay your proud and ancient seat in dust;
"Unless a king from Hercules derived
"Cause Lacedaemon for his death to mourn."
AS, when the hand of Perseus had disclosed
The snakes of dirc Medusa; all, who viewed
The Gorgon features, were congealed to stone,
With ghastly eye balls on the hero bent,
And horror living in their marble form:
Thus with amazement rooted, where they stood,
And froze with speechless terror, on their kings
The Spartans gazed: but soon their anxious looks
All on the great Leonidas unite,
Long known his country's refuge. He alone
Remains unshaken. Rising, he displays
His godlike presence. Dignity and grace
Adorn his frame, and manly beauty joined
With strength Herculean. On his aspect shines
Sublimest virtue, and desire of fame,
Where justice gives the laurel; in his eye
The inextinguishable spark, which fires
The souls of patriots: while his brow supports
Undaunted valor, and contempt of death.
Serene he rose, and thus addressed the throng.
WHY this astonishment on every face,
Ye men of Sparta? Does the name of death
Create this fear and wonder? O my friends!
Why do we labor through the arduous paths,
Which lead to virtue? Fruitless were the toil,
Above the reach of human feet were placed
The distant summit, if the fear of death
Could intercept our passage. But in vain
His blackest frowns and terrors he assumes
To shake the firmness of the mind, which knows,
That wanting virtue life is pain and woe,
That wanting liberty even virtue mourns,
And looks around for happiness in vain.
Then speak, O Sparta, and demand my life;
My heart exulting answers to thy call,
And smiles on glorious fate. To live with fame
The Gods allow to many; but to die
With equal luster, is a blessing, Heaven
Selects from all the choicest boons of fate,
And with a sparing hand on few bestows.
HE said. New wonder fixed the gazing throng.
In silence Joy and Admiration sat,
Suspending praise. At length with high acclaim
The arch of heaven resounded, when amid
The assembly stood Dieneces, and spoke.
SO from Thermopylae may Sparta's shouts
Affright the ear of Asia! Haste, my friends,
To guard the gates of Greece, which open stand
To Tyranny and Rapine. They with dread
Will shrink before your standards, and again
In servile Persia seek their native seats.
Your wives, your sons, your parents, general Greece
Forbid delay; and equal to the cause
A chief behold: can Spartans ask for more?
HE ceased; when Alpheus thus. It well becomes
The Spartans held the chiefs of Greece, and famed
For dauntless courage, and unyielding hearts,
Which neither want, nor pain, nor death, can bend,
To lead the rest to battle. Then with speed
From all your number form a chosen band,
While I returning, will my seat resume
Among the Isthmian council, and declare
Your instant march. Our brave allies, I deem,
Now on the Isthmus wait the Spartan king;
All but the Locrian and Boeotian force,
With Phocis' youth, appointed to secure
Thermopylae. This said, not long he paused,
But with unwearied steps his course renews.
NOW from the assembly with majestic steps
Forth moves their godlike king, with conscious worth
His generous bosom glowing; like his sire,
The invincible Alcides, when he trod
With ardent speed to face in horrid war
The triple form of Geryon, or against
The bulk of huge Antaeus match his strength.
SAY, Muse, who next present their dauntless breasts
To meet all danger in their country's cause?
Dieneces advances sage, and brave,
And skilled along the martial field to range
The ordered ranks of battle; Maron next,
To Alpheus dear, his brother, and his friend.
Then rose Megistias with his blooming heir,
Joy of his age, and Menalippus called;
Megistias, wise and venerable seer,
Whose penetrating mind, as fame records,
Could from the entrails of the victim slain
Before the altar, and the mystic flight
Of birds foresee the dark events of time.
Though sprung a stranger on the distant shore
Of Acarnania, for his worth received,
And hospitably cherished; he the wreath
Pontific bore amid the Spartan camp;
Serene in danger, nor his sacred arm
From warlike toils secluding, nor unskilled
To wield the sword, or poize the weighty spear.
Him Agis followed, brother to the queen
Of great Leonidas; his friend, in war
His tried companion. Graceful were his steps,
And gentle his demeanor. Still his soul
Preserved its rigid virtue, though refined
With arts unknown to Lacedaemon's race.
High was his office. He, when Sparta's weal
Their aid and counsel from the Gods required,
Was sent the sacred messenger to learn
Their mystic will in oracles declared
From rocky Delphi, and Dodona's shade,
Or sea-incircled Delos, or the cell
Of dark Trophonius round Boeotia known.
Three hundred more complete the intrepid band.
BUT to his home Leonidas retired.
There calm in secret thought he thus explored
His mighty soul, while nature to his breast
A short-lived terror called. What sudden grief,
What cold reluctance thus unmans my heart,
And whispers, that I fear? -- Can death dismay
Leonidas, so often seen and scorned,
When clad most dreadful in the battle's front? --
Or to relinquish life in all its pride,
With all my honors blooming round my head,
Repines my soul? or rather to forsake,
Eternally forsake my weeping wife,
My infant offspring, and my faithful friends? --
Leonidas awake! Shall these withstand
The public safety? Lo! thy country calls.
O sacred voice, I hear thee! At that sound
Returning virtue brightens in my heart;
Fear vanishes before her; Death receive
My unreluctant hand, and lead me on.
Thou too, O Fame, attendant on my fall,
With wings unwearied shall protect my tomb,
Nor Time himself shall violate my praise.
THE hero thus confirmed his virtuous soul,
When Agis entered. If till now my tongue
(He thus began) O brother, has delayed
To pay its grateful offering of the praise,
Thy merit claims, and only filled the cries
Of general applause, forgive thy friend;
Since her distresses, hers, whom most you love,
Detained me from thee. O unequalled man!
Though Lacedaemon call thy first regard,
Forget not her, who now for thee laments
In sorrows, which fraternal love in vain
Has strove to sooth. Leonidas embraced
His generous friend, and thus replied. Most dear
And best of men! conceive not, but my heart
Must still remember her, from whom my life
Its largest share of happiness derives.
Can I, who yield my breath, lest others mourn,
Lest thousands should be wretched; when she pines,
More loved than any, though less dear than all,
Can I neglect her griefs! In future days
If thou with grateful memory record
My name and fate, O Sparta, pass not this
Unheeded by. The life, I gave for thee,
Knew not a painful hour to tire my soul,
Nor were they common joys, I left behind.
SO spoke the patriot, and his heart o'erflow'd
With fondest passion; then in eager haste
The faithful partner of his bed he sought.
Amid her weeping children sat the queen,
Immovable and mute; her swimming eyes
Fixed on the earth. Her arms were folded over
Her laboring bosom blotted with her tears.
As, when a dusky mist involves the sky,
The moon through all the dreary vapors spreads
The radiant vesture of its silver light
Over the dull face of nature; so her charms
Divinely graceful shone upon her grief,
Bright'ning the cloud of woe. The chief approached.
Soon as in gentlest phrase his well-known voice
Her drooping mind awakened, for a time
Its cares were hushed: she lifts her languid head,
And thus gives utt'rance to her tender thoughts.
O THOU, whose presence is my only joy,
If thus, Leonidas, thy looks and voice
Can dissipate at once the sharpest pangs,
How greatly am I wretched; who no more
Must hear that voice, which lulls my anguish thus,
Nor see that face, which makes affliction smile!
THIS said, returning grief her breast invades.
Her orphan children, her devoted lord
Pale, bleeding, breathless on the field of death,
Her ever-during solitude of woe,
All rise in mingled horror to her sight,
When thus in bitt'rest agony she spoke.
O WHITHER art thou going from my arms!
Shall I no more behold thee! Oh! no more
In conquest clad, and wrapped in glorious dust
Will thou return to greet thy native soil,
And make thy dwelling joyful Yet, too brave,
Why would thou hasten to the dreary gates
Of death, uncalled? Another might have fallen,
Like thee a victim of Alcides' race,
Less dear to all, and Sparta been secure.
Now every eye with mine is drowned in tears,
All with these babes lament their father lost.
But oh! how heavy is our lot of pain!
Our sighs must last, when every other breast
Exults with transport, and the public joy
Will but increase our anguish. Yet unmoved,
Thou did not heed our sorrows, did not seek
A moment's pause, to teach us how to bear
Thy endless absence, or like thee to die.
UNUTTERABLE sorrow here confined
Her voice. These words Leonidas returned.
I SEE, I feel thy anguish, nor my soul
Has ever known the prevalence of love,
Ever proved a father's fondness, as this hour;
Nor, when most ardent to assert my fame,
Was once my heart insensible to thee.
How had it stained the honors of my name
To hesitate a moment, and suspend
My country's fate, till shameful life preferred
By my inglorious colleague left no choice,
But what in me were infamy to shun,
Not virtue to accept? Then deem no more,
That of thy love regardless, or thy tears,
I haste uncalled to death. The voice of Fate,
The Gods, my fame, my country bid me bleed.
-- Oh! thou dear mourner! wherefore streams afresh
That flood of woe? Why heaves with sighs renewed
That tender breast? Leonidas must fall.
Alas! far heavier misery impends
Over thee and these, if softened by thy tears
I shamefully refuse to yield that breath,
Which justice, glory, liberty, and heaven
Claim for my country, for my sons, and thee.
Think on my long unaltered love. Reflect
On my paternal fondness. Has my heart
Ever known a pause of love, or pious care?
Now shall that care, that tenderness be proved
Most warm and faithful. When thy husband dies.
For Lacedaemon's safety, thou will share,
Thou and thy children, the diffusive good.
Should I, thus singled from the rest of men,
Alone entrusted by th 'immortal Gods
With power to save a people, should my soul
Desert that sacred cause, thee too I yield
To sorrow, and to shame; for thou must weep
With Lacedaemon, must with her sustain
Thy painful portion of oppression's weight.
Thy sons behold now worthy of their names,
And Spartan birth. Their growing bloom must pine
In shame and bondage, and their youthful hearts
Beat at the sound of liberty no more.
On their own virtue, and their father's fame,
When he the Spartan freedom has confirmed,
Before the world illustrious shall they rise,
Their country's bulwark, and their mother's joy.
HERE paused the patriot. With religious awe
Grief heard the voice of Virtue. No complaint
The solemn silence broke. Tears ceased to flow:
Ceased for a moment; soon again to stream.
For now in arms before the palace ranged
His brave companions of the war demand
Their leader's presence; then her griefs renewed,
Too great for utt'rance, intercept her sighs,
And freeze each accent on her falt'ring tongue.
In speechless anguish on the hero's breast
She sinks. On every side his children press,
Hang on his knees, and kiss his honored hand.
His soul no longer struggles to confine
Its strong compunction. Down the hero's cheek,
Down flows the manly sorrow. Great in woe
Amid his children, who enclose him round,
He stands indulging tenderness and love
In graceful tears; when thus with lifted eyes
Addressed to heaven: Thou ever-living power
Look down propitious, sire of Gods and men!
And to this faithful woman, whose desert
May claim thy favor, grant the hours of peace.
And thou, my great forefather, son of Jove,
O Hercules, neglect not these thy race!
But since that spirit, I from thee derive,
Now bears me from them to resistless fate,
Do thou support their virtue! be they taught,
Like thee, with glorious labor life to grace,
And from their father let them learn to die!
SO saying, forth he issues, and assumes
Before the band his station of command.
They now proceed. So moved the host of heaven
Down from Olympus in majestic march,
On Jove attendant to the flaming plains
Of Phlegra, there to face the giant sons
Of Earth and Titan: he before them tow'r'd.
Thus through the streets of Lacedaemon passed
Leonidas. Before his footsteps bow
The multitude exulting. On he treads
Revered and honored. Their inraptur'd sight
Pursues his graceful stature, and their tongues
Extol and hail him as their guardian God.
Firm in his nervous hand he grasps his spear.
Down from his shoulders to his ankles hangs
The massy shield, and over his burnished helm
The purple plumage nods. Harmonious youths,
Around whose brows entwining laurels played,
In lofty-sounding strains his praise record;
While snowy-finger'd virgins all the ways
With odorous garlands strewn. His bosom now
Was all possessed with glory, which dispelled
Whatever of grief remained, or fond regret
For those, he left behind. The reverend train
Of Lacedaemon's senate now approached
To give their solemn, last farewell, and grace
Their hero's parting steps. Around him flowed
In civil pomp their venerable robes
Mixed with the blaze of arms. The radiant troop
Of warriors pressed behind him. Maron here,
With Menalippus warm in flowery prime,
And Agis there with manly grace advanced,
Dieneces, and Acarnania's seer,
Megistias sage. The Spartan dames ascend
The loftiest domes, and thronging over the roofs
Gaze on their sons and husbands, as they march.
So parted Argo from the Iolchian strand,
And plough'd the foaming surge. Thessalia's nymphs
Their hills forsaking, and their hallowed groves,
Ranged on the cliffs, which overshade the deep,
Still on the distant vessel fixed their sight;
Where Greece her chosen heroes had embarked
To seek the dangers of the Cholchian shore.
SWIFT on his course Leonidas proceeds.
Soon is Eurotas passed, and Lerna's banks,
Where his unconquered ancestor subdued
The many-headed Hydra, and with fame
Immortalized the lake. Th'unwearied bands
Next through the pines of Maenalus he led,
And down Parthenius urged the rapid toil.
Six days incessant thus the Spartans march,
When now they hear the hoarse-resounding tide
Beat on the Isthmus. Here their tents they spread.
Below the wide horizon then the sun
Had sunk his beamy head. The queen of night
Gleam'd from the center of th'ethereal vault,
And over the dusky robe of darkness shed
Her silver light. Leonidas detains
Dieneces and Agis. Open stands
The tall pavilion, and admits the moon.
As here they sat conversing, from the hill,
Which rose before them, one of noble port
Appears with speed descending. Lightly down
The slope he treads, and calls aloud. They heard,
And knew the voice of Alpheus. From their seats
They rose, and thus Leonidas began.
O THOU, whom heaven with swiftness has endu'd
To match the ardour of thy daring soul,
What calls thee from the Isthmus? Do the Greeks
Neglect to arm, nor face the public foe?
I COME to meet thee (Alpheus thus returned)
A messenger, who gladsome tidings bears.
Through Greece the voice of liberty is heard,
And all unfold their banners in her cause;
The Thebans only with reluctant hands.
Arcadia's sons with morning shall thou join,
Who on the Isthmus wait thy great command.
With Diophantus Mantinea sends
Five hundred spears; nor less from Tegea's walls
With Hegesander move. A thousand more,
Who in Orchomenus reside, who range
Along Parrhasius, and Cyllene's brow,
Or near the foot of Erymanthus dwell,
Or on Alpheus' banks, with various chiefs,
Attend thy call; but most is Clonius famed
Of stature huge: unshaken as a rock,
His giant bulk the line of war sustains.
Four hundred warriors brave Alcmaeon draws
From stately Corinth's towers. Two hundred march
From Phlius, whom Eupalamus commands.
An equal number of Mycenae's race
Aristobulus heads. Through fear alone
Of thee, and threatening Greece the Thebans arm.
To these inglorious Greeks my self repaired
Their dying sense of honor to recall.
A few corrupted by the Persian gold,
Unjust dominion have usurped in Thebes.
These in each bosom quell the generous flame
Of liberty. The eloquent they bribe;
With specious tales the multitude they cheat;
And prostitute the name of public good
To veil oppression. Others are immersed
In all the sloth of riches, and unmoved
In shameful ease behold their country fall.
I first implored their senate's instant aid,
But they with artful wiles demanding time
For consultation, I addressed them thus.
The shortest moment may suffice to know,
If to die free be better than to serve;
But if, deluding Greece by vain delays,
You mean to show your friendship to the foe,
You cannot then deliberate too long,
How to withstand her swift-avenging wrath,
Approaching with Leonidas. This heard,
Four hundred warriors they appoint to march.
The wily Anaxander is their chief,
With Leontiades. I saw their march
Begun, then hastened to survey the straits,
Which thou shall render sacred to renown.
Where, ever mingling with the crumbling soil,
Which moulders round the Malian bay, the sea
In slimy surges rolls; upon the rock,
Which forms the utmost limit of the bay,
Thermopylae is stretched. Where broadest spread,
It measures threescore paces, bounded here
By the deep ooze, which underneath presents
Its dreary surface; there the lofty cliffs
Of woody Oeta overlook the pass,
And far beyond over half the surge below
Their horrid umbrage cast. Across the straits
An ancient bulwark of the Phocians stands,
A wall with turrets crowned. In station here
I found the Locrians, and from Thespia's gates
Sev'n hundred more Demophilus has led.
His brother's son attends him to the camp,
Young Dithyrambus greatly famed in war,
But more for temperance of mind renowned;
Loved by his country, and with honors graced,
His early bloom with brightest glory shines,
Nor wantons in the blaze. Here Agis spoke.
WELL have thou painted that illustrious youth.
He was my host at Thespia. Though adorned
With highest deeds, by fame and fortune crowned,
His gentle virtues take from envy's mouth
Its blasting venom, and her baneful face
Strives on his worth to smile. In silence all
Again remain, and Alpheus thus pursues.
A CHOSEN troop has bold Plataea sent,
Small in its numbers, but unmatched in arms.
Above the rest Diomedon their chief
Excels in prowess. Signal were his deeds
Upon that day of glory, when the fields
Of Marathon were hid with Persian slain.
These guard Thermopylae. Among the hills
A winding path to stranger's feet unknown
Affords another entrance into Greece:
This by a thousand Phocians is secured.
HERE Alpheus paused. Leonidas embraced
The noble Spartan, and rejoined. Thou know
What fate to me the immortal Gods ordain.
Frame now thy choice. Accompany our march,
Or go to Lacedaemon, and relate,
How thy discerning mind, and active limbs
Have served thy country. From the impatient mouth
Of Alpheus straight these fervent accents broke.
I HAVE not measured such a tract of land,
Not looked unwearied on the setting sun,
And through the shade of midnight urged my steps
To rouse the Greeks to battle, that myself
Might be exempted from the glorious toil.
Return? Oh! no. A second time my feet
Shall visit thee, Thermopylae, and there
With great Leonidas shall Alpheus find
An honorable grave. And oh! amid
His country's danger if a Spartan breast
May feel a private sorrow, not alone
For injured Greece I hasten to revenge,
But for a brother's wrongs. A younger hope
Than I, or Maron blessed our father's years,
Child of his age, and Polydorus named.
His mind, while tender in its opening prime,
Was bent to rigid virtue. Generous scorn
Of pain and danger taught his early strength
To struggle patient with severest toils.
Often, when inclement winter chilled the air,
And frozen showers had swollen Eurotas' stream,
Amid the impetuous channel would he plunge,
And breast the torrent. On a fatal day,
As in the sea his active limbs he bathed,
A servile corsair of the Persian king
My brother, naked and defenseless, bore
Even in my sight to Asia, there to waste,
With all the promise of its growing worth,
His youth in bondage. Never can my tongue
My pains recount, much less my father's woes,
The days he wept, the sleepless nights he beat
His aged bosom. And shall Alpheus' spear
Be absent from Thermopylae, nor claim,
O Polydorus, vengeance for thy bonds
In that first slaughter of the barbarous foe?
HERE interposed Dieneces. The hands
Of Alpheus and Leonidas he grasped,
And joyful thus. Your glory wants no more,
Than that Lycurgus should himself arise
To praise the virtue, which his laws inspire.
THUS passed these heroes, till the dead of night,
The hours in friendly converse, and enjoyed
Each other's virtue; happiest of men!
At length with gentle heaviness the hand
Of sleep invades their eyelids. On the ground,
Oppressed with slumber, they extend their limbs;
When, sliding down the hemisphere, the moon
Now plunged in midnight gloom her silver head.
End of the First Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK II.
The argument.
Leonidas, on his approach to the Isthmus, is met by the leaders of the troops
sent from other Grecian states, and by the deputies, who composed the Isthmian
council. He harangues them, then proceeds in conjunction with the other forces
toward Thermopylae; is joined by Dithyrambus, and arrives at the straits about
noon on the fourth day after his departure from the Isthmus. He is received at
Thermopylae by the Thespian commander Demophilus, and by Anaxander the Theban
treacherously recommending Epialtes a Malian, who seeks by a pompous
description of the Persian power to intimidate the Grecian leaders, as they are
viewing the enemies camp from the top of mount Oeta. He is answered by Dieneces
and Diomedon. Xerxes sends Tigranes and Phraortes to the Grecian camp, who are
dismissed by Leonidas, and conducted back by Dithyrambus and Diomedon; which
last, incensed with the insolence of Tigranes, treats him with contempt and
menaces. This occasions a challenge to single combat between Diomedon and
Tigranes, Dithyrambus and Phraortes. Epialtes, after a conference with
Anaxander, declares his intention of returning to Xerxes.

AURORA spread her purple beams around,
When moved the Spartans. Their approach is known.
The Isthmian council, and the various chiefs,
Who led the auxiliar bands, proceed to meet
Leonidas; Eupalamus the strong,
Alcmaeon, Clonius, Diophantus brave,
And Hegesander. At their head advanced
Aristobulus, whom Mycenae's youth
Attend to war; Mycenae once elate
With power and dazzling wealth, and vaunting still
The name of Agamemnon, who along
The seas of Asia opened to the wind
Unnumber'd sails, and darkened half the shore
Of trembling Phrygia with the hostile shade.
Aristobulus joined the Spartan king,
And thus began. Leonidas survey
Mycenae's race. Should every other Greek
Be awed by Xerxes, and his Asian host,
Believe not, we can fear, derived from those,
Who once conducted over the foaming surge
The strength of Greece, who desert left the fields
Of ravaged Asia, and her proudest walls
From their foundations humbled to the dust.
LEONIDAS replied not, but addressed
The chiefs around. Illustrious warriors hail,
Who thus undaunted signalize your faith,
And generous ardour in the common cause.
But you, whose counsels prop the Grecian state,
O venerable synod, whose decrees
Have called us forth, to vanquish, or to die,
Thrice hail. Whatever by valor we obtain
Your wisdom must preserve. With piercing eyes
Each Grecian state contemplate, and discern
Their various tempers. Some with partial care
To guard their own neglect the public weal.
Cold and unmoved are others. Terror here,
And there corruption reigns. O fire the brave
With generous zeal to quit their native walls,
And join their valor in the general cause;
Confirm the wavering; animate the cold,
And watch the faithless: some there are, betray
Themselves and Greece; their perfidy prevent,
Or call them back to honor. Let us all
Be linked in sacred union, and the Greeks
Shall stand the world's whole multitude in arms.
If for the spoil, which Paris bore to Troy,
A thousand barks the Hellespont overspread;
Shall not again confederated Greece
Be roused to battle, and to freedom give,
What once she gave to fame. Behold we haste
To stop the invading tyrant. Till we bleed,
He shall not pour his millions on your plains.
But as the Gods conceal, how long our strength
May stand unconquered, or how soon must fall,
Waste not a moment, till consenting Greece
Range all her freeborn numbers in the field.
LEONIDAS concludes, when awful stepped
Before the sage assembly one, whose head
Was hoar with aged snow, and thus replied.
THY great example every heart unites.
From thee her happiest omens Greece derives
Of concord, freedom, victory, and fame.
Go then, O first of mortals, and impress
Amaze and terror in the Persians breast;
The freeborn Greeks instructing life to deem
Less dear than virtue, and their country's cause.
THIS heard, Leonidas, thy secret soul
Exulting tasted of the sweet reward
Due to thy name from endless time. His eyes
Once more he turned, and viewed in rapturous thought
His native land, which he alone can save;
Then summoned all his majesty, and over
The Isthmus trod. Behind the Grecians move
In deep arrangement. So the imperial bark
With stately bulk along the beating tide
In military pomp conducts the power
Of some proud navy bounding from the port
To bear the vengeance of a mighty state
Against a tyrant's walls. The Grecians march
Till noon, when halting, as they take repast,
Upon the plain before them they descry
A troop of Thespians. One above the rest
In eminence precedes. His glittering shield,
Whose spacious orb collects the effulgent beams,
Which from his throne meridian Phoebus cast,
Flames like another sun. A snowy plume
Falls over his dazzling cask. In wanton curls,
Which floated in the breathing air, around
The lofty crest it waved. Approaching near
Beneath the honors of his radiant helm
The warrior now a countenance displayed,
Where youth in rosy prime with sweetness mixed
Its manly beauty. With such modest grace
Respectful near Leonidas he came,
As all ideas of his own desert
Were lost in veneration. Phoebus thus
Appears before his everlasting sire,
When from his altar in the imbow'ring grove
Of palmy Delos, or the hallowed bound
Of Tenedos, or Claros, where he hears
His hymns and praises from the sons of men,
He reascends the high Olympian seats;
Such reverential awe his brow invests,
Diffusing over the glowing flower of youth
New loveliness and grace. The king receives
The illustrious Thespian, and began. My tongue
Would call thee Dithyrambus, for thou bear
All in thy aspect to become that name
For valor known and virtue. O reveal
Thy birth and charge; whoever thou art, my soul
Desires to know thee, and would call thee friend.
TO whom the youth returned. O first of Greeks,
My name is Dithyrambus, which the lips
Of some benevolent and generous friend
To thee have sounded with a partial voice,
And thou have heard with favorable ears.
I come deputed by the Thespian chief,
The Theban, and the Locrian, and the brave
Diomedon, to hasten thy approach.
Three days will bring the Persian powers in view.
HE ceased. At once the standards are uprear'd.
The host till evening with impetuous pace
Their march continue. Through the earliest dews
Of morning they proceed, and reach the pass,
Ever the fourth sun attained the sult'ry noon.
To their impatient sight no sooner rose
The rocks of Oeta, but with rapid feet,
And martial sounds of joy they rushed along;
As if the present deity of Fame,
Her temples with unfading laurels bound,
And in her hand her adamantine trump,
Had from the hills her radiant form disclosed,
And bade their valor hasten to the field;
That she their acts beholding might resound
Their name and glory over the earth and seas.
Before the van Leonidas advanced,
His eye confessed the ardour of his mind,
Which thus found utt'rance from his eager lips.
ALL hail! Thermopylae, and you, the powers,
Which here preside. All hail! ye silvan Gods,
Ye fountain nymphs, who pour your lucid rills
In broken murmurs down the rugged steep.
Receive us, O benignant, and support
The cause of Greece. Conceal the secret paths,
Which over the crags and through the forests wind,
Untrod by human feet, and traced alone
By your immortal footsteps. O defend
Your own recesses, nor let impious war
Profane the solemn silence of your groves.
Thus on your hills your praises shall you hear
From those, whose deeds shall tell the approving world,
That not to undeservers did you grant
Your high protection. You my valiant friends
Now rouse the generous spirit, which inflames
Your breasts; now prove the vigor of your arms:
That your recorded actions may survive
Within the breasts of all the brave and free,
And sound delightful in the ear of Time,
As long as Neptune beats the Malian bay,
Or those tall cliffs erect their shaggy tops
So near to heaven, your monuments of fame.
As in some torrid region, where the head
Of Ceres bends beneath its golden load,
If on the parching ground a fatal spark
Fall from a burning brand; the sudden blaze
Increased and aided by tumultuous winds
In rapid torrents of involving flames
Sweeps over the crackling plain, and mounting high
In ruddy spires illumines half the skies:
Not with less swiftness through the glowing ranks
The words of great Leonidas diffused
A more than mortal fervor. Every heart
Distends with great ideas, such as raise
The patriot's virtue, and the soldier's fire,
When danger in its most tremendous form
Seems to their eyes most lovely. In their thoughts
Imagination pictures all the scenes
Of war, the purple field, the heaps of death,
And glittering trophies pil'd with Persian arms.
BUT now the Grecian leaders, who before
Were station'd near Thermopylae, accost
The Spartan king. The Thespian chief allied
To Dithyrambus first the silence broke,
An ancient warrior. From behind his casque,
Whose crested weight his aged temples pressed,
His slender hairs, which time had silvered over,
Flowed venerable down. He thus began.
JOY now shall crown the period of my days.
And whether with my father's dust I sleep,
Or slain by Persia's sword I press the earth
Our common parent, be it as the Gods
Shall best determine. For the present hour
I bless their bounty, which has given my age
To see the great Leonidas, and bid
The hero welcome on this glorious shore;
Where he by heaven selected from mankind
Shall fix the basis of the Grecian weal.
HERE too the wily Anaxander spoke.
Hail! glorious chief. Of all the Theban race
We shall at least with gladsome bosoms meet
The great defender of the Grecian cause.
O! may oblivion over the shame of Thebes
Its darkest wing extend, or they alone
Be cursed by Fame, whose impious counsels turn
Their countrymen from virtue. Thebes alas!
Still had been buried in dishonest sloth,
Had not to wake her languor Alpheus come
The messenger of freedom. O accept
Our grateful hearts; thou, Alpheus, art the cause,
That Anaxander from his native gates
Here has not borne a solitary spear,
Nor these inglorious in their walls remained.
But longer do we loiter? Haste my friends
To yonder cliff, which points its shade afar,
And view the Persian camp. The morning sun
Beheld their numbers hide the adjacent plains.
Lo! here a Malian, Epialtes named,
Who with the foe from Thracia's bounds has marched.
HE said. His seeming virtue all deceived.
The camp not long had Epialtes joined,
By race a Malian. Eloquent his tongue,
But false his heart, and abject. He was skilled
To grace perfidious counsels, and to cloth
In swelling phrase the baseness of his soul,
Foul nurse of treasons. To the tents of Greece,
Himself a Greek, a faithless spy he came.
Soon to the friends of Xerxes he repaired,
The Theban chiefs, and nightly consult held,
How best with consternation to deject
The Spartan valor, or how best betray.
With him the leaders climb the arduous hill,
From whence the dreadful prospect they command,
Where endless plains by white pavilions hid
Spread, like the vast Atlantic, when no shore,
No rock or promontory stops the sight
Unbounded, as it wanders; but the moon
Resplendent eye of night in fullest orb
Throughout the interminated surface throws
Its rays abroad, and decks in snowy light
The dancing billows; such was Xerxes' camp:
A power unrivaled by the greatest king,
Or conqueror, that ever with ruthless hands
Dissolving all the sacred ties, which bind
The happiness of nations, have alarmed
The sleeping fury Discord from her den.
Not from the hundred brazen gates of Thebes,
The towers of Memphis, and the pregnant fields
By Nile's prolifick torrents deluged over,
Ever flowed such armies with the Egyptian lord
Renowned Sesostris; who with trophies filled
The vanquished earth, and over the rapid foam
Of distant Tanais, and the huge expanse
Of trembling Ganges spread his dreaded name:
Nor yet in Asia's far extended bounds
Ever met such numbers, not when Belus drew
The Assyrian bands to conquest, or the pride
Of high-exalted Babylon surveyed
The plains along Euphrates covered wide
With armed myriads swarming from her walls;
When at the rage of dire Semiramis
Peace fled affrighted from the ravaged East.
Yet all this hideous face of war dismays
No Grecian heart. Unterrified they stood.
The immeasurable camp with fearless eyes
They traverse, while in meditation near
The treacherous Malian waits, collecting all
His pomp of words to paint the hostile power;
Nor yet with falsehood arms his fraudful tongue
To feign a tale of terror: Truth herself
Beyond the reach of fiction to inhance
Now aids his treason, and with cold dismay
Might pierce the boldest breast, unless secured
By dauntless virtue, which disdains to live
From liberty divorced. Requested now
By every voice the traitor spoke, and all
Attentive ears incline. Oh! Greeks and friends!
Can I behold my native Malian fields
Presenting hostile millions to your sight,
And not with grief suppress the horrid tale,
Which you exact from these ill-omen'd lips.
On Thracia's sands I first beheld the foe,
When, joining Europe with the Asian shore,
A mighty bridge the outrageous waves restrained,
And stem'd the impetuous current; while in arms
The universal progeny of men*
Seemed all before me trampling over the sea
By thousands and ten thousands: Persians, Medes
Assyrians, Saces, Indians, swarthy files
From Aethiopia, Aegypt's tawny sons,
Arabians, Bactrians, Parthians, all the strength
Of Libya and of Asia. Neptune groaned
Beneath the burden, and indignant heaved
His neck against the incumbent weight. In vain
The violence of Boreas and the West,
With rage combined, against the unshaken pile
Dashed half the Hellespont. The eastern world
Sev'n days and nights uninterrupted pass,
And pour on Thracia's confines. They accept
The Persian lord, and range their hardy race
Beneath his standards. Macedonia's youth
With all Thessalia next, and every Greek,
Who dwells beyond Thermopylae, attend.
Thus not alone embodied Asia lifts
Her threatening lance, but Macedon and Thrace,
Whose martial loins with daring warriors teem,
And faithless Greeks in multitudes untold
The Persian Monarch aid. Celestial powers!
And thou, who reignest over men and Gods,
Who in a moment by thy will supreme
Can quell the mighty in their proudest hopes,
And raise the weak to safety, thou impart
Thy instant succor; interpose thy arm;
With lightning blast their legions: Oh! confound
With triple-bolted thunder Persia's camp,
Whence like an inundation with the morn
Shall millions rush, and overwhelm the Greeks.
Resistance else were vain against an host,
Which covers all Thessalia; for beyond
The Malian plains thus widely stretched below,
Beyond the utmost measure of the sight
Bent from the height of this aspiring cliff,
Lie yet more hideous numbers, which might drain
The streams of copious rivers with their thirst,
And with their arrows hide the midday sun.
THEN shall we join our battle in the shade,
Dieneces replied. Not calmly thus
Diomedon. On Xerxes' camp he bends
His lowering brow, which frowns had furrowed over,
And thus exclaimed. Bellona turn and view
With joyful eyes that field, the fatal stage,
Which regal madness has for you prepared
To exercise your horrors. Thou, O Death,
Shall riot here unceasing, when the rocks
Of yonder pass with bleeding ranks are strewn;
And all, who shun the avenging steel of Greece,
By pestilence and meager famine seized,
Shall with variety of ruin feast
Thy unabated hunger. Thus he spoke,
While on the host immense his gloomy eyes
He fixed disdainful, and its strength defied.
MEANTIME within the entrenchment of the Greeks
From Asia's monarch delegated came
Tigranes and Phraortes. From the hills
Leonidas conducts the impatient chiefs.
Around the hero in his tent they throng,
When thus Tigranes their attention calls.
AMBASSADORS from Persia's king we stand
Before you Grecians. To display the power
Of our great master, were a needless task.
The name of Xerxes, Asia's mighty lord,
Invincible, and seated on a throne
Surpassing human luster, must have reached
The extremest border of the earth, and taught
The hearts of men to own resistless force
With awe, and low submission. Yet I swear
By yon refulgent orb, which flames above,
The glorious symbol of the eternal power,
This military throng, this show of war
Persuade me, you have never heard that name,
At whose dread sound the billows wide remote
Of Indus tremble, and the Caspian wave,
The Egyptian tide, and Hellespontic surge
With homage roll. O impotent and rash!
Whom yet the large beneficence of heaven,
And our great monarch merciful and kind
Deign to preserve. Resign your arms; disperse
Each to your cities; there with humblest hands
Before your lord bestrew the way with flowers.
AS through the extensive grove, whose leafy boughs
Intwining crown some eminence with shade,
The tempests rush sonorous, and between
The crashing branches roar; by fierce disdain
And indignation thus the Grecians moved
With clamorous murmurs close the Persian's speech.
But Sparta's king arising, all is hushed
In sudden silence; when he thus replied.
O PERSIAN, when to Xerxes thou return'st,
Say thou have told the wonders of his power;
Then say, thou saw a slender band of Greece,
Which dares his boasted millions to the field.
THE Spartan said. Th'Ambassadors retire.
Them over the limits of the Grecian lines
Diomedon and Thespia's youth conduct.
With slow solemnity they all proceed
In sullen silence. But their looks denote
What speech would shame and weaken. Wrath contracts
The forehead of Diomedon. His teeth
Gnash with impatience for delayed revenge.
Disdain, which sprung from conscious merit, flushed
The cheek of Dithyrambus. On the face
Of either Persian insolence and pride
Incensed by disappointment gloomy low'r'd.
But when they reached the limits of the straits,
Where Xerxes' camp began to open wide
Its deep, immense arrangement; then the heart
Of vain Tigranes, swelling at the sight,
Thus overflows in loud and haughty phrase.
O ARIMANIUS, origin of ill,
Have we demanded of thy ruthless power,
Thus with the curse of madness to afflict
These wretched men? But since thy dreadful will
To irresistible perdition dooms
The sons of Greece, in vain should we oppose.
Be thy dire will accomplished, let them fall,
And fatten with their blood their native soil.
ENRAGED the stern Diomedon replies.
Thou servile, base dependent on a king,
Inglorious mercenary, slave to those,
Whom most we scorn, thou boaster, do thou know,
That I beheld the Marathonian field;
When, like the Libyan sands before the wind,
Your host was scattered by th'unconquer'd Greeks;
Where thou perhaps did turn before this arm
To ignominious flight thy shivering limbs?
O may I find thee in to morrow's fight!
Then on this rocky pavement shall thou lie
Beneath this arm to feast the vulture's beak.
HE ended here, and thus the Persian chief.
O thou, whose hand omnipotent protects
The throne of Xerxes, bend thy sacred ear!
For lo! my first victorious fruits of war
To thee I here devote, the gory spoils,
Which from this Grecian with the rising dawn
In sight of either host my arm shall rend.
PHRAORTES interrupting then began.
I too would find among the Grecian chiefs
One, who in battle dare abide my spear.
TO him thus answered Thespia's gallant youth.
Thou look on me, O Persian. Worthier far
Thou might indeed have singled from our host,
But none more willing to essay thy force.
Yes, I will prove before the eye of Mars,
How far the valor of the meanest Greek
Beyond thy vaunts deserves the palm of fame.
THIS said, the Persians to their king repair,
Back to their camp the Grecians. There they found
Each soldier poizing his extended spear,
And his large buckler bracing on his arm,
For instant war prepared. Through all the files
Each leader moves exulting, and with praise
And exhortations aids their native warmth.
Alone the Theban Anaxander pined,
Who thus apart addressed his Malian friend.
WHAT has thy lofty eloquence availed,
Alas! in vain attempting to confound
The Spartan valor? With redoubled fires
See how their bosoms glow. They wish to die,
And wait impatient for the unequal fight.
Too soon will come the insuperable foes,
And in promiscuous ruin all be whelmed;
Nor shall our merit to the Persian lord
Be told, or known: for whose adventurous feet
To serve the Thebans, through the guarded pass,
The Grecian watch eluding, will approach
The tents of Asia, that the king may know,
And spare his friends amid the general wreck;
When his high-swoln resentment, like a flood
Increased with stormy showers, shall cover Greece
With desolation? Epialtes here.
WHENCE, Anaxander, this unjust despair?
Is there a path on Oeta's hills unknown
To Epialtes? Over the trackless rock,
And mazy grove shall pass my secret steps.
This night I part. Thy merit shall be told
To Persia's king. Thou only watch the hour,
Nor then be tardy, when he wants thy aid.
End of the Second Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK III.
The argument.
Tigranes and Phraortes repair to Xerxes, whom they find seated on a throne
surrounded by his satraps in a magnificent pavilion; while the Magi stand
before him, and sing an hymn containing the religion of Zoroastres. Xerxes,
notwithstanding the arguments of his brothers Hyperanthes and Abrocomes, gives
no credit to the ambassadors, who report, that the Grecians are determined to
maintain the pass against him; but commands Demaratus an exiled king of Sparta
to attend him, and ascends his chariot to take a view of the Grecians himself.
He passes through the midst of his army, consisting of many nations differing
in arms, customs, and manners. He advances to the entrance of the straits, and
surprised at the behavior of the Spartans demands the reason of it from
Demaratus; which occasions a conversation between them on the mercenary forces
of Persia, and the militia of Greece. Demaratus weeping at the fight of his
countrymen, is comforted by Hyperanthes. Xerxes still incredulous commands
Tigranes and Phraortes to bring the Grecians bound before him the next day, and
retires to his pavilion.

NOW had Tigranes, and Phraortes gained
The splendid tent of Xerxes. Him they found
Begirt with princes, and illustrious chiefs,
The potentates of Asia. Near his side
His valiant brothers stood, Abrocomes,
And Hyperanthes, then Pharnuchus brave,
Pandates, Intaphernes, mighty lords,
And numbers more in purple splendor clad,
With homage all attending round the throne,
Whose gorgeous seat erected high upbore
Their regal master. He above their heads
Looked down imperious. So the stately tower
Of Belus, mingling its majestic front
With heaven's bright azure, from on high surveyed
The huge extent of Babylon, with all
Its sumptuous domes and palaces beneath.
That day the monarch deemed to enter Greece,
And hide her fields with war; but first ordains,
That grateful hymns should celebrate the name
Of Oromasdes: so the Persians called
The world's great author. By the king's decree
The Magi stood before the unfolded tent.
Fire blazed beside them. Toward the sacred flame
They turned, and sent their tuneful praise to heaven.
FROM Zoroastres was the song derived,
Who on the hills of Persia from his cave
With flowers incircled, and with murmuring founts,
That cheered the solemn mansion, had revealed,
How Oromasdes, radiant source of good,
Original, immortal framed the globe
With all its varied beauty: how with stars
By him the heavens were spangled: how the sun,
Refulgent Mithra, purest spring of light,
And genial warmth, whence fruitful Nature smiles,
Burst from the east at his creating voice;
When straight beyond the golden verge of day
Night showed the horrors of her distant reign,
Whence black, and hateful Arimanius sprung,
The author foul of evil: he with shades
From his dire mansion veiled the earth and skies,
Or to destruction changed the solar beam,
When parching fields deny the foodful grain,
And from their channels fly the exhaling streams,
Whence pestilence, and famine: how the power
Of Oromasdes in the human breast
Benevolence, and equity infused,
Truth, temperance, and wisdom sprung from heaven;
When Arimanius blackened all the soul
With falsehood, and injustice, with desires
Insatiable, with violence, and rage,
Malignity, and folly. If the hand
Of Oromasdes on precarious life
Shed wealth, and pleasure, soon the infernal God
With wild excess, or avarice blasts the joy.
Thou, Oromasdes, victory do give.
By thee with fame the regal head is crowned.
Great Xerxes owns thy succor. When with storms
The hate of direful Arimanius swelled
The Hellespont, thou over the angry surge
The destined master of the world did lead,
This day his promised glories to enjoy,
When Greece affrighted to his arm shall bend;
Even as at last shall Arimanius fall
Before thy might, and evil be no more.
THE Magi ceased their harmony; when now
Before the king with adoration bowed
Tigranes and Phraortes. Prone they lay,
And over their foreheads spread their abject hands,
As from a present deity too bright
For mortal vision to conceal their eyes.
At length in humble phrase Tigranes thus.
O XERXES, live for ever! Gracious lord!
Who do permit thy servants to approach
Thy awful sight, and prostrate thus to own
Thy majesty and greatness. May the power
Of Oromasdes stretch thy sceptered arm
Over all the nations from the Indian shores,
Even to the waters of the western main,
From northern Tanais to the source of Nile!
And still from thee may Arimanius turn
Against thy foes his malice to mankind!
By him, even now with frenzy smote, the Greeks
Reject thy proffered clemency. The morn
Shall see them bleed the victims of thy wrath.
HERE, to his brothers turning, Xerxes spoke.
Say, Hyperanthes? Does thy soul believe
These tidings? Sure these slaves have never dared
To face the Grecians, but delude our ear
With base impostures, which their fears suggest.
To him this answer Hyperanthes formed.
O from his servants may the king avert
His indignation! Greece was famed of old
For martial virtue, and intrepid sons:
I have essayed their valor, and with me
Abrocomes can witness. When our sire
The great Darius to the Athenian shore
With Artaphernes, and with Datis sent
Our tender youth; at Marathon we found,
How vain the hopes, that numbers should dismay
A foe resolved on victory, or death.
Yet not as one contemptible, or base
Let me appear before thee: though the Greeks
With such unconquered spirits be indu'd,
Soon as the king shall summon me to war,
He shall behold me in the dangerous van
Exalt my spear, and pierce the hostile ranks,
Or sink before them. Xerxes then returned;
WHY over Asia, and the Libyan soil,
With all their nations does my potent arm
Extend its scepter? Wherefore do I sweep
Across the globe with millions in my train?
Why shade the Ocean with unnumber'd sails?
Whence all this power, unless the eternal will
Had doomed to give one master to the world,
And that the earth's extremity alone
Should bound my empire? He for this reduced
Revolted Egypt, and enlarged my sway
With sandy Libya, and the sultry clime
Of Aethiopia. He for this subdued
The Hellespontic rage, and taught the sea
Obedience to my power. Then cease to think,
That heaven deserting now the cause of kings
Those despicable Grecians will inspire
With courage more than human, and expunge
The common fears of nature from their breasts.
He ceased, when thus Abrocomes began.
THE king commands us to reveal our hearts:
Then may the sun to lightning change his beams
And blast my head with ruin; may the king
Look on his servant with a loathing eye,
If what I here affirm be false, or vain,
That yonder Grecians will oppose our course.
THE king arose. No more: prepare my Car;
The Spartan exile Demaratus call:
We will our selves advance and view the foe.
THE monarch willed; and suddenly he hears
His trampling horses. High on silver wheels
The ivory car with azure sapphirs shone,
Caerulean beryls, and the jasper green,
The emerald, the ruby's glowing blush,
The flaming topaz with its golden beam,
The pearl, the impurpled amathyst, and all
The various gems, which India's mines afford
To deck the pomp of kings. In burnished gold
A sculptured eagle from behind displays
Its stately neck, and over the monarch's head
Extends its dazzling wings. Eight generous steeds,
Which on the famed Nysaean plain were nursed
In wintry Media, drew the radiant car.
Not those of old to Hercules refused
By false Laomedon, nor they, which bore
The son of Thetis through the scattered rear
Of Troy's devoted race, might these surpass
In strength, or beauty. With obedient pride
They heard their lord: exulting in the air
They tossed their foreheads, while the silver manes
Smote on their glittering necks. The king ascends:
Beside his footstool Demaratus sat.
The charioteer now shakes the golden reins,
Bold Patiramphes. At the signal bound
The attentive steeds; the chariot flew; behind
Ten thousand horse in thunder swept the field.
The eastern bands (so Xerxes had ordained)
Between the sea-beat margin, and the camp
All wait imbattled, all prepared to pass
Thermopylae. To these with rapid wheels
The imperial car proceeds. The approaching king
Soon through the wide battalions is proclaimed.
He now draws nigh. The innumerable host
Roll back by nations, and admit their lord
With all his satraps. From his crystal dome
Raised on the bottom of the watery world
Thus when the potent ruler of the floods
With each caerulean deity ascends,
Throned on his pearly chariot; all the deep
Divides its bosom to the emerging God.
So Xerxes rode between the Asian world
On either side receding; when, as down
The immeasurable ranks his sight was lost,
A momentary gloom overcast his mind,
While this reflection filled his eyes with tears:
That soon, as Time an hundred years had told,
Not one of all those thousands should survive.
Whence to obscure thy pride arose that cloud?
Was it, that once humanity could touch
A tyrant's breast? or rather did thy soul
Repine, O Xerxes, at the bitter thought,
That all thy power was mortal? But the veil
Of sadness soon forsook his brightning eyes,
As with adoring homage millions bowed,
And to his heart relentless pride recalled.
Elate the mingled prospect he surveys
Of glittering files unnumber'd, chariots scyth'd
On thundering axles rolled with haughty steeds
In sumptuous trappings clad (Barbaric pomp)
Which tore with spurning hoofs the sandy beach;
While every banner to the sun expands
Its gorgeous folds, that beamed with gold, with shields,
Tiaras, helms environed, and with spears
In number equal to the bladed grass,
Whose living green in vernal beauty clothes
Thessalia's vale. What powers of sounding verse
Can to the mind present the amazing scene?
Not thee, whom Rumour's fabling voice delights,
Poetic Fancy, to my aid I call;
But thou, historic Truth, support my song,
Which shall the various multitude display,
Their arms, their manners, and their native seats.
THE Persians first in scaly corselets shone
With colors varying on the gorgeous sleeves,
A generous nation. From their infant age
Their tongues were practiced in the love of truth,
Their limbs inured to every manly toil,
To brace the bow, to rule the impetuous steed,
And dart the javelin; worthy to enjoy
The liberty, their injured fathers lost,
Whose arms for Cyrus overturned the strength
Of Babylon and Sardis, and advanced
The victors head above his country's laws.
Such were the Persians; but untaught to form
The ranks of battle, with unequal force
Against the phalanx of the Greeks they stood,
And to the massy shield, and weighty spear
A target light, and slender lance opposed.
On every head tiaras rose, like towers,
Impenetrable. All with burnished gold
Blazed their gay sandals, and the floating reins
Of each proud courser. Daggers from their thighs,
A well-stor'd quiver from their shoulders hung,
And strongest bows of mighty size they bore.
Next, with resembling arms the Medes are seen,
The Cissians, and Hyrcanians. Media once
From her bleak mountains awed the subject East.
Her kings in cold Ecbatana were throned.
The Cissians marched from Susa's regal walls,
From sultry fields overspread with branching palms,
And white with lillies, watered by the tides
Of famed Choaspes, whose transparent waves
The golden goblet wafts to Persia's kings.
No other stream the royal lip bedews.
Hyrcania's race forsook their fruitful clime
Dark with the verdure of expanding oaks,
To Ceres dear and Bacchus. There the corn
Bent by its golden burden sheds unreap'd
Its plenteous seed impregnating the soil
With future harvests; while the bees reside
Among the intwining branches of the groves,
Where with their labors they enrich the leaves,
Which flow with sweetness. Next, Assyria's sons
Their brazen helms display, th'unskilful work
Of rude Barbarians. Thick-wove flax defends
Their chest and loins. A buckler guards their arm.
Girt with a falchion each a mace sustains
O'erlaid with iron. On Euphrates' banks
In Babylon's stupendous walls they dwell,
And over the plains, where once with mightier towers
Old Ninus reared its head, the imperial seat
Of eldest tyrants. These Chaldaea joins,
The land of shepherds. On the pastures wide
There Belus first discerned the various course
Of heaven's bright planets, and the clust'ring stars
With names distinguished, whence himself was deemed
The chief of Gods. His heav'n-ascending fane
In Babylon the proud Assyrians raised.
Drawn from the fertile soil, which Ochus laves,
The Bactrians stood, like Persia's bands attired,
Though less their javelins, and their bows of cane;
The Paricanians next all rough with hides
Of shaggy goats, with bows and daggers armed.
Alike in horrid garb the Caspian train
From barren mountains, and the dreary coast,
Which bounds the stormy lake, that bears their name,
With cany bows, and scymetars were led.
The Indians then a threefold band appeared.
Part guide the horse, and part the rapid car;
The rest on foot within the bending cane
For slaughter held their iron-pointed reeds.
These over the Indus from the distant floods
Of Ganges passed, and left a region loved
By lavish Nature. There the plenteous year
Twice crowned with harvests smiles. The honey'd shrub,
The cinnamon, and spikenard bless their fields.
Arrayed in native wealth the warriors shone.
Their ears were graced with pendants, and their hands
Incircled wore a bracelet starr'd with gems.
These were the nations, who to Xerxes sent
Their mingled aids of infantry and horse.
NOW, Muse, recount what numbers yet untold
On foot obscured the surface of the shore;
Or who in chariots, or on camels beat
The loosened sand. The Parthians first advance,
Then weak in numbers over the Malian strand
Far from their lonely vales, and woody hills,
Not yet renowned for warlike steeds, they trod.
With them the Sogdians, Dadices arrang'd,
Gandarians, and Chorasmians, all attired,
Like Bactria's sons. To these the Saces join,
From cold Imaus drawn, from Oxus' waves,
And Cyra built on Iaxartes' brink,
The bound of Persia's Empire. Wild, untamed,
And prone to rage, their deserts they forsook.
A bow, a falchion, and a ponderous ax
The savage legions armed. A pointed cask
Over each grim visage reared its iron cone.
In arms, like Persians, the Saranges stood.
High as the knee their buskins stretched, and clung
Around their ham. With glowing colors died
Gay shone their varied garments. Next are seen
The Pactyan, Mycian, and the Utian train
In skins of goats, all horrid. Bows they wield
Of springy reed, with poynards at their sides.
With spotted hides of leopards all arrayed,
Or with the spoil from tawny lions torn,
In graceful range the Aethiopians stand
Of equal stature, and a beauteous frame;
Though scorching Phoebus had imbrown'd their face,
And curled their crisped locks. In ancient song
Renowned for justice, riches they disdained,
As foes to virtue. From their seat remote
On Nilus' verge above the Egyptian bound,
Forced by their kings' malignity and pride
These friends of hospitality and peace,
Themselves uninjur'd, waged reluctant war
Against a land, whose climate, and whose name
To them were strange. With hardest stone they point
The rapid arrow. Bows of hideous length,
Formed with th'elastic branches of the palm,
They bore, and lances armed with horns of goats,
And maces strong with iron. Now, O Muse,
Recite the nations, who in helmets framed
Of various parts, and close-connected joints,
With darts, and poynards, shields, and lances weak,
A feeble train, attend their tyrant's will,
All victims destined to imbrue with gore
The Grecian spears; the Paphlagonians first
From where Carambis with projected brows
O'erlooks the dusky Euxine wrapped in mists,
And where through flowers, that paint its various banks,
Parthenius flows; the Mariandynians next,
The Matienian, and the Ligyan bands,
With them the Syrian multitudes, who dwell
Near Daphne's grove, who cultivate the glebe
Wide-water'd by Orontes, who along
The extended ridge of Libanus are nursed
Among the cedars, or with foodful dates
Plucked from the palms, whose fruitage graced the plains
Around Damascus: all, who bear the name
Of Cappadocians, swell the Syrian host,
With those who gather from the fragrant shrub
The aromatic balsam, and extract
Its milky juice along the lovely side
Of winding Jordan, till immersed it sleep
Beneath the pitchy surface, which obscures
The Asphaltic lake. The Phrygians then advance.
To them their ancient colony is joined,
The Armenian bands. These see the bursting springs
Of strong Euphrates cleave the yielding earth,
And wide in lakes expanding hide the plain.
Thence with collected waters fierce and deep
Its passage rending through diminished rocks
To Babylon it foams. Not so the wave
Of soft Araxes to the Caspian glides.
But stealing imperceptibly it laves
The fruitful herbage of Armenia's meads.
Next, strange to view, in similar attire,
Though far unlike in manners to the Greeks,
Appear the Lydians. Wantonness and sport
Were all their care. Beside Cayster's stream,
Or smooth Maeander winding silent by,
Or near Pactolus' wave among the vines
Of Tmolus rising, or the wealthy tide
Of golden-sanded Hermus they allure
The sight enchanted with the graceful dance,
Or with melodious sweetness charm the air,
And melt to softest languishment the soul.
What to the battle's danger could incite
These tender sons of luxury? The lash
Of their stern monarch urged their shivering limbs
Through all the tempests, which enraged the main,
And shook beneath their trembling steps the pile,
That joined the Asian and the western worlds.
To these Maeonia hot with sulfurous mines
Unites her troops. No tree adorns their fields
Unblessed with verdure, and with ashes strewn.
Black are the rocks, and every hill deformed
With conflagration. Helmets pressed their brows.
Two darts they brandished. Round their woolly vest
A sword was girt, and hairy hides composed
Their bucklers round and light. The Mysians left
Olympus wood-envelop'd, and the soil
Washed by Caicus, and the baneful tide
Of Lycus, nurse of serpents. Targets, helms,
And wooden javelins hardened in the flames
They bore. By these, imbattled next are seen
An ancient nation, who in early times,
By Trojan arms assailed, their native land
Esteemed less dear than freedom, and exchanged
Their seat on Strymon, where in Thrace it pours
Its freezing current, for the distant shores
Of fishy Sangar. These Bithynians named
Their habitations to the sacred feet
Of Dindymus extend. Yet there they groaned
Beneath oppression, and their freedom mourned
On Sangar now, as once on Strymon lost.
The ruddy skins of foxes formed their cask;
Their shields were fashioned like the horned moon;
A dart, and slender poynard armed their hands;
A vest embraced their bodies, while abroad
Tinged with unnumber'd hues a mantle flowed.
But other Thracians, who their former name
Retained in Asia, stood with shining helms.
The horns of bulls in imitating brass
Adorned the lofty crest. Phoenician cloth
Their legs infolds, with brightest purple stained;
And through the forest wont to chase the boar,
A hunter's spear they grasp. What nations still
On either side of Xerxes, while he passed,
Present their huge array, and swell his soul
With more than mortal pride? The numerous train
Of Moschians and Macronians now succeed,
And Mosynoecians, who, with berries fed,
In wooden towers along the Pontic shore
Repose their painted limbs; the mirthful race
Of Tibarenians next, whose wanton minds
Delight in sport, and laughter: all in casks
Of wood, with shields, and lances small, whose points
Beyond proportion lengthen. Then approach,
In garments over their spacious bosom clasped,
And part with javelins, part with Lycian bows,
A people destined in eternal verse,
Even thine, sublime Maeonides, to live.
These are the Milyans, Solymi their name
In thy celestial strains, Pifidia's hills
Their dwelling. Once a formidable train,
They faced the great Bellerophon in war,
Now doomed a more tremendous foe to meet,
Themselves unnerv'd with bondage, and to leave
Their putrid bodies for the dogs of Greece.
Next are the Marian legions furnished all
With shields of skins, with darts, and helmets wove
Of strongest texture. Aria's host protend
The Bactrian lance, and brace the Persian bow,
Drawn from a region horrid all with thorn,
One hideous waste of sands, which mock the toil
Of patient culture; save one favored spot,
Which, like an isle, emerges from the wild,
In verdure clad, and interspersed with vines,
Whose generous clusters yield a juice, that scorns
The injuries of Time. Yet Nature's hand
Had sown their rocks with coral, and enriched
Their desert hills with veins of sapphirs blue,
And those, whose azure sparks of gold adorn.
These from the turbant flame. On every neck
The coral blushes through the numerous throng.
The Allarodians, and Sasperian bands
Were armed with poniards, like the Cholchian host;
Their heads were guarded with a helm of wood.
Short were their spears, of hides undressed their shields.
The Cholchians marched from Phasis, and the shores,
Where once Medea fair enchantress stood,
And wondering viewed the first adventurous bark,
That stem'd the Pontic foam. From Argo's side
The demigods descended, and repaired
To her fell sire's inhospitable walls.
His blooming graces Jason there displayed.
With every art of eloquence divine
He claimed the golden fleece. The virgin heard,
She gazed with fatal ravishment, and loved.
Then to the hero she resigns her heart;
Her magic tames the brazen-footed bulls;
She lulls the sleepless dragon, and to Greece
With faithless Jason wafts the radiant prize.
The Cholchians then pursued their steps with war,
And now with ancient enmity inflamed,
Or else compelled by Xerxes to recall
The long-forgotten wrong, they menace Greece
With desolation. Next in Persian guise
A crowd advanced, who left the various isles
In Persia's gulf, and round Arabia known.
Some in their native topaz were adorned,
From Ophiodes, and Topazos sprung;
And some with shells of tortoises, which brood
Around Casitis' verge. To them were joined
Those, who reside, where Erythras entombed
Lies all beset with palms, a powerful king,
Who named of old the Erythraean main.
The Lybians next are placed. In chariots scyth'd
They sat terrific, clothed in skins, with darts
Of wood well-tempered in the hardening flames.
Not Libya's deserts from tyrannic sway
Could hide her sons; much less could freedom dwell
Amid the plenty of Arabia's fields:
Where spicy cassia, and the fragrant reed,
And myrrh, and hallowed frankincense perfume
The zephir's wing. A bow of largest size
The Arabians wield, and over their lucid vest
Loose floats a mantle on their shoulder clasped.
Of these two myriads on the lofty back
Of camels rode, that matched the swiftest horse.
SUCH were the numbers, which from Asia led
Bowed down with low prostration to the wheels
Of Xerxes' chariot. Yet what legions more
Expand their mighty range? What banners still
The Malian sands o'ershadow? Forward rolls
The regal car through nations, which in arms,
And ordered ranks unlike the eastern throng
Upheld the spear and buckler. Yet untaught
To bend the servile knee erect they stood;
Unless that mourning over the shameful weight
Of their new bondage some their brows depressed,
And stained their arms with sorrow. Europe's race
Were these, whom Xerxes by resistless force
Had gathered to his standards. Murmuring here
The sons of Thrace, and Macedonia stood,
Here on his steed the brave Thessalian frowned.
There pined reluctant multitudes, who bore
The name of Greeks, and peopled all the coast
Between Byzantium, and the Malian bay.
THROUGH all the numbers, which adored his pride,
Or feared his power, the monarch now was passed;
Nor yet among those myriads could be found
One, who with Xerxes' self in towering size,
Or beauteous features might compare. O wretch!
Possessed of all, but virtue; doomed to show,
How mean without her is unbounded power,
The charm of beauty, and the blaze of state,
How insecure of happiness, how vain.
Thou, who could mourn the common lot, which heaven
From none withholds; which often to thousands proves
Their only refuge from a tyrant's rage;
And which by pining sickness, age, or pain
Becomes at last a soothing hope to all;
Thou, who could weep, that Nature's gentle hand
Should lay her wearied offspring in the tomb,
Yet could remorseless from their peaceful seats
Lead half the nations in a clime unknown
To fall the victims of thy ruthless pride;
What did thou merit from the injured world?
What sufferings to compensate for the tears
Of Asia's mothers, for unpeopled realms,
And all this waste of nature? On his host
The king exulting bends his haughty sight,
When thus to Demaratus he began.
NOW Demaratus to thy soul recall
My father great Darius, who received
Thy wandering steps expelled their native home.
Ill would it then become thee to beguile
Thy benefactors, and the truth disguise,
Look back on all those thousands, and declare,
If yonder Grecians will oppose their march.
THE exile answered. Deem not mighty lord,
I will deceive thy goodness by a tale
Forged for their glory, whose deluded minds
Perversely hearkened to the sland'rer's tongue;
Who forced me with unmerited disgrace
To tread the paths of banishment and woe.
Nor be the king offended, while I speak
The words of truth. The Spartans never fly.
HERE with contemptuous smiles the king returned.
Will thou, who once were Lacedaemon's chief,
Encounter twenty Persians? Yet those Greeks
With greater disproportion must confront
Our host tomorrow. Demaratus thus.
BY single combat were the trial vain,
And vainer still by my unworthy sword,
To prove the merit of united force,
Which often by military skill surmounts
The strength of numbers. Nor in fields of war
The Greeks excel by discipline alone,
But from their manners. Grant thy ear, O king,
The difference learn of Grecian bands, and thine.
The flower, the bulwark of thy powerful host
Are mercenaries. These are cantoned round
Thy provinces. No fertile field demands
Their painful hand to turn the fallow glebe.
Them to the noonday toil no harvest calls.
The stubborn oak along the mountains brow
Sinks not beneath their stroke. With careful eyes
They mark not how the flocks, or heifers feed.
To them of wealth, and all possessions void
The name of country with an empty sound
Flies over the ear, nor warms their joyless hearts,
Who share no country. Needy, yet with scorn
Rejecting labor, wretched by their wants,
Yet profligate through indolence, with limbs
Soft and enervate, and with minds corrupt;
From misery, debauchery, and sloth
Are these to battle drawn against a foe
Inured to hardship, and the child of toil,
Wont through the freezing shower, and wintry storm
Over his own glebe the tardy ox to goad;
Or in the sun's impetuous heat to glow
Beneath the burden of the yellow sheaves:
Whence on himself, on her, whose faithful arms
Infold him joyful, and a numerous race,
Which glads his dwelling, plenty he bestows
With independence; and when called to war
For these his dearest comfort, and his care,
And for the harvest promised to his toil,
He lifts the shield, nor shuns unequal force.
Such are the powers of every state in Greece
One only breeds a race more warlike still,
Even those, who now defend that rocky pass,
The sons of Lacedaemon. They untaught
To break the glebe, or bind the golden sheaves,
To far severer labors are inured.
Alone for war, their sole delight, and care.
From infancy to manhood, are they formed
To want, and danger, to the unwholesome ground,
To winter watches, and inclement skies,
To plunge through torrents, brave the tusky boar,
To arms, and wounds; an exercise of pain
So fierce and constant, that to them a camp
With all its hardships is the seat of rest,
And war itself remission from their toils.
THY words are folly, scornful here replied
The Persian monarch. Does not freedom dwell
Among the Grecians? Therefore will they shun
Superior foes, for whosoe'er is free
Will fly from danger; while the Persians know,
If from the allotted station they retreat,
The scourge awaits them, and my heavy wrath.
CONCEIVE not, Xerxes, Sparta's chief returned,
The Grecians want an object, where to fix
Their eyes with reverence, and obedient dread.
To them more aweful than the name of king
To Asia's trembling millions is the law,
Whose sacred voice injoins them to confront
Unnumber'd foes, to vanquish, or to die.
IN silence now the banished king remained.
While near the straits the chariot rolled; it chanced,
The Spartans then were station'd out on guard.
These in gymnastic exercise employed,
Nor heed the monarch, nor his gaudy train;
But tossed the spear, and whirled the rapid dart,
Or met with adverse shields in single war,
Or trooping swiftly rushed on every side
With ranks unbroken, and with equal feet:
While others calm beneath their polished helms
Drew down their hair, which hung in sable curls,
And spread their necks with terror. Xerxes here
The exile questions. What do these intend,
Who thus with careful hands adjust their hair?
TO whom the Spartan. O imperial lord,
Such is their custom, to adorn their heads,
When with determined valor they present
Their dauntless breasts before the jaws of death.
Bring down thy myriads all in glittering steel,
Arm, if thou can, the general race of man;
All, who possess the regions unexplor'd
Beyond the Ganges, all, whose wandering steps
Behind the Caspian range the Scythian wild,
With those, who drink the secret fount of Nile,
Yet to the breasts of Sparta's sons shall fear
Be still a stranger. Thus with fervor spoke
The exiled king, when gushing from his eyes
Resistless grief o'erflow'd his cheek. Aside
His head he turned, and wept in copious streams.
The sad remembrance of his former state,
His dignity, his greatness, and the sight
Of those brave ranks, which thus unshaken stood,
And spread amazement through the world in arms,
Excite those sorrows. Often with eager eyes
He views the godlike warriors, who beneath
His standard once victorious fought, who called
Him once their king and leader. Then again
His head he bows with anguish, and bedews
His breast with tears; in agony bemoans
His faded honors, his illustrious name
Forgotten now, his majesty defiled
With exile and dependence. So obscured
By creeping ivy, and by sordid moss
Some lordly palace, or stupendous fane,
Magnificent in ruin stands; where time
Wide-wasting from the nodding roof has mowed
The column down, and cleft the ponderous dome.
NOT unobserved by Hyperanthes mourned
The unhappy Spartan. Kindly to his own
The exile's hand he joins, and thus humane.
O Demaratus, this thy grief confirms,
How well the Greeks deserve thy generous praise,
Who still repining do their loss deplore,
Though cherished here with universal love.
But O let indignation in thy breast
Revive thy wrongs! then bless the auspicious fate,
Which led thee far from calumny and fraud
To share the favor of the highest king.
AS Demaratus with a grateful mind
Addressed himself to answer, Persia's king
Thus interrupted. Soon, as morning shines,
Do thou Tigranes and Phraortes head
The Medes and Saces. Bring those Grecians bound.
This said. The monarch to his tent returned.
End of the Third Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK IV.
The argument.
Leonidas rising by break of day commands a body of Arcadians, with the
Thespians, and Plataeans to be drawn out for battle in that part of
Thermopylae, which lay under the Phocian wall, from whence he harangues them.
The enemy approaches. Diomedon kills Tigranes in single combat. Both armies
join battle. Dithyrambus kills Phraortes. The Persians, entirely defeated, are
pursued with great slaughter by Diomedon and Dithyrambus to the extremity of
the pass. The Grecian commanders, after the pursuit retire for refreshment to a
cave in the side of mount Oeta. Leonidas recals them to the camp, and sends
down fresh forces. Diomedon, and Dithyrambus, with the Plataeans are permitted
to continue in the field. By the advice of Diomedon the Grecians advance to the
broadest part of Thermopylae, where they form a line of thirty in depth,
consisting of the Plataeans, Mantineans, Tegaeans, Thebans, Corinthians,
Phliasians, and Mycenaeans. The attack is renewed with great violence by
Hyperanthes, Abrocomes, and the principal Persian leaders at the head of some
chosen troops.

LACONIA's leader with the morning rose,
When thus to Alpheus. From Arcadia's bands
Select a thousand spears. To these unite
The Thespians and Plataeans. Range their lines
Before the wall, which fortifies the pass:
There close-imbodied will their might repulse
The numerous foe. Obedient to his will
The appointed legions issuing from their tents
With deep'ning ranks Leonidas enclose.
So round their monarch in his stormy cave
The winds assemble, from his sable throne
When Aeolus sends forth his dread command
To swell the main, or heaven with clouds deform,
Or bend the forest from the mountain's brow.
The chief of Sparta from the rampart's height
Thus to the fight the listening host inflames.
THIS day, O Grecians, countrymen, and friends,
Your wives, your offspring, your paternal seats,
Your fathers, country, liberty, and laws
Have sent you hither, from your infant age
Versed in the various discipline of Mars,
Laborious, active, virtuous, brave, and free,
To match your valor with ignoble foes
In war unskilful, nature's basest dross,
The foes of all utility and worth,
And thence a monarch's mercenary slaves;
With spirits broke by servitude and want,
With limbs relaxed by sloth, and wanton ease,
With minds debauched by vices, uninspir'd
By all th'indearing cares in freeborn hearts,
Who cold and drooping fight without a cause,
To whom defeat is neither grief, nor shame,
Who seek no fruit from victory, but spoil.
These are the flower of Asia's host. The rest,
Who fill their boasted numbers, are a crowd
Forced from their dwellings to the bloody field,
From whom till now with jealous care their lord
Has still withheld the instruments of war.
These are the people taught with patient grief
To bear the rapine, cruelty, and spurns
Of Xerxes' mercenary bands, and pine
In servitude to slaves. With terror sounds
The trumpet's clangor in their trembling ears.
Unwonted loads, the buckler and the lance
Their hands sustain encumbered, and present
The mockery of war. -- But every eye
Flames with impatient ardour, and your breasts
Too long their swelling spirit have confined.
Go then, ye sons of Liberty, and sweep
These bondmen from the field. Resistless rend
The glittering standard from their servile hands.
Hurl to the ground their ignominious heads
The warriour's helm profaning. Think the shades
Of your forefathers rear their sacred brows
Here to enjoy the glory of their sons.
HE spoke. Loud Paeans burst from all the host.
With fierce reply unnumber'd shouts ascend
From hostile nations thronging down the pass.
Such is the roar of Aetna, when her mouth
Displodes combustion from her sulfurous depths,
And blasts the smiles of Nature. Dauntless stood
In deep array before the Phocian wall
The Greeks close-wedg'd with implicated shields,
And spears protended, like the graceful range
Of arduous elms, whose interwoven boughs
Before some rural palace wide expand
Their venerable umbrage to retard
The North's impetuous wing. As over the main
In lucid rows the rising waves reflect
The sun's effulgence, so the Grecian helms
Returned his light, which over their unequal poured,
And scattered splendor on the dancing plumes.
Down rushed the foe. Exulting in the van
Their haughty leader shakes his threatening lance,
And frowns defiance. Bursting from his rank
Diomedon with instant fury faced
The impending foes. Meantime he loudly calls
Their chief Tigranes, whom he thus defies.
NOW thou art met, Barbarian. Would thou prove
Thy actions equal to thy vaunts, command
Thy troops to halt, while thou and I engage.
TIGRANES turning to the Persians spoke.
My friends, and soldiers, check your ardent haste,
While my strong lance yon Grecian's pride confounds.
HE ceased. In dreadful opposition now
Each combatant advanced. With sinewy hand
They gripe their spears high-brandish'd. Thrice they drove
With well-directed force the pointed steel
At either's throat, and thrice their shields repel
The destined wound. At length the Eastern chief
With all his powers collected for the stroke
His javelin rivets in the Grecian targe.
Aside Diomedon inclines, and shuns
Approaching fate. Then all his martial skill
Undaunted summons. His forsaken lance
Beside him cast, his falchion he unsheaths.
The blade descending on Tigranes' arm,
That instant struggling to redeem his spear,
The shivering hand dissevers. Pale affright
Unmans the Persian, while his active foe
Full on his neck discharged the rapid sword,
And opened wide the purple gates of life.
Low sinks Tigranes in eternal shade.
The conqueror bestrides the prostrate dead,
Then in the clotted ringlets of the hair
His hand intwining from the bleeding trunk
The head disjoined, and whirled with sudden rage
Amid the hostile numbers. All with dread
Recoil, wherever the ghastly visage flew
In sanguine circles, and pursued its track
Of horror through the air. Not less amazed
A barbarous nation, whom the cheerful dawn
Of science never illumined, view on high
A meteor waving with portentous blaze;
Where often, as superstition vainly dreams,
Some demon sits amid the baneful fires,
Dispersing plagues and desolation round.
A while the stern Diomedon remains
Triumphant over the dire dismay, which froze
The hearts of Persia, then with haughty port,
And sullen joy among his gladsome friends
Resumes his station. Still the Asian bands
With consternation motionless behold
Their foes with terror, and suspend the fight;
When thus Phraortes animates their breasts.
HEAVENS! can one leader's death appal this host,
Which counts a train of monarchs for its chiefs!
Behold Phraortes! from Imaus' ridge
I draw my subject files. With hardy toil
I through the pathless forest have explored
The tiger's cavern. This unconquered arm
Has from the lion rent the shaggy spoil.
So through this field of slaughter will I chase
Yon vaunting Greek with ruin on his head
For great Tigranes slain. His words revive
The flame of valor through the drooping van,
Then on the rear he brandishes his lance.
Before him shrink the affrighted crowd, and roll
Their numbers headlong on the Grecian steel
With loose arrangement, and uncertain feet.
Thus with his trident Ocean's angry God
From its vast bottom turns the hideous mass
Of waters upward, and o'erwhelms the beach.
Terrific stood the fierce Plataean chief
Amid the Grecian van. His ample targe,
Like a strong bulwark, prominent he raised
Before the line. There thundered all the storm
Of darts and arrows. His undaunted train
With emulating ardour charge the foe.
Wherever they turn the formidable spears,
Which drenched the glebe of Marathon with gore,
The Persians heap the plain. Diomedon
Leads on the slaughter. From his nodding crest
The sable plumes shook terror. Asia's bands
All shudder backward at the dreadful beams
Of that unconquerable sword, which falls
With lightning's swiftness over their trembling heads,
And reeking still with slain Tigranes' blood
Their shattered ranks o'erturns. The furious chief
Encompassed round with carnage, and besmeared
With sanguine drops, inflames his warlike friends.
O DITHYRAMBUS! let thy deeds this day
Surmount their wonted luster! Thou in arms,
Demophilus, worn gray, thy youth recall!
Behold these slaves without resistance bleed.
Advance, my ancient friend. Propitious Fame
Smiles on thy years, and gives thy aged hand
To pluck fresh laurels for thy honored brow.
AS, when indu'd with Promethean heat,
The molten clay respir'd; with sudden warmth
So glows the venerable Thespian's age,
With newborn vigor every sinew swells.
His falchion thundering on Cherasmes' helm
The forehead clove. Ecbatana to war
Sent forth Cherasmes. From her potent gates
He proud in hope her swarming numbers led,
With Ariazus and Pencestes joined,
His martial brothers. They attend his doom
By Dithyrambus foiled. Their hoary sire
Shall over his solitary palace roam,
Lamenting loud his childless years, and curse
Ambition's fury, and the lust of war,
Then pining bow with anguish to the grave.
Next by the fierce Plataean's matchless sword
Expires Damates, once the host and friend
Of fallen Tigranes; him that day he joined,
And left his native bands. Of Syrian birth
In Daphne he resided near the grove,
Whose hospitable laurels in their shade
Concealed the virgin fugitive, that scorned
The embrace of Phoebus; hither she repaired
Far from her parent stream, in fables feigned
Herself a laurel to have reared her head
With verdant bloom in this retreat, the grove
Of Daphne called, the seat of rural bliss,
Fan'd by the wing of zephirs, and with rills
Of bubbling founts irriguous, Syria's boast,
And happy rival of Thessalia's vale;
Now hid for ever from Damates' eyes.
Nor with unactive spears the Arcadians stood.
Gigantic Clonius unresisted pressed
The yielding Persians, who before him sunk,
Crushed like vile stubble underneath the steps
Of some glad hind, who visits over the plain
His new-shorn harvest. With a fearless eye
Phraortes saw the general rout. He sprung
Over hills of carnage to confront the Greeks,
Reproaching thus his own inglorious friends.
FLY then ye cowards, and desert your chief;
Yet single here my falchion shall oppose
The might of thousands. Raging thus, he drove
The deathful steel through Aristander's breast.
Him Dithyrambus loved, a sacred bard
Revered for justice, for his verse renowned,
Which sung the deeds of heroes, those, who fell,
Or those, who conquered in their country's cause,
The inraptur'd soul inspiring with the thirst
Of glory won by virtue. His high strain
The Muses favored from their neighboring groves,
And blessed with heavenly melody his lyre.
No more from Thespia shall his feet ascend
The shady steep of Helicon. No more
The streams divine of Aganippe's fount
His tuneful lip shall moisten, nor his hands
Present their offerings in the Muses bower,
The prostrate shield and unforsaken lance
Now feebly grasping, never more to swell
His lofty numbers on the sounding string.
Lo! Dithyrambus weeps. Amid the rage
Of war and conquest a swift-gushing tear
Finds one sad moment's interval to fall
On his pale friend. But soon the victor proves
His fierce revenge. Through shield and corselet plunged,
His furious javelin tore the Persian's chest.
Phraortes sinks, nor yet expiring, sees
With indignation Persia's myriads fly.
Swift through their broken legions, side by side,
Urged by the voice of Victory and Fame,
Diomedon and Dithyrambus ranged.
So, where Alpheus heard the rattling car,
And sounding hoofs along his echoing banks,
Two generous coursers linked in mutual reins
With equal speed and ardour beat the dust
To reach the glories of the Olympic goal.
THIS from his lofty chariot Xerxes saw.
He saw his numbers pouring from the straits
In crowded flight, then spreading over the field,
All broke and scattered; as a river bursts
Impetuous from its fountain, then expands
Its limpid surface over the pastures broad.
Thrice started from his seat the astonished king,
Shame, fear, and indignation rend his breast;
As ruin irresistible were near
To overwhelm his millions. Haste (he calls
To Hyperanthes) haste and meet the Greeks;
Their daring rage and insolence repel,
And from dishonor vindicate our name.
THE godlike Hyperanthes through the tents
Obedient moves. Deliberate and brave
Each active prince he summons, and with care
Collects the hardiest troops. Around him soon
Innumerable javelins flame. His voice
Demands attention, when he thus began.
NOW friends divide, and form two equal bands.
One with the great Abrocomes, with me,
With Intaphernes, and Hydarnes bold,
With Mindus and Pandates shall advance,
And snatch this short-lived victory from Greece.
You Abradates with Pharnuchus joined,
Orontes, and Mazaeus, keep the rest
Imbattel'd ready to impart their aid,
Should envious Fate exhaust our numerous ranks;
For, O great Mithra, may thy radiant eye
Never see us, yielding to ignoble flight,
The Persian fame dishonor, and the praise
Of our renowned progenitors, who led
By Cyrus gave a monarch to the world.
Think, O ye princes, flower of Asia's realms,
What endless infamy will blast your names,
Should Greece, that narrow portion of the globe,
Your arms defy; when Babylon has low'r'd
Its towering head, when Lydia's pride is quelled,
And from Ecbatana its empire torn.
Think too, ye warlike bands, our army's boast,
What deeds are asked from your superior swords;
You, who our monarch's largest bounty share,
You, to whose faith and valor he commits
Himself, his queens, his realms, and now his fame.
WHILE Hyperanthes marshalled thus his host,
Far as the extremest limit of the pass,
Diomedon and Dithyrambus hung
Upon the rear of Persia. Now they turn
Victorious, striding over the impurpled heaps
Of arms, and mangled dead, themselves with gore
Distained; like two grim tigers, who have forced
A nightly mansion on the desert raised
By some lone-wandring traveller, and died
With human slaughter through the forest deep
Back to their covert's dreary gloom retire.
So passed these heroes over the crimson rock,
Approaching now, where gasping on his shield
Phraortes lay recumbent. Thespia's youth
Advancing, thus his generous soul expressed.
LIV'ST thou, brave Persian? By propitious Jove,
From whom the pleasing sense of mercy flows
Through mortal bosoms, less my soul rejoiced,
When Fortune gave the victory before
Than now to raise thee from this field of death.
THE dying prince his languid sight unclos'd,
And thus with trembling lips. Vain man, forbear
To proffer me, what soon thyself must crave.
The day is now extinguished in these orbs,
Nor shall my heart beat longer than to scorn
Thy mercy, Grecian; then resign to fate.
HE ceased. The great, and haughty spirit fled.
Demophilus drew nigh. The hoary chief
Long over Phraortes' corse his head inclined,
Poised on his lance, and thus addressed the slain.
ALAS! how glorious were that bleeding breast,
Had Justice given the buckler to thy arm,
And to preserve a people bade thee die!
Who now shall mourn thee! Thy ungrateful king
Will soon forget thy worth. For thee no tears
Among thy native countrymen shall tell
The public sorrow; what to them availed
Thy might and dauntless spirit? Not to guard
Their wives and offspring from the spoil of war,
Not from their walls repel the hostile blaze,
Nor desolation from their fruitful fields,
But to extend oppression did thou fall;
Perhaps with inborn virtues in thy heart,
Which, but thy angry destiny forbade,
By freedom cherished might have blessed mankind.
All-bounteous Nature! thy impartial laws
To no selected race of men confine
The sense of glory, fortitude, and all
The nobler passions, which inspire the mind,
And render life illustrious. These thou plant'st
In every soil. But freedom, like the sun,
Must warm the generous seeds. By her alone
They bloom and flourish; while oppression blasts
The tender virtues: hence a spurious growth,
False honor, savage valor taint the soul,
And wild ambition: hence rapacious power
The ravaged earth unpeoples, and the brave,
A feast for dogs, bestrew the insanguin'd plain,
HE said. Around the venerable man
The Grecians thronged attentive. Conquest hushed
Its joyful transports. Over the horrid field,
Late the rude scene of tumult, all was calm.
So, when the song of Thracian Orpheus drew
To Hebrus' margin from their dreary seats
The savage race, which Haemus wrapped in clouds,
Pangaeus cold, and Rhodopeian snows
In blood and discord nursed; the soothing strain
Flowed with enchantment through their ravished ears:
Their fierceness melted, and amazed they learned
The sacred laws of justice, which the bard
Mixed with the music of his heavenly string.
NOT from the field of slaughter far remote
In Oeta's rugged side had Nature clove
A rocky cavern. This with moss she spread,
And over the entrance downward from the roots
She hung the shaggy trunks of branching firrs
To heaven's hot ray impervious. From the sides
The vivid laurel spread before the sun
Its broad and glittering foliage; and, above,
The hill was darkened with a solemn shade
Cast from the sable cypress. This retreat
Cool, as the grot of Thetis, hid beneath
The vaulted ocean, with the murmuring sound
Of waters trickling from the riven stone
The Grecian leaders to its gloom invites.
Their helms they loosen, from their glowing cheeks.
Against the rock their bucklers they repose.
Propt on their spears they stood, when Agis thus,
Sent by Leonidas, accosts the chiefs.
O EVER-WORTHY of undying names!
Leonidas recals you from your toil,
Which has already filled our mouths with praise,
Our eyes with wonder, that from yonder tower
On your unequalled deeds incessant gazed.
TO whom the bold Diomedon returned.
Go Agis, say to Lacedaemon's king,
As yet untir'd my hand can poize the spear,
Nor hangs the buckler heavy on my arm.
And shall I then retire? And once again
Shall not the sun, before he sink, behold
The slaves of Xerxes tremble at my lance.
TO him the Thespian youth. My friend and guide
To noble actions, since thy generous mind
Intent on fame disdains to rest, O grant,
I too thy glorious labors may partake,
And learn once more to imitate thy deeds.
Thou, gentlest Agis, Sparta's chief entreat
Not to command us from the field of war.
THEN interposed Demophilus. O friend,
And thou, loved offspring of the dearest man,
Who do restore my brother to my eyes,
My soul your magnanimity applauds.
But, O reflect, that unabating toil
Subdues the mightiest. Valor then will sigh,
When the weak hand obeys the heart no more.
Yet I declining with the weight of years
Will not assign a measure to your strength;
If still you find your vigor undecay'd,
Stay and augment your glory. So, when time
Your heads shall whiten, and your feeble arms
Round the high temple's peaceful vault have hung
Their consecrated shields, your native land
Shall then with honors doubled on your age
Requite the generous labors of your prime.
So spoke the Senior, and forsook the cave.
NOW from the bubbling spring Diomedon
Receives the waters in his concave helm;
And thus addressed the genius of the flood.
WHOEVER thou art, whose deity presides
Over this fair fountain, bounteous are thy streams;
Though ill shall I repay thee: for again
Will I this day pollute thy silver wave,
Which mixed with gore shall tinge the Malian surge.
SO saying from his brimming cask he quaff'd
The clear, refreshing moisture. Thus repairs
The spotted panther to Hydaspes' side,
Or eastern Indus, feasted with the blood
Of some torn deer, which nigh his cruel grasp
Had roam'd unheeding through the secret grove:
Rapacious over the humid brink he stoops,
And in the pure and fluid crystal cools
His reeking jaws. The Thespian warrior here.
SEE, valiant friend, Leonidas has filled
The pass with fresh battalions. O survey
Yon line of plumed helms, and glittering shields,
Which emulate the midday sun. What joy!
What ardent hope enlightens every face!
O let us wait no longer, lest they cry,
Our wearied limbs retard us. Let us arm,
And take our station in the glorious van.
THUS Dithyrambus. The Plataean chief
Approves the counsel, and resumes his arms.
Them as a splendid recompense he bore
From grateful Athens, when his conquering sword
Her domes with great Miltiades redeemed
From Asiatic flames. The insculptur'd helm
Now pressed his manly temples. From on high
A fourfold plumage nodded, and, beneath,
A golden dragon with effulgent scales
The gorgeous crest illumined. On his arm
His shield he braced. Gorgonian serpents twined
Around the spacious verge. Within, the form
Of Pallas, martial goddess, was impressed.
Low, as her feet, the graceful tunic flowed.
Betwixt two gryffins on her helmet sat
A sphinx with wings expanded, while the face
Of dire Medusa on her bosom frowned.
One hand supports her javelin, which confounds
The pride of kings; the other leads along
A blooming virgin, Victory, whose brows
A crown incircles; laurels she presents;
But from her shoulders all her plumes were shorn,
With favored Athens ever now to rest.
This, Asia's terror, on his mighty arm
Diomedon uprear'd, then snatched his lance,
And thus to Dithyrambus. Lo! my friend,
Alone of all the Grecians, who sustained
The morning's battle, still unwearied stand
Plataea's sons, and well may keep the field,
They, who endured the Marathonian toil.
Then charge with us. Amid the foremost rank
Thy valor shall be placed, and share, this day,
Command and honor with Plataea's chief.
THE hero ceased, and towered the Grecian van
Strides with impetuous steps. Nor slow behind
The boast of Thespia, Dithyrambus moved;
Like blooming Hermes in celestial arms,
When lightly graceful with his feathered feet
Along Scamander's flowery verge he passed,
To aid the incensed divinities of Greece
Against the Phrygian towers. With eager speed
The heroes soon the imbattled Greeks attained,
To whom the brave Diomedon began.
NOT to contend, but vanquish are you come,
And in the blood of fugitives to stain
Your lances unoppos'd. My friends, behold,
Where furthest from the Malian gulf removed
The crags of Oeta less confine the straits.
There let us bend extending wide our front.
There with more ample scope may havoc range.
ALL with assent gave ear. The various bands
Move on successive. The Plataeans first
Against the rock are station'd. To their head
Is Dithyrambus brought. Exulting joy
Distends their hearts, and flashes in their eyes.
Thanks to the great Diomedon, they cry,
Who to our troop this godlike hero joins.
Hail! Dithyrambus. Hail! illustrious chief.
Well do thou merit to have reaped renown
At Marathon. Amid the glorious front
With conscious gladness blushing on his cheek
The youth his post assumes. Around him crowd
The hoary warriors their unnumber'd scars
Before his sight presenting, and recount
Their various dangers. He their wounds surveys
With veneration, nor disdains to hear
The oft-repeated tale. From Sparta's king
Returning, Agis here the chiefs addressed,
Leonidas permits you still to brave
The hostile numbers, with Plataea's band,
If yet by toil unconquered. But I see,
That all unwearied ask the promised fight.
Hail! glorious veterans. This signal day
May your victorious swords augment the wreaths
Around your venerable brows, and make
Thermopylae, like Marathon, renowned.
THIS said, he hastens back. Meantime advanced
The Mantinean Diophantus brave,
And Hegesander, Tegea's dauntless chief,
With all their troops imbattled; by their side
The Thebans form; to them their native files
Alcmaeon and Eupalamus unite;
Last on the margin of the Malian bay
Mycenae's youth Aristobulus drew;
In one impenetrable phalanx stretched
Across the pass. With close-connected force
An hundred warriors formed the expanded ranks,
And thirty bucklers every file condensed.
In strong reserve Dieneces behind
Disposed the Spartans, and the Locrian line.
There too with Maron Alpheus dauntless stood,
And godlike Agis. There Megistias placed
His blooming heir, and thus his valor fires.
O MENALIPPUS! born of foreign race,
Yet by these heroes not unworthy deemed
With them to fight for Sparta! lo! the hour
Is come, my son, to show thy generous heart;
That not with thee the buckler and the spear
Are ill entrusted to maintain a cause
So great and sacred. O remember well,
Leonidas on yonder bulwark stands,
Who all the war contemplates, and discerns
The bold and fearful. O propitious heaven!
Grant me to hear Leonidas this day
Applaud my son, and let Megistias die!
WHILE thus he spoke, the animated soul
Of Menalippus struggling in his breast
Demands the fight. This saw the tender sire,
And thus with tears rejoined. Remember too!
Thy father sees thy danger. Oh! my child!
To me thy honor as to thee is dear;
Yet court not death! By all thy filial love,
By all my cares and fondness I implore!
Amid the combat, or the warm pursuit,
Still by the wise Dieneces abide:
His prudent valor knows the unerring paths
Of glory; he will guide thy youthful steps.
This said, to Sparta's leader he retires.
NOW are the enemies descried. The van
Abrocomes and Hyperanthes led,
With them Pandates, Intaphernes proud,
Hydarnes, Mindus. Violent their march
With sounding footsteps swept the stony way.
So, where the unequal globe in mountains swells,
A river pours its thundering surge between
The steep-erected cliffs; tumultuous roll
The torrents bursting over the pointed crags:
The mountains roar, the marble channel foams.
With obvious arms the intrepid Greeks withstand
The dire encounter. Soon the impetuous shock
Of thousands and of myriads shakes the ground.
Stupendous scene of terror! Under hills,
Whose nodding summits vaulted over their heads,
In unextinguishable fury joined
The dreadful conflict. With inverted trunks
Obliquely bending from the shagged ridge
The sylvan horrors overshade the fight.
The shrill-mouth'd trumpet, and the deep-tun'd horn,
Mixed with the crash of intermingling spears,
The clanging shields, and war's discordant shouts
Awake the echoes through the neighboring groves;
And rocks and shores return the hideous sound.
End of the Fourth Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK V.
The argument.
Hyperanthes discontinuing the fight, while he waits for reinforcements,
Teribazus, a Persian remarkable for his merit and learning, and highly beloved
by Hyperanthes, but unhappy in his passion for Ariana, a daughter of Darius,
advances from the rest of the army to the rescue of a friend in distress, who
lay wounded on the field of battle. Teribazus, is attacked by Diophantus, the
Mantinean, whom he overcomes, then engaging with Dithyrambus, is himself slain.
Hyperanthes hastens to his succor. A general battle ensues. Hyperanthes and
Abrocomes, partly by their own valor, and partly by the perfidy of the
Thebans, who desert the line, being on the point of forcing the Grecians, are
repulsed by the Lacedaemonians. Hyperanthes composes a select body out of the
Persian standing forces, and making an improvement in their discipline renews
the attack; upon which Leonidas changes the disposition of his army:
Hyperanthes and the ablest Persian generals are driven out of the field, and
several thousands of the Barbarians, circumvented in the pass, are entirely
destroyed.

AMID the van of Persia was a youth
Named Teribazus, not for golden stores,
Not for wide pastures traversed over with herds,
With bleating thousands, or with bounding steeds,
Nor yet for power, nor splendid honors famed.
Rich was his mind in every art divine,
And through the paths of science had he walked
The votary of wisdom. In the years,
When tender down invests the ruddy cheek,
He with the Magi turned the hallowed page
Of Zoroastres; then his towering soul
High on the plumes of contemplation soared,
And from the lofty Babylonian fane
With learned Chaldaeans traced the mystic sphere;
There numbered over the vivid fires, that gleam
Upon the dusky bosom of the night.
Nor on the sands of Ganges were unheard
The Indian sages, from sequestered bowers
While, as attention wondered, they disclosed
The powers of nature; whether in the woods,
The fruitful glebe, or flower, or healing plant,
The limpid waters, or the ambient air,
Or in the purer element of fire.
The fertile plains, where great Sesostris reigned,
Mysterious Egypt next the youth surveyed,
From Elephantis, where impetuous Nile
Precipitates his waters, to the sea,
Which far below receives the sev'nfold stream.
Thence over the Ionic coast he strayed, nor passed
Miletus by, which once inraptur'd heard
The tongue of Thales, nor Priene's walls,
Where Wisdom dwelt with Bias, nor the seat
Of Pittacus along the Lesbian shore.
Here too melodious numbers charmed his ear,
Which flowed from Orpheus, and Musaeus old,
And thee, O father of immortal verse,
Maeonides, whose strains through every age
Time with his own eternal lip shall sing.
Back to his native Susa then he turned
His wandering steps. His merit soon was dear
To Hyperanthes generous and good.
And Ariana from Darius sprung
With Hyperanthes, of the imperial race,
Which ruled the extent of Asia, in disdain
Of all her greatness often an humble ear
To him would bend, and listen to his voice.
Her charms, her mind, her virtue he explored
Admiring. Soon was admiration changed
To love, nor loved he sooner, than despaired.
But unreveal'd and silent was his pain;
Nor yet in solitary shades he roam'd,
Nor shunned resort: but over his sorrows cast
A sickly dawn of gladness, and in smiles
Concealed his anguish; while the secret flame
Raged in his bosom, and its peace consumed:
His heart still brooding over these mournful thoughts.
CAN I, O wisdom, seek relief from thee,
Who do approve my passion? From the power
Of beauty only thou would guard my heart.
But here thyself art charmed, where softness, grace,
And every virtue dignify desire;
Yet thus to love despairing is to prove
The sharpest sorrow, which relentless Fate
Can from her store of woes inflict on life:
But do not thou this moment warn my soul
To fly the fatal charmer? Do I pause?
Back to the wise Chaldaeans will I go,
Or wander on the Ganges; where to heaven
With thee my elevated soul shall tower,
With thee the secrets of the earth unveil.
There no tumultuous passion shall molest
My tranquil hours, and every thought be calm.
O wretched Teribazus! all conspires
Against thy peace. Our mighty lord prepares
To overwhelm the Grecians. Every youth
Attends the war, and I, who late have poised
With no inglorious arm the soldier's lance,
And near the side of Hyperanthes fought,
Must join the throng. How therefore can I fly
From Ariana! who with Asia's queens
The splendid camp of Xerxes will adorn.
Then be it so. Again I will adore
Her gentle virtue. Her delightful tongue,
Her graceful sweetness shall again diffuse
Resistless magic through my ravished heart;
And thus when love with double rage inflamed
Swells to distraction in my tortured breast,
Then -- But in vain through darkness do I search
My fate: despair and fortune be my guides.
THE hour arrived, when Xerxes first advanced
His arms from Susa's gates. The Persian dames
(So were accustomed all the eastern fair)
In sumptuous cars accompanied his march;
And Ariana graced the beauteous train.
From morn till evening Teribazus guards
Her passing wheels; his arm her weight sustains
With trembling pleasure often, as she mounts
The imperial chariot; his assiduous hand
From each pure fountain wafts the living flood:
Nor seldom by the fair-one's soft command
Would he repose him at her feet reclined,
While over his lips her lovely forehead bowed
Won with his grateful eloquence, that soothed
With sweet variety the tedious march,
Beguiling time. He too would then forget
His cares awhile, in raptures vain intranc'd,
Delusion all, and fleeting rays of joy
Soon overcast with more intense despair;
Like wintry clouds, which opening for a time
Tinge their black skirts with scattered beams of day;
Then swiftly closing, on the brows of Morn
Condense their horrors, and in thickest gloom
The ruddy beauty veil. Such woes oppressed
The Persian's heart, not softened; for this day
His daring valor from the bleeding van
Opposed the frown of adamantine Mars.
With no tiara were his temples bound,
The slender lance of Asia he disdained,
And her light target. Eminent he moved
In Grecian arms the wonder of his foes.
Among the Ionians had his strenuous limbs
In war been practiced. A resplendent cask
Flamed on his head. Before his face and chest
Down to the knees his ample shield was spread.
A ponderous ash with skillful hands he grasped.
Thus armed, tremendous in the front he stood.
Beneath his might two bold Phliasians died,
And three Tegeans, whose indignant chief,
Brave Hegesander, vengeance breathed in vain
With streaming wounds repulsed. Thus far unmatched
His strength prevailed, when Hyperanthes' voice
Recalled his fainting legions. Now each band
Their languid courage reinforced with rest.
Meantime with Teribazus thus conferred
The godlike prince. Thou much-deserving youth!
O had thy deeds with emulation warmed
The frozen hearts of Persia, Greece had wept
Her prostrate ranks, not triumphed in our shame.
Relaxing now the wearied fight I wait,
Till from the camp with Abradates strong
The brave Pharnuchus and Mazaeus move,
And with fresh powers renew the drooping war.
For since surpassed in valor, we must waste
By endless numbers, and continual toil
The matchless ardour of our gallant foes.
HE said. Immersed in sadness scarce replied,
But to himself thus plained the amorous youth.
STILL do I languish mourning over the fame,
My arm acquires. O wretched heart! thou seat
Of constant sorrow, what deceitful smiles
Yet can thou borrow from illusive hope
To flatter life. At Ariana's feet
What if with supplicating knees I bowed,
Implored her pity, and revealed my love?
Wretch, can thou climb to yon effulgent orb,
And share the splendours which irradiate heaven?
Do thou aspire to that exalted maid,
Great Xerxes' sister, rivalling the hopes
Of Asia's purpled potentates and kings?
Unless within her bosom I inspired
A passion fervent as my own, nay more,
Such as might dissipate each virgin fear,
And unrestrained disclose its fond desire,
My hopes are fruitless. Plunged in black despair
He thus revolved, when suddenly the cries
Of Aribaeus smote his pensive ear.
By mutual danger, and by friendship joined,
They had been long companions in the toils
Of war. Together with victorious steps
The sons of Nile they chased, when Aegypt's pride
Before the arms of Hyperanthes fell.
Stretched on the plain, and covered over with wounds,
By all abandoned, Teribazus views
His gallant friend. His languid soul awakes,
And forth he issues from the Persian line.
The bleeding warrior in his strong embrace
Swift he conveys. By indignation fired
Fierce from the Grecians Diophantus rushed
With loud defiance. Teribazus leaves
His rescued friend. His massy targe he rears,
Advances high his formidable spear,
And turns intrepid on the approaching foe.
Amazement followed. On he strode, and shook
The plumed honors of his shining crest.
The ill-fated Greek awaits the unequal fight;
Pierced in the throat with sounding arms he falls;
Through every band the Mantineans mourn.
Upon the slain the victor fixed his sight,
And thus reflected. By thy splendid arms
Thou art a Greek of no ignoble rank,
And from thy fall perhaps am I adorned
With more conspicuous luster. What if heaven
Should add new victims, like thyself, to grace
My undeserving hand, who knows, but she
Might smile upon my trophies. Oh! vain thought!
Disperse ye fantome hopes! Too long, my heart,
Have thou in vain contended with thy woes!
I stand this moment on the verge of life,
By fame invited, by despair impelled
To pass the irremeable bound. No more
Shall Teribazus backward turn his steps,
But here decide his fate. Then beat no more,
Thou troubled heart, and every grief be still
Now at the approach of everlasting peace.
HE ended, when a mighty foe drew nigh;
Not less than Dithyrambus. Ever they joined,
The Persian thus the Thespian youth addressed.
SAY, art not thou the unconquerable Greek,
Whose dauntless valor mowed our battle down,
And scattered nations? To attempt thy force
This day I purposed, when our chiefs from fight
Their host withdrew? That now my single arm
Thou deign'st to meet, receive my thanks; and know,
The thought of conquest less employs my mind,
Than that by thee I cannot fall with shame.
HE ceased. These words the Thespian chief returned.
Of all the praises from thy generous mouth
The only share, which justice bids me claim,
Is, that I here adventure to confront
Thy matchless strength. Believe not, that unmarked
Were thy great deeds. From you unbounded camp
None yet has equaled thy victorious hand.
But whence thy armor of the Grecian form?
Whence thy tall spear? thy helmet? whence the weight
Of that strong shield unlike thy eastern friends?
O if thou be'st some fugitive, who, lost
To liberty and virtue, art become
A tyrant's vile stipendiary; with grief
That valor, thus triumphant, I behold,
Which after all its danger, and brave toil
Deserves no honor from the Gods, or men.
HERE Teribazus with a sigh returned.
I am to Greece a stranger, and a wretch
To thee unknown, who seek, this hour, to die;
Though not ignobly, but in death to raise
My name from darkness, while I end my woes.
THE Grecian then. I view thee, and I mourn.
A dignity, which virtue only bears,
And resolution on thy brow enthroned
(Though grief has dimmed thy drooping eye) demand
My veneration; and whatever be
The malice of thy fortune, what the cares,
Which thus infest thy quiet, they create
Within my breast the pity of a friend:
Why have thou then compelled me to oppose
My arm against thee, while thy might supports
The unjust ambition of malignant kings,
The foes to virtue, liberty, and peace?
Yet free from rage, or enmity I lift
My adverse javelin. Victory I ask,
Thy life may fate for happier hours reserve.
THIS said, their beaming lances they protend,
Of hostile hate, or fury both devoid;
As on the Isthmian, or Olympic sand
For fame alone contending. Either host
Poised on their spears in silent wonder gazed.
The fight begins, when soon the Grecian lance,
Which all the day in constant battle worn
Unnumber'd shields and corselets had transfixed,
Against the Persian target, shivering breaks,
Its master's hand disarming. Then began*
The sense of honor, and the dread of shame
To swell in Dithyrambus. Undismayed
He grapples with the foe, and instant seized
The threatening javelin, ever th'uplifted arm
Could execute the meditated wound.
The weapon burst betwixt their struggling hands.
They loose their grasp, and bare their shining swords.
With equal swiftness to defend, or charge,
Each active youth advances, or recedes.
On every side they traverse, now direct,
Obliquely now the wheeling blades descend.
Still is the conflict dubious, when the Greek
Dissembling points his falchion to the earth,
His arm depressed, as overcome with toil;
While with his buckler cautious he repels
The blows repeated from the exulting foe.
Greece trembles for her hero. Joy pervades
The Asian ranks, and Hyperanthes strides
Before the line, preparing to receive
His friend triumphant. Teribazus now
Pressed with redoubled efforts. Still the Greek
Sustains the assault defensive, and at last,
As with unguarded fury of his strokes
The unwary Persian sideways swung his targe,
The fatal moment Dithyrambus watched,
And darting forward with his feet outstretch'd
His falchion buries in the obnoxious side.
Affection, grief, and terror wing the speed
Of Hyperanthes. From his bleeding foe
The Greek retires, not distant, and awaits
The eastern prince. But he with watery cheeks,
And dumb with sorrow clasps his dying friend,
From whose cold lip with interrupted phrase
These accents broke. O dearest, best of men!
My heart is fruitful with ten thousand thoughts
Of gratitude and love to thee; but fate
Denies my voice the utt'rance. O my friend!
O Hyperanthes! hear my tongue unfold.
What thou should never have known before this hour;
When, as I open all my secret soul,
I may at once retire, and veil my eyes
In endless night: nor thou presumption deem
What with my dying breath I here divulge.
I love thy sister. With despair I loved,
And thence perhaps untimely is my date;
Though, witness heaven, without regret I bleed
With honor thus in Persia's sight and thine.
HE ceased: the inexorable hand of Fate
Weighed down his eyelids, and the gloom of death
His fleeting sight eternally o'ershades.
Him on Choaspes over the blooming verge
His frantic mother shall bewail, and strew
Her silver tresses in the crystal tide;
While all the shore re-echoes to the name
Of Teribazus lost. The afflicted prince
The pallid corse contemplating with tears,
Thus in the bitterness of grief exclaims.
OH! Teribazus. Oh! my friend, whose loss
I will deplore for ever. Oh! what power
To me and thee averse thus closed thy breast
To Hyperanthes with distrust unkind.
She should, she must have loved thee. Now no more
Thy friendly aspect shall delight my eyes,
While in remembrance thy unequalled worth
Will live for ever to remind my grief
Of what I lost. O Susa, if again
Thee I revisit from this hostile land,
Far from the clamours of tumultuous war,
Then shall my hours be vacant to complaint,
Whole years shall thou be witness, while I mourn,
And Ariana shall assist my woes.
Let fiercest vengeance now possess my soul.
HE said, and ardent rushes on the Greek,
Who, while his noble enemy expired,
And Hyperanthes snatched with tender arms
The last embraces from his gasping friend,
Stood near reclined in sadness over his shield,
And in the pride of victory repined,
Nor marked his threatening foe: when swift approached
Diomedon. Before the Thespian youth
Aloft he raised his targe, and loudly thus.
HOLD thee, Barbarian, from a life more worth,
Than thee, and Xerxes, with his host of slaves.
HIS words he seconds with his rapid lance.
Soon a tremendous conflict had ensued,
But Intaphernes, Mindus, and the half
Of Persia's leaders anxious for the life
Of Hyperanthes poured with all their bands
Betwixt the encountering chiefs. With mutual wrath
They strove in vain the combat to renew.
So rage two bulls upon the opposing banks
Of some deep flood, which parts the fruitful mead;
Defiance thunders from their angry mouths
In vain; in vain the furrowed earth they rend:
Wide rolls the stream, and intercepts the war.
The fierce Plataean satiates his revenge
On vulgar lives. Before his dreaded arm
Whole ranks are scattered. But the Persian prince
Borne down the stress of battle gains the shore,
Where then the brave Abrocomes advanced;
With him Orontes and Pharnuchus stood,
Mazaeus, Abradates famed in arms,
And all the boldest of the eastern chiefs
Begirt with fresh battalions: here with speed
Abrocomes his brother thus bespake.
TO Intaphernes is Pandates sent
With charge to harrass in perpetual fight
The Grecians next the mountains. Thou with me
And these unite thy valor. Here the flower
Of all our army is together drawn,
Here all the weight of battle will impend.
He said. The godlike Hyperanthes seeks
The dangerous van. He heads the splendid throng
Of satraps, princes, and imperial powers;
Themselves the lords of nations, who before
The throne of Xerxes tributary bowed.
Now mixed the war. The inverted javelins gleam
From every part, and fell Bellona roars.
WHO first distained with Persian blood his sword?
Eupalamus. Artembares he slew
And Derdas fierce, whom Caucasus had reared
On its tempestuous brow, the savage sons
Of violence and rapine; but their doom
Great Hyperanthes marks: his angry lance
Arrests the victor in his haughty course.
Beneath the strong Abrocomes overwhelmed,
Melissus swells the number of the dead.
None could Mycenae boast of prouder birth
Than young Melissus; blooming, as the son
Of Maia, all in radiant arms he graced
The front of battle; he in Cirrha's vale,
Where high Parnassus from its double top
O'ershades the Pythian games, the envied prize
Of fame obtained: low sinks his laurell'd head
In death's cold night, and horrid gore deforms
His graceful locks. Impatient for revenge
Aristobulus strides before the van.
A storm of fury darkens all his brow.
Around he rolls his gloomy eye, and marks
Achaemenes for death, of regal blood
Derived from Croesus, once the imperial lord
Of nations; him the nymphs of Halys wept,
When with delusive oracles beguiled
By Delphi's God, he passed their fatal waves
A mighty empire to dissolve: nor knew
The ill-destin'd king, that envious Fortune watched
That dreadful moment from his hand to wrest
The scepter of his fathers. In the shade
Of humble life his race on Tmolus' brow
Lay hid, 'till roused to battle here his breath
Achaemenes resigns. Then Lycis bled
For horrid war ill-chosen. He was skilled
To tune the lulling flute, and melt the heart;
Or with his pipe's awak'ning strains invite
The lovely dames of Lydia to the dance:
They graceful over the verdant level moved
In varied measures, while the cooling breeze
Beneath their swelling garments wantoned over
Their snowy breasts, and smooth Cayster's wave
Soft-gliding murmured by. His opening chest
Pours forth his entrails, and supine he falls.
Not long the Grecian triumphs. From the slain
In all the pride of conquest as he rends
His reeking javelin, Hyperanthes' steel
His knee invades, and bursts the sinewy cords.
The Mycenaeans with uplifted shields,
Corinthians, and Phliasians gather round
The wounded Grecian. With redoubled rage
The conflict glows. Abrocomes incites
Each Persian leader; all obey his voice;
Here Abradates, there Mazaeus pressed,
Orontes, and Hydarnes; none retire
From toil, or peril: urged on every side
The Greeks at length the abandoned chief resign.
Despairing, raging, destitute he stands
Propt on his spear; his wound forbids retreat.
None, but his brother Eumenes, abide
The dire extremity. His shield defends
The fainting chief, till Hyperanthes' sword
Full on his arm its dreadful weight discharged.
Down with the buckler drops the severed hand,
Nor quits its grasp. Now sink the wretched pair
Beneath the Persian's unresisted steel:
From both their breasts the vital currents flow,
And mix their streams. Elate the Persians roll
Their deepning legions on the foes dismayed.
The Greeks their station painfully maintain.
This soon the faithless Anaxander saw,
When thus to Leontiades he spoke.
THIS is the time to aid our Persian friends.
Behold the Greeks are pressed. Let Thebes retire,
And yield a bloodless conquest to the king.
THE Thebans straight desert the broken line
Not with unpunished treachery; the spears
Of fierce Orontes, and Pharnuchus joined
With Mindus gored their shameful flight, and thin'd
Their bleeding files. Meantime, as he who ruled
Than Jove more ancient on the throne of heaven,
When from the womb of Chaos dark the world
Emerg'd to birth, wherever he viewed the jar
Of atoms yet discordant and unformed,
Confusion thence with powerful voice dispelled,
Till light and order universal reigned;
So from the wall Leonidas explored
The various war. He saw the Theban rout,
That Corinth, Phlius, and Mycenae looked
Affrighted backward; instantly he charged
The sons of Lacedaemon to repair
The disunited phalanx. Ever they move
Dieneces inspires them. Fame, my friends,
Calls forth your valor in a signal hour;
For you this glorious period she reserved
To vindicate the Spartan name. He spoke.
On either side supported by the might
Of Agis and of Alpheus he conducts
His generous troop, who riveting their shields
In dense array indissolubly firm
Confront the Persians, and with death repulse
Their scattered numbers; when with efforts vain
They often renewed the contest, and recoiled
As often confounded with diminished ranks,
Thus Hyperanthes counseled. Learn, O chiefs,
From whence alone success can grace our arms.
These are a band selected from the Greeks,
Unlike the others, whom we lately chased;
Perhaps the Spartans, whom we often have heard
By Demaratus praised. To break their line
False is the hope, while unarray'd, and lax,
And wanting union singly we assail
Their strength collected. Do not we preside
Over Asia's myriads, and our valor boast,
And martial arts above the vulgar herd?
Let us, ye chiefs, attempt in ordered ranks
To join our force, and emulate the foe.
THEY wait not dubious. Soon a dreadful line
From Oeta's mountain to the shore extends,
Composed of all the leaders, Mindus bold,
Pharnuchus, and Mazaeus, and the strength
Of fierce Abrocomes, with each, who bore
The highest honors, and excelled in war.
To these succeed a chosen number drawn
From those, whom Asia boasts her bravest sons,
Who from their king perpetual stipends share;
And station'd round his provinces by arms
His tyranny sustain. In every part
Is Hyperanthes seen with active care
To form the huge battalion. Soon they stand
In just array, when cautious, lest their march
Might still relax their order, Persia's prince
Amid the center of the foremost rank
Orontes placed, committing to his hand
The imperial standard; whose expanded folds
Glowed in the air, presenting to the sun
The richest dye of Tire: the royal bird
Amid the gorgeous tincture shone expressed
In flaming gold. On this the eastern chief
Commands each Persian station'd in the front
To turn his eyes regardful, and to guide
His slow and equal feet by this alone
Retiring, or advancing. Next he charged,
That every warrior through the numerous files,
Observing none but those before him ranged,
Should watch their motions, and their steps pursue.
Close by the standard then the intrepid chief
His post assumes, and animates the band.
ILLUSTRIOUS warriors, whose unconquered arms
Rebellious Egypt, and the Libyan felt,
Think what the splendor of your former deeds
From you demands; remember, from the great
Heroic actions are a debt to fame.
No middle course remains for them to tread,
Whom she has once ennobled; and this hour
Or with fresh trophies will enlarge your praise,
Or will for ever with dishonor blast.
THE hero said, and all to fight proceed.
As when tempestuous Eurus stems the weight
Of western Neptune struggling through the straits,
Which bound Alcides' labors; here the storm
With rapid wing reverberates the tide,
There the contending surge with furrowed tops
To mountains swells, and whelming over the beach
On either coast invests with hoary foam
The Mauritanian and Iberian strand:
Not with less rage in hideous onset meet
The Grecians and Barbarians. These preserve
Their foremost ranks unbroken, where was drawn
The prime of Asia's warriors; and the crowd,
Though still promiscuous pouring from behind,
Yet added pressure to the imbattled chiefs
With endless numbers. Like the mural strength
Of some proud city bulwark'd round, and armed
With rising towers to guard her wealthy stores;
Immovable, impenetrable stood
The serried phalanx of the Greeks. Behind,
Their country spread, their fields with plenty crowned,
Their native walls and habitations lay
With each dear pledge of friendship and of love.
High in the Persian van the exalted lance
Of Hyperanthes flamed. Beside him pressed
Abrocomes, Hydarnes, and the bulk
Of Abradates terrible in war.
And here the great Dieneces upheld
His shield's expanded surface, and alone
Firm, as a Memphian pyramid, sustained
The stress of thousands. Alpheus here unmoved,
And Agis there connect their spacious orbs,
With Menalippus wise Megisthias' heir
In one impervious line. Long time the hosts
Maintain in strong and unrelax'd array
The conflict undecided; nor could Greece
Repel the adverse numbers, nor the force
Of Asia's myriads could remove the Greeks.
BUT now from Sparta's king, who soon discerned
The Persian's new arrangement, Medon hastes,
The illustrious chief of Locris, from the race
Of Ajax sprung in Trojan fields renowned:
To wife Dieneces he thus began.
LEONIDAS commands the Grecian line
To yield before the Persians, and with speed
To measure back some paces. Soon, he deems,
The unexperienced foe in wild pursuit
Will break their order. Then the charge renew;
Let Agis, joined with Alpheus, from the line
Rush with Laconia's troop imbattled deep,
And force a passage through the Barbarous host;
Thou with a strong battalion from the sons
Of Locris drawn must follow swift, and reach
The Spartans led by Agis; with the rest
Of Locris' youth shall I advance to fill
Your vacant station, and the line maintain;
While in the narrow entrance, where the pass
Looks over the Malian plain on Persia's camp,
Do thou arrange to intercept the foe,
Should Asia pour fresh succors from her tents:
Then Xerxes soon the slaughter shall deplore
Of all these thousands in the straits enclosed
For sure destruction; and the Gods of Greece
Behold their temples with profusion graced
Of splendid offerings from Barbarian spoils
Won by their freeborn supplicants this day.
THIS heard, Dieneces obedient gave
Through every band the signal of retreat,
When all at once drew backward. Persia stopped,
As with amazement rooted to the earth
At unexpected conquest; 'till the voice
Of fierce Abrocomes their minds awakes
With these triumphant accents. By the sun
They fly before us. My victorious friends,
Delay you then to enter Greece? Away,
Rush on undaunted. I already hear,
Our horse and chariots thundering over their plains,
And view their towns involved in Persian fires.
HE said. With hurried violence they roll
Tumultuous forward. All with headlong pace
Wide from their ranks expatiate in pursuit,
Disjoin their order, and the line dissolve.
This when the sage Dieneces descries,
The Grecians halt returning to the charge
With sudden onset. In a moment, pierced
By Lacedaemon's chief, Orontes falls,
And quits the imperial banner; this the Greek
In triumph waves, and gives the dreadful sign.
At once with Agis towering in the front,
And rapid Alpheus all Laconia's band
In deep arrangement bursting from the line
Bear down with irresistible career
The eastern legions, shattered and o'erturn'd
With all their standards trampled on the plain.
As the swift vessel, when a rising gale
Distends the canvass, its resistless course
Impells through millions of opposing waves;
Through the Barbarian multitudes so pierced
The Spartan wedge. Invincible over hills
Of arms, and mangled corses they impress
Their crimson footsteps. Persia's bravest chiefs,
Even Hyperanthes from the line is driven;
And flying thousands through the pass are swept
Before the Spartans. With a Locrian troop
Of hideous depth Dieneces pursues
His conquering friends, and hews his purple way
Through Asia's numbers, which again were closed
In vain: himself unconquerable leads
Destruction on, and heaps the rock with death.
But on the broken foe what ruin falls
From Alpheus' sword? Over all in swift pursuit
Was he renowned. His rapid feet had matched
The son of Peleus in the dusty course,
Or had he run for Atalanta's love,
He had rejected Cytheraea's aid;
Nor of her swiftness to beguile the fair
Before her steps had thrown the golden balls.
But now the wrongs, the long-remember'd wrongs
Of Polydorus animate his strength
With tenfold vigor; guided by revenge
His falchion reddens with Barbarian blood;
The gory drops besprinkled all his shield,
Like crimson poppies over the yellow plain.
As when with horror winged a whirlwind rends
A shattered navy; from the ocean cast,
The enormous fragments hide the sandy beach:
Thus over the rock the Persians lay bestrewn
By Alpheus raging in the swift pursuit.
Not with severer pangs the God of day
The Theban queen afflicted, when incensed
With her proud vaunts he hurled her blooming race
From youth and beauty to the pale abodes;
Than now distracted Hyperanthes' soul,
As round him, bleeding by the Spartan's lance,
His noblest friends lay gasping. Often he strove
To turn his flying legions, often the fight
With Abradates and his brother's force
Renews, against insuperable foes
In vain repugnant; till by all around
Deserted, mixing with the general rout
He yields to fortune, and the field forsakes.
So with relapsing waves the ebbing tide
Beats for a time against the shelving strand,
Still by degrees retiring, and at last
Within the bosom of the main subsides.
NOW at Thermopylae's extremest bound
The Spartans checked their progress. Soon approached
Dieneces, and thus began. Behold,
What numbers have we passed of Perfia's sons.
Be swift, my friends, and form. He said, and filled
The narrow straits with ordered files, a depth
Of fifty warriors; half on Asia's host,
Half towered the pass were turned, a double front,
Where every rank with twenty javelins flamed.
The Locrian band to Agis is assigned,
Who stands prepared to stop the flying foes;
Dieneces himself to Persia's camp
Presents the terrors of the Spartan steel.
NOW, Muse, the wondrous stratagem display,
Which Sparta's hero, whose presiding care
Marked all the great vicissitudes of fight,
And ruled the course of slaughter, had conceived
To whelm the numerous, long-resisting foe
In hideous death, and signalize the day
With horrors new to war. As over the wall,
His constant station, darting through the straits
His watchful eye, ever yet the battle closed,
He viewed the hostile myriads swarming down,
And nations still succeeding from the camp
Immense, exhaustless, by an horrid length
Of clust'ring helms, and shields, and threatening spears
Joined to the Grecian van; the wary chief,
Lest by the long-protracted fight his Greeks
Might yield o'erlabour'd, from the Locrians chose
A thousand warriors. These by Maron led
Ascend the mountain, which o'erhung the pass.
His charge he soon reveals. A thousand hands
At once with restless pains assemble stones
Of hugest bulk, and withered trunks uptorn
In elder times by whirlwinds from the grove.
Unwearied then they loosen from the rocks
Broad, craggy fragments; from the mountain hewed
Its venerable firs, and aged oaks
Of wide circumference, and knotted strength,
Which of their branches by the lightning bared,
Presented still against its blasting flame
Their hoary pride unshaken. These the Greeks
Roll heavy on, with massy leavers heave,
Or drag with strong-knit cables, till they reach,
Where over the Persian multitudes inclined
The mountain's edge; so lofty, that the voice
Of war below there lost its deafning roar,
And softened into murmurs. Still his post,
Though Hyperanthes from the field was driven,
With thronging numbers Intaphernes bold
Beneath the shade of this incumbent hill
Against the fierce Diomedon maintained;
Great Intaphernes, progeny of kings,
Whom over Damascus, and the Syrian palms
Had Xerxes seated with despotic sway
His substitute. This Maron from on high
Surveys, and gives the signal; downward sinks
The nodding pile, stupendous heap of death!
Trees rolled on trees with mingled rock descend,
Unintermitted ruin. Loud resound
The hollow trunks against the mountain's side,
Swift bounds each craggy mass. The foes beneath
Look up aghast, with horror shrink, and die;
Whole legions crushed beneath the dreadful heaps
Lie hid and lost, as never they had known
A name, or being; while around them grew
A hill of ruin. Numbers still survive,
Who shun destruction with impetuous flight;
But Agis stops them: Intaphernes falls
Before his thundering arm. Again they turn
To meet resistless ruin. From behind
With twice two hundred Locrians Agis pours.
MEANTIME the Grecian line (so Sparta's king
Decreed) had left its station, and beyond
The heaps of dreadful carnage was advanced;
There, stretched from Oeta to the Malian bay,
The Locrians led by Medon had disposed,
With Corinth, Phlius and Mycenae's train
Their hostile phalanx over the lessening pass.
Along the mountain's side Plataea's troop,
The Mantineans, and Tegaeans stood,
An horrid length of war. The unwearied swords
Of Dithyrambus and Diomedon
Still blazed the terror of the Barbarous host.
Before them fled the Persians to the shore,
All in a moment by the various bands
Of Greece surrounded. From the gulf profound
Perdition here inevitable frowns,
And there, incircled by a grove of spears,
They stand devoted hecatombs to Mars.
Now not a moment's interval delays
Their general doom, but down the Malian steep
Prone are they hurried to the expanded arms
Of Horror rising from the opening deep,
And grasping all their numbers, as they fall.
The dire confusion, like a storm, invades
The chafing billows; loud resounds the shore:
And over whole troops by fell Bellona rolled
In one vast ruin from the craggy ridge,
Over all their arms and ensigns deep ingulph'd,
With hideous roar the surge for ever closed.
End of the Fifth Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK VI.
The argument.
Night coming on, the Grecians retire to their tents. A guard is placed on the
Phocian wall under the command of Agis. He admits into the camp a lady
accompanied by a single slave, and conducts them to Leonidas; when she
discovers herself to be Ariana, sister of Xerxes and Hyperanthes, and sues for
the body of Teribazus; which being found among the slain, she kills herself
upon it. The slave, who attended her, proves to be Polydorus, brother of
Alpheus and Maron, and who had been formerly carried into captivity by a
Phoenician pirate. He relates before an assembly of the chiefs a message from
Demaratus to the Spartans, which discloses the treachery of the Thebans, and of
Epialtes, the Malian, who had undertaken to lead part of the Persian army
through a pass among the mountains of Oeta. This information throws the council
into a great tumult, which is pacified by Leonidas, who sends Alpheus to
observe the motions of these Persians, and Dieneces with a party of
Lacedaemonians to support the Phocians, with whom the defense of these passages
in the hills had been entrusted. In the mean time Agis sends the bodies of
Teribazus and Ariana to the camp of Xerxes.

IN sable pomp with all her starry train
The night assumed her throne. Recalled from war
Her long-protracted labors Greece forgets,
Dissolved in silent slumber; all but those,
Who watched the uncertain perils of the dark,
An hundred warriors: Agis was their chief.
High on the wall intent the hero sat,
As over the surface of the tranquil main
Along its undulating breast the wind
The various din of Asia's host conveyed
In one deep murmur swelling in his ear:
When by the sound of footsteps down the pass
Alarmed he calls aloud. What feet are those,
Which beat the echoing pavement of the rock?
With speed reply, nor tempt your instant fate.
HE said, and thus returned a voice unknown.
Not with the feet of enemies we come,
But crave admittance with a friendly tongue.
THE Spartan answers. Through the midnight shade
What purpose draws your wandering steps abroad?
TO whom the stranger. We are friends to Greece,
And to the presence of the Spartan king
Admission we implore. The cautious chief
Of Lacedaemon hesitates again.
When thus with accents musically sweet
A tender voice his wondering ear allured.
O GENEROUS Grecian, listen to the prayer
Of one distressed! whom grief alone has led
In this dark hour to these victorious tents,
A wretched woman innocent of fraud.
THE Greek descending through th'unfolded gates
Upheld a flaming brand. One first appeared
In servile garb attired; but near his side
A woman graceful and majestic stood;
Not with an aspect rivalling the power
Of fatal Hellen, or the wanton charms
Of Love's soft queen; but such as far excelled,
Whatever the lilly blending with the rose
Paints on the cheek of beauty soon to fade;
Such as expressed a mind, which wisdom ruled,
And sweetness tempered, virtue's purest light
Illumining the countenance divine,
Yet could not sooth remorseless fate, nor teach
Malignant Fortune to revere the good,
Which often with anguish rends the spotless heart,
And often associates wisdom with despair.
In courteous phrase began the chief humane.
EXALTED fair, who thus adorn'st the night,
Forbear to blame the vigilance of war,
And to the laws of rigid Mars impute,
That I thus long unwilling have delayed
Before the great Leonidas to place
This your apparent dignity and worth.
HE spoke, and gently to the lofty tent
Of Sparta's king the lovely stranger guides.
At Agis' summons with a mantle broad
His mighty limbs Leonidas infolds,
And quits his couch. In wonder he surveys
The illustrious virgin, whom his presence awed:
Her eye submissive to the ground inclined
With veneration of the godlike man.
But soon his voice her anxious dread dispelled,
Benevolent and hospitable thus.
THY form alone, thus amiable and great,
Thy mind delineates, and from all commands
Supreme regard. Relate, thou noble dame,
By what relentless destiny compelled,
Thy tender feet the paths of darkness tread.
Rehearse the afflictions, whence thy virtue mourns.
ON her wan cheek a sudden blush arose,
Like day's first dawn upon the twilight pale,
And wrapped in grief these words a passage broke.
IF to be most unhappy, and to know,
That hope is irrecoverably fled;
If to be great and wretched may deserve
Commiseration from the good; behold,
Thou glorious leader of unconquered bands,
Behold descended from Darius' loins
The afflicted Ariana, and my prayer
Accept with pity, nor my tears disdain!
First, that I loved the best of human race,
By nature's hand with every virtue formed,
Heroic, wise, adorned with every art;
Of shame unconscious does my heart reveal.
This day in Grecian arms conspicuous clad
He fought, he fell. A passion long concealed
For me alas! within my brother's arms
His dying breath resigning, he disclosed.
-- OH I will stay my sorrows! will forbid
My eyes to stream before thee, and my heart,
Thus full of anguish, will from sighs restrain!
For why should thy humanity be grieved
With my distress, and learn from me to mourn
The lot of nature doomed to care and pain!
Hear then, O king, and grant my sole request,
To seek his body in the heaps of slain.
THUS to the Spartan su'd the regal maid
Resembling Ceres in majestic woe,
When, supplicant at Jove's resplendent throne,
From dreary Pluto, and the infernal gloom
Her loved and lost Proserpina she sought.
Fixed on the weeping queen with steadfast eyes,
Laconia's chief these tender thoughts recalled.
SUCH are thy sorrows, O for ever dear!
Who now at Lacedaemon do deplore
My everlasting absence! then inclined
His head, and sighed; nor yet forgot to charge
His friend, the gentle Agis, through the straits
The Persian princess to attend and aid.
With careful steps they seek her lover's corse.
The Greeks remembered, where by Fate repressed
His arm first ceased to mow their legions down,
And from beneath a mass of Persian slain
Soon drew the hero by his armor known.
To Agis' high pavilion they resort.
Now, Ariana, what transcending pangs
Thy soul involved? What horror clasped thy heart?
But love grew mightiest, and her beauteous limbs
On the cold breast of Teribazus threw
The grief-distracted maid. The clotted gore
Deformed her snowy bosom. Over his wounds
Loose flowed her hair, and bubbling from her eyes
Impetuous sorrow lav'd the purple clay.
When forth in groans her lamentations broke.
O TORN for ever from my weeping eyes!
Thou, who despairing to obtain her heart,
Who then most loved thee, did untimely yield
Thy life to Fate's inevitable dart
For her, who now in agony unfolds
Her tender bosom, and repeats her vows
To thy deaf ear, who fondly to her own
Now clasps thy breast insensible and cold.
Alas! do those unmoving, ghastly orbs
Perceive my gushing anguish! Does that heart,
Which Death's inanimating hand has chilled,
Share in my sufferings, and return my sighs!
-- Oh! bitter unsurmountable distress!
Lo! on thy breast is Ariana bowed,
Hangs over thy face, unites her cheek to thine
Not now to listen with enchanted ears
To thy persuasive eloquence, no more
Charmed with the wisdom of thy copious mind!
SHE could no more. Invincible despair
Suppressed her utt'rance. As a marble form
Fixed on the solemn sepulcher, unmoved
Over some dead hero, whom his country loved,
Bends down the head with imitated woe:
So paused the princess over the breathless clay,
Intranc'd in sorrow. On the dreary wound,
Where Dithyrambus' sword was deepest plunged,
Mute for a space and motionless she gazed.
Then with a look unchanged, nor trembling hand
Drew forth a poniard, which her garment veiled,
And sheathing in her heart the abhorred steel,
On her slain lover, silent sinks in death.
In vain the Spartan intervened. With tears
He viewed the prostrate lovers, and exclaimed.
OH! most unhappy, heavy on your heads
Has sorrow fallen, which over your pale remains
Commands this pity from a stranger's eye!
Illustrious ruins, may the grave impart
That peace, which life denied! And now receive
This pious office from a hand unknown.
SO saying, from his shoulders he unclasp'd
His ample robe, and strewn the waving folds
Over the pale dead. Then turning, he bespake
The slave, who stood beside him. Thou, who ledst
Thy queen ill-destin'd to the fatal tents
Of Lacedaemon, now returning bear
Her bleeding relics to the Persian lord;
Thou, and these captives, whom I free from bonds.
ART thou a Spartan (interrupts the slave)
And do thou counsel me to seek again
A clime unblessed, where freedom never dwells?
No. Bear me to Leonidas. Alone
Shall he decide, if wretched, as I seem,
I may not claim protection from this camp.
WHOEVER thou art (amazed the chief replies)
Thou may indeed a better lot demand,
Than I, a stranger to thy hidden worth,
Unconscious offered. Thy ignoble garb
Concealed a virtue, which I now revere.
And since thy suffering soul has long endured
The gloom of bondage, and the hated face
Of tyrants viewed, now change the horrid scene;
Here freedom reigns, and justice: come and seek
With me their great protector. Ending here,
Swift he conducts him to Laconia's king,
When Agis thus Leonidas addressed.
LO! far superior to the name, which marks
His habit with dishonor, one, who sues
For thy protection! Here the slave subjoined.
I stand thy suppliant now. Thou soon shall learn,
If I deserve thy favor. I entreat
To see the assembled leaders of your host,
For I am fraught with tidings, which import
The weal of all the Grecians. Agis straight
Appointed by Leonidas convenes
The various leaders. To the tent they throng,
Amidst them placed, the stranger thus began.
O ALPHEUS! Maron! hither turn your sight,
And know your brothers. From their seats they start.
From either burst, with tears of transport mixed,
The name of Polydorus. On his breast
Each fondly strives to rush, but he withstands;
While down his cheek a stream of anguish pours
From his dejected eyes in torture bent
On that vile garb, which shamed his freeborn limbs.
At length these accents intermixed with groans
Broke from his heart, while all stood wondering round.
YOU first shall know, if this unhappy slave
Yet merits your embraces. Now approached
Leonidas. Before him all recede,
Even Alpheus' self; and yields his brother's hand,
Which in his own the generous hero pressed:
Then with majestic goodness thus bespake
The afflicted youth, and mitigates his pains.
FORBEAR to mourn, thou unexampled youth.
Thy friends, thy country, all on thee shall gaze
With veneration, whose unshaken mind
The chains of Asia never could debase.
Lo! every breast is open to thy worth,
Each tongue prepares to hail thee with applause,
Who have thy country honored even in bonds.
HE ceased, when Alpheus with an eager hand
Divests his brother of his base attire,
And his own mantle over the shoulders threw
Of Polydorus. Agis too advanced,
With friendly arms infolds him, and began.
Now, in thy native liberty secure,
Smile on thy past afflictions, and relate,
What chance restored thy virtue to the Greeks.
THEN Polydorus to the listening chiefs.
I was a Spartan. When my tender prime
On manhood bordered, from my native shore
Snatched by Phoenician pirates, I was sold,
To Ariana, sister to the king
And Hyperanthes. Fortune there was kind
My bonds committing to that gentle hand.
Yet was I still a captive, and estranged
From Lacedaemon. Demaratus often
With friendly sorrows would my lot deplore,
Nor less his own ill-fated virtue mourned
Lost to his country in a servile court,
The center of corruption; where in smiles
Is envy painted, treachery, and hate,
And rankling malice; where alone sincere
The dissolute seeks no disguise: where he
Who all possesses, that a king can give,
Is far less happy than the meanest son
Of liberty, and grovelling, as the slave,
Who serves his cruel pride. Yet here the sun
Ten times his annual period has renewed,
Since Polydorus has in bondage groaned.
My bloom now past, or else by pining care
Untimely withered, I at last return,
And to my native land the tidings bear
Of instant desolation. Here in grief
He paused, when thus Leonidas. Proceed.
Though from thy lips inevitable fate
To all be threatened, thou art heard by none,
Whose dauntless souls can entertain a thought,
But how to fall the noblest. Thus the chief.
The rest in speechless expectation wait.
Such was the solemn silence, which overspread
The shrine of Ammon, or Dodona's shades,
When anxious mortals from the mouth of Jove
Their doom explored. Nor Polydorus long
Suspends the Grecians, but resumes his tale.
AS I this night accompanied the steps
Of Ariana, ever we reached the straits
Before our view then opening, one appeared
With hasty feet now traversing the way,
Now fixed intensely toward the Grecian wall;
Then on a sudden starting would renew
His restless pace. As nearer we approached,
He by the moon, which glimmer'd over our heads,
Descried us, when advancing he demands
Where bent our midnight course. I knew the voice
Of Demaratus. To my breast I clasped
The venerable exile, and replied.
Our purpose ask not. Sparta's camp we seek,
And oh! farewell for ever! He rejoined.
Thrice happy Polydorus! Thou again
Shall visit Sparta to these eyes denied.
Upon your paths may heaven's protection smile.
Soon as you mix with yon triumphant tents,
Say to the Spartans, whose unconquered arms
Defend those rocks, you saw their exiled king;
Say, though their blind credulity deprived
The wretched Demaratus of his home,
From every joy secluded, which awaits
The parent and the husband, from his wife,
His offspring torn, his friends, and native gates,
Him from his virtue could they never divide:
Say, that even here, where all are kings, or slaves,
Amid the riot of flagitious courts
Not quite extinct the Spartan spirit glows
Within his breast, though grief has dimmed its fires.
Remembering this to Lacedaemon's chief
Report, that newly to the Persian host
Returned a Malian, Epialtes named,
Who as a spy had sought the Grecian tents.
He to the tyrant magnified his art,
Which with delusive eloquence had wrought
The Greeks to such despair, that Asia's king
Had been ever now their sovereign master owned,
Had not the spirit of their single chief,
By fear unconquered, and on death resolved,
Restored their valor: therefore would the king
Trust to his guidance a selected band,
They soon should pierce the unguarded bounds of Greece,
Led through a secret passage over the hills,
Where no Leonidas should bar their way.
Meantime by him the treacherous Thebans sent
Assurance of their aid. The assenting king
At once decreed two myriads to advance
With Hyperanthes, with Abrocomes,
And bold Hydarnes. Every chief besides,
Whom youth, or valor, or ambition warms,
Roused by the traitor's eloquence, attends
From all the nations, fired with eager zeal
The first to enter Greece. In silence now
The youth remains. Tremendous from his seat
Uprose Plataea's chief. His eyes were flames,
And thus on trembling Anaxander burst
The furious accents from his livid lips.
YET ever we fall, O traitor, shall this arm
To hell's avenging furies sink thy head.
ALL now is tumult, every bosom swells
With rage untamed, and vengeance. Half unsheathed
Diomedon's impetuous falchion blazed.
But, as the Cholchian sorceress renowned
In fables old, or Circe, when they framed
A potent spell from Erebus to wake
The dead in dark and fleeting forms to glide
Before the moon's dim twilight, with their charms
Smoothed all the sea, and silenced each rude blast;
Till not a billow heaved against the shore,
Nor even the wanton-winged zephir breathed
The lightest whisper through the magic air:
So, when thy voice, Leonidas, is heard,
Fell Discord listens; Rage with sacred awe
Subsides in silence; while Confusion slept.
WITHHOLD this rashness (interposed the king)
Before we punish, let us find the guilt.
Not yet has Persia overturned our tents,
Not yet her Barbarous shouts our ears alarm.
We still have time for vengeance, and to know,
If yet our swords destruction may repel,
Or how to die most glorious. Then arose
Dieneces, and thus the Greeks bespake.
EVER yet they pass our borders, Xerxes' host
Must learn to conquer, and the Greeks to fly.
The spears of Phocis guard the secret pass.
Let instant messengers be thither sent
To know the Persians progress. Alpheus here.
LEONIDAS, behold, my willing feet
Shall to the Phocians bear thy great commands,
Or climb the hills to mark the approaching foe.
THOU active son of valor (thus returns
The chief of Lacedaemon) in my thoughts
For ever present, when the public cause
Demands the swift, the vigilant, and bold!
Go and surmount the rocks aerial height.
And while, around, Dieneces conducts
An hundred Spartans to the Phocians aid,
Thou from the hills observe the Persians march.
BEFORE the purple-winged morn the night
Retiring warned their conference to cease.
They all disperse. When hastening on his course,
And ready now to climb the lofty crags,
O Polydorus, Alpheus thus exclaims,
Long lost and late recovered! we must part
Once more, and now for ever. Thou return,
And kiss the sacred soil, which gave thee birth,
Which calls thee back to freedom? Dearest youth
I should have tears to give thee -- but farewell!
My country chides me loit'ring in thy arms.
THIS said, he quits his brother, and ascends,
While Polydorus answers. Alpheus no.
I have the marks of bondage to erase,
My blood must wash the shameful stain away.
WE have a father (Maron interposed)
Thy unexpected presence will revive
His heavy age, that childless else will mourn.
Here Polydorus with a gloomy smile.
ILL should I comfort others. View these eyes;
Faint is their light, and vanished is my bloom
Before its hour of ripeness. In my breast
Grief as a native will for ever dwell,
Nor yield to time. Unceasing shall my soul
Brood over the dire remembrance of my youth
In servitude thus wasted. Life with me
Has lost its savor. Then in silent woe
He hangs his head. His brother pleads in vain.
He answers only with repeated groans.
Now in his view Dieneces advanced
With Sparta's band. On them his eyes are fixed
Immovable, and thus his mind revolves.
I TOO, like these, in Lacedaemon sprung,
Instructed once, like these, to poize the spear,
And lift the ponderous shield. Ill-destin'd wretch!
Thy arm is now enervate, and would fail
Beneath the buckler's weight. O cruel Heaven!
Who did compel my freeborn hand to change
The warriour's arms for ignominious bonds;
Would thou compensate for my chains, my shame,
My ten years sorrows, and the black despair,
Which on my youth has preyed; propitious once
Grant, I may bear my buckler to the field,
And known a Spartan seek the shades below.
HE ceased, and sudden turned his steps aside
To find the tent of Agis; there the youth
With grateful sorrow ministers his aid,
While with a kind and hospitable hand
The gentle Agis by her lover's corse
On one sad bier the pallid beauties laid
Of Ariana. He from shackles frees
Two Persian captives, whom his generous arm
That day preserved from slaughter, then began.
TO you I give that freedom, which you sought
To snatch from me. This recompense I ask,
And this alone. Transport to Asia's camp
These bleeding relics; bid the Persian king
Weep over this flower thus blasted in its pride;
Then say, the all-judging Gods have thus ordained:
Thou, whose ambition over the groaning earth
Leads desolation, over the nations spreads
Calamity and tears, thou first shall mourn,
And through thy house destruction first shall range.
THUS charged, to Asia's host the captives bend.
They soon attain the Phocian wall, where now
Was Dithyrambus station'd. He perceives
The mournful bier approach. To him the fate
Of Ariana was already told.
He meets the captives, when, with weeping eyes
On Teribazus turned, he thus exclaims.
O! AS thy arms present thee, had thou been
Indeed a Grecian! then thy generous heart
Its valor never had wasted to support
A king's injustice; then a gentler fate,
Had blessed thy life, or bleeding thou had known,
How sweet is death for liberty. A Greek
This friendly wish affords thee, though his head
Had lost the honors gathered from thy fall;
When fortune favored, or propitious heaven
Smiled on the better cause. Ill-fated pair!
Whom with this stream of pity here I lave;
But that my hostile hands imbrued with gore
Must be ungrateful to your loathing shades,
From all the neighboring valleys would I cull
Their fairest growth, and strew your hearse with flowers.
Yet O accept these tears and pious prayers!
May peace attend your ashes! may your shades
Pass over the silent pool to happier seats,
Where tyrants never can enter to molest
The blissful region; but are far removed
To realms of horror, where from righteous heaven
They bear those pains, they merit from mankind!
HE ceased in tears. The captives leave the wall,
And slowly down Thermopylae proceed.
End of the Sixth Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK VII.
The argument.
The bodies of Teribazus and Ariana are brought into the presence of Xerxes,
soon after a report had reached the camp, that half his navy was shipwrecked.
The Persian monarch, quite dispirited, is persuaded by Argestes, one of the
satraps, to send an ambassador to the Spartan king. Argestes himself is
deputed, who, after revealing his ambassy to Leonidas in secret, is by him led
before the whole army, and there receives his answer. In the mean time Alpheus
returns and declares, that the enemies were possessed of the passages in the
hills, and were hastening to Thermopylae, upon which Leonidas offers to send
away all the army except his three hundred Spartans; but Diomedon, Demophilus,
Dithyrambus, and Megistias refuse to depart: he then dismisses Argestes,
informs the Grecians of his design to attack the Persian camp in the night, and
making all the necessary dispositions retires to his pavilion.

BEFORE the tent of Xerxes now arrived
The Persian captives. On with solemn pace
And slow they move. The monarch from afar
Descries their sad demeanor. They approach,
Nor he forbids. That morn had Rumor told
The loss of half his navy dashed on rocks
By angry blasts, or buried in the surge.
Thus, when his bleeding sister met his eyes,
Already sunk in sadness, he had lost
His kingly pride, the parent of disdain,
And cold indifference for others woes;
Nor even beside his sister's nobler corse
Her humble lover now his scorn awaked.
In tears the captive's mournful tale he heard,
And then first knew compassion; but ever long
Those traces vanished from the tyrant's breast:
His former gloom redoubles, for himself
His anxious bosom heaves, and now he fears,
Lest he with all his numbers should be cast
A prey to Fortune. Near the monarch stood
The Spartan exile, whom he thus bespake.
O DEMARATUS, what will fate ordain!
Lo! Fortune turns against me! Who shall know
How far her daring malice may extend,
Which rages now so near me, and has made
My house the seat of ruin? I have sent
From my unshelter'd side my bravest chiefs,
And choicest troops to pass the desert hill,
Led by this Malian; may not there the Greeks
With opposition more tremendous still
And ruinous, than yester sun beheld,
Resistless hold their craggy post; renew
Their stony thunder with augmented rage,
And send whole quarries down the rocky steep
Again to crush my legions? Oh! unfold
Thy secret soul, nor hide the harshest truth;
Say what remains to hope? The exile here.
IF truth unblam'd may issue from my lips,
Too well, imperial Xerxes, you presage
What may befall your legions. If the Greeks
Arrang'd within Thermopylae, a pass
Accessible and spacious, could repel
With such destruction their unnumber'd foes;
What scenes of havoc must the untrodden paths,
Confined among the craggy hills, afford?
IMMERSED in care the monarch silent sat.
Amid the incircling peers Argestes stood.
A potent prince. On Sipylus he reigned.
Whose lofty summits overlooked the waves
Of Hermus and Pactolus; either stream
Enriched with golden sands its tribute bore
To this great satrap: through the servile court
Yet was there none more practiced in the arts
Of mean submission; none more skilled to gain
The royal favor; none, who better knew
The phrase, the looks, and gesture of a slave.
In soothing words he thus the king bespake.
IF Xerxes will to spare his faithful bands,
And not exert the terrors of his power;
More gentle means of conquest than by arms,
Nor less secure may artifice supply.
Renowned Darius, thy imperial sire
Great in the spoil of kingdoms, long in vain
The fields of proud Euphrates with his host
Overspread; at length confiding in the wiles
Of Zopyrus the mighty king subdued
The Babylonian towers: but who shall count,
What numerous states by policy have fallen;
And let corruption once her aid impart,
Not one shall stand. What race of men possess
Such probity and wisdom, whom the veil
Of craft may blind not, nor corruption's charm
Seduce. O Xerxes, thou, whom heaven has raised
To more than mortal greatness, can thou find
Through all thy empire, which from India's shore
Shall reach Eurotas soon, no dazzling gift
To gain the Grecian leader? O dispel
The cloud of sadness from those sacred eyes,
And proffer straight to Lacedaemon's chief,
What may thy own munificence declare,
And win his sword to aid thee. Xerxes here,
Roused from his trance of sorrow, swift replied.
WISE are thy words and counsels. Go, repair,
My faithful servant, to the Grecian chief;
Fall down before him; bid him join our arms,
And he shall reign over all the Grecian states.
AT once Argestes leaves the monarch's side.
He now approaches to the Phocian wall.
Thence Dithyrambus leads him to the tent
Of Lacedaemon's king. Retreated there
Alone the hero meditating sat
On future woes to Persia. At his feet
Prone bows Argestes, and begun. Thus low
Before thy awful presence Xerxes wills,
That I should bend me prostrate to the earth,
And thus accost thee. Great and matchless chief,
By fortune favored, and beloved by heaven,
Thus says the lord of Asia; join our arms,
And we reward thee with the sovereign rule
Over all the powerful states of haughty Greece.
And, O illustrious warrior, heed my words.
Think on the bliss of royalty, the pomp
Of courts, their endless pleasures, trains of slaves,
Who restless watch for thee and thy delights,
With all the glories of unrivaled sway.
Look on the Ionic and Aeolian Greeks
From them their fantom liberty is flown,
While in each province, raised by Xerxes' hand,
Some favored chief presides (exalted state,
Which envious freedom gives not) on his head
He bears the gorgeous diadem, and sees
His equals once now prostrate at his throne.
Yet how much greater thou, whom general Greece,
That teems with mightiest states, shall call her lord,
Thee only worthy. How will Greece rejoice
Around thy throne, and hail the auspicious hour,
When thou, selected by the Persian king
To bless consenting nations with thy sway,
Did calm the fury of unsparing war,
Which else had deluged all with blood and flames!
HE said. The chief replies not, but commands
The Thespian youth, who near the tent had watched,
To summon all the Grecians. He obeys.
While from his seat the hero moved, and bade
The Persian follow. He amazed attends,
Surrounded soon by all the Grecian bands;
When him the godlike Spartan thus bespake.
HERE, Persian, tell thy ambassy, repeat,
That to obtain my friendship Asia's lord
Bids me accept the sov'reignty of Greece;
Then view this band, whose valor shall preserve
That Greece unconquered, which your king bestows,
And strew your bodies on its crimson plains:
The indignation painted on their looks,
And generous scorn shall answer for their chief.
THE hero ceased, when suddenly returned
The speed of Alpheus; all suspended straight
On him direct their sight, who thus began.
EVER I could join the Phocians, from the hill,
Which overhung the close defile, I viewed
The powers of Persia. Down the narrow strait
No sooner gleam'd the innumerable spears,
But by our angry destiny misled,
Or some cursed demon, enemy to Greece,
The Phocians quit their station. Through the pass
An inundation of Barbarians pours,
The traitor Epialtes is their guide,
And to Thermopylae directs their course.
HE here concludes. Unutterable fear
In horrid silence wrapped the listening throng,
Aghast, confounded; silent too were those,
Who knew no terror, yet with wonder mute,
Thick-wedg'd enclosed Leonidas around,
Who thus with calmest elocution spoke.
I NOW behold my destiny complete,
And how at last Leonidas must die.
Here with the Spartans shall I rest behind
While you, my faithful, brave allies, retreat.
Then art thou near, thou glorious, sacred hour,
Which shall my country's liberty confirm!
All hail! thou solemn period! thee the tongues
Of Virtue, Fame, and Freedom shall record,
And celebrate in ages yet unborn.
Then O farewell, Megistias wise and brave;
Thou too experienced, venerable chief,
Demophilus farewell: farewell to thee
Invincible Diomedon, to thee
Unequalled Dithyrambus, and to all,
You other dauntless warriors, who may claim
Praise from my lips, and friendship from my heart,
You after all the wonders, which your swords
Have here accomplished, shall enrich your names
With fresh renown. Your valor must complete,
What we begin. Here first the astonished foe
A dying Spartan shall with terror view,
And tremble, while he conquers; then, by fate
Led from his dreadful victory dismayed
Against the phalanx of united Greece,
By your unconquered spears himself shall fall.
HERE interposed the fierce Plataean chief.
By the twelve Gods enthroned in heaven supreme,
By my fair name unsullied yet I swear,
Never shall thy eyes, Leonidas, behold
Diomedon forsake thee. First let strength
Desert my limbs, and valor shun my heart.
Did I not face the Marathonian war?
Have I not seen Thermopylae? O Fame,
What more can thou bestow, or I receive?
Where can I living purchase brighter praise,
Than dying here? A more illustrious tomb
Where can I gain, than underneath the heaps
Of Persians fallen the victims of our sword.
He ended, when Demophilus subjoined.
O KING of Sparta, pride of human race,
Whom none ever equaled, but the seed of Jove,
Thy own forefather numbered with the Gods,
Lo! I am old. With faltring steps I tread
The prone descent of years. The winged hours
By me, as one unequal to their speed,
Who can no more their fleeting joys attain,
Unheeding slide. My youth my country claimed,
My age no more can serve her; what remains?
What eligible hope can wisdom form,
But to die well? Upon this glorious earth
With thee, unrivaled hero, will I close
The eve of life. So spoke the hoary chief,
When Dithyrambus next. O first of Greeks,
Me too think worthy to attend thy fame
With this most dear and venerable man
For ever honored from my tenderest age,
Even till on life's extremity we part.
Nor too aspiring let my hopes be deemed;
Should the Barbarian in his triumphs mark
My youthful limbs among the gory heaps,
Thence may his fears be doubled, when again
He meets in fields hereafter to be known
The Grecian standards, trembling at a foe,
To whom the flower, and blooming joys of life
Are less alluring than a noble fate.
TO him Demophilus. Will thou too bleed,
My Dithyrambus? -- But I here withhold
All counsel from thee, who art wise, as brave.
If then thy magnanimity retain
Thee too with great Leonidas to fall,
At either's side our limbs shall press the ground,
And drop together in the arms of Death;
So if the attentive traveller we draw
To our cold relics, wondering shall he trace
The different scene, and pregnant with applause,
O wise old man, exclaim, thou well have chose
The hour of fate: and O unequalled youth,
Who to thy country did thy bloom devote,
May thou remain for ever dear to Fame!
May Time rejoice to name thee! and may Peace
With gentlest pinions hover over thy urn!
THIS said, the hero with his lifted shield
His face o'ershades, and drops a secret tear;
Not this the tear of anguish, but derived
From fond affection grown mature with time;
Which in a feebler mind to pain had turned,
But in the Thespian's firm and virtuous breast,
Alone a manly tenderness awaked
Unmixed with pity, or with vain regret.
MEGISTIAS last addressed the Spartan chief.
Thou, whom the Gods have chosen to exalt
Above mankind in virtue and renown,
O call not me presumptuous, who implore
Among these heroes thy regardful ear!
To Lacedaemon I a stranger came.
You there preserved me, there with honors clad;
Nor have I yet one benefit repaid.
That now the generous Spartans may behold
In me their high beneficence not vain,
Here to their cause I consecrate my breath.
NOT so Megistias (interposed the king)
Thou and thy son retreat. Again the seer.
FORBID it, thou eternally adored,
O Jove, confirm my persevering soul!
Nor let my fear neglect this happy hour
To show the Spartans, I deserved their care.
Thou, Menalippus, hear the king's command,
And my paternal tenderness revere.
Do thou withdraw thee from me, to my hand
Thy arms resigning. Fortune will supply
Fresh toil for valor. Vanquish then, or find
A glorious grave; but spare thy father's eye
The bitter anguish to behold thy youth
Untimely bleed before him. Grief suspends
His speech, and interchangeably their arms
Impart their last embraces. Either wept,
The hoary parent, and the blooming son.
But from his temples the pontific wreath
Megistias now unloosens, and resigns
His hallowed vestments; while the youth with tears
The helmet buckles over his snowy locks,
And on his breast adjusts the radiant mail.
WHILE such contempt of life, such fervid zeal
To die with glory animate the Greeks,
Far other thoughts possess Argestes' soul.
Amaze with mingled terror smote his heart;
Cold drops, distilled from every pore, bedew
His shivering limbs; his bosom pants; his knees
Yield to their burden; ghastly pale his cheeks,
Pale are his lips and trembling: such the minds
Of slaves corrupt, to them the beauteous face
Of Virtue turns to horror. But the chief
Of Lacedaemon now the wretch bespake.
RETURN to Xerxes; tell him on this rock
The Grecians faithful to their post await
His chosen myriads; tell him, thou have seen,
How far the lust of empire is below
A freeborn mind: and tell him, to behold
A tyrant humbled, and by virtuous death
To seal my country's freedom, is a good
Surpassing all, his boasted power can give.
HE said, the Persian hastens through the pass.
But now once more Diomedon arose.
Wrath overcasts his forehead, while he spoke.
YET more must stay and bleed. Inglorious Thebes
Never shall receive her traitors back, but here
Shall they atone their perfidy by death
Even from their swords, to whom their abject hearts
Have sacrificed their faith. Nor dare to hope,
Ye vile deserters of the public weal,
Ye coward slaves, that mingled with the heaps
Of those, who perish in their country's cause,
You shall your shame conceal. Whoever shall pass
Along this field of glorious slain, and trace
With veneration every nobler corse;
His soul, though warm with generous applause,
A while shall curb the transport to repeat
Its execrations over your impious heads,
On whom that fate, which gives to others fame,
Is infamy and vengeance. Dreadful thus
On the pale Thebans sentence he pronounced,
Like Rhadamanthus, from the infernal throne
When with inexorable frowns he doomed
The guilty dead to ever-during pain;
While Phlegethon its flaming billows rolled
Before their sight, and ruthless furies shook
Their hissing serpents. All the Greeks assent
With clamours echoing through the concave rock.
FORTH Anaxander in the assembly stood,
And thus began with indignation feigned.
If yet your clamours, Grecians, are allayed,
Behold, I stand before you to demand,
Why these my brave companions, who alone
Of all the Thebans under my command
Durst force their passage through dissuading crowds
To join your host, should now be traitors deemed;
Accused by one alone, a banished wretch,
Whom Lacedaemon in her anger drove
Far from her confines; one, who meanly sought
A servile court for shelter: has he drawn
Such virtues thence, that Sparta, who before
Held him unworthy of his native soil,
Should trust him now before auxiliar friends?
Injurious Greeks! we scorn the thought of flight.
Let Asia bring her millions; unconstrained
We wait the conflict, and for Greece will die.
THUS in the garb of virtue he adorned
Necessity, deluding every Greek
Except Laconia's hero. He perceived
Through all its fair disguise the traitor's heart.
So, when at first mankind in science rude
Revered the moon, as bright with native beams,
Some sage, that walked with Nature through her works,
By Wisdom led, discerned, the various orb
Itself was dark, in foreign splendours clad.
Now unexpected with his troop returned
Dieneces, and thus to Sparta's king.
I NEED not tell thee, that the Persian powers
Have passed the secret strait. This night they halt,
But with the morning will invade us here.
We come to die with thee. United thus,
Our strength a fiercer contest shall maintain;
Whence a more bright example to our friends,
And stronger terror of the Grecian name.
HE said, when thus Leonidas began.
O Spartans, hear, and all you other Greeks,
Whose matchless virtue shall inroll your names
In Time's eternal records, and inhance
Your country's luster; lo! the setting sun
Inflames the broad horizon. All retire,
And in your tents invoke the power of sleep
To aid your vigor, and to give your limbs
Unwearied patience of continued toil;
But when the second watch begins, let all
With mutual exhortation rouse to arms:
For soon, as Cynthia from the vault of heaven
Has hung her shining lamp, through Asia's host
Shall death with horror and amazement rage.
Their camp is open to our swords, deprived
Of all its chosen warriors. But I charge
All, even the Spartans, who are maimed, or weak,
To pain, or toil unequal, from our camp
This hour to hasten. You, our brave allies
Of Corinth, Phlius, with the Arcadian bands
And Mycenaeans must not yet return,
But here, while we repose, in arms remain;
When we our tents abandon, then depart.
HE said, all heard obedient, and dispersed;
While to his tent the godlike chief repairs,
And with him Agis, whom he thus bespake.
O AGIS, hear and mark my last command,
With wary skill dispose the nightly guard,
That no deserter from the Theban tents
May reach the camp of Asia, or ascend
To those now halting on the neighboring hills:
Nor yet with us the faithless band must join.
Not with such base associates must we trust
Our great design. Their perfidy might soon
Find means to rouse the unsuspecting foe,
And all our glorious enterprise confound.
Then, O my faithful Agis, ever we move,
While on the solemn sacrifice intent,
As Lacedaemon's sacred laws ordain,
Our prayers we offer to the tuneful nine,
Do thou in whispers charge the Theban train
Slow and in silence to disperse and fly.
This said, they parted. On his couch alone
Reclines the hero, where he thus revolves.
MY fate is now impending. O my heart!
What more auspicious period could I choose
For death, than now; when beating high with joy
Thou tell me, I am happy? If to live,
Or die, as Virtue dictates, be to know
The purest bliss; if she her charms display
Still beauteous, still unfading, still serene
To youth, to age, to death; whatever be
Those other climes of uncorruptive joy,
Which Heaven in dark futurity conceals,
Still here, O Virtue, thou art all our good.
Then what a black, unspeakable reverse
The wretched offspring of Injustice prove?
What in the struggle of departing day,
When life's last glimpse extinguishing presents
The unknown, inextricable gloom of death?
But can I paint the terrors of a breast,
Where guilt resides? Leonidas forego
The horrible conception, seek again
Thy own untroubled heart, and grateful bow
To those benignant powers, who framed thy mind
In crimes unfruitful, never to admit
The black impression of a guilty thought.
Else could I fearless thus relinquish life?
No. Such unshaken calmness from the unjust
Is ever absent. Often in them the rage
Of some prevailing passion for a time
Suppresses fear. Often hurried on they lose
The sense of danger, when dominion, power,
And purple pomp their dazzled sight enchant.
Yet still the joys of life alone they seek.
But he, who calmly meets resistless fate,
When glory only, and the general good
Invite him forward, must possess a soul,
Which all content deducing from itself
Can by unerring virtue's constant light
Discern, when death is worthy of his choice.
The man thus great and happy, in the scope
Of his large mind is stretched beyond his date;
Even on this shore of being he in thought
Supremely blessed anticipates the good,
Which late posterity from him derives.
THE hero closed his meditation here.
The swelling transports of his mind subside
In soft oblivion, while the silken plumes
Of sleep envelop his extended limbs.
End of the Seventh Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK VIII.
The argument.
Leonidas rising about three hours before midnight relates to an assembly of
the leaders a dream, which is interpreted by Megistias; he then arms himself,
and marches in procession with his whole troop to an altar newly raised on a
neighboring meadow, and there offers a sacrifice to the Muses: he invokes the
assistance of those Goddesses, he animates his companions, and then placing
himself at their head leads them against the enemy in the dead of the night.

SCARCE was begun the second watch of night,
When his pavilion Agis left, and sought
The chief of Lacedaemon. Him he found
Spread on his tranquil couch, while, over his face
Diffused, a glad serenity with smiles
His slumber painted; like an evening sky
Yet streaked with ruddy light, when summer suns
Have veiled their beaming foreheads. Transport filled
The eye of Agis. Friendship swelled his heart,
And veneration. On his knee inclined
The hero's hand he kissed, and thus began.
O THOU with more than human virtues great,
Accept this homage! and may gentle sleep
Yet longer close thy eyelids, that unblam'd
I thus may bow before thee. Thus he spoke,
And, prostrate bent, his godlike friend revered,
Whose eye the shades of slumber now forsake.
So, when new rising heaven's resplendent orb
Illumines first the sable skirts of night,
The white-rob'd Magi, or the Indian seers
Are seen from Ganges, or Euphrates' side,
Before the emerging glory bowed to hail
The radiant emblem of the immortal mind.
BOTH heroes rose, and mixed their friendly arms,
And now to Agis had the Spartan king
Disclosed his soul; when lo! the Grecian chiefs,
All roused, advancing with the sudden gleam
Of armor pierced the twilight shade. With joy
Leonidas accosts them. O thrice hail!
My virtuous friends. Approach, and all attend,
While I relate, and you with wonder hear.
This night no sooner sleep oppressed my brows,
But over my head the empyreal form
Of my great sire Alcides seemed displayed.
I saw his magnitude divine; his voice
I heard, his solemn mandate to arise.
I rose. He bade me follow: I obeyed.
Up to a mountain, whose ethereal brow
The involving clouds divided, we ascend.
Ever long we rested, suddenly the howl
Of wolves, and dogs, the vulture's piercing shriek,
The yell of every beast and fowl of prey,
Within my ears discordant broke. I turned.
When lo! a surface all with gore deformed
Beyond my view illimitable stretched,
One vast expanse of horror. There a corse,
Which with its huge dimensions seemed to hide
The unbounded plain, lay welt'ring, red with wounds
Delv'd in the enormous limbs, which bleeding gorged
The vulture's famine. Wondering I beheld,
When from behind I heard a second sound,
Like surges trembling over a craggy shore.
Again I turned. An ocean there appeared
With riven keels, and shrouds, and shivered oars,
With arms, and mangled carcases bestrewn
Innumerous. The billows foamed with blood,
And whelmed a crimson deluge over the strand.
But where the waters unobserved before
Between two adverse shores contracting rolled
A stormy tide, upon the beach, forlorn,
One of majestic stature I descried
In ornaments imperial. Often on me
He bent his clouded eye balls. On my name
With imprecations often he called aloud,
Then rent his splendid garments, and his head
In rage divested of its graceful hairs.
Impatient now he eyed a slender skiff,
Which mounted on the curling foam approached.
With indignation, and reluctant grief
Once more his sight reverting, he embarked
Amid the perils of the frowning waves.
O thou, whose virtue ranked thee with the Gods
(I here exclaimed) instruct me what produced
This desolation; when the God returned.
Let thy astonished eye again review
What thou did late abhor. I looked and saw
A land, where Plenty with disporting hand
Poured all the fruits of Amalthea's horn;
Where bloomed the olive, and the clustring vine
With its broad foliage mantled every hill;
Where Ceres with exuberance inrob'd
The pregnant bosom of the fields in gold;
Where spacious towns, whose circuits proud contained
The dazzling works of wealth, unnumber'd shone,
The strength and splendor of the peopled land.
Then in a moment clouds obscured my sight,
And all was vanished from my waking eyes.
THRICE we salute the omen (thus began
The sage Megistias) in thy mystic dream
I see the Grecian victories. The earth,
The deep shall own their triumphs; and the tears
Of Asia, and of Lybia shall bewail
Their offspring cast before the vulture's beak,
And all the monstrous natives of the main.
Those joyous fields of plenty shall be Greece
Enriched with conquest, and Barbarian spoils.
And whom thou saw in regal vesture clad
Print on the sands his solitary steps,
Is Xerxes foiled and fugitive from Greece.
MEGISTIAS thus, while every bosom felt
Enthusiastic rapture, joy beyond
All sense, and all conception but of those,
Who die to save their country. Here again
Leonidas the exulting chiefs addressed.
SINCE happiness from virtue is derived,
Who for his country dies, that moment proves
Most happy, as most virtuous. Such our lot.
To this the gods shall add eternal fame.
But now go forth, Megistias, and with speed
Prepare the victim, and the sacred flames;
That to the Muses, as the Spartan law
Commands, our prayers and offerings may be paid,
Ever to yon camp our hostile feet we bend.
But, O remember, from the solemn rites
Let every sound be absent, not the pipe,
Nor even the music-breathing flute be heard.
Meantime, ye leaders, every band instruct
To move in silence, nor with shouts alarm
The midnight stillness. Mindful of their charge
The chiefs depart. Leonidas provides
His various armor. First the breastplate arms
His ample chest. Over this the hero spreads
The mailed cuirass from his shoulders hung.
The shining belt infolds his mighty loins.
Next on his stately temples he erects
The plumed helm, then grasps his ponderous shield;
Where nigh the center on the swelling brass
The inimitable artist had imboss'd
The shape of great Alcides, whom to gain
Two Goddesses contended. Pleasure here
Won with soft wiles the attracted eye, and there
The form of Virtue dignified the scene.
In her majestic sweetness was disclosed
The mind sublime and happy. From her lips
Seemed eloquence to flow. With looks serene,
But fixed intent upon the son of Jove,
She waved her hand, where winding to the skies
Her paths ascended. On the summit stood
Fame, and protended her eternal trump,
Incumbent on a trophy near to heaven.
The youth attentive to her wisdom owned
The prevalence of Virtue; while his eye
With all the spirit, which redeemed the world
From tyranny and monsters, ardent flamed;
Not undescried by Pleasure, where she lay
Stretched on a gorgeous carpet, which bespread
The meadow with magnificence. Around
Were flourets strewn, and wantonly in rills
Soft streams maeander'd. All relaxed her limbs:
Nor wanting yet solicitude to gain,
What lost she feared, as struggling with despair
She seemed collecting all her power of charms,
And with excess of sweet allurement smiled:
In vain; for Virtue swayed Alcides' mind.
Hence all his labors. Traced with various art
They filled the surface of the spacious targe.
This portraiture of glory on his arm
Leonidas supports. Then forth he towers
From his pavilion. With their troops arrayed
The chiefs attended. Flaming torches blazed
In every hand. And now with silent pace
All to the solemn sacrifice proceed.
First Polydorus with the hallowed knife,
And barley strewn with sacred salt advanced.
Diomedon beside him, in his grasp
A weighty mace sustaining. Like the rest
All bright in armor with his shield and spear
Megistias followed, an unspotted priest,
And dauntless warrior. From on high his helm
With wreaths around the shining crest revealed
His sacerdotal honors. By the horns,
Where laurels twined, with Alpheus Maron leads
The consecrated ox. And lo! behind
Leonidas approaches. Never before
With such transcending majesty he trod,
Nor his own virtue, as that hour, enjoyed.
Then venerable moves the Thespian chief,
And great Dieneces. To them the bloom
Of Dithyrambus glowing with the sense
Of future praise succeeds, with graceful steps
The generous Agis next; the Thebans last
Repining and inglorious. Then slow march
The host all mute, nor shake their brazen arms.
NOT from Thermopylae remote the hills
Of Oeta yielding to a fruitful dale
Within their side half-circling had enclosed
A fair expanse with verdure smooth. The bounds
Were edged with wood o'erlook'd by snowy cliffs,
Which from the clouds bent frowning. From a rock
Above the loftiest summit of the groves
A tumbling torrent wore the shagged stone,
Then gleaming through the interwoven shade
The valley watered. Over the level shone
Its glassy bosom, and with placid waves
The smiling lawn divided. Near the banks,
Which flowers made various, new-erected stood
A rustic altar, which a chosen train,
Appointed by Megistias, raised with turf
Cut by their falchions from the verdant mead:
Broad was the surface, high with piles of wood,
The plenteous tribute of the adjacent groves,
All interspersed with laurel. Here a vase
Filled with the briny waters of the sea,
(More pure than every stream, or fountain, deemed)
Was placed beside the altar. There with wine
Unmixed capacious goblets stood arrang'd.
Here is the victim brought. Megistias straight
His helm unloosens. With his hoary head
Uncovered round the solemn pile he treads,
And with a branch of laurel scatters wide
The sacred moisture of the main. His hand
With mingled salt and barley next bestrews
The altar, and the victim. Over the horns
The inverted goblet foaming with the grape
Diffused the rich libation. Now advanced
Diomedon. Megistias gave command.
Down sunk the victim with a deathful stroke,
Nor groaned. Megistias buries in the throat
The hallowed steel. A crimson deluge flows.
Swift from the limbs the fuming hide is torn,
The flesh dissever'd on the altar heaped.
Now smoaks the pile, then sudden flames abroad.
A burst of splendor dissipates the dark.
Greece throngs around. Each lifts a sparkling brand
With beaming javelins intermixed, and shields,
And polished helms, which multiply the blaze.
Meantime the great Leonidas drew nigh,
And stood before the altar. There his helm
Unclasp'd to Agis he commits, his shield
And spear to Dithyrambus, then his arms
Extending thus in supplication spoke.
HARMONIOUS daughters of Olympian Jove,
Who on the top of Helicon adored,
And high Parnassus, with delighted ears
Bend to the warble of Castalia's wave,
And Aganippe's murmurs, if from thence
We must invoke your presence; or along
The ridge of neighboring Pindus if your steps
Now wander through your consecrated bowers,
Thence turn, ye Muses, nor for once disdain
Each with her beauteous form these hills to grace,
And stand the immortal witness of our fate!
But with you bring fair Liberty, whom Jove
And you most honor. Let her sacred eyes
Approve her dying Grecians, let her voice
With exultation tell the earth and heavens,
These are her sons; then strike your tuneful shells,
And with our praise bid harmony rejoice.
Record us guardians of our parents age,
Our matrons virtue, and our infants bloom,
And glorious bulwarks of our country's laws,
Who shall enoble the historian's page,
Or on the joyous festival inspire
With loftier strains the virgins choral song.
Then, O celestial maids, on yonder camp
Let night sit heavy, and a sleep, like death,
Weigh down the eye of Asia! O infuse
A cool, untroubled spirit in our breasts,
Which may in silence guide our daring feet
Through all the paths of slaughter, nor affright
The dark with tumult, till the dying groans
Of gasping tyrants into horror wake
The midnight calm! Then turn Destruction wild.
Bid Terror and Confusion revel round,
And in one carnage heap the Barbarous ranks,
Their horse, and chariots. Let the spurning steed
Imbrue his hoofs with blood, and shattered cars
Crush with their brazen weight the prostrate necks
Of kings, and purpled chiefs incircled round
By nations fallen. -- You, countrymen and friends,
My last commands attend. Your gen'ral's voice
Once more salutes you, not to rouse the brave,
Or minds resolved and dauntless to confirm.
Too well by this expiring blaze I view
Impatient valor flash from every eye.
But temper well your ardour, and your lips
Close on the rising transport. Lo! how sleep
Has folded millions in its black embrace.
No sound is wasted from the unnumber'd foe.
The winds themselves are silent. All conspires
To this great sacrifice, where thousands soon
Shall only wake to die. Perhaps our swords
This night may send even Xerxes' self to lead
The innumerable train of Persian ghosts
To Pluto's dreery shade, unless reserved
From all this ruin, to lament his shame,
And future flight, when Greece confounds that power,
Which we will shake. But now the second watch
Is verging to its period, and the moon
Prepares to glimmer on our darksome steps.
Let each his head distinguish with a wreath
Of twining laurel, then the goblet crown,
And share the victim. Take your last repast,
For with your fathers, and the heroes old
You next shall banquet in the blessed abodes.
WHILE thus the hero, through the thronging files
Presenting round a hideous depth of war
All shook with ardour their erected spears
Thick, as the fruitful growth of lofty pines,
Which from high Pelion's cloud-invested brow
To heaven's blue vault their stately honors bear.
Megistias soon through all the band divides
The sacred laurel: snatched with eager zeal,
By every hand, and round each helmet wove
It blends its verdure with the floating plumes.
Then is the victim portion'd, while the bowl
Flows with the vine's impurpled stream. Aloof
The Theban train in wan dejection mute
Brood over their shame, or cast a frighted eye
On that determined virtue, which unmoved
At fate's approach with cheerful lips could taste
The sparkling goblet, and with joy partake
That last and glorious banquet. Even the heart
Of Anaxander now forgets its wiles,
Its fear no more dissembling. Agis here
For ever mindful of his friend's command
Mixed with the Thebans, and in whispers thus.
LEONIDAS permits you to retire.
While in the rites of sacrifice employed
None heed your motions. Separate, and fly
With silent steps. At once the Theban troop
Its ranks dissolving from the Greeks withdraws.
Unseen it moulders from the host, like snow,
Which from the mountains in ten thousand rills,
Soon as the sun exerts his orient beam,
Descends soft-trickling, while the hoary heap
Insensibly decays. The Grecians soon
Conclude the solemn banquet, and their chief
Now reassumes his arms. Before his step
The crowd rolls backward. In their gladden'd sight
His crest irradiate with the uplifted brands
Its purple splendor shakes. The towering oak
Thus from a lofty promontory waves
Its majesty of verdure, while with joy
The sailor marks its heav'n-ascending pride,
Which from afar directs his foamy course
Along the pathless Ocean: so the Greeks
Exulting gazed, as down their opening ranks
Their chief proceeds; from whose majestic grace
A soul like thine, O Phidias, might conceive
In Parian marble, or effulgent brass,
The form of great Apollo; when the God,
Won by the prayers of man's afflicted race,
In arms forsook his lucid throne to pierce
The monster Python in the Delphian vale.
Close by the hero Polydorus waits
To guide destruction through the Asian tents.
As the young eagle near his parent's side
In wanton flight essays his vigorous wings,
Ever long with her to penetrate the clouds,
To dart impetuous on the fleecy train,
And dye his beak with gore; by Sparta's king
The injured Polydorus thus prepares
His arm for death, and feasts his angry soul
With promised vengeance: his impatient thoughts
Even now transport him furious to the seat
Of his long sorrows not with shackled hands,
But now once more a Spartan with his shield,
And dreadful spear to lead his country's bands,
And with them vengeance. Nor the rest of Greece
Neglect to form. Their helmets now unite
Their various plumage, as the intwining boughs
Mix their broad foliage in Dodona's grove;
Or like the cedars on the Syrian hills,
Which with their shady texture, as with night,
The gloomy soil overcast. In ordered ranks
While thus they stand, behold a warlike form
In gleaming arms slow-moving through the shade,
Led by a slave, approached Laconia's king,
And thus addressed him. O Leonidas,
Thou see before thee Eurytus, a name
To thee and every Spartan not unknown.
Thy ruling voice forbade the maimed to stay;
I, whose dark orbs no longer know the sun,
Immersed in sudden blindness since our march
From Lacedaemon, with the rest withdrew,
Not to revisit Sparta, but, resolved
To meet the Persians, in the public way
I sat; not long, before the increasing sound
Of trampling feet alarmed me, which I deemed
Were Persia's numbers rushing from the hills:
I started upward grasping in my hand
My spear and buckler, by my slave withheld,
Who told me, they were Thebans. Lo! I bear
The tidings of their flight. And now, my chief
And countrymen, farewell. Do you proceed,
With death and terror fill the hostile camp;
While I the fury of the exulting foe
Descending from the mountains here await
To yield the last remains of tedious life
Now to my country useless, and to me,
And close these shaded eyes in endless night.
HE ceased, when thus Leonidas began.
Then stay, my faithful soldier, and obtain
Not the least honors in this glorious night;
And you, my brave associates, all exult;
One spirit now inspires us; from our band
Doubt, fear, and treason with the Thebans fly:
While all with mutual confidence advance,
And equal fires. This said, once more the king
On the deep phalanx his attentive eye
Reverts, and through the ruddy gleam descries
One face of gladness; but the illustrious van
He most contemplates: Agis, Alpheus there,
Megistias, Maron, and Plataea's chief,
Dieneces, Demophilus are drawn,
And Dithyrambus. They their fixed sight
On him too bend with inexpressive joy,
With love, and veneration, till they hear
His last command; when instant to the earth
Are cast the extinguished brands. On all around
Drops sudden darkness, on the hills, the woods,
The silver stream, the rocks, and floating main.
It now was midnight. To the hostile camp
With steps composed and silent down the pass
The phalanx moves. Each patient bosom hushed
Its struggling spirit, nor in whispers breathed
The rapturous ardour, virtue then inspired;
But all await the moment doomed to give
The Barbarous millions to their deathful steel:
So lowering clouds expanding from the north
A while suspend their horrors, destined soon
To blaze in lightnings, and to burst in storms.
End of the Eighth Book.
LEONIDAS. BOOK IX.
The argument.
Leonidas and the Grecians penetrate through the Persian camp to the very
pavilion of Xerxes, who avoids destruction by flight. The Barbarians are
slaughtered in great multitudes, and their camp is set on fire. Leonidas
conducts his men back to Thermopylae, engages the Persians, who were descended
from the hills, and after numberless proofs of superior strength and valor
sinks down covered with wounds, and expires the last of all the Grecian
commanders.

THE waining moon displayed her gleaming horns,
When over the unguarded bound of Asia's camp
Now passed the Grecians. Through the unnumber'd tents,
Where all was mute and tranquil, they pursue
Their silent march. The eastern world around
Lay stretched in slumber, motionless, and deaf,
Wrapped in the dead security of night,
Nor marked the steps of Fate. The wary Greeks
By Polydorus guided still proceed.
Even to the center of the extensive host
Unseen they pierced, when now the imperial tent
Yet distant rose before them. Wide around
The proud pavilion stretched an ample space,
Where myriads might imbattle. Here a band
Of chosen Persians watchful round their king
Held their nocturnal station. As the hearts
Of anxious nations menaced with the waste
Of meager famine, and the ruthless sword
Sink in their frozen bosoms, while despair
Sees fear-ingender'd fantoms in the sky,
Aerial hosts amid the clouds arrayed,
Which seem to shake the firmament with war,
Portending woe and death; the Persians thus
Are smote with consternation, as the moon
By her faint beam discovered from afar
The glimpse of Grecian arms. With sudden cries
They waken Horror, which to Xerxes' couch,
And over the astonished host, swift-winged flew
Dispelling sleep and silence. All the camp
Pours forth its numbers naked, pale, unarmed,
Wild with amazement, blinded by dismay,
To every foe obnoxious; when at once
Plunged in ten thousand breasts the Grecian steel
Reeks with destruction. Deluges of blood
Float over the field, and foam around the heaps
Of wretches slain unconscious of the hand,
Which mows them down by legions. From his couch
The lord of Asia and of L^bia st^^^^
(Amaze, affright, distraction in his look)
And sees in thought united Greece advance.
Where then was fled the empty pride of kings,
The hope of glory, and the lust of power?
What then availed the innumerable range
Of thy huge camp save only to conceal
Thy trembling steps, O Xerxes, while thou fliest.
Leonidas before the Grecian van
Through bleeding thousands hews his dreadful way.
Before him Terror strides. Gigantic Death,
And Desolation at his side attend,
With all the Furies of insatiate war.
To Xerxes' tent the hero speeds, nor finds
His victim. Ardent throngs of Grecians fill
The stately mansion; to the ground are hurled
The glittering ensigns of imperial power:
The diadem, the scepter, late adored
And feared by millions, underneath their feet
With mingled rage and scorn the Grecians crush,
A sacrifice to Freedom. Now return
The furious bands. Leonidas exalts
For new destruction his resistless spear,
When sudden night o'ershrouds the spangled heavens,
And clouds condensing intercept the moon.
Black over the furrowed main the raging east
In whirlwinds sweeps the surge. Now roars the coast,
The crashing forests, and the cavern'd rocks.
Swift through the camp the hurricane impells
Its dire career, when Asia's numbers, veiled
Amid the sheltering horrors of the storm,
Evade the Spartan lance. The Grecians halt,
By great Leonidas restrained, and wait
Near Xerxes' tent their mighty leader's will.
BESIDE the high pavilion from the time,
That Xerxes near Thermopylae had drawn
His numerous bands, perpetual fire had shone;
Before whose sacred light the Persian lord
Was wont among his Magi to adore
The power of Oromasdes: piles of wood
Lay nigh, prepared to feed the constant flame.
These on the altar by the Greeks are strewn,
So wills Laconia's hero; while the winds
Excite the blaze, his phalanx he divides;
Four bands are formed by Dithyrambus led,
By Alpheus, by Diomedon, the last
Himself commands. The word is given; the Greeks
Press to the fire; soon shrink the burning heaps;
Destructive flames they brandish, and, enjoined
To reassemble at the regal tent,
By various paths the hostile camp invade.
RESISTLESS desolation now involves
The Malian fields, as over the eastern tents
From different stations flew ten thousand brands
Hurled by the Greeks unrespited. The winds
With violence redoubled breathing round
Tempestuous rage exasperate the blaze.
The conflagration, like a sea, expands;
Collected now from every part it forms
One waving surface of unbounded fire.
In ruddy volumes mount the curling flames
To heaven's dark vault, and paint the midnight clouds.
So, when the north emits its purpled lights,
The undulating radiance streaming wide,
As with a burning canopy, invests
The ethereal concave. Oeta now disclosed
Its forehead glittering with eternal frost,
While down the rocks the foamy torrents shone.
Far over the main the pointed rays were thrown;
Night snatched her mantle from the ocean's breast;
The billows glimmer from the distant shores.
But where ascends a pillar huge of smoke
With wreathing flames incircled, Horror there
And Death on great Leonidas attend.
He bade the exulting Polydorus lead,
Where Asia's horse and chariots stood arrang'd;
There at his word devouring Vulcan feasts
On all the tribute, which Thessalia's meads
Yield to the scythe, and riots on the heaps
Of Ceres emptied of the ripened grain.
A flood of fire envelopes all the ground;
The cordage bursts of every blazing tent;
Down sink the roofs, and overwhelm the throng
Of wretches panting from the Spartan sword,
Close-wedg'd with fear; the Libyan chariot burns,
The Arabian camel, and the Persian steed
Bound through the fiery deluge; wild with pain
They shake their singed manes, with madding hoofs
Dash through the blood of thousands mixed with flames,
That rage augmented by the whirlwind's blast.
MEANTIME the sceptered lord of half the globe
Through the wide tumult, like a guilty slave,
From tent to tent precipitates his flight.
Dispersed are all his satraps; Pride itself
Shuns his dejected brow; Despair alone
With pale Confusion, and with frantic Fear
Wait on the imperial fugitive, and show,
As round the camp his eye distracted roves,
No limits to destruction. Now was seen
Aurora mounting from the eastern hills
In rosy sandals, and with dewy locks:
The winds subside before her, darkness flies,
And streams of light proclaim the cheerful day.
When now at Xerxes' tent the Grecian band
Was reunited. What could Fortune more
To aid the valiant, and to gorge revenge?
Lo! Desolation over the Persian host
Has emptied all its horrors; even the hand
Of languid slaughter drops its crimson steel;
Nor Nature longer can sustain the toil
Of ever-during conquest. Yet what power
Among the Grecians once again revived
Their drooping warmth; new-brac'd their nerves, and called
Their wearied swords to deeds of brighter fame?
What, but the inspiring hope of glorious death
To crown their labor, and the auspicious look
Of their heroic chief, which still unchanged,
Still with superior majesty declared
No toil had yet relaxed his matchless strength,
Nor worn the vigor of his godlike soul.
Down to the pass with gentle march he leads
The imbattled warriors. There behind the shrubs,
Which near the verdant feet of Oeta sprung,
Beside the entrance of the straits the Greeks
In ambush lay. The tempest now was calmed;
Soft breezes only from the Malian wave
Over each grim face besmeared with smoke and gore
Their cool refreshment breathed. The healing gale
Dispells the languor from their harassed limbs,
Which swell with strength returning. After all
The incessant labors of the horrid night
Through flames and war continued, they prepare
In ordered battle to confront the powers
Of Hyperanthes, that selected band
From Asia's numbers, destined with the morn
To pass the mountains in triumphant march
With strength unwasted, and with souls elate.
Not long the Greeks in expectation stood
Impatient. Sudden with tumultuous shouts,
Like Nile's swift current, where with deafning roar
Prone from the steep of Elephantis falls
Its sea of waters, Hyperanthes pours
His rapid legions over the Grecian camp
Down from the hills precipitant. No foe
Is found to stop the torrent; on they roll
With thundering footsteps over the sounding pass.
THAT night no sooner had the Theban train
Thermopylae forsaken, but their course
They bent along the mountains, till they met
The powers of Xerxes. Dusky twilight still
Prevailing, Persia with misguided rage
Assailed her friends unknown. The Impetuous spear
Of Hyperanthes clove the faithless heart
Of Anaxander; on, the hero pressed,
And spread destruction through their bleeding ranks;
Nor checked his ardent valor, till he heard
The name of Thebes in suppliant cries proclaimed:
The Persians then receive them, in the front
As guides they place them, and, amazed to learn,
That daring Greece should Xerxes' camp invade,
Haste from the mountains, rush along the pass,
And now tumultuous issue from its mouth.
At once Laconia's leader gives the sign,
When, as the impulsive ram with dreadful sway
O'erturns the nodding rampart from its base,
And strews a town with ruin, so the band
Of serried heroes down the Malian steep,
An hideous depth, the blended numbers swept
Of Thebes and Persia. There no waters flow,
But horrid rocks present their craggy sides;
There dashed whole legions. From their mangled limbs
A tide of blood rolls foaming to the sea.
Again thy voice, Leonidas, is heard;
The Grecians turn; against the opening pass
They point their wheeling phalanx; on they rush.
Astonished Persia stops in full career,
Even Hyperanthes starts with terror back.
Confusion drives fresh numbers from the shore,
Whelmed in the Malian slime. The undaunted king
Of Lacedaemon entered now the straits,
And ranged for battle. Hyperanthes soon
Recalled his chosen warriors from their fear.
Swift on the great Leonidas was bent
A grove of darts; the incount'ring armies closed.
WHOM first, whom last, great Spartan, did thou foil?
What rivers heard along their echoing banks
Thy name in curses sounded from the lips
Of mothers wailing for their slaughtered sons!
What towns with empty monuments were filled
For those, whom thy unconquerable sword
This day to vultures cast! First Bessus died,
A haughty satrap, whose tyrannic hand
Despoiled Hyrcania of her golden sheaves,
And laid her forests waste. For him the bees
Among the branches interwove their sweets;
For him the fig was ripened, and the vine
With rich profusion over the goblet foamed.
Then Dinis bled. On Hermus' side he reigned,
And long had sought with unavailing love
Great Artemisia famed in Xerxes' fleet,
The martial queen of Caria. She disdained
The lover's soft complaint; her dauntless ear
Was taught to mark the tempest, while it raged;
Her sight was practiced from the rolling deck
To brave the chafing billows; doomed to meet
That day of horror, when the weeping eye
Of Xerxes saw the blood of nations flow,
And to its bottom tinge the briny floods
Of Salamis, whence she with Asia fled,
She only not inglorious: low reclines
Her lover now, on Hermus' banks no more
To sound her name, nor tell the vocal groves
His fruitless sorrows. Then Madauces fell,
A Paphlagonian born amid the sound
Of dashing surges, and the roar of winds;
Who over the unhospitable Euxine waves
Was wont from high Carambis' cliff to watch
The ill-fated bark, which cut the Pontic stream,
Then with his dire associates through the deep
For spoil and slaughter guide his hostile prow.
With these Tithraustes far from Medus fallen,
His native tide, with blooming strength indu'd,
And manly grace, Lilaeus, who had left
The balmy fragrance of Arabia's fields,
And Babylonian Tenagon expired.
His bravest friends on every side overthrown
With indignation Hyperanthes viewed,
And in fierce haste his dauntless arm opposed.
To Sparta's hero. Each his lance protends,
But thousands rush with interposing shields,
Such sacred lives all anxious to defend;
Or thither Fortune urged the tide of war,
Their term protracting for augmented fame.
So, when two galleys laboring through the foam
Present for battle their destructive beaks,
The billows often, by hurricanes impelled,
With mountainous commotion dash between,
And either bark in black'ning tempests veiled
Waft from its distant foe. But fiercer burned
Thy ardour, mighty Spartan, while in blood
Thy falchion raged unwearied. Now the steeds
Of day were climbing their meridian steep,
And over the Persian camp the shouts of war
Burst from Thermopylae. Pharnuchus heard,
Who from his couch beyond the Malian plain,
Roused by the tumult in the neighboring tents
To aid his lord had left Thessalia's fields
With Syria, Cholchis, and Armenia's bands,
The Assyrians, and Chaldaeans. Asia's camp
Was still the seat of terror and despair.
As in some fruitful clime, which late has known
The rage of winds and floods, when now the storm
Is heard no longer and the deluge fled,
Still over the wasted region Nature mourns
In melancholy silence, through the grove
With prostrate glories lie the stately oak
And elm uprooted, while the plains are spread
With fragments swept from villages overthrown,
And round the pastures flocks and herds are cast
In weltring heaps of death; so Persia's host
In horror mute one boundless scene displays
Of desolation: half devoured by fire
Its tall pavilions, and its warlike cars
Hide all the field with ruin; here in gore
Its princes lie, and nameless thousands there,
Here legions bleeding by the Grecian steel,
There Persians slain by Persians still declare
The wild confusion of the direful night,
When wanting signals, and their leaders care
They rushed to mutual slaughter. Xerxes' tent
On its exalted summit, when the dawn
First streaks the glowing sky, was wont to bear
The golden form of Mithra, closed between
Two lucid crystals, to the Barbarous host
An awful signal all in arms to leave
Their crowded tents, and numberless to wait
Their monarch's presence; this Pharnuchus rears
High on the proud pavilion: at the sight
Their consternation is at length dispelled,
And through the assembling nations hope revives.
Pharnuchus then from all the number forms
A chosen train; Thermopylae he seeks;
Their march in loudest clamours is proclaimed.
His phalanx soon Leonidas commands
To circle backward from the Malian shore:
Their order changes; now half-orb'd they stand
By Oeta's mountains guarded from behind
With either flank united to the rock.
As, by the excelling architect disposed
To shield some haven, a stupendous mole
Framed of the grove and quarry's mingled strength
In ocean's bosom penetrates afar;
There stands the pride of art against the weight
Of seas, unmoved, and breaks the whelming surge:
So, when Pharnuchus with innum'rous powers
Thermopylae had filled, the unyielding Greeks
Opposed the hostile deluge, and its rage,
Unshaken stem'd. Amid the foremost rank
Leonidas his dreadful station held.
Before him soon an horrid void is seen
Through Persia's legions, and the proud remains
Of noblest chiefs the insanguin'd rock bestrew.
Pharnuchus glowing with revenge and wrath
Discharges full at Lacedaemon's chief
His iron-studded mace. Aside it glanced,
Turned by the massy shield, and prone to earth
The Persian fell. Alcander to the rock
Transfixed the prostrate satrap through the reins,
Himself receiving in the unguarded side
The lance of Hyperanthes. Low he lies,
The only Theban, who by Sparta's king
Abode intrepid, and to Greece preserved
His faith untainted; a physician sage,
Who from Cithaeron each benignant herb
Was wont to gather, and expatiate over
The Heliconian pastures, where no plant
Of poison springs, but such, whose healing juice
Expells the venom from the viper's tooth
Filled with the sweetness of the soil divine:
Him all, who languish on the bed of pain,
Him most, the wretch, whom want, and sickness spreads
On earth's cold breast neglected, shall deplore.
On him the brave Artontes sinks in death,
Renowned through wide Bithynia now no more
The clamorous rites of Cybele to share,
While Echo murmurs through the hollow caves
Of Berecynthian Dindymus. The hand
Of Alpheus sent him to the shades of night.
Ever from the dead he disengaged his spear,
Huge Abradates glorying in his strength,
Surpassing all of Cissian race, advanced
To grapple with the victor; near him now
His foremost step the Persian plants, his hand
Grasps at the Spartan's shoulder. Alpheus once
At Nemea's games the wrestlers crown obtained.
His art he summons, and his rapid foot
Obliquely strikes against the Persian's heel;
He falling seized on Alpheus' neck, and dragged
His foe upon him. Straight an hundred darts
Of thronging Persia cleave the Grecian's back.
To Abradates' breast the weapons pierce,
And rivet both in death. This Maron saw,
And Polydorus, who with victims fallen
Before their vengeance hide their brother's corse.
At length the generous blood of Maron warms
The lance of Hyperanthes. On the spear
Of Polydorus falls the ponderous ax
Of Sacian Mardus; from the yielding wood
The steely point is severed. Undismayed
The Spartan stoops to rear the knotted mace
Of slain Pharnuchus; but thy fatal sword,
Abrocomes, that dreadful instant marks
To rend his opening side: unconquered still,
Swift he discharges on the Sacian's front
An horrid wound, that reached the bursting brain.
Down his own limbs the while a torrent flows
Of vital crimson; smiling he surveys
His sorrows ending, and his Spartan name
Renew its luster. Sudden to his side
Springs Dithyrambus; through the uplifted arm
Of Mindus pointing his impetuous dart
Against the bleeding Spartan he impells
His steel resistless. Polydorus now
Stretched his cold hand to Thespia's friendly chief,
Then bowed his head in everlasting peace;
And Mindus wasted by his flowing wound
Beside him faints and dies. In Ninus old
Had his exalted ancestors sustained
The Assyrian scepter. Now to Persia's throne
A tributary lord he ruled the vales,
Where Tigris swift between the parted hills
Of tall Niphates draws its foaming tide,
Impregnating the glebe. At once a crowd
Of ardent Persians seize the conqu'ror's lance:
An hundred arms infold it. Thespia's youth
With one strong hand maintains the struggling spear,
The other bares his falchion. Through his foes
With lightning winged it scatters wounds and death.
Artaphrenes in torture feels his arm
Lopt from the shoulder. Zatis leaves his hand
Yet twining round the long-disputed lance.
On Pheron's neck descends the ponderous blade;
Down drops the severed head; the vital stream
Spouts from its purple sluices. Mardon strides
Across the pointed ash. His weight o'ercomes
The wearied Grecian, who resigns his hold,
Yet cleaves the exulting Persian to the brain.
But now the fierce Abrocomes approached,
And louring shakes his dart. The wary Greek
With his broad buckler intercepts the stroke,
And closes with the Persian. Then what aid
Of mortal force, or interposing heaven
Preserved the eastern warrior? Lo! the friend
Of Teribazus eager to avenge
His loved companion, and at once to guard
A brother's life, beneath the sinewy arm
That instant raised for slaughter plunged his lance
In Dithyrambus' side. The vital strings
At once relax; nor Fame, nor Greece demand
More from his valor, and supine he lies
In glories ripened on his blooming head.
Him shall the Thespian virgins in their songs
Record one loveliest of the youthful train,
The good, the gentle, generous, and brave;
Now fallen his country's grace, and parent's pride:
So sinks the cedar, which in verdant bloom
High on the top of Libanus had stood
The mountain's boast, and glory of the grove;
Then to adorn the mansions of the great,
Or dignify some God's high-vaulted fane
Uprooted low'rs its heav'n-aspiring head.
Diomedon bursts forward. Round his friend
He heaps destruction. What a troop of ghosts
Attend thy shade, fallen hero! Long unmatched
Prevailed his vengeful arm, and Persia bled;
Till four Assyrians on his shelving lance,
Ever yet extracted from a prostrate corse,
Their ponderous maces all discharge. It broke.
Yet with the truncheon of his shattered spear
The Greek sustains the contest. Through his eye
The shivered fragment penetrates the brain
Of one bold warrior; there the splintry wood
Infix'd remains: the hero then unsheaths
His falchion broad; a second views aghast
His entrails falling, while Plataea's chief
From the gash'd belly draws his reeking sword:
Prone sinks a third beneath the falchion's weight;
Though with the furious stroke the yielding blade
Flew from the hilt, and left the Greek disarmed:
The fourth that instant lifts his knotted mace;
It falls resistless on the battered helm,
And low the great Diomedon extends
His mighty limbs. So weakened by the force
Of some tremendous engine, which the hand
Of Mars impells, a stately turret spreads
Its disuniting ramparts on the plain;
Joy fills the assailants, while the battle's tide
Whelms over the widening breach. The Persians thus
Over the late-fear'd Diomedon had rushed,
And swept the Greeks before them; when behold
Leonidas! At once their ardour froze.
He had a while within the orb retired,
Oppressed by labor. Now with strength restored
He pours fresh ruin from the Spartan front.
As, long retarded by the unmoving calm,
Soon, as a rising gale fresh-breathing curls
The surging main, again the vessel bounds
With all her opening sails; the hero thus
His buckler huge, and formidable spear
Advancing, through the Asian files renews
His course of slaughter. Destiny compells
The bold Hydarnes to the unequal fight,
Who proudly vaunting left his weeping bride
To mourn his absence on the distant verge
Of Bactrian Ochus. Victory in vain
He parting promised. Wanton hope no more
Round his cold heart delusive sports, nor paints
The imagined pomp of triumphs, gorgeous spoils,
And trains of shackled Greeks. The Spartan pierced
His shield, and bursting corselet. From the slain
The victor draws his iron-pointed spear
Bent, and infeebled with the forceful blow.
Meantime within his buckler's verge, unseen
Amphistreus stealing in the unguarded flank
His poniard struck. With swift effusion gushed
A crimson torrent, but the scaly mail
Immediate death repelled. The indignant king
Gripes with resistless might the Persian's throat,
And drags him prostrate. None in Xerxes' court
Was more corrupt, with insolence more base,
With rancour more fallacious. Phrygia pined
Beneath the oppression of his ruthless sway.
Was there a field once fruitful, or a town
Once populous and rich? The horrid change
To want and desolation there declared,
The cursed Amphistreus governed. As the spear
Of Tyrian Cadmus riveted to earth
The poisonous dragon, whose infectious breath
Had blasted half Boeotia; so the chief
Of Lacedaemon trampling on the neck
Of fallen Amphistreus fixes to the rock
The gasping tyrant, and his broken lance
Leaves in the panting corse. Meanwhile thy wound
Incessant flows, great hero, and augments
The hopes of Persia. Thou unyielding still
Sustain'st the contest, while unnumber'd darts
Are shivered on thy buckler, and thy feet
With glittering points bestrew; the Cholchian sword,
And Persian dagger leave their shattered hilts;
Bent is the Caspian scymetar; in vain
The Sacian wheels his falchion, and their mace
The strong Chaldaeans and Assyrians raise:
Thou stand'st unshaken, like a Thracian hill,
Like Rhodope, or Haemus; where in vain
The thund'rer plants his livid bolt, in vain
The glancing lightning cleaves the incrusted snow,
And Winter beating with eternal war
Shakes from his dreery wings discordant storms,
Chill sleet, and clatt'ring hail. But now advanced
Abrocomes, and aimed his deadly spear
Against the forehead of Laconia's chief,
Not unperceived; the Spartan's active hand
His sword opposing upward rears the blade
Against the threatening javelin; over his crest
Its fury wastes in air, while swift descends
The ponderous falchion on the Persian's knee:
At once the bone is severed; prone he falls;
Crushed on the ground beneath ten thousand feet
The gallant warrior breaths the last remains
Of tortured life. The Spartan thus maintained
The unequal combat with his single sword.
But Agis calls Dieneces, alarms
Demophilus, Megistias; they from heaps
Of Allarodian and Sasperian slain
Haste to their leader, and before him raise
The brazen bulwark of their massy shields.
The foremost line of Asia stands and bleeds;
The rest recoil: but Hyperanthes strides
From rank to rank throughout his various host,
Their dying hopes rekindles, in the brave
Excites new valor, and the freezing heart
Of Fear revives. Astaspes first obeyed
The hero's voice, a fierce Chaldaean lord
Vain of his birth from ancient Belus drawn,
Proud of his wealthy stores, and stately domes;
But now more proud by conquest, since his might
Had foiled the strong Diomedon. He seeks
The front of battle. His victorious mace
Against the brave Dieneces he bends;
The weighty blow bore down the opposing shield,
And crushed the Spartan's shoulder: idle hangs
The buckler now, and loads the inactive arm
Deprived of all its functions. Agis bares
His vengeful blade, and severs from the foe
His hand exalted for a second stroke.
The dying fingers with convulsive grasp
The falling mace infold. A Sacian chief
Springs on the victor. Iaxartes' banks
To this brave savage gave his name and birth.
His looks erect, and fierce deportment spoke
A bold and gallant spirit, but untamed,
With dreery wilds familiar, and a race
Of rude Barbarians horrid as their clime.
The hostile spear, against his forehead aimed,
Glanced upward, and o'erturn'd his iron cone:
The blow renewed his bursting chest divides.
The undaunted Sacian writhes along the lance,
Which griding passes through his breast and back,
A barbed arrow from his quiver draws,
Deep in the streaming pap of Agis hides
The deadly steel, then grimly smiles and dies.
From him Fate hastens to a nobler prey;
For lo! the brave Dieneces presents
His breast obnoxious to a thousand darts.
The shield deserts his unsustaining arm,
And slides to earth. A grove of javelins rose
On his broad bosom. Still for every wound
He hurled a Persian to the infernal gloom;
But life at length forfook his riven heart,
And over the rock the gasping hero stretched
His dying limbs in gore. Who now can stand
The torrent of Barbarians? Agis bleeds,
His spear is irrecoverably plunged
In Iaxartes' body. Low reclines
Dieneces in gore. The Spartan chief
Himself o'erlabour'd, of his lance disarmed
The rage of Death can exercise no more.
One last and glorious effort age performs.
Demophilus, Megistias join their might,
And stem the floods of conquest; while the spear
Of slain Dieneces to Sparta's king
The fainting Agis bore. The blazing steel
In that dire hand again for battle reared
Blasts all the Persian valor. Back in heaps
They roll confounded, by their leader's voice
In vain exhorted longer to endure
The ceaseless waste of that unconquered arm.
So, when the giants from Olympus chased
The inferior Gods, themselves in terror shunned
The incessant streams of lightning, when the hand
Of heaven's great father with eternal might
Sustained the direful conflict. Over the field
Awhile Bellona stills the rage of war;
When Thespia's leader, and Megistias drop
At either side of Lacedaemon's king.
Beneath the weight of years and labor bend
The hoary warriors. Not a groan molests
Their parting spirits, but in death's calm night,
All-silent, bows each venerable head:
Like aged oaks, whose deep-descending roots
Had pierced resistless through the mountain's side,
And there for three long centuries had braved
Each angry gust of Eurus, and the North;
Till, sapless now by Time's despoiling hand,
Without a blast their mossy trunks recline
Before their parent hill. By Sparta's chief
None now remains but Agis, who implores
The last kind office from his godlike friend,
The Sacian's arrow from his pap to draw.
This done, life issues with the sanguine tide.
Thy comely features, Agis, now are pale;
Cold are thy graceful limbs, and dim thy eyes,
Which now no more with placid beams reveal
The native virtues of thy gentle breast.
The noble corse Leonidas surveys.
Fate yields him one short interval of peace
To know how lovely are the patriot's wounds,
And see those honors grace the man, he loved.
But Hyperanthes with his single spear
Forth from the trembling ranks of Asia towers
His country's glory to redeem, or fall.
The Spartan worn by toil his languid arm
Once more uplifting waits the dauntless prince.
The heroes now stood adverse. Each a while
Restrained his valor, and his godlike foe
Admiring viewed. Such majesty and strength
To fierce Pelides all incircled round
With Trojan dead; and such to Priam's son
By struggling virtue, and by manly shame
From flight recalled, great Homer's fancy gave.
O thou exalted over the laureled train
High, as the sweet Calliope is throned
Above each vigin of the tuneful hill;
Now let one beam of thy celestial light
Dart through my laboring mind; lest Freedom mourn
Her chosen son dishonored in these strains!
NOW Hyperanthes, and Laconia's king
With brandished points, and targets high uprear'd
Commence the fatal combat, which must close
The long-continu'd horrors of the day.
Fixed with amaze and fear, the Asian files
Unmoved and silent on their bucklers pause.
Thus over the expanse of India's wilds contend
The elephant, and horned rhinoceros;
Earth groans beneath them, as with wrath untamed
Each hideous bulk in dire encounter meets:
With distant terror gaze the savage throng.
Prolonged by varied art, the dubious fight
The great event suspended. On the foe
His well-aim'd spear at last the Spartan drove,
And pierced the shield. Inexorable fate
That moment hovered over the eastern prince,
When with unmatched celerity aside
He swung his buckler; underneath his arm,
Unstained with blood the hostile javelin passed:
Meantime, with joy, and ardent hopes elate
Of fame and conquest, sudden he impelled
His rapid lance against the Spartan's throat;
But he with wary skill his target raised,
And over his shoulder turned the glancing steel;
For one last effort then his scattered strength
Recalled, and wheeling with resistless force
His massy buckler dashed the brazen verge
Against the Persian's forehead: down he sunk
Without a groan expiring, as overwhelmed
Beneath a marble fragment from its seat
Heaved by a whirlwind sweeping over the ridge
Of some aspiring mansion. Generous prince!
What could his valor more? His single might
He matched with great Leonidas, and fell
Before his native bands. The Spartan chief
Now stands alone. In heaps his slaughtered friends
All stretched around him lie. The distant foes
Shower on his head innumerable darts.
From various sluices gush the vital floods,
And stain his fainting limbs. Nor yet with pain
His brow is clouded, but those beauteous wounds,
The sacred pledges of his own renown,
And Sparta's safety, with serenest joy
His closing eye contemplates. Fame can twine
No brighter laurels round his glorious head,
His virtue more to labor Fate forbids,
And lays him now in honorable rest
To seal his country's liberty in death.
End of the Ninth and Last Book.
ERRATA.
B. 2. l. 130. for sult'ry r. sultry. 160. for breasts r. hearts. 3. 311. 332.
407. for poynard 4. poniard. 553. for, put. 606. after Greece put: 611. dele
the full point 4. 177. for Pencestes r. Peucestes. 375. after loosen dele the
comma. 5. 393. for from r. with. 7. 170. for, put. 8. 52. for trembling r.
tumbling. 252. for enoble r. ennoble.


