REMARKS ON FOREST SCENERY; AND OTHER WOODLAND VIEWS.

REMARKS ON FOREST SCENERY, AND OTHER WOODLAND VIEWS, (Relative chiefly to
PICTURESQUE BEAUTY) ILLUSTRATED BY THE SCENES OF NEW-FOREST IN HAMPSHIRE.

IN THREE BOOKS.

-- Happy he,
Whom what he views of beautiful, or grand,
In nature, from the broad, majestic oak
To the green blade, that twinkles in the sun,
Prompt with remembrance of a present God.
COOPER'S Poems. VOL. II.

By WILLIAM GILPIN, A. M. PREBENDARY OF SALISBURY; AND VICAR OF BOLDRE IN
NEW-FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON.

LONDON; PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE, STRAND.

M.DCC.XCI.

TRANSLATION OF QUOTATIONS in the Second Volume.
VOL. II.
Page 6. IN that wood, which is called New-forest, he ordered the churches, and
villages to be destroyed, the people to be driven out, and the whole to be
inhabited by wild beasts.

Hen. of Huntingdon.

Page 7. That tract of country, a space of more than thirty miles in extent,
now called New-forest, but formerly called Ytene, William, the bastard, ordered
to be despoiled of all its churches, villages, and inhabitants, and to be
turned into a habitation for beasts.

Brompton.

Page 7. Through the space of thirty miles, the whole county, which was
fruitful in a high degree, was laid waste. The churches, gardens, and houses
were all destroyed; and the whole reduced by the king's order into a chase for
beasts. Winchester chronicle.

Page 7. This prince (Rufus) made forests in various parts: but his capital
forest occupied that tract of country, which lies between Southampton, and
Christchurch. Here, to make room for his beasts of chase, he destroyed
twenty-two churches, some say fifty-two, together with villages, chapels, and
private houses, and formed New-forest, which he called his garden; filling it
with game; which he spared for seven years.

Knighton.

Page 44. No inquiry must be made, how venison is procured.

As tending to destroy the harbor of beasts -- to injure the forest -- and to
increase the poor.

Page 116. A hog from Epicurus's herd. Page 252. Sprung from mighty Jove. Page
264. Hail to that public wisdom, which defends
The docking kings, and steeds at different ends.
Alas! in France the ^^lly still prevails
Of leaving kings their heads, and steeds their tails.


Page 267. -- Or if the sound
Of our approach, he points his quivering ears,
And ^^ws, the ground --


Page 275. -- A favorite ^^ag
Was of this dire distress the leading cause.
It raised suspicions first, then roused the sons
Of violence to war. --



OBSERVATIONS ON FOREST SCENERY. BOOK III.
SECTION I.
WE concluded the last book with a catalogue (for it was little more) of the
principal forests, which formerly overspread the island of Britain. None of
them at this day possesses it is original grandeur. A few have preserved some
little appearance of scenery: but the greater part are wastes. New-forest in
Hampshire is among the few, which have retained any ideas of their ancient
consequence. -- At least it is superior to the rest, on account of the extent
of it is boundaries; the variety of it is contents; and the grandeur of it is
scenes.

With these scenes I propose, in the following book, to illustrate the
observations, which have been made in the two preceding books; and shall in
several excursions, through the different parts of this woody country,
endeavor to point out it is peculiar beauties. But tho I shall chiefly consider
it in a picturesque light, I shall vary my subject by giving a general idea of
the ancient history, and present state, of this celebrated forest.

This tract of wood-land was originally made a forest by William I in the year
1079. about thirteen years after the battle of Hastings; and is indeed the only
forest in England, whose origin can be traced. It took the denomination of
New-forest from it is being an addition to the many forests, which the crown
already possessed; and which had formerly been appropriated in feudal times.
The original name of this tract of country was Ytene.

As several forests were more commodiously situated for royal diversion than
New-forest, the historian has been sometimes led to conceive, that William
must have had other ends, than amusement, in making this addition to them: and
observing farther, it is vicinity to the coast of Normandy, he has from this
circumstance drawn a surmise, that under the idea of a forest, William meant to
preserve an unobserved communication with the continent; which would enable him
to embark his troops, on either side, without giving alarm.

But this surmise depends on no historical evidence; neither indeed is it
probable. The coasts of Kent, and Sussex were more commodious for the
embarkation of troops, than any part of New-forest. And it is absurd to suppose
an army could be embarked any where without observation. Southampton indeed was
commodious enough: but this port neither lies in New-forest; nor does the
forest in any degree, skreen it is avenues. -- Besides, the affairs of William
were never in so perplexed a situation, as to require privacy; especially at
the time when he made this forest; which was after he had defeated all his
enemies, and was of course in the height of his power. -- Nor indeed was it
agreeable to the general character of this prince to do things secretly. He
rather chose, on all occasions, to sway the scepter with a lofty hand. -- The
judicious Rapin seems to close the whole debate very justly, by observing, that
this surmise seems to have arisen merely from an opinion, that so politic a
prince as William, could do nothing without a political end: whereas the most
politic princes, no doubt, are swayed where their pleasures are concerned, by
passions, and caprice, like other men Vol. i. fol. page 178.
.

The means, which William used in afforesting these extensive wood-lands,
create another question among historians. The general opinion is, that he
destroyed a number of villages, and churches; drove out the inhabitants; laid
their lands waste; and formed New-forest in their room.

This opinion has appeared to some ill sounded; and Voltaire in particular, has
stood up in defense of the humanity, or rather the policy of William. It is
absurd, he thinks, to suppose that a prince so noted for prudent and interested
conduct, should lay waste so much cultivated ground; plant it with forest
trees, which would be many years in coming to perfection; and for the sake of a
few deer, turn adrift so large a body of his industrious subjects, who might
have contributed so much to the increase of his revenues See his abridgment of
universal history.
.

Voltaire's conclusion may be just; but his reasoning is certainly ill-founded.
It proceeds on the improbability of so wide a desolation; whereas it might have
proceeded better on the impossibility of it. For how could William have spread
such depopulation in a country, which, from the nature of it, must have been
from the first very thinly inhabited? The ancient Ytene was undoubtedly a woody
tract long before the times of William. Voltaire's idea therefore of planting a
forest is absurd, and is founded on a total ignorance of the country. He took
his ideas merely from a French forest, which is artificially planted, and laid
out in vistas, and alleys. It is probable, that William rather opened his
chases by cutting down wood; than that he had occasion to plant more. --
Besides, tho the internal strata of the soil of New-forest are admirably
adapted to produce timber; yet the surface of it, is in general, poor; and
could never have admitted, even if the times had allowed, any high degree of
cultivation. -- Upon the whole therefore, it does not seem possible, that
William could have spread so wide a depopulation through this country, as he is
represented to have done.

On the other hand, there is no contending against the stream of history: and
tho we may allow that William could not make any great depopulation; we are not
to suppose he made none at all. Many writers, who lived about his time, unite
in lamentable complaints of his devastations. According to them, at least
thirty miles of cultivated lands were laid waste; above fifty parish churches,
and many villages destroyed; and all the inhabitants extirpated In sylva, quae
vocatur nova foresta, ecclesias, et villas eradicari; gentem extirpari; et a
feris fecit inhabitari. Hen. de Huntingdon.

Nova regia foresta, anglice Ytene, quam Gulielmus bastardus, hominibus
fugatis, desertis villis, et subreptis ecclesiis per 30, et eo amplius
milliaria, in saltus, et lustra ferarum redigit. Brompton.

Per 30, et amplius milliaria, ubi erat hominum mansio, terra fructifera,
necnon frugifera, extirpatis domibus, cum promariis, et hortis, et etiam
ecclesiis, cum caemetariis, in forestam, vel potius in deserta, et ferarum
lustra, rege jubente, redacta orant. Hist. Winton.

Hic Gulielmus (Rufus) fecit forestas in multis locis, per medium regni; et
inter Southampton, et prioratum Twynam, qui nunc vocatur Christ-church,
prostravit, et exterminavit ^^ ^cclesias matrices, cum villis, capellis,
maneriis, atque mansionibus; secundum vero quosdam, 52 ecclesias parochiales;
et fecit forestam novam, quam vocavit fuum novum herbarium; et replevit eam
cervis, damis, et aliis feris; parcens illis per septem annos primos. Knighton.


. But it is to be considered, that these writers were monks, who had taken high
offense at William for his exactions on their monasteries; and were neither, as
it appears, informed themselves; nor disposed through their prejudices, to
inform others. Many things they say, are palpably false.

In this dearth therefore of historical evidence, we are still at a loss To
suppose that William made no devastation, and to suppose that he made all,
which these prejudiced monks lay to his charge, seem to be suppositions equally
unsupported. On the whole therefore, the truth of this matter, as of most
others, lies probably between the two opinions.

With regard to the situation, and boundaries of this extensive forest, it
occupies the southwest extremity of Hampshire; and in it is earlier form was a
kind of peninsula, bounded by the bay of Southampton on the east -- by the
river Avon on the west -- and on the south; by the channel of the isle of
Wight, as far as the Needles; and to the west of those rocks by the ocean. Thus
the boundaries of New-forest were determined by the natural lines of the
country.

It does not however appear, that William I extended the bounds of New-forest
thus far. They are supposed rather to have been enlarged by succeeding princes;
particularly by Henry I, who was probably tempted by the natural limits of the
country. By this prince, or at least by some of the early successors of
William, the whole peninsula was taken in; and the bounds of the forest were
fairly extended, as I have described them, to the bay of Southampton, the river
Avon, and the sea.

In those days it was a matter of little ceremony either to make, or to enlarge
a forest. Thus says the law: "It is allowed to our sovereign lord the king, in
respect of his continual care, and labor, for the preservation of the whole
realm, among other privileges, this prerogative, to have his places of
recreation, and pastime, wheresoever he will appoint. For as it is at the
liberty, and pleasure of his grace to reserve the wild beasts, and the game to
himself, for his only delight and pleasure, so he may also at his will and
pleasure, make a forest for them to abide in See Manwood on forest-law, chap.
ii.
."

Agreeable to this spirit of despotism, the royal forests were regulated. Each
had it is laws, and government; and as these differed from each other in very
few particulars, all were equally grievous to the subject. Forest-law indeed
was one of the greatest encroachments that ever was made upon the natural
rights of mankind; and considering the disparity of the object, one of the
greatest insults of tyranny.

The Romans had no idea of appropriating game. Under their government the
forests of England, like those of America, were common hunting-grounds. The
northern barbarians first pretended to the right of making private property of
what, being naturally wild, belonged equally to all.

The idea of forest-law, and forest-rights obtained early indeed in Saxon
times. But the Saxon princes were in general a mild race; and there were some
traces of liberal sentiment in their institutions. Under them, untenanted
wastes only were afforested -- the penalties of forest-laws were gentle -- and
the execution of them never rigid. So that, in those equitable times,
forest-law was hardly esteemed a burden upon the people.

The Norman princes were a different race. They were fierce, haughty, violent,
and despotic. Under them the language of English law in general assumed a new
tone; and of forest-law in particular. For as the Norman princes were all
mighty hunters, this part of jurisprudence engaged their peculiar attention. It
was conceived in the highest spirit of despotism; and executed with the utmost
rigor of vindictive tyranny If the reader wish to see the mischiefs of
forest-law heightened by poetic images, the following lines of Mr. Pope set
them in a strong light.

Thus all the land appeared, in ages past,
A dreary desert, and a gloomy wast,
To savage beasts, and savage laws a prey,
And kings more furious, and severe than they*
Who claimed the skies, dispeopled air, and floods,
The lonely lords of empty wilds, and woods.
Cities laid waste, they stormed the dens, and caves;
For wiser brutes were backward to be slaves.
What could be free, when lawless beasts obeyed?
And even the elements a tyrant swayed?
In vain kind seasons swelled the teeming grain,
Soft showers distilled, and suns grew warm in vain;
The swain, with tears his frustrate labors yields,
And famished dies amidst his ripening fields.
What wonder then, a beast, or subject slain,
Were equal crimes in a despotic reign!
Both doomed alike, for sportive tyrants bled:
But while the subject starved, the beast was fed.
Proud Nimrod first the bloody chase began,
A mighty hunter; and his prey was man.
Our haughty Norman boasts that barbarous name,
And makes his trembling slaves the royal game.
The fields are ravished from industrious swains,
From men their cities, and from gods their fanes:
The levelled towns with weeds lie covered over;
The hollow winds through naked temples roar;
Round broken columns clasping ivy twined;
Over heaps of ruin stalked the stately hind;
The fox obscene to gaping tombs retires,
And savage howlings fill the sacred quires.
Awed by his nobles, by his commons cursed,
The oppressor ruled tyrannic, where he durst;
Stretched over the poor, and church his iron rod,
And served alike his vassals, and his God.
Whom even the Saxon spared, and bloody-Dane,
The wanton victims of his sport remain.
But see the man, whose spacious regions gave
A waste for beasts, denied himself a grave!
Stretched on the land his second hope survey,
At once the chaser, and at once the prey:
Lo! Rufus, tugging at the deadly dart,
Bleeds in the forest, like a wounded heart.
Windsor forest.
.

It is true indeed the principal object of forest-law was the preservation of
game, which the offender killed at his own peril. But when we recollect how
extensive the royal forests were, including little less than an eighth part of
the kingdom -- when we consider the mischievous nature of every species of
game, and particularly of forest-deer in cultivated lands -- when we observe
farther, that many of the royal forests were blended with private property --
that the limits of others were very undefined -- and lastly, when we reflect,
how easy a matter it was, by a stretch of royal authority, to fix the locality
of a trespass in a forest, tho it was never committed there; we may easily
conclude, from the whole, how fertile a source of vexation forest-law might be
made, tho it merely respected game.

But other grievances accrued. Many encroachments were made on private
property. Extravagant claims were pretended by forest-officers; and heavy tolls
were levied on such merchandise, as passed through the king's forests, tho in
fact, it could pass in no other direction See King John's charter of forests.
. Sometimes also needy princes, (and most of them were needy) with a view to
raise money, would send commissioners purposely to examine into
forest-trespasses; and on these occasions, we may be sure, there was always
exaggeration enough.

This accumulation of hardship was at all times deeply felt, and resented; and
whenever the reins of government slackened in the hands of a weak prince, the
spirit of the nation arose, and endeavored to resume its native rights.
Success at last attended these repeated struggles. Forest-law was abolished; at
least its mischievous effects were repressed.

But if the people imagined this victory would reinstate them in their native
rights over the forest, they were mistaken. A new species of law, under the
denomination of game-law, arose upon the ruins of forest-law. This law had from
it is institution an aristocratic cast. For the barons and great men, who had
wrested the rigor of forest-law from the prince, did not mean to free the
people from the imposition; but only to administer it themselves: and thus a
thousand tyrants started up instead of one. Some of the severer penalties
indeed were abolished. A man preserved his eyes, or his hands, tho he killed a
pheasant, or a partridge: but he was fined -- he was imprisoned -- his dog was
shot -- his arms were taken from him -- and he was continually teased with
vexatious suits. Besides, as game-law was more extensive than forest-law, it
involved greater numbers within it is influence.

At the time, when forest-law was abolished, all the encroachments, which the
crown had made on the confines of forests, were given back. Then it was that
New-forest was reduced within it is ancient bounds; and all those lands, which
bordered on the bay of Southampton, the river Avon, and the sea, were restored
to their old possessors. These lands were then distinguished by the name of the
purlieus of the forest; and their owners, at least some of them, by way of
indemnification for injuries received, enjoyed several privileges, particularly
the right of commoning in the forest; and of killing trespassing deer, provided
they were killed before they entered the forest, which was always esteemed
their sanctuary See Manwood on forest-law.
.

The shape of New-forest is a kind of irregular triangle, wide at the south,
and drawing to a point toward the north; contained within a circumference of
about fifty miles. It Is limits on every side are very accurately known, and
described: but, in a work of this kind, it will answer no end, either of
amusement, or of utility, to walk it is bounds. -- So far indeed am I from
intending to be accurate in this matter, that I propose in the following
descriptive view of New-forest, to take very great liberties with it is
boundaries; and to consider the forest in it is ancient, and most extended
state, limited by the bay of Southampton on the east; by the river Avon on the
west; and by the sea on the south. Without taking this liberty, I should lose
the description of some of the most beautiful scenery, that formerly belonged
to it.

But before I enter on the picturesque part of my work, it remains, as I have
already given a short account of the ancient state of New-forest, to add a
short account also of it is present state; it is government, demeisns, and
inhabitants.

SECT. II.
THE government of New-forest is, at this time, nearly what it originally was,
excepting only that the abolition of forest-law has restrained the power of
it is officers I had many particulars with regard to the present state of
New-forest from Mr. Samber of castle-Malwood lodge, who was intimately
acquainted with it. After his death, his son, Capt. Samber of the navy,
obligingly put into my hands other useful papers, on the same subject, which
had belonged to his father.
.

The chief officer belonging to it, is the lord-warden, who is generally some
person of great distinction. The present lord-warden is the duke of Gloucester.
-- Under him are two distinct appointments of officers; the one to preserve the
venison of the forest; and the other to preserve it is vert. The former term, in
the language of forest-law, includes all species of game: the latter respects
the woods, and lawns, which harbor, and feed them.

Of those officers who superintend the game, are first the two rangers. But the
office of ranger; as well as that of bow-bearer, and a few others, have been
long in disuse: at least they seem to be delegated to the keepers: of these
there are fifteen; who preside over as many walks, into which the forest is
divided. In each walk is erected a lodge. A few of these lodges are elegant
mansions; and are the habitations of the keepers, who are generally men of
fashion, or fortune. Prince William of Gloucester has one; the duke of Bolton
another; and lord Delawar a third; but in general, the lodges are but moderate
buildings; and are inhabited by the under-keepers, or groom-keepers, as they
are called; on whom the executive part of the keeper's office devolves.

The under-keeper feeds the deer in winter -- browzes them in summer -- knows
where to find a fat buck -- executes the king's warrants for venison --
presents offenses in the forest-courts -- and prevents the destruction of game.
In this last article his virtue is chiefly shown; and to this purpose the
memory of every sound keeper should be furnished with this cabalistic verse.
Stable-stand;
Dog-draw;
Back-bear; and
Bloody-hand See Manwood on forest-law, chapter xviii. 9.
.
It implies the several circumstances, in which offenders may be taken with the
manner, as it is phrased. If a man be found armed, and stationed in some
suspicious part of the forest -- or if he be found with a dog pursuing a
stricken deer -- or if he be found carrying a dead deer on his back -- or
lastly, if he be found bloody in the forest; he is, in all these cases,
seizable; tho the fact of killing a deer cannot be proved upon him. The
under-keeper also drives the forest; that is, he annually impounds all the
cattle, that pasture in his walk; and sees them examined, and properly marked.

With regard to the woods of the forest, which were originally considered only
as they respected game, the first officer, under the lord-warden, is the
woodward. It is his business, as his title denotes, to inspect the woods. He
prevents waste -- he sees that young trees are properly fenced -- and he
assigns timber for the payment of forest-officers. This timber is sold by
auction at the court at Lyndhurst; and annually amounts to about seven hundred
pounds; which is the sum required.

Under the woodward are twelve regarders; and to these indeed chiefly is
delegated the executive part of his office. The regarders seize the
hedge-bills, and axes of trespassers; present offenses in the forest-courts;
and assign such timber as is claimed by the inhabitants, and borderers of the
forest, for fuel, and repairs. Of this inferior wood, there are great
quantities assigned, on every side of the forest. I can only speak of my own
assignment, as vicar of Boldre; which is annually twelve load.

Besides these officers, who are in effect the officers of the crown, as they
are appointed by the lord-warden; there are four others, called verderors, who
are commonly gentlemen of property and interest in the neighborhood, and are
elected, like the knights of the shire, by the freeholders of the county. These
officers, since the justiciary-in-eyre has been a sinecure, are the only judges
of the forest-courts. The verderor is an ancient forest-officer. His name
occurs in the earliest account of forest-law. But tho his appointment has at
present a democratical cast, it is probable, that he was formerly a royal
officer; and that his election by the freeholders of the county was extorted
from the crown in some period favorable to liberty. As New-forest was always
considered as the great magazine of navy timber, the verderors were empowered
by an act of parliament in king William's time, to fine delinquents to the
amount of five pounds in their attachment-courts: whereas in all the other
forests of England, the fine does not amount to more than a few pence, which
was the original amersement. The verderor is an officer without salary: but by
ancient custom he was entitled to course, and take what deer he pleased, in his
way to the forest-court: but this privilege is now compounded by an annual fee
of a buck, and a do.

Besides these ancient officers of the forest, there is one of later
institution, since timber became valuable as a material. He is called the
purveyor, and is appointed by the commissioner of the dock at Portsmouth. His
business is to assign timber for the use of the navy. The origin of the
purveyor is not earlier than the reign of Charles II. in whose time five
hundred oaks, and fifty beeches were annually assigned for the king's yards;
and this officer was appointed to assign them. But it being found, that the
forest could ill supply so large a quantity of oak; instead of five hundred,
the number was afterward reduced to sixty; which together with fifty beeches,
are still annually assigned Mr. Samber's MS.
. The purveyor has a salary of fifty pounds a year; and six and eight-pence a
day, when on duty.

I shall conclude this account of the officers of the forest with the singular
character of one of them, who lived in the times of James, and Charles I. It is
preserved in Hutchin's history of Dorsetshire See vol. ii. p. 63.
.

The name of this memorable sportsman, for in that character alone he was
conspicuous, was Henry Hastings. He was second son to the earl of Huntingdon;
and inherited a good estate in Dorsetshire from his mother. He was one of the
keepers of New-forest; and resided in his lodge there, during a part of every
hunting-season. But his principal residence was at Woodlands, in Dorsetshire,
where he had a capital mansion. One of his nearest neighbors, was the lord
chancellor Cooper, first earl of Shaftsbury. Two men could not be more opposite
in their dispositions, and pursuits. They had little communication therefore;
and their occasional meetings were rendered more disagreeable to both, from
their opposite sentiments in politics. Lord Shaftsbury, who was the younger
man, was the survivor; and the following account of Mr. Hastings, which I have
somewhat abridged, is said to have been the production of his pen.

Mr. Hastings was low of stature, but very strong, and very active; of a ruddy
complexion, with flaxen hair. His clothes were always of green cloth. His house
was of the old fashion; in the midst of a large park, well stocked with deer,
rabbits, and fish ponds. He had a long narrow bowling-green, in it; and used to
play with round sand-bowls. Here too he had a banquetting-room built, like a
stand, in a large tree. He kept all sorts of hounds, that ran buck, fox, hare,
otter, and badger; and had hawks of all kinds, both long, and short winged. His
great hall was commonly strewed with marrow-bones; and full of hawk-perches,
hounds, spaniels, and terriers. The upper end of it was hung with fox-skins of
this, and the last year's killing. Here, and there a pole-cat was intermixed;
and hunter's poles in great abundance. The parlour was a large room, completely
furnished in the same style. On a broad hearth, paved with brick, lay some of
the choicest terriers, hounds, and spaniels. One or two of the great chairs,
had litters of cats in them, which were not to be disturbed. Of these three or
four always attended him at dinner; and a little white wand lay by his
trencher; to defend it, if they were too troublesome. In the windows, which
were very large, lay his arrows, cross-bows, and other accoutrements. The
corners of the room were filled with his best hunting, and hawking poles. His
oister-table stood at the lower end of the room, which was in constant use
twice a day, all the year round; for he never failed to eat oisters both at
dinner, and supper; with which the neighboring town of Pool supplied him. At
the upper end of the room stood a small table with a double desk; one side of
which held a church-bible; the other, the book of martyrs. On different tables
in the room lay hawk's-hoods; bells; old hats, with their crowns thrust in,
full of pheasant eggs; tables; dice; cards; and store of tobacco-pipes. At one
end of this room was a door, which opened into a closet; where stood bottles of
strong beer, and wine; which never came out but in single glasses, which was
the rule of the house; for he never exceeded himself; nor permitted others to
exceed. Answering to this closet, was a door into an old chapel; which had been
long disused for devotion; but in the pulpit, as the safest place, was always
to be found a cold chine of beef, a venison-pasty, a gammon of bacon, or a
great apple-pye, with thick crust, well-baked. His table cost him not much, tho
it was good to eat at. His sports supplied all, but beef and mutton; except on
fridays, when he had the best of fish. He never wanted a London pudding; and he
always sang it in with, "My part lies therein-a." He drank a glass or two of
wine at meals; put syrup of gilly-flowers into his sack; and had always a
tun-glass of small-beer standing by him, which he often stirred about with
rosemary. He lived to be an hundred; and never lost his eyesight, nor used
spectacles. He got on horseback without help; and rode to the death of the
stag, till he was past fourscore.

SECT. III.
HAVING given an account of the government, and officers of New-forest in the
last section, I shall now examine the state of it is demeisns In the year 1788,
a survey of New-forest was taken, by order of the commissioners of the
land-revenue of the Crown; in which survey the following account was given in
of it is contents.

Acres. Forest-lands 63845 Lands held with lodges 1192 Encroachments 900
Leaseholds under the Crown 1003 Freeholds, and other intermediate property
25422 Total within the perambulation 92362 A few fractions, which make about
two or three acres more I have omitted. From this survey a splendid map of
New-forest has been engraved (by order of the commissioners,) by William Faden,
geographer to the king; in which the curious may see the boundaries, and
contents of New-forest, with all the lands granted by the crown, the
lease-holds, and encroachments, very accurately ascertained.


, and inhabitants.

The soil of New-forest, which is in general a sandy loam, is well adapted to
the production of oak-timber. This tract of woody country therefore has long
been considered, as one of the great magazines for the navy. It was formerly
thought to be inexhaustible; but by degrees it was observed, that it began to
fail. So early as in queen Elizabeth's reign, Manwood tells us, that "the
slender, and negligent execution of the forest-law has been the decay, and
destruction (in almost all places within this realm) of great wood and timber;
the want whereof, as well in this present time, as in time to come, shall
appear in the navy of this realm See Manwood on forest-law, chap. ii. 6.
."

In queen Elizabeth's reign Manwood's remark was speculation; but in the reign
of Charles II, it took the air of prediction. The decay of timber; which had
long been gradually coming on, began then to be felt. It Is sources failed, as
the demand increased. In most commodities the demands of a market immediately
produce a supply; but timber requires ages to make it marketable. It may be
added, that the navy magazines had not then those resources, which they have
since found. Timber was with difficulty brought from the inland parts of the
country, on account of the badness of the roads -- little foreign timber was
imported -- and what rendered the evil more conspicuous, in Charles's time, the
nation was on the eve of a naval war. Such pressing necessity urged strongly
the propriety of making provision for a future supply. Charles, who had a sort
of turn for ship-building, and had on that account, a kind of affection for the
navy, was easily induced to issue an order, under his sign manual, to sir John
Norton, woodward of New-forest, to enclose three hundred acres of waste, as a
nursery for young oak Mr. Samber's MS.
; the expense of which was to be defrayed by the sale of decayed wood. This
order bears date december 13th, 1669.

But tho the enclosure, here specified, was trifling in itself, yet it had the
merit of a new project, and led to farther improvements. A few years afterward
the same idea was taken up, on a more enlarged scale. In the 10th of king
William* an act passed, impowering certain commissioners to enclose two
thousand acres in New-forest for the growth of timber; and two hundred more,
every year; for the space of twenty years afterward.

This provident act was as well executed, as it had been projected. A very
considerable part of the quantity prescribed, at least four thousand acres,
were enclosed, and planted In Burley-walk above six hundred acres were enclosed
-- in Rhinefield-walk the same number -- in Boldre-wood-walk above four hundred
-- in Egworth-walk one thousand -- in Bramble-hill-walk above seven hundred --
in Dinney-walk above five hundred -- in Castle-Malwood-walk a quantity not
ascertained. Mr. Samber's MS.
, and the timber of these enclosures is now secure from all danger; and is
thrown out again into the forest. None of it has yet been felled, as it is not
yet in a state of perfection; but it is in a very flourishing condition; and is
at this day the glory of the forest.

In the reigns of queen Ann, and George I, I believe, no new plantations were
made; which is the more to be wondered at, as the severe hurricane in the
november of the year 1703 did great injury in New-forest. Not fewer than four
thousand of it is best oaks were destroyed See Evelin's Sylva.
, together with great quantities of growing timber.

In the reign of George II, three enclosures were made: but they were
injudiciously, or dishonestly managed; and Mr. Coleman, who undertook the
business, was fined in the forest-court at Lyndhurst, by the verderors, for his
neglect Mr. Samber's MS.
. Some attempts have been made in the present reign: but for want of being
properly planned, or honestly managed, very little advantage has accrued In
the year 1782 an inquiry was instituted, by an order from the treasury, into
the quantities of navy-timber in New-forest -- that is, such timber, as would
measure thirty-five cubic feet. The quantity given in, after a very nice
survey, was fifty-two thousand load. -- Forty cubic feet make a load. -- At the
same time the timber in Dean-forest was surveyed; which, tho of much smaller
dimensions than New-forest, contained sixty-two thousand load.
.

The great defect indeed here, as in other national matters, is the want of
honesty. Public affairs become private jobs. Large enclosures have been made
merely to enrich the undertakers by the profits of enclosing; or the plunder of
the underwood. It is said, that although the flourishing plantations made by king
William, are at this time, receiving injury from growing too close; they are
rather suffered to continue as they are, than to run the hazard of being
dishonestly thinned. For it has sometimes been found, that in thinning trees,
the best, instead of the worst, have been removed: nor can any thing prevent
such mischief, but the care, and honesty of forest-officers, and the persons
they employ.

What a general rapacity reigns in forests, may be conceived from the
devastation, which even inferior officers have been able to commit. Not many
years ago, two men, of the name of Batten, father and son, succeeded each
other, in the office of under-keeper, in one of the forest-walks. The
under-keeper is supposed to cut holm, and other under-wood of little value, to
browze his deer; and when the rind, and spray are eaten off, he faggots the dry
sticks for his own use. But these fellows cut down the young timber of the
forest, without distinction, and without measure, which they made up into
faggots, and sold: and for this paltry gain I have been informed, they
committed waste in the forest estimated at fifty thousand pounds damage. The
calculation seems large: but we may well imagine, that in the unremitted course
of sixty or seventy years, great mischief might be done. For tho a young
sapling may not intrinsically be worth more than half a crown; yet the great
difficulty of getting another thriving plant to occupy it is room in the forest,
raises it is consequence to the public much beyond it is mere specific value.

But the decay of forests is not owing solely either to the legal consumer, or
the rapacious trespasser. The oak of the forest will sometimes naturally fail.
Mr. Evelin remarks See his Sylva.
, that every forest, in which oak, and beech grow promiscuously, will in a
course of ages become entirely beechen. If this be a just remark, the oak, we
are to suppose, has not so strong a vegetative power, as the beech; which, in
time prevails over the whole. -- Whatever truth there may be in the
observation, certain it is, that this appearance of decay is found in many of
the wood-lands of New-forest, which consist chiefly of beech, and unthriving
oak.

Besides these sources of mischief, the woods of the forest are subject to
another, that of fire. In sultry weather, it is furzy heaths are very
combustible; and the neighboring cottagers are supposed sometimes to set them
purposely on fire to make pasturage more plentiful. The danger arises from the
difficulty of stopping these fires, which will sometimes continue burning, more
or less, at the mercy of the wind, during several days. In the early part of
the summer 1785, which was remarkably dry, many of these fires were lighted,
particularly one near Fritham, which did great damage The following was an
advertisement from the lords of the treasury on this occasion.

"Whereas on friday night, the 29th of april last, some person or persons, did
maliciously, and audaciously, set fire to one of the enclosures near Fritham;
in New-forest, whereby a very large number of young oak and beech trees growing
therein, and part of the fence thereof, were destroyed; notice is hereby given
that any person who will give information of the person, or persons who set
fire to the aforesaid enclosure, except the person, or persons who committed
the same, so as he, or they may be brought to justice, shall, on conviction of
the offender, or offenders, receive the reward of forty pounds.

Whereas also the heaths and furze in several other parts of the said forest
have been lately set on fire, whereby large tracts thereof, and many young
trees growing thereon, have been destroyed; notice is hereby given, that a
reward of five pounds will be paid to any person, or persons, upon whose
information, the person or persons, who set fire to the same, shall be
convicted.

The rewards aforesaid to be paid, on conviction of the offenders, by Mr.
Tombs deputy-surveyor of the forest."

Lyndharst, june 2d, 1785.
.

From these, and other causes, many parts of this extensive forest are now in a
state of extreme decay; being overspread merely with holmes, underwood, and
stunted trees, which in the memory of man were full of excellent oak Mr.
Samber's MS.
.

In planting oak, it has been a doubt, whether it is more judicious to sow the
acorn, after enclosing, and grubbing the ground -- or to sow it, without either
operation, in the wild parts of the forest, in the midst of thorn-bushes, and
hollies, which will defend the sapling from cattle, till it be able to stand
alone; and will draw it in it is early state to much quicker maturity, than it
can arrive at without such shelter. The latter way of sowing acorns, in the
wild parts of the forest, is not so sure, but much larger quantities may be
sown at a much less expense; and if one tenth part of the acorns succeed, the
saving is great on an equal quantity of timber. I cannot however help doubting
the efficacy of this mode of raising timber; tho I have often heard sensible
people, who have lived in the neighborhood of the forest, speak favorably of
it: and it is certain that timber is often raised fortuitously in this manner.
We see in the wild parts of the forest, trees, which have attained the growth
of ten, twenty, or thirty years, as far as we can judge, without any aid: and
we are at a loss to know, how nature manages a work of this kind, and rears
this exposed part of her offspring, amidst deer, and cattle. And yet we see the
same kind providence in a higher part of the creation. We see the children of
the cottage, exposed to mischief on every side, and continually running risks,
which delicate mothers would tremble at: yet befriended by a gracious
protector, they get forward in life, and attain maturity, like the wildings of
the forest, in a manner, which they who speculate only on human means, cannot
easily conceive.

In planting the forest, some again have been advocates for uniting the two
modes I have specified. The ground is enclosed, but not grubbed, and the acorns
sown at random. The late duke of Bedford, when he was lord warden, was very
intent on raising timber in this fortuitous manner. He merely enclosed and left
it to chance to fill his enclosures. But I do not find that any of them have
succeeded. -- If the ground were enclosed, and a spot here and there, grubbed,
in which two or three acorns were sown; and some little care taken afterward
of the infant-wood, it might be of all others, perhaps, the most certain, and
the least expensive, way of raising timber.

But the woods of the forest have not alone been the objects of devastation;
it is lands also have suffered. After the forest had lost it is great legal
support, and reasons of state obliged the monarch to seek his amusements nearer
home, the extent of these royal demeisns began insensibly to diminish.
New-forest, among others, was greatly curtailed. Large portions of it were
given away in grants by the crown. Many gentlemen have houses in it is interior
parts; and their tenants are in possession of well cultivated farms. For tho
the soil of New-forest is, in general, poor; yet there are some parts of it,
which very happily admit culture. Thus the forest has suffered in many places,
what it is ancient laws considered as the greatest of all mischiefs, under the
name of an assart See Manwood, chapter ix. sec. 1.
; a word, which signifies grubbing up it is coverts, and copses, and turning the
harbors of deer into arable land. A stop however is now put to all grants from
the crown. The crown lands became public property under the care of the
treasury, when the civil list was settled. The king can only grant leases for
thirty years; and the parliament seldom interferes in a longer extension,
except on particular occasions.

Besides these defalcations arising from the bounty of the crown, the forest is
continually preyed on by the encroachments of inferior people. There are
multitudes of trespassers, on every side of it, who build their little huts,
and enclose their little gardens, and patches of ground, without leave, or
ceremony of any kind. The under-keepers, who have constant orders to destroy
all these enclosures, now and then assert the rights of the forest by throwing
down a fence; but it requires a legal process to throw down a house, of which
possession has been taken. The trespasser therefore here, as on other wastes,
is careful to rear his cottage, and get into it as quickly as possible. I have
known all the materials of one of these habitations brought together -- the
house built -- covered in -- the goods removed -- a fire kindled -- and the
family in possession, during the course of a moonlight night. Sometimes
indeed, where the trespass is inconsiderable, the possessor has been allowed to
pay a fine for his land in the court of Lyndhurst. But these trespasses are
generally in the outskirts of the forest; or in the neighborhood of some
little hamlet. They are never suffered in the interior parts; where no lands
are alienated from the crown, except in regular grants.

The many advantages, which the borderers on forests enjoy, such as rearing
cattle, and hogs, obtaining fuel at an easy rate, and procuring little patches
of land for the trouble of enclosing it, would add much, one should imagine, to
the comfort of their lives. But in fact it is otherwise. These advantages
procure them not half the enjoyments of common day-labourers. In general, they
are an indolent race; poor and wretched in the extreme. Instead of having the
regular returns of a week's labor to subsist on, too many of them depend on
the precarious supply of forest pilfer. Their ostensible business is commonly
to cut furze, and carry it to the neighboring brick-kilns; for which purpose
they keep a team of two or three forest-horses: while their collateral support
is deer-stealing, poaching, or purloining timber. In this last occupation they
are said to have been so expert, that, in a night's time, they would have cut
down, carried off, and lodged safely in the hands of some receiver, one of the
largest oaks of the forest. But the depredations, which have been made in
timber, along all the skirts of the forest, have rendered this species of
theft, at present, but an unprofitable employment. In poaching, and
deer-stealing they often find their best account; in all the arts of which many
of them are well pactised. From their ealiest youth they learn to set the trap,
and the gin for hares, and pheasants; to ensnare deer by hanging hooks, baited
with apples, from the boughs of trees; and (as they became bolder proficients,)
to watch the herd with firearms, and single out a fat buck, as he passes the
place of their concealment.

In wild rugged countries, the mountane^^ forms a very different character from
the forester. He leads a life of labor: he procures nothing without it. He has
neither time for idleness, and dishonest arts; nor meets with any thing to
allure him into them. But the forester, who has the temptation of plunder on
every side, finds it easier to trespass, than to work. Hence, the one becomes
often a rough, manly ingenuous peasant; the other a supple, crafty, pilfering
knave. Even the very practice of following a night-occupation leads to
mischief. The nightly wanderer, unless his mind be engaged in some necessary
business, will find many temptations to take the advantage of the incautious
security of those who are asleep. -- From these considerations Mr. St. John
draws an argument for the sale of forest-lands. "Poverty, says he, will be
changed into affluence -- the cottager will become a farmer -- the wilderness
will be converted into rich pastures, and fertile fields; furnishing provisions
for the country, and employment for the poor. The borders, and confines of
forests will cease to be nurseries for county-goals; the trespasser will no
longer prey upon the vert; nor the vagabond, and outlaw on the venison. Nay
the very soil itself will not then be gradually lost, and stolen, by
purprestures, and assarts. Thus forests, which were formerly the haunts of
robbers, and the scenes of violence, and rapine, may be converted into the
receptacles of honest industry." See observations on the land-revenue of the
crown, p. 168.


I had once some occasional intercourse with a forest-borderer, who had
formerly been a noted deer-stealer. He had often (like the deer-stealer in the
play) -- struck a do,
And born her cleanly by the keeper's nose.
Indeed he had been at the head of his profession; and during a reign of five
years, assured me, he had killed, on an average, not fewer than an hundred
bucks a year. At length he was obliged to abscond; but composing his affairs,
he abjured his trade, and would speak of his former arts without reserve. He
has oftener than once confessed the sins of his youth to me; from which an idea
may be formed of the mystery of deer-stealing, in it is highest mode of
perfection. In his excursions in the forest he carried with him a gun, which
screwed into three parts, and which he could easily conceal in the lining of
his coat. Thus armed he would drink with the under-keepers without suspicion;
and when he knew them engaged, would securely take his stand in some distant
part, and mark his buck. When he had killed him, he would draw him aside into
the bushes, and spend the remaining part of the day in a neighboring tree,
that he might be sure no spies were in the way. At night he secreted his
plunder. He had boarded off a part of his cottage, (forming a rough door into
it, like the rest of the partition, struck full of false nail-heads,) with such
artifice, that the keepers, on an information, have searched his house again
and again, and have gone off satisfied of his innocence; tho his secret larder
perhaps at that very time contained a brace of bucks. He had always, he said, a
quick market for his venison; for the country is as ready to purchase it, as
these fellows are to procure it. It is a forest-adage of ancient date, non est
inquirendum unde venit venison.

The encroachments of trespassers, and the houses, and fences thus raised on
the borders of the forest, tho, at this time, in a degree connived at, were
heretofore considered as great nuisances by the old forest-law, and were very
severely punished under the name of purprestures, See Manwood, chapter x. sec.
1.
as tending ad terrorem ferarum -- ad nocumentum forestae -- and, as might be
added, at this time, by the neighboring parishes, ad incrementum pauperum.
When a stranger therefore rears one of these sudden fabrics, the
parish-officers make him provide a certificate from his own parish, or they
remove him. But the mischief commonly arises from a parishioner's raising his
cottage, and afterward selling it to a stranger, which may give him
parish-rights. These encroachments however are evils of so long standing; that
at this day they hardly admit a remedy. Many of these little tenements have
been so long occupied, and have passed through so many hands, that the
occupiers are now in secure possession.

Where the manor of Beaulieu-abbey is railed from the forest, a large
settlement of this kind runs in scattered cottages, at least a mile along the
rails. This nest of incroachers the late duke of Bedford, when lord-warden of
the forest, resolved to root out. But he met with such sturdy, and determined
opposition from the foresters of the hamlet, who amounted to more than two
hundred men, that he was obliged to desist Mr. Samber's MS.
-- whether he took improper measures, as he was a man of violent temper, -- or
whether no measures, which he could have taken, would have been effectual in
repressing so inveterate an evil. -- And yet in some circumstances, these
little tenements (encroachments as they are, and often the nurseries of
idleness) give pleasure to a benevolent breast. When we see them, as we
sometimes do, the habitations of innocence, and industry; and the means of
providing for a large family with ease, and comfort, we are pleased at the idea
of so much utility and happiness, arising from a petty trespass on a waste,
which cannot in itself be considered as an injury.

I once found, in a tenement of this kind, an ancient widow, whose little story
pleased me. -- Her solitary dwelling stood sweetly in a dell, on the edge of
the forest. Her husband had himself reared it, and led her to it, as the
habitation of her life. He had made a garden in the front, planted an orchard
at one end, and a few trees at the other, which in forty years had now shielded
the cottage, and almost concealed it. In her early youth she had been left a
widow with two sons, and a daughter, whose slender education (only what she
herself could give them) was almost her whole employment: and the time of their
youth, she said, was the pleasantest time of her life. As they grew up, and the
cares of the world subsided, a settled piety took possession of her mind. Her
age was oppressed with infirmity, sickness, and various afflictions in her
family. In these distresses, her bible was her great comfort. I visited her
frequently in her last illness, and found her very intelligent in scripture,
and well versed in all the gospel-topics of consolation. For many years she
every day read a portion of her bible, seldom any other book; Just knew, and
knew no more, her bible true;
And in that charter read with sparkling eyes,
Her title to a treasure in the skies.
When she met with passages, she did not understand, at one time, or other, she
said, she often heard them explained at church. -- The story seems to evince
how very sufficient plain scripture is, unassisted with other helps, except
such as are publicly provided, to administer both the knowledge, and the
comforts of religion even to the lowest classes of people.

The dialect of Hampshire has a particular tendency to the corruption of
pronouns, by confounding their cases. This corruption prevails through the
country; but it seems to increase as we approach the sea. About the
neighborhood of New-forest this Doric has attained it is perfection. I have
oftener than once met with the following tender elegiac in churchyards.

Him shall never come again to we:
But as shall surely, one day, go to he.
Having thus given a short account of the present state of New-forest, and it is
inhabitants, I hasten to the more agreeable part of my work, the description of
it is scenery. I have already apprized the reader See p. 16.
, that I propose to consider it is boundaries in their widest extent, as
advancing to the bay of Southampton on the east; to the river Avon on the west;
and to the sea on the south. -- Within equal limits perhaps few parts of
England afford a greater variety of beautiful landscape. It Is woody scenes,
it is extended lawns, and vast sweeps of wild country, unlimited by artificial
boundaries, together with it is river-views, and distant coasts; are all in a
great degree magnificent. It must still however be remembered, that it is chief
characteristic, and what it rests on for distinction, is not sublimity, but
sylvan beauty.

But before I enter on a particular description of the scenery of New-forest,
in a picturesque light, it may not be improper to give the reader a kind of
table of contents of what he is to expect.

ISLE OF WIGHT
map of the Isle of Wight

SECT. IV.
ON looking into a map of New-forest, and drawing an imaginary line from
Ringwood on the Avon, to Dibden on the bay of Southampton, the whole forest
easily divides itself into four parts. That district, which lies north of this
imaginary line, we may call one part. The river Avon, and Lymington-river make
the boundaries of a second: Lymington-river, and Beaulieu-river of a third: and
the country between this last river, and the bay of Southampton, may be
considered as a fourth.

When I spoke of forests in general, as consisting of large tracts of
heathy-land, and carpet-lawns, interspersed with woods See vol. I. p. 210.
, I had a particular view to the scenery of New-forest, which is precisely of
this kind. It Is lawns and woods are every where divided by large districts of
heath. Many of these woods have formerly been, as many of the heaths at present
are, of vast extent; running several miles without interruption. Different
parts too both of the open, and of the woody country, are so high, as to
command extensive distances, tho no part can in any degree assume the title of
mountainous.

Along the banks of the Avon, from Ringwood to the sea, the whole surface is
flat, enclosed, and cultivated. There is little beauty in this part. Eastward
from Christ-church, along the coast, as far as to the estuary of
Lymington-river we have also a continued flat. Much heathy ground is
interspersed; but no woody scenery, except in some narrow glen, through which a
rivulet happens to find it is way to the sea. In two or three of these there is
some beauty. -- Here the coast, which is exposed to the ocean, and formed by
the violence of storms, is edged by a broken cliff, from which are presented
grand sea-views, sometimes embellished with winding shores. As we leave the
coast, and ascend more into the mid-land parts of this division, the scenery
improves. The ground is more varied; woods and lawns are interspersed: and many
of them are among the most beautiful exhibitions of this kind, which the forest
presents.

In the next division, which is contained between the rivers of Lymington, and
Beaulieu, we have also great variety of beautiful country. The coast indeed is
flat, and unedged with cliff; as it lies opposite to the isle of Wight, which
defends it from the violence of the ocean: but the views it presents, are
sometimes interesting. It is wooded in many parts almost to the water's edge;
and the island appearing like a distant range of mountains, gives the channel
the form of a grand lake. -- As we leave the sea, the ground rises, and the
woods take more possession of it, especially along the banks of the two rivers
I have just mentioned, which afford on each side for a considerable space, many
beautiful scenes. There are heathy grounds in this district also; but they
occupy chiefly the middle parts between these two tracts of wood-land.

In that division of New-forest, which is confined by Beaulieu-river, and the
bay of Southampton, the mid-land parts are heathy as in the last; but the
banks, and vicinity both of the river, and the bay, are woody, and full of
beautiful scenery. This division is perhaps, on the whole, the most interesting
of the forest. For besides it is woods, there is greater variety of ground, than
in any other part. Here also are grander water-views, than are exhibited any
where else. The views along the banks of Beaulieu-river, it has in common with
the last division; but those over the bay of Southampton, are wholly it is own.
-- One disagreeable circumstance attends all the sea-views, which are opposite
to the isle of Wight, and that is, the ouziness of the beach, when the sea
retires. A pebbly, or a sandy shore, has as good an effect often when the sea
ebbs, as when it is full -- sometimes perhaps a better: but an ouzy one has an
unpleasant hue. However this shore is one of the best of the kind; for the ouze
here is generally covered with green sea-weed, which as the tide retires, gives
it the appearance of level land deserted by the sea, and turned into meadow.
But these lands are meadows only in surface; for they have no pastoral
accompaniments.

The northern division of New-forest contains all those parts, which lie north
of Ringwood and Dibden. As this district is at a distance from the sea, and not
intersected by any river, whch deserves more than the name of a brook, it is
adorned by no water-views, except near Dibden, where the forest is bounded by
the extremity of the bay of Southampton. The want of water however is
recompensed by grand woody scenes, in which this part of the forest equals, if
not exceeds, any other part. -- In noble distances also it excels; for here the
ground swells higher, than in the more maritime parts; and the distances, which
these heights command, consist often of vast extensive forest-scenes.

Besides the heaths, lawns, and woods, of which the forest is composed, there
is another kind of surface found in many parts, which comes under none of these
denominations, and that is the bog. Many parts of the forest abound in springs;
and as these lands have ever been in a state of nature, and of course
undrained, the moisture drains itself into the low grounds, where, as usual in
other rude countries, it becomes soft, and spongy, and generates bogs. These in
some places are very extensive. In the road between Brokenhurst, and Ringwood,
at a place called Longslade bottom; one of these bogs extends three miles,
without interruption, and is the common drain of all those parts of the forest.
In landscape indeed the bog is of little prejudice. It has in general the
appearance of common verdure. But the traveller must be on his guard. These
tracts of deceitful ground are often dangerous to such as leave the beaten
roads; and traverse the paths of forest. A horse-track is not always the clue
of security. It is perhaps only beaten by the little forest-horse, which will
venture into a bog in quest of better herbage; and his lightness secures him in
a place, where a larger horse, under the weight of a rider, would flounder. If
the traveller therefore meet with a horse-path, pointing into a swamp, even tho
he should observe it to emerge on the other side, he had better relinquish it.
The only track he can prudently follow, is that of wheels.

Having thus presented the reader with a general view of New-forest, I shall
now endeavor to give him a more intimate acquaintance with it, and shall lead
him into some of it is most beautiful scenes. -- Nor was the beauty of the
forest a matter of no concern, even at a time, when we might have supposed the
pleasures of the chase engrossed men's whole attention. "There are three
special causes, says Manwood, why the forest-laws have so carefully provided
for the preservation of the vert of the forest. The first is for the sake of
cover for the deer. The second for the sake of the acorns, mast, etc. which
feed them. The third is, propter decorem, for the comeliness and beauty of the
same in a forest. For the very sight, and beholding of the goodly green, and
pleasant woods in a forest, is no less pleasant, and delightful in the eye of a
prince, than the view of the wild beasts of chase; and therefore the grace of a
forest is to be decked and trimmed up with store of pleasant green coverts
Manwood, chap. vi.
." -- One should scarce have expected such a passage as this in a law-book. On
such authority however, I hope, I may consider the scenery of the forest as
essential to the very existence of it; and shall proceed with more confidence,
in the description of those goodly green, and pleasant woods, the sight and
beholding whereof is so comely and delightful.

In this detail I shall rarely go in quest of views into the intricacies, and
recesses of the forest. These sweet retreats would often furnish a great
variety of pleasing scenes; but it would be difficult to ascertain, and point
them out to the observation of others. I shall satisfy myself therefore with
following the great roads, or, at least, such as are commonly known, where
views may easily be ascertained; reserving only the liberty of stepping a
little aside, when any thing of peculiar excellence deserves attention. -- I
should in this detail also pursue my rout through the forest, with a careful
eye to the arbitrary division I have made of it, into four parts See page 51.
; but as the roads will not always admit such exactness, I must be content to
follow the rout prescribed by the surveyors of the highways; keeping within
the division I have prescribed, as nearly as I can.

SECT. V.
Remarks on the western parts of New-forest, from Vicar's-hill to Ringwood; and
from thence, through Christ-church to Lymington.
FROM Vicar's-hill, we passed Boldre-bridge, and ascending the opposite bank,
called Rope-hill, to Battramsly, we had a beautiful view of the estuary of
Lymington river; which when filled with the tide, forms a grand sweep to the
sea. It is seen to most advantage from the top of the hill, a few yards out of
the road on the right. The valley, through which the river flows, is broad;
it is screens are not lofty, but well varied, and woody. The curves of the river
are marked by long projections of low land, and on one or two of them some
little saltern, or other building is erected, which breaks the lines. The
distance is formed by the sea, and the isle of Wight. All together the view is
picturesque. It is what the painter properly calls a whole. There is a
fore-ground, a middle-ground, and distance -- all harmoniously united. -- We
have the same view, only varied by position, from many high grounds in the
neighborhood; but I know not, that it appears to such advantage any where as
from this hill. -- At Battramsly we join the London-road.

From hence to Brokenhurst, the forest exhibits little more than a wild heath,
skirted here and there with distant wood.

Brokenhurst is a pleasant forest-village, lying in a bottom, adorned with
lawns, groves, and rivulets, and surrounded on the higher grounds by vast
woods. -- From the churchyard an expanded view opens over the whole. On the
left rise the woods of Hinchelsea, and adjoining to these, the woods of
Rhinville. The center is occupied by the high grounds of Boldre-wood. The
little speck just seen among them, is a summer house, built by lord Delawar to
command a forest-view. The house among the woods on the right is Cuffnel's, the
seat of Mr. Rose; and still more to the right, are the woods of Lyndhurst.

At the entrance of Brokenhurst, a little to the right, Mr. Morant's house
commands a very grand, and picturesque forest-view. Both the fore-ground, and
the distance, are complete.

The former is an elevated park-scene, consisting of great variety of ground;
well-planted; and descending gently into the plain below. Among the trees,
which adorn it, are a few of the oldest, and most venerable oaks of the forest.
I doubt not but they chronicle on their furrowed trunks ages before the
conquest.

From this grand fore-ground is presented an extensive forest-view. It consists
of a wide range of flat pasturage (one of the spreading lawns of the forest See
page 210.
) garnished with tufted clumps and woody promontories shooting into it; and
contrasted by immense woods, which occupy all the rising grounds above it, and
circle the horizon. The contrast between the open, and woody parts of the
distance, and the grandeur of each part, are in the highest style of
picturesque beauty.

This grand view is displayed to most advantage from the front of the house:
but it is seen also very advantageously through other openings among the trees
of the fore-ground.

As you leave the village of Brokenhurst, the woods receive you in a noble
rising vista, in which form the road is cut through the forest. This vista is
exceedingly grand. A winding road through a wood, has undoubtedly more beauty
than a vista; and in a smaller scene we always wish to find it; and even
reprobate the vista, wherever it occurs. But through a vast forest the vista is
in better taste; tho I do not in the least apprehend we are under obligations,
on this score, to the surveyor of the highways. He took the direct road; which
happened, on this occasion, to be the line of beauty. On other occasions, under
the same principle, he has missed it: but here it suits the greatness of the
scene; and shows the depth of the forest, and the vastness of the woods, to
more advantage. Regular forms are certainly unpicturesque; but from their
simplicity, they are often allied to greatness. So essential is simplicity to
greatness, that we often see instances, in which the stillness of symmetry has
added to grandeur, if not produced it; while on the other hand, we as often see
a sublime effect injured by the meretricious charms of picturesque forms, and
arrangements.

We are not however to conceive of the forest-vista, as we do of the tame
vistas formed by the hand of art. As it is cut through a tract of woody
country, there is first, of course, no formality in the disposition of the
trees. In the artificial vista, the trees are all of one age, and planted in
regular growth. The whole plan is the offspring of formality; and the more
formal it is, the nearer it approaches that idea of perfection, at which it
aims. But in the forest-vista the trees are casually large, or small; growing
in clumps, or standing single; crouding upon the foreground, or receding from
it; as the wild hand of nature has scattered them. And it is curious to see
with what richness of invention, if I may so speak, nature mixes, and
intermixes her trees; and shapes them into such a wonderful variety of groups,
and beautiful forms. Art may admire, and attempt to plant, and form
combinations, and clumps like hers: but whoever examines the wild combinations
of a forest (which is a delightful study to a picturesque eye) and compares
them with the attempts of art, has little taste, if he do not acknowledge with
astonishment, the superiority of nature's workmanship.

The artificial vista again is rarely composed of more than one species. It is
the fir, the lime, or the elm. But in the forest-vista you have not only
different kinds of trees intermixed; but bushes also, and underwood, and wild
plants of all kinds, which are continually producing new varieties in every
part.

Open groves too make another variety in the forest-vista. In the woods between
Brokenhurst, and Lyndhurst, an open grove is continued on the right, with
little interruption, between the seventh and eighth stones. The woods on the
left are chiefly close.

Besides, these grand vistas are not only varied with such smaller openings,
and recesses, as are formed by the irregular growth of trees; they are broken
also by lawns, and tracts of pasturage, which often shoot athwart them. One of
this kind, and a very beautiful one, occurs at the sixth stone, and another,
tho of inferior size and beauty, at the seventh.

Added to this intermixture of lawn and wood, the rising and falling of the
ground in various parts of this vista produce another species of variety. The
elevation is no where considerable; but it is sufficient to occasion breaks in
the convergency of the great perspective lines. It creates also new beauties in
the scenery; particularly in some parts on the left, where you look down from
the road, among trees retiring, and sinking from the eye, till the stems of the
most distant are lost in the deep shadows of the descending recesses.

All these circumstances, tho the last is more general, give the forest-vista a
very different air from the artificial one, diversifying the parts, of which it
is composed, so much, that the eye is never fatigued with surveying them; while
the whole together presents one vast, sublime object. Like a grand gallery of
exquisite pictures, it fills the eye with all it is greatness; while the
objects, on each side, continually changing, afford at every step a new
entertainment.

A late traveller through Russia does not see these beauties in a forest-vista.
"The country, says he, through which we passed, was ill-calculated to alleviate
our sufferings by transferring our attention from ourselves to the objects
around us. The road ran, as strait as an arrow, through a perpetual forest.
Through the dreary extent of a hundred and ten miles, the gloomy uniformity was
only broken by a few solitary villages I beg the reader's pardon for not
quoting my author. I certainly met with the passage; but not noting the
reference at the time; and not opening my MS. for sometime afterward, it has
now escaped me.
." -- No doubt the continuation of a hundred and ten miles in any one mode of
scenery may be rather fatiguing: but I should have thought, that few modes of
scenery were better calculated to transfer the attention from a disagreeable
subject. I know not indeed what the nature of a vista through a Russian forest
may be: but if it partake of the circumstances that I have just been
describing, in this vista through New-forest, it must consist of varieties,
which could not easily be exhausted.

The account I have here given of the forest-vista is the sober result of
frequent examination. A transcript of the first feelings would have been
rhapsody; which no description should indulge. The describer imagines that his
own feelings of a natural scene can be conveyed by warm expressions. Whereas
nothing but the scene itself can convey his feelings. Loose ideas (not truth,
but verisimilitude) is all that verbal description pretends to convey; and this
is not to be done by high coloring; but to be aimed at by plain, appropriate,
intelligible terms.

I should add, before I leave this pleasing vista, that to see it in
perfection, a strong sunshine is necessary. Even a meridian sun, which has a
better effect on the woods of the forest, than on any other species of
landscape See v. i. page 242.
, is not perhaps too strong for such a scene as this. It will rarely happen,
but that one side, or the other of the vista will be in shadow; and this
circumstance alone will produce contrasts, which will be highly agreeable. -- I
may add also, that this vista appears to much greater advantage, as we rise
through it to Lyndhurst, than as we descend to Brokenhurst.

As we passed this vista, we saw, in many parts through the trees, on the left,
the pales of New-park, just removed from the road. This park, which is the only
one in the whole district of New-forest, is about four miles in circumference.
It was first used to secure stray cattle forfeited to the lord-warden: but in
the year 1670, it was strongly fenced by Charles II. for the reception of a
particular breed of red-deer, which he procured from France The expense of this
work stands thus in the treasury-books.

Fencing New-park and Holm coppice L. 100 Winter provision for red-deer 50 Pens
to feed them 20 Paddocks to catch them, and turn them out 20 L. 190
. It is now converted into a farm; having been granted in the last reign to the
duke of Bedford, for the term of thirty years.

In all the grand scenery of the forest, which we have just examined, we see
little appearance of fine timber. Most of the best trees have been felled. The
landscape however is not much injured. On a fore-ground indeed, when we have a
single tree, we wish it to be of the noblest kind; and it must be confessed
that in our passage through this vista, which in every part as we pass along
becomes a fore-ground, there is a great deficiency of noble trees. Many of the
oaks are scathed, and ragged; and tho in composition trees of this kind have
frequently their effect See v. I. page 8.
; yet in a rich forest-scene, if they present themselves too often, offend. For
all the other purposes of scenery, inferior trees, if they be full grown,
answer tolerably well; and when intermixed with stunted trees, and brush-wood,
as they are in all the wild parts of the forest, they are more beautiful, than
if the whole scene was composed of trees of the stateliest order. Interstices
are better filled; and a more uniform whole is produced. -- Considered in this
light a forest is a picture of the world. We find trees of all ages, kinds, and
degrees -- the old, and the young -- the rich, and the poor -- the stately, and
the depressed -- the healthy, and the infirm. The order of nature is thus
preserved in the world; and the beauty of nature is thus preserved in the
forest.

A gentleman once consulted his friend, who pretended to a degree of taste,
about the propriety of cutting down some trees, which shaded a winding avenue
to his back-front, where his offices were placed. His friend advised him by all
means to leave them untouched. They are beautiful, said he, in themselves; and,
you see, they skreen that part of your house, which you would wish to have
skreened. The gentleman seemed convinced, and the next time he met his friend,
I have taken your advice, said he, and have left the trees standing. And so
indeed he had; but all the stunted wood, and under-growth, which he considered
as offensive rubbish, he had rooted up; over-looking their use in composition.
The consequence was, he laid all the offensive part of his house open; let in
the light, and entirely destroyed the scene.

In the first book I mentioned the different effects of soil, and climate on
trees See v. i. page 25.
. In New-forest these observations are well illustrated. The oaks there seem to
have a character peculiar to themselves. They are the most picturesque trees of
the kind, we meet with. They seldom rise into lofty stems, as oaks usually do
in richer soils: but their branches, which are more adapted to what the
ship-builders call knees and elbows See ibid.
, are commonly twisted into the most picturesque forms. In general I believe,
the poorer the soil, the more picturesque the tree -- that is, it forms a more
beautiful ramification.

Besides, the New-forest oak is not so much loaded with foliage, as the trees
of richer soils. An over-loaded foliage destroys all form. On the other hand,
when the leaf is too thinly scattered, the tree looks blighted, shrivelled, and
meagre. The point of picturesque perfection is when the tree has foliage enough
to form a mass; and yet not so much as to hide the branches. One of the great
ornaments of a tree, is it is ramification, which ought to appear, here and
there, under the foliage, even when it is in full leaf. It is the want of this
species of ramification, which gives a heaviness to the beech See v. I, page 44.
.

The great avenue from Brokenhurst leads through the space of five or six
miles. After we have mounted the summit of the hill, the close views in the
descent on the other side, are very beautiful, consisting of little woody
recesses, open groves, or open glades, varied as they were before, in different
forms.

As we approach Lyndhurst, we pass Foxlees on the left. The situation here is
just the reverse of Mr. Morant's. The one stands high, and commands the forest
at a distance; the other, in a bottom, is surrounded by it. Both modes of
situation have their beauty; but an extensive forest-view before the house,
with a few noble trees on the fore-ground, is not only, at all times, a better
picture; but it is also more agreeably varied by the occasional incidents of
light and weather, of which the other is not capable.

In a part of the skreen, which divides these grounds from the road, we have an
opportunity of remarking the disagreeable effect of trees planted alternately.
The eye is disgusted with looking first on a fir, secondly on an elm; thirdly
on a fir; fourthly on an elm again, and so on. And yet this tiresome monotony,
under the name of variety, is one of the commonest modes of planting. In
planting, we should certainly endeavor at least to plant like nature, which
gives us the best criterion of beauty. This alternacy is a direct, and studied
opposition to all her pleasing forms of composition. It not only shows the hand
of art; but of the most tastless art. How much more beautiful would such a
skreen appear, made up of different kinds of trees in masses of each; or in an
indiscriminate mixture of all together?

The town of Lyndhurst makes a picturesque appearance, as we approach it; but
instead of entering it, we left it on the right; and turned abruptly into the
road to Minsted. The ground here is much varied. It is hilly, broken, and
wooded in clumps; with cottages here and there, interspersed. Nothing in the
pastoral style can be more picturesque. -- We have also extensive views through
the woods; particularly a grand retrospect toward Southampton. But as we
approach Minsted, the woods fail: all becomes cultivation; and the idea of a
forest is in a great degree lost. Soon after we enter the western road to
Ringwood, over a spacious heath.

At the eighty-second stone, about a quarter of a mile down the hill on the
right from the road, we are shown the scene of the celebrated event of Rufus's
death. When I mentioned the tree See v. i. page 161.
, on which the arrow Tyrrel glanced, I offered some reasons for supposing it
might be admitted, as evidence in identifying the place. The scene also in some
degree bears the same testimony. For history informs us, the diversion of the
day was now over, the sun was declining, and William, dismounting his horse,
was enjoying a moment's rest after the fatigue of the chase See William of
Malmsb. and Henry of Huntingdon.
, when a stag darted suddenly across the heath. The king turning toward it,
and lifting his hand to skreen his eyes from the sun See an account, which
Rapin gives in a note from Sir John Haywood.
, at that moment received the arrow. The scene is a sweet sequestered bottom,
open to the west, where the corner of a heath sinks gently into it; but
sheltered on the east by a beechen grove, and on every other side by clumps of
trees, forming an irregular skreen around it; among which are several winding
avenues of greensward. -- It is the very place, where a person heated with
toil, might be allured to stop for a moment's repose. But the chief
circumstance of evidence is, that as the place is open only to the west, where
the heath was never probably covered with wood, the king could there only have
been incommoded by an evening-sun.

Having taken a view of this scene, which in itself, unconnected with the
history it records, is a pleasing one, we ascended again into the great road,
and pursued the heath, over which it led. -- It is a wild expanse, unadorned
with wood; but bounded on every side, by very extensive distances. In front you
discover the high grounds of the isle of Purbeck. On the left, you have a large
range over the isle of Wight. In the retrospect you overlook the bay, and town
of Southampton; and on the right is spread before you a vast stretch of distant
country, bounded by the hills of Wiltshire, and Dorsetshire. This last is the
only part of these distances, which has any picturesque value. About the
eighty-sixth stone, the parts of it are best disposed; but it is the richest
about the eighty-ninth, where it is seen over a woody bottom, which makes a
middle ground.

In this part of the forest the paling of one of the new enclosures to secure
timber, which ran a considerable way in a strait line, deformed our views.
Sometimes indeed the paling of parks, and forests is picturesque, where it runs
winding round a hill, and appears again perhaps in some opposite direction; but
in general, it is an unpleasing object; and what in adorned scenery we should
wish to hide. Indeed all divisions of property are great nuisances to the
picturesque eye, which loves to range at large; and it adds peculiar beauty to
the forest, that in general the grand lines of nature, and various swelling of
the ground, are unbroken by these intrusions, and have their full play, and
undulation. In remote distances, hedge-rows, pales, and other objects,
offensive on the spot, become one rich blended surface. -- And yet, even on the
spot, winding lanes, with full-grown hedges on each side, are often beautiful.
It is clipping, and making, as they phrase it, which ruin the picturesque idea.
Utility is always counteracting beauty. No sooner is the hedge in perfection,
than it is destroyed If the reader wish to know an ancient mode of making
hedges, he will find it, as follows, in the fifth book of Q. Curtius. "Having
planted twigs very close in the situation they wished, they bent their
branches, as they made shoots, and inserted their extremities into the earth.
Here they took root; and from these roots shot into new branches. These again
were bent into the earth, and so on, till a fence was obtained of the
dimensions wanted." -- I have seen this mode, I believe, practiced in some
parts of England.
.

The approach to Ringwood, as we leave the wild heath, which gave occasion to
this digression, is woody and pleasant. -- Ringwood was formerly the boundary
of the forest in this part; and in times of still more remote antiquity, was a
place of great note. I know not whether in Saxon times, it did not claim the
honors of regal residence. At present it is a cheerful village, seated in a
flat country, on the banks of the Avon, which spreads, near the town, into a
large piece of water, full of little islands, and frequented by swans.

Somewhere near this part of the river the duke of Monmouth is said to have
been taken, on the eighth of july 1685, after his defeat at Sedgmore, near
Bridgwater. Thus far he had traveled in disguise, and generally by night;
feeding on pulse, and green corn, which he found growing in the fields. But I
think the account more probable, that he was taken near Woodlands in
Dorsetshire See Hutching's hist. of Dorset, p. 60 and 499.
. It was thought however, that he intended to have secured himself in the woods
of New-forest, with which he was well acquainted from having frequently hunted
in them. I have heard a tradition, that his body after his execution, was sent
down into the forest, and buried privately in Boldre-church-yard; but I cannot
find any ground for the surmise. The register of the year is yet extant, in
which no notice is taken of any such burial; unless he were buried, as might
possibly have been the case, under a fictitious name.

From Ringwood to Christ-church the country is flat, and the lanes close, and
woody. Scarce any distant view is admitted, except here and there, among the
meadows on the right. On the left, Mr. Compton's park at Bistern affords some
variety, running a considerable way along the road, and grazed with herds of
large speckled cattle, without horns.

As we leave the village of Sopley, the meadows on the right, form a better
landscape, than we had yet had. The parts are large, tho flat; and the whole is
bounded with wood; in which the tower of Christ-church appears as a principal
object. The church, to which it belongs, was formerly monastic. It is a grand
pile, partly Saxon, and partly Gothic. Some of it is Gothic members are
beautiful; particularly a small chapel, near the altar, dedicated to the virgin
Mary; which for proportion and beauty of workmanship, is a very elegant piece
of Gothic architecture. The church is now parochial.

The town of Christ-church, which takes it is name from the church, is a place
of great antiquity. Here we find the ruins of a castle, which was intended
formerly to secure the mouth of the Avon. This river is joined by the Stour
below the town; where uniting in a full stream, they wind together through a
bleak coast, forming it first into large flat meadows, and then opening into a
bay before they enter the sea. The view, which is not very interesting, is
bounded by a ridge of high lands, called Christ-church head, on the right; and
on the left, by the western end of the isle of Wight, which in this part, makes
a remarkable appearance. It is seen nearly in front; and it is broken cliffs,
when the noontide sun in winter shines strongly upon it, appear like the ends
of two fractured walls, with a dark cavity between them.

From Christ-church to Lymington the country continues flat, cultivated, and
enclosed. Scarce an object presents itself. A little to the right of the road,
you see a large house built by lord Bute for the benefit of the sea-air. It
stands on a cliff directly opposite to Cherburgh, from which it is about sixty
miles distant; and it overlooks the sea, just in that point, where
Christ-church head, and the western promontory of the isle of Wight, form an
immense colonade before it.

The road to the house runs directly to the front, narrow, and contracted at
the entrance, but opening by degrees. The house first appears; then the extent
of the lawn; which is ample, with a pavilion at each extremity. These from the
sea appear to connect it with the house; and give it consequence. Beyond the
lawn, the grand colonade just mentioned, extends; and beyond all, the expanse
of the ocean. There is something very amusing in thus contemplating an idea,
which is continually dilating, and opening itself from a narrow tunnel into
infinite space. If it were the effect of chance, or necessity, we have only to
admire the happiness of it.

The cliff, on which the house stands, is about fifty, or sixty yards high. It
is not perpendicular, but the ground being of a spongy, foundering nature, is
continually falling in huge masses; and affords an easy foundation for winding
stairs among the heaps of ruin, which occupy the slope. At the bottom you are
received by a clean, sandy beach, where, at the ebb of the tide, you may
continue your walk many miles.

The house is a sumptuous pile; and contains much curiosity: but as I am in
quest only of scenery, my subject forbids me to enter houses. Lord Bute has
made an attempt to adorn the cliff around him with a plantation. But if it
should not thrive, I think the loss not great. Trees, in so exposed a
situation, may perhaps just get hold of the ground: but I should think it
impossible for them to produce either shelter, or ornament. Indeed in views of
this kind, I have my doubts, whether the rural idea should not purposely be
excluded, as interfering with the native grandeur of the scene. Flowers, and
flowering shrubs at least seem to be alien beauties.

As we leave lord Bute's, the country still continues flat, cultivated, and
enclosed. Scarce a single opening presents itself. We observed however one
species of landscape, which in so flat a surface, is singular -- those hollows,
or dells mentioned in the general view of the forest See page 52.
, running across it to the sea. They have not indeed the consequence of
mountain-dells; yet some of them afford pleasing scenery. The most remarable
are those of Chuton, Ashley, and Effort. In each of these there is a little
rivulet, which the traveller, ignorant of the country, will sometimes be
surprised to see swollen to an extraordinary size, without any apparent cause.
The case is, they communicate with the sea, at a very little distance; but
being totally screened from it, and sheltered by wood on every side, they have
the appearance of inland brooks, tho in fact they are under the influence of a
tide.

The cliff, on which lord Bute's house stands, runs two, or three miles along
the coast toward Lymington; and is known by the name of Hordwell cliff. The
summit of it is a fine carpet down, and is much frequented in the
summer-season, by company from Lymington, for the sake of sea-air, and
sea-views. The sides of this cliff, as was observed, frequently fall in, and
after one of these founders, as they are called, the masses of ruin form a
bold, rough bank, against the sea, which secures the coast from another
founder, till that body of earth is washed away, and the land-springs have
loosened the earth above, when the cliff again falls in. Within these last
twenty years the sea has gained near a quarter of a mile, in some places on
this coast, and the calculators of the country say, that lord Bute's house
cannot possibly stand above thirty years. He has taken however great pains to
secure it, by diverting, at a great expense, the land-springs: so that he has
little to fear but the action of the sea, which, tho a rough enemy, is a much
less dangerous one; and against this he has endeavored to guard by facing the
precipice in different parts with stone.

In this cliff between Christ-church and Lymington, is found a great variety of
fossil shells. About a hundred and twenty different sorts were collected by Mr.
Gustavus Brander, of Christ-church, and presented to the British museum. Mr.
Brander published also in 1766, descriptions, and very neat engravings of them,
under the title of Fossilia Hantoniensia. These shells are found about fourteen
or fifteen feet below the surface. The stratum above them is sand and gravel.
The soil, in which they are found, is a bluish clay; and runs down from the
gravelly stratum, to a level with the sea; and probably much deeper. In every
part of this cliff these shells are found; but chiefly about the village of
Hordwell. It is difficult to get them: the collector must clamber up the sides
of the precipice; and then extricate them from the clay, which is very stiff,
by a tool. Their texture too is so brittle, that in cleansing them he runs a
great risque of breaking them. -- What is remarkable, few of these shells
belong to this coast, or indeed to any European coast; and many of them as far
as is known, are found no where else. It is remarkable also, that this stratum
of shells runs in a northerly direction quite through New-forest. Wherever the
earth is opened to any depth, in digging marle, or on other occasions, shells
are found; tho I never saw them of any size; except upon the coast.

A little below Hordwell, the cliff fails, and the coast becoming flat between
this place and Lymington, is commodiously formed into salterns; where great
quantities of excellent salt have been made; tho the trade has of late fallen
off. The square, bounded receptacles to receive the brine, are a glaring injury
to the beauty of the shore.



About two or three miles farther along the coast, stands Hurst-castle, built
at the point of an extraordinary natural causeway, which runs two miles into
the sea; forming a narrow channel, between the castle, and the isle of Wight.
The causeway itself also is so narrow, that it scarce, at high water, exceeds
two hundred yards in breadth. In high tides it is much narrower. The whole is
covered with loose pebbles. The side toward the island is a bold shore; beaten
into ledges, or terraces of pebbles, by the violence of the waves. The other
side, which is sheltered, is undulating, marshy, and undetermined; forming the
water, when the tide flows, into a smooth land-locked bay.

From this little peninsula you are entertained with views on each hand. The
island, and the Needle-rocks are objects, dreary, vast, and grand; and not
wholly unpicturesque. But to make them objects of the pencil, they must be well
enlightened, and the foreground adorned with a little naval furniture -- an
anchor, a net hanging to dry, a drifted boat, or some other object, with which
seacoasts abound. When I first saw this scene, it was in a sultry summer-noon,
and all the cliffs were overspread with that dingy indistinct hue, which
sometimes accompanies a hot meridian sun. The sea, which was calm, was lighter
than the land, tho darker than the sky. -- But in the evening, the white cliff
at the end of the island, together with the Needles, were tinged with the
setting sun, and became very splendid; and the sea glowing with equal radiance,
the whole view, and every part of it, was rich and harmonious.

On the other side of the peninsula, the Hampshire coast, extending far and
wide, forms an immense bay, which appears flat, woody, and interspersed with a
variety of distant objects. The parts are here, and there, picturesque; but the
whole, tho amusing, is too vast for the pencil.

Hurst-castle lying level with the beech, fully commands the channel, which
separates the coast of Hampshire from the isle of Wight. It consists of a round
tower fortified by semi-circular bastions; and was among the strongest of those
castles, which were built by Henry VIII. But since Portsmouth has been a place
of consequence, and always guarded by a fleet, this castle, as well as others
of the same intention, are now neglected. -- In this castle the apartments are
still shown, where Charles I was confined, when he was carried from the isle of
Wight; and very miserable they are. -- On the batteries we saw an instance of
Hogarth's humor, when he was painter to the ordinance. The carriages have all
crowns painted on them, with the king's initials. Below one of them, painted
exactly in the vulgar style of the rest, Hogarth has formally put the initials
of his name. -- The form of this castle at a little distance, set off by the
rocks of the island as a back ground, is unpicturesque.

The Needles, which are of the same texture of rock with the neighboring
cliffs of the island, seem to have been washed from them by the sea. A gradual
change has been observed, even in the memory of man. We may easily imagine with
what violence a storm at sea pours in among these piles of formidable rocks,
when the suction and eddies of tides and currents make them dangerous almost in
the serenest weather.

Besides the curious situation of Hurst-castle, there is another peculiarity on
this coast, which deserves notice. It is an island called the Shingles, which
sometimes rises fifteen or twenty feet above the water; and at other times
totally disappears. It shifts it is situation also, rearing itself, at one time,
nearer the isle of Wight, and at another, nearer the coast of Hampshire. The
mystery of it is this. In that part of the channel lies a vast bank of pebbles,
so near the surface, that it is beaten up into an island, by the raging of the
sea, sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other, as the tides and
currents drive. From the same causes too, all the prominent parts of it are as
easily dispersed, and the island vanishes. When we saw it, it consisted of
several acres: but it was then larger, than had been remembered for many years.
The sea however had found a passage through the middle of it; and it was
lessening daily.

But as the country from Christ-church is flat, and the sea generally excluded
from the fight, all these views of the isle of Wight, the Needles, and
Hurst-castle must be obtained by leaving the road, and getting a little nearer
the coast. Other interesting views may be sought in the same way, both on the
right, and left of the road. At Milford, and in the neighborhood of it, are
several good views of these great objects. At Rook-cliff, a little nearer the
sea, the views are again varied; the island, and coast forming the appearance
of an ample bay. On the other side of the road, about Pennington-common, from
Mr. Dixon's, and other places, the distant views make a new appearance, just
skirting the horizon, over a flat country, with a long sweep of the island, and
intervening channel. But the most beautiful view, on this side, is from Mr.
Etty's drawing room at Priestlands. The near grounds sink in the middle into a
sort of wide valley, which is occupied in the distance by the island, and the
channel: and as they retire from the eye on the left, and wind rather toward
it on the right, the whole has the appearance of a grand lake; bounded at this
end, but running far into distance at the other. As the house stands in the
center of this view, it appears as if the house, and view had been adapted to
each other; which is one of the happiest circumstances, that can attend a
situation. A fine view is pleasing; but a fine view adapted to the situation of
a house, is more so. -- They who are unacquainted with the country, should be
apprized, that in all these views, and wherever the island is seen from the
Hampshire coast, it is insularity is no where discoverable. An extensive curtain
of it only appears.

A little farther to the east stands Lymington, just at the point, where the
flat country we had been traveling from Christ-church, descends to the river,
which takes it is name from the town. The brow, and gentle descent of this
falling ground the town occupies; forming one handsome street, which overlooks
the high grounds on the opposite side of the river. It is a neat, well built
town, and pleasantly seated. The houses, especially on the side of the street
next the coast, have views from the windows, and gardens, of the isle of Wight,
and the sea.

Across the estuary, formed at the mouth of Lymington-river, a dam with
floodgates is thrown. The intention was, to exclude the salt water from the
meadows above; which, it was hoped, might have become good pasturage: but the
purpose is not answered. A great beauty however arises from the influx of the
tide, which forms a handsome piece of water above the dam, with many reaches,
and winding shores. We have already observed the beauty of this estuary; when
seen from the higher grounds, as it enters the sea See page 61.
. The scenes are equally interesting, which it affords, when the eye pursues it
up the stream, into it is recesses in the forest. One of the best of them opens
from the stable-yard of the angel-inn in Lymington, and the parts adjacent.

The channel between the isle of Wight, and the shores of Hampshire, is
sufficiently deep, at all times, for ships of force, and burden, which often
pass through the Needles, as it is phrased: but if the weather be at all rough;
it is thought an unsafe passage; and in general these narrow seas are
frequented by smaller vessels. The port of Lymington particularly, which is
entered by a long, narrow, shallow river, is chiefly frequented by light
skiffs, rigged in the cutter-form, with a jib and boom. These are, of all
others, the most beautiful vessels, which frequent a coast. To make a large
ship a beautiful object, some peculiar incident is necessary. She must be
fore-shortened; for a ship in profile is formal. Her sails also must in part be
furled: for the square sail without any contrast is disgusting. A degree of
distance also is requisite, both to lessen the object; and to soften the
features of it. -- But the light skiff, with a single mast, a jib, and boom, is
beautiful almost in any position. As she is often undecked, the lines of her
sides are generally well contrasted; and the various turns, and swellings of
her sails almost always present some elegant form.

Of these vessels great numbers frequent the channel, between the isle of
Wight, and the coast of Hampshire. And what adds to the animation of the scene,
the river forms two or three bold, and beautiful curves; so that you see each
little coasting-vessel, as she tacks about, in entering the harbor, or leaving
it, in every position in which she can possibly present herself. A small
harbor therefore is much more productive of picturesque objects, than one of
larger size, frequented either by ships of war, or of burden. A scene, like
this, gave occasion to those very beautiful lines in Shakespeare.

She sat with me on Neptune's yellow sand,
Marking the embarked traders on the flood;
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive,
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind:
Which she, with pretty, and with swimming gate
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire)
Would imitate; and sail upon the land,
To fetch me trifles, and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
As we leave the dam, and pursue our course along the shores of the river, we
are entertained, if it be full, with some good lake-scenes.

On the western side, just opposite to Vicar's-hill, are the ruins of a
Roman-camp, which the country people know by the name of Buckland-ring, tho in
fact it is rectangular. It gives no value to the scene; but if your curiosity
lead you to it, you will find it a very complete work of the kind. There are
many larger in England; but few more perfect. It measures in length about two
hundred paces; in breadth not quite so much; and has been defended by two
ramparts, and two ditches. The whole of these works is entire, except the front
toward the river, which is demolished: but in the demolition you may trace the
double ditches. The ramparts seem to have been about twenty feet high. In the
front, the view is very extensive over the channel, and all the environs of the
river. On the opposite side the eye is carried far and wide, into the forest.

Below the camp, runs a creek from the river, where it is supposed the Romans
used to land; and works have been thrown up there also with a view, no doubt,
to secure their landing. These works resemble those of the camp itself; only
the area is less, and the rampart single.

There has been also, on the other side of the river, exactly opposite to
Lymington, another small fort. Nothing remains now, except the artificial
mount, on which it had been erected: but it is generally supposed to have been
a speculatory station to the grand camp of Buckland, as it commands a wide view
of the channel.

SECT. VI.
Remarks on the western parts of New-forest, in a ride from Vicar's-hill, to
Wilverly-lodge -- Burley-lodge -- Boldrewood-lodge -- Rhinfield-lodge --
Setley-wood -- Burnt hill, etc.

HAVING thus taken a large circuit, of near fifty miles, round the western
parts of the forest; I shall now conduct my reader through the same country
again, interiore gyro. The internal parts of this extensive circle are supposed
to contain some of the most beautiful scenery of it is kind in the forest. But
as we had here no turn-pike-road to guide us, and a great variety of paths to
mislead us, we were obliged to put ourselves on horseback under the conduct of
one of the under-keepers.

Instead of holding the great road, as before from Battramsley to Brokenhurst,
we turned short, to the left, into the open part of the forest, toward a noted
landmark, called Marl-pit-oak; well known to the deer-stealer; who on this, or
some neighboring tree, often takes his stand, in the dusk of a summer-evening,
to watch the herd, as it leaves the woods to graze these open grounds.

This wild heath receives some beauty from it is swelling in various parts. The
swells are bold, but at the same time easy: the ground, seldom broken,
generally falls gently into little valleys. -- These beauties however are
obvious only to the picturesque eye, which by a little imaginary finishing can
form these rough ground-plots into pictures. -- As we attained the higher part
of the heath, we had better landscape. We had been mounting gradually from the
great road through two or three miles, when the country giving way on the
right, a grand display of woody-scenery was opened toward Brokenhurst, and
Lyndhurst. On the left, the heath is but meagerly skirted with wood. To make
amends however, the cliffs of the isle of Wight range beyond it in the distance.

Scattered about these wild grounds we meet with many tumuli. Between
Shirley-holms, and Setley-wood, are four or five. Two of them are raised in
contiguous circles, which is a circumstance rather uncommon. It seems to
indicate, that the persons, to whose memory they were constructed, had been
nearly connected. On pacing the circumference of each, we find they have
belonged to persons of unequal dignity, in the proportion of a hundred and
eight, to eighty three. But a little to the east of Shirly-holms, near
Peatmer-pond, arises a larger tumulus than either of these, called
Shirley-barrow. It Is circumference is one hundred and forty paces. -- There are
many other tumuli, on the great heaths of the forest; which I mention here, as
I shall take no farther notice of them.

As we descended the gentle heights, on which we were now raised, a beautiful
valley, about a quarter of a mile in breadth, opened before us, arrayed in
vivid green, and winding two or three miles round a wood. On the other side the
grounds, wild, and unadorned, fall with an easy sweep into it. Beyond these a
grand woody scene spreads, far, and wide, into distance; and as it approaches
the eye, unites gently with the other parts of the landscape. The valley was no
other than that vast bog, already mentioned, known by the name of
Longslade-bottom See an account of it, page 56.
. It Is deceitful surface however does no injury to it is picturesque form: only
indeed it deprives it of the appendages of grazing cattle. The nimble deer trip
over it in summer without inconvenience; but no animals of heavier bulk dare
trust themselves upon it. -- The name of the wood beyond this verdant valley,
is Hinchelsea.

As we leave Longslade-bottom on the right, the grounds, which rise on the
left, are occupied by Sethorn-wood, a scene of considerable extent.
Sethorn-wood was once the noblest of all forest-scenes. The ground it stood on
is beautifully varied; and the grandeur, and number of it is oaks were the
admiration of all, who saw them. But it is glories are now over. During the
unremitted course of thirty years it continued to add strength to the fleets of
Britain; itself sufficient to raise a navy. In this arduous service, it is
vigor was at length exhausted; and it contains little more, at present, than
shrubs, and underwood, and blasted trees. In the midst of this wood rises a
hill called Oak-brow, from the stately oaks, which once adorned it is summit,
and shaggy sides. But it is honors fell a sacrifice, not, like those of
Sethorn, to it is country's good, but to the convenience of a potent neighbor.
Through the influence of lord Delawar, whose views it obstructed, it is oaks
were felled, long before any inroads had been made among the woods, which
incircled them. And if the destruction of these oaks had been partial; if a
few, here and there, had been left as a fore-ground, the injury, on the spot at
least, might the less be regretted. For the views which are thus opened from
it is brow, make great amends for the loss of it is woods. They consist chiefly
of two or three beautiful lawns, skreened with forest-scenery. Yew-tree-bottom
denotes one of these scenes; and Even-water-bottom, another. The former
receives it is name from the species of trees, which decorate it; the latter,
from a pool, which occupies it is middle area.

In forest language, valleys in general are called bottoms; tho in fact, they
are wide extended scenes. Most of them have their little rivulets running
through them. But these forest-streams are very unlike the streams of a
mountainous country; pouring among rocks, and fretting among pebbles. Theirs is
a tamer nature. They are seldom more than little ouzing rills, which drain the
springy sides of rising grounds; and wander slowly, unobserved, and
unobstructed, through the valleys of the forest. The landscape however, seldom
wants their paltry assistance. The only way, in which these rivulets are of any
use in a forest-scene, is, when they spread themselves into little pools, in
some part of the valley, as they do here, in Even-water-bottom, and as they
frequently do in other scenes; and the merit of these little pieces of water
chiefly consists in drawing all the cattle of the neighborhood around their
banks, which greatly animate, and enrich the view.

In this part of the forest stands Wilverly-lodge commanding beautiful views of
these sweet wooded lawns, and valleys; which, from the high situation of the
lodge, are set off with the isle of Wight, as a back-ground.

From Wilverly, we traversed the pales of a new timber enclosure, which is not
less than four miles in circumference. If the wood, which it is meant to
defend, should ever flourish, it would soon create a scene. But at present this
part of the forest is barren of beauty, and there is so very little appearance
of the growth of timber, that people are apt to suppose, it has been ignorantly
planted; or negligently attended. -- One reason indeed assigned for the ruin of
the young wood, is the quantity of rabbits, which breed in the dry, sandy hills
of these parts; and which it is difficult, amidst such shelter, to extirpate. A
young oak, just vegetating from the acorn, is esteemed, by these pernicious
inmates, the most delicious food. Thus it may be said, the glory of England may
be nipped in the bud by a paltry rabbit.

After we leave these dreary pales, the country, here and there, breaks out
toward Holmsley-lodge; but nothing is very interesting till we arrive at the
brow of Burley-hill. Here the eye is greatly regaled. From this height it
surveys a grand sweep of different removes of woody distance, spreading round a
semicircular plain of several miles in extent; known by the name of
Mark-way-bottom. The plain itself consisting of a well-proportioned
intermixture of rich heath, and green pasturage, is something between a
forest-lawn, and a forest-heath; too large for the one, and yet not large
enough for the other. In two or three different parts, it is adorned with those
attractive pools, which enrich a landscape with the introduction of animal life.

The woods, which incircle this grand savannah, as we survey them from the brow
of the hill, are those of Bury on the left: adjoining to these, commence the
woods of Burley; and still more to the right, those of Rhinfield. All this rich
scenery is in one continued, tho varied and broken, sweep; and ranges at
different distances from one mile to ten. The woods of Bury on the left, being
he nearest, and most elevated, entirely fill that part of the horizon, under
which they spread: but beyond those of Burley rise, in fainter coloring, the
two woody-bosomed hills of Lyndhurst; and beyond the woods of Rhinfield, a very
remote forest-view stretches into all the obscurity of distance. Every species
of country, cultivated, as well as uncultivated, when melted down into
distance, has a fine effect; as we have often observed; but the
forest-distance, is among the richest. -- Such is the grand view, from
Burley-hill; continually varying it is appearance as we descend.

Our road led us over Mark-way-bottom, to the duke of Bolton's at Burley; which
is an excellent forest-lodge, tho an ordinary ducal-seat. The late duke having
obtained a grant of it for thirty years, was at some expense in adorning it. He
built handsome stables; fitted up the house, and laid out a lawn before it,
which is bounded by a piece of embanked water. There is but little taste
however shown in the improvements; nor indeed does the situation deserve much
attention. It is low; and except that it stands in the midst of a beautiful
forest, it is on the whole, ill-chosen.

The lawn of this lodge is adorned with some very grand oaks, which from the
dignity of their form, and venerable appearance; as well as the number of the
most respectable of them, have obtained the name of the twelve apostles.

In the woods around this lodge, we saw a breed of small cattle, which the late
duke of Bolton procured from Scotland. While this herd was increasing, they
were suffered to run wild in the forest; but in a course of years, when he
wished to reclaim a few of them, their habits were become so obstinate, and
their nature so ferocious, that it was attempted without success; and they are
now among the ferae natura of the forest. They are mischievous however only
when attacked. We rode, and walked among them without any molestation.

From Burley-lodge it is little more than two miles to Boldre-wood lodge, the
seat of lord Delawar. This house enjoys one of the finest situations of the
forest. It stands high, with an extensive lawn before it, from which it
commands a vast extent of forest-scenery, spread around in great variety of
distance; particularly toward Burley-lodge, where the woods stretch far and
wide, beyond a lengthened savannah, which sets them off to great advantage The
same kind of situation, only varied, is described in page 63.
. -- On the other side of the lawn, the distances are woody; but more broken,
and not so remote.

Nor are the home-views around this beautiful spot, less pleasing, than those
at a distance. We wound near a mile round the lodge, through a succession of
rich forest-scenery, composed chiefly of beech. The trees thmeselves are among
the most beautiful of their kind, having been secured from the ax by the
protection of the house they adorn. But still the beech, even in perfection, is
inferior to the oak, the elm, and the ash, in most of the characteristics of
picturesque beauty. It has always too much of a spiry pointedness in the
extremities of its branches; which gives a littleness to its parts. In its most
beautiful form it rarely shakes off this characteristic imperfection. If the
trees however as individuals, were less pleasing, their combinations were
highly beautiful; and exhibited much scenery from those natural openings, and
glades, which are so often found in the internal parts of forests.

All the woods not only around this lodge, but in its neighborhood, abound in
beech. The mast of this tree is the most fattening food for deer; and gives
such repute to the winter-venison of Boldre-wood walk, that a stranger would
have difficulty in getting a king's warrant for a do executed in it Mr.
Samber's MS.
.

These woods also afford excellent feeding for hogs, which are led, in the
autumn-season, into many parts of the forest, but especially among the oaks,
and beeches of Boldre-wood, to fatten on mast. It is among the rights of the
forest-borderers to feed their hogs in the forest, during the pawnage-month, as
it is called, which commences about the end of september, and lasts six weeks.
For this privilege they pay a trifling acknowledgment at the steward's court at
Lyndhurst. The word pawnage was the old term for the money thus collected See
Manwood on forest-law, p. 201.
.

The method of treating hogs at this season of migration, and of reducing a
large herd of these unmanageable brutes to perfect obedience, and good
government, is curious.

The first step the swine-herd takes, is to investigate some close sheltered
part of the forest, where there is a convenience of water; and plenty of oak,
or beech-mast, the former of which he prefers, when he can have it in
sufficient abundance Pliny seems to be of a different opinion. "Glans fagea
suem hilarem facit, carnem coquibilem, ac levem, et utilem stomacho. Tradit
Nigidius fungosam carnem fieri esculo, robore, subere." Lib. xvi. 6.
. He fixes next on some spreading tree, round the bole of which he wattles a
slight, circular fence of the dimensions he wants; and covering it roughly with
boughs, and sods, he fills it plentifully with straw, or fern.

Having made this preparation, he collects his colony among the farmers, with
whom he commonly agrees for a shilling a head, and will get together perhaps a
herd of five or six hundred hogs. Having driven them to their destined
habitation, he gives them a plentiful supper of acorns, or beech-mast, which he
had already provided, sounding his horn; during the repast. He then turns them
into the litter, where, after a long journey, and a hearty meal, they sleep
deliciously.

The next morning he lets them look a little around them -- shows them the
pool, or stream, where they may occasionally drink -- leaves them to pick up
the offals of the last night's meal; and as evening draws on, gives them
another plentiful repast under the neighboring trees, which rain acorns upon
them for an hour together, at the sound of his horn. He then sends them again
to sleep.

The following day he is perhaps at the pains of procuring them another meal,
with music playing as usual. He then leaves them a little more to themselves,
having an eye however on their evening-hours. But as their bellies are full,
they seldom wander far from home, retiring commonly very orderly, and early to
bed.

After this, he throws his sty open, and leaves them to cater for themselves;
and from hence-forward has little more trouble with them, during the whole time
of their migration. Now and then, in calm weather, when mast falls sparingly,
he calls them perhaps together by the music of his horn to a gratuitous meal;
but in general, they need little attention, returning regularly home at night,
tho they often wander in the day two or three miles from their sty. There are
experienced leaders in all herds, which have spent this roving life before; and
can instruct their juniors in the method of it. By this management the herd is
carried home to their respective owners in such condition, that a little dry
meat will soon fatten them.

I would not however have it supposed, that all the swine-herds in the forest
manage their colonies with this exactness. Bad governments, and bad governors
will every where exist; but I mention this as an example of sound policy -- not
as a mere Platonic, or Eutopian scheme; but such as has been often realized,
and has as often been found productive of good order, and public utility. The
hog is commonly supposed to be an obstinate, headstrong, unmanageable brute:
and he may perhaps have a degree of positiveness in his temper. In general,
however if he be properly managed, he is an orderly, docile animal. The only
difficulty is, to make your meanings, when they are fair, and friendly,
intelligible to him. Effect this, and you may lead him with a straw.

Nor is he without his social feelings, when he is at liberty to indulge them.
In these forest-migrations, it is commonly observed, that of whatever number
the herd consists, they generally separate, in their daily excursions, into
such little knots, and societies, as have formerly had habits of intimacy
together; and in these friendly groups they range the forest; returning home at
night, in different parties, some earlier, and some later, as they have been
more or less fortunate in the pursuits of the day.

It sounds oddly to affirm the life of a hog to be enviable; and yet there is
something uncommonly pleasing in the lives of these emigrants -- something at
least more desirable, than is to be found in the life of a hog Epicuri de
grege. They seem themselves also, to enjoy their mode of life. You see them
perfectly happy, going about at their ease, and conversing with each other in
short, pithy, interrupted sentences, which are no doubt, expressive of their
own enjoyments, and of their social feelings.

Besides the hogs, thus led out in the mast-season to fatten, there are others,
the property of forest-keepers, which spend the whole year in such societies.
After the mast-season is over, the indigenous forest-hog depends chiefly for
his livelihood on the roots of fern: and he would find this food very
nourishing, if he could have it in abundance. But he is obliged to procure it
by so laborious an operation, that his meals are rarely accompanied with
satiety. He continues however, by great industry, to obtain a tolerable
subsistence through the winter, except in frosty weather, when the ground
resists his delving snout: then he must perish, if he do not in some degree
experience his master's care. As spring advances fresh grasses, and salads of
different kinds, add a variety to his bill of fare; and as summer comes on, he
finds juicy berries, and grateful seeds, on which he lives plentifully, till
autumn returns, and brings with it the extreme of abundance.

Besides these stationary hogs, there are others in some of the more desolate
parts of the forest, which are bred wild, and left to themselves, without any
settled habitation. As they cost nothing either in food, or care, their owners
are content with the precarious profit of such, as they are able to reclaim.

Charles I, I have heard, was at the expense of procuring the wild boar and his
mate from the forests of Germany, which once certainly inhabited the forests of
England. I have heard too that they propagated greatly in New-forest. Certain
it is, there is found in it, at this day, a breed of hogs, commonly called
forest-pigs, which are very different from the usual Hampshire breed; and have
about them several of the characteristic marks of the wild boar. The forest-hog
has broad shoulders; a high crest; and thick, briftly mane, which he erects on
any alarm. His hinder parts are light, and thin. His ears are short, and erect;
and his color either black, or darkly brindled. He is much fiercer, than the
common breed; and will turn against an ordinary dog. All these are marks of the
wild boar, from whom, I have little doubt, that in part he derives his
pedigree, tho his blood may be contaminated with vulgar mixtures See vol. I.
page 281.
. -- But tho he is much more picturesque, than the common hog, he is in much
less repute among farmers. The lightness of his hind quarters, and the thinness
of his flanks appear to great disadvantage in the ham, and the flitch.

On leaving the beechen groves of Boldre-wood we were received by a large,
open, swampy, heath, called No Man's walk, being under the peculiar
jurisdiction of none of the keepers. -- The woods soon after commenced again,
in which we passed a large forest-vista, cut through them, from Lyndhurst to
Burley-lodge; but it wanted the turnpike road which we found in the other vista
See page 65.
. I could not have supposed how much it lost, from the want of this
accompaniment. Without a road, there seemed to be no reason for a vista. In
other respects also it wanted the variety of the Lyndhurst-vista.

Along the confines of these woods, we skirted a forest-lawn, called
Warwicksted; which wheeled around us in the form of a crescent, near two miles
in circuit. It was a beautiful scene, hung with wood on every side.

Near this place stands Rhinfield-lodge; the situation of which is perhaps as
pleasing, tho not so grand, as that of Boldre-wood. It stands on a spreading
hill, incircled with groves of oak, among which indeed greater destruction has
been made, for the sake of the view, than seems to have been necessary. As the
ground falls on every side from the hill, on which the house stands, so on
every side, it soon begins to rise again, tho very gently, expanding by degrees
into a vast circle of forest-scenery of every species -- extensive woods --
skirted heaths -- intermixtures of wood and lawn -- and all this landscape
exhibited through the various removes of distance. When we were sated with
these grand scenes, we had them afterward presented more picturesquely in
parts, as we descended the hill, on which the lodge stands. In this descent we
caught them every where to great advantage, through the boles, and branches of
the stately oaks, which surrounded us. As the ground, which immediately
incircled this hill at the bottom, is swampy, and watered with rivulets, the
situation is sometimes in the winter, rather uncomfortable. When the rains are
abundant, the waters stagnate so much around the hill, that it is almost
completely insulated.

The next scene we visited was a forest-lawn of grand dimensions. It seemed not
less than nine or ten miles in circumference; bounded on every side, at least
in appearance, with woods, some of which were on a level with it, and others on
grounds elevated above it. Among these latter were the woods of Brokenhurst,
adorned with the spire of the church shooting above them. -- The peculiarity of
this lawn is, that it is vast area is a perfect flat -- a form, which tho less
beautiful than a playing surface, exceeds it in simplicity, and grandeur. A
small flat is trivial. It is a mere bowling-green. It has neither beauty in
it is parts to set it off; nor greatness in the whole, to make it interesting. A
small piece of ground therefore should always be varied. But an extensive flat
like this we are now examining, gives one grand, uniform idea, which fills the
imagination. The grandest idea of this kind, is that of the ocean; the
greatness of which consists in it is being a continued flat. But the ocean
presents grandeur without beauty. In a view of this kind at land, the idea of
beauty is, more or less, impressed by the character of the scenery around it. I
remember being exceedingly struck with the grandeur of an immense scene of this
kind, on the borders of Scotland, called Brough-marsh See observations on the
lakes of Cumberland, etc. vol. II. page 109.
. It is infinitely larger indeed than this, and is environed, not with woods,
which would lose their effect round so vast an area; but with mountains.
Romney-marsh in Kent, is a scene also of the same kind; but it is cut in
pieces, and deformed by parallel lines, hedges, and canals. Nor are it is
boundaries good. Instead of woods, or mountains, it is bounded by the sea; and
where the sea appears in conjunction with a level surface, the effect is bad:
it joins one flat to another, and produces confusion.

The extensive forest-lawn, which gave occasion to these remarks, is known by
the name of Ober-green. It is chiefly pasturage, patched here and there with
heath; and is esteemed one of the best feeding grounds, both for deer, and
cattle in the forest.

Ober-green was the last of those beautiful lawns, with which our ride through
these parts of the forest was inlivened; and I imagine few counties in England
could furnish so many pleasing woodland-scenes in so small a compass. He who
delights in such scenery will find it in much greater perfection in the
wildness of a forest, than among the most admired improvements of art. He will
find it grander, more varied, and every where more replete with those wild,
enchanting passages, which the hand of art cannot give. What are the lawns of
Hagley The late Lord Lyttleton's in Worcestershire, now Lord Westcote's.
, or any other place celebrated for this species of artificial landscape, but
paltry imitations of the genuine works of nature?

Hinchelsea-wood See page 104.
, which we left on the right in the morning, now again skirted our right, as we
traversed Ober-green. Here it was as great an ornament, as it was on the other
side, at Longslade-bottom. That vast bog, which we had seen in the morning
winding so beautifully round Hinchelsea-wood, now presented it is deceitful
furface directly in our way. An inexperienced traveller might have ventured to
pass it without scruple. But our steps were better guided. We were carefully
led through the skirts of the wood to a place where a mole is thrown across
this vast bog, with two or* three wooden bridges to transmit the moisture.

Having passed this obstruction, we rose Blackamsley-hill, from whence, as in a
table of contents, we had a view of all the country, the woods, and the lawns
we had passed, extending at least nine, or ten miles in length.

From Blackamsley-hill, we came to Setley-wood, near which we met again the
great road, we had left in the morning. But instead of continuing in it, we
crossed it at a gate opposite to a gravel-pit, as we leave Brokenhurst; and
entered a wild heath called Burnt-hill, where some beautiful woody scenes
immediately opened. -- On the left along the declivities, hung enclosures of
cultivated meadow-land, and likewise of rough grounds, both equally adorned
with wood; and as these two species of landscape were here contiguous, and
exactly similar, excepting only the article of cultivation, they afforded a
good opportunity of illustrating the doctrine of gradation; one of those great
principles in landscape, which contributes more than any other, toward the
production of effect. -- The force of gradation is most shown in the management
of light and colors: but it is shown also in the union of objects. Abruptness,
it is true, and strong oppositions, are often great sources of picturesque
beauty; when properly, and sparingly introduced. In profusion, they are
affected. But the great principle of gradation has universal influence, and
enters more or less into every composition. -- The instance we saw of it here
respected the union of objects.

On examining a piece of natural ground, we see, at a single glance, how
gradually, and beautifully nature commonly unites one part with another -- the
tree with the shrub -- the shrub with the brake -- that again with the weed --
and lastly, these lowest decorations with the level ground; which is here, and
there, still farther softened into them by patches of more luxuriant herbage
See vol. I. p. 219.
. But in the cultured field, however beautiful in it is kind, you see no
transition, no connection, or gradation among contiguous parts. Even if the
hedges introduce no formality of lineal boundary, yet the smooth uniform
surface, whether of grass, or of corn, joins abruptly with the wood. This in a
picturesque light is displeasing.

But you admire the artificial lawn, bounded only with wood? You then talk of
contrast, rather than gradation, as a source of beauty?

We do: and scenes of this kind are often beautiful. But one of their great
beauties arises still from gradation. When we talk of contrast, we do not mean
simple opposition. Two contiguous stripes of black, and white produce no
effect. Strong oppositions we sometimes allow, but they must only appear in
transient touches: gradation enters into the idea even of contrast. It is true,
in the artificial lawn we commonly require neatness; so that the rude
connections of nature are excluded: but still a lawn, bounded with regular
wood, gives us little pleasure. It is the planter's care to obtain what
gradation he can, by bringing some of his clumps forward, and thus connecting
his lawn with his woods. Yet with all his art he can never do it in so nobly
wild, and picturesque a manner, as nature in her most beautiful works.

The two different kinds of hanging grounds, bounded with woods, which
occasioned these remarks, occupied our left. In front was an extended skirting
of woody scenery, which opening itself more and more, as we proceeded, spread
into a noble skreen. This scenery consisted of those vast woods, which stretch
from Heathy-Dilton, to Boldre-church.

These woods hang over the most pleasing meadows about Roydon, and along all
the valley to Brokenhurst, that ever adorned a landscape. It is a landscape
indeed of the cultured kind, and therefore little accommodated to the pencil;
but of it is kind it is the most lovely. Through this valley, consisting of
hanging meadows, variously bounded, and adorned with wood, the river of
Lymington, while it is yet rural, and only a forest-stream, forms many a
devious curve. But this pleasing scenery can only be traversed by the
foot-passenger, or the angler with his rod. Even on horseback you cannot pass
the many wooden bridges made of single planks, which are thrown athwart the
several windings of the stream.

Leaving these scenes behind us, we entered the lanes of Roydon, broad,
winding, and adorned in one part with an open grove, in others, with an
intermixture of beech, and oak; which stretching across, form a canopy above
the head. These lanes open upon a heath, called Sandy-down, which is supposed
to enjoy the best air in it is neighbourhoood. Here the woods, which had before
skreened our front, now winding round, appear with equal magnificence on the
left. The summit is crowned with Boldre-church, which discovering only it is
imbattled tower among the trees, takes the form of a lofty castle.

Having crossed the river near the ruins of Haywood-house, once a mansion of
considerable note, we mounted the hill to the church, from whence we had
beautiful views, on the north, to the forest, and on the south, toward the
white cliffs of the isle of Wight, which are set off by intermediate woods. --
Indeed all the churches of the forest are loftily seated. For when the whole
country was covered with woods, and before roads were cut through them; it was
necessary to place the church in a lofty situation, that the inhabitants might
the more easily find their way to it, through the devious paths of the forest.

SECT. VII.
Remarks on the middle parts of New-forest, between the rivers of Lymington,
and Beaulieu.

DIRECTING our course first toward Beaulieu, we passed the plantations of sir
Harry Burrard at Walhampton, which extend round his house, and are composed
chiefly of sir. His gardens command extensive views of the isle of Wight, and
the intervening channel: but they are views, which may rather be called
amusing, than picturesque. They are too extensive for the use of the pencil.
The distant coast exhibits too long a curtain; the hills are too smooth; and
the water-line is too parrallel with the coast of Hampshire. The only way to
obtain that species of beauty, which we call picturesque, from so lengthened a
view of distant coast, is to break it, here and there, with plantations,
sometimes immediately on the fore-ground, and sometimes in the second distance.
And indeed in many parts of the gardens, where such portions are intercepted by
the woods, good pictures are obtained. -- After all however we must allow, that
nine persons in ten would be better pleased with these extended views in their
present amusing state, than if they had been more generally broken in a form to
please the picturesque eye. Few people can distinguish between the ideas of
beautiful, and picturesque: but every eye is pleased with an amusing view.

To these sheltered recesses, which extend even to my garden-gate, I am so much
indebted, through the indulgence of their benevolent owner, for the quiet
pleasures of many a studious hour, that I should gladly enter more minutely
into a description of them; did not my subject, which holds me closely to the
wild scenes of nature, forbid. Yet there is one scene, which I cannot forbear
mentioning: it is so nearly allied to nature, that it is closely allied also to
to my subject. The scene I mean, is a small lake, containing about a dozen
acres, which has been formed out of a swamp. It is wooded on both sides; and
the view of the whole together is very pleasing, when you stand in the open
part, toward Portmerecommon, from whence the head, which confines the water,
is concealed; and the woods on each side, are united at the bottom, with those
of the garden. The walks, on both sides, are well managed; and contain many
little pleasing recesses, and openings to the water.

Sir John D'Oyly, and Mr. Robbins, whose houses we pass in succession, have the
same views toward the isle of Wight, and the channel, which are presented from
the gardens at Walhampton; but they are seen under different circumstances.

Sir John D'Oyly's capital view is from a circular room at the top of his
house, which commands a very great extent both of sea, and land. On the
land-side the diversified woods of the forest appear stretching far and wide
around his house, with all the intervening cultivation -- houses -- cottages --
and farms. On the other side, the sight extends along the channel of the isle
of Wight in both directions -- to the west, as far as the open sea; and to the
east, as far as Spithead, where every motion of the fleet, which is stationed
there, may be observed. His lawn has lately been new-modelled, and is now only
in a state of improvement; so that it is effect cannot yet be seen.

At Pilewell Mr. Robbins's views toward the sea, are nearly the same as those
from D'Oyly-park; only seen from a lower stand. Mr. Robbins's lawn is a very
extensive one. It is flat indeed; but so much quiet space forms an excellent
contrast with the busy scene of navigation, which is spread beyond it. Still
however these views are of the amusing kind. I should advise the picturesque
eye therefore to seek the scenery of the island, as he will find it more
broken, in many parts of the walk, which circles the lawn. The best view of the
whole together is from the dressing room windows.

About a mile and a half from Baddesly we pass the edge of a piece of
fresh water, above three miles in circumference, known by the name of
Souley-pond. In an inland-country it would have been thought a considerable
lake: but it is close neighborhood to the sea diminishes the idea. It is not
indeed skreened by such noble limits, as dignify the lakes of Westmorland and
Cumberland; rocks, mountains, and craggy promontories; yet it is marked by an
elegant irregular line; it is banks arise in gentle swells from the water; in
some places the skirts of Beaulieu woods run down to it is edge; and in others
low points of level land shoot into it, which are always beautiful, especially
when adorned with groups of figures, or of cattle. On the whole it is a
pleasing scene. It produces great plenty of fish; and often affords a
summer-day's amusement to the gentlemen of the neighborhood.

From Souley-pond the road leads toward the banks of Beaulieu-river, which are
rather high in this part, and much wooded; so that of course the water is
skreened from the eye. The road however is very beautiful, passing through
woody lanes, and open groves: and the woods of Beaulieu are the more beautiful,
as they are almost universally left untouched. You scarce see a maimed tree
among them.

About two miles from Souley, a strange ruin attracts the eye, on the left. It
appears like the two ends of a barn, the roof of which has fallen in. But the
curiosity of it is, it is amazing size. From one gavel-end to the other it
extends eighty-one paces. The name it is known by, is St. Leonard's; and it is
commonly supposed to have been a barn belonging to the monks of Beaulieu, who
placed here a little establishment of their fraternity, to gather the fruits of
the country in these parts. The vestiges of different buildings, and the walls
of a small chapel, still remain. -- In a picturesque light this ruin is of no
consequence. We walked round it, and tried it in every mode of perspective, if
possible to make a drawing from it, but the two vast gavel-ends would enter
into no kind of composition.

Large barns were the common appendages of abbeys; and the vestiges of some of
them still remain. There is a grand building of this kind at Battle-abbey in
Sussex; tho I should think is is more ornamented, than was requisite for a
barn. There is another very large one at Cerne in Dorsetshire. But the noblest
edifice, I believe, in England, under the denomination of a barn, is to be seen
at Choulsey in Berkshire, about two miles from Wallingford. This barn is still
larger than that we are now surveying. It is somewhat above a hundred yards in
length; and eighteen yards broad. It contains four threshing-floors; and is
supposed to have belonged to the rich abbey of Reading. Tho carrying upon it
the date of 1101, it is in good condition; and still performs the functions of
a barn. Mighty castles, and churches in three or four centuries have given way
to time: but here is a barn, which has continued doing it is offices to society,
through the space of seven hundred years.

From the ruins of St. Leonard's, the same woody road brought us soon to
Buckler's-hard, a beautiful semi-circular valley, or rather a dip of the bank
to the edge of the river, which forms before it one of it is grandest sweeps. --
In this pleasing retreat the duke of Montague, predecessor to the late duke,
proprietor of all this part of the country, proposed to build a town, which was
to bear his name. He was at that time proprietor also of the island of St.
Lucia in the West Indies; and as he enjoyed all the privileges on the river, of
the abbey of Beaulieu, which were great, and would have enabled him to invest
his colony with many immunities, he expected to derive much advantage from a
sugar trade; as sugars might thus be imported, and from the plenty of fuel,
refined, at a much cheaper rate here, than they could be any where else. And
indeed the scheme had the approbation of many men of sounder judgment, than the
duke's. The limits of a town were accordingly planned -- the streets were
marked out -- and the building-grounds adjusted. But at the peace of 1748, St.
Lucia was declared a neutral island, by which the duke's property in it was
lost; and soon after, his only son dying, he dropped all farther intention with
regard to his new town.

Buckler's-hard was however destined to receive a town, tho of a different
kind. The situation was commodious for ship-building, as well as sugar-boiling;
and was taken for that purpose, by Mr. Adams, who made large contracts with
government for building ships of war. Several very fine frigates have been
built here, and some ships of more force The following is a list of the ships
of war, and their number of guns, which have been built at Buckler's-hard.

The Illustrious of seventy-four guns. The Vigilant -- Agamemnon --
Indefatigable -- and Europe; all of sixty-four. The Greenwich, and Hannibal of
fifty. The Woolwich -- Romulus -- Gladiator -- and Sheerness of forty-four. The
Thames -- Thetis -- and Heroine of thirty-two. The Coventry -- Levant -- Triton
-- Greyhound -- Sibyl -- and Brilliant of twenty-eight. The Surprise -- Fowey
-- and Mermaid of twenty-four. The Kennington of twenty -- and the Scorpion
sloop.


. The great number of workmen, whom this business brought together, have given
birth by degrees to a populous village.

From this busy scene, we pursued our way to Beaulieu-abbey; which is about two
miles beyond it. The road is still close, and beautifully wooded. Within half a
mile of it you look down from the higher grounds, into the circular valley, in
which the ruins of the abbey stand.

The valley itself is extensive, and consists of great variety of ground; and
the whole scene, but especially the hills, which surround it, are woody.
Through the middle of it runs the river, which, about two miles above Beaulieu,
is a mere forest-stream, and has no consequence, but what it receives from the
beautiful scenes, through which it wanders. Under the walls of the abbey it
meets the tide, which immediately gives it form, and dignity. Here a bridge is
thrown over it; on each side of which, it spreads into a lake, when the tide
flows, shaping it is ample sweeps around rich wooded shores. Both these grand
basins might easily be kept constantly full, if a head were constructed, as I
have heard it might be, across the river, at the second reach below the abbey.
The tide, in all probability would not obstruct a work of this kind; as it
flows here with little force, scarce at the rate of four miles an hour.

The precincts of the abbey, which stands on the eastern side of the river,
are, in circumference, about a mile and a half. The boundary-wall is entire in
several parts; and visible almost in all. The area, within the boundary, is
nearly flat; and might easily be made a very beautiful scene. Along the banks
of the river the ground is a little varied, where a pleasant walk has been laid
out, which is now picturesquely marked by the ruins of time. The bank is here
somewhat higher than the river; and was formerly, in this part, the foundation
of the boundary-wall of the abbey; which, when the wall was entire, completely
hid the river, and all it is beautiful appendages from the walk. Time has now
restored them. Tho the wall yet holds out in some places, it has in general
failed. Large portions of it are gone; and in other parts there are chasms, and
fractures, through which the river, and the surrounding woods appear often to
great advantage from the walk. Old oaks likewise, coeval with the abbey itself,
are scattered profusely around the ruins of the wall; sometimes supporting it,
and sometimes supported by it. They are every where beautiful appendages; and
in many places unite with the ruins of the wall into the most pleasing
fore-grounds; while the river, spread here into a lake, and the woods beyond
it, form a distance.

Among these ruins, I remember, some years ago, to have seen a very
extraordinary instance of vegetation. The main stem of an oak arose in contact
with a part of the wall, which was entire; and extended one of it is principal
limbs along the summit of it. This limb, at the distance of a few yards from
the parent-tree finding a fissure in the wall, in which there might probably be
some deposit of soil, shot a root through it into the earth. From hence,
shooting up again through another part of the wall, it formed a new stem, as
large as the original tree; and from this again proceeded another horizontal
branch like the former. In a great storm, which happened on the 27th of
february 1781, both the wall, and the tree were blown down together.

Great part of the area between this beautiful walk, and the abbey, is occupied
by an open grove; part of which is beautiful, and part deformed. The reason of
the difference is, that one part is planted carelessly by the hand of nature;
the other regularly by that of art.

Of the buildings of the abbey considerable parts remain; enough to show, that
it has formerly been constructed in a rich Gothic style: tho it is dimensions
were never large. The parts still in being of most consequence, are what is
supposed to have been the refectory, and the abbot's lodge. The refectory is
now turned into a parish church, and forms a handsome aile, which is worth
looking into. The abbot's lodge is known by the name of the palace, and was
fitted up by the predecessor of the last duke of Montague, as a mansion; tho he
made little addition to it. The old hall still remains, and some of the other
apartments. What he added, is ill-done; and what he did in the way of taste, is
whimsical, and ill-managed. He did nothing indeed that adorns this beautiful
scene; many things which deform it; and some things so strangely absurd, that
no genius but his own, could have conceived them. Instead of calling in some
man of taste to assist him in making Beaulieu-abbey one of the most pleasing
scenes in England, which it might have been; he employed an engineer, by whose
help he drew a ditch around it; filled it with water; threw two or three
draw-bridges over it; secured all the avenues; and thus, by a wonderful stroke
of art, converted an abbey into a castle. This achievement was performed about
the time of a French war, and a rebellion; when the duke had been raising a
regiment, and his ideas had taken a military turn. It is said too, that he made
this strange metamorphosis under an apprehension, lest some adventrous French
privateer, taking the advantage of a full-tide, might sail up the river, and
endeavor to carry him off. -- Men of taste cannot enough lament, that a
situation, so well adapted to receive the beauties of art, should have fallen
so unhappily into such wretched hands; and that more money had been spent in
deforming it, than might have made it a scene of uncommon beauty.

Of the other parts of the abbey little remains. There is a court about sixty
or seventy feet square, formerly perhaps a cloister, which is now converted
into a garden. In the inner walls remain several arches, now closed, two or
three of which are of beautiful Gothic. Near this court also stands a small
room, roughly arched. The arches are of stone, centering in a point at the top:
but it does not easily appear for what purpose so small an apartment was
intended. The kitchen is still very entire; as this edifice often is among the
ruins of abbeys. It was a structure commonly of great strength.

But tho the situation of Beaulieu-abbey is very pleasing; and perhaps more
monkish, than could easily have been found in the neighborhood; yet if a noble
family-mansion should be intended, a much grander situation might be chosen in
many parts of this beautiful country; particularly on the high grounds, a
little to the north of Buckler's-hard, nearly about the point, where the road
from thence unites with that from Lymington. This situation commands a grand
sweep over the river, together with it is estuary -- the woods on both sides of
it, which are rich, and ample in a high degree -- and in the distance the
channel, and the high grounds of the isle of Wight, from Cowes' point to the
Needles.

The privileges of the manor of Beaulieu, which were granted by king John, were
very extensive; and are still preserved. No debtor can be arrested within it is
precincts, unless the lord's leave be obtained. The lords of Beaulieu also
enjoy the liberties of the Cinqueports; and the same exemption from duties;
which was the duke's principal reason, as was observed See page 138.
, for building a town at Buckler's-hard. They hunt also, and destroy the king's
deer, if they stray within the purlieus of the abbey. On the day we were at
Beaulieu, we found the hedges every where beset with armed men. There were not
fewer than twenty, or thirty. It appeared as if some invasion was expected. On
inquiry we were informed, a stag had been seen that morning in the manor; and
all the village of Beaulieu was in arms to prevent his escape back into the
forest. The fortunate man, who shot him, had a gratuity from the lord.

Beaulieu-manor is an extensive scene, being not less than twenty-eight miles
in circumference. It consists chiefly of woodlands; and besides the deer, which
accidentally stray into it from the forest, contains a great number of deer in
it is own domains. Among these rough grounds are intermixed many valuable farms;
and the whole yields annually about L. 4000.

As we leave Beaulieu-abbey, along the Lyndhurst road, we skirt the upper lake,
which is formed by the tide above the bridge. It is a beautiful sheet of water,
about a mile in circumference, surrounded, on every side with woods, which in
many parts fall into it from the rising grounds. As the view opens, we look
full up the lake. On the right the abbey appears among the woods to great
advantage. On the left, a winding road runs along it is margin; except where in
some parts it is intercepted by clumps of trees. In front, the woods recede a
little from the water, and leave a space of flat meadow, which has a good
effect in contrast with the rising grounds, and woods on each side. -- The
whole scene is pleasing. Soon after we leave the lake, the river dwindles into
a sluggish, little, bull-rush stream. The meadow, however through which it
winds, are adorned with wood, and still continue beautiful.

At a place called the Fighting-cocks, well known to the lurking poacher, the
manor of Beaulieu ends; and we entered the wild scenes of the forest. Deep
woods received us. Through these we rode near two miles, rising gently from the
river; and then emerged into an open scene, called Culverly-heath -- one of
those beautiful woody-skirted lawns, of which we had seen so many in the
western parts of the forest; and yet the features of this were different from
them all. -- We stood on a rough knoll, decorated with a few full-grown oaks,
descending in front into a lawn, which appeared to stretch about a mile in
front; and a league on each side. It was skirted in every part with woods,
shooting out, and retiring in skreens on each side; and folding over each
other. The whole was a pleasing piece of forest-perspective, and the lawn one
of the most picturesque compositions we had met with, in this mode of landscape.

Soon after we left Culverly-heath, we entered another scene of the same kind
-- larger, but less varied. In Culverly-heath the materials of landscape were
brought together in so perfect a manner, as to produce a picturesque whole.
Here, through an awkwardness in the composition, there was but an indifferent
whole, tho many of the parts in themselves were beautiful.

From this heath we entered a large wood, called Denny. It has once been a
noble scene, but it is now stripped of it is principal honors, and consists
chiefly of beech, with a few decrepid oaks straggling among them. Every where we
saw noble stools, as they call the stumps of such trees as have been cut down;
and could form an idea of their grandeur, by the respectful space they have
formerly occupied. None of the trees in the neighborhood seem to have
approached within a considerable distance of them.

In this wood, which makes a part of Denny-walk, the lodge belonging to it, is
seated. Here we left the Lyndhurst road, which we had thus far pursued from
Beaulieu; and turning to the left, directed our course to Whitley-ridge-lodge.
In the neighborhood of this place we found some beautiful scenes. One of them
has peculiar merit. -- It is a small forest-lawn, containing about seven or
eight acres somewhat circular, and skirted with oaks, thickets, and open
groves; but they are disposed in so happy a manner, and so much broken by
clumps standing out from the other woods, that all the regularity of it is form
is removed. This lawn is the favorite haunt of deer in summer-evenings; and
their constant feeding upon it, has given the finest texture to it is turf. It
is rough enough to show it is alliance with the forest; but, like some of
nature's fairest forms, it has so polished an appearance, that with the
smallest improvement it might accompany the most cultivated scene.

From hence we continued our rout through woods, like those of Denny, as far as
Lady-cross-lodge. These ravaged parts of the forest, tho they still afford many
pleasing scenes, yet deprived of their noblest trees, are deprived also of
their principal beauty. Tho inferior wood, as we had frequent opportunity to
observe, might produce distant scenery, yet when we enter the internal parts of
a forest, we wish for objects of grandeur. In forest-glades especially, where
the scenes are small, large trees on the fore-ground are almost necessary.

From the woods of Lady-cross, we entered the western side of that vast heath,
which occupies all the middle ground between the rivers of Lymington, and
Beaulieu. -- It is not a scene, like that of Culverly, and others, in which the
woods, and open country bear a proportion to each other; it is diffuse, and
unadorned. The circumambient woods are too inconsiderable; and yet it is every
where surrounded with them. Those of Heathy-Dilton occupied the right; and
introduced, as we skirted this side of the heath, some little scenery: but all
other parts were naked. In front indeed ranged a meagre skirting of wood;
beyond which the high grounds of the isle of Wight formed a distance.

As we proceeded farther on this heath, Norley-wood arose at some distance on
the left. Toward this, across the heath, we bent our course, as we were told
it afforded some of the most beautiful internal scenery of any part of the
forest. -- Norley-wood stretches about two miles in length; and taking a
semicircular turn, forms some heathy grounds, which hang to the south, into a
bay. -- As a distant object however, it is woods possess only common beauties.
To see it is oaks in their glory, we must enter it is recesses. Their forms are
remarkably picturesque; and their combinations are as pleasing as their forms.
These combinations are greatly assisted by a profusion of holly, and other
humble plants, which are interspersed among the trees. -- This delightful
scenery also is happily opened. Several roads winding in different directions,
through the wood, form a variety of little recesses. Sometimes we were
presented with a longer reach; sometimes with a sudden turn: and the beauty
generally arose from seeing little removed clumps of wood, in Waterlo's style,
variously rising behind one or two stately trees on the fore-ground, whose dark
branches gave their enlightened foliage effect. Other varieties are introduced
by the intersections of roads; and others by the grass running among full-grown
trees, or clumps of underwood; Where frequent tufts of holly, box, or thorn,
Steal on the greenswerd; but admit fair space,
For many a mossy maze to wind between.
In short, we found instances here, in great perfection, of every mode of
scenery, which I have already described in the internal parts of a forest See
vol. I. page 211.
.

There is also a circumstance connected with this wood, which is rarely found
in those woods, which occupy the middle regions of the forest; and that is a
hamlet of those little trespassing cottages scattered about it, which have
already been mentioned See vol. I. page 216.
. They commonly stand detached, and one or other of them meets the eye in
various parts, and adds much to the scene. I have already explained, how far
such circumstances affect both natural, and artificial landscape See vol. I.
page 217.
.

In a few years however, all the beautiful scenery of Norley-wood will vanish.
It Is destruction has long been expected; and was lately determined. In the
beginning of the year 1781, a band of wood-cutters entered it, with orders from
the surveyor of the forest to cut a hundred of the best trees, which he had
previously marked for the use of the navy. These trees were set apart for
building ships of the first and second rates. The next year another fall of the
same kind of timber was ordered: and in three or four years, when all the noble
trees are gone, the refuse will be destined to ships of inferior size,
frigates, sloops, and cutters. During seven years it is supposed this wood will
yield a considerable supply to the yards of Portsmouth. At present however a
respite is given it; and the depredations, which have been made, have not yet
greatly injured it is beauty. In some parts they may have improved it See vol.
I. page 266.
, by several openings, which the wood-cutters have made; tho the scenes of
Norley-wood admit improvements of this kind, less than almost any other scenes
in the forest; as they naturally abound in openings, and recesses. If a few
more attacks however be made upon it, it is glory will be extinct; and
Norley-wood like other ravaged woods, will suggest only the remembrance of a
scene.

And yet the various appendages of wood-cutting -- piles of bark, and scattered
boughs, and timber-wains, are not unpleasing objects See vol. I. page 267.
. The deep, hollow tone also of the wood-man's axe, or of axes responsive to
each other, in different parts of the wood, are notes in full harmony with the
scene, tho their music is a knell.

The fallen tree also, lying with it is white, peeled branches on the ground, is
not only beautiful in itself; but if it be not scattered in too great profusion
(for white is an unaccommodating hue) it forms an agreeable contrast with the
living trees. But when we see it deprived of it is beautiful ramification,
squared, and sawn in lengths, as it sometimes continues long to lie about the
forest, it becomes an object of deformity; and we lament what it once was,
without receiving any equivalent from it is present state.

It may here also be remarked, that the king's timber is much more picturesque,
than such timber, as is bought, and cut by the merchant. He, with cautious, and
discerning eye, stands at the bottom of the tree, while it is yet alive; and
having examined every twisting limb, and destined every part to it is proper
service, lops them off, one by one; and then fells the tree, a deformed and
mutilated trunk. The royal wood-cutter is less nice. He fells the tree as it
grows; and leaves the dock-men to ascertain the uses of it is several parts. Two
or three of the main limbs are generally reft, and splintered in the fall; but
that is not his concern: in the mean time, the ruin of the whole, with all it is
spreading parts about it, retains still a degree of picturesque beauty.

SECT. VIII.
A voyage up Beaulieu-river.

THE river Avon is the boundary of the forest on the west; and the bay of
Southampton on the east. Neither of these rivers therefore properly belongs to
the forest. The only rivers, which may justly be called forest-rivers, are
those of Lymington, and Beaulieu. The former of these we have already examined
in various parts; the latter only about the abbey of Beaulieu. We determined
therefore to investigate the whole by a voyage.

We took boat in Lymington-river; which at low water winds beautifully, before
it enter the sea See page 97.
. Its banks indeed are mud, but of the best species; for they are covered, like
the other mud-lands of this country, with sea-grass, which gives them the air
of meadows when the tide retires. The returning water over-runs all the
boundaries of the river, and makes it necessary, for the use of vessels of any
burden, to mark its channel with stakes. -- The mouth of the river is
distinguished by a larger post, known among fishermen, by the name of Jack in
the basket. It stands about three miles from Lymington-harbour.

At this boundary we entered the channel, which divides the coast of Hampshire
from the isle of Wight. The former, which stretches along the left, appears as
a flat woody distance, just raised above the edge of the water; and unmarked by
any object of consequence. They who are acquainted with the country, can point
out, here and there, a house, just seen among the trees.

On the right, the isle of Wight makes a better appearance; and yet not a
picturesque one. It consists of a double ridge of high lands; which, in almost
every part, are ill-shaped, and in some parts the upper, and lower grounds
follow each other in a disagreeable parallel. Indeed we seldom see a
continuation of high grounds, through a space of near ten miles, forming so
unpleasant a delineation. At least it seems such to any eye assimulated to the
grandeur of a mountainous country.

The water-line of the island appears to more advantage. Among many smaller
indentations of the coast, the bays of Totland, and New-town, are considerable.
Totland-bay is formed by the western point of the island, called the
Needle-cliffs, on one side; and on the other by that promontary, which shoots
out opposite to Hurst-castle, usually called Sconce-point. It is a rude, wild
scene; tho the cliffs themselves are rather of the tame species; without any of
those large parts, and projections, which give a rocky coast its most
picturesque form. New-town-bay affords an opening of a different kind. It is a
semicircular sweep into a country highly cultivated; which at a proper
distance, when the several objects of cultivation are massed together, has a
good effect.

As we approached the mouth of Beaulieu-river, it is opening promised little.
The eastern side forms a low, lineal, disagreeable shore. The western side is
still more disagreeable. It consists of a flat tongue of land, called
Needsore-point Needsore, that is, Needs-shore, but the sh was not used is Saxon
orthography. Hence Needsore, Stansore, and other terminations of that kind on
this coast; and Windsor, Hedsor, etc. on the Thames.
, which runs out a considerable way; and at low water unites with the
mud-lands. When the tide flows, it is in part covered with water. We found it
in this latter situation; and our boat made a short push over it, instead of
going round by the mouth of the river.

It is somewhat remarkable, that there is one of these spits of land, near the
mouth of each of these forest-rivers; and also at the mouth of Southampton-bay.
Hurst-castle, formerly intended to guard the passage through the Needles,
occupies one near the mouth of Lymington-river; and Calshot-castle another, at
the entrance of Southampton-bay. On Needsore-point, which is the middle one, a
fortress was thought unnecessary. -- But tho these spits of land are
remarkable, they are easily accounted for. The united force of wind and tide
from the south-west, and west, so much greater and more continued, than from
any other quarter, is the natural, and obvious cause. The same thing happens at
the entrance of Portsmouth-harbour. Spithead is the barrier of it is channel,
which runs close along the eastern shore under South-sea-castle, and
Portsmouth-wall, much in the same manner as the channel of Beaulieu, or rather
Exbury-haven, runs close under the shore from Leap. Wherever there is a low, or
gravelly coast, undefended, on the southern side of our island, it gives way to
the fury of the Atlantic winds and tides. The rocks of Purbeck protect the
gravelly coast about Pool, and Christ-church. To the east of these places there
have certainly been depredations. Wight defends Portsmouth, and the shores
eastward as far as Arundel; which would probably go to sea, if they were
equally unprotected from the west, as from the east.

We had now entered Beaulieu-river, which appears to be about half a mile
broad. For some time Needsore-point on the left, continued a low, winding
shore; closing us in behind; tedious, and unvaried. But, on the other side, the
grounds began to form a beautiful bank.

As the reach opened, the skreens improved. The high grounds about Exbury
formed themselves into a point covered with wood; through which Exbury chapel
just appeared. The other side-skreen was composed of ancient woods, where the
axe seemed never to have entered. The river still continued as wide as at the
entrance; stretching in front into an ample bay, confined by woods; but the
extremity of the bay was softened by it is length, into a second-distance.

By degrees we began to wind round Exbury-point; which still continued a
principal feature in the view. But tho it had greatly changed it is appearance;
the woods and meadows, and rough grounds were still very agreeably intermixed.
On the other side, the woods had taken a sweep with the river; and were thrown
into good perspective. They mantled down almost to the water; which was
bordered only by a narrow edging of meadow. Here the river affording easy
access to the herds of the neighboring pastures, they came down for
refreshment during the sultry hours of a summer-noon. While they cooled
themselves in the river, the woods behind sheltered them from the sun; and
formed a good back-ground to their several picturesque groups. -- The front of
this grand reach maintained long the same appearance, consisting chiefly of
woody grounds softened by distance. Nor did the side-skreens vary much.
Continued woods still rose on the left; and on the right a portion of rough
pasturage mingled with them.

We now came in sight of Buckler's-hard See an account of Buckler's-hard page
137. The word Hard signifies only a firm causeway made upon the mud, for the
sake of landing.
on the left, where the large timber-yards, houses, and ships on the stocks,
made a violent chasm in the landscape. A quantity of timber scattered about a
yard, makes a very unpicturesque appearance. -- It affords a variety of parts
without a whole. And yet in a timber-yard, there are sheds and other
circumstances, which are not wholly void of picturesque images. In a ship on
the stocks, through every stage as it advanes, there is a degree of beauty,
which consists chiefly in the variety of it is sweeping lines.

At Buckler's-hard the reach of the river is very interesting, On the right are
the woods of Beaulieu, winding round, with great richness, into a front-skreen.
On the left, where wood before abounded, the grounds now run more into
pasturage; tho far from being destitute of furniture. One decoration they have,
which is not unpleasing. Where the meadows fall down to the water, they are
secured from the tide, by low, staked banks, which follow the winding banks of
the river. If they had run in a straight line, they would have been a great
deformity; but as they wind, instead of being offensive objects, they give a
sort of rough, irregular termination to the line of the river. If we painted
the scene, we should have no objection to introduce them; both for the reason
given, and also for the sake of the reflections they form in the water. -- They
have sometimes also the beauty of contrast, when the other parts of the bank
are without them.

From Buckler's-hard the river takes a sweep to the right. The woods likewise,
on that side, follow it is course; and spreading in great luxuriance, to the
water's edge, throw a gloom over half the river. A noble bay, land-locked with
wood, begins soon to open. -- As this scene removes, the woods take a different
form, shaping themselves into removed skreens, following each other. -- Another
reach brought us within fight of Beaulieu -- the bridge and the abbey forming
the center of the view: the river, in the mean time, losing very little of it is
grandeur, from the first reach to the last.

Thus we finished our voyage up the river of Beaulieu; which in a course of
near three leagues from the sea, forms about five, or six grand sweeps. -- The
simple idea it presents throughout, is that of a winding tide-river flowing up
a woody, and uninhabited country; which is a singular character for an English
river to assume. Here and there we see a house, and a few spots of cultivation;
but so little, that they make no impression on the general character of the
scene. The picturesque eye, used to landscape, easily overlooks these little
obstacles; and carries on the general idea undisturbed. -- The busy scene of
ship-building at Buckler's-hard, rather aided, than injured the idea: for as no
one would expect a scene of this kind in so retired a place; it seemed as if
the adventurers, who had sailed up the river, had landed here either to refit
their ships, or to build others for the purpose of pursuing their discoveries.

Miratur nemus insuetum fulgentia long
Scuta virum fluvio, pictasque innare carinas.
The idea of a wild country, in a natural state, however picturesque, is to the
generality of people but an unpleasing one. There are few, who do not prefer
the busy scenes of cultivation to the grandest of nature's rough productions.
In general indeed, when we meet with a description of a pleasing country, we
hear of hay-cocks, or waving cornfieldsd, or laborers at their plough, or
other circumstances and objects, which the picturesque eye always wishes to
exclude. The case is, the spectator sympathises in the joys of a country, which
arise from the prospect of plenty; and associating these ideas with the country
itself, he calls it picturesque; by which he means only that it pleases him. --
Thus too in the grand, and sublime scenes of nature, if there be any mixture of
horror in them (which often adds greatly to the picturesque effect) the
associated ideas of unhappiness cloud the scene, and make it displeasing.

I mean not, when a person is among objects, which in their remote consequences
give delight; or in the midst of scenes, which are connected with distress;
that he should not feel the natural impressions they make -- all I mean is, to
investigate the sources of beauty; to limit the different modes of pleasure,
and pain; to separate causes, and effects; and to evince that a scene, tho it
abound with circumstances of horror, may be very picturesque; while another may
be entirely the reverse, tho replete with incidents, that produce joy and
happiness.

I have an instance at hand to my purpose. One of our voyagers Capt. King who
succeeded capt. Cook, p. 207.
to the northern seas, in sailing up a river, thus describes the scene. -- "The
country, says he, on each side, was very romantic; but unvaried; the river
running between mountains of the most craggy and barren aspect; where there was
nothing to diversify the scene, but now and then the sight of a bear, or
flights of wild-fowl. So uninteresting a passage leaves me nothing farther to
add."

It is hardly possible, in so few words, to present more picturesque ideas of
the horrid, and savage kind. We have a river running up a country, broken on
both sides with wild, romantic rocks; which, we know nature never constructs in
a uniform manner. We naturally therefore conclude, they ran out, in some parts,
into vast diagonal strata; on the ledges of which a bear or two appeared,
sitting on their hams, or howling at the boat. In other parts, the rocks would
form lofty promontories, hanging over the river, and inhabited by numerous
flights of sea-fowl screaming around them. This is not an imaginary picture;
but copied with exactness from captain King's sketch. -- And yet he has no
conception, that a scene so savage could present any other ideas, than such as
were disgusting. He calls it an unvaried scene; by which expression he meant
nothing, I am persuaded, but that the rocks were neither intermixed with
villages, nor with scenes of cultivation. Wood might probably be wanting; but
in a scene of picturesque horror, wood is by no means a necessary appendage. It
is rather indeed an improper one. Flourishing wood at least is out of place:
the scene might perhaps admit, here and there, a scathed, and ragged pine.

Beyond Beaulieu our boat could not pass. Thus far only the tide flows with any
force. At Beaulieu therefore we waited till the tide turned, when we again
embarked.

The views in ascending, and descending a river, vary considerably through it is
several reaches. Yet the difference, tho observable enough, cannot easily be
described. Language wants colors to paint such nice distinctions. We shall
therefore fall down the river with a quicker sail, than we ascended. And yet we
must not leave it is retrospect views entirely unobserved.

The bay formed by the circling woods in the second reach as we descend, is
very beautiful. I know not whether it is form is not more pleasing, than we
thought it in the morning.

The next reach loses in beauty. A long stretch of low land sweeping across the
river, like a mole, which was less observable before, now greatly interrupts
the beauty of the view.

The succeeding bay, where the woods of Exbury open in front, is very grand,
and extensive.

From Buckler's-hard, nothing can unite more happily than the rough
uncultivated grounds of Exbury on the left, with the long succession of
Beaulieu woods on the right.

After this, the river soon becomes an estuary. When we entered it, as we
looked up the stream, we had immediately the idea of a river winding into a
woodland country. In the same manner, when we descended, we had as quickly an
idea of a river entering the sea. For as the woods, in the former case, become
at once the center of the view; so does the sea, and the isle of Wight, in the
latter. The last reach therefore of the river continues long to exhibit a kind
of mixed scenery. Exbury-point, and the woody grounds about it, still preserve
the idea of the beautiful woodland scenes we had left: while Needsore-point,
tho it wind quite around, and shut us within a land-locked bay, is yet so low,
that the sea, and the island appear beyond it.

On opening the mouth of the river, our boat-men attempted to carry us across
the mud-lands, as they had done in the morning; but they found it dangerous,
and desisted: for if a boat should only touch the ground, the delay of a few
minutes might endanger her sticking, till the return of the tide; so rapidly do
the waters retreat.

As the tide was thus leaving the mud-lands, flights of sea-gulls hovered
round, watching, on that event, to pick up the little wreck that remained.
Sea-fowl are the common appendages of all estuaries. Indeed few masters in
landscape omit them.

-- Aeneas ingentem ex aequore Aeneas did not see the grove ex aequore, from
his ship -- but he saw it rising ex aequore from the water's edge.
lucum
Prospicit. Hunc inter fluvio Tiberinus amaeno
Vorticibus rapidis, et multa flavus arena,
In mare prorumpit. Variae circumque, supraque,
Assuetae ripis volueres, et fluminis alveo
Aethera mulcebant contu, lucoque volabant.
Again
Ceu quondam nivei liquida inter nubila cygni,
Cum sese e pastu referunt, et longa canoros
Dant per colla modos, sonat amnis --
And again
-- Piscoso amne Padusae
Dant sonitum ranci per stagna loquacia cygni.
On such classical authority we admire the flights of sea-gulls, as a proper
ornament in a scene like this. It was amusing to observe, how quickly they
discovered the relinquished shore, long before it was discoverable by us; and
to see them running in appearance on the surface of the water. For tho the tide
had in those parts left the land; yet the mud from it is perfect flatness long
retained it is glazed, and watery appearance. -- The cormorant also sat watching
the ebbing tide: but he seemed bent on matters of greater importance. He did
not, like the idle gull, wheel round the air; nor pace about the ebbing shore,
mixing business and amusement together. With eager attention he took his stand
on some solitary post, set up to point the channel of the river; and from that
eminence observed from the dimpling of the waters, where some poor, wandering
fish had gotten himself entangled in the shallows, whom he marked for certain
destruction.

But these are not the only birds, which inliven a voyage up Beaulieu-river. In
the lines I have just quoted from Virgil's description of Aeneas's entrance
into the Tyber (the whole of which might serve with very little alteration for
a description also of Beaulieu-river) two kinds of birds are introduced. --
Those, which disport themselves in fluminis alveo; and those, which aethera
mulcebant cantu, lucoque volabant. With the actions of the former of these we
have already been entertained: but we have not yet listened to the music of the
latter. I have been told it is extraordinary; and that all these woods, on both
sides of the river (so extensive are they, and unmolested) are filled with such
innumerable flights of singing birds, that to sail up the river in a morning,
or an evening in the spring, affords, in Virgil's language, an avium concentus,
hardly any where else to be found. The nightingale, the thrush, the blackbird,
and the linnet are the chief performers in the concert. Some of these you hear
continually bursting out either at hand, or from a distance: while the various
petty chirpers of the woods join the chorus: and tho alone their little
untuneable voices might be harsh; yet all together (one softening the
discordancy of another) they make a kind of melody; or at least an agreeable
contrast to such of the band, as are better skilled in their business.

I cannot leave this river-scene, without observing, that although it is
picturesque in a high degree; yet it exhibits such a specimen of the
picturesque (if I may speak in terms seemingly contradictory) as is not well
calculated to make a picture. The whole is a succession of those softer,
nameless beauties; which highly please; but cannot easily be described. Various
beautiful accompaniments are exhibited: but striking objects are wanting. If
every reach had been adorned with a castle, or a picturesque rock, such as
capt. King's uninteresting river would have afforded, each successive scene
would have been more picturesquely marked; tho the character of the river, on
the whole, might have been injured. But now the whole plays upon the eye in the
same pleasing, tho unvaried, colors. A strong and peculiar character belongs
to the river in general: but the parts if I may so express myself, are lost in
the whole. They are every where beautiful; but no where characteristic.



SECT. IX.
An excursion along the eastern side of Beaulieu river -- the coast opposite to
the isle of Wight -- the western side of Southampton bay -- and thence by
Dibden again to Beaulieu.

AT Beaulieu we crossed the bridge; and turning short to the right, had a
better view of the first reach of the river from the land, than we had before
in our voyage, from the water. The river itself had more the appearance of a
lake, (for it was then high water,) and made a magnificent sweep round a point
of wooded land: while the woods, on the opposite side, following it is course,
on an elevated bank, were as rich, as a picturesque imagination could conceive
them. The foreground indeed was not equal to a scene, which was in every other
respect so complete.

From hence we ascended a close lane cut through a corner of Beaulieu-manor;
and enriched on both sides, but especially on the left, with forest-scenery. At
Hill-top-gate the lane opens into that extensive heath, which occupies all the
middle part of the peninsula, between the river of Beaulieu, and the bay of
Southampton. As this peninsula shoots into length, rather than breadth, the
heathy grounds follow it is form; and extend several miles in one direction; tho
seldom above two, in the other. The banks of both rivers are woody; and these
woods appeared, as we entered the heath, to skirt it is extremities. Through
these extremities, containing the most beautiful parts of the country, we meant
to travel. At Hill-top therefore, instead of crossing the heath, we turned
short into a road on the right, which led us along the skirts of the woods,
under the shade of which we traveled about a mile. Sometimes these woods shot
like promontories into the heath, and we were obliged to ride round them; but
oftener our road threading the clumps, and single trees, which stood forward,
carried us among them. The richness, and closeness of the forest-scenery on one
side, contrasted with the plainness, and simplicity of the heath on the other,
skirted with distant wood, and seen through the openings of the clumps, were
pleasing.

From this heath we were received by lanes -- but such lanes, as a forest only
can produce; in which oak, and ash, full-grown, and planted irregularly by the
hand of nature, stood out in various groups, and added a new foreground, every
step we took, to a variety of little openings into woods, copses, and pleasing
recesses.

While we were admiring these close landscapes, the woods, on the right
suddenly giving way, we were presented with a view of the river --
Buckler's-hard beyond it -- the men of war building in the dock there -- and
the woody grounds which rise in the offskip. This exhibition was rather
formally introduced like a vista. The woods seemed to have been opened on
purpose: but formality is a fault, which we seldom find in nature; and which in
the scene before us, she will probably correct in a few years, by the growth of
some intervening trees.

A mile farther brought us to the seat of colonel Mitford, among the woods of
Exbury. The house is no object: but the scenery consists of a more beautiful
profusion of wood, water, and varied grounds, than is commonly to be met with.
Here we proposed to spend the evening; but not finding colonel Mitford at home,
we took a ramble into his woods, till supper, where we expected to meet him.

The richness of the scenes had led us imperceptibly from one to another. We
had every where instances of the beauty of trees as individuals -- as uniting
in clumps -- and as spreading into woods; for all here is pure nature: and as
they were beginning now to put on their autumnal attire, we were entertained
with the beauties of coloring, as well as of form. Among these unknown woods
our way at length became perplexed; and the sun was now set. Having no time
therefore to lose, we inquired at a lonely cottage, which we found in a
sheltered glade. Nothing could indicate peace and happiness more, than this
little sequestered spot; and we expected to find a neat, peaceful, contented
family within. But we found that a happy scene will not always make happy
inhabitants. At the door stood two, or three squalid children with eager,
famished countenances staring through matted hair. On entering the hovel, it
was so dark, that we could at first see nothing. By degrees a scene of misery
opened. We saw other ragged children within; and were soon struck with a female
figure, grovelling at full length by the side of a few embers, upon the hearth.
Her arms were naked to her shoulders; and her rags scarce covered her body. On
our speaking to her, she uttered in return a mixture of obscenity, and
imprecations. We had never seen so deplorable a maniac.

We had not observed, when we entered, what now struck us, a man sitting in the
corner of the hovel, with his arms folded, and a look of dejection, as if lost
in despair. We asked him, Who that wretched person was? She is my wife, said
he, with a composed melancholy; and the mother of these children. He seemed to
be a man of great sensibility; and it struck us, what distress he must feel,
every evening, after his labor, when, instead of finding a little domestic
comfort, he met the misery, and horror of such a house -- the total neglect of
his little affairs -- his family without any overseer, brought up in idleness,
and dirt -- and his wife, for whom he had no means of providing either
assistance, or cure, lying so wretched an object always before him. -- We left
him strongly impressed with his calamity; which appeared to be a more severe
visitation, than the hand of heaven commonly inflicts.

We found afterward, that we had been wholly mistaken; and that we had before
us a strong instance of that strange fatality, by which mankind are so often
themselves the ministers of those distresses, which they are so ready to
ascribe to heaven. On relating our adventure at supper, we were informed, that
the man, whose appearance of sensibility had affected us so much, was one of
the most hardened, abandoned, mischievous fellows in the country -- that he had
been detected in sheepstealing -- and that he had killed a neighbor's horse in
an act of revenge -- and that it was supposed, he had given his wife, who was
infamous likewise, a blow in a quarrel, which had occasioned her malady.

The next morning we took a particular view of the beautiful scenery around us;
of which, the evening before, we had only obtained a general idea.

The woods of Exbury, which are extensive, are chiefly oak -- the spontaneous
growth of the country: but Mr. Mitford found many of the bare, and barren spots
about his house planted by his father, and grandfather, with fir-groves of
various kinds; tho generally, according to the fashion of the times, in formal
rows.

On a deliberate view of his grounds, he formed a general plan, resulting from
the various scenes they exhibited. -- The boundary of his estate presents a
series of views of three very different characters. -- Toward the west, he has
a variety of grand river-views; formed by the Ex, or, as it is commonly at this
day called, Beaulieu-river, winding, as we had seen it in our voyage, through
the woods of Beaulieu, and Exbury in it is approach to the sea. -- The southern
part of his boundary overlooks, what was anciently called, the Solent-sea; but
now commonly the channel of the isle of Wight; which at it is two extremities
discovers the open sea, through the eastern passage by Spithead; and through
the western, by the Needles. -- On the east, and north, his boundary-views take
a new form. We leave the shore, and wind into a woodland country; which within
a hundred yards assumes so new a character, that we might easily conceive it to
be as many miles from the sea. In these woody scenes, intermixed with open
grounds, we continue about four miles; till winding round, we return to those
rising grounds on the west, from whence we first had the views of the river.

This boundary-circuit carries us through the space of about eight miles. Mr.
Mitford has done little, besides marking it out by cutting through the woods,
as he should wish to lead it. To complete his plan would be very expensive; tho
an expense equal to the natural advantages of the scene in good hands, would
make this one of the most varied, and picturesque wood-land-rides perhaps in
England.

Within this boundary-circuit Mr. Mitford has marked out an interior one,
circling about a mile round his house. As the object of the larger circuit, is
to show, as much as possible, the extent of his views; the object of this
interior one is to break those distant views into parts -- to form those parts
into the most beautiful scenes; and to exhibit them with woody fore-grounds to
the best advantage. From many parts of this interior scenery the isle of Wight
makes it is most picturesque appearance. In various views of it from the
Hampshire coast, we have seen it spread in too lengthened a curtain, and it is
hills too smooth, and tame. Both these inconveniences are here, in a degree,
obviated. Seldom more than a small part of the island is seen at once; and this
part is about the center, which is the loftiest, and the roughest. Here rise
two considerable hills, Gatescliff, and Wraxhill; and one of them affords a
circumstance of great beauty. Carisbroke-castle, seated on an eminence, about
four miles within the island, is seen very advantageously against Gatescliff,
when the sun shines either on the castle, or on the mountain; while the other
is in shadow.

In laying out this inner circle, Mr. Mitford had his greatest difficulties to
contend with: for here he had all his grandfather's formal groves to encounter:
and it was no easy matter to break their formalities; to make judicious inroads
through them; and unite them in one plan. He often lamented -- what other
improvers have lamented before him -- the injudicious sufferance of the growth
of trees. Next to the cutting down of trees improperly, the greatest mischief
is to let them grow together too long. They soon ruin each other. He had
suffered his woodward only to use his discretion in the distant woods. In the
groves, about his house, he allowed no marking-hammer, but his own. The
consequence was, he was so little on the spot, that many of his best trees were
injured. The fir especially, if it is natural branches are once lost, as they
always are by straitened quarters, never recovers them. -- These two circuits
round his house, Mr. Mitford has joined by three cross walks

In taking these circuits we could not help remarking the comparative virtue of
taste, and expense. The former, with very little of the latter, will always
produce something pleasing: while the utmost efforts of the latter, unaided by
the former, are ineffectual. The larger the proportion of misguided expense;
the wider will the deformity spread: whereas every touch in the hand of taste,
has so far it is effect.

It is the same precisely in working the scenes of nature, as in forming an
artificial scene. Set two artists at work. Give one of them a bit of
black-lead, and a scrap of paper. Every touch he makes, perhaps deserves to be
treasured in a cabinet. Give the other the costliest materials. All is a waste
of time, of labor, and expense. Add colors -- they only make his deformities
more glaring.

True taste, in the first place, whether in nature, or on canvas, makes not a
single stroke, till the general design is laid out, with which, in some part or
other, every effort coincides. The artist may work at his picture in this part
or the other; but if his design, and composition are fixed, every effort is
gradually growing into a whole. Whereas he who works without taste, seldom has
any idea of a whole. He tacks one part to another, as his misguided fancy
suggests: or, if he has any plan, it is something as unnatural, as the parts
which compose it, are absurd. The deeper his pocket therefore, and the wider
his scale, his errors are more apparent.

To an injudicious person, or one who delights in temples, and Chinese bridges,
very little would appear executed in the scenes I have described at Exbury.
There is scarce a gravel-walk made: no pavilion raised; nor even a white-seat
fixed. And yet in fact, more is done, than if all these decorations, and a
hundred others, had been added, unaccompanied with what has been done. The
greatest difficulty of all is surmounted -- that of laying out a judicious
plan. The rest, tho the most ostensible, because the most expensive, is only a
little mechanical finishing.

From these pleasing scenes we pursued our journey through part of the
beautiful ride we have just described to Leap, along lanes close on the left,
but opening to the right in various places, to the river, which assumes a
magnificent form. Needsore-point makes here an appearance very different from
what it made when we navigated the mouth of Beaulieu-river See page 160.
. It appears now from the higher grounds, when the tide is low, to run at least
a league into the sea; flat, unadorned, and skirted with drifted sand; making a
singular feature in all these views; and the more so, as every part of the
ground in it is neighborhood is woody, bold, and prominent. This peninsula, of
which Needsorepoint is the termination, belongs to the manor of Beaulieu. It
contains some good land; consisting chiefly of pasturage; and the whole of it
is let out in a single farm.

In this remote part, it is supposed, somewhere near Exbury, the Dauphin, after
his fruitless expedition to England, embarked privately on the death of king
John, for France; burning the country behind him as he fled. His embarkation,
from so obscure a place, shows, in a strong light, how much his hopes were
humbled.

At Leap we met the sea, where the coast of the isle of Wight, as far as to
Spithead on the left, makes nearly the same unpicturesque appearance, which it
does from the other shores of the forest. It extends into length, and exhibits
neither grandeur, nor variety. When it is seen, as we saw it from Mr.
Mitford's, broken into parts, as it should always be, when seen to picturesque
advantage See page 132.
, it afforded several beautiful distances. But here, when the whole coast was
displayed at once, it lost it is picturesque form. -- Near Leap however we had
one very beautiful coast-view. A rising copse on the left, adorned with a road
winding through it, makes a good fore-ground. From thence a promontory, in the
second distance, with an easy, sweeping shore, shoots into the sea; and is
opposed, on the opposite side, by a point of the island, leaving a proper
proportion of water to occupy the middle space.

Leap is one of the port-towns of the forest: and as it lies opposite to Cowes,
it is the common place of embarkation, in these parts, to the island. It
consists of about half a dozen houses: and shelters perhaps as many
fishing-boats. All the coast indeed from St. Helen's to the Needles, and around
the island is in peaceable times, a scene of fishing. In the whiting-season
especially, fleets of twenty or thirty boats are often seen lying at anchor on
the banks; or a little out at sea.



Fowling too is practiced, on this coast, as much as fishing. Numerous flocks
of wild-fowl frequent it, in the winter; widgeons, geese, and ducks: and in the
beginning of the season especially, as they bear a price in the country, they
of course attract the notice of the fowler. As the coast between Hampshire and
the isle of Wight is a peculiar species of coast, consisting, when the tide
ebbs, of vast muddy flats, covered with green sea-weed, it gives the fowler an
opportunity of practicing arts perhaps practiced no where else.

Fowling and fishing, indeed on this coast, are commonly the employments of the
same person. He who in summer, with his line, or his net, plies the shores,
when they are overflowed by the tide; in winter, with his gun, as evening draws
on, runs up, in his boat, among the little creeks, and crannies, which the tide
leaves in the mud-lands; and there lies in patient expectation of his prey.

Sea-fowl commonly feed by night, when in all their multitudes they come down
to graze on the savannahs of the shore. As the sonorous cloud advances, (for
their noise in the air resembles a pack of hounds in full cry) the attentive
fowler listens, which way they bend their course. Perhaps he has the
mortification to hear them alight at too great a distance for his gun (tho of
the longest barrel) to reach them. And if he cannot edge his boat a little
round some winding creek, which it is not always in his power to do, he
despairs of success that night. -- Perhaps however he is more fortunate, and
has the satisfaction to hear the airy noise approach nearer; till at length,
the host settles on some plain, on the edge of which his little boat lies
moored. He now, as silently as possible, primes both his pieces anew, (for he
is generally double-armed) and listens with all his attention. It is so dark
that he can take no aim: for if he could see the birds, they also could see
him; and being shy, and timorous in a great degree, would seek some other
pasture. Though they march with music, they feed in silence. Some indistinct
noises however, if the night be still, issue from so large a host. He directs
his piece therefore, as well as he can, toward the sound; gives his fire at a
venture; and instantly catching up his other gun, gives a second discharge,
where he supposes the flock to rise on the wing. -- His gains for the night are
now decided; and he has only to gather his harvest. He immediately puts on his
mud-pattens Mud-pattens are flat pieces of board, which the fowler ties to his
feet, that he may not sink in the mud.
, ignorant yet of his success, and goes groping about in the dark, happy if he
have a little starlight, in quest of his booty, picking up perhaps a dozen,
and perhaps not one. -- So hardly does the poor fowler earn a few shillings;
exposed, in an open boat, during a solitary winter-night, to the weather as it
comes, rain, hail, or snow, on a bleak coast, a league perhaps from the beach,
and often in danger, without great care, of being fixed in the mud; where he
would become an inevitable prey to the returning tide. I have heard one of
these poor fellows say, he never takes a dog with him on these expeditions,
because no dog could bear the cold, which he is obliged to suffer. -- After
all, perhaps others enjoy more from his labors, than he himself does; for it
often happens, that the tide, next day, throws, on different parts of the
shore, many of the birds, which he had killed, but could not find in the night.

I have heard of an unhappy fowler, whom this hazardous occupation led into a
case of still greater distress. In the day time too it happened, which shows
the double danger of such expeditions in the night. -- Mounted on his
mud-pattens, he was traversing one of these mudland-plains in quest of ducks;
and being intent only on his game, he suddenly found the waters, which had been
brought forward with uncommon rapidity by some peculiar circumstance of tide,
and current, had made an alarming progress around him. Incumbered as his feet
were, he could not exert much expedition; but to whatever part he ran, he found
himself completely invested by the tide. In this uncomfortable situation, a
thought struck him, as the only hope of safety. He retired to that part of the
plain, which seemed the highest from it is being yet uncovered by water; and
striking the barrel of his gun, (which for the purpose of shooting wild-fowl
was very long) deep into the mud, he resolved to hold fast by it, as a support,
as well as a security against the waves; and to wait the ebbing of the tide. A
common tide, he had reason to believe, would not, in that place, ^ave reached
above his middle: but as this was a springtide, and brought in with so strong
a current, he durst hardly expect so favorable a conclusion. -- In the mean
time, the water making a rapid advance, had now reached him. It covered the
ground, on which he stood -- it rippled over his feet -- it gained his knees --
his waist -- button after button was swallowed up -- till at length it advanced
over his very shoulders. With a palpitating heart, he gave himself up for lost.
Still however he held fast by his anchor. His eye was eagerly in search of some
boat, which might accidentally take it is course that way: but none appeared. A
solitary head, floating on the water, and that sometimes covered by a wave, was
no object to be descried from the shore, at the distance of half a league: nor
could he exert any sounds of distress, that could be heard so far. -- While he
was thus making up his mind, as the exigence would allow, to the terrors of
sudden destruction, his attention was called to a new object. He thought he saw
the uppermost button of his coat begin to appear. No mariner, floating on a
wreck, could behold a cape at sea, with greater transport, than he did the
uppermost button of his coat. But the fluctuation of the water was such, and
the turn of the tide so slow, that it was yet some time before he durst venture
to assure himself, that the button was fairly above the level of the flood. At
length however a second button appearing at intervals, his sensations may
rather be conceived, than described; and his joy gave him spirits and
resolution, to support his uneasy situation four or five hours longer, till the
waters had fully retired.

A little beyond Leap we were interrupted by a creek, which, when the tide
flows high, runs considerably into the land, and forms a large piece of water.
At all times it is an extensive marsh. It Is borders are edged with rushes, and
sedges, which grow profusely also on various, little rough islands on it is
surface. Here the wild-duck, and the widgeon find many a delightful cover;
amidst which they breed, and rear their young, in great abundance.

Near this part of the coast stands Lutterel's tower; built as the station of a
view: but as it is intended for a habitable house likewise, the offices, which
it could not contain, are constructed of canvas around it. It is finished in
the highest style of expense; and if it were not for the oddness, and
singularity of the conception, and contrivance, it is not entirely destitute of
some kind of taste. But the building is so whimsical, and the end so inadequate
to the expense, that we considered it, on the whole, as a glaring contrast to
those pleasing scenes, we had just examined at Exbury; in which true taste had
furnished us with a delightful entertainment at a trifling expense See page 186.
.

The view, which this tower commands over the circumjacent country, is very
extensive; but it is sea-view is most admired, stretching from the bay of
Southampton to Portsmouth -- form thence to St. Helen's -- and on the other
side, all along the range of the isle of Wight, and beyond the Needles to the
ocean. The whole together forms the appearance of a magnificent bay; of which
Spithead, and St. Helen's, (where there is commonly a fleet at anchor) make the
central part.

But this view, like the other extensive views we have seen, is by no means
picturesque. It might have been supposed, that the isle of Wight (on surveying
it is appearance in a map) would have made such an angle at Cowes-point, which
is nearly opposite to this tower, as would have thrown the eastern part of the
island into better perspective, than the western assumes from any part of the
Hampshire coast. And so indeed in some degree it does. But the eye is at too
great a distance to get much advantage from this circumstance. If the spectator
were carried nearer Cowes, the coast toward St. Helen's might then fall away
in good perspective. But at this distance all is sea; the coast is a mere
thread; and the whole view together is without proportion.

And yet it is not merely the disproportion between land and water, which
disqualifies a view of this kind in a picturesque light. A picturesque view may
consist entirely of water. -- Nor is it distance, which disqualifies it. The
most remote distances are happily introduced on canvas. But what chiefly
disqualifies it, is the want of fore-ground to balance this vast expanse of
distance. Unless distances and fore-grounds are in some degree, balanced, no
composition can be good. Fore-grounds are essential to landscape: distances are
not.

A picturesque view, as was observed, may consist chiefly, indeed entirely, of
water: but then, it is supposed, that, as there cannot be a natural
fore-ground, an artificial one must be obtained -- a group of ships -- a few
boats with figures -- a light-house -- or something, that will make a balance
between near and distant objects. Such were the sea-pieces of Vandervelt; in
which vessels of some kind were always introduced to make an artificial
fore-ground. We sometimes indeed meet with amusing views, such as that
celebrated one at Hack-fall in Yorkshire See Observations on the lakes, and
mountains of Cumberland, vol. II. p. 191.
, where there is a gradual proportion among the different parts of the retiring
landscape: we can scarce distinguish where the fore-grounds end, and where the
distance begins: yet still there are objects nearer the eye, which, in a degree
set off the retiring parts, tho they may not be fully proportioned to them. But
the most advanced parts of water cannot form a fore-ground, if I may so speak.
It wants, on it is nearest parts, that variety of objects, which receiving
strong impressions of light, and shade, are necessary to give it consequence,
and strength. It turns all into distance. Such is the view before us over the
channel, and along the shores of the isle of Wight. To the imagination it is
the simple idea of grandeur: to the eye, a mere exhibition of distance.

Besides, there is not only a want of natural proportion and balance between
the fore-ground, and the offskip; but a fore-ground here could not even
artificially be obtained, because of the loftiness of the point. Take the same
view from a lower stand; from the level of the sea for instance, or a little
higher, where you may station a group of ships, the masts and sails of which
rise above the horizon; and by thus giving the view a proper, and proportioned
fore-ground, you may turn it into one of Vandervelt's compositions, and give it
picturesque beauty.

But tho the view before us is not picturesque; it is certainly, as we observed
of those other views over the island See p. 132.
, in a great degree, amusing. The whole area, constantly overspread with
vessels of various kinds, is a perpetual moving scene: while the naked eye
discovers, in the distance, a thousand objects; and through a telescope a
thousand more. Tho the telescopic pleasures of the eye are very little allied
to the pleasures of the painter, they still assist the amusement. -- The cliff,
on which this tower stands, is about forty or fifty feet high; and is formed
into a terrace, which runs a considerable way along the beach.

About a mile from this whimsical building stands Calshot-castle; situated like
the castle of Hurst See p. 89.
, on a tongue of land shooting into the sea. Calshot is another of those
ancient coast-castles, which Henry VIII built, out of the spoils of the abbeys.
It was originally intended as a safeguard to the bay of Southampton. -- The
views here are of the same nature as those at Lutterel's tower. They have a
less extensive range to the west; but this is compensated by a full view up
Southampton-bay. And they are the more picturesque, as the point of view is
lower.

Near the village of Fawley, which is among the largest villages of the coast,
stands Cadland, the seat of Mr. Drummond; an edifice of a very different kind
from that we had just been surveying. Tho quite plain, it is one of the most
elegant, and seems to be one of the most comfortable houses, in the country.

It stands on a gentle eminence on the banks of Southampton-bay, with a great
variety of ground playing beautifully around it; which is every where adorned,
and in some places profusely covered, with ancient wood. The whole country
indeed was so well wooded, that no addition of wood was any where necessary; in
many parts it was redundant. This abundance of old timber gives the house, tho
lately built, so much the air and dignity of an ancient mansion, that Mr.
Brown, the ingenious improver of it, used to say, "It was the oldest new place
he knew in England." The clumps particularly he has managed with great
judgment. We observed some combinations of ash, and other trees, which were
equal to any clumps we had ever seen. They adorned the natural scene, and were
just such as the picturesque eye would wish to introduce in artificial
landscape. We regretted, that the great storm in february 1781 had blown down
nineteen of these ornamental trees. There seemed however no deficiency; tho I
doubt not, if we had known the situation of those which had fallen, we should
have found they filled their station with great propriety. The park includes a
circuit of about five miles.

Besides the beauty of the grounds themselves around the house; they command
all the pleasing distances in their neighbourhoood -- Southampton-bay --
Netly-abbey -- Calshot-castle -- Spithead -- the channel -- the isle of Wight
-- St. Helen's -- Cowes, and all the other conspicuous parts of the island: and
as many of these views are seen with the advantage of grand, woody
fore-grounds, they have often an admirable effect.

The only thing that appeared affected about this elegant mansion, is the
parade, which accompanies some of the appendant buildings. At the small
distance of halt a quarter of a mile from the house, stands a most splendid
farm. The stables, the cow-sheds, the pigeon-house, the graneries, the barns,
are all superb. In another direction the same honor, tho in an inferior
degree, is paid to poultry. This is too much, and tends only to lessen the
dignity of the principal mansion.

As the horse is so nearly connected with his master, and contributes so much
to his state, and convenience, we allow so noble an associate to lodge under a
roof proportioned to his master's magnificence. As he is expected also to be
ready at a call, and may properly be the object of attention to persons of any
rank, we allow his magnificent lodging to stand near the mansion, to which it
appertains. At the same time, if the stables be expensive, they should
contribute to the magnificence of the whole, by making one of the wings, or
some other proper appendage, of the pile.

But for the cow-sheds, and pig-sties, they have no title to such notice. Let
them be convenient, and neat; but let them be simple, and unadorned. Let them
stand in some sequestered place; where they may not presume to vie with the
mansion they depend on; but keep a respectful distance. Herds of cattle are
beautiful, in a high degree, in their proper place, among lawns and woods; but
pent up, as they are obliged to be in yards, amidst filth and litter, they are
no objects of beauty. Neither should their habitations be considered as such.
Ornaments here serve only to call the attention to a nuisance.

From Cadland we proceeded to Hethe through a variety of such beautiful
country, that we almost thought the house we had just seen, might have been
better stationed elsewhere. In a variety of pleasing situations it is difficult
to select the best. Something or other may excel in each; and the eye, divided
in it is choice, is unwilling to lose any thing. As we cannot however possess
every beauty, and every convenience at once, we must forego that idea; and
endeavor to make such a selection, as will include the most; tho perhaps some
striking beauty, which we observe in other situations, is lost. This probably
is the case of the elegant mansion we have been surveying. No situation
perhaps, on the whole, could have excelled it.

The pleasing landscape we met with between Cadland and Hethe, was of a similar
kind to what we had already admired -- great profusion of full-grown oak,
adorning great variety of playing ground. But what particularly recommended
these scenes, were several dips, running down to Southampton-bay; wooded on
each side, with a rich country beyond the water. They were of the same kind,
with those we admired between Christ-church, and Lymington See page 85.
; but much richer, and more beautiful. Two of the most striking of these
scenes, were from Stobland-common, and near Butt's-ash-farm.

At Hethe, the whole bay of Southampton opened in one view before us; but the
scene it offers, is far from being picturesque. The opposite shore is long, and
tedious; and the lines of the bay run parallel: for tho in fact there are two
or three bold openings in it, formed by the mouths of rivers; yet, in the
distance, which is about a league, they are totally lost.

Hethe is the ferry-port to Southampton; which lies higher up in a diagonal
across the bay, and upon a neck of land, which shoots into it. The flowing tide
therefore carries the boat quickly to Southampton; and the ebbing tide returns
it as expeditiously to Hethe.

From Hethe to Dibden, the country, if possible, improves in beauty. The many
inequalities of the ground -- the profusion of stately trees -- the sheltered
enclosures, appearing every where, like beautiful little wooded lawns -- the
catches, here and there, of the bay -- and above all, the broad green, winding
lanes, adorned with clumps standing out in various parts -- exhibit a wonderful
variety of pleasing landscape. I touch general features only; for as these
woodland scenes are no where strongly marked, it is impossible to give any
particular detail of them by verbal description. One may say of them, as we
sometimes say of a well-written history, which runs into a variety of
incidents, interesting indeed, but not replete with any important events; that
no just idea of the contents of it, can be given, without referring to the book
itself.

From Dibden, we continued our rout northward, till we entered a beautiful
forest lawn. We had found many of these scenes in different parts, each of
which had something peculiar to itself See p. 147.
. This too had it is peculiar character. It was about two miles in diameter. To
the eye it is limits appeared circular; and it is form descending gently to a
wide center, had some resemblance to that of a dish. Yet it was far from a
regular scene. It Is great beauty consisted chiefly in it is noble skreens of
forest-wood; which growing every where around it with great irregularity, broke
out into the skirts of the area, not in clumps, which in so large a scene would
have had little effect, but in corners of woods, adding variety to it is limits;
yet without incroaching on the simplicity, and grandeur of the general idea.
The name of this beautiful, and extensive forest-scene is Hound's-down; so
named probably from the fair advantage it gives the hound in pursuit. If he can
drive his chase, from the thickets into this open plain, it is probable he will
there secure him.

Through the middle of this wide down the Lyndhurst road passes to Southampton.
The entrance into it, on the Lyndhurst side, is beautiful; particularly between
the ninth and tenth stones, where the ground is finely diversified with those
woody promontories just mentioned. As we approach the top of the hill toward
Southampton, the beauty of the scene is gone: the extremity is a naked, barren
boundary. One advantage however we obtain from it, which is a distance; in
forest-scenery the more valuable, as the more uncommon. Distances are, at all
times, an agreeable part of landscape, and unite with every mode of
composition. Here it is introduced at first in it is simplest mode. A plain
fore-ground, without any ornament, is joined to a removed distance, without the
intervention of any middle ground. In a composition of this simple kind it is
necessary to break the lines of the foreground; which may easily be done by a
tree, or a group of cattle. -- As we rise to the verge of the eminence, the
view inlarges itself. The grounds immediately below the eye, are overspread
with wood, and become a second distance; beyond which extends a remote one.
Under a proper light this landscape is calculated to produce a good effect. The
parts are large; and if one vast shadow overspread the woods on the nearer
grounds, an enlightened distance would form a fine contrast.

Hound's-down is one of the best pasture-grounds in the forest, at least in
patches; and is of course frequented with cattle, which are a great addition to
it is beauty. We rarely pass it in a summer-evening without seeing herds of deer
grazing in different parts; or forest-mares with their colts.

One thing indeed disfigures it; and that is the strait course of the road,
which bisects it. The vista, which leads through the forest from Brokenhurst to
Lyndhurst, we observed See page 65.
, was both great in itself, and accompanied with infinite variety; and
therefore it became both a grand, and a beautiful object: but a simple strait
road, like this, over a plain, has a different effect. Tho in fact, it is
grander than a winding road, as being more simple, and consisting of fewer
parts; yet as it is at best only a paltry object, and has not grandeur
sufficient to rouse the imagination See this idea illustrated page 122.
, it is, on the whole, much less pleasing, than a road playing before us in two
or three large sweeps, which would at least have had variety to recommend it;
and might easily have been contrived, without lengthening the journey across
it, on a trotting horse, above two minutes. -- But in matters of this kind, in
which surveyors of high-roads are concerned, we expect beauty only by chance;
and when we obtain it, it is so much gain.

In our way to Hounds-down we rode past a celebrated spot, called the
Deer-leap. Here a stag was once shot; which in the agony of death, collecting
his force, gave a bound, which astonished those who saw it. It was immediately
commemorated by two posts, which were fixed at the two extremities of the leap,
where they still remain. The space between them is somewhat more than eighteen
yards.

About half a mile on the right, as we leave Hounds-down, stands Iron's-hill
lodge. It occupies a knoll in the middle of a kind of natural, irregular vista.
In front the ground continues rising gently about two miles to Lyndhurst. The
back-front overlooks a wild, woody scene, into which the vista imperceptibly
blends.

From Hound's-down we returned to Beaulieu, along the western side of that
extensive heath, which, as I observed See page 178.
, occupies the middle district between the river of Beaulieu, and the bay of
Southampton. In this part it consists of great variety of ground, and is
adorned with little patches of wood scattered about it; and as it is, in
general, the highest ground in it is neighborhood, it is not, like most of the
heaths we have seen, terminated by a woody skreen, but by distances; which
being commonly forest-scenes, are picturesque, tho not extensive. Among these
were some woody bottoms, on the right, which were pleasing.

SECT. X. A tour through the northern parts of New-forest.
HAVING now examined those parts of the forest, which lie on the south side of
the invisible line drawn from Ringwood to Dibden See page 51.
; we proposed next to examine those parts, which lie on the north side of it
See page 55.
. -- We directed our course first to Lyndhurst. This village stands high; and
the church, standing still higher, is a landmark round the country.

Tho Lyndhurst is but a small place, it may be called the capital of the
forest. Here the forest-courts are held; and here stands the principal lodge;
which is known by the name of the King's-house, and is the residence of the
lord warden; tho it is but an ordinary building. An assignment of timber was
lately made to put it, and some other lodges, into better repair.

Behind the house lies a pleasant sloping field, containing about six or seven
acres, which is planted round with shrubs, circled by a gravel walk; and
secured from cattle by a railed fence. I mention this mode of enclosure only
because I have often thought it a very good one, especially if a field, like
this, consist of sloping ground: for the rails, which are in many parts hid,
appear winding in others; and the eye is seldom offended -- sometimes pleased
with pursuing them, and taking them up again, after they have for a while
disappeared. There is something also not unpleasing in the perspective of
winding rails. -- I do not however mention a fence of this kind as suitable to
a regal mansion; or so proper in many cases as a sunk one: but only as a
simple, unaffected manner of enclosing a field near a plain, common house; and
perhaps less offensive, than chains, wires, nets, or any of those slight,
unnatural fences, which cannot be hid, and yet appear so disproportioned. I
should wish my rails however to be without ornament; and either to be left with
their natural color, or to be painted of some dingy olive-green hue: if they
are of a bright-green, of a white, or of any other glaring color, they
disgust. They are at best only disagreeable conveniences: ornament makes them
objects. But above all ornaments we are disgusted with the Chinese. That
zig-zag work, commonly called Chinese-railing, is very offensive. Plain, simple
posts, with one, two, or three rails, according to the sort of cattle we wish
to exclude, make the least disgusting fence.

Opposite to the royal lodge stands a large square building, with a turret at
each corner, where the king's horses, carriages, and staghounds are kept.

I do not find, that the royal lodge of Lyndhurst has ever been visited by the
sovereign from the time of Charles II, till the year 1789, when George III
passed through the forest in his road to Weymouth. So long a time had elapsed,
that all the etiquette of receiving a royal visitor was almost forgotten. When
the day however of his arrival was notified, all the keepers, dressed in new
green uniforms, met him on horseback, at his entrance into the forest. He
traveled without guards; and was conducted by these foresters to Lyndhurst.
When he alighted from his coach, sir Charles Mills presented him with two white
greyhounds, by which ceremony he holds certain forest-privileges. His majesty,
and the royal family (for the queen, and three of the princesses were with him)
at first dined in public, by throwing the windows open, and admitting the crowd
within the railed lawn: but as the populace became rather riotous in their joy,
there was a necessity to exclude them. The royal family however walked abroad
in the forest every evening. The king spent his mornings in riding: and as he
rides fast, he saw greatest part of the forest; and seemed so much pleased with
it, that he continued at Lyndhurst (poorly as he was there accommodated) from
thursday the 25th of june, till the tuesday following.

Near Lyndhurst stands Cuffnells, the seat of Mr. Rose. It is not placed
exactly as might be wished. High-ground rises immediately in front, which is
always a circumstance to be avoided. But Mr. Rose has happily managed an
inconvenience, which he found. He has laid out a very handsome approach, which
winds to the house under the rising ground; and makes it of much less
consequence, than when the road was carried abruptly down the slope to the
house. His improvements he has thrown to the back-front, where he is leading a
very beautiful walk, through clumps of old oak winding toward Lyndhurst. But
his improvements are yet incomplete.

Mr. Ballard also has a house near Lyndhurst, which stands high; and commands
an extensive view. The king walked up to it, and with his glass continued some
time examining the distant objects. He was so pleased with it, that on leaving
it, he gave it the name of Mount-royal.

From Lyndhurst along the Rumsey road, the forest opens beautifully, on the
right, upon a lawn swelling in different parts, and supported with wood at
various distances. This lawn is used as a race-ground, where the little horses
of the forest, of which there is a mart at Lyndhurst, are commonly brought to
try their strength, and agility.

That noble vista, which we described after we left Brokenhurst See page 65.
, is interrupted by Lyndhurst; but commences again, on the other side of the
town. Here however it is of little value. It is but ill adorned with wood. The
trees, which are rare, scathed, and meagre, are in general not only ugly, but
ill-combined. Some formalities also give it a bad effect. Before, it was
irregularly great, and simple: here the road rises to the eye in three regular
stages. The summit too is formally abrupt. The road cut through the wood, forms
here a gaping chasm, opening like a wide portal, discovering the naked horizon,
and making, as it were, a full pause in the landscape: we discover it plainly
to be artificial; and this hurts the eye. The effect is beautiful on the other
side of Lyndhurst, where the chasm of the vista, as you approach, is filled
with the tops of retiring trees, which excites the idea of something beyond it;
and gives it a more natural air.

This gaping chasm appears long the striking feature of the view, as we rise
the hill. In our approach to it however the eye is, here and there, agreeably
drawn aside; particularly by a forest-lawn, which presents itself about a mile,
and a half from Lyndhurst; opening both on the right and left. It is decorated
irregularly with wood -- rises before the eye -- blends itself leisurely with a
few scattered trees, and clumps, which come forward from the distant woods to
meet it -- and then loses itself imperceptibly in the depths of the forest.

Somewhere in this part, between Lyndhurst and Rumsey, a charitable scheme was
projected in favor of a body of Palatines, who took refuge in England, in the
reign of queen Anne; and engaged the humane part of the nation in endeavoring
to provide means for their support. Many benevolent projects were formed; and
among others this of settling them in New-forest: and the matter was thought so
practicable, that it was digested into a regular plan; and laid before the lord
treasurer Godolphin.

The arrangement was this. A square plot of ground, containing four thousand
acres, was to be marked out, and equally divided into four parts, by two roads
running through it, and crossing at right angles, in the center. Each of these
four parts was to be subdivided into five, so that the whole plot might be
proportioned into twenty farms; each of two hundred acres. This provision of
farms being made, twenty of the best, and most respectable Palatine families
were to be looked out, and put in possession of them: the rest were to be
day-labourers. Each farmer was to be entrusted with a capital of two hundred
pounds; to be exempted from taxes for twenty years; and to have an assignment
of forest-timber, for building, and repairs.

This scheme, which seems to have been well-digested, is said to have been
first hinted by the famous Daniel de Foe: but got no farther than the
treasurer's board -- whether the soil was thought incapable of being improved;
or whether it miscarried from being the production of so wild a genius, which
made it suspected as chimerical.

We had now arrived at the summit of the vista, which in prospect had appeared
so formal. On a close approach, it is formality wore off; and we found ourselves
surrounded by beautiful scenery. The summit itself is a fine wooded-knoll,
rising, on the left, and falling, on the right, into open groves. -- As we
descended the hill, on the other side, the close-wooded scenery still continued
beautiful, and we found the grand vista better supported with wood.

In wooded seenes, like these, the planoconvex-mirror, which was Mr. Gray's
companion in all his tours See Gray's memoirs, page 352.
, has a pleasing effect. Distances indeed, reduced to so small a surface, are
lost; it is chiefly calculated for objects at hand Mr. Gray, on viewing the
ruins of an abbey, says, "They were the truest objects of his glass he had met
with any where." He does not indeed assign the reason, but if he had considered
it, he might have seen, it was, because they presented a happy display of
present objects. See his memoirs, page 380.
, which it shows to more advantage.

When we examine nature at large, we study composition, and effect. We examine
also the forms of particular objects. But from the size of the objects of
nature, the eye cannot perform both these operations at once. If it be engaged
in general effects, it postpones particular objects: and if it be fixed on
particular objects, whose forms, and tints it gathers up with a passing glance
from one to another, it is not at leisure to observe general effects. -- But in
the minute exhibitions of the convex-mirror, composition, forms, and colors
are brought closer together; and the eye examines the general effect, the forms
of the objects, and the beauty of the tints, in one complex view. As the
colors too are the very colors of nature, and equally well harmonized, they
are the more brilliant, as they are the more condensed.

In a chaise particularly the exhibitions of the convex-mirror are amusing. We
are rapidly carried from one object to another. A succession of high-colored
pictures is continually gliding before the eye. They are like the visions of
the imagination; or the brilliant landscapes of a dream. Forms, and colors, in
brightest array, fleet before us; and if the transient glance of a good
composition happen to unite with them, we should give any price to fix, and
appropriate the scene "I got to the parsonage a little before sunset; and saw
in my glass, a picture, that if I could transmit to you, and fix, in all the
softness of it is living colors, would fairly sell for a thousand pound."
Gray's memoirs, page 360.
.

After all, perhaps the chief virtue of this deception may consist in
exhibiting the beauties of nature in a new light. Thus when we close one eye,
and look through the lid of the other half-shut, we see only the general effect
of objects; and the appearance is new, and pleasing: or when we stoop to the
ground, and see the landscape around us with an inverted eye, the effect is
pleasing for the same reason. We are pleased also, when we look at objects
through stained glass. It is not, that any of these modes of vision is
superior, or even equal to the eye in it is natural state; it is the novelty
alone of the exhibition, that pleases. -- If the mirror have any peculiar
advantage, it consists in it is not requiring the eye to alter it is focus; which
it must do, when it surveys the views of nature -- the distance requiring one
focus, and the foreground another. This change of the focus, in theory at
least, (I doubt, whether in practice) occasions some confusion. In the mirror,
we survey the whole under one focus.

On the other hand, the mirror has at least one disadvantage. Objects are not
presented with that depth, that gradation, that rotundity of distance, if I may
so speak, which nature exhibits; but are evidently affected by the two surfaces
of the mirror, which give them a flatness, something like the scenes of a
playhouse, retiring behind each other. -- The convex-mirror also diminishes
distances beyond nature, for which the painter should always make proper
allowance. Or, to speak perhaps more properly, it inlarges fore-grounds beyond
their proportion. Thus, if you look at your face in a speculum of this kind,
you will see your nose magnified. The retiring parts of your face will appear
of course diminished.

About a mile beyond the woody summit we had passed, we entered another
forest-lawn, which tho very confined, has it is beauty; as all these openings
must have, however confined, if surrounded with ancient wood. But about half a
mile farther, where the Romsey, and Salisbury roads divide, another forest-lawn
of much larger dimensions, presents itself. This is very spacious, well hung
with wood, and (what in all these scenes adds greatly to their beauty) adorned
in various parts with woody promontories shooting into it; and clumps, and
single trees scattered about it. On an eminence near this lawn, stands a new
house, belonging to Mr. Gilbert. It seems to enjoy a good situation; but we did
not ride up to it. -- In this part of the forest are a few scattered houses,
known by the name of Cadenam, remarkable for standing near that celebrated oak,
of which I have given an account in the early part of this work See vol. I. p.
165.
.

Not far from hence lies Paulton's, the seat of Mr. Welbore Ellis. -- Paulton's
was one of the first works of Mr. Brown; and therefore deserves the attention
of the curious; tho in itself indeed it is a pleasing scene. The situation of
the house is that of an abbey; low, sheltered, and sequestered. It is contained
within a paled boundary of about five miles in circumference: but the whole is
so woody, that the boundary is no where visible. When Mr. Brown first undertook
this place, it was full of ancient timber; and nothing was wanting, but to open
the area judiciously into ample lawns, screened with wood.

A polished scene, like this, in the midst of a forest, addresses us with the
air of novelty; and when natural, as this is, cannot fail to please. It will
not however bear a comparison with the wild scenes of the forest. We enter them
again with pleasure; and speak of them as we do of the works of a great
literary genius, which contain greater beauties, tho perhaps blended with
greater defects, than the labored works of a less exalted, tho more correct
writer. Every thing in these cultered scenes, may be perfectly correct --
nothing may offend; yet we seek in vain for those strokes of genius, which
rouse the imagination, and are so frequently found among the wild scenes of the
forest. Some things however at Paulton's did offend; particularly an attempt to
improve a little forest-stream (by forming a head) into a river. Attempts of
this kind seldom answer: and the misfortune here is the more glaring, as a
great, white, Chinese bridge stands every where in sight to remind us of it. We
wish for simple ornaments on all occasions -- ornaments which the eye is not
obliged to notice. Here the ornament was particularly out of place; as it was
not only a fault itself; but led the eye to the detection of other faults.

From Paultons we entered an extensive tract of rising ground, which bounds the
forest on the north, along the borders of Wiltshire; and stretches on the left
toward Fording-bridge, the river Avon, and the county of Dorset. This side of
the forest however is by much the narrowest. It Is limits hardly extend from
east to west above four miles: whereas the boundary of the forest, in the same
direction near the sea, extends at least fourteen.

This lofty plain, consisting chiefly of furze, and heath, as far as we
surveyed it, appeared in itself little adorned with any forest-furniture. The
little wood in any part of it is area bore no proportion to it is extent. But it
overlooked very grand views. In a picturesque light therefore we considered it
as a vast theater, from whence we might view almost all the regions of the
forest, which we had passed. -- Toward the north indeed, in some parts, it
commands views into Wiltshire; but the country is cultivated; and not removed
enough to lose it is formalities. This part therefore may be considered only as
a foil. The grand opening is toward the south. Here we found a station, which
commanded a very noble view. The heath, making a gentle dip, presents a vast
bay, which spreads the whole forest, in a manner, before the eye as far as the
sea, in one vast expanse of scenery. Bramble-hill, one of the lodges, standing
on a knoll, on the left, about half a mile below the eye, occupies one side of
the opening into this immense woody distance, and another prominence, on which
stand the ruins of Castle-Malwood, occupies the other. The station may easily
be found by this direction. Between these two promontories, the eye is
conducted from wood, to wood, over lawns and heaths, through every shade of
perspective, till all distinction at length is lost; and the eye doubts whether
it is still roving over the tufted woods of the forest; or is landed upon the
distant shores of the isle of Wight; or is wandering among the hazy streaks of
the horizon. At least it had that dubious appearance, when we saw it. But it is
one of the choice recommendations of these extensive scenes, that they are
subject to a thousand varieties from the different modifications of the
atmosphere.

A vast scene however, like this, is unmanageable as we have often observed,
tho it may be highly picturesque. -- But our observations on this subject may
be carried farther, than we have yet carried them.

It is a common assertion among landscape-painters, that if the picture be
justly painted, an extensive distance in miniature will have the same effect on
the mind of the spectator, as if it were painted on the largest scale. Stand
near a window, they tell you, and the whole may be brought within the
circumference of a pane of glass. If then the same landscape were exactly
painted on the pane of glass, it would have the same effect in a picture, which
it has in nature.

This reasoning, I fear, is false. It depends entirely on the supposition, that
we collect all our notices of external objects from the eye; agreeably to that
construction of it, which the anatomist gives us. Whereas, in fact, the eye is
a mere window. It is a pane of glass, through which the imagination is
impressed by the notices it receives of outward objects; which notices, tho
sometimes true, are often false, particularly with regard to the size of
objects; and will mislead it, unless corrected by experience. The mathematician
talks of the angle of vision; and demonstrates, that the size of the object in
the eye must be in exact proportion to that part of the cone of rays, which it
intercepts: and it is on this supposition, the painter asserts, that an
extensive distance, exactly painted, tho in miniature, will affect the
spectator like the natural scene. But many things are mathematically true; tho
experimently false. Such is the famous puzzle of Achilles, and the tortoise.
The mathematician demonstrates, that the tortoise must win the race; tho not
one jockey at Newmarket would bet on his side. Just so, the imagination revolts
from the mathematical account of vision. If I examine, for instance, the height
of that tree, by the side of a notched stick, it is scarce an inch. But no
mathematical proof can persuade me, that I see it under those dimensions. I am
well assured, that the tree, not only is, but appears to me much larger.

If indeed my imagination could be so far deceived, as to believe the
landscape, which is painted on a pane of glass, were really the landscape
transmitted through it; I might then suppose it of the dimensions of nature. On
no other supposition I can give it credit. But if a deceit of this kind could
not easily be practiced on a pane of glass; much less could it be practiced in
a picture. We could never so far impose upon ourselves, as to conceive a little
object, of the dimensions of a foot by six inches, hung against a wall, can be
a just representation of a country, twenty or thirty miles in extent.

I mean not to debate the structure of the eye with the philosopher. All I mean
to assert, is, that the picturesque eye has nothing to do with tunics, irises,
et retinas. It judges of nothing by a focus, or a cone of vispual rays. The
imagination guided by experience presides solely over vision, as far at least
as the bulk of objects is concerned; and it pictures them, not as painted on a
mathematical point, but on an extended plain, and of their natural size. How
nature manages this matter, is beyond the painter's power to explain. The fact
is certain: let the philosopher, if he can, account for it.

To bring the argument to the point before us: there must be real space to
interest the imagination; and excite ideas of grandeur. In a picture, the
imagination cannot be imposed upon. Two or three inches may give us the form of
the landscape; the proportion between the fore-ground, and the offskip; the hue
of distance, and it is general appearance: and we may be pleased with these
things even in miniature. But it is impossible within such scanty limits to
raise any of those feelings, which landscape in it is full dimensions will
excite. Try the matter experimentally: examine such a landscape as this vast,
extended forest-view before us, alternately; first with the naked eye, and then
with a diminishing glass, (which at least gives as just a representation of the
perspective, and keeping of nature, as any artificial landscape can do) and you
will be convinced how much the idea loses under the latter experiment. At the
same time, if such a distance as this, extensive as it is, were painted on a
larger scale than common, and properly accompanied, and balanced with
fore-ground; we might be tempted to forget it is under-size; and seeing so large
a picture, might acknowledge something like an equality with nature: we might
be inclined to forget the deception, and might in some degree, feel those
sublime ideas which nature itself excites.

Besides this grand and extensive distance, which we surveyed between
Bramble-hill, and the ruins of Castle-Malwood, we found many views of the same
kind, as we traversed the high, and heathy grounds toward Fritham, and
Fording-bridge. But the hills about Boldre-wood, and Lyndhurst occupy the
middle space between the northern, and southern parts of the forest; and as
they rise considerably, and intercept our views, the more we proceed in a
western direction, I know not, whether, on the whole, the view we have just
taken, is not one of the most extensive, and most amusing, which the whole
forest exhibits. -- I cannot therefore conclude a description of New-forest
more properly, than with this grand exhibition, which in a manner, comprehends
the whole.

As I have more than once however observed, that scenes of all kinds, and
distances the most of all, are so diversified by the circumstances, under which
they are examined, that no single view can give an adequate idea of them; I
wish, before I shut up these forest-scenes, to add a fuller illustration of
this great picturesque truth; which should always be in the recollection of
every picturesque observer of nature. The example I shall select for this
purpose, shall be the scenery around the parsonage-house at Vicar's-hills; not
so much because it is a pleasing scene in itself, as because lying constantly
before my eye, it is the best instance I can have: for no one can make remarks
of this kind on a scene, which he has not frequently examined. -- I must first
describe the scenery, before I remark the several circumstances, under which it
is often varied.

Vicar's-hill is a knoll, falling gently, on the east, to a grand woody bank,
part of the wild grounds of sir Harry Burrard -- on the south, toward the
channel, and the isle of Wight -- and on the west toward Lymington-river --
all which it overlooks. As it stands on the edge of the forest, the situation
of it is nearly conformable to the wish of the poet: -- Be my retreat
Between the groaning forest, and the shore,
A rural, sheltered, solitary scene Thompson's winter.
.
The two last of these epithets indeed belong not to it. It stands rather
lofty, tho not high; and is so far from being solitary, that it enjoys a good
neighborhood.

From this knoll, the views are engrossed by two houses, Mr. Cleavland's, and
the vicarage; the united plantations of which exclude the prospect from all
other parts of the hill. From both these houses the views are beautiful; but
they are of different kinds. Mr. Cleavland's standing on the west side of the
knoll, has a view of Lymington-river, which forms one of it is best sweeps below
his lawn. From hence the eye is carried along the river to it is opening into
the channel; of which -- together with the shores around -- the island beyond
-- and the town of Lymington -- the distant landscape is formed. These
distances are varied, as you view them from the upper, and lower parts of the
lawn; and in general, as they are circumscribed by the high lands, which bound
the estuary, they are much more picturesque, and in the eye of a painter more
beautiful, than those vast extensive views of the island and channel, which we
have so often seen from various parts of the coast. We have had other occasions
to remark the picturesque beauty of this estuary See page 61, and 95.
.

As Mr. Cleavland's has a better view of the water, the vicarage has a better
view of the woods. A house built, where it could command both scenes, would
enjoy a grand situation. The view however is so good, that it will bear a
division; and yet each part form a whole. The vicarage stands in the garden;
closed on every side, but the south, which is the aspect of the best rooms.
Before it is spread a small lawn, proportioned to it is size. At the end of the
lawn, which is also the boundary of the forest, is a sunk-fence; connecting it
with the meadows beyond. These meadows declining to the south, and east, form
the brow of Vicar's-hill in those directions; and are screened by the grand
woody bank, abovementioned, wheeling gently round, which shapes the lower part
of them into a sort of semi-circular valley. To the hanging woods of this very
picturesque bank, a close, descending walk from the house, following the
direction of the forest-boundary, unites the garden.

The woody bank, which is the grand circumstance of the view, having thus
circled the meadows, falls away toward the estuary of the river; and becomes
one of it is high enclosures. On the other side it is intersected by a rising
ground, on which stands the town of Lymington at the distance of a mile See the
situation of Lymington described, page 94.
. Over the dip, formed by this intersection, rises, as if fitted for the place,
a lofty part of the isle of Wight; from which a ridge of high land continues,
passing over the town as a back-ground. Below the island appears a small catch
of the channel: but the intervening woods of the eastern screen have now almost
intercepted it; interposing one beautiful circumstance in the room of another.

Some of the chief modes of incidental beauty, which vary these few parts of
landscape, are these.

In a morning the effect is often beautiful, when the sun rising over the trees
of the eastern bank, pours his sloping rays upon their tufted heads; while all
the bottom of the valley, not yet having caught the splendour, is dusky, and
obscure See an effect of this kind described more at length, Vol. I. p. 241.
.

The effect still continues beautiful, as the sun rises higher. Some prominent
part of the woody screen always catches the light; while the recesses among the
trees still hold the depth of the morning-shadow.

The disposition of the landscape is as well adapted to receive the effects of
an evening, as of a morning-sun. As all the eastern screen is richly, and
picturesquely wooded, the illumination of the trees from the west is generally
pleasing; especially as the meadows, descending to the east, and south, and of
course declining from the summer-sun, present large masses of shade.

But the effect of light is best seen in an evening-storm, when it rises from
the east, behind the woody bank; while the sun sinking in the west, throws a
splendour upon the trees, which seen to such advantage against the darkness of
the hemisphere, shows the full effect of light, and shade.

In winter, the island is generally of an indistinct, gray hue: but in summer,
when the evening-sun gets more to the north, it is declining ray strikes the
distant cliffs, and broken grounds of the island-shores, and gives them a great
resplendency. As these broken grounds run behind the town, the effect of the
chimnies, and houses, when seen in shadow against the warm tints of the
island-shores, is often very picturesque; much more so, than when the sun
throws it is light upon them. And here we see exemplified a truth in landscape,
that the light breaks a town into parts -- shows it is poverty -- and dissipates
it is effect: whereas all the parts of a town seen in shadow, are blended
together, and it becomes one grand object. I speak however chiefly of towns in
the situation of this, placed along the ridge of an eminence, and about a mile
from the eye. In remote distance, a ray of light thrown upon a town has often a
good effect. -- These splendid lights of an evening-sun upon the cliffs and
broken shores of the island, appear first about the beginning of april; but
they grow stronger, as the power of the sun increases. Various other tints also
of a bluish, purplish, and yellowish hue, the effects of evening-suns in
summer, occasionally invest the island.

But haziness, and mists are here, as in other places, the great sources of
variety. In general, they have a good effect; but sometimes a bad one. As the
remote part of the landscape, which consists of the isle of Wight, does not
immediately connect with the woods on one side, and the town of Lymington on
the other, but is separated from them by the channel, which is about two, or
three leagues across, it of course happens, that when a partial fog removes the
island alone from the fight, a violent chasm is left in the landscape: there is
no gradation; the rising ground, on which Lymington stands, appears staring
against a foggy sky without any support of distance. Nothing can show more
strongly the use of distances, in completing the harmony of a view. When the
several parts of a country melt into each other, as in the grand distance we
have just been surveying from Castle-Malwood, a fog, or mist can never
introduce any great mischief. It comes gradually on; and therefore only
gradually obscures. It is the chasm, which occasions the blank. At the same
time, notwithstanding the island is not gradually connected with the other
parts of the country, the landscape loses in no other modification of the
atmosphere. If the mist be more general, so as to obscure not only the island,
but the town also, and in proportion the nearer parts of the view, the effect
is often beautiful. The woods of the eastern bank being obscured, the firs of
the lawn standing much nearer, rise strongly in opposition: the eye is pleased
with the contrast; while the imagination is pleased also with diving into the
obscurity, and forming it is own objects.

The line also which the high grounds of the island form upon the sky, is
sometimes strong, and sometimes faint; sometimes also a part of it is broken,
or intercepted by clouds, which gives a contrast to the other part.

Again, the mist is sometimes so light, that it removes the island several
leagues farther from the eye: yet still the landscape partaking of the general
effect, preserves it is harmony.

Sometimes also, after a heavy shower, when the air, as the rain goes off,
becomes perfectly diaphanous, like an Italian sky, and all the the vapors are
precipitated, the island will advance many leagues nearer the eye: every part
of it will be perfectly conspicuous; even the little divisions of property will
appear faintly sketched upon it: yet still the clearness of the other parts of
the landscape according with it, all will be in place, and a general harmony
preserved.

These are chiefly summer-effects. I have often however seen beautiful effects
in winter of a similar kind; especially in a morning somewhat inclining to
frost; when the rays of the sun have appeared, as it were, struggling between
the haziness of the island, the smoke of the town, and the splendour of the
rising sun. In one part distinctness has prevailed; in another, obscurity. -- I
have seen also something of the same effect in a winternoon; only rendered
perhaps still more beautiful by streaks of ruddy sunset passing along the
horizon, and joining in the conflict.

In the year 1783, when such uncommon fogs prevailed over Europe, the
appearances of the island were often very strange. Earth, clouds, and water,
confounded together in vast combinations, seemed often to have exchanged
places; the water would appear above the island; and the clouds below both. But
these appearances were so uncommon, that they scarce deserve mention; nor
indeed were they often in themselves picturesque.

I omit mentioning here the variety, which the seasons produce on this
landscape; tho as it is a woody scene, the effect is often singularly
beautiful, especially in autumn.

If then so great a variety of incidents arise from the few circumstances of
landscape, which are found at this place; with what variety may we suppose
landscapes of a larger size, and composed of more complicated parts, may be
attended? particularly, extensive distances, which are of all others attended
with the greatest variety of incidental beauty. Every landscape indeed has
something peculiar to itself, which disposes it more or less to receive the
incidents of light, and weather in some peculiar manner. An open seacoast, one
should think of so simple a construction, as to be little liable to receive any
change; and yet I have stood upon a seacoast, on a sun-shiny cloudy day, when
the wind has been rather brisk; and have in less than an hour, seen the whole
picture under a dozen different forms, from the varying of the lights in the
sky, on the horizon, on the surface of the water, or on some part of the coast.

The conclusions from all these remarks are, that every landscape is, in
itself, a scene of great variety -- that there are few landscapes, which have
not, at some time or other, their happy moments -- that a landscape of extent,
and beauty will take the full period of a year, to show itself in all the forms
it is capable of receiving -- and that he who does not attend to the variations
of the atmosphere, loses half the beauty of his views.

SECT. XI. Of the animals, which frequent the forest.
HAVING thus taken a view of the most beautiful scenes of the forest, it is
lastly proper to people them. No landscape is complete without it is figures. I
shall make a few observations therefore on such animals, as frequent the
forest; which the imagination of the reader may scatter about, as he pleases,
in the several scenes, which have been presented to him. The human inhabitants
of the forest have already been mentioned See p. 40.
.

A diminutive breed of horses run wild in New-forest. In general however the
horse is private property; tho sometimes with difficulty ascertained. Numbers
of people, who have lands in the neighborhood of the forest, have a right of
commoning in it; and most of the cottagers, who border on it, assume that
right. Many of them have two or three mares; and some, who make it their
business to breed colts, have droves.

The horse is gregarious. Herds of twenty, or thirty are often seen feeding
together; in summer especially, when they have plenty of pasturage, and can
live as they please. In winter they are obliged to separate, and seek their
food, as they can find it. In general indeed they are left, in all seasons, to
take their chance in the forest. Where there is no expense, there can be no
great loss; and what is saved, is so much gained. In marshy parts a severe
winter often goes hardly with them. But in dry grounds, where heath and furze
abound, they pick up a tolerable winter-subsistence; especially if they have
learned the little arts of living, which necessity teaches. Of these arts, one
of the most useful is to bruise, and pound with their fore-feet, the prickly
tops of furze. This operation, which I have often seen performed, prepares the
rigid diet of a furze-bush in some degree for mastication; and renders it
rather less offensive to the palate

When such colts, as have long run wild, are to be caught for sale, their ideas
of liberty are so unconfined, from pasturing in so wild a range, that it is
matter of no little difficulty to take them. Sometimes they are caught by
slight of hand, with a rope and a noose. But if this method fail, they are
commonly hunted down by horsemen, who relieve each other. Colt-hunting is a
common practice in the forest. -- The colts which feed on Obergreen, are
sometimes taken by the following stratagem. In this part runs a long bog,
described, under the name of Longflade-bottom; which is crossed by a mole,
thrown over it See p. 124.
. With this passage the colt is well acquainted; and on being pursued, is
easily driven toward it. When he is about the middle of the mole, two or three
men start up in front, and oblige him to leap into the bog, where he is
entangled, and seized.

At all the neighboring fairs, these horses are a principal commodity, and are
bought up for every purpose, to which a horse can be applied. Diminutive as
they are, you may often see half a dozen of them straining in a wagon: and as
it is fashionable to drive them in light carriages, their price has been
inhanced. It is a little fortune to a poor cottager, if he happen to possess
three or four colts, that are tolerably handsome, and match well. He may
probably sell them for ten, or twelve pounds a piece.

In point of value, the New-forest horse would rise higher, if the same care
were taken in breeding him, which was formerly taken See Manwood on forest-law,
page 29.
; and which is still in some degree, taken in the neighboring forest of Bear;
where, I have heard, the keepers are ordered to destroy all horses, which, at
three years of age, are under thirteen hands; and all mates under twelve.

There is another evil likewise, which tends to injure the forest-colt; and
that is, putting him to business at too early an age. Tho a small horse attains
maturity earlier, than a large one; yet these horses, bred chiefly by indigent
people, and generally of little value, are introduced much sooner to labor,
than abler, and better horses commonly are.

The fame, and exploits are still remembered of a little beautiful, gray horse,
which had been suffered to run wild in the forest, till he was eight years of
age; when he had attained his full strength. His first sensations, on the loss
of his liberty, were like those of a wild-beast. He flew at his keeper with his
open mouth; or rearing on his hindlegs, darted his fore-feet at him with the
most malicious fury. He fell however into hands, that tamed him. He became by
degrees patient of the bit, and at length suffered a rider. From this time his
life was a scene of glory. He was well known on every road in the county; was
the favorite of every groom; and the constant theme of every ostler. But in the
chase his prowess was most shown. There he carried his master, with so much
swiftness, ease, and firmness, that he always attracted the eyes of the
company, more than the game they pursued.

The New-forest horse is often supposed to be of Spanish extraction; from
ancestors, imagined to have been ship-wrecked on the coast of Hampshire, in the
time of the armada. But I look on this as a species of the ancient vaunt, genus
a Jove summo; and to deserve as little attention. Some of them have a form,
which would not disgrace so noble a lineage. The gray horse represented in the
annexed plate, is among the most beautiful. But in general, the croup of the
forest-horse is low; and his head ill-set on, having what the jockies call a
stiff jaw. Of this defect a resemblance is given in the horse on the left,
whose head is set on, as those of the forest-horses commonly are. Their claim
therefore to high lineage must in general rest more on their good qualities,
than on their beauty -- on the hardiness of their nature -- on their uncommon
strength -- on their agility, and sureness of foot, which they probably acquire
by constantly lifting their legs among furze.

But tho the form of the New-forest horse is seldom beautiful; yet as the
ornament of a forest scene, he is very picturesque. The horse, in his natural
state, rough with all his mane about him, and his tail waving in the wind, as
he feeds, is always beautiful; but particularly in so wild a scene as this,
which he graces exceedingly.

On this subject I cannot forbear digressing a little, (and I hope the critical
reader will not be too fastidious,) on the great indignity the horse suffers
from the mutilation of his tail, and ears. Within this century, I believe, the
barbarous custom of docking horses came in use; and has passed through various
modifications, like all other customs, which are not founded in nature, and
truth. A few years ago the short dock was the only tail (if it may be called
such) in fashion, both in the army, and in carriages. The absurdity however of
this total amputation began to appear. The gentlemen of the army led the way.
They acknowledged the beauty, and use of the tail, as nature made it. The short
dock every where disappeared; and all dragoon-horses paraded with long tails.

The nag-tail however still continued in use. Of this there are several
species, all more or less mutilated. The most deformed one is nicked-tail; so
named from a cruel operation used in forming it. The under sinews of the dock
being divided, the tail starts upwards, directly contrary to the position,
which nature intended. The nag-tail is still seen in all genteel carriages. Nor
will any person of fashion ride a horse without one. Even the gentlemen of the
army, who have shown the most sense in the affair of horse-tails, have been so
misled, as to introduce the nag-tail into the light horse; tho it would be as
difficult to give a reason now for the nag-tail, as formerly for the short-dock.

Two things are urged in defense of this cruel mutilation -- the utility, and
the beauty of it. Let us briefly as possible, examine both.

To make an animal useful is, no doubt, the first consideration: and to make a
horse so, we must necessarily make him suffer some The (...) tail

The short dock.

The stretch tail.

The square tail.

things, which are unnatural, because we take him out of a state of nature. He
must be fed with hay, and corn in the winter, which he cannot get in his open
pastures: for if he have exercise beyond nature, he must have such food, as
will enable him to bear it. As it is necessary likewise to make our roads hard,
and durable, it is necessary also to give the horse an iron hoof, that he may
travel over them without injuring his feet. -- But all this has nothing to do
with his tail, from which no encumbrance arises.

Yes, says the advocate for docking; as it is necessary for the horse to
travel, to hunt, and to race, it is useful to lighten him of of every
encumbrance. And as it is necessary for him to travel through dirty roads; it
is useful to rid him of an instrument, which is continually collecting dirt,
and lashing it over himself, and his rider.

To ease your horse of every encumbrance in traveling, is certainly right. You
should see that his bridle, and saddle, (which are his great encumbrances) are
as easy as possible: and that the weight he carries, or draws, be proportioned
to his strength. But depend upon it, he receives no encumbrance from nature. It
is a maxim among all true philosophers, that nature has given nothing in vain:
and there can be no reasonable doubt, but that nature has given the horse his
tail to balance, and assist his motions. That this is the case, seems plain
from the use he makes of it. When the animal is at rest, his tail is pendent:
but when he is in violent action; he raises, and spreads it, as a bird does in
the same situation. Would the swallow, or the dove be assisted in their flight
by the loss of their tails? or the greyhound in his speed by docking him? For
myself, I have no doubt, but if the experiment were tried at Newmarket, which I
suppose it never was, the horse with his long tail, however the literati there
might laugh at him, would not be in the least injured in his speed; and would
certainly answer better, in all his sudden turns, to the intention of his
rider. He would extend, and spread his helm: it would steer his way; and we
should seldom hear of his running out of his course, or on the wrong side of
the post.

Besides, his tail probably assists him even in his common exertions; and
balances his body, when he trots, and prevents his stumbling. I have heard a
gentleman, who had traveled much in the east, remark, that the Turkish, and
Arabian horses rarely stumble; which he attributed, and with much appearance of
truth, to their long tails.

But whatever use the tail may be to the norse in action, it is acknowledged on
all hands to be of infinite use to him, at rest. Whoever sees the horse grazing
in summer, and observes the constant use he makes of his long tail in lashing
the flies from his sides, must be persuaded, that it is a most useful
instrument: and must be hurt to see him fidget a short dock, back, and forward,
with ineffectual attempts to rid himself of some plague, which he cannot reach.

As to the objection against the tail, as an instrument, which is continually
gathering dirt, and lashing it around, if there be any truth in what I have
already observed, this little objection dissolves itself; especially as the
inconvenience may with great ease be remedied, when the road is dirty, either
by knotting up the tail, or by tying it with a leathern-strap.

But whatever becomes of utility, the horse is certainly more beautiful, we are
told, without his dangling tail. What a handsome figure he makes, when he
carries both his ends well! This is the constant language of horse-dealers,
stable-keepers, and grooms; and such language, tho originating in tastless
ignorance, and mere prejudice, has drawn over men of sense, and understanding.
-- It is inconceiveable, how delusively the eye sees, as well as the
understanding, when it is fascinated, and led aside by fashion, and custom.
Associated ideas of various kinds give truth a different air. When we see a
game-cock with all his sprightly actions, and gorgeous plumes about him, we
acknowledge one of the most beautiful birds in nature. But when we see him
armed with steel, and prepared for battle; we cry, what a scarecrow! But a
cockfighter, with all the ideas of the pit about him, will conceive, that in
this latter state, he is in his greatest beauty: and if his picture be drawn,
it must be drawn in this ridiculous manner. I have often seen it.

Let jockies, and stable-boys, and cockfighters keep their own absurd ideas:
but let not men, who pretend to see, and think for themselves, adopt such
ridiculous conceits. -- In arts, we judge by the rules of art. In nature, we
have no criterion but the forms of nature. We criticize a building by the rules
of architecture: but in judging of a tree, or a mountain; we judge by the most
beautiful forms of each, which nature has given us. It is thus in other
things. From nature alone we have the form of a horse. Should we then seek for
beauty in that object, in our own wild conceptions; or recur to the great
original, from whence we had it? We may be assured, that nature's forms are
always the most beautiful; and therefore we should endeavor to correct our
ideas by hers. -- If however we cannot give up the point, let us at least be
consistent. If we admire a horse without a tail, or a cock without feathers,
let us not laugh at the Chinese for admiring the disproportioned foot of his
mistress; nor at the Indian, for doting on her black teeth, and tattooed
cheeks. For myself, I cannot conceive, why it should make a horse more
beautiful to take his tail from him, than it would make a man to clap a tail to
him See lord Monboddo on that subject.
. -- With regard indeed to the natural beauty of a horse's tail, we want little
reasoning on the subject. In conjunction with his mane, it gives him dignity.
-- It hides his stradling buttocks; which is a decency in nature, we should
admire, rather than destroy. -- It forms a contrast among the legs. The four
equal legs of every animal are it is greatest deformity; and their sameness of
course gives the painter the most trouble in the management of them. In many of
her forms indeed, where nature does not seem to aim at beauty, she neglects
this economy: but as if she meant the horse for one of her most elegant
productions, she has provided for him in this respect also, by giving him a
graceful flow of hair, which hiding sometimes one leg, and sometimes another,
introduces a pleasing contrast among them all. -- The accidental motion also of
the tail gives it peculiar beauty; both when the horse moves it himself; and
when it waves in the wind. The beauty of it indeed to an unprejudiced eye is
conspicuous at once; and in all parade, and state-horses it is acknowledged:
tho even here there is an attempt made to improve nature by art: the hair must
be adorned with ribbons; and the bottom of the tail clipped square, which adds
heaviness, and is certainly so far a deformity.

The captain of an English man of war gave me an account sometime ago, of his
landing in one of the piratical states of Barbary, while his ship anchored in
the bay. He was received by the Dey (I think, of Tripoli) with great civility;
and among other things, saw his stables. They were lined with a very long,
double row of the most beautiful Barb, and Arabian horses. He was struck with
their beauty, to which their grand flowing tails, combed, and oiled in the
nicest manner, were no little addition. As he continued his walk through the
stud, he came to a couple of horses with nag-tails. On inquiring into their
history, he found they were English horses, which had been presented to the
Dey. The horses themselves were fit to appear any where; but the contrast of
their tails, he thought, in such company, made so very strange, and disgraceful
an appearance, that he was ashamed of his countrymen. The case was, his eye
having been thus accustomed to the beautiful forms of nature, had gotten rid of
it is prejudices; and being a rational man, saw the matter in it is proper light.

I shall conclude my remarks on this cruel mutilation, with an epigram by
Voltaire. -- That celebrated wit was in England about the time, when the
babarous custom of docking horses was in high fashion. He was so shocked at it,
that he wrote the following verses, which, it is said, he gave to lord
Lyttelton.

Vous, fires Anglois, et barbares que vous etes,
Coupent les tates a vos rois, et les queues a vos betes.
Mais les Franccois plus polis, et aimant les loix,
Laissent les queues a leurs betes, et les tates a leurs rois.
There is more indignation, than wit, I think, in these verses. Voltaire seems
to consider docking a horse, and killing a king, as equal crimes; which however
is carrying the matter somewhat farther, than the picturesque eye wishes to
carry it.

The same absurd notions, which have led men to cut off the tails of horses,
have led them also to cut off their ears. I speak not of low grooms, and
jockies; we have lately seen the studs of men of the first fashion, misled
probably by grooms, and jockies, producing only cropt-horses.

When a fine horse has wide, lopping ears, as he sometimes has, without spring,
or motion in them; a man may be tempted to remove the deformity. But to cut a
pair of fine ears out of the head of a horse, is, if possible, a still greater
absurdity, than to cut off his tail. Nothing can be alleged in it is defense.
The ear neither retards motion; nor flings dirt.

Much of the same ground may be gone over on this subject, which we went over
on the last. With regard to the utility of the ear, it is not improbable, that
cropping it may injure the horse's hearing: there is certainly less concave
surface to receive the vibrations of the air. -- I have heard it also asserted
with great confidence, that this mutilation injures his health: for when a
horse has lost that pent-house, which nature has given him over his ear, it is
reasonable to believe the wind, and rain may get in, and give him cold.

But if these injuries are not easily proved, the injury he receives in point
of beauty may strenuously be insisted on. Few of the minuter parts of animal
nature are more beautiful, than the ear of a horse, when it is neatly formed,
and well set on. -- The contrast of the lines is pleasing; the concavity, and
the convexity, being generally seen together in the natural turn of the ear. --
Nor is the proportion of the ear less pleasing. It is contracted at the
insertion, swells in the middle, and tapers to a point. The ear of no animal is
so beautifully proportioned. That of some beasts, especially of the savage
kinds, as the lion, and pard, is naturally rounded, and has little form. The
ears of other animals, as the fox, and cat, are pointed, short, and thick.
Those of the cow are round, and heavy. The hare's, and ass's ears are long, and
nearly of the same thickness. The dog, and swine have flapping ears. The sheep,
alone has ears, that can compare with the horse. -- The ear of the horse
receives great beauty also from it is color, as well as form. The ears of bay,
and gray horses are generally tipped with black, which melts into the color of
the head. -- But the ear of the horse receives it is greatest beauty from
motion. The ear of no animal has that Anger or intended mischief.

Fear.

A crupt-horor

Under no impression of passion

vibrating power. The ears of a spirited horse are continually in motion;
quivering, and darting their sharp points toward every object, that presents:
and the action is still more beautiful, when the ears are so well set on, that
the points are drawn nearly together. Virgil, who was among the most accurate
observers of nature, takes notice of this quivering motion in the ears of a
horse.

-- Si qua sonum procul arma dedere,
Stare loco nescit; micat auribus --
The same word, which he uses here to express the motion of a horse's ears, he
uses elsewhere to express the gleaming of arms; the glittering of a gem; and
the vibrating motion of a serpent's tongue. -- But it is not only the quivering
motion of the horse's ears, that we admire; we admire them also as the
interpreters of his passions; particularly of fear, which some denominate
courage: and of anger, or malice. The former he expresses by darting them
forward; the latter, by laying them back.

This digression has carried me much farther, than I intended; but the
mutilation of the tail, and ears of this noble animal is so offensive to
reason, and common sense, that I have been imperceptibly led on by my
indignation. Tho nothing I can say on the subject, I am well persuaded, can
weigh against the authority of grooms, and jockies, so as to make a general
reform: yet if, here and there, a small party could be raised in opposition to
this strange custom, it might in time perhaps obtain fashion on it is side. --
We commonly suppose, that when mankind in general agree in a point, there is
truth. I believe no nation upon earth, except the English, have the custom
among them, of docking, nicking, and cropping their horses. -- The wisdom too
of all antiquity decides fully against the practice. Instances perhaps might be
found in the bas-reliefs of the Antonine column, and other remains of Roman
antiquity, both of the cropped ear, and of the hogged-mane, (which I take for
granted were never practiced, except in cases of defect,) but I am persuaded,
no one instance can be found, in all the remains of Grecian, or Roman
antiquity, of a short dock, or a nag-tail.

Besides the horse, the forest is much frequented by another animal of his
genus, inferior indeed in dignity; but superior in picturesque beauty; I mean
the ass. Among all the tribes of animals, scarce one is more ornamental in
landscape. In what this picturesque beauty consists, whether in his peculiar
character -- in his strong lines -- in his coloring -- in the roughness of his
coat -- or in the mixture of all -- would be difficult perhaps to ascertain.
The observation however is undoudtedly true; and every picturesque eye will
acknowledge it. Berghem bears full testimony to it is truth. In his pictures the
ass makes often the most distinguished figure: and a late excellent
landscape-painter Mr. Gainsborough.
, I have heard, generally kept this animal by him, that he might have it always
at hand to introduce in various attitudes, into his pictures. I have heard
also, that a plaister-cast of an ass, modelled by him, is sold in the shops in
London: but I never saw it.

One reason indeed for replenishing the forest so much with asses, is the
propagation of mules; of which great numbers are bred in many parts of it: at
least the breed was much encouraged before the troubles of America, whither
several were every year exported.

The mule is by no means so picturesque an animal as the ass; and is rarely
introduced in landscape; chiefly, I suppose, because he has not so determined a
character. He is neither a horse, nor an ass, and yet has a resemblance to
both. To make an object truly picturesque, it should be marked strongly with
some peculiar character. -- Besides, the mule varies in form, as much from
himself, as he does either from the horse, or the ass. He follows his sire. A
mule bred from an Arabian, differs as much from the offspring of a forester, as
the two sires themselves. This also injures his picturesque character. -- The
mule, from which the annexed drawing was taken, was a mule of blood. The ass
also varies from itself; but not so much as the mule. It is here represented
under one of it is most elegant forms, that it may the more justly be compared
with a mule of the same description.



With horned cattle of course, the forest, like all other large wastes,
abounds; and this is a source of great picturesque beauty. -- The enclosure
presents only a small number at once, the property of some single person: but
in the forest, the cattle of all the neighboring hamlets, and cottages,
pasture together. We see them often in large herds; and in summer, the season
of landscape, they are drawn in numbers, to favorite spots, particularly about
pools, and rivulets; where the various combinations, and attitudes they form
are beautiful, and picturesque, in the highest degree. -- Besides, they appear
in a forest to much more advantage, than they can possibly do within the
formality of hedges.

But of all animals, with which the forest abounds, the stag is in a peculiar
manner adapted to it is scenes. The wildness of his nature harmonizes with them;
and the beauty of his form adorns them. -- We admire his erect front; his
spreading horns, on which he sometimes wears above twenty antlers; his limbs
finished with so much elegance; and his stately, measured pace.

But here perhaps the advocate for docking horses will glory in the short tail
of the stag. He has no reason. There is no doubt, nature has provided for the
exigences of the stag in his speed, as well as for those of the horse. It is
true, the shortness of the tail in so beautiful an animal, rather seems a
defect. But as, in the language of religion, the well-ordered mind acknowledges
every thing right in the works of God -- so, in the language of painting, the
picturesque eye acknowledges every thing beautiful in the works of nature. Some
objects indeed may please less than others; and be less accommodated to the
rules of painting. But all objects are best as nature made them. Art cannot
mend them. Where art interferes, beauty vanishes. We dress the polished lawn:
but we only remove what may there be a deformity, tho elsewhere a beauty. When
we endeavor to improve the object -- when we clip the holly, and trim the box,
we introduce deformity. We sometimes indeed artfully remove a branch: but it is
to open the landscape; not to improve the tree.

The stag, during his first year is called a calf; and does not assume the name
of a stag till his fifth; being known in the intermediate years, by certain
tecknical names, which none but foresters can remember. In his sixth year he
takes the respectable title of a heart. Some authors have given it to his fifth:
but I follow the authority of Manwood See Manwood, page 99.
. -- Besides this title, he may still attain two higher degrees of honor;
those of a hart-royal, and of a hart-royal proclaimed.

If he be hunted by the king, and escape; or have his life given him for the
sport he has afforded, he becomes from thence forward, a hart-royal. -- If he
be hunted out of the forest, and there escape; the king has sometimes honored
him with a royal proclamation; the purport of which is, to forbid any one to
molest him, that he may have free liberty of returning to his forest. From that
time he becomes a hart-royal proclaimed. -- Manwood mentions a fact of this
kind, which he found on record, in the castle of Nottingham. It is dated in the
time of Richard the first, who having roused a heart in Sherwood-forest, pursued
him as far as Barnsdale in Yorkshire; where the heart foiled, and escaped his
hounds. The king in gratitude for the diversion he had received, ordered him
immediately to be proclaimed at Tickill, and at all the neighboring towns.

An affair of this kind, it is not unlikely, was the original of
white-hart-silver, as it is called, in the forest of Blackmore in Dorsetshire.
Some gentlemen, in the time of Henry III, having destroyed a white heart, which
had given the king much diversion (and which, it is probable, had been
proclaimed) the king laid a heavy fine on their lands; an acknowledgment of
which was paid into the exchequer so late as in the reign of Elizabeth See
Camden's Brit. p. 59.
. Hutchings, in his history of Dorsetshire, says it is paid to this day Vol.
II. p. 492.
.



Instances of favorite stags, and of the warmth, with which mankind have
espoused their cause, when injured, occur so frequently, that Virgil thought a
circumstance of this kind a proper incident for the whole plot of his Aeneid to
turn on: -- quae prima malorum
Causa fuit, belloque animos accendit agrestes.
Cervus, erat forma praestanti Aen. VII. 481.
--


In general, the stag is a harmless, inoffensive animal. At one season only,
when he is engaged in his seraglio, he is fierce. You hear him roaring, and
bellowing, at that time, about the forest; meditating revenge on his rival,
whom he meets, head to head, and foot to foot. While he is able with his
antlers to parry the attack, he stands his ground: and if he happen to be of
equal prowess with his rival, the conflict is obstinate. But a weak adversary
soon feels the strength of his opponent. He cannot resist his push. His flanks
give way; and he is presently driven off the field.

At these seasons of riot the stag is said to be dangerous. If therefore in
passing through the forest, you see him at a distance in your path, you had
better avoid him by turning a little to the right, or left. If you do not
approach, he will not pursue. I have heard old foresters however say, they did
not remember an instance of his ever doing voluntary mischief at any time; and
assert that he will always avoid the passenger, if he can.

But it is on all hands agreed, that he is highly dangerous, when hard pressed
by the hounds, and driven to extremity. When the chase is well nigh over --
when that elastic vigor, with which at first he bounded along the plain, is
changed into a heavy gallop -- when his mouth becomes black and dry -- his
tongue hanging from it -- and his eye marked with horror and dismay, (cruel,
surely, to turn such agony into sport!) his reverence for man is gone: he is
driven to despair; and all his powers are collected into terror and
undistinguishing fury.

Some years ago, a stag in New-forest, pressed by the hunters, and just
entering a thicket, was opposed by a peasant; who foolishly, with his arms
extended, attempted to turn him. The stag held his course, and darting one of
his antlers into the man, carried him off some paces, sticking upon his horn.
The man was immediately conveyed to Lymington, where he lay dangerously ill for
some time; but at length recovered. I have heard also, that when the duke of
Bedford was lord-warden of the forest, his huntsman had a horse killed under
him by a stag, which he crossed in the same imprudent manner.

We have a beautiful description in Shakespeare, which I cannot forbear
introducing, both for the sake of the picture; and for the knowledge it
conveys. The sorrows of the dying stag -- his sighs; his tears; and the
unfriendly return his distresses find from all his former companions, are
circumstances in his history well-known to the naturalist, the forester, and
the huntsman. The melancholy Jaques is introduced by the poet reposing on the
ground.

-- As he lay
Beneath an oak, whose antique root projects
Above the brook, that brawls along the wood;
To the same place a poor sequestered stag,
That from the hunter's aim had taken a hurt,
Did come to languish --
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans,
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting; and the big round drops
Coursed one another down his patient face.
-- Anon a careless herd,
Full of rich pasture, bounding comes along,
And never stays to greet him. Aye, quoth Jaques,
Sweep on, ye fat and greasy citizens;
It Is just the fashion: wherefore look ye not
Upon that poor, and broken bankrupt there?
The hind also, in defense of her calf, is equally formidable, as far as her
strength allows; and her powers of exerting it. She has been known to strike a
dog so violently with the spring of her fore-feet, as to strip his skin from
his flesh, and lay his side bare.

As it is now many years since New-forest has been a scene of royal-diversion,
the breed of stags is generally diminished. It is a rare thing now to meet them
in the southern parts of it; tho within the memory of man, they were so
numerous, that I have heard an old forester, pointing to the side of a hill, on
Beaulieu heath, say, he had seen them lying there in herds, like cows, and
horses. There are still however many in the northern parts of the forest,
particularly about Boldre-wood, and Burley-lodges; but, in general, the fallow
deer are more encouraged.



The stag might easily be trained, like the reindeer of Lapland, to draw a
carriage, if we had not animals more proper for the purpose. The present earl
of Orford, I have been informed, bred two, by way of experiment, which by
domestication became manageable, were bitted, and drew a light curricle with
great gentleness, and expedition. -- The stag is a native of our island; as
indeed he is found in most parts of the world; differing only in a few
accidental varieties.

The fallow-deer is much more limited by nature in the place of his abode; and
in this island particularly has been received only by importation. He is
supposed to have but two varieties, the spotted, and the darkbrown. The former
is of Indian extraction See Pennant's Zool.
: the latter was brought from Denmark by James I. They are now indeed much
intermixed; but in general the spotted race are more the inhabitants of the
park; the brown, which is the hardier species, occupy the forest. The latter is
the more picturesque animal. The uniform spot of the variegated deer is not so
pleasing, as one simple brown-tint, melting away by degrees into a softer hue,
which produces a sort of natural light and shade; as indeed all colors do,
which blend gently into each other.

Forest-deer, tho pasturing at large, seldom stray far from the walk, where
they are bred: and the keeper, who is studious, that his deer may not travel
into the limits of their neighbors, incourages their fondness for home, by
feeding them, in winter, with holly, and other plants, which they love; and
browzing them in summer with the spray of ash. When he distributes his dole, he
commonly makes a hollowing noise to call his dispersed family together. In calm
summer-evenings, if you frequent any part of the forest near a lodge, you will
hear this hollowing noise resounding through the woods; and if you are not
apprised of it, you will be apt to wonder, each evening, at it is periodical
exactness.

Deer feed generally in the night, or at early dawn, and retire in the day to
the shelter of the woods. Their morning retreat is thus picturesquely described.

-- The day pours in a-pace,
And opens all the lawny prospect wide;
The hazy woods, the mountain's misty top,
Swell on the fight: while over the forest-glade,
The wild deer trip; and often turning, gaze
At early passengers --
Mr. Pennant tell us See Brit. Zool.
, that in Germany the peasants frequently watch their corn, the whole night, to
preserve it from the depredations of deer. He needed not, on this head, to have
carried so far from home: the borderers of New-forest are equally subject to
the depredations of these animals; and are often obliged, when the neighboring
deer have gotten a haunt of their corn-lands, to burn fires all night to deter
them. I heard a farmer say, that it cost him five pounds, one summer, to guard
eight acres of wheat. It is a remark among foresters, that all the deer-kind
are particularly offended by disagreeable smells. The farmer commonly therefore
smears the ropes with tar, which he sets up as fences; and throws fetid
substances into his nightly fires, to disseminate the odor in the smoke.

We need not wonder if such depredations provoke acts of violence. Tho
protected by law, these atrocious marauders very often, and deservedly, suffer
death for their offenses.

A farmer however, not long ago, paid dear for taking the administration of
justice, into his own hands, on an occasion of this kind. He had frequently
lamented the depredations on his corn; and being at all events determined to
retaliate, he narrowly observed his fields; and having found the track, along
which the nightly plunderer advanced, he took his station near it, as evening
drew on, with a rifled barrel well laden. -- After much listening, and many
little alarms, he at last heard the bushes crackling, and giving way in
earnest. He now made himself sure of his prey; and lying close, he levelled his
piece, so as just to take the stag, as he emerged from the thicket. The night
was dark; but however allowed him sufficient light to take aim at so large a
body. He fired with effect; and had the pleasure to see his enemy fall. But, on
running to him, he was struck with finding he had killed one of the best horses
of his own team.

The sheep does not frequent the forest in any abundance. Here and there you
find a little flock on a dry gravelly hill: but, in general, the forest abounds
with swamps, and marshy bottoms, highly pernicious to the sheep -- the only
animal perhaps, except one, which pursues with the greatest avidity, what is
most destructive to it. It is the less however to be lamented, that the lawns
of the forest are not decorated with these animals, as they are certainly less
adapted to a forest-scene, than deer; tho in themselves perhaps, more
picturesque. The forest is wild, and they are domestic.

With hares and rabbits the forest abounds. The latter are the under-keeper's
perquisite; and of course well looked after. There are many dry, sandy knolls,
where colonies of these inmates are settled; which are not among the least
amusing of the minute inhabitants of the forest.

In the same class we rank the squirrel. He is not of consequence to be
numbered among the picturesque ornaments of a scene: but his form, and manners;
his activity, and feats of dexterity, are very amusing. On extraordinary
occasions, when he is agitated by love, or anger, his muscles acquire tenfold
elasticity. He descends a tree in a rapid spiral, as quick as thought -- darts
up another in an opposite direction -- flings himself from tree to tree with
amazing exactness -- and pursues his mate, or his rival, among the mazy
branches of an oak, with a velocity that eludes the sight.

Pheasants also greatly abound in many parts of the forest. In the manors of
Beaulieu, Fawley, and other places, where they are protected, they multiply
beyond belief. They are seen often in flocks feeding like poultry, in the
fields; and adorning the woods, and copses, with their elegant shape, and
glossy plumage.

The partridge is not so fond of the wild scenes of the forest, as the
pheasant. She is more the bird of cultivation. Where the plough flourishes, she
thrives; and seldom chooses to inhabit a country in a state of nature. The
pheasant has no objection to a field of corn; but he can procure his living
without it. He can make a hearty meal of the wild berries of the woods: or
content himself with a belly-full of acorns. To him therefore corn is a luxury;
to the partridge it is a necessary. She is generally found gleaning the
stubble, or basking under a hedge; and gets into many a difficulty, which she
might have avoided by feeding more at large. Sometimes indeed she is found in
the forest; but it is chiefly when she is hunted by men and dogs from her
favorite haunts

The black-cock, on the other hand, is more a forester, than even the pheasant.
He has no connection with man. He scorns the enclosure; and all the dainties of
the stubble. The wild forest is his only delight; and there, his pleasures lie
more in it is open, than in it is woody scenes. This bird was formerly found in
great abundance in New-forest; but he is now much scarcer; tho he has the
honor, which no other bird can boast, of being protected as royal game. To
this day when the chief-justice-in-eyre, grants his warrants to kill game in
the forest, he always excepts the black-cock, together with red, and
fallow-deer.

The plaintive ring-dove also is a great admirer of the woody scenes of the
forest. Many suppose her a solitary bird; at least, that she flies only with
her mate; confounding her habits perhaps with those of the turtle-dove; which,
I believe, is solitary: but the ring-dove is certainly gregarious: I have often
seen in the forest large flocks of this species together, in the winter months;
so well the poet knew their nature, by contrasting them with the wood-cock:
While doves in flocks the leafless trees o'er-shade;
The lonely wood-cock haunts the watery glade.


The wood-cock indeed is sometimes seen in the forest: but the rough lawns and
heaths, he finds there, do not entirely suit his appetite. He is curious in the
choice of his haunts. He must have some sweet woody glen, watered by little
ouzing mossy rills, into which he may easily thrust his beak; and these he
cannot every where meet with in the forest.

The snipe, less delicate in her haunts, is the frequent inhabitant of the
wildest scenes. Any swamp, or marshy spot will please her; and of these she
finds abundance in various parts of the forest.

Plover, of different kinds, are common also in it is heathy parts. I have
sometimes seen large flocks of the gray species; and have stood admiring them,
as they incircled the air. In their regular mode of flight, they in some degree
resemble waterfowl: but they are not so determined in their course; wheeling
about, and forming various evolutions, which are very amusing. Sometimes they
appear all scattered, and seem in confusion; till closing together, as if by
the word of command, they get again into form.

With regard to all the songsters of the grove, the woody scenes of the forest
are vocal with them. The thrush, the blackbird, the linnet, and the
nightingale, abound on every spray. The nightingale above all, delights in the
wild scenes of the forest. The blackbird, and the thrush are often seen
tripping over the embellished lawn, or flirting from the neat trimmed
holly-hedge. But the nightingale rarely frequents these cultured spots. To her
they afford little pleasure. Her commonest haunts are those of nature -- the
brake, the copse, the rough hedge, or the forest, where she sings her melodious
strains to woods, and solitude; and often -- wastes her sweetness on the desert
air: only that her voice, so varied, clear, and full, is heard far and wide,
when the evening is still; almost at hand, tho in the distant wood.

Among the birds of harmony, there are two, which I shall find it difficult
perhaps to establish in that class -- the jay, and the woodpecker. Their
screams, however discordant in themselves, or when out of place, accord
admirably with the forest; and produce that kind of local harmony, which one of
our old poets Davenant.
ascribes to the sound of a drum: it may be dissonant in one place, tho musical
in another.

What sound is that, whose concord makes a jar?
It Is noise in peace; tho harmony in war.
The drum, whose doubtful music does delight
The willing ear, and the unwilling fright.
"We take music however here (according to a very good definition of it) in the
large, and proper sense of the word -- as the art of variously affecting the
mind by the power of sounds." Gregory's comparative view.


But besides the harmony arising from the agreement of these wild notes with
the scenes of the forest; there is another source of it in the sympathetic
feelings of the mind. These wild notes excite ideas of those pleasing
forest-scenes, where we have commonly heard them. -- But I shall give my
meaning in better words, than my own.

There is in souls a sympathy with sounds;
And as the mind is pitched, the ear is pleased
With melting airs, or martial; brisk, or grave.
Some chord in unison with what we hear,
Is touched within us, and the heart replies.
How soft the music of those village-bells,
Falling at intervals upon the ear
In cadence sweet? now dying all away;
Now pealing loud again, and louder still,
Clear, and sonorous, as the gale comes on.
With easy force it opens all the cells,
Where memory slept; wherever I have heard
A kindred melody, the scene recurs;
And with it all it is pleasures -- Cooper.
.
But however discordant the notes of these birds may be to the fastidious ear;
their rich, yet harmonious plumage, must at least recommend them as highly
ornamental to every scene, which they frequent. The wood-pecker particularly is
arrayed in the richest plumage of any bird we have, except the king-fisher: yet
all his splendid tints are perfectly harmonious. The jay also is beautifully
tinted on his back, and breast, with a light purplish hue, intermixed with
gray; and his wing is perhaps the most admirable piece of workmanship in the
whole feathered creation.

On the same ground with the jay, and the wood-pecker, I should not scruple
also to rank the kite -- if his manners did not disturb the harmony of the
woods, as much as his voice supports it. Independent of his manners, he is one
of the most harmonious appendages of the forest; where Mr. Pennant makes him
indigenous Brit. Zool.
. He is too small for picturesque use; but highly ornamental to the natural
scene. His motions are easy, and beautiful in a great degree. He does not flap
his pinions, like the rook, or the magpie; and labor through the air: he sails
along, with steady wing, as if he were lord of the element, on which he rode.
-- But what harmonize chiefly with the forest are his wild screams, which
strike notes in peculiar unison with those scenes, over which he sails.

-- Kites, that swim sublime
In still repeated circles screaming loud,
Have charms for me. --
Sounds inharmonious in themselves, and harsh,
Yet heard in scenes, where peace for ever reigns,
Please highly for their sake --
It is remarkable, that we seldom see more than two of this species together,
the male and the female. They seem to divide the forest into provinces. Each
bird has his own; and, with more than princely caution, avoids his
neighbor's. It is his great employment to circle through the air, as the poet
describes him above, in various evolutions over his own woody dominions; where
with keen eye, and keener talons, he still preserves the spirit of the old
forest-law.

Very often the eagle himself is found in the forest. Mountainous, and rocky
countries are his delight. On the ledge of some steep, prominent rock he builds
his eyry, and rears his royal progeny. But when food becomes scarce in those
desolate regions, as it sometimes does, he finds it convenient to make an
excursion into the forest. Here he hunts the leveret, and the fawn; and screens
his atrocious deeds in the closest woods. Wherever he is seen, the watchful
forester endeavors to keep him in sight, till he bring him to the ground. And
yet I have heard of a pair of eagles, which took possession of a part of the
forest, called King's-wood, where they eluded all the arts of the keeper, and
continued their annual depredations, for several years. Some time ago, an eagle
was killed, after three discharges, near Ashy-lodge; and was extended, like the
imperial arms, in the courtroom of the king's-house at Lyndhurst.

Of all the feathered inhabitants of the forest I should have thought it is
scenes, in all respects, the best adapted to the rook. Here he might build his
habitation; and rear his young, far from the prying eyes of men. Here also he
might indulge his social temper without limits; and enlarge his aerial town
from wood to wood. -- But he has no such ideas. I cannot learn that he ever
thought of forming a settlement in the forest; which is the more extraordinary,
as he is in fact a lover of it is scenes; and rejoices in them at all times, but
in the breeding-season, when one should imagine, he stood most in need of their
shelter. At that time he seems sedulously to court the faithless habitations of
men; through what propensity, or instinct of nature, the naturalist is wholly
at a loss to determine. After his family is reared, and he has carried off in
safety such of his progeny, as have escaped the arts of men, and boys, he
retires every evening, at a late hour, during the autumn, and winter months, to
the closest covers of the forest, having spent the day in the open fields, and
enclosures, in quest of food. His late retreat to the forest, is characteristic
of the near approach of night. -- Night thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to the rooky wood. --
And again, Retiring from the downs, where all day long
They pick their scanty fare, a blackening train
Of loitering rooks, thick urge their weary flight,
And seek the shelter of the grove. --


But in his economy there is something singular. Tho the forest is his
winter-habitation (if I may call that his habitation, which, like other
vagrants, he uses only as a place to sleep in) he generally every day visits
his nursery; keeping up the idea of a family, which he begins to make provision
for in earnest very early in the spring.

Among all the sounds of animal nature, sew are more pleasing than the cawing
of rooks. The rook has but two, or three notes; and when he attempts a solo, we
cannot praise his song. But when he performs in concert, which is his chief
delight, these two or three notes, tho rough in themselves, being mixed, and
intermixed with the notes of a multitude, have all their sharp edges worn off,
and become very harmonious; especially when softened in the air, where the band
chiefly exhibits. You have this music in perfection, when the whole colony is
roused by the discharge of a gun. -- The cawing of rooks however is a sound not
so congenial to the forest, as it is to the grove.

Among the winged inhabitants of the forest we should not forget the honey-bee,
which every where covers the surface of it. These wide demeisns are in many
parts spread with heath, which is one of the favorite vegetables of this
industrious insect. Where this abounds, the cottager commonly carries out his
hives in winter, hiding them, as he can, from observation; and fencing them
from the annoyance of cattle. There he leaves them, till swarming-time, when
they necessarily become the objects of his care; and if he is fortunate, his
profits are considerable. I knew a cottager who made above fifteen guineas, in
one year, of his forest-honey; tho he sold it only at three pence a pound.
Sometimes the hive is discovered, and stolen; tho in general it is a garrison,
which can defend itself pretty well: however as the prudent peasant never
places all his wealth in one place, he generally at worst, secures enough to
repay his trouble. -- Hampshire-honey is in good esteem; but it is rather the
honey produced in the northern parts of the county, than what is commonly
called forest-honey.

Another species of fly should not be passed over, which is one of the greatest
nuisances of the forest. In form it is not unlike the common black fly, and
about it is size; but it is color is different. It is a bright-coated, brown
insect; well-cased; strong; and very retentive of life Vivit, cursitat, immo
coit, dempto licet capite. Linneus de hippobosca.
. It has a side-long, crawling motion, like a crab. The horse is it is favorite
quarry, tho it attacks the cow, and other animals. You may sometimes see
hundreds of these insects nestling under the tail, and belly of such horses, as
are patient of them; as the New-forest horse commonly is by long sufferance.
But to such horses, as are unaccustomed to these teasing insects, they are a
grievous torment; tho it is doubtful, whether they are blood-suckers, or
subsist only on such juices as exude through the skin. In this latter case they
offend the horse only by tickling him; for which operation their legs are well
adapted, appearing, in a microscope, armed with sharp talons, like pot-hooks.

Such are the inmates of the internal parts of the forest. Along it is shores,
bordering on the isle of Wight, it is furnished with a new set of inhabitants
-- those various tribes of sea-fowl, which frequent the brackish waters of an
estuary.

Among the most common, as well as the most beautiful, is the gull. Waterfowl,
in a particular manner, discover in their flight some determined aim. They
eagerly coast the river, or return to the sea; bent on some purpose, of which
they never lose sight. But the evolutions of the gull appear capricious, and
undirected, both when she flies alone, and, as she often does, in large
companies. -- The more however her character suffers as a loiterer, the more it
is raised in picturesque value, by her continuing longer before the eye; and
displaying, in her elegant sweeps along the air, her sharp-pointed wings, and
bright silvery hue. -- She is beautiful also, not only on the wing, but when
she floats, in numerous assemblies, on the water; or when she rests on the
shore, dotting either one, or the other with white spots; which, minute as they
are, are very picturesque; and may properly be introduced in landscape; giving
life and spirit to a view. Sea-painters particularly make great use of this
bird, and often with good effect. The younger Vandervelt was fond of
introducing it: he knew the value of a single bright touch in heightening his
storms.

As the wheeling motion of the gull is beautiful, so also is the figured flight
of the goose, the duck, and the widgeon; all of which are highly ornamental to
coast-views, bays and estuaries. We often see innumerable bodies of these, and
other sea-fowl, congregated in close array, and filling the air with their
resounding cries See page 192.
. They are not hyperbolically described as -- living clouds,
Infinite wings; till all the plume-dark air,
And rude resounding shore, are one wild cry.
In a picturesque light these living clouds are of little value; unless indeed
some wild, forlorn, and rocky coast is presented, where these sea-fowls
commonly breed; and where in great bodies they are characteristic.

Among the solitary birds, which frequent the estuaries of rivers, the hern,
and the cormorant are of too much consequence to be omitted.

The form, in which the hern contracts his long neck in flying -- his
outstretched legs -- the solemn flapping of his wings -- his easy deliberation
in taking the ground -- the blueish tint of his plumes, softening into white --
and his patient, and attentive posture, as he stands fishing on the shore --
are all, circumstances as far as they go, picturesque. His hoarse note too, at
pausing intervals, as he passes through the air, tho harsh and discordant when
unaided by it is proper accompaniments, like other notes of the same kind, when
the scenes of nature act in concert with it, has it is full energy, and effect.
-- I call the hern a solitary bird, because his common habits, and manner of
seeking his food, are solitary: we seldom see more than two in company; tho,
like the rook, he breeds in large societies.

Nor is the cormorant without his beauty. His eager, steady, determined flight
-- his plunging into the waters -- his wild look, as if conscious of guilt --
his bustle on being alarmed; shaking the moisture from his feathers, and
dashing about, till he get fairly disengaged, are all amusing circumstances in
his history. But he is a merciless villain; supposed by naturalists to be
furnished with a greater variety of predatory arts, than any bird that inhabits
the waters. When the tide retires, he wings his ardent flight with strong
pinions, and outstretched neck, along the shores of the deserted river; with
all the channels, and currents of which he is better acquainted, than the
mariner with his chart. Here he commits infinite spoil. Or, if he find his prey
less plentiful in the shallows, he is at no loss in deeper water. He dives to
the bottom, and visits the eel in her retirement, of all others his favorite
morsel See other parts of his history, p. 172.
. -- In vain the fowler eyes him from the bank; and takes his stand behind the
bush. The cormorant, quicker-sighted, knows his danger; and parries it with a
glance of his eye. If he choose not to trust his pinions, in a moment he is
under water -- rises again in some distant part -- instantly sinks a second
time; and eludes the possibility of taking aim. Even if a randomshot should
touch him, unless it carry a weight of metal, his sides are so well cased, and
his muscular frame so robust, that he escapes mischief. -- If the weather suit,
he fishes also dexterously at sea. Or perhaps he only varies his food between
seafish, and river-fish, as his palate prompts. -- When he has filled his maw,
he retires to the ledge of some projecting rock; where he listens to the surges
below in dosing contemplation, till hunger again awaken his powers of rapine.

SECT. XII.
Conclusion of the whole.

THUS I have carried my reader through all the varieties I know, of woodland
scenes. I considered first the single tree as the origin, and foundation of
all. I considered next the various combinations of trees, under the several
beautiful forms of scenery, which they compose: and as the forest is of all
others, the grandest, and most interesting combination of trees, I dwelt the
longest on this part of my subject; selecting New-forest in Hampshire as an
example to illustrate the several observations I had made. Through this
picturesque country I have led my reader geographically; and have presented him
with a great variety of beautiful scenes -- woods -- lawns -- heaths --
forest-distances -- and seacoast views. I have adorned these scenes also with
their proper appendages, wild horses, deer, and other picturesque inhabitants.
-- I might greatly have multiplied both my general and particular remaks; but I
fear I ought rather to apologize for my redundances, than my omissions.

I now close my observations with a sigh over the transitory state of the
several scenes, I have described. I mean not, with unphilosophic weakness, to
bemoan the perishable condition of sublunary things; but to lament only, that,
of all sublunary things, the wood-land-scene, which is among the most
beautiful, should be among the most perishable.

Some species of landscape are of permanent nature; such particularly as depend
on rocks, mountains, lakes, and rivers. The ornamental appendages indeed of
these scenes, the oaks, and elms, that adorn them, are of a more transient
kind. But the grand constituent parts of them may be supposed coeval with
nature itself. Nothing less than some general convulsion can injure them.

Such landscape again as depends for beauty on old castles, abbeys, and other
ruins, generally escapes for ages the depredations of time. If the woody
appendages of these scenes, like those of lakes, and mountains, are open to
injury, yet a quick vegetation restores them speedily to nature -- unless
indeed the persevering hand of improvement intervene.

But the landscape, which depends chiefly on wood-land scenery, is always open
to injury. Every graceless, hand can fell a tree. The value of timber is it is
misfortune. It is rarely suffered to stand, when it is fit for use; and in a
cultivated country, woods are considered only as large cornfieldsd; cut, as
soon as ripe: and when they are cut for the uses, to which they are properly
designed, tho we may lament, we should not repine. But when they are cut, as
they often are, yet immature, to make up a matrimonial purse, or to carry the
profits of them to race-grounds, and gaming-houses, we cannot help wishing the
profligate possessors had been placed, like lunatics, and idiots, under the
care of guardians, who might have prevented such ruinous, and unwarrantable
waste.

The depredations, which we have seen made in every part of New-forest; and the
vast quantities of timber, which are felled, every year, for the navy; and
regularly assigned for various other purposes, cannot but make a considerable
change in it is scenery. The description therefore, which I have given of it, is
not the description of what it was in the last century, nor of what it will be
in the next. Many alterations in particular scenes have taken place, even since
this work was begun. In a fore-ground, the cutting down of two or three stately
trees makes an essential alteration; and much change of this kind has been
made in many places. In these instances therefore the remarks here offered must
be considered as history, rather than as description. They attempt to chronicle
scenes, which once existed, and are now gone. That grand vista, which has been
described between Brokenhurst, and Lyndhurst, has, since these remarks were
made, undergone much change. Many of the nobler trees, which adorned it, have
been felled: and many of the old decaying trees, and others which had been
stunted under the shade of those, that had been felled, are now grown still
more decayed, and ragged. They are ill-clad and thin; and their withered
branches every where stare out, unadorned, and naked through their meagre
foliage. From these causes, and the deformed gaps, which the felling of good
trees has occasioned, this avenue has lost much of it is beauty. -- The reader
will still remember, that when in the early part of the work See vol. I. p. 8.
, I considered the maladies of trees as a source of picturesque beauty, I meant
it only with regard to individuals placed in particular circumstances. Here,
where we are contemplating the beauties of what should be a rich forest-scene,
they are out of place. -- It must however be added, that although these changes
are continually happening among the ancient oaks of the forest; yet as young
trees are growing old, nature is also continually working up new fore-grounds
to her landscapes; tho it is a much easier business to deform, than to restore.

In the distant scenery of the forest indeed, where effect depends on vast
combinations of trees, and may be produced even from the inferior kinds, the
inroads of the axe are less observed. Tho the choicest oaks therefore may be
removed; yet if a sufficiency of meaner trees is left, no considerable change
will happen, for many years, in the distant landscapes of the forest. The
lawns, and heaths, in which it is greatest beauty consists, will preserve their
ornaments: and, unless where their dimensions are small (in which case stately
trees are required as fore-grounds,) they may long remain the objects of
admiration.

THE END.
INDEX.
A
ASH, described Vol. I. Page 32 Animals, figures of, in stone and wood; remarks
upon them I. Page 35 Alder described I. Page 64 Acacia described I. Page 68
Allegory on the fall of the leaf I. Page 103 Address of the oak to the saplin
on his removal from the forest I. Page 117 Arbor-de-rays, or Banian-tree I.
Page 154 Aquaduct, how it may be introduced I. Page 217 Autumn, the most
replete with incidental beauty of any season I. Page 257 Angel-inn at
Lymington; a good view from the stable-yard there II. Page 85 Atmosphere, it is
various effects on landscape described II. Page 241 Ass; a forest-animal II.
Page 268
B
Balance of trees I. Page 5 Blasted tree, often beautiful I. Page 14 Brionies,
beautiful I. Page 17 Beech described I. Page 43 Birch described I. Page 66
Bloom of different trees I. Page 110 Britannia, dimensions of her bowsprit I.
Page 128 Boabab, an uncommon tree found in Senegal I. Page 152 Brown, Mr.; his
resources in landscape I. Page 183 Bramble, an unaccommodating plant I. Page
220 Britain, despoiled of wood I. Page 293 Beaston-castle I. Page 313
Bull-running, a diversion in Needwood-forest I. Page 316 Beanmanour-park in
Charnwood-forest I. Page 316 Bosworth-field, on the borders of Leicester-forest
I. Page 317 Berkly-castle, on the confines of Micklewood-forest I. Page 320
Bradon-forest, a scene of great slaughter, when invaded by the Danes 905 I.
Page 321 Boldre, vicar of; his assignment of forest-timber II. Page 20 Bedford,
duke of; his fruitless attempt to remove a hamlet of trespassers in New-forest
II. Page 45 Bogs, frequent in New-forest II. Page 56 Brokenhurst, a pleasant
village; view from the churchyard II. Page 62 Bute, lord; views from his house
II. Page 83 Buckland-ring, a Roman camp II. Page 98 Bottom, it is meaning in
forest-language II. Page 106 Burley-hill; view from it II. Page 108
Burley-lodge II. Page 109 Boldre-wood lodge II. Page 110 Beech, remarks on it is
mode of growth II. Page 111 Blackamsley-hill; view from it II. Page 124
Boldre-church; view from it II. Page 129 Buckler's-hard II. Page 138
Beaulieu-abbey II. Page 139 Beaulieu-river; entrance of it described II. Page
159 -- character of it II. Page 165 Birds, which frequent Beaulieu-river II.
Page 171 Beaulieu-bridge; view from it to the right II. Page 177
Butt's-ash-farm II. Page 206 Beaulieu-heath, western side of it II. Page 212
Bramble-hill, a view from it II. Page 231 Bere-forest; care taken there in
breeding horses II. Page 252 Black-cock; a forest-bird II. Page 285 Birds,
singing; frequent in the forest II. Page 288
C
Curtailed trunk I. Page 8 Chequered shade I. Page 21 Chestnut described I. Page
58 Cedar of Lebanon described I. Page 73 Cluster-pine described I. Page 82
Color in general, remarks on it I. Page 86 -- farther remarks on the same
subject I. Page 96 Crown, a French-ship, dimensions of her keel I. Page 127
Chestnut, a celebrated one on Mount Etna I. Page 130 Cleves, account of a
remarkable lime-tree there I. Page 133 Chaucer's oaks, account of them I. Page
134 Cadenham-oak I. Page 165 Clump; properties required in a small one I. Page
172 -- properties required in a large one I. Page 177 Copse described I. Page
191 Claude, subjects of his pictures I. Page 215 Cottage, how far the
introduction of it may be allowed in landscape I. Page 216 Caesar, his account
of the early Britons in their forests I. Page 275 Cougar I. Page 280 Caractacus
taken by the Romans in Clune-forest I. Page 315 Corff-castle in the forest of
Purbeck I. Page 327 Compton, Mr.; his park II. Page 82 Christ-church II. Page
82 Churches, forest; their common situation II. Page 129 Choulsey; a large
abbey-barn there II. Page 137 Culverly-heath; view over it II. Page 147 Creek,
one near Leap II. Page 196 Calshot-castle II. Page 201 Cadland, Mr. Drumond's
II. Page 202 Cuffnals, Mr. Rose's II. Page 219 Chasm, a gaping one in the vista
beyond Lyndhurst II. Page 221 Cleavland, Mr.; his views over Lymington-river
II. Page 238 Colts, in New-forest; how caught II. Page 251 Cattle, horned;
abound in the forest II. Page 271 Cawing of rooks, a pleasing sound II. Page
295 Cormorant described II. Page 301
D
Diseases of trees often beautiful I. Page 7 Damory's oak, a celebrated tree
near Blandford, in Dorsetshire I. Page 142 Deception; of little estimation in
painting I. Page 265 Dog, the first associate of man in a state of nature I.
Page 273 Destruction of forests I. Page 285 Deer-stealer, the history of a
noted one II. Page 43 Dialect of New-forest II. Page 48 Division, under which
New-forest is considered in this work II. Page 51 Divisions of property
offensive to the picturesque eye II. Page 79 Dells, several in the road between
Christchurch and Lymington II. Page 85 D'Oyly-park II. Page 133 Denny-wood II.
Page 148 Dauphin, supposed to imbark near Exbury II. Page 189 Distances, and
foregrounds, should be balanced in a view II. Page 199 Dibden, views about it
II. Page 207 Deer-leap II. Page 211 Docking-horses, the absurdity of the
practice II. Page 255 Deer, fallow; more encouraged in the forest, than the
stag II. Page 278
E
Elm, description of it I. Page 39 Effects of light, not enough studied by
landscape painters I. Page 249 Elephant I. Page 278 English-forest, character
of it I. Page 303 Edwin, k. of Northumberland, slain in Hatfieldchace I. Page
313 Edelfleda, a town built by her in Delamere-forest I. Page 313
Enfield-forest divided into farms by Cromwell I. Page 324 Even-water-bottom II.
Page 106 Exbury, a description of the scenery about it II. Page 183 Ear,
horse's; the absurdity of cropping it II. Page 265 Eagle, often found in the
forest II. Page 293
F
Form of trees I. Page 3 Firs in different parts of the world, suppositions
about them I. Page 91 Fairlop, a celebrated oak in Hainhault-forest in Essex I.
Page 141 Fig Tree in the Deanery-garden at Winchester I. Page 148 Fig Trees at
Lambeth I. Page 148 Forest, a general idea of it is scenery I. Page 209
Fore-ground, in a forest I. Page 211 Fern, it is use in scenery I. Page 219
Forest-distance considered I. Page 225 Forest-lawn I. Page 225 Forest-heath I.
Page 226 Felling trees accidentally has often a good effect I. Page 266
Fitz-Stephen's account of the woods near London in the time of Henry II. I.
Page 293 Forests of Derry-more, and Derry-monach I. Page 304 -- of Coygach, and
Loch Mais I. Page 304 -- of Abernethy, and Rothimurcha I. Page 305 -- of
Loch-loyn, and Glenmoriston I. Page 305 -- of Strath-glass, and Loch-garrie I.
Page 305 -- of Loch-artrig, and Kinloch-leven I. Page 305 -- of Glenmore, and
Glentaner I. Page 305 -- of Braemar, and Invercald I. Page 305 -- of
Loch-rannoc, and Loch-tulla I. Page 307 -- of Torwood, Tiviot, and Cheviot I.
Page 307 -- of Rothbury, and Lowes I. Page 308 -- of Nicol, and Knaresdale I.
Page 308 -- of Westwood, Inglewood, and Copeland I. Page 308 -- of Milburn,
Whinfield, and Martindale I. Page 309 -- of Thornthwait, Stainmer, and
Mellerstang I. Page 309 -- of Langden, or Teesdale I. Page 310 -- of Lancaster,
Bowland, and Simonswood I. Page 310 -- of Lime, and Applegarth I. Page 311 --
of Swale-dale, and Wensely-dale I. Page 311 -- of Pickering, and Knaresborough
I. Page 312 -- of Harewood, and Galtries I. Page 312 -- of Hallifax, and
Hatfield I. Page 312 -- of Delamere, and Macclesfield I. Page 313 Forests of
Wireall, and Sherwood I. Page 313 -- of Huckstow, and Kingswood I. Page 314 --
of Bridgenorth, and Clune I. Page 315 -- of Needwood, and Cankwood I. Page 316
-- of Charnwood, and Leicester I. Page 316 -- of Lyfield, Bringwood, and
Deerfield I. Page 317 -- of Hawood, and Acornbury I. Page 317 -- of Wire,
Malvern, and Fackingham I. Page 317 -- of Arden, Rockingham, and Sacy I. Page
318 -- of Yardly, Whittlebury, and Wabridge I. Page 318 -- of Dean, Micklewood,
and King's wood I. Page 320 -- of Which-wood, Bernwood, and Clitern I. Page 320
-- of Epping, and Hainhault I. Page 321 -- of Peevisham, and Blakemore I. Page
321 -- of Bradon, and Savernack I. Page 321 -- of Windsor, and Enfield I. Page
322 -- of Tunbridge I. Page 324 -- of St. Leonard's, Word, and Ashdown I. Page
325 -- of Waterdown and Dallington I. Page 325 -- of Arundel, and Charlton I.
Page 325 -- of Dartmore, and Exmore I. Page 325 -- of Neroke, and Selwood I.
Page 326 -- of Gillingham, and Cranburn I. Page 327 -- of Blackmore, and
Purbeck I. Page 327 -- of Chute, and Harewood I. Page 327 -- of Holt, and
Waltham I. Page 328 -- of Bear and New-forest I. Page 328 Forest-law, it is
grievances II. Page 9 Fire, often mischievous in the forest II. Page 34
Forester, and mountaneer compared, to the disadvantage of the former II. Page
41 Foxlees II. Page 74 Fossil shells; a variety of them found at Hordwellcliff,
near Lymington II. Page 87 Flat surfaces, remarks on them II. Page 121 Fishing,
and fowling II. Page 190 Fowler, story of one II. Page 193 Fawley II. Page 202
Farm-yard, ill stationed near a great house II. Page 204 Fritham,
heathy-grounds about it II. Page 236 Farmer; story of one, who shot his own
horse II. Page 282 Fly, horse; a troublesome insect in the forest II. Page 297
G
Groaning-tree of Badesley I. Page 162 Gates as the entrances into parks;
remarks upon them I. Page 186 Glen described I. Page 197 Grove, the open one
described I. Page 201 Greenland, and other northern countries; accounts of
great quantities of drift-timber thrown on them I. Page 288 Gibraltar;
drift-timber thrown up there I. Page 289 Germany despoiled of wood I. Page 290
Ghent, John of; destroyed the forest of Caledonia I. Page 298
Gillingham-forest; Danes defeated on the confines of it by Edmund Ironside I.
Page 326 Game-law arose in the room of forest-law II. Page 14 Gradation,
remarks on this principle II. Page 125 George III. his visit to New-forest II.
Page 218
H
Hop, the growth of, beautiful I. Page 18 Horn-beam I. Page 48 Horse-chesnut I.
Page 61 Hemlock-spruce I. Page 91 Holly I. Page 98 and 218 Haw-thorn I. Page 99
and 219 Holm-trees, four of great antiquity, at Tybur, and Rome I. Page 125
Hitchin-priory in Hertfordshire; account of an immense chestnut there I. Page
140 Hern's oak, near Windsor I. Page 145 Haziness, it is effect in
forest-scenery I. Page 234 Hunting in Braemar-forest I. Page 306 Hallifax-law
I. Page 312 Hastings, Henry; account of him II. Page 22 Hordwell-cliff; a
description of it II. Page 86 Hurst-castle; it is situation, and the views it
commands II. Page 89 Hogarth, an instance of his humor II. Page 91
Hinchelsea-wood II. Page 104 Hogs; method of feeding them in the forest II.
Page 113 Hampshire, coast of, described II. Page 158 Hill-top-gate, views from
thence II. Page 178 House, situation for one, difficult to choose II. Page 205
Hethe, views from it II. Page 206 Hound's-down described II. Page 208 Horse,
New-forest; description of him II. Page 250 Heart II. Page 273 Hind, her spirit
in defending her calf II. Page 278 Hares abound in the forest II. Page 283
Harmony, local; remarks upon it II. Page 289 Honey-bee; frequent in the forest
II. Page 296 Honey, forest; not in esteem II. Page 296 Hern described II. Page
300
I
Ivy, often beautiful I. Page 15 Ilex, or ever-green oak I. Page 97 Johnson,
Dr.; a passage quoted from him I. Page 222 Incidental beauties of distant
forest-scenery I. Page 233 Italy despoiled of wood I. Page 290 Iceland also I.
Page 290 Iron's-hill-lodge II. Page 212 Jay II. Page 291
K
Kircher's account of a chestnut on mount Etna I. Page 131 Kenelworth-castle in
the forest of Arden I. Page 318 Keepers, and groom-keepers of New-forest II.
Page 18 Kitchens, those of abbeys commonly very substantial II. Page 144 King,
capt.; his description of a river-scene II. Page 167 King's-house at Lyndhurst
II. Page 216 Kite II. Page 291 King's-wood, frequented by eagles II. Page 293
L
Lightness, a characteristic of beauty in a tree I. Page 5 Lombardy-poplar,
described I. Page 52 Lime-tree described I. Page 55 Larch described I. Page 70
Luccam-oak described I. Page 97 Lycian-plane I. Page 123 Longleat, situation of
I. Page 182 Lion I. Page 277 Lymington, town of, described II. Page 94
Longslade-bottom, a vast bog II. Page 104 Leonard's, St.; a large barn II. Page
136 Lady-cross-lodge II. Page 150 Lymington, harbor of, described II. Page 157
Leap, views about it II. Page 188 Lutterel's tower II. Page 196 Lyndhurst II.
Page 216 Landscape, woodland; most subject to injury II. Page 304
M
Moss, often beautiful in trees I. Page 10 Motion, beautiful in trees I. Page
20 Mountain-ash described I. Page 37 Maple described I. Page 56 Menalaid-plane
I. Page 123 Maundrel, his account of the cedars of Lebanon I. Page 128 Magdalen
college in Oxford, an account of a celebrated oak there I. Page 135 Mist, it is
effect on forest-scenery I. Page 235 Meridian-sun, it is effects on
forest-scenery I. Page 242 Man, in his early state, a forest-animal I. Page 271
Monkey I. Page 279 Mouse-deer I. Page 280 Marsden, Mr.; his account of the
woods of Sumatra I. Page 287 Mansfield, millar of I. Page 314 Morant, Mr.; view
from his park II. Page 63 Monmouth, duke of; where taken, atter the battle of
Sedgmore II. Page 81 Marl-pit-oak, a landmark II. Page 102 Mark-way-bottom II.
Page 108 Mudlands, how dangerous II. Page 171 Maniac, story of one II. Page 188
Mud-pattens II. Page 193 Mount-royal, Mr. Ballard's II. Page 220 Malwood
castle; a view from it II. Page 231 Miniature, landscapes in; remarks upon them
II. Page 232 Mule, a forest animal II. Page 269
N
Newfoundland (or black) spruce I. Page 91 Newstadt, account of a remarkable
lime-tree there I. Page 131 North Wind, it is effect on forest-scenery I. Page
236 New-forest, first made II. Page 2 -- reasons given for making it II. Page 2
-- question examined, how far William I depopulated the country II. Page 4 --
it is ancient boundaries II. Page 8 Nature's superiority to art in forming
combinations of trees II. Page 65 New-park in New-forest II. Page 70 Needles;
account of them II. Page 91 No-man's-walk II. Page 119 Norley-wood; description
of it II. Page 151 Needfore-point II. Page 160 Nag-tail, it is absurdity II.
Page 256 Nature; ideas of improving her works, absurd II. Page 272 Nightingale,
frequent in the forest II. Page 288
O
Oak described I. Page 23 Occidental-plane described I. Page 48 Oriental-plane
described I. Page 50 Oak, against which the arrow of sir Walter Tyrrel glanced
I. Page 160 Officers of New-forest II. Page 17 Oak-woods converted into
beech-woods II. Page 33 Oak of New-forest, it is picturesque character II. Page
73 Oak-brow II. Page 105 Oaks, remarkable, at Burley-lodge II. Page 110
Ober-green II. Page 121 Orford, earl of; account of his training two stags in a
carriage II. Page 279
P
Poets not always uniform in their ideas of beauty I. Page 14 Pliny's account
of the rooting of trees I. Page 19 Poplar described I. Page 52 Pinaster
described I. Page 81 Park-scenery I. Page 181 Petworth-house, situation of I.
Page 182 Park-ornaments I. Page 185 Pleasure-ground I. Page 188 Poussin,
subjects of his pictures I. Page 214 Pont-du-Gard, in Languedoc, an account of
it I. Page 217 Permanent beauties of forest-scenery I. Page 229 Parts in
painting should always be subordinate to the whole I. Page 250 Planters in vain
attempt, by assorting their trees, to assort the beauties of autumn I. Page 260
Picturesque pleasure; its sources I. Page 265 Purchas's account of the
drift-timber carried down the Oby, and Jenisca I. Page 288 Polidore Virgil's
account of the state of forests in England in the time of Henry VII. I. Page
293 Pines, which yield excellent timber, found in the forest of Invercald in
Scotland I. Page 306 Pendragon-castle I. Page 309 Purlieus of New-forest II.
Page 15 Purveyor, in New-forest II. Page 22 Planting oak; different opinions
about it II. Page 35 Planting different trees alternately, disagreeable II.
Page 75 Priestlands; a good view of the isle of Wight from it II. Page 93
Pawnage month II. Page 112 Pilewell II. Page 134 Picturesque ideas, and their
limits, explained II. Page 166 Palatines, a scheme to settle them in New-forest
II. Page 222 Plano-convex-mirror examined II. Page 224 Paultons II. Page 228
Pheasants abound in the forest II. Page 284 Partridges, less frequent II. Page
285 Plover, common in its heathy parts II. Page 287
Q
Queen Elizabeth's oak I. Page 147 Queen Ann, a scheme in her reign to settle a
body of Palatines in New-forest II. Page 222
R
Rooting of trees, a source of beauty I. Page 19 Royal Sovereign; dimensions of
her mainmast I. Page 127 Ravenna in Italy; gates of the great church there,
made of vine-planks I. Page 131 Rising-sun, its effect on woods I. Page 239
Rubens, his faulty introduction of spots of light I. Page 245 Reindeer I. Page
282 Robin-Hood, and other banditti, frequented Sherwood-forest I. Page 314
Rockingham-castle in the forest of Rockingham I. Page 318 Rapacity exercised in
forests II. Page 32 Rope-hill; view from thence of the estuary of
Lymington-river II. Page 61 Regular forms allied to greatness II. Page 65
Ruffian forest; description of one II. Page 68 Rhapsody, and verbal
description, compared II. Page 69 Rufus, scene of his death II. Page 76
Ringwood II. Page 80 Rabbits injurious to seedling oaks II. Page 107 -- abound
in the forest II. Page 283 Rhinfield-lodge II. Page 120 Roydon II. Page 128
Roads, when straight, disfigure an open country II. Page 210 Rails, a good mode
of fencing II. Page 216 Ring-dove, a forest-bird II. Page 286 Rook, haunts the
forest only at night II. Page 293
S
Sycamore, description of it I. Page 58 Stone-pine described I. Page 78
Scotch-fir described I. Page 84 Spruce-fir described I. Page 88 Silver-fir
described I. Page 90 Spray of trees, the study of; useful to landscape-painters
I. Page 102 Spray of the oak I. Page 106 -- of the ash I. Page 107 -- of the
elm I. Page 108 -- of the beech I. Page 109 Stawel, lord; situation of his
house in Holt-forest I. Page 182 Swanevelt, subjects of his pictures I. Page
214 Salvator, subjects of his pictures I. Page 215 Smoke, its effect in
forest-scenery I. Page 236 Setting-sun, its effect on forest-scenery I. Page
243 Storms, their effect on forest-scenery I. Page 247 Shade, predominancy of;
produces the best effect I. Page 251 Seasons, a source of incidental beauty I.
Page 255 Spring I. Page 255 Summer I. Page 256 Strabo, his account of certain
Asiatics I. Page 272 -- and of the ancient Britons I. Page 276
Subterraneous-timber accounted for I. Page 294 Spaniards in 1588 intended to
cut down the forest of Dean I. Page 298 Scotch forest, character of it I. Page
301 Selwood-forest, remarkable for a victory obtained near it by Alfred over
the Danes I. Page 326 Sopley, view there II. Page 82 Salt-works near Lymington
II. Page 88 Shingles, an island on the Hampshire coast; account of it II. Page
92 Skiff in motion, described II. Page 96 Sethorn-wood II. Page 104
Scotch-cattle at Burly-lodge II. Page 110 Sandy-down II. Page 128 Souly-pond
II. Page 134 Spits of land remarkable at the mouths of the forest-rivers II.
Page 160 Singing-birds frequent the banks of Beaulieu-river II. Page 173
Sea-views, when seen from lofty stands, will not admit proportion in the
fore-grounds II. Page 200 Stables, how they may be stationed II. Page 204
Stobland-common, view from it II. Page 206 Stag, described II. Page 271 Sheep;
the forest not much frequented by them II. Page 283 Squirrel abounds in the
forest II. Page 284 Snipe, frequent in the forest II. Page 287 Sea-gull, his
manners described II. Page 298 Sea-fowl in general II. Page 299
T
Trees compared with animal life I. Page 2 Traveller's joy, beautiful I. Page
17 Tugg, a sort of wane used in Sussex for conveying timber I. Page 116 Trees,
which have attained large dimensions; catalogue of I. Page 120 Tiberius's larch
I. Page 126 Tortworth in Glocestershire, account of a chestnut there I. Page 139
Tyrrel, sir Walter; tree, on which his arrow glanced I. Page 160 Timber-wane,
drawn by oxen, has often a good effect I. Page 267 Tiger I. Page 278 Turks
great admirers of wood I. Page 291 Tees, fall of I. Page 310 Tutbury-castle on
the confines of Needwood-forest I. Page 315 Turkies, an ornament to parks I.
Page 323 Timber, care of government in providing a supply in New-forest II.
Page 28 Trespasses on forest-lands II. Page 39 Taste, comparison between it,
and expense II. Page 186 Tail, horse's; absurdity of docking it II. Page 255
U
Upas, or poison-tree, in Java I. Page 156 Uncommon appearances in nature, to
be avoided I. Page 237 Underwood, it is use in landscape II. Page 72
V
Vines, beautiful I. Page 17 Vanier, his lamentation over the destruction of
timber I. Page 117 Velitrae, a famous plane-tree there I. Page 125 Van Egmont,
his account of the cedars of Lebanon I. Page 129 Valentine-house, near Ilford
in Essex; a remarkable vine there I. Page 149 Voltair's reasoning about
depopulating New-forest, examined II. Page 4 -- his epigram on docking horses
II. Page 264 Verderors, judges of the forest-courts II. Page 20 Vista, a very
grand one between Brokenhurst, and Lyndhurst II. Page 64 Valley of
Lymington-river II. Page 128 Vegetation, extraordinary instance of II. Page 141
Voyage up Beaulieu-river II. Page 161 Vista beyond Lyndhurst, of little value
II. Page 220 Vicar's-hill II. Page 239 Vanderveldt makes great use of the
sea-gull II. Page 299
W
Withered top I. Page 8 Wreathed fascia I. Page 36 Witch-elm described I. Page
41 Weeping elm described I. Page 41 Walnut-tree described I. Page 54
Weeping-willow described I. Page 62 Willows of different kinds I. Page 63 Withy
described I. Page 64 Weymouth-pine described I. Page 82 Worksop, an account of
a celebrated oak there I. Page 138 Wallace-tree, a celebrated oak near Sterling
I. Page 143 Waterlo, subjects of his pictures I. Page 214 Weeds, their use in
landscape I. Page 219 Weather, a source of incidental beauty I. Page 233
Winter, the picturesque effect of that season I. Page 261 Wild-boar I. Page 281
Wolf I. Page 282 Windsor-forest formerly the property of queen Emma I. Page 322
Windsor great park I. Page 323 Whorwell-abby, founded by Elfrida in the forest
of Harewood I. Page 327 Walks, different; into which New-forest is divided II.
Page 18 Woodward, and regarders, officers in New-forest, who superintend the
timber II. Page 20 William III, a salutary act in his reign, for providing a
supply of timber in New-forest II. Page 30 Widow; story of one on the borders
of the forest II. Page 46 Wilverly-lodge II. Page 107 Wild-boar introduced into
New-forest by Charles I II. Page 118 Warwicksted II. Page 120 Walhampton II.
Page 131 Whitley-ridge-lodge; a beautiful forest-lawn there II. Page 149
Wood-cutters, their different modes of felling timber II. Page 155 Wight,
island of; it is coast described II. Page 158 White-hart-silver II. Page 274
Wood-cock, not often found in the forest II. Page 287 Wood-pecker II. Page 289
X
Xerxes's plane I. Page 122
Y
Yew I. Page 92 Ytene, the ancient name of New-forest II. Page 2
Yew-tree-bottom II. Page 106
Z
Zealand; account of a bleak seacoast there I. Page 269

