A POEM Sacred to the MEMORY of SIR ISAAC NEWTON.

By JAMES THOMSON.

His Tibi me Rebus quaedam divina Voluptas
Percipit, atque Horror; quod sic Natura tua Vi
Tam manifesta patet ex omni Part retecta.
LUC. DUBLIN: Printed by S. POWELL, for RICHARD NORRIS, at the Corner of
Crane-lane in Essex-street, M DCC XXVII.

Where may be had Summer a Poem, and Winter a Poem.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Walpole, KNIGHT of the Most Noble Order of
the Garter.
SIR,
SINCE I have ventured to write a Poem on a Gentleman who is universally
acknowledged to be the Honor of our Country as a Philosopher, prompted by the
same Ambition, I address it to her most illustrious Patriot.

Though, by the wise Choice of the best of Kings, you are engaged in the highest
and most active Scenes of Life, balancing the Power of Europe, watching over
our common Welfare, informing the whole Body of Society and Commerce, and even
like Heaven dispensing Happiness to the Discontented and Ungrateful; though thus
gloriously employed, yet are you not less attentive, in the Hour of Leisure, to
the Variety, Beauty, and Magnificence of Nature, nor less delighted, and
astonished at the Discoveries of the incomparable Newton. The same
comprehensive Genius which Way soever it looks must have a steady, clear, and
unbounded Prospect.

But not to encroach any further on your important Moments all devoted to the
Good of Mankind, I once more plead the Dignity of my Subject for my Excuse in
this Approach, and beg Leave to subscribe my self, with the sincerest
Veneration,

SIR, Your most faithful, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

A POEM Sacred to the Memory of Sir ISAAC NEWTON.
SHALL the great Soul of NEWTON quit this Earth,
To mingle with his Stars, and every Muse,
Astonished into Silence, shun the Weight
Of Honors due to his illustrious Name!
But what can Man? -- Even now the Sons of Light,
In Strains such as delight the Ear of GOD,
Hail his Arrival on the Coasts of Bliss.
Yet am not I deterred, though high the Theme,
And sung to Harps of Angels; for with you,
Aetherial Flames! ambitious I aspire
In Nature's general Symphony to join.
AND what new Wonders can ye show your Guest!
Who, while on this dim Spot where Mortals toil
Clouded in Dust, from Motion's simple Laws
Could trace the boundless Hand of Providence,
Wide-working through this universal Frame.
HAVE ye not listened while he bound the Suns,
And Planets to their Spheres! The unequal Task
Of Humankind till then. Often had they rolled
Over erring Man the Year, and often disgraced
The Pride of Schools, before their Course was known
Full in its Causes and Effects to Him,
All-piercing Sage! Who sat not down and dreamt
Romantic Schemes, defended by the Din
Of specious Words, and Tyranny of Names,
But bidding his amazing Mind attend,
And with heroic Patience Years on Years
Deep-searching, saw at last the System dawn,
And shine, of all his Race, on him alone.
WHAT were his Raptures then! how pure! how strong!
And what the Triumphs of old Greece and Rome,
By his diminished, but the Pride of Boys
In some small Fray victorious! When instead
Of shattered Parcels of this Earth usurped
By Violence unmanly, and sore Deeds
Of Cruelty and Blood, Nature herself
Stood all subdued by him, and open laid
Her every latent Glory to his View.
AND first our solar System he surveyed
With accurate Ken, and by the mingling Power
Of Gravitation and Projection saw
The whole in silent Harmony revolve.
Drawn to his lengthened Eye the attending Moons,
Designed to cheer remoter Planets, were
By him in all their mixed Proportions seen.
He also fixed the wandering Queen of Night,
Whether she wanes into a scanty Orb*
Or waxing broad with her pale shadowy Light
In a soft Deluge overflows the Sky.
Her every Motion clear discerning, He
Adjusted to the obsequious Main, and taught
Why now the mighty Mass of Waters swells
Resistless, heaving on the broken Rocks,
And the full River turning; till again
The Tide revertive, unattracted, leaves
A Yellow Waste of idle Sands behind.
THEN breaking hence, he took his ardent Flight
Through the blue Infinite; and every Star,
Which the clear Concave of a Winter's Night
Pours on the Eye, or Astronomic Tube,
Far-stretching, snatches from the dark Abyss,
Or such as farther in successive Skies
To Fancy only shine, at his Approach
Blazed into Suns. The enlivening Center each
Of an harmonious System. All, combined,
And ruled unerring by that single Power
Which draws the Stone projected to the Ground.
O UNPROFUSE Magnificence divine!
O Wisdom truly perfect! thus to call
From a few Causes such a Scheme of Things,
Effects so various, beautiful, and great,
An Universe complete! And O Beloved
Of Heaven! into the Almighty's Councils thus
To be admitted, and allowed to scan
The rising, moving, wide-establish'd Frame.
HE too, unbaffled in his Aim, pursued
The Comet to' the long Elliptic Curve,
As round innumerous Worlds he wound his Way,
Till to the Forehead of the Evening-Sky
Reduced, the blazing Wonder glares anew.
THE Heavens are all his own. Finished by him
The fair Discovery lies; and every Eye
May lay the useless Telescope aside,
Unless it be to hold the great Acquests
By Newton made: Who from the wild Domain
Of the Des Carts.
French Dreamer rescued Heaven and Earth.
All Europe stood appalled; but found it vain
To keep at Odds with Demonstration strong,
And lingering to resist the awakening Force
Of Truth. At once their pleasing Visions fled,
With the gay Shadows of the Morning mixed,
When Newton rose, our Philosophic Sun.
THE Aerial Flow of Sound was known to Him,
From whence it first in wavy Circles breaks,
Till the touched Organ takes the Message in.
Nor could the darting Beam, of Speed immense,
Escape his swift Pursuit, and measuring Glance.
Even Light it self, which every thing displays,
Shone undiscovered, till his brighter Mind
Untwisted all the shining Robe of Day;
And from the whitening, undistinguished Blaze,
Collecting every Ray into his Kind,
To the charmed Eye educ'd the gorgeous Train
Of Parent-Colours. First the flaming Red
Sprung vivid forth; the tawny Orange next;
And then delicious Yellow; by whose Side
Fell the kind Beams of all-refreshing Green.
Then the pure Blue that swells autumnal Skies
Aetherial played; and then of sadder Hue
Emerg^d the deepen'd Indico, as when
The heavy-skirted Evening droops with Frost.
While the last Gleanings of refracted Light
Died in the fainting Violetaway.
These, when the Clouds distill the rosy Shower,
Shine out distinct adown the watery Bow,
While over our Heads the dewy Vision bends
Delightful, melting on the Fields beneath.
Myriads of mingling Dies from these result,
And Myriads still remain, the exhaustless Source
Of Beauty ever-flushing, ever-new!
DID ever Poet image ought so fair,
Dreaming in whispering Groves, by the hoarse Brook!
Or Prophet, to whose Rapture Heaven descends!
Even now the setting Sun and liveri'd Clouds,
Seen, Greenwich, from thy lovely Heights, declare
How just, how beauteous the refractive Law.
THE noiseless Tide of Time, all bearing down
To vast Eternity's unbounded Sea
Where the green Islands of the Happy shine,
He backward stem'd alone; and to it is Source
Ascending, marked it is Periods, and hung out
His Lights at equal Distances to guide
Historian, wilder'd on his darksome Way.
BUT who can number up his Labors? Who
His high Discoveries sing? When but a few
Of the deep-studying Race can stretch their Minds
To image what he knew, as clear as they
The Truths self-evident with which he linked
His far thest Views. For is there ought that is great.
That Is wonderful, and hard, deterring Search?
That was his Prize! and worthy of his Toil
Unfailing, Who the lonely Monarch reigned
Of Science thin-inhabited below.
WHAT Wonder then that his Devotion swelled
Responsive to his Knowledge! For could he,
Whose piercing mental Eye diffusive saw
The finished University of Things,
In all its Order, Magnitude, and Parts,
Forbear incessant to adore that Power
Who fills, sustains, and actuates the whole.
SAY, ye who best can tell, ye happy few,
Who saw him in the softest Lights of Life,
All unwithheld, indulging to his Friends
The vast, unborrow'd Treasures of his Mind.
O speak the wondrous Man! how mild, how calm,
How greatly humble, how divinely good,
How firm, established on eternal Truth,
Pure as his Faith, and active as his Love,
Fervent in doing well, with every Nerve
Still pressing on, forgetful of the Past,
And panting for Perfection! far above
Those little Cares, and visionary Joys
That so befool the fond, impassioned Heart
Of over-cheated, ever-trusting Man.
AND say, ye downward, gloomy-minded Tribe,
Ye who, unconscious of those nobler Flights
That reach impatient at immortal Life,
Against the Prime, indearing Privilege
Of Being dare contend, say can a Soul
Of such extensive, deep, tremendous Powers*
Enlarging still, be but a finer Breath
Of Spirits dancing through their Tubes awhile*
And then for ever lost in vacant Air?
BUT hark! Methinks I hear a warning Voice,
Solemn as when some awful Change is come,
Sound through the World -- "He Is dead. -- The Measure's full,
"And I resign my Charge. -- Ye mouldering Stones
That build the towering Pyramid, the proud
Triumphal Arch, the Monument effaced
By ruthless Ruin, and whatever supports
The worshipped Name of gray Antiquity,
Down to the Dust! What Grandeur can ye boast
While Newton lifts his Column to the Skies
Beyond the Waste of Time! -- Let no weak Drop
Be shed for him. The Beauty in her Bloom
Cut off, the Joyous Youth, and darling Child,
These are the Tombs that claim the tender Tear,
And Elegiac Song, but Newton calls
For other Notes of Gratulation high,
That now he wanders through those endless Worlds
He here so well descried, and wondering talks,
And Hymns their Author with his glad Compeers.
O BRITAIN'S Boast! Whether with Angels thou
Sit in dread Discourse, or Fellow Saints
Who joy to see the Honor of their Kind;
Or whether mounted on Cherubic Wing,
Thy swift Career is with the whirling Spheres,
Comparing Things with Things, in Rapture lost
And lowly Adoration for that Light
So plenteous ray'd into thy Mind below,
From Light himself, O look with Pity down
On Humankind, a frail, erroncous Race!
Assuage the Madness of a frantic World!
But chiefly over thy Country's Cause preside,
And be her Genius called! Her Council steer,
Correct her Manners, and inspire her Youth!
For, guilty as she is, she brought thee forth,
And glorious in thy Name; she points thee out
To all her Sons, and bids them eye thy Star:
While in Expectance of the arrousing Blast,
When Time shall be no more, thy sacred Dust
Sleeps with her Kings, and dignifies the Scene.
THE END.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Richard Norris, at the Corner of Crane-lane in
Essex-street.
MRs. Haywood's Novels, 2 Vol. Bp. Burnet's Travels. Mrs. Manly's Novels.
Johnson's History of the Pirates. The Complete Seedsman. The Prude a Novel,
three Parts. The Country Housewife and Lady's Director. The Life of General
Monk.
PLAYS and POEMS.
The Recruiting Officer. The Orphan. The Busy Body. Tunbridge Walks. Love for
Love. The Careless Husband. Hibernia freed. The Beaux Stratagem. Humors of the
Army. Fair Quaker of Deal. Hasty wedding. The Poetaster. Calpe or Gibraltar a
Poem. Pig and Mastiff. The Art of being easy.

