AN ESSAY ON SOMNAMBULISM, OR SLEEP-WALKING, PRODUCED BY Animal Electricity and
Magnetism.

AS WELL AS BY SYMPATHY, etc.

AN ESSAY ON SOMNAMBULISM, OR SLEEP-WALKING, PRODUCED BY Animal Electricity and
Magnetism.

AS WELL AS BY SYMPATHY, etc.

AS PERFORMED BY THE REV. JOHN BELL, MEMBER OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL HARMONIC
SOCIETY OF FRANCE, FELLOW CORRESPONDENT TO THE MUSEUM AT PARIS, AND THE ONLY
PERSON AUTHORIZED TO TEACH AND PRACTICE THAT SCIENCE IN GREAT BRITAIN, IRELAND,
etc.

The soul's dark cottage battered and decayed,
Lets in new light through chinks which time has made.
WALLER. DUBLIN: Printed for, and to be had of the AUTHOR, also of Mr. BUTLER,
No. 2, Grafton-street, and other Booksellers.

MDCCLXXXVIII.

[Price One British Shilling.]

PREFACE.
I WAS not initiated in the Science of Animal Electricity and Magnetism, until
I was introduced to the Augustine Convent at Paris, where the celebrated Father
Harvier, attended daily a great number of patients, of every rank and degree,
gratis. I was instantly struck with astonishment by the Magnetical
Somnambulism, which I saw constantly performing before crowds of the most
respectable and dignified clergy, who assembled every day, all of whom were
thoroughly convinced that the art was practiced by men of integrity, without
any deceit. I was soon after presented to the famous and learned Marquis de
Puysegur, and to several other noblemen, distinguished in the literary world;
who took delight in showing those phenomena to their friends. Scarcely had I
acquired a knowledge of the science, before I put one person in a state of
Somnambulism, which made me exult on the success, as my tutors in the science
were present, viz. General Meziere, Chevalier Justamond, who encouraged me to
persevere. I na little time I produced numbers, who in that state answered my
questions; found out the diseases of the people present, and prescribed
infallible cures for them; they are called Malade Medecin, concerning whom I
shall speak at large, in my Treatise upon the Doctrine of Somnambulism.

That it is practicable to put certain persons into this state, need be no
longer doubted, without touching or giving them any previous operation. It is a
matter strange to persons unacquainted with the science, but that will vanish
when the mind receives instruction and becomes familiar with it; in order to
the attainment of which, I invite all persons of every sex, rank and degree, to
come, see, and judge for themselves. I shall soon publish one Number on Theory,
and another on the Practice.

AN ESSAY ON THE PROBABILITIES OF Electrical and Magnetical Somnambules, OR
SLEEP-WALKERS.
OF all the novelties which are created by Animal Electricity and Magnetism,
Somnambulism is, doubtless, the most interesting.

By Somnambulism is meant that peculiar state when the senses are suspended
between sleeping and waking; partaking of both, and is also productive of many
phoenomena, which each are strangers to.

The patient being reduced to a state of Somnambulism, without touching him, is
deaf to all that is near him: Motionless amidst the greatest motions; he seems
separated from nature, as if it were, to communicate only with the person who
put him into that state.

The latter, owing to Magnetisation alone, has an intimate analogy with the
patient; by the means of a kind of an invisible leaver, he causes him to move
at his pleasure; and such is the power of his influence, that he not only makes
himself understood by speaking and signs, but even by the very thought itself;
and what is still more extraordinary, the Magnetiser can, by a single contract,
communicate his faculty to other people; and from that moment there is a
constant communication between the Somnambule and his new director.

The patient being put into a state of Somnambulism, there is in him a want of
organization, which breaks the equilibrium of his senses; so that some
experience an extreme degradation, whilst others acquire a prodigious degree of
subtlety.

Thus, some have their hearing entirely lost or weakened, and their sight
becomes prodigiously penetrating. In others, the privation, both of sight and
hearing, are amply compensated by an incredible delicacy both of feeling and
taste.

And in many, a sixth sense appears to declare itself by an extreme extent of
the intellectual faculty, far superior to the common altitude of the human mind.

In a word, the phoenomena, attending on the state of Somnambulism, daily offer
new subjects of astonishment, even to those who ought to be more fami^iar with
them.

It remains to consider, whether those pretended phoenomena are such as is
propagated; or, whether on the contrary, they are nothing the but illusions,
kept up by the imposition of some ill designed persons and the credulity of
others.

For it is well known that the human mind, naturally bent toward every thing
mavelous, eagerly seizes on whatever is flattering to the taste; and there
are exalted geniusses to be found that employ both their head and talents to
realize mere chimeras.

Among the persons who have been witnesses to the singularities attending on
Somnambulism, some struck with astonishment and admiration, have given full
credit to its influence, and look on it as an irresistible proof of Animal
Electricity and Magnetism.

Others, though convinced of the reality of its phoenomena, are yet incredulous
with regard to the cause which produced them. They had rather suppose in this
affair some secret spring productive of illusions; and, though incapable of
comprehending those means of intelligence, they have, nevertheless, supposed
their existence; alleging, for example, those cunning tricks which a subtle
philosopher Caumus and Pinetty.
made use to astonish all Paris and London during many years.

As to the Physicians, most of them have disdained to prove witnesses to the
essects of Magnetical Somnambulism, under the pretense that it was sufficient
for them such a phoenomenon was contrary to those notions consecrated in physic
and physiology; they have considered those pretended marvels as mere chimeras
unworthy a serious examination.

There was even a learned body who went so far as to forbid their members to
entertain the least doubt on the subject, and expelled from their society
whomsoever have given themselves up to the study of this new doctrine A decree
of the faculty of Paris, 1784, which is the same as they did for inoculation,
which is now adopted by them.
.

However, on the other hand, Magnetical Somnambulism becomes daily more and
more consistent; a great number of people remarkable for their learning,
probity, found judgment and sagacity, certify beyond a doubt the reality of
Magnetical Somnambulism; and that contradiction of respectable authorities on
both sides, leave the public in suspense, who, to take a decisive part in the
contest, impatiently wait until the matter is more fully investigated.

The following impartial reflections may serve to fix the opinion of impartial
people on the subject of Magnetical Somnambulism. To treat this object with the
more success, I think it is necessary to divide the discussion into three parts.

The first point to be considered, is to know, in fact, the public have been
witnesses of phoenomena of some importance, well deserving to excite their
curiosity, and of which the cause ought to be investigated.

Secondly, suppose the effects spoken of deserved to be enquired into, it is
proper to examine whether they cannot reasonably be suspected of artifice.

Lastly, admitting it impossible to find out the artifice, it will remain to
examine whether they are contrary to common notions already received.

1st. Are Magnetical Somnambulism phoenomena of such an importance as to
deserve the curiosity of both the public and the learned?

The object of this question is, I believe, very plain and obvious; I mean to
say, that previously to our being at the trouble of examining whether
Magnetical Somnambulism be an illusion, or reality, we must establish, that,
there exist, at least seemingly, some singularities which concern both the
public good and the improvement of learning.

Many people, however, might have a right to doubt it, because they had no
occasion to know the truth of the assertion. They have a right to require to be
satisfied, previously to the discussion of the two following propositions, viz.
"That there are either at Paris, Dublin, etc. in the provinces, or any where
else some people, who being naturally forced into a state of sleep, really
offer the phoenomena which we are about to examine."

For if it was not certain that such a scene is not to be met with somewhere,
it would be a loss of time to enquire into its principle.

It is, therefore, a preliminary obligation for any body else, to establish
well the existence of Magnetical Somnambulism, whether right or wrong.

This point was, for a long time, a matter of general incredulity. They plainly
denied that there were any such individuals existing any where, and the very
discourse held on the subject, was looked upon merely as a fable to amuse the
public.

The first writing, which treated of Magnetical Somnambulists, was, if I am not
mistaken, a letter from Mr. Cloquet, paymaster of rents at Soissons, who,
relating what he had seen at Buzanci's treatment, by the Marquis de Puysegur,
insinuated something which seemed to characterise Magnetical Somnambulism.

Since that letter, a gentleman, whose candor is above all suspicion, has
consigned in a writing, which is, in every respect, interesting, several
phoenomena he had observed in Puzo^nei's treatment, still more wonderful than
those which (...). Cloquet had given a sketch of.

The perusal of this performance having inspired some people of the first rank
with the eager desire of being witnesses to a like Somnambulism, the author of
the above found an opportunity of gratifying their curiosity at Paris, in the
winter of 1785.

More than 5000 people have been at liberty to see those phoenomena true or
false, of which notice was taken both in the national and foreign prints. These
Somnambules underwent repeated trials, which all met with more or less success.

Besides those mentioned, many more were made at Paris, or in some other
provinces. This Somnambulism example having induced the Magnetisers to adhere
to that part of Magnetism, they applied themselves to it with more zeal, as it
seemed to be a sure way toward a remedy. Thus, the concern of Magnetism, and
that of the patient, uniting both to prescribe that mode of proceeding, it is
become the common object of all Magnetisers attempts, and in all treatment they
gloried in showing some patient more or less improved.

It is evident then that there exists many individuals struck with a seeming
Somnambulism; and I begin to establish the question, in order to proceed
methodically, after settling constant and notorious facts, which might lead to
infallible consequences.

It is then certain and indisputable, that there are pretended Somnambules,
which offer wonderful phoenomena to the spectators, as compensative
gratification for excited curiosity.

Now, the question is to know what opinion we should form concerning those
Somnambules; if it be not a feigned state, by the means of which they endeavor
to impose on the credulity of those whom they are surrounded by.

2d. How far are Magnetical Somnambules to be believed?

Among the Somnambules I am here speaking of, I do not include that multitude
of persons of both sexes among the common people, who are to be seen at some
impostors, and may reasonably be suspected to perform Somnambulism, through
imitation, or to make themselves interesting, and others who are paid for it.

It is a misfortune, constantly attending on good things, that they can never
be preserved in their native purity, nor escape that mixture which malice or
cupidity seldom fail to blend with them.

Those who, either through prejudice or interest, endeavor to display the
discovery, take care to examine it on that side only, which seems to convey an
idea of apparent quackery, and never fail to present it to the public in that
view.

But those who sincerely wish for information, pay but little regard to such a
consideration, and throwing aside quackery and exaggerations, carefully
penetrate as far as the principle itself. Thus, a botanist, desirous of
procuring the fruit of an Almond to be enabled to discern its true quality, is
not discouraged by the putrid flesh which surrounds it; but cheerfully lopping
all nauseous superfluities, he finds at last the fruit which is to be the rule
of his study.

In that manner should every unbiassed man act, who sincerely seeks for truth,
without having interest or design to destroy it.

Let us contemptuously disregard those suspicious apparent Somnambules, and
attend to those who, by their civil existence, their character, manner, etc.
are above suspicion; and in whom, besides Somnambulism, the science is
portrayed, and brought to the highest degree of perfection.

I think those ought to be chosen among patients, in whom Somnambulism appears
to be in a higher degree of perfection, and such a caution is, in my opinion,
very material.

In fact, the more imperfect the Somnambule is, the easier it is to impose; if
he badly answers your signs, and follows your motions in an untoward and ill
contrived manner, he apologizes by saying he is not, as yet, arrived to a state
of perfect Somnambulism, and the observator, who really conceives that such a
state must have its degrees, is puzzled, on account of his not knowing whether
the bad success he has experienced is to be attributed to the untowardness of
the Somnambule, or the imperfection of his state.

But when I fix on a Somnambule, recommended as a perfect being, it is evident
that this task is very painful. In that case, there is neither excuse nor
pretense; the observator is easy, and Somnambulism has a trial to undergo,
which is to prove either his shame or his triumph.

Such perfect Somnambules have not been wanting last year in France; and among
those who have tried my experiments, there is one with whom I staid more than
half an hour, and who has before me, and at my pleasure, executed such motions
as I prescribed him.

Being at my own disposal, without witnesses and contradictors, left nothing
untried to discover the fraud, if there had been in the case; but the swiftness
of his evolutions, the precision of his movements, a vast number of facts which
it would be too tedious to relate, disconcerted all my attempts.

Many other experiments, which had their intended effects with regard to other
perfect Somnambules, have all given me the same satisfaction.

There are at Paris, and in the provinces, more than 600 persons, who are in
the same predicament.

Therefore, to overthrow the consequences resulting from such experiments,
there is no other resource left, but to persevere in giving out that it was a
deceitful trick on the part of Somnambules.

But such a supposition carries with it the greatest difficulties, and is
accompanied by improbabilities still more shocking than Somnambulism itself.

To admit that the phoenomena in question are the result of imposition, two
things are absolutely required: 1st. Somnambules must have an intention of
deceiving. 2d. They must be endowed with an address to do it. But, we must
first confess, that, among those who have already been or are daily inspired
with Somnambulism, there are many above all kind of suspicion. They are
respectable women of family, men of stability and known integrity, people of a
plain and simple turn of mind, children, etc. in whom we cannot reasonably
suppose to exist any design or interest, to seign a like situation.


Should they be led by any faction, or the intention of performing Animal
Electricity and Magnetism with any seeming reality? But most of them have no
concern at all, as to the fortune of Animal Electricity and Magnetism; nay,
many of them had no notion of it at the moment they were confirming Magnetical
sleep.

Shall it be said, that, it is possible some of those individuals are
encouraged by the partisans of Animal Electricity and Magnetism, and that they
are but a mere instrument in the hands of the latter to favor the success of
that system?

But, for what purpose should the partisans of Animal Electricity and Magnetism
have recourse to so capricious a stratagem? The supposition, would, at the
best, be admissible, if Somnambulism had originally been announced as a
necessary effect of Magnetism; so that they must have been forced to resign
Animal Electricity and Magnetism, had they been deprived of the resource
tendered them by Somnambulism: but the case is very different.

Animal Electricity and Magnetism was originally announced without the
attendance of Somnambulism. This singularity is a later discovery, the result
of the habitual practice of Magnetism. Even now, there are many Magnetisers who
do not look on Somnambulism as being an effential part of the science, but only
as an accessory which may indifferently be united to, or separated from
Magnetism.

From whence it plainly follows, that if the partisans of Animal Electricity
and Magnetism were in want of a resource to impose on the public, surely they
must have been very destitute of penetration to embrace so strange a maneuver,
which carried with it a prodigious complication of springs, and insuperable
difficulties in its execution.

And, that had it been an artifice, it would have been sufficient to deter
every honest man from entering or associating with it.

They must then, have only dealt with, and chosen people of profligate manners,
and of the worst sort, to invest them with that confidence, at the risk of
seeing it betrayed, and made public on the very next day. That is not all, they
must have found in those individuals an extraordinary address to act so
difficult a part, and deceive the experiments of an enlightened and incredulous
people, at whose tribunal appearance must be made.

Had things been thus transacted, Somnambulism could not have lasted long, and
far from gaining credit, time would soon have discovered the illusion and
deceit, by the difficulty of finding actors capable of perpetrating the
imposture. But the contrary has happened; every day Somnambulism gets new
partisans, and the credit which it constantly obtains, partisans, and the
credit which it constantly obtains, plainly contradicts every idea of deceit.

Patients are daily seen in that condition, in the very bosom of their family,
under the inspection of their nearest relations, and those who are the most
interested to verify their situation.

Who could believe that such patients, surrounded with the very horrors of
death and most painful sufferings, could dissemble for the sole interest of
Magnetism? Their relations, fathers, husbands, wives, children -- are they then
concerned in the piot?

Shall it be said that their illness is feigned? It is another supposition no
less admissible; for besides that it is no easy matter to feign a malignant
fever, a fiuxion, dropsy, and other diseases of that kind, there are some so
well averred that no man in his senses could possibly doubt their existence.

Another consideration may be added here, that is, even in supposing that a
healthy man could long act the part of a sick man, or the patient take upon
himself to act the Somnambule; and, that people hidden before the curtain,
should preside over this mummery, I maintain would be impossible in the
execution; and whatever address may be supposed to exist on both sides, the
deceit must soon be discovered, and, indeed, after a few moments, I would defy
the most nimble buffoon, the most expert of all, and the most inured to bodily
exercises, to assect Somnambulism before scientific persons, or execute any
such thing as is observed among the Somnambules, whom I am now treating of. I
defy any one to remain during eight or ten hours, having his eyes shut, and his
eyelids quite close together, without one eyelid separating from the other
during that period of time. Such a perseverance seems to be much above the
reach of human power and patience. Who is the man that could remain five or six
hours in a motionless attitude, without showing the least sensation of what
passes round him, inaccessible to every emotion, and all the sudden and
unforeseen shocks of noise which his attention shall, at periods, be gratified
with? Who is that histrion, subtle enough to imitate, with his eyes closely
shut, the different signs which will be presented him, and describe the lines
which will be traced with a justness and acuteness, that no interval shall be
found between the order and the compliance. A few experiments of this nature
would be sufficient to discourage the most consummate Saltimbank, and make him
give up his undertaking in two hours time.

Now, when we see the same effects constantly repeated, without the least
effort, and multiplied in the presence of a prodigious number of persons of all
sexes, age, and rank, we must necessarily acknowledge that they act through a
natural impulse, without any assistance of art: for it is well known that
nature can easily perfect what is impossible for art to execute.

Thus, physical probabilities concur with moral ones to establish the reality
of Magnetical Somnambulism. -- Somnambulism cannot be rejected, without
supposing it a deceit too palpable to credit, and in whatever manner you act,
it will prove a phoenomenon, either moral or physical; and I confess the latter
is, by far, easier to be conceived than the former; for a natural phoenomenon,
after all, is susceptible of an explanation; and the plot of a deceit, without
interest and motive whatever, is no less complicated in its execution.

A number of people are to be found over whom such considerations, striking as
they are, can never triumph. Whatever difficulties may be encountered with, to
make those stratagems succeed, they suppose that such an address takes place,
because they say in the things hurtful to reason, the authority of testimonies
is of no value.

That evident impossibility is a kind of resentment on that part of the public
who have not seen the phoenomena in question, and inspire those who have
actually seen them, with a certain degree of diffidence.

If a common fact, consistent with the usual proceedings of nature, was only
agitated, it is in general confessed, that there would be more proofs than
requisite to establish its credit, on bare words and without having seen it.
But as to a phoenomenon, so little consistent with nature, which is neither
explicable nor conceivable, and overthrows all received notions, we are
authorized not only to refuse the testimony of others, but even that of our own
senses. It is after such an absurdity that many learned have been heard to say,
"That they would not believe it if they saw it."

Now then it remains to consider, whether Magnetical Somnambulism, and the
several phoenomena usually attending on it, are as inconceivable as those
gentlemen would insinuate.

Are Magnetical Somnambulisms phoenomena repugnant to the order of nature?

Physicians by affecting the greatest incredulity in Magnetical Somnambulism,
under the mere pretense that such phoenomenon is inconceivable, give no
satisfactory account of their disbelief, because, that the identical difficulty
they attempt to condemn, cannot withhold the victorious testimonies which
militate in favor of Magnetical Somnambulism.

The difficulty of conceiving a phoenomenon, by no mean destroys its reality;
we are surrounded with a multitude of natural marvels, which no one has the
least doubt about, though they are incomprehensible; for it is evident that
nature has prescribed certain limits which are inaccessible to human conception.

But, perhaps, some will say, "From such a mode of reasoning it will then
follow that we must give credit to every absurdity we hear, and believe the
greatest oddities in the world; and those who will exact such a belief, shall
only have to invoke the great power of nature, and the immense extent of its
resources.

That way of reasoning would deprive arts of their rules, and banish principles
from sciences, in order to make room for rash assertions, etc. our learning,
instead of being susceptible of improvement and enlargement, would fall again
into chaos and confusion."

But that objection is, by no means applicable; for the question is not to
admit a phoenomenon under the single consideration that nothing is impossible
to nature; it is, on the contrary, recommended that we should submit to the
trial of contradiction, experience, and reasoning itself, a fact certified by a
multitude of persons of every denomination who have been eye witnesses to the
same.

Thus, till now, presumption is still in favor of Somnambulism, since being
grounded on the strongest considerations; those considerations are neither
overcome nor weakened by the pretended improbability urged against them.

But what will then be said, if we were to discover that Magnetical
Somnambulism? far from offering to the learned an inconceivable phoenomenon,
incompatible with all notions admitted both in physic and physiology; it is on
the contrary, a natural consequence from those very principles, accessory of
the common notions with which it is blended and united in a very natural manner?

It is what I propose to demonstrate, and in order to proceed methodically, I
shall first successively examine the two articles of Magnetical Somnambulism,
which have excited the reclamation of the doctors. 1st. The facility of putting
a patient in a state of Somnambulism. 2d. The phoenomena usually attending on
such a state.

Article 1st. The Somnambulism's communication is in the order of the already
admitted notions in physiology.

It is something remarkable to hear many learned men obstinately declare it to
be absolutely impossible for a patient to be put in a state of Somnambulism, by
any art whatever, when we consider that it is one of the favorite maxims in
physic, that by the assistance of art all natural revolutions may be imitated
in the human body. It is on that principle that the partisans of inoculation
chiefly relied to defend both the practice and success of that proceeding.

All physicians agree, that the art of inoculation consists in preventing by a
factitious indisposition in an individual, the real one which nature would have
soon or late occasioned.

It is still according to the same maxim, that physicians attempt to inoculate
many kinds of distempers, either to prevent them, or to make them serve as a
counterpoise to other diseases; and now the art of curing one disease by
another, is esteemed in medicine as a complete knowledge of physic.

The case being thus, and since it is acknowledged that nature is liable to
imitation, by introducing such or such maladies in the human body, is it so
strange, so inconceivable, that Somnambulism should also be transmissible
through artificial means?

Somnambulism is by physicians entitled a disease; it is, therefore, in that
quality as in the number of those revolutions which the power of art
introduces. To that effect one more step is to be made in the career of
distempers, and inoculation: but such an extension, far from contradicting the
principles of physiology, only confirms them.

It is expected, however, that physicians will oppose this similitude, in
establishing some differences and distinctions; nay, they will perhaps forget
themselves so far as to take Somnambulism from the number of maladies, by
disowning their nosologists in this point.

That no pretense may be left for subterfuge, we shall be intent on maladies
and discourse solely on sleep.

Neither doctor, or natural philosophers, have as yet been able to explain the
cause of sleep, nor the manner by which it is produced.

Whatever has been said on the subject offers nothing but mere conjectures, the
work of imagination; one thing only is certain, that sleep comes on whenever
the body is in any disposition to produce it, and is put in such a disposition
by the assistance of art. Such is the evident effect of narcotical piants, as
opium, cockle-weed, etc.

Now; if there exists any art whatever conducive to put the body in a
disposition to sleep, it is not surprising at all that Magnetical proceedings
might also produce the same effect. Will they say that there is a want of
similitude, because in Magnetical proceedings neither decoctions nor infusions
are employed to create sleep? I answer that there is no need at all to have
recourse either to drink, or any drug whatever, to convert any one into the
state of sleep; the same effect is produced by a multitude of other means and
proceedings; and it is even one of the particular singularities inherent to
sleep, that it is produced by an infinitely different number of causes, and
which are all contrary to each other. For example, if excessive heat causes
sleep, it is also the effect of excessive cold. Soldiers have been seen to fall
asleep on the snow, and even perish with cold in that state of drowsiness.

If gentle and soft friction invite to sleep, exquisite sufferings act the
same; which is proved by the example of those wretches, who being put to the
torture, fall asleep at the very moment of their most poignant sufferings.
Others are said to have yielded to sleep while lying on the wheel.

Gemelli Carreri relates, that when in China he traveled with a Tartar, who,
every night, was obliged, in order to procure sleep, to desire somebody to beat
him for a while on the belly, as they do a drum.

Hunger and the excess of food, fatigue and rest, and cool and warm
refreshments likewise produce sleep; it is also the result of the increase or
decrease of the blood running in the brain. It is the effect of bathing as well
as bleeding: fever, which causes insomnies, likewise creates drowsiness; a
small difference in a dose of wine awakes or makes a man sleep. It would be an
endless task to sum up all the various cause, which induce man to that state;
whether because these causes produce themselves, or that many different
combinations are likewise capable of producing sleep, or because,
notwithstanding the seeming disserence, the result is the same.

But in both cases, one must confess that the means productive of sleep are
infinite, and that we are unable to determine on their nature or quality. This
consideration alone, doubtless, suffices to destroy the improbability of a
sleep arising from Magnetical feelings.

Those means, which at first seem so extraordinary, appear far less mavelous
when compared with others still more strange, concerning which, not a doubt can
be reasonably entertained, such as those as have just now been mentioned.

The efficacy of simply touching to create sleep, seems besides to be a
necessary consequence, flowing from the general law of nature, that has
designed the five senses to serve as an introduction to sleep. If touching
could not produce it, it would be the only one deprived of that faculty.

Indeed, if we consider but a moment the four other senses, hearing, smelling,
sight and taste, we shall perceive in them as many conductors to sleep. No one
can deny but the ear is a very efficacious way to sleep: the noise of a mill,
the murmur of a river, the spouting of waters, a lingering conversation, the
monotony of the voice, a slow and melancholy music organize the body, more or
less quickly, in a manner fit for sleep.

The smell of aromatical and narcotical plants occasions a drowsiness, and some
chemists have in their works given the receipt of somniserous essences, which
criminals have often abused.

Taste is another introductor to sleep, and medicine establishes those means in
administering narcotical physics, either to procure sleep to those who
naturally want it, or to render patients insensible to painful operations.

It is to be observed that most of the drugs productive of that effect, display
their power, before they have been decomposed in the stomach, even before they
are come down to it, merely by contract of the palate, or tongue; which plainly
shows that such an effect belongs to the taste.

Lastly, the sight is no less productive of sleep. Too bright a light, by
inviting the eyelids to shut themselves, insensibly encourages and causes sleep.

It is also well known how far reading contributes to invite sleep. Many people
never resist that impression, and even they make, upon occasion, a sure
resource of it.

And it must not be said that sleep is then the effect of tediousenss, since
sleep is, for the most part, involuntary, and comes on in the middle of the
interesting lectures we could hear other people deliver, without feeling the
least propensity to sleep.

It is then, doubtless, sight, which in that case, serves as a vehicle to sleep.

From whence it follows, that it is clearly proved that sleep comes in through
five of our senses; now that observation naturally leads us to think that
touching is endowed with the like power, because the constant uniformity which
is visible in all nature does not permit us to suppose that sense alone would
have been made particular exception of.

Moreover, a little reflection will show that the above faculty ought to belong
to feeling more specially than any other sense. It is agreed, that, generally
speaking, there is but one sense, which is feeling, and that the other four are
only a modification of it.

The sight, hearing, taste and smelling produce no sensation in us but through
the means of contact. The light, sound, savours and smell only act upon us by
shaking the nervous tufts of our organs, and such a shaking can never be
obtained before they have touched them. This is an uncontrovertible truth.

Feeling, properly so called, only differs from other senses by its great
energy and vast extent. The other senses occupy but a very narrow place, and
are only susceptible of a local impression; but feeling, by experience, is
spread over all the surface of the body: and this is sufficient to show that
feeling ought to enjoy, in a superior manner, the faculty of opening a way to
sleep: for being the chief sense, and almost to say the principal one, from
which the others are derived, how is it possible to conceive it deprived of a
power which the subordinate senses are endowed with?

Lastly, it is so certain that sleep is introduced by feeling, that the faculty
prescribe opium taken in topic and applied to the skin, which really produces
sleep. The touching We may even recollect on that account manner of touching
made use of in India, by which means slaves procure sleep to their masters;
which is called Masser.
of an organized body may then, without any marvel, occasion sleep; and it is
the point I want to clear and answer fully the objection of improbability. But,
will they say, supposing the Magnetisers to be endowed with the power of
producing sleep, there is not the like reason to lead us to think that they can
likewise produce Somnambulism?

The answer is plain and obvious.

Somnambulism itself is nothing else but a mere modification of sleep. There is
no Somnambulism without sleep.

We might even add that there is no sleep without Somnambulism, and that every
man is born a Somnambule.

This proposition, which is apparently a paradox, is no less incontestable,
provided too much extent is not allowed to the meaning of the word Somnambule.
Perfect sleep is a time of rest, during which, sensations are reduced to a
state of concentration, which discovers seemingly no other sign of life but
respiration and the motion of the pulse.

Imperfect sleep is that in which such a concentration is not complete, so that
it still leaves some access for the interior display of organs. We seldom enjoy
the former kind of sleep.

In a sound and natural sleep, the person whose mental powers were absolutely
in suspension, preserves still a more or less active portion of watching, by
the means of which diverse motions are performed: Who does not know that during
our very sleep, the body is agitated and combines itself, in order to choose an
advantageous position; the hand is continually assisting the incommoded parts,
property adjusts the bed clothes, destroys insects, etc. All these things
doubtless belong to the watch, and of course constitute a kind of Somnambulism.
For we must comprehend, under that denomation, the exercise of every motion
whatever occasioned during sleep.

Most men carry still farther the effects of Somnambulism, since there are many
people who speak during their sleep, make different gestures, hold discourses
of a considerable length, address those whom they think themselves in company
with, get out of their beds and in again, etc.

So common are such practices, that they are to be met with almost in every
house.

Whenever Somnambulism acquires a more extended penetration, it produces
wonderful things.

Then the sleeper is seen writing, working, opening the doors, lighting the
fire, ascending the tops of houses, swimming over rivers, currying horses, etc.

But you must observe that Somnambulism in this last degree is no new state,
nor contrary to the nature of sleep; it is singly a reinforced modification of
a state natural to man and inherent to sleep; which naturally leads us back to
the following proposition, "That every sleeper is in the commencement of
Somnambulism;" that whoever gives himself up to sleep is in a near state of
Somnambulism, which is to display itself in a more or less striking manner,
according to the physical constitution of the sleeper, the nature of his
distemper, and especially according to the different causes which have
produced, preceded, or accompanied his sleep.

From thence it is easily conceived that a sick person already inclined, either
by his constitution, or the nature of his disease, to a Somnambulism in its
juvenile state, is liable to receive with Magnetical sleep a greater
determination toward Somnambulism.

Is such a state useful in curing the disease? Such a question is not now to be
discussed. Whether Somnambulism be salutary or not, it is however certain, that
it is a dependent on sleep, introduces itself with it, and ought consequently
to predominate more or less.

There are people whose Magnetical drowsiness is attended by no very striking
signs of Somnambulism, who are only drowsy, and possess a continual somnolency
not insensible to any thing that may be transacted round them.

Others are only drowsy for a short time, then awake, and fall again into a
state of drowsiness. The nuances are infinitely multiplied from the very
sleepers, who display nothing but what usually appears in a common sleep to
those who perform the wonderful things so much spoken of in all the world.

It is those very marvels that remain to be explained: for having fully proved
that Magnetical proceedings, or a contact graduate and combined according to
principles, can produce sleep and then Somnambulism; I shall be obliged to
reduce Magnetism to that rule which is already known. But the Animal
Magnetism's adversaries will not fail to object that Magnetical Somnambulism
extends still further, by offering the spectacle of a Somnambulism of which we
can have no idea, is attended with phoenomena never before observed in natural
Somnambulism.

Such is the last allegation, which serves as a refuge to the incredulity of
those who never saw any Somnambule, and the disbelief of them who had it in
their power to see and be convinced. But it will, in a moment, be deemed
surprising, to observe that Magnetical Somnambulism has nothing superior to the
effects of natural Somnambulism; that, on the contrary, it exactly agrees with
the phoenomena of the latter state, which is nothing more than a more
discovery; and such a consideration might be, by many people, looked on as a
victorious argument in favor of Magnetical Somnambulism.

ARTICLE 2d. Magnetical Somnambulism's phoenomena, far from being
inconceivable, are, on the contrary, a necessary consequence of Somnambulism.

According to the virulent declamations thrown out against Magnetical
Somnambulism, representing it as a base and deceitful trick, unworthy the least
credit, it would be natural to suppose that such Phoenomena are without
precedents, and only concentered in Magnetical Somnambulism.

Such is the prevalent opinion with the public, even among the sensible part,
composed of people no less remarkable for their virtues than their learning;
but who, not being familiar with physiological phoenomena, must necessarily
have adopted that way of thinking.

Those very persons might, perhaps, have had a different opinion on that
matter, if it had been in their power to know that there exists in nature a
state absolutely the same as that given out merely as a feigned one; and, that,
the same phoenomena, which are, in the one, pronounced to be chimerical,
impossible and inadmissible, are, in the other looked upon as incontestable,
and certainly beyond any manner of doubt.

Such a circumstance makes a material difference; for they only refuse to give
credit to the phoenomena of Magnetical Somnambulism, because reason will hardly
admit of facts by which it is hurt, and which are grounded on no precedents.

But if credit ought to be given to natural Somnambulism, the same must be
granted to Magnetical Somnambulism; for, it being proved that those phoenomena
really exist with regard to one of these two species of Somnambulism, it would
be to contend for contradiction's sake only, to deny the possibility of their
existence in the other.

We must then necessarily know that there exists a state of natural
Somnambulism, acknowledged and awarded by the faculty, during which, sleepers
execute things impossible for any man awake to perform.

Without entering into a detail of the singularities already observed on that
account, I shall only mention the phoenomena perfectly analogous to those
observed among Magnetical Somnambules.

Nothing is more common than to see Magnetical Somnambules walk, go toward
other people, speak to them, come back to their places, take a book, paper,
ink, in a word, perform a prodigious number of things which supports the idea
of perfect reason and sense.

Thus is the public justly incensed when any one presumes to insinuate, that
such persons are not in a state of sleep, and that they neither see nor hear
through their usual organs.

Some of those Somnambules having their eyes open, the spectators naturally
thought they must make use of them, and the faculty themselves have ridiculed
this pretension, "That people could see without the use of their eyes, and
having their eyes open, could not make use of them."

But, unhappily for them, such a pusillanimous observation loses much of its
strength, when we consider that even our learned have consecrated that very
truth in one of their books, calculated to teach posterity the actual state of
our knowledge. Open the Encyclopedia, and at the word Somnambule, you may read
literally thus:

"People struck with Somnambulism, given up to a sound sleep, walk, talk, write
and perform many other actions as if they were awake; nay, even sometimes with
more discernment and exactitude;" and afterward,

"Some Somnambules have their eyes open, but do not seem to make use of them."

The learned consequently (for Encyclopedia is their work) are convinced
plainly to believe, with Magnetisers, that it is possible to see without the
eyes assistance, and that though the Somnambule has his eyes open he does not
make use of them.

Magnetisers have often observed, that Magnetical Somnambulism displayed in
many patients a wonderful subtlety of sight, so far that they discern very
delicate objects through a bandage, or any other intermediate body.

That proposition, has not been more savourably received.

They have laughed at the story of a Magnetical Somnambule, who had written
when his eyes were covered with a head-band, and corrected words, erased
letters to substitute others, upon or near them.

They said such a thing should be seen before it was believed; and even after
having really seen it, they suspected the good faith of the Somnambule, so
extraordinary the event appeared.

But how could they forget that our learned had beforehand prepared us to
believe those phoenomena, by presenting them to us, as a necessary consequence
from Somnambulism? "If you follow a Somnambule," says the already quoted
article, "it is casy to perceive, that his sleep, so much alike when he is
awake, offers a prodigious number of wonderful things. Truth itself becomes
incredible."

The author despising the exaggerations often attending on such stories, has
only referred "to notorious sacts, of which the truth cannot even be suspected."

It is after such a preamble, that he relates the story of a young Somnambule,
a clergyman and fellow-student of the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. That Prelate
used to go every night in that Somnambule's room, as soon as he thought him
asleep. He remarked in particular, that the person got up, took paper, composed
and wrote sermons. When he had finished a page, he read it over, and repeated
it very loud; if, adds the author, that action was done without the eyes
assistance, can it be called reading?

The same clergyman with his eyes shut composed music; a cane served him as a
compass; with it he traced, at an equal distance, the five necessary lines, put
in their stead the Key, Flat, Sharp, then marked the notes which he had first
done all white; and when he had finished, in taking up again every one of them,
he made them black, such as should have been so, and wrote the words under.

It once happened that he wrote them with too large characters, so that they
were not placed directly under their corresponding notes; he soon perceived his
mistake (without the assistance of his eyes) and in order to mend it, he erased
what he had just done, by passing his hand over, and made again lower that
musical line with all possible precision.

The Prelate to whom we are indebted for these particulars, having placed
himself before the Somnambule to be enabled to follow him with more
application, observed a very wonderful circumstance: The young clergyman having
put in some place of his sermon the words, this divine infant, perceived in
reading it over again, that these two words made a disagreeable dissonance, and
substituted the epithet adorable instead of the word divine; but that
alteration left an imperfection in the phrase, because there was ce adorable
enfant; the Somnambule perceiving the error, very dexterously added a t after
ce, so that it was written cet adorable enfant.

Whenever the Somnambule read or corrected what he had written, he took care to
put his fingers on the characters that were not yet dry; he made a digression
to avoid rubbing them: a caution he never took when the letters were not wet.

It is to be observed that the Prelate, in order positively to know whether he
made any use of his eyes, had imagined to put a paste-board under his nose; and
it was in that position he continued the operations abovementioned.

There are facts certified in the Encyclopedia itself, equally notorious, and
above all contradiction; which is no doubt sufficient evidently to prove one of
these two points, viz. That the Somnambule can see without the assistance of
his eyes, or that his sight, exalted to an inconceivable degree, pierces
through his eyelids and the opacous bodies.

The memorials of the Academy of Sciences, and the physicians works, contain a
prodigious number of observations which plainly consirm the facts hinted, and
others of the same nature. When an explanation of such a singularity is
demanded, they all unite to acknowledge the weakness of our comprehension, and
exhort us to admire what we cannot understand. What Encyclopedia says on that
account well deserves to be related.

"How is it possible," says he, "that a man buried in a sound sleep should
hear, walk, write, or see; in a word, enjoy the exercise of all his senses, and
perform diverse motions with exactness and precision?

We must freely own there exist many things, the reason of which we are quite
ignorant of, and which we cannot penetrate into, nature has its mysteries."

The author of the same article, after having mentioned many surprising facts,
which he asserts as incontestable, makes a judicious sarcasm against those
pretenders in point of learning, who believe nothing but what they can account
for, and will not for a moment suppose, that there are in nature mysteries
impenetrable to their sagacity. Let us now observe the dangerous effect of
prejudice.

Whenever the same phoenomena are repeated by a Magnetical Somnambule, it is
insinuated those concerned in them use deceit and fraud, because such
phoenomena are contrary to all received notions, and have no instance in nature
to authorize a belief. But how is it possible to reconcile such a reclamation
with the various examples which have just now been quoted?

One of the chief objections against Magnetical Somnambulism is, because it
offers both contradictions and inconsequences with that pretended subtlety of
both sense and feeling.

It has been observed that those Somnambules, so discerning with regard to
certain objects, were altogether insensible of others.

For example, such a man who dexterously crosses a row of chairs without
touching them, and writes or reads through a paste-board, shall not see whether
there are people round him; he will take one thing for another, and shall not
perceive the fraud imposed on him.

But natural Somnambulism's example fully answers that objection, and the
supposed contradiction, far from being an argument against the reality of
Magnetical Somnambulism, better establishes its veracity, since it presents a
degree of resemblance more consistent with natural Somnambulism.

The natural Somnambule of Encyclopedia well saw his paper and letter through a
paste-board, and yet could not see the very person who was placed before him,
busily employed in examining his motions.

The same Somnambule imagining he was walking on the border of a river, thought
he saw a child falling into the water; immediately he precipitates himself on
his bed, making the same gestures as a man swimming, and after having much
moved and fatigued himself, finding the bed clothes in a heap, he supposes it
the child, takes it up with one hand and employs the other to return, by
swimming on shore; when he thinks himself there, he lays himself on the bed,
and rattles his teeth, conveying the appearance of a man quite wet and cold; he
then asks the bystanders for a glass of brandy to warm him, and as they were
giving him a glass of water he perceived the trick, and insisted on having
brandy, which, as soon as he has got, he eagerly drinks it, declaring, at the
same time that it does him good.

By that example it is evident that the Somnambule, though deceived by the
sight and feeling, had his taste sound and perfect, since he well knew how to
discern brandy from water.

Such contradictions being hereditary to natural Somnambules, they should not
be looked upon as extraordinary in Magnetical Somnambules, since both
Somnambulisms are derived from a secret disposition which, likely, are very
near the same.

I had many times an opportunity of seeing myself such contradictions, which at
first produced in me a great diffidence, because I was not then well acquainted
with the singularities inherent to Somnambulism.

Two years ago being at the Marquis of Puysegur's I ordered a Magnetical
Somnambule, whom he showed me, to take a hat which was lying on a table in the
closet, and to go and put it on the head of some of the company.

I did not express my command in speaking, but only by sign in tracing the line
which I gave him to run over, and at the end of which was the hat. The
Somnambule, (whose eyes were covered with a paste-board) got up from his chair,
follows the direction shown with my finger, advances toward the table, and
takes the hat amidst many other objects that were on the same table; but before
he presented it to the person, thinks it civil to brush it; and though there
was no brush on the table, he makes the gesture of a man who took one; and
holding the hat with his left hand, he brushes it on the three sides with his
right hand, puts the imaginary brush on the table, and carries the hat, placing
it on the head of the indicated person. Though that Somnambule had perfectly
fulfilled my intention, I conceived some diffidence on account of the
circumstance of the brush.

How could that man whose sight and feeling were seeming perfectly sound, not
perceive there was no brush on the table! How could he mistake himself so far
as to think he had one in his hand?

From thence I inferred, that having committed so gross and palpable a mistake,
he was far from having the feeling and sight as subtle as they would give to
understand, and that there was in the rest of his operations more address than
fair practice.

The Magnetical Somnambules, whom I have since seen, have all given me reason
for the same dissidence, by displaying contradictions of the same nature.

But how great was my surprise, when, after having consulted the works,
memorials, and relations made on Somnambulism, I observed the same
contradictions in natural Somnambules, and that they were also an object of
great astonishment to spectators; so what at first seemed to me a motive of
suspicion, became at last a new reasen to ground my persuasion. "What is
inconceivable," says Pigatti, an Italian doctor, (speaking of Somnambules) "is,
that, on certain occasions their sensations are very subtle, whilst, on others
they are very impenetrable."

I saw in the same work an infinite number of other Somnambules, which, after
having at first shown a wonderful subtlety of sensation, seemed the next moment
to be entirely deprived of them, by taking one thing for another, and
confounding the objects which could claim no analogy to one another.

The most astonishing Somnambule that ever existed, is, without a doubt, John
Baptist Negretti, who was both followed and closely examined during five
successive nights, by a vast number of people. Mr. Pigatti, who was present at
those experiments, has given an exact and precise account of them, which is
found in the Journal Etranger, March 1756.

That Somnambule, having his eyes closely shut, took snuff out of a box
presented to him, came down many large stairs without groping, hesitation, or
even touching, turning and stopping precisely where he should; placed bottles,
and glasses on a small pillar which was in his way; went and came into the
different apartments without running against any thing; stopped at doors which
were shut, and opened them; went to draw water from the well, took out of the
buffet napkins, towels, knives, and generally all that was necessary for a
table; and performed many other things no less surprising, too tedious to
relate, but which all suppose an exquisite subtlety in the sight and feeling.

Next to this, are to be seen mistakes, which quite contradict that perfection
in the senses. After having looked for a light, the Somnambule imagines he has
a candle in his hand; without perceiving his error, he thinks he holds a
candlestick whilst it is only a bottle; he helps himself with that pretended
light by carrying it along with him; he draws near the chimney to dry a wet
towel, though there is no fire; he salutes the ladies and gentlemen in whose
company he imagines himself, whilst there is not any such person as he supposes
among those that surround him. He goes to the public-house, thinking to be
accompanied by a comrade, though there is not such a thing; he pours him some
drink, addresses him, and drinks his health, without perceiving he is alone.
When busy in eating a sallad, they take his plate away to substitute a dish of
cabbages imbibed with vinegar and cinnamon, unknown to him: they take the last
dish to serve him with a plate of raw fritters, and he continues to eat; they
give him water instead of wine; at last somebody jestingly rubbing his legs
with a cane, he takes it for the beating of a dog which he supposes near him;
he falls in a passion against the dog, looks for him, endeavors to beat him,
goes and ferches a whip to chastise him: after having returned with the whip,
some of the spectators throw a muff at him; then imagining to lay hold of the
dog, he beats him with violenc.

There are contradictions to explain that which struck me so forcibly in the
Somnambule of the Marquis of Puysegur, on account of the imaginary brush he
thought he held.

There are an infinite number of other examples which might be quoted, and
which all tend fully to manifest that inequality of sensations and sensibility
observed in the several Somnambules.

The Library of Medicine, vol. x. p. 477. mentions a Somnambule, who getting
out of his bed at midnight, went to a neighboring decayed house, and of which
but little remained, saving the bare walls and some pieces of timber.

The Somnambule mounted to the very top of that house, and jumped from one beam
to another, though there was under a profound abyss.

In the same work is related a story of another Somnambule, who, in the night
time dressed himself, put on his boots and spurs, and then leapt on the border
of a window five stories high, which he mistook for his horse, and in that
posture agitated himself with all the gestures of a cavalier who rides post.

In the two last instances, there is an inexplicable association of the most
perfect penetration, with the greatest stupidity. How a man, who had address
enough to climb up the top of a decayed house, and run on a few weak beams,
could not perceive the profound abyss which lay under? and how he, who dressed
himself as a cavalier, put on his boots and spurs, could take the border of a
window for a horse? To explain those singularities, the principle of
Somnambulism, and that want of organization which at that moment took place in
the individual, should be better known.

That induces Mr. Rehelini, a colebrated Italian doctor, author of many
observations on Somnambulism, to say, that we ought to content ourselves with
admiring the wonderful effects of that condition which Providence seems to
present to the learned, in order to confound them, and show the narrow compass
of human understanding.

The apparent immobility and insensibility of Magnetical Somnambules, for
whatever is said or transacted round them, is also experienced in natural
Somnambules. He whom I just now spoken of, was quite insensible to the approach
of a candle, which almost burnt his eyebrows.

There is likewise in the memorials of the Academy of Sciences for the year
1742, p. 409, a dissertation of Mr. de Savage de in Croix on the Somnambulism
of a girl from Montpellier, exhibiting a striking instance of the like
insensibility:

"On the 5th of April, 1757," says the author, "when I visited the hospital at
ten o'clock in the morning I found the patient in bed.

She began to speak with a degree of vivacity and wit, which she never showed
when out of that situation; she changed now and then her discourse, and seemed
to address many of her friends who were assembling round her bed; what she
uttered seemed to bear some analogy with what she said in her attack of the
preceding day, wherein having verbatim related an instruction, in the way of a
catechism, which she heard the day before, she made some moral and malicious
applications to the people of the house, whom she took care to mention under
fictitious names, accompanying the whole with gestures and motions of her eyes,
which she had opened: in a word, with all the circumstances attending on the
action done the day before; and yet she was in a sound sleep. It was a very
awarded circumstance which no one doubted; but foreseeing I could never presume
to ascertain it, unless I had previously rendered some formal experiments, I
made them on her senses and organs whilst she was in the act of speaking.

At first, as the girl had her eyes open, I thought that dissimulation, if
there was any in the case, could not withstand a slap on the hand, or one given
suddenly on the face; but this repeated experiment did not either occasion the
least grimace or interrupt her discourse: I had recourse to another experiment,
which was to put briskly my singer to her eye, and to approach a lighted wax
candle near enough to burn her eyebrows; but she did not even twinkle on the
occasion.

Secondly, a hidden person made suddenly a great noise in the girl's ear, and
repeated it with a stone against the bolster of her bed: at any other time she
would have been trembling with fear, but then she appeared perfectly
indifferent and insensible to what passed.

Thirdly, I poured in her eyes and mouth some brandy, and spirit of ammoniac
salt; I even applied on the horny tuniele of the eye, a seather's beard, then
the end of my finger, but in vain: Snuff blown up her nose, pricking with pins,
and fingers extorted, had on her the same effect as on a mere machine; she
never gave the least sign of sentiment."

The 10th vol. of the Medicine's library contains a memorial on a female
Somnambule, who was insensible to the blows she received with a whip on her
naked shoulders; one day they rubbed her back with honey, and in that condition
exposed her in the sun's meridian to the stinging of bees, which occasioned a
great number of blisters on her body, without showing the least motion in the
world: but when she awoke, she seemed to suffer acute pain in the affected
places, and bitterly complained of the hard usage and treament she had met with.

Concerning that woman, I observed an interesting circumstance, which is
perfectly conformable to what is now past; it is because the learned and other
professors of medicine declined to go and verify the case of that sleeper,
under the pretense that such a state contradicted the notions already received
in physiology.

The author of the relation thus expresses himself:

"The long stay that woman made at Louvain, gave every body an opportunity of
seeing her, and scrupulously examining so extraordinary a phoenomenon. The
ancient professors in that town looking on the event as a fable and mere
chimera, could not take on themselves to increase the number of spectators. It
is thus," continues the author, "that prejudice shuts the eyes of men of the
first merit, and hinders them from studying and applying themselves to the
discovery of several things which might prove very beneficial to monkind --
Lastly," says the same author, t"he young professors and other physicians in
the town, looking on this phoenomenon with an indifferent eye, seriously
enquired into the case of that sleeper, and after a thorough investigation, had
every reason to be fully satisfied."

It will not be amiss to observe, that the author of this page is "a physician
of the faculty at Paris."

Such an insensibility is true, for the noise which surrounds Magnetical
Somnambules does not extend to every kind of noise, since the Somnambule
preserves the faculty of hearing those persons with whom he is in analogy and
harmony.

This distinction has been deemed, by many, a mere extravagance, as it is not
conceivable how, in the same individual, a faculty could exist which lies open
only to such a person, and open for all others.

But that wonder, repugnant to reason, finds its analogy in natural
Somnambulism, wherein Somnambules are seen, who, though deaf to thundering
noises and the voice of several people, yet hear very well, and without the
least dissiculty, another person with whom they keep an exclusive relation,
such as patients, nurses, or others they have more specially approached, as a
husband, wife, or children.

These last have not only the faculty of making themselves heard to a natural
Somnambule, but even that of making him speak.

This singularity is so very remarkable, that many authors complain that
certain persons avail themselves of such a circumstance to catch the secret of
the Somnambule. It is thus that begins the article Somnambule in Encyclopedia:

"Somnambules are frequently seen," says that article, "who, in their sleep
relate whatever happened to them in the course of the day; some answer the
questions made them, and hold very consistent discourses. There are persons so
uncandid as to avail themselves of the condition they are in, "to catch in
spite of them," certain secrets which it is much their interest to conceal."

Observe well these expressions "to catch in spite of them." This plainly shows
the acknowledgment of the formal influence which certain persons awake can
exercise over the Somnambule.

But by similar means and proceedings can such a relation take place betwixt
the person awake and the Somnambule? Magnetisers pretend, and insinuate, that
the relation is established by mere contact, by touching the Somnambule in the
extremities of his fingers or pulse; or by touching, in a like manner, any body
else in relation with him; which presents a kind of resemblance with the
loadstone.

They have not failed in exclaiming against this affertion; and when experience
has seemingly convinced them of the truth, a deceit has been suspected on the
part of the pretended Somnambule.

But to what purpose then have they recourse to that pretended reluctance, to
admit of so ancient an effect, and long since well known in the world? A
proverbial expression traces us this opinion of old; for, it is well known that
most proverbs are but scattered remains of forgotten truths.

But as many persons might refuse such authority, we must furnish them with a
testimony given out by the learned themselves, and which fully evinces the
efficacy of the proceeding taught Magnetisers.

Henry de Steers, a Flemish physician, certifies, that he knew from his infancy
a Somnambule, who, during his sleep, performed wonderful things; among others,
he relates that in the middle of night, and during a most profound sleep, he
went and took his child out of the cradle where he lay, and then walked over
all the house, holding the infant in his arms: his wife, who had accidentally
perceived this, afraid of the child, followed her husband step by step, with an
intent of assisting them if occasion required: or, as she had observed that, in
that situation her husband answered all questions she put to him, and took the
freedom of interrogating him on the most secret things she wanted to know.

The author observes that the husband was in daytime very circumspect with his
wife on his personal affairs, which he affected to conceal from her: but being
interrogated by his wife, when in a state of Somnambulism, and "holding his
child in his arms," then, said the author, he plainly answered all the
questions put to him by his wife, who followed him, and "then had nothing
concealed from her," and was often surprised to hear her speaking of things
which he thought were only known to himself. Vide Library of Medicine, vol. x.
p. 463.

The te^timony of a respectable author serves first to confirm that influence
spoken of in the Encyclopedia, which lies in certain persons "to oblige the
Somnambule to speak and declare those very thing which it was his interest to
conceal." It also confirms the possibility of finding out a means to establish
a relation between the person who is awake and the Somnambule.

The Somnambule we were speaking of, was in no relation with his wife, from the
moment he entered into the state of Somnambulism; to establish a communication,
it was necessary he should have had his child in his arms. Lastly, observe,
that the circumstance of having his child in his arms, perfectly answers the
proceedings pointed out by the Magnetisers. The child, placed in his father's
arms, and on the other hand supported by the hands of a trembling mother,
established a relation between the husband and wife, through the communication
and analogy he bore to each of them.

Thus, that astonishing marvel, against which physicians have so much inveighed
as a mere chimera, a fable, a fraud, has, long ago, been attested by one of
their authors, who confirms in the most precise manner what Magnetisers had
advanced. -- It is easy to perceive that Magnetisers, by putting themselves in
harmony with Magnetical Somnambules, do nothing else but procure themselves
that intimate analogy, of which instances are to be found in natural
Somnambulism, and into the principle of which they have neglected to enquire.

As to the faculty the Magnetisers pretend to be endowed with, to direct the
Somnambule's motions, by making him go from the right to the left, forwards and
backwards, in a direct and circulary line, after the manner of a loadstone, in
the presence of the Carupeas, that faculty is a necessary consequence of what
has been said before; and after having admitted and acknowledged the power "of
making a Somnambule speak against his will, and declare those very things he
has a material interest to conceal," ought not have any great objection to
admit the faculty of directing his motions.

An instance quoted by Kaau Boerhaave, will afford an idea of the astonishing
subjection which a man is liable to with regard to another person with whom he
is in affinity.

That author speaks of a man who had the whim quickly to enter in affinity with
all those whom he approached.

After a few moments, his body acquired a sympathetical flexibility which
forced him to imitate, with precision and rapidity, all the motions he
perceived in the person he had fixed upon, as, "to move his eyes, lips, hands,
arms, feet, to cover or uncover his head, walk, etc." and all this in spite of
himself, and through the influence of a superior force, which prompted his
sympathetical organs to act with those of others.

It was an amusement to hold his hands in the presence of any one who happened
to make gestures, and then he was extremely agitated, continually struggling
and endeavoring to set himself at liberty.

If any kind of sensation was required of him, he was in those moments
constrained, and answered he had the head or heart ach.

Boerhaave adds, that in consequence of that odd kind of organization, he was
obliged to go in the street with his eyes closely shut, and that he was a very
troublesome member of society.

The example of such a sympathetical sensibility may serve to diminish the
improbability, of the assinity and relation which Animal Magnetism seems to
establish between the patient and the Magnetiser; and it is on that account
that Kaau Boerhaave certifies, that a man can, by the means of such an affinity
well establisned, become "a god for another man," by making him subservient to
his will and pleasure. Sic home homini Deus est.

We read in the work of the Marquis de Puysegur, entitled, "Memorials to serve
for establishing Animal Magnetism," many observations of that nature,
concerning the patients he had put in a state of Somnambulism.

The very first person, whom, to his great astonishment he put in that state,
was in such perfect affinity with him, that he exactly followed all his
motions, and loudly repeated every air which the Marquis internally sang.

That singularity which at first appeared incredible, acquires (notwithstanding
the high character of the author) a new degree of authority from the above
related examples, and the testimony of the authors, who have spoken of that
kind of sympathetical influence.

The proceedings made use of by Magnetisers find likewise their analogy and
authority in natural Somnambulism.

Mr. ^i^a^ti was used to put an end to the state of Somnambulism, by lightly
passing the extremity of his fingers ever the Somnamoule's eve-lids. It is
exactly the method used by Magnetisers. We read in the work of the Marquis de
Puys^^ur, that he made, at his pleasure, a patient change his conversation, by
deterring him from sad objects, and presenting him with some of a more
consoling nature.

"When I thought," says the author, that his thoughts "ought to affect him in a
disagreeable manner, I stopped him, and tried to inspire him with agreeable
ones, which I easily did, and then saw him perfectly pleased, and imagining
that he either aimed at some prize, or danced at an entertainment. I united
those thoughts in him, and by that means forced him to move himself in his
chair, as in imitation of dancing, etc."

Those phoenomena have been suspected, though they are fully confirmed by the
Encyclopedia in the article of Somnambule.

The author of that article, relating a number of wonderful facts in the
Somnambule mentioned, continues thus:

"The same Somnambule has furnished us with a great number of extraordinary
facts: but those which I have related are sufficient to my purpose. I shall
therefore only add, that whenever I had a mind to make him change his
discourse, leave off sad and disagreeable subjects, it was sufficient to pass a
pen over his lip, and immediately he discussed quite different question."

That conformity betwixt both recitals, serves to confirm the one by the other;
and if, after that double testimony, any one is authorized to persevere in his
surprise, he is still more so to persevere in his suspicions.

To conclude, the last proof of resemblance between the two kinds of
Somnambules is, that of waking: they both entirely forget whatever they have
either done or said during their sleep.

I could, by extending such discussion, account for the communication of
thoughts, without the assistance of either voice or signs, it being easy to
show that this singularity is not more difficult to be understood than the
other; that it has been suspected by ancient physiologists; and even mentioned
in modern works of celebrated physicians; but I think it useless to expatiate
any further on a phoenomenon with which the different minds are not as yet
grown familiar enough.

My object is, by no means, to write a complete work wherein the subject of
Magnetical Somnambulism should be fully discussed. I only meant to elucidate
some ideas, and to encourage judicious persons to investigate the matter,
excite their reflections, and provoke in them a philosophical doubt, and
lastly, to encourage them to contribute, by investigation and observations, to
resolve a problem no less interesting to mankind than conducive to the
improvement of Sciences.

In my next I shall give an Essay on the Theory of Somnambulism.

FINIS.

