BRITANNIA.

A POEM.

-- Et tantas audetis tollere Moles?
Quos Ego -- sed motos praestat componere Fluctus.
Post mihi non simili Poena commissa luetis.
Maturate Fugam, Regique haec dicite vestro:
Non illi Imperium Pelagi, Saevumque Tridentem,
Sed mihi sort datum. --
VIRG.

LONDON: Printed for T. WARNER, at the Black-Boy, in Paternoster Row. M. DCC
XXIX.

BRITANNIA.
A POEM.
AS on the Sea-beat Shore BRITANNIA sat,
Of her degenerate Sons, the faded Fame,
Deep in her anxious Heart revolving sad:
Bare was her throbbing Bosom to the Gale,
That hoarse, and hollow, from the bleak Surge blew;
Loose flowed her Tresses; Rent her Azure Robe
Hung over the Deep: from her Majestic Brow
She tore the Laurel, and she tore the Bay.
Nor ceased the copious Grief to bathe her Cheek;
Nor ceased her Sobs to murmur to the Main.
Peace discontented nigh, departing, stretched
Her Dove-like Wings. And War, though greatly roused,
Yet mourned his fettered Hands. While thus the Queen
Of Nations spoke; and what she said the Muse
Recorded, faithful, in unbidden Verse.
EVEN not you Sail, that, from the Sky-mixt Wave,
Dawns on the Sight, and wafts the ROYAL YOUTH,
A Freight of future Glory to my Shore;
Even not the flattering View of golden Days,
And rising Periods yet of bright Renown,
Beneath the PARENTS, and their endless Line
Through late revolving Time, can sooth my Rage;
While, unchastis'd, the insulting Spaniard dares
Infest the trading Flood, full of vain War
Despise my Navies, and my Merchants seize;
As, trusting to false Peace, they fearless roam
The World of Waters wild, made, by the Toil,
And liberal Blood of glorious Ages, mine:
Nor bursts my sleeping Thunder on their Head.
Whence this unwonted Patience? This weak Doubt?
This tame Beseeching of rejected Peace?
This meek Forbearance? This unnative Fear,
To generous Britons never known before?
And sailed my Fleets for this; on Indian Tides
To float, unactive, with the veering Winds?
The Mockery of War! While foul Disease,
And Sloth distempered, swept off burning Crowds,
For Action ardent; and amid the Deep,
Inglorious, sunk Them in a watery Grave.
There now they lie beneath the rolling Flood,
Far from their Friends, and Country unaveng'd;
And back the weeping War-Ship comes again,
Dispirited, and thin; her Sons ashamed
Thus idly to review their native Shore;
With not one Glory sparkling in their Eye,
One Triumph on their Tongue. A Passenger,
The violated Merchant comes along;
That far-sought Wealth, for which the noxious Gale
He drew, and sweat beneath Equator Suns,
By lawless Force detained; a Force that soon
Would melt away, and every Spoil resign,
Were once the British Lion heard to roar.
Whence is it that the proud Iberian thus,
In their own well-asserted Element,
Dares rouse to Wrath the Masters of the Main?
Who told him, that the big, incumbent War
Would not, ere this, have rolled his trembling Ports
In smoaky Ruin? And his guilty Stores,
Won by the Ravage of a butchered World,
Yet unatton'd, sunk in the swallowing Deep,
Or led the glittering Prize into the Thames?
THERE was a Time (Oh let my languid Sons
Resume their Spirit at the rouzing Thought!)
When all the Pride of Spain, in one dread Fleet,
Swelled over the labring Surge; like a whole Heaven
Of Clouds, wide-roll'd before the boundless Breeze.
Gaily the splendid Armament along
Exultant plowed, reflecting a red Gleam,
As sunk the Sun, over all the flaming Vast;
Tall, gorgeous, and elate; drunk with the Dream
Of easy Conquest; while their bloated War,
Stretched out from Sky to Sky, the gathered Force
Of Ages held in its capacious Womb.
But soon, regardless of the cumbrous Pomp,
My dauntless Britons came, a gloomy Few,
With Tempest black, the goodly Scene deformed,
And laid their Glory waste. The Bolts of Fate
Resistless thundered through their yielding Sides;
Fierce over their Beauty blazed the lurid Flame;
And seized in horrid Grasp, or shattered wide,
Amid the mighty Waters, deep they sunk.
Then too from every Promontory chill,
Rank Fen, and Cavern where the wild Wave works,
I swept confederate Winds, and swelled a Storm.
Round the glad Isle, snatched by the vengeful Blast,
The scattered Remnants drove; on the blind Shelve,
And pointed Rock, that marks the indented Shore,
Relentless dashed, where loud the Northern Main
Howls through the fractur'd Caledonian Isles.
SUCH were the Dawnings of my liquid Reign;
But since how vast it grew, how absolute,
Even in those troubled Times, when dreadful Blake
Awed angry Nations with the British Name,
Let every humbled State, let Europe say,
Sustained, and balanced, by my Naval Arm.
Ah what must these immortal Spirits think
Of your poor Shifts? These, for their Country's Good,
Who faced the blackest Danger, knew no Fear,
No mean Submission, but commanded Peace.
Ah how with Indignation must they burn?
(If ought, but Joy, can touch aetherial Breasts)
With Shame? With Grief? To see their feeble Sons
Shrink from that Empire over the conquered Seas,
For which their Wisdom planned, their Councils glowed,
And their Veins bled through many a toiling Age.
OH first of human Blessings! and Supreme!
Fair PEACE! how lovely, how delightful thou!
By whose wide Tie, the kindred Sons of Men,
Like Brothers live, in Amity combined,
And unsuspicious Faith; while honest Toil
Gives every Joy, and to those Joys a Right,
Which idle, barbarous Rapine but usurps.
Pure is thy Reign; when, unaccurs'd by Blood,
Naught, save the Sweetness of indulgent Showers,
Trickling distills into the vernant Glebe;
Instead of mangled Carcasses, sad-seen,
When the blythe Sheaves lie scattered over the Field;
When only shining Shares, the crooked Knife,
And Hooks imprint the vegetable Wound;
When the Land blushes with the Rose alone,
The falling Fruitage, and the bleeding Vine.
Oh, PEACE! thou Source, and Soul of social Life;
Beneath whose calm, inspiring Influence,
Science his Views inlarges, Art refines,
And swelling Commerce opens all her Ports;
Blessed be the Man divine, who gives us Thee!
Who bids the Trumpet hush his horrid Clang,
Nor blow the giddy Nations into Rage;
Who sheaths the murdrous Blade; the deadly Gun
Into the well-pil'd Armoury returns;
And, every Vigor, from the Work of Death,
To grateful Industry converting, makes
The City flourish, and the Country smile.
Unviolated, Him the Virgin sings;
And Him the smiling Mother to her Train.
Of Him the Shepherd, in the peaceful Dale,
Chaunts; and, the Treasures of his Labor sure,
The Husbandman of Him, as at the Plow,
Or Team, He toils. With Him the Sailor sooths,
Beneath the trembling Moon, the Midnight Wave;
And the full City, warm, from Street to Street,
And Shop to Shop, responsive, rings of Him.
Nor joys one Land alone; his Praise extends
Far as the Sun rolls the diffusive Day;
Far as the Breeze can bear the Gifts of Peace,
Till all the happy Nations catch the Song.
WHAT would not, PEACE! the Patriot bear for Thee?
What painful Patience? What incessant Care?
What mixed Anxiety? What sleepless Toil?
Even from the rash Protected what Reproach?
For He thy Value knows; thy Friendship He
To human Nature: but the better thou,
The richer of Delight, sometimes the more
Inevitable WAR; when ruffian Force
Awakes the Fury of an injured State:
Then the good easy Man, whom Reason rules;
Who, while unhurt, knew nor Offense, nor Harm,
Roused by bold Insult, and injurious Rage,
With sharp, and sudden Check, the astonished Sons
Of Violence confounds; firm as his Cause,
His bolder Heart; in awful Justice clad;
His Eyes effulging a peculiar Fire:
And, as he charges through the prostrate War,
His keen Arm teaches faithless Men, no more
To dare the sacred Vengeance of the Just.
AND what, my thoughtless Sons, should fire you more,
Than when your well-earn'd Empire of the Deep
The least beginning Injury receives?
What better Cause can call your Lightning forth?
Your Thunder wake? Your dearest Life demand?
What better Cause, than when your Country sees
The sly Destruction at her Vitals aimed?
For Oh it much imports you, it is your All,
To keep your Trade entire, entire the Force,
And Honor of your Fleets; over that to watch,
Even with a Hand severe, and jealous Eye.
In Intercourse be gentle, generous, just,
By Wisdom polished, and of Manners fair;
But on the Sea be terrible, untamed,
Inconquerable still: let none escape,
Who shall but aim to touch your Glory there.
Is there the Man, into the Lyon's Den
Who dares intrude, to snatch his Young away?
And is a Briton seized? and seized beneath
The slumbring Terrors of a British Fleet?
Then ardent rise! Oh great in Vengeance rise!
O'erturn the Proud, teach Rapine to restore:
And as you ride sublimely round the World,
Make every Vessel stoop, make every State
At once their Welfare and their Duty know.
This is your Glory; this your Wisdom; this
The native Power for which you were designed
By Fate, when Fate designed the firmest State,
That ever was seated on the subject Sea;
A State, alone, where LIBERTY should live,
In these late Times, this Evening of Mankind,
When Carthage, Rome, and Athens are no more,
The World almost in slavish Sloth dissolved.
For this, these Rocks around your Coast were thrown;
For this, your Oaks, peculiar hardened, shoot
Strong into sturdy Growth; for this, your Hearts
Swell with a sullen Courage, growing still
As Danger grows; and Strength, and Toil for this
Are liberal poured over all the fervent Land.
Then cherish this, this unexpensive Power,
Undangerous to the Public, ever prompt,
By lavish Nature thrust into your Hand:
And, unencumber'd with the Bulk immense
Of Conquest, whence huge Empires rose, and fell,
Self-crush'd, extend your Reign from Shore to Shore,
Wherever the Wind your high Behests can blow,
And fix it deep on this eternal Base.
For should the sliding Fabric once give Way,
And on the Brink of Fate begin to nod,
Soon blackened quite, and past Recovery broke,
It gathers Ruin as it rowls along,
Steep-rushing down to that devouring Gulf,
Where many a mighty Empire buried lies.
And should the big redundant Flood of Trade,
In which ten thousand thousand Labors join
Their several Currents, 'till the boundless Tide
Rolls in a radiant Torrent over the Land,
Fruitful of Wealth, Magnificence, and Joy,
Of every glittering Harvest, richer far
Than what Hesperian Gardens bore of old;
Should this bright Stream, the least inflected, point
Its Course another Way, over other Lands
The various Treasure would resistless pour,
Never to be won again; its ancient Tract
Left a vile Channel, desolate, and dead,
With all around a miserable Waste.
Not Egypt, were, her better Heaven, the Nile
Turned in the Pride of Flow; when over his Rocks,
And roaring Cataracts, beyond the Reach
Of dizzy Vision pil'd, in one wide Flash
An Ethiopian Deluge foams amain;
(Whence wondering Fable traced him from the Sky)
Even not that Prime of Earth, where Harvests crowd
On untilled Harvests, all the teeming Year,
If of the fat, overflowing Culture robbed,
Were then a more uncomfortable Wild,
Steril, and void; than of her Trade deprived,
Britons, your boasted Isle: Her Princes sunk;
Her high-built Honor moulder'd to the Dust;
Unnerv'd her Force; her Spirit vanished quite;
With rapid Wing her Riches fled away;
Her unfrequented Ports alone the Sign
Of what she was; her Merchants scattered wide;
Her hollow Shops shut up; and in her Streets,
Her Fields, Woods, Markets, Villages, and Roads,
The cheerful Voice of Labor heard no more.
OH let not then waste Luxury impair
That manly Soul of Toil, which strings your Nerves,
And your own proper Happiness creates!
Oh let not the soft, penetrating Plague
Creep on the freeborn Mind! And working there,
With the sharp Tooth of many a new-form'd Want,
Endless, and idle all, eat out the Heart
Of LIBERTY; the high Conception blast;
The noble Sentiment, the impatient Scorn
Of base Subjection, and the swelling Wish
For general Good, erazing from the Mind:
While naught save narrow Selfishness succeeds,
And low Design, the gloomy Passions all
Let loose, and reigning in the rankled Breast.
Induced at last, by scarce-perceiv'd Degrees,
Sapping the very Frame of Government,
And Life, a total Dissolution comes:
Sloth, Ignorance, Dejection, Flattery, Fear,
Oppression raging over the Waste He makes;
The human Being almost quite extinct;
And the whole State in broad Corruption sinks.
Oh shun that Gulf! That gaping Ruin shun!
And countless Ages roll it far away
From you, ye Heaven-belov'd! May LIBERTY,
The Light of Life! the Sun of human kind!
Whence Heroes, Bards, and Patriots borrow Flame,
Even where the keen depressive North descends,
Still spread, exalt, and actuate your Powers!
While slavish Southern Climates beam in vain.
And may a public Spirit from the THRONE,
Where every Virtue sits, go copious forth
Wide over the Land! the finer Arts inspire;
Make thoughtful Science raise his pensive Head,
Blow the fresh Bay, bid Industry rejoice,
And the rough Sons of lowest Labor smile.
As when, profuse of Spring, the loosened West
Lifts up the pining Year, and luscious breathes
Youth, Life, and Love, and Beauty over the World.
BUT haste We from these melancholy Shores,
Nor to deaf Winds, and Waves, our fruitless Plaint
Pour out; the Country claims our active Aid;
That let Us rome; and where we find a Spark
Of public Virtue, blow it into Flame.
The THRONE be chief our Care; the aetherial Streams
Of Wisdom, Justice, and Benevolence,
That issue thence, refreshing all the Land,
Joyous to swell: and over the lovely Round
Of ROYAL BEAUTY, which about it glows,
To hover fond, prophetic of those Days
That, FREDERICK! dawn delightful in thy Eye.
And now my Sons, the Sons of Freedom! meet
In awful Senate; thither let us fly;
Burn in the Patriot's Thought, flow from his Tongue
In fearless Truth; myself, transformed, preside,
And shed the Spirit of BRITANNIA round.
THIS said; her fleeting Form, and airy Train,
Sunk in the Gale; and naught but ragged Rocks
Rushed on the broken Eye; and naught was heard
But the rough Cadence of the dashing Wave.
FINIS.

