THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH BIRDS.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH BIRDS; OR, A SELECTION OF THE MOST RARE,
BEAUTIFUL, AND INTERESTING BIRDS WHICH INHABIT THIS COUNTRY: THE DESCRIPTIONS
FROM THE SYSTEMA NATURAE OF LINNAEUS; WITH GENERAL OBSERVATIONS, EITHER
ORIGINAL, OR COLLECTED FROM THE LATEST AND MOST ESTEEMED ENGLISH
ORNITHOLOGISTS; AND ILLUSTRATED WITH FIGURES, DRAWN, ENGRAVED, AND COLORED
FROM FINE AND LIVING SPECIMENS.

BY E. DONOVAN, F. L. S.

IN FIVE VOLUMES. VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; AND FOR F. AND C. RIVINGTON, No. 62, ST.
PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. 1799.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Work being now completed, we conceive our engagement with the
Subscribers, is, in every respect fulfilled, and that it only remains to
embrace this opportunity, to repeat our thanks for their favors; and in
particular, for the candor with which the Supplementary Part has been received.

But, in submitting the work to the Public in general, as an illustration of an
important branch of British Zoology, it is incumbent on us, to state briefly,
the nature, and extent of the undertaking, the information it contains, and its
peculiar advantages. In this retrospective survey of the work, we must advert
to our former observations; some similar remarks appeared at the conclusion of
the fourth volume, and we retrace those, as they immediately relate to the
outline of our design.

Ornithology, as a science, has undergone various alterations and improvements:
different authors have submitted their systems to the world, and each has found
its admirers and opponents; nor has the unrivalled genius of Linnaeus devised
an arrangement in which those opposite opinions may be reconciled. On the
importance of Ornithology, in the great scale of animated nature, no difference
of opinion can prevail. The beauty and elegance of the feathered race: their
pleasing and various melody; their sagacity, and tractable manners, has been
admired in every age and country; and their unerring economy and instinct, has
ever engaged the attention of the moral philosopher. The Birds of this country
are of plainer colors than those of warmer climates, but they are not less
interesting to the English naturalist. If, in some instances, their beauty has
little claim to our notice; in others it excites our admiration; and to the
intelligent mind, their beauty, their singularities, peculiar manners, and
economy are equally engaging. They are the source of information and
improvement to the practical Ornithologist, and of rational and agreeable
amusement to every common observer of nature.

At the commencement of this work, it was our intention to form a complete
History of British Ornithology, and to include figures of all the known Birds,
amounting to more than two hundred and fifty species; but we have since
conceived it would be advisable to select only the more beautiful Birds, in
addition to those which are interesting to the naturalist: for a considerable
number of the British species are so well known, that their history would be
tedious, and the figures unnecessary, in a work professedly designed to treat
of the most remarkable species only. Not that we have entirely overlooked the
common Birds; in several instances some of these are introduced also, to point
out their singular habits of life, and other interesting peculiarities; but, in
general, we have endeavored to form an instructive as well as amusing
illustration of this department of Natural History.

It will perhaps be contended, that a complete collection of figures and
descriptions of all the British Birds, would be more acceptable than any
partial selection, however comprehensive. We admit the propriety of this
objection; but must observe, that such addition would considerably increase the
expense to the purchaser, and scarcely contribute to his information. On the
other hand, this work, in its present limits, may assist the researches of the
uninformed naturalist, and tend to promote a deeper and more extensive enquiry
into this branch of science. It embraces in one view the whole of those British
Birds that are scarcely known, and of which the inquisitive reader, under many
circumstances, may be desirous of information. We have omitted many of those
Birds which constantly inhabit this country; but have included all local
species, and in particular, those, whose haunts and breeding places are
difficult of access, and the Birds in consequence, little known. The extensive
marshes and lowlands in some parts of the kingdom, are the retreats and
breeding places of certain species. Those solitary kinds, which retire to the
depths, and gloomy recesses of forests, are rarely observed; and many of those
which seek the open plain for security, elude our vigilance, and are not better
known. But the rarest of the local kinds, are of the rapacious and gallinaceous
tribes, which never leave their dreary solitudes: their wilds and barren
mountains in the north; to visit the southern parts of Great Britain. The
migratory Birds are numerous, and include many well known species, with others
that are uncommonly scarce. We have taken an extensive variety of the beautiful
Land Birds, that resort to this country occasionally from the south of Europe;
and of the aquatic or web-footed tribe, that are driven by the severity of the
winter in the Arctic regions to seek shelter on our shores. History and
tradition inform us of other Birds that formerly inhabited these kingdoms, but
are now extirpated; and these form an interesting sequel to this selection. We
cannot vindicate the propriety of introducing naturalized exotic species
amongst these, though they are arranged by our Naturalists in the British
Ornithology; and in some instances we have followed their authority, for the
sake of embellishment and variety.

In the course of publication, we have been fortunate in procuring specimens of
many uncommon Birds. Among the most remarkable, are The Rose-coloured Ouzel,
Roller, Little Bittern, Waxen Chatterer, Black Woodpecker, and in particular
that rare and almost unknown species, the Wood Chat. -- The Red-necked Grebe,
Dartford Warbler, Dusky Lark, Long-legged Plover, Egret and Cock of the Wood.
We could enumerate many other species highly important to the uninformed
naturalist; but, we refer our readers for the general detail, to the complete
Systematic Arrangement annexed to this Advertisement.

In this Systematic Arrangement we have followed the Systema Naturae of
Linnaeus, though we totally dissent from the opinion of that celebrated
naturalist in his primary divisions of Ornithology. In every system, the Birds
which inhabit the land only, are separated from such as frequent the water.
This appears to be a natural method of forming two principal divisions of
Ornithology; it was adopted by Ray, and approved by Pennant and Latham. In the
Linnaean system, those which inhabit the water are separated from the rest; but
the Land Birds are divided into two parts, and the Water Birds are placed
between them. To avoid confusion we have adhered to this arrangement; but we
have also placed an Index, in the manner of Pennant and Latham, at the
conclusion of each volume.

Having endeavored to explain the nature and extent of this undertaking, we
submit the whole to the candor of the Public; and, though not indifferent to
the flattering testimony of approbation, it has received in the course of five
years publication, we entreat indulgence for whatever may be thought
exceptionable, either in the outline of our undertaking, the selection of
species, or the manner in which they are illustrated. To our Subscribers, we
shall not presume to address any apology, as their opinion must be already
decided. The progressive manner in which the work has appeared, has afforded
every opportunity for critical examination, for detecting error, or discovering
merit; and, we trust, their continued patronage is some criterion of their
approbation, and of the general utility of our design.

SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF SELECT BRITISH BIRDS.
ORDER I.
ACCIPITRES
Includes the Falcon, Owl, and Shrike or Butcher Bird.

FALCON.
Falco Ossifragus. Sea Eagle. Haliaetus. Osprey. Apivorus. Honey Buzzard.
Milvus. Kite. Those marked with a star are not described by Linnaeus.
Peregrinus. Peregrine Falcon. Cyaneus. Hen Harrier. Tinnunculus. Kestril.
Subbuteo. Hobby: Those marked with a star are not described by Linnaeus.
Aesalon. Merlin.
OWL.
Strix Brachyotos. Short-eared Owl. Flammea. White Owl. Stridula. Tawny Owl.
Passerina. Little Owl.
SHRIKE.
Lanius Excubitor. Great cinereous Shrike. Collurio. Red-backed Shrike. *
Rufus. Wood Chat.
ORDER II.
PICAE
Crow, Roller, Oriole, Cuckoo, Wryneck, Woodpecker, King's-fisher, Nuthatch,
Hoopoe, Creeper.

CROW.
Corvus Cornix. Hooded Crow. Glandarius. Jay. -- var. white. Pica. Magpie.
Caryocatactes. Nutcracker.
ROLLER.
Coracias Garrula. Garrulous Roller.
ORIOLE.
Oriolus Galbula. Golden Oriole.
CUCKOO.
Cuculus Canorus. Common Cuckoo.
WRYNECK.
Yunx Torquilla. Common Wryneck.
WOODPECKER.
Picus Martius. Great Black Woodpecker. Minor. Lesser spotted Woodpecker.
Viridis. Green Woodpecker.
KING'S-FISHER.
Alcedo Ispida. Common Kingsfisher.
NUTHATCH.
Sitta Europaea. European Nuthatch.
HOOPOE.
Upupa Epops. Common Hoopoe.
ORDER III.
ANSERES
Duck, Merganser, Auk, Petrel, Pelican, Diver, Gull and Tern.

DUCK.
Anas Aegyptatica. Egyptian Goose. * Albifrons. White-fronted Goose. Tardona.
Shieldrake. Hyemalis. Long-tailed Duck. Querquedula. Garganey. Boschas.
Mallard.
MERGANSER.
Mergus Merganser. Goosander. Serrator. Red Breasted Goosander. Albellus. Smew.
Minutus. Red-headed Smew.
AUK.
Alca Arctica. Puffin. Torda. Razor-billed Auk.
DIVERSE.
Colymbus Troile. Foolish Guillemot. Glacialis. Northern Diver. Immer. Imber
Diver. Septentrionalis. Red-throated Diver. Cristatus. Crested Grebe. Auritus.
Eared Grebe. Urinator. Tippet Grebe. * Nigricans. Dusky Grebe. * Ruficollis.
Red-necked Grebe. Minutus. Little Grebe.
GULL.
Larus Canus. Common Gull. Hybernus. Winter Gull.
TERN.
Sterna Sandvicensis. Sandwich Tern. Hirundo. Common Tern. Minuta. Lesser Tern.
Fusca. Black Tern.
ORDER IV.
GRALLAE
Heron, Ibis, Snipe, Sandpiper, Plover, Avoset, Oyster-catcher, Coot, Rail,
Bustard.

HERON.
Ardea Cinerea. Common Heron. Garzetta. Egret. Minuta. Little Bittern.
IBIS.
* Tantalus Igneus. Glossy Ibis.
SNIPE.
Numenius Phaeopus. Wimbrel. Scolopax Aegocephala. Common Godwit. Calidris.
Redshank.
SANDPIPER.
Tringa Pugnax. Ruff. Vanellus. Lapwing. Cinclus. Purre.
PLOVER.
Claradrius Pluvialis. Golden Plover. Himantopus. Long-legged Plover Hiaticula.
Ringed Plover. Morinellus. Dottrel.
AVOSET.
Recurvirostra Avosetta. Scooping Avoset.
OYSTER-CATCHER.
Haematopus Ostralegus. Pied Oyster-catcher.
COOT.
Fulica Atra. Common Coot. Chloropus. Water Hen.
RAIL.
Rallus Crex. Land Rail. Aquaticus. Water Rail. Porzana. Small spotted
Water-Hen.
ORDER V.
GALLINAE.
Pheasant, Grous, Peacock.

PHEASANT.
Phasianus Colchicus. Common Pheasant.
GROUS.
Tetrao Urogallus. Cock of the Wood. Tetrix. Black Game. Logopus. White Game or
Ptarmigan.
PEACOCK.
Pavo Cristatus. Common Peacock, (variety.)
ORDER VI.
PASSERES.
Pigeon, Lark, Stare, Thrush, Chatterer, Grosbeak, Bunting Finch, Fly-catcher,
Warbler, Wagtail, Titmouse, Swallow, Goat Sucker.

PIGEON.
Columba Oenas. Stock Pigeon.
LARK.
Alauda Oscura. Dusky Lark.
STARE.
Sturnus Cinclus. Water Ouzel.
THRUSH.
Turdus Torquatus. Ring Ouzel. Roseus. Rose-coloured Ouzel.
CHATTERER.
Ampelis Garrulus. Waxen Chatterer.
GROSBEAK.
Loxia Curvirostra. Common Crossbill. Coccothraustes. Hawfinch. Enucleator.
Pine Grosbeak. Pyrrhula. Bulfinch.
BUNTING.
Emberiza Frigida. Tawny Bunting. Citrinella. Yellow Bunting. Miliaria. Common
Bunting.
FINCH.
Fringilla Montana. Tree Sparrow. Montifringilla. Brambling. Carduelis.
Goldfinch. Linaria. Lesser Redpole.
FLY-CATCHER.
Muscicapa Atricapilla. Pied Fly-catcher.
WAGTAIL, WARBLER.
Motacilla Alba. White Wagtail. Flava, Yellow Wagtail. Boarula. Gray Wagtail.
Luscinia. Nightingale. Phoenicurus. Redstart. Salicaria. Sedge Warbler. *
Dartfordiensis. Dartford Warbler. Rubicola. Stone Chat. Rubetra. Whin Chat.
Regulus. Gold-crested Wren. Trochilus. Yellow Wren. * Sylviella. Lesser White
Throat. Rubecula. Redbreast.
TITMOUSE.
Parus Major. Great Titmouse. Ater. Colemouse. Caeruleus. Blue Titmouse.
Caudatus. Long-tailed Titmouse. Biarmicus. Bearded Titmouse. Cristatus. Crested
Titmouse.
GOAT SUCKER.
Caprimulgus Europaeus. European Goat Sucker.
THE LINNAEAN ARRANGEMENT OF THE ORDERS INCLUDED IN THE CLASS AVES.
ORDER I. Acciptres. RAPACIOUS Birds; having the upper mandible of the beak
furnished on each side with an angular process; claws arched, strong. ORDER II.
Picae. Pies; having the beak a little curved, and rather compressed on the
sides. ORDER III. Anseres. Web-footed; these have a beak somewhat obtuse, and
covered with a thin skin; at the base underneath gibbous, and wide at the end;
the faux, or edges of the base, denticulated; the feet palmated, or webbed, and
formed for swimming. ORDER IV. Grallae. Waders. These have the beak
subcylindrical, and somewhat obtuse; the tongue entire, and fleshy; the thighs
naked for some space above the knees; legs very long. ORDER V. Gallinae.
Gallinaceous. Birds having the upper mandible unequal, or arched, and receiving
the edges of the lower nostrils, half covered by means of a unequal membrane,
rather cartilaginous; the rectrices, or tail-feathers, more than twelve; the
feet cloven, but connected by a membrane as far as the first joint. ORDER VI.
Passeres. Passerine. These have a conical acuminated, or pointed, beak;
nostrils oval, open, naked.

PLATE I. PARUS BIARMICUS. BEARDED TITMOUSE. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill short, strong, entire, bristles at the base. Tongue,
blunt, with bristles at the end.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Bill short, strong, unequal, yellow. Head
gray. A black tuft, or beard, beneath each Eye. Plumage red yellow. Tail long.
Legs black.

Lin. Syst. Not. 342. edit. 12 -- 1766. Scop. ann. 1. No 241. J. L. Frisch. t.
8.
PARUS BARBATUS. La Mesange barbue, ou le Moustache. -- Bris. Orn. III. p. 567.
No 12. Buf. Ois. pl. 18. v. p. 418. Pl. enl. 618. t. 1.2.
Pendulus. Kram. el. p. 373. Beardmanica, Albin. 1. pl. 48. Lanius Minimus,
Least Butcher Bird. Edw. pl. 55. Bearded Titmouse. Br. Zool. 1. No 167. Arct.
Zool. -- Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.

The Great Titmouse, Colemouse, and Marsh Titmouse; with the Blue, Long-tailed,
and Bearded, Titmice, are the only species of the tribe which inhabit this
country: they are all very frequent excepting the latter; which however is not
uncommon in certain situations, though formerly esteemed as rare.

It was described by Aldrovandus in his Ornithology published in the years 1610
-- 1613; and appears to be well known at that time in several parts of Europe,
though unknown in Britain: more than a century after Aldrovandus, (1734), it
was included in a History of the Birds of Germany by J. L. Frisch; but even at
that time, was so rare with us, that it was scarcely ascertained to be a native
of Britain; and Albin, who seems to have possessed some knowledge of Birds,
determines it as a native, only on the authority of the information he received
from others; his History of Birds was published in 1738; therein he gives a
figure of the Male Bird, and says in the Descriptions annexed, "These two birds
(male and female) I bought of Mr. Bland on Tower Hill, who told me he had them
from Jutland: I have been since informed by Sir Robert Abdy, that they are
found in the Saltmarshes in Essex, and by others that they are likewise in the
fens in Lincolnshire."

He also observes that it receives the name Beardmanica from the black tuft
resembling a picked beard.

Edwards G. Edwards's Not. Hist. of Birds, Vol. 7. 4 to. London, 1743, etc.
refers it to the tribe of Butcher-birds, under the title of LANIUS Minimus,
Least Butcher-Bird; but Linnaeus, in his Systema Naturae, reduced it to the
PARUS genus; and late writers have also determined it to the same family.

Its length, from the tip of the bill to the end of the tail, is six inches and
a quarter: the bill is thick, and of a bright yellow color, but fades
immediately when the bird dies; in the female it is rather dusky; and the head,
which is of a fine gray in the male, is of a brownish rust color, spotted with
black, in the female: indeed, the female is immediately distinguished by the
plainness of her plumage, it neither possessing the beautiful purple color on
the breast, or the black tufts on the throat, which characterizes the male: the
vent-feathers of the male are pale black; of the female light brown; as are the
other parts of the belly.

Pennant, in the British Zoology, says, "This species is found in the marshes
near London: we have seen it near Gloucester: it is also frequent among the
great tracts of reeds near Cowbit in Lincolnshire, where I suspect they breed.

Latham, in his General Synopsis, -- "These birds are found in England, but
have hitherto been observed only in marshy situations where reeds grow, on the
seeds of which it feeds, as well as small insects; both of which have been
found in their stomachs. They are pretty frequent, and in not inconsiderable
quantities, in the marshes among the reeds between Erith and London, and are
again met with in suchlike places near Gloucester, as well as among the great
tracts of reeds near Cowbit, in Lincolnshire. In all these places I make no
doubt of their breeding, as I know that they stay in the first-named parts the
whole year. The nest is not known for certain; but I have seen one, which was
composed of very soft downy materials, suspended between three reeds drawn
together, thought to be the work of that bird."

"They are also common in Denmark; and Buffon supposes that a pair of these,
having escaped from the cage of the Countess of Albemarle, have founded this
colony in England. This may have been the case in respect to those of Erith,
being on the borders of the Thames, but will not so well account for their
being elsewhere; and I am inclined to think that they are indigenous to us, and
have been so ab origin; and that it is merely owing to their frequenting such
places only where the reeds grow, that they have been so little known; for as
those birds never go farther than a few yards from the beds "The reed-beds
frequently cover many acres of ground; these grow in the water, so as to be
overflowed at every tide; and few persons ever go near them, except in the time
of cutting, which they do in boats, as, except at very low tides, one can
scarce set a footstep within their boundaries."
, they have stood a greater chance, which has really happened, of not being
earlier observed."

Kramer says the nest is built among the willows, and is of the shape of a
purse, made of soft downy materials, such as the down of the Greater Cat's-Tail
Typha latifolia. Lin.
, or that of the Asp Populus tremula. Lin.
, hanging the nest on a branch.

What new light Mr. Latham could throw on this subject, is given in the
Supplement published in the year 1787.

"I have never yet been able myself to ascertain the nest and eggs. In Sepp's
Sepp. V^g. pl. in p. 83.
plate the nest is placed on the ground among the sedges. It is of a very loose
texture, composed of the tops of dry grass, mixed with the seed-heads of rushes
and reeds, with narrow leaves intermixed. The eggs four in number, of a reddish
white, marked with small brown spots."

"This species is found in Schonen, in Sweden; but rarely. Is very common about
the Caspian Sea and Palus Moeotis, and among the rushes of the rivers which
fall into them; but in no high latitudes in Asia. None in Siberia Arct. Zool.
."

The male shows much tenderness and care for its young, and its mate partakes
also of its affection: it is said to be ever constant in its attachments; and
at night, when at roost, the male protects the female, under the concave of his
wing.


PLATE II. CORVUS GLANDARIUS. JAY. PICAE.
Bill compressed, unequal, or a little curved.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strong, conic, with bristles at its base reflected
downwards. Tongue bifid.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Head covered with long feathers. Forehead
white with black strokes. From the angles of the mouth a broad streak of black
under each eye. The head, sides, neck, breast, back and scapulars, vinaceous
buff-colour. Coverts of the wings fine blue, barred with black. Rump white.
Tail black-brown.

CORVUS glandarius. Lin. Syst. 1. p. 156. No 7. Scop. ann. 1. p. 36. No 39.
Mull. p. 12.
PICA glanduria. Gesn. av. 700. Jay. Aldr. Ornith. l. 12. e. 14. Will. Orn. p.
130. pl. 19. Raii. av. 41. A. 2. Alb. av. 1. p. 16. t. 16.
Le Geay, Garrulus. Bris. Orn. ii. p. 47. No 1. Buf. ois. III. p. 107. pl. 8.
-- Pl. enl. 481. Renel. 481.
Holtz-schreyer (Wood Crier), Eichen-heher (Oak Jay), Nusheher, Frisch. t. 55.
Nus-heher, Kramer El. p. 335. Ghiandaia, Zinan. 67. Skoia, Schoga. Scopoli, No
39. Screch y Coed. (Ancient British.) Brit. Zool.
The Jay, though very frequent in every part of the country, evidently
deserves, for the singular beauty of its plumage, the first place in a
collection of interesting British Birds: it is a species, however, not merely
confined to this kingdom; but generally diffused over the greater part of the
continent of Europe.

Among the foreign birds which are referred to this genus, are several species
eminently distinguished for their rich and elegant coloring; but the European
Jay is certainly superior in this particular to many exotics of the same family.

Its habits are known, in a great degree, to resemble those of the Magpie,
which also belongs to the same genus. It will devour with avidity cherries,
gooseberries, raspberries, or other fruits; but in autumn and winter it feeds
on acorns; whence it long since derived the name PICA Glandaria. It is not
destitute of a carnivorous appetite, as it frequently combats, and devours,
small birds: it also feeds on worms and insects.

Ablin, in Plate 16. Vol. 1. very accurately describes the Jay he took his
figure from, which nearly corresponds with our specimen.

"Its length, from the point of the bill to the end of the tail, was fourteen
inches; its breadth, when the wings were extended, twenty-one inches and an
half; its weight seven ounces; the bill dark ash color inclining to black,
strong, near an inch and an half long; the tongue black, thin, pellucid, and
cloven at the tip; the irides of the eyes white. Near on the lower chap of the
bill are two black spots, on each side one. The chin and lower part of the
belly whitish, else the breast and belly are of a mixed cinereous and red; the
rump above is white, the back red, with a mixture of blue; the feathers on the
crown of the head variegated with black and white.

"The sails of the wings are in number twenty, of which the first is shorter by
half than the second, the fourth the longest (being by measure six inches and a
quarter); the first or outermost is black, the bottom or lower part white,
which is proper to it alone; the six next following have their exterior vanes
of an ash color, the three next likewise, but more obscure, and mingled with
blue, being also marked toward their bottom with transverse black and white
strokes; the five succeeding have their exterior vanes half white, half black,
viz. the lower half white, the upper black, but so that each extremity of the
white is terminated with blue; the sixteenth, in place of the white of the four
precedent, has transverse blue, black, and white spots; the seventeenth is
black, having one or two blue spots; the eighteenth is black with some little
red; the nineteenth red with the tip black; the under sides of all the feathers
of the wing are of a dark or dusky color; the covert-feathers of the fifteen
exterior sails are very beautiful, being variegated or chequered with black,
white, and lovely shining blue lines, the rest of the covert-feathers being
black.

"The tail is six inches and a quarter long, consisting of twelve feathers,
wholly black except toward their roots: under the rump there is something of a
blue mingled with cinereous.

"The feet and toes are of a ferruginous dusky color, the middle toe is the
longest; the outmost is equal to the back toe; the lower joint of the outmost
toe is joined to the middlemost; the back claw is the greatest.

"The guts are twenty-four inches long; the blind guts but half an inch; it
has a gall and a long spleen: the stomach or gizzard not very fleshy, and
having its echinus, wherein were found acorns, etc."

He adds, "The female differs little or nothing from the male, either in
bigness or color, so that it is very difficult to know them asunder:" but
after the publication of his first Volume of Birds, he rectifies this error, in
a supplement which is prefixed to the work. "The following observations," (says
he) "I received from Dr. Derham, after the descriptions were printed. He has
observed the Cock Jay (Plate 16. Vol. 1.) to be somewhat bigger than the Hen,
the feathers on the head to be blacker, the stripes longer, and the black and
blue colors more elegant in the Cock than in the Hen."

Jays generally build in woods, preferring a situation near the skirts: the
nest is composed of fibrous roots, and young twigs, erected on a base of
several large sticks, and is placed on the top of a thorn-bush, or other
under-wood, or between the first branches of low decayed trees: the female lays
five or six eggs, of the size of a pigeon's, of a cinereous olive color,
marked with very pale brown spots: the young Jays remain with their parents
till the next spring; and at the pairing time they each choose his mate, to
propagate their future progeny.

It is a restless and very quarrelsome bird: makes a harsh, chattering and
screaming noise; and is ever at variance not only with its own species, but
with every other inhabitant of the forest: when deprived of liberty, it may be
taught to imitate the human voice; but the original appearance of its plumage
is so altered by confinement, as scarcely to retain any of the beautiful
colors, which are so eminently conspicuous in the wild state.

It is a native of Denmark, and of Russia; of Scotland, and of England; but
does not frequent the islands adjacent.

Latham says, "The Jay, I believe, is not spread so far as many others of the
genus, as we do not hear of its inhabiting further south than Italy and Greece.

"This species is common in the woods both of Russia and Siberia, but none
beyond the Lena Arct. Zool.
; Georgi mentions it as frequenting the Lake Baikal, and Russel records it as
an Aleppo species Hist. Alepp. p. 69
. I have a suspicion also that it extends to China, as it is to be seen in the
drawings of birds from that country.

"It is called by the name of Jay, about Arragon in Spain, as in England. In
the last it is not esteemed as food; but in the first it is exposed to sale
along with other birds Faun. Arag.
." It is also eaten in Sweden Mr. Swederus.
. Supp. Genesis Syn. p. 79. No 19.

LE GEAY BLANC. WHITE JAY. Bris. orn. II. p. 51. A.
Latham describes this Jay, as only a variety of the common sort, and says he
had one which was taken in a nest with four other Jays of the usual color; the
specimen he mentions, is at present in my collection; it is less than the
common size, is wholly white, inclining to a cream color in the shades; the
legs and bill are white also: the irides red.


PLATE III. TURRDUS ROSEUS. ROSE-COLOURED THRUSH OR OUZEL. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, subulate, and somewhat angular.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Bill at the base reddish, at the point
black. A long pendent Crest. Head, Crest, Neck, Wings, and Tail, black, tinged
with green-purple. Breast, Belly, and Back, pale rose-colour with dark spots;
Legs dirty orange.

Lin. Syst. 1. p. 294. No 15. Faun. Suec. 219. Nov. Com. Ac. Petrop. XV. p.
478. t. 23. f. 1.
STURNUS Roseus, Scop. ann. 1. p. 130. No 191. TURDUS Seleucis. Faun. Arab. p.
6. a. -- p. 5. No 16. Le Merle couleur de Rose. Bris. orn. ii. p. 250. No 20.
Buf. Ois. iii. p. 348. t. pl. 22. -- pl. enl. 251.
MERULA Rosea, Raii. Syn. p. 67. 9. Aldr. av. II. 283.
Rose, or Carnation-coloured Ouzel. Will. orn. p. 194. Edw. pl. 20. Br. Zool.
App. No 5. pl. 5. Ar. Zool. -- Lev. Mus.

This species is very rare in every part of Europe; and especially in this
country: we have a figure of it in the British Zoology; but unfortunately,
notwithstanding Mr. Pennant's very laudable intentions, he had no opportunity
of consulting the original specimen; he depended on a drawing done by his
friend Mr. G. Edwards; and the copy is only a distant imitation of the bird; it
is defective about the body, and exceedingly incorrect as to the circumference
of the neck; the account says, "Mr. Edwards discovered this beautiful bird
twice in our island, near London, at Norwood, and another time in Norfolk;" the
figure of this was copied by permission from his beautiful and accurate design,
which we gratefully acknowledge, as well as every other assistance from our
worthy friend; whose pencil has done so much honor to his country.

This bird is the size of a starling; eight inches in length: bill three
quarters of an inch, of a flesh-colors, with the base reddish: irides pale: the
feathers on the head long, they form a crest which impends on the neck: the
head, neck, wings, and tail, are black; the two latter are strongly glossed
with green; and in some parts with an inclination to blue and purple: the back,
rump, breast, belly, and lesser wing coverts, pale rose color, with a few
irregular dark spots: legs pale red, or orange.

Russell in his History of Aleppo, calls our rese a flesh-colors; and in the
Petersburgh Transactions the name given to it is sanguineous; we may then
conclude that the bird varies much in its rose, or pink color; the female also
is paler than the male.

Mr. Latham has added a farther proof of its being found in this country, one
was shot at Grantham, in Lincolnshire, and is now in the possession of Sir
Joseph Banks, Bart.; and he says that he is assured of one, or more, being shot
almost every season about Ormskirk in Lancashire.

It is more frequent in France; and is met with in Burgundy, in its passage to
other parts: Aldrovandus mentions it as not uncommon in Italy, where it is
called the sea stare, and says its usual haunts are among heaps of dung Aldr.
Av. II. 283.
: it is also found in Switzerland and Lapland, but it never passes the limits
of that frozen region Linnaeus. -- Mr. Ekmarck.
.

In some parts of Asia it is common: "It comes in great numbers about Aleppo,
in July and August, in pursuit of the swarms of locusts Hence called the locust
bird. Russell. Hist. Allep.
; whence it is held sacred by the Turks, as great quantities are destroyed by
this means: it is also seen in vast flocks, every year in the south of Russia;
about the river Don; and in Siberia, about the Irtisch; finding abundance of
locusts for food, and convenience for breeding between the rocks: it is also
common on the borders of the Caspian Sea; about Astrachan; and from thence all
along the Volga." Latham Genesis Syn. 3. 50. 52.

It extends to India; Sir Joseph Banks, has one in his collection which was
received from Bombay.


PLATE IV. MOTACILLA REGULUS. GOLDEN-CRESTED WREN. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, slender. Tongue jagged.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. AND SYNONYMS. Crown of the head bright yellow, with a
longitudinal black margin on each side, which passes immediately above the
eyes. Back greenish. Breast white with a dirty green tinge. Legs yellow-brown.

MOTACILLA REGULUS Linn. Syst. 1. p. 338. No 48. Muller, p. 33, No 280. Georgi
Reise, p. 175. Frisch. t. 24.
GOLDEN-CROWNED WREN Raii. Syn. p. 79. A. 9. Will. Orn. p. 227. pl. 42. Albin.
1. pl. 53. A. Edw. pl. 254. 1. Catesh. Car. App. 36. 37. Br. Zool. 1. No 153.
Arct. Zool. -- Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus. Latham. Genesis Syn. IV. 508. Le Poul, ou
Souci, ou Roitelet hupe, Calendula, Brison, av. III. p. 579. No 17. Pl. enl.
651. fig. 3. Le Roitelet. Buff. ois. V. p. 363. pl. 16. f. 2. Fior rancio.
Olina. pl. in p. 6. La Soulcie. Belon av. 345. Kongs fogel. Faun. Suec. sp.
262. Kratlich. Scopoli, No 240. Summer Zaunkoenig (Summer Wren.) Frisch, 1. 24.
Goldhannel. Kram. 378. Fugle-Konge. Brun. 285.

The golden crested Wren is the smallest bird yet discovered, in either of the
British isles; is common to France, Austria, Italy, and most other parts of
Europe; and in those countries, as with us, it appears to be the least native
species.

But discoveries in the interior parts of south America, have verified, that it
is not the least kind existing; in that country where the Condor is found, the
most diminutive species of the feathered tribe are also taken; and to those the
least European bird bears a gigantic disproportion; for instance, the length of
the golden-crested Wren is three inches and an half, its weight seventy-six
grains: but the total length of the least South-American Humming bird Trochilus
minimus Lin. Syst. 1. p. 193. No 22.
is not more than an inch and a quarter, and its weight when fresh killed
twenty grains Sir Hans Sloane. Jam. ii. p. 307.
; the female is yet smaller Brown. Jam. p. 475.
.

The appellations Regulus, and Tyrannus, Little King, or Tyrant, have been
given to the golden-crested Wren by some authors: it has ability to conceal the
orange band on the head; by corrugating the forehead, and drawing together the
feathers, which form the black longitudinal band on each side.

The color of the plumage of the female is paler, than of the male; the crest
or feathers on the crown of the head are yellow, but without the bright orange
color, which softens into the crest of the male.

It remains with us through the winter Latham. IV. 509. 145.
; frequents woods; and builds its nest, either in oak, fir, or yew trees, the
nest is of a roundish form, with an opening on one side; it is composed of
moss; and lined within with some downy substance, (perhaps cobwebs,) intermixed
with small filaments.

It lays six or seven eggs, which are no bigger than large peace Albin Orn. 1.
51. 53.
.

Although the species is found in Europe, it is scattered throughout the other
three quarters of the globe, with only some little variations which mark the
influence of climate; Latham mentions a specimen received from Cayenne with
black legs.

It is a native of Russia Georgi.
, Sweden, and Norway; and is found as far north as the Shetland isles; but
disappears before winter; it bears cold extremely well, and therefore it may be
rather the scarcity of insects, on which it feeds; than merely the approaching
season, which induces it to take such vast flights.

It is also found in the northern parts of America, Pensylvania Edwards.
, and New York Colonel Davies.
.

"We have observed this bird suspended in the air for a considerable time over
a bush in flower, whilst it sung very melodiously. The note does not much
differ from that of the common Wren, but is very weak." Brit. Zool. 379. 153.


PLATE V. MOTACILLA ALBA. WHITE WAGTAIL. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, slender. Tongue jagged.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. AND SYNONYMS. Bill dark brown. Head, Tail, and Legs,
black. Breast, Belly, and sides of the Tail, white. Upper parts of the Body,
and Wing coverts cinereous, Tail and back claw long.

MOTACILLA ALBA. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 331. No 2. Gesner, av. 618. Sepp. Vog. pl.
in p. 119. -- Faun. Arag. p. 88. Lath. Genesis Syn. IV. p. 395. No 1. -- Arct.
Zool. ii. p. 396. E.
WHITE WATER-WAGTAIL, Raii. Syn. 75. A. I. -- Albin. I. pl. 49. Will. Orn. p.
237. -- Brit. Zool. 1. No 142. pl. 55. Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
La Lavandiere, Bris. Orn. iii. 461. No 38. Buff. Ois. v. p. 251. pl. 14. f. 1.
-- pl. enl. 625. f. 1. -- Variety. f. 2.
Ballarina, Cutrettola. Olina, 43. Monachina. Zinan. 51. Pliska, Pastaritra.
Scopoli, No 224. Arla. Sadesarla. Faun. Suec. sp. 252. Danis Vip-Stiert, Havre
Saeer. Norvegis Earl, Lin-Erle. Weiss und schwartze Bachsteltze. Frisch. 1. 23.
Grave Bachstelze. Kram 374.

This bird is very frequent in England, and is spread throughout the whole of
the old Continent; Latham says he has more than once met with a representation
of it in Chinese drawings: it extends as far as Iceland, the Feroe Isles, and
Drontheim; it is common in Russia, Siberia, and Kamptschatka; but is not found
in the more northern regions.

It also inhabits India, a drawing which was done on the spot being in the
collection of Lady Impey Latham Supp. Genesis Syn. 178.
.

It frequents the sides of pools and small rivulets; and feeds on insects: it
is often seen running on the ground with much celerity, or leaping up after
flies: the tail is frequently in motion. Birds of this genus seldom perch; fly
in an undulating manner, and have a twittering noise in flight.

Willughby observes, that this species shifts its quarters in the winter;
moving from the north to the south of England during that season.

Latham suspects that part of them migrate, as he does not recollect seeing so
many in winter, as in the summer season, and says, in Scotland, and in the
north of England, it is scarce ever seen in hard weather.

This, and others of this class, are called, both by the French and English,
Washer-Women, or Dish-Washers.

It is particularly serviceable to the farmer in Spring and Autumn, by
attending the plough to devour the larvae of insects, worms, etc. which are
turned up; hence it is the interest of the farmer to discourage any attempt to
destroy those birds, and to this circumstance they may owe much for their
preservation.

The marks and colors vary very considerably in different specimens. Some have
only a crescent of black on the breast, the chin and throat being quite white,
in others all the white parts are strongly tinctured with yellow; in some the
chin, fore part of the neck, and breast, are black; and in the Leverian Museum
is a fine variety; white, except the hind parts, which are yellowish.

In the females, the top of the head generally inclines to brown. The usual
length of this species is seven inches from the bill to the extremity of the
tail.

The nest is built on the ground, is composed of dry grass, fine fibers, and
moss; lined with hair, feathers, or soft dry grass; the eggs are five in
number; white, spotted with brown: for the most part they have only one brood
in a year.


PLATE VI. PODICEPS RUFICOLLIS. RED-NECKED GREBE. ANSERES.
Bill obtuse, covered with a thin membrane, broad, gibbous below the base,
swelled at the apex. Tongue fleshy. Legs naked. Feet webbed, or sinned.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill straight, slender, pointed. Nostrils linear at the
base of the Bill. Legs placed near the tail. Feet flat, thin, and serrated
behind with a double row of notches.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Bill black, with the base of each mandible
fine yellow. Irides bright orange-yellow. Crown, and sides of the Head above
the Eyes black-brown, with the feathers a little elongated. The hind part of
the Neck, Back, and Wings, dark brown; six of the middle secondaries white, a
little mottled with dusky at the tips: the two or three next outward, are more
or less white near the tips and inner webs. The Chin, sides under the Eyes, and
fore part of the Neck, for above an inch, pale ash color; the rest of the Neck
ferruginous chestnut, mottled on the Breast with dusky; thence to the Vent,
white, like satin, mottled on the sides with dusky irregular spots. Legs black.

COLYMBUS SUBCRISTATUS, Jacq. Vog. p. 37. pl. 18. COLYMBUS PAROTIS, Sparrm.
Mus. Carls. pl. 9. PODICEPS RUFICOLLIS. Lath. Genesis Syn. 5. 288-7. -- Supp. 260.
7. RED-NECKED GREBE. Lath. -- Arct. Zool. p. 499. C. Le Grebe a joues grises,
ou le Jougris, Buf. Ois. viii. p. 241. Pl. Enl. 931.
Supposed to inhabit some parts of Denmark and Norway; has been discovered,
though very rarely, near the Caspian Sea; and was once received by Mr. Pennant,
from Copenhagen.

It is probably a scarce bird in every part; in this country it has been only
discovered by a few individuals, and that very lately; we believe the most
perfect yet taken, to be that specimen of which Mr. Latham has given a figure
in the supplement to his General Synopsis; our figure is also copied from the
same bird.

It is on the authority of this author, that we include it as a British bird;
in his description he says, "I received a perfect specimen of the Male of this
bird from Major Hammond, who informed me, that the end of April, the year 1786,
two of them alighted in a farm-yard, near his house, in East Kent, and were
taken alive."

"I have also met with two other specimens; the first sent to me January 28,
1786, by Mr. Martin, of Teignmouth, a gentleman to whom I owe many other
obligations: his specimen had not come to perfection, as the colors on the
head and neck were much blended, and the ferruginous on the neck only just
breaking forth. Mr. Boys, of Sandwich, also obliged me with a third, the
beginning of last October, (1787): his bird, he informed me, weighed nineteen
ounces and a half; the length twenty-one inches and a half; breadth eight. The
bill yellow at the base, dusky olive toward the tip: lore dusky: irides pale
brown: head quite smooth. The description differed not much; but the
ferruginous color of the neck was much blended with dusky; the white on the
under parts greatly mottled with the same: Legs dusky; within, greenish yellow.
The middle toe united to the inner as far as the first joint; and to the outer,
to the middle of the second This species was unknown to Linnaeus, but according
to his definition,evidently belongs to the genus COLYMBUS: Latham observes,
that Linnaeus has erroneously included the Grebes, Diverse, and Guillemots into
that genus without even a division, though they very materially differ from one
another; especially in the legs: those of the Grebes are not webbed; the
Guillemots, though web-footed, have only three toes, all placed forwards; and
the Diverse have three toes before, and one behind.

He therefore thinks that they should be separated; and as the form of the feet
of this species appears to prevail throughout the genus, recommends its being
included with the other parts of its essential character; he has named his new
genus PODICEPS.

Pennant has also submitted to a division of the Linnaean genus. "The Grebes
and Diverse are placed in the same genus, i. e. of Colymbi, by Mr. Ray and
Linnaeus; but the difference of the feet forbade our judicious friend, M.
Brisson See Bris. Orn. vol. vi. p. 33. 70. 104.
, from continuing them together; whose example we have followed." Brit. Zool.
2.496.


."

"The two last mentioned are, no doubt, birds not in full plumage. That
described by Dr. Sparrman is clearly under the same predicament; perhaps a
still younger bird than either of the others, as the cinereous parts on the
throat appear white, with three or four lines of black, and across the lower
part of the neck is a band of white. The bird figured in Jacquin seems an
adult."

That mentioned by Buffon was seventeen inches in length; had the breast
mottled with ferruginous; and a white spot on the quills.


PLATE VII. ORIOLUS GALBULA. GOLDEN ORIOLE. PIGAE.
Bill compressed, unequal.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, conic, sharp pointed; edges cultrated,
inclining inwards; mandibles of equal length. Nostrils small; at the base of
the bill, and partly covered. Tongue divided at the end. Toes three forward,
one backward; the middle joined near the base to the outmost one.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Bill brownish-red. Irides red. General
color of the plumage fine golden yellow; between the bill and eye a streak of
black. Wings black, with a patch of yellow on the middle. Tail yellow except
the two middle feathers; all the rest black, from the base to the middle black,
and thence to their tips yellow. Legs black inclining to a lead color: claws
black.

ORIOLUS GALBULA. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 160. No 1. Faun. Suec. No 95. Georgi Reise.
p. 165. Sepp. Vog. pl. in. p. 19. Lath. Genesis Syn. ii. 449. 43. -- Suppl. 89.
Pennant Brit. Zool. ii. 626. 4.
CORACIAS ORIOLUS. Scop. Ann. 1. p. 41. No 45. -- Faun. arab. p. 7. ORIOLUS.
Gesner. av. 713. -- Aldr. av. I. 418. GOLDEN ORIOLE. Latham. -- Pennant. --
Brit. Mus. -- Lev. Mus. GOLDEN THRUSH. Edw. pl. 185. YELLOW BIRD from Bengal.
Albin iii. pl. 19. WITWALL. Will. orn. p. 198. Le Loriot. Bris. orn. ii. p.
320. No 58. Buf. Ois. iii. p. 254. pl. 17. -- Pl. enl. 26. the male.
Widewal, Pyrold, Frisch. pl. 31. the male and female. -- Kram. el. p. 360.
Galbula, seu Picus nidum suspendens, Raii. Syn. p. 68. No 5.
Size of a Blackbird. The body of the female is of a dull greenish color; the
wings are dusky inclining to green also; and the tail is nearly of the same
obscure color, except the two middle feathers which are of a pale yellow.

But the male is evidently one of the most beautiful birds that has ever been
discovered in this island: the whole of the body which is a dull green in the
female, is a lovely golden yellow, inclining to an orange color in the male;
the wings are black and form a most striking contrast; and the black stripe
from the beak to the eye is no inconsiderable addition to its beauty.

It is rarely met with in England: PENNANT observes in the British Zoology 1776.
, that he only knew one instance of its being shot in Great Britain, and that
in South Wales: Latham says "it is now and then met with in England List of the
Birds of Great Britain. Supp.
;" and adds, in his Supplement, "Since the publication of my Synopsis 1782.
, this bird has been twice shot in England. One of the specimens is now in my
collection."

It Latham. Genesis Syn.
is common in several parts of Europe, but supposed to be most frequent in
France, where it spends the summer, and propagates its species. It is scarcely
ever seen so far north as Sweden; and consequently is rare in England; is
mentioned as a bird of Russia, though perhaps it only inhabits the warmer
parts; comes twice in a year into Switzerland, and is found also in Carniola;
observed in Malta in September on its passage southward, and returns in spring
to the north through the same track; comes into Constantinople in spring, and
leaves it in September, but stays in Alexandria till the beginning of November,
when it takes its leave; from this we must suppose that it winters in Africa
and Asia, especially as this very bird has been brought from China and Bengal
This bird must have been very little known in England at the time Albin
published his History of Birds (1740) for he says in the description annexed to
his figure "a drawing from the life of this curious bird was brought from
Bengal to Mr. Dandridge, who was pleased to let me have a drawing from it."
, as well as the Cape of Good Hope.

A variety of this species, with the head and throat of a full black color, is
common in India, where it is called the Mango-bird, as it appears first at the
ripening of that fruit, and is at that season in great plenty Lady Impey.
.

"The nest is of a curious construction, but perhaps not quite so as some of
the Orioles, though built after the same fashion. It is of the shape of a
purse, fastened to the extreme divarications of the outmost twigs of tall
trees, and composed of fibers of hemp or straw, mixed with fine dry stalks of
grass lined within with moss and liverwort. The female lays four or five eggs,
of a dirty white, marked with small dark-brown spots, which are thickest about
the largest end: she sits three weeks, and is observed to be very tender of her
young, fearing nothing for their defense; not unfrequently will suffer herself
to be taken with the eggs and nest, and continue to sit upon them till she
dies."

"The food which this bird is most fond of is grapes and figs, in the season,
also cherries, etc. but at other times is contented with insects, and what else
it can get."

"It has a loud cry that may be heard far off; but I do not hear it remarked by
any one for the least song, though Gesner says it whistles before rain."
Latham, Genesis Syn.

"Its note is loud and resembles its name," Brit. Zool.

Willughby saw those birds exposed for sale in the poulterers shops in Naples,
where the flesh is esteemed as delicate food.

It is suspected that the yellow and buff Jay Raii Syn. av. p. 194. No 7, 8.
of Ray are the male and female of the Golden Oriole.


PLATE VIII. ALCA ARCTICA. PUFFIN AUK. ANSERES.
Bill obtuse; covered with a thin membrane, broad, gibbous below the base.
Swelled at the apex. Tongue fleshy. Legs naked. Feet webbed, or finned.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strong, thick, unequal, compressed on the sides.
Nostrils linear, placed parallel to the edge of the bill. Tongue almost as long
as the bill. Toes three in number, all placed forward.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill compressed, triangular, sharp-pointed, red, base
gray, furrows four, oblique. Nostrils long and narrow. Eyelids callous; edges
crimson; on the upper eyelid is a protuberance of a triangular form which
projects over the eye. Irides gray. Above black. Cheeks, chin, belly, white.
Collar black. Legs orange and near the tail.

ALCA ARCTICA. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 211. 4. Faun. Suec. No 141. Brun. No 103.
Muller. No 140. Frisch, t. 192. Latham. Genesis Syn. 5. 314. 3.
PUPHINUS ANGLICUS. Gesner av. 725. PICA MARINA. Aldr. av. III. 92. ANAS
ARCTICA. Clusii Exot. 104. PUFFIN, COULTERNES. Raii. Syn. p. 120. A. 5. --
Will. Orn. P. 325. pl. 65. -- Hist. Groenl. ii. pl. 1. -- Albin. ii. pl. 78,
79. -- Edw. pl. 358. fig. 1. -- Brit. Zool. 11. No 232. -- Arct. Zool. No 427.
-- Tour in Wales, pl. 20. Brit. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
Fratercula, le Macareux. Briss. av. VI. 81. Tab. 6. fig. 2. Buf. Ois. IX. p.
358. pl. 26. -- Pl. Enl. 275.
Ipatka, Hist. Kamts. p. 153. See Papagey, or See Taucher. Frisch. II. 192.
Length from the point of the bill to the end of the feet twelve inches;
breadth twenty-one. Weight twelve ounces. The bill is an inch and a quarter
long, and of a very singular shape, much compressed on the sides, and near an
inch and an half deep at the base; from whence both mandibles tend to a point,
which is a little curved; across the upper are four oblique furrows; on the
under three: half next the point is red; that next the base blue gray; and at
the base is a cere full of minute holes: the nostrils are a long and narrow
slit on each side, near the edge of the upper mandible, and parallel to it: the
top of the head, the neck, and upper parts of the body black; beneath white:
legs orange.

The bill, which gives such an appearance of novelty to this bird, varies
considerably according to its age; in the first year it is small, weak,
destitute of any furrow, and dusky; in the second year it is larger, stronger,
of a paler color, and discovers a faint vestige of a furrow near the base; but
those of the third or more advanced years, have a bill of great strength and
vivid colors as before described. Those birds are supposed to be imperfect
until the third year; or at least not to breed before that period: not a single
one has ever been discovered at Priestholm which had not the bill of an uniform
size See Tour in Wales, p. 252; and figures of the different growth of the bill
in pl. 20.
.

The male very nearly resembles the female: in the former the white cheeks are
sometimes obscured with a mixture of dark feathers, and in others a patch of
the same color has been observed on each side of the under jaw.

This species is very common in several parts on the coasts of England; they
are seen in flocks innumerable at Priestholm Isle off the coast of Anglesea; in
great numbers about the Needles, in the Isles of Wight, Man, Bardsey, Caldey,
Farn, Godreve, and other small, and desert islands near the shore. A few about
the rocks of Dover.

They are frequent in Ireland; on the island of Sherries, three leagues N. N.
W. of Holyhead; and in the S. Stack, near Holyhead they breed in abundance.
Inhabit Iceland and Greenland, and breed in the extreme part of the islands,
especially on the west part of Disco, and the island Orpiksauk Latham V. p. 316.
.

In the different parts it frequents, it has received a variety of
appellations, but generally expressive of the singular shape of the beak; as
Coulter-neb in the Farn isles; Guldenhead, Bottle-nose, and Helegug in Wales;
at Scarborough, Mullet; at Cornwall, Pope Will. orn.
, and in the Ferroe isles, Lunda.

To what part those birds emigrate on the approach of winter is very
imperfectly known; it is probable when they retire from those northern regions,
their flight is directed to some more temperate climate; perhaps they live at
sea, and form those multitudes of birds that navigators have observed in many
parts of the ocean; they are always found there at certain seasons, but retire
at the breeding time to the northern latitudes, and during that time are found
as near the Pole as navigators have ever penetrated Pen. Brit. Zool.
.

In America, they are said to frequent Carolina; and have been met with in
Sandwich Sound, by our late voyagers: the natives ornament the fore parts and
collars of their seal-skin jackets with the beaks of them; and in Aoonalashka,
they make gowns of their skins, along with those of other birds.

On the coast of Kamtschatka and the Kurilschi islands they are very common,
even on the Penschinski Bay, almost as far as Ochotka: the nations of the two
first wear the bills about their necks fastened to straps; these are put on by
their Shaman or Priest, for the people are persuaded that by putting them on
with a proper ceremony, they will procure good fortune to all their
undertakings Hist. Kamtsch.
.

"About the fifth or tenth of April, they arrive in vast quantities at
Priestholm isle; but quit the place again, and return twice or thrice before
they settle to burrow, which they do the first week in May, when many of them
dislodge the rabbits from their holes, by which they save themselves the
trouble of forming one of their own: in the last case, they are so intent on
what they are about, as to suffer themselves to be taken by the hand. It has
been observed that this task falls chiefly to the share of the males, and that
these last assist also in incubation: this has been proved on dissection. The
female lays one white egg Albin observes "they build no nest, but lay their
eggs on the bare ground" -- "They lay but one egg apiece (which is especially
remarkable)" "The eggs are very large for the bigness of the bird, even bigger
than hens or ducks, of a reddish or sandy color, much sharper at one end than
hen's eggs, and blunter at the other." vol. 2. p. 78, 79.

But it appears very probable that Albin was mistaken as to the color of the
eggs, if we may judge by the concurrence of the best informed naturalists of
the present time; "I must add," says Pennant, "that they lay only one egg,
which differs much in form; some have one end very acute; others have both
extremely obtuse; all are white. Brit. Zool.


. The young are hatched the beginning of July: and about the eleventh of August
they all go off, to a single bird "The Reverend Mr. Hugh Davies, of Beaumaris,
informed me, that on the 23d of August (1776) so entire was the migration, that
neither Puffin, Razor-Bill, Guillemot or Tern was to be seen there." Brit.
Zool. 2. 515.
, and so completely as to desert the young ones that are late hatched; leaving
them a prey to the Peregrine Falcon, who watches at the mouth of the holes for
them, as they through hunger, are compelled to come out. Notwithstanding the
neglect of their young at this time, no bird is more attentive to them in
general, as they will suffer themselves to be taken by the hand, and use every
means of defense in their power to save them; and, if laid hold of by the
wings, will give themselves most cruel bites on any part of the body they can
reach, as if actuated by despair; and when released, instead of flying away,
will often hurry away into the burrow to their young." Lat. Genesis Syn. 5. 316.
-- Arct. Zool.

Their flesh is excessively rank, as they feed on fish, particularly sprats, or
on small crabs, sea-weeds, etc. yet that of the young birds is often pickled
and preserved with spices, and is much admired by some for its peculiar flavor
"They are potted at St. Kilda and elsewhere, and sent to London as rarities.
The bones are taken out, and the flesh wrapped in the skin; are eaten with
vinegar, and taste like baked herrings. Lat. Genesis Syst.
. Dr. Caius writes, that in his days the church allowed them in Lent, instead
of fish; and also that they were taken by means of ferrets, as now they are by
rabbits: at present they are either dug out, or drawn from their burrows by a
hooked stick: they bite extremly hard, and keep such fast hold on whatever they
fasten, that it is with difficulty they can be disengaged; when they are taken,
their noise is very disagreeable, being like the efforts of a dumb person to
speak.

It flies with great strength and swiftness when it gets on the wing, but meets
with many falls before that can be effected: the legs are placed so far behind,
that it cannot stand except quite erect; and at that time it rests not only on
the feet, but on the whole length of the legs also.


PLATE IX. UPUPA EPOPS. COMMON HOOPOE. PICAE.
Bill compressed, unequal.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill long, slender and bending. Nostrils small, placed near
the base. Tongue short, sagittal. Toes three before, and one behind; the middle
one connected at the base to the outmost.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Bill black, slender. Tongue triangular;
placed low in the mouth. Crest composed of a double row of feathers; of a pale
reddish brown. Breast and belly white. Back scapulars and wings, barred with
black and white. Tail of ten feathers; black marked with white, in the form of
a crescent, with the horns pointing toward the end of the feathers. Legs short
and black.

UPUPA EPOPS. Lin. Syst. Not. 1. p. 183 No 1. Scop. Ann. 1. p. 53. No 62.
Muller. p. 13. 103. Brun. No 43. Georgi. Reise. p. 165. Sepp. Vog. pl. in. p.
129. Faun Arag. p. 74. Kolb. Cap. ii. p. 157.
UPUPA. Raii. Syn. p. 48. A. 6. Gesner. av. 776. Kramer. elen. p. 337.
UPUPA; arquata stercoraria; gallus lutosus. Klein Stem av. 24. tab. 25. HOOP
or COMMON HOOPOE. Will. orn. p. 145. Albin. 2. pl. 42. 43. Edw. 7. pl. 345. Br.
Zool. No 90. Arct. Zool. ii. p. 283. A. Lath. Genesis Syn. ii. p. 687. -- Supp.
122. Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
DUNG BIRD. Charlton ex. 98. tab. 99. La Hupe, ou Puput. Bris. orn. ii. p. 455.
No 1. pl. 43. f. 1. Buff. ois VI. p. 439. -- Pl. enl. 52.
La Huppe. Belon. Av. 293. Bubbola. Olin. uccel. p. 36. Wied-hopf. Frisch. t.
43. Harfogel, Pop. Faun. Suec. sp. 105. Her-fugl. Brunnich. 43. Smerda kaura.
Scopoli. No 62. Ter-chaous, or Messenger Bird. Pococke's Trav. 1. p. 209.
Linnaeus in the Fauna Succica 2d edit. 37.
observes that this elegant bird receives its name from the sound of its note;
but by other naturalists it has been suspected that its name was originally
derived from the French huppe or crested; as the crest is of a very curious
structure, and alone is sufficient to distinguish it from every other European
bird. It is the only species of the Hoopoe genus that is peculiar to the
continent of Europe.

It inhabits Asia and Africa, and is said to be met with in the large forests
of Sweden Fauna Suecica, p. 37.
, and in Austria Scopoli.
; and has been found as far north as the Orknies and Lapland, as well as in
many of the intermediate places between them; at the Cape of Good Hope on one
hand, and quite to Ceylon Edwards.
and Java on the other. In Europe it is considered as a bird of passage, and is
said not to winter even in Greece The Hoopoe and Roller are said to come into
Constantinople in August, from the north, to return in spring. Faun. Arab. p.
7. -- "The Hoopoe and Bee-eater come in the spring, and remain all the summer
and autumn." Russel. Alep. p. 70.
. In England Latham, Genesis Syn. 688. 1.
it is far from common, being seldom seen, and at uncertain times: it has been
observed in Kent, Surrey, Northumberland, and Moyston in Flintshire, as well as
in several other counties. A gentleman of veracity in Essex informs us that one
was discovered last year in a hole in his garden wall, but being frightened
away did not return again to that place. Among other proofs of its migrating
into, and even breeding in England, Mr. Latham has mentioned several. "The year
1783 seems to have been more abundant in these birds than any I have yet heard
of; one being shot near Oxford, on the coast of Suffolk, in May, and another
seen near the same place the 24th of June following: these no doubt had bred
thereabouts. The place where these were seen was a remarkable barren spot. In
the month of September of the same year two were shot at Holderness, and many
were seen in various parts of Yorkshire, and as far north as Mr. Turnstall.
Scotland. One was shot the 10th of September at Came in Gloucestershire,
another on Epping Forest, and a third in Surrey. A few years since a pair had
begun to make a nest in Hampshire; but being too much disturbed, forsook it,
and went elsewhere Di^^s.
. The last year (1786) a young bird was sent to me, the 10th of May,
full-sledged, shot near South-fleet, in Kent By Mr. G^dden of that place.
; but the old birds had not been observed." -- It was well known, as a visitor
in England, at the time Albin published his History of Birds; his observations
deserve notice. "The hen of this bird was shot in the garden of Mr. Starkey
Mayos, at Woodford on Epping Forest, where they had observed it some time, and
used all the means to take it they could; but it was so shy, that it avoided
all their traps which were laid for it; which the gentleman observing, ordered
it to be shot: it was sent to me to be preserved for him.

The cock of this kind I drew from a picture done in Germany, by a great master
there, now in the possession of Mr. Nisbet, a gentleman, who had it drawn from
the bird when alive.

There is some difference in the colors of the hen, and this bird which was a
cock, I was credibly informed by Robert Bristow, Esquire who saw both the drawings
of the cock and hen, and told me his son shot the cock, which was like the
drawing at his seat at Micheler, near Winchester in Hampshire.

Albin, Vol. II. 42, 43. Latham observes, "it is a solitary bird, and seldom
more than two are seen together; though it is said that in Egypt it assembles
in small troops. It is very common in Cairo, where it builds in the streets, on
the terraces of houses, etc. It is also common in the deserts of Russia and
Tartary, though scarce beyond the river Ob; however some are found beyond the
Lake Baikal. Dr. Pallas confirms the account of the filthy manners of this
bird, as he met with an instance of a pair breeding in the privy of an
uninhabited house in the suburbs of Tzaritzn Arct. Zool.
.

"I am informed by colonel Davies, that they every year are seen in Gibraltar
in March, in small flocks of ten or twelve; hence are called there March Cocks.
They are supposed to come from Africa, and to be on their passage north to some
other place, as they only stay a few hours to rest themselves: and it is not
uncommon to see five or six flocks in a week, during the time of their passage.
He did not observe them to have any note; but that they had a dipping kind of
flight not unlike a Woodpecker. I have observed this Bird to be among paintings
both from China and India; it is therefore no doubt common to both those
parts." Lath. Genesis Syn.

In Sweden the appearance of this Bird is regarded as a presage of war; and in
England its visits were formerly considered as ominous by the vulgar.

In Turkey it is called Tir Chaous, or the Messenger Bird from the resemblance
its crest has to the plumes worn by the Chaous, or Turkish couriers.

Latham says, the female is like the male, and lays from two to seven eggs; but
for the most part four or five. These are somewhat less than those of a
Partridge, but longer and ash-colored. This Bird is said to have two or three
broods in a year, and to lay the eggs in the holes of trees, like the
Woodpecker, but in general to make no nest: notwithstanding which, Buffon
observed, that two out of six nests, which were brought to him for inspection,
had a soft lining of moss, wool, leaves, feathers, and the like; and he is of
opinion, that when this is the case, the bird has made use of the old nest of
some other bird. It will also lay, and hatch the young in holes of walls, and
even on the ground. The food of this bird is insects; and it is the exuviae of
the large beetles, and such like, with which the nest is crowded, that cause
the nest to stink so horribly; insomuch that former writers asserted the nest
to be made of excrement.

In Sepp's plate the nest is placed in the hollow of a tree; it is composed of
soft bents, and smooth within. The eggs, four in number, of a blueish white,
marked with pale brown spots.

Buffon mentions one of this species which lived with a lady for three months,
subsisting only on bread and cheese; and, contrary to the common opinion, drank
frequently, and that by gulps. Another was kept for eighteen months on raw
meat, and would not eat any thing else.

Olina says, that this bird lives three years.

In some countries it is esteemed as good eating. It seldom perches on trees,
unless they are very low. It does not erect its crest, except when agitated by
surprise: in a natural state the crest falling behind the neck (...).
; but whenever it alights on the ground, it is said to spread its crest
beautifully.

Some authors mention a variety of this species. Kolben K^l^en. Hist. du Cap.
I. p. 152.
mentions one at the Cape of Good Hope, which is smaller; the bill shorter in
proportion; and the legs longer: the crest is not so long, and has no trace of
white in it throughout: and in general the plumage is less variegated. Another
specimen from the same place, had the upper part of the beak of a deep brown,
and the belly varied with brown and white; but as this was less in every
respect, it was probably a young bird.

Gerini mentions one which he saw at Florence, and again on the Alps, which had
the crest bordered with sky-blue. Orn. Ital. Hist. des ^is. VI. p. 462.


PLATE X. SYLVIA DARTFORDIENSIS. DARTFORD WARBLER. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill weak, slender The Linnaean genus Motacilla has been
separated by Pennant, and his method adopted by Latham; by this separation the
Wagtails constitute one genus; and the Warblers another: the latter are
distinguished from the former in several respects; they perch on trees, proceed
by leaps, not running, and seldom emit any noise in flight.
. Nostrils small, a little depressed. Tongue cloven. The exterior toe joined at
the under part to the base of the middle one.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, Bill black, with a white base; the upper mandible a little
curved at the tip. Irides red; eyelids deep crimson. The upper parts of the
head, neck, and body, dusky reddish brown. Breast and belly deep ferruginous;
middle of the belly white. Quills dusky edged with white. Bastard wing white.
Exterior web of the outer tail feather white; the rest dusky. Legs yellow.

SYLVIA DARTFORDIENSIS. Lath. Genesis Syn. iv. p. 435. No. 27. DARTFORD WARBLER.
Suppl. p. 181. Pennant. Brit. Zool. i. No 161. pl. 56. -- Arct. Zool. -- Lev.
Mus. -- Berken. out. Not. Hist. Vol. i. 52. 14.
Le Pitchou de Provence. Buf. ois. v. p. 158. Pl. enl. 655. 1.
This bird measures five inches from the tip of the bill to the end of the
tail: it is of a lively appearance, though not very beautiful in the colors of
its plumage; and deserves our immediate attention as one of the least known
species we have in this country.

It is a native of France as well as of England. In Provence it is commonly
found among cabbages: it feeds on the insects that harbor among those
vegetables, and not unfrequently conceals itself under the shelter of the
leaves during the night.

A friend of Mr. Latham's shot a pair of those birds on Bexley Heath, near
Dartford in Kent, April the 10th, 1773, as they were sitting on a furze bush:
they fed on flies; springing from the bush every time one approached near, and
returning to the same place repeatedly; thereby imitating, as he observes, the
manners of our Cinereous Flycatcher.

This species resides with us in the winter. Several specimens, which are now
preserved in the Leverian Museum, were shot on a common near Wandsworth in
Surrey, 1782.

Mr. Latham appears to entertain some doubt, whether this species ever breeds
in France Hist. des Ois. v. p. 158.
. He says an intelligent observer of English Birds Mr. Green.
has informed him, that he never met with this species in the neighborhood of
London, except in winter; and that it disappears before the end of April.
Should this be the general fact, he can by no means reconcile the circumstance
of its breeding in France, as all migratory birds retire northward to breed,
not to a warmer climate; and should rather suppose, that if it does not quit
England in summer, it will hereafter be found in the northern parts of it.


PLATE XI. AMPELIS GARRULUS. WAXEN CHATTERER. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, unequal, bending toward the point; near the
end of the upper mandible a small notch. Nostrils hid in the bristles. Tongue
cartilaginous, bifid.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Length eight inches. Bill black, irides reddish: the
feathers on the crown of the head elongated into a crest: the head and upper
parts reddish ash color. Rump fine cinereous. From the nostrils over each eye,
passes a streak of black. Forehead chestnut. Chin black. Breast pale purplish
chestnut; belly paler, inclining to white near the vent. Lesser wing coverts
brown; the greater, farthest from the body, black with white tips, forming a
bar: quills black, the third and fourth tipped on the outer edges with white,
the five following with yellow: secondaries ash color, tipped on the outer
edge with white; seven of the secondary feathers have the ends of their shafts
continued into a flat horny appendage, of the color of fine red sealing-wax.
Tail black, tipped with yellow. Legs black.

AMPELIS GARRULUS, Linn. Syst. 1. p. 299. 1. Faun. Suec. No 82. Kram. el. p.
363. 1. Frisch. pl. 32.
LANIUS GARRULUS. Scop. Ann. 1. p. 20. GARRULUS BOHEMICUS. Albin. 2. pl. 26.
Gesn. av. 703.
BOHEMIAN CHATTERER. Will. orn. p. 132. pl. 20. -- Albin. WAXEN CHATTERER.
Latham. Syn. iii. 91. 1. Pennant. Brit. zool. 1. 314. Br. Zool. No 112. pl. 48.
Arct. Zool. -- Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
SILK TAIL. Raii. Syn. av. 85. A. Phil. Trans. Vol. xv. p. 1165. pl. 1. f. 9.
Ray's letters 198. 200.
Le Jaseur de Boheme. Bombycilla Bohemica. Bris. orn. 11. p. 333. 63. Buff. ois
III. p. 429. pl. 26. -- Pl. enl. 261.
Siden-suantz, Snotuppa. Faun. Suec. sp. 82. Sieden vel Sieben Suands.
Brunnich. 25. Zuserl, Geidenschweiffl. Kramer. 363. Seiden-schwantz. Frisch. 1.
32.
This bird is supposed to breed in Bohemia and other parts of Germany, but its
summer residence is perhaps more northward; it is seen in plenty both at St.
Petersburgh and Moscow, in the winter; but comes from the north and departs
again to the Arctic circle in spring; never known to breed in Russia, is scarce
in Siberia, and has not been observed-beyond the river Lena Pennant.
.

All the birds of this genus are natives of America; this species excepted;
they wander from their native place all over Europe, and at uncertain times
visit the Southern parts of Britain. They are observed in the Northern parts;
about Edinburgh in February they come annually and feed on the berries of the
mountain ash: they also appear as far south as Northumberland and Yorkshire
frequently, and like the fieldfare make the berries of the white-thorn their
food Pennant Br. Zool. 11. 314.
. They have also been met with several times near London One was shot at
Eltham, in the winter 1781, and was in the collection of Mr. T. Latham, of
Dartford.
. They disappear in spring Br. Zool. -- Flor. Scot.
. In France and Italy they are not unfrequent.

The nests of those birds are said to be constructed in the holes of rocks In
Tartary. Frisch.
, but as we can scarcely determine even their native country, we need not
expect any satisfactory information relative to its eggs and nest, until some
future traveller shall be so fortunate as to discover them.

The general food is berries of all kinds, especially grapes; in countries
where they are plenty they are esteemed good food.

It is said that the females want the red appendages at the end of the second
quills This is probable, since it is certainly so in the American species. But
these birds vary much in this characteristic; for I have observed so few as
five in some specimens; and Buffon mentions having seen a bird with seven on
one wing, and five on the other, as well as others with three only." Latham.
, as well as the yellow marks on the back "This is not clear to me. The
American species has no yellow on the wings in either sex. I have never met
with one of these without." Latham.
.

A variety of this bird is also found in America from Carolina to Mexico, it is
the AMPELIS GARRULUS of Linnaeus, Le jaseur de la Caroline, of Brisson and
Buffon; Caquautototl, Raii; and Chatterer of Carolina, of Edwards, Catesby, etc.

This bird is less than the European kind, is much like it, except that the
belly is of a pale yellow instead of reddish; both sexes have the wings of a
plain color without the marks of yellow: the female has no appendages at the
ends of the second quills, and the plumage is less lively than in the male.

This variety is called the Recollect at Quebec; our late voyagers met with
this bird at Aoonalshka Ellis's voyage II. p. 15.
.


PLATE XII. TETRAO LAGOPUS. PTARMIGAN GROUS. OR WHITE GAME. GALLINAE.
Bill unequal: the upper mandible arched. Toes connected by a membrane at the
bottom. Tail feathers more than twelve.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill unequal, strong, and short, a naked scarlet skin above
each eye Three or four species excepted.
. Nostrils small, hid in the feathers. Tongue pointed at the end. Legs strong,
feathered to the toes, and sometimes to the nails. Toes of some species
pectinated on the sides.

Three or four species excepted.
With four toes.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, Length fifteen inches. Bill black. Plumage pale brown or
ash color, crossed or mottled with small dusky spots, and minute bars: the
head and neck with broad bars of black, rust color, and white* Wings white:
Shafts of the greater quills black. Belly white. Winter dress pure white,
except a black line between the bill and eye, and shafts of the first seven
quills black, in the male. Tail of sixteen feathers, the two middle ones
ash-colored in summer, white in winter, two next slightly marked with white
near the ends; the rest entirely black. The upper tail coverts almost cover the
tail.

TETRAO LAGOPUS. Lin. Syst. i. p. 274. 4. Suec. 203. -- Scop. Ann. i. No 170.
Raii. Syn. p. 55. 5. -- Baun. p. 59. Phil. Trans. vol. lxii. p. 390. -- Frisch.
pl. 110. 111. -- Kram. el. p. 356. Faun. Groenl. No 80. -- Georgi. Reise. p.
172.
LAGOPUS. Gesner. av. 576. Plinii. lib. x. c. 48.
Perdrix alba seu Lagopus, Perdice alpestre. Aldro. av. 11. 66.
WHITE GAME Erroneously called the White Partridge
. Will. orn. p. 176. pl. 32. PTARMIGAN. Br. Zool. 1. No 95. -- Gent. Mag. 1772.
pl. in p. 74. -- Sib. Sect. 16. Pen. Zool. -- Arct. -- Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus. --
Lath. Genesis Syn. IV. 741. 10.
La Gelinote blanch. Bris. orn. 1. p. 216. 12. -- Pl. enl. 129. (Winter
dress). -- Pl. enl. 494. (Summer dress). La Perdrix blanch. Belon. av. 259. Le
Lagopede. Buff. ois. ii. p. 264. pl. 9. Snoripa. Faun. Suec. sp. 203.
Schneehuhn. Frisch. 1. 110. Schneehun. Kram. 359.
This species measures fourteen or fifteen inches from the tip of the bill to
the extremity of the tail: extent twenty three, weight nineteen ounces. Its
summer dress varies exceedingly from that which it assumes in winter; in the
former the general color is pale brown, or ash color, not inelegantly marked,
or mottled with dusky bars, spots, rust color, etc. in both sexes, but in the
latter, the female is entirely of a very beautiful white; the male of the same
color, but is distinguished by a dark dash, or line which passes from the bill
to the eye, and by the shafts of the first seven quill feathers being black;
the twelve extreme feathers of the tail are of the same black color.

Our figure is copied from a male bird which has not wholly assumed its winter
appearance, but is in the last stage of changing its summer dress, as appears
from the slight intermixture of dark feathers on its breast and back.

It inhabits most of the northern parts of Europe, even as far as Groenland, in
Russia and Siberia it is very frequent; it is seen in plenty on the Alpine
mountains of Savoy, on the Alps, and mount Cenis.

In Great Britain it is met with on the summits of the highest hills in the
Highlands of Scotland. Hebrides, and Orknies, and a few yet inhabit the lofty
hills near Keswick in Cumberland, as well as Wales Latham -- Pennant.
. They live amidst the rocks, and perch on the gray stones, the general color
of the strata in those situations.

Willughby has described the Ptarmigan under the name of the White Game. M.
Brisson Tom. 1. p. 216.
joins it with the White Partridge of Edwards, but Pennant has given as his
decisive opinion that they are two distinct species. "I have received both
species at the same time from Norway, and am convinced that they are not the
same." Penn.

The female lays eight or ten eggs, spotted with red-brown, the size of those
of a Pigeon, on the earth, in a stony situation, about the middle of June
Latham.
.

Authors agree that they are stupid silly birds, and are so tame as to be drawn
into any snare; or suffer themselves to be taken by the hand; if the hen is
killed the male will not forsake her. The Greenlanders take them with nooses
tied to a long line, which being carried by two men is drawn over their heads.

Pennant.
Their food consists of the buds of trees, young shoots of pine, heath, fruits,
and berries which grow on the mountains: on the continent they feed on the
Dwarf Birch and Black-berried Heath, or sometimes on the various kinds of
Liver-wort.

"They taste so like a Grous as to be scarcely distinguished; like the Grous
they keep in small packs; but never like those birds take shelter in the heath;
but beneath loose stones."

In winter they lie in heaps, in lodges which they form under the snow.


PLATE XIII. PICUS MARTIUS. GREAT BLACK WOODPECKER. PICAE.
Bill compressed, unequal.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, strong, angular, and connected at the end.
Nostrils covered with bristles reflected down. Tongue very long, slender,
cylindric, bony, hard and jagged at the end. Toes two forward, two backward.
Tail of ten hard, stiff, sharp-pointed feathers.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill ash color, blending to black, whitish on the sides.
Irides yellow. Whole bird black except the crown on the head, which is
vermilion. Legs lead color; covered with feathers on the fore part half their
length.

PICUS MARTIUS. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 173. No 1. Scop. Ann. 1. p. 46. No 51. Brun.
No 38.
Picus niger maximus. Raii. Syn. p. 42. 1. GREAT BLACK WOODPECKER. Will. Orn.
135. pl. 21. Albin. 2. pl. 27. Amer. Zool. Lath. Genesis Syn. 11. p. 552. 1. Arct.
Zool. 11. p. 276. A.
Le Pic Noir. Bris. Orn. IV. p. 21. No 6. Buf. Ois. VII. p. 41. pl. 2. -- Male,
Pl. enl. 596. Orn. de Salern. pl. 10. f. 2.
Schwartz Specht. Frisch. t. 34.
This species is near seventeen inches in length; the plumage is entirely
black, except the crown of the head, which is of a vermilion color, rather
inclining to crimson; the bill, and claws, are of considerable strength,
particularly the latter, which are curved in a more formidable manner than
those even of many rapacious birds of equal magnitude.

The female differs from the male in the general color of the plumage; that of
the female, having a strong cast of brown on the back, and the vermilion
colored feathers, with which the whole crown of the male is invested, being
only sparingly diffused on the crown of the female, though they terminate in a
rich tuft on the hind part of the head.

Both male and female are very liable to variations in the red on the crown;
some are adorned with a profusion of those feathers, while others have scarcely
any; and specimens have been met with entirely black, without even a trace of
the vermilion color on their heads.

As an English Woodpecker it is the largest we have; it even considerably
exceeds the size of the GREEN WOODPECKER, Picus Viridis. It is very rare in
this country, and generally believed to have been only observed in the southern
parts, and in Devonshire Mr. Latham writes, "Mr. Tarsiall tells me, that he has
been informed by a skilful Omithologist, of its being sometimes seen in
Devonshire." Genesis Syn.
.

It is found in almost every part of Europe, but is plenty only in Germany; it
is rarely seen in France; never in Italy; and only during the summer in Sweden,
Switzerland, and Denmark. Extends to Russia, where it is common in the woods
from St. Petersburgh, to Ochotsk on the eastern Ocean, and to Lapmark on the
west Arct. Zool.
.

"This species is so very destructive to Bees, that the Baschirians in the
neighborhood of the river Ufa, as well as the inhabitants of other parts, (who
form holes in the trees twenty-five or thirty feet from the ground, wherein the
Bees may deposit their store), take every precaution to hinder the access of
this bird; and in particular are cautious to guard the mouth, of the hive with
sharp thorns; notwithstanding which, the Woodpecker finds means to prove a very
destructive enemy: and it is observed to be in most plenty where the Bees are
in the greatest numbers Dec. Russ. IV. p. 9. 17.
." Latham.

Its food does not consist entirely of Bees; Albin writes of the bird he has
figured, "The guts are seventeen inches long, great and lax; the stomach also
lax and membraneous, full of Hexapods and Ants. It wants the appendices or
blind guts as the rest of this tribe."

Its nest is capacious and deep, and is said to be usually built in old Ash or
Poplar trees; Frisch observes, that they often so excavate a tree, that it is
soon after blown down with the wind; and that under the hole of this bird may
often be found a bushel of dust and bits of wood.

The female lays two or three white eggs; which color, according to Willughby
Zool. Danic.
, is peculiar to the whole genus, or at least to all those which have come
under his inspection.


PLATE XIV. MOTACILLA TROCHILUS. WILLOW WREN. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill slender, weak. Nostrils small, a little depressed:
Tongue cloven. The exterior toe joined at the under part to the base of the
middle one.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Upper parts pale olive green; under parts pale yellow. A
streak of yellow over the eyes. Wings and tail brown, edged with yellowish
green. Legs yellowish.

MOTACILLA TROCHILUS. Linn. Syst. I. p. 338. No 49. Faun. Suec. No 264. --
Scop. Ann. I. No 238. Kram. el. p. 378. No 22. -- Brun. No 286. -- Muller 281.
-- Frisch. t. 24. f. 2.
MOTACILLA HISPANICA. Hasselq. Voy. 287. 52. TROCHILUS. Gesner av. 726. ASILUS.
Aldrov. av. II. 293. SMALL YELLOW BIRD. Raii Syn. p. 80. A. 10. LITTLE
YELLOWISH BIRD. Will. Orn. p. 228. GREEN WREN. Regulus non cristatus. Albin.
II. 59. YELLOW WREN. Latham Genesis Syn. IV. 512. Penn. Brit. Zool. No 151. Arct.
Zool. -- Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
Le Pouillot, ou Chantre. Bris. Orn. iii. p. 479. No 45. Buff. Ois. V. p. 344.
-- Pl. enl. 651. f. 1.
Chofti, ou Chanteur. Belon av. 344. Schnee Rienig (Snow King). Frisch, I. 24.
Schmittl. Kramer. 378.
The Yellow Wren ranks among the least of the British Birds; it measures only
four inches and three quarters from the tip of the bill to the extremity of the
tail. The colors of its plumage are not attractive, neither do we introduce it
as a rare bird, being one of our most frequent species; but it is a very
delicately formed creature, exceedingly active, and by concealing itself
immediately among the thickest of the foliage when any noise approaches, it may
not be so generally known as some less timid birds.

It chiefly frequents large woods, which abound with willows; and builds its
nest at the roots of trees, or in the hollows of dry banks; it is constructed
in the form of an egg, with a hole at the top for its entrance, the outside is
composed of moss and hay, or straw; and the inside is lined with soft feathers,
wool, or hair. It lays seven white eggs Pennant Br. Zool. 1. 151.
, or, according to Latham and Albin, only five; they are freckled all over with
reddish spots. Its note is low and plaintive, scarcely more than twit, twit
Latham.
, which it utters when it is running up and down the branches of trees in
search of insects on which it feeds. It is said that the male has a song during
incubation, far from unpleasing, and is soft, though weak. It is migratory, but
visits us early.

Albin says it sings like a grasshopper, and frequents woods and solitary
places, sitting on the tops of oaks.

Pennant observes, that the breast, belly, and thighs, vary in color in
different birds; in some those parts are of a bright yellow, in others they
fade almost into white. The legs also appear to admit of variation, those of
our specimens are yellowish in both sexes, Albin describes those of his male
specimen to be pale amber color, and those of the hen to be black.

Latham, in his Genesis Syn. has given a description of four other birds, which he
considers only as varieties of the MOTACILLA TROCHILUS. Among those are
included the GREATER NON-CRESTED REGULUS of Willughby, and the MOTACILLA
ACREDULA of Linnaeus. This latter bird appears in the British Zoology of
Pennant as a new species, (the Scotch Wren;) it has been also considered as a
distinct kind in the writings of some, and the synonymas of others, as Brisson,
Buffon, Ray, Sloane, Catesby, and Edwards, but as it differed from our species
only in the color of the upper parts, inclining more to brown than to green,
and the lower parts more to yellow, Mr. Latham concluded it was only a variety.
It is a native of Jamaica, Carolina, and America; but one was communicated to
Mr. Latham by E. S. Fraser, Esquire. who informed him that it was shot in the
Highlands of Scotland.


PLATE XV. MOTACILLA FLAVA. YELLOW WAGTAIL. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill weak and slender; slightly notched at the tip. Tongue
lacerated at the end. Legs slender. Tail frequently in motion, seldom perch;
have a twittering noise in flight Vide Latham's division of the Motacilla genus.
.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill black: head and upper parts of the body olive green,
rump palest: under parts from the throat bright yellow; on the throat a few
black spots; above the eye a streak of yellow; through the eyes another of
dusky color: beneath the eye also a streak of dusky. Lesser wing coverts as
the back; the others dusky, edged with pale yellow: quills dusky. Tail black
except two of the outer feathers, which are partly white. Legs dark brown; hind
claw very long.

MOTACILLA FLAVA. Linn. Syst. I. p. 331. No 12. Faun. Suec. 253. Scop. ann. 1.
No 226. Brun. No 273. 274. Muller. No 273. Kram. el. p. 374. 2. Frisch. pl. 23.
Georgi Reisse. p. 174. Sepp. Vog. pl. in. p. 103. Faun. Arag. p. 88. Gesner.
av. 168.
YELLOW WATER WAGTAIL. Raii. Syn. 75. A. 2. Will. Orn. p. 238. pl. 68. Edw. pl.
158. (the female). -- 258 (the male). Br. Zool. 1. No 143. Arct. Zool. -- Br.
Mus. -- Lev. Mus. Latham Genesis Syst. IV. 400. 6. -- Suppl. 179.
La Bergeronette de Printemps. Bris. Orn. iii. p. 468. No 40. Buff. Ois. V.
265. pl. 14. f. 1. -- Pl. enl. 674. No 2.
Susurada. Belon. obs. 11. Codatremola. Zinan. 51. Gelb-brustige. Bachsteltze.
Frisch. 1. 23. Gulspink. Brunnich. 273. Gelbe Bachstelze. Kram. 374.
The Yellow Wagtail is not equal in size to the Common, or White Wagtail, it
measures only six inches and a quarter in length. It is a bird of distinguished
beauty, particularly the male, whose plumage is for the most part of a very
lovely yellow, by no means inferior to that of the male Golden Oriole; the
yellow color on the breast of the female is paler, the streak over the eye
whiter, and it wants the black markings on the throat.

It is usually observed in moist meadows, and cornfieldsd in this country in
the summertime; but migrates, or shifts its situation in the winter: Pennant
says it continues in Hampshire the whole year.

It makes its nest in the cornfieldsd on the ground, the outside is composed of
bents and fibers of the roots, the inside is lined with hair. They are commonly
found with five eggs in them, of a whitish color, varied with red brown spots.

Is seen in France at all times of the year, except the winter is uncommonly
severe. Is said to inhabit Sweden, Russia, Siberia, and Kamtschatka.

Latham describes the legs, black: those of our specimens are brown.


PLATE XVI. PARUS CAUDATUS. LONG-TAILED TITMOUSE. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, a little compressed, strong, sharp-pointed,
bristles reflected over the nostrils. Tongue terminated by three or four
bristles. Toes divided at their origin; back toe very large and strong.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill short, thick, and black. Top of the head white,
surrounded by a broad streak of black, like a crown, it passes down the hind
part of the neck, and back to the rump. Side of the head white. Sides of the
back, the rump, belly, sides, and vent, dull rose color. Wing black. Tail very
long, feather of unequal lengths, some black, others black with white tips.

PARUS CAUDATUS. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 342. No 11. Scop. Ann. 1. p. 164. No 247.
Kram. el. p. 379. No 6. Sepp. Vog. pl. in. p. 49. Frisch. t. 14. Raii. Syn. p.
74.
LONG-TAILED TITMOUSE. Will. Orn. p. 242. pl. 43. Albin 11. pl. 57. f. 1. Raii.
Syn. p. 74. Br. Zool. 1. No 166. -- Arct. Zool. -- Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
Latham. Genesis Syn. IV. 550. 18. -- Suppl. 190.
La Mesange a longue queue. Bris. Orn. III. 570. No 13. Buff. Ois. V. p. 437.
pl. 19. -- pl. enl. 502. f. 3.
Monticola. Aldro. av. II. 319. Pendolino, Paronzino. Zinan. 77. Alhtita. Faun.
Suec. sp. 83. Gaugartza. Scop. No 247. Belzmeise Pfannenstiel. Kram. 379.
Langschwaentzige Meise. Frisch. 1. 14.
This bird is very common in England; is said to inhabit Sweden, and thence to
extend even to Italy; the fullness of its plumage enables it to bear the
inclemencies of the northern regions in winter, but it admits of some surprise
that such as are found in warmer countries are not clothed with a plumage more
adapted to the climate.

The length is five inches and a quarter, the breadth seven inches, the tail is
remarkably long in proportion to the size of the body; in form it is like that
of a magpie, consists of twelve feathers of unequal lengths; those in the
middle are the longest, those on each side grow gradually shorter. The legs are
generally black, but of some specimens are brown.

The form of the nest is almost peculiar to this species only, it is of an oval
shape, with a small hole or entrance in the side; the materials of the external
part are moss, liverwort, and wool, curiously interwoven, the inside is lined
with a thick bed of the softest feathers. The nest is not suspended from a
bough as is usual with some of the tribe, but is built between the forked
branches of low wood, about three feet from the ground: they generally contain
from ten to seventeen or even twenty eggs of greyish color, speckled with pale
red-brown.

Those birds are most frequent in gardens and orchards, to which they do much
injury by devouring the tender shoots; they are very active, and fly to and fro
with great facility, or run up and down the branches in every direction. The
parents and their offspring remain together the whole winter, but separate in
the spring "The young follow the parents the whole winter; and from the
slimness of their bodies, and great length of tail, appear, while flying, like
so many darts cutting the air," Pennant.
.

The male has more of the rose color than the female; in the former however it
is subject to much variation.


PLATE XVII. LOXIA ENUCLEATOR. PINE GROSBEAK. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strong, unequal above and below, very thick at the
base. Nostrils small and round. Tongue as if cut off at the end. Toes placed
three before and one behind.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill stout at the base, the upper mandible hooked at the
tip; Nostrils covered with recumbent feathers. Head, neck, breast, and rump,
rose-coloured crimson. Back and lesser wing coverts black, edged with reddish;
greater wing coverts black, tipped with white; quills black; secondaries have the
outer borders white, primaries have gray. Belly and vent ash-colored. Tail
rather forked. Legs brown.

LOXIA ENUCLEATOR. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 299. No 3. Faun. Suec. 223. Brun. No 239.
Muller, No 246.
GREATEST BULFINCH, Edw. pl. 123, 124. M. and F. PINE GROSBEAK, Arct. Zool. 2.
No 209. Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus. Latham's Genesis Syn. iii. p. 111. No 5. Pennant's
Brit. Zool. 1. No 114. pl. 49. fig. 2.
Gros-bec de Canada, Bris. Orn. iii. p. 250. No 15. pl. 12. f. 3. -- Pl. enl.
135. 1. Le Dur-bec, Buf. Ois. iii. p. 457. Tallbit. Natt-waka. Faun. Suec.
Coccothraustes Canadensis. Bris.
The male Pine Grosbeak is certainly one of the most beautiful of the feathered
tribe that inhabit either of the sister countries of Great Britain. It measures
nine inches from the tip of the bill to the end of the tail, its weight two
ounces; the general color of its plumage is rose-coloured crimson, and black,
elegantly marked with white on the edges of the feathers: the bill, which is
remarkably stout, and curved at the tip, is well adapted for the purpose of
dividing the cones of the pines to obtain the seeds.

The female has not the beautiful appearance of the male; the principal color
of her plumage is dirty green, inclining to brown, the crown of the head varied
only with a few reddish or yellowish teints, and some feathers of the same
color slightly dispersed over the back, breast, and belly.

In England this species is found only in the most northern parts, or is
probably entirely confined to Scotland; like the Crossbill it inhabits the pine
forests in the Highlands; Pennant suspects that they breed there, as he has
observed them flying above the great pine forests of Invercauld, Aberdcenshire,
in the month of August.

It is found in the pine forests also of Sweden, the northern parts of Russia
"Common about St. Petersburgh in autumn, and is caught in great plenty at that
time for the use of the table, returning north in spring." Pennant.
, of Siberia, and Lapland; they are also common in the northern parts of
America: from April to September they are frequent at Hudson's Bay; the
southern settlements are inhabited by them throughout the year. It has been met
with at Aoonalashka Ellis's Narr. vol. ii. p. 15.
, and in Norton Sound.

Latham observes, that at Hudson's Bay it frequents the groves of pines and
junipers in May; and makes a nest in the trees with sticks lined with feathers,
at a small height from the ground. The eggs are four in number, and white; the
young are hatched the middle of June: he adds, "though this bird, when adult,
is beautiful in color, the young brood for some time remain of a plain dull
blue." The natives of the Bay call it Wuscunithow Mr. Hutchins.
.


PLATE XVIII. CHARADRIUS HIATICULA. SEA LARK, or RINGED PLOVER. GRALLAE.
Bill roundish. Tongue entire, fleshy. Thighs naked. Toes divided.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, roundish, obtuse. Nostrils linear. Toes three
in number, all placed forwards.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Length seven inches. Bill orange, black at the tip. From
the base of the upper mandible to the eyes, a black line: another from one eye
to the other. Crown of the head brown. Chin and throat white, passing round the
neck in a broad collar: beneath this, on the lower part of the neck, is a
second line of black, encircling the neck behind, but becoming narrower as it
passes backward. Breast and under parts white. Back and wing coverts pale
brown. Two middle feathers of the tail greyish brown, growing almost black
toward the ends; the three next on each side the same, with white tips; the
last but one is white, with a brown band: the outer one white. Legs orange;
claws black.

CHARADRIUS HIATICULA. Lin. Syst. 1. p. 253. 1. Faun. Suec. 187. Scop. Ann. 1.
No 147. Brun. No 184. Georgi Reise. p. 172. Faun. Groenl. No 78.
SEA LARK. Raii Syn. p. 112. A. 6. 190, 13. Sloan. Jam. p. 319. 13. pl. 269.
fig. 2. Albin. 1. pl. 80. Will. Orn. p. 310. pl. 57. Br. Zool. 11. 383.
RINGED PLOVER. Pennant's Br. Zool. No 211. Arct. Zool. No 401. Br. Mus. --
Lev. Mus. Lath. Genesis Syn. V. 201. 8.
Le petit Pluvier-a Collier, Bris. Orn. V. p. 63. 8. pl. 5. fig. 2. -- Pl. enl.
921. Le Pluvier a Collier, Buff. Ois. viii. p. 90. pl. 6. Griess hennl. Kram.
354. Strandpipare, Grylle, Trulls, Lappis Pago. Faun. Suec. sp. 187. Bornholmis
Praeste-krave, Sand-Vrifter. Brun. 184. Frisch. 11. 214.
Those Birds migrate to our shores in the spring, but are never very numerous;
they remain with us during the summer, and depart in autumn. They run lightly,
and with much swiftness, and when disturbed take short flights; at the same
time they make a loud twittering noise.

The female makes no nest, but deposits four eggs on the ground, under some
convenient shelter; the eggs are about one inch and an half in length, of a
dull whitish color, spotted and blotched with black.

The same species is found in several parts of the Continent; in Greenland, and
in America. Latham observes that it visits Hudson's Bay the middle of June, and
departs in September. He adds, "it is a solitary bird; and observed, on any
one's approaching near the eggs, to use many stratagems to decoy the person
from it, by drawing off its attention. Called at Hudson's Bay, Kisqua, the napi
Shish." -- Genesis Syn.

The same writer also mentions a variety which inhabits Cayenne; the length of
this variety is six inches and an half. Bill black: forehead, and before as far
as the breast, white, passing round the lower part of the neck as a collar: the
rest of the plumage pale dusky ash color: the end half of the tail dusky
black, the tip fringed with rufous: legs pale.


PLATE XIX. TRINGA PUGNAX. RUFF. GRALLAE.
Bill roundish. Tongue entire, fleshy. Thighs naked. Toes divided.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill roundish, strait, about the length of the head.
Nostrils narrow. Toes four.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Feathers of the neck remarkably long. General color
brown, commonly marked with spots, or concentric circles of black. Legs dull
yellow. Female has no ruff.

TRINGA PUGNAX. Linn. Syst. 1. p. 147. 1. Faun. Suec. 175. Scop. Ann. 1. No
140. Brun. 168. 169. Kram. p. 352. Frisch. t. 232. 235. Georgi Reisc. p. 172.
AVIS PUGNAX. Aldr. av. III. 167. RUFF and REEVE. Albin. 1. pl. 72. 73. Penn.
Brit. Zool. No 192. pl. 69. Arct. Zool. p. 479. A. Lath. Genesis Syn. V. 159. 1.
Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
RUFF. Raii Syn. p. 107. A. 3. Will. Orn. p. 302. pl. 56.
Le Combattant, ou Paon de Mer, Bris. Orn. V. p. 240. 18. pl. 22. fig. 1. 2.
Buff. Ois. vii. p. 521. pl. 29. 30. Pl. enl. 305. 306.
Krosler. Kram. 352. Brushane. Faun. Suec. sp. 175. Bruushane. Brunnick, 168.
Streitschnepfe, Ramphaehnlein. Frisch. 11. 232. 235.
The length of the male is twelve inches, of the female ten inches; the bill of
the former is yellow in some, in others black, or dark brown; the face is
covered with yellow pear-shaped pimples; the back part of the head and neck are
furnished with long feathers, which expand in a very singular manner on each
side of the neck, and impend loosely over the breast, like the ruff anciently
worn in this country. A portion or tuft of those feathers project also just
beyond each eye, and have the appearance of long ears.

As the most remarkable peculiarity of those birds are that no two specimens
are ever found to agree in the colors of the plumage, it is impossible to give
any description, except of its form, that may assist the unskilful
ornithologist to determine the species, when it has attained the ruff; it
cannot, however, be mistaken, as no Bird of this country resembles it in the
smallest degree. The ground color is generally brown, but it varies in
different Birds to every hue between the lightest teint that can deserve that
name, and the deepest chocolate color; sometimes we find the ruff of a fine
tender buff color, without the slightest appearance of spots, except on the
breast and back, which may be of a deep black, intermingled with a few white
feathers, and glossed with shining purple; others we find that have the ruffs
of a deep brown, barred with black; some with white ruffs spotted with brown,
or brown spotted with white; and indeed with every variation that it is
possible to describe.

The females, or Reeves, Pennant asserts, never change their colors, which he
says are pale brown; the back spotted with black, slightly edged with white;
the tail brown; the middle feathers spotted with black; the breast and belly
white; the legs of a pale dull yellow: but I have two specimens that do not
well agree with his description, or correspond with each other; and in the
Leverian museum a variety of that sex is preserved that is wholly white, except
the wings, on which the usual markings are visible in a very pale color.

The female has no ruff, and the male does not attain that appendage until the
second season; at the time of incubation the plumage of the latter is in the
full perfection, and the pimples break out on his face: but after that time
they shrink beneath the skin, the long feathers of the ruff fall off, and he
again assumes the plain appearance of the female.

These Birds inhabit the North of Europe in summer, as far as Iceland, as well
as the northern marshes of Russia and Siberia. In this country they are found
in Lincolnshire, the Isle of Ely, and in the east riding of Yorkshire Brit.
Zool.
; they arrive at those places early in the spring, and disappear about
Michaelmas.

The Reeve lays four eggs in a tuft of grass the beginning of May; they are
white, marked with large rusty spots.

Soon after their arrival, the males begin to hill; that is, to collect on some
dry bank near a splash of water, in expectation of the females. Each male keeps
possession of a small piece of ground, round which it runs so often as to form
a bare circular path; the instant a female alights among them, the males are in
motion; a general battle ensues, and the fowlers, who have been waiting for the
advantage of such an event, catch them in their nets in great numbers They
visit a place called Martin-mere in Lancashire, the latter end of March, or
beginning of April, but do not continue there above three weeks. -- Brit. Zool.
.

In the fens each male remains within his circle, and defends himself against
every invader with much resolution; the least infringement on his possession by
another male is resented with the greatest violence; and if any farther attack
is made, a battle is the consequence: in fighting they have the same action as
a cock, spread their ruffs, and place their bills to the ground.

"It is usual to sat these birds for table by means of bread and milk mixed
with hemp seed, and sometimes boiled wheat; to these by many sugar is added;
which last in a fortnight's time will cause them to be one lump of fat, when
they will fetch from two shillings to half a crown each." -- Lath. Genesis Syn.


PLATE XX. MERGUS ALBELLUS. SMEW. ANSERES.
Bill obtuse, covered with a thin membrane, broad, gibbous below the base,
swelled at the apex. Tongue fleshy. Legs naked, feet webbed, or finned.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill slender, a little depressed, furnished with a crooked
nail; edges of the mandibles very sharply serrated. Nostrils near the middle of
the mandible, small and subovated. Feet furnished with four toes; three
forwards, and one behind; the outer toe before longer than the middle one.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill lead color. General color of the plumage white.
Head crested at the back part; on each side of the head an oval black spot,
beginning at the bill, and encircling the eye. On the lower part of the neck,
on each side, are two curved black streaks, pointing forward. Inner scapulars,
back, coverts on the side of the wing and the greater quill feathers, black.
Tail cinereous. Legs gray.

MERGUS ALBELLUS. Lin. Syst. 1. p. 209. 5. Faun. Suec. No 137. Brun. No 97.
Kram. El. p. 344. 3. Frisch. t. 172.
MERGUS ALBULUS. Scop. Ann. 1. No 91. MERGUS RHENI. Raii Syn. p. 135. 5. Will.
Orn. p. 337.
MERGUS RHENANUS. Gesner. av. 131. SMEW. Albin. 1. pl. 89. Penn. Brit. Zool.
ii. No 262. Lath. Genesis Syn. 6. 421. 5. Arct. Zool. No 468.
WHITE NUN. Will. Orn. 337. pl. 64. Raii Syn. p. 135. A. 3.
WEESEL COOT. Albin. 1. pl. 88. RED-HEADED SMEW. Br. Zool. 11. 263. Br. Mus. --
Lev. Mus.
Le petit Harle huppe, ou la Piette, Bris. Orn. vi. p. 243. 3. pl. 24. fig. 1.
Buf. Ois. viii. p. 275. pl. 24. -- Pl. enl. 449.
L'Harle etoile, Bris. Orn. vi. p. 252. 6. Brun. No 98.
Kreutz-Ente, (Cross-Duck) Frisch. 11. 172.
The Smew is about sixteen inches in length, and twenty-four inches in breadth;
its weight thirty-four ounces; our figure is copied from a specimen of the
male. The colors of the female do not exactly correspond with those of the
male; the head of the former is ferruginous, and slightly crested; cheeks,
chin, and throat, white; between the bill and the eye the same oval spot as in
the male; breast clouded with gray; belly white; legs pale ash. It is generally
called the Lough Diver.

It visits this country only in the winter; on the Continent it is found as far
south as Carniola; is also found in Iceland, and is supposed to breed and
remain there during the winter; or that it passes to some other arctic region.
It has been observed with the Mergansers, Ducks, and other Water Birds in their
migratory course up the Wolga in February Dec. Russ. ii. p. 145.
.

It also inhabits America, having been sent from New York Arct. Zool.
.

Latham, in his supplement, says that he once discovered a few shrimps in the
belly of one of those birds, and supposes them to be its chief food.


PLATE XXI. ANAS QUERQUEDULA. GARGANEY. ANSERES.
Bill obtuse, covered with a thin membrane, broad, gibbous below the base,
swelled at the apex. Tongue fleshy. Legs naked. Feet webbed or finned.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill unequal above, flat beneath, hooked at the apex with
membranous teeth.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill lead color. Head dusky with oblong streaks. From the
corner of each eye a white line passes to the back of the neck. Cheeks and
upper part of the neck, brown-purple, marked with minute oblong white lines,
pointing downwards. Breast light brown, with semi-circular bars of black. Belly
white. Wing coverts gray; first quills ash colored, exterior webs of the
middle quills green. Legs lead color.

ANAS QUERQUEDULA. macula alarm viridi, linea alba supra oculos. Fn. Sv. --
Linn. Syst. 1. p. 203. Scop. Ann. 1. No 75. Brun. No 81. Muller, No 125. Kram.
El. p. 343. 18. Frisch. pl. 176.
QUERQUEDULA Varia. Gesner. av. 107. QUERQUEDULA Prima. Will. Orn. 291. t. 74.
Raj. av. 148. 8.
GARGANEY. Ditto. Br. Zool. No 289. pl. 101. Arct. Zool. p. 576. O. Lath. Genesis
Syn. 5. 550. 87. Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
La Sarcelle Bris. Orn. VI. 427. tab. 39. 1. 2. Buff. Ois. 9. p. 260. -- Pl.
enl. 946. (male) Belon. av. 175.
Scavolo, Cervolo, Garganello. Aldr. av. 3. 89. 90. Krickantl. Kramer. 343.
Kriech-Ente. Frisch. 2. 176. Norvegis Krek-And. Quibusd. Saur-And. Brunnich,
81.
This species is found in England in the Winter; at that time also it is seen
in France. In April it departs, and migrates to the North as the Summer
advances, to breed.

In Europe it is found as far as Sweden; it is very common throughout Russia
and Siberia, and as far as Kamtschatka.

Our figure is of the male bird; the female has an obscure white mark over the
eye, the rest of the plumage is of a brownish ash color.


PLATE XXII. MUSCICAPA ATRICAPILLA. PIED FLYCATCHER. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill flatted at the base; almost triangular; notched at the
end of the upper mandible, and beset with bristles. Toes divided as far as
their origin.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill black. Upper parts of the body, wings, and tail,
black. Forehead and under part white. Several white feathers in the Wing. Upper
tail coverts black and white mixed. Legs black.

MUSCICAPA ATRICAPILLA. Lin. Syst. 1. p. 236. 9. Frisch. pl. 24. Kram. El. p.
377. 16.
Atricapilla five ficedula. Aldr. av. II. 331. COLDFINCH. Raii Syn. p. 77. A.
5. Will. Orn. p. 236. Edw. pl. 30. Br. Zool. -- Land. 1766.
PIED FLYCATCHER. Penn. Brit. Zool. 1. No 135. Land. 1776. Arct. Zool. Lath.
Genesis Syn. III. 324. 2.
Le Traquet d'Angleterre. Bris. Orn. iii. p. 436. 27. Rubetra Anglicana. Buff.
Ois. V. p. 222. Meerschwartz puffle. Kram. Aust. 377.
The Coldfinch, or according to Latham and Pennant, the Pied Fly-catcher, is
found in Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Derbyshire; in those parts of the kingdom
it is not very frequent, in every other it is extremely rare.

It is unnecessary for us to describe the many varieties that are known of this
species; in England the colors of its plumage varies considerably at different
seasons of the year; but such as are natives of foreign countries, are again so
dissimilar to ours, that different authors have alternately described them as
varieties, or new species.

The bird that Latham describes, was white on the outer web of the exterior
tail feather; the two exterior tail feathers of Willoughby's bird was marked
with white; and on the contrary, we have a specimen which does not exhibit the
least trace of white on either. The upper tail coverts are black and white
mixed, in some specimens; in others they are wholly black; and Le Gobe-mouche
noir of Brisson, which is only another variety, differs in having a mixture of
gray on the upper parts, the thighs brown and white, and three of the exterior
tail feathers white on the margins.

A more pleasing variety than either, is found in Lorraine and Brie; it
corresponds in size with those found in England; but the white of the breast
which terminates under the cheeks in the latter, passes quite round the neck
like a collar in the former This variety is called by Buffon Le Gobemouche noir
a Collier. Hist. des Ois. 4. p. 520. pl. 25. f. 1.
.

The plumage of the female is brown in those parts where the male is black; it
has no white on the forehead; the white spot on the wing is more obscure; and
the under parts of the body is of a dusky white. The male possesses only the
full black during the summer; as that season declines, its plumage alters, and
it gradually assumes so perfectly the appearance of the female, that he cannot
be distinguished from her.

The nest is usually built in the hole of a tree, not very near the ground; it
is composed of fibers, mixed with moss, and contains six eggs. It feeds on
Insects.


PLATE XXIII. STERNA HIRUNDO. COMMON TERN. ANSERES.
Bill obtuse, covered with a thin membrane, broad gibbous below the base,
swelled at the apex. Tongue fleshy, legs naked. Feet webbed or finned.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, slender, pointed. Nostrils linear. Tongue
slender and sharp. Wings very long. Tail forked, back toe small.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill and feet red. Crown and tip of the bill black. Neck,
and underside white. Back and wings fine gray.

STERNA HIRUNDO. Linn. Syst. Not. 1. p. 227. 2. Faun. Suec. No 158. Hasselq. p.
272. No 40. Scop. Ann. 1. No 111. Brun. No 151. 152. Mull. p. 21. Faun. Groenl.
No 69. Kram. El. p. 345. (Larus). Frisch. 2. 219.
THE SEA-SWALLOW. Raii. Syn. p. 131. A. 1. 191. 7. Will. Orn. p. 352. pl. 68.
Albin. 11. pl. 88.
COMMON TERN. Lath. Genesis Syn. 6. 361. 14. GREAT TERN. Br. Zool. No 254. pl. 90.
Lev. Mus. Br. Mus.
THE KERMEW. Marten's Spitzberg. 92. Le Grande Hirondelle-de-Mer. Bris. Orn.
VI. p. 203. 1. pl. 19. fig. 1. Buff. Ois. 8. p. 331. pl. 27. -- Pl. Enl. 987.
Tarna. Faun. Suec. Sterna (Stirn, Spyrer, Schnirring). Gesn. av. 586. Grauer
fischer. Kram. 345. Islandis Kria. Norvegis Ten, Tend, Tende-lobe,
Sand-Tolle, Sand-Taerrne. Danis Taerne. Bornholmis Kirre, Krop-Kirre. Brunnich.
151. Makauka. Scop. No 3. Schwartz plattige Schwalben Moewe. Frisch. 11. 219.
The length of this species is fourteen inches; its breadth thirty; and its
weight four ounces and a quarter. It is very common on the seacoasts, banks of
lakes and rivers in this country during summer; it quits the breeding places at
the approach of winter, and returns in spring.

It is found in various parts of Europe and Asia; in the summer as far as
Greenland and Spitzbergen. It is also found in America; arrives at New England
in May, and disappears in Autumn. At Hudson's Bay it is known by the name of
Black-head Lath. Genesis Syn.
.

Dr. Forster mentions a variety at Hudson's Bay, having the Legs black; Tail
shorter and less forked; and the outer feathers wholly white Phil. Trans. vol.
lxii. p. 421.
: The Bird Albin has figured in his plate 88, vol. 2. appears also to be a
variety; the legs are black, and the bill is of the same color, except the
tip, which is red.

These Birds breed among tufts of rushes, grass, or moss near the water side;
they lay three or four eggs, about an inch and three quarters in length, of a
dull olive color, marked with irregular black spots, and sprinkled with specks
of an obscure brown in June; the young birds are hatched in July, and quit the
nest soon after.

They feed on small fish and water insects; are very clamorous and daring; and
during the time of incubation, will dart on any person who may pass by their
nest, though they should neither provoke nor disturb them.

It appears to have all the actions over the water which the Swallow has on
land, skimming and describing vast circuits over the surface of the waves when
seeking its prey, diving with intrepidity the instant it discovers it, and
instantly appearing again on the wing with the fish in its mouth.
Notwithstanding the affinity of its actions with those of the Swallow, Pennant,
in the British Zoology, has altered the name to Tern, "a name," he observes in
a note, "these birds are known by in the North of England; and which we
substitute instead of the old compound one of Sea-Swallow; which was given them
on account of their forked tails."


PLATE XXIV. STURNUS CINCLUS. WATER-OUZEL. PASSERES.
Bill conic, pointed. Nostrils oval, broad, naked.

GENERIC CHARACTER. Bill strait, subulate, and somewhat angular.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Bill compressed on the side, black. A white spot above and
another beneath the eye. Upper part of the head and neck deep brown. Back,
Wings, Tail, black; feathers with brownish edges. Chin, fore part of the breast
pure white, Belly rufous brown; next the tail black. Legs black.

STURNUS CINCLUS, niger, pectore albo. Linn. Syst. Not. 2. 168. 4. editio
Decima. MOTACILLA pectore albo, corpore nigro. Fn. Suec. 216. MOTACILLA
CINCLUS. Scop. Ann. 1. No 223. Kram. el. p. 374. 3.
MERULA AQUATICA. Gesn. av. 608. WATER-OUZEL, or WATER-CRAKE. Will. Orn. 149.
Raii. Syn. p. 66. A. 7. Albin. 2. pl. 39. Br. Zool. 1. No 111. Arct. Zool.
Lath. Genesis Syn. 3. 48. 50. Br. Mus. -- Lev. Mus.
WATER-CRAW. Turner. Le Merle d'Eau. Bris. Orn. V. p. 252. 19. Buff. ois. 8. p.
134. pl. 11. -- Pl. enl. 940.
Watnstare. Faun. Suec. sp. 214. Merlo Aquatico. Zinan. 109. Providni Koss.
Scop. No 223. Norvegis Fosse Fald, Fosse Kald, Quaern Kald, Stroem-Staer,
Baekke Eugl. Brun. 203. Wasser-amsel, Bach-amsel. Kra. 374. Lerlichirollo.
Aldr. av. 3. 186.
The Water-Ouzel is a very shy and solitary bird, and though well known as a
British species, is generally confined to such parts as abound with small
rivulets, or with waters that course between the craggy fragments of mountains;
it is therefore that we find it plenty only in Wales, Cumberland, Yorkshire,
and Westmoreland.

It feeds on small fish and insects: its nest is built among the stones on the
ground near the water side; beneath the small shelving rocks that over-hang the
streams it frequents; or in holes contrived in steep and perpendicular banks;
it is composed of hay and fibers of roots, is lined with dead oak leaves, has a
covering of green moss, and contains five eggs of a white color with a blush
of red. In young birds the belly is wholly white.

Most authors have noticed the very singular manner in which it searches for
its prey, it not only dives under the water, but will fly and run after them at
the bottom in the same manner as on land Hist. des. Ois. -- Dacouv. Rus. vol.
i. p. 307. 314.
: Kramer says, that one of them had been caught under water by means of a line
and hook, which had been baited to catch fish Albin says, "it feeds on fish,
yet refuses not insects; sitting on the banks of rivers it now and then flirts
up its tail; although it be not web-footed, yet it will sometimes dive or dart
quite under water. It is a solitary bird, accompanying only with its mate in
coupling and breeding time."
.

These birds are smaller than the Ring-Ouzel, their length is seven, and
breadth eleven inches, weight two ounces and an half; they are found in Europe
as high as Feroe and Finmark Arct. Zool.
; as far as Kamtschatka in the Russian dominions; in Christiansoe and Norway.

INDEX TO VOL. I. ARRANGEMENT ACCORDING TO THE SYSTEM OF LINNAEUS.
ORDER II. PICAE.
CORVUS GLANDARIUS Plate 2 Oriolus Galbula Plate 7 PICUS MARTIUS Plate 13 UPUPA
EPOPS Plate 9
ORDER III. ANSERES.
ANAS QUERQUEDULA Plate 21 MERGUS ALBELLUS Plate 20 ALCA ARCTICA Plate 8
PODICEPS RUFICOLIS Plate 6 Not described by Linnaeus.
STERNA HIRUNDO Plate 23
ORDER IV. GRALLAE.
TRINGA PUGNAX Plate 19 CHARADRIUS HIATICULA Plate 18
ORDER V. GALLINAE.
TETRAO LAGOPUS Plate 12
ORDER VI. PASSERES.
STURNUS CINCLUS Plate 24 TURDUS ROSEUS Plate 3 AMPELIS GARRULUS Plate 11 LOXIA
ENUCLEATOR Plate 17 MUSCICAPA ATRICAPILLA Plate 22 MOTACILLA SYLVIA Plate 14 --
ALBA Plate 5 -- FLAVA Plate 15 -- DARTFORDIENSIS Plate 10 -- REGULUS Plate 4
PARUS BIARMICUS Plate 1 -- CAUDATUS Plate 16
VOL. I. ARRANGEMENT ACCORDING TO LATHAM's SYNOPSIS OF BIRDS.
DIVISION I. LAND BIRDS.
ORDER II. PIES.
GENUS IV. JAY Plate 2 GENUS XIV. GOLDEN ORIOLE Plate 7 GENUS XXI. GREAT BLACK
WOODPECKER Plate 13 GENUS XXVII. COMMON HOOPOE Plate 9
ORDER III. PASSERINE.
GENUS XXXI. WATER OUZEL Plate 24 ROSE-COLOURED THRUSH Plate 3
GENUS XXXII. WAXEN CHATTERER Plate 11 GENUS XXXIV. PINE GROSEEAK Plate 17
GENUS XXXVIII. PIED FLYCATCHER Plate 22 GENUS XL. WHITE WAGTAIL Plate 5 YELLOW
WAGTAIL Plate 15
GENUS XLI. SEDGE WREN, or Warbler Plate 14 DARTFORD WARPLER Plate 10
GOLD-CRESTED WREN Plate 4
GENUS XLIII. LONG-TAILED TITMOUSE Plate 16 BEARDED TITMOUSE Plate 1

ORDER IV. GALLINACEOUS.
GENUS LIII. PTARMIGAN Plate 12
DIVISION II. WATER BIRDS.
ORDER VII. WITH CLOVEN FEET.
GENUS LXIX. RUFF Plate 19 GENUS LXX. RINGED PLOVER Plate 18
ORDER VIII. WITH PINNATED FEET.
GENUS LXXIX. RED-NECKED GREBE Plate 6
ORDER IX. WEB-FOOTED.
GENUS LXXXIV. PUFFIN Plate 8 GENUS LXXXVIII. COMMON TERN Plate 23 GENUS XCI.
SMEW Plate 20 GENUS XCII. GARGANEY Plate 21
VOL. I. ARRANGEMENT ACCORDING TO PENNANT's BRITISH ZOOLOGY.
GENUS I. JAY Plate 2 GENUS VIII. GREAT BLACK WOODPECKER Plate 13 Not mentioned
by Pennant as British Birds.
GENUS X. HOOPOE Plate 9 GENUS XII. PTARMIGAN Plate 21 GENUS XVI. WATER OUZEL
Plate 24 GENUS XVII. WAXEN CHATTERER Plate 11 GENUS XVIII. PINE GROSBEAK Plate
17 GENUS XXI. PIED FLYCATCHER Plate 22 GENUS XXIII. WHITE WAGTAIL Plate 5
YELLOW WAGTAIL Plate 15
GENUS XXIV. GOLDEN CRESTED WARBLER Plate 4 SEDGE WARBLER Plate 14 DARTFORD
WARBLER Plate 10
GENUS XXV. LONG-TAILED TITMOUSE Plate 16 BEARDED TITMOUSE Plate 1
GENUS XXXI. RUFF Plate 19 GENUS XXXII. RINGED PLOVER Plate 18 GENUS XXXVIII.
RED-NECKED GREBE Plate 6* GENUS XL. PUFFIN Plate 8 GENUS XLIV. GREAT TERN Plate
23 GENUS XLVI. SMEW Plate 20 GENUS XLVII. GARGANEY Plate 22 APPENDIX. ORIOLE
Plate 7 ROSE-COLOURED OWZEL Plate 3

VOL. I. ALPHABETICAL ARRANGEMENT.
Chatterer, Waxen, Plate 11 Flycatcher, Pied, Plate 22 Garganey, Plate 21
Grebe, Red-necked, Plate 6 Grosbeak, Pine, Plate 17 Hoopoe, Plate 9 Jay, Plate
2 Oriole, Plate 7 Ouzel, Water, Plate 24 -- Rose-coloured, Plate 3 Plover,
Ringed, Plate 18 Ptarmigan, Plate 12 Puffin, Plate 8 Ruff, Plate 19 Smew, Plate
20 Tern, Greater, Plate 23 Titmouse, bearded, Plate 1 --, long-tailed, Plate 16
Wagtail, Yellow, Plate 15 --, White, Plate 5 Warbler, sedge, Plate 14 --,
Dartford, Plate 10 --, Golden-crested, Plate 4 Wood pecker, Great black, Plate
13

