AN ADDRESS TO THE SUBSCRIBERS FOR THE HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF THE COUNTY
PALATINE OF DURHAM: WITH A SKETCH OF THE MATERIALS FROM WHENCE THE INTENDED
PUBLICATION IS COMPILED.

BY WILLIAM HUTCHINSON, F. A. S.

1784.

CONDITIONS.
THIS WORK will be comprised in two large Volumes Quarto, printed on a fine
Paper, with an elegant new Type, and embellished with a Number of Copperplates,
by the best Artists. Price Two Guineas in Boards, to be paid on Delivery of the
Books. A few Copies will be printed on Royal Paper, for the Curious. The WORK
is now in the Press. SUBSCRIPTIONS are taken in by Mr ROBSON, New Bond-street,
Mess. LOWNDES and SON, Fleet Street, LONDON; and by all Booksellers in the
Country. The Author humbly requests, That such Persons as intend to favor him
with their Subscriptions, or with any Materials to embellish or illustrate this
Work, will be pleased to transmit the same as soon as possible: And all
Booksellers are desired to send in the Names of Subscribers, not inserted in
the following List, in Order that they may be delivered with the Work.
The NAMES of such SUBSCRIBERS as have been communicated to the AUTHOR.
A
All Souls' College, Oxford John Arden, Esquire of Pepper Hall Richard Pepper
Arden, Esquire his Majesty's Attorney General William Ambler, Esquire Durham James
Algood, Esquire Nunwick Henry Askew, Esquire Redheugh John Askew, Esquire Pallinsburn Miss
Allan, Grange Mr James Allan Darlington Mr George Allan Darlington Mr Henry
Atkinson; Ripon Mr John Adamson, Barnardcastle Mr William Addison
B
Hon. Lord Barnard Hon. Mrs Berkley Andrew Robinson Bows, Esquire Gibside George
Brooks, Esquire London John Burdon, Esquire Hardwick Mrs Bland, Hurworth Thomas Bows,
Esquire Bradley Hall Mr John Burdon, Norton Mr John Bailey, Chillingham Castle Mr
Blenkinsop, Whickham Christopher Bell, Esquire Staindrop Rowland Burdon, Esquire Castle
Eden Thomas Brown, Esquire London Robert Bird, Esquire London John Broadley, Esquire
Boxley, Kent John Bacon, Esquire First Fruits Office, London Mr Thomas Beckwith,
York Mr Joseph Beckwith, Rotheram John Bowman, Esquire Crake John Baynes, Esquire
Embsay Kirk John Erasmus Blackett, Esquire Newcastle The Rev. Mr John Brand, London
The Rev. Dr Blackburn, Richmond Calverley Bewick, Esquire Close House The Rev. Mr
Jonathan Branfoot, Durham John Drake Bainbridge, Esquire Durham Mr Smith Burke,
Durham John Charles Brook, Esquire Herald's-Office, London The Rev. Dr Burn, Orton
Mr Thomas Bows, Darlington Mr John Buddle, Bushblades Mr Bailey, Sunderland Mr
Brown, Newcastle Mr Bear, Middleham
C
University College, Cambridge Trinity College, Cambridge St John's College,
Cambridge Sir Thomas Clavering, Baronet Sir Gray Cooper, Baronet The Rev. Dr
Cooper, Durham Dr John Carr, Hertford John Cuthbert, Esquire Witton Castle William
Constable, Esquire Burton Constable William Chayter, Esquire Spennythorn John Metcalfe
Carlton, Esquire Hellbeck Mr Chrishop, Durham Mr Edward Clough, York Edward
Collingwood, Esquire Chirton Thomas Crathorn, Esquire Crathorn Henry Collingwood, Esquire
Cornhill John Carr, Esquire Ryehope Sheldon Cradock, Esquire Hartforth Peter Conset,
Esquire Brawaith Mr Nathaniel Clayton, Newcastle The Rev. Mr Joseph Carr, Winlaton
Mr Robert Christopher, Stockton on Tees
D
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Durham The Right Hon. the Earl of Darlington
The Right Hon. the Countess of Darlington The Right Hon. the Lord Delaval The
Dean and Chapter of Durham The Hon. and Rev. Dean Digby The Rev. Dr Dampier,
Durham Jonathan Davison, Esquire Norton Thomas Davison, Esquire Bakeston Charles Joseph
Douglas, Esquire Witton Mr Dowker, Kendal Thomas Davidson, Esquire Newcastle Robert
Doubleday, Esquire Newcastle Math. Duane, Esquire London Thomas Dawson, Esquire London The
Rev. Mr William Dade, Backiston Mr Davidson, Sunderland Mr George Dixon,
Cockfield The Rev. Mr Stote Donnison, Trimdon Nicholson Doubleday, Esquire M. D.
Berwick
E
The Advocates Library, Edinburgh The College of Edinburgh Sir John Eden,
Baronet William Eden, Esquire London The Rev. Mr Henry Egerton, Durham The Rev. Mr
Francis Egerton, Wolsingham Thomas Air, Esquire Hassop, Derbyshire, 2 sets Henry
Ellison, Esquire Park-House Geo. Edwards, Esquire M. D. Barnardcastle Mr William Emin,
Bishop-Aukland Mr Luke Elstob, Stockton on Tees Mr Thomas Ebdon, Durham John
Walton Elliot, Esquire Gainford
F
The Rev. Dr Fothergill, Durham Mr Edward Fairless, Bishop-Aukland Barnabas
Fenwick, Esquire Ryton R. Raikes Fulthorpe, Esquire -- Mr Flintoff, -- Mr Fisher,
Newcastle
G
The Rev. Mr John Gibson, Romaldkirk Charles Gibson, Esquire Lancaster Mr Anthony
Greenwell, -- Philip Gell, Esquire -- William Gibson, Esquire Newcastle Mr Joshua
Greenwell, Newcastle Thomas Gaul, Esquire Newcastle Richard Gough, Esquire Enfield
H
The Right Hon. the Earl of Hilsborough The Right Hon. Lord Hampden Sir Robert
Hildyard, Baronet The Rev. Mr Hymers, -- The Rev. Mr Hogarth, Kirknewton Mr
John Harrison, -- Timothy Hutchinson, Esquire Egleston William Hutchinson, Esquire the
Temple, London John Hardcastle, Esquire Bedale John Horsely, Esquire M. D. Darlington
Mr Robert Harrison, Durham The Rev. Mr Benjamin Hutchinson, Kimbolton Mr John
Heaviside, -- The Rev. Dr Hornsby, Oxford Mr Jasper Harrison, Newcastle William
Hughes, Esquire -- Mr Leonard Hartley, Middleton Tyas The Rev. Mr John Hutton,
Houghton-le-Spring John Hullock, Esquire Barnardcastle Mr Hendry Hopper, Durham
John Scot Hylton, Esquire -- Mr George Hubbuck, -- The Rev. Mr Holme, Sedgfield Mr
Ely Hargrove, Knaresborough John Hogg, Esquire the Temple, London The Rev. Mr Henry
Hildyard, Bishop-Aukland Cornelius Harrison, Esquire Stubhouse William Hoar, Esquire
Durham Mr Haswell, -- Mr John Hutchinson, Baxterwood Dr Robert Henry, Edinburgh
The Hon. Col. Harvey The Rev. Mr Ralph Hopper, Merrington James Hobson, Esquire
York
I
The Rev. Mr George Johnson, Norton Robert Ilderston, Esquire Westoe The Rev. Mr
William Ironside, Houghton-le-Spring George Jackson, Esquire Palace-yard, London
Mess. Johnson and Charlton, Sunderland Mr Christopher Johnson, Durham
K
The Rev. Dr Kaye, Durham The Rev. Mr Kipling, St John's College, Cambridge
L
The Hon. Thomas Lion Sir John Lawson, Baronet John Leaton, Esquire Snow's-green
General Lambton, Lambton Mr Robert Lakeland, York Mr John Letteny, Gray's-Inn,
London The Rev. Mr Robert Lascelles, Gilling Miss Lambton, Biddick Robert
Lodge, Esquire Barnardcastle Mr Thomas Liddle, junior, -- John Lamb, Esquire Gateshead
John Lowes, Esquire Ridley-hall, Northumberland
M
His Grace the Duke of Marlborough The Right Hon. Lord Maitland Robert
Milbourne, Esquire Armathwaite Castle Mr Henry Milbourne, Gray's-Inn Henry Lawson
Maire, Esquire Lartington John Morrison, Esquire -- John Marlow, Esquire -- Ralph Milbanke,
Esquire Seaham Miss Milbanke, Barningham John Sawrey Morrit, Esquire Rookby-Park The
Rev. Mr Oliver Martin, Lancaster Mr John Mathews, -- Edward Milward, Esquire Duston
Henry Mills, Esquire Willington
N
His Grace the Duke of Newcastle The Rev. Mr William Nowell, Wolsingham Cosmas
Neville, Esquire -- John Nesham, Esquire Houghton-le-Spring John Nelson, Esquire -- The
Rev. Mr Mark Noble, Birmingham
O
Daniel Ord, Esquire -- Mr Henry Ornsby, Darlington Colonel O'Carroll University
College, Oxford
P
Thomas Pennant, Esquire Downing, 2 sets The Rev. Dr Pie, Whitburne The Rev. Mr
Pixall, Durham Mr George Pearson, Durham Mr Robert Preston, Stockton Mr John
Potts, Durham George Parker, Esquire -- Henry Pulleine, Esquire Carlton-Hall The Rev.
Mr Peacock, Denton Mr William Peter's, Newcastle John Prestwick, Esquire -- Mr
Robert Parker, Halifax John Peareth, Esquire St Martin's Lane, London James Poole,
Esquire the Temple, London Dr Pennington, Professor of Chemistry, Cambridge
Q
Queen's College, Oxford
R
The Right Hon. Lord Ravensworth The Hon. Lady Henrietta Roper, 2 sets William
Rudd, Esquire Durham William Russell, Esquire Newbottle Mr John Stapleton Raisbeck,
Stockton Mr Benjamin Reed, Stockton Robert Richardson, Esquire London Mr John Raw,
Barnardcastle Mr Thomas Richardson, London Mr Joseph Ritson, Gray's-Inn, London
Joseph Reah, Esquire Newcastle John Richardson, Esquire Durham Richmondshire
Agriculture-Society John Russell Rountree, Esquire -- The Rev. Mr Edward Rudd,
Haughton Mr Lawrence Richardson, Durham
S
The Right Hon. the Countess of Strathmore Sir Edward Smythe, Baronet Robert
Shaftoe, Esquire Whitworth The Rev. Dr Thomas Goodfellow Shaftoe, Brancepath The
Rev. Mr George Sayer, -- Robert Surtees, Esquire Mainsforth Crosier Surtees, Esquire
Merryshields Thomas Shaftoe, Esquire Dunstan Bank Charles Sleigh, Esquire Stockton
William Salvin, Esquire Croxdale Mr Thomas Stout, Wooler Mr Richard Scruton,
Sunderland Francis Smythe, Esquire -- The Rev. Dr Sharp, Durham William Sharp,
Esquire London James Sharp, Esquire London Granville Sharp, Esquire -- George Storey, Esquire
the Temple, London William Sanderson, Esquire Felton Charles Spearman, Esquire Durham
Mr Thomas Sanderson, Sunderland Mr Brack Shorter, Picktree The Rev. Mr William
Sisson, Darlington Ralph Spearman, Esquire Eachwick Joshua Smith, Esquire -- Anthony
Storer, Esquire -- Mr Thomas Sowerby, West-Auckland -- Silvertop, Esquire Benwell
T
Sir Charles Turner, Baronet John Tempest, Esquire Winyard John Tempest, junior,
Esquire -- Marmaduke Tunstall, Esquire Wycliffe Mr Thomas Terry, Darlington The Rev. Mr
Temple, Richmond Nicholas Tyzack, Esquire Newcastle Anthony Todd, Esquire London
Richard Troward, Esquire -- J. S. Tailor, Esquire Sunderland John Thornhill, Esquire
Sunderland Mr. Thorn, Durham, 3 sets Mr Tessyman, York Mr Todd, York, 2 sets
V
Hon. Frederick Vane, -- Mr Vane, Staindrop The Rev. Mr William Vaughan, --
W
Lord Viscount Ward The Rev. Mr Weston, Durham The Rev. Mr Daniel Watson,
Middleton-Tyas Farrer Wren, Esquire Binchester Mr Charles Wren, Newcastle Sir
Hedworth Williamson, Baronet Robert Hopper Williamson, Esquire Whickham Mr Timothy
Williamson, Fleetstreet, London Mr Samuel Wilkinson, Darlington Mr George Wood,
Durham Mr Robert Walker, Sunderland Mr Nicholas Walton, Farnacres Mr Nicholas
Walton, junior, Farnacres Rowland Webster, Esquire Stockton The Rev. Dr Wetherell,
Oxford Mr Anthony Walker, -- Mrs Ward, Beckenham, Kent Moses Wait, Esquire Ham
Common, London Jacob Wilkinson, Esquire -- Reed Ward, Esquire Dinsdale Thomas Wright,
Esquire -- Emanuel Walton, Esquire of the Regiment of Royal Scots Cavalry The Rev. Mr
Joshua White, Barnardcastle Moorcroft Wastell, Esquire Barnardcastle Robert Wade,
Esquire Fatfield Captain Wakefield, of the -- Indiaman John Walker, Esquire --
Christopher Wilkinson, Esquire Newcastle John Wright, Esquire Byers-Green John
Wilkinson, Esquire Stockton Mr Thomas Woodness, Durham Thomas Wharton, Esquire M. D.
Old Park Mr John Ward, Durham Graville Wheeler, Esquire Dunnford-House The Rev. Mr
Wilson, Washington


THE various unforeseen circumstances, which have hitherto delayed the
publication of this work, the Author hopes, will apologize to his Subscribers
when laid before them; and the acquisition of many valuable materials, which
greatly enrich the Compilation, he flatters himself, will compensate the
trespass committed on their patience.

A short account of the method pursued in this work seems necessary to
demonstrate the value of those Manuscripts, which have lately been obtained.

ATTENTION to the most distant antiquity, may appear to the learned Reader not
sufficiently engaging to detain him from those Events, which are strictly
Provincial; yet the neglect of a general view of this County, in the earliest
ages, would disappoint others: Therefore, in the Introduction, I shall in a
cursory manner pay attention to those times which preceed the accession of the
ROMANS, and notice the conquest made by them of the Province of BRIGANTIA,
their departure, the calling in of the Saxons and foundation of their Monarchy
in Northumberland, with the succession of Sovereigns in BERNICIA and DEIRA,
until the union of those States under OSWALD. In this period, the state of the
Christian Church in the Northern parts of Britain, shall be noted, and the
manners and customs of the people described.

THE work opens with the conversion of the Northumbrian Saxons, and the
foundation of the Sea of LINDISFARNE.

IT would be useless to mention the various ancient authors, whose labors
furnish materials for this part of the work, or to recapitulate the many
publications well known to the learned reader, which will be critically
referred to, on every occasion throughout the whole. Soon after the Prelates
were settled at LINDISFARNE, they appear to have taken a part in the affairs of
Government, and indeed, the situation of Religious Societies was such in the
infancy of Church Establishment, that on every convulsion of State and
revolution of Empire, they were in imminent peril; so that it becomes
indispensibly necessary in carrying on a history of the progress of the Sea, to
weave and mingle therewith the material events of State, more especially where
the Provincial injunctions and ordinances were a mixture of maxims Civil and
Clerical. If it appears necessary to introduce the affairs of Government in the
early stages of our Bishopric, how much more important does it seem, when our
Prelates held high Offices under the Crown, led forth the troops of their
Province, were Ambassadors making League and Truce, and when this Palatinate
became a barrier between two hostile Nations, and often the scene of battle.
These are briefly noticed here, to account for interweaving so much of the
general history with the annals of our Prelates. The rehearsal of local Events
must be abrupt, and material facts unconnected and unpleasant in the relation,
if not carried on in a short successional line of circumstances for their
introduction, thereby rendering such Events more interesting to the Reader, and
by enlarging the limits of Provincial history, giving a more pleasing channel
to the narrative. By this method, the reader will also be enabled to collect
the traits of character which every Prelate displayed in his public or private
Capacity, and to read the Man divested of the robes of Pontificacy.

IT was not till after the Episcopal seat was at DURHAM, that we hear any thing
of the Civil Jurisdiction being vested in the Prelates. WALCHER, whose
accession was in the year 1072, was the first that wore that Imperial Mitre,
which in after ages became so distinguished, and with the Clerical character
mixed the rights and privileges of a Sovereign, thereby erecting an English
Popedom. The ambitious BEKE in maintenance of his regal authority within this
Province, touching forfeited Estates, for which he contended with the Crown,
alleged in Parliament, that the Bishops of Durham had from ancient time all
regal rights and Jurisdiction within their Royal Liberty of Durham from the
time of the Conquest and antecedent thereto. This privilege is founded upon
Prescription immemorial, because there is no record of its being granted by any
Princes before the Conquest or since, wherein it is not supposed to have been
granted also by their predecessors; it proceeded at first from a principle of
Devotion to St. CUTHBERT, that whatever Lands were given to him, or bought with
his money, he should hold them with the same freedom that the Princes who gave
them held the rest of their Estates; but this piety to the Saint was not
without its prudential purposes all along, both for the service of the Crown in
the Wars with Scotland, and also for the service of the Country, because of its
distance from the Courts of Law above.

IN the Annals of Bishop WALCHER and his Successors, all the evidence obtained
by laborious research will be laid down, to define, of what the PALATINE power
consisted in the exercise of its authority, and into one point of view will be
collected whatever our most learned Writers have said concerning it. For as the
regal jurisdiction in this Province is alleged to be prescriptive, it is from
Writers of Antiquity only we can trace the original sense entertained of the
authority of a PALATINE, and from successional acts coming into ages of
learning and research, that we can learn the real power of that species of
Jurisdiction. It was an ancient maxim, Quidquid rex habet extra Commitatem
Dunelmensem, Episcopus habet infra, nisi aliqua sit concessio aut praescriptio
in contrarium.

THE Bishops had great extent of power, as the several Records quoted in the
course of the work, under each Episcopacy will evince. They levied taxes for
the defense and service of the Palatinate, and made truces with Enemies; raised
defensible troops within the liberty from sixteen to sixty years of age, and
impressed Ships for war; they sat in judgment of life and death, and held
execution by life and limb: They had power to create Barons, who formed their
Council or Parliament, and with their Vassals were bound to attend the Bishop's
summons in time of public exigency: The greatest part of the Lands within the
liberty were held of the Bishops as Lords Paramount, in Capite: They coined
money, granted licenses to embattle Castles, build Churches, found Hospitals
and Chantries; instituted Corporations by Charter, to which the Crown's assent
was not essential to maintain their legality, and granted Fairs and Markets:
They had all manner of Royal Jurisdiction both Civil and Military, by Land and
by Water; for the exercise whereof they held proper Courts, and appointed
Officers and other Ministers of every department, as well such as the Crown
nominates without the liberty, as those the King had been used to depute,
according to the exigencies of special cases, and for the Execution of Acts of
Parliament. The Bishops Officers by Patent are, the Temporal Chancellor,
Constable of Durham Castle, to whom belonged the care of the Levies, the
custody of the Armor and pay of the troops; the high Chamberlain, the under
Chamberlain, Secretary of State, Steward, Treasurer, Comptroller of the
Household, Master of the Horse, Stewards of the Manors and Halmote Courts,
Sheriff, Prothonotary, Clerks of the Chancery, Crown and Peace, Keeper of the
Rolls, Cursitor, Registers and Examiners in Chancery, Clerk of the County
Court, Stewards of Borough Courts, Eschaetors, Feodaries, Auditors and under
Auditors, Clerks of the receipt of the Exchequer, Supervisors of Lordships,
Castles, Mines of Coal, Lead and Iron, Coroners, Conservators of Ports and
Rivers, Officers of Marshalsea, Clerks of Markets, Keepers of the great Seal,
of Ulnage, of the Wardrobe and Harness, and Master Armourer. They had several
Forests, Chaces, Parks and Woods, where they had their Foresters, who held
Courts in their name, and determined matters relative to Forests, Parks,
Rangers and Palekeepers. They were Lord high Admirals of the Sea and Waters,
that lie within or adjoining the County Palatine, had Vice Admirals and Courts
of Admiralty, Judges to determine according to the Maritime Laws, Registers,
Examiners, Officers of Beaconage, Anchorage, etc. and awarded Commissions, to
regulate Waters and passages thereon. Thus by themselves and Officers, they did
Justice to all persons, in all cases, without either the King or any of his
Officers interfering ordinarily in any thing. Whatever occasion the King had
within this liberty, his Writs did not run here, they were not directed as to
his own Officers in other Counties, but to the Bishop himself, or in the
Vacancy of the Sea, to the proper Officers of the Palatinate. When King Henry
the II. sent his Justices of Assize hither upon an extraordinary occasion of
Murders and Robberies, he declared by his Charter, that he did it with the
license of the Bishop, et pro hac vice tantum; and that it should not be drawn
into custom either in his time, or in the time of his heirs, not being done but
upon absolute necessity; and that he would, nevertheless, have the Lands of
Saint Cuthbert to enjoy its Liberties and ancient Customs as amply as ever.

IT was not 'till after WILLIAM DE CARILEPHO's accession to the Sea in 1080,
that the regal rights of our Prelates received confirmation in writing from the
Crown: After the coming in of the NORMANS, Deeds and Writings under Seal gained
general acceptance, and every material transaction was conducted under written
muniments: Proceeding that era, most of the public Records were only entries
in testimonium, attested by the parties present, as Registers of the fact, who
thereto subscribed their names under the sign of the Cross, and from that
important period in our Provincial History, the long series of Records, to
which I shall have occasion to refer, will appear.

THE Work will consist of two Volumes. The first comprehends the Annals of the
Bishops with their several acts of Jurisdiction, embellished with many
Portraits, Seals, Coins, Arms, etc.

THE second comprehends local descriptions, with the peculiar history of each
part of the County, thrown into Parochial divisions. The CITY of DURHAM is
treated of at large, and in progressive order the Charters of Incorporation are
inserted, particularly the new one granted by the present Bishop. In this
arrangement of City records, is a fac simile of Bishop PUDSEY's Charter, with
the Pope's confirmatory Bull, a Plate presented by Mr. G. ALLAN, and engraved
by that incomparable artist Stephens; by whose death the Author has lost a
great assistant, and the public one of the most accurate workmen of the age.
Under this head, lists of the chief Magistrates of the City, and
Representatives in Parliament will be inserted. Great attention is paid to the
history of the Cathedral, which is embellished with two correct draughts and
admeasurements of the North and East fronts, by an eminent Architect employed
in the present costly repairs now carrying on; and each part thereof and other
Monastic buildings described, with a comparative view of their ancient
magnificence and present state. Short anecdotes of the Priors, Deans,
Prebendaries, and other Ministers, with historical notes and Monumental
Inscriptions will be inserted. The Endowment by K. Hen. VIII. will be given at
length, with the Statutes and other Muniments; to which are added a number of
Records hitherto withheld from the public: In like manner the Author passes
through every other public building and place of consequence, and throws in
Engravings of all the remains of Antiquity, Castles, and principal Seats, some
of which have been contributed as an encouragement to the work, by the late
JOHN CUTHBERT Esquire JOHN TEMPEST and TIMOTHY HUTCHINSON Esquires, MR. ALLAN and
others.

As the Author proceeds in Parochial Divisions, he takes for his guide the Book
of Rates, made for collecting the Royal Aid under the Satutes of 16 and 17 of
Charles II. Each Parish Church is described, and engravings given of the most
remarkable; due attention is paid to things memorable recorded in the
Registers, and Monumental Inscriptions; and the supposed value of each Living
shown, and the Incumbents in succession thrown into the notes. Under this
division, every thing remarkable in Antiquity or rare in nature is treated of,
and some of the most singular monuments represented. The foundations and
privileges of each religious House, Hospital, Gild and Chantry are set forth,
with engravings of all the Seals extant.

ALL Gentlemen's Seats are described and ancient possessors noted, with
Genealogical Tables, not only of the principal Families existing, but such as
are extinct, and were once of consequence in the County, together with
transcripts of Visitations in the Libraries of JOHN TEMPEST and MARMADUKE
TUNSTALL Esquires, whose liberality demands every grateful acknowledgment.
These are completed by the additions of Mr. ALLAN, whose indefatigable labor
has accumulated most of the materials, from which this work is compiled, and
from whose unexampled bounty and generosity they are submitted to the author's
arrangement for the public Eye.

A short account of the STAPLES of this County will be presented, its Trade and
Manufacturies, with the Imports and Exports: Comparative tables from the Church
Registers for 20 years of the last and present Century are inserted, to show
the state of Population, communicated by the respective Clergy, whose attention
hereto has been singularly kind.

A cursory view of the NATURAL HISTORY of each district is introduced, with
delineations of such productions as are curious, and a short account of the
STRATA found in the Mines, with drawings and admeasurements from the works.

PROGRESSIVE observations will be made as the Itinerary advances, on
AGRICULTURE, produce of the Lands, growth of Timber, and breeds of Cattle, with
other matters equally interesting to the Inhabitants.

HAVING given a cursory view of the manner in which this Work will be executed,
the MATERIALS from whence it is chiefly compiled, shall next be noticed; and
this the Author is more particularly induced to do, as, since his proposals
were offered, a publication has appeared from the Clarendon Press, entitled
Collectanea Curiosa taken from the Manuscripts of Archbishop SANCROFT in the
Bodleian Library, wherein is a compendious arrangement of Materials necessary
for constructing a work like this.

THE first Record noted, is, the Doomsday Book of this County, called BOLDON
BUKE, from the Survey which it contains, having reference in many Lordships to
the Manor of Boldon, touching the services of the Tenants, "sicut in Boldon".
The Editor gives several Extracts, which he says were collated with the
transcript, lodged in the Bodleian Library See Gough's Anecdotes of British
Topography V. 1. p. 336.
. The Original Survey is deposited in the Auditors Office at Durham, and bound
up with a succeeding Survey made by order of Bishop Hatfield. It is wrote on
Vellum, and thus indorsed. " Supervisus temp. Hugonis Epi. 1183, et Supervisus
temp. Thome Hatfeld Epi'. The first is wrote in a compact hand and contained in
24 pages; the latter in a looser hand of 187 pages, and more comprehensive.

IT was not till after Proposals were offered to the public, that these Records
were obtained, and they are introduced through the work, as they appertain to
the place described, thereby rendering them less tedious to the Eye, and much
readier in application than in an Appendix: This required much labor and
attention to execute, and necessarily has delayed the Publication.

THAT laborious Collector of Records the Rev. Mr. THOMAS RANDALL, late Master
of the Grammar School in Durham, employed the leisure of his whole life in
searching the several Repositories there, and I have before me fifteen large
Volumes in Manuscript, consisting of upwards of 300 pages each, copied
therefrom with that accuracy, for which he was singular.

IN the Chapter Treasury and Library, it is said, there are above ninety Royal
Charters and Grants, above fifty Deeds by Nobles and Barons, about 266 by
Gentlemen, 131 by Popes, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Convents and other Religious
Persons and Houses, and above 130 other Original Deeds and Copies, which will
amount in all to about 670. In Mr. Randall's Collection are Copies of all the
Grants, Conventions and other Instruments that are curious, and entered in the
Chartularies of the Chapter, not only from his own inspection, but gathered
from the labors of Dr. Hunter and Mr. Gabriel Swainston, whose amusements led
that way. These Volumes also contain extracts from the Copyhold Books of the
Bishop, copies of a series of the close Rolls of the Chancery, minutes of the
Visitation Books and Registers of all the Prelates etc. Also two large folios
of the Inquisitions post mortem taken before the Bishop's Sheriffs and
Eschaetors, within the liberties of Durham and Sadberge, and another of the
Wills of such Persons as have founded public Charities; and other matters
equally important to a Work of this kind. All this Fund was bequeathed by Mr.
Randall's Will to Mr. Allan, and is part of his Collection opened for my use:
The materials were unarranged and without Index, so that though the Treasure was
great, the labor of digesting was infinite.

MR. SPEARMAN made Collections in an unfortunate dispute with the then Prelate
(CREWE) and published a small tract in quarto, entitled, " An Enquiry into the
ancient and present state of the County Palatine of Durham etc. 1729", and
therein referred to all such records as he had received information from: Those
noticed, were inspected, and notes taken thereof at Bishop CREWE's instance, an
original Manuscript whereof, is dated 21 February 1697, mutilated by Spearman's
publication, but apparently the Manuscript to which he was indebted: His other
Papers fell into hands disinterested in matters of that kind, and as said, are
lost. The late THOMAS GYLL Esquire of Durham, has remarked in writing, that most,
or all of this Gentleman's Papers came to the hands of Gilbert Spearman Esquire who
by Will dated 14 October 1736, bequeathed them to his Son George Spearman, and
desired, that such parts, relating to the County Palatine of Durham, as were
thought proper, might be published, and earnestly recommended to his Son, not
to make them his study but his diversion; which I am verily persuaded George
out of filial duty did most religiously observe, and the fact proved so, for he
suffered them to be wasted and thrown away. Though the late Mr. Cuthbert of
Witton informed Mr. Allan, that he knew where many of these MSS. were, and
promised to procure them for his use, when he got up to London, but
unfortunately he died on the Road thither.

MR. MICKLETON's Papers were more fortunate; he had made considerable
Collections, and Mr. Randall laments their imagined loss (as he never saw them)
in these words; Mr. Mickleton, a Counselor at Law in Durham had collected some
Evidences touching the Palatinate, and his Executors sold his Papers to Mr.
Gilbert, so that they are lost to the public, save what appears in Mr.
Spearman's Book.

JOHN RUDD Esquire of Durham, an eminent Counselor at Law, had an inspection
thereof, and happily thought them of sufficient importance to make full
extracts of every material matter therein, and gives the following account
thereof.

TITULUS primi Lib. -- De Officiis et Officiariis temporalibus, infra
Episcopatum et Comitatum Palate. Dunelm; et de aliis rebus et materiis
temporalibus tangentibus Episcopos Dunelmenses et Comitatum Palatinum et
Episcopatum Dunelmensem.

LIBER secundus, -- sine ullo titulo.

LIBER tertius. -- De potestate Dom. Episcoporum Dunelm. ut Admiral. infra
regalem libertatem suam Dunelm; et in, et supra aquas in eadem liberate sua;
et tangens Wreccam Maris in eisdem contingentibus; et de Pontibus et aliis
regiis viis in liberate praedicta.

LIBER quartus. -- De potestate Dominorum Episcoporum Dunelm. in arraiando
homines armatos defenfibiles infra libertatem suam regalem Dunelm: Et de
commissionibus corundem Episcoporum et postea regum Angliae aemanatis premissis
tangentibus: Et de monstrationibus seu armilustrariis hominum armatorum et
aliorum a 16 usque ad 60 infra regalem libertatem Dunelm.

WILLIAM RUDD Esquire has lately been pleased to open the treasures of his Library:
The eminence that family held at the Bar, gives the greatest importance to
their collections. From this channel, the Author has received two Volumes of a
complete series of Extracts from the Cursitors Rolls, and in three folios,
innumerable copies of Charters, Grants and other public Instruments, together
with Mickleton's Collections, which, it is not doubted, will amply apologize
for the delays that have hitherto befallen this intended Publication.

BREVITTS, though of no authority in point of evidence, yet for information are
often useful, discovering what suites have formerly depended, directing to the
Records, and often explaining their meaning, and giving us the several
pleadings and proceedings therein, with the best discovery of the merit and
mystery of the cause. The Attorneys or Sollicitors who keep these Brevitts
after the Causes are determined, are the persons capable of supplying us;
particularly those of the greatest bufiness, they having most of them
COLLECTANIA Curiosa V. 2. p. 107.
. By the author's extensive acquaintance with Gentlemen of the Law, and other
connections, he is possessed of several, touching boundary Causes and others of
the first importance in the County, which it might give offense to eminent
Characters to name.

THE late THOMAS GYLL Esquire was a skillful Antiquarian, had a fine taste in the
Belles Lettres, and held correspondence with Persons of the first eminence in
that walk: He made many Collections and Observations touching this County,
which he communicated to Mr. Allan and are now before me.

MR. MANN who was Deputy Clerk of the Peace and County Treasurer many years,
made considerable collections, from whose labors, given to Mr. Allan in his
life time, the Author derived the accounts dispersed through the work, of
public Assessments and Money Charges, together with many materials relative to
the Church, City, and County at large.

MR. RALPH HODGSON, an eminent Attorney, and Steward to several Prelates, had
collected many curious matters touching the Bishop's Revenues and Church Lands,
whose Manuscripts and Papers were also communicated to Mr. Allan.

Two Manuscript Volumes of the late COUNCELLOR GRAY of Newcastle, have been
kindly lent by MR. ABBS of Weremouth, from whence great assistance is gained in
historical notes and references, touching the several Prelates and inferior
Clergy hitherto unknown.

CONSIDERABLE assistance has likewise been received from Mr. ROBERT HARRISON of
Durham, and Mr. JOSEPH RITSON of Grays Inn London, whose researches, in the
Harleian and Cottonian Libraries, have furnished several valuable transcripts,
especially an historical Poem on the Battle of Durham fought October 1346,
known by the title of the Battle at Nevill's Cross which will be inserted at
full length.

IN a valuable Manuscript communicated by Sir JOHN LAWSON, many particulars are
recorded of the Riches, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church at Durham: And in a
long Paper Roll about five inches broad, written in a clear ancient hand,
communicated by JOHN HOGG Esquire of Norton, is discovered the original perhaps, or
at least the whole contents of DAVIES'S RITES, and from which the 105th. page
of the COLLECTANEA CURIOSA is composed.

W. H. MILBOURNE Esquire of Armathwate Castle in Cumberland, JOHN LAWSON MAIRE Esquire
of Lartington in Yorkshire, and many other Gentlemen, have also favored me
with some Manuscripts from their repective Libraries.

THE evidences of several private families have been inspected, and every thing
interesting to the public carefully extracted.

To close this account of my materials, I should be unpardonable were I to omit
the assistance of my kind friend Mr. ALLAN, whose Library has been generously
laid open to me, together with the use of five large Manuscript Volumes of the
Parochial history, arranged and digested by himself; besides innumerable
collections from various authorities and records, with Charters, Seals, Coins,
and other Antiquities. It is to his bounty that the work will be embellished
with many curious and valuable Plates, Pedigrees of families etc:

SUCH Materials, like gems in the hand of the jeweller, cannot lose their
intrinsic value, in their present arrangement. And if the following work should
be considered as little better than a mere repository, by means of which a more
happy Compiler may display them in a more judicious manner, I shall have a
secret pleasure in having been the humble and laborious instrument in
collecting the Materials of his nobler edifice.

William Hutchinson.
Barnardastle, 1 April 1784,

