SELECT LETTERS. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

SELECT LETTERS BETWEEN THE LATE DUCHESS OF SOMERSET, LADY LUXBOROUGH, MISS
DOLMAN, MR. WHISTLER, MR. R. DODSLEY, WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE. AND OTHERS;
INCLUDING A SKETCH OF THE MANNERS, LAWS, etc. OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE, AND
SOME POETICAL PIECES; THE WHOLE NOW FIRST PUBLISHED FROM ORIGINAL COPIES,

By Mr. HULL.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

LONDON; PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, PALL MALL. MDCCLXXVIII.

PREFACE.
THE Letters, which I have herewith the Honor and Happiness of offering to the
Public, were to me the voluntary Gift of an elegant Friend of the late Mr.
SHENSTONE; of a Friend, who, like myself, loved his private Virtues, and
admired his literary Abilities; and if the Value of such a Gift could have
received Enhancement, it was effectually derived from the polite Manner wherein
it was presented. The following Extracts from some Letters which accompanied
them, will show on what unreserved Stipulations I received them, and
consequently will (I hope) justify the Use I make of them. Extract the first,
from a Letter dated Nov. 9, 1775.
I herewith perform my Promise; as I found the Letters in my Bureau, so I send
them to you, having neither Time nor Spirits to look them over. They are now
your own, with full Permission to apply them to any Purpose you think proper. I
shall be glad if they answer your Expectation. As some of them are those of a
Friend so highly valued, they will, with you, I know, have Merit, and, I hope,
with the World. Of the latter, however, you are the best Judge, and to your
Decision I implicitly trust them. I wish I could add much more -- the little I
can, I will. PINDAR's Odes, VERNON's Poems, (with Observations by Mr.
SHENSTONE) and the Gentle Shepherd, were all his, and as such I hope you will
accept them, in Remembrance of him. Besides the Letters which are tied up, the
Parcel will contain Remarks on MILTON's Paradise Lost, Copies of the Duchess of
SOMERSET's Letters, (transcribed by Mr. SHENSTONE These particular Letters (I
should presume) will unquestionably be allowed to deserve the Character which
Mr. SHENSTONE has prefixed to them in his Transcript. It is as follows: Copies
of Letters from her Grace the Duchess Dowager of SOMERSET (formerly Countess of
Hertford) in which is discernible a perfect Rectitude of Heart, Delicacy of
Sentiment, and a truly-classic Ease and Elegance of Style. There are many of
them tinged with an Air of Melancholy, through the Loss of her only Son, Lord
BEAUCHAMP.
) and bound in Vellum, three loose in the Leaves, (her Grace's own
Handwriting) the Scotch Fragments, and a little Memorandum-Book, over which,
perhaps, you will like to spend Half an Hour, though it contains nothing but
Names.


Again, in a Letter, dated April 4, 1776. Have you seen, or heard from Mr. --?
Have you yet got, or are you likely to get, that Letter of the Duchess of
SOMERSET's which was missing? I hope so -- May Success attend you! When the
whole is digested and revised, I have no Doubt of its being valuable.




This explicit Disclosure of the liberal Means, by which these Letters came
into my Hands, will, I presume, confirm the Authenticity of them, if they can
be supposed to stand in Need of such Confirmation; I say, if they can, for
surely they possess indubitable Marks of Originality, and require no
adventitious Evidence to support them.

Being thus possessed of such an unlimited Power, my first Care was to make the
most cautious and delicate Use of it. I have accordingly suppressed all entire
Letters, as well as distinct Passages, which appeared to contain Matter
improper for public Inspection; all, in Fact, which might be liable (in the
slightest Degree) to Misconstruction, either relative to the Writer, or the
Party addressed, or that might awaken unwelcome Feelings in the Breast of any
surviving Friend or Relation. I have likewise, where a Correspondent is
introduced, or other Person alluded to, who may be still alive, (though most of
the Correspondents, I am convinced, are dead) I have, I say, on such Occasions,
preserved only Initials of the Names, in order that public Curiosity should be
no further gratified than might be agreeable to the Parties concerned.

After what I have advanced to prove the nice Precaution I have taken, does
this pleasing, and, at the same Time, useful Undertaking of mine stand in Need
of an Apology? -- I hope not. -- I flatter myself, the very Persons, to whose
Situations I have alluded in the foregoing Paragraph, will confess, it does
not. Not to say a Word of my own Principles, I affirm that the bare Idea of a
Publication, wherein Mr. SHENSTONE's Talents are displayed, or wherein even his
Name is mentioned, would deter me from advancing one Step beyond the Bounds of
Propriety and Decorum.

Yet, notwithstanding all I have said in Self-Justification, I know there are
some very peculiar (if I dared, I would call them over-nice) Persons, who
allege, that no private Letters should be made public, without the Consent of
the Writers of such Letters. This I will readily allow to be a good general
Rule, but, like many others, may admit of an Exception, in particular
Instances; and these Instances are, where a proper Mode of introducing them to
the World is inviolably attended to. It is a well-known, and equally
uncontrovertible, Maxim, that Persons of the highest Excellence (especially in
the literary Walk) are possessed of the greatest Reserve and Diffidence. Were
the private Sentiments of such to be withheld from the Public, till their
individual Consent were obtained, what a Loss would it be to the Republic of
Letters, and what an Injury to moral Improvement! Any Person's general
Principles and Ideas may be seen, perhaps, in the respective public Profession
and Situation of Life, and their general Intercourse with Mankind; but the
innate Sensations, the more refined Emanations of the Mind, are alone
discoverable in the private Communications of Friendship. There can therefore
be no unpardonable Liberty in decoying, or even gently-compelling such
Deservers into public Notice; nor is it, by any Means, uncharitable to suppose,
there may be many, who would not be violently displeased to see their
Sentiments in Print, however reluctant they might, and, perhaps, ought to
appear, if their particular Permission were applied for.

To illustrate and enforce this Position, let me be permitted to ask, if the
Duchess of SOMERSET had been requested to have suffered her Letters to be made
public, whether she would have consented? Probably not -- Yet what an Advocate
would moral Virtue, pious Resignation, and genuine Piety have been deprived of,
if those exquisite Transcripts of her Mind had been concealed from public View!
-- It is, moreover, Matter of great Doubt, whether we should have been so well
acquainted with the Talents of a SHENSTONE, had Providence indulged the Wishes
of his most intimate Friends and Acquaintances, in prolonging so valuable a
Life.

Thus it has been, is, and will be, with most People of distinguished
Abilities; their Excellencies must, in a Manner, be forced into Daylight, or
we should lose the Benefit of their Precepts; they might otherwise be said,
like Misers, to have a valuable Treasure buried with them, which ought, in
common Justice, to be left behind for the Advantage of Survivors.

I have, I doubt, been too prolix; but the Fear of offending, or, at least, a
Desire to wipe off the Stain of such an Intention, has led me into it. I hope,
I stand exculpated; and now beg only to conclude, with sincere Thanks to the
Gentleman, who politely obliged me with Letter XXVII. of the Duchess of
SOMERSET's, and my most grateful Acknowledgements to the first mentioned
Friend, who conferred on me the elegant Pleasure of conveying to the Public
some few more Excellencies of that benevolent Man whose living Talents I
admired, and whose Memory I revere.

THOMAS HULL.
London, Dec. 18, 1777.
*The accurate Reader will discover some Letters erroneously placed in Point of
Date, owing principally to some Copies not being received early enough for
their proper Situations; but as no Chain of Events is interrupted thereby, it
is hoped the Error may easily be excused.

CONTENTS To VOLUME I.
LET. I. WILLIAM Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. D --, on familiar Topics. Oct. 19,
1736. Page 1 LET. II. The same to Miss G --, on the like. Oct. 30, 1736. 5
LET. III. Miss G -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on the like. May 12, 1740. 8 LET.
IV. Miss F -- to the same, on the like Topics. Sept. 6, 1745. 10 LET. V. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. to Miss F -- on the like. Nov. 28, 1745. 14 LET. VI. Miss F --
to W. Shenstone, Esquire. with some Hints respecting the Rebellion. Jan. 21,
1745-6. 18 LET. VII. The same to the same, on familiar Topics. March 19,
1745-6. 24 LET. VIII. Lady Hertford (afterward Duchess of Somerset) to the
Hon. Mrs. Knight, on the Loss of her (Lady Hertford's) favorite Son, Lord
Beauchamp, etc. May 16, 1746. 30 LET. IX. Miss F -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on
familiar Topics. Sept. 3, 1746. 33 LET. X. The same to the same, on the like.
Nov. 1, 1746. 35 LET. XI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to the Rev. Mr. Jago, on familiar
Topics. Sept. 17, 1747. 41 LET. XII. The same to the Hon. Mrs. Knight, on the
like. 45 LET. XIII. The same to the same, on the like. May. 48 LET. XIV. The
same to the Right Hon. Lady Luxborough, at Barrels, on her Illness, etc. Oct.
18. 50 LET. XV. The same to the same, apologizing for not writing, etc. March
15, 1747-8. 53 LET. XVI. The same to the same, at Barrels, on familiar Topics.
57 LET. XVII. The same to the same, after a Visit to the Leasowes. 60 LET.
XVIII. The same to the same, mentioning the Death of Sir Tho. Lyttelton, etc.
62 LET. XIX. Countess of Hertford to Lady Luxborough, on Improvements at
Piercy-Lodge, and sundry Publications. May 15, 1748. 67 LET. XX. W. Shenstone,
Esquire. to the Rev. Mr. Graves, at Whitchurch, near Reading, Berks, relative to
the School-Mistress, etc. June, 1748. 72 LET. XXI. The same to Lady
Luxborough, on familiar Topics. July 25, 1748. 76 LET. XXII. Miss Dolman to W.
Shenstone, Esquire. Nov. 8, 1748. 79 LET. XXIII. Countess of Hertford to Lady
Luxborough, alluding to the Death of Lord Beauchamp, etc. Nov. 20, 2748. 81
LET. XXIV. Miss Dolman to W. Shenstone, Esquire. in Reference to the foregoing
Letter, etc. Jan. 23, 1749. 86 LET. XXV. The same to the same, on familiar
Topies. March 26, 1749. 88 LET. XXVI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Lady Luxborough,
with Sentiments on Epitaphs, rural Inscriptions, etc. June 2, 1749. 91 LET.
XXVII. The Duchess of Somerset (formerly Countess of Hertford) to Lady
Luxborough, containing a Description of intended Alterations and Improvements
at Northumberland House, etc. June 17, 1749. 96 LET. XXVIII. Mr. Whistler to
W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Topics. Oct. 7, 1749. 102 LET. XXIX. Duchess of
Somerset to Lady Luxborough, relative to Northumberland House, etc. Jan. 21,
1749-50. 106 LET. XXX. Miss Dolman to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Topics.
Feb. 26, 1750-1. 111 LET. XXXI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Lady Luxborough.
Observations on the French Language, his own Writings, etc. March, 1750-1. 113
LET. XXXII. The same to the same, relative to his Brother's Illness. May 24,
1751. 119 LET. XXXIII. Miss Dolman to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Topics.
Oct. 25, 1751. 124 LET. XXXIV. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Lady Luxborough, on the
Death of his Brother, etc. Dec. 30, 1751. 127 LET. XXXV. Mr. Whistler to W.
Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Topics. June 2, 1752. 131 LET. XXXVI. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. to Lady Luxborough, relative to familiar Occurrences. June 6,
1752. 134 LET. XXXVII. Mr. H -- n to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Topics.
Aug. 16, 1752. 138 LET. XXXVIII. The Duchess of Somerset to Lady Luxborough,
on Resignation to the Divine Will, etc. Sept. 9, 1750. 141 LET. XXXIX. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. te Mr. --, on a Subscription for two new Bells at Hales-Owen.
Jan. 1753. 145 LET. XL. Mr. H -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on occasional Matters.
March 20, 1753. 147 LET. XLI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Lady Luxborough,
complaining of his Spirits, etc. April 1, 1753. 155 LET. XLII. Mr. Whistler to
W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Topics. May 14, 1753. 160 LET. XLIII. The
Duchess of Somerset to Lady Luxborough, describing her Situation and
Reflections on it. Dec. 31, 1751. 164 LET. XLIV. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to the
Rev. Mr. Graves, on familiar Matters. Oct. 24, 1753. 170 LET. XLV. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. H -- n, on domestic Matters. Oct. 25, 1753. 174 LET.
XLVI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to the Duchess of Somerset, with the Poem of Rural
Elegance. June 23. 1753. 179 LET. XLVII. Duchess of Somerset to W. Shenstone,
Esquire. declining to have the Poem inscribed to her. Nov. 20, 1753. 181 LET.
XLVIII. Duchess of Somerset to Lady Luxborough, on the short Duration of Life,
a Character of Miss Talbot, etc. etc. Nov. 23, 1753. 184 LET. XLIX. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. Jago; an Account of Visits, Observations, etc. Jan. 29,
1754. 189 LET. L. Duchess of Somerset to W. Shenstone, Esquire. including the
Character of Miss Talbot, etc. Dec. 18, 1753. 195 LET. LI. Mr. H -- to W.
Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Matters. March 16, 1754. 197 LET. LII. The same to
the same, including a painful Piece of Intelligence. March 29, 1754. 205 LET.
LIII. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. H --, alluding to the preceding Circumstance
before he was apprized of the Event. March 29, 1754. 208 LET. LIVE. Mr. H -- to
W. Shenstone, Esquire. alluding to the foregoing Event, etc. 210 LET. LV. The same
to the same, including a minute Relation of the foregoing Event, etc. April 13,
1754. 213 LET. LVI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. D --, assigning the Cause of his
Silence, describing some Improvements at the Leasowes, etc. Nov. 13, 1754. 219
LET. LVII. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Lady Luxborough, accounting for his Silence
and Dispiritedness. Feb. 27, 1755. 223 LET. LVIII, W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr.
Graves. Hints of Mottos for Sun-Dials; Publications by Dodsley, etc. March 21,
1755. 227 LET. LIX. The same to Mr. B --, on a Reconciliation. Oct. 1755. 232
LET. LX. The same to Mr. S --, containing Advice to a young Sea-Adventurer.
Aug. 24, 1756. 236 LET. LXI. Mr. Sp -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. Opinion of his
Writings, Heads of a Tour to Edinburgh. Durham, Aug. 19, 1758. 238 LET. LXII.
Mr. W -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. Description of the Palace at Hampton Court;
Account of a Mohawk Warrior; philosophical Disquisition on the Study of
Physic, etc. Jan. 31, 1759. 243 LET. LXIII. Mr. H -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire.
applying for a Piece of Shakespeare's Mulberry-Tree. Feb. 13, 1759. 251 LET.
LXIV. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. Robert Dodsley, containing a whimsical
Definition of Industry, and an Invitation to the Leasowes to complete his
Fables. March 31, 1759. 253 LET. LXV. The same to Dr. Percy, on his Ovid,
Ancient Poetry, Dodsley's Fables, etc. June 6, 1759. 258 LET. LXVI. -- to Mr.
Dodsley at the Leasowes. July 28, 1759. 262 LET. LXVII. Mr. Robert Dodsley to
W. Shenstone, Esquire. with a Description of Persfield, near Chepstow, in Wales,
the Seat of Mr. Morris; Account of the Progress of his Fables, etc. Oct. 12,
1759. LET. LXVIII. The same to the same, soliciting him to write an Elegy on
the Death of General Wolf, to execute Plans of the Leasowes, exchange
Portraits, etc. Dec. 1, 1759. 270 LET. LXIX. The same to the same, requesting
him to revise his Essay on Fable, and including some Lines on the Leasowes.
Jan. 4, 1760. 277 LET. LXX. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. Hull, recommending the
old Ballad of the Spanish Lady, as a Subject for a musical Petite-Piece;
Considerations on the Difficulties and Hazards attending Dramatic Writers;
Sentiments on the Purposes of a Theater, etc. Jan. 7, 1761. 279 LET. LXXI.
Miss M -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. relating a short Jaunt to Wales. July 21, 1760.
285 LET. LXXII. Duchess of Somerset to Lady Luxborough, containing Reflections
on the Transitoriness of Human Life, and Opinion of some new Publications. Feb.
25, 1754. 295 LET. LXXIII. Mr. Dodsley to W. Shenstone, Esquire. Account of the
Publication of his Fables, etc. Jan. 5, 1761. 300 LET. LXXIV. W. Shenstone,
Esquire. to Mr. Dodsley, with an Account of Plates, etc. intended for Publications.
Feb. 11, 1761. 303 LET. LXXV. Mr. W -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar
Topics. Feb. 14, 1761. 306 LET. LXXVI. Mr. M -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on the
like Subjects. April 15, 1761. 310 LET. LXXVII. Mr. Dodsley to the same, on
the like Subjects. Sept. 18, 1761. 314 LET. LXXVIII. Mr. T. L -- to the same,
on the Profession of the Laws, and a projected Improvement on the Terms used
therein. Oct. 18, 1761. 317
SELECT LETTERS.
LETTER I. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. D --.
Oct. 19, 1736.
I AM sorry to put you to an Expense for a trifling Letter at this Distance. It
seems too, to give you leave to expect something extraordinary, or uncommon.
Whatever is so in my Letters, I am sure, must be on the bad Side. I may however
have the greater Power to convince you, that Distance is incapable to separate
you from my Thoughts.

I am, at present, in a very refined State of Indolence and Inactivity. Indeed
I make little more Use of a Country Life, than to live over again the Pleasures
of Oxford and your Company. You might convey me a Letter full, would you be so
exceedingly good as your Promise. I am vastly self-interested, for I write only
in order to beg a Letter from you, with very small Hopes of your receiving much
Pleasure from mine.

I should here give you an Account of the Pleasures we have had at M --, but my
Paper will not contain it. There was one only wanting, pour le comble -- you will be
the last to find it out -- your Company. I aim at rendering my Letters as odd
and fantastical as possible; but when I write to a Person of your elegant
character, my Compliments degenerate into downright Truths, just (I was going
to say) as the Sun turns bad Wine to Vinegar; but downright Truths are
sometimes valuable, though a Person of your Taste might reasonably expect more
refined -- at least less obvious ones. Sometimes, however, Vinegar has also its
Use, though to treat a Gentleman with it entirely may well create a Nausea. I
fancy my poignant Simile grows stale by this Time. I write to an Intimate, and
a Man of Sense, whose Goodnature will forgive what his Judgment may find fault
with.

I hope your Ring gives you all imaginable Happiness, however fatal it may
prove to female Ken. I suspect to hear of you as the finest Performer on the
Spinnet in the World. Were I a Poet, I should be highly pleased to celebrate
the admirable Conduct of your little Finger -- " Tui Pollicis Ictum," says
Horace; vile Pedant that I am! who shall deliver me from the Influence of
Formality?

I heard at Oxford of the Addition of the Side-Diamonds; I guessed, lest the
Splendor should be extinguished by a greater, ou vous scavez. I want to see
you exceedingly; you are, I assure you, a vast Part of my Pleasure at Oxford,
as POPE is in the Country; indeed, you might share that Effect with Mr. POPE,
would you write. It is a Favor, for which I must grow importunate;
notwithstanding which, the Favors I have already received, would make me
uneasy, were I not conscious who bestows them.

Of all the moral Virtues, Gratitude is sure the most beautiful; so far from
betraying any Thing mean or ignoble in her Behavior, she has an Air which
naturally discovers her Quality. -- I cannot stay to describe her now -- It is
sufficient that I pay some Sort of Tribute to her, when I call myself Mr. D --
's

Obedient, humble Servant, W. S.
My humble Service to your Parents. -- Direct to Harborough.



LETTER II. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Miss G --.
Sent Oct. 30, 1736.
I HAVE sent the Patterns, though with far less Expedition than you might
expect from one so entirely yours. The truth is, I was sensible how
insupportable the Transition must be from your Company to none at all, so
contrived to pay several Visits immediately after I had left M --. You Will guess
how sufficient a Mortification I found even thus. To pass from yours to the
Company of dull Aunts and Cousins must needs prove tedious, as the Reverse
would be agreeable.

As to the Draughts, I am satisfied in what a ridiculous Light they must
appear; it was a Task I was very much unused to, and solicited rather out of an
officious Fondness to be employed for you, than any Skill I was conscious of in
myself. I must beg Mr. G -- 's Pardon for engaging in a Work, wherein he is far
my Superior. Such as they are, I beg you would believe they are the best I am
capable of. I would rather have my Judgment than Care censured, in any Thing I
am employed in for you. You Will be surprised to find them joined with a Paper
scrawl'd over with dull Poetry: however, I must confess, as I wrote it to
please myself, I sent it, not without Hopes that it might, in an inferior
Manner, please you. One may sometimes amuse one's-self with what one cannot
entirely approve. As I cannot flatter myself, your Judgment can excuse, so I
cannot apprehend your Goodnature will expose me. To vindicate my Character to
you, as a Poet, I shall only join these alleviating Circumstances; First, that
nothing makes so awkward a Figure in Verse (as well as in some other Respects)
as Sincerity. Secondly, that these Lines were wrote when I had no great Flow of
Spirits, namely, when I had just left M --, and you; but I shall want your
Patience elsewhere, so will say no more about 'em -- only this -- that I should
not have mentioned Miss L --, were I not persuaded that, as you are entirely
free from the other Faults of your Sex, so you are from that of not bearing to
hear another commended. It is a Sign of a great Want of Accomplishments, when a
Person is continually suspicious of being rivalled; and, for that Part, you may
give every One many more than their Due, without the least Danger of being so.

I could not help envying WHISTLER's Happiness, when I came away; I fancy your
Lives have been a constant Round of Delights; I don't know any Neighborhood
more likely to produce 'em. I could reconcile myself, however, pretty well to
Harborough's melancholy Scenes, were I not conscious of such superior
Pleasures, ou vous scavez. You might convey me a Letter full of them, but
you will, perhaps, think it an impertinent Request. I could set what Value you
please on the Favor, though the Pleasure I cannot pretend to limit.

I must now break off my Letter in as aukwark a Manner as I take my Leave,
which is likewise usually most awkward, where I have most Respect. I Will even
lay aside further Ceremony in this, as in the other Case, and say no more than
that I am,

Madam, Your humble Servant, (In the most obsolete Sense) W. S.

LETTER III. Miss G -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
M --, May 12, 1740. SIR,
YOU express so great a Concern for my Brother's Illness, that not only common
Civility, but Humanity, obliges me to acquaint you, that he is upon the
Recovery. His Physicians have thought him out of Danger these three Weeks, as
to his Fever, but are apprehensive of a Consumption; to prevent which, they
have ordered him a Milk-Diet, as soon as he gets into the Country, which he
hopes to do, some Time next Week. My Brother G -- is with him. To make the
Journey easy, they propose to hire a Chaise, and make three or four Days of it.

DICK has been so compassionate to write to me twice; the First was only to
show me he was alive; in the last Letter he seems to have recovered his usual
Spirits, and says, he must be obliged to the most despicable Creature in the
Universe for the most valuable Blessing in Life. He is quite determined to
leave the Study of Physic, and turn Friar, which I am delighted at, as I
believe it will be conducive to his Health.

I think I have been very particular in my Account of my Brother, which you
would have received last Post, but that I was from Home when yours came, and
did not return till late on Saturday Night. I write this in the greatest Hurry,
for Company waits for me to set out for S --: but I must tell you, that I am
very angry you should think so meanly of me, as to imagine I had not Generosity
enough to send you an Account of my Brother and your Friend, without the Bribe
of a Compliment. Out of Regard, however, I must pardon you.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant, M. G.
P. S. The Letter you wrote to DICK, I have locked up in the Cabinet, to give
him by Way of Cordial, at his first coming Home.



LETTER IV. Miss F -- R to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Sept. 6, 1745. SIR,
I THINK it would be inconsistent with Gratitude, as well as Good-manners, not
to return you Thanks for the Pleasures your Writings have given me; but I shall
desist from declaring my Sentiments of them, lest you should style it Flattery.
Writing has been my constant Employ (when at Home) ever since you left us, and
I hope you could not expect them sooner. I could not but think Fate doubly
cruel, (when to part us was as much as we here could bear with Decency) to
embroil us still more by the Hurt of the Leg, which I am glad to hear is got
well.

With you fled all Life and Spirit from A --; a total Eclipse succeeded you,
and the Sun will shine no more till your bright Influence dispels the Cloud.
Company and Fruit come in often, but all in vain, for nothing has any Relish,
but the Writings of him who caused the Malady. You have shone so much to the
Prejudice of our Neighbors, that it is with Difficulty we behave with
tolerable Decorum. We drink your Health as constant as Appetite (or rather,
Custom) calls to Table, for nothing has any Taste, except the Glass, in which
you are named.

We sent Tom Thumb's Performance (I think in my Heart it is Nonsensense) to Mr.
--, who read it, called him nasty Dog, and put it in his Pocket. Whether it
will be a Spit-Cat, or dumb Madness, I don't know; but I am sure the bottled
Small-Beer was very brisk last Sunday.

From August 25th we date our Misery; no Smile seen, or Laugh heard since, till
last Night. -- What could cause one then? -- Why, Mr. SHENSTONE, who had been
dumb so long, spoke then, and who can hear him without being pleased? It is
meet and right, as well as highly pleasing to Mrs. MARY, that you should
respect Mr. A --, who, I believe, intends to spend his last Breath in your
Praise, but he will make your Name glorious. Nothing could give him more Pleasure
than you have done, except a Present of Lawn-Sleeves. As to the Scheme you
mention, I dare not bid you hope, but I will venture to bid you not despair, on
a Presumption that your Rhetoric can never fail of Success.

I cannot prevail with my Sisters for a Letter a-piece. One says, that you shall
be the next Gentleman she writes to. Mrs. A -- says, though you cut off your
Hair, she believes your Ears will remain, and wishes nothing so much as an
Opportunity to pinch 'em. Miss K -- says, she has already suffered too much by
that Tyrant, Love, ever to engage with Mankind more, not even Mr. SHENSTONE;
but cannot bear that Miss D -- should be so happy. S -- says, she would make a
handsome Speech, but cannot, and therefore sends you only Service. My Brother
desires his Compliments, and says, he cannot fix a Time for seeing the Leasowes,
but designs to be at Broom with your Brother, in Three Weeks Time. So here you
have the Sayings of the A -- ians. But I have not done yet, till I have been a
little more troublesome.

Note. If I did not know you to be a good Judge of Mankind, and had not
experienced your Goodnature, (which inclines you to excuse the Foibles of the
weaker Vessel) together with the Hopes, that, for the Sake of some happy
Favorite, you would not expose the Sex, I should not have trusted you with my
Nonsense. This concludes, therefore, with desiring one Favor, which is, that
you would burn this, and that the Flame and my Folly may die together; and be
assured you will oblige

W. F -- R.
I begin to think you have vowed Destruction to some of my favorite Poets; and
must own, you have given two of them a Wound in the Side; but if you conquer
'em, you shall never never know it. Adieu!



LETTER V. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Miss W. F -- R, at A -- n.
The Leasowes, Nov. 28, 1745. Dear Miss F --,
ON a Time, as it is reported, the Mountains were in Labor; when, after a long
Course of Pains and Inquietudes, they made a shift to produce that puny Animal,
a Mouse. Now that very individual Mouse, according to the mysterious and
figurative Import of Types and Shadows, was the perfect Image and
Representative of this mine Epistle. A grovelling, starveling, insignificant
Production, conceived with much Difficulty, and transmitted to you with
Confusion of Face. In short, you may look upon it as the noble Booty you have
taken, by baiting your Trap so artfully with Praise and Compliment, about two
or three Months ago. True it is, that, considering the Politeness and
Complaisance of your obliging Letter, my Behavior since must appear the most
unknightly of all Proceedings, But your Packet did not arrive till three Weeks
after it was sent; so you will excuse my Silence till the Day after I received
it, and whatever was more than that, I freely acknowledge, came of Sin.
However, you will, upon Confession, pardon me, as you expect Pardon from your
Confessor, should the Benedictines and Friars get a Footing in this Island,
which I find your Brother is endeavoring to prevent.

I can be no longer ludicrous on this last Article. I am too seriously
concerned for his Safety; yet I don't fear but the Rebels will be defeated,
and, it may be, all Danger over in less than a Fortnight. But General WADE's
Behavior, loitering so long at Newcastle, astonishes me. I was at Birmingham
on Tuesday Morning, from whence I saw the Remains of LIGONIER's Horse march
with vast Spirits and Alacrity. They wish to have, what they call, the Refusal
of the Highlanders. They are Men of experienced Bravery, and fought like Furies
at the Battle of Fontenoy. May they do so now, and with better Success!

B -- told me, your Brother would borrow my Pistols. At that Time, supposing
him in Jest, I sent him no very serious Answer. I now think it incumbent on me
to say, that I would lend them him with all my Heart, but that one of them is
broke in the Stock, and cannot be fired with Safety till it is stocked afresh.
Perhaps he might recollect it was so when I was at A --.

We have been best Part of a Week at Litchfield, where we lived like Chickens
in a Pen, confined and crammed, and where we served God after the Manner of
Popes and Cardinals. -- I only allude to Cathedral Service. Mr. and Mrs. D --
seemed quite disposed to entertain us agreeably. The Son and Daughter, to say
the least, appeared much more indifferent in that Particular. "These," as
SHAKESPEARE says, "are certainly better Christians, or else, are worse than we."

You have escaped me at Birmingham, by concealing the Time of your Visit.
Surely, you will come over to Broom, ere it be long, and give me my Revenge.

Tell Mrs. A --, my Ears make great Shoots, and such as may tempt her Hand
egregiously: but if I am metamorphosed into an Ass entirely, I will come and
serenade her in a Morning, when she has been up late the Night before.

I beg my Compliments to all Friends. I must not make my Letter much longer --
the Mouse will else grow to the Size of a Rat. I beg you to accept this idle
Billet in Part of an Answer to your elegant Letter, and in Lieu of a thousand
Professions of the Friendship and Esteem, with which I am,

Dear Miss F --, Your most obedient and faithful humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER VI. Miss F -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Jan. 21, 1745-6. SIR,
I HAVE several Times examined myself, to find out what can authorize or
qualify me to write to Poets and Men of Letters. Upon strict Enquiry, I am
sensible, that nothing I am possessed of, can entitle me to it, and nothing but
Vanity and Selfishness could spur me on to this Impertinence; Vanity, in being
addressed by a Man of your Capacity and Figure in the World, and Selfishness,
as I am sure to be a Gainer by your Correspondence. I must, however, tell you,
the Epithets of artful, polite, and witty, I have no Right to. In these
Respects, I am an Heroine of your own making, but I attribute all this to the
Consequence of that great and generous Mind of your own, and in whose Nature it
is to imagine you see in others what you really possess yourself.

I shall not trouble you with a Detail of the Frights, Fears, and dreadful
Apprehensions, almost every body has been under, concerning the Devil, the
Pope, and the Pretender; it is my good Fortune to have more of that
strengthening Ingredient, called Hope, than that of the destructive one, called
Fear, in my Composition, which has prevented my suffering so much upon the
Occasion, as the rest of my Neighbors. For my own Part, I had but one Fear,
which was that of my Brother's marching; but I was soon made easy in that
Particular, when I found the Duke Duke of CUMBERLAND, second Son to King GEORGE
the Second, who headed the Forces against the Rebels.
had no Occasion for, nor would accept of, the new-raised Regiments. All the
neighboring Gentlemen, who had not Commissions, went Volunteers in Captain
WHITMORE's Company, but are all come Home again, and begin to think they have
been upon a Don QUIXOTE Expedition, or have done like the King of France, and
his Forty-thousand.

All the Females are turned Politicians, except myself. I bestowed two Minutes
and an half in considering whether I should affect to appear one or not. In the
first Minute, my Thoughts suggested to me, that there never would be a
Parliament of Women; in the second, I was convinced, if that should happen, it
was morally impossible I should ever have a Seat in the House; and the last
Half-minute confirmed me in my Resolution, not to meddle with Politics, which,
I imagine, was never designed a Province for Women. I shall therefore be
content till they act in their proper Sphere, and Ribbons, and Fans, (which are
better adapted to my Capacity) are again their Theme.

What shall I say, as to neighboring Occurrences? Your Friend, Mr. A --, is
very well, and often talks of you. He told me, last Time I was in his Company,
he designed himself the Pleasure of calling on you in his Way to B --, early in
the Spring. Meeting with bright B -- the other Day, I desired him to stir up
his Muse, to whip her, and lash her, and put forth something upon the Times. A
Gentleman, who sat by, replied, "Perhaps he may ruin himself in Whip-cord,
before he rouses her." The Brobdignags go on with their Knotting, as usual; but
I don't find that your favorite Miss D -- designs you any for a Waistcoat.

It was not in my Power to give you more Notice of my Visit to Birmingham than
I did, as the Time was not fixed above six Days before I set out, in which Time
my Brother went to B --, and desired Mr. D -- to let you know, when he saw you,
(which he said would be in a Day or two) you would think you had Revenge
enough, if you knew how I was disappointed. At last, I sighed within myself,
and said, "Surely, the Favor is more than I can merit."

I shall now cry aloud, and say, Woe unto them that forget their Promise, for
therein is their Fidelity called in Question! -- Woe unto them that erase out of
their Letters what they had written, for thereby they injure the Brain of her
that would find it out! -- Woe unto them that are three Months in answering a
Letter, for surely it must tire the Patience of her, who is, all that Time, in
Expectation! -- Woeful Truths!

S -- the Valiant desires his Compliments, and thanks you for the Offer of your
Pistols, which Favor he never asked, as he did not imagine they should fight
with Pistols. He has been at Home this Month recruiting. I don't doubt but the
Shropshire Fusileers will make a great Figure in military History -- at least,
in the Prints. The tender, the wild, the grave, and the mild, all lump their
Compliments.

By the Time you come to this Place, (which, without a double Share of
Patience, you will never arrive at) you must be greatly disappointed, as you will
then find the Sum Total of all I have said amounts to Nothing: but don't then
blame Nature, Education, or the Stars that presided at my Birth, that I Am not a
Novelist, nor capable of saying any Thing that can possibly entertain you
herein, but rather blame your own wrong Choice in a Correspondent. I will now,
out of Compassion to you, put an End to this unparalleled Piece of Nonsense, by
wishing you the Compliments of the Season, and assuring you, that I am,

Sir, Your obliged and humble Servant, W. F --.
P. S. Who is the Author of Bishop RIDLEY 's Ghost, a Poem just come out, which
I suppose you have seen? -- I shall be in daily Expectation of the Book you
promised, till it comes.



LETTER VII. Miss F -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
A --, March 19, 1745-6. Sir,
IT cannot possibly be otherwise, than that I shall soon arrive at the Pinnacle
of the Temple of Vanity, in full Persuasion of the just and deserved Encomiums
on my Letters. In the Name of all that is sincere and honest, let me prevail
with you to leave off Flattery, and act the Plain-Dealer; and let it suffice,
when I tell you, that the grand Compliment of all is, that you think my Letters
worthy an Answer, which alone is sufficient to feed my Vanity.

Now, lest you should not immediately recollect the fatal Consequences, that
may attend Flattery, from a Person one may chance to have a good Opinion of,
imagine that you see me intoxicated to the greatest Degree that weak Woman is
capable of; in order to which, you are to suppose that I have taken it into my
Head, that the House I live in, is not embellished with Ornaments and
Decorations fit for me to inhabit; that the Meat I eat is too coarse for my
delicate Constitution, and Ortolans alone fit for my Palate; that the
Conversation of my own Family is quite despicable; my Neighbors not worth my
Notice; that the Air is not pure enough for me to breathe; in fine, that I am a
celestial Creature, far superior to the Race of Mortals on Earth. And, should
this happen, you must then smite your Breast, and say, "Alas! these are the
Effects of Flattery! -- Which shall deter me from the Practice of it upon
Womankind for the future." I know it is a received Maxim with most Men, that no
Woman can be pleased without Flattery; but why might there not be an Exception
to this Rule? If my Letters are polite, it is what I never designed; nor do I
think you could possibly expect they should be so, from a little Garret, in a
Corner of a House, in a Corner of the World; and from one who has nothing more
to boast of, than the common Gifts of Nature, without any other Assistance than
what proceeds from her Handmaid Time.

As to your Dispute with Mr. B --, it is so like that between the Turks and
Persians, that I fancy it will not be determined soon. For my own Part, though the
Fighters have done little, I am inclined to think the Writers have done less;
for, as yet, I have not seen one Line in the poetical Way, but what a B -- may
rival; and as to historical Facts, I think they hang much upon Uncertainties.
As it probably will be demanded of every true Englishman, what he has done in
Defense, or to the Honor of his Country, I would fain know, if you are
provided with an hundred Pages to throw in the Teeth of any one who shall ask
you the Question.

We are going to have some new Neighbors at W -- d; they are Sisters in Law to
old Mrs. D -- T; perhaps, as complete a Pair of old Maids as England can
produce. The youngest is past Sixty, and yet the Lungs of of the eldest are so
good, that I Will be answerable she shall harangue ten Hours together, upon the
Subject of Matrimony. She will scarce allow St. PAUL in the Right, when he
says, "They that marry do well;" but is thoroughly persuaded of the Truth of
his next Assertion, "They which don't marry do better." The youngest is not so
fluent with her Tongue, but she, like the Welchman's Owl, pays it off with
thinking. I fancy we shall be able, in a little Time, to furnish out a
considerable Society of old Maids, whereof Mrs. L -- (which is the Name of one
of the abovementioned Ladies) shall be Lady-President.

The Amazonian Mrs. A -- will not own that she envies Mrs. M --; but I have a
great Suspicion, that she intends to rival JENNY CAMERON, being equally fond of
Wisdom, to which I may add, some Ambition to outshine her in the Field. She
has practiced frequently on one or other of the Family this Winter, by which
Means it has been my Fate, more than once, to lie in Honor's Truckle-bed. I
believe she designs to do great Feats in War this Spring.

I am vastly pleased with the Conversation of your Tenants, and laughed
immoderately when I came to JOHN W -- R's Witticism. I don't intend to appear
in Print, till I am well assured I shall rival Mrs. -- (A. P.) with her COPE,
WADE, etc.

Mr. PIT has resigned his Post in the Army, and recommended one of his Nephews
in his Room; not Mr. B --, I believe, for I don't hear that he intends to boil
his Lobster. -- I love a genteel Phrase. Your Brother was here last Week, but I
could not prevail with him to sing Polly Willis.

That you may not think a Word of yours falls to the Ground, I must tell you
that I delivered your Message to Mr. A --; at which, a Mixture of Joy and
Gratitude appeared in his Countenance; and being inclined to believe it (and
perhaps too complaisant to call in Question my Veracity) did not insist upon my
Oath. He told me, he had, before this Time, done himself that Pleasure, had not
Illness prevented him; but, if he lives, he intends to see you this next
ensuing Summer. I have been under dreadful Apprehensions of his drawing near
the Time of his Dissolution, and great Reason I had, you will say, when I tell
you, that for six Weeks he had not Spirits to squeeze his dear MOLLY by the
Hand. He has taken great Pains for upwards of thirty Years, to instruct and
improve his little Flock; yet (such is the Perverseness of the People, and the
Corruption of their Morals) that after a Sermon of half an Hour long, I fear he
had little Reason to believe he had made any great Alteration in their
favorite Tenets.

I hope you are convinced, that the Consequence of having a female
Correspondent, is to be pestered with Nonsense, and the Return of a very few
Letters lets you into the Knowledge of the Materials wherewith a Woman's Mind
is furnished. From which of 'em shall we claim Merit? -- All I beg is, a
favorable Allowance, which will oblige

Your humble Servant, W. F --.
By the Birmingham Post, you may direct for me at A -- n, near B -- th, to be
left at the Wheel. All here desire their Compliments.



LETTER VIII. Lady HERTFORD For Mr. SHENSTONE's Character of the Letters
written by this elegant Correspondent, the Reader is desired to revert to the
Preface.
(afterward Duchess of SOMERSET) to the Hon. Mrs. KNIGHT.
Piercy-Lodge, May 16, 1746. Dear Madam,
I OUGHT, and really intended, to have made Use of the Permission you gave me,
to trouble you with a Letter before this Time; but you do not need any Thing to
lower your Spirits, and my Letters can hardly have any other Effect upon harder
Hearts than yours, When I lost my dear, and by me, ever-lamented Son, Lord
BEAUCHAMP.
every Faculty to please (if ever I were possessed of any such) died with him.
I have no longer any cheerful Thoughts to communicate to my Friends; but as the
Joy and Pride of my Heart withers in his Grave, my Mind is continually haunting
those Mansions of the Dead, and is but too inattentive to what passes in a
World, where I have still Duties and Attachments, which I ought to be, and, I
hope, I may truly say, I am thankful for. I am sure my Affection for my Lord
HERTFORD, and Solicitude for his Welfare, are sincere; since, if I know my own
Heart, I would not deliberate a Moment to lay down my Life for his Service.
Lady BETTY and Sir HUGH SMITHSON, and their Children, are justly dear to me;
and I still feel the Bonds of tender Friendship: but I enjoy all these
Blessings with Trembling and Anxiety; for, after my dear BEAUCHAMP, what human
Things can appear permanent? Youth, Beauty, Virtue, Health, were not sufficient
to save him from the Hand of Death! And who then can think themselves secure?
These are the melancholy Considerations, which generally entertain my waking
Hours. Though sometimes I am able to view the bright Side of my Fate, and ask
myself, for whom I grieve? Only for myself? How narrow an Affection does this
imply! Could he have lived long as my fondest Wish desired, what could I have
asked, at the End of that Term, more, than the Assurance that he should be
placed where I humbly hope, and confidently trust, he is, beyond the Reach of
Sorrow, Sin, or Sickness? But I must leave a Subject, which, though I am never
tired of, I ought, in regard to my Friends, to be silent upon, and ask you,
where you would have the Collection of Letters sent, which you were so good to
subscribe for at my Desire? I have a Letter from Mr. COLLINS this Day, in which
he desires to receive your Commands. My Lord, and Mr. COWLAD, charge me with
their Compliments to you. I am, with great Truth,

Dear Madam, Your very affectionate, and obedient humble Servant, F. HERTFORD.

LETTER IX. Miss F -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
A -- n, Sept. 3, 1746. SIR,
I MUST certainly stand in a very bad Light, if, after so many Favors and
Obligations conferred on me, I should be so idle, as not to attempt to show my
Gratitude. But how can this be done? Where is the Pen that can describe the
Pleasures I have been entertained with? (mine cannot do it -- nay, even a
THOMSON's would fail here) or where shall those Thanks, or that Praise begin,
that never can end? -- But hold -- He wants no Thanks, he desires no Praise, he
follows not Fame, but Fame takes Pride in following him. I shall only say, all
that is agreeable is to be found at that elegant Place, the Leasowes, where you
reign, as Monarch of all, and have only to say to this Man, "Go," and he goes,
to another, "Come," and he comes, to your Servants, "Do this," and they do it,
and that with a Smile, which shows that Love, as well as Duty, binds 'em to
Obedience.

Mrs. A -- opens not her Mouth, but in Praise of you and yours. She designs to
metamorphose into a Pigeon, and you may expect to find her cooing in VIRGIL's
Grove. Miss K -- thanks you for her Picture, and values it as a Drawing of
yours; S -- drinks Tar-water, and looks fat; and W -- could wish you would not
stir off your own Domain, till you had finished your Elegies, and that the
first Journey then may be to print 'em. Did you but wish it may be so, it would
not be in the Power of any Thing to prevent it.

My Brother has sent you the Song, and with it his Compliments. He designed
coming to the Leasowes, while we were there, but was prevented, and now leaves
off all Thoughts of it till Spring. I am going on in my old Way -- but am
determined to be as short as a Shrewsbury Cake, in abruptly telling you that

I am, Sir, Your much obliged humble Servant, W. F --.
All here desire their Compliments. Excuse every Thing. -- Adieu!



LETTER X. Miss F -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
A -- n, Nov. 1, 1746. SIR,
I CAN no longer forbear telling you, that you have in your last, obliged me
more than by any one Action of your whole Life, and for which I could almost
call you Friend; (which, I assure you, is the highest Appellation I can bestow)
for I must tell you, that no one yet ever commenced a Friend of mine, till they
had corrected me of some Fault, Failing, or Error; and though I Have long since
been taught, that I ought not to make a Friend of any but my own Sex, together
with other Particulars parallel to that, yet I cannot but think it a friendly
Act, and as such esteem it. For myself, let me say, that I am not so obstinate
as to persist in an Error for the Sake of supporting a wrong Judgment; and had
I discovered Reason to dispute Superiority with you in any Respect, I should
have thought you little worthy of my Correspondence; instead of which, I allow
you to excel, much beyond myself, in all Pre-eminence.

Before I proceed any farther, let me clear Mrs. A -- from the Aspersion her
Judgment seems to lie under in this Affair, otherwise I shall appear to be
afraid of the Censure it deserves. Know then, 'twas I chose her Shape; and,
peradventure, the better to serve my own Purposes; for how know you, but I
intended to make a Letter-Carrier of her, (as they do in Babylon, Aleppo, and
the East Indies) and by that Means to accommodate myself with a swifter
Messenger than the Post? And as I knew her Inclination, when a reasonable
Creature, I concluded, after Transmigration, Instinct would then as naturally
incline her to frequent VIRGIL 's Grove. How unnatural soever this Shape may
appear to the Grove, I must tell you, I could produce some Authorities on my
Side, exclusive of those you have mentioned; but I am not about to do this,
for, as you seem to disallow it, I readily give it up, and answer, "True, O
King!" -- Nay, I think to be in the Wrong, and to be reproved in such an
ingenious, humane, and polite Manner by you, more than equals being in the
Right. I believe too, 'twill be for your Interest, that she remain in her own
Shape, for some Time, as her Fingers are employed in knotting Fringe for you,
so you find you have no Occasion to buy; 'twill be ready before the Season for
wearing it comes.

Marvel not that I don't admit your next Assertion, maugre all the Forces you
can raise, nay, though the whole nine Muses combined against me, I Will be absolute
for once. I am as tenacious of my Prerogatives as any of my Sex, nor do I think
I have been guilty of an Infringement in what I have said. I am neither so
insensible of Favors as not to discover 'em, nor am I so proud, or so prudish,
as not to acknowledge 'em. Surely, you have dealt with none but the
last-mentioned Sort of the Sex, that you are so alarmed at what I have said.
But no more of this -- I now enter a Caveat to the Subject.

Mr. A -- is much pleased with your kind Remembrance of him. He made an
excellent Hare-Chase Preachment on the Thanksgiving-Day; for he told us all the
Doublings and Turnings the Pretender and his Party made from their first Effort
to their Defeat. He has got his Brother with him, a Man, whose Aspect, at one
View, discovers to you the Imbecility of his Mind. I do not yet know in what
Capacity he is to act, but am a little afraid 'twill prove that of a Servant,
which will be similar to P -- Y's Generosity.

There was a droll Scene the other Day, at W -- d, between bright B -- Y, and
old Mrs. D -- T's Servant, who was sent to ask him to Dinner. The Message
delivered, B -- Y nodded his Head, and replied, "I conno' come." The Servant,
not content with this, followed, pulled him by the Sleeve, and entreated him;
upon which he responsed, " I conno' come, nor I wonno' come." At this, the Man
retreated, much chagrin'd, thinking, no doubt, his Mistress slighted, that his
own Pocket had lost a Chance, and nothing had been befriended -- but the
Sir-Loin. It was great Glee to the Spectators, and, being Sunday, there was a
numerous Audience.

You have certainly added Beauty as well as Gentility to the Place, by
destroying those Hedges; for I think there can scarce be a Hedge near you, that
does not hide a thousand Beauties; and as to the Horse-Pond, it disturbed me
greatly when I was there. Has Monsieur Snuff Box sent your Busts, and will your
Elegies ever be printed? Lord DUDLEY does us an honor, when he mentions us,
and, if drinking his Health is an Equivalent, I assure you we are not
behind-hand with his Lordship. I had a Letter from Mr. D -- N this Week; he
seems as much alarmed as you at my moderate Acknowledgment. Miss F -- Y is very
glad to hear that you design her a Picture. The enclosed is from Mr. D -- IE.
Surely, Gossip JOAN never prated faster.

I have only to add, that I wish you an untarnished Bliss in the Company of
your polished Friend, and that you may enjoy each other's Friendship even to
the Age of old NESTOR, Whose Tongue dropped Honey; full of Days was he;
Two Ages past, he lived the Third to see;
And, his first Race of Subjects long decayed,
Over their Sons' Sons a peaceful Scepter swayed.
POPE's Homer.

I have already been too prolix, and it is Time I tell you, that

I am, Sir, Your obliged humble Servant, W. F --.
All here desire their Compliments. You say, you have two Fellows, but I say,
you are an odd Glove. Adieu!



LETTER XI. In DODSLEY's Collection of Mr. SHENSTONE's Letters, the 47th,
addressed to a Friend, begins, and contains some Passages, exactly similar to
this, but as the Editor's Copy (Mr. SHENSTONE's own Transcript) specifies the
particular Correspondent, to whom it is addressed, and contains more Subject,
it was judged not improper to be inserted in this Collection.
W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Rev. Mr. JAGO, at Bishop's Itchington, near Kineton,
in Warwickshire.
The Leasowes, Sept. 17, 1747. Dear Mr. JAGO,
I THINK I have out-corresponded all my Correspondents; whether you are the
last that is to be subdued, I cannot say; but the Rest are so fatigued, that
they are not able to achieve a Line. Apprized of this, and being by Nature
disposed to have Mercy on the Vanquished, Parcere subjectis, and debellare
superbos, I seldom write a Syllable more than is requisite to further some
Scheme, or ascertain some Interview; the latter being the Purpose of this mine
Epistle. I am in great Hopes I shall be at Liberty to see you, ere many Weeks
be past, and would beg of you to let me know by a Line, when I am most likely,
or when very unlikely, to meet with you at Home. The Reason why I can fix no
week, at present, is, that I am in daily Expectations of Mr. LYTTELTON, and the
HAGLEY Family. I dined there, some Time since, with Mr. PIT, Mr. BOUHOURS, Mr.
CAMPION, and all the World. Mr. THOMSON, that right friendly Bard, was
expected, and I fancy may be there now. Mr. LYTTELTON offered me the Visit, and
I own I am pleased with the Prospect of showing him something at the Leasowes
beyond his Expectations. I have made a great Improvement in VIRGIL's Grove,
since you were here, and have finished a new Path from it to the House, after
the Manner you approved. They are going to build a Rotund to terminate the
Visto at Hagley; I think there is a little Hill joining the Park, that would
suit one better, though it will be very pretty where it is.

If I come to your House, I will not go to Mr. M -- R's. He has been, twice, as
near me as the Grange, with CHARLES LYTTELTON, but never deemed my Situation
worth seeing. I doubt you are a little too modest in praising it, wherever you
go. Why don't you applaud it with both Hands? -- Parcentes ego Dexteras odi --
Sparge Rosas --
I am so very much enamoured, that is, so very partial to my native Place, that
it seems a Miracle to me, how it comes not to be famous. But to be serious --
How my Lord DUDLEY is tumbled about the World! He was overturned in going to
Town, and now again in coming back. Is not this falling up Stairs and down
Stairs? -- Nevertheless, he is safe and sound, and able to sit up with you and
me till twelve or one at Night, as I know by last Monday's Experience.

I have somewhere about a thousand Things to say to you -- not now though -- Mrs.
KNIGHT's Visit I reserve till I see you. A Coach with a Coronet is a pretty
Kind of Phenomenon at my Door; -- few Things prettier -- except the Face of
such a Friend as you; for I do not want the Grace to prefer a spirituous and
generous Friendship to all the Gewgaws that Ambition can contrive.

I have wrote out my Elegies, and heartily wish you had them to look over,
before I come, but I know not how to send them. I shall bring and leave much
Poetry with you -- " Thus and Odores!" -- or rather a Covering Thuri and
Odoribus -- Yet, I pray you,
If you shall ever my foolish Lines repeat,
Speak of me, as I am -- nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in Malice -- then
Must you speak
Of one who --


Is, Sir, Your most affectionate and faithful Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XII. This Letter to Mrs. KNIGHT (afterward Lady LUXBOROUGH) together
with several others addressed to the same Correspondent, bearing very
indistinct Dates, are placed together in as good Order as Surmise was capable
of directing.
W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Honorable Mrs. KNIGHT.
The Leasowes. Dear Madam,
AS it has hitherto seemed good to you to expatiate pretty largely on so
diminutive a Subject as a Thimble, I flatter myself that you may read with
Patience an Account of the Life and Conversation of your most trifling humble
Servant. Otherwise, I should not have told you, that I am extremely unhappy in
my present Situation; that, when you left the Country, I had recourse to
another Kind of natural Beauties, namely, that which is to be found in "Groves,
Meads, and murmuring Streams," and so long as Summer was pleased to continue
his Favors, I looked upon your Departure as what only changed my Pleasure to
Amusement. Now, indeed, Summer has forsaken me likewise; the Trees and Groves
are stripped of their Covering, and I am left without any Fence against Spleen,
Vapors, Megrim, Discontent, and a numerous Train of such Sort of Beings, which
plague me to Death, whenever I offer to recollect your Absence; and how often
that happens, I leave any one to guess but yourself, because any one else is
better acquainted with the numerous Ways and Means you have of rendering your
Company agreeable. I appeal also to the same Persons to guess how provoking you
are, when you mention the Possibility there was that I might have seen you at
the Leasowes some Time ago. What need you tell one of it, since it could not be
effected? Why will you put me upon cursing Fortune upon more Accounts than I
have already Occasion to do? Pray let me endeavor to conform myself to my real
Circumstances, rather than give me a Glimpse of the Pleasure which you was
about to do me, and yet had not the Goodness to go through with. I want no
Inducements to come to Worcester, since I discovered that you lived there, and
that being all that was necessary, though you have mentioned others that are
attractive.

I beg you would make my Compliments agreeable to Mrs. WINSMORE, which you are
best capable of doing, for two Reasons; first, because you know the Sincerity
of my Esteem, and, secondly, because I have no Idea how any Thing you say can
be disagreeable. The Consideration that she remembers me, and that she spoke of
me in the same Breath with Mrs. KNIGHT (as my Vanity interprets your Letter)
makes me so vain, that I, with the utmost Assurance, take the Liberty of
subscribing myself,

Madam, Your most obedient, humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
P. S. I believe I shall go to L -- n the End of next Week. If I were to
receive a Letter from you, as I put my Foot into the Stirup, I should bid Mrs.
ARNOLD take in her Bottle, for I had no Occasion for a Cordial. Your Affair (ou
vous scavez) diverts me highly.



LETTER XIII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Honorable Mrs. KNIGHT.
NANDO's Coffee-House, near Temple Bar, May. Madam,
A LADY, whose Conversation is ever discovering somewhat new and agreeable, may
possible find some Amusement in a Subject that is new, though with no other
Recommendation. It Is upon this Account, that I beg your Acceptance of this
grotesque Poem.

I took great Pleasure in seeing the piping Faunus at RACKSTROW's, because, as
it is certainly a genteel Design, it must needs prove agreeable to Mrs. KNIGHT.
Connoisseurs would choose to have his musical Intention expressed, as it is, at
present, by the Posture merely; if the Pipe was added, it would prove more
obviously agreeable. If I might presume to advise, it should be, to calculate
it, in some Degree, for Tastes less refined than your own; because there are
Millions of the former Species to, perhaps, one or two of the latter, and I
know you take a superior Pleasure in the Satisfaction of others.

"Trifles light as Air," or as the Poem I am sending, acquire a fresh Weight
with me, as often as they give me an Occasion of assuring you that

I am, Madam, Your most obliged, and obedient humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XIV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Right Hon. Lady LUXBOROUGH, at Barrels.
Madam,
I WAS much concerned to hear by Mr. WILLIAMS's Account, last Thursday, that
your Ladyship has been greatly indisposed. The Particulars of your Disorder he
does not mention, but tells me, he was desired to give it as a Reason that I
did not hear from you before. It is as natural for me to make Enquiry
concerning the Recovery of your Health, as it is for me to wish it, which I
very earnestly do; I have, therefore, sent an honest Neighbor of mine upon
this Errand, who will be glad of an Opportunity of seeing Barrels. Poor TOM, my
trusty Servant, has, ever since I came from Barrels, been in a very dangerous
way; and whether he ever may regain the small Share of Health he has been used
to, is a great Question, else I had sent something sooner. But I must request
your Ladyship not to write, if you find it the least troublesome. A verbal
Message will be very sufficient, till such Time as you can write me a full
Account of your Recovery.

I have no Particulars that can tempt me to enlarge this Letter, and, indeed, I
hardly wish for any, lest I should accidentally let fall any Thing, that might
tempt you, at this Time, to write an Answer; which, though so highly agreeable to
me at a more favorable Season, can afford me little Satisfaction, when I
conjecture that you write in Pain.

I hope Mr. HALL is recovered by this Time. As my rural Scenery could not
attract him hither in Summer, I have little Hopes that my Conversation can have
that Effect in Winter. Few Persons care to ride twelve dirty Miles in Winter,
be their Charity ever so great, To see the dullest of the Sons of Men, for such
am I, without any Affectation, during the Winter-Season; altogether absorbed in
what I think they call Swiss-Meditation, that is, thinking upon Nothing. A very
unjoyous Circumstance this, for such of my Friends as vouchsafe to read my
Letters. -- But I digress -- I pray for your Ladyship's Health and Happiness,
hoping my Messenger may bring me an Account of both, agreeable to the Wishes of

Your Ladyship's most obliged and obedient Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
It Is now Oct. 18th -- but this Letter was wrote, in order to have been sent
last Week. I sat up late with Lord DUDLEY one Night this Week. He often
proposes your Ladyship's Health, and drinks it very respectfully.

The Inhabitants of our Parish have presented our Parson at the Visitation; on
which Occasion, I have given myself the generous Air of observing a strict
Neutrality -- in other Words, I am a Person unconcerned.



LETTER XV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
March 15, 1747-8. Madam,
AFTER having owned, that the Fear your Ladyship has been under, is in reality
to be imputed to me, I am at a Loss for Words to express my Concern, or to
alleviate my Fault. I will not, however, disallow that the Book came to Hand
much sooner than I could reasonably expect it, and that the Letter enclosed in
it, gave me that uncommon Pleasure, which your Ladyship's never fail to do. I
have nothing to say in my Behalf, but that I have never had Health or Spirits
since I received it, that might encourage me to think I could return an Answer
as I ought; and even tonight my Spirits are so bad, and my Head so confused,
that I have no Reason to hope these few Lines can do any Thing more, than free
you from your present Uncertainty. But if I am honored with a Line from your
Ladyship hereafter, I will immediately acknowledge it as well as I am able, let
my Capacity be what it will.

I do not know how far your Ladyship's Name may be distinguishable by a
Post-Woman's Ear; but this I know, that if I had been Parson H -- K, your
Ladyship should not have known from me, that there was any Woman in the World,
who could express herself concerning you with the Indecency you mention. I am
astonished at her Behavior, and not a little at her Forgetfulness. There seems
to me to be no surer Conveyance in the World than that of the Farmer, by whom I
sent my Letter to the Post Office at Henley, and by whom, I suppose, you
conveyed your Parcel. However, in Obedience to your Ladyship's Commands, I have
sent this Letter to Master H -- K, and shall have an additional Pressure on my
Spirits, till I hear you have been pleased to forgive my Neglect. I know
extremely well, that Want of Time and Leisure, and some other Excuses, which
are often made for not writing, can be of Weight from no one but a Cobbler, who
has ten or a dozen Children dependent on a Tatching-End; but I know as well,
that your Ladyship's is no ordinary Correspondence, and that a Person ought to
have a clear Head, and an unembarrassed Cheerfulness of Temper, when he sits
down to answer any Letter of yours. For my Part, I hardly look upon this as any
Letter at all, and will infallibly write again, as soon as I can recover my
natural State of Mind. I have as little Reason to consider the enclosed as
Poetry; but as they were short Compositions, I had been writing them out
yesterday, with a Design to send them to the Post Office tonight.

I am afraid I have tired your Ladyship with Madrigal and Sonnet. I hope, when
the Weather gets finer (with which my Spirits uniformly sympathize) to vary my
Style a little for your Ladyship's Amusement; in the mean Time, I have sent you
a Poem, written by a Gentleman of my Acquaintance, and shown up, for a
College-Exercise, in Print. Your Ladyship will soon discover a juvenile Want of
Judgment in several Places; but I trust that the Elegance of his Fancy you will
admire. He sometimes comes and and stays a Month with me at the Leasowes, in
the Summer; the next Time he does so, I will be obliged to your Ladyship for
Leave to introduce him at Barrels. I am mistaken, if he will not be pleased
almost to a Degree of Enthusiasm.

As to your Ladyship's Lameness, though it comes last in this irregular Letter, I
beg Leave to assure you, that it gave me a sincere Concern to hear that it was
bad, and a very sensible Pleasure to hear it was abated. I as heartily wish
your Ladyship's Health and Happiness as you do yourself; and as I solemnly
assure you, that such is always the Disposition of my Mind, I will hope to be
forgiven, if I should, through Ignorance, fall short in my Means of expressing
it. This last Neglect is what I shall scarce again be guilty of, and can only
be excused by your Ladyship's Candor.

I am, Madam, Your most obliged, and most obedient Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
If your Ladyship wants the Book, I will send it directly; otherwise, I will
beg Leave to keep it a Week or two longer.



LETTER XVI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Right Hon. Lady LUXBOROUGH, at Barrels.
I HAVE sent your Ladyship a Book of Gardening, which I borrowed, about five
Years ago, of a Neighbor. If it will be of any Service to you, in modelling
the crooked Walks in your Shrubbery, I shall be glad; and you may return it at
your Leisure, as I do. It is written by a poor illiterate Fellow,
notwithstanding its Dedication to His Majesty, who is delighted with Enquiries
into vegetable Nature. You will see something of his Ignorance, perhaps, in
every Page; more especially Page 204, first Part, where he talks of MINERVA and
PALLAS for Statues, with many Blunders of like Nature. It was written,
seemingly, when the present natural Taste began to dawn, and which I wish,
rather than hope, may last as long as Nature.

Mr. L -- N, you may perhaps hear, has been offered, and has refused the Place
of Treasurer of the Navy, in Mr. D -- N's Room. -- What a Tide of Success!

May your Ladyship be as happy as Success ever made any Body! and that it is
more in the Mind than Externals is to me a Demonstration. I Am sure I shall
never be so happy, with with all my Philosophy and Success, as an old Fellow
who works for me: but I think your Ladyship has not only a right and
philosophical Understanding, but good animal Spirits, which are half in half;
so that you may be much happier that even him, which, I assure you, is to be
greatly so.

I am now a little maudlin after Dinner, and if my Groups are inconsistent and
queer, you must excuse me. I hope Mr. ALLEN is, by this Time, well. I have
written a Line to Mr. OUTING, at the Head of his Regiment. I am now to take my
formal Leave, as I do after a long Visit; that is, with about half a Bow, and
the Expression of about half I think; but I include as much as any Body, when I
say,

I am Your Ladyship's Most obliged, and most devoted Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
If your Ladyship could spare me about three Eggs of your Guinea Fowl, I should
be much obliged.



LETTER XVII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Madam,
I AM quite ashamed that I have not been able to make a speedier Enquiry into
the Event of your Ladyship's Journey. It would give me the utmost Uneasiness to
find that you underwent any Inconvenience from a Visit which gave me so much
Pleasure and yourself so little.

I am somewhat apprehensive, that one ought to guard against Ambition, and even
too much Admiration, if one would prepare to live as beseems a pious Hermit to
do. Your Ladyship will discover, therefore, how dangerous a Visitant you are,
and how much you must have retarded my Progress toward an eremitical Temper of
Mind; having diffused an Air of Dignity through my solitary Paths, which will not
fail to present itself as often as I resume them. Perhaps, Politeness, Elegance,
and Taste, may be some of those privileged Accomplishments, which it may be
allowable for a Recluse to admire, under certain Limitations. If not, I can
only say, that I must remain a very imperfect Hermit, till I am able to forget
the Honor you have done me; and if I am not likely to succeed that Way, I may
as well indulge my Ambition to the full, which I never fail to do, as often as I
am permitted to subscribe myself

Your Ladyship's Most obliged, and most obedient humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
I propose to wait on your Ladyship at Barrels very soon; in the mean Time, if
you would please to lend me Mr. MALLET's and Mr. WHITEHEAD's Poems, I will take
all imaginable Care of them.



LETTER XVIII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes. Dear Madam,
THOUGH I think it is a Sort of Maxim, that a Person in London seldom complains
he is forgotten by his Friends in the Country, yet I cannot, by any Means,
prevail upon my Conscience to acquit me of a Sort of disrespectful Silence,
since your Ladyship went to Town. It was not either the Politics or the
Amusements of our great Metropolis, that could make the Letters of your Friends
appear impertinent, or even indifferent to you; and though the sublime
Entertainment you must receive from the Conversation of so great a Man as Lord
BOLINGBROKE, might bid the fairest to do so, yet was I not without Conviction,
that your Ladyship would feel some sort of Complacency upon the Sight of a
Scrip of Paper, which should acquaint you that I was alive.

Alive, indeed, I am; at least, if it may be called so, to exist among a Set of
People, whose Employments, Passions, and Sentiments, are entirely foreign to my
own; and where I see, and hear, and do nothing, but what I think may as well be
left unseen, unheard, and undone. What can your Ladyship expect from a
Correspondent so situated, beside pure Respect and Friendship, and many artless
Assurances of their Reality and Continuance?

Mr. O -- stayed pretty near a Week with me. He has, I think, strict Honor,
Goodnature, and good Sense. What he wants, in my Eye, is a little genuine
Taste; for though good Sense may, by Degrees, enable a Person to discover the
Beauties of Nature or Art, yet it can never furnish him with any extraordinary
Relish or Enjoyment of them, which is the Effect of innate Taste alone, and
which differs as widely from the former, as the Palate differs from the Brain.
Your Ladyship has, I dare say, frequently made the same observation.

You will hear Sir THOMAS LYTTELTON, notwithstanding he complained always of
his Head, died of a Polypus in the great Artery; which, I do not find, was
ever, in the least, suspected by his Physicians; but which, if it had been ever
so apparent, they could not possibly have cured. You will imagine that his
Death must have thrown a Sort of Gloom round the Villages in his Neighborhood.
A numerous and fashionable Family animates a Country-Place to an inconceivable
Degree. The Family at Hagley will be immediately dispersed. Miss LYTTELTON goes
to Lady LITCHFIELD's, to the Colonel's, to London, and does not think to
settle. Miss WEST goes first to Stow, and then intends to reside with her
Brother the Commodore. Sir GEORGE and his Lady set out for London tomorrow,
and as they propose to build, next Spring, upon the old Foundation, it may be
many Years ere they come to reside amongst us, even for a small Part of the
Summer.

Lord DUDLEY and I dined together at Hagley last Wednesday, where we found Lord
ANSON's Brother, and some other Company. Mr. MILLER unluckily asked me at
Table, how I liked the new Situation of their Column; which threw me under a
Necessity of offending either against the Rules of Politeness, or (what it more
sacred with me) the Laws of Sincerity. The Truth is, I do not like it upon many
Accounts; and I am persuaded, before many Years are past, they will be of the
same Mind. But least of all, do I approve their Intentions of building three
new Fronts, and altering every Room by a gothic Model, and that with an Eye to
Frugality, at the same Time that they have not an Inch of Gothicism about the
House, to warp their Imagination that Way. But this Subject never fails to lead
me too far; nor can I explain myself to the full, unless I could show your
Ladyship their Plan. The fine Situation they have, within an hundred Yards,
they neglect; -- in short, as it appears to me, they are going to sacrifice an
Opportunity of rendering their Place complete, for the Sake of an imperfect,
but expensive Specimen of gothic Architecture; which, not having its Foundation
either in Truth or Proportion, will fall into Disgrace again in the Course of a
few Years -- Can one then forbear crying out, "The Graces droop" -- "Am I in
Greece or in Gothland?" But as their Resolution seems fixed, I mention this in
Confidence, and must, for the future, lay my Finger on my Mouth.

Mr. S -- has so mangled and disfigured my Grove, that I dare not send it to
your Ladyship, till he has altered the Plate, so as to render it less
intolerable. FLUELLIN, as I remember, in SHAKESPEARE, Historical Play of King
HENRY V.
speaking of the near Resemblance betwixt Macedon and Monmouth, observes,
"There is a River in Macedon, there is a River also in Monmouth --
peradventure, there be Fish in both. -- Would you desire better Similitude?". S
-- being a modest Man, has seemed to content himself with some such Degree of
Resemblance: but I wish him well, and will cause him, one Day, to do the Place
Justice, for his own Sake as well as mine -- for his own, as his Piece will be
seen by many who know the Place, and for mine, as the Place is known to afford
the best Scene I have.

I am, etc. W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XIX. The Countess of HERTFORD to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Piercy-Lodge, May 15, 1748. Dear Madam,
HOW long soever your Letters are in coming, they never fail to assure their
Welcome, by being more agreeable and entertaining, as well as breathing more of
Friendship, than any Body's else have the Art of doing. I have been here about
a Month, and find some little Improvements, which were ordered when we went to
London, completed; and I think they are not quite unworthy of the Name. A
Piece of waste Ground, on the lower Side of the Abbey-Walk, has been turned
into a Corn-Field, and a Turf-Walk, about eight Feet wide, round it; close to a
flourishing Hawthorn Hedge; on one Side, there is a thatched Seat open on three
Sides, which pretends to no Name of greater Dignity, than justly belongs to
what it represents, namely a Shepherd's Hut; before it there is an irregular
Piece of Turf, which was spared for the Sake of some old Oaks and Beeches,
which are scattered upon it; and as you are sitting down there, you have, under
these Boughs, a direct View of Windsor Castle. There are Sweet-Williams,
Narcissus's, Rose-Campions, and such Flowers as the Hares will not eat, in
little Borders, round the Foot of every Tree; and I almost flatter myself, that
you would not be displeased with the rural Appearance of the whole. The Rains
have given us the strongest Verdure I ever saw: our Lawns and Meadows are
enamelled with a Profusion of Dasies and Cowslips, and we have the greatest
Appearance of Fruit that has been seen these many Years. I conclude you will
read Mr. THOMSON's Castle of Indolence: it is after the Manner of SPENCER, but I
think he does not always keep so close to his Style, as the Author of the
School-Mistress, whose Name I never knew, till you were so good as to inform me
of it. I think it a charming Poem; and was very much pleased with his Ballad of
Queen ELIZABETH's seeing the Milk-Maid. She apappears, at least in my humble
Imagination, in a more natural Light, than when we hear of her bullying foreign
Powers, and cutting off the Head of an unhappy Queen, who fled to her for
Protection. But to return to the Castle of Indolence; I believe it will afford
you much Entertainment; there are many pretty Paintings in it, but I think the
Wizard's Song deserves a Preference. -- "He needs no Muse who dictates from his
Heart." Have you met with two little Volumes, which contain four
Contemplations, written by a Mr. JAMES HERVEY, a young Cornish or Devonshire
Clergyman? The Subjects are upon walking among the Tombs, upon a Flower Garden,
upon Night, and upon the starry Heavens. There is something poetical and truly
pious. Now I have got into the Impertinence of recommending Books to one who is
a much better Judge than myself, I must name an Essay on Delicacy, The Essay on
Delicacy, here mentioned, was the Production of Dr. NATHANIEL LANCASTER, many
Years Rector of Stanford Rivers, near Ongar, in Essex, Uncle to the Editor of
these Letters. He was a Man of strong natural Parts, great Erudition, refined
Taste, and master of a nervous, and at the same Time, elegant Style, as is very
obvious to every one who has had the Happiness to read the Essay here spoken
of. His Writings were fewer in Number than their Author's Genius seemed to
promise to his Friends, and his Publications less known than their intrinsic
Excellence deserved. Had he been as solicitous, as he was capable, to instruct
and please the World, few Prose-Writers would have surpassed him; but in his
later Years, he lived a Recluse, and whatever he composed in the Hours of
retired Leisure, he (unhappily for the Public) ordered to be burned, which was
religiously (I had almost said irreligiously) performed.

He was a Native of Cheshire, and, in his earlier Years, under the Patronage
and Friendship of the late Earl of CHOLMONDELEY, mixed in all the more exalted
Scenes of polished Life, where his lively Spirit, and brilliant Conversation,
rendered him universally distinguished and esteemed; and even, till within a
few Months of his Decease, (near seventy-five Years of Age) these Faculties
could scarce be said to be impaired.

The Essay on Delicacy, (of which we are now speaking) the only material Work
of his, which the Editor knows to have survived him, was first printed in the
Year 1748, and has been very judiciously and meritoriously preserved by the
late Mr. DODSLEY, in his Fugitive Pieces, published in two Volumes.


a Subject which, if I were not acquainted with you, and one or two more, I
should imagine had no longer an Existence upon our Globe.

I sincerely sympathize in the Pleasure which you must feel, Dear Madam, from
the extreme good Character which every Body gives of your Son, and which his
Behavior to you proves he deserves. May this, with every other Blessing, be
long continued to you, and may you always look upon me as a sincere, though
insignificant Friend, as well as a

Most faithful and obedient Humble Servant, F. HERTFORD.
My Lord is at present in London, but I hope he will be here Time enough to
save the Postage of this Letter. I should be very glad to see any Thing of Mr.
SHENSTONE's.



LETTER XX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Rev. Mr. GRAVES, at Whitchurch, near
Reading, Berks.
The Leasowes, June, 1748. Dear Mr. GRAVES,
I FIND a very strong Impulse, prompting me to write to you this Evening. I
don't know whether I ever let you into the Secret, that I receive an inward
Satisfaction at the Time that I am sending you a Letter, and that this Action
partakes of the Nature of all virtuous ones, in being its own Reward. However
we are taught to hope for other and more ample Rewards attending Virtue, as I
am inclined to expect a more considerable Pleasure, when I receive your Answer.
My Soul now leans entirely on the Friendship of a few private Acquaintance, and
if they drop me, I shall be a wretched Misanthrope. Is it a great Fatigue to
you to sit down some vacant Half-Hour, and scribble me a few Lines, relating to
the State of your Mind, and your Affairs? -- DICK JAGO, who called accidentally
at a Public-house, at Mickleton, told me, they heard --; mentioning, at the
same Time, his thorough Conviction, that, whatever might prove the Event of
this Affair, as you were a Principal, it would be as it ought. Mr. SMITH, (the
Designer) who knew you too, was here at the same Time, and many civil Things,
very agreeable to me, were said in your Behalf; " Immo, Omnes omnia bona
dixere." As to --

I thank you for your little Strictures on the School-Mistress. I have
sacrificed my Partiality to your unbiassed Judgment; Multa gemens, have I
sacrificed it. The Truth is, I am not quite convinced (though I have acted as if
I were) that one should give up any Part, that appears droll in itself, and
makes the Poem, on the whole, more agreeable, for the Sake of rendering it a
more perfect Imitation of SPENCER. But when you have more Leisure, and I
collect my Pieces, I don't despair of furnishing a more complete Edition yet.

Mr. SMITH (whom I mentioned just now) has taken two Views of Hagley-Park,
which, with two from other Places, complete a Set; the Subscription-Price, half
a Guinea; but he takes other little Views of the closer Scenes, and of
particular Beauties, which will form a Drawing-Book, and which I shall like
beyond those I have subscribed for. Would you not be surprised to see a Draught
of my VIRGIL's Grove inserted among the latter? -- He took one, and promised to
have it engraved, and inserted somewhere; but I had rather he should stay a
Week, and take about four Views, and that you were here, and would give him
some Instructions, and it should make a little Drawing-Book to sell for a
Shilling. But, "Ah, me! -- I fondly dream" -- The Days of Fancy and dear
Enthusiasm will never more return! Such as those that flew over our Heads when
you were here, and at Harborough, on your first Visit; when the merum Rus of
the Leasowes could furnish you with pleasanter Ideas, than the noblest Scenes
that ever Painter copied.

I am impatient to see you, and resolve to do so when I can; and I beg you will
project some Means of coming to the Leasowes without Inconvenience to yourself.

I am, Your truly affectionate W. SHENSTONE.
I beg my Compliments to Mr. WHISTLER. I don't know whether I am more ashamed
or vexed, that I cannot set out -- tomorrow -- for Whitchurch; but my Mind
will not be easy till I have seen both him and you.



LETTER XXI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, Sunday, July 25, 1748. Madam,
WHEN I received your Ladyship's Letter on Friday, I was just upon the Point of
setting out for Broom; I therefore declined answering it, till I had spoke with
Miss DOLMAN. It is now with the greatest Thankfulness for your obliging
Invitation, and the most pleasing Idea of the Visit we propose, that I am to
inform your Ladyship, we intend waiting on you upon Tuesday or Wednesday
sev'n-night. If you should have much Company at that Time, or the Visit should
be otherwise unseasonable, your Ladyship will be so good as to let us know; if
not, I will not fail to show Miss DOLMAN the Way to the most agreeable
Entertainment, and the most engaging Conversation, I have met with any where.
Your Ladyship will not imagine that I understand Entertainment in the vulgar
Sense; (though what I say is true enough in that) my chief Pleasures, I flatter
myself, are Pleasures of the Mind; and I can say, with great Truth, that my
Mind was never more disposed to be pleased any where else, or found equal
Opportunities to gratify that Disposition.

Miss DOLMAN, though she has not seen much of the World, has done great Things,
or, in other Words, has made good Use of the Opportunities she has had, if she
can deserve any Part of that favorable Mention you make of her. All I know is,
that she has Taste enough to put the Pleasure I have promised her at Barrels
out of all Dispute.

I now proceed to other Things. I have sent your Ladyship the first Number of
Sickness, a Poem, which is all I have. I send it as indeed I offered it,
because it bears some Relation to Lady HERTFORD, on Account of the Panegyric
of Lord BEAUCHAMP, which I believe is just.

I have of late read the Life of Colonel GARDENER, being induced to do so by a
Vision, which is described there, and which I hear Mr. LYTTELTON countenances.
I will give your Ladyship my Opinion of the Story, when I come to Barrels.

Pray don't buy the Books I talked of; you will hardly read them twice; and I
can lend you HERVEY's Meditations, the Life of Colonel GARDENER, and, in a
short Time, Memoirs of Mrs. PILKINGTON, either of my own, or my Brother's. I
beseech your Ladyship, that I may have leave to save you six Shillings, and
three Shillings, and three Shillings; that is, according to the old Maxim,
(viz. a Penny saved, etc.) put into the Power of my Gratitude, to be of about
twelve Shillings significancy. By so doing, I shall not only talk, but proceed
to one ouvert Act in the Cause of Economy. -- I wish it be not the only one.

In regard to Mr. OUTING, I will only say, that I please myself with the full
Assurance of meeting him at Barrels. It is out of my Power this Day to send you
an amusing Letter, whether it be so at other Times or not. There is not a
single Cloud or Dimness in the Sky, but has its exact Image or Counterpart in
my Imagination; but one's Sincerity does not suffer by Weather, though one's
Vivacity may; and it is with the greatest Truth that I shall always remain

Your Ladyship's Most obliged, and most obedient Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XXII. Miss DOLMAN to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Broom, Nov. 8, 1748. SIR,
I AM under two Obligations to you for the genteel Present you have made me;
one, for the Pleasure I have received, and shall receive from the neat and
valuable Letter-Case, which is Part of it; and the other, for the Honor of
your Letter. This Acknowledgment is all the Return I am able to make you for
them, at this Time; but Fortune will, I hope, give me some future Opportunity
of freeing myself; as soon as she does, I shall certainly take it, if I have
your Consent so to do; but the latter I despair of ever discharging, as I can
never do it till Apollo is pleased to favor me in such a Manner as he does
you. I am desiring you to accept of my Brother's Compliments, and to give both
his and mine to your Brother.

Your much obliged and affectionate Servant, M. DOLMAN.

LETTER XXIII. Countess of HERTFORD to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Percy Lodge, Nov. 20, 1748. Dear Madam,
I Remember Mrs. HIGGONS used to say, Lady CLARENDON had such a Power over her
Understanding, that she might persuade her she was a Fish. You have pretty near
the same Ascendant over mine, yet cannot quite convince me, that eight Months
is not an immoderate while to keep Silence, and make a Chasm in a
Correspondence with a Friend, who incessantly wishes to hear of your Health and
Happiness. I am not more easily seduced into an assent to your Apology; for
though I admire the beautiful Language in which the Fiction of your Dullness is
painted, I cannot mistake it for a Truth. I am so bad at Invention, that I will
not search for an ingenious Fable, to excuse myself for troubling you with an
Answer so soon, though my Readiness to obey your Commands, in subscribing for
the Prints you mention (if you will let me know where I must send for a
Receipt) might furnish me with one: but honestly own, that as my Lord has been
in London since Thursday, I did not know how to employ the leisure Hours his
Absence afforded me, more to my Satisfaction.

We returned hither from Bath only Friday the Eleventh: we were there two
Months, the last Fortnight of which we were detained, after all our Things were
gone, by my poor Lord's having a Fit of the Gout; and I believe we came away
rather too soon after it, for his Limbs had not recovered their Strength, so
that he was terribly fatigued; however, he has now recovered it, and is
certainly upon the whole infinitely the better, for having drank the Bath
Waters. If I could envy you, dear Madam, I should be tempted to do it, for
being in Reach of Hagley, for having Mr. WEST for a Neighbor, and Mr.
SHENSTONE for a Friend. He has obliged me so much, in letting me see his
charming Ode upon Autumn, and the Honor he does Mr. THOMSON's Memory in that
Poem, and in his Design to erect an Urn for him in VIRGIL's Grove, that I am
sorry I cannot agree with him, in his Dislike to Autumn. On the contrary, I
draw one Motive of my Partiality to it, from a similar Cause to what he partly
ascribes his Aversion: he hates it as a Season which deprived him of a Friend;
I love it, because the latest Days my Heart could boast of Happiness, in the
best and most beloved of Sons, were in that Time of the Year, till (as Dr.
YOUNG says) -- At Death's Toll, whose restless, iron Tongue
Calls daily for his Millions at a Meal,
Starting I woke, and found myself undone.


And then, The Clouds, the Winds, the Rains, the falling Leaves,
The naked Branches, the poor shivering Birds --
Every Thing around me seemed to sympathize in my Distress, and still at every
melancholy Anniversary of my ever-to-be-lamented Loss, put on the same friendly
Appearance of social Sorrow; and I may say with MYRA, in her Poem, before Mr.
THOMSON's first Edition of the Seasons, To thee, my gently-drooping Head I bend,
Thy Sigh my Sister, and thy Tear my Friend.


Forgive me, dear Madam, for thus continually returning to this afflicting
Subject: but two Lines of Mr. POPE's, with the Alteration only of one Word,
must plead my excuse, Of all Affliction taught a Sufferer yet,
It Is sure the hardest Science to forget.


I have done -- and will now tell you, that our being obliged to go to Bath,
has hindered us from undertaking any Thing here, so that I have nothing to talk
of that is new, and I am afraid there was Nothing here before, that would make
a tolerable Figure, either in a Print or a Drawing; a Flat can hardly look well
upon Paper, though in reality, the Variety of Woods and Lawns, Water, Grass,
and Gravel, may produce a Contrast not unpleasing to the Eye. I am sorry you
find any Defects in Mr. HERVEY; for both the Design and Manner of his Writing
pleases me extremely.

I want to know what you think of the Peruvian Letters, and especially of the
Fifth in the Suite. I have been very well entertained lately with the two first
Volumes of the Foundling, The History of TOM JONES, by HENRY FIELDING, Esquire.
written by Mr. FIELDING, but not to be published till the 22d of January; if
the same Spirit runs through the whole Work, I think it it will be much
preferable to JOSEPH ANDREWS. My Lord is absent from London, but I hope will be
here Time enough to free this Letter, for I Am sure it is not worth the Postage.

I am, Dear Madam, Your most faithful and devoted F. HERTFORD.

LETTER XXIV. Miss DOLMAN to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Broom, Jan. 23, 1749. SIR,
IN the first Place, I return you Thanks for your very polite Letter, which, I
do assure you, I was proud of receiving, and should have troubled you with an
Answer the same Day, could I write with as little Difficulty as you.

I admire the Countess's Letter, and especially that Part about her Son. She
seems sensible of her great Loss still. She talks of VIRGIL's Grove, as if she
had seen it. I am sure, if she had, she would have been highly delighted with
the Beauties of that Place. I want Summer to come, that I may see the Urn,
which you intend to erect to THOMSON's Memory, and VIRGIL's Grove in Perfection.

With Carelessness and Inattention, I have read Mrs. PILKINGTON's second
Volume; she is still more entertaining; I think she expresses herself well; I
fancy too her Poetry to be good; and I dare say, she will think it hard not to
be allowed the Liberty of her Tongue and Pen. -- But I ought to be ashamed of
giving my Opinion, with so much Freedom, to one who is so good a Judge of
Writing as you are.

My Litchfield Journey afforded me but slender Amusement; less even than I
expected. Mrs. DOLMAN had two Visitants, Mrs. WHITBY and her Daughter, who came
from the same Town where Lord ANSON lives. They talked much in Praise of his
Lordship, and seemed to be intimate Acquaintance of his.

Miss FLETCHER's severe Letter has never been answered yet: I hope, Sir, that
will excuse for the Shortness of this, because I must instantly set about
writing one to her. Pray excuse this Nonsense, with all its Faults, which are
very numerous.

I am, yours, M. DOLMAN.

LETTER XXV. Miss DOLMAN to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Broom, March 26, 1749.
SO, you are determined, Sir, to be silent, till I have wrote again! -- An
effectual Method, indeed, to make me; for I should be very imprudent, did I not
procure myself your inimitable Letters every Opportunity I had, which are sure
to please, amuse, and instruct at the same Time. But I have really so great
Contempt for my own, that, when I have finished a Letter, I can scarcely
persuade myself to send it, were I not inclined to believe, you are more my
Friend, than to make any Use of it to my Disadvantage.

Last Week I received an Epistle from Miss FANNY FLETCHER. All she says in
Relation to Lady LUXBOROUGH is as follows: "Pray don't think what I said of
Lord LUXBOROUGH proceeded either from Envy or Jealousy. I assure you, it did
not. I am neither so stupid, nor so unreasonable, to desire you to like me
only, and hope I am far from speaking ill of any Persons, because they have
Accomplishments."

"Mrs. D -- T, of Worfield, is dead. Her Son is gone to Oxford, to qualify
himself for a Living of L.600 a Year, which his Aunt S -- N has given him,
together with an Estate of L.100. The Living is held in Trust by one Mr. W --
RE."

This is all she informs me of, that I think worth relating to you, only that
she has your Eclogues very safe, and has kept them, she says, seven Months
longer than you gave her Leave, yet hopes, and trusts, you will forgive to
seventy Times seven.

If you only mentioned the Ruffles to me, as a Hint that you wanted a Pair of
that Sort, I am mighty glad I have taken it so. I have sent the enclosed, to
know whether the Flowers are filled up in the Manner you would have 'em; if
not, please to communicate to me, some way or other, how you mean, and then I
will persevere in my Work with infinite Pleasure.

This Summer I shall also begin my Brother a Fire-Screen, if he can contrive
the Pattern of it. I wish I may be so fortunate, to please you both in the
Performances which I have undertaken, and then I shall be sure my Time has not
been spent in vain: but if the contrary should happen, I will immediately go in
Search of the great Mr. AESOP, and entreat a Cup of the Waters of
Forgetfulness. Adieu! -- I would add more Nonsense to what I have already
wrote, did not your Servant wait.

I am, with great Sincerity, Yours, M. DOLMAN.

LETTER XXVI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, June 2, 1749. Madam,
THOUGH I may seem to have been extremely idle, I have really taken no small
Pains in endeavoring to obey your Ladyship's Commands. I wish, when you peruse
my Packet, you may not rather think me too officious; though I should imagine
even that a Crime by no Means equal to Negligence, in any Affair, wherein you
are pleased to employ me. How far I have erred in that Respect, I am utterly
unable to judge, as your Ladyship's Directions were not very explicit, and as I
have not been favored with a single Syllable from Mr. H -- LL, to inform me
whether, or how far he approved of any Alterations. But what Harm do I commit?
I do not call them Alterations, which I send; they are only a small Cargo of
different Expressions, which I sincerely desire you will apply or reject,
entirely as you think proper; nor shall it give me the least Offense if you
reject the whole, if so be you please to acquit me of Presumption. To speak my
present Thoughts, I think the Epitaph on Mr. H -- LL's Father, and, indeed, all
Epitaphs, should be short. What I have chiefly aimed at in Number I. and Number
II. is to express his general Character in few Words. Nevertheless, if Mr. H --
LL chooses to have a more particular Account of his Father, I should think he
had better let A Printer then residing at Birmingham.
ARIS take off about half a Score Copies (on a single Sheet) of that which your
Ladyship has sketched out; after you have made what Improvements and Additions
you shall think advisable; I mean to give them away amongst a few Friends or
Relations. I am not languid, in my Wishes to advance the Character to as high a
Pitch, as Mr. H -- LL can desire, for I believe his Father might deserve as
good an one, as any Person in a public Station. But you remember these Lines of
Mr. POPE -- according to the Way of the World, It Is from high Life, high
Characters are drawn;
A Saint in Crape is twice a Saint in Lawn,
A Judge is just, a Chanc'llor juster still,
A Gownman learned, a Bishop -- what you will;
Wise, if a Minister; but if a King --
More wise, more learned, more just, more every Thing.
Where, by the Way, the second and third Verses seem to dwell upon the same
Distinction -- but the whole Paragraph, to the best of my Memory, is
exceedingly beautiful. What there seems of Weight in this, so far as regards
the present Purpose, is, that the Character of a Person in private Life should
not be drawn too pompously. Perhaps, I am too scrupulous; however, I wish your
Ladyship may be full as much so, in Regard to my trifling Criticisms. Does the
Affair require Haste, or may it be deferred till I have the Honor of seeing
you? -- I will, however, for the present, take Leave of the Subject.

I lead the unhappy Life of seeing nothing in the Creation so idle as myself. I
am continually piddling in little Matters about my Farm. What do you think of
my publishing Verses once a Week upon my Skreens, for the Amusement of my good
Friends the Vulgar? -- My Verses for the present Week are published in VIRGIL's
Grove, and run thus: The Editor is well aware, that the Substance of these
Lines has been repeatedly published, but as this was probably the original
Reading, he thought that it might not be unacceptable in this Place.
Here in cool Grot, and mossy Cell,
We Fauns, and tripping Fairies dwell,
Though rarely seen by human Eye;
Yet, when the Moon, ascended high,
Darts through yon Limes her quivering Beam,
We frisk it near this crystal Stream.
Then fear to spoil these sacred Bowers,
Nor wound the Shrubs, nor cross the Flowers;
So may your Path with Sweets abound,
So may your Couch with Rest be crowned!
But ill betide or Nymph or Swain
Who dares these hallowed Haunts profane!
OBERON.

My Method is a very cheap one; I paste some Writing-Paper to a Piece of Deal,
then print with a Pen. This serves in Root-Houses, and under Cover.

Your Ladyship has been so unkind, as not to let me know how your Pavilion
proceeds; whether you are happy in planning, or in beholding the Plans executed
-- May I hope to hear soon? -- Two hundred Pounds expended in a Rotund at
Hagley, on Ionic Pillars! The Dome of Stone, with thin Lead underneath, to keep
out wet. While I propose, or fancy I propose to build a Piece of Gothic
Architecture, at Sight of which, all modern Castles near shall bow their Heads
abased, like the other Sheaves to JOSEPH's. I send you the Plan; it is for a
Seat on the Bank above my Hermitage, and will amount, on a moderate
Computation, to the Sum of fifteen Shillings.

I am, very constantly, Your Ladyship's Most obliged, and most obedient
Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XXVII. Duchess of SOMERSET to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Percy-Lodge, June 17, 1749. Dear Madam,
YOUR Ladyship bids me give you an Account of what Alterations we are making at
present, but I feel myself much less able to describe the Fabric and Furniture
of a Palace than a Hermitage, and while I am attending to all my Lord's Designs
there, I fancy I Am no better acquainted with the Effect it will produce, than a
Person would be with the Beauty of a Piece of Tapestry, who saw only the wrong
Side of it. My Lord will do a good Deal to the Front of the House, in order to
make it appear less like a Prison; he builds a new Wing on the Right Hand Side
of the Garden, which will contain a Library, Bedchamber, Dressing Room, and a
Waiting-Room. I think I told you, that all the Sashes, Doors, and Ceilings, in
both Apartments, must be entirely new, and the Floors in my Lord's; the
Staircase is very noble, but will require as large a Lanthorn to light it, as
that at Houghton, so much celebrated in the Newspapers. The Chimney-Pieces in
both Apartments are to be all new, and some of them very expensive; the
Draughts are mighty pretty. My Lord's Bed on the Ground-Floor is crimson
Damask, with Tapestry Hangings; the next Room is furnished with green Damask,
on purpose to set off his Pictures; the next with a Set of very fine old
Hangings of the Duke of NEWCASTLE's Horsemanship, with his own Picture, on
Horseback, as big as Life; and, now they are clean, looking neat, as when new.
The Parlour to be hung with some very good Pictures; above Stairs, the great
waiting Room, with Saxon green Cloth Chairs, with gilt Nails, and green
Lutestring Window Curtains, marble Table, and large Glass between the Windows;
first Drawing Room, new crimson Damask, with Lutestring Window Curtains, two
very fine Japan Tables and Glasses between the Windows, with carved and gilt
Frames; inner Drawing Room, Tapestry Hangings, with small Figures very pretty,
and as fresh as new. He lays two Rooms together in the right Wing of the Court,
on the ground Floor, in order to make a Chapel, with a Gothic Wainscot,
Ceiling, and painted Windows; there is to be a Dutch Stove in it, which is so
contrived, as to represent a Tomb with an Urn upon it. The Court is to be
paved, and the Foot-Way altered; and my Lord is in Treaty for nine Houses on
the other Side the Way, in order to pull them down and build Stables, (for
there are none belonging to the House) whose Gates are intended to open
directly over against those of the Court; if he can agree for this Purchase, he
will widen the Street in that Part about eight Feet. Now, dear Madam, I have
obeyed, you in the best Manner I am able: but upon looking back into my Letter,
I find I have forgot my Bedchamber, Dressing Room and Closet, which one would
think, should not appear least interesting to myself; the first of these is to
have a new Bed-Hanging, and Chairs of crimson Queen's Damask; the
Dressing Room, which has two large Sashes, will have Tapestry Hangings and
green Damask Chairs; the Closet, which is small, and has only one Sash, exactly
facing the Chimney, furnished with painted Paper; the Chimney-Piece in the
Dressing Room, is to be of Statuary-Marble and Giallo di Siering, and just in
the Front of it, the Fable of the Stork inviting the Fox to Dinner, very neatly
carved; there is another little Waiting-Room, at this End of the Apartment, for
the Groom of the Chambers to be in, in the Morning, or, when I Am not in Form,
in the Evening. To return to my Bergerie, nothing has been done in it this
Summer, nor have I the Heart to propose any Thing, for I Am actually frightened
with the Sum my Lord is laying out, about Northumberland-House; and I find, by
living long in strait Circumstances, one contracts a Narrowness of Mind, which
makes launching out at once into great Expense, not appear so desirable, as it
would be thought by young, gay People. The cold North Winds have blighted and
ruined the Beauty of my Roses for the Remainder of this Year, and starved all
the various Flowers, which used to adorn our Clumps and Borders. The Time of
our going into Sussex remains unfixed; but I fancy it will be in about a Month:
and we have taken a new House in Bath, for the first Week in September, so that
instead of enjoying my peaceful Shades, as I used to do, I appear engaged in a
tedious Pilgrimage, and am looking (over the Charms of the Summer Month) to a
resting Place in Northumberland-House, and where, perhaps, I may never come;
the probability is much stronger against me, than it was, this Time five Years,
against my ever-lamented BEAUCHAMP; and indeed I am far from well at present,
having a most terrible Cough and Cold, with a continual Headache and Sickness
at my Stomach.

I am glad to hear, that Mrs. W -- L's seeming Neglect did not proceed from her
own Heart, but the Hardness of another's, which is a Stranger to all that is
gentle or humane. I am persuaded, your Improvements will add great Beauty to
your Habitation, and would make me long to see it, if I were a movable Being,
but you know I never was fond of traveling, and I cannot take a Journey now,
but as the Rhodian Colossus might do. Among all my Lord's Acquisitions, none
has given me more Pleasure than his Chaplain, who is between sixty and seventy,
very well bred, strictly pious, and they say, is an admirable Scholar; has a
Genius for all the polite Arts, is a good Judge of Poetry, has read a
prodigious deal, is very modest, and at the same Time constantly cheerful, but
naturally inclined to a solitary Country Life; in short, we are all fond of his
Company, from my Lord to the lowest Servant in the House. I am sure you are
tired of my Obedience by this Time, and will be glad to see me come to a
Conclusion, by subscribing myself,

Dear Madam, Your most faithful and obedient humble Servant, F. SOMERSET.

LETTER XXVIII. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Whitchurch, Oct. 7, 1749. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I HAVE buried a Friend, who has made me his Executor, and, of consequence, I
have had a good deal of Fatigue. I tell you this thus abruptly, because I could
not have wrote a Sentence without blushing, till I had, in my Opinion, made a
reasonable Excuse for my seeming Neglect of you; you, who so abundantly obliged
me by your last Favor. The Flowers were the finest I have seen this Season,
though I have seen those of a celebrated Florist this Year -- inferior in no
Respect, and superior in this, (which weighs much with me) that they will not
fade. Such is the Advantage of Art, the Offspring of the Mind, above the
perishable Beauties of Nature. I am sure they shall never perish in my Hands,
for I shall even piously transmit them down to Posterity, as they deserve. You
are continually finding out some new Way to ravish your Friends, and yet that
seems needless, since in your old one, I mean that of Wit, you seem to be
infinite. All this is so, and so superlatively so, that I begin to think myself
a Fool to hold so unequal a Correspondence. I am a Gainer in one Respect, but I
am certainly a Loser in another. It is a great Proof of my Affection to you
however, for none but mean Souls would, otherwise, prefer their Pleasure to
their Honor. To speak in the most sincere Manner, I never am so sensible of my
own Inability, as when I take one of your Letters before me to answer it.
Emulation immediately ceases, and then you cannot wonder if I fall even below
the Bathos of my own Genius.

I know you are, by this Time, impatient to hear what Friend I have lost. It is
Mr. BROOKER, of whom you have often heard me speak. I have got, indeed, by his
Death, but I assure you, no Gain would be sufficient to make me unconcerned at
the Loss of a Friend -- so far from it, that the Acquisition only adds to the
Tenderness, and consequently to the Regret.

Now I must return to the old Burden. When shall I see you? -- I long to see
you -- It Is more than GARRICK playing RICHARD to see you -- the next highest
Pitch my Imagination can soar. I long too to see your Alterations, which I look
upon as so many of your visible Ideas.

As for my Retreat, it is not worth describing; or, to describe it at once, I
may call it a Band-Box, viz. "The Citizen's Delight." However, I wish you were
in it: and now let me propose my Scheme. It is the same I proposed last Year.
It is to meet either here, or at London, first; for I shall be alternately at
both Places, and will order my Route at your Pleasure. I purpose going soon;
but a Letter from you shall determine my Schemes at any Time. Though if I
should be at London, and you would come thither first, and afterward with me
to Whitchurch, it would complete my Wishes, for I long to be at both Places
with you. My Residence in London is at Mr. PEARETH's Chambers,
King's-Bench-Walks, No. 7; but direct to me at Whitchurch as yet.

If you have any Vanity, it must be exquisitely fed by the smallest Favor from
Lady LUXBOROUGH. If you have a Taste for Pleasure, refined to the highest
Degree, (Why did I say, If?) by all Accounts, her Politeness must gratify it to
the full. When I say this, I don't speak in the Gross; I don't say, that this
Person or the other said she was a Wonder, (though that I can aver too) but I go
upon better Grounds for my Assertion, than general Applause; I go upon
Particulars, from which I have formed a Character that must be beautiful.

You complain of Mr. --. I told him of it, but don't know whether he has made
an Atonement. I am a good deal picqued at him myself. Though we live next Door
to each other, he has spent but one Evening with me since he has been at --,
and that was after a thousand Remonstrances, and much against his Will. He
neglects every Body for his Wife; in short, he is no more.

I hope you will favor me with a Line soon, and that it may bring "sweet
Boadments." All Compliments wait on you. With these I must conclude, applauding
myself, whenever I reflect that I am

Yours, A. WHISTLER.

LETTER XXIX. The Duchess of SOMERSET to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Percy-Lodge, Jan. 21, 1749-50. Dear Madam,
WHEN I look upon the Date of your Letter, it puts me both out of Countenance
and Patience with myself. Your Letter found me at Bath, from whence, I thank
God, my Lord is returned with his Health and Appetite much improved; and I
hope, the good Effects of this Journey, will continue longer than those of the
preceding Years. Our Servants and Goods have all been removed to
Northumberland-House, since before Michaelmas, but when we shall get into it
ourselves, is yet among the Secrets of Fate. It is still hid with Scaffolds
toward the Street, but by the Plan, and the little I could see of it when I
was in London, on the King's Birthday, it will be very handsome, and indeed it
should, my Lord destined 10,000 l. for the Alterations; but I believe he has by
this Time experienced, that he deceived himself, at not setting it at above
double; for though the House itself will not cost, perhaps, above 14.000 l. yet
the Houses he has purchased, in order to widen the Street and build his
Stables, and the Remainder of the Duke of CHANDOS's grant for Scotland-Yard,
which he is in Treaty for, in order to carry down his Garden, and open a View
from his House to the Thames, will cost at least as much more. Mean Time, you
may guess our poor Bergerie has been neglected, and except a very pretty and
convenient Hot-House for Pine-Apples, has had no additional Ornament of any
Kind. We pass this Winter here, which I should not regret at any other Time but
as Lady BETTY The late Duchess of NORTHUMBERLAND.
is to lie in, and is already gone a Month past her Reckoning, I should like to
be nearer to her. I was not eight and forty Hours in Town, when I went to be
presented, on my Lord's new Earldoms, and to make my Appearance on the
Birthday; for I went from hence at Seven on the Sunday Morning, and was
presented that Day at Noon, and on the Monday, as soon as the Drawing Room was
over, undressed and came back directly. I lay at Sir HUGH SMITHSON's, for I
could not have a Room at Northumberland-House, and I have never seen London
since. We have the most glorious Weather that I believe was ever seen in
Winter: but, alas! I can only admire it from my Windows, being under Dr. SHAW's
Hands, for the ill Consequence of a Fall, which I had before I went to Bath, by
a Servant heedlessly taking away a Chair, just as I was going to sit down, and
which I took too little Care of at first, so I am now forbid all Sort of
Exercise, which gives me but a melancholy Prospect, as to my Health, for the
future: but God's Will be done! and I hope I shall cheerfully submit to the
Event, whatever it be.

Have you seen a little French Book called Conseils a une Amie, said to be
written by Madame de POMPADOUR: the Name of the Author will not induce you to
expect any very exalted Sentiments of Religion or Morality; but it contains
good Rules for making a proper Figure in High-Life. I have also had the Letters
of Monsieur RACINE LE PERE, and some Memoirs of his Life, by his Son, lent me;
and they give me a greater Esteem for him as a Man, than as the Author of Ester
and Athaliah. I hope you have seen my old Acquaintance, the Minister of B -- 's
Answer to Dr. MIDDLETON's Free Enquiry about Miracles. I cannot imagine how he
can reply to it, without owning himself a Deist, or explaining some of his
Innuendos in a different Way to what they appear at first Sight. Mr. and Mrs.
WYMONDESOLD's handsome Behavior to you, dear Madam, gives me a good Opinion of
them both. I believe I shall never have reason to alter that which I have
formed of my Lord L -- for some Years past; and as to that I strove to
entertain of him before, 'twas the Work of Art, and a Contre-coeur. As to your
Son, I think he does not act of himself. I am sorry to hear Mr. SHENSTONE has
been so ill, but I hope his Muse has not left him; I am sure yours has not; I
am confident she attended you very agreeably upon his Bench. Mr. LINDSEY, my
Lord's Chaplain, (who by the Way is a very good Judge, and a pretty Sort of
Man) prefers his Ode on Autumn to almost every modern Performance. My Lord
sends you his Compliments; and I am, with a very sincere Regard,

Dear Madam, Your Ladyship's most obliged and faithful humble Servant, F.
SOMERSET.
The First of the enclosed Verses are said to have been written by a Gentleman
in New England, the Second by Mr. MARSHMAM. If you have not seen them, I hope
they will serve for a Minute's Amusement.



LETTER XXX. Miss DOLMAN to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Broom, Feb. 26, 1750-1. SIR,
I Return you a Multitude of Thanks for the Favor of your last Letter to me. I
think you seem to have had as solitary a Winter as we have at Broom. This is
the Season a Town Life is vastly preferable to that of the Country; the Country
now is only fit for Poachers and Game-keepers. Like old DARBY and JOAN, we live
now upon the Thoughts of past Pleasures; In fondly meditating over
Past Pleasures, and in hoping more.
However, we have two Amusements which never fail us, and those are Reading and
Music. In order that we may enjoy the latter in a greater Degree than we have
done of late, we have got Mr. G -- over sometimes, you know, who has procured
us a new Spinnet, and he says, he will make us proficient in the Art of Music
presently, provided we will but be diligent.

I have sent for the Pamphlet that is wrote against Mr. G -- 's Compositions.
As he is my Master, I have a Curiosity to it. He says, it pulls him all to
Pieces. I cannot tell what Genius he has for composing Music, but certainly he is
a very good Music-Master. As a Companion, I do not much admire him: I think
he is a disagreeable Man; very mercenary; always full of Esteem for himself, and
of Contempt for all others; and does not consider, that it is almost as
glorious to acknowledge Merit in other Persons, as to have it oneself: but he
sets good Lessons, so I Will bear with him; as Lord FOPPINGTON tells his
Shoemaker -- "Now by all that is great and powerful, thou art a most
incomprehensible Coxcomb; but thou make good Shoes, so I Will bear with thee."
Sir JOHN VANBURGH's Comedy of the Relapse.


Pray have you seen the Memoirs of the House of Brandenburgh in English, by the
King of Prussia? I have some Thoughts of buying the " Economy of Life," A most
excellent little Work published about this Time by Mr. R. DODSLEY, and by most
Persons, supposed to be his Writing, though vague Report attributed it to various
Geniuses, namely, Lord CHESTERFIELD, Mr. MELMOTH, etc.
but should be glad of your Opinion of it first: it is wrote in the Manner of
SOLOMON's Proverbs, which I think is a pretty one. I am very glad to hear that
Lady LUXBOROUGH has her Health. The Family at A -- n are all well; I heard from
them this Moment. I am, Sir,

Your most obedient, humble Servant, M. DOLMAN.

LETTER XXXI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, March, 1750-1. Madam,
I CAN very faithfully assure your Ladyship, that the Pleasure I received from
your French Letter was equal to what I expected; and as I can hardly form an
Expression that implies my Approbation more fully, I ought, perhaps, to add
nothing more upon this Head. However, I can ill avoid being more explicit; for
besides that your Choice of Words gives me an agreeable Idea of the French
Language, there is I don't know what Kind of Pleasure arises upon seeing common
or domestic Affairs treated of in a Language foreign to one's own. I wish it
may not one Day tempt me to hazard a few French Lines to your Ladyship, although
I have, in a great Measure, forgot the Termination of my Moods and Tenses, and
should of course make a thousand Blunders, in regard to the proper Idiom: but
if I should, I trust your Ladyship would be prevailed upon to burn what I wrote
immediately. Surely it is either owing to the Delicacy of your Choice, or the
French have great Numbers of Words more expressive than our own: for Instance "
trop bonne pour avoir Besoin de cet Assaisonnement;" "Too good to stand in need
of this Recommendation."
I know not of any English Word that would be proper here besides
Recommendation, which is greatly inferior. I have observed the same of many
others. But I confine my Partiality to their Prose, and I dare say your
Ladyship (who knows so well all the Beauties of their Language) is also not
unacquainted with the Imperfections of it; by which Means you find yourself so
well enabled to disguise the latter, at the same Time that you are displaying
the former. Notwithstanding the supposed Qualifications of the GLUMS and the
GAWRIES excites one's Curiosity, the Book does not, I think, deserve a Place in
your Ladyship's Library, and I would not have you purchase it. It makes two
Volumes in 12mo. Price 6s. It came into my Way, so I read it, giving it just
Attention enough to let it amuse me with the imaginary Scenes it describes. As
to what I said of the Scribbleriad, you will observe, I had read nothing but a
few Quotations, and am now to request your Ladyship's Opinion, who have
received the Book. Believe me, my Lady, I am not lazy in Mind. I long for
nothing so much as bodily Health and Spirits, to be able to acquit myself
better of my Share of the Correspondence, and to deserve the Vivacity of yours
somewhat more than I do. But when I shall be able to exchange the Cypress Grove
for the more agreeable Verdure of the Myrtle or the Laurel, is a Question I
cannot pretend to solve -- Very pedantic truly this! -- But to proceed: I wrote
many ludicrous Things at College, and in the former Part of my Life, and one or
two of these am I thinking to enclose during this insipid Season; perhaps
taking, like Woodcocks, the Advantage of a Fog, they may hope at such a Time
for something better Quarter, though, to speak the Truth, they are much too
silly, and your Judgment too penetrating, to give them any Room for such an
Expectation. As to printing, I will not say that I never intend it, but I must
first be able to spend a few Weeks with my Friend GRAVES, who is a Person of
great Delicacy, and whose Friendship may, perhaps, induce him to examine my
Trifles with some Attention, no very agreeable Task to him or any one else.
Mean Time, the Complaint you make of your present Want of Amusement, gives me
an Occasion to pour in Floods of my written Impertinence. The Progress of Taste
I meant to show you long ago. The Snuff Box (which by interweaving another Poem
or two, is now, I see, a mere Piece of Patch-Work) appears before you for no
other Reason in the World, but that it happens to be transcribed in the same
Book with the former; and is interested in my desiring you not to read a Line
of it. I send also the Ode I first mentioned to the Duchess, " Rural Elegance,"
an Ode to the late Duchess of SOMERSET. See SHENSTONE's Works, Vol. i, Page 105.
and would ask, in the first Place, whether it deserves Correction? If you
would not choose I should immediately destroy it, will you be so Kind as to
mark any Improprieties, or propose any Improvements to me? I hope you will be
in no concern about defacing the Copy, in that Case, for I would write it over
ever so often, if I could by that Means add a Syllable that was more expressive
of my Veneration for her Grace, or that tended to give her a Moment's
Amusement. I calculated the Subject as well as I could; but I am fearful you
will discover nothing but commonplace Thoughts. I think most of my Verses
smell of nothing but Field-Flowers, and considering how I spend my Time, they
can scarce do otherwise.

A Word more, in regard to the proposed Alteration in your Room. If your
Ladyship does not choose to go to the Expense of a carved Frame, what think you
of a white oval Frame to your Glass in the middle, and a Festoon on each Side;
this with the Stucco need amount to no more than four Guineas. But the Room is
mighty well as it is, and you are yourself the Judge, whether the Expense of
the Alteration would afford you an answerable Amusement. I am greatly pleased
with what your Ladyship mentions of coming to the Leasowes; for though you will
see but little new this Year, yet by allowing yourself some little Time, you
will see the same with much greater Ease than you could before; and if I should
add, Pleasure, I hope you will allow it to my Fondness for a Place that has
engrossed my Care so long. You complain, Madam, of the Want of fresh Ideas,
(which I never yet observed in your Conversation or Letters at any Time or
Tide) guess, however, what must be my Case, who see nothing from Day to Day but
Bleak Mountains and wild staring Rocks,
The wretched Result of my Pains;
The Swains, greater Brutes than their Flocks,
And the Nymphs as polite as the Swains --
I once thought of inscribing these on a Seat, but now my very Spleen forsakes
me.

LETTER XXXII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, May 24, 1751. Dear Madam,
I Hasten to acquaint your Ladyship, that my Brother is now greatly better,
and, is, we all hope, in a fair Way of Recovery.

What small Hopes I have entertained for most Part of the Time since I wrote
last to Barrels, have been rather owing to a Kind of Self-Flattery, and an
Unwillingness to Despair, than any proper Foundation -- but these three Days,
his Disorder is so much abated, that they seem to receive some Sanction from
Reason; not that I am entirely free from Apprehensions. The asthmatical
Disorder is fallen down into his Legs, where it continues at present. But what
by Means of Ass's Milk, which agrees with him, the Advantage of a few Days, in
which he has been carried Sedan-Fashion about my Grounds, and the most
scrupulous Care, in regard to what we suffer him to eat or drink, his Spirits,
Pulse and Complexion are astonishingly recovered, and his Strength and Stomach
proportionably restored.

I will not detain your Ladyship any longer on this Head, than to acquaint you,
that I have thought about writing to Barrels every Day since your Servant was
here; but finding all along, such frequent Changes in the Disorder, and being
utterly incapable to give your Ladyship any satisfactory Account, I had not the
Spirit to set Pen to Paper.

This has been to me the most disagreeable Season, for a Continuance, I ever
spent in my Life; betwixt sleepless Nights, painful Apprehensions, constant
Solicitude, Confinement, and an entire Alteration in regard to my Way of Life,
I found my own Situation not a little endangered: but as the original Cause
begins to cease, I hope the Effect will. I might have added to the former
Vexations, the Difficulty of procuring good Advice, and the no less Difficulty
of prevailing on my Brother to follow it. Such Persons as he ought always to be
well; I mean, to guard more than others against Diseases, as they have so
little Patience in reserve to submit to the Means of Cure.

But to lead your Ladyship from the sick Room into the open Air a little -- I
am now beginning, for the first Time, to brush up my Walks. The Trees and
Shrubs are in full Bloom all of a sudden; I mean, so far as concerns the green
Leaves, for the latter have not yet flowered. The Servants are now very busy in
cleaning my Grove, etc. whither I stray now two or three Times a Day, with
great Complacency. I doubt the Death of poor Mr. H -- LL's Brother will
occasion him much worldly Perplexity, as well as Concern, at present: I would
otherwise press him to spend a Week with me at the Leasowes, as some Kind of
Relief to him, and a great Pleasure to us. I think a Change of Place, after
such an Affliction, is very often of no small Service. That Book of Mr.
PEARSALL's which your Ladyship subscribed for, is come out, I hear, but I have
had no Copies sent yet. Your Ladyship, I know, intended to oblige me by your
Subscription, and THAT Point you can never fail to obtain -- more I am not at
Liberty to say. You will please to mention this Publication to Mr. H -- LL; I
sent his Name, though I am not sure that he subscribed: but I know he would be
the readiest of Men to serve an old Schoolfellow. Would your Ladyship be so
Kind as to lend me POMPEY the Little? I have read, as I said before, nothing
but Physic-Books for these last six Weeks, and I want now to be indulged with
somewhat more amusing. I will not pretend to your Ladyship that I am a very great
Physician, but I consider myself as qualified to make the best Nurse of any
body in the three Kingdoms. I hope soon to be able to adjust a Time, when I may
have the longwished-for Happiness of waiting on your Ladyship at the Leasowes.
In the mean Time, I am to return my Brother's Thanks with my own, for every
obliging Instance of your Regard, and to subscribe myself inviolably

Your Ladyship's Most dutiful and obedient Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
P. S. May 25. I should have sent the foregoing Account yesterday, when it was
wrote; but I find nothing to add hitherto, that may discolor the favorable
Relation I have been giving of my Brother's Recovery. I will yet hope that
there is some good in reserve for us, which may in some Measure, compensate for
the gloomy Season we have past -- I don't know from what Quarter, but I Will
still confide -- I hope your Ladyship does.

I did not propose to do much about my House this Year, and I now shall do
nothing. But I know your Ladyship will find some Pleasure in the Conjecture,
that the Money which might have been expended upon Rooms or Furniture, has been
spent with some Effect upon my Brother's Recovery; without which, the Leasowes
would have afforded no Pleasure of one while. I hope, with this good Weather,
your Ladyship's wonted Spirits will return; I hope, also, that I shall
henceforth be able to correspond with you upon more agreeable Subjects than I
could of late. Miss DOLMAN desired her Compliments when she was here last,
which was about a Week ago. I cannot yet write with any Sort of Spirit; so I
will relieve your Ladyship at once from so many insipid Nothings, as I should
probably add if I proceeded.



LETTER XXIII. Miss DOLMAN to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Broom, Oct. 25, 1751. SIR,
I Return you the Collection of Poems, which you were so kind as to send me,
and can but acknowledge myself very much obliged to you for the Perusal of them.

If I did not expect the Pleasure of seeing them soon again in print, I should
have parted with them into your Hands with vast Reluctance, without having
taken the Liberty of transcribing some of them for my Amusement hereafter: but
something whispers me in my Ear, that you really design those charming The
Elegies published in Mr. SHENSTONE's Works, Vol. i.
Elegies for the Press shortly, and that they will no longer be concealed in the
little secret Box, from whence I remember I was so rude as to steal them.

Sometime before my Lord DUDLEY sets out for London, my Brother and I flatter
ourselves, that he and Miss LEA will come to Broom, and we hope too, that you
and your Brother will accompany them there, whenever they intend us the Honor
of a Visit.

I came Home from the Grange so much enamoured with the Concert I heard there,
that the Desire I had before of being a Performer in such a one has, if
possible, taken a deeper Root. CLARENDON calls Ambition a Weed, which, he says,
is apt to grow in the best Soils, so I will not be wholly void of it; I will be
ambitious of attaining to some Knowledge of two Things, namely, Music and the
French Language; and in order to do the latter, I believe my Brother and I
shall be so very extravagant, as to have a French Master attend us at Broom, as
frequently as we have G -- M to teach as Music now.

How do you approve of the Scheme of our having two such great Masters both
together? Can you say any Thing to encourage us in it or not?

I beg the Favor of you, Sir, to send me your Verses upon Autumn, where you
mention poor THOMSON's Death so feelingly; I want it extremely, to show Miss
LYTTELTON, having promised that I would send it her a Fortnight ago: "think of
that, Master BROOM, I pray you think of that." Alluding to an Expression in
FALSTAFF's Mouth, in SHAKESPEARE's Merry Wives of Windsor.
Surely my Letters are always as dull as a twice-told Tale; yet am I so
impertinent, as to send you this long one, without making any Kind of Apology
for so doing.

Je suis, Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, M. DOLMAN.

LETTER XXXIV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, Dec. 30, 1751. Dear Madam,
I HAD wrote to your Ladyship long before this Time, to acknowledge the
Kindness of your Letter and Present: but I have a most deplorable Account to
give of my Delay, and what so good a Friend as yourself will not read without a
Sigh. Alas, dear Madam, I have lost my only Brother! A more sincere or truly
affectionate one never bore the Name. I cannot now add more; though I should not
want Matter to expatiate upon his Merit, if I were not at the same Time to
revive and lament the Loss of it. He is gone before me in the very Prime of his
Days, and ere the Force of his Understanding, or the Benevolence of his Heart
has been half exerted or known.

Future Letters, and other Conversations, may afford me an Opportunity to pour
out all my Soul; at present, I am not enough Master of myself. I find all my
Views intercepted: my Schemes, Measures, and even my Heart itself, to be well
nigh broken. I have lost that Spirit of a Man, which alone is able to sustain
his Infirmities. Every Object round me, that was once the Source of my
Amusement, revives a Train of Ideas that I can hardly render supportable. I
procure a Set of low Friends to chat around me, and call off my Attention. But
the greatest Relief I have found, since the fatal Close of November, is what I
have drawn from Stupefaction.

Pardon me, my good Lady; I do not mean to make a Display of my Affliction. I
mention it, that you may account for, and excuse any Omissions or Improprieties
in your unfortunate Correspondent.

Since this unhappy Catastrophe, it has been my Lot to hear of one that must
nearly affect your Ladyship. Believe me, my honored Lady, I am far from an
unconcerned Observer of Events, that must afford you either Pleasure or Pain.
But I am not in a Condition to receive Relief, and how can I pretend to give
it? One Thing, however, I will suggest -- I think CAESAR confessed at an
earlier Period of Life than what my Lord BOLINGBROKE arrived at, that he had
lived enough, either in regard to Nature or to Glory.

During the Height of our Afflictions, we can scarce believe it possible they
should ever wear off. In my Case, there are some Particulars which render it
improbable they should. Yet Time, we find, alleviates the Misfortunes of
others, and it is fitting we should hope implicitly, that it may some how
diminish our own.

I will excuse your Ladyship from dwelling upon the Subject. Assure me only of
the Continuance of your Esteem, and it will be of greater Service than whole
Volumes of Philosophy.

Pray be so good as to write or dictate a Letter to me. I earnestly pray that
it may be the former, I am, dear Madam, with all the Tenderness of my present
State of Mind, your

most obliged, faithful, and very affectionate Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
This is the third Time I have begun this Letter, without being able to finish
it till now. If your Ladyship will favor me with a Line, I hope to be able to
answer it without the same Difficulty.

I have some Thoughts of waiting on you at Barrels for a Week, when I hear you
are come down, but I have had a Kind of nervous Fever, for which I have been
taking Medicines. This I did, though I knew at the same Time how ineffectual they
must prove. I was taking Drugs from the Shop to cure Anxiety of the Mind.



LETTER XXXV. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Whitchurch, June 2, 1752. Dear Sir,
MR. GRAVES has lately set me right as to a Mistake, which otherwise I might
have remained in much longer. As I hope to live, I had quite forgot my Promise
of writing to you from London, and so wondered I did not hear from you. But
upon his mentioning it, I immediately, to my great Confusion, recollected my
Error. I felt a great deal of Uneasiness, while I imagined the Fault to lie at
your Door; but I assure you, much more, since I find it to be at my own.
Ingratitude is what I most abhor; and I must be a Monster, to slight such a
Favor as your last to me, and from such a Friend. Pray believe me incapable of
it, or of possessing a serene Mind, while there should be any Misunderstanding
between you and me. I am likewise sincerely concerned for the Death of your
Brother, especially as Mr. GRAVES says, it touched you so nearly, consequently
I should advise you to change the Place a little after so melancholy an Affair;
and I am sure you can find in no Place, one who would be more solicitous to
divert you than at Whitchurch. I cannot ask that Favor of you, because I am so
much in Debt to you already. But it would give me a double Pleasure, since I
believe at present it might be beneficial to you. For my own Part, I long to
wait on you; but my Mother's State of Health is so bad, that I must not think
of gratifying that Passion this Summer; though I can hardly lay that Hope aside,
or forbear saying, that a small Alteration in her for the better would make me
pursue it. I have got a little Chaise, which at present I am much pleased with,
and I assure you, its Wheels have a natural Penchant to run to the Leasowes.

I wished for you much at London. Plays are well worth seeing now. I reckon
those who cannot be pleased with the present Performances of the Stage, are too
delicate ever to be pleased. There are a great many very good Actors, and some
(GARRICK and Mrs. CIBBER) acknowledged to exceed all that ever have been. You
must come once more into the World, I mean to London; I am sure it will do you
good: I find the Benefit of it myself; Change of Place gives me Spirits for the
Year, which, I find, fail me very much without -- Don't let us grow old if we
can help it; and I think Variety and new Scenes are the most likely to keep us
young, at least produce the Effects of Youth. I own Life is dull at best, and
therefore it is the wisest Way to vary it as much as possible. The most stupid
Vulgar (both high and low) find their Account in this Method. Then you must
find a double Pleasure in it, who know how to vary it so elegantly, as to
entertain others as well as yourself. I assure you, you succeeded so well as to
the first, when you were here, that your Praises are still blooming; the
agreeable Impression still remains on all. I long to see you, and hope to hear
from you. Pray harbor no ill Thought of me, for if I have erred, it was, I
assure you, from Mistake or Forgetfulness, and not with Intention. I never did,
nor ever can, mean Ill or Disrepect to dear Mr. SHENSTONE, but shall ever be
his most sincere Friend and humble Servant,

A. WHISTLER.
The latter End of July, Mr. PERTH is engaged to be with me for six Weeks; any
Time before that, or after September, my House will be empty, if you should do
me the Favor I mentioned.



LETTER XXXVI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, June 6, 1752.
MY Conversation, dear Lady LUXBOROUGH, is by no Means equal to the Reception I
find at Barrels, and if you return me Thanks upon that Score, you make me
doubly sensible how unable I am to make a due Acknowledgement.

The Day after I left Barrels, I had a Morning Visit from Admiral SMITH,
Captain WHOOD, Mrs. STANLEY, and her two Daughters, who engaged me to dine with
Sir G. LYTTELTON. These are Ladies of Taste, I think; but Admiral SMITH is the
Delight of Mankind! I forgot to mention Mr. MILLER, who seems to recommend my
Walks with great Cordiality. I see they condescend to look upon modern Plans at
Hagley, and if they build anew, I suppose it will be in that Style.

Since this I have seen a good deal of Company, more of whom arrive to see my
Walks than me; yet I am not jealous or invidious: my Walks are truly more
deserving of this Favor.

Yesterday, I had the Company of Miss LEA, and Mr. HILTON, a very modest and
ingenious Man, who came with Lord DUDLEY from London; besides two other Parties
of Visitants, who engrossed my whole Day.

And now I sit down by Five in the Morning to answer your Queries concerning
the Papier-Machee. It is bought of Mr. BROMWICH, at the Golden-Lion, upon
Ludgate Hill. What you will want, will be an Ornament for the Middle, and four
Spandrells for the Corners. I have taken down the Pineapple from the middle of
my Cieling, and send it you to see, together with some other Ornaments which
were never yet fixed up. They will cost (I mean a middle and four corner
Ornaments) somewhere about eight Shillings. You may ornament it more or less
though as you please. As to the Cracks of your Cieling, (which I don't remember)
if they are not violently bad, they may be mended by a common Mason, and the
Color will disguise them. As for putting them up, I will send you over a very
agreeable Neighbor of mine, who was once an eminent Upholsterer, but now lives
upon his Fortune, who seems glad of the Opportunity it will give him to see
Barrels, and the Honor it will afford him of being serviceable to your
Ladyship. They should be painted with Flake White and thin Starch; but all this
he will manage to your entire Satisfaction. He is a Person of Taste, has seen a
good deal of Life; and though he has had his Share of Difficulties, always
cheerful. You must not offer him any Thing. Thus have I been as short as I can,
in pointing out your quickest Method of embellishing your Cieling. The whole
Cove (except the Moulding) should be washed with Oker; but this you may defer,
if you please, till Mr. PIXELL arrives.

I beg my Thanks to Mrs. WEYMONDESOLD, for her kind Remembrance of me: am a
little fearful her Visit will be too late in the Year; but it is in Mrs.
WEYMONDESOLD's Power to make all Seasons pleasing.

My Lord DUDLEY will be extremely glad to wait on Mr. OUTING: but he must come
hither first, and we will adjust the Remainder.

I have taken the Liberty to send this by my Servant Girl, who is desirous to
see her Sister and Barrels; and really my Man is so much Assistant in the Way
of fitting up my Room (which engages me) that I could very ill spare him.

I hope Mr. PRICE is recovered, by the Mention you make of his going again to
London. I did not merely ask, but wish to see him here. And now I must leave
your Ladyship for the Company of my Carpenters; yet am ever uniformly your
Ladyship's most obliged

W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XXXVII. Mr. H -- N to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
C -- r-H -- e, near Coventry, Aug. 16, 1752. Dear Sir,
AS I promised to write to you soon, I hope you will excuse the Haste and
Errors of this Epistle. I was almost wet through before I reached Birmingham
last Wednesday, where I eat a Mouthful of Dinner at my Inn, and proceeded to
Solihull: there I stopped, and was told by the Landlady, I should be too late for
the Races at Warwick, if I did not make haste. I thanked her, and proceeded to
Mr. WREN's, who gave me a very friendly Reception, and asked me to stay all
Night, which I immediately accepted. We walked and talked much; he praised
Gloom and Solitude, and I fine Prospects: not but that (I told him) sometimes I
could relish a grave Scene, and lo! he opens a Door, and turned me into the
Churchyard, which he said was full of Graves, and desired me to tell you the
same. Great Alterations might be made there, which he will never do. Next Day,
after Breakfast, I took my Leave, and reached Warwick, and yesterday came
hither. I fear my Business cannot be ended before the Beginning of next Week,
as it is Assize-Time, and my Brother is but in an indifferent State of Health.
I have wrote thus far, and find my Pen can scrawl nothing but what is as
insipid as myself. Lord WILLOUGHBY DE BROOK is dead. The Distemper is amongst
the Cattle here. Lord BROOK is at Warwick, and has locked up the Castle
Gardens.

I have not been at Coventry yet; neither do I intend to enter often into a
Place so diametrically opposite to those sylvan Scenes I was entertained with
at the Leasowes. Oh! when shall I sit down and end my Days on such a Spot
somewhere near you? The money-getting Slaves all think me mad to spend my Life
in Idleness, and wonder I have passed another Year without setting up in my
Business. Sordid wretches! whose only God is Gold. How despicable must Life
appear, when it has past away only in collecting a Heap of shining Cinders! My
Resolutions are more strongly attached than ever to retire. When I come over, I
purpose to talk with Mr. SHAW about Palmer's-Hill, which, if not much out of
the Way, I will purchase. I should be glad, when you meet any of the Workmen,
you would ask, now and then, how they go on at Northfield. I hope yourself and
all Friends are well, to whom my best Devoirs, from

Your affectionate Friend and humble Servant, J. S. H -- N.
P. S. I fear Lady LUXBOROUGH, and all your fine Company, will visit you before
I come back. Pray let me hear from you, if convenient. I have wrote to Lord
DUDLEY, of whom I begged the Favor to send you this. Adieu!



LETTER XXXVIII. The Duchess of SOMERSET to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Percy-Lodge, Sept. 9, 1750. Dear Madam,
I AM extremely sorry for the Accident which prevented my having the Pleasure
of hearing from you, and sincerely hope you have overcome all the ill Effects
of it. You are very obliging in the Concern you express, for the Scenes of
Sorrow I have passed through. I have, indeed, suffered deeply; but when I
consider it is the Will of God, who never chastises his poor Creatures but for
their Good, and reflect, at the same Time, how unworthy I was of these
Blessings, which I now lament the Loss of, I lay my Hand upon my Mouth and dare
not repine; but I hope can with Truth appeal to him in the following Words:
Questo affano ei su che non si oppone al suo santo voler: Chio gemo e gli affro
tutti il gemiti miei Chio Rango and in tanto Benedico il suo Nome in Mezzo al
Pianto.

You are so good, as to wish my Solitude may afford me some Amusement; and as I
think it a Duty, while it pleases God to continue us here, not to let ourselves
sink into a stupid and unthankful Melancholy, I endeavor to find out such
Entertainments, as my Retirement, and my dear Lord's unmerited Bounty will
admit of. I have built a Porter's Lodge at my Gate, and am now turning the long
Drawing Room into a Chapel, which will be finished in the Gothic Taste, and
have three fine painted Windows; these I had bespoke for Northumberland-House,
but as its present Owners do not intend that their Chapel shall be in the same
Place that we had proposed, they would not have fitted there. The Room where
you were so good as to breakfast with us, and my Lord's Bedchamber, I could
not bear to go into since my irreparable Misfortune, and therefore, with Lord
NORTHUMBERLAND's Advice, have laid them together, which will make a Room of 35
by 21. I shall put up a very pretty Chimney-Piece in it with Paper, on which I
shall hang my best Pictures.

The Season for some little Alterations without Doors is now coming on, and I
intend some Change in my Rosary, and Openings in other Parts of the Park. I
have also erected a little Hermitage in one of the Woods near the Canal, whose
Roof is thatched, and its Walls of Straw. I read as usual, and have lately been
much pleased with the new Edition of SULLY's Memoirs. Besides this, my own
Servant and myself have worked five cross-stitch Chairs, and intend three more
for my Chapel; they are a Gothic Mosaic, in fine Crimson, and are to have
Gothic Frames. Thus, dear Madam, I have given you an Account of my Schemes and
Occupations. My Company, at present, consists of Dr. LE COURAYET, Mr. COWSLAD,
and my Chaplain, who is a modest, sensible and truly pious young Man. The
Gentleman who traveled with poor Lord BEAUCHAMP has been with me two Months,
but left me yesterday. What is come to Lord LUXBOROUGH, or rather to his Son?
And why is poor Mrs. WYMONDESOLD to be treated as an Alien? I conclude she did
not marry without her Father's Consent.

I hear an extreme good Character of your Nephew, Lord ST. JOHN, which I am
sure will give you Pleasure. I must do Lord EGREMONT the Justice to tell you,
that it is impossible for any one to behave in a more kind and handsome Manner,
than he has done ever since my dreadful Loss; but Mrs. O -- N has never taken
the least Notice of me. Lord and Lady NORTHUMBERLAND are at present in the
Country, and very well. I am so near the End of my Paper, that I must only add
the Assurance of being, dear Madam,

Your Ladyship's most faithful and obedient, F. SOMERSET.

LETTER XXXIX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. --
The Leasowes, Jan. 1753. Dear Sir,
THE Letter with which you favored me deserves my earliest Acknowledgments,
and will prove not a little serviceable, in regard to the Subscription we have
in Hand. The whole Account of that Affair is as follows: I had been assured by
Persons of Veracity, (amongst which I may safely name Lord DUDLEY, Mr. PIXELL,
and THO. COTTEREL) that you had generously made an Offer of twenty Guineas
toward the Addition of two new Bells to our present Set; and that in Case the
Parish would supply what was wanting, it would be a Pleasure to you, Sir, to
have your Offer accepted. Upon this Encouragement, I determined to make Trial
what a Subscription would produce, and accordingly drew up a Form for that
Purpose; intending to write you an Account of the Undertaking, so soon as I
could form a Conjecture of its Success. This I was upon the Point of doing,
when I had the Pleasure of a Letter from you, which, nevertheless, was
extremely seasonable, as it immediately removed a Doubt that began to spread,
in Regard to your Concurrence.

There is now subscribed, (exclusive of your Benefaction) the Sum of fifty
Guineas; and I make no Scruple of raising twenty more, by an Application to
such Persons as have not yet been solicited. Be our Progress what it will, I
purpose in a few Weeks to give you a farther Account of it; in the mean Time,
can assure you, that the Subscription will be pushed forward with all possible
Diligence, that it may give us the earlier Chance for the Pleasure of your
Company. I have only to add, that the Bells will never sound more agreeably,
than when they ring for your Arrival; will be heard no where more
advantageously than from some Parts of my Farm, and that you will find no one
more desirous of making the Country agreeable to you than

Your most obedient humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XL. Mr. H -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
March 20, 1753. My dear Friend,
YOUR two last Epistles, of the 4th and 9th Instant, merit greater
Acknowledgments than the trifling Return of mine. I am going upon an Expedition
in a few Hours, yet must not neglect assuring you, how greatly I think myself
indebted to your Care and Informations relative to my Tenants, and beg, if they
apply to you again, to tell them, I have lately had a Letter from Mr. I --, who
has promised me to be down at Lady Day, and settle Affairs with them all. The
Brickman's Bill is much higher than I thought it would have been. Believe me,
between Lawyers and Builders I am almost wearied out of my Life, and sincerely
wish myself disengaged from them, especially the former; I hope they may be the
last Set of People applied to by you or me.

The Malady you complain of at present is not, I conjecture, so much owing to
the Winter, as to Solitude; Cold braces and Heat relaxes. Could you have in
Winter the same Round of Company and enchanting Scenes that you enjoy in
Summer, your Nerves would, I am convinced, be stronger, and your Spirits more
alert. Your Friends (more particularly myself) ought to think ourselves much
obliged to you for that small Palliative you administer to your languid Hours,
in thinking of, or writing to us. I could cure you much better by a
Prescription out of Madame DE MAINTENON's Letters, or our Friend HORACE, than
by any the whole Materia Medica affords; should these fail, SAPPHO, that
universal Panacea, might prove a Restorative. I think myself very happy in
having this Opportunity of conveying to you, (according to Promise) what she
says of you in her Letter to me, which I shall do in her own Words, viz. "Pray
tell the Salopian Bard, that it is my Wish more than Hope, to preserve him as an
Admirer; I would cautiously avoid losing a common PHILANDER, but a Son of
APOLLO is inestimable," and again, "The Genii could not please more than
VIRGIL's Grove does; Miss H -- 's Glass shows it perfectly." In the Postscript;
"Say something clever to my second Poet, and persuade him, I should do the same
myself." You see how far the Lady is gone only by my Commendations: she is a
comical Girl, and I wish you were to see her; she has promised me to visit you,
as soon as our new Road will admit of their Coach, if I will escort her to the
Leasowes.

I was somewhat surprised at being nominated for a Commissioner of our new
Road, as my Residence is precarious; my Vote, if necessary, will be guided by
Merit, and the Direction of my Friends. As C -- has been a Servant to my
Father, and recommended by you as deserving, I will give him my Vote, if in the
Country. My Lord DUDLEY has been applied to by Captain W -- for his Father, but
declined it, and was so good to declare to me, he would serve C -- before he
saw your Letter.

The --, who never knew me at Hales, met me at my Lord's House, and requested
my Vote; my Answer was, I knew so little of the Affair, and my coming down was
so uncertain, that I could not declare myself in any one's Favor.

Mr. CHEEK I have not lately seen. Mr. OUTING and self set out this Day for
Purford's-Green, to make a Visit to our honest Friend CHARLES WALKER, where we
hope to arrive before this Letter does at Lombard Street.

My Lord, Miss LEA, Mrs. ROCK, and her Daughter, all join in Compliments and
good Wishes to you. They are in tolerable good Health, excepting now and then
catching Cold. I had the Pleasure of the three last to Breakfast with me
yesterday Morning.

Mr. O -- has often been solicited by me to write to you, which he sincerely
says he intends when we return to London next Week, and with his Compliments,
hopes you will forgive the seeming Neglect he has been guilty of. His going to
sleep at the Leasowes, and my accompanying him therein, has been often Matter
of Discourse between us. He declares, he will soon write a Panegyric upon
Sleep, and the Benefit arising from the unrestrained Occupation of one's own
Bed.

I can furnish you with few Particulars concerning Mrs. W -- 's Amor. All I
know is, her Husband and other People had ocular Demonstration of her Guilt, by
a Servant Boy's boring three Holes in the Wainscot, which were afterward cut
in one. I am myself sorry to see a Person possessed of amiable and noble
Qualities, so much sunk by one fatal Error; and much greater is her Fall, when
the less malicious Part of the World condemn her, and declare her Foible of no
late Commencement. Mr. O -- tells me, Mr. K -- (though I should little have
thought it) wears a triste Visage on this Occasion, and whimpers that he is
much concerned.

Your Glass is done, and I have got the gold Clasp back from the Chaser's. Do
let me procure you something, if it is but in Silver, which perhaps you may
like as well, and be Money in Pocket.

DODSLEY's Man told me, Mr. GRAY's Poems would come out in about three Weeks.
The Earl of Essex is a fine Tragedy; I have seen it, and the Rival Brothers,
but do not like the Plot of the last. I am now reading the Memoirs of Sir
Charles Goodville, in two Volumes; they are contained in a Series of Letters
relative to his Family, and I think some of them pathetic and engaging. FRANCIS
either has, or soon will publish a new Play. The Tragedy of Eugenia, replete
with Delicacy, Sentiment, and Pathos. It was produced at Drury Lane, under the
Conduct, and assisted by the Performance, of Mr. GARRICK.
MOORE is now universally allowed to be the Author of the Gamester.

I have heard SOUTHWELL is now in Place, at his own Trade, and hope he will do
well. I am really glad my poor Patient is happily married, and hope she will
not relapse any more into a bad State of Health. I shall be much obliged to
you, for the Verses you promise me to Mr. W. LYTTELTON, and believe I shall
like them full as well as those you designed for the Colonel, because more
friendly than panegyrical.

I wish (to the Lord! as O -- says) I had the Spirit of Versification, and I
would exert it most superabundantly against two or three of my witty Enemies,
and believe I shall one Day endeavor to finish my Birmingham Verses, to
revenge myself on some Folk in and near this Town, for smiling in my Face, and
cutting my Throat at the same Time with a Feather. Mrs. R -- is quite sick of
their Folly and Hypocrisy, and I believe nobody will ever lament the Loss of
their Acquaintance.

Miss L -- is, I think, more improved since she came to Town than before; and I
am glad to see her address People with a little more Vivacity than she used to
do. My Lord has presented her with a fine new flowered silk Sack, laced Linen,
and a Pair of Diamond Earrings, etc. etc. We were all, last Night, at the
Concert in Dean-Street, Soho, and wish your Company had added to our Pleasure.

Upon reconnoitering my Epistle, I imagine it appears a mere Farrago
Litterarum, or more properly like a Welsh Dish, called a Salmagundy, which
hungry People may eat, but not well digest, and wish you may have any Relish
for this of mine.

The most falsely esteemed polite Part of the World, deem long Letters
ridiculous and rude; may they ever think so! I am now at my Conclusion of the
fourth Page, and will so far avoid an Apology for it, that I assure you, it is
only Want of more Time, that makes me conclude this, with the Request of as
speedy, and as long an Answer, which will still more firmly (if possible) unite
the Bonds of Amity between, dear Sir, yourself and him who is most inviolably
your affectionate

and sincerely devoted Friend and Servant, J. S. H --.
P. S. I shall be at Home again in five or six Days. I should be glad of the
Honor of Mr. W -- 's Acquaintance. Captain O -- blames me for not traveling
like an Apostle, as he does, with one Coat, one Shirt, one Pair of Stockings,
one Pair of Shoes, etc.



LETTER XLI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, April 1, 1753. Dear Madam,
WHILST your Ladyship's Spirits appear as perennial as your Genius, I have a
deplorable Account to give you of my own. They have been, in short, but few
Degrees better than they were the last fatal Winter: and though I was conscious
what apparent Cause I gave you to be angry with my Silence, I could not bear
the Thoughts of answering so polite a Letter as your last, with an Heart
dejected, and a Head equally confused. " Les Morts n'ecrivent point," says
Madame MAINTENON, " and je me comptois de leur Nombre."

Suffer me to thank you here, Madam, for the very striking Amusement I received
from those Letters; I read them twice, and as I have sullied the Copy you were
so good to lend me, I will send another I bespoke for myself, as soon as it
arrives.

The Memoirs of Lord BOLINGBROKE's Life abound too much with Politics for me.
I believe the World also would be as well pleased with the more private
Anecdotes of so great a Man. Herein your Ladyship would shine; and I could wish
you to engage in something of this Kind, though ever so short; if not for the
Public, at least as an Amusement to yourself and Friends, and a Legacy to the
present Lord BOLINGBROKE, or whom else you should prefer.

Now I have begun to mention Books, let me finish the Subject. The Gamester I
have read no more of, than what I gleaned from the Quotations in the Magazines.
I never yet had any Opinion of the Genius of Mr. MOORE, and I hardly think I
shall alter my Sentiments, on Account of this Performance. The Moral, however,
must be allowed to be extremely seasonable.

The Earl of Essex I have read; the unfortunate Earl of ESSEX! whose Story,
whatever it may deserve, has never yet produced a good Line, and now hardly
ever will, yet I am willing, with your Ladyship, to make all Allowances for the
Writer.

The Brothers, which I have also read, is a noble Tragedy, full of refined and
elevated Sentiments, and, generally speaking, of suitable Expressions. I am not
blind to many of its Faults -- but I have read nothing of late Years that has
affected me more.

Shall I beg the Favor some Time of borrowing " Manners," the Book you mention
to have read.

I don't remember to have heard you mention any Thing about VOLTAIRE's last
Play. I therefore send it -- and thus ends all I have to say upon the Article
of Books.

I am truly glad to hear that you had Mrs. DAVIES so long at Barrels, to
counterwork the Effects of this unjoyous Season. For my own Part, had my Health
permitted, I could gladly have borne a Part there; but I have been little
better in bodily Health than I have been in Mind; and Home, when one is not
truly well, has more Attractions than Elysium. Pardon this unpolite Assertion,
which seems to partake of Selfishness: and yet it is as unpolite at least, to
offer one's Company to another, when one is not pleased with it one's-self. I
deny that Penances can be done at Barrels. At the Leasowes, I have had many a
Winter's Experience they may; and what adds to their Severity is, that they are
no way meritorious.

The Jack was sent to COTTEREL to be copied in Mahogany long ago. It Is
possible, your Servant may find it ready to take Home.

I was two or three Times in company with Captain SOMERVILLE, when he went to
Westminster-School. I would send my Compliments, and an Invitation, if there
was probability enough of his remembering me, to render it proper: though his
Goodnature alone could induce him to visit me now, when there is not a Grain
of Amusement to be expected either from my Place or myself.

I hear now and then of Mr. O --, by Means of my good Friend Mr. H --. They
were both going last Week to CHARLES WALKER's Villa; not his Cabbage-Garden
orne, as Mr. GRAVES calls his Place at Claverton, and for which I rebuke him,
for fear the Burlesque should spread. The last I heard of O -- was, that he
blamed Mr. H -- for not traveling like an Apostle, as he did, with one Coat,
one Shirt, one Pair of Stockings, one Wig, etc.

I have promoted and accomplished the Addition of two new Bells to our present
Set; toward which, however, I give but two Guineas.

I drew up a Specimen, or foul Copy of a Petition to Sir GEORGE, about the
Turnpike, and so the People of our Parish have both signed and sent the
Echantillon.

Pardon me, if I leave half your Letter unanswered. You write so fluently, and
at the same Time so correctly, that I am angry at myself, and yet never better
pleased than when I come to subscribe myself,

Yours.

LETTER XLII. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Whitchurch, May 14, 1753. Dear Sir,
NOthing but ill Health could have hindered me from writing to you, and
acknowledging the most agreeable Favor of your Letter. I have been confined
ever since Christmas with that odious Distemper the Gout. The very Name of it
is abominable. What lengthened my Confinement was, that as soon as I was almost
well, I fell down Stairs, hurt the Part, and was again laid up; but you will say,
I might have wrote for all this. Indeed I could not. For one of the malicious
Imps of the old Demon got into the Forefinger of my right Hand at the same
Time. I can show the Mark now -- Besides, my Mother's Health has been so bad,
as quite to dispirit me, and continues to be so; else I assure you, I should
think of seeing the Leasowes this Summer. But I cannot do it, as Things are,
upon any Account, nor should I ever forgive myself, should she die in my
Absence. All these Reasons have likewise hindered my Journey to London this
Year. Mr. PEARETH too, has been exceeding ill; so that I may look upon this
Year, as unfortunate both to myself and Friends. I hope, however, you have not
felt the Influence of this evil Star. That Health and Happiness may attend you,
is the Interest of all that know you; mine I am sure in particular; and I can
add, that I am thoroughly sensible of it.

I am an Architect at present. Since I have been able to hop about, I have
amused myself that Way. I have been altering the Disposition of my Rooms, and
have made them more commodious as I think: but I will not prejudice your
Judgment beforehand. I have, like you, been at some Expense this Way. But
there are two Imperfections I have to struggle with at Whitchurch, which never
appeared at the Leasowes; an indifferent Situation, and but a second-hand Head
for Architecture. I long to see your Improvements, from those I have seen
already. Lady LUXBOROUGH has celebrated you as a Designer very justly and very
elegantly.

I have got the Verses, and wonder you did not communicate them to me, for they
please me on two Accounts, yours and Lady LUXBOROUGH's. I dare say it would
have given me double Pleasure, to have received a Letter from you by the Hand
you proposed. I am much obliged to you for your kind Intention, and think
myself unhappy I was not in London on that Account. Now, though I cannot ask
the Favor with any Propriety, yet, give me Leave to say, how glad I should be
to see you at Whitchurch this Summer; and whenever I have that Pleasure, I beg
you will let me know beforehand, for fear of Accidents. As for my Part, I
resolve to wait on you at the Leasowes, as soon as ever it is in my Power to do
it.

I have one Piece of News to tell you, which most likely you have heard by Mr.
GRAVES, which is, that my Brother and Mrs. H -- S are married. I think they are
very likely to be happy. I had rather have a Relation than a Friend married,
for the last is always entirely lost. You have the Compliments of all this
Place. But my own I shall always separate from the Vulgar, when addressed to
dear Mr. SHENSTONE, from

His most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, A. WHISTLER.

LETTER XLIII. The Duchess of SOMERSET to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Percy-Lodge, Dec. 31, 1751. Dear Madam,
APologies between Friends appear so unnecessary, that if you have still the
same Inclination which you have formerly shown to look upon me in that Light,
you will never again treat me with the Ceremony of a formal Acquaintance; when
you write to me, you give me Pleasure; when you do not, I love my own Peace two
well to fancy you are angry with me, while I am not conscious of my deserving
to have you so. You see I do not regulate my Correspondence as poor Lady -- did
her Visits; which she never was to return sooner than her former ones had been
repaid.

I am not in the least surprised that you were pleased to return to the
venerable Seat of your Ancestors, and the Abode of your first and happiest
Days, and find nothing trivial or childish in the Satisfaction you felt, in
seeing old Faces full of Gratitude for Obligations long since past, and by you,
perhaps, forgot; or in recalling some little lively Incidents in the earliest
and innocent Hours of Youth. As for the Wise and Witty of the present Age, I
know not what they would say, and I do not design to hear it; they will scarce
visit my Hermitage, and I shall not leave it to visit them. I hope to dispose
of my House in Downing-Street, which I would not do, if I ever intended to pass
six Weeks in London, for I am fond of the Situation. But I find myself happiest
in the Retreat which my dear Lord's unmerited Beneficence has made me Mistress
of, and fixed my Home upon the Spot of Earth I would have chose for myself.
Every Thing both within and without the House reminds me of my Obligations to
him; and I cannot turn my Eyes upon any Object, which is not an Object of his
Goodness to me. The Satisfaction I take in adding either Beauty or Convenience
to my Habitation, is greatly enhanced by the Reflection, that while I am
adorning it, I at the same Time can show my Value for the Gift, and my
Gratitude to the lamented Giver.

I have a regular, and, I hope, a religious Family. My Woman, though she has
not lived with me quite three Years, had before lived twenty-three betwixt Lord
GRANTHAM's and Lady COWPER's; my Housekeeper has been a Servant as long; the
Person who takes in my Accounts, pays the Bills, and overlooks the Men within
Doors, has been in the Family nineteen Years; and the other, who has lived ten,
has the Care of the Stables, and every Thing without. I rise at seven, but do
not go down till nine, when the Bell rings, and my whole Family meet me at
Chapel; after Prayers, we go to Breakfast; any Friend who happens to be there,
myself, and my Chaplain, have ours in the little Library: the rest in their
respective eating Rooms. About eleven, if the Weather permits, we go to walk in
the Park, or take the Air in the Coach: but if it be too bad for either, we
return to our various Occupations. At three we dine; sit perhaps near an Hour
afterward; then separate, till we meet at eight for Prayers; after which we
adjourn again to the Library, where somebody reads aloud, unless some Stranger
comes who chooses Cards, until Half an Hour past nine, when we sup, and always
part before eleven. This to the fine World would sound a melancholy monastic
Life; and I cannot be supposed to have chosen it from my Ignorance of the
Splendor and Gaiety of a Court, but from a thorough Experience that they can
give no solid Happiness; and I find myself more calmly pleased in my present
Way of Living, and more truly contented, than I ever was in the Bloom and Pomp
of my Youth. I am no longer dubious what Point to pursue. There is but one
proper for the Decline of Life, and indeed the only one worth the Anxiety of a
rational Creature at any Age: but how do the Fire of Youth and Flattery of the
World, blind our Eyes, and mislead our Fancies, after a Thousand imaginary
Pleasures which are sure to disappoint us in the End!

I condole with you for the Loss of Mr. PRICE, as a faithful Servant is always
a valuable Possession.

Mr. SHENSTONE does me a great deal of Honor in inscribing his Ode upon Rural
Elegance to me. I am persuaded he is Master of the Subject, for I have heard
from People who saw his Gardens not long ago, that they are the most perfect
Model of it.

I dare say, Lady NORTHUMBERLAND did not know how near she was to you, or she
would not have passed by, without enquiring after you. The Newspapers will
inform you, that her Lord supplies the Place of Lord WALDGRAVE, in the King's
Bedchamber. Their Children, I mean the two youngest, were both here, while
they made their Warwick and Staffordshire Tour, and also till they came from
Bath. The little Boy is called ALGERNOON, after his Grand-Papa; and is, though
less handsome, the Counterpart of his poor Uncle, Lord BEAUCHAMP; his
Innocence, his Temper, and his Voice, are just the same, and every Motion of
his Body: judge if I am fond of him.

Books you wish me to name. You have undoubtedly read VOLTAIRE's Siecle de
Louis, and Madame MAINTENON's Letters; I have been entertained with both: he
informs the Head; she, I think, instructs, and may reform the Heart. I often
regret that I had not seen her Writings thirty Years ago. I have seen nothing
in the Genie of CECILE, except la laid aimable, which I think are pretty. But
as for Jenny Jessamy, Betty Barnes, and their Compeers, I never buy any of
them, though I have looked over the two last I have named, in their Passage
between Lady NORTHUMBERLAND and Mrs. KINGDON. I hope you will prevail with Mr.
SHENSTONE to let me see his Ode. There are some Particulars in Archbishop
TILLOTSON's Life, that may amuse you, and a Dialogue upon Beauty, by Sir HARRY
BEAUMONT; these are the only new Things I have seen. I have hardly Room to
subscribe myself,

Dear Madam, every faithfully yours, F. SOMERSET.
I wish you as many happy Years as you wish yourself.



LETTER XLIV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the rev. Mr. GRAVES.
The Leasowes, Oct 24, 1753. Dear Mr. GRAVES,
AFTER a long Season of Vanity and universal Dissipation, I return with
unfeigned Pleasure to a Correspondence with my dearest and most familiar
Friends. So just is your Notion of the Permanency of my Affection; and so true
it is, that much greater Civilities, than any yet shown me by the Great, can
never alter my Opinion of the Valuableness of your Friendship. Will you believe
my simple Assertion, or shall I take Pains to prove it by the very Nature of
Things? I cannot esteem it necessary.

Your Accounts of Mrs. WALKER's Death was new to me. I will write to Mr.
WHISTLER shortly, and am in Hopes, I shall now prevail with him to give me some
Weeks of his Company. Amongst the Strangers who visited my Walks this Summer,
there were three or more, as their Servants informed us, who had recourse to
these Amusements, on the Death of their Relations. Perhaps the Sight of an old
Friend is no less serviceable on such Occasions.

Your Stream, I find, is very considerable; I dare say HORACE's was not larger,
though mentioned as " Fit to be called a River; insomuch that neither a cooler,
nor a purer Stream, surrounded Hebrus, the Thracian River.
rivo dare nomen idoneus; ut nec frigidior Thracum nec purior ambiat Hebrum."
And you are mistaken in imagining that there is no Notice taken of it, for I
assure you I have heard it commended here this Summer: I forget by whom. You
show excessive Delicacy in your Dislike of its running over Watercresses as
Pot Herbs. Pray what can at once have more Beauty and more Propriety, supposing
your Stream to pass through the Kitchen-Garden? But I will not quarrel with you
about the Kind of Aquatick, if you will allow me to think nothing more pleasing
than Greens beneath transparent Water.

When I can fix upon a Painter, to draw me an Head of Lord DUDLEY, (for which
he promises to sit at the Leasowes) I will endeavor to get your Picture
altered; though BOND, Mr. BOND, a Painter in Birmingham, an Artist of great
Taste and Ability. The Editor of these Letters is in Possession of an admirable
Likeness of Mr. SHENSTONE, painted by this Gentleman, for which he is proud to
make this public Acknowledgment.
whose Painting I have heard much celebrated, made no Scruple to pronounce it
an admirable Portrait.

I am glad enough to hear of your Increase of Salary, and begin to think a Sort
of Affluence a little more essential to Happiness than I have formerly done.
Only remember you are thin, and do not injure your Constitution.

I enclose you a Copy of that Ode to the Duchess. It would admit of many
Emendations, if it does not want many Corrections; but I know not when it will
receive either, and I choose moreover to send it in the Dress it wore at Hagley
Table. I would send you moreover the Ode to Sir RICH. LYTTELTON, but that it
would be grievously irksome to transcribe it at this Time. The antiquary
Character given the -- is not approved. I vindicated it as far as was decent
for me; but I believe I must exchange it for a Compliment upon his Humanity.

Sir GEORGE, the Dean, Mr. LYTTELTON, etc. made me a Morning's Visit yesterday,
and took me with them to Dinner at the Grange. Sir GEORGE goes next Week to
London, and the Family will disperse.

DODSLEY adds this Winter a fourth Volume to his Miscellanies. He wrote to me
last Week, to beg a few Copies of Verses; I shall send him the Autumn Verses,
and two Copies that are upon my Seats, " Oh, let me haunt this, etc." and " Oh,
you that bathe in courtlye Bliss, etc." in old Characters. Give me your
Opinion, what else of mine; and whether I shall send any Copy of yours: they
will be read by the polite World. What do you think of getting your Verses upon
Medals inserted? But he talks in his Letter as if they must be sent immediately.

I desire my Compliments to Mrs. GRAVES, and am satisfied that I never can be
otherwise than what I am at present,

Your most affectionate Friend, etc. W. SHENSTONE.
Excuse this villainous Scrawl; I am not half in Spirits.



LETTER XLV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. H -- N.
The Leasowes, Oct. 25, 1753. Dear Mr. H -- N,
THIS can prove no other than an heavy, stupid Letter, agreeable to the present
Disposition of my Mind. The most it can pretend, is to acquaint you, in vulgar
Terms, that you retain your usual Place in my Affection and Esteem; yet this
may be no trivial Information, now you have accepted a Place at Court, and have
left your Friends at Liberty to form Conjectures about your future Conduct; to
continue, or to dismiss you, as our Electors do their Representatives. Be this
as it will, I confess that I rechuse you, and wish that every Court in Europe
consisted of as honest Men.

You are in the right to decline taking M -- s, if you find the Scheme too
expensive; and as he could not have come into your Service, without purchasing
his Time out from his Master, I believe it will now be his Point to continue
with him till the Expiration of his Indentures.

I am now in some Sort of Doubt, concerning the Management of my Snuff Box;
whether to have it repaired in the cheapest Way, with a figured Tortoise-Shell
on the Top, and a plain Tortoise-Shell in the Bottom; or to exchange the Gold
of it, and have a figured Tortoise-Shell Box with a gold Rim, like yours with a
gilt one, only in the Shape of an oblong Square, a little rounded at the
Corners. I should have no Thoughts of this, but that my own seems too little
and unmanly. Give me your Opinion soon; though, if this latter Scheme includes
much Expense, proceed with the former, if you please, immediately.

I desire my gold Clasp and Rim may be directly exchanged; I shall have a new
gold Clasp and Rim: perhaps, may enclose a Pattern for the former, before I
seal this Letter. Quaere, therefore, whether the Man, who makes it, will now
allow most in the Exchange.

I believe I shall defer the Purchase of my favorite Waistcoat till the
Spring. My Visitants begin to fail me, (though Sir GEORGE LYTTELTON, the Dean,
and Mr. LYTTELTON, were here yesterday) my Verdure abandons me, and I have
little else to do, than go to sleep for the Winter.

Pray send me the Verses on Miss B -- R, by the honorable Personage. As to
mine, you may give Copies, if you please; but as they are not fully corrected,
I hope whoever has those Copies, will take care they be not printed. I can say
nothing polite at present, so must defer my Acknowledgments to the Ladies at
Woolston, till I write to you again.

Your Letter to Lady LUXBOROUGH was promised, so I think you should by all
Means write, though I confess it appears to have been rather too long deferred.

And now having spoke to the principal Parts of your Letter, let me consider
what I have to add.

First then, your Tenant, old Mr. P -- s, of the Hill-Top, was carried in a
Hearse, through my Grounds, to be buried yesterday. Mr. I -- has been two or
three Days in this Country adjusting Matters with your Tenants. --.

C -- Y tells me, you may have your Place supplied at the Expense of five
Pounds per Year. If so, is it not your Point to come down and live at Lappal? I
do not herein speak merely for my own Sake. Sir GEORGE told me yesterday, that
he had secured me BLOOMER'S Cottage. I said, I was obliged to him, but did not
ask, after what Manner. He promised to come and dine, and stay a Night with me
next Year. In the mean Time, I am beguiled of his dining with me, by your
venerable D --; for having had an Offer from him, from Mr. LYTTELTON and the
Dean, to take a Dinner here this Week, the D --, through his great Address,
conveyed all these Honors to the Grange; and tomorrow, it seems, Sir GEORGE
dines with Master PEARSALL. I remonstrated upon this to Mr. LYTTELTON, at the
Grange, in a Manner pretty forcible, and yet tolerably decent. He excused for
himself and them in a Manner that made me quite satisfied with him. He is an
excellent young Man.

Let these Things serve as Lessons to you, who are a Courtier, not to hope from
Ambition to receive the " Plaisir sans Peine."

Adieu! I am truly yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XLVI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to the Duchess of SOMERSET.
June 23, 1753. Madam,
I FIND myself at length enabled to obey your Grace's Commands, after a Delay,
but ill expressive of the Pleasure with which I received them. But by some
Means or other, the Original of this Ode was mislaid, and it was not
immediately in my Power, from scattered Materials, to give it once more the
Form, in which it now appears.

I fear it is no less requisite to make an Apology for the Freedom of
inscribing it to your Grace from the Beginning. In this Respect, I have but
little to offer, beside the flattering Imagination, that the Subject might
recommend it. It would be no small Vanity in me to presume, that in Regard to
the more elegant Amusements of a Country Life, I had the Honor to entertain
the same Sentiments with your Grace; however, something of this Kind I must of
Necessity confess, if I would give a genuine Account of the Liberty I have
taken.

The additional Fragment was originally intended as an Episode to a much larger
Poem on the Subject. It was thrown into its present Form soon after the
Rebellion, and it is now transcribed, because I would not send a vacant Space
in my Paper, wherein I had the most distant Chance of contributing to your
Grace's Amusement.

Lady LUXBOROUGH, who does me the Honor of communicating these trifling
Productions to your Grace, will not fail to do me the Justice of declaring the
singular Veneration I have for your Grace's Character. She will testify, with
how much Diffidence I offer you such imperfect Compositions, written at a
Distance from every judicious Friend, with too much Inaccuracy, by the Side of
Meadows and Streams, from which little can be expected, but a Group of rural
Allusions. Above all she will be so obliging as to suggest, how little I am
influenced by any other Ambition, compared with that of being esteemed,

Madam, Your Grace's most devoted and most obedient Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XLVII. The Duchess of SOMERSET to W. SHENTONE, Esquire.
Piercy-Lodge, near Colnebrook, Nov. 20, 1753. SIR,
IF Lady LUXBOROUGH has not been so just as to let you know that she never
conveyed your two excellent Poems to my Hand till last Saturday Night, you must
look upon me as the most ungrateful and tasteless of all Mortals. I have read
them both over more than once with Pleasure: but will it not appear strange, if
I confess to you, that the Honor you have done me by the Inscription of the
First, and a Stanza or two in the Poem itself, has given me some Pain? And I
shall look upon it as a very great Addition to the Favor, if whenever my Name,
or that of Piercy-Lodge occurs, you will have the Goodness to fill the Blank
(which leaving out those Words must occasion) with Stars, Dashes, or any other
Mark you please, without suspecting me of an affected or false Modesty, since
to either of these Accusations I can honestly plead not guilty. The Idea you
have formed of my Character, you have taken from a partial Friend, whose
Goodnature may have (and in this Case certainly has) warped her Judgment. The
World in general, since they can find no Fault in your Poem, will blame the
Choice of the Person to whom it is inscribed, and draw mortifying Comparisons
betwixt the ideal Lady and the real one. But I have a more impartial Judge to
produce, than either my Friend or the World, and that is my own Heart, which
though it may flatter me, I am not quite so faulty as the latter would
represent me, at the same Time loudly admonishes me, that I am still further
from the valuable Person Lady LUXBOROUGH has drawn you in to suppose me.

I hope you will accept these Reasons as the genuine, and most serious
Sentiments of my Mind, which indeed they are, though accompanied with the most
grateful Sense of the Honor you designed me.

I cannot help mentioning another Copy of Verses of yours, which, if it is not
already printed, I hope you will permit Mr. DODSLEY to add to his new
Collection, and that is Damon's Bower, occasioned by the Death of Mr. THOMSON.
If you should have mislaid the Original, I have a Copy at your Service, which I
will transmit either to you, in Case you should have a Mind to look it over
again, or transmit it directly to Mr. DODSLEY.

I am, with unfeigned Esteem and Gratitude, Sir, your most obliged, etc. F.
SOMERSET.

LETTER XLVIII. The Duchess of SOMERSET to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Piercy-Lodge, Nov. 23, 1753.
I DID indeed, dear Madam, begin to despair of having the Honor, and (what I
felt more sensibly) the Pleasure of hearing from you again. I am so subject to
fall into Errors, that I was afraid some unguarded Expression in my last Letter
might have given you Offense, and yet my Heart bore witness, how far I had been
from intending it.

I have been extremely ill the whole Summer, and for some Weeks believed in
great Danger; but, by the Blessing of God upon Dr. SHAW's Prescriptions, I am
at present, though lean and ill-favored, much better; yet still obliged to be
carried up and down Stairs, for Want of Strength and Breath to carry myself:
but I have great Reason to bless God for the Ease I now enjoy. When one comes
to the last broken Arches of MIRZA's Bridge, Rest from Pain must bound our
Ambition, for Pleasure is not to be expected in this World; where I have no
more a Notion of laying Schemes to be executed six Months, than I have six
Years hence; which, I believe, helps to keep my Spirits in an even State of
Cheerfulness to enjoy the Satisfactions which present themselves, without
anxious Solicitude about their Duration. We have lived to an Age that
necessarily shows us the Earth crumbling under our Feet, and as our Journey
seems approaching toward the Verge of Life, is it not more natural to cast our
Eyes to the Prospect beyond it, than by a retrospective View, to recall the
troublesome Trifles that ever made our Road difficult or dangerous? Methinks it
would be imitating LOT's Wife, (whose History is not recorded as an Example for
us to follow) to want to look back to the miserable Scene we are so near
escaping from.

I have spent the last three Weeks most agreeably. The first of them, the
Bishop of Oxford and Mr. TALBOT, passed with us, and had the Goodness to leave
Miss TALBOT (whose Character I think you must have heard) when they went away.
She is all the World has said of her, as to an uncommon Share of Understanding:
but she has other Charms, which I imagine you will join with me in giving the
Preference even to that; a mild and equal Temper, an unaffected pious Heart,
and the most universal Good Will to her Fellow Creatures, that I ever knew. She
censures Nobody, she despises Nobody, and whilst her own Life is a Pattern of
Goodness, she does not exclaim with Bitterness against Vice. We spent a good
deal of our Time in our own Rooms, except in the Mornings, but our Time is a
good deal broken in upon. Soon after nine we meet in the Chapel; as soon as
Prayers are over, we go to Breakfast, and after that we work, during which, Mr.
COWSLAD, or my Chaplain, read aloud; at eleven we go, if the Weather is
tolerable, to take the Air for two Hours at least, which Dr. SHAW insists upon
my doing. The Moment we get out of the Coach, we see no more of one another
till three, when the Dinner is punctually upon the Table. Dinner and Tea are
both over by five, when we retire till eight, and then go to Prayers; after
which we adjourn into the little Library, where we work, and the Gentlemen
read, as in the Morning, till Supper, a Quarter before ten, and it is a Rule to
be all in our Rooms a Quarter before eleven.

We are at present very highly entertained with the History of Sir Charles
Grandison, which is so vastly above Pamela or Clarissa, that I shall not be
easy till you have read it, and sent me your Sentiments upon it. Miss TALBOT
received Lady GRAY's [ Somewhat omitted, perhaps some Remarks on Grandison] in
a Letter of six Sides, wrote with the greatest good Sense and Vivacity
imaginable. I fancy she is an excellent and agreeable young Woman.

It is now more than Time to return you Thanks for the Trouble you have taken
in conveying Mr. SHENSTONE's admirable Poem Rural Elegance, inscribed to the
Writer of this Letter.
to me. I have wrote to him this Post, and could not do it sooner, because his
Letter was only dated Leasowes, and I could not find out his Post-Town, without
sending to Mrs. STANLEY, whom I do not visit, and who lives twelve Miles from
me. I have expressed my Gratitude in the best Manner I am able; but am under
the Necssity of declining the Honor he intended me, and have begged him to
fill up the Blanks with Stars, or what he pleases, whenever my Name, or that of
Piercy-Lodge was designed, and I hope he will oblige me.

You say, you have been in a Lethargy. Dear Madam, this must have proceeded
from some Oppression upon your Spirits, for which I have known Tar-Water to be
a sovereign Remedy, and wish you would try it. Poor Mrs. W -- D! but since we
can say nothing to her Honor, let us not expatiate upon her Disgrace.

Any Thing directed to be left with WILLIAM PHILLIPS, my Porter, in
Downing-Street, will be sent to me directly.

I am, dear Madam, Your Ladyship's most obliged, and obedient humble Servant,
F. SOMERSET.

LETTER XLIX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. IAGO.
The Leasowes, Jan. 29, 1754. Dear Mr. IAGO,
I AM at a Loss how to begin this Letter. I will not, however, in the usual
Way, give you a tedious List of Apologies in the Front of it. Some Account of
my Silence you will find dispersed throughout the Letter, and as for what is
deficient, I will depend upon your Friendship.

There has not been a Person here since you left me, of whom I could obtain the
least Intelligence concerning you; and as an Enquiry by the Post was my only
obvious Method, and as I both owed and promised you a Letter at Parting, I do
acknowledge myself to blame, notwithstanding all the Excuses I can make.

Amidst all that Conflux of Visitants whom I received this last Season, I was
hardly once so happy as I was in your Company: I was the happier in seeing you
so, and if you remember, I took Notice at the Time, how little your Vivacity
was impaired, in comparison of mine. If I was then but a sorry Companion, it
was not Solitude and Winter that could make me a better Correspondent. That
Gaiety and Humor, which you was once so partial as to discover in my Letters,
will hardly appear again there, even to the Eyes of my most partial Friend; at
least, they will not enliven any Letter that I write in Winter. Yet Friendship
still remains; Friendship, like the Root of some perennial Flower, perhaps even
then gathers Strength in Secret, that it may produce a better Display of its
Colors in the Spring.

This I do not pretend to be an adequate Apology. I know, my dearest Friend,
that you both like to see and to hear from me at all Times; but it proves that
you have no great Loss, either of my Letters or my Company.

I am, as the Phrase is, deeply penetrated by the Civility of your Neighbor,
Mr. MILLER. He took a short Dinner with me once, dropping Sir GEORGE at Mr.
PEARSALL's; he could not have pleased me better: he afterward breakfasted
here, and in general seemed fond of every Opportunity of bringing good Company
to my Hole, the Leasowes. Do you think that Radway or that Harbury have no
Attractions for me? You know me too well to imagine it -- But I truly am not
well enough to dare to be from Home. Friends will say, "You may be as free at
my House as at your own," and they will mean what they say. But what is this to
the Purpose, if you cannot make yourself so?

I cannot pretend to give you a Detail of what passed since I saw you. Lord D
-- with myself made one Visit to Hewell. I will not say, that his Lordship
only, for I also was received in the politest Manner imaginable. We met Mr. and
Mrs. WINNINGTON. We took a Trip to Mr. VERNON's, where we met also Mr.
COVENTRY, and a deal of other Company. All this would afford Subject for
Conversation betwixt you and me, but I must not use so much of my Paper to this
Purpose.

Lord P -- 's Piece of Water should have been only a large Serpentine Stream. I
can give you many Reasons. I think him such a Sort of Character, as may shine
in Company upon growing older; he is, and must be beloved already: he has been
here once since, and talks of causing me to come and design for him in his
Park. The Plan for the House is right, supposing it right to continue it. His
Park may have many Beauties. I hope some time to meet you there.

My Ode after long Delay has been sent to the Duchess of SOMERSET. It has
produced me two genteel Letters from her Grace, and I am pleased with the
Event, for some Reasons which I could mention.

Soon after this, DODSLEY asked me to contribute to a fourth Volume of his
Miscellanies. I meant at first to do so pretty largely; but I afterward
changed my Mind, and determined to send only little Pieces. I did send him
several of my own, some of my Friends WHISTLER, and GRAVES, and some accidental
Pieces of yours, which lay in my Drawer. I meant to send something of yours of
my own Accord, if I was hurried, otherwise not without applying for Consent. He
wrote me word, last Week, that his Publication must be deferred, upon Account
of the Elections, so that we shall now have Time enough to meet or write upon
the Subject. What I purposed was your Linnets, "I owe, etc." Dick G -- s sent
me the enclosed little comical Fable; I made some few Alterations, and put it
into DODSLEY's Hands. Be so good as to return it, as I have now no other Copy.

Some Correspondence I have had this Winter with Mr. H -- N, about Toys and
Trinkets, which he gets done for me in London. He is by far a better Friend and
Correspondent than a Poet. Should you take a Trip to Town, he would be quite
proud to see you.

I am like the rest of the World, perusing Sir Charles Grandison. I don't know
whether that World joins me in preferring the Author's Clarissa. He wants the
Art of Abridgment in every Thing he has yet wrote.

My dear Friend, pardon this flegmatic Letter, and cherish and preserve your
own Vivacity. If Occasion offers, do not neglect to call upon me, for my own
Sake, and believe you have not alive a more lasting, or, more affectionate
Friend, than

W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER L. The Duchess of SOMERSET to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Piercy-Lodge, Dec. 18, 1753. SIR,
I WOULD sooner have returned you my Thanks for the Favor of your most truly
obliging Letter, but was afraid of being too troublesome, by engaging so much
of your Time, which you know so well how to employ to better Purposes.

The kind Offer you made me, of sending me any Thing you occasionally happened
to write, I look upon as the highest Obligation; and you will greatly add to
it, if you will permit me to show them to a very ingenious Friend of mine,
whose Ingenuity is her least Praise, since the even Cheerfulness of her Temper,
the Candor and Integrity of her Heart, joined with the most unaffected and
honorable Piety, must claim the Esteem of all Lovers of Virtue, who have the
Happiness of being acquainted with her. You may possibly have heard of her, as
in her very young Days, some little Things of her writing got abroad, which
were thought worthy of Notice, considering the Age she was then of. She is a
Granddaughter of old Bishop TALBOT's and Niece to the Lord Chancellor of that
Name. She has lately spent six Weeks with me here, and went away only last
Thursday.

I take the Liberty to send this Letter without a Cover, as I am conscious that
nothing I write is worth double Postage, since its only Meaning is to express
the Regard with which I am,

SIR, Your most faithful and obliged humble Servant, F. SOMERSET.

LETTER LI. Mr. H -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
FEW People can boast a greater Sensibility of the Obligations conferred upon
them than myself, and few are, I believe, less able to repay them: but that I
may not appear quite defective in both, I will endeavor to send you a long,
though not a very elegant Epistle, in return for the many obliging ones you
have favored me with.

My Spirits, like yours, have a Tendency toward Retirement, and whatever
brings them into violent Action, is sure to destroy them. No less than ten or
twelve Persons in different Parts of the Town, who are lately arrived from the
Country, have I been obliged to attend to one Place or another, which, with my
own Affairs likewise, have often made we wish to dwell where no one should find
me out for seven Years to come. Mr. B -- H was one of my Visitors, and brought
great Complaints from SAPPHO, and the Ladies at W -- n, against me, for not
writing according to Promise; I have wrote her a very penitential Letter of two
Sheets, which I hope will make an Atonement, and produce an Answer. Thus far
have I wrote a Week ago, and by many Occurrences have been prevented finishing
my Letter till this Day, when I received yours of the twelfth Current, to
which, as well as your former Epistles, I will scrawl forth some Things by Way
of Answer.

I have at last got (after having two returned) a gold Pencil Case made to my
Mind for you, which with the Egyptian Pebble, and some Impressions of my
Seals, I packed up in a Box, and carried them myself to the White-Horse, in
Friday-Street, last Tuesday, in Order to go by ROWLEY's Wagon, but he was gone
before I arrived there; which induced me to leave the Box (packed up in blue
Paper, and sealed with my Arms) in the Hands of the Woman of the House, who
promised herself to deliver it today to old DANKS, and hope you will receive
it safe some-time next Week. The Pebble I was obliged to return, for I did not
think it was made concave and unequal enough; it is not quite as I would have
it, however, it is as well as I can procure it, and if it pleases you, it will
please me of course. I saw a beautiful Onyx at the Lapidary's, eight Inches
long or more, and four broad, it was to be cut for an Etwee. I have bought a
Sheet of China Paper, pink Color, bigger than this, for one Shilling and
Sixpence, and some few Prints, a new Pair of fine silver Buckles, etc.

If I could be astonished at any Thing, it would be at the Perplexity and Delay
of the Law; and to complete my Amazement, my Attorney has presented me with a
Bill of Costs of more than two hundred Pounds. Positively I will leave London.
My Scheme is this; to board at L --, and see no Company, except yourself and
Lord DUDLEY's Family, on any Account whatever. Do stand my Friend, and advise
me what do in regard to settling there. I propose to send down my Cabinet, and
some other Boxes, very soon. If you will be so good to make JOHN TAILOR and
SAMUEL PARKES set their merry Men to work for me. I will prepare to depart from
London the Beginning of next Month; must call for a few Days at Gore-Lands, as
being the first visiting Place in my Rout; next, Oxford will detain me a little
while; from thence to Edge-Hills, (to see Mr. T -- N, who I hear has got a
Living of three hundred Pounds per Annum lately fell to him;) next to Coventry,
where I must stay a Fortnight, or perhaps a Month, then to Birmingham, and then
to the ne plus ultra of my Tours till next Summer, of which I can say nothing
certain; however, I will live in Spe melioris Aevi, In Hope of better Times.
and, with sometimes your Company, I shall esteem myself happier than if I
remained here. Pardon me, when I confess, I fear you will think me altered in
many Respects; that I am no very elegible Companion is most certain: what with
the Intricacy of my Affairs, indifferent Health, (for my Pain in my Breast has
troubled me much of late) and some other Incidents, I am rendered so stupid and
confused, that I scarce can rank myself a Degree above the veriest Boor in the
Country; and when I come down, I shall put a quick Stop to all the intended
Visits from all the Jack-a-Nokes's and Tom-a-Stiles of Hales-Owen, even though
that double-faced Janus you mention were at the Head of them, peeping in at
both Doors at once. I absolutely have laughed very heartily this Afternoon, at
your odd Account of the old Cur, whom I should take great Pleasure to mortify,
or even to mar, for he can never be mended before the D -- l has him.

I fear your Anger against me is at this Hour, (past eight at Night) at a
Crisis; another very pestilent Fit will arise, worse than the former on Monday,
which I prognosticate will go off at the same Time, the very Instant you read
this Part in my Letter. Am not I very vain, to think you can so very easily
forgive me; I fear you will have more Reason to find Fault with me in the
Country, when I shall be so much nearer to you then than I am now. I do not
fish for a Compliment, when I say, I have many dark Spots for a few white ones:
but I flatter myself, you will have the Goodness to bear with my Foibles, more
than any body else. Be not angry at me for not enclosing this to Lord D -- Y. I
write so often there, and so seldom have answers, that I fear his Lordship will
think I make too free with him: I desired a few Franks a while ago, but have
heard nothing concerning them; however, do make my respectful Compliments at
the Grange, when you go there. I hear that Miss DOLMAN and Miss MILLWARD are in
London; the former I have not seen, and the latter I am unacquainted with.

I lately contracted some Acquaintance with a Gentleman who is a great
Virtuoso, he is a F. R. S. and has a very fine Collection both of Medals and
Fossils, especially the latter, which he is willing to increase, at the Expense
of the former. I told him of the Dudley Lime-Pitts; he showed me some Fossils,
like those you gave me from thence; begs me to procure him all I could lay my
Hands upon, and he would exchange Medals for them. I should be obliged to you,
if you meet with any more, to reserve them till I come down, and in the next to
inform me, if you are likely to procure any for me, as I have promised the
Gentleman to visit him again soon: you must not let the D -- y Fellow impose
upon you, he is ignorant, though impudent. The Gentleman's Name is B -- E, of
Swedish Parents: I bought some silver Coins of him very cheap. I saw the famous
Mr. A. POND at his House in the City, who had a Diamond on his Finger, which I
think outshone the D -- of E -- 's, who I find is, as a F. R. S. an
Acquaintance of theirs. The D -- n is gone to E -- r.

What to say concerning Miss -- I know not! All has been done, and said, and
thought of, by all of us that could be. I pity her for her Mother's, as well as
for her own Sake, and should be sorry to have her Mother think her incapable of
going into the World; I do assure you, (under the Veil of Secrecy) she is too
giddy, young and thoughtless, as well as proud, to know her own Interest, or
even, knowing it, to pursue it. A young Lady will not bear with her; and it
would be somewhat difficult to introduce her to one of middle Age, who would
strictly keep her under her Eye, and improve her by Advice and Instruction more
than Command; for she has at School a great deal of Work to very little Book,
which I am certain makes her, at her leisure Hours, fly to Amusement rather
than Study. Do not mention this to Mrs. R. I will talk to Mrs. B -- concerning
her.

The Post-Bell rings, and I must conclude this with assuring you,

I am, dear Sir, Your most affectionate and obliged, J. S. H --.
March 16, 1754. P. S. I am reading the Abbe de MABBLY's Remarks upon the
Romans. It is too concise for them who have read but little of their History. I
will bring it down.



LETTER LII. Mr. H -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
MY last Letter will reach your Hands this Evening; it will be very unamusing I
dare say, and though I snatch this Moment to write, I do it at the Expense of
postponing many other affairs; but the melancholy Occasion demands, nay compels
it.

Poor Miss D -- expired yesterday Morning at three o'Clock; Dr. B -- and Mr. S
-- were called up to no Purpose. Miss M -- fell into violent Hysterics, and is
now very indifferent. What sad Catastrophes oftentimes attend the most
desirable and innocent Pleasures! I will say no more of this Matter to you, as
I believe every Body of her Acquaintance must regret the Loss of her.

I saw Mr. CRAWLEY today, who enquired after your Health, etc. desiring his
Compliments to you. I am by him informed, that Miss L -- is one of Mr. W -- 's
Executors, and will inherit great Part of his Fortune; though the Will has a
Caveat lodged against it, which may probably cause some Trouble before she can
enjoy what I hope will render her independent of the World. Pray do you know
whether Lord D -- is coming to Town or not? I hear he is.

My Cabinet and Boxes did not go last Saturday it seems, but will next -- When
I shall follow them I know not; my Attorney tells me, I must stay in Town till
my Cause comes on, and is over. I have taken another Lodging, but shall not go
to it till the Middle of next Month; and even then would have you direct your
Letters here as usual. I never shall like another Lodging so well as I do this.

My Brother, who is my principal Witness, is to come up; in short, I have
little Time of Relaxation, either to Body or Mind, and wish I were once settled
in the Country. Your kind Invitation to the Leasowes obliges me much, but do
not press me to see Company, whilst I am so much happier there without. By
Company, I mean Visitors whom I am unacquainted withal.

Sir G -- L -- is to be Treasurer of the Navy, as reported. People tell me, I
should make an Interest for myself in his Favor. How am I to introduce myself?
Believe me, I had rather live at L -- comfortably upon a little, than be at any
great Pains to acquire much here. Pray write soon to

Dear Sir, your ever affectionate, J. S. H --.
Brook-Street, March 28, 1754.
LETTER LIII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. H --.
March 29, 1754. Dear Mr. H --,
I Write in the utmost Astonishment and Confusion of Spirit! -- I wonder Mr. C
-- did not give me some Intimation of Miss D -- 's Illness before. However, all
her Relations will think themselves lastingly indebted both to him and to all
beside who have contributed their kind Endeavors to further her Recovery. We
are under a terrible Anxiety concerning her. Satisfied as I am of the Abilities
and Vigilance of Dr. B --, and convinced of the friendly Care of her
Acquaintance that attend her, I shall dread to look into the Letter that I
expect by tomorrow's Post. God grant it may be favorable! I have Hopes given
me tonight; Mr. D -- sends me Word, that the Letter he received on Thursday
(probably written after yours) acquainted him, that the Pustules began to turn;
that she was then better, and that they hoped the worst was past.

Believe me uniformly your Friend, but do not expect me to dwell upon many
Particulars tonight, nor suffer any Thing I have said to discourage you, in
your Scheme of retiring into this Country. Will not the Grange, or the
Leasowes, be endurable for one half Year, and that the Summer half Year, when
they dress themselves afresh to please you?

Your Cabinet nor Oysters are neither yet brought me, whatever be the Reason.
Leave my Compliments to dear Miss D --, and all that attend on her. Send me
five Lines at least every Post next Week.

Adieu!
LETTER LIVE. Mr. H -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I Really compassionate your Sufferings, both of Body as well as Mind, the
former (the Toothache I mean) may perhaps soon be remedied, the latter, I fear,
must be effected by Time, But it is needless, as well as impertinent, in me to
moralize to you upon this, or any other unavoidable Misfortune, who know how to
reconcile the seeming Contradictions in the Decrees of Providence, and to
submit to them in a better Manner than People of weaker Judgments than yourself
can. Let me have the Pleasure, my dear Friend, to find your Spirits unbroken by
this Shock, and endeavor to shake off the Melancholy you are too subject to
indulge, to the Prejudice of your Health, when Accidents like this, or
sometimes less, befall you. I have not seen Mr. C --, (nor can I till Thursday)
therefore do not pretend to send you any more Particulars, relating to the
unwelcome News you have received. I beg, if you would have me think you well,
to let me hear from you immediately.

I am extremely pleased with your Argument upon Enmity and Revenge; it is my
own Way of thinking, yet I often lament, that I am compelled to act contrary to
it, in the Prosecution of my Lawsuit against --, the faithless Guardian of my
younger Days and shattered Fortune. If any Man will take my Coat, I must give
him my Cloak also. This is very self-denying Doctrine, and what I scarce think
was intended to be literally accepted. I have been these three Days past
attending on my Attorney, about settling some disagreeable Truths relating to
my Cause; and greatly wronged as I am, I would forgive the Author of my Evils,
if he would restore what he unjustly detains from me, and banish himself from
my Knowledge, without calling him to Account for what his Extravagancy has
hitherto robbed me of; this I fear he will not do, and Self-preservation will
compel me to take all Advantages I can.

I am greatly concerned to think, I shall not be able to come down before the
End of Summer. I will write to Mr. I --, to see what he can do with A -- T --,
in order to make him quit, when he meets him at Birmingham; am much obliged to
you, for the Trouble you already have had, and still offer to undertake to
serve me.

As I am in great Expectations my Cause will be determined this Summer, I would
defer doing any Thing material at L -- till it is over, unless it be putting
the Parlour in some Repair when the Tenants quit, which I shall desire them by
Mr. I -- to comply with.

More Particulars I will mention in my next, and will write next Post,
notwithstanding Franks, I am told, will not go after tonight. Adieu, dear Sir,
and let your next assure me, of your being as well as I can wish you, which
will be the greater Satisfaction

to your ever affectionate J. S. H --.
Brook-Street, April 2, 1754.
LETTER LV. Mr. H -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I Should not have let two Posts slip away since I received your last Letter,
dated the 6th Instant, could I have avoided such an Omission; I will give my
Reasons for so doing before I end my Letter.

When I reflect upon the melancholy Situation of Mind you labor under, I think
I should not indulge it. It is offering an unavailable Sacrifice to an
irremediable Misfortune. I can sympathize with my Friend, and partake of his
Grief, yet it is not, I believe, any Impeachment of a compassionate Temper, to
endeavor to remove those Ideas from the Mind (if they impair the Health of the
Sufferer) which are too violent for it; even though the Object were (if
possible) more meritorious than the greatly-lamented Lady who was so suddenly
hurried from us: however, while this Catastrophe is so recent, I may venture to
write upon a Subject which I hope Time will draw the Veil over, though not
totally efface; you expect it from me; yet I know few Particulars that have not
very probably reached your Ears by other Hands. I purposely avoided going to
Mr. C -- 's, by Reason of the great Confusion they were in, till the Middle of
this Week, when I called, and paid the Thanks you desired, both to that Family
and Dr. B --, for their Care and Attendance. Mrs. C -- 's little Girl was sent
out of the Way, and is not permitted to come Home yet; she has been so ill
herself, that it was feared she would have miscarried, but is now better. Miss
M -- D came into the Room while I was there, and asked much after you and Mr. D
--, whom she was glad to hear was gone to D -- 's. She desired me to remember
her Compliments when I wrote to you, and should be glad to hear how you were in
Health. I thought she looked a little Wild, and was fearful of mentioning any
Thing that might disorder her again; they tell me, she is, in a Manner, quite
well, for when she was at the worst, Ophelia in Hamlet, Mrs. B -- said, could
not equal her Delirium.

Mrs. B -- could scarcely refrain her Tears when she spoke upon the Subject,
and it gave me great Pain to hear her Detail. She told me, the Doctor left her
at half an Hour past ten as well as could be expected. At three in the Morning,
the Nurse went down Stairs; Miss M -- dropped asleep, when Miss S -- perceived
the poor Lady struggling to spit, and though every Assistance was immediately
at Hand, she expired in less than five Minutes. The Doctor returned, Mrs. B --
said, so affected, that he did not recover his Spirits for two or three Days
afterward, and wished often, that he had never known her, though every body is
well satisfied with what he did; Miss M --, in particular, spoke in Raptures
upon the Tenderness of Conduct, and friendly Affability that appeared through
his whole Attendance.

I will here put an End to my Narration. I fear I have said too much, and am
almost inclined not to send what I have wrote. My Motives for not writing
sooner appear on the other Side; only a disagreeable Hurry you will find.

You may, perhaps, remember me to have mentioned a Relation I had in Norfolk,
of my Name, who always was seemingly fond of me, and having no Children,
promised to make me his Heir. I was sent for by a Gentleman, a few days ago,
who informed me, he was dead and buried; that his Will was proved in the
Country, the Contents of which he knew nothing of; but that the Executors have
sold off all his Effects. I wrote last Tuesday to an Attorney near there, to
whom I gave Orders to seek out the Executors, and send me a Copy of the Will.
My Time has been somewhat employed in seeking what Intelligence I could amongst
his Acquaintance here, who none of them had heard of his Death. I never had any
great Reason to expect any Thing from this Gentleman; and I think it an Abuse
upon a Person's Credulity, to amuse and deceive one with unmeaning Promises and
false Hopes. If I am disappointed, I will not suffer it to grieve me one
Moment, but forget it as soon as possible; to which Purpose, I will (if Mr. I
-- can spare me) come down to the Leasowes for a Week or two, as my Cause will
not come on these two Months, I believe.

I do not find that Mr. COVENTRY and Mr. PYTTS are likely to have an Opposition
in Worcestershire, therefore my Appearance will not serve them much, but only
will prove an unnecessary Expense to myself. I have been importuned, by many
well-wishers to me, to congratulate Sir G -- L -- on his new acquired Honor.
Where would the Advantage be to either? I declare I would not (contracted as my
Fortune is) willingly accept a Place of one hundred Pounds per Annum, to be
confined to one Spot. I wish I were once fixed at some Certainty in the
Country, and twice that Sum should not move me. I seemingly contradict myself,
but you understand my Meaning. I would not sell my Liberty.

Let me beg you to write to me soon; I hope you will be more capable of so
doing than you were a while ago. Remember me to Lord D -- 's Family, whom I
wish (the better Part I mean) Success and Happiness. I can learn no Particulars
concerning Mr. W -- 's Affairs. Miss R -- dines with me tomorrow, at Dr. B --
's. I am obliged to break off -- Believe me, with every good Wish for your
Health and Welfare,

Dear Sir, your most affectionately devoted J. S. H --.
Brook-Street, April 13, 1754. P. S. I have wrote to I -- I --, at L --, to
quit the Rooms, that they may be repaired. I thank you kindly for taking Care
of my Boxes. I have seen many curious Fossils at Mr. BRANDER's, who has
promised me some of his Duplicates. I cannot procure the Plates of your old Box;
they were thrown away: but I will bring something better in lieu of them when I
come down.

Pray present my Compliments to Lady LUXBOROUGH when you write. I have not
heard from SAPPHO yet. I have some fine Impressions of Seals given me to Day,
and I have bought some beautiful Etchings of Dollabella's this Week. Once more,
adieu!



LETTER LVI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. D --.
The Leasowes, Nov. 13, 1754. SIR,
THE Arrival of your Servant gave me a retrospective View of my own intolerable
Omissions, and oppressed me with somewhat like the Load of an evil Conscience.
I must allow that Appearances make against me; and yet I must and will assert,
that there is no one has a truer Respect for Mr. D --, a deeper Sense of his
Civilities, a greater Relish for his Company, or a more lively Desire to
partake of those Beauties which he is daily distributing round his Situation.
Of these last, Miss F -- F -- has sometimes favored me with the greatest
Encomiums: I am sure she knew how much I should enjoy them, and might also mean
them as Inducements (which I never yet wanted) to hasten the Visit I intended
you at W --. Alas! neither her Pleasure in giving me these Descriptions, nor
mine in receiving them, were unmixed with Pain; as she was too often forced to
adjoin but an indifferent Account of poor Miss D -- 's Health. For this, and
for the Affliction it occasions you and Mrs. D --, I really feel a Concern that
I am not satisfied to express in the ordinary Forms of Condolence.

I have passed this Summer in a Series of Dissipation; betwixt some Events
disagreeable enough, and others that wear at least the Appearance of Pleasure.
I have done (what I must call) a good deal round my Place. Company produced new
Operations, and new Operations produced almost daily Company. The Line of my
Path is now almost universally extended to the Sides of Hedges, and, together
with some slighter Improvements, have been added two new Cascades: of the first
of these, I believe you have heard some Account; it is really, if you will pardon
such an Expression from the Proprietor, a very great Thing for the Size of it.

My Servant has been weekly upon the Point of setting out for D -- House, ever
since the Time I first heard of your Return to it: but as he is here much less
of the Footman or Groom, than the River-God, he has been almost continually
called upon to unlock and conduct his Rivulets; for this Fortnight, indeed, or
three Weeks last, he has been less importuned on that Score; but then, during
that Space, arrived a Visitant, who is now with me in the House, and, till the
Time of whose Departure was ascertained, I was unable to fix a Day when I could
wait upon you and Mrs. D --: I hope to do so about the Middle of next Week; and
will not fail to send TOM over upon Monday or Tuesday. If he can be of any
possible Service, in Regard to the Cascades you proposed (and I think his Head
a clear one) you are welcome to command him over as often as you please. I have
detained your Servant much beyond the Time he purposed to return. I can
therefore only desire my best Compliments to Mrs. D --, and assure her, that my
Muse is not less at her Service, and beg your Acceptance of this Ode to, etc.
and would, I am sure, esteem it greater Honor to embellish your Place than
mine. I wish you do not find it obscure; however, if it discover but an
ordinary Talent for Poetry, it will discover at least a warm Attachment to
rural Improvement. With this I shall be quite contented, so long as I think it
has the least Tendency to recommend me to Mr. D -- 's good Opinion.

I am, dear Sir, yours and Mrs. D -- 's, etc.

LETTER LVII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
The Leasowes, Feb. 27, 1755. Dear Madam,
I FIND it necessary to write to your Ladyship this Week, not being able to
endure that you should think hardly of me, during the Time that may elapse
before I can possibly see you. When I have the Honor of doing so, I trust that
I can erase any unfavourable Impressions, and very fairly acquit myself of all
voluntary Neglect; meantime, let me only beg, that you would suspend your
Accusation. I wish I could fix a Time for the Performance of this Visit, but it
is not in my Power: such Weather as the present does not only numb ones Limbs,
but extends its Severity to our Projects, Hopes and Resolutions. Your Ladyship
well knows how Winter affects me; and have indeed yourself remarked it in the
very Style of my Letters. I am dull enough to be unworthy of a Conversation
much inferior to yours; and if I add, that I am a little peevish withal, I
shall do myself no Injustice. Were it then possible to retain the same venomous
or torpid Qualities, when arrived upon the Coast of Barrels, I ought in common
Policy to confine myself at Home: but I have been, and am confined upon a
different Score, a Kind of Partition-treaty with Master D --, and when this is
concluded or broken off, as I trust will soon be the Case, I shall not then
draw Excuses from the Stupidity with which it is my Fate to be visited in
Winter. I have, indeed, sometimes imagined, that I brightened up in your
Company, when I had before esteemed it as impossible as that you should polish
a Piece of Cinder or of Sponge.

I have expected to see DODSLEY's Miscellany advertised six Weeks ago. Had he
allowed me but one Half of this Time to deliberate, I could have adjusted the
Share we have of it much more to my own Satisfaction. I know but little what he
has done, in Consequence of that discretionary Power, with which, through mere
Haste, I was obliged to entrust him; and this possibly at a Time when his own
Hurry was as great as mine. But this I know, that in all I did myself, you may
expect to trace the Finger of Stupidity precipitated.

Stupidity, however, is many an honest Man's Lot; Presumption is less
excusable; and it is with the utmost Humility, that I beg your Ladyship's
Pardon for the Liberty I took in proposing what I thought might be an
Improvement of your Verses. I have only this to plead, that you write these
lively Pieces almost extempore; that you lay no Stress upon them, and scarce
ever revise them; that, on these Accounts only, I thought it possible an
Expression not altogether exact might here and there escape you; that finding
my Proposals disapproved, I did all my Time would allow, to cause DODSLEY to
have Recourse to your original Readings; and if he have not done so
universally, (as I apprehend may be the Case) those Readings may be restored in
any future Impression. I will resume the Subject on some other Occasion; at
present let me only mention, that DODSLEY, when he wrote to me last, desired my
Opinion, whether or no he should be thought impertinent if he presented your
Ladyship with a complete Set of his Miscellanies. It seems the three first
Volumes are out of Print at this Time; but will be reprinted in about a Month:
the fourth he gives me Reason to expect every Day.

I am particularly glad to hear that your Health is tolerable, during this
rigorous Weather, as it gives me Room to conceive the Advantage you may derive
from a better. How do I long for the Approach of Spring! Methinks I could
travel Leagues to meet it, were it possible by so doing to bring it faster on
its Way: and yet, unless it should supply me with Health, as well as with
Company, with Spirits, as well as Spring-Flowers, and in one Word, enliven both
the Farmer, and the Farm, what would it avail? The two Canary Birds that were
given me about three Weeks ago sing whilst I am writing; sing from Morn to
Night, and that with all the Vigor which the Spring itself could inspire; yet
I do not half enjoy them; my Mind is not in tune: the Commencement of my Spring
must receive its Date at Barrels. I am, with constant Attachment,

Your Ladyship's most obliged W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER LVIII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. GRAVES.
The Leasowes, March 21, 1755. Dear Mr. GRAVES,
PARDON the Arrival of this one more Letter without a Frank; I have sent some
Covers to my Lord of D --, who is down, and shall probably enough receive them
before I write again.

There is nothing that I can less forgive the World than your Want of Leisure.
Do not misinterpret me, or take amiss what I say. I know you to be infinitely
more happy than myself, who am cloyed with it: but it would add something to my
Happiness, if not to your own, that you had more vacant Spaces or Intervals of
Time to employ in those refined Amusements, for which you are so exquisitely
qualified.

I am in doubt, whether I should add Mottos to my Seal, or not rather cause the
Circumference, which at present is rather of the largest, to be contracted.
Should you have struck out any Thing since you wrote to me, you will be so good
as to let me know.

As to Sun-Dials, I never much affected the Things themselves, nor indeed any
Mottos with which I have seen them inscribed; perhaps this Indifference may
arise from no very commendable Sources, a Reflection upon my own Want of
Proficiency in Mathematics, and an habitual Consciousness of my own Waste of
Time. However, I have often had Thoughts of placing a slight one somewhere upon
my Premises, for the Sake of inscribing it with a Couple of Lines from VIRGIL:
Sed fugit interea fugit, irreparabile tempus,
Singula dum capti circumvectamur amore. IMITATED. Meantime the Hours, the
irreparable Hours,
Wing their swift Flight, while Streams, and rural Bowers,
And Love engage the Mind.




All the Lines in VIRGIL afford me that Sort of Pleasure which one receives
from melancholy Music; and I believe I am often struck with the Turn and
Harmony of his Expression, where a Person less attached to these can discover
no great Beauty.

I told you, how much I was vexed that DODSLEY did not suffer me to avail
myself of the Time that passed from the Correction of the Proof-Sheets to the
Publication of his Book. He has at last sent me a Copy, which I received last
Thursday Se'en-night. I wish the last Stanza of WHISTLER's Verses upon Flowers
had remained as he himself wrote it: but being somewhat dissatisfied with the
original Reading, and having no Time left to improve it myself, I left it to D
--, who I think has made it worse; however, in this Respect, and some others,
it may be proper to fix one's Eye upon a subsequent Impression; and DODSLEY has
acted as discreetly as it was possible for him to do, considering what
Instructions were given him, and how much was left to his Discretion. Our
Contributions may be said to begin with Mr. SOMERVILLE's Address, etc. Page
302; amongst which he has inserted two Odes (Page 305 and 307) to which I am a
Stranger. The Song marked J. S. H. is my Neighbor Mr. H -- 's, who has a
pretty Collection of Drawings, Petrefactions, and Coins. The Lady of Quality
you know; and as to all the Pieces that follow, you know the Authors of them as
well as I do. I will not anticipate your own Observations; but I cannot help
remarking that MILTON's Il Penseroso has drove half our Poets crazy: it has,
however, produced some admirable Odes to Fancy, amongst which, that of WHARTON
(not in this Volume) I think deserves the Preference; and after his, MERRICK's,
PENSHURST, and the Ode on Solitude are of the same Tribe, and are good. The
Pleasures of Melancholy, and MARIOTT's Ode to Fancy, of the same Tribe, are
indifferent. There is nothing I am more pleased with, than Father FRANCIS's
Prayer, MRS. BERKLEY repeated it to me in my Root-House this last Summer, and,
I think, said it was Mr. WEST's. I could wish I had made you some Compliments
in this Volume, for particular Reasons, and had resolutely done so, had your
own Diffidence permitted me.

I have now and then some Thoughts of printing that Ode to the Duchess,
together with something sufficient to make a twelve or an eighteen-penny
Pamphlet, about the Time the Parliament rises; but not unless it sits till June
as was reported, and not unless you will promise me the Favor of your
Assistance.

It Is the Property of great Delicacy, to be oftentimes too diffident; possibly
then you may not long persevere in that Manner of spelling your Name, which you
seem at present to prefer; yet is nothing so clear to me, as that yourself and
your Relations should spell their Name GREAVES to the End of the World -- Nati
Natorum and qui nascentur ab illis. Grandsons, great Grandsons, and all your
Posterity.


COWPER's Performance is all that you think it: but would you see both his
Style and Sentiments effectually demolished, look into the Account of Books in
that Gentleman's Magazine where it was first advertised.

You will guess that I shall want impatiently to hear from you, when you have
received your Set of Books, or perused them elsewhere.

I am, ever-more affectionately yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER LIX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. B --.
The Leasowes, Oct. 1755. Dear Mr. B --,
THE affectionate Letter I received from you ought to have been answered by the
next Post; it had been so, if I had pursued the Dictates of a Heart, I will not
say, altogether happy in our Reconciliation, but more properly in the
Manifestation of our ever-undivided Friendship. I have had a large Conflux of
Visitants this Summer, and the Dissipation they have occasioned me, was for the
most Part very agreeable. But it must not be by any Accession of Pleasure, that
I attempt to excuse my unseasonable Neglect of writing; for Pleasure I have in
writing to my Friends, when my Mind is free from Anxiety, and that Pleasure
connected with a Duty I owe to Friendship, superior to what is claimable by any
mere Visitant or Acquaintance; yet I cannot but confess the Change which a very
few Years have wrought in me; for surely it is not long since I wearied you,
and the rest of my Correspondents, with my Assiduity; where I now write one
Letter, I then wrote twenty: mean while, the Warmth of my Heart is not
diminished, with regard to Friendship; I know it from the Pleasure which the
Receipt of your Letter gave me. Of this Kind are the only Pleasures which
accompany us through Life; they increase upon Repetition, and grow more lively
from Indulgence. " Vient l'Appetit en mangeant," was, I think, an Answer made
by a French Courtier to his Sovereign, when it was objected to him by the
latter, that there was no End of his Importunities. But whatever odd Instances
may be found of a perverted Appetite, the Maxim is only universal, in regard to
social Pleasure. The Case is not the same, with regard to Pleasures of Sense;
it is not so even with regard to Pleasures of Imagination. Accordingly, though
I first embellished my Farm, with an Eye to the Satisfaction I should receive
from its Beauty, I am now grown dependent upon the Friends it brings me, for
the principal Enjoyment it affords; I am pleased to find them pleased, and
enjoy its Beauties by Reflection. And thus the durable Part of my Pleasure
appears to be, at the last, of the social Kind.

With much Willingness would I have waited upon your Friend Colonel C -- this
Year, but for the perplexing Lawsuit in which I am involved with young D --.
It has made me rude to my Superiors, deaf to all inviting Offers, and
neglectful, at once, to my old Friends and my new. Pray make my Compliments to
him, and assure him how sensible I am of the Honor he has done me. Another
Year, if I live, will, I hope, make me some Amends for this, by affording me an
Opportunity of waiting upon him and you.

Pray also make my Compliments to Mr. and Mrs. P --, and Dr. C --, and my Peace
with the A -- n Family, or any other where you visit, that may mistake
Necessity for Disrespect. Above all, recommend me to Mrs. B -- in the best
Manner you are able, which, I take it, is by assuring her, that I ever have
been, and am, and will be while I live,

Dear Mr. B --, you affectionate Friend, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER LX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. S --.
The Leasowes, Aug. 24, 1756. Dear S --,
I AM truly glad to hear of your Reception with our worthy Admiral, to whom I
will take the first Occasion of conveying my Acknowledgments. It is not quite
clear from your Letter, whether you are Mate or Midshipman; but whatever your
Post may be, I hope, and make no Doubt, that you will endeavor to fill it as
becomes you. Should you happen to be continued in the Admiral's own Ship, you
will have the Honor to serve more immediately under the most generous Man
alive; whose Penetration will not suffer any Degree of Merit to escape his
Notice, and who will allow yours the more Consideration, on Account of his
Regard for me. As the best Means, therefore, of promoting your Interest, you
will need to concern yourself little further, than to deserve well; and this by
an uniform Course of Diligence and Sobriety, by the strictest Attention to
Honor and your Duty, and by a Conduct entirely free from all Artifice and
Disguise. You have an honest, open Countenance; I do not in the least question
that you will verify it in your Behavior; neither do I drop any of these
Hints, as though I mistrusted your Conduct; I do unfeignedly believe them to be
every one superfluous: however, it may prove a Satisfaction for you to reflect,
that the Temper, which I trust is natural to you, is what I think most likely
to recommend you to the Admiral. And be assured, that you shall acquire no
Reputation in the Service, which shall not be seconded by all the Interest and
good Offices of your affectionate Kinsman,

W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER LXI. Mr. SP -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
D --, Aug. 19, 1758. My dear Sir,
AFTER a Journey of above a Month, is it not very reasonable to allow a Man of
my Age, a Month to rest himself? I have been here indeed so long; but Visits,
and returning Visits, and Business, have prevented most of it from being a Time
of Rest. I am now set down to writing Letters, which I verily believe will take
up another Month, for, on casting up my Accounts of that Kind, I found myself
no less than forty-seven in Debt; a Number, for which I am sure you must pity
me.

I don't know how to thank you enough, for all the Pleasure we had during the
Week we were at the Leasowes. I have talked of it every Day since, and dream of
it a-nights. If you loved traveling as well as I do, I should certainly
beseech you to come and stay a Month or two here at Durham; and I should be the
more encouraged to do so, because our Friend Mr. DODSLEY left us quite in love
with the Place; (I don't mean the Town itself, but the Walks about it.) Indeed,
if Wood, and Water, and Wildness, are the Things that make a Place agreeable,
we are as must obliged to Nature here, and more, than any Town I have ever
seen, either at Home or abroad.

My Obligations to you are not confined to Shropshire, and your delightful
Paradise in it; but spread through all the Counties that we passed; and
increased, when we had Time to set down here, from your Works of another Kind;
they often gave me the greatest Pleasure, not only from their Spirit and
Elegance, but from the good Heart that shines forth throughout them. Whatever
Excellencies a Writer possesses, and to whatever Degree, this is the true Sun,
that gives the noblest gilding of all to his Compositions; and you must give me
leave to say, that you are the most sun-shiny Writer of this Kind that ever
warmed me.

If, in the first Month that you cannot walk abroad, you would favor me with
the natural History, how, and why, and in what Order, you laid out every Part
of your Gardens, it would not only be a Continuation of the Pleasure you have
given me ever since I saw you, but would be, I dare say, of particular Use to
me, as a Guide and Assistant in many Things, and particularly in those two
great Articles of Vistos and Cascades. What I wrote down, was a mere Skeleton
of the Ground, and was only intended to enable me to take all the Round of it,
whenever I should want to do so, in my Imagination; but what I would beg of
you, is, a more lively Account of a Place, that is so much mine and every
Body's Favorite.

I went from you to Scotland, as I fear too many People do, with an Expectation
of scarce seeing any Thing there worth seeing: but after passing above one
hundred Miles of it, through bad Roads, over Mountains, by Cottages composed of
Dirt, and a barren, bleak Country, we were very agreeably surprised, on our
Approach toward Edinburgh, to find ourselves in an open Country, well
cultivated, and in a noble View, that struck us with double Pleasure, from our
being used so long to see almost nothing but what was displeasing. When you
have coasted the Pentland Hills, and get upon a Rising, you see the City all at
once, spread in a Line before you, with the Castle to the right, the Palace and
a Rock (the middle Part of which is called ARTHUR's Seat) to the left; and a
vast Basin of Water (the Frith of Forth) appearing from behind it; the Country
near is varied with little Swells and Risings, and studded with Villas; the
Land spreads on with a cheerful and cultivated Look, and the whole is
terminated with a long Range of Hills, that grow dimmer and ruder, quite on to
those of the Highlands. You may a little conceive of what an Extent this View
must be, when I assure you, that the Basin of Water about the Middle of it does
not appear at all over-proportioned, and yet we were assured, that it was sixty
Miles long, about thirty in the broadest Part, and fifteen in its opening to
the Sea. I could say much more of this same Edinburgh, but I have been already
rather too diffusive.

When you see Mr. BASKERVILLE, I beg my Compliments to him, and all the good
Family. May you long enjoy the delicious Spot you live in; and may you always
look upon me as a faithful Friend, and one of

your most affectionate humble Servants, J -- S --
P. S. Could you send me a Receipt how to build a Root House? In my wild
Abbey-Grounds, I have a Place that asks for one loudly; but we have neither any
Gentleman or Artist here, who understands any Thing of that Style of
Architecture.

Secondly, I hope you will not forget your Promise of a Visit to me at B -- next
May.

Thirdly, Mr. DODSLEY told me, you desired me to mark any Thing that I thought
suspicious in your Elegies; and wherever I had the least Feeling of any such
Thing in my Mind, I have writ it down, without much Reason, but with great
Honesty. I beg you would look upon them only as Queries, and not as Assertions.



LETTER LXII. Mr. W -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Covent Garden, Jan. 31, 1759. Dear Sir,
BEING gone for a few Days to Hampton Court, I did not receive the Favor of
yours so soon as you might naturally imagine, consequently it was not in my
Power to write to you by the returning Post; and ever since being full of
Employment, I deferred that Pleasure till the present Moment, which I fear will
produce little worth your Attention; however, such as it is I give unto you.

In going to Hampton Court, I met with little or nothing curious or
entertaining, as indeed mere Motion and Horse-Language are Subjects that afford
no great Matter for Narrative. As to the Place, it is a flat, but very
pleasant, and has the Advantage of being always dry. The Palace has externally
little to recommend it besides Bulk, and in this Respect, it would excite the
Admiration of my Friend Dr. A --, who would call it a noble Pile. There are
many grand Rooms within, and some fine Paintings; but the Method of showing
such Places would not allow me much Time to examine them. The Gardens are all
in the Dutch Taste, with Ever-greens and strait Canals, and some fine Brass
Statues interspersed; there is a Terrass by the Side of the Thames a great
Length, with a Wall on one Side, and Iron Pallisades on the other, which, from
the Quantity of Iron and the Workmanship, will deserve the Approbation of those
who deal in that Manufacture, but I think their least Merit is in the Place
they occupy. I took several Walks round about, and the Number of Gentlemen's
Seats and neat Villages in the Neighborhood make it a desirable Situation. Mr.
GARRICK has built at Hampton a Rotund Temple, in Honor of SHAKESPEARE, but I
could not have an Opportunity of seeing the Inside of it. The Morning I was to
go to London, the Stage was full, therefore being very dry and pleasant, I
walked to Town; but taking Cold that Night afterward at the Play, I was laid
up for a Week. On my Return to Covent Garden, I found, besides your Letter, a
Card from Mr. D --; I waited on him the next Morning, but had not the Pleasure
to find him at Home; he has since, however, been so obliging as to call on me,
when I told him your Request, which he promised to gratify. He was to have
dined with the Mr. K -- s and me on Sunday last, but sent us Word, he had that
Morning lost some Blood. Mr. K -- promises to write to you soon; he gave me
some of Mr. P -- 's Subscriptions, which I make no Doubt but I shall dispose of
as soon as I go abroad; for not having a single Article of Mourning by me, I am
obliged to buy all new, and my Tailor is a Man of such Consequence, that I have
not been able to obtain the Favor of mine from his Hands yet.

I have not seen Mr. DODSLEY some Time; I intend him a Visit soon. I have not
met yet with an Antinous. Mr. K -- and I shall some Morning scrutinize all the
Shops in Town. It is very odd, that not many Nights ago, I dreamt somebody had
made you a Present of one; if that should happen to be the Case hereafter, I
shall have more Faith in Dreams than ever I had before.

All public Diversions were stopped for a Week on the Death of the Prince of
ORANGE; how the Town so long subsisted without, and what new Amusement served
to kill Time, would be a Subject well worth knowing. There has been a
successful Method thought of to tax Curiosity these last three Weeks, with the
Sight a famous Mohawk Warrior, armed with his Scalping Knife, Battle Axe, etc.
and painted in the Indian Manner for War: his Body is stained Mahogany, but his
Face is made most terrific by the Hand of some Sign-Post APPELLES; in his
Cheeks, the Red is very predominant; his Eyebrows owe their Breadth and Color
to a thick Stratum of Lamp-black, and his Nose is not less remarkable for a
large Line of sable. He goes through his Exercise with great Expedition;
performs the War Dance and Whoop, which is a Noise unheard in this Part of the
World before: all this is very fine, exceeding curious, etc. but will not you
laugh when I tell you who this formidable Hero is, Ecce iterum Crispinus! Mr.
FOOT, and no less a Man; if it is not him in propria persona, it is one of his
Agents; it is certain it is no Indian; if it was, he could not bear Confinement:
another Circumstance, Mr. FOOT is missing, and has not been seen since the
Arrival of this Mohawk, which gives strong Proof to suspect him; however, be
who he will, he is a clever Fellow, and has got a great deal of Money.
Tomorrow Night a new Farce is to be acted at Drury Lane, for the Benefit of
Mr. S --, who has been some Time confined in Luke's Hospital.

Mr. G -- B -- is just come from Bath, where he left Mrs. P -- in high Spirits,
and Mr. and Mrs. B --; Mr. P -- is gone into Warwickshire, to attend a
Lawsuit; somebody having laid Claim to a Part of his Estate, which his Family
have had uninterrupted Possession of, for above fifty Years.

Your State of one Day's Account is, I must confess, very natural, and too
often true, particularly in some Articles; in return for it, I am promised by
some Gentlemen of my Acquaintance, a true State of their Expenses one Day,
which, from the Manner of the Men and Way of Life, cannot fail of being
extraordinary. Some Choice Spirits, to the Number of five and twenty, agreed to
dine at WHITE's; and the Orders were, Get a Dinner as expensive as you can
possibly make it; which was punctually performed, and, to their great Surprise
and Mortification, found that the most luxuriant Dinner amounted to no more
than ten Pounds a Man! This Experiment served to convince them, that eating was
a mean, paltry Enjoyment, and only fit for Cits and Aldermen, to whom they left
it, because it cost so little, and therefore confessed the Supremacy of Gaming,
which they embraced as their Summum Bonum, for the contrary Reason.

Mr. BURKE's Treatise on the Sublime and Beautiful I read almost two Years ago,
in his first Edition: the Pleasure I received from the Perusal, will make me
embrace the first Opportunity I have of reading the second -- Quaere, whether
Lady COVENTRY corresponds with his Idea of Beautiful? The Study of Physic
certainly will produce in us Admiration; because when we trace the Mechanism of
Nature philosophically, as in the human Body, it becomes an Object of the
Sublime; every Step we take in such Researches, fills us with amazing Instances
of Wisdom and Contrivance: but in the living Body, Nature there conceals her
Machinery, and presents to our Eyes a smooth Object, whose external Figure is
molded with such inimitable Harmony, such an insensible and pleasing Variation
from the right Line, together with such a Delicacy and Transparency in the
Skin, that it cannot fail of exciting our Ideas of Beauty, which as they tend
to relax the Solids, will refine them into those of Love. Quaere then, if that
Love may not receive additional Force in the Breast of an Anatomist, from his
previous Acquaintance with the internal Springs and Structure of such an
Object, and thereby the better qualified to judge of the Beauty of the whole?
In other Words, may not his Admiration, cooperating with his Love, make him a
more sensible and feeling Observer? Argol, the Study of Physic may be said (if
not to produce) to heighten Love. I submit it to your Decision; for who can
paint Nature, must have felt, and who has felt is the best Judge.

I did not understand you literally, that you meant what you wrote: but as I
am, beyond what many may conceive, taken up every Hour of the Day, I intended
my Insinuation of my Industry as a Plea for any seeming Neglect I might be
guilty of toward my Friends, in not writing to them so punctually as I could
wish; for I have known it a Maxim with many, that no People had so much leisure
Time as those who lived in London. But let it not discourage the Oracle; let
him deal out with as liberal a Hand as he pleases, mysterious Truths, and they
shall be applied to form the Conduct of one who has the Happiness to subscribe
himself

his most affectionate Friend and Servant, F. W --.

LETTER LXIII. Mr. H. -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Feb. 13, 1759. Dear SIR,
I Received the Tobacco-Stopper, which my Friend Mr. PERCY bought at MOODY's
Shop, and also the Letter, to authenticate its being made of the Tree he
mentioned. I am also pretty well assured of the Truth thereof, having lately
seen Mr. HOBBS of Birmingham. who informs me, that he has a Piece of the same
Tree, which he brought from Stratford, in his Possession. I think the Wood much
too spungy to carve neatly on it, else should like to improve a Hint that Mr.
HOBBS gave me, of having a Cup or little Bowl, with some particular Scene out
of one of SHAKESPEARE's favorite Plays carved thereon; however, if you will
get him to procure (but not at an extravagant Rate) any, or what he can of the
said Mulberry-Tree, I will have something made of it, as shall make it
advantageous to him for undertaking the same, if he pleases. I have Coins of
most Sorts, both English and foreign, and some of JAMES the First, therefore do
not want what seems to me to be imperfect: however, if that he mentions was
really dug up near the Tree in SHAKESPEARE's Garden, I shall be glad to give a
small Matter more than the Weight for it, and Mr. HODGETTS, will pay for the
same.

I will not apologize for applying to you on this whimsical Occasion, as I have
no other Connections about your Part of the World, by which I could procure
such a Memorial of our distinguished Bard. When I am so happy as to be the
Subject of your Pen next, be so good as to give me your Thoughts on this Kind
of Curiosity, (or whatsoever else you please to call it) which induces us to
pay a Price for a Morsel of a Tree, planted (as Report says) by SHAKESPEARE's
own Hand; and how far you think such a Passion allowable, or (to frame a Word
nearer my Meaning) indulgeable. I am, dear Sir,

your very affectionate, J. S. H.

LETTER LXIV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. DODSLEY.
March 31, 1759. Dear Mr. DODSLEY,
I AM afraid you think me negligent: know then that I sat down last Thursday,
to write you a long Letter, about seven o'Clock at Night, when I discovered
that the Post went out at that very Hour I sat down to write. I had immediate
Recourse to such Consolation as the Case admitted; and supposed a Letter
received on Monday Morning, might do near as well as one on Saturday Night,
considering that Sunday intervened, which must be a leisure Day, even for
Printers. But in good Earnest now, do you think me lazy? Or have not you, under
your present Dissipation, an heavier Complaint against my Diligence? You and I
shall hardly agree about the Means of estimating Letters; you, conscious of
your own Genius, are desirous to value them by their Weight; while I, conscious
of my late Industry, would fix their Value by the Number of Words. What
Pretensions, pray, can you suggest, for so very perverse a Manner of Reckoning?
Is not Industry a moral Virtue? And are not many written Words a Proof of
Industry? But though your Ingenuity be even a Miracle, you will hardly prove it
to be a moral Virtue, unless, indeed, in the Way you manage it; and so, all
your Faculties are moral Virtues: however, we less artful, or less heroic
Personages, must magnify the Virtues that we have; of these, Industry is one,
though perhaps this had been scarce allowed me, till within these three or four
Months past. I say, that we, who are the Animae nil magnae Laudis egentes;
"Souls little desirous of Praise."
we, the Animae viles, inhumata infletaque turba: Low Souls -- an unburied, and
unlamented Multitude.
In other Words, the Numerus, The Crowd, born to consume the Produce of the
Ground.
and the " nati Fruges consumere;" if we would appear considerable, pray what
Method can we take? I know, indeed, but two; the one of disparaging your
Abilities, which is not quite so feasible; the other, of taking all occasion to
magnify our own good Qualities. If then, Industry be a Virtue, I am possessed
of it very remarkably: Not a Moment of my Time passes, but I am employed,
either in overseeing Laborers; reading ROBINSON's History of Scotland; writing
in my Paper Books, ('it is not material what, but writing;) perplexing the
Birmingham Artists with Sketches for Improvements in their Manufactures, which
they will not understand; and lastly, and finally, feeding my Poultry, my
Ducks, my Pigeons, and my Swans; which last give me as much Pleasure, as what I
had before gave me Vexation. No inconsiderable Panegyric, I Will assure you! And
surely this is not only Industry, but an Industry of a better Kind than what
employs the Animae viles of a Drawing Room. And now this last Instance of my
great Industry puts me in Mind of asking you a Question:

Pray now, you that are a Mythologist, what an absurd Man you are, not to jump
at an Invitation to come directly to the Leasowes? Here am I, (like your Friend
AESOP, before OGILBY's Fables; or like ADAM, in our old Bibles) sitting once or
twice a Day with every created Animal before me. Is not this the only Residence
for a Person that is writing Fables? It Is true, this very Person may
contemplate better in a Crowd, than another in the Depth of Solitude: you may
far surpass me, who thus converse with Birds, while he describes a Sparrow from
Pall Mall, or a King-fisher from Charing Cross: but Imagination is a prodigious
Heightener; and unless he paints them from Life, may he not attribute to a
King-fisher much finer Feathers than he in Truth possesses? Pray take the
Opinion of Mr. SPENCE -- How I blush, while I recollect that Name! And yet,
were it not for my own Omissions, it must revive only my most favorite Ideas.
Surely it is written in the Book of Fate, that I shall discharge my Debt within
a Post or two; for Fate evidently enough interferes, or I could never have been
so long silent. I am almost ashamed to desire my humble Respects to him, and
yet it is impossible for me to suppress my Feelings.

I must now proceed to Business. Past six o'Clock once more; but the Post now
goes out at ten. If you can procure me the quarto Cuts for MILTON, it will be a
very desirable Favor.

Mr. BOND has made some Alteration in your Grove, which I thought very pretty
on its Arrival; yet, perhaps, he may be right enough, if Mr. GRIGNION can
comprehend his Meaning. The Trees he means on the wrong Side the Water, are
some of those opposite to the Letter S, which I have put upon the Back: but I
am fearful of spoiling; and must beg Mr. GRIGNION would re-compare the Print
with Mr. BOND's original Drawing, then retouch his Plate, and let me have a few
more Proof-Sheets of both the Prints. Give me one or two Lines by Return of
Post, if possible.

No Books ready? I want MALLET's Works, bound in Russia Leather, and lettered
on Green. Pray excuse this last vile Page. I have wasted my Time, and now am
utterly at a Fault for it.

W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER LXV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Dr. PERCY.
The Leasowes, June 6, 1759. Dear SIR,
IT is, perhaps, no uncommon Case for the Magnitude of a Debt to prevent, or at
least retard every Step toward a Discharge. In Truth, the many Favors you have
conferred upon me by the Packet I have received for E --, have made me ashamed
of such a partial Payment, as my Health and Leisure would permit; when I
complain of Health, I mean no other than a Kind of Drowsihead and Lentor which
has somewhat infested me at this Season; perhaps it were better expressed by
that disreputable Name, Stupidity: be that, however, as it may, it is by this
chiefly, I have been disqualified from those refined Sorts of Amusement, in
which your Letters and Packets required me to engage.

I have been expected to pass a Week at Shiffnal, ever since the Beginning of
May, where I was by particular Appointment to meet our Friend Mr. BINNEL. The
Visit is not laid aside, but will probably take Place in about a Fortnight's
Time or less. One Pleaure I expect from it, beside what I shall reap from Mr.
PIT and Mr. SLANEY's Company, and that turns upon the Opportunity it will
afford me of perusing your OVID in Conjunction with Mr. BINNEL; and it has been
with this View, in some Measure, that I have deferred the Examination you
desired me to bestow upon it. In general, I would wish you to make it as just
to the Author's Sense, and to your own Sentiments, as you can, and afterward
consider me as a mere Music Master, whom you would employ to tune your
Harpsichord; in other Words, as a proper Person to retrench any little
Encroachments upon Simplicity, Ease of Style, or Harmony.

I want to communicate many Things; but must defer most of them till I see you.
And pray let Mrs. PERCY know me for one of your peculiar Friends, and then I
hope she will not scruple to reward me with an irregular Visit, by Way of
Distinction. I brought my Friend JAGO's new Bride to pay me that Compliment the
other Day.

Mr. DODSLEY in his last Letter desired, I would present you with his new
Edition of Cleone, which is the only one you should preserve. It is, according
to my best Calculation, improved in about an hundred Places merely, and altered
in about six. I will either keep it till you come, or send it to you, if you
will show me how.

I had retouched and transcribed both the Gentle Herdsman and Edom of Gordon,
Two Pieces in Dr. PERCY's Collection of Ancient Poetry.
long before your Letter arrived. Your supplemental Stanzas must undoubtedly
approach nearer to what was the original Reading, than those which I have
substituted, and which I will not send you now, because I will multiply your
Inducements to visit my Place in the proper Season.

You must by all Means read Dr. YOUNGE's New Conjectures on original
Composition; and let it deter you, when you have completed OVID, from engaging
in any more Translations. I have also read the Essay on the present State of
Learning, written by a Dr. GOLDSMITH, whom you know, and whom such as read it
will desire to know. LA MOTTE also has afforded me no little Entertainment: I
read it on Account of DODSLEY, who you may remember is writing Fables, and who
has requested me to send him my Thoughts upon the Subject.

LETTER LXVI. The liberal and just Mention made in this Letter, of Mr.
SHENSTONE and Mr. DODSLEY, will (the Editor presumes) be a sufficient
Justification for having retained it.
-- to Mr. DODSLEY, at the Leasowes.
July 28, 1759. Dear Sir,
I Finished my Peregrinations the Day before you began yours; for the Day after
my Arrival at this Place, I called at your Lodgings, and was informed you set
off that very Morning for Mr. SHENSTONE's. I have often thought you, in many
Respects, a Man to be envied; but in your present Situation, you are in
Possession of a Happiness too great for Mortals; enjoying in one of the hottest
Seasons that ever was known in England, the Shade and Coolness of the finest
Groves perhaps in the World, rendered still more enchanting by the Conversation
of one of the best Poets, as well as one of the worthiest Men of the Age. A
certain Monarch of old broke off all Connection and Alliance with a Brother King
in Greece, for no other Reason, but because the other experienced an uncommon
Share of Felicity. If his Example deserved to be followed, you are the Man of
all others, whose Friendship I would renounce. But the Truth is, you cannot
have more Happiness than I wish you; nor more, I am persuaded, than you
deserve; and therefore, I will even be contented to hold on my Amity with you,
till I have a better Reason for parting with it, which I am very sure I shall
never be furnished with.

With Respect to my own Travels, I have little to say worth relating. Finding
my Health not equal to so long a Journey as to Scarborough, and the Weather at
the same Time proving extremely cold and wet, I turned out of the high Road at
Newark, and crossed the Country to Nottingham. As I found the Air of the Place
agree with me, and likewise met with an old Friend, who lives like a true
Arcadian, in a little rural Cottage, at a short Distance from the Town, I
continued there till my Return hither. I saw every Thing in the Neighborhood
worth looking at; but what pleased me most was Lord BYRON's Abbey upon the
Forest, which without Doubt you have visited. Adieu, dear Sir.

I am you faithful and affectionate humble Servant, --.

LETTER LXVII. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Oct. 12, 1759. Dear Sir,
WHAT Apology can I make for not writing to you now for more than a Month,
after receiving so much Pleasure and so many Civilities? However, as you too
well know how easy it is for such Things to happen, I will make none, but leave
you to forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And this would lead me to expostulate with you for not coming to Bath: but I
forbear, having many Things to be pardoned in myself, as well as many to
deliver to you, and therefore so much for Apology.

I have seen Persfield, Mr. MORRIS's Seat; and Mr. SPENCE was just come from
seeing it, when he arrived at Bath: he is much struck with it, and has
attempted somewhat toward a Description of it. I shall have a Copy of his
Papers soon, and will transmit it to you. The Place is certainly of the great
and sublime Kind; most of the near Views are seen below you from the Top of
high Precipices, consisting of steep Rocks, hanging Woods, the Rivers Severn
and Wye, which last winds about the Feet of the Rocks below you, in a very
romantic Manner, almost surrounding a very pretty Farm, where Cattle and Sheep
are feeding in the Meadows, at such a Depth below your Eye, that they seem very
much diminished. The Rocks are bold and numerous, half covered with Woods, and
rise almost perpendicular from the Edge of the Water to a surprising Height,
forming, from the great Cliff, a Kind of double Amphitheatre. A Gun fired from
the Top of this Cliff, creates, by the Reverberation of the Report amongst
other Rocks, a loud Clap of Thunder, two or three Times repeated, before it
dies away: but even this Echo, conformably to the Pride and Grandeur of the
Rest of the Place, will not deign to answer a smaller Voice than that of a
Musket; with a Culverin, I suppose, it would hold a noble Dialogue. The Town of
Chepstow, and its ruined Castle, appear in the near View at somewhat more than
the Distance of Hales Owen from your Grove; and the romantic Windings of the
Wye are seen all the Way to them, except now and then that its Stream is hid
among the Rocks; and all the Way below them, till it is swallowed up by the
Severn, at about two miles Distance, where that River is also near two Miles
over, and from whence it extends, enlarging in Breadth, quite down to
King-Road, below Bristol. I can conceive nothing finer than these Views would
be, were the Waters of the Rivers as clear as that of the Thames: but, alas!
they are so muddy, that they will scarce return the Images of the Rocks, Trees,
and other Objects, that rise upon their Banks. The distant Views are very
extensive, and lets the Eye into Parts of fourteen different Counties. The
Extent of the Walks is near four Miles, which in about five Hours Time I made
shift to accomplish. I went from Bath with a polite Party of Gentlemen and
Ladies, and our three Days Excursion was altogether exceedingly agreeable. I am
this Instant favored with a more particular Description of the Scenes and
Views I have attempted to describe, and for your better understanding the
Situation of them, have copied them. First you enter the serpentine Walks,
(which are near four Miles and a Half in length) from Chepstow, and the I.
View, the Town. II. The Sea and the Rocks. III. The two Passages over the
Severn, from England to Wales, where the Passage-Boats are continually passing
and re-passing. Three Avenues from which are seen IV. Chepstow, V. The Church,
VI. Castle and Rocks.
VII. A confined View of the Rocks and Channel. VIII. A Balcony, from whence
are beautiful Views of the River Wye, and its Windings, the Rocks, Woods, etc.
etc. beyond Description. IX. A Seat; the View, the Woods continued. X. A
Chinese Bridge; a pretty confined Prospect. XI. A large Oak, with Ivy, and two
Seats under it. XII. A beautiful Green by the Wood. XIII. A Seat under two
Oaks. XIV. A delightful Shrubbery. XV. A Cave of Stone and Pebbles, with an
extensive Prospect. XVI. The Top of the Mount, with the Prospect of seven
Counties, the Sea, the Rocks, Berkley Castle, the Shipping, etc. etc. XVII. A
Mew for Pheasants, with Shrubberies of the finest foreign Shrubs. XVIII. A fine
Beech Tree, exceedingly large. XIX. A Druid's Throne and Temple in a Parterre.
XX. The Cave where we dined; the opening before it in Form of a Semicircle,
which the Prospect from thence resembles, from whence are seen the Rocks, the
Wood, the River, with fine Lawns. XXI. A Chinese Semicircle; the View, the
River, Rocks and Lawns, Berkley Castle, and a very extensive Prospect of
Bristol, etc. etc. XXII. A Cave, with Iron Rails before it; the View, looking
down a Precipice, the most beautiful Woods imaginable. XXIII. An octagon
Temple, surrounded with Chinese Rails, from whence is a most extensive Prospect
of many Counties, with Kings-Road, the Shipping, etc. etc.



Dr. L -- has favored me with six new Fables, which are very clever and
ingenious. Poor Mr. M -- has been so ill, that he has done but one. I have
written one myself, since I came Home; the Butterfly, Snail, and Be: and one
Mr. G -- gave me, the Tube-Rose and Sun-Flower: the two last I send you
enclosed. So that if you will favor me with half a Dozen, I shall have got my
Number. I will, therefore, now set about writing the Preface and the Essay on
Fable; and shall be glad to publish this Winter, that I may get them off my
Hands, and out of my Head, before I am quite sick of them. Mr. G -- was so kind
as to read them all over, and gave me several Corrections, and an Imitation of
the squeaking Pig from PHAEDRUS. Mr. M -- is now employing himself the same
Way; and when he has done with them, Dr. L -- will go over them again; so that
I shall hope they may be pretty correct. I shall throw out several of the
weakest of my own new ones, and shall endeavor to supply their Places with
better.

As you seemed to like the Madeira, I shall send by TRIMEN's Wagon, next
Monday, Carriage paid, four dozen Pints of the same, which beg your Acceptance.
Believe me to be ever,

dear Sir, sincerely and affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.
P. S. Mr. SPENCE's Drawing, which I took to be the Arcadia, was only a Drawing
that he directed to be made at Rome for a Lady's Monument in a Garden.



LETTER LXVIII. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dec. 1, 1759. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I Suppose you have some Time ago received from my Brother the Things you
ordered. I desired him to send them, as also the Poems for Mr. WOODHOUSE, to
whom I beg my Compliments, and am sorry he had them not sooner, but I had
really forgot them. I have been such a Rambler since I came to Town, that I
have not had Time to attend to any Thing. I have not written a single Fable
since that I sent you, and yet am so unreasonable, as to wonder you have not
sent me your half Dozen. I am writing an Essay on Fable, and thinking of a
Preface, both of which I shall desire you to take the Trouble of reading and
correcting, as soon as I have done them; however, I believe I shall take your
Advice, and not think of printing this Winter. I was glad to hear you had some
Hopes of finishing your Affairs with Mr. D --, and hope they are completed to
your Satisfaction. I have been favored with a Letter from Mr. WREN, which I
answer by this Post. You said, my Lord LYTTELTON was to be at the Admiral's
till after Christmas, but I saw him pass by in his Chariot a few Days ago. You
have given me Hopes of seeing a Survey of your Farm; I beg you will not delay
what will give me so much Pleasure: would to God you would bring it yourself,
with all your verbal Descriptions, Mottoes, etc. and let them be engraved and
printed. I wish I could hear that you was writing somewhat. What think you of
an Elegy on the Death of General WOLF? You know, I suppose that he was to have
been married to a Sister of --, before he went on his last Expedition, but that
she desired it might be deferred till his Return. I think the Scene might be
laid in her Chamber, on the rejoicing Night for the taking of Quebec; her
Friends may be supposed to have concealed his Death from her, and her Anxiety
for his Welfare, in the Midst of the Rejoicings, might have a fine Effect: when
suddenly his Ghost should appear, inform her of his Fate, and endeavor to
comfort her in her Affliction. Here is Room for Description, Reflection, and
the true Pathetic. Such a Story as this in your Hands could not fail to be
fine: I wish you to try, and that right soon.

I have searched all the Shops in London for a Pan proper for the Subject we
talked of, but in vain. What think you of the enclosed Sketch? I think it might
be mended. Is not the left Hand raised too high?

I had written thus far on Saturday Afternoon, when your Letters and Plans
arrived by the Penny-Post, which determined me to stay till Tuesday before I
finished my Letter. You have now embarrassed me; I have so many Things to reply
to, that I know not where to begin: I must take them as they lie.

Did I ever tell you of Mr. P -- 's Chinese Novel? If I did, I have quite
forgot it, and will therefore never own it. I shall be very glad to see Mr. H
-- 's Picture: my Compliments to him, and tell him, I suspect he intends it as
a reconciling Present to Miss S --. I wish Mr. ALCOCK would finish my two
Drawings for the Fables; as to my Face, it is a Subject not worth considering;
however, I will make you an impudent Proposal: if you will exchange Faces with
me when you come up to Town, we will both sit to the same Painter.
Notwithstanding you have taken Pains to forfeit all Claim to Favor from Mr.
SPENCE, I am very well satisfied, the Letter you promise will effectually
cancel all your Offenses: I shall go down to him in about a Month, (you see I
give you Time enough) enclose it to me, and I will carry it to him, with one of
your small Plans, to which I will put References; at the same Time, I will
endeavor to get the Scotch Paper on Gardening. As to my Sketch of the
Leasowes, I have not yet had Time to think of it; but as soon as I have
finished my Essay, especially if you make it unnecessary for me to write any
more Fables, by sending me your half Dozen, I will certainly sit down to it;
you see I am willing to make good Bargains. The Duchess of SOMERSET's Letters I
have safe, and will send them to you. I am glad Mr. GRAVES is going on; and
doubt not but the Work will turn to his Advantage. I shall certainly not print
the Fables this Winter; and as to the Essay, I hope to have gone through it in
about a Fortnight. I have read Dr. HAWKSWORTH's Adventurer on the Subject, in
which I exactly agree with you; and I have read a bad Translation of LA MOTTE's
Essay: I know nothing else on the Subject worth reading. When I send you my
Essay, I beg you will give it any Improvement which you may think it wants,
either in correcting Imperfections, or in supplying Deficiencies. I have got
six more new Fables from Dr. L --.

Do not think that I will tamely hear my Friend's Custard abused; I shall
certainly find a Time to vindicate his Honor, and to make your proud Foreigner
own the superior Merit of English Custard.

And now for your Plans: I am much obliged to you for sending them; and if I
might have my Wish, I would engrave the small colored one, with Figures of
Reference. This should be the Frontispiece to a Pamphlet, which should contain
a Description of the Places and Things referred to, somewhat more at large than
they are in this Drawing; together with all your Mottos, Verses, Compliments,
etc. as also a verbal Description of the rising and falling of the Ground; the
Objects, Prospects, etc. all the Way round. In the Middle of the Title Page, I
would put the last Plate of VIRGIL's Grove; as a Headpiece at the Beginning of
the Pamphlet, I would have a Print of your House; and at the End, which should
be contrived to be almost a whole Page, I think the chief Cascade might be
placed. The Plate should be worked off in Green; the Road through the Path
round the House, and the Water, should be afterward colored by Hand. Think of
these Things; and may Heaven give you Resolution to put them in practice!

I am, dear Sir, most affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.
P. S. Get a Drawing, by BOND, of the great Cascade, and of your House, of a
proper Size, and I will be at all other Expense; and if you have any Delicacy
about being the Editor of this yourself, I will write a short Preface, and sign
my Name to it, in which I will say, that I teized you into it, which is no more
than Truth.

Dec. 3.


LETTER LXIX. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Jan. 4, 1760.
HEALTH, Happiness, and all the Compliments of the Season, to dear Mr.
SHENSTONE! I have enquired of all the SPILSBURY's in Town, but I cannot find
that my little Drawings are yet sent up. This, if Mr. ALCOCK be still with you,
I wish you would be so good as to tell him, with my Compliments. When am I to
expect an Answer to my last long Letter? And when am I to have your half dozen
Fables? I have sent my Preface, and my Essay on Fable, to Mr. GRAVES, by this
Night's Post, with a Desire, that he will transmit them to you in a Post or
two. When you get them, I shall be very glad if you will look them carefully
and critically over: they are both very short; and there are blank Pages on one
Side, for whatever Alterations or Remarks you shall favor me with. I beg you
will be so good as to let me have them back, with your Fables, as soon as
possible. I shall not publish this Winter: but I want to have all my Materials
together, that I may begin to think of disposing them in the Order they are to
stand.

I have Compliments to you from Mr. SPENCE, and he is much obliged to you for
the Survey of your Farm. He has never been able to get DALRYMPLE's Essay on
Garden Grounds. I enclose a few Lines on the Leasowes. If you should think them
not totally unworthy of the Subject, I should be glad if you would please to
bestow such Correction upon them as you may think will tend to their good. I
have other Matters to communicate to you, and to advise with you about; but you
have so much upon your Hands already, from my last Letter and this, that I will
not discourage you from sitting down to write to me, by adding at present any
Thing further to your Trouble.

I am, dear Sir, affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER LXX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. HULL.
The Leasowes, Jan. 7, 1761. Dear Sir,
I AM with you aware, that the Story of the Spanish Lady is rather too simple,
too destitute of Matter for the Generality of People who frequent the Galleries
of a London Theater; but might not some Incidents of Humor be extracted from
the Group of Sailors, which must necessarily be introduced in the Piece? There
are in real Life various, and very striking Characters among our English Tars.
Indeed, much Use has been made of them already, and to very pleasing Purposes.

Observe, I propose (or rather merely allow) this Violation of the Simplicity
of the Story, as a Means to make it answer the Purposes of Emolument to you, if
you choose to undertake it; for, as far as relates to my own Taste, I think,
even in Representation, it could not be preserved too simple.

The Consideration that an Author is compelled to forego, in many Instances,
his favorite Intention, renounce a Compliance with his own Judgment, and even
sometimes abolish the very Excellencies of his Genius, to gratify the vitiated
Taste of a few noisy Auditors, who otherwise would condemn the Work, is rather
melancholy; and could not by any Species of Reason be supported, except that
which you advanced, namely, that your Theaters in London are maintained in
these Days at a very great Expense, and that Expense must be repaid;
consequently, if SHAKESPEARE cannnot elicit a full House, HARLEQUIN must extort
it; but woe the while for the State of Letters and Genius! -- Such was not the
genuine End and Intention of a Theater. I, for my own Part, look upon it as a
Temple raised to Moral Virtue; the Design of it is to instruct through the
Medium of Delight; to show Virtue and Vice in their respective Colors: and the
Business of the Audience is, to judge, compare, define, to distinguish between
what is given for Example, and what for Precaution: so conducted and preserved,
a Theater truly merits the Denomination I have given it; but if Moral is to
submit to Matter, if fine Sentiment is to give Way to fine Scenery, it falls
from the Purposes for which is was originally instituted, and becomes a Place
of Show indeed, but not of Science,

All these Absurdities and Misfortunes are owing to the Audience; and it is
much to be lamented, that the Conductor of an useful Place of Amusement cannot
oppose and rectify them; but I clearly see he cannot. Your Anecdote of Mr.
GARRICK's laudable Attempt, some Years ago, to remove from public View an
annual Object of Indecorum and Immorality, and substitute a Piece, which
(however antique) furnished Matter for the moral HOGARTH to display his Genius
on, diverts me much, and would (were I of any Country beside England) most
probably astonish me. As an Englishman it does not. The Attempt was as much to
the Credit of Mr. GARRICK, as the Defeat of it was disreputable to the
Audience. It had been a Custom at both the royal Theaters, for many Years, to
perform the London Cuckolds on the Lord-Mayor's Day; Mr. GARRICK, from Motives
of Propriety, endeavored to substitute the old Play of Eastward-Hoe; but the
Audience exploded it.


This Subject might, I think, by itself furnish Matter for a tolerably-sized
Essay; and I marvel that some Writer, who has rather more Affection for the Use
of a Pen than myself, does not adopt it. A Reflection on the very severe Trial
a dramatic Writer undergoes, when he offers his Work to the Public, has
frequently called forth my Compassion; the Means to procure general Approbation
are so vague and precarious, that I almost wonder when I hear of any one hardy
enough to stand a Candidate for it.

My Zeal in these Particulars has made me deviate from the principal Object of
this Letter, which was to request you to make a little Sketch of my favorite
Story upon dramatic Principles, during the Course of this Winter; and let us
(Deo favente) when next we meet at the Leasowes, see how the Design apappears.
It may be an agreeable Amusement, if it answers no other Purpose.

Whether I may ever execute the Elegy which Mr. DODSLEY has recommended, is
very uncertain, though I much approve his Plan. Suppose you were to attempt it
-- I have some Reasons for thinking that Elegy would suit your Disposition and
Abilities. The Mention of DODSLEY's Application See Letter lxviii. Dec. 1, 1759.
to me has procured me twelve Lines, for which I hold myself indebted. You do
not tell me who they were written by, so I suppose I am to ask no Questions.

When you get any more such original Morsels, your communicating them will be a
Kindness. While I am thus a Winter Solitudinarian, while Scarce one Friend my
Grass-grown Threshold finds,
You can hardly conceive how much Value such Trifles bear.

I am, dear Mr. HULL, your very faithful and affectionate, W. SHENSTONE.

*EPITAPH on General WOLF, alluded to in the preceding Letter. With patriot
Zeal inspired in Youth's first Bloom,
Conquest and Fame adorned his early Years;
Such Fame, such Conquest, as might well become
A Vet'ran's Brow, and grace his silver Hairs.
Eager he snatched at Glory's highest Palm --
Snatched and achiev'd it -- Fame exulting bore
Quebec's Defeat, and WOLFE's immortal Name,
Warm from the Field of Blood, to Albion's Shore.
America grew pale beneath his Look,
While Justice reared her Standard by his Side,
For her and Britain his last Blow he struck,
He fought, he bled, he conquered and he died.


LETTER LXXI. Miss M -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Bath, July 21, 1760.
SCARCE was I sat down after our agreeable Jaunt, when I was welcomed by my
dear Mr. SHENSTONE's polite Favor. You are particularly good in conferring so
much Honor on a poor, prattling, insignificant Being like me; yet, however ill
I may confess I deserve it in my Ability to repay it, I will venture to affirm,
that my Merits, if rated by the Value I set on it, are equal to those of any
other wild Female in the Circle of your Acquaintance. But is it come to this?
And must I really take Pen in Hand, and describe our little Peregrinations? I
must, for you have commanded me. If I even wanted an Inducement beyond your
Command, it is at Hand. I mean our common Friend, Mr. HULL. I applied to him
for Counsel, and he flatly says, I shall be rude, if I decline to obey. Here
then, my good Sir, take it in the best Manner I am able to execute a
descriptive Letter, and if it is badly done, you must be my Advocate to
yourself, for having drawn me into such a Dilemma; in short, your own humane
Heart must make Allowances for whatever is unworthy your Judgment.

Be it known unto you then, that last Wednesday Morning, we all four (you know
our Party) got into a Coach, at six o'Clock, and drove at no slow Rate, for we
got to Bristol at eight. There we were met by a Gentleman and a Lady from the
Hot-well, as wild and as whimsical as ourselves; we are all of a Spinning I can
tell you. We just took a Bit of Breakfast at Bristol, and then made the best of
our Way to Aust, the old Passage over to Wales; there we dined, and then, after
driving a long Way over the Rocks, amongst Sea-Weed, and I cannot tell what,
with some Difficulty we got into a Stable, in which we were to cross the Water
-- A Stable! methinks I hear you say -- Why yes, in Truth, good Sir; for pray
what can one better compare a Thing to, that was littered from one End to the
other with dirty Straw, and filled with as many Horses as People? Oh, we went
most sociably over, Horses, Coach, and ourselves, all together: this, however,
was the worst of the Bargain, all the best was to come.

When we arrived in Wales, we just took a little Refreshment, and then drove to
Chepstow, remarkable for the great Height of its Bridge, the Tide rising higher
by some Degrees there than in any Part of the three Kingdoms. At this Place we
were to sleep, so we went to the best Inn to get Accommodations. These secured,
we made the best of our Way to Persfield, the Seat of Mr. MORRIS; and such a
Place, for the Variety and Beauty of its Prospects, I never saw.

The Gardens are seven Miles round, so our poor old Lady was forced to occupy a
Seat just by the House, and the rest of us then walked as far as our Legs were
able to carry us. We could not compass the whole round, but saw all the
principal Prospects. To attempt describing them is impossible, at least to do
it with Justice to their Merit, yet, though unequal to the Task, I must say
something. The Gardens are situated on the Rocks, I cannot call them the Banks,
of the River Wye, and cut into Walks, in themselves excessively beautiful, but
the superior Beauty of the Views they command, so entirely engrosses the Eye,
that they can be very little heeded. Sometimes we look down upon the River,
from an Eminence of near four hundred Feet, which winds itself round as in a
Semicircle. The opposite Side is bounded by Rocks of equal Height, some
barren, and resembling the Ruins of old Fortifications; others covered with the
most pleasing Variety of Greens the Eye can wish to behold, while at the
Bottom, Cattle are feeding in the sweet Pastures by the River's Side: Cattle,
we were told the Creatures were which we saw; but really our Faith had need be
strong to believe it, since they appeared to our View more like Hens and
Chickens, and I do assure you, one of our Company took them for such.

Here too we saw a Place called the Lover's-Leap, it was at the Summit of a
Rock full four hundred Feet high from the River, and I believe, if used, would
be a certain Cure for Love or any other Kind of Trouble. After having delighted
our Eyes as long as our Feet would support us, we went back to the reverend
Lady; and one of our Company being acquainted with a Lady at Mr. MORRIS's
House, we were invited to eat a Bit of Cake and drink a Glass of Wine; this was
a most agreeable Repast after our Fatigue, and helped us on very notably. But
here, methinks, I hear you say, Alas, the poor old Lady! She saw none of these
fine Sights! -- Yes, but she did, Sir, as you shall hear: We had a Servant of
Mr. MORRIS's to attend our Coach, and he conducted us through various Fields to
some Views we had not seen in the Part of the Gardens we walked over, and from
these the reverend Dame feasted her Eyes; so you see she came in for a Share of
the Show.

We now returned to Chepstow, where, after spending as laughable an Evening as
could be desired, (I have before told you, we were all of a Spinning) we
retired to rest, a Thing not at all unpleasing after the Employment of the Day.

Next Morning we got into a large Boat, with two Pair of Oars, and went up the
River Wye, to a Place called Tintern-Abbey. Here we had the extreme Pleasure of
contemplating the most curious Piece of Ruins I ever beheld; I do not believe
your Balbecks or Palmiras can much exceed it. It is the Remains of a Cathedral;
all the outside Walls remain so far entire, as to be a Fence to keep People
out, but are in a cracked, ruinous State; most of the Pillars on the Inside are
standing, though robbed of the fine Carving which adorned them; yet we had some
Notion of their former Beauty, from many Pieces tolerably entire, which lay
scattered here and there on the Ground. Grass and Wood Strawberries here supply
the Place of a Pavement, except in one small Part, where it has not yet been
broken. Here is discernible a very pretty Kind of Tile OF Stone, the Ground
yellow, flowered with black.

The Top of the Church is entirely off, so that Birds build all around in the
Pillars and Walls. There are planted a great Variety of Trees in many Parts of
the Edifice, some Fruit Trees: I myself eat three Strawberries I gathered in
the Body of the Church. This Place, it seems, was dedicated to the Virgin MARY,
and Part of an Image remains, which still bears some Resemblance to her. There
is likewise one of an Earl of PEMBROKE, formerly Lord of the Place; that Earl
who was surnamed Strong-Bow, and as Tradition says, who had five Fingers and
two Thumbs on each Hand; one Hand of the monumental Figure is so perfect, that
we could distinguish the five Fingers and two Thumbs. In short, I never in my
Life saw any Place so well worth visiting of its Kind as this Tintern-Abbey,
and we were as loath to quit it, as I seem now to be of finishing my wild
Description.

Next we went to look at some Iron Works, and saw the Manner of making Bar
Iron, and Drawing of Wire. After this we got again into our Boat, to return to
Chepstow, and as we rowed along the River, had the Pleasure of looking up to
those beautiful Rocks we had looked down from, in Mr. MORRIS's Ground. This
Reverse of View made a second Enjoyment, and we were more sensible of the
Height of the Mountains in this Situation, than when we were at the Summit of
them. So delightful was this Water-Scene, that we all wished a Continuance of
it. This put us upon asking the Master of the Boat, if he could safely venture
to land us in England; he assured us he could, and then it was resolved, nem.
con. only to stop at Chepstow to dine -- we did so, and sending our Carriage
and Horses to the Passage, to be again taken over in the beforementioned
Stable, we went on board our Boat, and rowed till we got into the Severn, and
then the Wind favoring us, we had a most charming sail to the opposite Shore.
Here we had another Piece of Variety; the River was not deep enough from the
Rocks to bring the Boat to dry Ground, nor shallow enough to let the Carriages
come to us, so we were all compelled to be carried out on Men's Shoulders.

We drank Tea at the old Passage-House, and then drove to the Hot-well,
Bristol, but made King's-Weston-Down in our Way, which, for the Beauty of its
Prospects, could well vie with what we had been seeing in Wales. Next Morning
our first Route was up to Clifton, where we saw Mr. GOLDNEY's Grotto; of its
Kind, to be sure, the most finished Thing; all Description must fail to do it
Justice, so let your Imagination form the most regular, elegant, costly
Arrangement of Shells it is able, and it cannot go beyond the real Beauty.

From a Part of Mr. GOLDNEY's Garden, we had a Prospect I think rather superior
to what we saw in Wales; it was, if I mistake not, more extensive, commanding a
full Scope of the Severn losing itself in the Sea, an entire, and uninterrupted
View of Bristol, and as fine a rural Prospect around, as the Eye could wish to
behold.

Are you not, my good Sir, almost weary with reading? I am of writing, I can
assure you; and I fear you will not make out what I have wrote without some
Difficulty. But my Ideas of this charming Scene flowed so fast, I could not
keep my Pen in any Order, it run on, and I must beg you to take it as it is,
for I have not Time to write a fair Copy.

Mr. HULL, I take it for granted, will have the Happiness to deliver this
Scrawl of mine, as he sets out for Warwickshire tomorrow Morning. He has been
endeavoring to persuade us to another Jaunt incontinently, and to let him
guide us to the sweetest Retirement in the World, such he calls the Leasowes.
That Happiness is denied us at present, but I trust will not be always so.

I hope, my good Sir, this implicit Obedience to your Commands, will entitle me
to some small Degree of Approbation, and that you will continue to esteem me

Your very faithful humble Servant, J -- M --.

LETTER LXXII. This Letter having been unluckily mislaid, is here inserted
erroneously in Point of Date; the Reader will be pleased to observe, it ought
to have taken Place, Page 197 in this Volume, immediately preceding Letter LI.
The Duchess of SOMERSET to Lady LUXBOROUGH.
Piercy-Lodge, Feb. 25, 1754. Dear Madam,
PRAY never think Excuse can be necessary to me about Exactness in answering my
Letters; I am always glad to hear from you when it is agreeable to you to
write, but am not one of those over-kind Friends who are for ever out of Humor
with those whom they rather enthrall than oblige, by giving them that Name. As
a Proof I never wish to act so by my Friends, or am afraid of being treated so
by them, I will own to you, I am not quite sure, I should have answered your
last Letter so soon, were it not that I am under serious Concern to find how
aukwardly I must have expressed myself to Mr. SHENSTONE, if I gave him Room to
believe, I harbored a secret Wish to have so fine a Poem as his Ode
suppressed. On the contrary, I should think myself guilty of a very great Crime
and Injustice to the Public, if I were to be the Means of depriving them of so
charming and rational an Entertainment. I gave him the true Reasons in my
Letter, for desiring that my own Name, nor that of my humble yet peaceful
Dwelling, might be inserted. You know I always envied the Lot of " La Vislette,
qui se cache sous l'Herbe."

It Is true, my dear Lady LUXBOROUGH, Times are changed with us, since no Walk
was long enough, or Exercise painful enough to hurt us, as we childishly
imagined; yet after a Ball or Masquerade, have we not come Home very well
contented to pull off our Ornaments and fine Clothes, in order to go to rest?
Such methinks is the Reception we naturally give to the Warnings of our bodily
Decays; they seem to undress us by Degrees, to prepare us for a Rest that will
refresh us far more powerfully than any Night's Sleep could do. We shall then
find no Weariness from the Fatigues which either our Bodies or our Minds have
undergone; but all Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, and Sorrow, and Crying,
and Pains, shall be no more; we shall then without Weariness move in our new
Vehicles, transport ourselves from one Part of the Skies to another, with much
more Ease and Velocity, than we could have done in the Prime of our Strength,
upon the fleetest Horses, the Distance of a Mile. This cheerful Prospect
enables us to see our Strength fail, and await the Tokens of our approaching
Dissolution with a Kind of awful Pleasure. I will ingenuously own to you, dear
Madam, that I experience more true Happiness in the retired Manner of Life that
I have embraced, than I ever knew from all the Splendor or Flatteries of the
World. There was always a Void: they could not satisfy a rational Mind: and at
the most heedless Time of my Youth, I well remember, that I always looked
forward, with a Kind of Joy, to a decent Retreat, when the Evening of Life
should make it practicable.

Boadicea I have read -- there is an interesting Scene or two in it; but there
is something wanting in the Management of the Drama to keep up the Spirits of
the Audience. Philoclea I have not seen, nor have heard such a Character of it,
as to raise my Curiosity. If you have not read Deformity, an Essay, by Mr. HAY,
nor his Religio Philosophi (I don't know how that last Word should end) I
believe they will entertain you very well in their different Ways. The
Adventurer will soon be published in Volumes, and will be very well worth
buying. I doubt I must agree with Mr. SHENSTONE, that the Style of Sir Charles
Grandison is too prolix, and yet I don't know any of it I should be willing to
part with, except Harriot Byron's Conversation with the Oxonian, in the first
Volume, and the Preparations and Entertainments at Sir Charles's Wedding, in
the fifth.

When I came home from taking the Air on Friday, I was very agreeably surprised
to find Lady NORTHUMBERLAND ready to receive me, as I had no Notion of her
coming. She had been alarmed with a false Report, that I had not been so well
for some days as she left me. I took the Opportunity of showing her your
Letter, and she desired me to make her Compliments to your Ladyship, and tell
you, she keeps no Servant about Lady ELIZABETH, while she is at School, and at
her Return will think it necessary to have a Person of a middle Age about her.
Such a one she now has about her little Boy; a pretty Sort of Woman, who speaks
French and English equally well, is grave and properly behaved, and, I believe,
hopes for Lady ELIZABETH's Place, when her little Angel of a Master goes into
the Hands of the Men. His Mamma took him away with her on Saturday, after
lending him to me for a Month (though she is excessively fond of him) because
she sees he is the Joy of my Life. He has some faint Resemblance (though not a
good one) of his poor Uncle; but his Openness and Mildness of Temper are the
very same. Her eldest Boy too, is a very sensible and good one. He and Lady
GREVILLE dine with me from Eaton every Sunday; they are here at present for two
or three Days, on Account of their being Hollidays. I have hardly left myself
Room to make Mr. COWSLAD's Compliments, and subscribe myself, dear Madam,

Your Ladyship's most faithful and obedient Servant, F. SOMERSET.

LETTER LXXIII. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Jan. 5, 1761. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I AM very glad, that with the Return of Spring, your Strength and Spirits
begin also to revive. May they proceed and increase with the Season, and
communicate such Health and Vigor to your vernal Shoots, as will encourage and
enable them to bud, blossom, and bear; for it is Pity, that Fruit of so
exquisite a Flavor should be lost to the Taste of Mankind! But your Generosity
and Benevolence lead you to cultivate and improve the barren Soil and sorry
Shrubs of your Friends, to the Neglect of your own rich Fields and more
excellent Plantations. You will see in the Critical Review a Character of my
Fables sufficient to make me excessively proud, were I not inwardly checked by
considering how much they owe to your Correction: but I ought to be proud of
that, and I am so. They do not, however, yet appear to be much taken Notice of;
but it is early Days, and my Friends encourage me to hope, that when they are
known, they will not be neglected. I am much pleased with the further Honor
you have done them, in getting new Head and Tail Pieces executed, and shall be
very impatient till I see your List of the Subjects.

As to your Picture, you may be sure I long to receive it, as it will at once
adorn my Room, and do Honor to myself; and I think farther, that as it will,
probably not be much mended by Alteration, the best Way will be to send it up
without Delay: but this, however, I leave entirely to your Determination.

I have applied to Mr. RICH, in Behalf of Mr. HERON; but he has no Vacancy in
his House, nor Room to employ him: as to Mr. GARRICK, I am not on such Terms,
at present, as to ask a Favor of him. I have spoken also to two or three
Printers about Mr. W --, but I have not yet been able to hear of any Thing for
him -- but I will not give it up: I shall be glad to know what Pay he will
expect.

Mr. JENNYNS's Book will be published in about a Fortnight -- When Mr. PERCY's
will be ready is uncertain. All your Letters are very acceptable to me, as they
assure me of your Friendship; therefore, pray write to me as often as you can,
though you should have nothing more to say, than to give me that Assurance.

I am, dear Sir, ever affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER LXXIV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. DODSLEY.
Feb. 11, 1761. Dear Mr. DODSLEY,
I HAVE spoken to Mr. L -- upon the Subject of his Dedication; and he agrees
with me, that there can be no properer Person to procure the Leave we want than
Mr. D --. Suppress, therefore, if you please, my Letter to Mr. L --, and engage
Mr. D -- as soon as ever you can, to do his best Offices in this Affair. They
wait only for the Plates, and my Lord's Answer, before they can order his Arms
to be engraved. I blundered, in regard to L -- 's University; a Blunder so much
the more unlucky, as they have no Masters of Arts at Edinburgh: he was of
Aberdeen. As to the rest, you will give Mr. D -- any proper Information my
Letter affords you. L -- does not expect a Present; he will be perfectly
satisfied if the Work entitle him to any Degree of Lord B -- 's esteem: and
this Mr. D -- may say, should his Lordship give him an Opportunity. Perhaps it
need not be mentioned, that L -- is a Scotchman, unless my Lord should make
particular Enquiry. Betwixt Friends, I believe, that having no Establishment,
he means hereafter to ask some little Matter, by Means of a Scotch Lady, who is
my Lord's Relation.

The smaller Drawing you enclosed is really a perfect Beauty, and must be
executed at all Events when I return it, which I mean to do on Saturday; I
shall give the Engraver one or two Directions.

I wish I could think as highly of the Frontispiece. In Truth, it does not
please me; and what to do, I cannot tell. The Designer does not seem to enter
into the Spirit of the Story; and the Circumstance of the Shield hung upon the
Pillar, (a single Pillar of the Temple had been sufficient) with the Motto
being wholly omitted, throws the whole Stress upon the Merit of the two Figures
in the fore Ground. I am sorry to say, these do not answer, MAECENAS appears
with no Dignity, and HORACE's Attitude I cannot explain. If the Floor had been
raised one Step where the Patron sits, and his Person tall, or his Chair
embellished a little, etc. and if HORACE were shorter, (as his Nature was) his
Attitude no Way violent, and his Head down-cast, it would, perhaps, have
removed some of my Objections. But if there were no Possibility of hanging a
Shield, etc. on a Piece of a Temple, and so making the Back-Ground important,
(as the Designer surely might have done) yet there evidently were Means of
rendering it more beautiful than it appears here. HAYMAN certainly should have
been the Man! But more of this when I write on Saturday.

When shall I see Baptista Porta? As also the Frontispiece only to the
Ornaments, etc. of Temples and Churches? The Verses in the London Magazine are
tolerably well printed, though my Punctuation is not observed. Your Brother was
to send me also the Annual Registers; all, except that for the Year 1759. I
believe W -- has or will desire your Brothey to supply him with the few
Magazines he distributes here. This Letter is written amid much Hurry and
Confusion of Brain, when I can really express nothing to my Mind, much less the
Esteem and Affection with which I am,

Dear Sir, your most obedient, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER LXXV. Mr. W -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Feb. 14, 1761. SIR,
YOUR very obliging Letter gave me great Pleasure; pardon my Delay in not
returning my Thanks for that Favor sooner; I waited to have offered my small
Collection to your View at the same Time, which Dr. W -- genteely excused
himself from the Trouble of perusing, professing he had not Leisure or critical
Skill enough to be of Service to the Work. -- When my Brother received my
Papers at Birmingham, he showed them to Dr. H --, who obligingly asked Leave to
show them to Lord LYTTELTON, which you will imagine was too agreeable an Offer
not to be accepted: the Doctor took them to Hagley, about a Fortnight since, to
be transmitted to his Lordship by Admiral SMITH. As soon as I receive them, I
shall immediately do myself the Pleasure of sending them to the Leasowes.

To Mr. -- I find myself indebted for the Publication of my Verses to Miss L
--, of which, and my Letter to her, she had given him Copies. I received the
first Intimation of that Affair from you, but soon after saw the same incorrect
Copy, together with his absurd and disadvantageous Account of me, in two
different Magazines. I wrote to him upon that Subject; he promised to retract
what he had asserted upon Misinformation; but his Letters and Behavior did not
appear quite equal to the amiable Idea I had conceived of him. I am informed by
a Friend in Town, that the same Person has sent up a handsome Apology, to be
inserted in the Gentleman's Magazine, for February, which (as if it were
intended purely for the Satisfaction of the Public, and not to do Justice to an
injured Person) he did not condescend to honor me with the Perusal of.

I am extremely obliged to you for the Trouble you took in sending a correct
Copy of those Verses to the London Magazine, which I saw with much
Satisfaction. I am also to acknowledge the Favor of your friendly Advice, in
Regard to Mr. W -- 's Papers; what you say on that Head gives me great
Pleasure, as it entirely coincides with my own Sentiments: I had no Thoughts of
inserting those Papers in my Collection, but looked upon them as Things of a
private Nature, intended only for the Amusement of ourselves.

When last I saw that Gentleman, he mentioned my adding those to the Number I
intended to print; had I directly objected to it, I had some Reason to think it
would disgust him: he mentioned referring it to you, which I agreed to with
Pleasure, resolving to give it a fair Chance, not doubting but your Judgment
and Delicacy would disapprove of such an Addition to my little Volume: (that is
to be.) I have not yet wrote to Mr. W --, but shall take an early Opportunity
of letting him know your Opinion, which cannot (I think) be any Diminution of
the Pleasure he may take in his Composition, as it is only the Subject which
denies it a Place in my Collection.

I am, Sir, with great Esteem, your much obliged, humble Servant, M. W --.

LETTER LXXVI. Mr. M -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Edinburgh, April 15, 1761. Dear Sir,
IT is not in my Power to express the grateful Sense of the Obligations I owe
you, for your most agreeable Letter, and for those valuable Pieces which
accompanied it, and your other Favors. I am sensible, that so late a Return to
such repeated Marks of Goodness, carries with it Appearances against me; but as
I am convinced, your Goodnature cannot interpret any Thing harshly, I hold it
as almost unnecessary to assure you, that Neglect was not the Cause of my
Silence; that, indeed, would have been a Fault for which I could not have
forgiven myself, far less could I have asked Forgiveness of you; the Hurry of
Business, during the Winter Sessions, is the only Excuse I shall plead in my
Defense, which but too effectually deprived me of the Pleasure of corresponding
with my Friends, and cut me off from all Communication with Elegance or the
fine Arts -- and of late, an Inflammation in my Eyes has much distressed me,
which at present gives the more Pain, as it prevents me from the Satisfaction
of writing so fully as I intended, and from giving you any Remarks on those
Pearls you was so good as to send me; the chief Intention of this is to assure
you, that I have not been unmindful of your Friend Mr. PERCY, whose Design I
much approve of, and the more especially, as he has given you a rejecting
Power. Please to let him know that I have written to my Friends every where, to
pick up all the Ballads they can, while I am searching every Part in Town,
where I suspect any Thing may be found worthy of Publication. In a short Time I
hope to have it in my Power to transmit you some Pieces which will merit a
Place in his Collection.

Although it is not without some Difficulty that I now write, yet I cannot
leave off without letting you know, how much I was delighted with your
excellent Verses, intended for the Pedestal of Venus de Medicis: "To VENUS,
VENUS here retired," etc. See the last Composition, in the Description of the
Leasowes, SHENSTONE 's Works.
but all the Encomiums that I can give them (or your other Compositions) fall
infinitely short of their real Value. The Thoughts are fine, and rise naturally
from the Subject; the three first Stanzas show, indeed, the Hand of a Master,
nor do I remember any Thing of Antiquity superior to them for Elegance and
Simplicity of Versification, Justness of Sentiment, or Beauty of Allusion;
nothing can be more happily imagined, than the Opposition of your bashful
Beauty to the Paphian and Phrygian Goddess, while the Choice of Words does
Honor to the Truth and Beauty of the Sentiment. The seventh is charming, and
the Epithet Meretricious conveys so striking a Description of false Taste, and
is so well adapted to the fulsome carving and gilding of Chinese Baubles, that
he must be dull indeed who is not struck by it. It irks me, that I am obliged
to defer taking Notice of the other Pieces till another Time.

I had lately the Pleasure of a Visit from your Friend Mr. COOKS, whose
Connection with you I wish I had known sooner. I shall take the first
Opportunity of sending you the Anandale Bronze Earth he mentioned. In the mean
Time, I have sent you a little Provision of the best Preston-Pans Snuff, both
toasted and untoasted, in four Bottles, with one Bottle of Highland Snishon,
and four Bottle Bonnets, all packed in a Box, along with some Things for our
worthy Friend Dr. ROEBUCK, at Birmingham, which I hope you will accept of, as a
small Stimulus to our Friendship. Please to let me know, which Sort is most
agreeable, that I may send you a fresh Supply in due Time.

The good Lord ALEMOOR is just now getting the better of a tedious Fit of the
Gout; he returns you his kindest Respects, and bids me assure you in the
strongest Manner, of his most cordial Esteem, that he would be happy to hear
from you, but much more to see you in this Corner of the World. Professor
SMITH, DOUGLAS, HUME, Dr. ROBERTSON, (now Principal of our University here) and
many other of your Friends, desire me to return you their Compliments
centuplicated. Allow me a small Share in your Friendship, and believe that I
am, with the utmost Esteem, dear Sir,

your much obliged, and very sincere Servant, J. M --.

LETTER LXXVII. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Sept. 18, 1761. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
AFTER I parted from you at Broomsgrove, I arrived very safe and speedily at
Worcester, as I hope you did at the Leasowes. I found Dr. D -- in the same
infirm State of Health, in which he has lingered for some Years past; but by
keeping up his Spirits and his Appetite, by great Temperance, and by taking an
Airing regularly twice a Day in his Chaise, for six or eight Miles at a Time,
he has so nicely trimmed his feeble Lamp of Life, that he has prevented it from
going out, and may possibly preserve it burning some few Years longer. I
employed Mrs. D -- to get me a Pot of Lampreys, which I sent, Carriage paid, to
be left for you at Mr. HODGETT's: I hope you received them safe, and that they
proved good.

On the Monday following, I went from Worcester, in the Birmingham Stage, to
Bristol, and the next Morning in a Post-Chaise to Bath. I found a Letter at
LEAKE's, which had lain for me eight or ten Days, and the Morning after my
Arrival received another, both earnestly pressing my Return; I set out again,
therefore, in two or three Days for London, where, without the least Fatigue,
on Tuesday last I arrived. If I can be of any Service to the Widow, I shall be
very glad; but I am afraid the Father is inclined to take every Advantage which
the Law will allow him.

At Bath, I saw Mr. MELMOTH, who arrived there with his Lady the Day before I
set out. He laments very much his Misfortune in missing you at the Leasowes:
but hopes he shall have the Pleasure of seeing you some Time or other at Bath,
where for the future (except two or three Months in the Winter, which he will
dedicate to his Friends in London) he intends to reside. I spent a Day with Mr.
W --, who is meditating an Essay on Simplicity, of which he showed me an
imperfect Plan, and some few Sketches of the Work; he considers it in
Sentiments, Language, Actions, and Works of Art, and I fancy will make a good
Performance of it. I spent also a Day with Mr. GRAVES. Mr. ALLEN has built him
a good additional Room, and a handsome School. He is very earnest in his
Wishes, that you would pursue your Subscription without farther Delay, and
desires that I will press you to it without Intermission; I told him, I had
said all I could, and hoped you would proceed. You are in the Meridian of your
Fame, he says, and should not let your Sun decline one Moment, before you put
your Work in Agitation.

I am, dear Sir, with great Truth, affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER LXXVIII. Mr. T. L -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Northfield, Oct. 18, 1761.
THAT the Polite must ever please equally in the Matter and Manner is what I am
not now to learn, having had convincing Proof of it, ever since I have had the
pleasing Honor of being known to Mr. SHENSTONE. To comprehend in a Nut-Shell a
Volume of Ideas, is the happy Talent of a superior Genius, which those of the
more minute, at a Distance, admire, but cannot attain; at least, in our dull
Profession, the Difficulties attending such an Attempt are almost insuperable.
It cannot have escaped so penetrating an Observation as Mr. SHENSTONE's, that
bad Men examine every Law with no other Intention than to reap the Benefits,
and at the same Time to evade the equal Contributions intended to be levied
from all those, who, as they enjoy the Benefits, ought in Reason to contribute
their just Proportions of the Expenses incurred by those, to whom they are
indebted for those Advantages. Against such artful and mischievous Examiners,
it is the Duty of those of our dull Profession to be upon our Guard, and to
protect, by all the Vigilance we are able, the honest and well-meaning from the
Artifices and Designs of the dishonest and ungenerous. Few Words, alas! however
significcant, are not able to effect such a Security; and though Dullness has
been the unfortunate Cause of introducing a Multiplicity of useless Tautology
in many legal Transactions, yet the necessary Cautions, requisite to protect
the undesigning from the Dangers of Fraud, from those who are the Pests of
Society, have unhappily made some Repetitions necessary in many Cases, where a
liberal Interpretation, and Elegance of Expression would point them out as
unnecessary, and place them in a ridiculous, and, indeed, contemptible Light,
in the Judgment of a liberal and generous Observer, unacquainted with the
hackneyed Ways of bad and designing Men. But, alas! Such Men there are -- such
must be guarded against; and to aid me in such an Herculean Labor, to unite
Force, and introduce, at the same Time, Dignity of Expression and Elegance,
instead of dull Form, I took the Liberty of requesting the Aid of a
Pen-Shenstonian! I return my very sincere Thanks for the kind Assistance you
have been so good as to give me; and, as far as the Cautions I am obliged to
observe, in order to guard against the Inconveniences I have before hinted at,
will permit me, shall profit by them; and as I foresee many Difficulties that
may be likely to arise before the Benefits we wish for from the intended Act
may be brought to Perfection, I shall take the Liberty you so obligingly permit
me, of desiring the Assistance and Honor of your Advice, where I have Occasion
for it.

If I was much susceptible of Vanity, I should have ample Food for it in
indulging the Belief you flatter me with, that a Correspondence from -- could
give you any Pleasure or Entertainment: but I am not yet so vain -- Plain
Facts, and plain Truth and Sincerity, are all that I can aim at in a
Correspondence; nor can I think, that simple Narratives, unaided with any
Embellishments of Genius, or Liveliness of Fancy, can give Pleasure to a Mind
so stored with brilliant Ideas as Mr. SHENSTONE's; yet permit me to assure you,
if you honor me with any Commands, I shall take a very sincere Pleasure in
obeying them.

You have much damped the pleasing Expectations I had formed of seeing you in
-- but I yet cannot help indulging an Hope, that we yet may, by some happy Event
that may deserve your Attention there, be gratified with that Pleasure the
ensuing Winter. But wherever you are, permit me very sincerely to wish you
every Felicity, and to join in a particular Assurance, with the general
Assurances which I am desired to add from all this Family, that they are, as I
am,

Dear Sir, your faithful and obedient Servant, T. L --.

END of the FIRST VOLUME.

