AN INVITATION TO PEACE: OR, TOBY's Preliminaries TO NESTOR IRONSIDES, Set
forth in a DIALOGUE Between TOBY and his KINSMAN.

Hor. Niger est Romana Caveto.
Milt. -- Why did he not accept
Friendly Composure offered --
LONDON: Printed and Sold by Mr. Lawrence, near St. Paul's Churchyard.

TOBY's DIALOGUE With his KINSMAN, etc.
A. COME, Come, Mr. Toby, Mr. Ironsides offers very fair; and if you don't come
to an Accommodation, what will the World say of you?


T. Tell not me of Offers, Accommodation, and the World: I say positively I
will not hear of any Reconciliation, till he shall make me such Proposals as
may agree with my Safety and Honor. And therefore I do insist that Fort A -- n
be demolished, and that, for our Security during the Negotiation, it be put
into the Hands of the Sieurs Took and Barber: And if he refuse to do this, I
am determined to hold it out, and fight it to the last. Vid. Cat.



A. But Sir, consider a little. You began this Paper-War with no other View but
supporting the Balance of Pamphleteering; and you have now, as is evident,
reduced old Ironsides to so low a Condition, that perhaps he may be glad upon
any reasonable Terms, to put an End to this long and bloody War: yet, Sir,
whether his Pen is so far subdued, whether it be wrought by ill Success to such
a Submission, Vid. Cat.
is what I mightily doubt of. Consider, Sir, I beseech you, what a deal of
Money that strong Fort has cost him; how he has perpetually annoyed you from
that Coast, and --


T. Sir, you may talk till Doomsday if you please; but I shall make you no
other Reply than Fort Ad -- son, Fort Ad -- son.


A. All this is towering Frenzy and Distraction; Vid. Cat.
and you talk as if you were sure of holding Fortune by the Forelock, and of
going down to the Grave with the Reputation you have now established, whereas
there is nothing so difficult and uncertain; Of this, the Person you now so
much despise is a fresh Instance. How did the Force of his Pen in a few Months
overrun your whole Country? Did he not in three Weeks time take the strong
Towns of Fenwick and Cocoa, Politic Coffee-Houses used by the Tories and where
Mr. Ironsides used to go formerly and dispute.
with many others. Did he not attempt to force the Examiner, that brave and
experienced General, out of his Lines; and was he not very near effecting it?
This should learn you, Sir, some Humility, and to put an end to your
extravagant Way of Talking. Besides, Remember, Sir, We took up Pens, not to
revenge our selves,
But free the Commonwealth. Vid. Cat.

Now you have obtained this End you should hearken to Reason, or else the
impartial World will say -- and --


T. When Fort A -- son is once in my Hands, I will then send him some
Proposals, which I think fit to make him subscribe as Preliminaries to our
Treaty. As First, Sir.

1. The Town of Button, The Coffee-house used by Ironsides, etc.
now Garrisoned by Wits, shall be yielded up in the Condition it is now in, with
all its Dependences.

2. The said Garrison shall have free leave to carry off their Effects, but
they shall not meddle with such Wit as belongs to the Inhabitants of the said
Town.

3. That the Garrison may march out with their Pens in their Hands, each Man
allowed two Charges, with a Sheet of fine Fools-cap Paper.

4. All commanding Wits may be allowed to carry off as much Wool in their Hats
as they shall think fitting; but the said Officers and commanding Wits shall
not carry off any Wool in a clandestine Manner, nor transport more than what
shall be allowed by this present Treaty, to any Dutch Coffee-house within our
Dominions.

5. That no wast be committed upon such Oak as is now standing within the
Liberties of the said Town; but it shall be and is hereby lawful, for each
Pastoral Writer to carry off a large Beach.

6. That all sick and wounded Wits may remain three Months in the Town of
Button, counting from the Time of signing this Treaty; and that it shall be
lawful for them to send for Dr. G --, provided the said Dr. G -- shall give
good Security before such Persons as we shall appoint, that he will not at any
time, nor upon any Consideration whatsoever, offer to prescribe to any of our
Subjects: And also that the said Doctor shall not go armed with any Epigram or
Panegyric; but that it shall be lawful for the said Doctor to wear what
Epilogues and Songs he shall think fit, provided the said Epilogues and Songs
be neither lewd nor blasphemous.

7. If at any time it shall happen, that any Dispute or Quarrel shall arise
between any of our Guards, Officers, or Domestics, i.e. Footmen, and the said
Mr. Ironsides, we do declare that we will not intermeddle in such Disputes or
Quarrels, but freely permit the Sieur Ironsides to pursue the said Quarrel, as
he shall think fit, provided it be with such Decency as is usually observed
among Footmen.

8. We do also insist, that all Free-thinkers. i.e. Atheists, now inhabiting
Villa Graeca, do forthwith depart from our Dominions; and that the said Villa
be demolished in such Time and Manner as the Sieur B -- ly shall think fit.

9. That the Province of Scandal be erected into a Principality, and settled
upon our dear Kinsman and Ally, Abel Roper, and his Heirs for ever. That the
said Hereditary Succession be not invaded by Mr. Ironsides either directly or
indirectly, by Word or Writing; and that for the better Security, the
Expressions, Crisis, public Spirit, liberal Education, grave Man of Business,
as wise the best, etc. be hereafter never made use of, unless in company with
three or more Wits of his own Party, in which case it shall be allowed to
commend himself as much as he shall think fit; and the said Wits also may be
allowed to believe as much as they shall judge necessary.

10. That the Sieur Jacob, Librarian and Stationer to the Town of Button, be
permitted to reside in the said Town, till such time as he shall have sold off
all his Effects, excepting such as shall be specified Contraband Goods by the
present Treaty; as all Ambassadress's Speeches, etc.

11. That the said Sieur Jacob be not permitted to erect any public Booth or
Stage, or expose to Sight any Lions, Bears, or other Monsters; but that it
shall be lawful for the said Sieur Jacob to keep open House on the Fifth of
November, and dance himself for the Diversion of any Number of Kit-Kats or
Kitlings not exceeding Forty.

12. It shall also be permitted to the said Jacob to assist at the Buying,
Dressing, and burning the Pope, Pretender, and as many Cardinals as shall be
thought necessary, provided the said Pope, Pretender, and Cardinals, be bought,
dressed and burnt by an equal Assessment; and that there be always two or more
ancient and grave Persons, of any Quality not exceeding an E. to take care that
there be no Riot or Indecency committed at the said Solemnity. The D. of Mon --
ue bought a whole Pope at his own charge, which was seized by the Secretary of
State.


13. It shall not be permitted to burn Dr. Sacheverell, but it may be, and is
hereby lawful to burn the Reverend Dr. T -- p, provided the said Kitlings will
consent to burn two or more Preface Writers in company with him.

14. Lastly we do insist, that the Englishman, alias Ironsides, do at his own
Expense, cause forthwith to be printed, a new Edition of Cato, with a large
Margin, and a Hand in the said Margin, pointing to such Lines in the said Play,
which in any way belong to the D. of M. and also there shall be another Hand of
a different make, which shall declare what Lines in the said Play do belong to
Us, or to our Kinsman and dear Ally Abel Roper. We do also declare that the
said Edition shall in a very sincere and open manner, i.e. without any
Equivocation, or mental Reservation, declare at what Lines in the said Tragedy
of Cato the Sieur Englishman, alias Ironsides, with his Followers, did not
think fit to make a Noise, v.g. over against the Verse, It Is time to sheath the
Sword, and spare Mankind. Cat.

it shall be expressly said, No Clap, but a great Melancholy, and some little
Confusion.

ITEM Are not the Lives of those who draw the Sword
Entrusted to our Care? Cat.

Another melancholy Look. Ditto in two or three other Places, which we think
fit to reserve for the General Treaty. But at -- The Work of Ages --
The Roman Empire's fallen! -- Cat.

shall be a great Stamp, followed with a Clap of two Minutes long.

ITEM at When Vice prevails, and impious Men bear sway,
The Post of Honor is a private Station. Cat.

shall be printed, Biggest Clap, with a N.B. that several Kitlings swooned, and
that Nic. L -- mere was carried off for dead.

N.B. That in the said Play we do think fit to reserve to our own Use all such
Lines as shall make mention of any laborious Virtue, v.g. Toil, Hard Watching,
Abstinence, Want of Food, etc.

And now, Sir, upon these Preliminaries I will consent to a Treaty, and not
otherwise.


A. Modestly offered, truly -- Pray what do you take Mr. Ironsides for, that
you should think he would ever condescend to such Conditions.


T. Take him for, why for one of Mr. Congreve's odd Fellows, with a great deal
of your little sort of Wit, or if you please to let me give you his Character
plainer, for one who vainly imagines to become, from a Bankrupt in Poetry, a
Haberdasher in Politics; or if this wont do, I am sure he is like one of those
Wise Men who laugh at a Fool's Advice, which, God knows, is sometimes as fit to
be followed, as that of a Wit's.


A. Why, Sir, I pray do you know of any Fool that can help out our Friend at a
dead Lift; for Faith, as Affairs stand, he seems to want it.


T. Yes that I do, and as I am a publickspirited Man, and of a liberal
Education, I think my self bound to tell you, and it is, Sir, the Fool in Lear.


A. And what says he?


T. Say -- why he says, Let go thy Hold, when a great Wheel runs down Hill,
lest it break thy Neck by following; but the great one which goes upwards, let
it draw thee after. And then continues he, When a Wise Man gives you better
Counsel, give me mine again.


A. Why truly I am of the Fool's Opinion, and should be glad if others would
not despise it; but do you think, Sir, that Mr. Ironsides, who has been well
bred, a good Scholar, and a topping Wit, will ever strike Sail to a Fool.


T. I know not that, but I am sure now is the Crisis, and the Remedy may prove
too late, if deferred: Therefore prithee go to him, and, as from your self,
offer him some wholesome Counsel, -- it is pity the poor Fellow should be thrown
away.


A. Even go your self for me, for I have done with him: It was but on Monday
last when I went to see him at his Lodgings, in hopes to persuade him to a
Peace with you; but --.


T. But what?


A. What; nay I am almost ashamed to tell you; but when I knocked at the Door,
his Servant told me his Master was at home, but not stirring; and it was then
past Eleven: That he had had but a very bad Night. -- I was afraid indeed he
might have drunk some very bad Wine, or eat something that did not agree with
him, somewhat too course for a Gentleman of a fine Education; but his Servant
soon set me right, telling me he was sure his Master had had some Quarrel over
Night, for that he often started, and called out upon Toby and the Examiner,
talked much of Hereditary Right, and ever and anon would cry out, Oh Ad -- n!
and will thou leave me thus? Upon which account I immediately came away, giving
a strict Charge that all Swords, Pistols and Penknives, should be taken from
him; and in coming back -- Do you see this? His Head was broke in going to
visit Mr. S -- le.



T. Ay! How came you by it?


A. Why, by a Riot, which I very unfortunately fell into at my coming out of
his House: For you must know, the Street where he lives is very far gone from
the Doctrine he perpetually harrangues them with; and it is ten to one if you
pass it without meeting with some public spirited Cobbler or Tailor, who very
insolently will give you a Justle into the Kennel, should you offer at a
Question, he immediately tells you, it is his Duty, calls you Tory, damns you
for a Jacobite, and so goes about his Business. Nay, even the Constables of his
Parish have drunk so deep of his Cup, that they make no scruple to declare to
you, that, as they are Constables they are accountable to no Man; but that all
England is accountable to them; and this they will tell you with an Air of
Insolence. All which is to go for nothing, because forsooth at the End they
cry, God bless the House of Hanover; as if it were impossible to say so,
without being impertinent, saucy and troublesome, and somewhat else which
deserves a worse Name. And now I know where Mr. Ironsides had his accountable
and unaccountable.


T. No, no, I tell you the Constable had it of Mr. Ironsides, and not Mr.
Ironsides of the Constable; though the Constable indeed is one that understands
public Affairs very well. Besides, Mr. Ironsides does not absolutely say, that
he is not accountable to any body whatsoever, but that he is not accountable so
far as he is a Member of Parliament, or rather so long as he shall be. Out of
that Capacity he well knows he is accountable, how much, and to whom, and that
as soon as he shall cease to be the Representative of Stockbridge, and how soon
that will happen, God knows. This Account must begin --


A. Well, I Will take care and distinguish. You see however the Constable will
have no Reserve. But tell me, Mr. Toby, for you are a very generous Enemy, will
you not have some Pity, when that Day shall come?


T. What Day?


A. Why the Day of Accounts. -- Poor Mr. Ironsides! how will he then wish his
public Spirit had been less, and his private Economy more; That he had never
heard of Dunkirk; That he had never known the Importance of it. And --


T. How will he then wish he had retired betimes To his paternal Seat, the
Sabine Field,
Where his great Ancestors told with their own Hands, etc. Vid. Cat.



His Qualification, if he has any, would have been enough to have entitled him
to the Office of Justice of Peace, and he might have lived and died with a
moderate Reputation.


A. O Dunkirk, Dunkirk!


T. Ah! that cursed Port! -- But why did he not mind his Business, and leave
Politics to those who knew what to do with them: I had not then meddled with
him. But let him thank himself for it, I have washed my Hands.


A. Well, I wish to God he would accept of your Offers, though they are hard, and
come to a friendly Composition, for really he has been a Fellow of pretty Parts.


T. Has been -- True. -- but is no more. We allow, as a Tatler or Spectator, or
as he was now and then, a Piece of one, he had much Merit. In every Spec. his
towering Wit did soar,
And he was more admired, and more and more
Spec. lost in Politics, by all is mourned,
His Brain, alas! the important Port has turned.
O would he choose some fitter Theme-in Pastorals,
Declare if Philips or if Pope excells,
Or else translate some Mother in Distress,
For he grows less a Wit, and less and less.
And this is the best Advice I can give him, which if he will do, and grant me
my Preliminaries, with a very little more which I intend to ask, he shall have
Peace and Rest; if not --


A. But, Mr. Toby, are you sure Mr. Ironsides is fallen so low?


T. Fallen! ay, ay, prithee look on this.

[Pulls out his Englishman.
A. Hey de, what is here? [Reads.] Villain, Knave, Rogue, Fort, Dunkirk,
Business, all for the Pretender, an undeniable Argument, my Duty, true Light,
House of Hanover, Succession and Constitution, etc. Why this is never Mr. S --
l.


T. Nay, if you can get any body else to Father it, I am mistaken.


A. What, this Mr. Ironsides?


T. Ay, even That -- You may look as wild as you please, so it is -- "And alas,
poor Yorrick! I knew him, Horatio, a Fellow of infinite Jest, most excellent
Fancy: He has born me upon his Back a Thousand times, and how abhorred my
Imagination is now, my Gorge rises at it. -- Where be your Gibes now? your
Gamballs, your Songs, your Flashes of Merriment, that were wont to set the
Table in a Roar? -- Quite chap-fallen, etc. And thus, Sir, going a little
farther, perhaps we may trace the mighty Ironsides, till we find him stopping a
Bung-hole.


A. Now you are too curious, Toby.


T. No, no: Faith I only do it to show you to how vile Uses we may return.


A. By this last Speech, Mr. Toby, it plainly appears the Englishman is quite
dead.


T. The World, perhaps, may take him for a dead Man, and to say the Truth, many
an honest Man has been buried without half this Splutter; but you must know Mr.
Ironsides can die i.e. be dull with a Design. Vid. Spec.
when he pleases for Eight or Ten Days, and be never the worse for it: But be
assured, whenever this Fancy comes into his Head, there is some plaguey Plot at
the bottom.


A. Come, Mr. Toby, never fear his rising again, Clamatum est; so even a done
with your Treaty. What! you will not negotiate with a dead Man.


T. I tell you he is not dead, he is only dozing a little, that his Wit may
awake like Cato's Soul. Renewed in all its Strength, and take its flight,
And be a Match for Toby -- Cat.




A. Away, you are too severe now, what cannot Mr. Add -- n escape you? But, Sir,
give me leave to tell you, if you go on at this rate to play the Ridicule with
Shakespeare, and patch up a Buffoon from the Tags of Sentences, no one is
secure. And will any one think you sit tame under such an Indignation? In the
Name of common Sense, what do you take Mr. S -- l's Public Spirit for?


T. Take it for, why for the foul Fiend in Lear, which leads through Fire and
through Flame, through Sword and Whirlpool, over Bog and Quagmire, that has
laid Knives under his Pillow, and which perhaps may lay a Halter in his Pue.


A. If this be the Case, for God's sake some Charity for poor Dick, whom the
fou Fiend vexes -- But why eternally upon Plays?


T. Oh, because it is the modish way of drawing a Character, and was first set
on foot by a Gentleman that understands the World very well.


A. Enough, enough, I understand you; Him you mean, who drew his General from
Cato.


T. Yes, and from Thunder and Lightning, and Scipio, and a great Rock, and a
destroying Angel, and from Hannibal, and him that beat Hannibal, and from two
and thirty animate things, and inanimate without Number.


A. Well, I am glad however for one Reason; for now I shall never want
something to put me in mind of Mr. Ironsides, and I would not willingly forgot
him: It Is but turning over Shakespeare. In the Comedy of Errors I immediately
shall find him, as also in Much ado about Nothing: but sure I am, when I come
to Love's Labor lost, I shall then naturally think of the Importance of
Dunkirk, which he writ only, as he kindly tells us, for the Love of his Fellow
Subjects.


T. Importance of Dunkirk! away with that Trash.


A. What is not every Man free to set up for a Politician, especially when he
is sure of his own Sufficiency, and has all the Reason in the World to be under
Horrible Expectations.


T. A Politician! yes, provided it be in his Study. He may there indeed pull
down and erect, praise and condemn, and in short, make a Constitution
Hereditary or Elective, as he shall think fit; but I must insist he has no
Right openly to revile a Ministry, because he likes not the Faces of those that
compose it, which perhaps may be as good as his own, though not yet in Print in
Jacob's Shop. Besides, Sir, every Man in his way: Mr. Ironsides understands
Latin, understands the Classics, has writ three Comedies alias Farces, has
dined with a great Lord, and been at the burning of several Popes; but what has
this to do with Government? Mr. Dogget, I allow you may divert us in low
Comedy, but can never make a tolerable Figure with the Buskin and Truncheon --
What, I beseech you, would Mr. Ironsides think, if Will. Pinkethman should take
a fancy to play Cato, if at the beginning of the second Act he should rudely
break in, and disturb Mr. Booth, and his little Senate, and talk of his liberal
Education, of his being a grave Man and fit for Tragedy, sure neither He nor
his Circle of Pupils could forgive such an Impertinence.


A. Come, come, you are for stopping the Mouths of People, and restraining the
Liberty of the Press; a sure Sign, Mr. Toby, your Actions will not bear the Light.


T. As for stopping Mr. Ironsides's Mouth, I don't think it of moment enough to
go about it; but you know, Friend, it would be less offensive, were it somewhat
more cleanly, therefore I Will compound for washing it.


A. Agreed, and when it is washed, what would you have next.


T. Nay, provided it be clean, let him do what he will with it -- But I advise
him to return to his old inoffensive way of Life.


A. What do you take him for a Spider? You know he never spun out of his own
Bowels, or if he did, he cannot spin to Eternity.


T. Why even let him do as Spiders do, gather up his Web, and begin again.


A. How do you mean?


T. Mean, why since his Store is exhausted, let him give us the same a second
and a third time, that is, let him do as the Players do, (for I cannot yet
leave the Stage) study the Taste of the Town, and repeat that oftenest which he
finds goes down best: Let him daily put up a Bill, and declare what he intends
for our Diversion: As for Example, At the Shakespears Head on this present
Tuesday, being the 16th of this Instant, will be reprinted my Tatler concerning
Mohocks, or Whalebone Petticoats -- Now and then he may put up, At the Desire
of several Persons of Quality of the High-Church Party, will be presented my
Tatler about Atheists and Immoralists: Or, At the Desire of the Kit-cat Club
will be shown my Letter to a certain Lord, Reading a Penny, and no Money to be
returned after the first Paragraph is read --


A. All this is very pretty; but really, Sir, these Trifles are not for
Senators, No, we shall hear from Mr. Ironsides in another manner -- Mr.
Ironside's first Speech in Parliament, come a halfpenny a piece -- Or else
perhaps, Mr. Ironside's Dying Speech, with a full Account of all those
Jacobites who passed Sentence against him.


T. That Is as it shall happen; but if they don't turn him out, Woe be to them;
for he is about qualifying himself in such a Manner as will soon make him
terrible.


A. As how, I pray you?


T. Why it is said he will set out armed Cap-a-pee; that is, Sir, he will have H
-- d-n's Eloquence, L -- re's Modesty, and W -- le's Honesty; if so, beware of
Ironsides.


A. 'Slife Man, if this be true, he must to the Tower, right or wrong, or what
will become of the present Ministry? But more especially what will become of
the Lord and his Fool?


T. I know not that; but assure you, he shall have my Consent to stay in; and
more than that, you shall see I will take Leave of him in a very genteel
Manner; and whatever I may have shown him to be in this Dialogue, I will allow
him to be as follows -- If this will not suffice let him give the Challenge as
soon as he shall make himself ready, and have at him at Comedy, Tragedy,
Panegyric, Songs, Epigrams, Elegys, Catos, Ballads, and Lampoons. A clear
Stage and no Quarter.


To Mr. IRONSIDES.
'TWAS you who first did put to flight
The Amber Cane of sauntring Knight,
The Shoulder-knot, the Hat and Feather,
And Rocklowe worn in sultry Weather.
That SPEC, was you, or Part of you,
Which first subdued the red-heel'd Shoe.
The Snuff Box too, with Nun and Priest,
The fluttering Coxcomb's nauseous Jest.
The only Object that could suit
The delicate and well-bred Brute.
To Playhouse whensoe're you came
To SPEC, to Censure and Reclaim,
The guilty Chloe curtsy'd low,
The Fop his tributary Bow
Submissive paid, and strait would be
Demure, as if he came to see.
To Vice from Folly you could step,
Or rather, if you please, could leap.
Nor Atheist then, that is, Free-thinker,
Nor, for the sake of Rhyme, Free-drinker;
Nor others tedious to rehearse,
Below the Dignity of Verse;
However, disguised in Virtue's Shape,
SPEC's Guilt-pursuing Pen could escape.
Great was the Dread, all fell before ye;
Tam Fool quam Knave, tam Whig quam Tory.
In vain the Rich your Doors would crowd,
No Safeguard Money was allowed.
The Town and you did long wage War;
That is, 'twas long fight Dog, fight Bear.
But you, at last, did overcome,
And brought the Eternal Laurel home.
Great was the Glory then, I trow,
As great as that of Marlborough.
Nor did you rid us of a lesser Evil,
He beat the Bourbon, you the Devil.
FINIS,

