ELEGIES By Mr. DELAP.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY in PALL MALL. MDCCLX.

ELEGIES.
ELEGY I.
AH stay! -- thy wand oblivious over my eyes
Yet wave, mild power of sleep! -- my prayer is vain;
She flies, the partial nurse of nature flies,
With all her soothing visionary train.
Then let me forth; and near yon flowering thorn
Taste heaven's pure breath; while robbed in amber vest,
Fresh from her watery couch, the youthful morn
Steals on the slumbers of the drowzy east.
Lo, at her presence, the strong arm of toil,
With glittering sickle, mows the prime of may;
While yon poor hirelings, for the mine is rude soil,
Leave to their sleeping babes their cots of clay.
With sturdy step, they cheerly whistle over
The path that flings across the reedy plain,
To the deep caverns of that yawning moor,
Whose shaggy breast abhors the golden grain.
There, in her green dress, nature never roves,
Spreads the gay lawn, nor lifts the lordly pine,
They see no melting clouds refresh the groves,
No living landscape drawn by hands divine.
But many a fathom from the sunny breeze,
Their painful way in central night they wear;
Heave the pik'd axes on their bended knees,
Or sidelong the rough quarry slowly tear.
Yet while damp vapors chill each reeking brow,
How loudly laughs the jovial voice of mirth;
Pleased that the wages of the day allow
A social blaze to cheer their evening hearth.
There the chaste housewife, with maternal care,
Her thrifty distaf plies, in grave attire;
Blessed to behold her ruddy offspring wear
The full resemblance of their sturdy sire,
To spread with such coarse fare their homely board
As fits the genius of their little fate,
Free from those ills that haunt their pampered lord;
To be unhappy we must first be great.
In these dark caves, where heaven's paternal hand,
Far from the world, their private cradle laid,
They toil secure: the storms that strike the land
With wild dismay, roll harmless over their head.
For who, the load of weary life to bear,
Would from these murky mansions chase the slave?
Who cease to breathe heaven's pure and cheerful air,
To be but living tenants of the grave?
Yet harrass'd as they are, their face still wears
The reverend comeliness of green old age;
No stains their mind from worldly science bears;
Their ray of knowledge gleams from nature's page.
The few plain rules her simple lessons give,
They still through life with pleased attention ply;
Their helpless offspring bid them wish to live,
Their breathless parents bid them learn to die.
And surely heaven, whose penetrating sight
Pierces the soul, and reads its inmost groan,
Must see content, with more sincere delight,
Toil in the mine, than triumph on the throne;
See Charles V. of Spain, who in the full blaze of his glory, resigned the
throne to his son Philip, and retired to a convent in Estremadura.
Charles, more pleased, within the convent's gloom,
Seeking the slaves calm nights, their temperate days,
And peaceful passage to the private tomb,
Than diadem'd with glory's crimson rays.
Even the proud sage, whose deep mysterious brain
Has reasoned all the balm of hope away,
Convinced that learning's but ingenious pain,
Might hail their happier lot, and sighing say,
"Oh had I thus, within the dark profound,
"By daily labor earned my daily food;
'Or with yon seedsman sowed the quickening ground,
"Or cleav'd with ponderous ax the groaning wood!
"Full many an hour that now, though sped with art,
"On slow and dusky pinions sullen flies,
"Full many an anxious wish, or pang of heart,
"That reason's boasted anodyne defies,
"Had never been born. Nor had the uneasy mind,
"Pent in the prison of this mortal mould,
"Felt its ethereal energy confined,
"Its brightest sunshine in dark clouds enrolled.
"But native sense her modest course had run;
"Her saintly luster untaught virtue spread;
"Health crowned my toils, and ere the day was done,
"Sound sleep beneath some alder's rustling shade.
"Then, as I stole down life's declining hill,
"Here nature's gifts had furnished nature's needs,
"The brook's cold beverage every latent ill
"Had starved, that cloistered contemplation feeds.
"Till, in the peaceful shade of this lone bower,
"Or near yon shattered tower in silence laid,
"The orient orb, that watched my natal hour,
"Had brightly glittered over my mouldering head.
TO SICKNESS.
ELEGY II.
HOW blithe the flowery graces of the spring
From nature's wardrobe come: and hark how gay
Each glittering insect, hovering on the wing,
Sings their glad welcome to the fields of may.
They gaze, with greedy eye, each beauty over;
They suck the sweet breath of the blushing rose;
Sport in the gale, or sip the rainbow shower;
Their life's short day no pause of pleasure knows.
Like their's, dread Power, my cheerful morn displayed
The flattering promise of a golden noon,
Till each gay cloud, that sportive nature spread,
Died in the gloom of thy distempered frown.
Yes, ere I told my two and twentieth year,
Swift from thy quiver flew the deadly dart;
Harmless it past 'mid many a blithe compeer,
And found its fated entrance near my heart.
Pale as I lay beneath thy ebon wand,
I saw them rove through pleasure's flowery field;
I saw health paint them with her rosy hand,
Eager to burst my bonds, but forced to yield.
Yet while this mortal cot of mouldering clay
Shakes at the stroke of thy tremendous power,
Ah must the transient tenant of a day
Bear the rough blast of each tempestuous hour!
Say, shall the terrors thy pale flag unfolds,
Too rigid Queen! unnerve the soul's bright powers,
Till with a joyless smile the eye beholds
Art's magic charms, and nature's fairy bowers.
No, let me follow still, those bowers among,
Her flowery footsteps, as the goddess goes;
Let me, just lifted 'bove the unlettered throng,
Read the few books the learned few compose.
And suffer, when thy aweful pleasure calls
The soul to share her frail companion's smart,
Yet suffer me to taste the balm that falls,
From friendship's tongue, so sweet upon the heart.
Then, though each trembling nerve confess thy frown,
Even till this anxious being shall become
But a brief name upon a little stone,
Without one murmur I embrace my doom.
For many a virtue, sheltered from mankind,
Lives calm with thee, and lord over each desire;
And many a feeble frame, whose mighty mind
Each muse has touched with her immortal fire.
Even Mr. POPE.
He, sole terror of a venal age,
The tuneful bard, whose philosophic soul,
With such bright radiance glowed on Virtue's page,
Learned many a lesson from thy moral school.
He Mr. GRAY.
too, who "mounts and keeps his distant way,"
His daring mind thy humanizing glooms
Have tempered with a melancholy ray,
And taught to warble 'mid the village tombs.
Yes, goddess, to thy temple's deep recess
I come; and lay for ever at its door
The siren throng of follies numberless,
Nor wish their flattering songs should sooth me more.
Thy decent garb shall oer my limbs be spread,
Thy hand shall lead me to thy sober train,
Who here retired, with pensive pleasure tread
The silent windings of thy dark domain.
Hither the cherub charity shall fly
From her bright orb, and brooding over my mind,
For misery raise a sympathizing sigh,
Pardon for foes, and love for humankind.
Then while ambition's trump, from age to age
Its slaughtered millions boasts; while fame shall rear
Her deathless trophies over the bard and sage,
Be mine the widow's sigh, the orphan's prayer.
The END.

