THE LETTERS.

THE Occasional Miscellany, IN PROSE and VERSE.

CONSISTING OF, A VARIETY of LETTERS, Written originally to a YOUNG GENTLEMAN
Who DESIGNED to go into HOLY ORDERS; With a SPECIMEN of SACRED POETRY and
SERMONS.

Omne tulit Punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. HOR. VOL. I.

By JOHN WALLIS, A. M. late of Queen 's College, Oxford.

NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE: Printed by JOHN GOODING, on the Si^^. 1748.

TO Her Grace the Duchess OF RICHMOND and LENOX.
Madam,
TO fly to the BEAUTIFUL, the GOOD, and the GREAT, as to GUARDIAN-ANGELS, for
Protection, has been the Practice of humble Adventurers for Fame in all Ages;
but which of these Virtues out shines the other in your GRACE, requires a nicer
Judgment than mine to determine. I can only distinguish, that they give a kind
of Glory and Luster to each other: I can only say, they are so eminently
conspicuous together, as to make your GRACE'S Person seem to the wondering Eye
like a Paradise, and your Soul a Cherubim within to guard it. I can only
discover to the World a Part of your GRACE'S Excellencies, and that too
according to the Measure of my own Weakness. Like those who have surveyed some
Celestial Luminary or Constellation, I can only tell of a new and shining World
above me, but not all the Riches and Glories of the Place.

THERE are some of your GRACE'S Virtues, of a public Nature, such as Candor,
Benevolence, and Generosity, which display themselves in such an amiable
Variety of Lights, that not to perceive them, or to deny them to be YOURS,
would be as ungrateful as not to perceive, or to deny the SUN'S Existence, at
the same Time that we feel its beneficial and extensive Influence. The noble
Manner in which your GRACE seems to enjoy Riches, would almost tempt one to
think, that FORTUNE, if I may so speak, had consulted REASON when she bestowed
them on YOU, since the World has more Cause to wish you the Addition, than envy
you the Abundance.

-- For Merit hence is heard
Amidst its Blushes; dawning Arts arise;
The gloomy Clouds, which Ignorance or Fear
Spread over the Paths of Virtue, are dispelled;
Servility retires, and every Heart
With public Cares is warmed. --
YOUR GRACE'S Encouragement of Learning is the more extraordinary at a Time
when many think they but too well recompense an Author, if they honor him with
a barren Praise. -- I have the public Voice to attest what I have now advanced
concerning your GRACE, and therefore, I hope, I shall not be suspected of
uttering those obliging Falsehoods, which many of our Moderns can do without
blushing.

AND here, MADAM, I am proud that I cannot flatter, if I say YOUR private
Virtues have deserved to be set as an Example to a less-degenerate,
less-tainted Age. They approach so near to Singularity in ours, that I can
hardly make a Panegyric to your GRACE, without a Satyr on many others: And
therefore this is a Theme that I must cast in Shades, and leave your GRACE to
the Testimony and Satisfaction of your own Mind, which, though a silent Encomium,
is still the best. This epistolary Address keeps its Distance, and goes no
farther than my Heart. There it is I feel all the Transport and Joy imaginable,
when I see Virtue encouraged, and Learning patronis'd and rewarded by your
GRACE'S noble Family. -- That it may long enjoy the full Vintage of its flowing
Honors, is the sincere and earnest Wish of,

Madam, Your Grace 's Most obedient, Most humble, and Most devoted Servant,
JOHN WALLIS.

THE PREFACE.
Written by a FRIEND.
THE Author of these Volumes is too well convinced of his own Weakness, to be
pleased with any thing he has written; and he has so little of the Self-Opinion
of a Writer in him, that he has imposed the Task upon another to say something
concerning his Work. After a Review of so considerable a Body of Men as the
Clergy, he has modestly attempted to show, why the Number of good Orators among
them is so inconsiderable; why so few, so very few, of those who are bred to
the Church, become Masters of the Force and Charms of Eloquence.

THOUGH he may not have pointed out all the several Reasons that might be
assigned for it, yet in Obedience to a young Gentleman's Commands, who designed
to go into HOLY ORDERS, he has very freely let him into his Sentiments about
every Particular relating to this Subject. And he entered the more boldly upon
the Enquiry, from this Consideration, that no Embellishment of Style could be
expected from him in a Letter. Epistolary Writing must resemble a natural
Conversation, though it may be a little better than what the Generality of People
are supposed to speak Extempore, as a PICTURE may be like, though handsomer than
the Original.

IN a Disquisition of so much Importance, he thought it no ill Method to
exhibit the most material Accomplishments required in a DIVINE, and the
Blemishes he ought carefully to beware of, and to set in the most conspicuous
Point of View obvious Examples for Illustrationsake. He has endeavored to
produce such Instances of Offenders, both in Eloquence and Morals, as may
convince any impartial Person, that, by proper Means, Coxcomb after Coxcomb may
be gently led off the sacred Stage, and persuaded to part with every glaring
Particularity which drew them into the Ministry or the Pulpit to be laughed at.
Some Men have a strange Inclination to branch out into Extremes, and will be
dilating themselves into the Ridiculous, unless some benevolent Hand takes the
Trouble to prune their Luxuriances, to pare away the Redundancies of Fancy,
till they are left in the becoming Simplicity of Action and Delivery.

HAD some of our modern Preachers but the least Spark of Emulation in them,
they would blush to find the little Progress they have made in the Study of
Eloquence, at an Age in which many others have succeeded so well, as to be able
to give Sweetness to the Eye, Charm to the Tongue, and Grace to Motion, and to
point their Arguments with all the Life and Spirit, with all the Edge and
Flame, that Wit, or Judgment, or Example, could give them.

IT IS strange, indeed, to see how differently the VANITY of Preachers runs.
It Is the Boast of many a one, of but a raw Fancy, and untaught unpracticed Ear,
which has not had an Opportunity to form itself, and become truly musical, that
by his Genius alone, and a natural Rapidity of Style and Thought, and an
elaborate Freedom and Facility of Action, he is able to carry all the
Affections of his Hearers before him: Others again, with a wondrous affected
Air, lisp in the Pulpit as in their Cradles; and their pretty stammering
Tongues, which nothing besides their Ignorance can excuse, speak continually in
wretched Pun and Quibble: And even a later Race, scarce free of this Infirmity,
and aiming at a false Sublime, with crowded Simile and mixed Metaphor, become
rather ridiculous in endeavoring to discover the Pains they have taken to be
oratorical.

THE Way of Form and Method in many of the Sermons we hear preached, has so
little Force toward the winning our Attention, that it is apter to tire us,
than the Meter of the old Ballad of The Children in the Wood. We no sooner hear
the Text given out, the Subject divided and subdivided, (with first of the
first, and so forth, as Order requires than instantly we begin a Strife with
Nature, which otherwise might surprise us in the soft Fetters of Sleep; to the
great Disgrace of the Preacher, and Scandal of the Audience.

THE Manner of dividing a Discourse into plain FIRSTS and SECONDS only, is of
late grown so much out of Fashion, I think, that it is the unpolished
Country-Orator alone almost, who presents his Audience with a DIVISIBLE
DISCOURSE The well-bred Court-Divine exhorts in POLITE ESSAY, and is ashamed to
bring his simple TWOS and THREES concerning HELL TORMENTS before a fashionable
Assembly.

THE Truth of all this may easily be apprehended by those who know any thing of
the present State of Pulpit-Eloquence, or are in the least fitted to judge of
the Manner of the common Preachers of the Times.

WHOEVER has been an Observer of Action and Grace in Preaching, must of
Necessity have discovered the great Difference in this Respect, between such
Persons as have had the Assistance of Nature and a simple rude Education only,
and such as have had the Advantage of forming themselves under the best Masters
at OXFORD or CAMBRIDGE. There are some Men, indeed, so happily formed by Nature
herself, that with the greatest Simplicity or Rudeness of Education, they have
still something of a natural Grace and Comeliness in their Action and Delivery:
And there are others of a better Education, who by a wrong Aim, and injudicious
Affectation of Grace, are of all People the farthest removed from it. It Is
undeniable, however, that the Perfection of Grace in Preaching can be found
only among the People of a liberal Education. And even among the graceful of
this kind, those still are found the gracefullest, who early in their Youth
have learned their Exercises under the best and ablest Masters, such as a An
eminent Tutor at QUEEN's College, OXON.
FOTHERGILL or a A Tutor at St JOHN's College, CAMBRIDGE.
RUTHERFORTH.

IT IS remarked, that by the Help of Imitation, and the Force of Example merely,
such a Comeliness of Language and Delivery is acquired, with such apt Motions
and Freedom of Action, as on all ordinary Occasions may enable a Man to demean
himself prettily enough in the Pulpit: But when, upon farther Occasion, Trial
is made in an extraordinary Way; when Sermons of the genteeler kind are to be
preached, 'twill easily appear who of the Preachers have been formed by the
most excellent Rudiments and Masters; and who, on the other Side, have wanted
the Opportunity and Means of forming themselves after the better Models.
Methinks, I can distinguish the Man of liberal Education, and pregnant Genius,
by the fine Drapery, and beautiful Coloring of his Style, which always has a
certain Fullness without Grossness, is gentle, yet lively and strong, and such
that its Excellency lies in its equally partaking a moderate Share of both
kinds: I observe it is attended with a Coloring which appears handsome, not
from the Daubing of Paint, but the Flush of Health.

I AM sensible that other Topics, than what my Friend's Letters are upon,
would have been more to the Liking of some People. For Human Nature is so
formed, that he who flatters Men for his own Interest, pleases more, than he
who has no View but Public Benefit. And some Men there are of so confused a
Thought, and so irregularly formed within themselves, that it is no more than
natural for them to be displeased, and to find Fault with the best-natur'd and
most benevolent Performances; but about such our Author need not be under the
least Concern, as to what their Sentiments of him may be, so long as he has the
Countenance and Encouragement of the most worthy of his Profession. -- A Man
that should pursue Learning even with the disinterested Spirit of a AMID the
Van of PERSIA was a Youth,
Named TERIBAZUS, not for golden Stores,
Not for wide Pastures traversed over with Herds,
With bleating Thousands, or with bounding Steeds,
Nor yet for Power, nor splendid Honor famed.
Rich was his Mind in every Art divine,
And through the Paths of Science had he walked
The Votary of Wisdom. In the Years,
When tender Down invests the ruddy Cheek,
He with the MAGI turned the hallowed Page
Of ZOROASTRES; then his towering Soul
High on the Plumes of Contemplation soared,
And from the lofty BABYLONIAN Fane
With learned CHALDEANS traced the mystic Sphere;
There numbered over the vivid Fires, that gleam
Upon the dusky Bosom of the Night.
Nor on the Sands of GANGES were unheard
The INDIAN Sages, from sequestered Bowers
While, as Attention wondered, they disclosed
The Powers of Nature; whether in the Woods,
The fruitful Glebe, or Flower, or healing Plant,
The limpid Waters, or the ambient Air,
Or in the purer Element of Fire.
The fertile Plains, where great SESOSTRIS reigned,
Mysterious EGYPT next the Youth surveyed,
From ELEPHANTIS, where impetuous NILE
Precipitates his Waters, to the Sea,
Which far below receives the sev'nfold Stream.
Thence over the IONICK Coast he strayed, nor passed
MILETUS by, which once enraptured heard
The Tongue of THALES, nor PRIENE's Walls
Where Wisdom dwelt with BIAS, nor the Seat
Of PITTACUS along the LESBIAN Shore.
Here two melodious Numbers charmed his Ear,
Which flowed from ORPHEUS and MUSAEUS old,
And thee, O Father of immortal Verse,
MAEONIDES! whose Strains through every Age
Time with his own eternal Lip shall sing. --
Back to his native SUSA then he turned
His wandering Steps." --
Vide Mr GLOVER' 's LEONIDAS, L. 5.
TERIBAZUS, would need more than all the Abilities of that noble PERSIAN to
convince the worthless Part of the World of his Discretion, unless he had made
some Improvement in the Pleasures of the Palate, in Wealth and Luxury.

IT will evidently appear, that from the Beginning of this epistolatory Work he
has varied his Style according to the Nature of the Subject he is upon, and has
taken the Liberty now and then to depart a little from the Course of it, that
he might introduce a greater Variety of Sentiments, indulge his Correspondent
with agreeable Digressions, to entertain and relieve his Juvenile Mind, whose
Improvement, Pleasure, and Instruction, he had solely in View.

WHATEVER some Men may think, the Letters are real, and not precise and formal
Treatises, designed for the Press; though it is become indeed so common a Practice
among Authors, to feign a Correspondency, and give the Title of Private
Letters, to Pieces addressed to the Public, that I should not at all wonder,
if some People looked upon these Epistles merely as fictitious; like those of
SENECA to his Friend LUCILIUS, or those of ancient Sophists, Grammarians, or
Rhetoricians.

IT will be expected, perhaps, that I should say something with regard to the
POEM of THE ROYAL PENITENT, and THE EXHORTATION: The Design of these is to show
the Advantage that SACRED has over PROFANE POETRY. The Treasures of it are
almost infinite; and it fares with those that study it, as with a Traveller,
when he ascends a rising Ground: every new Step enlarges his Horizon, and
presents new Countries, new Pleasures to his Eye. Our Northern Island will in
Time, I hope, burn with as many Altars to the SACRED MUSE, as did formerly in
CYPRUS, DELPHOS, or any of those warmer GRECIAN Climates, to VENUS and APOLLO.

THE SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A
MArk Anesley, Esquire John Anesley, Esquire Adam Askew, M. D. The Rev. Mr Andrews, A.
M. John Airy, Esquire The Rev. Mr Armstrong, Vicar of Heddon on the Wall The Rev.
Mr Alderson. The Rev. Mr Allen The Rev. Mr Allison Mr William Archer Mr John
Archer Mr Nicholas Armstrong Mr Richard Armstrong Mr Atkinson Mr Robert
Akenhead, jun. Mr Henry Atkinson Mr James Atkinson Mr Jeremiah Adderton
B
Sir Edward Blackett, Bart. John Burden, Esquire 2 Sets William Big, Esquire 2 Sets
Mr Edward Big The Rev. Dr Bland, Prebendary of Durham, etc. Henry
Richmond-Brougham, Esquire High Sheriff for Cumberland Nicholas Brown, Esquire High
Sheriff for Northumberland Alexander Brown, Esquire Mr Brown Mr Nicholas Brown Mr
Isaac Brown George Bows, Esquire Mrs Bacon Montague Brook, Esquire The Rev. Mr Burrel,
A. M. Vicar of Chatton Robert Burrel, Esquire Mr Matthew Bell Mr Bannister Bails Mr
Bramwell Mr Peter Blenkinsop Mr Bryson, Bookseller Mr Barber, Bookseller Mr
Thomas Bird
C
Sir Thomas Clavering, Bart. The Rev. Dr Cooper, Dean of Durham, etc. Lady
Codrington, jun. Edward Collingwood, Esquire 2 Sets Henry Collingwood, Esquire
Alexander Collingwood, Esquire Thomas Clennel, Esquire Mr Clennel, Gentleman-Commoner
of Corpus Christi, Oxford Percival Clennel, Esquire The Rev. Mr Crow, A. M. Vicar
of Gilling, 2 Sets. William Cooper, M. D. The Rev. Mr Cooper, A. M. Rector of
Kirk-Bride William Carr, Esquire Mr John Carr Mr Christopher Carr Mr Robert Claxton
Mr George Colepitts The Rev. Mr Clayton, A. M. Mr Crosby Forster Charlton, Esquire
Mr Sacheveral Crawford Mr William Cookson Mr Benjamin Cook The Rev. Mr Coxon Mr
Cust The Rev. Mr Cockburn, A. M. Vicar of Long-Horsley
D
Francis Blake-Delaval, Esquire The Rev. Mr Thomas Dockwray, A. M. The Rev. Mr
Thomas Dockwray, A. B. of St John's College, Cambridge The Rev. Mr Davison, A.
M. Vicar of Ellingham The Rev. Mr Robert Davison, A. M. Mr Dixon Mr John Dixon
Mr Thomas Dixon Mr William Dixon Mr George Dixon Mr John Dean Mr Dawes, A. M.
Mr Thomas Dobison Mr John Dent Mr Anthony Dunn John Dawson, Esquire
E
Sir Robert Eden, Baronet The Rev. Dr Eden, Prebendary of Durham, etc. The Rev.
John Ellison, A. M. Vicar of Bedlington, etc. The Rev. Mr Nathaniel Ellison, A.
M. Vicar of Kirkwhelpington Mr Robert Ellison
F
John Fenwick, Esquire Knight of the Shire for Northumberland Mrs Fenwick Miss
Fenwick Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire Mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne, 2 Sets Robert
Fenwick, Esquire 2 Sets Robert Fenwick, Esquire The Rev. Mr Fenwick, Vicar of Bolam
Christopher Fawcett, Esquire Recorder of Newcastle upon Tyne The Rev. Mr
Fetherstonehaugh, B. D. Mr Ferdinando Bacon Forster, A. M. Mr Joseph Forster,
A. M. Mr Ralph Forster Matthew Forster, M. D. Mr Collingwood Forster Mr John
Forster The Rev. Mr James Forster Mr Timothy Forster Mr Falder Henry Fletcher,
Esquire The Rev. Mr Fisher Mr Fleming, Bookseller
G
The Rt Rev. Martin, Lord Bishop of Gloucester Sir Henry Gray, Bart. Henry
Gray, Esquire Ralph William Gray, Esquire The Rev. Mr Gisburn, Prebendary of Durham,
etc. Richard Gilpin, Esquire Recorder of Carlisle Mr Grieve Richard Grieve, Esquire Mr
Brignol Grainge Mr Greenwood The Rev. Mr Guelson The Rev. Mr Griffiths Mr
Edward Gallon Mr John Gallon The Rev. Mr Goodday Mr Graham, Bookseller
H
Sir Richard Hilton, Bart. 2 Sets The Rev. Mr Head, Prebendary of Carlisle Miss
Melisena Harcourt James Hargrave, Esquire Henry Hudson, Esquire -- Honeywood, Esquire
Christopher Hunter, M.D. Mr Hunter Mr Isaac Hezlip Robert Hezelrige, Esquire The
Rev Mr Hodgson, A.M. Vicar of Brough under Stainmore Mr William Hodgson,
Bookseller The Rev. Mr Hartley, Vicar of Kirbystephen The Rev. Mr Henderson,
Vicar of Felton The Rev. Mr Hall, Vicar of Long-houghton The Rev. Mr Hall Mrs
Humphreys The Rev. Mr Holden Mr Edward Henzill Mr Thomas Hindmarch Mr Thomas
Haddon The Rev. Mr Harrison
I
The Rev. Mr Johnston, Prebendary of Durham, etc. The Rev. Mr Johnston, Rector
of Corsonside Francis Johnston, M.D. Mr Johnston Mr Jobson
K
The Rev. Dr Knatchbull, Prebendary of Durham, etc. The Rev. Mr Kitching Mr
Kinliside Mr Jessery Kell
L
Sir Guilfred Lawson, Bart. The Rev. Mr Wilfred Lawson, Vicar of Warkworth The
Rev. Mr Law, Archdeacon of Carlisle The Rev. Dr James Leslie, Prebendary of
Durham, etc. The Rev. Mr Lamb, A.M. Rector of Gateshead, etc. The Rev. Mr Lamb,
Vicar of Norum Cuthbert Lambert, M.D. Mr William Lock The Rev. Mr Lancaster The
Rev. Mr Langhorn The Rev. Mr John Langhorn Mr Lisle Mr George Lisle Mr Lake Mrs
Lake, 2 Sets
M
Sir William Middleton, Bart. Knight of the Shire for Northumberland The Rev.
Dr Mangy, Prebendary of Durham, etc. Mr James Moncaster, A.M. Mr Moncaster, 2
Sets Mr John Mulcaster The Rev. Mr Morland, A.M. Vicar of Penrith, etc. The
Rev. Mr Marsh, A.M. Rector of Ford The Rev. Mr Richard Marsh, A.B. of Christ's
College, Cambridge The Rev. Mr Mitford, Vicar of Long Edlingham The Rev. Mr
Maddison Mrs Meaburn George Marshal, Esquire The Rev. Mr Metcalf The Rev. Mr Monton
Mr Mills
N
The Rev. Mr Oliver Naylor, A.M. Prebendary of Lincoln, etc. The Rev. Mr Noble,
A.M. The Rev. Mr Noble, Rector of Croglin The Rev. Mr Thomas Noble The Rev. Mr
Noble, Master of Scorton School Mr John Noel The Rev. Mr Nicholson The New
Printing-Office in Newcastle, 4 Sets
O
Henry Ogle, Esquire William Ogle, Esquire William Ord, Esquire Francis Ord, Esquire Mr John
Ord, of Morpeth Mr John Ord, of Newcastle
P
Madam Honoria Prat Mrs Place Christopher Pattenson, Esquire 2 Sets The Rev. Mr
Pattenson, Rector of Melmerby, etc. Mr Pawson, 2 Sets Mr Proctor Mr Anthony
Proctor The Rev. Mr Preston, Vicar of Ninekirks The Rev. Mr Plaskett, Vicar of
Brampton The Rev. Mr Petrie Mr Michael Pearson Mr Henry Peareth The Public
Library of Scorton School
R
Her Grace the Duchess of Richmond, 6 Sets The Right Hon. the Lord
Ravensworth, 2 Sets Matthew Ridley, Esquire Member of Parliament for Newcastle upon
Tyne The Rev. Dr Robinson, Prebendary of Peterborough and Llandaff John Romer,
Esquire Captain in the Honorable Lt Genesis Barrel's Regiment of Foot Joseph Reay,
Esquire The Rev. Mr Ritson, Vicar of Egremond The Rev. Mr Robertson, Vicar of
Holy-Island Mr Christopher Rutter The Rev. Mr Radley, Rector of Ingram The Rev.
Mr Rawling John Reed, Esquire Robert Rhoddam, Esquire Mr John Rotheram, of Queen's
College's, Oxford Mr Richard Routledge Mr Romney Mr William Romney Mr
Richardson Mr John Richardson Mr Richardson, Bookseller Mr Reed, Bookseller
S
The Right Hon. Henry Earl of Shelbourn, 6 Sets Lady Savile The Rev. Dr Sharp,
Archdeacon of Northumberland, etc. The Rev. Mr Stillingfleet, Prebendary of
Durham, etc. The Rev. Dr Stonehewer, Rector of Houghtonle-Spring Miss Judith
Storer The Rev. Mr Charles Stoddart, Rector of Whalton, etc. The Rev. Mr
Stoddart, of Alnwick Joseph Studholme, Esquire John Stephenson, Esquire Mr William
Stephenson John Simpson, Esquire Ralph Sowerby, Esquire The Rev. Mr Swinburn The Rev.
Mr Simkoe, Vicar of Woodhorn Mr William Smart Mr Soulsby Mr Langdale Sunderland
Mr Shaftoe The Rev. Mr Skelly, Vicar of Stockton, etc. The Rev. Mr Stockdale,
Vicar of Brankstone The Rev. Mr Stockdale, A.B. of Chester-le street Mr Smith
The Rev. Mr Smith The Rev. Mr Smith, A.B. Mr Strother Edward Stuart, Esquire Mr
John Shell The Rev. Mr Salkeld, Vicar of Shilbottle The Rev. Mr Salkeld, of
Rothbury The Rev. Mr Shotten The Rev. Mr Shield The Rev. Mr Storey The Rev. Mr
Sewel
T
The Rev. Dr Tomlinson, Prebendary of St Paul's, etc. The Rev. Mr Thorp, A.M.
Vicar of Chillingham, etc. The Rev. Mr Gustavus Thompson, A.M. Chaplain to the
Bishop of Carlisle The Rev. Mr Thompson, Rector of Sturmer The Rev. Mr
Twentyman Mr Thomas Threlkeld Henry Tulip, Esquire Middleton Teasdale, Esquire
V.
The Hon. Henry Vane, Esquire Lady Grace Vane The Hon. Thomas Vane, Esquire Lionel
Vane, Esquire
W
The Rev. Mr Wastell, A.M. Rector of Simonburn, 2 Sets Matthew White, Esquire Mr
Thomas Waters, 2 Sets Mr Matthew Waters Mr William Wharton Mr Richard Wharton,
Commoner of Queen's College, Oxford Wadham Wyndham, Esquire Wadham Wyndham, Esquire
Captain in his Grace the Duke of Montagu's Dragoon-Guards Capt. Thomas Wallis
Mr John Wallis The Rev. Mr Richard Wallis, A.M. of Queen's College, Oxford, 2
Sets Mr Anthony Wallis Miss Anne Wallis Miss Esther Wallis Miss Ruth Wallis
John Wilson, Esquire Major in Barrel's Regiment Mr Cuthbert Wilson, A.M. of Queen's
College, Oxford The Rev. Mr Wilson, A.M. The Rev. Mr Wilson Mr Charles Wilson
Mr Benjamin Wilson Mr John Werge, of St John's College, Cambridge Mr
Collingwood Wilkie The Rev. Mr Ward The Rev. Mr Charles Ward, A.M. The Rev. Mr
Williamson, A.B. Mr Joseph Williamson, A.B. John Wilkinson, Esquire The Rev. Mr
Wilkinson, A.M. Mr James Wilkinson Mr John Widdrington Mr Webbersley Mr
Williams Thomas Wood, Esquire Mr Thomas Wood Mr Walton Stephen Watson, Esquire The Rev.
Mr Watson, Vicar of Balmbrough The Rev. Mr Watson Mr John Watson The Rev. Mr
Woof, Vicar of Lessbury The Rev. Mr Wrangham, A. B. The Rev. Mr Woolfall Mr
Teasdale White Mr Nicholas Whitehead The Rev. Mr Wetherel
Y
Samuel Younghusband, Esquire Mr Timothy Yates, of London Came to hand since the
first Part of the Subscribers were put to the Press. The Rev. Mr George
Fothergill, B. D. The Rev. Mr Thomas Fothergill, A. M. of Queen's College,
Oxford Mr William Huetson, of Gray's Inn, London George Cuthbertson, Esquire Mr
William Lowes Mr Robert Lowes Mr William Aynsley Mr Gabriel Hall Mr William
Gibson Mr Thomas Davidson Mr Richard Burdus Mr Thomas Fish
LETTER I.
DEAR SIR,
I AM glad to hear of your Resolution to enter into the Service of GOD; you
could not possibly choose a better Master, provided you are but sufficiently
qualified to serve such a Master well, and to acquit yourself with Honor in
the Exercise of the ministerial Office. All the Duties and Qualifications which
are requisite to the Pastoral Charge, seem to me to be summoned up in these few
Words of the Apostle St PAUL to TIMOTHY; -- 2 Timothy ii. 15.
Study to show thyself approved unto GOD, a WORKMAN that needs not be
ashamed, rightly dividing the WORD of TRUTH. -- For by being approved unto GOD,
does not probably signify more than the pleasing him, fearing, loving, and
honoring him does; that is, by leading a religious and virtuous Life,
according to the Rules of the Gospel; thus Romans xvi. 10.
APELLES is said to be approved in CHRIST, and he is said to be the (...), the
good, the upright, or approved Man; not he who commends himself, but whom the
LORD 2 Cor. x. 18.
commends. By being a Workman that needs not be ashamed, I take to be meant
such an one who is skilful in his Profession, one that is qualified with
competent Learning and Skill for the Discharge of the Pastoral Office; for a
Minister that wants these Qualifications had need to be ashamed, because it is a
very great Shame for any Workman whatsoever to work or practice in that
Profession or Calling which he does not understand; for a Man cannot have the
Face so much as to excuse his Ignorance in that Matter which he professes to
know. By rightly dividing the Word of Truth, I understand the teaching sound
and orthodox Doctrine, the interpreting the Scripture truly and genuinely,
without heretical, false, erroneous, or whimsical Glosses, which St PAUL does
so often caution against in many Places of his EPISTLES. For dividing the WORD
signifies teaching or interpreting it, being a Metaphor probably taken from the
JEWISH Sections or Divisions of the LAW, one Division of which was read and
commented upon every Sabbath Day; so that to divide the WORD, came to signify
the interpreting, commenting, or preaching upon such a Division of it.

A GOOD Life then, according to the APOSTLE, is a Duty which is particularly
incumbent upon us of the Clergy; -- we must study to approve ourselves unto
GOD. Colors artfully spread upon Canvas may entertain the Eye, but never
affect the Heart; and he, who takes no Care to add to the natural Graces of his
Eloquence any excellent Qualities, may be allowed still to amuse, as a PICTURE,
but not to triumph over the Affections of his Auditors. The Eloquence of a bad
Man is so involved in Smoke, that it does not appear in half its Beauty; but
that of a good Man shows itself in such a Variety of corresponding agreeable
Lights, that it shines, as it were, in an universal Blaze; his Sermons receive
a Luster from his Life, and his Delivery, though not so graceful as that of a
TILLOTSON, has however the Power of charming. Without this irradiating Power,
the proudest Divine ought to know, whatever he may think to the contrary, that
his finest Sentiments, both in his Pulpit-Harangues, and in common
Conversation, are uninform'd and dead. It Is the good, the upright, the approved
Man only can deliver his Discourse or his Opinion with Dignity, can rouse a
desponding, or check an outrageous Sinner; can chastise the Enormities of the
Age, or applaud Virtue, Innocence, and Integrity. For how can the vicious
Preacher be warm in exhorting to Devotion? How can he be vehement in reclaiming
the Reprobate? How can be gracefully recommend Piety and Virtue? How can he be
successful in soothing the afflicted or desponding Christian? It Is impossible
that a Hearer should ever be impressed with Sorrow, with Hatred, with
Detestation of Sin, with Dread of Punishment; it is impossible to move him to
Penitence, to Tears, and Contrition, unless the Preacher shall appear possessed
of all these good Dispositions which he aims to awaken in others. A wicked
Clergyman is a ridiculous Character; there is never a SUNDAY he goes to Church,
but his Congregation are Witnesses of his Folly and Impudence; he never ascends
the ROSTRUM, but he undergoes a severe Trial, and every Time he reads PRAYERS
it is renewed. For there is scarcely any one who hears him that has not a
quicker, a more piercing Eye to the Defects of his Life, than the Beauties of
his Delivery; so that of whatsoever Complexion his Immoralities may be, they
cast a Cloud over all his Excellencies. I must own, indeed, he that has made
but one false Step, or committed one single Error in Life, is not immediately
pronounced a Stranger to Virtue and Goodness; the good-natured World always
throws the Mantle of Charity over it, because it is impossible for frail Man to
be free from all Fault. I have known it an Advantage to many that they have
committed Mistakes in their first setting out in the World, because they have
thus improved their Caution and Prudence; and the Remembrance of former
Miscarriages, has put them upon repairing little Slips with extraordinary
Success. To desire, indeed, to be free from all Fault, whilst we are frail Men,
is an extravagant Pitch of Arrogance; and as often to stumble against the same
Stone, and not to learn Caution, even when the Event chastises our Rashness, is
even far beneath the Character of a Man.

As there is nothing so distasteful to an Audience as a bad Clergyman, so there
is nothing they so much adore as a good one. They are struck with the Beauty of
INWARD CHARACTER, the Harmony and Numbers of the HEART, the just Regulation of
the AFFECTIONS, which form the Manners of an ORATOR.

I SHALL therefore enter into a more particular Discussion of those Virtues, or
moral Qualifications, which the ROMAN Orator styles the HANDMAIDS of ELOQUENCE;
and which we of this Profession are under an indispensible Obligation to
practice, if we would approve ourselves unto GOD, or our Hearers, as eloquent
DIVINES.

THE first Virtue I shall mention, as more particularly necessary for us to
practice, is HUMILITY. There is not, indeed, any Degree of Meanness in the
Pastoral Office which should engage Clergymen to be more condescensive than
others; for they have rather Reason to value themselves upon the Dignity of it.
But such is the Nature of their Employ, that it being their Business to assist
and instruct Persons of all Ranks and Qualities, as well the POOR as the RICH,
it is impossible, without a considerable Degree of Humility and Condescension,
that they should, in any tolerable Measure, perform their Duty. We must with as
much Sincerity and Application instruct the poorest Child in our Parish in the
Principles of Religion, as if we had in Charge the Son of CAESAR. We must with
as great Readiness visit in their Sickness the poor Almsman and Beggar in their
squalid Cotrage, as we do those great Persons that lie expiring in Pomp and
Splendour. It Is an intolerable Arrogance for us, upon a great Preferment, to put
on a Mein of Grandeur and a supercilious Carriage, and to despise those poorer
Laborers in the Gospel, who have met with a less bountiful Reward. If any
Clergyman were to set a Value upon himself, it should be upon the conscientious
Discharge of his Office, for the ELDER only that rules well is worthy of
DOUBLE HONOR; for the Church must never value herself upon her Patrimony,
because her best and purest Ages were when she inherited nothing but
Persecution; and we find in Scripture an Abundance of Commendations and
Blessings upon good and faithful Pastors, but it is for feeding the SHEEP, and
not for the WEIGHT of their FLEECE. And it is as great a Fault in a Clergyman
to be proud of great Parts and Learning, not only because these are the Gists
of GOD as well as other Things, but because these Qualifications, when
accompanied with Pride, do very little good, nay, commonly a great deal of
Mischief in GOD's Church; for the learnedest Men, though good, are not always the
most successful Pastors; though PAUL plants, and APOLLOS waters, yet it is GOD
that gives the Increase; a painful and industrious, though less learned Minister,
may gain more Souls to CHRIST than the most learned GAMALIELS; for oftentimes
poor ignorant Wretches, which stand unaffected by all the rational Strength of
some great Doctors of the Law, are roused up to Repentance, and a Sense of
Religion, by the weak Performances of some of the meanest of the Sons of the
Prophets.

THERE is a pretty remarkable Story of a COUNTRY CLERGYMAN, which, as perhaps
you have not heard, I shall here insert, and for a Matter of Fact. This
Gentleman had a Son who, being deficient in point of Learning, was refused
DEACON'S ORDERS by a certain worthy PRELATE a few Years ago; it was such a
Grief to him, that he went personally to his Lordship, and begged hard that his
Son might not return with such a Slur to the University, and be discouraged
from making better Use of his Time. MY LORD, said the Clergyman, be pleased but
to admit my Son to DEACON'S ORDERS, and I will engage that he shall appear
before your Lordship the next Time with a better Stock of Learning, and approve
himself not unworthy of your future Favor. When I was about his Age, I got
into ORDERS, though but indifferently furnished with Learning; for I had been
very remiss in my Studies. A few Years after, being promoted to a Living, I
found my Parishioners mostly DISSENTERS, which, for a while, made me a little
dissatisfied. Now your Lordship may, perhaps, wonder how I did to manage them,
being not over-burthen'd, at my first setting out, with Divinity. Why, my LORD,
I took this Method, which effectually answered my Desire. Whenever I had any
Occasion of speaking with them, either at my own House, or any other Place, my
Carriage toward them was never divested of good Manners, and I never made my
Company distasteful to them on the Score of Opinion. I frequently had them to
spend an Evening with me, and our Discourse was chiefly confined to such Things
as fall in Countrymens' Way. By these Means, and doing them all the good Turns
in my Power, I had much of their Company; and can now, with Comfort, say, that
of all the DISSENTERS in my Parish that went to the MEETING, I have not one now
that goes to it; they all come as duly to Church as the rest of my People. --
This, my LORD, was my Case, and I leave it to your Lordship's Candor and
Consideration. The good Bishop, I have been told, was so pleased with this
Country Clergyman's honest Simplicity and plain Dealing, that he obliged him,
and ordained his Son.

THIS STORY, if duly considered, is enough to quell the Pride of those
Clergymen who unmeasurably value themselves upon their Learning and great
Preferment, and look upon others only as the Caterpillars in the Vineyard. Such
Endowments, single of themselves, are no Qualifications for a Christian
Ministry, and they may as well be possessed by the proud Priests of BAAL or
BACCHUS, by Pagan FLAMENS, or Mohammedan MUFTIES.

So true is it, that Men who excel in other Respects, nay, shine in other
Lights of Life, are frequently more deficient in that Address, that mild
Humanity, which wins the Affections of Mankind, than in Talents to raise
themselves to honorable Stations. The haughty and dogmatical are often
substituted in the Room of the friendly, benevolent, and obliging. As to the
Objection, that we might perhaps be over-bold with GREATNESS, and make
Acquaintance with it in too familiar a Manner, if it was humble and
condescensive; I answer, it may be just with respect to those Gentlemen whose
only Qualifications lie in Form and Distance, but not to those of real Merit. A
becoming Freedom, Simplicity, and Openness of Behavior, methinks, when
extended to Men of Sense and Prudence, will never lessen Greatness at all; but
rather, like the regular APERTURES of a BUILDING, add Beauty to the WHOLE,
without diminishing the Strength of any PART of it.

THE superior Clergy should be the Support and Ornament of the Priesthood; they
are placed in higher Orbs, not that, like METEORS, their ominous Blaze should
be the Gaze and Terror of their less happy Brethren; but that, like STARS, they
may illuminate and beautify, animate and impregnate the inferior World: For
they, like THEM, should have an enlarged Prospect, a swift and constant Motion,
a bountiful and benign Influence.

-- BUT Man, proud Man,
Dressed in a little brief Authority,
Most ignorant of what he is most assured,
His glassy Essence, like an angry Ape,
Plays such fantastic Tricks before high Heaven,
As makes the Angels weep.
SHAKESPEARE. A LARGE Share of this INDECORUM of Behavior belongs to those, I
believe, who have contracted the Reverse of Affability and civil Manners in
their INFANCY. For PRIDE is a Passion which, instead of being restrained, is
usually indulged in Children: So that it is indeed no Wonder if the Effects of
it are very unfortunately felt in SOCIETY. For it will be hard, perhaps, for
one to give a Reason why that Temper which was used to delight in Insult over
Servants or Inferiors, in a Kitchen or a Nursery, should not afterward be the
Occasion of equal Mischief in the Public itself.

IT has been known likewise to be perfectly reigning in those, who have long
indulged themselves in an habitual Moroseness in a COLLEGELIFE. There are
certain Negligences or PECCADILLOS in Behavior toward Inferiors contracted
there, which sometimes reduce Gentlemen into a perfect Apathy toward others
that are not their Equals in Birth, or Fortune, or Learning, or Preferments,
ever afterward. When we go to an University, we find that, as FORTUNE holds
the GLASS, Things have quite different Faces in the Imaginations of many of the
graver sort of Academicks: We find that there is scarce one in five of the
FELLOWS of a COLLEGE can be tolerably civil to any Gentleman of less Rank than
a NOBLEMAN, a GENTLEMAN-COMMONER, or a GRADUATE. Hence it is, that others catch
the Infection; Noblemen, or Gentlemen-Commoners, will only keep Company with
the FELLOWS, or with one another; a Graduate with a Graduate, or Men of the
same standing. So that by these foolish Distinctions, the poor SCHOLAR or
SERVITOR in a tattered Gown, though of ever so much Merit, has rarely, but very
rarely, the Benefit of keeping Company with his Superiors; which, I must own, I
mention with Concern, as it is a great Disadvantage to Youth when they first go
to an University, and would gladly learn MANNERS, as well as SCIENCES. If a
poor Scholar should happen to neglect or forget the Ceremony of putting off his
CAP in passing one of the FELLOWS in the COLLEGE-QUADRANGLE, it is a thousand to
one but he is made to fast that Day by being put out of COMMONS, or else he
perceives his Mistake not only in his Dinner, but at it likewise. For if the
proud Gentleman that thinks himself slighted, should happen to sit
PROVOST-PLACE, as they call it, he sits at the Head of his Table in all the
Agonies of concealed Ill Nature, and his Discourse is made up of half
Sentences, and dark Allusions, both disagreeable and unintelligible to all
present; so that the Scholars that wait at Table, can only stare each other
wildly in the Face, and stand with a malicious Sneer, wishing the Dinner was
over, and inwardly commiserating the Condition of one another. When Gentlemen
of such a saturnine Complexion retire from the Exercise of magisterial
Authority over a few poor Scholars, and enter into Life, their Behavior is
commonly attended with a great many disagreeable Sullennesses toward their
Inferiors, or Dependants, upon the slightest Displeasure; nay, whether in or
out of Humor, they have contracted such an Aversion to tattered Robes, that,
for the most part, they fly the Society of the POOR. Such Men forget, that they
give the World the same Advantage over their REPUTATION, which a more criminal
Conduct would do. --

-- Hae Nugoe seria ducunt in Mala. THE young Gentleman therefore that goes to
an University has great Need of Counsel and Direction. I would have him consult
GOD in the first Place, and next, the most humble, the most devout, and
experienced Tutor and Companions he can find out. For he stands in a Place
where many Ways meet; and if he takes the Wrong, he will certainly wander far,
and it may be, never recover the right. He may float a long, long while, upon
the BILLOWS of PRIDE and FOLLY, before he recovers the Haven of WISDOM and
HUMILITY.

How considerable a Part of Happiness is lost by those, who seem by the
Eminence of their Condition to be above ordinary human Commerce, and who affect
a sort of distant Strangeness toward their Inferiors, will be easily
apprehended by one who is not exceedingly ill-natured. Such a referv'd,
uncommunicative, unfriendly Greatness, must, of all others, be the most
distasteful and gloomy State. Nor can it possibly be esteemed other than sound
and thorough Wretchedness, a grating and disgustful Feeling, without the least
Mixture of any thing soft, gentle, or agreeable. How great must be the Shocks
of Disappointment, the Stings of Affront, and the Agonies of a working
Antipathy, against the multiplied Objects of Offense, to the haughty proud Man,
who with a severe Aspect, and a pompous lofty Tone of Authority, guards his
Greatness, as a gruff Bully does a Mistress? Wherever such a Creature turns
himself, which ever Way he casts his Eye, every thing around him must appear
ghastly and horrid; every thing hostile, and, as it were, bent against a
private and single Being, who is thus divided by PRIDE from every thing beneath
him, and has nothing soft or pleasing from the Side of FRIENDSHIP in the
INFERIOR WORLD. How little does such a Mortal know the Extent, and Power, and
Pleasure of HUMILITY, and to what an heroic Pitch a Soul may rise, which feels
the thorough Force of it? Never was Humility practiced but with increasing Joy,
which makes the Practiser still more in Love with the fair Act. It leaves
behind it the Perception of a delicious Ease, and an Overflowing of soft and
pleasing Sensation. I would to GOD, that enormous Pride and Distance did never
appear among us, that Humility and a just Reverence for Mankind, and Civility
and affable Manners, did always take place. We should then feel nothing but the
enlivening Influence of the benevolent and obliging, the courteous and
unreserv'd Temper, which is a perfect Stranger to the untoward Delights of a
dissocial Community.

I SHALL conclude this Epistle, lest I should fall under the Imputation of
being prolix, with ardently wishing, that all of US may be able to say with
DAVID, Psalm. cxxxi.
LORD, I am not high-minded, I have no proud Looks. I do not exercise myself in
great Matters, which are too high for me: But I refrain my SOUL, and keep it
low, as a CHILD that is weaned from his MOTHER; yea, my SOUL is even as a
weaned Child. Our SAVIOR has so often pronounced the humblest Man the greatest
in the Kingdom of Heaven; he has so often promised the first Place, and the
greatest Exaltation to the lowest Condescensions; he was himself so illustrious
an Example of Lowliness of Mind, of Poverty of Spirit; and the APOSTLE has so
expressly asserted his Phil. ii.
JOY and CROWN to be the Reward of his HUMILITY, that I can never think, DEAR
SIR, that we can ever rise to a more eminent Height, than that to which the
Imitation of this Virtue of our LORD and MASTER will advance US.

I am, etc.

LETTER II.
DEAR SIR,
ANOTHER Virtue we are particularly to practice is PATIENCE; for, I am sure, no
Order of Men in the World have more Occasion to exercise it. If we should give
way to Passion and Peevishness, our whole Life would be one continual Fret. We
had need of a great deal of Patience in the Instruction and Admonition of those
that are under our Care; to see what slow Progress they make in the Knowledge
of divine Truths; how perverse the younger sort are to learn their Duty, and
how refractory and stubborn the elder are to retain their vicious Habits; with
how great a Facility even Children can apprehend any thing that is lewd and
wicked, and how dull and stupid their very Parents are whilst we are preaching
to them what is good; how that when we speak to them in Demonstration and
Power, making out to them as clear as the SUN, the Agreeableness, the Pleasure
and Happiness of a virtuous Course of Life, and the inevitable Misery of a bad
one; and when to this, we farther add the Efforts of a pious Zeal, and the
Charms of a grateful Eloquence; and yet, notwithstanding all this, to make no
more Impression upon their Hearts, than the STROKES do upon the hardened ANVIL.
-- We had need be considerable Masters of this Virtue, when we find how many
Men are become our Enemies, because we tell them the Truth; that when we preach
up Religion and Virtue, we are looked upon as so many knavish Cheats and
Impostors by the Atheistical and Profane; whilst we endeavor to maintain the
Unity and Apostolic Government of our Church, whilst we warn Men of the great
Danger of an unreasonable Separation, we are traduced by the resolved
Schismatic as the Agents of ROME, and the Advocates only of a more covert and
disguised Popery; that when we teach the Quiet and Peaceableness of Primitive
Christianity, the Guilt and Danger of Faction and Rebellion, to think we should
be censured, for the Miscarriages of some this Way, as the Mercenaries of
Government, and the Promoters of a despotick Power. To think farther yet, how
the INFERIOR CLERGY should be set up as the Mark of Ridicule and Contempt; that
they should have Reason to complain of more Grievances, than their Superiors
can boast of Immunities; that no Injustices are so frequently committed, nor so
hardly redressed, as what are done to them; that they should, in many Places,
be the Sport of the Gentry, and be liable to all the unmannerly Mirth of the
Commonalty; that their very Name should pass for a Jest, and every thing, though
never so nauseously silly, when they are the Subject, presently commence Wit,
and go for a Thing that is well said. -- Now to be able to conflict with these
and many more Grievances and Difficulties in the Exercise of our Office, we
must be armed with a great deal of PATIENCE, and wait for a Recompense in
another World for our SUFFERINGS here: THIS, and this only, has kept up the
Spirits of my Neighbor EULALIUS.

EULALIUS may be said now to be one of your very rich Clergymen not worth a
Groat; who is little known, and much esteemed by his few Friends; thankful for
what Mercies he receives, and humble under Chastisement: He is despised by the
World for his Poverty; and pities the World for its Weakness; is a Friend to
Mankind, and an Enemy to nothing but Vice. A LADY of his Acquaintance told him
one Day she was sorry he had the Misfortune of being so poorly provided for in
the Church, and asked him if he had no better Chance for Preferment? CHANCE,
MISFORTUNE, and good or bad Luck, MADAM, replied he, are Words without a
Meaning, or they signify the Direction of PROVIDENCE. If you have no Meaning in
these Words, you tell me you are sorry for nothing; if you have, it is impious;
for it is thinking the Source of MERCY cruel. But, as I think better of you, I
take them to be Words of Course. He who depends on Providence can never want a
Support: But say we are neglected, and all our Endeavors for a decent Support
prove fruitless. He who considers that Death will soon relieve him, will by
that Reflection not be dismayed, but find his Constancy supported.

WE ARE all but ACTORS on the World's great Stage,
Some play without, some with an Equipage:
Death drops the Curtain, and the Farce is over,
And all Distinctions cease' twixt Rich and Poor.
WERE the good and virtuous of Mankind, MADAM, wholly prosperous in this Life;
did Goodness never meet with Opposition, or Merit lie under a Cloud, where
would be the Trial, Victory, or Crown of VIRTUE? Where would the Virtues have
their Theater, or whence their Names? Where would be TEMPERANCE or SELF-DENIAL?
Where PATIENCE, MEEKNESS, MAGNANIMITY? Whence would these have their Being?
What Merit except from Hardship? What VIRTUE without a Conflict?

EULALIUS, though in these low Circumstances, is often telling his Friends that
he is very happy, -- -- Dulces pendent circum Oscula Nati:
Casta Pudicitiam servat Domus. --
Virg. Georg. l. 2. and that he looks upon his Condition to be for the best;
which puts me in mind of a Gentleman who, coming from IRELAND to ENGLAND, and
going into the Packet-Boat, and the Entering-Rope breaking, fell into the
Pinnace, and broke his Leg. "Well, said he, it is all for the better." His
Friends asked him, how he could think breaking his Leg, attended with the Loss
of his Voyage, etc. could be for the better? PROVIDENCE, VIDENCE, replied he,
knows best: I am still of Opinion, it is for the better. He was carried back,
the Packet-Boat sailed, foundered in her Passage, and but one Man was saved.

AND here it is pleasant to observe, that though the Pavilion of the ALMIGHTY be
thick Clouds, and he walks upon the Wings of the Wind; though his Providence be a
great Abyss, and the Swiftness and Secrecy of his Actings elude our Search, and
baffle our Enquiries, so that we cannot discern when he acts by PREROGATIVE,
when by LAW; yet, as is plain from this Relation, he does frequently exert a
supernatural Force and Virtue for our Preservation.

A LOW Condition in the World seems to all (my Friend!) a terrible Misfortune;
its Sound is so, and that is all. Life, methinks, is various enough, and if one
Livelihood fails, another may succeed: If one Rank of Life cannot be supported,
a Clergyman may flourish very well in another. It Is but descending a Step
lower, and the Event would abundantly atone for the Condescension. It Is well
known the MERCANTILE WORLD is indebted to an ingenious poor Clergyman, to his
neglected Merit, for the curious Invention of the STOCKING FRAME; being out of
Bread, and ignorant of any Means of Subsistence by DIVINITY, he lived for some
Time upon what his Wife got by KNITTING; and by curiously observing the playing
of the Needles whilst she was at Work, he framed in his Mind the famous Model
of the Frame, which has since proved of such singular Advantage to that Branch
of the BRITISH Manufactures, that it affords good Bread to Thousands.

I REMEMBER a little Story of a Gentleman of GASCOIGNE, who inherited two
thousand Crowns a year from his Father, commenced MARQUIS at PARIS, and, being
a very volatile Genius, soon got the better of his Fortune, and was reduced to
the lowest Ebb of Wretchedness. Yet, in the Midst of it, he never lost his
Spirit and Courage, or impotently repined at what was not to be remedied: But,
with the small Pittance he had left, purchased a MULE, and turned
WATER-CARRIER. Some Time after which, as he was trafficking his Merchandise up
and down the Streets, he happened to meet two of his old Companions, who would
have avoided him for fear of giving him Pain, at being caught in such an
Equipage. But he prevented them, sprung forward to salute them with his usual
Freedom, and when they seemed to pity his ill Fortune, briskly interrupted them
by saying, -- That he had Forty thousand Crowns Worth of Water in the SEYNE,
but, for want of Servants, he was obliged to sell it himself.

I AM afraid very few among us in Distress display such a Fortitude and
Greatness of Soul; our Pride will not suffer us to do it; and we rather choose
to have that very Pride wounded every Day in our Lives, by laying ourselves
open to the rich Man's Contumely, to Insults and new Grievance, in entreating
Obligations; to endure which with PATIENCE should be beneath the Spirit of the
SACRED ORATOR. As to all other Sufferings we may rejoice in them with EULALIUS,
and, with our BLESSED LORD, endure the CROSS and despise the SHAME.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.

LETTER III.
DEAR SIR,
WE of this Profession are likewise obliged to show forth a sincere LOVE of
GOD, and not to take the RICHES or the PLEASURES of the World for our MASTERS.
For Men that have devoted themselves to this Employ, have set themselves one
Remove out of the World, GOD has received them into his immediate Service, and
they are created, as it were, the DOMESTICS of HEAVEN. Therefore we must
always demonstrate an extraordinary Love to our peculiar Master; we must
endeavor to have the greatest and noblest Conceptions of his Power and
Goodness, and to propagate the same in others; we must be zealous of his
Honor, to vindicate with Intrepidity and Boldness his holy Name and Word from
Blasphemy, and those Things which are consecrated to his Service from
Profanation; we must afford all the Advice and Encouragement we can for Men to
observe his Commands, and dissuade them to the utmost from the Violation of
them. We must likewise give an eminent Example in the Worship of that GOD to
whom we are so nighly related; we must never omit the worshipping of GOD in our
Families, by whose particular Bounty our Families are maintained; we that are
Priests of his Temple must never be backward to offer up his Sacrifice there,
be the common Votaries never so negligent.

A NOBLE ROMAN Youth, JUVENIS ROMANUS Admiratione in se Cives Hostesque
convertit. Sacrificium erat Statum in Quirinali Colle Genti Fabiae: ad id
faciendum C. FABIUS DORSO, Gibino Cinctu, sacra Manibus gerens, quum de
Capitolio descendisset, per medias Hostium Stationes egressus, nibil ad Vocem
cujusquam Terroremve motus, in Quirinalem Collem pervenit. Ibique, omnibus
solennibus peractis, eadem revertens similiter constanti Vultu Graduque, satis
sperans propitios esse Deos, quorum Cultum ne Mortis quidem Metu prohibitus
deseruisset, in Capitolium ad suis rediit, seu attonitis Gallis Miraculo
Audaciae, seu Religione etiam motis, cujus haud quaquam negligens est Gens.
LIVE. HIST. VOL. 1. A young ROMAN drew upon himself the Admiration both of his
Fellow-Citizens and Enemies. A Sacrifice peculiar to the FABIAN Family, had
been fixed in the QUIRINAL HILL, and could be performed no where else.
Therefore C. FABIUS DORSO came down from the Capitol to perform the same, and
in his sacrificing Dress, and all the Apparatus for that Ceremony in his Hands,
passed through the Enemies Quards, and without being moved at what they did or
said, arrived on the QUIRINAL HILL. Having duly performed this Sacrifice in
that Place, and returning with the same steady Countenance and Pace, he
re-enter'd the Capitol, in full Confidence that those GODS, whose Worship even
the Fears of Death could not force him to abandon, would be propitious to him.
The GAULS were either astonished at his surprising Boldness, or moved by a
Sense of Religion, which that People do by no Means neglect.


C. FABIUS DORSO, in the Time of the Siege of the ROMAN Capitol, to the great
Astonishment of his Countrymen as well as the Enemy, could come down from the
Citadel amidst the Darts of the GAULS, and perform a Yearly Sacrifice, peculiar
to the FABIAN Family on the QUIRINAL HILL. And shall WE, the peculiar Ministers
of Heaven, be less careful of performing the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving to our LORD and Master in his Temple, than a private ROMAN
Nobleman the holy Rites of his Family? We must, for so honorable a Master's
Sake, endeavor to do all the Good we can to the Souls he has committed to our
Charge, to draw them out of the Snares of the Devil, and to lead them into the
Way of Salvation, to grieve at their Miscarriages, and to rejoice at their
Amendment; to endeavor, to our utmost, to promote Piety and true Religion, to
enlarge the Confines of the Gospel, and the Kingdom of our BLESSED LORD.

AND so likewise as to RICHES, which the vain World so courts and admires, we
must not take them for our MASTERS, but with a decent Humility condescend to be
easy in the Situation we are in, and endeavor rather by our Deserts to invite
Preferments to us, than make any Tendency to them. We must not, when we are
advanced to the most plentiful Station in the Church, only fill our Bosoms with
the Fruits, and raise Families upon its Revenues; nor yet, if we meet with
Disappointments, must we be impatient, but study to live decently, creditably,
and contentedly, according to our Conditions.

I HAVE often thought that the great polite ANCIENTS had nobler Notions of
Wealth than we have, and behaved with much more Patience and Magnanimity, than
we generally do, under the Want of it. Many of them hugged their Poverty more
than even some Men do a Bishopric. The famous GRECIAN Lyrick ALCAEUS, on whose
Tongue dwelt Rapture and Melody, outbrav'd Misfortune, and sung, as we say,
like a NIGHTINGALE.

Et te sonantem before aureo,
ALCAEE, Plectro dura Navis,
Dura Fugae Mali, dura Belli. --
HOR. Od. 13. lib. 2. LIKE him was the good-humored HORACE. --

-- Et mea
Virtute me involvo, probamque
Pauperium sine Dote quaero. --
HOR. Od. 29. lib. 3. ZENOPHON, whom ATHENAEUS calls (...), ( lib. 2.) was
endowed with so heroic a Patience, and possessed of so contented a Turn of
Mind, that in Banishment he writ the politest, wisest, usefullest System of
Works, and (to those who can understand the DIVINENESS of a just SIMPLICITY)
the most amiable, and even the most sublime and elevating of the kind of all
profane and merely Heathen Authors.

ANTIQUITY scarce affords us a more exalted Character than that of VIRGIL'S
EVANDER, who in a tattered Gown and homely Cottage bade Defiance to FORTUNE,
and could address AENEAS with --

AUDE Hospes, contemnere Opes, and te quoque dignum
Finge Deo, Rebusque veni non asper egenis.
Virg. Aen. l. 8. THE Soul that is GREAT in itself, can be happy or content
with a very little. EPICURUS used to say, That with such Fare as a mean Garden
afforded, he could vie even with the GODS for Happiness. Who could be happier
than VIRGIL's honest Countryman, old CORITIUS?

REGUM aequabat Opes Animis: seraque revertens
Nocte Domum, Dapibus Mensas onerabat inemptis.
VIRG. GEORG. l. 4. WHO, that reads this, despises not the Wealth, and pities
not the Persons of all the GREAT ONES upon Earth?

-- (...).
(...)
(...).
Euripid. Iphig. in Aulid. How small a Particle of FORTUNE was an ample
Competency for those brave ROMANS, * MANLIUS CURIOUS, Spes unica Imperii Populi
Romani L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS trans Tiberim quatuor Jugurum colebat Agrum,
quae PRATA QUINTIA vocantur. Ibi ab Legatis, seu Fossam fodiens Palae innexus,
seu quum araret, Operi certe, id quod constat, agresti intentus erat. L.
QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, the sole Prop of the Roman State, cultivated with his own
Hand four Acres of Land, lying on the other Side of the TIBER, which are called
the QUINTIAN MEADOWS; there was this great Man found by the Senate's Deputies,
either digging a Ditch with a Spade, or at least this is certain, that he was
busily employed about his Farm.

Live. Hist. vol. 1. l. 3.


L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, Vide Live. Hist. vol. 1. lib. 2.
VALERIUS POPLICOLA, Vide Frenshem. Suppl. Live. Hist. l. 12. cap. 21.
CORUNCANIUS, Vide Live. Hist. vol. 1. l. 2.
MENENIUS AGRIPPA, MANLIUS CURIOUS nihil ex opulentissima Victoria, etc. MANLIUS
CURIOUS, without reaping any other Advantage from a prodigious great Conquest,
but a good Conscience and a fair Character, continued in his former Poverty and
laborious Way of Life, the same Man being both the Pattern and strict Guardian
of public Moderation. When the Senate would have assigned him a considerable
Share of Land, he was content with the same Quantity which he had given others,
which was but four Acres; often using this Expression, That he was a bad
Citizen who could not be contented with what satisfied others. Here he built a
Country House which he called after his Name; and when the SABINES, whom he had
conquered a little before, happened to come, and finding him roasting TURNIPS
in it, offered him a large Sum of Gold, which they had brought him as a
Present, he said, I had rather eat these Turnips out of Earthen Dishes, and
rule over those who are possessed of that Gold. Afterward the elder CATO had
some Estates in the Neighborhood of this House, whither he used to come
frequently, and upon seeing this poor little Cottage, and the small Farm which
this great Man, after three Triumphs, had cultivated with his own Hands, and at
the same Time calling to Mind a Life led in the most abstemious Manner, he
disposed his Mind to the like Moderation, in Imitation of CURIUS's primitive
Simplicity and Virtue. Frenshem. Suppl. Live. Hist. l. 14


and C. FABRICIUS! It is worth those Persons while, methinks, who despise every
human Endowment in Comparison with Riches, and think that there can be no real
Greatness or distinguished Merit without a Flow of Wealth and Preferment, to
attend to the Narration that Historians give us of these eminent Heathens.

Respicere Exemplar Vitae Morumque jubebo,
Doctum Imitatorem, et VERAS hinc ducere Voces.
Hor. de Art Poet. THE private Conversation which passed between C. FABRICIUS
and King PYRRHUS, who wanted to make a Trial of his Constancy and Self-Denial,
is so remarkable, that I shall here set Part of it down. -- C. FABRICIUS, said
the KING, as I sincerely desire to have all the rest of the ROMANS for my
Friends, so especially I do you; whom I esteem to excel all others for your
Conduct both in Civil and Military Affairs. Yet I am sorry to see that you want
one thing; for your Circumstances are too narrow to enable you to keep up the
Port becoming Men of Quality. I will not suffer this Frown of FORTUNE to make
you uneasy any longer; for I will give you such Plenty of Gold and Silver, in
Money and Plate, as will set you above the most opulent ROMAN in point of
Riches. Because I am persuaded that nothing can be more worthy my princely
Station and Fortune than relieving the oppressive Poverty of Men of Merit, who
have preferred Glory to the heaping up of Riches. I look upon this as a most
glorious Act; as an Act by which a Prince raises the most illustrious Monuments
of his Royal Magnificence, and offers the most solemn and acceptable Sacrifice
to the Gods. Therefore, if you will allow me to assist you with my Riches, I
shall esteem it as a Benefit received rather than bestowed.

To which C. FABRICIUS, after a short Silence, answered, -- MY POVERTY is so
far from being a Burden or Inconvenience to me, that, on the contrary,
whenever I compare myself to the Rich, my Condition seems to be infinitely
happier; and I number myself amongst those few, whose Lot it is to enjoy all
the Felicity possible in this Life; and when thus ranked, I feel the greatest
inward Delight, and am thankful for my Poverty. For while I deem it idle and
foolish to covet Superfluity, and my little Field, when well cultivated and
laid out, affords me all Necessaries, I know not for what Purpose I ought to be
solicitous about greater Wealth. For all Nourishment is most pleasant to me
when seasoned with Hunger; and all Drink grateful when I am a-dry. I procure
myself easy and quiet Sleep by Labor. If my Clothes keep out Cold I am
satisfied with them: In Houshold-Furniture I like that best, which is most fit
and convenient for the Use to which it is applied, and at the same Time
cheapest. Wherefore I should be doubly unjust, if I should accuse FORTUNE for
not having afforded me more Riches, than my NATURE requires, which neither
inspires me with a Desire of Superfluities, or Dexterity to procure them.

THEREFORE with this Indigence of mine, I look upon myself as richer than the
most opulent of other Men, nay, than even you yourself; for I have so much,
that I can desire no more; as to you, would you have come over to ITALY, if you
had not thought yourself poor, notwithstanding you possess EPIRUS and other
Dominions? Ay, but say you, Wealth fairly enables us to do Good to others! and
my Poverty puts it out of my Power to help any one! But truly this gives me no
more Trouble, than that I am not more than ordinary furnished with other
Things; that GOD has not granted me uncommon KNOWLEDGE, nor the Art of
PROPHECY, for the Benefit of those who want them; nor many other excellent
Endowments. And if I employ the Talents I possess for the Interest of my native
State and Friends, if by assisting every Man in every respect that I am
capable, I suffer my good Offices to extend to all, I think hitherto I am free
from Crime on this Score. Nor can you in Justice call these Things mean and
trifling, which you pretend to set so high a Value upon, and are so ready to
purchase at the Expense of great Treasure.

WE are informed, that the KING, having heard him talk in this Manner,
desisted, from farther Trial of his Virtue at that Time. But next Day he
ordered FABRICIUS to be called to him, and, in order to frighten him, having
placed an ELEPHANT behind a Curtain at their Backs, as they were discoursing
together, the Curtain was drawn up all of a sudden at the Command of the King,
and the Beast laid his Trunk on FABRICIUS'S Head, and set up a terrible Noise
and braying. But the undaunted HERO turned about very calmly, and, smiling,
said; Your Gold could not tempt me Yesterday, nor has your Beast frighted me
Today.

THE same FABRICIUS, whose whole Side-Board of Plate consisted only of a Silver
Salt-seller, and a little Dish which stood on a Stool of Cornel-Wood, when the
SAMNITE Ambassadors brought him Money and fine Furniture, carried his Hands
wide open to his EARS, thence to his EYES, NOSE, MOUTH, THROAT, and at last
down to his BELLY, saying, While I can govern THESE, I shall want nothing; but
do ye carry back the MONEY to them who need it.

PARE away VANITY and AMBITION, dear Sir, and there is no solid and natural
Contentment but may be had with the smallest Income or Preferment, If we have
not a stately BRICK HOUSE, and the costliest Sort of Furniture, we may perhaps
have as convenient a little Cottage as C. FABRICIUS or M. CURIOUS had, with
decent Necessaries in it; and if we have not a Bottle of PORT or FALERNIAN, we
may have Plenty of Spring Water, which is every whit as clear and wholesome, as
if it darted from the Breasts of a MARBLE NYMPH, or the Urn of a RIVER GOD.

IF we cannot be moderate in our Desires, no Greatness can satisfy or content
us; still if we could mount up a little higher in the Church, if we could get
that RECTORY, or that DEANERY, or that BISHOPRIC, we would be happy, we would
obtain all our Wishes. But yet at last, when we have got up to the very Top of
the PEAK of TENERIFF, to the very Summit of Preferment, we are in exceeding
great Danger of breaking our Necks downwards, but in no Possibility of
ascending upwards into the Seat of Tranquillity above the Moon. The first
ambitious Men in the World, the OLD GIANTS, are said to have made an Attempt of
scaling HEAVEN, in Despite of the GODS, and that they cast OSSA upon OLYMPUS,
and PELION upon OSSA; two or three Mountains more, they thought, would have
done their Business, but the Thunder of OMNIPOTENCE spoiled all their Work when
they were come to the third Story.

IT is recorded of the same PYRRHUS, King of Epirus, whom I just now mentioned,
that fighting for one Territory after another was his constant Amusement to the
last Gasp, without ever arriving at the MERRY HOUR which he proposed as the
Issue of all his Victories; for he was knocked in the Head at storming of a
City, and like a true restless Hero died in his Vocation. -- Frenshem. Suppl.
Live. Hist.
What, SIR, do you propose in this Expedition against the ROMANS, said his
Prime-Minister, CINEAS, to him? To conquer all ITALY, answered PYRRHUS: And
what next, said the Counselor? Then we will transport our Forces into SCILLY,
and make that Kingdom our own, replied his Majesty: And what Expedition will
you go on after that? Then, quoth the enterprizing Hero, we'll sail to AFRICA,
and subdue that Part of the World. And what, continues the Statesman, remains
to be done then? Why then -- then, says the Monarch, we'll sit down and be
merry over our BOWLS. And what, answered his Minister, hinders us from doing
that NOW.

MEN of great Parts and Learning who are ever uneasy, always restless in their
Cures, and struggling for Wealth and Grandeur, as CHILDREN do for RATTLES, are
as weak as PYRRHUS, and weaker than Children. The harmless BABES, indeed, are
innocently amused with the tinkling of the BELLS, but the Amusement of the
ECCLESIASTIC INFANTS is attended both with the Loss of Time and Reputation;
they are in a continual Hunt after Baubles till the End of the Lottery of Life
approaches, till the last Minute, like the last BENEFIT-TICKET upon the WHEEL,
puts a Stop to their Career.

I OFTEN look upon these aged CHILDREN, or GAMBLERS for Preferment, in the same
merry Light with those that sly down from a Steeple, dance on a Rope, whistle,
sing, walk, run, hop, or tumble into the golden Lap of FORTUNE. It Is not
unlikely but some of them are Gamblers all their childish Days, that they may
not seem to want Activity, or Life and Spirit, to be engaged in the busy Scenes
of Life; like DIOGENES, who, upon the Approach of PHILIP of MACEDON with an
Army toward CORINTH, and the Inhabitants running in great Consternation with
Materials for its Defense, took his TUB, which was his Dwelling, and with great
Industry rolled it up and down the CRANEUM, the usual Place of his Residence
before the City, and, being asked the Reason of his whimsical Labor, answered,
He did it that he might not be the only idle Person among so many that were in
ACTION.

BUT to be serious. We of the CLERGY ought, of all Men, to show a CONTEMPT of
worldly Things; we must not ambitiously aspire to great Preferment, nor
indecently progg and solicit for any by a criminal LOWLINESS or sawning
Obsequiousness of Behavior, by a servile Submission, and falling into the
corrupt Taste and Pleasures of great People; though I know they are reckoned
essential Qualities and Accomplishments for a Man that would nowadays rise in
the World. But it is observable, that those that arrive at Preferment this Way,
would gladly forget the Steps of that detestable LADDER by which they ascended
into it, and eagerly wish that others would forget it too: like a STREAM
running, as soon as it enlarges itself as far it can from its little FOUNTAIN,
and laboring, as it were, by its Circlings and Wanderings, to conceal the
MEANNESS of its RISE.

-- It Is a common Proof,
That LOWLINESS is young Ambition's Ladder,
Whereto the Climber upwards turns his Face;
But when he once attains the upmost Round,
He then unto the Ladder turns his Back,
Looks in the Clouds, scorning the base Degrees
By which he did ascend. * --
I am, etc. SHAKESPEARE.

LETTER IV.
DEAR SIR,
AS we of this Profession must not take the RICHES, so neither must we take the
PLEASURES of the World, for our MASTERS: We must not prefer them to that
intellectual Pleasure and divine Peace, which is attainable by Men alone, and
denied to Beings of a lower Class. Any Man may see the great Disproportion
there is between the resin'd Pleasures of conscious Innocence, and sensual
Gratifications, unless he has parted with his noblest Prerogative, his REASON,
and, by intemperate and disorderly Living, made thinking his Torment. The
PLEASURE of SENSE, that is not resin'd by Virtue, is like a LAND-FLOOD,
impetuous, muddy, and irregular, it leaves nothing behind it but a Group of
Impurity: But the PLEASURE of VIRTUE is like a STREAM, which runs indeed within
its Banks, but it runs smooth and clear, and is as pure as the limpid FOUNTAIN
from whence it flows.

PURITY of Heart is of all others the most excellent, as well as the most
elevated Virtue; and therefore a poor GREEK MAIDEN, being asked what FORTUNE
she would bring her Husband, answered truly and bravely, -- I will bring him
what is more valuable than any Treasure, a Heart unspotted; and that Portion of
Virtue without a Stain, which was all that descended to me from my PARENTS.

THE wild ACADEMICKS give ample Testimony of the Slavery and Wretchedness of
Vice. They may extol their criminal Delights to the Skies, and point their Wit
as sharply as they please against a virtuous regular Conduct; but when they
come afterward to pay the necessary Tribute to their commanding Pleasures, we
hear their pathetick Moans, and find the inward Discord and Calamity of their
Lives. We may often read in their Looks the dolorous Confession in behalf of
Virtue, and see in their very Eyes how the Case stands: -- Nam veroe Voces tum
demum Pectore ab imo eliciuntur.

WHO can express the Horrors that flow in upon the Men of Pleasure, when cool
Reflection brings their guilty Scenes to View? How sharp are the Upbraidings of
an offended Conscience! What inward Perturbations and Agonies distract the
Mind! As that poisonous Plant in the Island of SARDINIA, which, if Frenshem.
Suppl. Live. Hist.
FRENSHEMIUS and Procop. Hist. Bell. Goth. L. 1.
PROCOPIOUS Herbam SARDINIA producit vehementis Veneni Apiastro per^^milem,
quoe in Cibo sumpta Mentem adimit, Nervisque violenter attractis Labia
distorquet in ridentium Speciem; exitiali Succo, nist post Vomitum Lac aut Aqua
mulsa copiose bibatur: ita vis istius Mali proesens diluitur, ceteris deinde
Incommodis ea medeatur, quoe in Convulsionibus Nervorum Usui sunt. SARDINIA
produces a strongly poisonous Herb, very like MINT, which turns People mad when
eaten, and so violently contracts the Muscles of their Faces, and so distorts
the Lips, that they look as if they were laughing. The Juice of it proves
mortal, unless they first vomit, and afterward drink plentifully of Milk or
Emulsion. By this Means, for the present, the Force of the Poison is broke, and
afterward the other ill Essects of it are cured by the same Remedies which are
used in Convulsions of the Nerves.


say true, causes a Convulsion in the Face, whereby a Person seems to die
laughing; so are the Smiles that sensual Gratifications and Love-Intrigues
produce, but false and hollow at the best, and, at last, fatal.

I HAVE somewhere read of an unlucky Mistake made by one of the FRENCH BISHOPS,
an intriguing Gentleman among the Ladies, who, writing to a certain young
DUCHESS at PARIS, and, at the same Time, to the CARDINAL DE FLEURY, directed
one Letter for the other. That for the DUCHESS, which the CARDINAL received,
was as follows.

I have just now wrote to his OLD EMINENCE, my charming QUEEN, to entreat his
Leave to return to PARIS; I make no Doubt but he will grant it: As for the
rest, the Air is so pure here, that I have acquired so good a State of Health,
that I reckon I shall be able to give you most sensible Proofs of it, when I
come to have the Happiness of seeing you.

YOU may guess how the PRELATE was surpised when he read the following Answer
which the CARDINAL immediately sent him.

HIS OLD EMINENCE advises you to extinguish your Passion: His Majesty orders
you to continue in your Diocese till further Orders, and requires that your
Life and Conversation may be as pure as the Air you breathe; and that you make
no other Use of your good State of Health, but to discharge the Duties of your
FUNCTION.

WE of this Profession must also be very moderate in the Enjoyment of those
other good Things which GOD has allotted us, such as our DIET, DRESS, and
CLOTHING. -- When People see a Clergyman laboring and toiling among a
Squadron of Dishes, grunting under the Load and Repletion of the strongest
Meats, panting almost in vain for Breath, but quite in vain for Thought, and
reminded only of his Existence by the unsavory Returns of an OLIO, what Good
can they expect from such inglorious Work?

WHAT Life in all that ample Body, say,
What heavenly Particle inspires the Clay?
DISTEMPERS, of all Complections, are the just Rewards of such a Sensualist,
the never-failing Trophies of such a CULINARY DIVINE, who eats according to the
Laws of some eminent Epicure at PONTACK'S, and has no Relish for plain Beef and
Pudding, but must have his fricasseed Frogs and his Ortalans. The Calamity
would not be so great, if the Offspring of such a Compound Piece of Clay were
no Sufferers; but his Children are commonly a Race of pale-faced,
spindleshank'd LILLIPUTIANS, to see the most vigorous of whom it would make
one's Heart ach. -- A single Regiment would put Fifty Thousand of them to
Flight.

THERE is also a Decency and Moderation to be observed in our Attire, Dress,
and Clothing. -- A Gentleman in a Gown and Cassock must be a little Soul who
converses no higher than a LOOKING-GLASS, ESSENCES, and PERUKES, and a
fantastic Dress; he may help to make up the Show of the World, who flutters
about with a frizzled Headpiece, is sleek with Perfumes, and shines in flowing
Robes of Paduasoy, but must not be reckoned among the rational Inhabitants of
it.

LET the voluptuous, the fantastic, and the finical, be as extravagant as they
please; they must, at the same Time, discover their Inconsistency, and live in
Contradiction to that Principle, on which in the Pulpit they pretend to ground
their highest Entertainment, when in passionate Strains they preach up the
Beauty and Charms of an abstemious Life, and Temperance in Attire. This I would
call the LEPROSY of ELOQUENCE; for, undoubtedly, such Leprosies are the worst
of any. -- I would advise such leprous ORATORS to accustom themselves a little
to the Exercise of SELF-DISSECTION, and to afford themselves a little Time to
think in private, for their own particular Benefit and Use, Et verae Numerosque
Modosque edicere Vitae, and not be so often retired as they are, and yet never
be by themselves.

IT must be confessed, indeed, that few Things make a Man appear more
despicable, or more prejudice his Hearers against what he is going to offer,
than an awkward or pitiful Dress; insomuch that I fancy, had Adeo hand secus
quam venerabundi intuebantur Homines CICERONEM in Foro concionantem, praeter
Ornatum Habitumque humano augustiorem, Majestate etiam, quam Vultus Gravitasque
Oris prae se ferebat, simillimum DEO Eloquentiae.

Live. Hist. Vol. 1. L. 5. Men beheld CICERO, at it were with a reverential Awe,
haranguing in the FORUM, dressed and adorned in a Manner more magnificent than
human, nay, perfectly resembling the GOD of Eloquence in the awful Majesty and
Gravity of his Looks and Countenance.


TULLY himself pronounced one of his Orations in tattered Robes, more People
would have fneer'd at his Dress, than have admired his Eloquence.

NIL habet PAUPERTAS durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos Homines facit --
Quid quod Materiam praebet Causasque Jocorum
Omnibus hic idem? si faeda et scissa Lacerna;
Si Toga sordidula est, et rupta Calceus alter
Pelle patet, vel si consuto Vulnere crassum
Atque recens Linam ostendit non una Cicatrix.
JUV. SAT. 3. WANT is the Scorn of every wealthy Fool,
And Wit in Rags is turned to Ridicule.
The Rich have still a Gibe in Store,
And will be monstrous witty on the Poor;
For the torn SURTOUT, and the tattered Vest,
The Wretch and all his Wardrobe are a Jest:
The greasy GOWN, sullied with often turning,
Gives a good Hint to say the Man's in Mourning;
Or, if the SHOE be ripped, or PATCH is put,
He Is wounded! See the Plaster on his Foot.
DRYD. WE must likewise, DEAR SIR, be extremely delicate in our Choice of
DIVERSIONS; we must often tread in the rugged Tract even when there is little
Occasion for it; DESIRE must be frequently confined within the Circle
prescribed by CUSTOM only, when there would be really no Harm with Decency to
indulge it. For, though in the very Road to Virtue, there are several
PRIMROSE-PATHS, (to use the Expression of LAERTES in SHAKESPEARE) which may
invite the Step, without leading absolutely out of the Road itself, or offering
any indecent Prospect to the View; yet the World expects a CLERGYMAN should
tread the direct Road, without going to the Right or Left, for fear he should
wander too far, or trip in the Circumflex.

ALTHOUGH a Fondness for the Entertainments of the STAGE is the prevailing
Temper of the Age we live in, yet it would but ill become us to give any
Encouragement to them. For the false Notions of Honor there propagated, the
agreeable Shade which is cast over unlawful Love, and the Ridicule and Contempt
with which all Seriousness and Religion is generally treated, makes me think it
too dangerous for the young, and unbecoming the old. The Gay, the Polite, and
the Witty, may perhaps run the Rigg upon us, the Toupees may laugh at us, and
the Ladies frown upon us, if we do not make a Party with them to the
Playhouse, but we must not regard that. I am, indeed, ashamed to tell you,
that a Man may read the COMEDIES of the ancient HEATHENS with less Offense to
his Modesty and Virtue, than those of modern CHRISTIANS. A vicious Sentiment in
a theatrical Performance at ATHENS would have cost the Poet his Liberty or
Life. When EURIPIDES made one of his Actors say, -- Riches are the supreme
Good, and with Reason excite the Admiration of Gods and Men; -- the whole
Theater rose upon him, and he had been banished immediately, if he had not
desired Patience till the End of the Play, where the Speaker of this Sentence
perishes miserably. Were the Stage under proper Regulations, it would be a
rational and agreeable Entertainment, and I cannot see why a Clergyman, as well
as another Person, might not then go to a Play; it might then as much help, as
it now hinders the the Cause of VIRTUE.

WE must never frequent GAMING-HOUSES, to play at BILLIARDS, etc. but fly from
the Infection of them with Horror; it is really my Opinion, that this single
Depravity puts Thousands of People in the Kingdom to greater Expense, than
would maintain the SCIENCES in all their Glory.

GAMING was so much dis-esteem'd among the greatest of Men formerly, that the
King of PARTHIA is reported to have sent a Bale of golden Dice to DEMETRIUS, on
Purpose to upbraid his Inconstancy. And COBILON, the LACEDEMONIAN, being sent
to CORINTH for obtaining a mutual League and Friendship between those two
Cities, when he saw the Captains and Senators of CORINTH playing at Dice,
returned without doing any Thing; saying, that he would not so much as tarnish
the Glory of the SPARTANS, as that it should be said, they had made a League
with GAMESTERS.

I AM far from being an Enemy to the Entertainment of a CONCERT; I even think
Music a Science peculiarly necessary amongst us, to soften our rugged Genius,
to prepare the Way to Politeness and Good-breeding. In HOMER we read of a
HARPER to whom ALCINOES and ULYSSES willingly lent their Ears. In VIRGIL, JOPAS
both sings and plays, while DIDO and AENEAS give Attention. Such is the Force
of Music, that ORPHEUS assuaged the Tempest of the ARGONAUTS with a Song; and,
if there be any Authority in FABLES, we find that though ARGUS had his Head
guarded with a hundred Eyes, yet they were all charmed asleep with the Sound of
one single PIPE. Music has Charms to soothe and tamethe horrid Savage;
Rocks and Deserts are respondent to the Voice.
CICERO's Orat. for ARCHIAS. But even this Taste for musical Diversions a Man
may encourage with too great Profusion, and he may become a Dupe to Sounds, to
the Prejudice of his Understanding.

THOUGH I am for taking the highest Care to exhilerate Religion, yet I would, by
no Means, encourage your going to dance, etc. at ASSEMBLIES. Dancing may be a
very necessary Qualification for Youth, as it gives a Person a genteel
Carriage, and an easy graceful Behavior; but I don't know of any Business a
Gentleman in Holy Orders has with it. When CYRUS the GREAT demanded the Advice
of his Counselors about the best Method of keeping a Nation which he had
conquered in Subjection, he was advised to let SINGERS and DANCERS be
introduced amongst them, and let their Youth be brought up in learning the
LUTE, and they would soon languish into Foppery and Effeminacy, and lose all
Sense of Liberty. This will always be the Case whenever, like the FAR unlike in
Manners to the GREEKS
Appear the LYDIANS. Wantonness and Sport
Were all their Care. Beside CAISTER's Stream,
Or smooth MEANDER winding silent by,
Or near PACTOLUS' Wave among the Vines
Of TMOLUS rising, or the wealthy Tide
Of golden-sanded HERMUS they allure
The Sight enchanted with the graceful Dance,
Or with melodious Sweetness charm the Ear,
And melt to softest Languishment the Soul.
Mr GLOVER'S LEONIDAS, lib. 3.
LYDIANS, we become a Nation of Bell Esprits, and the warbling Gullet of a
FARANELLI, or the lulling Pipe of a -- HE was skilled
To tune the lulling FLUTE, and melt the Heart;
Or with his PIPE'S awak'ning Strains invite
The lovely Dames of LYDIA to the Dance:
They graceful over the verdant Level moved
In varied Measures, while the cooling Breeze
Beneath their swelling Garments wantoned over
Their snowy Breasts, and smooth CAISTER's Wave
Sost-gliding murmured by.
LEONIDAS, lib. 5.
LYCIS, shall be more admired than the manly Eloquence of a Archbishop of YORK.
HUTTON, a Bishop of ST ASAPH.
DRUMMOND, or a Prebendary of WORCESTER.
TOTTIE.

CAUTIOUSNESS and Circumspection in our taking a GLASS at a Tavern, or at our
own Houses, is a Duty which is also more particularly incumbent upon us of the
CLERGY. -- It Is true, our SAVIOR exhorts us to CHEERFULNESS and GOOD HUMOR,
in the strongest Manner, and under the most familiar and pleasant Images: Even
the first MIRACLE he ever wrought, carries with it a certain agreeable
Festivity and Alacrity. And old NESTOR in HOMER, as sage a Soul as he was,
could take a cherruping Glass, and be very merry: (...). Which AUSONIUS
translates, Concussit quamvis potantem NESTORA Clamor. But we may sometimes, by
our imprudent Freedoms, betray weaker Christians into real Sin; they, for
Instance, by keeping the same Company, or the same Hours, which we do, may act
very wickedly; for it is not to be supposed, that they should have so much
Metaphysics as to distinguish between an unseasonable Sitting for
Discourse-sake, or for Drink. We must therefore abridge ourselves of many
little Liberties which other Men lawfully take, both in our Words and Behavior
in Company. We must avoid not only Guilt, but Scandal too; because Scandal may
do as much Mischief in our Profession as Guilt, and Men will be as far from
imitating our Practice, or practicing our Doctrines, if they believe us to be
immoral, as if we were really so. We must attemper our Discourse over a GLASS
with a decent Cheerfulness, and, as it were, a pleasant unaffected Seriousness.
For by this we may even then, probably, obtain the Conversion of some
mis-guided Persons, who are averse to our Communion only for the general
Neglect of this; or, at least, we shall gain their better Opinion, and we
ourselves shall not be the worse Men for it. I confess, the wicked Hypocrisy of
those pretended godly Ministers in CROMWELL'S Days, that were carrying on
Rebellion and Sacrilege with so much sanctimonious Preciseness, has entailed
such a lasting Scandal upon the outward Form of GODLINESS, as has made good
Men ever since very cautious of using it; but, in Opposition to them, we have,
perhaps, carried the Point too far on the other Side, we have given them
Occasion to censure some of our FREEDOMS, as we have done their PRECISENESS.
Very worthy of our Attention is the Behavior of ARISTIPPUS. ARISTIPPUS wore
neither the formal Beard, nor the sour severe Aspect of an INSTRUCTOR, but
mingling himself in all Companies, artfully picked Occasions, as if by Chance,
to rectify an Error, or prevent a Vice; by this Means, his Virtue became the
Fashion, and Men were reformed from Vice, while they thought they were only
growing polite.

BECAUSE it is always expected, DEAR SIR, that Men of a liberal Education should
be no Strangers to GOOD BREEDING, we must, by no Means, neglect the Culture of
that social Virtue. -- A VIRTUE that has all the Heightening of Embellishment
and Gracefulness: It Is Benevolence brought into Action with all the Assemblage
of Propriety and Excellence: It Is the Friend of Society, and the Polish of
Science: It regulates Life and Conduct, refines upon Happiness, enlarges the
Circle of Enjoyment, and is the Improvement of Pleasure: It obliges us to
behave with Decency and Elegance, and quickens our Attention to the good
Qualities of others. COMPLAISANCE is, indeed, its Resemblance; but only as a
SHADOW is of a SUBSTANCE. It is only the Varnish, the Masque of it. GOOD
BREEDING is the real Ornament of the Soul, made visible and set in the fairest
Point of Light. Our modern Complaisance, like false WIT, has something glaring
in it which strikes the Injudicious with a kind of Admiration; but, like false
WIT, has no other Effect on People of Sense than to produce Ridicule and
Contempt.

THE Design of SCHOOLS, the Use of UNIVERSITIES, the Benefit of CONVERSATION,
should all, in some Measure, center in this great Point -- GOOD BREEDING. No
one can be properly called a Gentleman, who has not made Use of every
Opportunity to enrich his own Capacity, and settle the Elements of good
Behavior, which he may improve at Leisure. There are Numbers of Persons of our
Profession, who may justly claim Reputation for a single Excellence, that in
all others are defective and inconsiderable, for the Want of this general
Accomplishment. -- A Variety of Incidents agree to make the Want of it very
common. Bad Principles of Education when at SCHOOL; an ill Choice of
Acquaintance at entering into the UNIVERSITY; the unhappy Bluntness of TUTORS
who undertake to inform us, and an untoward Disposition of our own. But the
Frequency or Confirmation of an Evil, should never discourage us from
endeavoring to surmount it; and if it is grown quite desperate, there is the
more Necessity for opposing it with the greater Vigor. I must own, that little
Oddities and Singularities of Behavior in a Gentleman of a liberal Education,
whose Mind is very much accustomed to a Habit of Study and Thoughtfulness, may
be sometimes excused with Candor and Indulgence; they may be only like Spots,
perhaps, in the SUN, or Asperities in a DIAMOND; or may be as MOLES and
DIMPLES, which hinder not a Face from being beautiful, though that Beauty be not
regular; or of the Number of those amiable Imperfections which we see in the
FAIR SEX, and which we pass over without a strict Examination, when they are
accompanied with greater Graces.

THERE is another Particular, in my Opinion, DEAR SIR, of no small Consequence
to the Support of our Character, and that is, to retain in our Memory our poor
KINDRED and RELATIONS, though never so remote; for nothing is more unbecoming a
Clergyman than a Forgetfulness either of his poor Friends or his Parents, which
is always imputed to an affected, disdainful Superiority and Pride.

A GENTLEMAN who was on the Road of ALGIERS some Years ago, was an Eye and Ear
Witness of the following Story. -- One Day as some Christian Captives, who had
been ransomed, were going to be discharged, the Town-Cruizers brought in a
Swedish Vessel; one of them hearing it was of that Nation, and being from
thence himself, was very desirous to see the Crew, when, to his great Surprise,
he saw his own Father (who was Master of the Ship) in Company; the Son knew the
Father, but the Father (who had lost him when a Youth many Years) knew not the
Son, having given him up as dead long before, not hearing any thing of him. The
Son soon made himself known to the Father, who embraced him with great
Tenderness; but their Unhappiness to meet in that Place was grievous to them
both. The young Man addressed himself to his Father in this Manner: -- The
Slavery you are going into will be insupportable to you, and soon put an End to
your Life, the Thoughts of which is Death to me; I have been here a great many
Years, and know the Country, the People, and their Work; if they will accept of
me in your Room, I will go back into Slavery, and you shall go Home again; I
know, if it should please GOD to enable you, I shall be redeemed; if not, GOD'S
Will be done. The Moors readily accepted the Exchange; so the Father returned
Home, and the Son back in his Stead into Slavery.

GELON, the Son of HIERO, King of SYRACUSE, (who, after living upwards of Fifty
Years, died before his Father) from a Moderation and Affection very uncommon
among Men, chose rather to want his Kingdom for EVER than be deprived of his
Father, whom he honored with a strict Duty and Obedience to the last Minute of
his Life.

JUSTIN, in his History, gives us a Description of Filial and Parental
Affection, which is extremely moving and pathetick. It Is that Part where he is
speaking of the approaching Death of AGATHOCLES, the Sicilian Tyrant, and of
his Wife and Children going into Exile.

Discedentes parvuli, flebili Ululatu amplexi Patrem tenebant. Ex altera Part
Uxor Maritum non amplius visura, Osculis fatigabat. Nec minus Senis Lacrymae
miserabiles erant. Flebant by morientem Patrem; ille Exules Liberos: hi
Discessu suo Solitudinem Patris, aegri Senis; ille in Spem Regni relinqui in
Egestate lugebat. Inter haec Regia omnis assistentium Fletibus tam crudelis
Discidii impleta, resonabat.

JUST. Hist. L. 23. JOSEPH'S affectionate Behavior to his BRETHREN, as it is
related in Holy Writ, after the Death of his Father JACOB, is attended with
every Circumstance of FRATERNAL LOVE and Regard, and deserves our most serious
Consideration.

AND when JOSEPH'S Brethren saw that their Father was dead, they said, JOSEPH
will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the Evil which we
did unto him. -- And they sent Messengers unto JOSEPH, saying, Thy Father did
command before he died, saying, -- So shall ye say unto JOSEPH, Forgive I pray
thee now, the Trespass of thy Brethren, and their Sin; for they did unto thee
Evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the Trespass of the Servants of the GOD of
thy Father. And JOSEPH wept when they spoke unto him. -- And his Brethren also
went and fell down before his Face: and they said, Behold we be thy Servants.
-- And JOSEPH said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the Place of GOD? -- But as
for you, ye thought Evil against me; but GOD meant it unto good, to bring to
pass, as it is this Day, to save much People alive. -- Now therefore fear ye
not: I will nourish YOU, and your LITTLE ONES. And he comforted them, and spoke
kindly unto them Genesis l. 15, to 21.
.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.

LETTER V.
DEAR SIR,
ANOTHER Virtue, which we are particularly obliged to practice, is CHARITY. --
We know the APOSTLE recommended Charity as the Principal of all Christian
Virtues, the Top and Height of our Religion; he prefers it not only before
FAITH and HOPE, but even sets it beyond MARTYRDOM itself. -- If I give my Body
to be burnt, and have not Charity, etc. We therefore that are the Preachers of
Righteousness, and the Propagators of this blessed Religion, must be eminently
charitable in our Censures of other Men; we must hope all Things of them,
believe the best, not mistrust worse than does plainly appear, excuse as far as
possible their Failures, and draw a Veil over their Infirmities we are
conscious of, that they may not be espied by others. If there should be any so
uncharitable as, without Reason, to censure our Behavior, so as to endeavor
to lessen us in the Opinion of our Parishioners, we must remember that Scandal
never fails to recoil with double Force on the Authors, it is a noxious, but
transitory Vapor, which vanishes at the first Appearance of Light; we must
reprove them gently, but not use them with Inhumanity; and should they still
keep pecking at us, it will not be worth our while to inflict any heavy
ecclesiastical Censure upon them. SPIRITUAL-COURT-OFFICERS, like knavish
PHYSICIANS, seek Employment enough for themselves, and would be glad to see
every Parish in a Diocese always diseased, that Men might apply to them for
Cure. Besides, our Enemies may be such, that they may not deserve our Concern,
so as to feel the Weight of our Indignation, and the Vengeance of a Spiritual
Court.

A MERCHANT, who resided sometimes at BENCOLEN, bought a tame ELEPHANT there,
whom he suffered to go at large. This Animal used to walk about the Streets, in
as civil and familiar a Manner as any of the Inhabitants, and wonderfully
delighted himself in visiting the Shops; particularly those which sold Herbs
and Fruit, where he was always well received, excepting only by a Couple of
brutal Cobblers, who dwelt in that Quarter. These Fellows, without any Reason,
took Offense at the generous Creature, and had once or twice attempted to wound
his PROBOSCIS with their Awls. The noble Animal, who knew it was beneath him to
crush them, did not disdain to chastise them. He filled his large Muscular
Trunk with a considerable Quantity of Water, not the cleanest, and advancing to
them, as usual, covered them at once with a dirty Flood. The Fools were laughed
at, and the Vengeance applauded.

A NOBLE MASTIFF, being once attacked by a Parcel of little yelping Curs, and
scorning to encounter such Reptiles, contented himself with p -- ssing upon
them, as they crept at his Heels.

WISE Men have upon all Occasions treated Slanderers with Contempt: DIOGENES
hearing a vociferous Assassin of Characters exclaiming against PLATO, and
charging him with a Thousand Faults, told him with great Spirit and Justness,
SIR, your Malice is all thrown away; you will no more be believed in speaking
Evil of him, than I should be, if I spoke Good of you. And PELOPIDAS made a
very proper Answer to some who, to curry Favor with him, impeached certain
brave Soldiers of having spoke disrespectively of him behind his Back: It may
be, said he; but you will give me Leave to act according to the best Evidence I
have; as for their Actions, I have been Eyewitness of them; and, as to their
Words, I have only heard what you have been pleased to tell me.

WE must retain kind and easy Thoughts of those, my Friend, who differ in
Judgment from us, especially upon the Score of Religion, to think, as far as
may be, that they do it upon unfeigned Conviction of Conscience, and for the
Sake GOD's Glory; but however, we must have a very great Care of unchurching
whole Countries and Nations by the Blast of one choleric Expression. -- Nor
are we only obliged to this MENTAL CHARITY which will cost us nothing, but to
be also liberally charitable, and bountiful of those good Things GOD has
blessed us with: Of which there are two principal Branches, HOSPITALITY and
ALMS. The Apostle does in two Places recommend HOSPITALITY to the CLERGY, 1 TIMOTHY iii. 2. and TITUS i. 8. in that early Time of the Church when the Revenues
were so miserably small, and therefore undoubtedly it is a Duty much more
incumbent upon us in these Ages, when we are more amply provided for. This has
been always looked upon by the HEATHENS as a most generous Virtue, and the Want
of it a Note of Barbarity.

AXYLUS, hospitable, rich, and good,
Near fair ARISBA's Walls (his native Place)
He held a Seat, a Friend to human Race.
Fast by the Road, his ever open Door
Obliged the WEALTHY, and relieved the POOR.
HOM. l. vi. v. 16. IN HOMER 's Odyss. l. xv. v. 81. there is an admirable Rule
to be observed in the Practice of HOSPITALITY: -- ALIKE he thwarts the
hospitable End,
WHO drives the free, or stays the hasty Friend:
True Friendship's Laws are by this Rule expressed,
Welcome the coming, speed the parting Guest.


THE Doors of the noble Roman POPLICOLA were always opened on the Outside to
save the People the common Civility of asking Entrance; where all were equally
admitted; where nothing that was reasonable was denied; where even Misfortune
was a powerful Recommendation; nay, I may add, where Want itself was a powerful
Mediator, and next to Merit.

TO strike a friendless or helpless Person, the Stranger, the Poor and Needy,
was reckoned a cruel and barbarous Action in HOMER's Days. When ULYSSES, in the
Disguise of a Beggar, was struck by ARTINOUS, the other Suitors (though
represented as profligate Persons) are shocked at, and condemn the Action: --
Ill fits the Stranger and the Poor to wound,
Unblest thy Hand! If in this low Disguise
Wanders, perhaps, some Inmate of the Skies:
They (curious often of mortal Actions) deign
In Forms, like these, to round the Earth and Main,
Just and Unjust recording in their Mind.
HOM. Odyss. l. 17. v. 575. -- The GODS revere;
THE POOR and Stranger are their peculiar Care;
To JOVE their Cause, and their Revenge, belongs,
He wanders with them, and he feels their Wrongs.
HOM. Odyss. l. 9. v. 321.

THE Use of HOSPITALITY formerly was to entertain chiefly Travelers upon the
Road before the World was generally provided with Houses of public
Entertainment; but since its Office is to accommodate Persons of a lower Rank
with more grateful Provision than their Fortunes can attain to, to afford a
free Recourse to decayed Persons to eat with us, whose Condition is not so
abject as to take up with a formal ALMS; and with the Remainder of our ample
Provisions to let the POOR have a convenient Sustenance. There are likewise
several CANONS of the CHURCH to enforce this LIBERALITY; but generally our
LIBERAL EDUCATION makes us very seldom defective this Way, unless it be some
few of our Order that are sunk to the lowest Degree of Baseness, whom neither
GOD's Word, nor Shame, nor the Contempt of all good Men, can work upon.

WE must likewise, to our Abilities, be charitable to the POOR, and this is our
Duty to do in common with other Christians; but then we have higher Obligations
to it, because we must recommend the Doctrines we preach more effectually by
our EXAMPLE, but chiefly because the Endowments of the CHURCH do, in some
Measure, belong to the POOR, and for some Ages of Christianity the Poor had a
FOURTH PART to their Share of the ECCLESIASTICAL REVENUE.

THE POOR are, as it were, the ORPHANS of HEAVEN, they have a Demand on us, as
well as others, for the Necessaries of Life; and besides, there is an Authority
due to Distress; and as none of human Race is above the Reach of Sorrow, so
none should be above hearing the Voice of it. The Heathen Poet, in commending
the Charity of DIDO to the TROJANS, spoke like a Christian: Non ignara Mali,
miseris succurrere disco. When sharp Misery, to use an Expression of the divine
SHAKESPEARE's, has worn a Man to the Bone; when his Eyes have lost all their
Spirit; when his Hair and Beard is become wild and neglected, and every Muscle
of his Face expressive of Famine and Despair; when he is so depressed by
Calamities, as not to be able to look upwards, or hope for Comfort, nay,
unwilling to receive it, as if so painful a Being was not worth preserving, and
Death the only Relief that was truly to be wished for; every generous Heart
must bleed, methinks, that HUMANITY should be liable to so much Woe and
Wretchedness. And there are in the World Persons of such great Merit, such fine
Qualities, reduced to this melancholy Circumstance, by such a Series of strange
Accidents, that one would think they were left by PROVIDENCE on Purpose for
Objects, on which the SON of FORTUNE should exercise his Humanity and Virtue.
And, believe me, in serving any of these poor unhappy People, we would find a
more sensible Pleasure, than can possibly arise from all the monied Bliss of
Bags and Coffers, the Splendor of Equipage, or the Excess of the Epicure's
Table.

THERE are some Persons, indeed, who rather choose to fatten as Vagrants, than
sweet away their Lives in honest Labor and Industry; and there are others with
artificial Sores, and artificial Legs, who counterfeit the Dress and Guise of
Wretchedness so well, that no Painter can help them to a Circumstance which can
heighten the Image; but these have no Right to our Charity, they are worth no
Body's Notice but the Legislature's; and as, I think, they are a public
Nuisance, Mankind has a sort of Demand on every Magistrate to have it removed
out of the Way. But he must be of a savage Nature, that would turn such Objects
of Commiseration away with Contempt, who have the strongest Claim for
Compassion and Assistance; such as those who are unable to support themselves
by any Business or Employment; such as those, whose natural Pride and Modesty
will not suffer them to complain, who pine in secret, without a Chance for
Relief, without a Friend to assist them, or the most distant Hope of better
Days, who, perhaps, are forced to appear gay and smiling in the Midst of Agony,
and sit mournful Spectators of the Profusion of others in Trifles, which would
be a comfortable Support and Happiness to them; such as those, who are
compelled to throw themselves on the Mercy of their Fellow Creatures, and trust
entirely to Providence for their Preservation. Were there no Divine Command
that enjoined us to look upon these as Persons who had a natural Right to all
we could spare, we should beside, I think, reckon it our highest Glory to make
them easy.

THE History of PERU assures us, that their INCAS esteemed, above all their
Titles, that the highest, which called them LOVERS of the POOR: A Name more
glorious than the FAELIX, PIUS, and AUGUSTUS of the ROMAN Emperors; which were
Epithets of Flattery, deserved by few of them.

SOME of our polite Moderns have contracted such a Reverse of what we call
URBANITY or civil Manners to the POOR, that to see or meet a Person in Distress
is offensive. The very Aspect of one in Need is a Disturbance to them, and they
are sure always to hate at first Sight. This inhumane, barbarous, savage
Temper, is the immediate Opposite to that noble Affection which the good
EUMAEUS in HOMER had for the POOR, and the helpless Stranger.

MY present Labors Food and Drink procure,
And more the Pleasure to relieve the POOR.
Odyss. l. xv. v. 398. MY Heart has learnt to glow
For other's Good, and melt at other's Woe.
Odyss. l. xviii. v. 269. IT IS mine with Food the Hungry to supply,
And cloth the Naked from the inclement Sky.
Odyss. l. xvi. v. 83. BY JOVE the Stranger and the Poor are sent,
And what to those we give, to JOVE is lent.
Odyss. l. vi. v. 247. AMONG the unhappy Wretches that lie in TARTARUS, VIRGIL
places the COVETOUS, who only brood over their Treasures, -- Nec Partem posuere
suis, -- and give no Part of it to their Fellow Creatures who stand in Need of
it; adding likewise, that the Offenders this Way are the most numerous of any.

THE poor WIDOW mentioned in Holy Writ, threw her MITE into the TREASURY,
indeed a small Matter in itself, but her own Want made it a great Proof of her
charitable Disposition, retrenching her own Subsistence, and the Necessaries of
Life, to contribute to the Relief of the Necessities of others.

How does St PAUL magnify the CHARITY of the Churches of MACEDONIA? 2 Cor.
viii. 2, 3.
In a great Trial of Affliction, the Abundance of their Joy and their deep
Poverty abounded to the Riches of their LIBERALITY. For to their Power I bear
Record, yea, and beyond their Power, they were willing of themselves.

DR HOUGH, the late Bishop of WORCESTER, was actuated by a secret celestial
Influence to undervalue the splendid Encumbrances, the Overflowings of
CHURCH-REVENUES, to diffuse Joy and Gladness through the tortured anxious Soul
loaded with Affliction, to support a falling Family, to give Encouragement to
the diligent Hand, to preserve the Portion of the helpless Orphan, and to raise
the Head of the aged Widow, the mourning Husband, and the unhappy Stranger. The
Lowliness, the Humanity, the Sweetness of Dr HOUGH'S Temper, prompted him daily
to exert some noble Inclination or other for the Service of his
Fellow Creatures, and made his Superiority in the Church not only a Blessing to
Mankind, but also the Source of innumerable Satisfactions, an Ocean of Joys to
himself. Such is the Effulgence of the Reputation he has left behind him, so
great the Dignity of his CHARITABLE CHARACTER, that it may challenge Time to
consume the Trophies it has reared, while every Monument erected by Art or
Labor must yield to Age, and moulder into Dust.

THUS much for the MORAL QUALIFICATIONS which we of the Clergy are under an
indispensible Obligation to practice, if we would approve ourselves unto GOD or
our Hearers as eloquent Divines: How a Clergyman is to be qualified as to
LEARNING, etc. or that he may be an able Speaker, or a WORKMAN that needs not
be ashamed, I shall point out to you in our future Correspondence.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.

LETTER VI.
DEAR SIR,
I SHALL now touch upon some general Qualifications which all that are of the
Body of the Clergy, especially in these Ages of Literature, ought to be
furnished with. And first, a moderate Skill in PHILOSOPHY is requisite in our
Profession. LOGIC, I think, is undeniably necessary for every one who pretends
to Learning, and Skill in the Arrangement and Disposition of his Sentiments or
Ideas. And if we would become Masters of fine Reasoning, we must not only apply
ourselves closely to the Study of LOGIC, but also take Care that the
Aristotelian Authors we read be of the right sort. This Country never produced
a more modest, useful, or entertaining one to begin with, in my Opinion, than
Dr WATTS. He steers to the Coasts of this kind of Philosophy with as much
Caution, as if he was afraid of splitting upon the Rock of some unwarrantable
Desire. And what I reckon is very much to his Praise, he never grows trifling,
or troubles us with what is of no Importance; and has this Excellency beside,
which few Authors of this Rank have, he writes in a Manner that is very taking
and intelligible to young Gentlemen, and furnishes them with all the necessary
Materials for their Improvement.

I HAVE always thought, that LOGIC would go down more glibly with most of our
young Students, especially in some Colleges, if they were not crammed so much
with it. I am sensible it would suit more with their Inclinations, and they
would not so often mutiny and declare War against venerable CRACKENTHORP and
BURGESDICIOUS. A Man who has a Genius, and whose Profession should lead him to
the Study of Divinity, should not, methinks, spend so much of his Time in
Altercation, as they do, who grow gray almost in studying the Wiles and
Subtilties of it. But, as to this Matter, I resign my Judgment, with entire
Condescension, to my Superiors. I shall only add, that to me there appears to
be a great Deal of Difference between the Practice of ARISTOTLE and our modern
Schoolmen. He, by the same mental Eye with which he took in the Power and
Quality of every Object in Nature, likewise surveyed the Properties of
ELOQUENCE, which at the same Time had but a second Place in his Esteem; but the
others, who are such dear Lovers of Disputation, dwell almost upon that single
Province; they want the Prudence and good Sense of ARISTOTLE, though in this
single Point, they outdo him in Practice and Application.

MR Vide OCILVY's Description of ASIA, etc. Fol. Edit. p. 60.
OCILVY in his Description of PERSIA tells us, that the PERSIANS have all
ARISTOTLE'S Works translated into ARABIC, and call him DANJA PIALA, that is,
the CUP of the WORLD; for as we may use the CUP to refresh ourselves, so we may
likewise to Inebriation; so according to their Opinion, we may use and misuse
Philosophy; for they say, that strong Liquor and Philosophy make good Orators,
but Excess of both makes wise Men Fools.

A MODERATE Skill in ETHICS and the vulgar METAPHYSICS, PHYSIOLOGY and the
MATHEMATICS, is also requisite, DEAR SIR, in our Profession. -- MORALITY gives
a Rationale, a demonstrative Rectitude or Pravity of the Virtues and Vices we
are speaking to, it adds a mighty Gust especially to those of a philosophical
Palate, which a bare Scripture-Reasoning has no Effect upon. The vulgar
METAPHYSICS is essential to Divinity as it is handled in later Ages; without
some Portion of it, we cannot be able to dispute, or write, or talk Divinity in
proper Terms. PHYSIOLOGY and the MATHEMATICS seem the most remote from our
Profession, and yet we may see of what Consequence they are to Divinity from
reading Mr BOYLE'S LECTURES. How strong, how forcible is Truth physically and
mathematically demonstrated, how guarded and fortified is our Religion on all
Hands, how keen and poignant is every Argument, cutting and mauling the
Adversary, and driving him out of all his Entrenchments? The most copious and
solid, the most compact and nervous Preachers which this Nation ever had, were
some of the Writers of these Lectures.

THERE is also this Advantage arising from Physical and Mathematical Knowledge,
(besides that of clearing up a Man's Thoughts, and giving him a just Taste of
right and wrong Reasoning) it makes the Human Mind generally sensible of its
own Worth and Excellence, and perceive that it is intimately allied to that of
the Divinity; which must afford it a ravishing Satisfaction. The very
Reflection upon the Power and Nature of GOD, makes a good Man emulous of
imitating his divine Perfections; neither does he think that he is placed here
as an idle Spectator, when he observes the Dependence of the Parts of each
System of the Creation, and of the several Systems upon one another, and how
they all contribute to proclaim the Wisdom of that ALMIGHTY BEING that gave
them Existence.

How does such a Genius as Vicar of Farrington, in Hampshire, etc. and Fellow
of the Royal Society.
Dr HALES break forth from amidst the Darkness that involves Human
Understanding! He appears like one of another Species. The Plan of this
habitable Globe lies open to him, he seems not unacquainted with the general
Laws that govern it; and while with the Transport of a Philosopher, he beholds
and admires the glorious Work, he is capable of paying at once a more devout
and rational Homage to his MAKER. His EXAMPLE, methinks, should inspire us with
a generous Ambition, should engage us to endeavor to improve our Faculties,
and to exercise them conformable to the Rank we now hold among reasonable
Beings, and the Hope we have of being one Day advanced to a more exalted
Station.

WE of this Profession ought also to be qualified with a considerable Knowledge
in the HOLY SCRIPTURES. Our BLESSED LORD gives it as a Command to all Men to
search the John v. 39.
Scriptures. And St PAUL tells TIMOTHY, 2 Timothy iii. 15.
that the Scriptures are only able to make him wise unto Salvation. We see how
excellently learned all the Apostles were this Way, whilst they neglected the
Use of other Literature. Which is abundantly sufficient to show, that we of the
Clergy ought to make the Study of the Scriptures our chiefest Concern. It is
requisite therefore for us to be competent Masters of the PHRASEOLOGY of
Scripture, to be able to express divine Truths in Scripture-Terms, thereby to
avoid the frequent Mistakes which are incident to human Expressions, and to
raise the Affections and warm the Hearts of devout Christians, which this
Eloquence does infinitely beyond all the little Arts of a profane Rhetoric.
We must study the Scriptures to be able to allege apposite Examples from
thence of the Truths we are enforcing, and to bring Proofs and Assertions of
the same Truths out of the SACRED ORACLES, which, to good Men, are more
undeniable than all the Demonstrations of REASON. We must study the Scriptures
to be able to understand some difficult Passages therein, which are apt to lie
uneasy upon our Minds till we have discovered the Sense of them, which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest to their own Destruction, and which
Persons under our Care are often wont to ask our Information in. We must also
study them to be able to understand the Types and Prophecies of our BLESSED
SAVIOR, to see how those, formerly unintelligible Ceremonies of the Law, are
but expiatory Rites, and receive their full Completion in the great Sacrifice
of the SON of GOD, how all the dusky Prophesies clear up and con-center in him,
what a World of strange fortuitous Events hit in and conspire together, to make
out the Predictions concerning HIM. It Is requisite that we should study the
Scripture that we may be Masters of its CHRONOLOGY, which alone of all other
History affords the firm Grounds to that Art; to be able to defend it against,
or reconcile it with the Oppositions of profane Authors: And, lastly, that we
may be able to solve those seeming Contradictions which atheistical Men pick up
in it to expose its Credit. And as an Assistance to do this the better, we must
have a competent Skill in the GREEK and HEBREW LANGUAGES which these holy Books
were wrote in, to consider the Words and Construction of the original Text, and
what Variation the common Interpreters do make from it, to find the Use of
those and other synonimous Words in other Places, to consider the particular
Idioms, Metaphors, Transitions, etc. in these Languages; and by this Means
oftentimes a very mean Knowledge in those Tongues may give a good and true
Interpretation of a Place which has been blunder'd upon by very great Critics.

WE ought likewise to have a complete Knowledge in CONTROVERSIAL DIVINITY.
Besides the Controversies which we are to manage with ATHEISTS and INFIDELS, by
reason of the woeful Divisions of Christianity, which is crumbled into so many
Sects, it is the Duty of our Order to maintain the Truth against so many
erroneous Opposers. There are some of these that strike at the very
Fundamentals of Religion, and the main Articles of Faith, such as are chiefly
the SOCINIANS and PAPISTS; others that entertain very erroneous Opinions
concerning the Discipline and Government of the Church, as the ANABAPTISTS,
INDEPENDENTS, and PRESBYTERIANS. Now it is requisite we should have an Insight
into all these Controversies, to be able to answer all the Objections which
such Men bring against our Religion, to confute their Opinions with Arguments
either brought from SCRIPTURE, REASON, or ANTIQUITY, or all of them; to know
what Cavils and Exceptions they raise against the Arguments of our Divines, and
to prove upon them the Invalidity of such Replies; to show what fallacious and
jejune Interpretations they put upon Scripture, and what Distortions and
Falsifications they use toward ancient Writers. -- Thus we must be every way
prepared for our Defense, and have every Weapon ready to enter the Lists with
them; and then, when we are attacked, we cannot be thrown into any Confusion or
Perplexity by their Grimace and Tone, which I have always observed are mighty
Helps to Dullness, and are frequently made Use of by dull Fellows of all
Persuasions.

BUT though nothing can be so necessary as to have always ready those Arms, which
at the same Time can discover every controversial Quirk, and defend us from
those who would entangle us in the Snares of their questionary Debates; yet
whenever we have Occasion to speak of GOD, or his ATTRIBUTES, we ought to be
inwardly affected, and in our outward Expressions appear to be so, with the
unmeasurable Distance there is between a most perfect and omnipotent CREATOR,
and a mere impotent CREATURE. It Is not without some Indignation as well as
Astonishment, that I see some among us (who little considering what GOD is, and
what they themselves are) presume to talk of him and his Attributes as freely
and unpremeditately, as if they were talking of a GEOMETRICAL FIGURE, or a
MECHANICAL ENGINE. So that the least presumptuous Discourse of the Nature and
Perfections of that unparalled Being, as if they were Objects their
Intellects can grasp; and scruple not to dogmatise about those abstruse
Subjects as freely, as about other Things, that are confessedly within the
Reach of human Reason, or perhaps are to be found among the more familiar
Objects of Sense.

HOW often do we hear Mr PUZZLE even from the Pulpit discourse of GOD and his
ATTRIBUTES, as if he comprehended the Height, the Breadth and Depth of his
Wisdom, and knew the Extent of his Greatness and Power, and all his
Perfections. With an Air of Confidence he tells us of such and such Things
being consistent or inconsistent with the Deity, how he is under such and such
a Necessity, as if he were of the Cabinet-Council of the KING of KINGS. If Mr
PUZZLE is not too wise in his own Conceit to consult his Bible, he will there
see how vain and foolish and presumptuous it is to be engaged in such deep
Researches. The SECRET THINGS belong unto the LORD; but those Things which are
revealed belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, that we may do all the
Words of this Law," is the Reflection of MOSES. When I applied mine Heart to
know Wisdom, says the WISE MAN, and to see the Business done upon the Earth:
Then I beheld all the Work of GOD, that a Man cannot find out the Work that is
done under the SUN: Because though a Man labor to seek it out, yet he shall not
find it; yea further, though a wise Man think to know it, yet shall he not be
able to find it.

SEEK not out the Things, says the wise Son of SIRACK, that are too hard for
thee, neither search the Things that are above thy Strength. But what is
commanded thee think thereupon with Reverence; for it is not needful for thee,
to see with thine EYES the Things that are in secret. Be not curious in
unnecessary Matters: for more Things are shown unto thee than Men understand.
For many are deveiv'd by their own vain Opinion, and an evil Suspicion has
overthrown their Judgment. Can thou, says JOB, by searching find out GOD?
Can thou find out the Almighty to Perfection? It is as high as HEAVEN, what
can thou do? deeper than HELL, what can thou know?

THE fallen ANGELS are described by MILTON, in his PARADISE LOST, as touched
with a Curiosity, like Mr PUZZLE'S, of discovering the Measures of the DIVINE
ECONOMY, amidst the Horror and Melancholy they were in, and unable to find out
either the Antecedents or the Consequents, the Beginning or the End of it.

OTHERS apart sat on a Hill retired,
In Thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate,
Fixed Fate, Free Will, Foreknowledge absolute,
And found no End, in wandering Mazes lost.
HOWEVER Mr PUZZLE may please himself with an Opinion of his own Wisdom, he
cannot, with all his boasted Reason, account for the Ways of NATURE, even for
the meanest of her Productions. Can he tell me why the VIOLET is arrayed in
Purple; why the SUN-FLOWER glows wiih Yellow, and the LILLY appears in White?
Can he so much as form a Conjecture, by what surprising Chemistry Nature, from
the same Soil, extracts the delicious, but different Juices of innumerable
sorts of FRUITS? Can he even tell me how the APPLE and CHERRY become round; the
PEAR and FIG oblong? How the WALNUT acquires a Shell that is broke with
Difficulty, whilst the MULBERRY growing near it, has a Skin so tender, that it
scarce endures the Touch? Can he tell me why GRAPES hang in Clusters; why some
Fruits on aspiring lofty Trees, some on Bushes, and others on the Ground? If
these Things, which seem so trifling, are beyond the Reach of HUMAN
UNDERSTANDING, how great must be Mr PUZZLE'S Folly, Assurance, and Presumption,
when he takes upon him to comprehend the Ways and Dispensations of the
Almighty, and insolently dares pretend to know the Extent of his Wisdom and
Power, and his other glorious Perfections! This is more than an honest Heathen
durst do, who thought our Words ought to be few, and those becoming the tardy
Apprehensions of Men, concerning the wise Dispositions of Providence, and the
Perfections of an omnipotent Creator.

SICUT aeguum est Homini de Potestate Deorum, timide et pauca dicannus.

Cic. Orat. pro lege Manilia. WE ought to have, my Friend, a moderate Insight
into CASUISTICAL POINTS. We that have undertaken the Pastoral Charge have
frequently under our Care heedless Persons, that will run unadvisedly into Sin
which they do not know to be such, and scrupulous Persons who forbear many good
and innocent Actions for fear of offending, or whose Consciences trouble them
when they have committed them. Therefore it is requisite we should, in some
Measure, be conversant in CASUISTICAL DIVINITY, to be able to understand how
Circumstances create or improve the Pravity or Goodness of moral Actions; what
are the exact Boundaries of Vice and Virtue; by what Manner Sins are aggravated
or mitigated; how Obligations are made, confirmed, or vacated; how far Oaths
are obligatory, and in what Sense imposed and taken; how far it is lawful to
comply with superior Authority, and for the Sake of Peace and Union. These
Things we ought to be able readily to determine, for the Sake of those who may
frequently be supposed to seek Advice from us.

WE must also have a competent Knowledge in ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, and the
Writings of the FATHERS. WE, who are the DEFENDERS of the FAITH, ought to know
how it has been delivered down to us, what Opposition has been made against it
by SCEPTICKS, and how it has been defended by the ORTHODOX; what Afflictions
have happened to the Church by persecuting EMPERORS, and what Privileges it has
gained by the pious and religious; what great and holy BISHOPS have graced
their respective SEES by their LEARNING, WISDOM, and PIETY, and how many others
have been the TORMENT of their DIOCESES, and the PEST of the CHURCH. WE must be
conversant likewise in the diverse COUNCILS of the several Ages, to see with
what Alacrity those HOLY FATHERS came from all Parts of the World to defend
their Religion, and to give an Account of their traditionary Faith in their
respective Districts down from the apostolical Times; what a pious Zeal they
showed, and what learned Speeches they made against the heretical Innovations;
what excellent Explications of Faith they formed, and what admirable Canons and
Laws of the Church. WE must carefully study the Writings of the ANCIENT
FATHERS, especially the APOLOGETICAL, POLEMICAL, and PRACTICAL, to know what
admirable Vindications of Christianity they made against the malicious
Imputationss of the PAGANS; how, by a wonderful Strength of Reason and
Learning, they overturned the very Foundation of the ETHNIC THEOLOGY, made the
Doctrine of the CROSS triumph over all the Glories of this World, and even bore
down the HEATHENS by the Force of their own RHETORIC: to see the Heresies of
the VALINTINIANS, MANICHEES, ARIANS, and others, perfectly struck through with
the Pens of these admirable Writers; and, lastly, to find in their PRACTICAL
TRACTS such a Force, and such a Warmth, as is inimitable in these later Ages,
that one may plainly have a Taste of the very Souls of these good Men in their
Writings.

I am, DEAR SIR Yours, etc.

LETTER VII.
DEAR SIR,
WE of this Profession must endeavor to make ourselves Masters of a nervous,
sweet, and musical STYLE. For it is not enough that we are barely heard, but we
must temper our Thoughts with the softest Harmony of Words, that we may
convince the Reason, and move the Passions of our Hearers. Vide Longin. Sect.
39.
Harmonious Composition has not only a natural Tendency to please and to
persuade, but inspires an Audience to a wonderful Degree with generous Ardour
and Passion. Fine Notes in Music have a surprising Effect on the Passions of
Men. Do they not fill the Breast with an inspired Warmth, and lift the Heart
into heavenly Transport? The very Limbs receive Motion from the Notes, and the
Hearer, though he has no Skill at all in Music, is sensible however, that all
its Turns make a strong Impression on his Body and Mind. The Sounds of any
musical Instrument are in themselves insignificant, yet by the Changes of the
Air, the Agreement of the Chords, and Symphony of the Parts, they give
extraordinary Pleasure, as we daily experience, to the Minds of an Audience.
Yet these are only spurious Images, and faint Imitations of the persuasive
Voice of Man, and far from the genuine Effects and Operations of human Nature.

WHAT an Opinion therefore may we justly form of fine Composition, the Effect
of that Harmony which Nature has implanted in the Voice of Man? Does it not by
an elegant Structure and marshalling of Sounds convey the Passions of the
Speaker into the Breasts of his Audience? Does it not seize their Attention,
and by framing an Edifice of Words to suit the Sublimity of Thoughts, delight
and transport, and raise those Ideas of Dignity and Grandeur in others which it
shares itself?

IT IS the Judgment of the CICERO de Orat. Lib. 1.
ROMAN Orator, that to use one's self much to reading and writing is the only
Way in the World to arrive at a Perfection and Grace of Style. We must
therefore carefully read the best Authors, and hear with the utmost Attention
the most celebrated Preachers; and be as studious of observing the Beauties of
a charming Discourse, as a FLORIST would the Colors of a fine AURICULA, or a
Botanist the Form of a curious PLANT. All this, I confess, is very troublesome,
but give me the Genius that is thus exercised; this is the Soil that Eloquence
will thrive and flourish in. As a TREE that is a good. Bearer shoots out into
Expressions of Kindness, and bends beneath its own precious Load to the Hand of
the Gatherer, when the Ground about it is meliorated and enriched with Culture:
So the Eloquence of a cultivated Genius will immediately break out into
Swan-like Music, and flow from his Lips with such delicious Sweetness, as to
fill his Audience with Melody and Rapture.

HORACE, that great Judge of fine Writing, bids us place before our Eyes the
great polite Ancients of ATHENS as Mirrors and Exemplars to form, to elevate,
and enoble our Style and Sentiments by.

-- Vos Exemplaria GRAECA
Nocturna versate Manu, versate diurna.
THIS, my Friend, must be our Ambition, this should be the fixed and lasting
Scope of all our Labors; we must spare no Pains to educate our Style and
Thoughts to Grandeur, and impregnate them with the noble Language and generous
Ideas of others, that our own Compositions may receive a kind of beautiful Glow
and Flavor from theirs.

NOR is an Imitation of the finest Pieces, or copying out those bright
Originals of ATHENS, or ROME, or our own, or neighboring Nations, to be looked
upon as Plagiarism, but as consistent with the nicest Honor. Was not I used,
says CICERO, to translate a Book of PLATO's and ZENOPHON's, by which I acquired
this Advantage, that in rendering the GREEK I had read over into Latin, I not
only fell upon the most elegant, and yet the most usual Expressions, but was in
the Course of my Translations led into an Imitation of their Manner, and to
introduce some new Words into the Language of my Countrymen, which I took Care
should be just and a-propo'. Vid. CICERO de Orat. Lib. 1.
CICERO the Imitator of ZENOPHON and PLATO? Was not Longin. Sect. 13.
HERODOTUS the constant Imitator of HOMER? Did not STESICHORUS was Inventor of
the LYRICK CHORUS. He was born, according to SUIDAS, in the 37th OLYMPIAD. If
he had kept within due Bounds, says QUINCTILIAN, he seems to have been able to
come the nearest to a Rivalship with HOMER. Vid. QUINCTIL. Instit.


STESICHORUS and ARCHILOCHUS imitate him more than HERODOTUS? And did not IT
was a common Report in the Age that PLATO lived in, that BEES dropped Honey on
his Lips, as he lay in the Cradle. And it is said, that the Night before he was
placed under the Tuition of SOCRATES, the Philosopher dreamed he had embraced a
young SWAN in his Bosom, who, after his Feathers were full-grown, stretched out
his Wings, and soared to an immense Height in the Air, singing all the Time
with an inexpressible Sweetness. This shows, at least, what a great Opinion
they then entertained of his Eloquence, since they thought its Appearance
worthy to be ushered into the World with Omens and Prognostics.
PLATO more than all of them, who from the copious HOMERICK Fountain has drawn
a Thousand Rivulets to cherish and improve his own Productions? HOMER had
engrossed the Admiration of the learned World, and wore the Laurels without a
Rival, the divine PLATO therefore was inspired with a noble Emulation to
contend the Prize with him; and though he did not succeed in his own Way, yet he
had noble Success in another; for the Style of his Prose has a poetical
Sweetness, Majesty and Elevation, and he is justly esteemed the HOMER of
Philosophers. The ROMAN Orator was so great an Admirer of him, that he said, If
JUPITER conversed with Men, he would talk in the Language of PLATO.

A GREATER Prize than the Glory and Renown of the celebrated ANCIENTS and
MODERS can never be contended for, where Victory crowns with never-dying
Applause, when even a Defeat in such a Competition is attended with Honor and
Advantage. PLATO, in all Probability, had never written so smoothly,
delicately, and poetically, and with the nicest Decoration, had not his
God-like Spirit carried him forwards in the noblest Career to the Imitation of
HOMER. Neither do I think that CICERO had ever been the Sovereign of Forensian
Pleading, or that his Eloquence had been so exquisitely and beautifully
finished, had he not, like a youthful Champion, been ambitious of entering the
Lists with the GREEKS, and, by applying himself entirely to the Imitation of
those excellent Models, united, in his Manner, the Force of DEMOSTHENES, the
delicious Copiousness of PLATO, the Sweetness of ISOCRATES, and the divine
Simplicity of ZENOPHON. By this Means he so fertiliz'd his Genius, that his
Eloquence seems to pour itself forth, not like the Streams of a little RIVULET,
but the Rapidity of a FLOOD.

IF, DEAR SIR, Men of our Profession were but inspired with an Ambition and
Thirst of excelling one another in the Arts of fine Composition, or emulous of
imitating the Style and Manner of the best Writers this Nation affords, their
Reasoning would be much closer, their Style more harmonious, and agreeable to
the Ear, and their Sentiments have more of the Spirit and Flavor of Divinity.
It Is evident that some in their Sermons, rather than take Pains, make Use of
sordid and blemished Terms; others again curtail and mince their Periods; and a
third fort shamefully spin them out into a vast Extent, whereby their Life and
Spirit evaporate, and all their Strength is lost by being quite overstretch'd.
Numerous Instances might be produced, to prove this, out of modern Sermons,
published by Men of no small Note and very sober Understandings.

THAT a judicious Vid. LONGIN. Sect. 30.
Choice of proper and magnificent Terms has wonderful Effects in winning upon
and entertaining an Audience, cannot, I think, be denied. For it is from hence
that the greatest Writers derive, with indefatigable Care, the Grandeur, the
Beauty, the Solemnity, the Weight, the Strength, and the Energy of their
Expressions. This clothes a Composition in the most beautiful Dress, makes it
shine, like a PICTURE, in all the Gaiety of Color; and, in a Word, it animates
our Thoughts, and inspires them with a kind of vocal Life. But though fine Words
are indeed the peculiar Light in which our Thoughts must shine, yet they should
not every where swell and look big. For vulgar Terms are sometimes much more
significant than the most ornamental can possibly be. They are easily
understood, because borrowed from common Life; and what is most familiar to us,
soonest engages our Belief. Some Writers very frequently make Use of common and
vulgar Terms that have not the least Air of Elegance to recommend them, yet by
musically disposing, and artfully connecting such Terms, they cloth their
Periods in a kind of Pomp and Exaltation, and dexterously conceal their
intrinsic Lowness.

IT IS observable, that some of our modern Preachers are more happy in the
Style, than in the Sentiments of their Sermons. Their Language is very often
noble and sonorous, but the Sense either very trifling, or else so obscured by
the sounding Phrases, hard Metaphors, and forced Expressions in which it is
clothed, that it is difficult to find it out. For my Part, I should prefer a
noble Sentiment, that is depressed with homely Language, infinitely before a
vulgar one, that is blown up with all the Sound and Pomp of Expression. Sublime
Thoughts, either by Means of a great Affinity they bear to the Springs and
Movements of our Souls, or by their own superlative Luster, always outshine
the Artifices of Rhetoric, whose Appearance they cover with a Veil of superior
Beauties. For as the STARS are quite dimmed and obscured, when the SUN breaks
out in all its blazing Rays, so pompous Phrases, and towering lofty
Expressions, are entirely overshadowed by the superior Splendour of noble
Sentiments.

To the Formation of a Style, our Reading and Imitation, if they be of the
right sort, must principally contribute. Whatever Sermons we hear, or however
polite and agreeable their Characters may be who preach them, if the Authors we
read or imitate are of another kind, we shall find our Palate strangely turned
their Way. We are unhappier in this respect, for being Scholars and Imitators,
if our Studies and Patterns be ill chosen. Nor can I, for this Reason, think it
proper to call a Man well-read, who reads and imitates many Authors; since he
must of Necessity have more ill Models than good, and be more stuffed with
Bombast, ill Fancy, and wry Thought, than filled with solid Sense, and just
Imagination.

THOUGH to pass a right Judgment upon Compositions is generally the Effect of a
long Experience, and the last Improvement of Study and Observation, yet, since
you request it, I shall give you my Opinion concerning as many Authors in our
Profession, as I think it needful for you to read at present, and you may
single out which you please for your Imitation.

IF you would have your Understanding charmed, your Affections captivated, and
your Passions directed and restrained by the Powers of Rhetoric, you must read
DR TILLOTSON. There is Gracefulness, there is Strength, there is Spirit, there
is Dignity in all he says. Such a divine Power and Energy, I think, never
displayed itself in so easy and genteel a Flow, and Command of Sentiment and
Expression, as the Sermons of this excellent Prelate.

DR SOUTH has brought in a Species of Eloquence in his Sermons, that is almost
peculiar to himself, and rarely to be met with among our Divines. He abounds
with Turns of Wit, which are inexpressibly fine; and is prodigiously dextrous
at Irony or Sneer. His Strokes of Raillery are vastly genteel, apposite and
proper. In Matters of Controversy, with what Humor does he ridicule his
Adversaries, and with what Dexterity does he sting in the Midst of a Smile! How
skilful at managing an Argument! Wit is not excluded by the Importance of the
Subject, nor its Weight lessened by the Humor.

DR SCOT's Book of THE CHRISTIAN LIFE is admirably well written; wherein we
meet with the simple Language of Truth, which, though unadorned and without Pomp,
is pure and perspicuous.

THERE are lively Strokes of Passion, and numerous Beauties in Archbishop of
York.
DR SHARP's Sermons, such as show the inherent Greatness of his Soul. He
strikes with powerful Might at the Adversaries of our Religion, is enflamed
with a servent, and yet peaceable Vehemence and Ardour. His Style particularly
excells in Smoothness, and an easy and peaceable Flow of the Words, and yet it
has such an Elevation as to excite an extraordinary Emotion in those especially
who are to be brought over by soft and gentle Insinuation.

BISHOP PEARSON'S Book on the CREED is a complete and delicate Performance;
though he launches out into the Depths of Divinity, and soars to the sublimest
Eminence, yet he never drops, like many others, unfortunately down, but still
preserves his own intrinsic Grandeur. His Arguments run rapidly along,
immediately strike the Imagination, inflame us with the Warmth and Fire of his
own Genius, and carry all before them by the Weight and Solemnity of Thought
and Expression.

THERE is something extraordinary, something more than humanly great in Dr
ATTERBURY's Sermons. And for this Reason has the inimitable and godlike Mr
POPE, unmoved by Partiality and unbiased by Envy, awarded the Laurels to this
great Author, which flourish still green, and will flourish as long as the Name
of POPE has an harmonious Sound to an ENGLISH Ear. To write in a Language that
is graceful and proper, that is distinguished by certain masterly Touches, and
an artful Polish, that would have shone in the Days of ATTICK Elegance, is the
peculiar Character of Dr ATTERBURY.

IN passing their Judgment of Dr CLARK'S Sermons, Men commonly muster his
Imperfections, so that the Remembrance of his Faults sticks indelibly in their
Minds, and that of his Excellencies is quickly worn out. For my Part, though I
cannot by any Means be blind or partial to his Faults, I have always thought
that his Sermons are very grand and beautiful Compositions: not like those of a
low and groveling Genius, who never endangers himself by aiming at Grandeur,
but still goes on in the same uniform secure Track. The whole Universe is
scarce sufficient for the extensive Reach and piercing Speculation of Dr
CLARK'S Understanding. His lofty Genius is frequently aspiring to prodigious
and amazing Heights, which expose him to sudden Falls; and such Falls sometimes
work the Good of Men. And besides, in the Judgment of the best Critics, what
is truly grand in the Midst of some Faults, is preferable to that, which has
nothing extraordinary in its best Parts, correct however throughout, and
faultless.

FOR a smooth and polite Style Mr SEED is very much admired. That Theology of
the Schools which he found undower'd, as it were, unattended, and in a
Dishabille, he has enriched with all the Wealth, the Pride and Ornament of
Language. He gives us some fine SIMILIES and ALLUSIONS, which, were they not
too much BY too eager a Pursuit of Elegance, says LONGINUS, a Subject becomes
dry and insipid. And those Persons, continues he, commonly fail in this
Particular, who by an ill managed Zeal for a neat, correct, and above all, a
sweet Style, are hurried into a heavy, nauseous Affectation. Vid. LONGIN. Sect.
3.


crowded, would be very taking and agreeable: like STARS, they would cast a
kind of Blaze about them; they would illuminate, and give a Luster to his
Sermons.

THERE are very few Genius's that write more gracefully or copiously than The
present Bishop of Oxford.
Dr SECKER; and he has this peculiar Talent, that besides an extraordinary
Gravity, a Spirit of Benevolence and Cheerfulness glows in his Compositions,
which gives them a matchless Dignity, not only persuades, but even throws an
Audience into Transport.

I DO not know of an Author that meets with more general Applause than
Archdeacon of Carlisle.
Mr LAW. Persons of different Humors, Ages, Professions, and Inclinations, all
agree in the same joint Approbation of his Writings, which Union of Assent
gives them an indisputable Title to our Esteem.

WHEN you have a competent Share of acquired as well as natural Taste, my
Friend, you may easily discover the Value of any Performance yourself from a
bare Recital of it. For if it is intrinsically good, the Mind is naturally
elevated by it, and so sensibly affected with its lively Strokes, that it
swells with Transport and an inward Pride, as if what had been only heard had
been the Product of its own Invention. But if we find that it transports not
the Soul, nor exalts our Thoughts, that it calls not up into our Minds Ideas
more enlarged than what the mere Sound of the Words convey, but on attentive
Examination its Dignity lessens and declines, we may conclude, that whatever
pierces no deeper than the Ears, can never deserve our Applause or Imitation.

THESE few Authors I have named to you, according to their Time and Age, have
provided us with the richest ORE. To their eternal Honor they have attempted
to throw off the horrid Discord of antiquated Prose, false Grandeur, Impotence
and Puerility of Sentiments. They have happily broken the Ice for those who are
to follow them, and who treading in their Footsteps, may at Leisure heighten
and polish the ENGLISH Language, lead the Ear and Understanding to finer
Pleasure, and find out the true, permanent, harmonious Idiom, which alone can
satisfy a just Judgment, and godlike Apprehension.

WHENEVER we are engaged in Compositions of the genteeler kind, such as require
Grandeur of Style and exalted Sentiments, it will then be of excellent Use to
raise in ourselves such Reflections as these. -- How in this Case would Dr
TILLOTSON, or Dr SOUTH, have raised their Thoughts? -- How would Dr SHARP, Dr
PEARSON, or Dr ATTERBURY? For these celebrated Preachers, being proposed by us
for our Pattern and Imitation, will in some Degree lift up our Souls to the
Standard of their own Genius. It will be yet of greater Use if to the
preceding Reflections we add these. -- What would Dr SECKER, or Mr LAW think
of this Piece? Or what Judgment would they pass upon it? How would they have
expressed themselves? It is really a noble Enterprise to frame such a Theater
and Tribunal to sit on our own Compositions, and submit them to a Scrutiny, in
which such eminent Writers must preside as our Judges, and be at the same Time
our Evidence. By this Method we must inevitably arrive at such a Perfection of
Style, as to be able to give the ENGLISH Language its due MUSCLING, as the
PAINTERS say of a good PIECE, its due Body and Proportion, and also the natural
Ornaments of Correctness, Simplicity, and Grace. -- But of this more in my next
Letter.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.

LETTER VIII.
DEAR SIR,
TO give Majesty, Sweetness, Politeness to a Discourse, to make it strike, to
give it the finishing Touches of Eloquence, to work it up with as much of the
Pathetick as is needful, we must have a moderate Skill in POETRY. A Man must be
so much of a Poet at least, as to be able to diversify his Style with the
finest FLOWERS of Sentiment and Expression. But they must not run through the
whole of a Discourse, but only such particular Places as that they may serve,
like JEWELS and DISTINCTIONS in DRESS. For the finical Ornaments of a
Discourse, and a continued Affectation of Excellence, gives Disgust; it is not
only unpleasant to the Ear, but also to the Intellectual Faculties. The same
Observation holds as to our other Senses; we are less pleased with those
FLOWERS and PLANTS that have too high a Perfume and Fragrance, than those that
have but a moderate Scent; and one would rather choose to smell at the ROSE,
than the MUSK-CRANESBILL. Even in the handling FRUIT there is a Degree of
Softness and Smoothness. So a Sermon or Discourse, if it has an undiversify'd
Height'ning and Embellishment of Style, affords no lasting Pleasure. Besides,
if it have all the Advantage of Poetical Coloring, it ought to have some
Shade, that that which is illuminated may cast a greater Luster.

IF we would embellish our Style by the Substance as it were, and
Ground-colouring of Poetical Sublimity and Grandeur, we must apply ourselves
diligently to the Study of the HOLY SCRIPTURES. It would be worth our while to
digest them so in our Minds, as to have them almost by Heart. For we should
have both nobler Sentiments and Expressions if we applied sacred to profane
Eloquence.

THE Effect and Beauty of SACRED POETRY you will perceive, in some Measure,
though imperfectly, from the two following SPECIMENS. I have chose the Pathetick
Kind, and studied to represent the Amiableness of Virtue, by such Foils and
Contrarieties as DAVID, the Man after GOD'S own Heart, furnishes us with, and
which serve as Graces, if I may so speak, in poetical Limning, and render this
Music of the Passions more seraphick, powerful and enchanting. Had this been
attempted by some abler Hand, you would have been led with Delight and Rapture,
Anxiety and Concern, by Turns, through the Labyrinth of the Affections, and
interested, whether you would or no, in the Passions of the ROYAL PENITENT: And
in the EXHORTATION annexed, you would presently have understood the Reality of
those Charms in the SACRED WRITINGS, which by my weak Endeavors, perhaps, you
will imagine not to be half so commanding, natural, and so powerful, or capable
of pleasing a judicious polite Ear, and Muse-like Understanding.

THE Royal Penitent, etc. A SACRED POEM.

THE ROYAL PENITENT: OR, HUMAN FRAILTY DELINEATED, IN THE PERSON of DAVID. A
SACRED POEM.

-- Delirant REGES, plectuntur ACHIVI. HOR. IN Days of Ease, when now the weary
Sword
Was sheathed, and LUXURY with CHARLES restored;
In every Taste of foreign Courts improved,
A Verse of the Lord LANSDOWN.
ALL, by the King's Example, lived and loved.
Then PEERS grew proud in HORSEMANSHIP t'excell,
NEW MARKET's Glory rose as BRITAIN's fell;
The SOLDIER breathed the Gallantries of FRANCE,
And every flowery COURTIER writ Romance.
Then MARBLE softened into Life grew warm,
And yielding METAL flowed to human Form:
LELY on animated Canvas stole
The sleepy Eye, that spoke the melting Soul.
No Wonder then, when all was Love and Sport,
The willing MUSES were debauched at COURT;
On each enervate String they taught the Note
To pant, or tremble through an EUNUCH's Throat.
POPE. THE Royal Penitent, etc.
I SING the Causes of a Troubled Reign,
How fleeting's Joy, how permanent is Pain;
Reason unthron'd, rebellious Passion's Sway,
The fatal Produce of a lustful Day:
The Anointed Head how vicious Joys expose,
A Soul in Anguish, and a King in Woes.
LIGHT Spots on Ermine are conspicuous shown,
And doubly glare the Follies of a Throne:
How then thy Crimes, O DAVID! shall we scan?
Thou greatest Monarch! Thou most God-like Man!
Or how the Frailty of our Frame confess,
When GOD's distinguished Favorites thus transgress?
THE Sun a-down the Steep of Heaven had rolled,
And fringed the purple Clouds with Skirts of Gold,
When shunning Grandeur, and the Noise of State,
On the high Turrets of the Royal Seat,
DAVID the Sweets of deep Reflection sought,
Indulging all the Luxury of Thought.
ON SION'S Mount the Cedar-Fabrick stood,
The ruined Honors of the TYRIAN Wood.
Hence stretched his Eye around his large Domain,
And much he joy'd him in his ample Reign;
Pleased could the Present with the Past compare,
The Regal Glories with the Rural Care:
The Rural Care fair BETHLEM's Hill renewed,
Which gently rising in the South he viewed.
Life's Steps from that distinguished Day could trace,
When, though the youngest of the Sons of JESSE,
He first was destined by the Sacred Oil
To splendid Cares, and Eminence of Toil.
How did he once the Bear and Lion slay,
While yet a Swain, to save the fleecy Prey!
At ELAH how a beardless Strippling dare
The grim gigantick Terror of the War!
Harsh whizz'd the Sling, and with a thundering Sound
He fell enormous over a Length of Ground.
AND now resolved he, as new Scenes he chose,
How still new Labors, and new Dangers rose.
To Envy doomed a Sacrifice to fall,
How twice he 'scap'd the vengeful Hand of SAUL;
And how he foiled the proud GOLIAH'S Arms,
To merit MERAB'S falsely promised Charms.
HE next the Wonders of his Sword admired,
When gaily bold, by MICHAEL'S Beauty, fired,
Two Hundred Foreskins of the Foe he paid,
A double Dow'ry for the Royal Maid!
The Royal Maid the daring Youth approved,
Met her new Lord, and unreserv'd she loved.
NOR yet was the relentless Father won
By the True Subject, or the Duteous Son.
The thirsted Blood still sought he to attain
By Fraud, by Force: but Fraud and Force were vain.
The faithful MICHAEL bade her Spouse depart,
Mourned him as sick with all the Woman's Art,
But through a Window secretly conveyed,
To seek at RAMAH holy SAMUEL's Aid. --
THENCE fled He, the devoted Life to save,
Now to ADULLAM, now ENGEDDI'S Cave,
To PARAN'S Desert, or the ZIPHITE's Wood:
To Woods, to Caves, to Deserts, SAUL pursued.
TRUSTING a Foe before a Father's Wrath,
He sought Protection in the Land of GATH.
Through NOB He thither past, a fatal Guest,
GOLIAH'S Sword and hallowed Bread the Priest
Bounteous supplied: but, for the well-meant Aid,
The Lives of Fourscore Priests to SAUL were paid.
AT GATH kind AKISH gave him ZICLAG's Town,
And well the Hero merited the Boon,
Till SAUL at GILBOA fell, and by his Side
The Prince, the other Half of DAVID, died.
Much He the Father mourned, but more the Son,
He found a Scepter, but the Friend was gone.
AND now what Wars He waged, what Labors bore,
Ere ISRAEL's Crown at Ease the Monarch wore,
Employed his Thoughts: while ISHBOSHETH in vain
Labored a lineal Title to maintain;
Murdered he fell, who ill aspired to rule:
A Traitor's Victom, and a Party's Tool!
The hated Crime the Murd'rers' Lives atone,
And DAVID mounts the uncontested Throne.
AMAZING Toils! but now these Toils were over,
And banished Sorrow should return no more.
United ISRAEL gloried in his Reign,
And Heaven his Throne had promised to sustain;
Had destined to a long successive Race,
Distinguished Glory, and peculiar Grace.
SION He sees, by his victorious Hand,
The Seat of Worship, and of Empire stand.
The PHILISTINES and AMLECK dread his Sword,
And vanquished EDOM owns Him as her Lord.
MOAB's proud Sons a forced Submission bring,
And SYRIA mourns in Blood the Rashness of her King.
Before His Arms the Strength of AMMON falls;
And haughty HANAN trembles in his Walls,
Repents the Insult that his Pride returned,
The Friend provoked, and proffered Kindness scorned.
FEARED by his Foes, by his Allies caressed,
Loved by his GOD, and by his People blessed,
Remained there ought to fear? Or had there been
A happier Prince among the Sons of Men?
UNHAPPILY secure! Untimely vain!
Sincerer Ills, and heavier Griefs remain.
That Hour, that Ease thou boasts, shall hurt thee more
Than all the Injuries in Fortune's Power.
A Frontier-Town which crowded Forces shield,
Dares thus the gleamy Squadrons of the Field:
Secure in Arms on the high Walls they shine,
While the Foes labor in the secret Mine:
Till passed the gloomy Vaults they rise to Air,
Horribly dreadful in the proudest Square.
NEVER felt his Soul the sad Effects of Sin,
For all was pure, and all was calm within.
Tumult'ous Passion, Lust, Deceit, Despair,
And black Remorse, had never harbored there.
Naught feared he from himself, nor understood
DAVID was yet by DAVID unsubdu'd.
Now was the Hour ill-fated he must know
That vicious Pleasures terminate in Woe.
URIAH's Garden near the Palace laid,
Where twining Trees a private Arbor made:
Yet from aloft the piercing Eye might trace
With Ease the Secrets of the close Recess.
Hither a Rivulet was taught to glide,
Whose constant Store a Marble Bath supplied;
And here to bathe, about the setting Sun,
The lovely BATHSHEBA retired alone.
Unconscious of a Witness she displayed,
Luxuriant Beauty in the fraudful Shade;
Her comely Limbs the curling Stream embraced,
And flowed, but limpid flowed, around her Waste:
To the King's View her snowy Charms were bare,
He saw her naked, and he owned her fair!
Fair! IT was necessary here to evade the Grossness of Expression which is so
frequently to be met with amongst most of the profane Poets, except the
GREEKS, who were a People remarkable for Decency of this kind. There is a
pretty Instance of this Manner in AESCHYLUS's Tragedy of AGAMEMNON, where the
CHORUS says, (...),
(...).
I neither saw nor speak what followed next,
But CALCHAS's Arts obtained too well their Ends.

-- she was wondrous fair!
A Lot too great for any Subject's Bliss!
Oh, she was Heaven! and oh -- that she were his!
NOW through his Soul an earnest Wish there fled
Of furtive Joys, and an Adult'rous Bed;
The Hands-breadth Cloud from whence the black'ning Storm
Arose to wreck his Peace, and all his Joys deform.
NOR Rest, nor Ease, th'intruding Thought affords,
Till he reveals the Secret to his Lords.
The Lords officious, with a courtly Care,
Discharge the Message, and address the Fair.
In moving Terms the King's Desires conveyed,
With too much Ease were those Desires obeyed.
Soft Love incites, and proud Ambition warms,
Weak Woman yields, and meets the Monarch's Arms.
WHILE these in Love the flying Hours employ,
Revel secure, and give a Loose to Joy,
Laugh at the Ignorance of the injured Spouse,
The violated Bed, and cancelled Vows;
At RABBAH's Siege URIAH sought Applause,
Lavishly valiant in his Country's Cause.
Till the sad Wanton's News the King alarms,
That she was pregnant by the Royal Arms.
Now must he be to the false Bed beguiled,
The imagined Father of the spurious Child.
For this dispatched a feigned Express to bring,
He leaves the Camp, attends the lustful King.
Who wanted not (Credulity to force)
Artful Reception, and prepared Discourse.
Inquired the Monarch, with designed Address,
The Gen'ral's Welfare, and the War's Success.
Curious he seemed each Circumstance to know,
The Site, the Strength, the Number of the Foe.
Received the Answers with majestic Pride,
Forced a kind Look, and with a Smile replied:
"WELL have thou satisfied our Royal Caire,
"Sure of our Favor to thy House repair.
"Indulge the Pleasures of the Court a while,
"A short Delay shall give thee back to Toil.
"Let the rough Labors of the Warrior cease,
"And taste, till then soft Love, and joyous Ease."
"THESE I adjourn to Peace, the Chief rejoined,
"Ill suit such Pleasures with a martial Mind.
"The Feast luxurious, and the flowing Bowl,
"Unstring the Sinews, and debase the Soul.
"Say, shall thy Soldier the fond Wife possess,
"And melt inglorious in the soft Caress?
"Or press the downy Bed in Silk enclosed,
"While JUDAH sees her Ark in Tents exposed?
"And sheathed in Arms the Youths of ISRAEL dare
"The generous Hardships of the toilsome War?
"May Heaven so bless thee, as I disapprove
"This dull Inaction, and unmanly Love!"
To him the King: -- "Enough is-giv'n to Fame,
"At least a Night domestic Sweets may claim.
"Till Morrow's Dawn thy purposed Haste delay,
"And take thy Journey with returning Day."
HE said: -- resolved the mirthful Feast to prove,
If ought might fire him to the Joys of Love;
At his own Table caused the Chief to dine,
And the rich Goblet flowed with generous Wine:
In vain the Feast was served, the Goblet flowed,
And all his Arts the wily King bestowed.
Stretched on the lonely Couch the Night he sped,
Nor sought the Pleasures of the nuptial Bed;
He slept: -- But Sleep the Royal Eyelids fled.
URIAH's Death the treacherous King designed,
And the black Thought deep labored in his Mind.
He rose, the rash Resolve to JOAB wrote,
Beneath whose Care his Hosts at RABBAH fought,
To place him where the surest Danger lay,
In the sharp Conflict of the doubltful Day.
Strict he enjoined, till by the Foes beset,
Then to retire, and leave him to his Fate.
The Royal Signet closed the dire Command,
And safe consigned it to URIAH's Hand.
All heedless of the murderous Charge he held,
Early the Hero hasted to the Field;
Took his last Orders with a joyous Mind,
And rushed impatient to the Post assigned.
He charged impetuous, till he saw, too late,
The Foes surrounding, and the Friends Retreat.
Yet dear resolved the abandoned Life to sell,
Greatly he fought, as loyally he fell;
And blessed, with the expiring Gasp of Life,
The ungrateful Sovereign, and the faithless Wife.
THE Monarch heard the News with artful Care,
He blamed the Sword, unknowing how to spare,
And undiscerning Chance of wasteful War.
But now avowed his Flame, (the Husband dead)
And took the Widow to the Royal Bed.
A Son she bore; and, for a transient Time,
Greatly he joy'd at the successful Crime.
ABSURD MANKIND! when in the Ways of Ill,
We for our Reason substitute our Will,
Fondly secure, and indolently gay,
In the smooth Calm of flattering Vice we play;
Till over our Heads the Thunder bursting loud,
Echoes tremendous, and proclaims the GOD.
THUS DAVID found his sanguine Hopes recede,
And all the gaudy Dream of Pleasure fled;
When NATHAN came, a venerable Sage,
In the grave Majesty of hoary Age.
Awful his Gesture, and his Words sincere,
Nor knew he ought to flatter, or to fear;
He bore his GOD's Commission in his Look,
Hailed the vain King, -- and thus the Prophet spoke.
"PLAINTIVE I come of arbitrary Ill,
"The sad Encroachment of the lawless Will.
"May ISRAEL's King attend what I relate,
"And say, what Vengeance meets a Crime so great?
"WITHIN thy Realm a Man there dwelt of late,
"Blessed with the Plenty of a vast Estate.
"So large his Herds, that the increasing Breed
"Blackened the Vales, and lowed in every Mead;
"And Flocks so numerous were around him spread,
"That scarce he knew the Hills on which they fed.
"In the near Cottage lived a laboring Hind,
"Of scanty Fortune, but an easy Mind:
"Nor Sorrow he, nor Envy knew, though poor;
"A Lamb was all his Joy, and all his Store.
"This darling Partner of his Board and Bed,
"With Care he nursed, with fond Indulgence fed.
"Bred with his Children, as a Child it fared,
"Loved with a Parent's tenderest Regard.
"Mean while it chanced that to the neighboring Dome,
"An unexpected Visitant was come;
"The lordly Master, for the Friend's Repast,
"Nor from the Flock, nor Herd, selects the Feast.
"His own he spared: the little favorite Ewe,
"The Bosom-comfort of the Lab'rer slew,
"Feasting remorseless on a Neighbor's Woe."
SCARCE to the finished Tale the King suppressed
The rising Fury of the Royal Breast;
Incontinent he gave th'incens'd Reply: --
"As the LORD lives the Man shall surely die!
"The fourfold Value of the Lamb returned,
"For Force injurious, and for Pity scorned."
THE Seer, stern Anger frowning on his Brow,
Replied; "The Man, whom thou condemn'st, art THOU.
"Even DAVID thus has sinned: -- and now prepare,
"The Sentence of an angry GOD to hear.
"BY me he cites thy Folly, and thy Pride,
"His Goodness slighted, and his Power defied.
"Even thee, O King! who durst that Power disdain,
"Raised by my Favor from an abject Swain.
"I gave thee Grace, I gave thee Strength in War,
"And made thy Safety my peculiar Care.
"Lavishly bountiful, I gave thee all,
"The Wealth, the Wives, the Diadem of SAUL.
"Peace through thy Land, and smiling Plenty flowed;
"Foes spoke thee Great, while Subjects spoke thee Good.
"These Blessings, why could JUDAH's King destroy,
"For the short Transport of a guilty Joy?
"Bethink, O King! for what have thou resigned,
"Thy Peace, thy sweet Serenity of Mind;
"And Raptures which the virtuous Soul bestowed,
"Conscious of Worth, and conversant with GOD?
"For the wild Cravings of the vicious Will,
"And false Appearance of a specious Ill,
"Pursued with Labor, purchased with Deceit,
"Enjoyed with Shame, and finished with Regret.
"Nor end the Evils of the Crime therein,
"Lust's but the Threshold to the Gates of Sin.
"This well thou know; for thou have found it lead
"To the Invasion of the Nuptial Bed,
"The base Deception of the fraudful Word,
"And the Friend murdered by the hostile Sword.
"For this, the insatiate Sword with endless Rage
"Shall haunt thine House, and persecute thine Age.
"For this, thy Wives, estranged from DAVID's Arms,
"Shall to thy Neighbor's Bed transfer their Charms;
"Nor furtive shall, like thine, their Joys be hid,
"The Noontide Sun shall view the flagrant Deed.
"ISRAEL the Justice of her GOD shall know,
"Who makes the Offender's Crime the Offender's Woe."
WHAT wild Amazement seized the Monarch's Breast,
When Vice appeared in all her Shame confessed,
When now no more the glossy Varnish shone,
The wretched Mariner conceives alone,
Who far has sailed; and at his wished Return
Has, through the Errors of a misty Morn,
With eager Joy imagined Land pursued:
But when the Splendour of the Sun renewed,
Have madly mourned the dear Delusion lost,
And the Ship bulging on the rocky Coast.
He wept his Folly, and his Crime he owned.
"Thy Death remitted, and thy Crime atoned,
"Thy GOD declares, the Prophet said, the LORD,
"Slow to avenge, as righteous to reward.
"Yet since, by this, thou did his Name expose
"To the rude Scorn of unbelieving Foes;
"Since Pleas for Vice the LIBERTINE may bring,
"From this Excess of JUDAH'S fav' rite King,
"Die shall the Offspring of the adult'rous Womb,
"Fixed is his Fate, and unrevers'd the Doom."
THUS spoke the Seer; nor farther would disclose
The destined Series of the Monarch's Woes,
Though his prophetic Soul in Time's dark Law
The Scene of future Miseries foresaw.
The Royal Offspring what black Crimes should stain,
A Sister ravished, and a Brother slain.
Rash AMNON's Death by ABSALOM decreed,
For beauteous TAMAR's violated Bed
And DAVID grieving at the impious Deed.
How he the Slain and Fugitive should mourn,
Until the faithless ABSALOM return:
Return, accursed Ingratitude to show,
And plunge him farther in the Depth of Woe.
How forced over JORDAN's Stream the Sire should shun
The impious Arms of the rebellious Son;
Yet in the Anguish of a Father sad,
With Ashes sprinkled, and with Sackcloth clad,
Should grieve the Conquest that his Death must cost,
And all the Rebel in the Son be lost.
FARTHER he saw him destined to sustain
A deeper Anguish, and a keener Pain;
When summoned by the unrelenting Seer
To the sad Choice of Famine, Plague, or War.
How each keen Arrow from the Almighty's Bow
Should pierce his Soul with the severest Woe;
While gasping he surveys, on every Side,
The guiltless Thousands for the Monarch's Pride.
OPPRESSED with Grief he saw his hoary Age
By ADONIJAH's Plot, and factious Rage:
And even in Death transmitting with his Crown
Invidious Vengeance to his favorite Son.
THESE he foresaw, yet wisely these suppressed
Safe in the close Recesses of his Breast.
For Heaven in Pity to our State conceals
From human View the Course of future Ills.
Reluctant else would wretched Man essay
The toilsome Journey of the thorny Way.
Inly the Fortunes of the King he mourned,
Restrained the rising Grief, and Home returned.
While DAVID in the expiring Child beheld
The sad Predictions of the Seer fulfilled.
Apart in Bitterness of Soul he sat,
And his Repentance, as his Crime, was great.
By his EXAMPLE warned, may we beware
Of tempting Vice, and shun the fatal Snare.
Or, by the Frailty of our Passions led,
Atone with Sorrow for the loathed Misdeed,
On each Offense a sad Remembrance cast,
And mend the FUTURE, as we mourn the PAST.
THE ROYAL PENITENT'S EXHORTATION.

THE EXHORTATION OF THE ROYAL PENITENT.

A SACRED POEM.

BEING A PARAPHRASE ON PSALM CVII.

THE Royal Penitent's EXHORTATION.
HOW gracious and how great the heavenly King,
In Praises endless, as his Mercy, sing.
SING they his Praise, who, rescued by his Hand,
From hostile Nations, sought an happy Land.
From distant Realms the numerous Wand'rers joined,
Some left the North, and some the South behind.
Or from the East began their tedious Way,
Or Lands that last enjoy departing Day.
Long did they wander with erroneous Toil
Through the blind Mazes of a Desart-Soil.
No City there the weary Troops received,
No Food refreshed, no grateful Drink relieved.
Taught by Distress, from GOD they seek Release:
He hears their Prayers, he bids their Sufferings cease,
Leads them in Safety to their wished Repose,
And in a City terminates their Woes.
SING then his Praise, ye Sons of Earth, proclaim
Your GOD, your MAKER, your DELIV'RER'S Fame.
WITH heavenly Goodness bountiful he feeds
The famished Soul that his Assistance needs.
Such as in Misery and in Fetters bound,
The Shades of Death, and darksome Night surround.
Because their GOD'S Indulgence they abused,
Slighted his Counsels, and his Laws refused;
Till angry Justice destined them to bear,
Helpless, the heavy Miseries of War.
Their GOD they sought when humbled and enslaved:
He heard, forgave; he pitied, and he saved.
SING then his Praise, ye Sons of Earth proclaim
Your GOD, your MAKER, your DELIV'RER'S Fame.
NOT Gates of Brass can his Commands restrain,
And Bars of Iron are opposed in vain.
In vain Diseases all their Terrors bring,
A contrite Heart disarms the grizly King,
The Vengeance deprecates that Folly drew,
The GOD appeases, and averts the Woe.
SING then his Praise, ye Sons of Earth proclaim
Your GOD, your MAKER, your DELIV'RER'S Fame.
THE Original is, -- They that go down to the SEA in SHIPS, that do Business in
great Waters: -- These see the Works of the LORD, and his Wonders in the Deep.
-- For he commands and raises the stormy WIND, which lifts up the Waves
thereof. -- They mount up to the HEAVEN, they go down again to the DEPTHS;
their SOUL is melted because of Trouble. -- They reel to and fro, and stagger
like a DRUNKEN MAN, and are at their Wits End. -- Then they cry unto the Lord
in their Trouble, and he brings them out of their Distress. -- He makes the
STORM a CALM, so that the Waves thereof are still. -- Then are they glad
because they be quiet; so he brings them unto their desired Haven. -- This
single Passage runs in a higher Vein of Sublimity, and has more Spirit in it
than all the applauded Descriptions of the Authors of Antiquity put together;
because when the Tempest is in all its Rage and Fury, and the Danger become
extreme, ALMIGHTY POWER is introduced to calm at once the bellowing Ocean, and
give Preservation to the miserable distressed. It ends in that Fervency of
Devotion, which such grand Occurrences are sitted to raise in the Human Mind.
BE that their Song who in Pursuit of Gain
Over the wide watery Waste their Course maintain.
When Storms at the Almighty's Word begin,
And threatening Death from every Surge is seen.
High over the Ridge of some vast Wave they go,
And view all ghastly pale the Depths below.
Then stooping down the steep Descent, they dread
Enormous Mountains swelling over their Head.
Unfix'd their Steps, but more confined their Mind,
Till to Devotion from Despair inclined,
And timely wise upon their GOD they call:
Hushed are the Winds, the boisterous Billows fall,
And friendly Gales the shattered Bark convey
Over the smooth Waters of a peaceful Sea.
SING then his Praise, ye Sons of Earth, proclaim
Your GOD, your MAKER, your DELIV'RER'S Fame.
HIM let the Tribes, him let the Elders praise,
With joyous Gratitude, and tuneful Lays.
Powerful, with Drought the watery Meads to spoil,
And curse with Barrenness the fertile Soil.
Or pleased to bid new Rivers take their Course
Through the waste Desert, from a rocky Source.
Here he commands the Hungry to reside,
Erect a City, and new Domes provide:
To till the Ground, the generous Vine to plant,
And blessed with Plenty to forget their Want.
Joyful to see their Offspring numerous grow,
Whilst thriving Herds over all the Valleys low.
Or when he gives them up to Grief a Prey,
And haughty Tyrants more oppressive Sway;
Them through wild Deserts he permits to roam,
But brings the poor afflicted Wretches home,
Supply their Wants, and settles them in Peace,
And bids their Households, like their Flocks, increase.
THE Just with Joy shall view this heavenly Care,
The Sinner shall be struct with silent Fear:
Reflection to the Wise it shall afford,
And conscious Virtue own a gracious LORD.
IN the sacred Writings, my Friend, POETRY has a finished Excellence, and
RHETORIC a majestic Flow. Where did Eloquence ever ride in more Glory and
Splendor than in the Royal PSALMIST'S Descriptions of the Greatness and Power
of the ALMIGHTY? With what Loftiness and Sublimity of Diction does he paint the
mavelous Workings of DIVINE PROVIDENCE? Where do we read such strange Risings
and Fallings, now the Faintings and Languishings, now the Terrors and
Astonishments of Despair, venting themselves in such high amazing Strains as in
the 51st Psalm? Mr Dean of Armagh.
DANIEL'S Paraphrase of it is extremely beautiful; Part of which runs thus: --
GREAT GOD, with conscious Blushes, lo! I come
To cry for Pardon, or receive my Doom.
But oh! I die when I thine Anger meet!
Prostrate I lay my Body at thy Feet.
How can I dare to ask for a Reprieve?
Must I still sin, and will my GOD forgive?
Thy Justice cannot let thy Mercy flow;
Strike then, oh! strike, and give the deadly Blow!
Do I still live? and do I live to prove
The inexhausted Tokens of thy Love?
This UNEXAMPLED GOODNESS wounds me more
Than even the Wrath I merited before.
Oh! I am all a Blot, the foulest Shame
Has stained my Scepter, and disgraced my Name:
A Name, which once I could with Honor boast;
But now the Father of his People's lost!
THOUGH darkly thy mysterious Prophet spoke,
While from his Lips the fatal Message brake,
Fixed and amazed I stood, confounded whole;
Too soon his dreadful Meaning reach my Soul!
Thou art the Man -- has fixed a deadly Smart;
Thou art the Man -- lies throbbing at my Heart.
I am -- whatever thine Anger can express,
Nor can my Sorrow make my Follies less.
Raised and exalted to the first Degree,
Thy heavenly Will had made the Monarch free.
The fond Restraint of Man I scorned to own,
But grasped the full Possession of a Crown.
Indulged in Ease, I ruled without Control,
And, to its utmost Wish, enjoyed my Soul.
Vain Boast of Power! which vanished into Air,
Since I forgot the LORD, who placed me there.
Was it for this thou gave the glorious Land,
And thy own Flock committed to my Hand?
"Was I the Shepherd to go first astray,
Till Innocence itself became a Prey?
Ah no! the Fault was mine, I stand alone:
Be thine the Praise, who placed me on the Throne;
The Guilt, the Folly, and the Shame my own.
How vile must I appear, how lost a Thing!
The worst of Tyrants, and no more a King.
O do not thou my abject State despise,
But let my Soul find Favor in thine Eyes!
WHENEVER the horrid Deed I backward trace,
My Soul rolls inward, and forgets her Peace:
Waking I dream, and, in the silent Night,
A frightful Vision stalks before my Sight.
The pale URIAH walks his dreadful Round,
He shakes his Head, and points to every Wound.
O foul Disgrace to Arms! who now will go
To fight my Battles, and repel the Foe?
Unhurt the Coward may to Ages stand;
The Brave alone can die by my Command.
"Oh! hold! my Brain to wild Distraction wrought,
I will not, cannot bear the painful Thought:
Oh! do not fly me; for thy Mercy's Sake,
Turn thee, oh! turn! and hear the wretched speak.
Even self-condemned thy kneeling Servant save,
And raise a drooping Sinner from the Grave.
SPEAK, mighty GOD! and bid thy Servant live;
Let my charmed Ears but hear the Word -- forgive:
My joyful Muse shall bear the Tidings round,
While listening Worlds shall catch the grateful Sound:
Thus other Sinners shall obedient prove,
And, taught by me, shall wonder at thy Love!
BUT oh! if stricter Justice must be done,
If my relentless Fate comes driving on,
I stand the Mark; whatever is decreed,
Be ISRAEL safe, but let its Monarch bleed.
"On me, on me, thy utmost Vengeance take,
But spare my People for thy Mercy's Sake.
Oh! let JERUSALEM to Ages stand,
Build thou her Walls, and spread her wide Command:
So shall thy Name for ever be adored,
And future Worlds, like me, shall bless the LORD.


IN every Page of the Royal Psalmist's Compositions, there are such pathetick
and exalted Expressions of FEAR and LOVE, HOPE and TRUST, and DELIGHT in the
Deity, that it is no Wonder if such a genuine and sub5lime Penitence was able to
cover a MULTITUDE of SINS. In the CLOSET he seems to be something more indeed
than Man, his Prayers are offered with that Fervency of Zeal, that they are
like the Incense of an ANGEL, or SAINT in Glory.

WHAT SONG of TRIUMPH was ever writ in higher or more exalted Strains than that
of GIVE Ear, O ye HEAVENS (says he) and I will speak; and hear, O EARTH, the
Word of my Mouth. -- My DOCTRINE shall drop as the RAIN: My SPEECH shall
distill as the DEW, as the small RAIN upon the tender HERB, and as the SHOWERS
upon the GRASS. -- Because I will publish the Name of the LORD: ascribe ye
GREATNESS unto our GOD. -- He is the ROCK, his Rock is perfect: for all his
Ways are JUDGMENT: a GOD of Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right is he.
-- They have corrupted themselves, their Spot is not the Spot of his Children:
they are a perverse and crooked Generation. -- Do ye thus requite the LORD, O
foolish People and unwise? Is he not thy FATHER that has bought thee? Has he
not made thee and established thee? -- Remember the Days of old, consider the
Years of many Generations: Ask thy FATHER, and he will show thee, thy ELDERS,
and they will tell thee. -- When the MOST HIGH divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, when he separated the Sons of ADAM, he set the Bounds of the
People according to the NUMBER of the Children of ISRAEL. -- For the LORD'S
Portion is his PEOPLE: JACOB is the Lot of his Inheritance. -- He found him in
a desert Land, and in the waste howling Wilderness: he led him about, he
instructed him, he kept him as the APPLE of his EYE. -- As an EAGLE stirs up
her NEST, fluttereth over her YOUNG, spreads abroad her Wings, takes them,
bears them on her Wings; -- so the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no
strange God with him. -- He made him ride on the high Places of the Earth, that
he might eat the Increase of the Fields; and he made him to suck HONEY out of
the ROCK, and OIL out of the flinty Rock. -- Butter of Kine, and Milk of Sheep,
with Fat of Lambs, and Rams of the Breed of BASHAN, and Goats, with the Fat of
KIDNEYS of Wheat, and thou did drink the pure Blood of the GRAPE, etc.
MOSES? -- How does he accustom us to mount along with him to heroic Grandeur,
when he sets the Works of Omnipotence in a magnificent Light, and paints the
Deity in all his Majesty and Splendour, as in that Description of the Creation
of LIGHT, and the EARTHLY GLOBE, which has been already applauded by Vid.
LONGIN. on the Sublime, Part 1. Section 9.
LONGINUS. The BOILEAU undertook the Defense of this Passage, and bravely
defended it against HUET and LE CLERC, who pretended that LONGINUS never saw
it, though he has actually quoted it; and that he never read MOSES, though he has
done so exemplary a Piece of Justice to his Merit, and left so candid an
Acknowledgement of it. Vid. BOILEAU 's Works in four Vols. 4 to, and Mr SMITH
's Translation of LONGINUS, where he has a Note upon this Passage.


JEWISH LEGISLATOR, says he, having conceived a just Idea of the Power of GOD,
has nobly expressed it in the Beginning of his Law. And GOD said -- What? --
Let there be Light, and there was Light. Let the Earth be, and the Earth was.
-- Can there be more Beauty and Harmony in Numbers, than in the SONG of THEN
sang DEBORAH, and BARAK the Son of ABINOAM, on that Day, saying. -- Praise ye
the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the People willingly offered
themselves. -- Hear, O ye KINGS, give Ear, O ye PRINCES; I, even I, will sing
unto the Lord, I will sing Praise unto the LORD GOD of ISRAEL. -- LORD, when
thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the Field of EDOM, the
Earth trembled, and the Heavens dropped, the Clouds also dropped Water. -- The
Mountains melted from before the LORD, even that SINAI from before the LORD GOD
of ISRAEL. -- In the Days of SHAMGAR, the Son of ANATH, in the Days of JOEL,
the Highways were unoccupy'd, and the Travelers walked through By-ways. -- The
Inhabitants of the Villages ceased, they ceased in ISRAEL, until that I,
DEBORAH, arose, that I arose a Mother in ISRAEL. They chose new Gods; then was
War in the Gates: Was there a Shield or Spear seen among forty thousand in
ISRAEL? My Heart is toward the Governors of ISRAEL, that offered themselves
willingly among the People: Bless ye the LORD. -- Speak ye that ride on white
Asses, ye that sit in Judgment, and walk by the Way. -- They that are delivered
from the Noise of Archers in the Places of drawing Water; there shall they
rehearse the righteous Acts of the LORD, even the righteous Acts toward the
Inhabitants of his Villages in ISRAEL: then shall the People of the Lord go
down to the Gates. -- Awake, awake, DEBORAH: Awake, awake, utter a Song: Arise
BARUK, and lead thy Captivity Captive, Thou Son of ABINOAM. -- Then he made him
that remains have Dominion over the Nobles among the People: the Lord made me
have Dominion over the Mighty. -- Out of EPHRAIM was there a Root of them
against AMALECK; after thee, BENJAMIN, among thy People: out of MACHIR came
down Governors, and out of ZEBULUN they that handle the Pen of the Writer. --
And the Princes of ISSACAR were with DEBORAH: Even ISSACAR, and also BARAK, he
was sent on Foot into the Valley: For the Divisions of REUBEN there were great
Thoughts of Heart. -- Why abodest thou among the Sheepfolds, to hear the
Bleatings of the Flocks? For the Divisions of REUBEN there were great
Searchings of Heart. -- GILIAD abode beyond JORDAN: and why did DAN remain in
Ships? ASHER continued on the Sea Shore, and abode in his Breaches. -- ZEBULUN
and NAPHTALI were a People that jeoparded their Lives unto the Death, in the
high Places of the Field. -- The KINGS came and fought; then fought the KINGS
of CAANAN in TAANACH by the Waters of MEGIDO, they took no Gain of Money. --
They fought from Heaven, the STARS in their Courses fought against SISERA. --
The River of KISHON swept them away, that ancient River, the River KISHON: O my
SOUL, thou have trodden down Strength. -- Then were the Horses Hooss broken by
the Means of the Prancings, the Prancings of their mighty ones. -- Curse ye
MEROZ, (said the ANGEL of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof:
Because they came not to the Help of the LORD, to the Help of the LORD against
the Mighty. -- Blessed above Women shall JAEL, the Wife of HEBER the KENITE be,
blessed shall she be above Women in the Tent. -- He asked Water and she gave
him Milk, she brought forth Butter in a lordly Dish. -- She put her Hand to the
Nail, and her Right Hand to the Workman's Hammer: And with the Hammer she smote
SISERA, she smote off his Head when she had pierced and stricken through his
Temples. -- At her Feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: At her Feet he bowed,
he fell; where he bowed there he fell down dead. -- The Mother of SISERA looked
out at a Window, and cried through the Lattess, Why is his Chariot so long in
coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariots? Her wise Ladies answered her,
yea, she returned Answer to herself, -- Have they not sped? Have they not
divided the Prey, to every Man a Damsel or two? to SISERA a Prey of diverse
Colors, a Prey of diverse Colors of Needle Work, of diverse Colors of Needle
Work on both Sides, meet for the Necks of them that take the Spoil? -- So let
all thine Enemies perish, O LORD: But let them that love him, be as the SUN
when he goes forth in his MIGHT.
DEBORAH and BARUK. -- Can any thing communicate a more exquisite Pleasure to
the Ear and the Understanding, than those Descriptions of the DIVINE MAJESTY in
THEN answered the LORD unto JOB out of the WHIRLWIND, and said -- etc.

HAVE thou given the Horse Strength? Have thou clothed his Neck with THUNDER?
Can thou make him afraid as a Grasshopper? The GLORY of his NOSTRILS is
terrible. -- He paweth in the Valley, and rejoiceth in his Strength: He goes
on to meet the ARMED MEN. -- He mocketh at FEAR, and is not affrighted; neither
turns he back from the SWORD. -- The Quiver rattleth against him, the
glittering SPEAR and the SHIELD. -- He swalloweth the GROUND with FIERCENESS
and RACE: neither believes he it is the Sound of the TRUMPET. -- He says among
the Trumpets, HA, HA; and he smells the BATTLE afar off, the THUNDER of the
CAPTAINS and the SHOUTING.


JOB? -- Where do we find SORROW flowing in such a natural prevailing PATHOS,
as in the Prophet JEREMY? One would think that every Letter was wrote with a
TEAR, every WORD was the NOISE of a BREAKING HEART; and that the Author was one
that never breathed but in SIGHS, nor spoke but in a GROAN.

WHEN in turning over the sacred Page, I read of SIMEON waiting for, and
expecting DEATH, as weary LABORERS do the EVENING SHADES, or the REWARD of
their WORK; when I read St PAUL with humble Impatience expressing his devout
Desire of Death and Dissolution; I must own, my Soul glows with Desires to die
the DEATH of the RIGHTEOUS, to breathe itself forth not in a GROAN but an
EJACULATION.

WHEN the same St PAUL appears before the CORINTHIANS, and discourses to them
on the RESURRECTION, and before his Judges, FESTUS and AGRIPPA, and harangues
upon TEMPERANCE and the DAY of JUDGMENT, how full of Life and Spirit, how full
of the Pathetick is his Diction? Are not his very JUDGES drawn, as it were by
an ENGINE, into Compassion and Gentleness, and made to shudder with FEAR and
TREMBLING? By the Dignity of the Subject, and the Strength of his Arguments,
AGRIPPA was roused and alarmed, and almost persuaded to turn CHRISTIAN. This
great APOSTLE, even in the Opinion of THERE is a strong Probability that
LONGINUS, says his ingenious Translator, was not only acquainted with the
Writings of the Old Testament, but with those also of the New, since to a
Manuscript of the latter in the VATICAN Library, there is prefixed a Passage
from some of this Author's Writings, which is preserved there as an Instance of
his Judgment. He is drawing up a List of the greatest Orators, and at the Close
he says, And further, PAUL of TARSUS, the chief Supporter of an Opinion not yet
established. FABRICIUS, I own, has been so officiously kind in his BIELIOTHECA
GRAECA, L. 4. c. 31. as to attribute these Words to Christian Forgery, but for
what Reason I cannot conjecture. If for any of real Weight and Importance,
certainly he ought not to have concealed them from the World.

IF LONGINUS ever saw any of the Writings of St PAUL, he could not but
entertain an high Opinion of him. Such a Judge must needs applaud so masterly
an Orator. For where is the Writer that can vie with him in sublime and
pathetick Eloquence? DEMOSTHENES could rouse up the ATHENIANS against PHILIP,
and CICERO strike Shame and Confusion into the Breasts of ANTHONY or CATALINE;
and did not the Eloquence of St PAUL, though bound in degrading Fetters, make the
oppressive, the abandoned FELIX tremble, and almost persuade AGRIPPA, in spite
of all his Prejudice, to be a Christian? HOMER after his Death was looked upon
as more than human, and Temples were erected to his Honor; and was not St PAUL
admired as a God even whilst he was on Earth, when the Inhabitants of LYSTRA
would have sacrificed to him? Let his Writings be examined and judged by the
severest Test of the severest Critics, and they cannot be found deficient;
nay, they will appear more abundantly stocked with sublime and pathetick
Thoughts, with strong and beautiful Figures, with nervous and elegant
Expressions, than any other Composition in the World.

Vid. Mr SMITH 's Preface to his Translat. of LONGIN. p. 23, 24.


LONGINUS, eminently distinguished himself by his inimitable Quickness and
Sublimity of Style.

THE HOLY SCRIPTURE, with regard to the divine Original, and Principle of its
Laws, and as to the Weight of Authority, and Extent of Utility, is preferable
to all the Volumes in the World. In the SACRED PAGE we are taught, not by
Disputations endless and full of Quibbling, but by the Authority and Command of
the ALMIGHTY, to hold fast our Integrity, to subdue our Passions, to check all
our Affections, to restrain our very THOUGHTS, our EYES, our HANDS, from all
Manner of EVIL. The Vices, the Frauds of Mankind, are threatened to be punished
with Perdition, Ignominy, with Chains, with Stripes, with Banishment from the
Presence of the DEITY, and with ETERNAL DEATH: But we see that sincere, that
just and honest Endeavors are to be crowned with Honors and Rewards, GLORY
and IMMORTALITY. The HOLY SCRIPTURE, in short, is above all Panegyric: It Is
very truly and emphatically styled by the APOSTLE, THE GIFT OF GOD, the Mother
of all Eloquence. It Is not to be equaled, either for the Flow and Copiousness
of the Expression, or the Grandeur of the Subject, by the most eloquent of the
Heathens. Every Sentence is lofty and sublime, and casts, as it were, a GLORY
round it.

I am, DEAR SIR Yours, etc.

LETTER IX.
DEAR SIR,
WE of this Profession ought to have a becoming Smoothness of Delivery, and a
lively spirited Manner of Expression. There are some Men so harsh, so clownish,
so effeminate in their Tone of Voice, so stuttering, so drawling, and
spiritless in their Expression, so ungraceful, awkward, and slovenly in their
Manner of speaking, that they can never be heard discoursing even on the most
important Subjects with Pleasure.

AND here we may perceive the Capital Mistake of those who are entrusted with
the Education of Youth; they frequently advise Parents to breed up their Sons
to the Church, without ever consulting their Abilities or Inclinations. The
forming of Youth was reckoned a Matter of that Consequence by the polite
ATHENIANS, that the Education of their Children was under the Direction of
particular INSPECTORS and CENSORS, accountable to the STATE. And indeed it
requires the greatest Delicacy and Strength of Mind to perform so difficult and
arduous a Task as it ought. It Is exceedingly hard, in the Beginning especially,
to pry into the Souls of young Persons, and discover the different Bent of
Genius in each; not to say that the DAWN of Genius is often as flattering as
the SERENITY of an APRIL MORNING, or the Bloom of a forward FLOWER, seen and
admired one Moment, and lost in the next.

A Master or Tutor ought above all Things to have a special Attention to the
Cast of Genius with which Nature has endowed his Pulpils or Scholars. For we
perceive that in the ARTS, the same Schools, as it were, furnish, and the same
CRAFTSMEN and MECHANICS form, Scholars in the several Arts, each unlike the
one to the other, yet all of them excellent in their Kind; therefore the Tutor
or Teacher ought to accommodate his Manner to the several Capacities of Youth.
He must try what becomes them best, what Lenghts they can go with regard to
their Voice, their Strength, their Lungs; and if he finds they have any thing
downright averse in their Natures for the Seize necessary in our
Profession, or any thing shocking in their Manner of speaking, which the
Refinements of Art and Study cannot remedy, he should advise them to turn their
Views to some other Way of Life, and not unmercifully beat and flog out of
them, as is the Practice of but too many, the few Grains of Genius Nature has
given them. An ingenuous Mind will sooner be wrought upon by mild Treatment,
than by Violence and Rigor; which rather seem a Discharge of the Master's
Spleen and Passion, than intended for the Scholar's Advantage. There is a
certain Hesitancy and Bashfulness in some Natures which must not be checked,
but pushed forward with as much Care and Diligence, as a skilful ARTIST in
GARDENING would the Circulation of an EXOTIC PLANT in his GREEN-HOUSE, or a
TREE in his ORCHARD that is a bashful Bearer. SEVERITY should never be made Use
of till all gentler Methods have been tried, and found unsuccessful; then
indeed it may be practiced as the ultimate Remedy, but then too with
Discretion, so as to carry nothing of Revenge along with it, so as to be no
greater than Necessity requires, and to continue no longer than till it
produces either Amendment, or discovers an utter Incapacity for Learning.

I MUST own, the Master is not always to blame for recommending Youth that are
a little thickskull'd, have slender Parts, and slow Apprehensions, to go into
our Profession; because, I believe, it is sometimes the Parents' Fault, their
take a particular Liking to it, and therefore de^^^e their Sons may be of it.
But in so great, so important, and weighty an Affair of Life, Parents ought to
consider the Capacities of their Children, more than their own Inclinations.
Yet Masters are so far to blame, as when they cannot keep their Temper, and
bear the Tediousness of learning those with Patience who have none of the
quickest Parts. They ought to wait the Issue of their Hopes, however long it
may be deferred. There are many excellent Tempers, says an ingenious Person,
which are worthy to be nourished and cultivated with all possible Diligence and
Care, that were never designed to be acquainted with ARISTOTLE, TULLY, or
VIRGIL; and there are as many who have Capacities for understanding every Word
those great Persons have writ; and yet were not born to have any Relish of
their Writings. Such therefore (as I intimated before) should be sent to some
Mechanic Way of Life, without respect to their Birth, if Nature designed them
for nothing higher, for it is no Guilt to be an honest plain TRADESMAN or
MECHANIC. But before they go to what they have the most natural Propensity to,
let them be allured to Habits of Virtue, and their Minds trained to a Sense of
Honor and Religion, whilst they are in the Simplicity of their native
Innocence, full of Shame, and capable of any Impression from that Grace of
Soul; and let not the Sparks of Virtue be extinguished in them for Want of
Patience, Care, and Culture; the most excellent Natures are soon depreciated
and spoiled by Negligence and Impatience, and Want of proper Application to
exalt them into good Habits.

PLANTS and VEGETABLES are cultivated into the Production of finer Fruit than
they would yield without that Care. NATURAL HISTORIANS tell us, that no Fruit
grew originally among us, besides HIPS and HAWS, ACORNS and PIG-NUTS, with
other Delicacies of the like Nature; that our Climate of itself, and without
Culture, can make no farther Advances toward a PLUMB than to a SLOE, and
carries an APPLE to no greater Perfection than a CRAB; that our MELONS, our
PEACHES, our FIGS, our APRICOCKS, and CHERRIES, are Strangers among us,
imported in different Ages, and naturalized in our ENGLISH GARDENS by Culture;
and that they would all degenerate and fall away into the Trash of our own
Country, if they were wholly neglected by the PLANTER, and not cultivated, but
left to the Mercy of our SUN and SOIL. Neither, I think, can we hope to model a
tender conscious Spirit into Acts of Virtue, without the same Method as is used
to improve the VEGETABLE WORLD, to cut TIMBER, or give new Shape to a Piece of
STONE or MARBLE.

OUR modern forward SLIPS of Quality put forth nothing but BLOSSOMS, and
continue a kind of overgrown Children all their Lifetime. The Reason is, YOUNG
MASTER is not suffered by the FOND MAMMA to be too much plagued with going to
SCHOOL, for fear of breaking his Spirits, making him bookish, and so fit for
nothing but to make a PARSON. -- How do these Sparks behave themselves in the
Prime of Life? In RELIGION, they are generally FREE-THINKERS (in the worst
Sense of the Word) from the want of an early pious Education; in POLITICS,
they are Slaves to the Party whose Principles they were brought up in; in
MORALS, they are loose; and above all other Evils, detest SOLITUDE and
MATRIMONY: the first, because it would make them converse with themselves; and
the latter, because it might lead them into the Company of a Person, toward
whom they know not how to behave, viz. that of A MODEST WOMAN.

As to a PUBLIC or PRIVATE EDUCATION, it is not yet determined, I think, which
is most eligible; sometimes the one, and sometimes the other is preferred,
according to the Fancy of People of fine Taste. As in ancient PERSIA the Youth
of Quality was put to a polite MEDE for Education, so the Child of Distinction
about ********* is happy in having his ************** for his public or
private Tutor. As young Master is only designed for a fine Gentleman, it would
give an unhappy Biass to his Infant-Mind, to make a good found PROTESTANT, an
orthodox CHRISTIAN, or a loyal SUBJECT of him; the Child, to be sure, is too
young to imbibe the Principles of Disobedience to his GOD, or his PRINCE, from
the Policies and Maxims of a ******** Teacher; there is no Need to make LOYALTY
of either Kind habitual to it, or to take Care that DISLOYALTY do not become so
in its Stead.

BUT if you were to demand my Opinion concerning a public or private
Education, which ought to have the Preference, I should tell you, that the
Youth who is like a weak BARK, which in boisterous SEAS and WINDS carries too
much SALL, and too little Ballast, whose JUDGMENT is weak and unsteady, and
whose PASSIONS are light and violent as HURRICANES, ought unquestionably to
have a private Education; but sedater Tempers a public one. It ought no more
to derogate from the Excellency of the latter, because of the Miscarriages of
some unhappy Natures, than some few SHIPWRECKS ought to discredit NAVIGATION,
or the failing of some few TRADERS disparage ART and INDUSTRY; it is enough that
the experienced and skilful, the careful and diligent, do generally sail
successfully. What valuable Treasures have been derived to Posterity from those
famous Schools of PYTHAGORAS, SOCRATES, ZENO, PLATO, ARISTOTLE, instituted at
ATHENS; and those of POLYBIUS, CARNEADES, DIOGENES, CRITOLAUS, and others, set
up at ROME; by whose noble Precepts and Instructions were formed the learned
and eminent Heroes of Antiquity, that have done Honor to Human Nature, and
left such Tracts of Glory behind them, as distinguish the Years in which they
acted their Parts from the ordinary Course of Time?

BUT to resume. As there is a Manner of speaking in which nothing shocks an
Audience, nothing can disgust, nothing can displease it; a Manner in which
there is nothing that is uncouth, harsh, or untunable, nothing that is awkward,
rustic, or slovenly, nothing that is drowsy, dry, and spiritless; we must
follow that, and endeavor to speak quickly, smoothly, and gently. For an
Audience of all Things cannot endure to hear a SERMON drawlingly preached, or
the Divine Service negligently slubber'd over, read in a lifeless, cool,
dispassionate Manner, or yet spoke with puffing and swelling. Such is the
Effect of a feeling Manner of speaking, that it becomes, as it were, the
PICTURE of our own Minds, and conciliates the Esteem and Attention of our
Hearers. The COMMON PRAYER especially makes a deeper Impression upon them, when
they perceive in us a proper Fervor and Emotion of Soul. For as no MATTER is
so combustible as to kindle without the Application of Fire; so no one's Mind
is so susceptible of the Power of DEVOTION, as to catch its Blaze, unless we,
when we read Prayers, appear to be so affected, as to be all of a Flame
ourselves. In short, a becoming PATHOS and Energy of Diction animates an
Audience with uncommon Life and Spirit, and gives mere Words the Force, as it
were, of Inspiration.

How pathetick and beautiful is URANIUS'S Manner of reading the COMMON PRAYER!
HE reads the whole Service so distinctly, so emphatically, so fervently, that
it is next to an Impossibility to be unattentive. Peoples' Eyes and Thoughts
cannot wander as they usually do when some others read, but are confined to
their Prayers; their Minds are really affected, and fervent Wishes accompany
their Words. For HE reads the CONFESSION with such a resigned Humility, the
ABSOLUTION with such a comfortable AUTHORITY, the THANKSGIVINGS with such a
religious JOY, as makes his HEARERS feel those Affectons of the Mind that HE
himself does, they seem transported in their Addresses to the ALMIGHTY, and, as
it were, in HEAVEN.

I would propose this Clergyman as a Pattern to all those of our Profession,
who murder the DIVINE Service by their Manner of reading it. The EXAMPLE of
such an excellent Reader would make those that are afraid of stretching their
Mouths, and spoiling their Lungs, learn to read with Clearness, Loudness, and
Strength; and others that affect a rakish negligent Air, by folding their Arms,
and lolling on their Book, would be taught by HIM a decent Behavior, and a
comely Erection of Body: Those that read so fast, as if impatient of their
Work, may learn by HIM to speak deliberately. There are another Sort of Persons
whom we may call PINDARICK READERS, as being confined to no set Measure; these
pronounce five or six Words with great Deliberation, and the five of six
subsequent ones with as great Celerity: The first Part of a Sentence with a
loud exalted Voice, and the latter Part with a low submissive one: Sometimes
again with one sort of Tone, and immediately after with a very different one.
These Gentlemen might learn of my admired READER URANIUS, an Evenness of Voice
and Delivery; and all who are innocent of these Affectations, but read with
such an Indifferency, as if they did not understand the Language, or were
reading a BALLAD or NEWS PAPER, may be informed by HIS EXAMPLE of the Art of
reading Prayers movingly and fervently, how to place the Emphasis, and give the
proper Accent to each Word, and how to vary the Voice according to the Nature
of the Sentence.

How great an Influence would the Service of our Church have on the People,
containing the best Prayers that ever were composed, and that in Terms most
affecting, most humble, and most expressive of our Wants, and Dependence on the
Subject of our Worship, disposed in a most proper Order; and void of all
Confusion; what Influence, I say, would these Prayers have, were their exalted
Sense not depreciated by the dispassionate Indolence of the Readers here
complained of, but delivered in the Manner that URANIUS does, with a due
Emphasis, and apposite rising and Variation of Voice, the Sentence concluded
with a gentle Cadence, and, in a Word, with such an Accent and Turn of Speech
as is peculiar to Prayer.

WE of this Profession, my Friend, ought to keep clear of the INDECENCIES of
AFFECTATION in Preaching. For Affectation fills the Mouths of Men with Bombast
and Fustian, and gives them such Sentiments as proceed rather from a lofty
Swelling and Tumor, than a true Greatness of Mind, and such an ungraceful
Action, Dress, and Delivery, as makes them perfectly ridiculous. GERYO has
furnished himself with a well combed Toupee, and an immutable Countenance, has
got a Jauntee Air, opposes his Front to the Ladies, stares sedately between
every Sentence, nor will he give over this his surprising Rhetoric, till he
has star'd every one of his fair Audience out of Countenance.

DIABLINTES has got it into his Head that the WHITE GLOVE is a great Help to a
polite Preacher, if used with Skill and Judgment. The displaying a fine Glove
as white as Lilly, when the Hand waves gently along with a soft smooth Period,
adds an irresistible Force, says, DIABLINTES, to whatever you deliver, gives it
the Stamp of Sublime, and makes it appear with an inimitable Grace and
Elegance. Instead of pushing your Adversary Home in a Controversial Sermon,
continues he, with MODE and FIGURE, MAJOR and MINOR, there is no more
necessary, but to make an Extension of that Hand on which you wear your
Preaching Glove, and you will infallibly be adjudged Victor, by your Auditors.

SANDROCOTUS holds the thumping the CUSHION as a powerful Auxiliary in the
Pulpit. The thumping it every now and then, may supply a Pause, says he,
express JOY, ANGER, or several other Passions, according to the Action or
Manner you use in thumping it. A late celebrated Preacher, adds he, who
generally had the good Fortune to please, on any Emergency in the Pulpit had
immediate Recourse to the EXPRESSIVE THUMP, and seldom without Success.

CYZICENUS thinks he charms both the great and small Vulgar with the Assistance
of a beautiful WHITE HANDKERCHIEF. Whenever he is like to be at a Loss, he
never makes a HUM or HA, but whips from under his Gown his DECLAMATORY
HANDKERCHIEF in so pretty, genteel, and elegant a Manner, that it immediately
causes a Redundancy of Wit, he tells you, Fluency of Words, Propriety of
Expression, and Impetuosity of Diction, etc.

WE see a thousand Absurdities committed, DEAR SIR, by these finical affected
Coxcombs, which the very Vulgar, I am sure, would be ashamed of, and the most
illiterate Hearer condemn. But if any one be surpised, says the ROMAN ORATOR,
that these Things are discerned and marked by the most vulgar Audience, he need
but only reflect how great and incredible the Force of Nature is in every
Thing, especially in this; for every Man has within him a certain tacit Sense,
which enables him to distinguish what is right or wrong in Arts and Sciences,
and this without Instruction and Information. If this Observation holds good
with regard to Pictures, Statues, and other Works, in criticizing which, they
have less Assistance from Nature, it is much more evident in the Judgment they
form upon Words, Harmony, and Delivery, because this is a Judgment implanted in
the Senses that are common to all Mankind: It Is a Faculty which Nature never
meant that any rational Creature should be absolutely without.

CICERO de Orat. Lib. 3.

THE common People are not such stupid Clod Pates (though they want Politeness)
but they can judge of the Refinement of those Pleasures which Nature has
dictated. I have, I assure you, seen both Wit and Pleasantry, and Discernment
among them, and as perfect as is needful to their Circumstance.

A CERTAIN LORD taking a Walk with a Gentleman near a Country Village, saw a
poor BOY dragging a CALF Home with both his Hands; You shall see, says my LORD,
laughing, I Will make the Boy leave his Calf; supposing the Boy would have pulled
off his HAT to him; but being disappointed, Sirrah, says he, don't you see me,
and do you keep your Hat on?" "A'n't please your LORDSHIP to hold my Calf,
(replied the Boy) I Will pull it off; but at present, you see, I have my Hands
full.

AN illiterate COUNTRY FARMER once took a Fancy to hear the LATIN DISPUTES of
DOCTORS at an UNIVERSITY. He was asked what Pleasure he could take in viewing
such Combatants, when he could never know so much as which of the Parties got
the better. For that Matter, (replied the FARMER) I a'n't such a Fool neither,
but I can see who is the first that puts the other in a Passion. Nature herself
dictated this Lesson to the Farmer; that he, who had the better of the
Argument, would be easy and well-humour'd; but he, who was unable to support
his Cause by Reason, would naturally lose his Temper, and grow violent.

I HAVE seen low and uncultivated Minds surprizingly affected on beholding
those noble Pieces of Painting, the celebrated CARTOONS of RAPHAEL, at HAMPTON
COURT. To see the silent Eloquence, the earnest enforcing Look, the devout
Gesture of St PAUL preaching, is not a dumb Entertainment to the Eye of the
Vulgar, but a speaking Image to their Minds, that awakens every drowsy
Sentiment in them, and hurries them by an amazing and imperceptible Violence,
through every Passion represented on the living CANVAS.

WHAT draws together the numerous Crowds of the small and great VULGAR in
LONDON, to hear Dr HERRING.
HIS GRACE OF CANTERBURY, the BRITISH CICERO, harangue in the Pulpit, but the
Rapture which his Language never fails to inspire, and that Softness of
Delivery, and modest Action, which engages the Attention, and charms every
Faculty? There is indeed so much Spirit, so much Force, so much Passion in his
Eyes, his Features, and his Air, (nay, his very Hands have an artless Meaning
in them) so powerful is the Torrent of weighty, well-chosen Expressions, so
entire his Sentiments, so just, so new, with so unaffected, so manly a Glow,
that there is not a Soul in his Audience can help being all in a Flame.

A MODEST Action and Delivery carry an extraordinary Prejudice in their Favor,
an irresistible Force, by recommending the Goodness of a Man's Heart. The Man
who discovers no Symptoms of being being abashed at committing Indecencies, in
CICERO's Opinion, deserves not REPROOF only, but PUNISHMENT. So great a
Veneration had the ROMA SENATE for a ROMAE, cum multa GRAECIAE Civitates,
Questum de Injuriis PHILIPPI Regis Macedonum venissent, and Disceptatio in
Senatu inter DEMETRIUM Philippi Filium, quem Pater ad satisfaciendum Senatui
miserat, and Legatos Civitatum esset; Turba Querelarum confusus Adolescens,
repenti obticuit. Tune Senatus VERECUNDIA ejus motus, quae probata etiam antea,
cum Obses ROMAE esset, omnibus fuerat, CAUSAM illi donavit: Atque ita MODESTIA
sua DEMETRIUS Veniam PATRI, non Jure Defensionis, sed Patrocinio PUDORIS
obtinuit: quod ipsum Decreto SENATUS significatum est, ut appareret, non tam
absolutum Regem, quam donatum FILIO Patrem. JUST Hist. L. 32.


becoming Bashfulness in speaking, that they pardoned the flagrant
Misdemeanors of King PHILIP, for the sake of the modest Eloquence of his Son
DEMETRIUS, who was thrown into Confusion and Silence on barely hearing the long
Catalogue of his Father's Crimes. The Man who excells in Preaching, is
generally the more sensible of its Difficulty, he is under the greatest Concern
how to answer the Expectation of his Hearers. But the Man who can compass
nothing worthy of his Profession, worthy of the Name of a Preacher, or worthy
the Attention of his Hearers, is seldom under any Concern, he has not the Grace
either to blush at, or to avoid Indecencies. Some indeed put on a demure Look,
and counterfeit an Air of Bashfulness and Modesty, but then it sits upon them
with so little Ease and Grace, that an Audience presently detects the Cheat,
and detests it. For there is as much Difference between a natural Shame, a real
Emotion of Soul, and a counterfeit one, as there is between the LIGHT that
glitters in a DIAMOND, and that which faintly imitates it in a PEBBLE.

THUS far, Dear Sir, of a Clergyman's LEARNING and Skill in DIVINITY and
ELOQUENCE; -- That he may be a Workman that needs not be ashamed. -- To be an
excellent Preacher, I know, requires the Study and Practice of a Man's Life, a
peculiar Genius, and a noble Stock of Nature; but all of us (since we are
frequently required to speak in Public) should arrive at such a Degree of
Learning and Eloquence, as to speak in proper and handsome Terms, to express
ourselves with Clearness, and with so much Gracefulness, at least, as our
Matter may not suffer by our Language, nor our Language by our Delivery.
livery. But it will be highly useful, besides this, to adorn our Discourse with
the more SELECT PHRASES, and refined Forms of Speech, which will make it relish
better, especially to the Auditors of the better Breeding; to illustrate it,
when Occasion requires, with easy and decent Metaphors, not fordily mean, nor
prodigiously vast; to be able to command the Use of natural and elegant
SIMILITUDES, for ILLUSTRATION, and not for VARNISH; to know what Words to use
to aggravate, and what to extenuate, with a Regard had always to Truth and
Sobriety; to delineate a VIRTUE or a VICE, a GOOD or a BAD MAN in such proper
and natural Colors, as may raise the Esteem or Aversion, the Love or Hatred of
our Auditors to them at Pleasure; if we can arrive to this, then we shall, in a
true Sense, -- DOMINARI IN CONCIONIBUS -- be LORDS over the Affections of our
Hearers; which if we take Care to join with orthodox sound Doctrine, and good
Reasoning, we shall then have the same Advantage for VIRTUE, which the DEVIL
has against it, that is, we shall have all the Warmth of of MENS' PASSIONS
pleading for it.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.
THE POSTSCRIPT.
DEAR SIR,
I Shall now show you, by way of POSTCRIPT, what is required to make a
CLERGYMAN an ORTHODOX TEACHER, -- "rightly dividing the WORD of TRUTH." -- Now
to do this, he must be lawfully called to the MINISTRY. He cannot divide the
WORD rightly if he have a wrong Title to do it, if he do it upon his own Head,
or upon insufficient Authority. Now, I think, it is sufficiently proved, even to
the silencing GAINSAYER, that the only ordinary lawful Call into the Ministry
is by EPISCOPAL ORDINATION. For we find no Ordination in Scripture but what was
made by the APOSTLES, and whom they had before ordained Bishops, as is clear by
the Example of PAUL, BARNABAS, and TITUS; and never any Ordination by
PRESBYTERS was ever so much as dreamt of till of late Years, and that was only
to serve a Turn at GENEVA. Therefore all that come rightly into the Clergy,
must come this Way. It Is not the being of a pert confident Humor, or a popular
noisy Eloquence, that gives a Man a Commission to divide the WORD of TRUTH, but
this lawful Means which CHRIST has instituted; this is the only DOOR which our
BLESSED LORD has made to come into the CHURCH, and then he has made the
Consequence, that they who come in otherwise are THIEVES and ROBBERS. Without a
lawful ORDINATION a Man has no more Title to the PRIESTHOOD than he has to the
CROWN, and the Crime of each Presumption is equally great, only the Laws are
more fevere against the one than the other. But when GOD took the Execution
into his Hands, the Case was otherwise; for when KORAH, DATHAN, and ABIRAM,
usurped the Priesthood, they found as dreadful a Punishment as ever any Traitor
since.

LIVY in his LIVY's Hist. Vol. 2. L. 9.
History tells us, that the Family of the POTITII, who had the Privilege of
performing the Priestly Office at the Altar of HERCULES, called the ARA MAXIMA,
having by the Advice of APPIUS the Censor, instructed some public Servants in
the solemn Rites of their Function with a Design to commit the Exercise of
their Office to them as their Delegates, an amazing Effect ensued, and one,
says the Historian, that may justly deter from making any Alteration in
Religion, for though there were at that Time twelve Families of the POTITII, and
thirty Persons above the Age of fourteen Years, they all died within the Space
of one Year thereafter, and the whole Race became extinct. Nor is it only
observed, continues he, that the Name of the POTITII perished upon this
Occasion, but also that APPIUS the Censor, some Years after, by the lasting
Resentment of HEAVEN, entirely lost the Sight of his Eyes.

HE must be no SCHISMATIC. If a Man comes into the Church ever so regularly,
yet if he schismatically makes a Separation from it, he is no orthodox Teacher,
he does not righty divide the Word of Truth, because he takes wrong Measures to
do it; he has ^o Commission to be a Teacher out of the Church, his Orders do
not qualify him to set up Altar against Altar, but he acts as heinously as if
he preached the Gospel without any Orders at all. Our BLESSED SAVIOR in the
whole Tenor of his Doctrine preaches up Peace and Unity; in his dying Speech
to his Disciples, he says, Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you.
The APOSTLE does, with all the pathetical Endearments imaginable, engage us to
UNITY, If there be any CONSOLATION in CHRIST, says he, if there be any COMFORT
in LOVE, etc. fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be all like-minded.

NOBLE was that ANSWER of a certain PRELATE, and worthy of a Christian Bishop,
to a PRIME MINISTER'S Letter, containing a Reproof for holding some orthodox
Opinions which the Minister did not like. -- A BISHOP, whose Conscience cannot
reproach him, who likes the Place of his Residence, and has no Ambition to live
within the Sunshine of a Court, need fear nothing of what your LORDSHIP can
write to him. As a NOBLEMAN, I pay you Respect; as a MINISTER of State, I have
nothing to do with you; as a CHRISTIAN, I am accountable to GOD alone. It Is
before his TRIBUNAL I hope to render myself acceptable, where we must both of
us appear shortly: And it behooves you, my LORD, to take heed, lest you should
not find there the same Favor as in the COURTS of MEN.

HE must not be an HERETIC, one that holds an erroneous FAITH concerning the
fundamental Parts of Religion, concerning the DIVINITY, the INCARNATION,
SATISFACTION of our LORD; concerning the DEITY of the HOLY GHOST, and the
Necessity of his GRACE; such an one is so far from being a right Divider of the
Truth, that he teaches a false Religion, and another Gospel; such an one ought
not to continue a Member of CHRIST'S Flock, much less a Teacher and Pastor of
it.

HE must not be an obstinate Defender of any false or erroneous Doctrine of
lesser Moment. For let the Doctrine be of ever so small Moment, it is still an
Opposition against the Truth, it is a confronting of GOD's WORD, and an
innovating in the Doctrine of the CATHOLIC CHURCH. Besides, it is very
dangerous to have a Teacher of such erroneous Opinions; because it is very
natural for the People to imbibe them from him, and they may be tempted in
Time, for the Esteem they have for their Pastor, to make a formal Schism.

FOR a MINISTER to be an ORTHODOX TEACHER, he must not teach uncertain Truths.
The APOSTLE bids us exhort with sound Doctrine, not to build with HAY and
STUBBLE; and he himself came with DEMONSTRATION, as well as POWER; and the
other Apostles taught what they had heard and seen; which ought to be well
considered by those Divines, who value themselves upon their newfangled
NOSTRUMS in DIVINITY, and fine-spun Inventions in this Science. For Divinity is
a Thing which is recommended most by Antiquity. Our FAITH was but once
delivered to the SAINTS, and so leaves no Room for the Wits of later Ages. But
if Men must be showing their Parts, and giving the World a Cast of their rare
Inventions, they have a large Scope for it elsewhere, but, by all Means, they
ought to spare DIVINITY.

HE ought to ground his Doctrine upon SCRIPTURE, and the EXPLICATION of the
CATHOLIC CHURCH. TO teach Doctrines without the Confirmation of Scripture, is
to teach the Doctrines of Men; and to explain Scripture otherwise than the
Church of GOD has done in all Ages, is always Presumption, and frequently
Heresy, All Doctrines, and Explications of Faith especially, were
superabundantly sifted by ancient Councils and Writers, when they were Matter
of Debate for so many Ages; and therefore we ought to stick to their Notions
and Expressions of these facred Truths, who are supposed to understand them
better than any single modern Divine, who has only conversed with his own
Thoughts. Now to remedy this, we ought to study DIVINITY first out of the HOLY
SCRIPTURE, and next out of the FATHERS, who, let some Men say what they will,
were Men of very good Sense, and talk very intelligibly: and though the SOCINIANS
and REMONSTRANTS may have more of Method, Closeness, and Subtilty, they have
that which makes Alloy for all this, a great deal more of HERESY.

AND now, (my Friend!) I can perceive it is Time to put an End to this
Epistolary Correspondence. I have taken the Liberty, you see, to laugh upon
some Occasions; and if I have either laughed wrong, or been impertinently
serious, I can be content to be laughed at in my Turn; for my Humor does not
very much incline me to melancholy Reflections. I have very freely, and
without the least Reserve, given you my Sentiments concerning the necessary
Qualifications of a Minister of the Gospel, as he is a CHRISTIAN, a PASTOR, and
a CATHOLIC; and I pray GOD, if you go into HOLY ORDERS, you may do your Duty
in all these Respects. But a Good Life ought to be the Principal of your Aim,
for a wicked Life is the worst of HERESIES, and a Minister may do more Mischief
to Religion by one ill Action, than Good by a Hundred fine Sermons. Nay, we
undo all we preach by an ill Practice, for Men have Reason to think that That
Doctrine should not have any Influence upon their Lives, which they see has
none upon our own. To me, indeed, it seems surprising, that an immoral
Clergyman can have the Considence to appear or preach in Public; for all his
Declamations against Vice, are but so many Libels against himself, and every
Time he gets up into the Pulpit, he is but doing a PUBLIC PENANCE to the whole
Congregation. Let me entreat you therefore steadily to adhere to the Practice
of Virtue; dare to oppose yourself to the licentious Customs of a degenerate
Age, wherever you go; and by a good Example, endeavor to stem the Torrent of
Vice. Don't blush to own your Obligations daily and hourly to that great Being,
who fills the Universe with the wondrous Exertions of his Wisdom and Power;
give him your highest Esteem, your highest Reverence, and supreme Regard. Let
your Devotion to him spring from Love and Gratitude, and never mention his Name
without a respectful and humble Awe; regard his Favor as the highest Blessing;
and endeavor to imitate and follow the bright Example, which the BLESSED
AUTHOR of our Religion has set before us. Believe me, my DEAR FRIEND; there is
no Comparison between a wicked and a good Life: A good Life, stored with every
moral and religious Virtue, resembles HEAVEN, methinks, its CANNOPY stuck with
STARS and CONSTELLATIONS. A Clergyman who is conscious of having done his Duty,
enjoys a most refined and rational Delight; but he who wants the Secret Witness
of an approving Conscience, is never seen to have that serene Composure, and
Self-complacency, which becomes a Minister of CHRIST.

In a Word; let your Countenance be open, and your Bosom close; let your
Beneficence be attended with a Familiarity so circumscribed as to impress Love
and Respect; and let all your Actions appear consistent with the Dignity of
your Profession, that you may be upon Earth a true Image of the Deity, by
giving all Mankind certain and impartial Marks of your Probity and paternal
Love for the People under your Care, whose Hearts if you gain, you possess the
most precious of all Treasures: A Treasure which that brave ROMAN Flaminium
Martiale A. POSTHUMOUS ALVINUS habeba^, eoque Provinciam sortiri cupientem L.
CAECILIUS METELLUS Pontifex Maximus dicta mulcta prohibuit, negans fas esse
Flamini a Sacris recedere: cujus Facti posterioribus quoque Temporibus probata
Ratio est. When A. POSTHUMOUS ALVINUS the High Priest of MARS, presented
himself to draw Lots for the Provinces, L. CAECILIUS METELLUS, the Pontifex
Maximus, declared it unlawful for him to be absent from his sacred Function,
and expressly forbad him to leave it under the Pain of sining him. This became
a Precedent among the ROMANS, which was observed ever after.

Frenshem. Suppl. Live. Hist. L. 9 c. 54.


L. CAECILIUS METELLUS, looked upon as sacred, and obliged even the High Priest
of MARS, A POSTHUMOUS ALVINUS, to Residence, and would by no Means dispense
with his Absence from the Charge committed to him.

As a frequent Consideration of the Nature of our HIGH OFFICE will be a
continual Encouragement for us to do our Duty, I shall conclude all with an
excellent Observation of St CHRYSOSTOM to this Purpose; THEREFORE has the LORD
chosen us to be the LIGHTS of the World, and the LEAVEN of the LUMP, to be
MASTERS and TEACHERS of other Christians; to be, as it were, ANGELS associating
with Men on Earth, as MEN conversing with Children, as those of a spiritual
Nature with the gross, animal and carnal; so that by our Conversation they
might reap an extraordinary Advantage.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc.



A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR.
A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR, ON THE DEATH OF HIS CORRESPONDENT.
-- Dictis maerentia Pectora mulcet. VIRG.
A LETTER, etc.
-- Nec te tua plurima PANTHEU,
Labentem Pietas, nec Apollinis Infula texit.
VIRG.
DEAR SIR,
I DURST not intrude on your private Sorrows too soon; we water not FLOWERS
whilst they are scorching with the Heat of the NOONTIDE SUN; and it is as fit
the PASSIONS of the MIND should have Leisure to cool and remit ere they be
dealt with. By this Time your Eye may be cleared of the Brine and Mist that
hung upon it; and since you have been pleased to regard my Friendship on other
Occasions, let it have Leave to drop some Balm upon this Wound. It Is an
Advantage to the careful SURGEO, that his PATIENT has a good Heart; and this
gives me Hope and Confidence that the manly Fortitude of your own Breast will
help to finish the Cure I go about. I know, Sir, what a ROMAN EMPEROR said to
the TROJAN AMBASSADOR that came somewhat too late to mourn with him for his
Son's Death, -- And I, says TIBERIUS, condole with you for the Loss of your
renowned Countryman HECTOR. -- But your known and confirmed Goodness will not
permit an Office of Humanity to be thus scorned; if it keep not Time, it may
testify Respect. Our cheering Addresses to mourning Friends, says a GREEK POET,
are wont to be as welcome as Calms to a tossed Mariner. Even the Son of GOD
himself, when his Trial and Agony fell upon him, was glad of a strengthening
Angel.

TEARS are as just a Debt to the Death of our Friends, as their Death is to
Nature. JUPITER, in HOMER, bemoans the Death of his SARPEDON; and APOLLO mourns
the Loss of his HYACINTHUS. DAVID weeps for ABNER, whom JOAB slew, as he took
him aside to speak with him quietly. 2 Samuel iii. 31, 32, 33, 34.
And DAVID said to JOAB, and to all the People that were with him, Rend your
Clothes, and gird you with Sackcloth, and mourn before ABNER. And King DAVID
himself followed the Bier. -- And they buried ABNER in HEBRON: and the King
lift up his Voice, and wept at the Grave of ABNER; and all the People wept. --
And the King lamented over ABNER, and said, Died ABNER as a FOOL dies? -- Thy
Hands were not bound, nor thy Feet put into Fetters: as a Man falls before
wicked Men, so fellest thou. And all the People wept again over him. -- When
JONATHAN, the Beauty of ISRAEL, was slain, DAVID'S Sorrow was also
inexpressible. 2 Samuel i. 26, 27.
I am distressed for thee, (says he) my Brother JONATHAN: very pleasant has
thou been unto me: thy Love to me was wonderful, passing the Love of WOMEN.

Lo the brave DITHRAMBUS weeps for his dying Friend Him DITHRAMBUS loved, a
sacred Bard
Revered for Justice, for his Verse renowned,
Which sung the Deeds of Heroes, those who fell,
Or those who conquered in their Country's Cause,
The enraptured Soul inspiring with the Thirst
Of Glory won by Virtue. His high Strain
The Muses favored from their neighboring Groves,
And blessed with heavenly Melody his Lyre.
No more from THESPIA shall his Feet ascend
The shady Steep of HELICON. No more
The Streams divine of AGANIPPE'S Fount
His tuneful Lip shall moisten, or his Hands
Present their Offerings in the Muses Bower,
The prostrate Shield, and unforsaken Lance
Now feebly grasping, never more to swell
His lofty Numbers on the sounding String.
GLOV. LEONIDAS, L. 4.
ARISTANDER.

-- Amid the Rage
Of War and Conquest a swift-gushing Tear
Finds one sad Moment's Interval to fall
On his pale Friend.
GLOV. LEONIDAS, L. 4. THE beauteous -- Her aspect far excelled
Whatever the Lilly blending with the Rose
Paints on the Cheek of Beauty soon to fade;
Such as expressed a Mind, which Wisdom rol'd,
And Sweetness tempered, Virtue's purest Light
Illumining the Countenance divine,
Yet could not soothe remorseless Fate, nor teach
Malignant Fortune to revere the good,
Which often with Anguish rends the spotless Heart.
GLOV. LEONIDAS, L. 6.
ARIANA could mourn the Lot of Nature doomed to Care and Pain. And the great
LEONIDAS did not forbid his Eyes to stream before his Grief-distracted Family.

-- Down the Hero's Cheek,
Down flows the manly Sorrow. Great in Woe
Amid his Children, who enclose him round,
He stands indulging Tenderness and Love
In graceful Tears; when thus with lifted Eyes
Addressed to Heaven: Thou ever-living Power,
Look down propitious, Sire of Gods and Men!
And to this faithful Woman, whose Desert
May claim thy Favor, grant the Hours of Peace.
"And thou, my great Forefather, Son of JOVE,
O HERCULES, neglect not these thy Race!
But since that Spirit, I from thee derive,
Now bears me from them to resistless Fate,
Do thou support their Virtue! be they taught,
Like thee, with glorious Labor Life to grace,
And from their Father let them learn to die!
GLOV. LEONIDAS, L. 1. THE faithful Woman here mentioned is the Royal Partner
of his Bed, whose Heart o'erflow'd with the fondest Passion, and was plunged in
Sorrows.

Amid her weeping Children sat the Queen,
Immovable and mute; her swimming Eyes
Fixed on the Earth. Her Arms were folded over
Her laboring Bosom blotted with her Tears.
As, when a dusky Mist involves the Sky,
The Moon through all the dreary Vapors spreads
The radiant Vesture of its Silver Light
"Over the dull Face of Nature; so her Charms
Divinely graceful shone upon her Grief,
Bright'ning the Cloud of Woe.
GLOV. LEONIDAS, L. 1. IT IS the Part of a Man to melt in such Cases, of a Brute
not to be moved at all, of a Christian to be moderate in his Regret. Methinks,
SIR, the Experience you have had of the World, and human Chances, should steel
you enough against the like Strokes. How many Funeral-Matches had your Eyes
seen, ere Death knocked at your Friend's Door? But he might (you will say) have
lived longer. True! so he might have died sooner. What Reason have we to think
that too hastily taken away, which was payable as soon as we received it? If
his Mortality displeased you, you should have mourned when it began, not when
it ends. Why do we grieve for a Wound which no Grief can relieve or remedy? Why
bear we not that in another which we must come to ourselves? It Is for none but
our MAKER to be eternal. Lie we not all under an unchangeable Law, under an
eternal Ordinance, to be born and die?

THE SNOW and ICE of WINTER may lie crowded together a While, and hold out for
a Month or two, but the SPRING will be sure to melt it all: Should we chance to
pass over our Youth and Virility safe, yet OLD AGE will consume us at last.

WE come into this World as CHILDREN are sent to SCHOOL, not to live there
always, but to learn somewhat, and then be gone. We scramble up from lower to
higher Forms, from our Childhood to an Age of Constancy and Gravity; but we
must be gone when we have learned enough to fit and prepare us for Heaven; and
the sooner we grow fit, the sooner we are taken away. Virtue protects not the
Body, but glorifies the Soul. As Flowers of the fairest Hue, and Glasses of the
finest Mould, wither and break soonest: So we commonly see them that excel in
Virtue to be shortest lived, when the ungodly and dissolute are in no Peril of
Death, but are fat and frolicksome, lusty and strong. When the MOWER or REAPER
comes, Weeds and Flowers, Corn and Cockle, high and low Spires, ripe and
unripe Ears, are cut down alike: So deals the SICKLE of DEATH with us, of what
Age, of what Rank soever, it makes bold to pare us away. The GREAT LORDS of the
Earth, after all their painted Glory, and stern ruffling, are brought down to
the Ghastliness and Dust of Death: Nay, mighty States and Kingdoms expire,
those awful Monarchies that spread so far, are shrunk to nothing: Heaven and
Earth look for a Day of Dissolution.

WHEN all are rated for POLL-MONEY, what Pride, what Partiality, nay, what
Folly were it to grumble, and seek Exemption? Death is a Tribute which all pay;
why then should we grieve and whine when we are called upon for it? Why should
we think to slip the COLLAR alone? The only Salve for a Necessity is a willing
Compliance with it. What should we do but give up a Game of our own Accord
which is so sure to be lost?

AND as it avails not to quarrel with a Law of Necessity, so it becomes us not
to to quarrel with the Will of GOD. We must, says a RABBIN, be as bold as
LEOPARDS, as swift as EAGLES, as nimble as HEARTS, and as valiant as LIONS, to
do the Will of our Father which is in Heaven. And is it not HE that kills and
makes alive, that brings us down to the Grave, and that raises us up? Shall
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Elements submit to that high CREATOR, and shall
Man alone, who owes him most Service, spurn at his Decrees? As that CENTURION
in Sacred Writ could say of his Domestics, If he called a Servant, he came
presently, if he sent him forth, he went; so should we behave ourselves to our
heavenly Master. If he keeps us here below in our Pilgrimage, we must be
content to trudge still; if he calls us away to himself, we must be ready to
go. What fearful Judgments were pronounced on ELI and all his House, yet he
puts them up with this mild Acknowledgment, It is the LORD, let him do what
seems him good; what should a Servant do but fulfill his Lord's Pleasure?
Nay, it is not only a Lord, but a FATHER that determines of us. Even Children
are many Times handled more severely of their loving Parents than they would
be; it is for their Good, though they discern it not. The Course which our
heavenly Father takes with us is no less beneficial, however it may gripe and
startle our sensual Part. Had a STONE or a STAFF hit us, we would look angrily
about, and prepare to revenge ourselves on the Assaulter; but should we find
the Blow given us by a Friend, or by a great Man we depended upon, and that it
was rather given in Love and Familiarity, than Spleen or Grudge, we would be
calm immediately, and excuse our Choler, and count it a Courtesy, not a Wrong:
So when temporal Crosses annoy us, the Death of our dear Associates, the Loss
of our Goods, the Blemishes of our good Name, in all this would we call to Mind
that it is but a Friend's Blow, but the fatherly Stroke of a merciful GOD, how
soon would it restrain us from repining, how soon bring us into the PSALMIST'S
Tune, -- O GOD, thy Rod and thy Staff are so far from bruising and vexing mine
Heart, that they bring me Comfort; it is a Sign of thy Favor and Familiarity
that I am thus touched!

THE Savage INDIANS that were demanded by our late Discoverers what they meant
in worshipping the SUN, had this Reason at Hand, -- "Because it brought DEATH
upon them." They thought it a Device and Ordinance that could suit with none
but the Power and Goodness of a Deity.

YOU, Sir, are deprived of one that was deservedly dear to you, but let GOD be
dearer, whose high Pleasure it was to take him from this World to himself. What
has HE taken but what HE once gave you? Why should HE not receive for ever
what HE lent you but for a Time? Ah, how fond are we of our own Vexation! Like
ulcerous Limbs, how do we shrink at every Touch! Many Comforts cannot erect us
so much as one Grief is able to cast us down. We are greedy of that which we
want, and as unthankful for that which we have. Something is gone we once had,
and we afflict ourselves for it when there were more Reason it should quiet
than heighten our Grief that we once had it. For that we had it was a Benefit
for which we are owing to GOD, and it would best become us to think of paying
our Debt to our bountiful LORD. Lo! he asks nothing but our PATIENCE, but our
PEACE; Peace with ourselves, and Peace with HIM. There is more left us than we
have lost, and why will we lose whatsoever we have, because we have not a Thing
that we have lost? For that which we have left is wilfully lost while we take
no Joy in it. What Injury do we to our own Happiness if we place it in Things
which we want? Never shall we want Matter of Dejection if we go to Work thus.
Every MISER'S Coffer, and every MERCHANT'S Ship, every full Table, and every
well-furnish'd House we come short of, will bring us in a plentiful Harvest of
Perplexity. But I beseech you, SIR, to turn your Eyes rather on that which GOD
has done for you, to bethink yourself how many Comforts are left you to season
this particular Loss. How can you think him dead who in the bright Echo of his
Reputation is still remaining with you. LAELIUS could cheer himself that his
SCIPIO was to him alive still, -- alive in his glorious Virtues, alive in his
renowned Name! 'Twas not the INNOCENT'S Death DAVID bemoaned, but the REBEL'S.
When SOCRATES saw his WIFE storming that such a good Man should die unjustly,
what, says he, Would thou rather have me die a Malefactor?

IF, SIR, you find your Heart bleed with such a Meditation, -- "Ah, what a
Friend has GOD "taken from me!" Let a sweeter one heal it again, -- "What a
Friend had I given me!" Whenever you look upon the Greatness of your Loss, it
must bring to your Mind the Greatness of your Debt, and GOD'S great Kindness in
bestowing such a Friend upon you. How unthankful is he, who so remembereth the
Loss of a Benefit, that he forgets the Receipt. Shall we receive Good at GOD'S
Hand, and not Evil too? Were it not far better we should submit ourselves to
the Will of GOD, than the Will of GOD should be squared to ours? Do we fondly
presume that we know what is better for us, or wish ourselves better than GOD
does? How often have we delighted in hurtful and perilous Things? How often have
our vain Longings brought Mischief upon us? On the other Side, what gracious
Tokens of his Good Will has GOD shown us? When HE took our Flesh and lived
among us, and died for us, was not his Good Will toward Men proclaimed aloud?
And is not his Will the same in laying the Cross on us, as in bearing it for
us? Had HE not the same tender Love and gracious Aim in both of doing us good?
If we reckon it for our Good that GOD would suffer so much for us, we may
believe it for our Good too, that HE would have ourselves suffer a little. All
HIS Attributes are vast and infinite, HIS Power, Wisdom, and Love; nor is He
thus alone in HIMSELF, but this to us; HE loves us better than we love
ourselves, -- infinitely better! And HE seeks our Good more, and is more able
and skilful to effect it, -- infinitely more! What therefore comes in our Heads
when we bemoan our Mishaps? Do we think GOD deceived, or spiteful? Do we think
HIS Arm shortened that HE cannot prevent an Evil? Far be such Thoughts from a
Christian's Heart. It comes not from any Weakness, Malice, or Imprudence in HIM
that we are vexed thus, but from HIS infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; and
who are we that, like the old GIANTS, we should fight with Heaven, and attempt
to pull GOD from his Throne, and wring his Scepter out of his Hand? -- Oh, let
us give HIM Leave who made us for his Glory, to rule us at his Will! To that
Glory HE will assuredly bring us, if we be guided by his Will and Counsel in
the Way to it. A Passenger at SEA takes not upon him to steer and order the
SHIP that wafts him, but leaves that to the Pilot and Master, and in a Storm
obeys his Direction most, and stirs not a Foot against his Will, but casts out
the dearest Things that he has at his Bidding. What think you, (my Friend!)
has GOD less Skill to govern the WORLD, than the SHIPMAN his Bark? That which
we would do for a Man who is to land us on Earth, shall we not do for a GOD who
would bring us to Heaven? Our Crosses are sent us either by an angry GOD or a
favoring one; if they are sent in Favor, why do we spurn at a Benefit? If in
Displeasure, what should we do but appease it with an humble Submission? GOD'S
Anger will be the sooner appeased, if we can meet his chast'ning Hand not only
with Silence and Sufferance, but even with Consent, and Joy, and Thanksgiving.
The old GERMANS well understood this, who taught their Children, when their
Fingers were cut or scorched, to cry, "GOD be thanked." What heard we from our
distressed LORD in the Garden of GETHSEMANI? "Not my Will, O Father, but thine
"be done!" And should not this affect us as much as the rueful Spectacle did
that HEBREW Host, which were besieging the MOABITES? They no sooner saw the
King's Son offered up for a Sacrifice, but they departed, amazed and vexed.
When the Son of GOD himself becomes a Burntoffering, and sacrifices his Will
to the Will of his Father, shall it not work as fierce an Indignation within us
against our own Stubbornness? We solace ourselves in all our Extremities to see
other Men suffering with us; and should we not think it a more abundant Comfort
to see our blessed LORD a Sharer with us in Sorrow and Sufferance? Shall we
leave HIM to climb up to his CROSS alone, and shall we suffer nothing at all
with him, but run away from the very Shadow of a threatening Affliction, of a
seeming Distress?

WHY, SIR, should we grieve immoderately to see our Friends going from hence,
who have the ANGELS to convey their Souls, and to gather up their Bodies at the
last Day; nay, CHRIST himself bearing them Company in all their Way? Why went
he down to the Grave with us, but to save us from the Danger and Horror of it?
If it is an unpleasant Thing to follow the SON of GOD, yet in any case let us
not fly from him. If we dare not imitate, how dare we resist him? When we might
be like him, why do we thus abhor his Resemblance? Oh, wretched Ingratitude!
GOD stampeth upon us the Image of his beloved Son; and we that will not be like
CHRIST in Sufference, become like LUCIFER in Pride; nay, methinks, we become
worse, for LUCIFER thought not himself better than his GOD. And we, as if we
were faultless, refuse the Stripes which our innocent JESUS bore.

HOWEVER we find ourselves stated, indeed, it becomes us to bear our Crosses
contentedly. For if we see a deep Stain of Guilt within us, were not an high
Insolence to be loath to suffer justly when CHRIST had those bitter Storms of
Sorrow upon him who never did amiss? On the other Side, if we find no
Indictments in our own Hearts, nothing to implead or accuse us, we are the more
encouraged to be like him, who was crucified, without a Cause. If our own Guilt
brought not our Affliction upon us, let not Impatience bring any Guilt on our
Affliction?

SHOULD we have met our SAVIOR, as that CIRENIAN did, fainting under his
CROSS, and desiring us to carry it a while for him, nay, should he have laid
that precious Burden upon our Shoulders with his own Hands, would we
churlishly have put it from us, would we have pleaded Excuse or Impatience,
would we not have carried it away in Joy and Triumph, and have thought
ourselves happy to have been crucified on the same Tree with the SON of GOD?
Lo! this very Honor we may come to, without going to Mount CALVARY for it. GOD
puts our Strength to a Trial, with his own Hand imposes this or that
particular Cross on us, a Cross far lighter than that our LORD bore; why do we
refuse and abhor it?

THE SON of GOD was wounded and pierced for me by the bloody Hands of ungodly
Ruffians; why should not I suffer a gracious GOD to touch me, why should I not
be struck by so good and gentle a Hand?

WHEN the Disciples were tossed at SEA, and felt a new Tempest within
themselves, to see a Man walking on the liquid Waves, on Word from their
MASTER'S Mouth quells them all, -- "Be of good Comfort, it is I!" -- It is I
have called this Storm upon you, it is I can appease it; it is I have taken
away the Serenity of the Heavens, it is I can restore it again. -- If HE makes
us sore, says JOB, he can bind us up; if he wounds us, his Hands can make us
whole. Let us therefore wait on him for a SALVE from whom our SORES come.

IT IS true, SIR, you have lost an excellent Friend. -- But what, is the
Almighty Hand of your heavenly Father any whit shortened? Has HE locked up all
his Care of you in this URN? No! cast your Care upon him, for he cares for
you. You never saw the Righteous forsaken; of Men often enough, but never, never
of GOD.

BUT you are not, I hope, so fixed on the Meditation of your own Loss, but you
remember also, that to him, to die, was Gain. Yes, it was inexpressible
Felicity to be taken away from a World in which we are immerg'd in Labor and
Sorrow. For what is the Life we dote on but a Stage of Folly, but a Sea of
Mifery, which how smoothly soever we sail over, yet many a Rock, many a Gulf
will cross our Way, many a Storm will toss us, and many a Rover fright us, ere
we unlade our Bottom in the wished for Haven? That very Period of Life which we
long for, which we are so glad to arrive at, our OLD AGE, what is it else but a
loathsome Prison? Even now, when we are nearest to Death, our buried Griefs and
Maladies begin to revive; as RIVERS run in a broader Stream, when they are
ending their Course.

BUT if we look into the Mysteries of our tender Age, we shall find, that our
young Infants at their Birth begin to weep, in their Sleep seem to laugh. He
that deplored the Entrance of his Life with Tears, consecrates the Image of
Death with Smiles; as if he foresaw the Anxieties of the one, and the Sweetness
of the other.

WISELY therefore did GOD and Nature appoint that Souls, as yet rude and
ignorant, should be infused into our Bodies, and kept senseless in the closed
Womb, for fear of loathing so harsh a Prison; which ORPHEUS thought was nothing
else but a Punishment laid upon us, like that the old Tyrants used when they
tied the Dead and Living together; for thus, says he, the pure and immortal
Soul is served, when she is yoked with a rotten, corruptible, and crazy Body.
And what divorced Soul, that carries her Intellect with her, would gladly
return this foul Way again, to lie pent in a dark and polluted Womb, to be
deprived so many Months of the Light of Heaven, so many Years of the Use of
Reason, to run through so many sordid Necessities of Nature, so many Mockeries
of Fortune, to take up again the Madness of Infancy, the Terrors of Childhood,
the Dangers of Youth, the Cares of Virility, and the Griefs of old Age? I
cannot believe any Man has lived so happy, as to wish his whole Life again
repeated.

NONE, I dare say, would desire to recover Life but such as deserved it not,
but such as had abused it. -- Had Death, methinks, no Comforts attending upon
it, the very Troubles of Life might be enough to render it sweet, as WEARINESS
gives a Relish to REST.

IT made ARTABANUS laugh to see XERXES so foolishly weeping, when from a steep
Hill he took a View of his numerous Army; he fell into such passionate Moans,
that such a Multitude, enough to turn the World upside down, must be gone from
it so soon; it grieved him that they, whom himself was precipitating into a
present Danger of Death, and sacrificing straight up to the Madness of his
Ambition, should be all dead within an hundred Years. -- O XERXES, there had
been more Reason for thee to have bemoaned so long a Stay in so cross a World!
Had thou discerned as clearly from that high Mount their human Anxieties, as
thou did their human Bodies, the Advantages of Death would rather have dried
thy Tears, than the Suddenness drawn them out.

'TWERE as easy, methinks, to find a moiling Collier with a white and unsullied
Face, as a mortal Man not stained with some Tincture of Grief. Pick out the
bravest Darlings of Fortune, take one of those that had the very Surname of
HAPPY and GREAT, take a SYLLA or an ALEXANDER, or a JULIUS CAESAR, even they
that commanded all had their Lives perplexed, and their Deaths violent. Look on
AUGUSTUS, whose public Reign seemed a perpetual Calm, found he not many deep
Vexations at Home, the want of natural Issue, the Miscarriage of adopted? What
Joy could he take among the Treacheries of Some, the Libels of others; to see
his nearest Kinswoman lewd and loose, his only Successor hateful and unworthy?
What farther Instance need I seek? You see, Dear Sir, even in this Loss, that
which was one of your greatest Joys, become an Occasion of your just Heaviness.

SUPPOSE now a Man deep in Debt, for which he was bound to pay yearly a
grievous and unreasonable Use, how glad would he be to get out of his
Creditor's Lurch, to see the main Debt cleared and the Bond cancelled! For the
Principal being paid, the biting Interest ceases. And is not this the common
Condition of the Sons of Men? We have our Bodies from Earth, our Souls
immediately from GOD; both these are lent us, but we pay a hard Interest in the
mean Time. The bodily Pangs that press us, Hunger and Thirst, Cold and Heat,
Sickness and Labor, and all the Variety of corporal Distresses, what are all
these but Interest-Money to be daily paid till the Principal be restored, till
the Body return to the Earth from whence it came? On the other Side, the Fears
and Cares, and Sorrows, and all the troublesome Passions of the Soul, must be
paid too for the Use of it, till the Spirit returns to GOD that gave it. How do
we wrong ourselves if we come not gladly out of such chargeable Debts? When
SOCRATES had drunk his last Hemlock, he bad them prepare a Sacrifice for
AESCULAPIUS, for the Medicinal GOD; he took his Death as a Remedy that would
cure all his Griefs.

INFAMY is one of those Evils that sticks closest unto us, and yet in Death it
begins to lose its Sting. Who talks now in a virulent Manner of an O -- d? We
speak not of the Dead but with a Kind of Reverence. Even they, who, while they
lived could get nothing but Grudge and Envy, once dead, are praised, extolled,
and wished for again.

IN the Judgment of the WISE MAN, the Day of our Death is better than the Day
of our Birth. Better without Question, to the virtuous good Man, who has all
his Tears and Troubles wiped away; and better in some Measure, for the vicious
too; for though it ends not his Misery, yet it puts an End to his Misdoings. And
is it not a Kindness to wrest a Poniard from one that would do nothing but stab
himself, to deny Money to a gaming BORROWER that would do nothing but cast it
way? It Is no less Courtesy to take away Life from him that abuses it. We reckon
that good which brings us Profit; and is not Death beneficial? we meet not the
King with such awed and composed Thoughts, as we do a dead CORSE. The very
Sight of another's Funeral does us good, it causing the Remembrance or
Reflection of our own; and therefore the CATAJAN PRIESTS call the People to
public Prayers with a Trumpet made of the Bones of the Dead, and deck their
Bodies with Beads and Jewels of the same Stuff, and drink commonly out of a
Skull.

BUT if from our private Condition we turn our Eyes to the public Face of the
Times we are cast upon, have we not Cause to count the Dead happy? It Is one of
our greatest Comforts in public Calamities to see our Friends and dear
Associates freed from them, and sheltered in some safe Retreat. Were we got
into some hideous Desert, and environed there with roaring and venomous Beasts;
on one Side a fierce Tiger ready to fly upon us, on the other Lions or Bears
with bent and erected Paws gaping for us; here a Cluster of Serpents spitting
their Fire and Venom, there a Troop of Savages brandishing their Clubs, or
preparing their Arrows to lay us dead; what would we give to be gone from such
ill Neighbors? Why, are we not here in a woeful a Plight? Within, outrageous
Passions encompass us about, and tear our Hearts with restless Desires; abroad
Misfortune and Misery, and the proud Man's Contumely wound us daily. Religion,
pure and undefiled Religion, as practiced in the primitive Ages of the Church,
is it not grown a very Jest, and become the Scorn of Idiots? Nay, do wise Heads
show a better Example? Do they accustom themselves to entertain their Friends
and Acquaintance with Discourse about another World? Do they mingle the Praises
of GOD with the Feasts and Joys of Life? Do they retire to their Country
Dwellings, to contemplate the Variety and Riches of Divine Wisdom and Bounty in
those natural Scenes of Pleasure which the Country affords, and do they now and
then invite their Companions to join with them in offering Hallelujahs to GOD
on this Account? No; sacred Themes are not now the Business of Conversation,
nor are common Friendships any way useful or serviceable to the great End of
Life. Riot and Luxury, or sordid Profit and Interest, or else Folly, Trifling
and Impertinence, are the Ties, the Bonds of modern Confederacies, the
Ligaments of Christian, nay, of Protestant Societies. The Oracles of God, or
Things serious, are such unfashionable Topics of Discourse, such unusual, nay
I may add, unwelcome Subjects of Entertainment every where, that the Company
deserves now to be praised, which is only barren and unprofitable, not hurtful,
and wherein we suffer no greater Loss than that of our Time.

I WISH, says Dr LUCAS, in his excellent Essay upon Happiness, that whatever
Men talk of a Treasure in another World, they do not now and then think it
wisest to have their Portion in this. How many are there, who making a
Profession of living by Faith, and looking for the blessed Hope and Appearance
of CHRIST, do yet live as if all the Business of Life were to get and enjoy as
much of this World as they can; who professing themselves the Disciples of the
Son of GOD, whose Heart was lowly, his Fortune mean, and his Appearance humble,
do yet lay out their Time, their Labor, their Wealth on this one Design, to
make such a Show, such a Figure in the World, as may render them the Gaze, the
Envy of the Neighborhood they live in. -- Such a tender Concern for, such an
eager Pursuit after temporal Things, cannot flow from, nay, nor consist with
Purity of Heart, and Poverty of Spirit, the Love of GOD, and a Desire of
Heaven.

WHAT an excellent Thing must we think that to be which frees us from such a
degenerate World, which even rectifies the crooked Partialities of Fortune, and
makes us as good as those that trod upon us? We are not therefore to reckon it
as an Injury of Fortune, but as a Degree of Grace and Favor unto us, that our
Course is finished a little sooner than we were aware of. For it is as if a
TRAVELLER in a rainy wintry Day should get safe and well to his Journey's End
or his Inn ere Sunset, which others cannot attain till the dark Night has
overtaken them.

IN a cold severe WINTER we think long till it be passed over, till the warm
SPRING and SUMMER arrive; and why should not we be as glad to have the
Hardships of this Life exchanged for the Joys of a better?

WERE a Man necessarily to cross a deep and dangerous RIVER, what Madness were
it in him to grieve or complain that he had met with a BRIDGE or a BOAT to waft
him over? They are, methinks, as foolish who quarrel with Death; for what is it
else but a Bridge or Boat to waft us to the opposite Shore, over a Flood we
must needs pass, from a brittle and frail Life to a glorious and immortal one.

WE are not to judge of Death by that which it carries us from, but by that
which it brings us to. To get a Kingdom or poorer Territory we venture our
Lives; and what is a Spot of Earth to the Kingdom of Heaven? What can we reckon
Death but our gainfullest Hour, that adds so much to our Felicity as it takes
from our Life. The sooner we die, the longer we are happy.

SEE you not how the poor KINE, that are turned out in Winter, will be clinging
to the STABLE or BARN-DOOR where they know there is better Food. The World
starves and pines us, and why run we from Death's Door, where Fullness of Joy
lies ready for us? Why mourn we hopelessly for a mouldering Body, which is in
so sure a Hope of a Resurrection?

WE see that those Men, who are any thing skilled in the Nature and Motion of
heavenly Bodies, are not amazed or troubled at the yearly ECLIPSES of the SUN
and MOON, because they know all these obscured Planets will quickly recover
their Light, and shine out as clearly as ever they did. And we, why should we
shrink or shudder to see the Eyes of our Friends closed up in Darkness, who
know these sullen Eclipses are to last but a While, that, after a little
Interposition of Dust, these hid and obscure Bodies shall shine out as the
STARS in Heaven.

WHEN that huge PERSIAN Army we read of in Story was setting forward to invade
GREECE, MILTIADES, the ATHENIAN General, calling his thin Troops together,
presented them with a Cock-sight, imagining that would put Courage into them;
and the Device took as he wished, for they (seeing such an invincible Stoutness
and eager Combat in a Couple of Birds, that they would never yield till both
lay dead on the Ground) snatched up their Weapons, and marched on despising
Danger and Death. WE CHRISTIANS have not Birds and Beasts, but reasonable Men
to give us an Example of Fortitude in bearing the Loss of our Friends, -- our
Relatives, -- our other selves. We see DAVID wiping his Eyes when his Child was
dead; we see JOB breathing out the Praises of GOD when a violent Wind had blown
all his Sons and Daughters away; we see that brave DAME in the Book of
MACCABEES hearing the Cries of her murdered Sons with as much Delight as a
musical Song. Nay, PAGANISM is able to show us a TIBERIUS, a PAULUS, a MARTIUS,
a CATO, a GALLIENUS at ROME, a PERICLES, a XENOPHON, an ANAXAGORAS in other
Places, so manfully bearing the Death of their domestic Friends and Children,
that they have gone presently about their Business, sat in the Senate House,
and kept their Garlands upon their Heads, and told the World they knew they
were mortal Men they had begotten. And we that know more, shall we bear less?
Will not these Heathens be eternal Monuments of our Shame if we lie grovelling
in Sorrow, and raise not up our dejected Hearts?

THE sweet and long Acquaintance you had, Dear Sir, with him whose Loss you
lament, the upright and innocent Course of his Life, as it gives you the more
Hope of his present Happiness, so it gives you the less Reason to bewail his
Dissolution. His Life was not a mere Calm, but a gentle Breeze; it did not
consist in mere Rest and Quiet, but a delightful Motion. Even in his Retirement
he could employ all the Vigor of his Mind usefully and delightfully; nay, that
very Solitude which would have been the Prison and (...) ^anishment of the busy
Worldling, wa^ ^is ^aradise. Most undoubtedly, if a righteous and unblemished
Life, if a sure Faith in his precious Redeemer, if the Fear of GOD, and a
fruitful Use of his Ordinances, could bring him to Heaven, he is become an
abiding Citizen of that NEW JERUSALEM. -- O! if he had but Liberty to whisper a
few Words into your Ear, would he not thus expostulate? My dear Friend! What do
you bewail? My Departure from you? Why, look where I am, in whose soft Bosom I
lie, how glorious, how secure I am become! Is it your own Mishap that afflicts
you? It will be but for a Moment, I am but gone before, and you shortly will
follow me, and all those I left with you. -- Numbers of our Friends, says St
CYPRIAN expect us above; let us therefore, Dear Sir, g^sp and long for an happy
Meeting, that we may be joined in Glory with those, with whom we are joined in
Affection.

I am, etc.

FINIS.

